
      
         
            
            
            OUIDS
METAMORPHOSIS
Translated Grammatically, and also
according to the propriety of our English
tongue, so farre as Grammar and the
verse will well beare.
            Written chiefly for the good of Schooles, to
be vsed according to the directions in the Preface
to the painefull Schoole-master, and
more fully in the booke called
Ludus Literarius, or the
Grammar-schoole,
Chap. 8.
            
               ET VSQVE AD NVBES VERITAS TVA
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            
               LONDON
Printed by Humfrey Lownes, for Thomas Man,
dwelling at the signe of the Talbot in
Pater-noster rowe. 1618.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HOnourable,
EDWARD, Lord Denny,
Baron of Waltham.
            
               WHereas (right noble Lord) I haue
beene much, and am daily called
vpon for the performance of my
promise in my Grammar-schoole,
concerning the Grāmaticall translating
of our lower schoole Authors,
and that by those who
haue made due triall, and found by good experience
the benefit of such like translations; I haue presumed,
to send forth vnto them this Essay, vnder your Lordships
patronage, not onely for your Lordships most
honourable affection to some vnto whom God hath
very neerly linked mee, and your vndeserued fauour
vnto my selfe, but more specially for your singular
curtesie, and desire of the aduancement of all good
learning, which beeing conioyned doe so-much grace
true Nobility. The rather also haue I done this, for
that full assurance which God hath giuen mee, of a
rich blessing to accompany the right vse of these translations

for the generall good of schooles. And first,
for all the ruder places of the Land, wherein there is
not any thing vsually to be found, which may afford
the least content or comfort to parents, children, or
any other. Chiefly, for the poore ignorant countries
of Ireland and Wales; of the good whereof wee ought
to be carefull aswell as of our owne: vnto which I
haue principally bent my thoughts in all my Grammatical-translations
of our inferiour classicall schoole-authors.
For that as in all such places, so especially in
those barbarous countries, the hope of the Church of
God is to comp rimarily out of the grammar-schools,
by reducing them first vnto ciuility thorough the
meanes of schooles of good learning planted amongst
them in euery quarter;Adde, quod ingenuas didicisse fideliter artes, Emollit mores, nec sinit esse feros. Ouid.
                wherby their sauage and wilde
conditions may be changed into more humanity; according
to the right iudgement of our Pöet, which
the experience of all ages hath confirmed.
            To which purpose, what can be imagined to bee
more effectual, then if together with the Latine tongue
they shall attaine withall vnto our owne Language,
and both get and keepe the Latine farre more easily
and surely in each respect, by the meanes of these translations,
without any inconuenience. Yet haue I not
so writtten them for our ruder places alone, but that
euen our head Grammar-schooles may sundry waies
receiue their benefit by them, and make their profitable
vse of them for their great furtherance for Grammar,
true sense and meaning of the Authors, propriety,
purity of stile, and variety of phrase, both in our
owne and the Latine tongue, & in many other things;
especially, when the Lord shall bee pleased that they

may be brought to that perfection, which we hope &
pray for, daily labouring and striuing thereunto. As
for euills and inconueniences of such Grammaticall
translations surmised by some who neuer saw any true
triall of them, nor euer considered of them aright,
what can they be? when the schollars that vse them
are caused to seeke out according to their rules, and to
render a reason euen of euery word why it must be so,
& not otherwise. But for all imagined euils by such like
translations, I haue fully answered in my Ludus literarius,
in the eight chapter, and in my other translations;
and haue moreouer there giuen directions for the
right vse of them; as I shall heere also more fully in
the Preface to the Reader, and for the benefit hereof.
Concerning the matter of this booke, I need not commend
it vnto your Lordship, or vnto any other: Because,
as I can neuer sufficiently admire the diuine wisdome
(that I may so speake) of Tully in his Offices, in
prescribing most morall duties amongst men, as if he
had been directed by the sacred Scriptures; so nor here
the rare vnderstanding of this our Poet, in setting forth
vnto vs the creation in that wonderfull manner, and so
alluding to the Flood, as if he had seen and read that
part of holy story in Genesis. Also for the Latine and
stile vsed in it, who knoweth not, that as in all Ouids
works, so chiefly in his Metamorphosis his singular wit
and eloquence doe appeare: that wee may truely say,
that neuer heathen Poet wrote more sweetly in such
an easie and flowing veine, than hee in this.
            Thus desiring through the assistance of our blessed
God to creep forward by little and little in accomplishing

my promised seruice to our Grammar-schooles,
which I haue so much longed for, & wherein he hath
beene hitherto shewing his power in my weakenesse,
and is still with me graciously, humbly crauing pardon
I commend your Lordshippe with your honourable
and worthy Lady vnto his heauenly Maiesty, who
looketh not as man, but accepteth the vpright hart,
and the labour according vnto the same, and rest
            
               Your Honours in all
Christian affection
and seruice,
I. B.
            
         
         
            
            To the painefull Schoolemaster, desirous
to reape the fruits of his labours,
and to see the blessing of the Lord, by
the new meanes and helps which he
affordeth daily.
            
               IF you desire to finde the benefit, and
reape the fruit of this, and the like
Grammaticall translations with mee,
without inconuenience, doe these
things; at least make triall that you
may be able to iudge truely hereof.
            1. Cause all your schollars, who
take construction to bee very perfect in the rule of construing,
as it is set downe in the Ludus Literarius Chapt.
8. or more shortly in the Posing of the Accidence.
            
            2. To be able to say perfectly without book, or to turne
vnto presently any of the rules of Grammar which are vsually
learned.
            3. For taking of their lectures, direct them in this manner
following, and see that they can doe it.
            1. That one of the two Seniors of the forme which is
to vse the help hereof, hauing the translation, doe in all
more hard places reade vnto the rest of the forme either the
lecture in English first, as it is translated, or at least the brief
summe & sense of it out of the inmost columnes, ouer against
the translation of the lecture, to giue them some light and
vnderstanding of the meaning of it.
            
               
2. That one or both of the Seniors looking vpon the translation
together with the Author in Latine, cause the rest,
each in his order, first to reade his peece, and in reading to
obserue all things according to the direction in the said rule
of construing, and then to construe and giue a reason according
to the same rule, why it must be so construed, and not
otherwise. And where any sticke or goe amisse, varying
from the translation, to recall them to the rule, demanding
of them what the rule teacheth to be taken first, and what
in the next place; so to help them by the translation, where
none of their fellowes can finde it out, to giue both Grammar,
sense and variety of phrase in English, according to the text
in the translation and to the third columne compared together,
by the helpe of the markes.
            Thirdly, when they haue construed twice or thrice ouer,
and that the very lowest and worst can construe, that they
cause them likewise to parse according as they construed, viz.
each his peece, giuing the reasons of euery word.
            Fourthly, afterward let them direct them to be able to
giue each thing obserued in the vttermost columne for notation,
history or otherwise. And this for taking their lectures.
            Secondly, for preparing their lectures herein;
            First, cause each to study and make their lectures perfect
by the helpe of the translation and their Grammar, to
be able, so soone as they shall be called to say, First, to deliuer
the English, secondly, the Latine both in prose and
verse, viz. first, in a pure Latine stile in prose, and then
turning that into the Poets verse. Which practice will be
both a good helpe for making Latine, and also a most plaine
way to enter them in making a verse. And afterwards to
be able to construe and parse without booke, rendering a

reason of euery thing; to giue the phrases, to vary them,
and to doe whatsoeuer the translation directs vnto. Thus
let them doe in all the Authors thus translated, so farre as
the Author and translation afford them helpe.
            Secondly, Cause them at their leasure, oft to construe ouer
amongst themselues all which they haue learned in the
Author, the two seniors onely, or one of them directing the
rest by the translation that they construe truely. And especially
make them to construe it oft out of the translation, looking
only on it, each his peece, all the rest looking vpon their
Latine books: which will be a helpe to cause them to keep all
most perfectly, and chiefly if they obserue phrase and difculty
as they proceed. And much more if they be warned
to construe them oft ouer, priuately at home, and sometimes
be examined of a sodaine in seuerall places.
            By these meanes (vnlesse daily experience can deceiue)
these translations will prooue worthie the accept
                  •
               nce and vse
of our chiefe Schooles; when hereby all the middle formes
of the schoole may both take and each waies prepare their
owne lectures of themselues, at least with very little helpe
or trouble of the master; & that as profitably and surely in
euery respect, as if the master gaue, or heard the giuing of
them himself: vvhen they are caused hereby to search out
and giue a reason of each word why it must be so construed,
parsed, and vsed in that place, that the master ordinarily
shall need but onely to examine them, when they are prepared.
Thus to auoid not onely that common toyle to the Master
in giuing each lecture, but also that he may saue all that
time which is so spent, to imploy much of it with his highest
formes in the chiefe Authors Latine or Greeke in giuing
their lectures, or hearing them to take their owne lectures
of themselues, for their greater furtherance & better fitting

for the Vniuersity, and likewise for the credit of the school,
and in examining and posing, which is the best quickner of
their wittes, and spurre to all good learning. Hereby, moreouer▪
shall the children be fitted with vnderstanding and
iudgement, how many waies to make their benefit of their
Authors. Or else that the Master may bestowe the more
time and paines, amongst the lowest and first formes, for
the better entring and grounding of them, which beeing
rightly performed makes all their proceeding afterwards ful
of certainty and pleasant delight. In this one thing (and
that by meanes of these helps, there may bee many moe of a
forme, and euery one able to prepare his owne lecture, and
also that all of them may so easily and surely by oft repetitions,
and their owne priuate paines keepe all which they haue
learned) I finde so great gaine without losse, in redeeming so
much time to be imployed vpon other most necessary vses in
the schoole, yea so much freedome from many occasions of
discontentment and ouer-wearying my selfe, and so sweete
an allurement to prouoke the children to study of themselues
with contention & delight, as that it makes me bould to commend
the vse of them to all of this function, that they maie
be partakers of the same comforts. To omit the sundry other
benefits; and namely for beating out the right sense, & Grammar
rule in each place, with propriety in our owne tongue, somuch
as I haue beene yet able in my streights of time. Giue
them not ouermuch at a time, but that they may learne all so
perfectly as that what they haue learned may bee a schoole-master
to that which followeth, and make experiment heereof:
for this Essay and the many defects and slips in it, let the
difficulty in this kinde of translating (to frame it each waie

both for Grammar propriety purity, variety, and to fit it to
the childrens capacities in euery respect and meete to all the
intended purposes without inconuenience & that in my continuall
imployment in my calling) plead for me. I doubt not
but all they who haue or shall make triall of it, (as some learned
haue done) will fauourably accept it. Afford mee your
helpe in shewing how to amende it, directing your Letters to
the Printer to be deliuered, & future editions shall God willing
send it forth more perfectly, with all the rest. In the
meane time desiring still an increase of your loue and praiers
for finishing my worke, I commend you to him, whose this &
all my labours are; and shall rest yours as his goodnesse shall
vouchsafe mercy.
         
         
            
            Contents of the Columnes.
            The inmost columnes containe the sum of the history, which
is to be first read and vnderstood.
            The second containe the Grammaticall translation made
plaine and easie according to the propriety and purity of our
owne tongue so far as Grammar will well beare.
            The third haue variety first of Grammaticall construction,
where the English is ouer harsh to be placed in the translation,
noted with an Asteriske, or little starre thus (*); and
secondly variety of other phrases better to expresse the meaning,
directed by an (r).
            The fourth sheweth the resoluing of sundry difficulties in
allusions and the like, for better vnderstanding of the Authour,
with some more obscure notations, tropes & other necessary
points of learning.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE
FIRST
BOOKE of
theMetamorphosis signifieth a change of one likenesse or shape into another, of 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , whereof commeth 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  transformo, and 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  transformatio. Some books haue of the metamorphosis or transformation in the singular number, others of the transformations in the plurall, it is all one in effect; one sort speaking of the whole work in generall, the other of the particular changes.
               Metamorphosis.
               Changes. Transformations
of
P.Ouid. Ouidius
Naso.
            The Exordium [or
entrance] into the
whole worke.Here first is set down the Exordium or entrance into this worke, contained in these 4 first verses. Which consisteth of two parts, viz. a Proposition, and an Inuocation.
            
            MY[My] minde carrieth [me] viz. desireth. desire is
I intend, or I am purposed or determined.to speake
ofFormes changed into new bodies, for bodies chāged into new forms, by a figure most common amongst the Poëts called Hypallage.
               
               Formes or shapes changed into new bodies. bodies
changed into new
shapes.This is vsuall with the Poëts, to beginne with the inuocation of those Gods which they thought to be the principall authors and directors of the matters whereof they writ.
               O [ye]
Gods (for euen ye haue changed those shapes) & no other, O [ye]
Gods,1. The proposition sheweth the authors intēt, which is to set down a continued history of the first creation of all things, and the change of them after.
               
                  Aspirare] signifieth to blow prosperously vnto. A metaphor taken from the windes blowing fitly vpon the sailes of a ship, so f
                     •
                  rthering it in sailing.
               Fauour ye &c. fauour
myAspire ye vnto, or blow ye vnto, viz. Prosper ye, or giue good successe vnto. enterprizes:2. The inuocation of the Gods is to prosper this attempt: And that first, because this transformation was their worke alone. Secondly, for that his desire is to draw out the storie in a continued verse, euen vnto his owne times, & to make each fable to arise and depend euery one vpon another.
               Beginnings or attempts.
(forYee, and none other. euen yee
haue changed thē)
and draw ye out a
Perpetuall, viz. so continued as no transformation is omitted, but euery one fitly knit vnto another, that one fable might seeme to rise of another.continued verse
from the firstCreation of the world.
beginning of the
world [euen] vntill
my times.
            
               
               FABLE I.
               Of the Chaos, or
of the first and most
admirable Metamorphosis,
viz.
of the forming or
fashioning all things
out of the Chaos: &
first of the 4. Eleme
                     •
                  ts
made out of it.This Ouid teacheth to be the order of the creation, according to the Poets, as they had receiued of the ancicients, who it is most like had scene or heard of the sacred scriptures. Which although it be not in all things agreeable to the scriptures, yet in many things cō
                     meth very ne
                        •
                     re therevnto.
               
               BEfore theSeas.
Sea, &Earths or lands. earth,
andCoelum quasi varj
                        •
                     sy. deribus coelatum, or q. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     concau
                        •
                     tate.
                  The outward cir
                           •
                        cūferēce wherin are the Sun, moone, and stars called the firmament or heauen. Heauen,One one
                        •
                     y.
which couereth al
things,Before Heauen or ear
                        •
                     h were maue there was but one forme or fashion of all things.
               
               There was one
Countenāce shape or f
                        •
                     shion.formeO
                        •
                      nature viz. of all natural things, wh
                        •
                     r
                        •
                      of nature is the au
                        •
                     hour. Met. efficientis, for nature is thus described, Vis quaedam qua omnia 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                     
                   of nature
inAll the world. the whole
world:
               
                  Which forme or countenance. Which they
called
                     Chaos signifieth hiatus, 
                     
                        •
                      gaping, of 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      The Poets meane by it a confused heape or lumpe, which th
                        •
                     y hold to haue beene eternall and that out of it God formed all things, contrary to the Scriptures, which teach that God made this first, and then all things out of it by his word aloue. They seeme herein to allude to that which is Gen. 1. ver. 1. 2 That in the beginning God created the Heauen, & the earth, & the earth was without form and voyde, and darkenesse was vpon the face of the deep &c. yet missing in the chiefe, that God created first the very lumpe or masse.
                  Men tearmed or the ancients called. 
                  Chaos,
                  This the auncients called Chaos.
                  
[which was]An impolished & vndigested masse or a greatnesse without distinction or order a
rude & confused
Lumpe.heape,Which was a confused heape without all order.
               
               Neither [was
there] any thing
but aSluggish or heauie and immooueable without all art lumpish
weight,And nothing but a dead and vnmoueable lumpe without all art. andContrary or repagnant.
disagreeingThose seedes were chiefly the four
                        •
                      Elements, called the first bodies of which all things consist. 
                  
                     •
                  eeds
of things not well
ioyned,Yet hauing the seeds of all thing
                        •
                      heaped vp together in it.
                  Seedes viz. the beginings of all things disagreeing among themselues, heaped or confused in the same place, or in the Chaos. heaped

vp together in
the same.
               No
                     Titan] son to Coel
                           •
                        m, and Vesta, viz. to the heauen and the earth. Sun gaue
light as yet to
the world;There was as yet no Sunne to giue light to the world.
               
               NeitherThe new mooue repaired. did
the mone repaired 
                        •
                     er new hornes.. the newe
                     Phoebe, sister to Phoebus the Sunne so called o
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      because or their brightnesse. MooneRenew or restore. repaire
her hornes
by increasing.Nor Moone to change and increase.
               
               
                  Neither.
                  Neither did the earth peized, &c. hang in the ayre Nor yet
theThe earth alone of all the Elements remaines immooueable, and is therefore called the center of the world, because it is in the middest of all the elements vnto which all things desc
                        •
                     nd. earthWeighed by her &c. or stayed vp. p
                     •
                  ized
with herProper.
owneWeights. weight,Nor earth hanging equally of it selfe in the middest of the ayre.
did hang in the
ayrePoured about or compassing it about. compassed
about [it] nether
The sea had reach
                        •
                     d or stretched out.had the
                     Amphitrite the wife of Neptune, heere put for the Sea. Met▪ Effic.
                  
sea reached out
her armes by the
longBrinke or shore. banke of
theEarths or lands. earth.Neither any sea reaching along by the bankes of the earth.
               
               
                  And also. And likewise
in what [part]
There was.was earth,All parts of the world were mingled and confused in one. there
was also both sea
andslie.. ayre▪
               
               So the earth
wasVnsetled or moueable. vnstable,The earth was vnstable.
the waterNot possible or fit to be swomme in. not
to bee swomme
in.The water not to be swomme in.
               
               
                  
The ayre was
Needing or wanting light.without light,The ayre without light.
                  The owne forme [or shape] did remaine to nothing, or to none of the foure Elements.nothing had
the proper form.Nothing had the right shape.
               
               
                  Contrary qualities were in the same subiect, which now cannot be in the same manner. AndAnother thing stood against other [things] one
thingwas contrary to others. was against
others:One thing hindered another.
because in one
bodie.For that all things did striue together in the Chaos.
               
               Cold things
didStriue or contend. fight with
Hot things.hot,Colde with hot.
                  Moyst things [did fight] with drye things. moist
with dry.Moyst with dry.
               
               Soft things,Soft things with hard.
                  Heauy with light.
[did fight] with
Hard things.hardWeighty or heauy things. things,
hauing weightDid striue with things.
wth things without
weight.Thus much concerning the Chaos: Now the Poet sheweth the the first generall chāge how the foure Elements were made out of this, & by whom, & so all things out of them.
               
               
                  This he speaketh either acccording to the opinion of those Philosophers, who thought nature to bee superiour to God, & more mighty then hee, as it is in the 9. Booke.
Or [et] may be taken for 
                        
                           •
                        d est, melior natura, viz. God that better nature, so the words following import, that he diuided, &c. God and a better
natureEnded or brake or determined.
tooke away this
Contention.strife.That God the best nature tooke away this strife.
               
               For heCut away or parted in sunder. diuided
theEarths. earth
from heauen &
theWaters. water from
the earth.Diuiding the earth from heauen, and the waters from the earth.
               
               AndSeuered or distinguished. separated
thePure clear, bright, free from corruption. liquid
Heauen.skie from theThe thick ayre wherin the clouds and raine are bred.
                  Thicke or grosse.foggie ayre.The pure skie from the foggy ayre.
               
               
                  
Which after
He rouled out.he had tumbled
out,And hauing separated these forth of the Chaos, andExempted. taken
from theBlind or disordered. confused
Lumpe or Chaos.heape.Hee bound each of them in their own proper place, and settled them in a quiet peace.
               
               Hee bound
[thē] beingDissociate in [their] places or seuered a sunder. separate
inPlaces. place,
with aAgreeable. quiet
peace.
               
                  The fier. The fiery
Force or strength.power of the
heauenBowing downeward. bending
downward,The fire or fiery power of the heauen bending downeward and lightest, in the highest place. and
without weight,
Appeared.shined out, &
chose it selfe a
placeIn the highest part of all. in the
Chiefe.highest tower.
               The ayre is
next to it in lightnesse,The ayre next to it in lightnesse and place.
and in
place.
               The earth [is]
moreGrosse and heauy. solide
then these,The solide earth pressed downe with the weight of it selfe, and drawing all heauie things vnto it, in the lowest place. and
The earth is said to draw all heauie things, because al heauy things doe naturally descend to it.hath drawen
The great & heauie parts out of the Chaos, or all weighty things.the great Elements
[with
it.]
               
                  
                  
                     Ouid doth not 
                        •
                     ssigne the third place to the earth, but the lowest, as bei
                        •
                     g th
                        •
                      heau
                        •
                     est, and drawing downe al
                        •
                      heauie things vnto it, and so the water, compassing it about.And is pressed
downe with
the heauinesse of
it selfe.The water flowing vpon and compassing the vttermost parts of the earth in the third. The water
flowing about
it
               Hath possessed
The vtmost parts of the earth flowing vpon it, in many places compassing it about, not couering it all.the vtmost
[places] and kept
inThe earth. the so
                     ••
                  e
globe.
            
            
               FABLE II.
               Of the full and
perfect forming and
fashioning of the 4.
chiefe parts of the
world, and the adorning
each of them
with their proper
creatures, more specially
of the creation
of man last, to bee
Lord of all.
               
                  So when hee which of the Gods soeuer he was.. WHen
Heere the Poet making 
                        •
                     s though he was ignorant which of the Gods it was, which diuided the foure Elements, intimateth that it was some greater and more mighty thē those which the common sort tooke for Gods.hee,In this Chapter the Poet sheweth that God hauing thus diuided the Chaos into parts
which soeuer of
the Gods he was,
Cut, or hath cut, or seperated.had diuided
theSet in order. heape so
disposed, and

                  Reduced or brought ba
                        •
                     ke, viz. dig
                        •
                     steit.brought itBe
                        •
                     ng cut▪
                   diuided
into parts.First hee made the earth round like a globe.
               
               
                  In the beginning. First of all
He winded round, or made round the earthhee made the
earth roundTo the fashion or shape or like to. after
the fashion of
a greatOrbe or bowle. globe,
That it might be.least that it
should not beEquall or round, and of like weight. euen
On euery side.of euery
part.That it might bee equall on each side.
               
               Then he poured
abroad
                     Pretum is any narrow sea, where 
                        
                           〈…〉
                         to boyle à seruend
                           •
                         o
                           •
                         as 
                           •
                        ome w
                           •••
                         à 
                           •
                        remendo.
                  
                  The mediterranean seas.
the narrow seas,Then hee poured abroad the seas.
and commanded
themTo begin to swell or to rage. to swell
wth theViolent, vehement or fierce winds. whirling
winds,Commanding them to swell with the winds. and
to compasse about
the shores
of the earthGone about, or compassed in, or h
                        •
                     
                     med in, inuironed
[By those seas.thereby.]To inuirone the earth.
               
               
                  Hee added also Moreouer he
addedSprings. fountaines,
andVnmeasurable standing waters or fennes. huge
standing ponds
andPooles 
                        ••
                     eres, or deepe places, a
                        •
                     wa
                        •
                     es full of water. lakes;After he made fountains, & the great standing waters, as lakes, and fennes.
               
               And heCompassed in, or compassed about. girt
in the riuersTurning downewardes.,
running downewardsAlso riuers kept in with crooked bankes.
                  
with
Thwart, or winding, or sidelong bankes.crooked banks.
               
                  Which [riuers.] Which being
Diuers or separate.distant in places,Which being distant in places one from another,
areSwallowed vp. supped
vp partly of
[the earth] it self.Are some of them swallowed vp of the earth.
               
               Partly doe
theyRunne. come
into the sea,Others of them run into the Sea. and
being receiued
[there]As in a field, or in a more large place of waters. in a
fieldWhere they haue more liberty as in a large field.
               
               
                  Where there is more liberty or room for them. Of more
free water, they
Dash against.beate vpon
the shoaresFor bankes. instead
of banks.And shores insteade of bankes.
               
               He commanded
also the
Plaine fields.champaine
fieldes to beeNext hereunto hee stretched out the champaine fields.
                  Extended or stretched out, to lye euen all abroad.stretched abroad,
theA valley is properly the hollow betweene two hils.
                  Vales or dales.
valleies toDescend. settle
downward,Making the valleyes to descend.
               
               
                  Hee commanded the woods. The woods
to bee couered
withA leafe, viz. with boughs of trees. leaues,The woods to be couered with leaues.
theStonie hils to arise; or rockes. craggie
mountains to ascend.Mountaines & rocks to ascend.
               
               
                  
And as two
                     Zona signifieth both the part of the body which is gi
                        •
                     t, and the girdle it selfe which girdeth it.
                  Girdles or circles. zonesCut. diuide
the heauen
on the
                     Coelius Rhodiginus sheweth out of Cleomedes, a notable expounder of the 
                        •
                     ifficulties of the Poets, that antica, or the fore-part of the heauens is the West, whither the heauens tu
                        •
                     ne, quoniam illuc annuit mundus; so the hinder part towards the East, from whence it is carried towardes the West; and thereupon the left part towards the South, the right toward the North. Like as it is if wee stand with our face towa
                        •
                     des the West. right
part,H
                        •
                     e likewise diuided the he
                        •
                     uens into fiue zones or p
                        •
                     rts; two on the right hand, two on the left, and the burning zone in the middest. andSo many, or euen so many. as many
moe on the
Left [part.]left,The fift [zone.] the fift is
moreHot or scorching. burning
Then these foure.then those:
               So theCare. prouidence
of God
hathDiuided. distinguished
The earth compassed about within those zones or circles.the
burden included,Hee diuided likewise the earth into fiue climates proportionable to the fiue zones in the heauens.
                  By the same number of fiue, viz hath diuided the earth into so many parts. by the same
number; and euen
so many
Cuts, diu
                        •
                     sions, circles, or regions.climates are
Pressed or stamped.set in the earth.
               
                  Of which climates that &c. Whereof,Whereof that which is in the middest is not habitable for heate.
                  The fift which is the middle, is more hot and scor
                        •
                     hing then the rest, for the nee
                        •
                     en
                        •
                     sse of the Sunne passing ouer it twise in the yeer.that which is
In the middest.the middle is
Thus the ancients thought, but our trau
                        •
                     llers finde it otherw
                        •
                     se.not habitable
for heate:
               
                  High. Deepe snow
couerethTwo [
                        •
                     limates of those c
                        ••
                     mates.] two
[of them:]The two vttermost are extreamely cold.
                  And hee hath set euen so many between both or either of them. and
also hee placed
as many moe between
those two.The two middle, viz. betweene the cold and hot of either side, temperate, of an equal mixture of hot and cold.
               
               And hath giuen

[them]A temper. a tē
                  perature,The flame.
                  Hauing mingled or tempered them of hot and colde.
heat
being mixed [in
them] wth cold.
               The ayre hangeth
ouerThose climates. these,
Which is heauier then the fier by so much, by how much it is light
                        ••
                      the
                        •
                      the weight of the earth, [and] then the weight of the mater.wch is so much
heauier then the
fier,The ayre hangeth ouer these, which is so much heauier then the fir
                        •
                     , as the water is lighter then the earth.
                  Pondus leuius. as the
Pondere leuior.weight of the
water is lighter
then the weight
of the earth.
               
                  He hath commanded both the little cloudes [to stay] there, and the great clouds to stay there. There he hath
cōmanded both
theFogs or mists. little and
great cloudes to
Stand or abide.stay,In the ayre hee hath placed both the little cloudes, viz. fogs and mists, and also the great. and the
thundersAbout to moue or able to terrifie mens minds or the hearts of men. to
mooueHumane minds. mens
harts.The terrible thunder.
               
               And together
with theLightnings. lightning,
All windes are cold by nature.the winds
making theColds. cold,Lightning. Windes.
               
               
                  And also. Moreouer,Hee also limited the windes, that they should not haue free liberty of the ayre.
theFramer. maker of
the world hath
notSuffered or granted permitted
to these,the ayre to bee
vsed of these
The ayre to be had or to haue the ayre, viz. free liberty of the ayre.euery where:
All abroad.there

                  It is resisted scarcely to them now, viz. things can hardly abide the violence of them now.there is scarcely
any wi
                     •
                  hstanding
of thē now,For that they are so boystrous, that they hardly can be resisted:
               
               
                  Although euery of them hath but his owne region, or quarter. Whenas
euery one of thē
ruleth his owne
blasts in a diuers
Tract, coast, or quarter.region.Although he haue restrained euery one of them to his owne part and region.
               
               
                  But that they teare in pieces the world, or butcher the world, or destroy it. But [that]
they would reare
the world in pieces:Epiphonem
                        •
                     .
the discord
of [those] brethrē
is so great.Because they would otherwise teare the world in pieces, thorough the vehemen
                        •
                     y of the discorde between them.
               
               
                  
                     Eurus 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     quod ab oriente flat. It is called Vulturnus, by a similitude from the fierce flying of the Vultur.
                   The East-winde
Went backe or departed.betooke
it selfe vnto the
The Sunne rising.morning, and
to theNabathaean kingdomes. kingdomes
of
                     Nabathaea is a part of Ar
                           •
                        bia-foelix, between the Persian Sea, and the red Sea. 
                  Nabathaea.
                  The East-wind hee hath limited to the Sunne rising, viz. to all those parts towards the Sunne rising.
               
               And to
                     Persia a Countrey in the East part of Asia.
                   
                  Persia,
and to the
Ridges or tops of the hills, subiect or lying towards themountaines lying
vndermorning beames. the
Sunne rising.
               The euening
and the shoares
wch wax warme
by the Sunne setting▪
                  The warme West-winde to the Sunne setting, viz. to all those parts towards it.
               
               
                  
Are next vnto
the
                     Zephyrus 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , à ferenda satis omnibus vita, of refreshing and qui
                        •
                     kning all things sowen. West-wind:
the horrible

                     Boreas 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , of the noyse which 
                        •
                     t maketh: or 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , à nutrimento, because it especially nou
                        •
                     sheth the body, making it healthfull.North-wind hathGone into. inuaded
Scythia,
                  The boystrous North winde to the parts towards the north 
                        •
                     ole, or the Charles waine. &
The seauen flowe Oxen, or the seauen starres, called the Charles waine.the parts lying
vnder the North
pole.The moyst South-winde to the contrary parts.
               
               The contrarie
P
                        •
                     rt of the e
                        •
                     rthearthDoth waxe wet. is wet
with continuall
clouds &Or by the rainie South. frō
the rainyAuster q. hauster ab hauriend a aqua, because it is commonly rainie.
                   south.Ouer these he set the liquid skie without all weight or earthly substance.
               
               HeHee hath imposed or set. placed ouer
theseThe liquide skie. the

                     Aether, may be taken here for the Element of the 
                        〈◊〉
                     , 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     b ardendo 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , 
                        •
                      
                     semper currendo.
                  skie being pure,
andAnd wanting waight. without all
heauinesse, neither
hauingAny thing of earthly dregs or setling. any
terrene substāce.These were scarcely thus separated and setled, but the starres,
               
               
                  He had separated or distingu
                        •
                     shed scarcely. Scarcely had
He, viz. God.he thus seuered
all things in
[their]Setled and vnchang
                        ••
                     ble. certaine
bounds,Which before had lyen hid, kept-in in the Chaos,
                  
               
               When as the
Signes consisting of many starres▪ as Aries, T
                           •
                        uru
                           •
                        
                      &c.starres,Which haue lyen hid long. which
had long lyen
hidKept vnder that they could not shine. pressed
vnder that same

                     The Chaos.masse, began

toShine bright in euery part of heauen. glister in
the whole heauē.Began to glitter in all parts of the heauen.
               
               [And] least any
region should
beDepriued or voyd of. destitute of
Her, viz. proper and belonging to them.their owne liuing
creatures.And lest any region or part of the world should bee destitute of her huing creatures, He set in each of them seuerall kinds.
               
               TheHe followeth their opinion who hold the stars to bee liuing, and the fained Gods liuing creatures. starres
and theFormes [or shapes] of the Gods, viz. the imagined Gods of the heathens. Gods
doeHolde, or haue. possesse
Heauen.the heauenly

                     Solum] is taken for whatsoeuer doth sustaine other things, as the earth doth the creatures vpon it. q sol dum.
                  soyle.The stars and Gods in the heauens.
               
               TheWaues. waters
haueGiuen place to, yeelded themselues, or fallen to the lot of. befallen to
bee inhabited of
theShining. bright fishes.Fishes in the waters.
The
earthReceiued the beasts for her creatures. tooke
the
                     Ferae] quod toto corpore ferantur. They are properly wilde beasts, here for all kinds by Synec spec.
                  
                  The wilde beasts. beasts,
theThe ayre is called mooueable, because it is easily driuen hither and thither. moueable
ayre[Tooke or receiued] the birds to abide chiefly in it. the birds.Beasts in the earth.
                  Birds in the ayre.
                  Man is said to bee a holy liuing creature, and partaker of a high mind, because he alone is partaker of reason: hauing some acknowledgement of the Lord by nature. For this high mind doth signifie reason inlightned with the knowledge of God, and of the law of nature.A liuing creature
more holy
thenThese, viz. beasts, fishes and birds these and
more capeable
ofA high or deepe mind, viz. of a profound memory and great wit. a diuine
Vnderstanding or reason.minde.And finally whereas there was as yet lacking a creature more holy, and of a more diuine 
                        •
                     nderstanding,
               
               
                  Man through reason hath the vse and benefite of all the creatures, making all so to serue him. And which
mightHaue the gouernment of the rest. rule ouer
The rest of the creatures.the restWas lacking as yet. was
as yet lacking.Which might rule ouer the rest,
               
               
                  
ManIs. was
Bred.borne:Man was made: but whereof, by whom, or how, hee sheweth it to be vncertaine amongst the Poets.
                  We are not to maruaile if the Poet professe his ignorance in the creation of man. whether
That [chiefe] workeman or framer of things, viz. Godthat maker
of [all] things, the
Originall or fountaine, viz the cause or author.beginning of
The world after the Chaos.
                  the better
world made him
of diuine seede;Whether that God which had made all the o
                        •
                     her creatures framed him of diuine seede;
               
               Or whether
the earthFresh or new. newly
made,Or whether of the new earth, retaining still the seeds of heauen, wherunto it was so neer of kin. & lately
Drawne asunder, or diuided.separated from
the high skie retained
the seedes
of the heauen,
[being]Neere vnto it by kin, as comming out of the same masses or framed together. kinne
vnto [it.]
               Which [earth]
beingmixed. mingled
with riuerWaters. water
He who was sowē [or begotten, or descended] of Iaphet.
                  
                  Prometheus
the Son of
                     Iapeto] by Iapetus is thought to bee meant Iaphet, the sonne of Noah, whom antiquitie accounted a holy man, & of the number of the heauenly; like as they account his sons whom the Poets call Titans, to bee more ancient then man-kinde. And amongst them, one of them was called Prometheus, à prouidentia, because he was prudent and prouident aboue the rest. 
                  Iaphet,
                  Being mingled with water.
                  
                     Prometheus the Son of Iaphet.
                  
               
               
                  This Prometheus is celebrated to haue been the framer of man, either because wisedome is onely belonging to man, or because man was made by singular counsell aboue the other creatures; or else for that he was the first that instructed men in the knowledge of the creation, especially of man kinde, how God made him to his image, and so as the knowledge of God & all diuine vnderstanding came from him.
                  Hath fashioned [or framed] vnto the image [or likenesse. Formed according
to the image
of the
GodsGouerning all things. ruling all
things.Formed him according to the image of the Gods who gouern all things.
               
               And whereas
The other liuing creatures.the rest of the liuing
creatures
Doe looke vpon or behold the earth.do looke to the

earthProne or inclining downeward, or groueling. downeward,And made him such a one, that whereas the rest of the creat
                        •
                     res looke downewards towards the earth,
               
               
                  This shape of man after this sort, sheweth to what end he was created, to wit, to the acknowledgment of God and the contemplation of heauenly things; which appertaineth to no other of the creatures. He gaue to
manMouth [viz. a countenance] looking vpward or high. a lofty
countenance, &
commāded him
toSee or looke to. behold the
heauen,He gaue him a lofty countenance to looke vpward, and to
lift vp hisCountenances erect to the signes or starres. face
vpward to the
skies.And commaunded him to behold the heauens.
               
               So the earth
whichWas. had
beeneEuen now. but presētly
beforeRude. vnwrought
and
withoutImage, frame or shape. forme,Thus finally for a conclusion hereof hee sheweth that the earth which had been so lately before framed out of the Chaos, was both brought into forme & also men made out of it; out of whose diuers conditions follow the foure diuers ages of the world.
               
               BeingConuerted or turned. chanchanged
put vpon
it the vnknowen
Figures.shapes
of men.
            
            
               
               FABLE III.
               
                  This fable of the foure ages seemeth to bee an imitation of the History in the s
                        •
                     cond Ch
                        •
                     pter of Daniel, concerning the image which Nebuchadnezzar saw in his dream, which was of foure sorts, expounded of the foure Monarchs, here applyed to the foure ages of the world. Of the foure
ages of the world,
v. z. the Golden,
Siluer, Brazen, &
Iron ages: and
first of the golden
age.In this Fable Ouid declareth how mankinde increasing the world degenerated, waxing wors
                        •
                      and worse by little and little vntill the floud, which God brought to purge it withall, which that the Poets might signifie, they fained this Metamorphosis of ages, before the floud.
               
               
                  The first age is said to haue beene golden, both in regard of the nature and goodnesse of men then, & also for the easinesse of their liuing & quietnes, in regard of the rest which followed. THe golden
Time.age is
Begun or made of the manners of men.sowen first:
whichLoued or maintained. obserued
Faith and right, viz. faithfull and iust dealing, honesty.fidelity and vpright
dealing,
With no reuenger, or none being to reuenge, viz. without any punishment or iudge.without any reuenger,The first whereof in regard of the rest was a golden age, as he sheweth how.
of the
own accord wth
outLawes. law.This obserued faithfulnesse and vpright dealing without any compulsion.
                  That there was neither punishment, nor feare, nor yet any law.
               
               
                  Punishment and feare were away. There was no
punishment nor
feare:Nor bondes threatning the necke were bound in brasse, viz. lawes ingrauen in brasse.. nor
Lawes were ingrauen in brasse, that they might indure long, and hanged vp or fastened vpon the walles, that they might be publikely read of all.threatning
wordes were
bound in fixed
brasse: neither
yetThe suppliant company did feare, viz. prisoners or offenders humbly prostrate on their knees. did the suppliant
company feare theMouthes. face of

their Iudge:None feared the face of the Iudge, for that there was not any malefactour. but
they wereSecure and safe from all iniury. safe
without iudge.But all liued in securitie, without any execution of Iustice.
               
               
                  The Pine not yet cut out &c. TheThe ship made of Pine tree. Met. M
                           •
                        t.
                   Pine
cut out of her
mountaines,There was then no Nauigation. had
not yetGone downe. descended
into the
Moyst waters.liquid waues,
that shee might
Visite.goe to see the
Peregrinus, 
                        •
                      p
                        •
                     ragrando.
                  Vnknowen, or far off.st
                     •
                  aunge
Orbe, or compasse of the world, viz. foraine Countries.world;No ships nor sayling.
               
               AndMen. mortall
[men]Had knowen. knew
noShoares. coastsBesides their own. but
their owne.Men knew no countries but their owne.
               
               
                  Praeceps fossa, vnde se quis praecipitem dare possit.
                  Steepe. downe ditches. Deepe trenches
Compassed not the townes as yet.did not as
yet compasse about
theOppidum, ab ope dand
                        •
                      in bell
                        •
                      periculis. towns.There were no wars. No fortifications of Townes by ditches, wals, or the like.
               
               
                  [There was] not a Trumpet &c. There was
no Trumpet of
straight [brasse]
[There were] not hornes of bended or bowed brasse, viz. horsemen Trumpets or Cornets.no hornes of
bended brasse.No instruments of warre, as Trumpets, Cornets, or such like.
               
               
                  Not helmets. No helmets,
not a sword.No Helmets, nor Swords.
                  There was not any sword poynt.
                  The secure Nations.The nations liuing
Without care or feare.securely
didFinish. follow continually

their
Soft ease, viz. quiet and easie labours, or sweet pleasures.pleasant ease,
withoutHelpe, or need of the souldier, viz. without warre. Miles vel à mille, vel quòd minimè mollis, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   vse
of the souldier.All Countries liued at their ease in quiet security, without any need of souldier.
               
               Also the earth
it selfe [as yet]
Without tillage.free and vntouched
with
theAny instrument wherewith to cut the earth. harrowe,The earth brought forth all things of it selfe without any tillage or husbandry.
norWounded or broken vp. cut with any
Plought.Shares,
Gaueyeelded all
thingsby it selfe, viz. without any husbandry. of it selfe.
               And they being
content with
meatsCreated, no man compelling. prepared
without any labour,The people were content with that which the earth brought forth without any labour.
               
               GatheredThe young, or fruit of the Arbute or Seruice tree. Seruice-berries
and
Mountaine straw-berries.Straw-berriesStraw-berries,
growing in the
mountaines,They liued on Seruice-berries,
               
               AndHawe-berries or berries growing on the hawthorne. Hawes,Hawes,
and alsoMulberries. bramble-berriesBramble-berries.
sticking
in theHard, viz. sharpe. rough
Thickets.bushie places:
               And [likewise]
Mast of the Oke.AcornesAcornes, and other kinde of fruites. wch
                  Had fallen.fell from the
Okes dedicated to Iupiter.broad spreading

tree of Iupiter.
                  The Spring was continuall, without any varying the times of the yeare, pleasant with warme West windes, which caused the flowers to spring vp without seeds.
               
               
                  There was an eternall spring, viz. no varying of times. The spring
was continual, &
theThe West winds being pleasing, milde, quiet or calme, with warme blasts..The West winds being pleasing, milde, quiet or calme, with warme blasts. pleasant
WestWindes continually blowing, or ayres. windes
Brought forth.cherisht the
flowersGrowing of themselues. bred
without seede,
Wth [their] warm
blasts.
               
                  Afterwards or by and by. Forth-with
also theVnhusbanded. vntilled
earthBare. broght
forthCorne. fruits:The earth fruitfull with all kindes of fruits of it selfe.
               
               
                  Neither the field renued, husbanded, &c. The field not
renuedWaxed white or h
                        •
                     arie. was
white with (r) ful
Heauie.eares of corne.That the fields were loaden with Corne, without any renewing or husbandry.
               
               
                  Now ran the riuers of milke, &c. NowAwnes or beards of corne put for the whole eare.
                  Floods, or riuers of milke [went.] riuers
of milke,
now the riuers of
Drinke of the Gods, or most pleasant wines.NectarDid goe, or went. ran.The riuers ran with milke and Nectar,
               
               And yellow
Honeyes. honeyDistilled.dropped
downFrom euery tree. frō
the green holme.
                     And honey dropped from the trees.
                     And so he concludeth the fable of the Golden age.
                  
               
            
            
               
               FAB. IIII.
               Of the other
three ages, viz. the
Siluer, Brazen, &
Iron ages: & first
of the siluer age,
wherein Iupiter
contracted that
perpetuall spring,
diuiding the yeare
into foure parts.
               
                  For the occasion of this Fable of Saturne sent into hell, Sabine thinketh it to haue byn taken from the profundity of the aire: because Saturne is the highest & farthest remoued from the earth of all the Planets, and that the wonderfull height of the ayre is called Tartarus.
                  
                  [But] Iupiter contracted the times of the anciēt spring after that Saturne being sent into dark hell, the world was vnder Iupiter, &c. AFter that
Saturnus quasi satur annis ob aetatem immenjam.
                  
                     Saturne being sent into the darke hell, viz. Saturne being dead, or after the death of Saturn, for they who dye are said to be sent into hell.
                  Saturne
was sent
into the darke
Tartarus à 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , quia ibi omnia contarbata & confusa.dungeons of
hell,In this Fable Ouid being to speake of the other three ages, sheweth that after the golden age, wherein Saturne raigned, followed the siluer age, in which Iupiter his sonne raigned.
               
               The world was
Vnder the gouernment of Iupiter.vnder
                     Iupiter is said to haue beene the sonne of Saturne, & Ops, and borne at the same birth. That hee expelled his Father out of the Kingdome of Creete. That he was valiant and wise, whereupon, after his death, he was honoured for a God, and called Father and King of Gods. 
                  Iupiter,
and the siluer
Issue [of spring or progeny] came in or entred in.ageCame vnder or came in, or entred in. succeeded,This siluer age hee describeth,
               
               Worse then
golde, more
Better.pretious then
theDeepe yellow, er red shining brasse. yellowe
Brasse.1. To haue beeue worse then the former golden age, but more pretious then the br
                        •
                     
                     zen age which followed.
               
               
                  
[This] Iupiter
                  Shortned, or drew in and abridged.contracted
the timesOf that continuall spring which was in the golden age. of
the anciēt spring.2. That this Iupiter now raigning contracted the ancient spring.
               
               And heeExacted or finished, viz. diuided or measured. digested
the yeare
byFoure measures of times or parts, euery one consisting of three moneths. foure spaces,
by Winters
&Heats of the weather. Summers, &

                     Autumns or Haruests, are called vnequall, because they are more vnconstant, sometimes hot, sometimes colde.
                  vnequall.inconstant autumns,
andThe spring is said to bee short, in regard of the ancient spring in the golden age. a
short spring.Diuiding the yeare into foure parts, viz. Winter, Summer, Autumne, and Spring.
               
               Then first
the ayre being
Scorched.burnt with
Dry heat, viz. feruent or vehement heate, drying all things.drying heat,3. That then first the ayre began to bee scorched with the heate in Summer.
               
               
                  Glowed like a coale, or waxed hot. Beganne to
glowe, and the
Ise bound with the winds hanged.ise hāged being
Frozen, viz. the North-winde, and other colde windes.congealed
wth the (r) winds.And the waters to be frozen with the windes in Winter.
               
               Then [men]
firstWent vnder, or went into. got into
housesCaues [or holes of the earth, dennes] haue beene. caues
were [their]
House.houses,4. That now men began first to seek them houses, to saue themselues in from the violence of the weather.
               
               And thicke
Fushes.shrubs, and
Windings tyed with barks of trees, viz. hurdles made of rods.rodsIoyned with a barke, viz. tyed or bound together. tyed
with pillings of
trees.That their houses were at the first but dens of the earth, thicke shrubs and hurdles.
               
               
                  
Then first
Ceres, daughter to Saturne and Ops, is said to haue first deuised sowing of corne, which before grew wilde, for which shee was honoured as a Goddesse.
                  Ceres seeds, or seeds belonging to Ceres.the seed corne
Are ouerwhelmed.was couered
With long furrowes.in long furrowes,
and the
Oxen.bullocks groned
being pressed
wth the yoke.Then first the sowing of Corne and husbandry was inuented.
               
               
                  The brazen age being the third succeeded after that. The third
Of-spring.age being made
of brasse succeeded
afterBrazen. that,After the siluer age succeeded the brazen age, worse then it:
               
               More cruell in
That siluer age.disposition,Wherein men waxed more cruell in disposition, and more forward to warre and bloudshed. and
moreWits. forward
toHorrid a arma q. horrorem incutientia.
                  Ready. dreadfull
Horrible or bloudie.warres;Yet this was not so wicked, as that which followed.
               
               Yet notArmes or weapons. mischieuous.
The
last [age]Wicked, vngratious.
                  Is [made of] &c. is of
hard iron.Then in the last place hee declareth how the last age of all succeeded, which he calls the iron age, for that it seemed to be made of Iron. Wherein all kinde of wickednesse burst forth, modesty, truth and fidelity, viz. all vertue and honesty departed.
               
               
                  [And] forthwith an age of a worse metall burst forth into all villany. Forthwith
allMischiefe or villany not to be spoken of. wickednesse
Brake out.burst into an
Time.age of a worse
Veine or Myne.metall.
               
                  Modesty.Shamefastnesse
and truth
andFaithfulnesse or faithfull dealing. fidelity
fled away.
               Into the place

                  Of which, viz. shamefastnesse and truth &c.whereofBoth fraudes and guiles, and lying in wayt priuily, and violence and a wicked desire of hauing came vnder, or entred in. there
came both fraud
and deceit,And in place thereof succeeded all kinde of vice, as deceit, treacherie, violence, and wicked couetousnesse.
               
               And also treachery,
andForce. violence,
andHere is a briefe descriptiō of couetousnes, which is therefore called a wicked desire of getting or hauing riches, because it inforceth man to all kinde of wickednesse, and makes him wicked, whence it is called the mother of all euils. a wicked
Loue of hauing.desire of
getting.
               The Mariner
Gaue.hoisted vp the
Sayles to the
winds,Neither had hee knowen them well as yet, viz. he knew not the violence or danger of the winds, or how to preserue himselfe. although
he yet knew thē
not well: and
theKeeles or bottoms of the shippes for the whole ships.
                  Ships. Keeles
Wch hadStood long, viz. whilest the trees growed there. stood
long in the
high mountains
Leaped vp and downe, or daunced,bounsedWith or amongst the vnknown waues. in
the vnknowen
Floods.waues.And then the Mariner for greedinesse of gain durst venture himselfe to the raging seas, thogh he neither knew winds nor seas.
               
               Also the wary
Measurer of grounds.SuruaierMarked out. bounded
[his] ground
with a longBound, frontier, or ditch. limite,Then men began to measure and bound out their grounds,
being common
before, as
theLights. light of the
Sunne, and of the
ayre.Which before time had beene as common as the sun or the ayre.
               
               Neither onely the rich ground

                  Was required for, viz. corn was sought for of the ground.was asked corn,Then also men began to seeke for corne, and all manner of nourishment of the earth by husbandry.
and dueNourishments. nourishment,But it is gone of men into the bowels of &c. viz. men digged deepe for riches.
but
men went into
the bowels of
the earth.And then they digged into the depth of the earth for gold and siluer, and all kinde of metall.
               
               And
                     Opes.] Riches are said to haue the name of Ops, Saturnes daughter, by which the earth is signified, out of which all riches are gotten. riches
which[The earth] or God or nature had layed lowe in the earth. it had
Layed almost as lowe as hell.hid deepe, &
Stirrers vp of many euils.put vnto the
Stigian shades,
are digged out,
being the (r) prouocations
of euils.Whence riches the prouocations of all mischiefes were got out of the earth.
               
               And now
Hurtfull iron had come forth, &c.hurtfulWeapons made of iron. iron,
& golde
                     Nocentius.] Gold is said to be more hurtfull then iron, because most hainous and shamefull wickednesses are committed to get gold. more
hurtful then iron
came abroad,
war comes forth,
which
                     Pugnat vtro
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
                     ] These are as it were the sinnowes of warre: these (chiefly gold) carry away the victory. fighteth
With weapons and with gold.with them
both.Then also was iron found out, whereof swords and other weapons of war are made, and then came golde abroad, farre more hurtfull then iron. And finally warre which is managed with them both.
               
               AndSmites together. shakes
hisRustling, viz, ringing or making a noyse. ratling
armour with a
bloudy hand.Which warre is described by the ratling of armour, and sheading of bloud.
               
               
                  It is liued of that which is snatched [or which is gotten by rapine.] Men liue of
rapine,The host is not safe from [his] guest, viz. from all danger by his guest.. the
guest [is] not safe
from his host.Then men began to liue by rapine, That the guest could not bee safe from his Host.
               
               
                  
The father in
lawe [is not safe]
from [his] sonne
in lawe,Nor the father in law from the sonne in law. and the
Fauour, viz. loue, or true affection.agreemēt of brethren
isSeldome seene. rare.And that it was rare to see brethren to agree.
               
               
                  The man. The husband
Hangeth or houereth ouer.watcheth for
theDestruction. death of [his]
wife,The husband seeking the death of the wife; the wife, of her husbād.
                  She [houereth] for the destruction. she of [her]
husband.
               TheCruell towards their step-children. terrible
step-mothers
doePrepare. mingle

                     Aconitum is a very venemous hearbe, first bred (as Poets faine) of the frothing of the dog of hell amongst the rockes or crags.
                  Pale or wan.blackPoyson, making blacke. wolfbane.The step-mothers cruelly practising the death of their step-children by poyson, and all other wicked deuices.
               
               The Sonne
Inquires of diuiners, sorcerers, mathematicians, and the like.
                  Inquires.
                  Inquires how long his Father shall liue.pries into
his Fathers yeers
before his day.The sonne inquiring and seeking by magicall and wicked arts, how long his Father should liue.
               
               
                  Godlinesse lieth ouercome [of vngodlinesse] or trampled vnderfoot. Piety lyeth
ouercome,Then began all true goldlinesse to bee troden vnder foote. and
the virgin
                     Astraea) is said by some to haue beene the daughter of Astraeus, a most iust Prince, for whose equity shee was called Iustice, and is said to haue been taken into heauen, and is placed in the Zodiack, & called Virgo.
                  
                  Astraea. Iustice,
the last of
the heauenly
Vertues or heauen dwellers.inhabitants,
left the earthWet with slaughter. imbrued
in bloud.Then Iustice which before had beene vntouched betooke her selfe into heauen, leauing the earth imbrued in bloud.
               
            
            
               
               FABLE V.
               
                  Of the fight of the Giants. Of the battell
which the Giants
prepared against
the Gods.In this Fable the Poet sheweth, that the earth thus defiled, and iustice gone of it.
               
               ANd least the
highSkie. heauē
should bee more
Safe.secure then
the earth,Least the heauen should bee more secure then the earth,
               
               
                  Men] say. They say that

                     Gigantes.] Giants were properly men of huge bodies, said to be the Sonnes of the the earth, without father, hauing serpents feet. But these indeed were wicked men, desp
                        •
                     si
                        •
                     g the Lord, and so said to goe about to driue God out of heauen.
                  Giants to haue affected, viz. vehemently desired, or set vpon.Giants did

                     Affectare.] Signifieth to desire something vehemently, which a man cannot attaine vnto.affectThe heauenly kingdome. the kingdome
of heauen,Men say that Giants began to affect the very kingdome of heauen it selfe, to subdue it, and rule in it, hauing driuen out the Gods.
               
               AndTo haue built vp. built vp
mountainsCarried together. heaped
vp vnto the
high skies.And to this end and purpose to haue heaped mountaines one vpon another, whereby they might climbe vp into heauen.
               
               ThenIupiter. the
Almighty Father
Brake in pieces Olympus with his thunderbolt, sent downe.sending
downe his thunderbolt,
brake in
pieces
                     Olympus is a most high hill of Macedonia.
                   
                  Olympus,
andCast downe, or dashed in pieces, Pelion lying vnder Ossa. smit out
Pelion and Ossa, are knowen mountains of Thessalie.
                  
                  Pelion lying vnder
Ossa.
                  2. How Iupiter the King of heauen, with his thunderbolts brake downe and dasht those hils in peeces.
               
               When as their

                  Horrible, or direfull, or terrible.cruell bodies
lay ouerwhelmed
with their
owneGreatnesse. vast
weight,And with them ouerwhelmed the direfull bodies of those monsters.
                  Which bodies of theirs thus crushed with the weight of the hils, and of their owne vastnesse,
               
               
                  Men say the earth besprinkled [or imbrued] with much bloud of her sonnes, to haue waxed wet, and to haue animated [or giuen life to] the warme bloud. They say that
the earth waxed
wet being dashed
wth much blood
of [her] sonnes,Imbrued the earth with their bloud.
and that it animated
the warm
bloud.3. How the earth thus soked with that warme bloud gaue life therevnto.
               
               And least no
monuments of
their progenie
should remaine;And thereupon, least no monument of those Giants should remain,
               
               
                  This bloud turned into the shapes of men, and not of Apes (as some thought) for that they were such contemners of the Gods, so violent and greedy of bloud, which Apes are not.
                  [It] to haue turned into the face [or shape] of men. That it turned
[it] into the
shape of men:That the earth so steeped and animated with their bloud, turned into the shapes of men.
                  But also that.and moreouer
that that same
Stocke, race, or linage. Propago is properly the flocke of an olde Vine, out of which many young shutes come.of-spring [was]
a contemner of
the Gods,Which of-spring of theirs proued also contemners of the Gods, and most cruell and bloudily minded, and
most greedy of
cruell slaughter.
               And was violent:That any might know them to haue beene bred of bloud.
thatAny one might knowe. you
might know it to
be bred of bloud.
            
            
               
               FAB. VI.
               Of Lycaon turned
into a Walfe.This cruelty of theirs is shewed by the example of Lycaon, whome Iupiter turned into a Wolfe for his bloudy tyranny in this manner.
               
               WHICH
things
After that.when

                     Father Saturnius, viz. Iupiter, Saturnes sonne.
                  
                  Iupiter sawe
From the top of heauen.from his high
Tower.That when Iupiter from his high throane beheld this their cruelty, hee gaue a deepe groane.
               
               
                  Hee fetched a sigh or deepe grone. He sighes:
andRelating or shewing, or oft thinking of. reuoluing
in his mind,And pondering or reuoluing with himself the cruelty practised by Lycaon at his table, in setting mens flesh before his guests, the fact being lately committed, and not yet divulged, the
Filthy.
                  Shamefull fact at Lycaona table.odious banquets
of
                     Lycaon king of Arcadia, and sonne to Pelasgus, is reported not only to haue killed his guests, but also to haue vsed to set them at his banquets before other strangers to bee eaten: which when Iupiter had found by experience, he both burnt his house, and turned him into a Wolfe. Some thinke that this was fained, for that Lycaon did sacrifice a childe vpon the Altar of Iupiter. Lycaon of 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      signifying a Wolf. 
                  Lycaons
Table, not yet
Made knowne, or spread abroad.divulged,
Because the fact was not yet made knowen.the fact being
Fresh, viz. newly committed.new;
               He conceiueth
in his mindeExceeding great angers. very
great indignation
Worthy of Iupiter.
                  beseeming
Iupiter.
                  Hee first conceiued high indignation, beseeming his Maiesty.
               
               And calleth a
councell [of the
Gods:]And forthwith called a councell of the Gods, who came immediately to consult hereof.
                  They came without delay. no delayDid hold.
with-held
thē being called.
               
                  
                  The milky circle▪
                  There isA way aloft. a
lofty wayManifest, viz.
                  
                  Shining brightly.
                  Heere first the Poet takes occasion to set out the way to Iupiters Court. apparant
The heauen being cleare.in a cleare heauen.1. That it is aloft, & apparant to all in a clear heauen.
               
               
                  It hath the name Lactea, viz. the milky [way] or Lactea hath the name. It is called
Lactea [or milky]
Of all other circles in heauen, it alone may be seene with the eyes.
                  Notoriously knowen, or easie to bee noted and knowen.notable
by the very
whitenesse.2. That it is called via lactea, notable for shining whitenesse.
               
               
                  This [way] is the iourney for the gods to the roofes of the great thunderer, viz. Iupiter, or the iourney for the Gods, &c. This way the
Gods goe vnto
the Palace of
great Iupiter,
                  3. That the Gods go that way to Iupiters house.
               
               
                  4. That on both sides of this way are the houses of all the other greater Gods, as Mars, Mercury, &c. continually frequented, & their gates standing euer open.And to [his
royall] house.
The Courts before the houses.The Courts of
the
                     Nobilium.] These were called the greater Gods of the heathen, as Mars, Apollo, Neptune, Mercurie, &c.
                   noble
Gods are frequented
With open gates.the
gates standing euer
open, on the
right hand, and
on the left.
               
                  The inferiour sort. The cōmon
sort [of the gods]
Haue their dwelling.inhabiteth
Diuers, or separate in places.distant in places:5. That the multitude of their lesser or inferiour Gods haue their houses further distant from it. But the chiefe of the gods haue their houses in the front of that way.
                  The mighty heauen dwellers.the potent
And the famous, or noble.& glorious heauēly
peeresHaue set their houses from the front, or rather towards the forepart of the via lactea.
                   haue
placed their houses
in the front.
               
                  
                  
                     Hic locus.] The Poet seemeth to allude to the Palace of Rome, wherein the Emperours and chiefe 
                        •
                     eeres had th
                        ••
                      houses thus placed. Palatium was one of the 
                        〈◊〉
                      of Rome, where were most stately buildings of the Emperours, whence all such are called Palatia of mons palat
                           •
                        nus.
                  This is the
place whichIf boldnesse may be giuen [or graunted] to my words. if I
may speak boldly,6. That such is the state of that way, that the Poet protesteth that he would not be afraid to call it the very palace of heauen.
               
               
                  I cannot, viz. I would not bee afraid. I need not
feareTo haue called. to call the
Palace of the
great heauen.
               
                  Therefore where. Then when
the Gods satIn their inner roome paued with marble stone. in
a Marble inner
roome,After this description of the way wherby the Gods came to Iupiters house, and that they were now set in an inner roome, paued with Marble,
               
               He being higher
in place,That Iupiter placed in his throane aboue them all, and leaning vpon his Iuory Scepter, shaked first the terrible locks of his head, with which hee made both Earth, Sea, and Heauen to tremble. and
leaning vpon his
Iuorie
                     Sceptro.] The Scepter is a staffe which Kings vsed to leane vpon. It is chiefly attributed to Iupiter, the King of Gods and men. Sceptrum 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         hoc est, ab innitendo, because Kings standing vsed to leane vpon their Scepters. Scepter,
Moued [or shook] both thrice & foure times.shak't oft the
terribleBush of haire or lockes, viz. haire. bush of
his head, wherewth
heMakes to quake. moued
[both] the earth,
Sea, andThe stars or signs of heauen, viz. the whole heauen. Heauen.
               
                  And then he loosed [or opened] his disdaining mouths in such manner. And after he
spake thus with
great indignation.And after that spake with great indignation.
               
               
                  
                     Iupiters Oration to the Gods, wherein hee sheweth that all mankinde was worthy to be destroyed, sith the very Gods themselues were not free from their trecheries and outrage; When as Lycaon was not afraid to lay hands vpon Iupiter himselfe, being the father both of Gods and men. Hee maketh them also attentiue, setting forth both the hainousnesse of the thing, and his own care for their safety.
                  I haue not beene. I was not
moreDoubtfull or troubled. carefull
for the kingdom
of the world at
that timeIn which. wherinWhere is set out Iupiters Oration to the Gods, in which hee laboureth first to make them attentiue, by his care of the world, and of preseruing the Gods that yet remained in the earth. And this by comparison.
                  
euery one of
The 
                        ••
                     ants are 
                        〈◊〉
                      to haue 
                        〈◊〉
                      fe
                        •
                     t for the
                        ••
                      
                     
                        •
                     lish d
                        •••
                     ces, & a hundreth hands for their violence.the snake-footed
[giants]Prepared [himselfe] to cast on his hundreth armes to heauen, taken or surprised. was
ready to laye
[their] hundreth
Armes.hands vpon
The Gods dwelling in heauen.the heauen
Being captiue, viz. taken, subdued, or conquered.which they indeuoured
to surprize.That hee was not more carefull for the kingdomes of the world at that time whē the Giants sought to inuade and conquer heauen.
               
               For although
[that] enemy was
cruell,Because although that was a cruell enemie, viz. the Giants, yet that warre depended but onely vpon the Giants as vpon one bodie, and so he had to doe but onely with thē, to destroy them. But now, that hee must bee inforced to destroy all mankinde in the whole world, all being becomne corrupt and rebellious against him, so farre as sea and earth extended. yet that
warre depended
ofOne body [of the Giants] that is, one kinred or stocke. one body &
of oneOf-spring of the Giants. beginning.
               
                  The manner how Magistrates should proceed in punishing, euen as the Chirurgian with limbs past cure. Now[All] the mortall kinde is to bee destroyed of me. I am
to destroy [all]
man-kindeWhat way. as
far as the
                     Nereus a God of the Sea, put for the Ocean Sea, compassing the world.
                  
                     Nereus soundeth about, viz. maketh a noyse about with his waues. Ocean
roareth about
the whole
world:This hee bindeth by the solemne oath of the Gods, viz. swearing by the infernall riuers running from the Stygian groue, viz. by Styx.
                  
                  Hee sweares by Styx the riuer of hell, as the Gods vsed to doe, for that they feared to deceiue the God thereof. I sweare
by theFlouds beneath. infernall
riuers,Sliding. running
vnder the earth
fromThe wood hanging ouer the riuer Styx.
                   the Stygian
groue,
               
                  
                  This was the reason why the Consuls of Rome had a bunch of rods tyed vnto an Axe carried before them, to signifie that lesse offences are to be corrected with rods, but that wickednesse that cannot be helped is to bee vtterly cut off.
                  All things.All meanes
[are]Before. first to bee
Tryed.assayed,That howsoeuer all meanes were to be tried first for preuenting hereof, yet fith all mankinde was becomn now as an vncureable and a desperate wound, they were all to bee cut off, for feare of corrupting that one part, which yet remained sound. but
The wound that cannot be cured.the vncureable
wound is to
bee cut off with
theSword point. sword, lest
theSencere, viz. whole and vncorrupt. sound part
Bee drawen to [a like corruption]be corrupted.
               
                  These were worthy Nobles which were accounted greater then men, yet lesse then Gods.
                  There are to mee halfe Gods, there are rurall diuine powers. I haue halfe
Gods,For that hee had yet in the earth halfe Gods, and countrey Gods, as Faunes, Nymphes, Satyrs, gods of the woods and mountaines. I haue
countrie Gods,
These Faunes are supposed to haue beene some kind of Baboons, Munkies, and the like, which the poore people seeing but seldome thought to bee Gods. For they are reported to haue beene little dwarfes, with crooked Noses, hairy bodies, Goats feete, and some of them hauing two hornes. These vsed oft to daunce, with other such like wanton gestures.
                  Faunes, Satyrs, & Syluanes were accounted countrey Gods.Faunes, and
Nymphes, were supposed Goddesses, and they of sundry sorts, according to the places which they are said to inhabite.Nymphs, &
Satyrs, and also
Syluans, wch inhabite
the moū
                  taines.
               Whome because
we doe not
as yetCount worthy. vouchsafe
the honour
of heauen,Whome because hee did not yet vouchsafe the honour of heauen to dwell there, yet he would haue them to inhabite the earth which he had giuen them, quietly and safely.
               
               [Yet]At least. certainely
let vs suffer
them to inhabite
theEarths, lands, or Countries. earth,
                     Sabine maketh a doubt of it, whether they were men or diuels.
which wee haue
giuen them.
               O yeGods inhabiting the heauens. supernall
Gods,Then turning his speech more specially vnto the Gods there present, asketh of them whether they thinke that those other halfe Gods, & the rest, could possibly bee safe in the earth, when as Lycaon durst plot mischiefe euen against himselfe, the great God, hauing the thunderbolt in his hand, to be auenged of all his enemies, and who was chiefe of all the Gods, hauing all of them vnder him, euen these themselues. do
yee belieue that

they can be safe
enough.
               When
                     Lycaon a 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                     ▪ 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   
                  Lyeaon
                  The occasion or the Fable of Lycaons cruelty is thought by some to bee this, that hauing ordained games for triall of masteres (in a hill called Lycaeus,) vnto Iupiter, whome he therefore called Iupiter Lycaeus; he there first offered an infant vnto Iupiter vpō his Altar which cruelty made him notorious and odious to all, as eating mans fies
                        •
                     
                     ▪ & so entertaining Iupiter..
Others thinke it to bee for murdering one of the hostages of the Molossians, and offering him in sacrifice to Iupiter; and so deuo
                        ••
                     ing them as sheepe, the Poets faine him to be turned into a Wolfe, alluding to his name.
                  Knowen or noted for, or famous for it.notorious
for cruelty, hath
Built, [viz. contriued or practised] treacherre [or treason.]plotted mischief
Tome.[euen] against
This is thought to be spoken in fauor of Augustus Caesar, who escaped the treachery against him; Not of Iulius Caesar, who was so murdered.me,The name of the Romans was becomne famous, by the worthy acts of Iulius and Augustus Caesar, which was sought to bee extinguished in Augustus Caesar, so conspired against to be murdered cruelly, as Iulius Caesar had beene before. who both
Haue and rule.possesse and
gouerne theThunderbolt.
lightningWho doe possesse and rule you. and
[euen] you [yourselues.]
               They allRequire earnestly with ardent [or feruent] studies [him] being bold to enterprize such things. fretted
together,Hereupon the Poet shewes the effect of his speech, how they all stormed, asking earnestly for him who durst attempt this. and

                     viz. they asked for him to be punished.earnestly ask
with vehement
desire for him
who durst doe
such things.Then sets out the manner of their murmuring by a fit similitude: That like as when certaine wicked conspiratours sought to extinguish the famous name of the Romans, by murdering Augustus Caesar, as they had done Iulius Caesar before, all mankinde was astonished with the terrour of the suddaine feare, and the whole world did dread exceedingly, so did they disdaine.
                  So. Euen
so as when
[that] wicked
Hand, viz. a company of wicked conspiratours.bandDoth cruelly rage. raged furiously
to extinguish
The Roman name in the Coesarian bloud.the name
of the Romans in
the bloud of the
Caesars.
               
               [All] mankind
wasAmazed. astonished

with so great a
terrour of [such]
a suddenRuine [or vtter ouerthrow] [intended or ready to haue beene executed]. downfall,
& the whole
worldWas horribly afraid, or trembled with feare. did
dread exceedingly.
               
                  
                     The religion & loue of thy people of Rome, who auenged the conspiracie against thee, is no lesse acceptable to thee, then the indignation of the Gods was to Iupiter, for the intendment against him.
                     This sheweth, the former to be meant of Augustus Caesar.
                     
                   Neither (oh
Augustus) [is]
the piety of thy
[Subiects of Rome.
                   Romans]
lesseAcceptable. pleasing
vnto theeAfterwards, turning his speech to the Emperour Augustus, sheweth Iupiters acceptation hereof, that this loue and piety of the Romans, for being auenged on those conspiratours, was no lesse pleasing to Augustus himselfe, then that was to Iupiter.
                  
               
               Then that
Hath beene.was to Iupiter;
who after that he
had repressed the
murmure of the
GodsThe Poet expresseth the gesture of them who command or cause a silence.
                  With voyce. with
[his] speach and
hand;And then how Iupiter staid the murmure of the Gods, inioyning them silence both by his speech and hand: & how all of them kept silence.
                  They all held their peace. all of thē
kept silence.
               After theClamour. noise
wasHusht. stayed,And after that the noise was repressed by his grauitie, that Iupiter spake to them all againe, quieting them in this manner. That, that bloudy Lycaon had pa
                        •
                     
                     ed dearely for it, and therefore that they should not bee any further carefull, nor fre
                        •
                      themselues about it:
being repressed
by the grauitie
of the
                     Iupiter their gouernour. Regent,
               
                  Iupiter againe
brake off the silence
with this
speech.
               
                  
                  That bloudy Lycaon.
                  He indeed
hathPayed the punishment, viz. hee hath dearely bought it. payed for
it,Dismisse ye [or let goe] this care of requiring him to bee punished. let this care
passe.
               Notwithstanding,And to giue them full content, he relates vnto them both the horrible fact which Lycaon had committed▪ and how hee tooke vengeance of him.
                  I will teach what [was] admitted [or committed] [and] what the vengeance is.I will
shew what a horrible
fact hee
committed, and
whatPunishment for reuenge. vengeance
I tooke of
him.
               
                  This seemeth to bee a plaine allusion vnto that speech of GOD which he vseth to Abraham, before the destruction of Sodome, Genesit 18. 20. 21. and so Genes. 11. 5 concerning the builders of Babell, and an imitation thereof. TheCry of the sinnes. infamie
of the
Age▪ 
                     viz of the people of this age or time.time had
Touched.comne to our
eares:Herein he sets downe first the occasion thereof, viz. how the generall cry of the wickednesse of that age had comne to his eares.
               
               Which ICoueting or earnestly wishing. desiring
[to be] false,And secondly, how hee (wishing the cry to be false) came downe from heauen to try it.
                  Doe slide downe.descend from
the highest heauen.
               And [though
I bee the great]
GOD [yet] I
Compasse about.viewe the
earthVnder a humane shape, viz. in the likenesse of a man. vnder the
shape of a man.That thus, though he was the great God, yet he did view the earth in the likenesse of a man.
               
               
                  
                  It is a long delay.It is too long
To number or recken vp.to tell,Here hee aggrauates the sinne of all mankinde, that it were too long to tell how much wickednesse hee found euery where, that it was greater then the cry. how
much wickednes is found euery
where: theReport or cry. infamy
it selfeHath beene. was
lesse thenThe wickednesse it selfe. the
truth.And that to the end to search out that notorious and abhominable cruelty reported of Lycaon, he passed through Arcadia, going ouer Menalus that famous hill of Arcadia, notable and horrible with wilde beasts, and so ouer Lycaeus and Cyllenus.
                  
               
               I hadGone ouer. passed

                     Menalus is a Citie, & famous mountaine of Arcadia, named of Menalus the sonne of Arcas.
                  
                  Menalus being
Horrible, or very fearefull to cause horrour. dreadfullWith.for
theCruell wild beasts. dennes of
wilde beasts.
               And thePlaces full of Pine-trees. Pinegroues
of colde
Lycaeus,
                  And the hill Cyllenus.
                   with

                     Cyllenus a mountaine of Arcadia, dedicated to Mercurie. As Lycaeus is a mountain there, dedicated to Pan.
                  
                  Cyllenus.
               
               
                  And then, or from hence. Afterwards
I enter into the
Seats, or habitations.seat andVnhospital roofes, viz. place vnmeet for hospitality. barbarous
house of
The cruell King of Arcadia, viz. Lycaon,
                  the Arcadian
Cruell Kings in Ouids time were called tyrants, which had formerly beene called kings.tyrant,And how afterwards he came to the seat and the very house of the tyrant Lycaon himselfe.
               
               
                  When the late twilight drew on the night. When as now

                     Crepuseulum is taken for the twilight, either in the euening or morning, when it is doubtfull whether it bee day or night, of creperus, signifying doubtfull.it drew towards
night.In the shutting in of the euening.
               
               
                  I gaue signes [or tokens.] I signified
A God to haue comne. that a
                     Deum may seeme here to be taken for Iupiter, the great God, viz. father of Gods and men.God was
comne, and the
Common people.common sort
Had begunne.beganTo adore and worship me. to
pray:
                     And caused notice to bee giuen, that the great God was comne.
                     Whereupon the common sort hauing yet some feare, began to fall to prayer.
                   [but] Lycaon
                  
atIn the first [place.] first
Scoffes, or laughes at.derides [their]
godly prayers.But that Lycaon first derides their prayers.
               
               
                  I will proue saith he, by and by, by an open difference, or a manifest perill or experiment. By and by,Secondly, glories that he will make an experiment, to try whether hee was a God or no, or but a mortall creature, and that hee would make that past all doubt.
quoth hee, I will
try by a plain experience,
He would make it plaine whether hee was a God, or no, thus; because if hee was a God he could not be killed.whether
he be a God
or a mortall
[man.]Neither the truth shall be doubtfull, or to be doubted of. Neither
shall the truth be
any more to bee
doubted of.
               [So] he prepareth
toKill or dispatch. destroy
mee being
heauie with sleep
in the night,And thirdly, prepares for the murthering of him, viz. of Iupiter himselfe, by an vnexpected death, to catch him being heauie with sleepe in the night, and so this only experiment of the truth would please him. by
A death not thought of.an vnexpected
death. This experience
of the
truth pleaseth
him.
               Neither is hee
content therewith,Fourthly, that he not yet content herewith, presētly cuts the throat of one of the Hostages sent to him from the Molossians.
                  
[but] hee
cuts the throate
of one of the
Pledges, viz. men sent to him for performance of promises.Hostages sent
From the Nation of the Molossians.from the
                     Molossi were a people of Epeirus, of whom Lycaon, hauing ouercomne them in warre, tooke Hostages, one whereof hee killed that hee might set him before Iupiter to banquet with. 
                  Molossians.
               
               
                  
And soHe partly mollified [or boyled soft] [his] limbs halfe dead, with hot water. he did
partly seeth his
ioynts being but
halfe dead,And of him causeth part to be sod, and part roasted, and so to be set before him. [and]
partlyRoasted [them] with fire put vnder [or put to them.] roasted
them.
               WhichTogether. so
soone as hee had
setTo the tables. vpon the table;But assoone as euer these dainties were set before him vpon the table, hee forthwith turned vpon that cruell tyrants held his house, meet for such a master, and consumed it to ashes with reuenging fire.
                  I ouerturned the roofes, being meete houses with reuenging flame vpon the master.I ouerturned
vpon the
Masters head,
The house or houshold Gods worthy of reuenging fire.. with a reuenging
flame his
houses, being
worthy [to bee
burnt.]
               
                  Lycaon. HeAffrighted with the burning of his house. being
terrified flyeth
away:And then how the wretch being terrified fled away, and getting all alone into desert woods, & getting
theSilence or quietnesse.
                  The woods. solitarinesse
of the
countrey,
               HeHowleth wonderfully like a Wolfe. howleth
out,Howleth out like a Wolfe: andAssateth in vaine to speake. indeauoureth
to
speake,And endeauouring to speake, but not able, runnes mad with furie. but all in
vaine:
                     Lyeaon was driuen into madnesse because he could not speake.
                  His mouth gathereth a furious woodnesse from that time. from
that [time] hee
runnes mad:And instead of men fals vpon beasts, deuouring them as hee was formerly woont to deuour men. and
vseth his greedy
desire of [his] accustomed

slaughter
vpō
                  Beasts instead of men. beasts,
andLike as when hee was a man. now also
doth heReioyce. delight
In sheading bloud.in bloud.And so still delights in bloud.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Lycaon is fained to be turned into a Wolfe, because hee was so giuen ouer to greedy couetousnesse, that he liued of spoile as a Wolfe.
                     Thus are all rauenous and cruell oppressours, Wolues in the shapes of men.
                   HisClothes or apparel. garmēts
Goe away, or vanish.are turned
intoRough or great haire. haires,His garments were turned into haire, [his] armes into legs.
[his] arms[Grow forth, or are changed.] into
legs.
               He is made a
Wolfe,So that hee becomes in all things a Wolfe; yet keeping still the prints of his olde shape. and [yet]
he keepes the
prints of his olde
shape.
               
                  There is [to him] the same grainesse. Hee hath the
sameHoarines or white gray colour. graynesse,Hauing the same hoary grainesse.
the sameViolence or fiercenesse. grimnesse
of [his]
Countenance.lookes.The same grimnesse of his lookes.
               
               
                  The same eyes doe shine [to him] there is the same image of cruelty, or fiercenesse. The same
gloring of his
eyes;The same gloring of his eyes; and the very same picture of cruelty. the same
picture of crueltie.
            
            
               
               FAB. VII.
               Of the generall
deluge, and destruction
of the
world thereby, for
the ouerflow of iniquitie,After that the Poet had set out the wickednesse of the time in this horrible fact of Lycaon, and the vengeance which Iupiter tooke of him for the same, hee proceedeth to declare that all the world, being likewise filled with cruelty, Iupiter fully resolues to destroy all in like manner.
and the repairing
the same
againe.
               ONe house
Hath fallen, or is fallen.is ouerthrowen;
but
not one house alone
hath beene
worthyTo be ouerthrowē. to perish:

                     Erynuis is taken for a Furie of hel, delighting in discord and warre, & a taker of vengeance on such especially as are impious against their parents.
                  Cruell furie raigns what [way] the earth lyeth open, viz. euery where.crueltie
raignes through
all the world.That although this one house was ouerthrowen, yet it was not one house alone that had deserued it, but euen all man-kinde was worthy to perish.
               
               
                  You may thinke [them] to sweare to horrible wickednesse.
                  A man would thinke that all men had bound themselues by oath to commit all kinde of mischiefe. You would
thinke that all
men had sworne
together to commit
all horrible
wickednesse.Because cruelty so raigned euery where, that a man would haue thought that all sorts had conspired & bound themselues by oath, to commit all horrible wickednesse.
               
               
                  All of them let them giue the punishment &c.
                  Let them haue all according to their deseruings. Let all of
themMore quickly. presently
abide the punishmēt
which theyAnd therefore he decrees to deale with thē all, in taking vengeance according to their desert.
                  
haue deserued
To suffer.to indure,So my sentence [or decree] stands. [for]
so I haueDetermined. decreed.And this is the determination of his sentence, which he will not reuoke.
               
               
                  This seemeth to be an allusion to the manner of the Senatours of Rome, in giuing their sentences or voices. Part [of
them] approoue
theSayings. speech of
Iupiter by voice,
                     Hereupon all the rest of the Gods approoue of Iupiters decree.
                     Some by speech setting him on,
                  
andPut vnto pricks or goads. put spurres
vnto him [thus]
Chafing, discontented, or full of indignation.moued:Others by their assents agreeing thereunto. others
fulfil [their] parts
By giuing their assent, or assenting.with [their]
assents.
               Yet notwithstanding
They all take to heart the losse of mankinde.the
Destruction.losse of mankinde
is a griefe
vnto [them] all,Yet here the Gods make sundry doubts concerning this matter. And first they are all troubled for this vtter destruction of mankinde. And then demand what the forme and condition of the world should be, being vtterly dispeopled, and depriued of mortall men.
andThey demaund of Iupiter.
                   they ask,
What the fashion of the earth shall be, being depriued [or destitute.]whatshould be. shall
be the forme of
the earth being
depriu'd of mortal
[men.]Who should do them any worship or seruice?
                  Who should worship or doe any honour vnto them. who
should bring
Incense or sacrifice.Frankincense
vnto their Altars:Whether he thus prepared a way to deliuer the earth to the wilde beasts, to be wasted by them?
whether he
[thus] prepare
To giue ouer the earth to be wasted with wilde beasts.to deliuer to the

wilde beasts the
earth to beeDispeopled, or wasted. destroyed?
               
                  The King of the Gods forbids them, asking such like things to feare. 
                  Iupiter bids
them asking such
like things,To all which Iupiter giuing answere, first for the generall, bids them not to feare: for that he would haue a care of all these things. not to
Tremble.feare,For [hee said] the rest [or other matters] to bee afterwards a care to him. for that
hee would haue a
care of all other
matters, and promiseth
[[To be.] that
there should be]
anIssue or generation. of-spring
vnlike vnto the
former people,And for mankinde, that hee would raise vp another of-spring farre vnlike this former, which hee would destroy, and of a more admirable beginning, viz. by changing euen very stones into men and women, as followeth after.
of aMaruailous original, stock or birth, viz. By changing stones into men and women, as followeth after. wonderful
beginning.
               And euen now
was heeAbout. ready
toScatter or spread, or throwe abroad. disperse his
Thunderbolts.lightnings
vponThe whole earths. all the
earth:And here he was ready to haue scattered his lightnings, & throwen his thunderbolts thoroughout all the earth;
               
               But he feared,But that hee feared least hereby the verie heauens should bee set on fire, by so many fires euery where vnder them.
least bechance
the holySkie. heauen
shouldConceiue [or catch] the flames. catch the
flameFrom so many, &c. by so many
firesVpon the earth. [vnder
it] and the whole
The Axletree about which the heauen is said to bee turned, put for the whole heauen.
                  Axletree.heauen should
Begin to burne.be set on fire.
               
                  
He alsoCals to minde. remembreth
that

                     Fatum, according to the Stoicks, is the decreed order of things, whereby the world is gouerned necessarily.
                  To be in the destinies or fates.it was decreed,And withall remembred that it was decreed, that such a destruction by fire should come in the end of the world.
                  A time to be present.that the time
should come,
               
                  In which [time] the sea, in which, the earth & palace [or court] of heauen being catched [by fires] must burne. Wherein the
sea,For that the time should come wherein earth, sea, and heauens being set on fire should burne, and the whole frame of the world should be dissolued. earth, & Palace
of heauen
being set on fire,
should burne, &
theHuge masse [or building] of the world so ful of work, [or that cost so much labour] must labour [or faint.] curious
frame of the
world should be
dissolued.
               [His]Darts. thunderbolts
Framed, forged, or hammered.made by
the hands of the
The Cyclopians are said to haue beene Iupiters Smiths which make him thūderbolts. They were giāts of Sicily, hauing but one eye, and that in the middest of their forehead.
                  Cyclopians are
Layed aside to bee reserued against the last destruction by fire.laid vp.Hereupon hee layeth vp his thunderbolts forged by his Smiths the Cyclopians.
                  
               
               ADiuers.
                  It pleaseth him to haue a punishment contrary to that by fire, viz. by water. contrary
punishment
pleaseth [him] to
destroyThe mortall kind. all mankinde
By water.vnder
the water;And resolueth of a contrary destruction, viz. To destroy all mankinde with a floud of waters: and that chiefly by sending downe a mighty raine from euery part of heauen. and
to send downe
Great showers or sodaine stormes of raine out of all the heauen.mighty raine
from euery part
of heauen.
               
                  
[AndTo that end. therefore]
hee forthwith
shuts vp the

                     Aquile, the Northwinde is so called, because he commeth flying boystrously as an Eagle.North-winde
in theEolian caues. caues of

                     Eolus, is fained to bee the sonne of Iupiter by Acesta
                           •
                        
                      and he is said to bee the GOD of the winds, because being Prince of Eolie, hee found out much the reason of the winds, & by certaine signes to foretell what windes would blowe, and so was thought to haue the windes at commaund.
                  Eolia.
                  And to this purpose hee presently shuts vp the North-winde in the caues of the countrey of Eolia, where Eolus rules them.
               
               AndWhatsoeuer other blasts. all other
windes which
Put to flight, or cause to fly away.driue away the
cloudsSpred ouer. broght
in;And likewise all other windes which driue away the cloudes, and the raine.
               
               And hee sends
out the South-winde.And instead of them sends abroad the south-winde, the principall procurer of raine.
               
               
                  The South-winde is thus described, because it is commonly wet. The South-winde
flies abroad
The winds are said to haue wings, for the swiftnesse of them.with wet
wings,Which is described thus, for the more easie vnderstanding the rainie
nature of it.
               
               
                  Hauing couered his terrible, &c. or being couered in respect of his countenance, or as concerning his countenāce. Synce.
                   Hauing his
terrible countenance
couered
withPitchy darknesse, viz. blacke clouds. darknesse
as black as pitch.1. That hee comes flying with wet wings.
                  2. That he hath his countenance terrible & couered with darknesse as blacke as pit
                        •
                     h.
               
               [His] beard [is]
Heauie or full.loaden with
Huge showers or stormes.abundance of
raine,3. That his beard is loaden with raine, and that raine floweth from his hoarie lockes, all bedeawed. theWaue. water
floweth from
hisWhite with deaw. hoarie
Haires.lockes.
               Little cloudes
sit in [his] forehead,4. That in his forehead sit little cloudes, his feathers, bosom, & all distill like deaw.
                  
both [his]
feathers and bosome
Drop downe as the deaw or send downe a deaw.distill
like deawe.
               And as hee
Pressed the clouds hanging farre and wide, with his hand.wringed with
his hand the
cloudes hanging
all abroad;5. That hee wrings the clouds in his hand.
               
               
                  
                     Fragor is the noise of things broken, 
                        
                           •
                        frango.
                  
                  There followed a crash. A crash
is made,Whereupon followeth immediatly a wonderfull crash, and the raine powreth downe abundantly from the skie. &Dense or thicke stormes. huge
showers are poured
downe from
theHeauen. skie.
               
                  
                     Iris, the raine-bowe is said to be the messenger of Iuno and sometimes of Iupiter, because appearing after dry weather, she is said to foreshow showers, and after raine faire weather, ab 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , dico.
                   The rainebowe
The messenger of Iuno hauing put on diuers colours.
                  Iunoes
messengerShe is said to be arrayed with diuers colours for the sundry colours of it, made in the clouds by the reflexion of the beames of the Sunne or Moone. being
arrayed with
diuers colours,And lastly how the raine-bowe which is said to bee the messenger of Iuno, arrayed in her sundry colours, gathereth water likewise, and ministreth raine vnto the cloudes.
                  Receiueth or gathereth within it selfe.conceiueth
waters, andBringeth nourishmēt vnto the clouds, viz. water to fill thī. affoordeth
matter
vnto the clouds.Then is set downe the effect of all these; that by the violence of the mightie raine,
               
               The standing
corneAre cast throwen downe. is beaten
downe,The standing corne is beaten downe euery where.
                  And the vowes lye deplored [or bewailed, or desperate] to the husbandmen. and the

                     Vota, may bee taken for their corne, which they had begged with many vowes and prayers.hopes of the
husbandmen lye
altogether desperate:And all the hope and labour of the husbandman vtterly perisheth.
and also the
labour of the

long yeerMade vaine, [or becomne vaine and fruitlesse] perisheth. being
frustrate perisheth
vtterly.And besides all these, the Poet sheweth, that for the increasing and furthering of this destruction by waters,
               
               Neither yetThe anger of Iupiter is content. is
the anger of Iupiter
contētTo powre downe waters onely from heauen. wth
his own heauen;
                     Iupiter in his wrath not content onely to send downe raine from heauen in this manner, Procures moreouer his brother Neptune the God of the seas and waters to helpe him with his forces.
but[His] azure [or skie-coloured] brother, viz. Neptune God of the sea. [his] azure
colored brother
Neptune, helpeth
himWith the forces of his waues. with [his]
aiding waues.
               
                  Neptune. He calleth
togetherThe riuers. the
Gods of theAmnis ab ambiendo. Varro.
                   riuers:How Neptune forthwith calls together all the Gods of the riuers.
who after
that theyHaue entred the roofes of their Tyrant. entred
the house of their
Tyrant is sometimes taken in the good part for a good King, ruling iustly for the good of the subiects.
                  Tyrant, viz. Neptune.
                  King; weMust not. are
not now,To whome so soone as euer they were entred his Palace, and comne into his presence, hee speaketh to this purpose, quoth
he,That he was not now to vse any long exhortation: but that they all presently send out their forces, to vse any
long exhortation:
powre out
your forces:That they open the fountaines of their riuers, open
[your]Houses, viz. the fountains which are said to be the houses of the riuers, or rather of the Gods thereof. fountaines,
[for] so
there is neede; &
The great dam [or heape of earth keeping in the water] being remoued out of the way.hauing remooued
all hindrances,
                     Remoue all hindrances which might keepe in their waters,
                     And giue a free libertie to all their streames.
                  
                  Send ye in.
                  Giue liberty to all your great riuers to ouerflowe.giue the
whole
                     Habenas.] A metaphor frō horses which are stayed with bridles. raines to
[al] your streams.
               
                  
                  
                     Neptune had no sooner commaunded but these returne.
                  Neptune.Hee had
[thus] commanded.And then followeth their obedience, and readinesse, that Neptune had no sooner giuen this command, but that they all straight returne.
               
               
                  The Gods of the riuers returne. These returne,
andVnloose the mouthes to their fountaines. set
open the mouths
of their fountaines.Set open the mouthes of the fountaines of their riuers.
               
               And [so]The great riuers or streames. they
areRouled. tumbled into
the seaWith an vnbride. led course, or outragiously. with
a most violent
course.Whereby the waters flowe out with all violence, and are rowled towards the sea in an outragious manner.
               
               
                  As the thunderbolt is ascribed to Iupiter, so a three-forked Mace to Neptune, wherewith he smiting the earth maketh it to tremble, and so the earth-quake, which is said to be made by the bursting of vapours, or waters out of the earth.
                  Neptune. He himselfe
[also] smit
the earth with
his three-forked
Mace;And moreouer, how Neptune also himselfe smites the earth with his three-forked mace.
                  But it, viz. the earth. so that
it
               
                  Quaked exceedingly. Trembled,Whereupon it trembleth exceedingly, and presently by the quaking thereof sets open all the passages of the waters, and springs within it.
andMade to lye wide open the wayes. set open the
passages of the
waterWith her motion or trembling. in the
moouing [thereof.]
               TheGreat riuers flowing wide and farre. floudes
running all abroad,And hereby the flouds run all abroad, and rush thorough the champaine fields.
doe rush
through the open
fields.
               
                  
AndSnatch away, or whirle away.
                  Carry away with all violence. carrie
away with violence
All manner of trees.
                  Groues of trees.groues
of trees, together
with theSowen fields.
                  Sowen Corne. sowen
corne, and also
cattell,Cattell. and men,
andRoofes of houses.
                  Men. houses;Houses. and
[all]The inward places of their houses where they worshipped their Gods, and so their houshold Gods also. Here it is taken for all places of worship, as Churches, Chappels, &c. the places
of the worship of
their Gods,Churches and Chappels. together
with their
sacred things.Houshold Gods, with all their sacred things.
               
               If any house
remainedNot cast downe by the force of the waters.
                  If any house remained standing by the strength of it, vncast
downe, and
couldResist. withstand
so great an euill:
yet theWaue.
                  Yet the water still encreaseth till it couer the tops thereof. water
Being aboue it.being higher
couereth the
The top of the house was called Culmen, à culmo, because they were woont to be thacked with straw.topOf this. thereof;
and the towers
lye hid beingPressed, or co
                        •
                     ered.
                  So that the highest Towers are couered and ouerwhelmed vnder the vast waters. ouerwhelmed
vnder
the
                     Gurges, signifieth properly any deepe gulfe or whirling place in a riuer.
                  Gulfe, or deepe waters. vast
waters.
               
                  There was no difference betweene sea and land, all was like a Sea.
                  And that there was no difference betweene sea and land. And now
the sea andEarth. land
had no difference;
               
                  
                  The sea couered all
                  But all things were maine sea.All things
were
                     Po
                           •
                        tus the sea called Pontus Euxinus here put for the sea in generall. sea,Also the shoares were wanting, viz. no shoares did appeare. euen
the very shoares
were wanting to
the sea.No shores appearing any where.
                  Then followeth that lamentable sight,
               
               
                  This [man]
                  That one gets vp into a hill to saue himself. One manOccupieth, or possesseth, viz. taketh a hill. gets
vp into a hill, another
sits in a
The boate is called crooked, because both the forepart and hinderpart are so commonly, and other parts of it.
                  Another sits in a boat to preserue life,crooked boat:
               AndDraweth [or guideth] his rudders there, or thither.
                  Rowing where hee had plowed but hard before. roweth
there, where hee
had plowed of
late.
               
                  Another [man.]
                  And sailing ouer not onely standing Corne, but also tops of Villages ouerflowen, Hee sailes
Vpon.ouer the standing
corn, or the
[Ouer] the tops.top ofA Village drowned a
drowned farme:
Hee, viz. another man.
                  That now they might catch fish sitting in the tops of trees.another catcheth
fish in the top
of an Elme.
               
                  The iron which the Mariners cast down into the sea by a cab
                        •
                     e to stay their ships.
                  The anchors of their ships are fastened in the greene medows insteed of the bottome of the sea. The Anchor
is fastened
in the greene medowe,So fortune carried it, or would haue it, or so it happened.
as it fell
out:
               Or the crooked
The Keeles or bottomes of the ships put for the whole ships.
                  Ships.
                  The keeles of their ships floate ouer the vineyards, lying drowned vnder them.keeles
Goe ouer the vineyards. do couer the
Places set with Vines.vineyards lying
vnder them.
               
                  
And where
Euen now or a little before.
                  And where of late Go
                        •
                     tes and other cattell did feed.of late the
Nimble.slender Goats
Haue cropped grasse.did feede;
               
                  There now.
                  There sea-calues and other like Monsters of the sea do wallow now. There the
Filthy & great.ill-fauoured
sea-calues doe
nowWallowe. lay their
bodies.
               
                  Nereides. sea Nymphs so cald of Nereus their fathe
                           •
                        .
                  
                  The sea Nymphs.
                  The very sea-nymphs do woonder to see the groues, Citties, and houses vnder the water. The nymphs
of the sea doe
woonder at the
groues, and Cities,
and houses
vnder the water:
also the Dolphins
Hold or possesse the woods.
                  The great Dolphines and other huge fishes of the sea dwell, as birds in the woods,abide in
the woods, and
Doe oft runne in, to the high branches.
                  Swim vp and downe amongst the boughes of the trees,doe runne vp
and downe amongst
the thick
boughs, and beat
vponThe Oakes tossed with the waters.
                  And beate in their swimming against the Oakes tossed in the waters. the tossed
Oakes.
               The Wolfe
swimmeth amōgst
the sheep;The Wolues and Lyons swim amongst the sheepe.
the water carrieth
theBrowne or weefill coloured. tawnie
coloured Lyons.
               
                  
The water
Carrieth.
                  Neither doth their woonderfull swiftnesse helpe the Tigres,beareth away
theThe force of the wilde Bore, who is caried with so great violence against the hunter, that he may seeme to haue the very power of the thunderbolt, or lightning.
                  The Tigre is a be
                        •••
                      of woonderfull 
                        〈◊〉
                      nesse.
                  Nor fiercenesse the Bore, though his violent rage bee like the thunderbolt. Tigres, neither
doth the
This may bee vnderstood also of the 
                        〈◊〉
                      of the Bore, wherewith he smiteth and 
                        〈◊〉
                      like a thunderbolt.force of the
thūderbolt [help]
the Bore.
               
                  Neither.
                  Nor yet the light legs ought auaile the Stagge. Nor yet doe
the swift legsProfit. availe
theHart. Stag
beingTaken away. carried
away [with the
waters.]
               
                  All sorts of birds, or more specially the Swallow, which in flight most wand
                        •
                     rs vp and downe.
                  The poore bird hauing long wandered vp and downe with weary wings, yet at length falleth into the sea, finding no place at all for rest or succour. The bird
likewise wandring
with wearie
wings falleth
downe into
the Sea,The earths being sought long where she may stand or stay. hauing
long sought
the earth where
she might rest.
               
                  The vnmeasurable liberty.
                  The outragious waters couered all the lesser hills. The outragious
swelling
of the Sea had
Ouerwhelmed the lesser hils.couered the
Tum
                        •
                     lus à tumor
                        •
                     .hils.
               
                  
AndThe great and vnusuall waters.
                  And new surges still arising, beat vpon the tops of the highest mountaines. the
(r) new waues
Beat against.beate vpon the
tops of the moū
                  taines.
               The greatest
part [of men] is
Snatched away.
                  Finally, for mankinde, the greatest part thereof is violently whirled & carried quite away by the waters.whirled away
violently by the
water:They who escaped drowning, perished with hunger. whom
the water spared,
               Those long
Long fastings doe tame [or subdue] them with a helpelesse [or succourlesse] liuing.
                  And if any bechance scape the violence of the waters, yet they languish away with long fasting, and vtterly perish for want of foode.fasting doth ouercome
thorough
lacke of
Sustenance.
                  Here the Poet hauing thus shewed the generall destruction of all things by this deluge, proceedeth now to shew how onely Deucalion and Pyrrha, were preserued, by whome mankind was repaired; and first setteth downe the place where they were preserued viz. in the mountaine Parnassus, in the countrey of Phocis: which Phocis is described that it did lie betweene the Aonians and Acteans, seuering them. 2. That it was a f
                        •
                     uitfull land whil'st it remained a land.foode.
               
                  Here followeth a description of the mountaine Parnassus. in the top whereof Deucalion and Pyrrha were preserued, by whome after mankinde was repaired.
                  Some make this an Hypallage. That the Aonians separate Phocis from the Acteans or Athenians, according to the tables of the Geographers.
                  
                     Phocis a fruitefull land, whilest it was a land, &c. seuereth. 
                  Phocis
                  Separateth, or diuideth.seuereth the
Boetians.
                  Aonians from
theAthenean fields, or fields of Acte where Athens stoode, or the countrey of Attica.
                   
                  Actean
fields.
               
                  Which was. [It was] a
fruitfullCountrey. land
whilst itHath beene, or was. remained
a land,But [it was] a part of the sea at that time, and &c. but
at that time,
               A part of the
sea & aLarge or spacious.
                  But that at this time it was all ouerflowen and like vnto the maine sea. broad
field of suddaine
waters.
               
                  
                  Where the moū
                     taine Parnassus being high, with two tops..3. That in this countrey stoode the hill Parnassus, which is also described Where
the mount
Named Parnassus.
                  
                  Parnassus by
name,A high hill.
                  1. By the height, that it did seeme to reach almost to the starres. reacheth
almost vnto the
Seeketh or goeth vp vnto the starres, or ascendeth.stars,2. By the tops. That it had two tops, the height whereof went aboue the cloudes. with two
tops, andCelestiall signes or skies. goeth
aboue the clouds
with hisGoeth beyonde.
                  And only this mountaine remained vncouered of the waters, by reason of the height. height.
               
                  This seemeth to be a plaine al
                        •
                     usion to the resting of the Arke of Noah, vpon the mountaine of Ararat.
                  
                  Top. Whenas
Deucalion being
carried in a little
Where, or heere where Deucalion.
                  
                  How Deucalion and Pyrrha his wife, carried in a little ship, stayd here vpon this mountaine.shipBoate or Lighter.
                  With the consort or companion of his bed, or bed fellow.
                  
                     Ratis is most properly a Lighter, made of pieces of timber, pioned together, whereon hay or other like things are dragged or drawen with horses on Riuers. together
with his wife,
Sticked here.stayed here, for
the sea had couered
the rest;
               
                  They adore Nymphes of Coryceus.
                  .And how first when they were comne to land; in token of their thankfulnesse, and to pacifie and obtaine the fauour and helpe of the Gods, they adored the Nymphs and Gods of that mountaine, to whome it was consecrat
                        •
                     ed. He adoreth
the
                     Coryceus is a caue in the hill Parnassus, dedicated to the Nymphes. (r) Corycidane
Nymphes,
and theDiuine powers of the mountaine, viz. Apollo, B
                           •
                        cchus, and the Muses to which Parnassus was consecrated. Gods
of the Mountaine,
               AndThemis Iupiters sister' (of whome hee begat Minerua) Goddesse of Iustice, commanding men to aske nothing of the Gods, but that which was lawfull and meet, whereof she had her name of 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     sas or iustum.
                  
                  
                     Themis the foret
                        •
                     ller of the secrets of the destinies. 
                  Themis
the destinieteller,And especially Themis the Goddess of Iustice, who at that time was Lady and president of the Oracles, and gaue answers vnto them who sought for helpe, or to know secrets of the Gods, as Apollo did after.
who at that
time
                     Themis is 
                        〈◊〉
                      to be the chiefe geuetr our of the Oracles▪ 
                     viz of Religion, 
                        〈…〉
                      reason which is in 
                        〈◊〉
                      doth teach all sons that there is a God, and that this God is of due to be worshipped: and doth maintaine this opinion, being ingrauen in the minds of men, by the generall consent of all Nations; as Tully saith. vid. Sabin.
                  
                  Held the Oracles, or gaue answer concerning the destinies as Apollo did after. gaue answeres
from the
Gods.
               
                  
                  There was not any man better then he.
                  Here the Poet setteth out first that holinesse and integrity of these two parties who were thus preserued by whō mankinde was so repaired, to whome also the Gods had such respect.There was
not a better man
then he,Nor more louing equity or iustice. or one
that more loued
equitie; or
any oneMore reuerencing the Gods [or a more deuout worshipper of the Gods.]
                  That there were not any better in the earth then they, nor any more iust or more deuout, and more true worshippers of God. that
more reuerenced
the Gods then
she.
               After that Iupiter
seethThe globe or compasse of the earth.
                  And secondly, that hereupon Iupiter, seeing the world thus ouerflowen as a pond. the
worldTo stand all ouerflowen as a fen. to
stand as a pond
withWaters standing all abroad as in a fen. liquide
fens,
               And one onely
man to remaine
Of so many thousands euen now..And onely one man and one woman to bee left aliue of all the world, and all alone;of so
manyThousand men. thousands,
               And onely
one woman to
be remaining of
so many thousands,
               Both of them
Innocent.
                  And these two both of them most harmelesse creatures, & most deuout worshippers of God:harmelesse,
bothWorshippers of the diuine power or God. deuout
worshippers of
God;
               
                  
HeCast asunder, seuered or scattered.
                  Hee in compassion disperseth the clouds; dispersed
the cloudes, and
Great showers [or tempestuous weather] being remooued with the Northwinde.
                  And driues away the raine with the Northwinde.hauing remooued
the mighty
raine with the
The Northwinde scattereth the cloudes, and bringeth faire weather.Northwinde,
               Hee sheweth
both theLands.
                  And so beginnes to cleare both the heauen and the earth by remouing the cloudes from the skies, and the waters from off the face of the earth, that both heauen and earth might bee seene to one another. earth
To heauen, and the skie to the lands, viz, the waters which had couered all being remooued.vnto the heauens,
and the
heauens vnto the
earth.
               Neither doth
theAnger viz. viclent ouerflowing.
                  Hee abateth also the rage of the seas. rage of the
seaRemaine or abide. continue:
               
                  And also the triple poynted [or three-forked] dart being layed away, [or being put to it] the sea asswageth [or calmeth] the waters.
                  His brother Neptune also, who had so helped in increasing the flood, hee layeth aside his triple-forked Mace, And also Neptune
                  Vsing his three-forked Mace.. hauing
layd asideThe three-forked Mace is ascribed to Neptune, as is thought of some, for the three parts of the world which the Ocean sea compasseth about, and for that in places neere the sea are oft earthquakes, and inund
                        ••
                     
                     ons with the e
                        ••
                     thquake: and thereupon is Neptune 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to smite the earth with his three-forked mace, as before. his
three—forked
Mace,Asswageth the waters. asswageth
the waters:Calleth forth his Trumpetour Triton.
                  
and calleth
forth [that]
Skie coloured, or Sea coloured.azure coloured
Triton [his
Trumpeter] appearing
aboue
The deepe [Sea.]
                  Who straight appears vpon the sea,the deepe,

andCouered vpon his shoulders, or in respect of his shoulders. Synec.
                  
                  Hauing vpon him a robe of a natiue purple colour. hauing his
shoulders couered
withA purple robe. a natiue

                     Murex is a shell-fish, of the bloud whereof purple colour is made, here put for the colour it selfe, or a robe dyed with that colour.purple colour;
and commaunds
him to

                     Triton is a sea-monster, like vnto a man in the vpper part, and in the nether part like vnto a fish; he is of a skie color, & hath a shel like vnto the great Cockle. He is f
                        •
                     ned to be Neptunes Trumpeter, who by a sound can asswage the seas. And the reason thereof is, because he both soundeth loud in a shell, and when hee is heard, or appeareth, he then foresheweth a calme to follow.
                  Him hee commands to sound a retreit to the flouds and streames, therwith to recall them all.blow with [his]
sounding shell,
and now to recall
theWaues and flouds. floudes
and streamesA signe being giuen [that they may returne,] or a retreit being sounded. by
[this] signe giuen
vnto them.
               
                  
                     Tritons Trumpet described.
                  Triton.
                  A hollow Trumpet is taken to him, [or of him.]
                  Hee forthwith takes his Trumpet. He taketh
vnto himselfe
[his] hollowe
Trumpet writhē
                  Into widenesse or a broad compasse.wider and wider,
Which increaseth from the lowest top [or mouth, or poynt] like the sharpe end of a top.]which waxeth
bigger like
vnto a top from
the very smallest
end.
               
                  [His] trumpet [I say is taken]
                  Which so soone as hee had set vnto his bedeawed mouth, & that it felt his blast, [His] trumpet
[I say] which
So soone as it began to be blowen [or to sound.]so soone as it
conceiueth the
Ayre or winde.blast in the middest
of the sea,

Filleth with
theVoyce.
                  It filled with the sound of it al the shores lying vnder the whole heauen. sound [all]
the shoares lying
vnderBoth Phoebus, viz. the sun rising and setting, or both East and West, or all betweene the East and West, and so vnder the whole heauen. compasse
of the Sunne.
               Then alsoAfter that. so
soone (r) as it
touched the
Mouths of the God, viz. of Triton.
                  mouth of the
GodTriton had set the trumpet vnto his mouth, distilling with his wet beard. distilling
like the deawe
with his wet
beard, and being
Blowen in, sang.blowen, sounded
the commā
                  ded
retreits,
               It was heard
To all, viz. by and throughout all the waters.
                  So that it was heard of all the waters, both in the land and sea.of all the waues
both of land and
sea.
               And of what
Waues.
                  And so soone as euer it was heard of them, it forthwith repressed thē all;waters soeuer it
was heard, it
[forthwith] repressed
them all.
               And now hath
the Sea [his]
Shoare.
                  That immediately the Sea commeth within the shores againe.shoares [again;]
the chanellTaketh or receiueth, or keepeth within the compasse of it. containeth
the full
Streames.
                  The riuers returne & runne within their chanels.riuers.
               
                  
The floudes
Are diminished, and not so deepe.
                  All the floudes doe settle downe; and as it were, little hils begin to appeare.settle downe,
[and] the little
hils doe seeme to
Goe forth, or they doe appeare.come forth.
               The ground
ariseth,The ground ariseth, waxing broader. places
Waxe greater and broader as the waters diminish.doe increase,
theWaues.
                  The waters fall, waxing narrower. waters decreasing.
               
                  Also the woodes shew their naked tops after a long season.
                  So that after a long time, the woods begin to shew their naked tops; And after a
long
                     
                        〈…〉
                      in foeminino vsi
                     
                        〈…〉
                      pro tempore. time the
woodes shewe
theirVncouered, and without leaues. naked
tops, andHold.
                  Hauing still the mud hanging in their boughes. keepe
the mud left In
theirBough, branch, or leafe. boughs.
               
                  The globe or compasse of the earth, or vpper face,
                  And finally the world is restored againe, that the face of the earth doth all appeare. The world
is to be seene againe.was restored:
which after that
Deucalion sawOpen, viz. empty of man and beast.
                  Which when Deucalion sawe how it was emptie, and desolate, and silent, it
made bare,
               And also the
Left alone, or desolate of man and beast.desolateEarths. earth
To doe [or keepe] deepe silences.to be altogether
silent, he speakes
thus vnto Pyrtha,
                  He speakes thus vnto Pyrrha with the teares arising in his eyes.the teares
Risen, or arising.standing [in his
eyes.]
               
               
                  A patheticall speech, and full of affection, whereby Deucalion indeauoureth to binde Pyrrha mere firmely vnto him; and to moue her to consult for the repaire of mankinde.
                  
                     Deucalion and Pyrrha were brethrens children: for Iatheth as they say had two sons, Prometheus, of whome came Deucalion, and Epimetheus, of whome was Pyrrha. And so he calleth her sister in most kinde sort, for that neer bond, and after the ancient manner.
                  Oh my sister, my dearest wife, oh woman onely left aliue, Oh sister,
oh [my] wife, oh
the only woman
Suruiuour of all womankinde.remaining aliue,
               Whome the
common stocke
andOriginall of cosingermans, descended from two brethren, viz. Prometheus, and Epimetheus.
                  
                  Whome so neere a descent, euen from the same Grandfather, and afterwards the mariage bed, and now also these very present dangers haue thus ioyned together: descent
from the same
Grandfather, &
afterwards the
Mariage.bed hath ioyned
vnto mee,
Now the very dangers do ioyne.and now also
these very dangers
do ioyne together:
               Wee two are
the whole company
of [all] the
lands,Thou seest that wee two are all the company that are left aliue in all the world. which soeuer
The setting and rising [of the Sun] doe see.the West
and East do see;
the SeaHath possessed the rest.
                  The sea hauing vtterly swept away all other liuing creatures. hath
Caetera animant
                        ••
                     a.all other liuing
creatures.
               Moreouer,And moreouer, that this stay of our life is very vncertaine. this
Trust or stay.confidence of
our life is not

yetCertaine.
                  And how euery little cloude doth now terrifie our hearts. sure enough;
nowEuen the clouds. euen
the verie
cloudes doe
terrifie [our]
minde.
               
                  Oh [woman] to be pittied, what minde coulde bee to thee now, if thou hadst beene
                  Oh poore soule, what a heart wouldest thou now haue had, if thou hadst escaped alone without me? Ah poore
soule to be pittied,
what a heart
shouldest thou
now haue had, if
thou hadst beene
Deliuered from the destinies without me?preserued alone
without mee?
Snatched from the fates.
                  How shouldest thou haue been able to haue endured this feare?how couldest
thou aloneBy what meanes. endure
[this] feare?
Beare the feare.
                  By whome comforting [couldst thou endure these] griefes?
                  Whome shouldest thou haue had to haue comforted thee in thy griefes?by whose comfort
[couldest
thou abide these]
griefes?
               For why? I
my selfe,As for my selfe (my dearest wife) if the sea had taken thee away, I would certainely haue followed thee, and it should haue had mee too. (my
[deare] wife belieue
mee) if the
Sea had thee
Also, viz. in like manner as the rest of the creatures.likewise, would
follow thee, and
the sea should
haue me too.
               
                  
                  
                     Prometheus (
                        •
                     s is said before) formed the earth vnto the image of man, and put into it a heauenly soule.
                  And for mankinde, that is thus destroyed, oh would to God I were able to repaire it, by my ancient Father Prometheus skill, and to infu
                        •
                     e soules as hee did into the formed earth.Oh that I
were able to
Renew, or restore againe.repaire the
people by my
FathersArts. skill, &
To powre in.infuse soules into
The earth being formed [or framed] viz. into the shapes of men.the formed
earth.
               Now [all]
The mortall kinde.
                  For now all mankind remaineth in vs two.mankinde remaineth
in vs
twaine.
               [For] so it hath
Seemed good to.pleased the
Gods,So it hath beene the good pleasure of the Gods. and we remaine
Onely patternes.
                  And we remaine the onely patternes of the same.samples
of men.
               
                  He had spoken.
                  And thus Deucalion ended his speech. Hee had thus
made an end of
his speech,The Poet hauing thus liuely set out the emphaticall speech of Deucalion, concerning the restoring of mankinde, proceedeth to shew the effects which followed. and
they [both] wept.
               
                  It pleased [them]. Then they
thought it good
to pray vnto the
heauenlyDiuine power.
                  How they both wept. God,
and to seeke his
ayde by the
                     Sacrae sortes] were taken for such answers and prophecies as were drawen out by lot, and were knowen by the lots.
                  And thought this the onely meanes for effecting hereof; sacred
Lots.
                  First, to pray to the heauenly God, and to seeke his ayde herein by the sacred Oracles.Oracles.
               
                  There is no delay. They made
no longer delay:
They goe vnto.
                  And secondly, how they made no longer stay, but went both together forthwith to the riuer Cephisus, a riuer hard by, flowing out of the bottome of the hill where they were.
                  And there, though the water thereof was not yet cleare, but onely gotten in, and running within the chanell,they goe together

toThe Cephisidan waters. the waters
of
                     Cephisus is a riuer flowing out of the bottome of Parnass
                           •
                        s, 
                     
                        •
                     neer vnto which the temple of Themis stood. 
                  Cephisus.
               
               
                  And not as yet liquide, viz. cleare or pure [but muddy] Although
not* cleare as
yet, but now
[onely]Keeping within their chanels or knowen banks. cutting
the knowen
fordes.
               
                  And then so soone as they haue bedeawed [or sprinkled] the liquors tasted [or drawen vp.]
                  Yet they sprinkled of the same vpon their clothes and heads. From thence
so soone as they
had sprinkled the
waters lightly
touched
               
                  To their garments and head. Vpon their
clothes & head,
They goe.
                  And thence turned presently vnto the Tē
                     ple of the sacred Goddesse Themis, which stoode neere therevnto.they turne
their steps vnto
the
                     Delubrum, is coniectured to be of Deus (vt candelabrum, à candela) a place where any God was worshipped: or of diluendo, because the Heathens vsed to sprinkle them before they praied or worshipped in them.
                  Place of worship, or chappell. Temple
of the sacred
Themis.Goddesse,
theTops of which were foule [or filthy or ouergrowen.] roofe wherof
ofThe roofe whereof was all, as ouergrowen with mosse, filthie and lothsome, was lothsome
with filthy
mosse, and
The altars of Themis.
                  [her] Altars
stoode without
Fires.
                  And her Altars stood without fire.fire.
               
                  As they haue touched. Assoone as
they touched
theSteps, or greeces.
                  And thirdly, how assoone as they touched the staires of the temple, both of them fell downe humbly vpon their faces, staires of the
Temple, both of
themLyeth downe, or fals downe. fall down,
               
                  
                  Groueling, or flat on their faces.Humbly vpon
the ground,
andBeing in great feare.
                  And trembling kisse the stones thereof. trembling,
Gaue kisses to the colde stone.
                  And finally thus they make their prayer vnto Themis:
                  kissed the colde
Stones of the stairs.stone.
               And thus they
spake: If theGods,
                  If the Gods can bee ouercomn by the praiers of the iust, if they can bee appeased and their anger asswaged, diuine
powers being
ouercomne
With iust prayers, viz. with prayers of iust men.with the prayers
of the iust,
Wax mild, or doe relent.begin to be appeased
againe: if
the anger of the
Gods beBowed, viz. can be mooued, or pacified. asswaged,
               Oh Themis tell
[vs] by whatArt, viz. skill o
                        •
                      r meanes.
                  Oh Themis tell vs by what meanes the losse of our kinde may bee repaired, and helpe (Ogracious Goddesse) for the restoring of all things againe. deuice
the losse of
ourStocke or kinred, viz. mankinde. kinde
Is repairable, or is to bee repaired, or may be repaired, or restored.may be repayred;
and oh most
Gentle or gratious.milde [Goddes]
Bring helpe to, or relieue, or renue,bring [som]
help toThe things drowned. mankind
being thus destroyed.
               The Goddess is
mooued [at their
prayers] &Gaue a lot, viz. an answer from the Oracle.
                  Hereupon the Goddesse is mooued with compassion at their prayers, and giues them this answer; giues
[them] [this] answer,Depart ye out of the Temple.
Depart yee
out of the tēple;
               
                  
AndHide.
                  Couer your heads, and let your garments loose. couer
yourHead. heads,And vnloose your garments being girt, or slacke them. &
withall vnloose
your garments,
               And [then]And then cast the bones of your great mother behinde your backes. cast
the bones of
[your] greatParent or grandmother. mother
behind your
backe.
               
                  They were amazed long, viz. wondring what the answer should meane.
                  At this strange answere they stood both amazed long; They stood
amazed long;
but
                     Pyrrha the former brake the silences with her voyce, viz. spake first.
                  But Pyrrha breaking off the silence first, refuseth to obey this cō
                     maundement of the Goddesse, 
                  Pyrrha
breakes off the
silence first, and
refuseth to obey
theHest. commandement
of the
Goddesse.
               AndPrayeth with a fearefull mouth.
                  Beseeching her with a trembling voyce, that she would pardon her therein, for not doing as she commanded, for that shee feared exceedingly to hurt her mothers soule; by casting of her bones in such manner behinde her backe. beseecheth
[her] with
a trēbling voice,
That she may giue pardon to her.that [she] would
pardon her,And. for
that shee feareth
exceedingly
               To hurt [her]
Mothers shadowes or ghosts.mothers ghost,
Her bones being [so] cast or hurled.by casting of
her bones.
               In the meane
time theyRepeat with themselues, viz. meditate.
                  And yet in the mean time, they both of them oft repeat, and seriously can betweene themselues the words of the Oracle, which were so obscure with secret mysteries. repeate
andRoule often, or tosse in examining and pondering in their mindes. scan

betweene themselues
the words
of theLot being giuen. answer
which was giuen
being obscure
withBlinde. darkeHoles▪ or secret & hidden things. mysteries.
               
                  
                     Prometheus and Fo
                           •
                        
                        metheus, are 
                        〈◊〉
                      to haue bee
                        •
                     e breth
                        •
                     en, sonnes of 
                        
                           •
                        aphet, as 
                        〈◊〉
                      said. Prometheus signifieth one who is vi
                        •
                     , following reason, and so taketh aduice before, or prouiding before, of 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     & 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     consi
                           •
                        ium. Epimetheus, one following sense & reason foolish, taking counsell after the deed.
                  And then beginnes Deucalion to comfort his dear wife with these sweet words; And then

                     Prome
                           •
                        hides, Prometheus sonne, viz. Deu
                           •
                        a
                           •
                        ion the sonne of Prometheus.
                  
                  Deucalion comforts
Epimethides, viz. Pyrrha, Epimetheus daughter.
                  
                  Pyrrha [his
wife] with these
Pleasing or gentle words.sweet wordes:
               
                  And either.
                  Either (quoth hee) my judgement deceiueth me much, Either, quoth
he,Our cunning [or wit] is deceitfull to vs, or the depth is hid from vs. our iudgement
deceiueth vs;
               Or theOracles are godly.
                  Or the answer of the Goddesse is holy, and perswadeth vs to no such impietie at all, much lesse to such as the words may import. answeres
are holy,
&Command.
                  Perswade no wickednesse or vnlawfull thing. perswade
vs to no impietie.
               The great mother
isThe earth is rightly called the great mother, for that all things in it both li
                        •
                     ing, and without, life are bred of it, and for that it nourisheth all liuing things, and receiueth all things, dying, as into the bosome of it.
                  I suppose that by the great mother is meant the earth, and by the bones the stones in the body thereof. the
earth: I suppose
the stones in the
bodie of the
earth to bee called
bones;And that we are commanded to cast those stones behinde our backs. wee
are commanded
to cast these behinde
our backs.
               
                  
Although

                     Titania a name of Pyrrha, neece or grandchilde to Iaphet, the son of Titan, who was the Sonne of Coelum and Vesta.
                  
                  Titania is.
                  Now although Pyrrha was much mooued at this coniecture of her husband; and both of them hoped well it might be so;
                  Pyrrha be moued
by thisDiuination or interpretation. coniecture
of her
husband;
               Yet[Their] hope is in doubt, viz. they hope doubtfully, or distrusting.
                  Yet they were still doubtfull, and both distrust in some sort the heauenly Oracle. their hope
is doubtfull, and
stil both of them
distrust the heauenly
Admonition or counsell.
                  Notwithstanding thus they beginne to reason with themselues;Oracle:
but what shall it
hurt [them]To trie.
                  What can it hurt vs to make a triall hereof? to
make a triall?
               They depart
&Veile.
                  Thereupon they depart, and as they were inioyned, couer [their]
Head.
                  They couer their heads,heades, &Let loose [their] coats.
                  Loose their garments, vngirde
their garments,
               AndSend.
                  Cast stones behinde their backes. cast the
This is thought to bee fained thereupon, that Deucalion a King of Thessalie, after a great 
                        •
                     oud, wherewith all Greece is said to haue beene ouerflowen, is reported to haue instructed the rude and sauage people, and to haue framed them by good lawes to put away their fierce, hard & vntractable natures: and so to haue caused them to leaue the stony rockes and caues wherin they then liued, casting them as it were behinde their backes, and to haue gathered into companies, and built them Cities.stones commā
                  ded
behind their
Footsteps.backes.
               The stones
(who can belieue
this but that anquitie
Hath witnessed it.
                  And forthwith the stones (a matter incredible, but that antiquity doth giue certaine testimony vnto it)is witnesse?)
               Began toPut away.
                  Begin to lay away their naturall hardnes. lay
away [their] hardnesse,
and their
Rigour, sturdiness or roughnesse.
                  Or rather it is fained of the Poets onely to signifie the deprauation or peruersnesse of soule and bodie, or of mans nature.stifnesse,
               
                  
And to bee
Made soft.
                  To soften by little & little,softenedBy delay. by
little and little,
and being softened
To lead.
                  And to take a shape.to take a
shape.
               
                  Straight-way, whenas.
                  Yea so, as some shape of man beginnes to appeare; By and by
They haue increased or waxed bigger.they increased
And a softer nature happened vnto them.and
receiued a softer
nature,As. that
some shape of
manMay. might be
seene,So.
                  Although not very manifest at the first, though
notManifest or apparant enough. [very] manifest,
but as [an
image made] of
Marble newly
begun,
               
                  Not exact [or perfect] enough.
                  Yet like images wrought in marble when they are newly begunn
                        •
                     , onely rough hewen, and not finished: Not yet finished,
and most
likeRude or rough.
                  And most like vnto impolished pictures. impolished
Signes, viz. images or statues roughly hewen.pictures.
               Yet what
part of them
was moyst with
anyMoysture.
                  And what part of the stones was moyst and earthy, iuyce,
               
                  
And also earthy,That is turned into flesh and bloud.
is turned intoFlesh.
the vse of
the body:
               
                  What thing, or what part. What is solide
and cannot
bee bowed,The solide parts into bones. is
changed into
bones.
               
                  What [part] hath beene. What was
Euen now.lately a veine,The veines of the stones
into vaines of the bodie.
remained vnder
the same
name.
               
                  And so the stones sent by the hands of the man, drew the
face of men in a short time by the diuine power of the Gods. And [so]
in a
short space by
the power of
the Gods,And thus in a short space, through the mighty power of the
Gods. the
stones
               
                  Sent, Cast by the
hands
                     Of Deucalion. of the
man,The stones cast by the hands of the man are made men.
                  Receiued the proportion and nature of men. tooke
the shape of
men.
               And the womanIs.
was repairedBy the stones which the woman cast behinde her.
by the
womans casting
[of stones behind
her.]A
                        •
                     d those cast by the hands of the woman are made women.
               
               
                  
Thereupon
wee are a hard
kinde andHauing such experience [or pro
                        •
                     fe] of labours, or
so able to indure toyle and hardnesse. so experienced
in labours.Whereupon it is com
                        •
                     e to passe, that we are so hard a
kinde.
               
               And [thereby]
do giueDocuments or demonstration. experimentsHence it is said to bee that the Graecians call the people 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      of

                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , a s
                        •
                     o
                        •
                     e.
                  Of what originall wee are bred, viz.
whereof wee are made.
from
whence we haue
had our beginning.And doe giue continuall experiments from whence wee
haue had our beginning, euen from stones.
               
            
            
               FAB. VIII.
               Of the restoring
of the Creatures,
by the sliminesse of
the earth and
warmenesse of the
Sun, and the killing
ofThe serpent or dragon. theBy the
Python or dragon bred after the flood, of the moyst earth, is meant
the 
                        •
                     otten, noysome and pestilent vapours, which were caused by the
inundation and generall deluge, vntill they were consumed by the beames of
the Sunne, signified by Apoll
                           •
                        es shaf
                        •
                     s. 
                  Python
bred amongst
them, by
Apolloes shafts,
in the remembrance
wherof the
Pythian games
were ordained.
               
                  That liuing creatures may 
                        〈…〉
                      the moyst 
                        〈…〉
                      warme by
the heate of the Sunne, hee sheweth that Egypt is a witnesse; where,
after the inundation of Nilus, the clo
                        ••
                      are changed into diuers
shapes of liuing creatures by the power of the s
                        •
                     nne.
               
               THe earth
broughtIn this Fable the Poet proceedeth to shew the repairing of the
rest of the creat
                        •
                     res.
                  
forthOther liuing creatures. the rest
of the liuing creatures,These are here inserted by the Poet, not
onely to shew the restoring of the rest of the creatures, but also for the
more fit knitting hereto of the next fable of Daphne turned into a
Lawrell.
in diuerse
Formes.shapes of it own
Nature.accord,
                     1. How mankinde being thus restored,
the earth brought forth the rest of the liuing creatures, of all sorts, and
that of it owne accord.
                     And secondly, the meanes and manner thereof.
                     That so
soone as the moyst earth began to wax warme by the heat of the sunne.
                     And especially the
mud in fennie places,
                   after
that the olde
Humour or moyst earth.moystureWaxed
throughly warme, or very hot. began
to bee thoroughly
warme
From.by theFire. feruent
heat of the sunne;
and also the mud
and the moist
fennes
               
                  Haue swelled. Began to swel
with heat,
                     Began to swell by the heat thereof,
                     The seeds of all things being in the same earth,
                   & the
fruitfull seeds of
[all] things
               Being nourishedIn the earth ministring life.
in the
Quickning.liuely soyle as
in theBelly. wombe
of [their] mother,And nourished in that liuely soyle, as in the wombe
of their mother,
               
               Increased,Increased, and tooke sundry shapes by little and
little. and
took someFace or forme. shape
By delaying, staying or tarrying, or by little and little.by continuance
of time.This he declareth by a similitude, and an instance of the like
in Egypt, by the meanes of the riuer Nilus.
                  
               
               Euen as when

                     Nilus is thought to be so named, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     nouum lutum, new clay or mud, because it ouerflowing euery yeare, carieth with it new mud, whereby the fields are manured and made exceeding fruitfull, and whereof these creatures are said to be bred.
                  Nilus,
                  Hauing seauen streames or currents. which
floweth into the
sea by 7 mouths,That euen as when Nilus that great riuer of
Egypt, running into the Sea by seauen streames, hath ouerflowen
their fields, and is returned againe within his banks,
                  
hathForsaken. left the
Wet fields.fields all wet,And hath restored his flouds to the ancient chanell.
and brought
againe [his]
Flouds or current.streames into
his anciētAlueo Synaeresis. chanell,Chanell or water-course.
               
               And theNew mud or slime, or moyst earth. fresh
mud hath waxen
very hot by the
The sunne is specially so called athere
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     idus, because of the heate and influence of it aboue the rest of the starres.
                  Fiery signe or star.heauenly
Sunne,And that the fresh mud left behind it, hath waxen warme by the
beames and influence of the sunne.
               
               TheTillers [of the ground or husbandmen] plowmen
The clods being turned ouer.turning ouer
the clods doe
finde very many
liuing creatures;The husbandmen as they plowe and turne ouer the clods,
do finde very many liuing creatures caused thereby.
andThey see in these. amongst
these they see
some onely begunne,And amongst the same, some they see only begun to be formed, according to the short time they haue had to be bred in.
                  By the very space of breeding, viz. according to the time of their breeding.
according
to the short
space of [their]
breeding,Some vnperfect, and as it were cut off by the shoulders.
some
vnperfect, and
Cut short, viz. wanting shoulders or heads.cut
off by
their shoulders:And ofttimes they behold one part of the same creature
liuing, another part therof still remaining a very lumpe of earth altogether
without shape or forme.
                  And one part oft times liueth in the same body.and oft
times in
the same bodie
one part liueth,

another partIs. remaineth
Vnformed or vnsha
                        •
                     e
                        ••
                     a
                        •
                     th.rude
earth.
               BecauseWhere, or when as. so
soone as both the
moysture and
heate haueTaken. receiued
A right mixt proportion.a temper,Then hee setteth downe the reason hereof: for that so soone
as moysture and heate haue once receiued a right temper or mixture, they
straight conceiue, and so of these two are all things bred.
they conceiue,
and all
thingsDoe arise. are bred
of theseMoysture and heate. two.
               
                  And whereas fire is a fighter [or aduersary] to the water, a moyst vapour doth create all things. And although
the fire bee contrarie
to water,And that although fire be contrary to
water yet a moyst vapour, wherein moysture and natiue heate are rightly
mixed, doth breed all things, and s
                        •
                     ch a disagreeing concord is fit for
increase of al young things.
                  Heat and moysture separate, doe naturally disagree: but being mixed together rightly, they agree well, and are most apt for breeding all things.yet
                     Viz. moysture & heate mixed. a
moyst
Heate or warmenesse.vapour doth
breed all things,
and a disagreeing
concord is fitCreate, make, or fashion. for
increase.
               ThereforeFor young ones, or things to be bred, or
brought forth. so
soon as the earth
beingWhere, or when as. slimie by
the late flood,Afterwards he commeth to apply th
                        •
                     s, to prooue the
truth of the manner of the repairing of all things.
waxed warme
by the heauenly
Muddy, dirtie, 
                        ••
                     ay
                        •
                     ie.
                  Sunnes, viz. the continuall shining and beames therof.Sunne, and by
theHigh heate, or pearcing deepe. heate from
aboue,That euen in like sort so soone as the earth being all muddy
and slimie by the late ouerflowing, began to waxe throughly warme by the Sun
beames & heauenly influence,
               
               
                  
It brought
forth innumerable
Shapes.kindes,It brought forth innumerable kinds
of liuing creatures. and
partlyRepresented. restored
again the ancient
Figures.formes,Partly restoring againe the
ancient sorts which had beene formerly;
partlyBred or fashioned. created
newMisshapen things. monsters.And partly creating
new monsters which had neuer been before.
               
               It indeedWould not. was
vnwilling [to
breedThem. such,]And that, howsoeuer it was vtterly vnwilling to breed such mishapē and vgly creatures,
                  But oh thou greatest serpent, it begot thee then also.
but yet it bred
Apostrophe.thee also at that
time,Yet at the very same time it brought forth that huge deformed
dragon, called the Python.
                  
oh thou
By the Python is meant the abundance of pestilent vapours caused by the deluge (as is said before): it hath the name of 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , putre
                           •
                        acio, because they were bred of the rottennesse of the earth, consumed by the beames comming from the circle of the sunne, as from a bowe, Vid. Sup.
                  most huge
By the Python is meant the abundance of pestilent vapours caused by the deluge (as is said before): it hath the name of 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , putre
                           •
                        acio, because they were bred of the rottennesse of the earth, consumed by the beames comming from the circle of the sunne, as from a bowe, Vid. Sup.
                  
                  Python; and
[thou]Oh vnknowen serpent. serpent
being vnknowen
[formerly] wast
a terrour to the
New.new-bred people:Which hauing been altogether
vnknowen before, became a terror vnto that new-bred people, for that his
body couered such a space and compasse of the mount where he lay.
thouHeldest or occupiedst. coueredst
So great a compass of the mount Parnassus, where thou wast formed.such a
space of the
mountaine.
               
                  
                     Apollo was painted with a bowe and quiuer. By him war
meant the Sun which destroyeth all noysome vapors with his beames, as with
arrowes.
                  The God holding the bowe. 
                  Apollo
killed
this Serpent
beingHeauie. loaden
with a thousand
Dartsshafts,His quiuer almost drawen
                        •
                     out [or spent] viz. emptied. hauing
almost spent hisNow this great and mighty serpent Apollo slew,
with a thousand shafts, vntill hee had almost spent his whole quiuer vpon him, although hee had neuer vsed those before, vnlesse against Bucks and Does.
                  
whole quiuer, although
[he had]
neuer vsed such
likeDarts. weapons
before, except
In [killing] deere.amongst
Bucks and D
                        •
                     es.Deere, and
swiftWilde Gotes. Roes;
His poyson being poured out through [or by] his blacke wounds. so that his poison
was shed out
[by thē] through
Here seemeth to bee an Hypallage, the black wounds for the blacke poyson running out of his wounds; or else it may be properly, because poyson maketh the part which is poysoned to be blacke.black
wounds.Yet hee so pierced him with these, that all his blacke and
deadly poyson powred out, & so was shed by the wounds made
thereby.
               
               And lest that
Ancientnesse or time.long continuance
of time
might blot out
theFame. famous memory
Of this staying of this dragon.of [this]
worke;And lest that by tract of time, the memory of this famous
victorie & happy worke should vtterly perish;
               
               
                  Hee instituted games [to be] sacred in a famous
contention, [or tryall of masteries.] He ordained
sacred games wth
a renowned strift
for masteries.
                     
                        Apollo ordained sacred games to bee renowned for the strift & contention for masteries, which were to bee euer vsed therein.
                     And these games to bee called the Pythian games, according to the name of this monstrous Python thus ouercomne, for
a perpetuall remembrance thereof.
                     And in these games moreouer, that whosoeuer did the best and got the mastery, at what strift or contention soeeuer in wrestling, running, or any other way, should receiue this honour to bee crowned with a crowne or garland made of the branches of the Escule
                           •
                        ree, in honour of Apollo.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Being called Pythia.
                   Which games
were called the

                     Pythia were playes made in the honour of Apollo for slaying the Python.
                  
                  Pythian games,
by the name of
theOuercomne, conquered or vanquished. subdued
serpent.
               
                  In these games. Heere
What young man or youth soeuerwhich-soeuer
of the young

menHad ouercomne [or got the mastery or victory.]
ouercame
by hand, orBy feete. feet,
or wheele,Tooke. receiued
A crowne or garland made of the branches of the Escule tree in honour of the victory.the honour
of an
                     Esculus is a t
                        •
                     ee bearing m
                        •
                     st almost as big as
the mast of the Oke, and hauing leaues bigger. It was so named of
Esca, & so honoured because in olde time they did eate of the
fruite thereof. Escule
branch.
               
                  The Laurell tree was not yet. As yet there
was noBay-tree. Lawrell,
                     The reason also hereof, that these garlands were made of the Escule tree, was this,
                     For that as yet there was no Lawrell tree sprung vp.
                     And therefore Apollo compassed about the temples of his head comly with long locks, with writhen branches plucked from any kind of tree.
                  
and [therefore]
This is here fi
                        •
                     ly brought in to make a way to the next Metamorphosis, how Daphne was turned into a Laurell, & so to tie this fable fitly to that which goeth before. Thus is Apollo painted.
                  
                     Phoebus is an Epithet of Apollo, proper to the Sunne, siguifying pure, for the brightnesse of the sunne.
                  Phoebus did compasse about or gird.
                  Apollo
did adorne
His comely head.the temples of
his head being
decent with
long haire,
[With a crowne or garland made] of any kinde of tree.[wth
branches plucked]
from any
tree.
            
            
               FAB. IX.
               
                  This Fable sheweth the power of loue, that euen
Apollo, God of wisedome was ouercomne thereby: And also the reward
of chastity in chast Daphne, turned into a Laurell, alwaies
greene. Of Daphne
turned into a Laurell
tree.The Poet intending here to set downe the power of loue, that it
preuaileth with the most renoun'd, & withall the reward of chastitie,
descendeth vnto this next Fable, how Apollo who had slaine the
dragon, was yet ouercomn with the loue of Daphne, and how she for
her chastity was turned into a Laurell. And to this end sheweth,
               
               
                  The first loue of Phoebus [was] Daphne,
&c.
                  
                     Peneian Daphne.
                  
                     Daphne signifieth a Laurell or Bay-tree, of 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , because
when a leafe or branch of it is burned, it seemeth to send forth a voyce by
cracking. 
                  DAphne
                  It is fained to bee the daughter of Peneus, because the banks thereof are full of Bay-trees.the
of the

                     Peneus a riuer in Thessaly, running betweene Ossa and Olympus.
                  
                  Peneus,
[was] the first

loue ofPhoebus. 
                  Apollo:
                  1. That Daphne,
Peneus daughter, was the first loue of Apollo.
                  
                  Which [loue.]which not
Ignorant lot, or hap, or chance, or vnskilfull fortune which hath no choice of things.Blinde fortune
gaue [vnto
him] butThe great indignation of the God of loue. the
cruell anger of

                     Cupid, God of loue, sonne of Iupiter and Venus, or as some say, of Mars and Venus, à cupidine, of the carnall desire which he is said to worke.
                  Cupid.
                  2. The meanes wherby hee fell in loue with her. That it was not by fortune, but through the anger of Cupid God of loue, and that vpon this occasion;
               
               
                  
                     Delius.] Apollo is so called of the Iland
Delos, wherein he and Diana are said to haue beene
borne. 
                  Apollo being
proudeThe serpent lately ouercomne, had seen this [Cupid]
bending the hornes, [or tips of his bowe] the string being brought to it
[or drawen vp to it.] of his
late subduing of
the serpent,That Apollo being proude of his late conquest in
killing the Python,
                   sawe
this [Cupid] bending
hisThe bowe and arrowes, and also the firebrand are attributed
to Cupid, to expresse the wonderfull power of loue, because loue is
more pearcing then either iron or fire; yea, more burning, for that loue
burnes a farre off, whereas fire burnes only things touching it, or neere
vnto it. bowe:Seeing Cupid bend his bowe, disdainfully
scoffed at him,
               
               
                  And he had said, O wanton boy, what is to thee with these
valiant weapons? And what
(quoth he)Calling him wanton boye, thou
wanton boy hast
thou to doe with
these warlike
weapons?And demanding of him what hee did with those warlike
weapons:
                  Thes
                        •
                      things which thou carriest doe become,
viz this bowe and arrowes. this
furniture which
thou bearest becomes
our shoulders;Because that kinde of furniture, would rather become his
shoulders.
               
               Who are able
To giue sure wounds to the wilde beast, to giue woūds to the enemy.without missing
to wound
the wilde beasts,For that he was able not onely to smite wild beasts
with them, but euen to wound the enemie.
to wound also
the enemy;Which he demonstrateth by a notable instance, who
latelyMade prostrate or flewe. beat down
wth innumerable
shafts theSwollon or prowd. swellingAs that he
had so lately beat downe with his shafts, and killed that vgly serpent,
which was so huge, that he couered many acres of ground, with his belly
full of poyson.
                  
                  Python,
                  Pressing. couering
so many
An acre of ground was so much as a yoake of Oxen could well plow in a day.acres of ground
with [his]Belly full of poyson. pestilent
belly.
               
                  Be thou content. Content thou
thy self toProuoke [or stir vp] with thy firebrand.
                  
                     Irrîto, to stir vp: Irrito, to make vaine.kindle
with thy

                     Fax, viz. a firebrand is ascribed to Cupid, whereby the mindes of youth are inflamed with loue.brand,
Thereupon Apollo aduiseth him, to content himselfe,I know
not whatLoues, viz. wanton, sory, or vnbeseeming
men.
                  Thus hee speaketh to Cupid in contempt.
light
loues,To kindle with his brand some silly loues, and not to meddle with
his praises.
                  Neither arrogate, claime, or challenge to
thy selfe our praises. and meddle
not with our
praises.
               
                  The sonne of Venus.
                   
                  Cupid answered
This [Apollo.]him;But Cupid
answereth him:
                  
                     Oh Apollo. 
                  Phoebus,
                  That howsoeuer that bowe of his whereof he so gloried, was able to smite all liuing creatures; yet his bowe was able to wound euen him being a God.
                  Let thy bowe smite all things.be it so that

                     Cupids bowe and shafts more pearcing then Apolloes.
                  thy bowe
Fastens or shootes through.smites all liuing
creatures (quoth
he) [yet]Thou canst not escape mine. my
bowe shall smite
thee:And therefore looke how much all liuing creatures were inferior to
God, so much should Apolloes glory be vnto his. andBy how much. how
much all liuing
creaturesDoe yeeld or giue place. are
inferior to God,
Thy glorie is lesse then ours [by so much.][so much]
is
Thy glory in shooting.thy glorie
lesse then ours.
               [Thus] hee
spake,Hauing thus spoken, fluttering with his wings, hee flewe
forthwith vnto the shady toppe of Parnassus mount. andThe ayre being dashed with his wings smitten together,
fluttering
with his wings,
               
                  
                  [Hee] not flowe stood on the shadie tower.Hee stood
forthwith vpon
the shady top of
Parnassus.
               
               And
                     Cupid is said to be armed with different shafts, viz. sharpe and blunt, golden and leady: The reason is, for that all are not affected after one manner in loue: one loues more feruently then another; and sometimes one loues the other most vehemently, the other no whit affected, or disliking all loue, or else those especially who are so inamoured with them; as here it fell out betweene Apollo & Daphne.
                   drewe
Out of his quiuer bearing shafts [or full of shafts.]forth of his quiuer
twoDarts. arrowesAnd there standing, he drew two
arrowes out of his quiuer;
               
               OfContrarre. diuers
Workes or effects.operations:Those also of diuers
qualities.
                  This driueth [or chaseth] away, the other
maketh loue. the
one driueth away
[loue] the
other causeth it.
               That which
Maketh.causeth [loue]
isGolden. of gold,The one of them causing loue, hauing a sharpe head, and all of gold. &
Shineth.glittereth with
a sharpePoynt. head.
               That which
Driueth away loue.driueth it away,
isWithout poynt. blunt,The other abating and driuing
away loue, being of Cane filled with lead, and hauing a blunt head. and
hath leadVnder the cane whereof that shaft is made. vnder
a reed.
               
                  Cupid. The God
fixedThis blunt shaft. this in
Daphne, Peneus daughter.
                  the Nymph
Peneis:
                  This leadeu shaft hee fixed in Daphne,
                   but
He hurt [or wounded] Apolloes marrow through his bones smitten thorow with the other.hee
pierced the very
marrow of Apollo
through his
bones,But the other he shot into Apollo, pearcing his very
marrow thorow his bones. with the
other.
               
                  
                  Apollo.The one
[of them]Loues. falls
in loue forthwith:So that Apollo begins forthwith to bee inflamed with loue.
                  Daphne.the other
fliethThe name. the
very name of a
louer;
                     Daphne cannot endure to heare of loue, or the name of a
louer.
               
               
                  Reioycing [or delighting herselfe.] Solacing
herself
in theHiding places [dens or caues] of the woods.
thick
woods,But contrarily solaceth her selfe to liue in the woods; and with
the skins of wild beasts which she killed. and in
theCases. skinnes of
theTaken wilde beasts. wilde beasts
which she tooke,Becomming therein a follower of chast Diana
liuing vnmarried.
and becomes an
Being an emulatour or follower.imitatour of
Vnwedded [or reioycing in perpetuall virginitie.]vnmarried
Phoebe.
                  Diana,
               
               
                  A hairelate [or headband] did keep in her haires, being
put without lawe, viz. without any curious setting or
tricking.
                  Some expound it she had onely a coife vpon her
head; which seems contrary to that after Et leuis impulsos vetro dabat
aurae capillos, Et Spectat inornatos collo pendere capillos. Here also
is shewed how Daphne became an imitatour of Diana, that she
neglected the tumming vp of her head, and despised all men. Shee had
onely her head
fillited vp with a
ribband.Onely tyed her haire together without any other
curiosity.
               
               Many sought
Her loue.her:So as although many suters sought her
loue, yet shee despised them all. [but] she
[Was] against [or turned away from] them, seeking [or her weers.]despised all [her]
suters;
               [And]Impatient. being
vnpatiēt [to hear
of mariage] without
a husband,And being male content, liuing all alone without a husband,
ranging the vnwayed woods,
sheVieweth. rangeth the
vnwaied woods.
               
                  
NeitherDoth she care what Hymen, what loue, what
mariages are. regards
shee
                     Hymen is taken both for the god of mariage, the
mariage, and the bridall or wedding song, viz. vsed to bee sung at
mariages. the
bridal song,Neither regarded mariage nor loue. what
loue, or what
marriageMeanes. is.
               Oft times [her]
Peneus.father said:Although her father oft times
challenged & vrged her,
                  Daughter thou owest me a sonne in lawe.thou owest me
a son in law [my]
daughter.
               [Her] father
said oft times,That she ought him a sonne in lawe, and nephewes;
[my] daughter
thou owest mee
nephewes.
               She hating the
Bridall solemnities or mariage songs, viz. mariage.marriage
                     
                        Teda is properly the middle or heart of the Pine tree, which being kindled through the fatnesse in it, burneth like a taper or torch.
                     The tapers vsed at mariages are put here for mariage, because as Plutarch saith, they were woont to carry fiue burning tapers before the new maried parties.
                   tapers
as a
Fault or blot.crime,Yet she still disliking and
detesting mariage as a crime.
               
               
                  Pouring ouer her beautifull countenance ouercast with a
shamefast red, viz. hauing her comely countenance ouercast with a
modest blush. Synec.
                   Blushing modestly,At length blushing
modestly,
               
               
                  And cleauing [or hanging] on the necke of her father with
fauning armes. And foulding
about [her]
fathers neck with
[her]Fauning armes are put for the armes of her, fauning.
Hypallage.
                   fauning
armes,And foulding her armes about her fathers necke, Maketh this
humble request vnto him:
               
               Said,That he would grant vnto her to inioy perpetuall
virginitie,
                  Giue. grant
mee [my] dearest
fatherTo liue a perpetuall virgin or maid. to inioy
perpetual virginity:Like as Dianaes father had graunted vnto
her before.
                  [Her] father gaue this before vnto Diana, viz. Iupiter, Dianaes father.
                  Dianas father
gaue this to her

before.
                     Whereunto her father answereth, that hee could consent;
                     But that yet her beautie hindered that desire of hers.
                  
                  Her father.He indeed
Obeyeth or yeeldeth.consents,

                     Peneus her father answereth her thus tenderly.but
[yet] [quoth
hee] this comelinesse
[of thine]
Hinders [or denies] thee to liue a virgin.forbids thee
to bee [that] wch
thouWishest.requirest,
And thy forme doth repugne thy vowe.and thy beauty
is repugnant to
thy desire.
               
                  Phoebus loueth & desireth the marriages of
Daphne, being seene.
                  This is the speech and relation
of Ouid.
                   
                  Apollo falls
presently in loue
with Daphne,
                  But Apollo presently fals in loue with her so
soone as euer hee seeth her, & desireth to marry her. and
assoon as he seeth
her hee desireth
to marry her:
               And what hee
desireth,And as he is inamoured with her: so he hopeth and perswadeth
himselfe to obtain her; although his Oracle deceiues himselfe. he
hopeth
for:And. but
yet his owne
Predictions, or foretelling to himselfe.oracles do
deceiue
him.
               And as the
lightHame, or strawe. stubble
Are burnt.is
                     Adoleo is properly to
burne sweet things. wholly set
on fire,And heere the Poet sets out the vehemency of his loue by a
double similitude. whenThe awnes or beards of the
corne are taken away [or reaped] the

                     Arista is properly the awne or beard of the eare, put for the whole eare of corne, and that for the corne in it. Metalepsis.
                  eares are taken
away.
               
                  
As [dry] hedges
burne with
Torches or firebrands.brands which
Trauellers in the darke nights are wont to carry torches or firebrands of some fat wood with them, to light them, which at the appearing of the day they cast out of their hands carelessely neere hedges, or wheresoeuer it happeneth.thePassenger or way fairing
man. traueller
bechanceThat euen as the stubble is burnt, when the corne is taken
away, or as the hedges are set on fire by brands carelesly left by the
traueller, towards the breaking of the day:
               
               EitherMoued, or carried, or layed. held
too neer [thē], or
left, nowVnder or about the light [comming.] about
the breaking of
the day:
               SoApollo. the God
Went away into flames, viz. with the loue of Daphne.
                  is all inflamed,So was the God wholly
inflamed.
soHe is burnt in his whole breast. is his whole
heart set on fire,
& [thus] he nourisheth
hisVaine, whereof he could looke for no fruite or
pleasure. barren
loue with
hoping [still.]And nourished his barren loue with increased
hopes.
               
               HeBeholdeth. seeth her
Not adorned, or curiously set.vntrickedHaires. haire
to hangAbout her necke, or vpon her necke. in her
necke.Here also the Poet declares the meanes whereby his loue was thus
kindled more and more.
               
               And what if
theyBee kemmed, or dressed vp, or finely set out. were
trimd?That her very haire, although vntrimmed, did exceedingly please
him; and therefore how much more would it, thought he, if it were set
out. quoth he:
hee seeth [her]
eyesShining or glistering with fire. glistering
like the stars:So her eyes glistering like the stars, hee
beholds [her]
                     Oscula ab os, seemeth here to be taken for
her little mouth; which especially commends a virgin.
                  Her lips,lips, which it
was not sufficient
for him to

see:Hee expresseth the conditions of elegant louers, who thus
commend all things in their loues.
                  
                     Brachia seeme to
bee taken here for the vpper part of the arme from the elbow to the
shoulder, as lacertus for the nether part; though they are more
vsually taken contrarily. he praiseth
her fingers and
her hands.And fingers, Hands,
               
               And also arms,Armes and wrists bare aboue the midst.
and wrists being
bareMore then a middle part, or the half. aboue the
midst.
               
                  If any things lye hid, hee thinketh [them] better or more
excellent. What other
parts are couered,And therefore hee thought those parts which were
couered to be farre more comely.
he thinketh
more beautifull;But shee flees away swifter then the winde.
she fleeth swifter
then the light
winde;Neither would shee stay, though hee called her backe by most kind
and louing words, in this tender sort; neither
stayd she at these
wordsOf [Apollo] calling her backe. of [him]
recalling her.
               
                  I pray thee nymph Peneis stay. Oh nymph
Peneis stay,Oh Nymph Peneis stay, I pray thee: I doe not
pursue thee as being thine enemie, like as thou doest flee from me. I
pray [thee] I do
not pursue thee
Being an enemy.[as] an enemy.
               
                  Oh nymph stay. Stay, oh
Nymph: [for]
soThe Yewe lambe. the Lambe
doth flie the
Wolfe,Stay on Nymph, thou fliest from mee euen as the lambe doth flie
the Wolfe; and as the Hinde flees frō the Lion. so the
Hinde [flies frō]
the Lyon.
               
                  
So the Pigeons
flie the Eagle
with [their]A trembling [or flittering] pen or fether.
trē
                  bling
wings.Or the Pigeons flie the Eagle with their trembling
wings.
               
               
                  All [liuing creatures] fleet. Euery [of thē
flie] their enemies;Euery one of them flying from their enemies
rage:
[but]Loue is the cause to mee of following [thee.]
loue
is the cause of
my following of
thee.But loue is the cause why I thus follow thee.
               
               
                  Alasse, how would it grieue my heart if thou shouldest fall,
&c. [Ah] mee
wretch,Then after in most louely manner pittying her simplicity and
danger, still proceedeth to stay her by aduising her to take heede,
[beware]
thou fall not
Prone or groue
                     
                        •
                     ing forward.on the face,That she
fell not on her face with haste, or
That.lest theBryers or pricks.
thorns
May note, or marke, or pricke.should scratch
[thy] legs vnworthy
to be hurt,Nor scratched herselfe amongst the thornes; and so hee
should bee the cause of her griefe, &
I be the causeOf griefe [hurt, or smart] to thee. of
thy griefe.
               The places
Where.which [way]
thouRunnest. hastest
areSharpe or prickie. rough,For that the places
whither shee so hasted from him were rough, run
I pray [thee]
moreLeasurely, or softly. moderately,And so
perswades her to run more moderately; and hee would follow more leasurely
after her.
andInhibite or abate. stay
thy flight; I my
selfe willFollow after thee, or pursue thee. follow
on thee more
Moderately.leasurely.And also to bethinke
herselfe well, who it was that now did seeke her loue, and to whom she
might giue content.
               
               YetInquire whome thou pleasest, or gin
                        •
                     st content
to. take aduice,

whom thou
mayst please:That he was not som vplandish clowne;
                  I am not an inhabitour of the mountaine, [or a rude fellow
dwelling among the hils or crags.] I
am no vplandish
man.
               I am not a shepheard.Nor a fieldman tending heards or
flockes.
                  I doe not attend [or keepe] here, being slouen like [or vnhandsome] herds of great cattel or flockes of lesse [as sheepe.]I do
not
here clownishly
tend
                     Armentum was taken for a company of a cattel, as
was sit to helpe some way in war 
                        〈◊〉
                      the worke thereof: grex, for
a company of lesse cattel, as of goats, swine, or sheepe. herds or
flocks.That shee indeede knew not from whome she fled, and therefore
shee fled from him.
                  Oh thou rash [maide] thou knowest
not. Thou
knowest not, oh
vnaduised soule,
thou knowest
not
               Whom thou
fliest,And then doth the Poet most artificially set out Apollo
wooing of her, and alluring her by mentioning his power, descent,
knowledge and inuentions. andFor that cause thou
fliest. therefore
fliest thou
[me.]
                     Delphi, a citie and people of Boetia by
Parnassus, where the Oracle of Apollo was.
                  The Delphian land [or the Citie Delphos] is mine, [or
serueth me.] 
                  Delphos
is mine,
               And
                     Claros is said to be a Citie of Lycia,
dedicated to Apollo, where also was an Oracle of
Apollo.
                   
                  Claros
and
                     Tenedos a citie of Lycia, or as some say of
Pamphilia, vnder the protection of Apollo.
                  
                  Tenedos,
                  That for his greatnesse he was Lord of Delphos,
Claros, Tenedos,
                   &
The palace [or kingly place] at Patera serueth me.the court of

                     Patera was also a citie of Lycia, so called of Patarus the sonne of Apollo and Lycia, where Apollo was specially worshipped, whence he is also called Pataraeus Apollo.
                  
                  Patera honoureth
me.And the palace of Patera: Being specially worshipped in all
these places.
               
               
                  Iupiter is [my]
Progenitour or begetter.father:And for his
descent, that Iupiter was his father.
                  By me its
knowen. Its
Lyeth open [or is made manifest.]knowen by me
both what shall
be,For his knowledge, that he was the God of wisedome, that by him
alone, and by his Oracle were all things knowen, both past, present, and
to come. & hath beene,
and [now] is:

                     Apollo is fained to be the inuentour of musicke, to commend the dignitie thereof, as being inuented by God, not by man.
                  Verses agree to strings or instruments by me, viz. I am the God or inuentour of musicke, harmonie, or melodie.songs
consort
vnto the instruments
by me.For his inuentions, that he was the God of musicke, and inuentour
thereof.
               
               
                  
                  And so of shooting, for the sunne beames so directly descending vpon the earth, and destroying all noysome vapours.Our
shaft indeed
is sure:So the God of artilery or shooting. but
yet [there is]
Viz. Cupid
                           •
                        
                      dart of loue, whereby he woundeth all.one surer
shaft thenOur [shaft,] ours,Howsoeuer;
Cupid had one surer shaft then his, with which bee had so wounded his
heart with loue.
                  That wounded my heart thus with loue, which before was free from all affection thereof.which hath
made [these]
wounds in [my]
empty breast.
               
                  
                     Apollo is fained also to be inuentour of physicke,
because by the power of the sunne all hearbs doe flourish, whereof is
speciall vse in physick for the health of man.
                  I am the God
& inuentour of physick and surgerie. Physicke
is my inuention;And finally, that hee was the God of physicke; for
that physicke was his inuention.
and I am called
The bringer of helpe and ayde.the helper thorow
the world:And he was counted the chiefe helper of all through the
world.
the power of
hearbsIs from mee, [or doth proceed from my gift.] is
also
subiect vnto
vs.That all hearbs had their vertue and power from him.
               
               Alasse for me!And yet he complaineth of this loue,
                  
                     Daphne, viz. the Laurell, is fained to be thus loued by Apollo, both for the speciall vse therof in physicke, and also that the Bay-trees are so pleasant for students.That loueIs curable, or able to bee cured by no hearbs. cannot
be cured by
anyMeanes. hearbs.That it could not be cured by any
hearbs, nor by all his skill.
               
               
                  Neither the arts doe profit the Master, which profit
all. Nor that the
arts can doe
[their]Inuentour or authour. Lord
any good,That those arts which were able to cure all others, could doe
their Lord no good at all. which
helpe all [others.]
               But [the
Nymph] Penels
fled from[Apollo] being about to speake moe
things. [him]
as he would haueBut yet notwithstanding all this speech and labour of
the God, the Poet sheweth how the Nymph still fled more fearefully from him,
& left him with his speech yet vnperfect, and not fully vttered.
                  
spoken more,
With a fearefull course.
                  Timido cursu. Hypallage, pro cursu timide.with a trembling
pase, and
left his words
imperfect with
himselfe.
               
                  And also. And then also
seemed shee
Decent.comely,And how in her flight she continually seemed more faire in his eyes. the
windsMade naked or bare [her] bodies. made her
body bare,
               AndThe winds meeting [her] shaked [or blew] her
garments, being against them, or contrary to them. the meeting
blasts did
tosse her garments
wch were
against them.For that the winds, wauing her garmēts as she ran,
vncouered som part of her body.
               
               
                  And the light wind [or ayre] gaue her haires driuen
behinde her [or backewards.] And likewise
euery light puffe
did blowe her
haire behinde
her.And euery light puffe of ayre did tosse her haire behinde
her.
               
               [Her] beautie
Is.was increased
by [her]Running, viz. her running made her seeme more
beautifull. flight:So that her beautie still encreased by her
flight.
                  But for that.but because the
Young.youthfull God
Abides not.indures not
any longerTo lose his flatteries [or fawning words.]
to
spend his pleasing
words:And how therevpon Apollo being youthfull could endure no
longer so to spend his pleasing words; and
That.asCupid himselfe.
                   loue it
selfeAdmonished. incitethBut as his loue incited
him, so he made the faster after her.
                  
[him,]This speed and strift of both these two Ouid setteth out
by a most liuely similitude, taken from the running of the grey hound and
the Hare. the followeth
her stepsHis pase being sent forth [or hastened]
viz. swiftly. wth
his pase more hastened.
               As when the
grey houndHath seene. seeth
the Hare in the
Empty or open field.champain field,That euen as
when the Greyhound pursueth the Hare in the champaine field, hee straines
at him with all his footemanship, the Hare as fast to saue his life.
andThe dog. heSeekes [or stretcheth] at
the prey with his feet [or running.] strains
at [his] prey by
[his] footmanship,
He safety.the Hare
Runnes for his life.[seekes] safetie.
               
                  The greyhound. The one
Like [to one] as it were ready to cleane to [the other] viz. close to the hare, ready to gather him vp.as cleaching the
other,The Greyhound as at the backe of the Hare hopes euer
and anon to
holde [him] and
straines hisFootsteps or prints of his feet. steps
His nose being thrust forth to latch the hare betweene his teeth.with his snout
thrust out.Hopes euer and anon to beare him away,
                  Straining
his steps, and thrusting out his snout to catch him.
               
               
                  The hare. The other
is inAmbiguity doubtfulnesse. doubt,The poore
Hare is alwaies in doubt whether he be catched, or no; and yet still hardly
scapes out of the Greyhounds mouth, and from betweene his teeth.
whether
he be catcht
andIs snatched from the very bitings. is [still]
deliuered
out of
[his] very teeth,
andLeaues the touching mouthes. scapes the
mouth which
touched him.
               
                  
                  So the God [is] and the virgin is.So is
Apollo
and the Mayde;So was Apollo and the Nymph.
                  Hee [is] swift in hope, viz. hoping to catch her, shee for feare of being catched.hee swift in
hope,Hee swift through hope, shee for
feare.And she for feare.
               
               Yet he which
Pursueth.followeth after
being helped
by thePens or fethers. wings of
Cupid.loue,Yet that Apollo was more
swift.
                  For that hee was helped forward by Cupids
wings.
               
               
                  Is the swifter. Is more
swift,And therefore denyed her any rest; &Will
not let her rest. denyeth
[her any] rest,
andHangeth ouer the backe of her fleeing. hangeth
euen
ouer her
backe,Being euer hard at her backe, as she was
thus fleeing away;And with his very breathing blowes her haires into
her necke, so that shee feeles his breath.
                  And blowes vpon her haire, being dispersed about her necke, or through her haires into her necke.. and
blowes her scattered
haire into
her necke.
               
                  Her strength being spent, she waxed very pale.
[But] when
her strength was
spent,Whereupon the Poet shews that her strength was cleane spent.
she waxed
wondrous pale:And that so she waxed wondrous pale,
and being ouercomne
by the
Toile or wearisomnesse.labour of [her]
Quicke or hastie course.speedy flight,And how then
being vtterly ouercomne with the violence of her running,
                  Beholding the Peneian waues, viz. the riuer Peneus, her father.looking to the
waters of Peneus.
                  She looked vnto her father Peneus
streames,
               
               
                  
Oh father,Crying vnto him to helpe her,
helpe,If that the riuers had any such diuine power, as to be able to
succour her. quoth she,
if [ye]Streames. riuers
haue [any]Power of the gods to helpe. diuine
power.
               O earth,And after prayes vnto the earth (sith that vpon it shee had
too much pleased the fancies of others) quoth
she, whereinI haue ouermuch delighted others with my
beauty. I
haue pleased ouer
much,Gape, viz. to swallow me vp. open
[& receiue me],That it would open it mouth and receiue her quicke,
or at least destroy that shape of hers, which had beene the cause of her
misery, by changing it into some other forme.
or destroyThis figure by changing [it] which maketh that I
bee hurt. this
shape, by changing
of it, which
causeth me to be
hurt.That this prayer of hers was scarcely ended,
               
               
                  [Her] prayer scarcely ended, or she had scarce made an
end of this praier. [This] prayer
scarcely ended,But a senselesse benummednesse fell vpon her,
                  A heauie drowsinesse [or senselessenesse] occupieth [or possesseth] her ioynts or limbs, or sinewes.her ioynts waxed
starke.That her ioynts waxed stiffe;
               
               The
                     Praecordia, signifieth properly the fleshy skin
called Diaphragma, or the midriffe separating the heart & lungs
from the stomacke, liuer, and other bowels: quòd cordi
praetendantur: but here it is taken for all the inward parts.
                  Soft. tender
Entrailes.parts about
her heart,Her heart, and all her tender inward parts were compassed
about with a thin rinde;
areCompassed about or girt in. girt about
with a thin
barke.
               Her haires
Are changed.[grow forth]
intoA leafe. leaues,Her haires were turned into
leaues; her
armes growe into
Branches.boughes.Her armes growen forth into great
boughs;
               
               
                  
[Her] foote
Euen now so swift cleaues [or stickes] with slowe rootes, viz. her feet were changed into roots.ere while so
swift,Her feet which euen now were so swift, into roots, sticking fast
in the earth. stickes
[in the earth]
with immooueable
rootes:
               
                  Her faces [or countenance] haue a top. [Her]
countenāce becomes
the top [of the
Laurell]Her beautifull countenance is turned into the top of the
Laurell.
                  There is in it onely a fresh greene colour.
one
shining brightnesse
remaines
In her, or in it.therein.And one onely fresh
greene colour remaining on her continually.
               
               
                  The Laurel hereupon is said to haue been dedicated to
Apollo.
                   And [now]

                     Phoebus, an epithet of Apollo, or the Sun, and signifieth pure, because the Sun is pure from all grosnesse or corruption. 
                  Phoebus loues
this [tree:]And hereupon Apollo loues this tree, as he did
Daphne before. and
laying his right
hand vpon the
Stocke.bodie of the
tree,And putting his right hand vpon the body of it:
               
               
                  Hee feeles as-yet her breast to tremble vnder the new
bark: viz. her heart to part or beat. He still perceiues
her heart
to beat vnder the
new rinde:He still perceiues her heart to beate vnder the new
barke.
               
               And imbracing
the branches,And imbracing the branches of it with his armes,
as [her]
Members or limbs.bodie, with
[his] armes,
               
                  
                  He giueth kisses to the wood, yet the wood fled back from the kisses, [or writhed away from them.]He profereth
kisses to the tree;He profered to kisse the tree,
but it writhed
back from them,But it writhed away from him.
               
               To whom the
GOD [thus
spake];And finally how the God honoured it with this gracefull
speech; But [yet]
sith that thou
canst not be my
wife,That sith it could not now be his wife, which he had so much
desired, it should surely bee his tree. That hee would weare it as an
ornament both about his head, his harpe, and quiuer.
                  Certainely thou shalt be my tree. thou shalt
surely bee my
tree:The Poet elegantly numbers vp those things which are
commonly adorned with a laurell bough: as, the bush of haire, instruments
and quiuers, which properly belong vnto Apollo.
                  
                  Oh▪ Laurell tree [our] locke [or bush of haire,] [our] harpes,
our, quiuers, shall haue thee alwaies [as an ornament] or thou shalt euer
serue to adorne these. Oh Laurell
tree, [our]
bush of haire,
[our] instrumēts,
our quiuers shall
Inioy or weare thee.haue thee euer
[for an ornament.]And so it should alwaies serue to adorne all
these.
               
               
                  The Emperours in their triumphs ware a crowne of Laurell. The
souldiers vsed to follow thē, singing [triumphe] to
triumphe.
                  
                  Thou shalt be present to the ioyfull
Captaines. Thou shalt
bee an ornament
to the ioyfull
Emperours.Captaines,And that moreouer the conquering
Emperours should euer in their triumphs weare a crowne of Laurel, when as
they went vnto the Capitoll in Rome with solemne pompe, hauing all
their souldiers following them, crying 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         triumphe, Triumph,
Triumph.
when as the merrie
voice [of the
souldiers] shall
sing the triumph,
andThe chiefe place in Rome, or the palace of the Citie
of Rome.
                   the
Capitol shall see
theSolemne sights or shews going in great length attending
vpon, or following them. long
pompes.
               
                  
                  Before the posts which stand before the gates of the Emperours palace in Rome, was set an Oke betweene two Laurels, to signifie that the safety of the common wealth was to bee preserued by the vertue and felicity of the Emperours. The Laurell was a signe of victorie and triumph, the Oke of a Citizen preserued. Whereupon they whosoeuer had gotten any famous victorie, where carried vnto the Capitol, wearing a Laurell branch or crowne; and he who had preserued a Citizen from the enemie, with a coronet made of Oke. Sab.
                  Thou shalt
Ward or watch.stand euen as
a most faithfull
keeper at the
Royall posts, viz. before Augustus palace dore.Emperours
posts before the
dores,And also that the Laurel tree should stand as a faithfull keeper,
before the posts which are set before the gates of the Emperours houses; to
wit thus, an Oke directly before the gate with a Laurell on either
side. and shalt
defendThe Oke set before the Emperours posts betweene two
Laurell trees. the
middle Oke.
               And as my
head is [euer]
youthfull with
Vncut.vnpouled
Haires.haire,And finally, that as his head was
alwaies youthfull, with his haire vnpouled; so it should haue this
perpetuall honour, to haue the branches euer greene, with flourishing
leaues.
               
               Thou in like
manner alwaies
beareThis honour, that thou shalt bee euer greene. the
perpetuall
honours
of [thy]Leafe. leaues.
               
                  Apollo had
[thus] ended [his
speech] the LaurellNodded vnto [or inclined, or bowed vnto
him.]
assented
wth [her] boughs
so lately made,And thus Apollo hauing ended his speech,
&
seemed to haue
Tossed.mooued [her]
top euen as [her]
head.The Laurell gaue her assent, by mouing and inclining her top, as
it were, mouing her head towards him.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   