
      
         
            
            
            THE LAST SVMMONS, OR AN ORATION SENT to the Inhabitants of the Towne of Rochell, To mooue them to yeild the Towne vnto his Maieſtie, and to obay his Commandements.
            
               Written by Monſieur le Marquis de Berguille.
            1621.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE LAST SVMMONS OR an Oration ſent to the Inhabitants of the Towne of Rochell.
            
            
               MOnſieur. You that make profeſſion to vnderſtand, and to know the Scriptures well; if it be true, I wonder how you perſeuere in your rebellion and diſobedience, ſeeing that therein, it is expreſly ſayd, he that diſobeyeth the commandements of Kings, holy contradicteth the commandement of God, whoſe liuely Images they are; know for certaine, that the Soueraigne Maieſtie of God, doth ſo much abhorre all thoſe that reuolt and rebell againſt their Soueraigne Princes; that if his mercy, did not hinder the force and effects of his Iuſtice, hee would ſuddenly diſcharge the arrowes of his wrath, to exturpe and deſtroy all thoſe, that are the perturbators of the will and pleaſure of there Soueraigne Kings.
            Caſt your eyes vpon him, againſt whom you are diſobedient, (it is nothing but ſhame that withholds you from it) I beſeech you, to the end that you may put away from you, all thoſe that loue the trumpet of Rebellion and were into your eares, and thereby to diuert you from ſo dangerous an enterpriſe, conſider, with whom you haue to doe.
            It is your King, Louis the Iuſt; Sonne to Henrie the Great, who already in his young age, is as great as his father, great in power, great in courage, great in counſell, great in friends, and ſpecially in theſe affaires, and moſt great in Iuſtice, the point, which thereby is to be decided conſiſteth herein, to know whether hee ought to be obayed of his ſubiects: or not, in a thing whereas he vſeth no violence whatſoeuer.
            
               Then it is to this great King that you are diſobedient and rebellious, againſt his Maieſties commandements, who in this great and puiſſant Realme, is beloued, feared, and obayed of all men, vnleſſe it be of a handfull of men, who being prouoked and incited by diuers intereſts and pretences, vnder a falſe pretence Religion ſeeke to moleſt and diſturbe the ſtate of the land.
            Thinke not to oppoſe your armes againſt his, your forces againſt his, and your Souldiers againſt his: In what places can you maintaine your ſelues againſt him, but that the ſame places will put you in minde of your faults? will you alwayes be thoſe onely that reſiſt and opugne his Maieſtie in his Realme? will you alwaies in ſome of his Prouinces warre againſt your Prince, his Townes, and his name of a King: cannot be thinke you, cauſe your armes to fall ouer off your hands, and dompt the courage of your heart? For my part, I am not of opinion, neither can I be perſwaded, that any of you once ſo much as imagine, that you are able to raiſe a ſufficient armie, to withſtand that which his Maieſtie in a moneths time is able to bring into the field. Remember I pray you, what paſt and fell out the laſt yeare, in thoſe commotions, that ſeemed to ſpread and extend themſelues ouer the whole Realme, which was a ſtrong and puiſſant complet as it then fell out.
            The King iſſued out of Parris, accompanied onely with two thouſand men, but his Princely preſence, that was worth a hundred thouſand, in ſuch maner in all places drew the courages and hands of euery man, vnto him that in leſſe then a moneths time, hauing pacified the whole Realme of Fraunce, he had ſo great a force about him, that if then he would haue ſet vpon your Towne of Rochell, and other places of refuge which you hold by his fauour, to execute that, which now you faine to feare, he ſhould not haue found any one that once durſt to haue conceiued ſo much as a thought to ſhut their gates againſt him.
            When Kings march through their Realmes; they are like haile ſtones, lying vpon the tops of hills and mountaines, which

the further you goe from them, ſtill waxe thicke and fearefull vnto thoſe, vpon whom they fall.
            But if he had no other power, then his guards of Frenchmen Switzers and Scots, and his foure regiments of Souldiers, continually entertained, that haue no other occupation, then the skill how to beate and kill their enemies. It were ſufficient againſt you.
            Remember alſo that when this great Monarch would raiſe new troupes, when he would make new regiments, he can and is able to doe it with ſuch facilitie and promptnes, that you ſhall ſooner ſee the enſignes diſplayed in the aire, ſooner heare the drumes beate in the fields, ſooner heare the horſes neighy: The cannons roare, and the ſouldiers ready to aſſaile you, then you could imagine or once conceite that any armie were raiſed againſt you.
            I would for your ſakes that your Towne of Rochell were an impregnable Rocke, and Saint Iohn Dangely ſo ſtrong as that the Angels were not able to ouercome it. I would for your ſakes that all the places wherein you encloſe yourſelues, were not able to be vndermined, not able to be ſcaled, not to be battered, and to conclude, inuincible, wherein I graunt you more then you your ſelues demaund, and much more then is true: The ſtrongeſt of them being no other, but ſuch as tenne thouſand men, within the ſpace of 6. weekes would force you to yeild.
            It is not as it was in times paſt, the manner of beſieging of times at this preſent is brought to ſuch a faſhion and perfection, that there is not any one, which is impregnable, and may not be woone. If you had ſeene how men vſe to raiſe Trenches, how they make mounts of earth; how they fill vp deepe ditches, how they draw riuers drie, and ſtop chanels of water. And to conclude, if you had ſeene how men encloſe and preſſe vpon Townes that are beſieged, you would neuer ſay nor report that yours are impregnable: They are of to good metall to be ſuch; the fields, the vignes which enuiron them, alway giue meanes to thoſe that beſiege them to berry them therein.
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
               There is nothing impoſſible to our victorious Monarch Louis the thirteenth within this Realme, where all men, employ all their forces to execute his wil, for I can aſſuredly tel you, that if you enter not into that obedience, which you owe vnto his Maieſtie, and giue him not free entraunce into his Towne of Rochell, that you will thereby giue his Maieſtie cauſe; in ſhort time to raiſe vp & erect a great number of forces about your Townes of refuge, according to militarie Art, furniſhed with men, Artillerie, and all maner of prouiſions, that ſhall ſo ſtraightly on all ſides encloſe you about, that you muſt either burſt or yeild.
            In the meane time you ſhall want victuals, you ſhall conſume your powder and bullets, you ſhall try the inſolence of ſouldiers, the brauadoes of Captaines, the mutenies and murmorings of the poore people, leſſe furniſhed with prouiſion for the mouth, then with riches.
            What will you expect after all this, but onely, that hauing abuſed and refuſed the Kings mercy, you ſhall trie and feele his Iuſtice: It makes me quake and tremble for you, when I call to minde, the ſpeedy execution of the moſt culpable, and thoſe that were the raiſers & ſeducers of ſuch rebellion and diſobedience, which will then be done.
            But I aſſured my ſelfe, and am verily perſwaded, that when you ſhall once behold your King, as iuſt, as martiall, and armed magnanimitie, runne from rancke to rancke, as a forerunner of the victorie, to annimate his troupes to fight, what countenances you will ſhew, and what will be your behauiours; but onely that of a miſerable company of ſheepe appointed to a bloody ſlaughter, altogether trembling, all bleating, all deſirous to run away, but by meanes of your fearefulnes, hauing not the hardines to doe it, ſo that we cannot be perſwaded, that if you did but once call to minde and thinke vpon all theſe things together, you could be ſo hardy as to withſtand this funerall blow: the beſt that you could doe is, to ſhut your ſelues vp, like fearefull ſheepe, within 3. or 4. of your ſtrongeſt Townes; and there, being obſtinately bent, ſeeke to ſaue your infortunate liues, behind the

ramparts and walles of the ſame.
            But good Lord, what remedy is this, to haue all the reſt of your faction, encloſed with you in Rochell, Saint Iohn Dangely, Montauban, Niſmes, and in ſuch Townes as you haue made choiſe of, leauing and abandoning the others, as leſſe ſtrong, or to many in number, to be kept by ſo ſmall a number of mutuous perſons, leauing within them all the neſt of the reformed Sext, who wiſer then you, and it may be more affected to their Religion, will content themſelues, (obaying the King) to deplore and lament your neere approching vnfortunate ſtate. But doe I ſay ſhut vp in thoſe places, what thinke you thereby to doe? O, it is poſſible you perſwade your ſelues to wearie the armie Royall, by the tongues of a ſiege which you pretend to endure.
            Doe you ſet before your eyes the happy deliueranc, that you haue tryed in like diſtreſſes in the former warres? You ſay and blaſe it abroad, that Rochell is as ſtrong as euer it was, that Saint Iohn Dangely is able to defend it ſelfe, that all your Townes are in better ſtate, to reſiſt and withſtand the forces of a puiſſant army, then euer they were, that it is which you ſay, and the ſame wherwith you nouriſh the ſtubbornnes of theſe among you, that haue leaſt inſight in theſe matters: Whoſe eyes, if they be capable to conceiue it, I muſt open, and cauſe them to ſee, that they are lulled a ſleepe with deceitful words, which wholy leade them vnto the path of their moſt certaine and aſſured deſtruction.
            Open your eyes then (I pray you) but you ſpecially, that are engaged in this dangerous enterprice; call your duties to remembrance, and ſhowe forth that obedience which lawfully you owe to our King, you are his Subiects, he is your Prince, ordained here on earth to gouerne and rule ouer you. There is nothing in his Kingdome, whereof he is not to haue the full and free poſſeſſion. The Towne wherein you are encloſed is as much his as all the reſt: Therefore it makes me wonder, to ſee that you are ſo much blinded, as to be rebellious againſt, and obſtinate to execute his Royall commandements.
            I ſummon and inuite you once againe, to know your ſelues,

and to yeild that vnto him and into his hands, which belongeth vnto him; not that his Maieſtie will in any ſort takeaway your notable and ancient priuiledges, but rather to the contrary, if he ſeeth you become Loyall and obedient Subiects, he will giue you many others.
            Send an honorable number of Deputies to his Maieſtie, humbly to craue pardon of him for all the rebellions, that you haue made; and I am aſſured, that his clemencie is ſuch and ſo great, that he will accept of your ſubmiſſion, pardon your offences, and forget all your fault. If you will doe it ſpeedily, and in the meane time, I beſeech God to giue you the grace, to humble your ſelues, and to obay the King.
            1621.
            
         
      
   