
      
         
            
            A godlie and zealous prayer, to bee vſed of euery Chriſtian
and duetifull Subiecte, for the preſeruation of our moſt ſoueraigne Lady Elizabeth,
by the grace of God, of England, Fraunce, and Irelande Queene: and in all cauſes
as well eccleſiaſticall as temporall, next vnder God of the Church of Englande and
Irelande ſupreame Gouerneſſe.
            
               
                  English royal blazon or coat of arms
                  HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
                  DIEV ET MON DROIT
               
               
                  O Moſt gratious God and louing father, wee moſt wretched and miſerable
ſinners proſtrate our ſelues before the throne of thy diuine Maieſtie: earneſtlye beſeeching thee from
the bottom of our harts, (not for any of our deſerts) but for thy ſonne Ieſus Chriſt his ſake, to hearken
vnto our prayers and ſupplications, which with groning ſoules and mourning mindes, wee powre foorth
beſore thee, which art the God of Abraham, Iſaac, and Iacob. For we appeale vnto thee O heauenly Father,
and vnto none, but onelie vnto thee, for comfort in theſe dangerous daies of iniquity: wherein ſinne aboundeth,
and the godles which haue not thy feare before their eyes, labour without ceaſing, to deface thy eternall trueth, to roote
vppe violently the precious plants of thy vineyard, to hinder the building of Syon, and to treade downe like blood thirſty Tyrants
and rauenous Wolues, thy choſen ſeruaunt Elizabeth, our moſt gracious Queene and Gouernes: vnder whome, through
thy prouidence, we haue to our great ioy, and her highnes exceeding comfort, beene moſt peaceablie and quietly gouerned.
            Continue we beſeeche thee, (O moſt gracious Father and eternall God) this thine ineſtimable loue, and vndeſerued fauour
vnto vs although we haue iuſtly by the meanes of our greeuous contempt of thy graces, our innumerable wickedneſſes
and immeaſurable ingratitude deſerued the contrary: yet for thy ſonne Chriſt his ſake, moſte gracious God and louing Father,
lay not the multitude of our ſinnes to our charge, but be mercifull vnto vs, that with bitter teares ſue vnto thee for thy mercie,
loue, and fatherly fauoure.
            Vpholde we beſeeche thee amongſt vs, as graciouſly thou haſt doone hetherto, the ſincere preaching of thy Goſpell, (O moſt
mighty Iehoua) and giue vs grace without wauering, to hold faſt the ſtaffe of thy bleſſed promiſes, and to beleeue without faining
the ſacred teſtimonies contained in thy holy Lawe. Keepe vs good Lorde vnder the winges of thy defence from the ſedicious
and damnable doctrine of Antichriſt, that man of ſinne, which exalteth himſelfe aboue God, robbing him of his glorye
and honour, in making our Sauiour Chriſt Ieſus, inſufficient by his painefull death and bloody paſſion, to purchaſe vs the
price of our redemption, and thereby to raunſome vs from the infernall lake of hell and damnation.
            Plucke the ſeales of ignoraunce we moſt hartely beſeeche thee (O moſt louing God and heauenly father) from the eyes of
all Chriſtian Princes, and at thy good pleaſure giue vnto them the good feeling of thy grace, that by the diuine w
                  •
               rking of the
ſame, they may perfectly vnderſtand, and faithfully beleeue thy holy Goſpell. Make them of perſecuting Saules, to become conuerted
Paules, that they with vs, and we with them, may glory and triumphe in the fall of Babilon, and ſtudie in all theyr and
our actions, as it becommeth redeemed Chriſtians to aduaunce and ſet foorth the glory of thy holy name.
            And cheefely and eſpecially, (O gracious God and louing father) we commende vnto thee in theſe our prayers and ſupplications
at this preſent, according to our bounden dueties, the eſtate of thy choſen ſeruaunt, our ſoueraigne Lady, Queene Elizabeth.
Be thou vnto her as thou haſt from the beginning to her laſt ending. O moſt heauenly father, a Bulwarke of defence
againſt all her and our enemies. Weaken and make feeble ſor thy ſonne Chriſt his ſake we beſeeche thee the perrilous practi
                  •
               es,
and dangerous deuiſes of all peruerſe and ſedicious Papiſts, which indeuour to withſtand and reſiſt thy trueth, to perſecute
thee afreſh in thy members, and to ouerthrow thine annointed. Stretch foorth thy hand O heauenly Father, and euer
defend thy handmayd from thoſe deuouring Bulles of Baſan, which haue bent their hornes againſt her, hardning their hartes
in their vngodlines, to worke the confuſion of ſo vertuous and godly a Princeſſe. Keepe thou (O good Lorde) her highnes
from the murmuring of Dathan, Coran, and Abiram, which enuie the godly eſtate of her gouernment, and let theyr reward bee
ſhame and confuſion, which imagine to worke her highnes any harme.
            Defende thou (O heauenly Father) by the powre of thy prouidence, our happie Heaſter, from the conſpiracy of all hatefull
Hamons, that thirſt after the blood of the righteous, intendinge by treachery to worke the ſpoyle of thine inheritaunce, yea let
their deuilliſh deuiſes be brought to naught, and let them periſh in their vngodlines, that heaue vp their hands againſt thyne
annointed. Keepe her farre off good Lord we beſeeche thee, from all ſuch ambitious minded Abſolons, as haue determined
to alter the eſtate of her moſt gracious gouernment, and let their hire be ſhame and confuſion that haue conſpired againſt her
and thy people. Gyue her highnes power and ſtrength from aboue, with victorious Iudith, to draw the ſword, and to cutte of
the heades of all ſuch drunken Holoferneſes, as are become drunken with the deuilliſh dregges of Antichriſt, ſuperſticious popery
and treaſonne: yea, let them be taken in theyr owne ſnares, and fall into the pytte which they haue digged for the deſtruction
of the innocent. thus we thy poore people ſhall reioyce in thy wonderous workes and make our continuall boaſtes of thy
prayſes. Eſtabliſhe wee beſeeche thee (O good Lord) the throne of her highnes, make her an olde and aged mother in the
houſe of Iſraell, to aduaunce the trueth of thy teſtament to reedify Ieruſalem, and to plucke vp by the rootes all ſuch wicked
weedes and peſtilent plants, as are not grafted by Ieſus Chriſt, in the precious vineyard of his eternall trueth. Endue her
with wiſedome from aboue, garniſh her with the health of body and minde: and plant about her as thou haſt doone from the
beginning, euen to her laſt ending, wiſe and godly Counſaylers, that by theyr foreſight and her gracious gouernment, ſinne
may be ſuppreſſed, vertue aduaunced, trueth maintained, Idolatry defaced, and the horne of thine honour for euer bee continually
exalted. Increaſe the number of godly Subiects, and giue vs grace we beſeeche thee O eternall God, truely to ſerue and
worſhippe thee, to hate ſinne, to flye farre from the fellowſhip of the vngodly, and to abound in all obedience, loue and duety towardes 
thee and her maieſty. And then thou like a louing father and moſt gracious God, wilt mercifully ſtretch foorth vnto vs
the aſſured Scepter of thy euerlaſting fauour: double the dayes of our ſoueraigne, to our exceeding ioy and comfort. Multiply
our peace, confounde and ouerthrowe all her and our enemies, as well forraine as domeſticall, powre vppon vs plenti
                  •
               lly inthis
life, the euerlaſting dewes of thy mercy and grace, and in the world to come, make vs partakers of thoſe celeſtiall ioyes
which Chriſt Ieſus hath prepared for the number of his elect in his heauenly kingdome: the which God for his ſonne Chriſte
his ſake graunt vs. Amen.
            
               I. P.
            
            Viuat, Valeat, vincatque Regina Elizabetha.
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London by Hugh Singleton, dwelling
in Smithfielde, at the ſigne of the Golden Tunne, printer
to the right honorable Citie of London.
            
         
      
   