
      
         
            
            
            
            
            ORDERS AND CONSTITVTIONS, PARTLY COLlected out of his Maieſties Letters Patents; and partly by authority, and in vertue of the ſaid Letters Patents: Ordained vpon mature deliberation, by the Gouernour and Company of the City of LONDON, for the Plantation of the SumMER-ILANDS: for the better gouerning of the actions and affaires of the ſaid Company and Plantation. 6. Febr. 1621.
            
               AT LONDON, Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON. 1622.
         
         
            
            
               
                  Bermuda coat of arms
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Orders and Conſtitutions, partly collected out of his Maieſties Letters Patents, and partly by authority, and in vertue of the ſaid Letters Patents: ordained vpon mature deliberation, by the Gouernour and Company of the City of London, for the Plantation of the Summer-Ilands: for the better gouerning of the Actions and Affaires of the ſaid Company and Plantation. 6. February. 1621.
            
            
               THE FIRST PART.
               
                  The Company.
                  1. THe Company of Summer-Ilands conſiſteth  of the Free-holders and Owners of Land there. Neuertheleſſe, no man ſhall be admitted into this Company, or haue voyce in any election, or other buſineſſe, in quality of a Free-holder or Owner of Land, that is not Owner of one entire Share, at the leaſt, of the foure hundred and fiue

ſhares, into which the eight Tribes of the ſaid Summer-Ilands are diuided. Prouided alwayes, that the Owners by Ioynt-tenancy, Coparcinary, or otherwiſe, as Tenants in common, if the number of their perſons exceed not the number of their Shares ſo held, may be admitted into the ſaid Company, and haue each their ſeuerall voyces: but if the number of their perſons exceed, they ſhall, or may preſent one to haue voyce for them all.
                  2. No man, though hauing right, ſhall preſume to be preſent at the Aſſemblies of the ſaid Company, before he be ſolemnly admitted by the Gouernour or Deputie of the ſaid Company in a Generall Court: which admittance ſhall neither bee granted, where it is not due; nor denyed, or delayed, where it is apparantly due.
                  3. No perſon, by reaſon of minority of yeeres, (hauing otherwiſe right) ſhall bee excluded from being preſent at the Generall Aſſemblies of the ſaid Company: but yet ſhall not be admitted to haue voyce in any Election, or other buſineſſe whatſoeuer, till he haue accompliſhed the full age of eighteene yeeres.
               
               
                  
                  Courts.
                  4. THere are foure great Generall Courts, commonly  called, Quarter Courts, appointed to be held by the Gouernour, Aſſiſtants, and Company for the Summer-Ilands, vpon the foure laſt Wedneſdayes of euery Terme; which onely haue, and ſhall haue power to chuſe Officers, as well for the Company here, as alſo for the Colony and Planters in the Summer-Ilands; to make Lawes and Ordinances; to diſtribute and diſpoſe of the Lands in the Summer-Ilands, as well for the publique good of the Company and Colony, as alſo agreeable to euery mans particular right. And laſtly, to ſettle the matter of Trade, for behoofe of the Company and Colony.
                  5. Euery Friday before a Quarter Court, ſhall bee held a Court to prepare all kind of buſineſſe reſerued to the power of a Quarter Court to determine.
                  6. Euery Wedneſday fortnight, reckoning from the great Courts, ſhall alſo bee held an ordinary Court for this Company, for diſpatch of ordinary and extraordinary buſineſſe. And it is not to bee counted a perfect Court, vnleſſe the Gouernour or Deputy be there, and ſeuen of the Aſſiſtants.
                  
                     
7. It ſhall bee in the power of the Gouernour or Deputy in his abſence, vpon extraordinary cauſe, to call an extraordinary Court.
                  8. It ſhall not be in the power of any other then a Quarter Court to make any contract, (ſaue for the ſetting out of Ships) whereby either to charge the Company, or otherwiſe to binde the Company for any continuance of time. In which caſe it ſhall bee propoſed alſo in the Preparatiue Court next preceding.
                  9. Publique buſineſſe ſhall haue precedence in the Courts before priuate, vnleſſe there bee extraordinary important cauſe to the contrary.
                  10. If any thing ordered in an ordinary or leſſer Court, be afterward reuerſed in one of the foure great and Generall Courts, it ſhall be from thence forward, as though it had neuer been ſo ordered.
                  11. All Courts ſhall begin at two of the Clocke in the afternoone, and diſſolue at the riſing of the Gouernour, or of the Deputy in his abſence.
                  12. Nothing ſhall be put to the queſtion after ſixe of

the clocke in the afternoone: yet by order of the ſame Court to be made before ſixe, the debating and concluding of any particular buſineſſes mentioned in the ſaid Order, may continue on longer, as the matters then in handling ſhall require.
                  13. If the buſineſſe for the Quarter Courts grow very great; it ſhall be in the power of the Gouernour or Deputy, with allowance of the Preparatiue Court next preceding, to aſſemble the Quarter Courts both in the forenoones at eight of the clocke, and in the afternoones of the dayes appoynted for them. Neuertheleſſe, in regard the meetings in the afternoones haue beene obſerued to bee alwayes farre greater then in the mornings: It ſhall be in the power of the ſame Quarter Court, in the afternoone to diſauow and reuerſe any thing paſſed in the morning; to which purpoſe the morning Court ſhall be firſt read.
                  14. The Company ſhall be ſummoned to the Quarter Courts, and Courts extraordinary by the Officer, but of the ordinary Courts themſelues ſhall take notice. And the Secretary ſhall keepe a Booke of the proceedings of the Courts, who with the husband, and other Officers ſhall at all Courts giue diligent attendance.
                  15. It ſhall be lawfull at a Generall Court, and with

conſent thereof, to diſpence with all meetings in long vacations, or in ſuch part of them as may bee ſpared, vnleſſe ſome extraordinary matter befall. In which caſe may be called extraordinary Courts.
                  16. The Gouernour and Company being a Body and Communalty perpetuall, ſhall haue one faire and common legall Seale, to be kept by the Gouernour, and not to be affixed to any Grants or Inſtruments whatſoeuer, otherwhere then in publike Courts, or by expreſſe warrant from thence.
               
               
                  Elections.
                  17.  AT the Great and Generall Court, commonly called the Quarter Court in Eaſter Terme, all Officers of this Company ſhall be voyd; and the Court ſhall proceed to Election of new Officers in manner following.
                  18. The Gouernour, ſoone after the beginning of the Court to be held in the afternoone of that day, at the giuing vp of his Office, ſhall declare by word or writing, the preſent eſtate of the Colony and Planters in the Summer-Ilands. And the Treaſurer at the ſame time ſhall deliuer into the Court a Booke of his Accounts for the yeere then ended,

examined and approued vnder the Auditors hands: declaring withall the preſent eſtate of the Caſh: which booke ſhall lye open in euery Court to bee viewed by all men till the next Quarter Court; and ſhall then be laid vp in the Cheſt of the Companies euidences.
                  19. This done, the Gouernour ſhall leaue his place, and the Court without intermixing of other buſineſſe, ſhall proceed to Election of Officers for the yeere inſuing; firſt of a Gouernour, then of a Deputy; afterward of the Aſſiſtants; next of a Treaſurer; after that, of the Auditors: and laſtly of the Secretary, Book-keeper, Husband, and Beadle.
                  20. At the choyce of each Officer, the perſons nominated to ſtand in Election, ſhall withdraw themſelues, till the party choſen bee publikely ſo pronounced. And generally, no man ſhall bee preſent in the Court, whileſt himſelfe or his matter paſſeth the iudgement of the Court.
                  21. In regard of the waighty buſineſſe of this Company, which is alſo like to increaſe: no man ſhall be choſen Gouernour of the Company of the Summer-Ilands, who at the time of his Election is Gouernour of any other Company; except it ſeeme good for the behoofe of both Companies, that the ſame man haue the gouernment both of this Company, and of that for Virginia.
                  
                  
                     
22. It is for waighty reaſons thought very expedient, and ſo ordered, that no man continue in the place of Gouernour, Deputy, or Treaſurer of this Company, aboue three yeeres at once.
                  23. For the auoyding of diuers inconueniences; It is thought fit and ſo ordered, that all elections of Principall Officers, in, or for the Summer-Ilands, as alſo of the Gouernour and Deputy here, be performed by a ballating box, as in ſome other Companies.
                  24. Euery Officer as hee is choſen, ſhall openly in Court take his Oath, or if he bee abſent, at the next Court he commeth to.
                  25. The Gouernour, Deputy and Treaſurer, hauing no certaine allowance for their cares and labours: the rewarding of theſe former Officers according to their deſerts, is referred to the pleaſure of the Court, wherein new Officers are choſen.
               
               
                  
                  Gouernour.
                  26. THe Gouernours duty is to keepe the ordinary  Courts of the Summer-Ilands, and vpon cauſe extraordinary, to call Courts extraordinary: And in all Courts and other meetings, hee is to haue a caſting voyce.
                  27. He is to moderate the Courts in quality of a Preſident, and to cauſe grauity, decency and good order to be obſerued: and for breach thereof, after a graue admonition firſt giuen and preuailing, to proceed to reformation by the iudgement of the Court.
                  28. He is to propound and put all things to the queſtion which the Court requires, the ſame not being contrary to his Maieſties Letters Patents, or Inſtructions, nor to the Standing Lawes and Orders of the Company; vnder paine of being immediately put from his office, if he refuſe: in which caſe, the Deputy ſhall doe it vnder the like paine. And if hee refuſe, then any of the aſſiſtants there preſent.
                  29. The Gouernour is to haue care that the extraordinary Committies appoynted by the Courts

to ſeuerall buſineſſe, doe proſecute the ſame, and giue ſeaſonable account of their doings to the Court.
                  30. He is alſo to haue an eſpecial care, that no Grant or Patent doe paſſe from the Company, but vpon examination thereof by a ſelect Committy; who are exactly to obſerue the Orders made concerning them. And to this end, with diuers others, hee is to haue a vigilant eye on the Companies Seale, which is to be committed to his cuſtody, that they be not wronged by abuſing thereof.
                  31. The Gouernour, vpon receit of publike Letters, from, or concerning the Summer-Ilands, ſhall aſſemble at leaſt foure of the principall Aſſiſtants to impart them to them, and by their aſſent ſhall cauſe them to bee read in Court, vnleſſe there bee ſome cauſe of ſecreſie; in which caſe hee ſhall communicate them with the Aſſiſtants onely. In like ſort, the publike Letters and inſtructions to bee ſent to the Gouernour and people in the Summer-Ilands, or otherwiſe concerning them, hee ſhall cauſe to bee publikely read, and approued by the Court or Aſſiſtants as the caſe ſhall require. And neither hee, nor any other, ſhall of his owne head or authority, write, or ſend any directions ſwaruing from ſuch as the Court or Aſſiſtants ſhall giue, vpon paine to be ſuſpended from the Court for euer.
                  
                     
32. The Gouernour ſhall aſſemble the Principall Aſſiſtants whom the Court ſhall particularly aſſigne to aſſiſt him, vpon all waighty occaſions requiring ſerious deliberation: and ſhall haue care with them, that the Lords of his Maieſties Priuie Councell be acquainted with all matters of extraordinary and greateſt importance concerning the State.
                  33. He is to doe his beſt, that fit men bee choſen to the place of Aſſiſtants, and being choſen, is to haue care that they take their Oathes.
                  34. The Gouernour is to haue care alſo that the generall Aſſiſtants keepe their Courts with the Deputie, vpon all occaſions of buſineſſe.
                  35. The Gouernour at his pleaſure ſhall ſit in any Aſſembly, either of the Aſſiſtants, or other Committies ordinary, or extraordinary; vnleſſe the matter happen to concerne himſelfe particularly.
               
               
                  
                  Deputy.
                  36.  FOr matter of the Courts, in the Gouernours abſence the Deputy ſhall performe his Office, and in his preſence be aſſiſting to him.
                  37. He ſhall ouerſee the Secretary for entring the Orders of Court, and ſhall giue inſtructions for the writing of Letters as he ſhall be directed, and haue care that accordingly they be written.
                  38. The Deputy ſhall alſo keep the Courts of Aſſiſtants vpon all occaſions requiſite, and at his pleaſure ſhall alſo ſit in any Aſſembly of Committies ordinary or extraordinary, vnleſſe the matter concerne himſelfe: and in all theſe, in the Gouernours abſence, he ſhall haue a caſting voyce.
                  39. He ſhall ſuffer no warrant to be made and ſigned for iſſuing out of money, but in the open Court of Aſſiſtants, after due examination of the Cauſe: vnto all which warrants his owne hand ſhall bee firſt ſet, and after it, other foure hands or more of the Aſſiſtants. And the Deputie and Aſſiſtants ſhall not intermeddle with Disburſements for any other

charges, then ſuch as ariſe within the compaſſe of their owne yeere.
                  40. When a Warrant is directed to the Treaſurer to pay any groſſe Summe to the Deputie, to be iſſued out by him and the Aſſiſtants for the vſe of the Company: in that caſe it ſhall not be requiſite, that the Deputies hand be to the Warrant, ſo it be to the receit.
                  41. Generally the Deputy ſhall ouer-ſee all inferiour Officers, that they performe their duties.
               
               
                  Aſſiſtants.
                  42. THe Aſſiſtants being to bee foure and twenty, and to be yerely choſen; there ſhall be a yeerly alteration made of one fourth part at the leaſt; to the end many be trained vp in the buſines: to which end, the ſix new Aſſiſtants ſhall be firſt choſen.
                  43. The Aſſiſtants Office is, together with the Deputy, to performe the orders of Courts, for ſetting out Ships, and buying prouiſions for the Summer-Ilands; wherein eſpeciall care is to be had, that neither the husband, nor any one man alone bee intruſted

with the making of thoſe prouiſions: but two at the leaſt, to be appoynted thereunto by the Deputy and Aſſiſtants in their Court; who ſhall alſo bring in their bils and accounts, to bee examined and approued by the Aſſiſtants. The like care ſhall they haue at the returne of Ships from the Summer-Ilands, of the Goods belonging to the Company, to bee ſafely kept and ſold to the beſt aduantage, either in Court, or otherwiſe by the Courts direction. The accounts of all which, ſhall be transmitted to the Auditors; and the money remaining, returned to the Caſh. The Deputy and Aſſiſtants ſhall alſo haue care, of the Invoyces to be made for the prouiſions ſent to the Summer-Ilands: and of the Certificates of the receit to be thence returned: as likewiſe of the Invoyces of the Goods ſent from the Summer-Ilands. All which ſhall bee regiſtred fairely in a Booke.
                  44. The Aſſiſtants ſhall diligently keep their Courts, whenſoeuer occaſion of buſineſſe ſhall require. They ſhall bee ſummoned by order from the Gouernour or Deputy: and it ſhall not bee counted a Court of Aſſiſtants, vnleſſe the Gouernour or Deputy with ſixe Aſſiſtants be preſent. The Secretary of the Company ſhall keepe a Booke alſo of their proceedings.
               
               
                  
                  Principall Aſſiſtants.
                  45. AFter choice of the foure and twenty Aſſiſtants, ſixe of them ſhall be ſelected by the Court, to be of counſell with the Gouernour, or Deputy in his abſence, in all matters of importance concerning the Summer-Ilands: and they ſhall haue the name of Principall Aſſiſtants; but their power ſhall be onely to deliberate and aduiſe; but not to conclude, without the reſt of the Aſſiſtants, or the generall Court, as the caſe ſhall require.
                  46. The Principall Aſſiſtants are to aſſemble vpon all important occaſions, being requeſted by the Gouernour or the Deputy in his abſence. And in defect of both, being deſired by the Court: and without fauour or diſpleaſure, priuate or ſiniſter reſpect, to giue their faithfull aduice in all matters tending to the aduancement and benefit of the Plantation; and eſpecially touching the making of Orders and Conſtitutions for the better gouerning, as well of the Company heere, as alſo of the Colony planted in the Summer-Ilands, wherein the policy and forme of England is to bee followed as neere as may be.
                  47. The Principall Aſſiſtants, together with the Gouernour

and Deputy, ſhall haue an eſpeciall regard, by pious Conſtitutions, and by other good politique Lawes and Orders, to hold the people there in the true Religion and ſeruice of God; and in aſſured alleagiance to his Maieſty and the Crowne of England; in due reſpect alſo to this Company for the Summer-Ilands; and in iuſtice, peace, vniformity, and amity, amongſt themſelues.
                  48. They ſhall alſo haue care of the Inſtructions to be deliuered, or ſent from time to time to the Gouernour, or other Principall Officers in the Summer-Ilands: and ſhall haue an eye vpon the due obſeruance of the ſame.
                  49. If any Principall Officer of the Company here, or Magiſtrate, great Officer or Councellor in the Summer-Ilands, ſhall by the fame of his miſ-deſerts, or particular occaſion, merit to bee called in queſtion heere of being remoued from his place, or otherwiſe reformed or cenſured: he ſhall be firſt conuented and examined by the Gouernour, Deputy, and Principall Aſſiſtants, before his cauſe bee produced in publike Court: and in his abſence the like courſe ſhall be held for his buſineſſe.
                  50. The Principall Aſſiſtants, in conſideration of this their greater imployment, ſhall not bee tyed to attendance at the Courts of the generall Aſſiſtants,

other then at their owne leiſure and pleaſure.
               
               
                  Treaſurer.
                  51. THe Treaſurer ſhall ſtand charged with the publike  Treaſure of the Company, and is to haue care that it be duely got in, and not iſſued out, but by lawfull warrant, and to the Companies vſe.
                  52. A lawfull warrant for charges of the preſent yeere, is that which is ſigned by the Deputy and foure of the Aſſiſtants, vnleſſe the money be to bee paid to the Deputy himſelfe; in which caſe the warrant ſhall be ſigned by ſixe of the Aſſiſtants: and for former charges and debts, that which is ſigned by three of the Auditors, whereof one to be of the Quorum; and vnderneath, or vpon the backe of euery Warrant, an Acquittance ſhall bee taken for the Receit vnder the parties hand.
                  53. The Treaſurer is alſo to yeeld vp a true and perfect account of the generall Caſh at the end of his yeere, and to bring it in a fortnight before, to the Auditors to be examined; and at all times, being requeſted by the Auditors or Aſſiſtants, to ſhew in what caſe the Caſh doth ſtand.
                  
                     
54. If any complaint or ſuſpition grow concerning the account, a reuiew ſhall be made by twelue choſen by the Court, and the account being accepted and approoued by the Court, the Treaſurer ſhall haue his Quietus eſt, vnder the Companies Seale at the Quarter Court in Trinity Terme then next inſuing.
               
               
                  Auditors.
                  55.  THe Auditors ſhall be fiue; whereof one at the leaſt of the Principall Aſſiſtants, and two of the Quorum.
                  
                  56. The Auditors ſhall haue care of the generall accounts, to examine the Receits and Disburſements according to the Orders of the Company: and in all caſes of difficulty, or of breach of theſe Orders, they ſhall acquaint the Gouernour, and the generall Court therewith; and from thence receiue reſolution, and direction.
                  57. They ſhall alſo cauſe to be reduced into a ſeuerall booke, the whole Receits and Disburſements of that yeere; and the ſame vnder three of their

hands at the leaſt, (whereof one to be of the Quorum) ſhall bee preſented by the Treaſurer at the Quarter Court in Eaſter Terme, at the giuing vp of his and their Office.
                  58. They ſhall ſigne no Warrants for the iſſuing of money, but onely for old charges or debts, that is to ſay, due before that yeere of their Office; and that not otherwiſe, then after due examination of the matter had in their appoynted meetings. Vnto which Warrant ſhall bee firſt ſet the hand of one at the leaſt of the Quorum, and then of two other or more of the reſt of the Auditors.
                  59. The Auditors ſhall alſo imploy their beſt induſtry and care, for the recouery of the old Debts due to the Company, and their Receits ſhall tranſmit to the generall Caſh.
                  60. And touching the old accounts now depending in Audit, that is to ſay, from the beginning of the Plantation, till the ninth day of May 1621. the Auditors ſhall proceed in the examining and reducing them to order, and to the finall auditing of them, with what expedition they well can; and ſhall from time to time acquaint the Gouernour, Deputy and Court, with ſuch impediments and difficulties as ſhall be incident.
                  
                     
61. The Auditors ſhall keep their meetings once at the leaſt in a week in Terme time, or oftener, if need require; and once euery moneth at leaſt in the vacation times, to ouerſee the accounts, and to diſpatch ſuch other buſineſſe as ſhall be committed to them.
                  62. They ſhall alſo haue the authority of the Court, to call before them ſuch perſons as are indebted or accountable to the Company. To which end the Beadle ſhall attend vpon them: who ſhall be rewarded for his trauell at the pleaſure of the Court.
               
               
                  Accounts.
                  63.  NO Auditors extraordinary, ſhall preſume to intermeddle with the auditing of any account, wherein the Body of the Company is intereſſed; but being appoynted in the face, and with the approbation of the Court.
                  64. All Accountants whatſoeuer, and Auditors extraordinary, if the Court ſo require, ſhall haue an Oath miniſtred vnto them in the face of the Court;

the one for true accounting, the other for true auditing.
                  65. No account ſhall bee held cleered, nor Accountant diſcharged, till the account being approued vnder the Auditors hands, bee preſented to the Court, and there lye openly in Court two Court dayes, to bee viewed by any that are ſo diſpoſed.
                  66. If exception bee taken to any account whatſoeuer, the Court ſhall proceed to reuiew, as in like caſe of the Treaſurer. If no exception bee taken in the two Court dayes, or vpon the reuiew returned, and the account approued; the Gouernour then, or Deputy in his abſence, ſhall ſigne the account in open Court; whereby the Accountant ſhall bee cleerly diſcharged.
                  67. If any Officer, or other Accountant bee ſlow in bringing in his accounts to the Auditors ordinary or extraordinary; or within one moneth after his account is perfect, doe not pay the Caſh the due Summe remaining, vnleſſe the Court ſee cauſe to giue longer time: the Auditors or Treaſurer ſhall impart the ſame to the Court, that order be thence giuen for redreſſe thereof.
                  
                     
68. If any man be found indebted to the Company by any meanes whatſoeuer, and being required, ſhall refuſe or forbeare to pay the ſaid Debt: the ſame ſhall be leuied vpon ſuch profits and commodities, as hee either hath in the Summer-Ilands, or ſhall be returned hither from thence; wherein hee ſhall ſtand to the iudgement of the Court.
               
               
                  Secretary.
                  69.  THe Secretary ſhall attend the Gouernour and Deputy, in ſuch ſeruice of the Company, as wherein they ſhall haue cauſe to vſe him. And beſides the generall Courts, hee ſhall of duty attend the Courts of Aſſiſtants, and keepe ſeuerall Bookes of their proceedings. The Principall Aſſiſtants, Auditors, and Committies extraordinary, he ſhall then alſo attend, when, and ſo often as hee ſhall bee thereunto required.
                  70. He ſhall be bound by oath to keepe ſecret all matters of ſecreſie; and not to diſcouer the proceedings of the Principall Aſſiſtants, and Committies extraordinary, till ſuch time as themſelues ſhall publiſh the ſame.
                  
                     
71. The Secretary, vpon reference of any buſineſſe from the Court to a ſelect Committie, ſhall giue a note to the Officer, containing the buſineſſe, time, and place.
                  72. His Office is alſo to be a Remembrancer to the generall Courts, and to the Courts of Aſſiſtants, for the proſecuting and performing of matters formerly ordered; as alſo touching Motions formerly made, and referred to ſpeciall Committies, or other further conſideration.
                  73. If at any time a generall Court ſhall order any money to be iſſued out of the Caſh, the Secretary vnder his hand ſhall deliuer a Copy thereof to the Auditors, if it be of old Debts; and if otherwiſe, then to the Deputy and Aſſiſtants, who reſpectiuely ſhall vnder that Order, make their warrant for payment of that money, vnleſſe they finde the Court, by wrong information, to haue been abuſed and deceiued in that order; whereof at the next Court they ſhall giue aduertizement.
                  74. The Secretaries Office is to keepe the Bookes of the Company, and fairely, and orderly to enter in them the particulars heere-vnder expreſſed, and in ſuch manner as hee ſhall bee directed by

the Gouernour, Deputy, or Auditors. Firſt, a Booke containing the Copies of the Kings Letters Patents to the Company: Likewiſe of all Grants from the Company for Virginia: Alſo of all Letters, Orders, Directions, and other Writings from his Maieſty, the Lords of the Councell, and other great Officers, concerning the Company and Affaires of the Summer-Ilands; together with the anſweres made vnto them.
                  75. A ſecond Booke ſhall bee kept of all the Lawes and Standing Orders eſtabliſhed henceforward in the Quarter Courts, and beginning with this day; as well ſuch as concerne the Gouernment of the Company and buſineſſe heere, as alſo the Gouernment of the Colony and Affaires in the Summer-Ilands.
                  
                  76. In a third Booke ſhall bee regiſtred all the Patents, Charters, and Indentures of validity, heretofore granted, or that hereafter ſhall bee granted by the Gouernour and Company; all Inſtructions; all publike Letters written to the Summer-Ilands, or from thence returned.
                  77. A fourth Booke ſhall bee of the Acts of the generall Courts, beginning with a new Booke at the Quarter Court in Eaſter Terme laſt. In which Booke, vpon any cauſe controuerted and debated,

the Secretary ſhall haue care to ſet downe exactly, the reſolution and concluſion of the Court, together with the principall reaſons inducing thereunto: but ſhall not ſet downe other paſſages of ſpeech, nor the parties names that were of other opinion.
                  78. A fifth Booke ſhall bee of the Acts of the Aſſiſtants, beginning from the ſame Court. In which Booke ſhall be regiſtred all Invoyces of the prouiſions ſent to the Summer-Ilands, and the Certificats of the Receits to be thence returned: as likewiſe the Invoyces of the Goods ſent from the Summer-Ilands, with the Husbands Certificats of the receit or defect.
                  79. In the ſixth Booke ſhall be regiſtred the names of all the Aduenturers and Owners of Land in the Summer-Ilands, together with the number of Shares to each perſon belonging, according to the ſeuerall Tribes wherein they are placed. Here ſhall alſo bee entred the lawfull tranſports of Shares. Both which ſhall firſt bee publiſhed and allowed in a generall Court, and not regiſtred in this booke, but by direction from thence.
                  80. The Secretary ſhall alſo keepe ſafe in the Companies Cheſt of Euidences, the Originals of all the Letters Patents, and other writings afore mentioned:

all the bookes alſo aforeſaid: all the Gouernours and Treaſurers bookes of their yeerely accounts: the Husbands bookes of accounts of euery voyage to the Summer-Ilands: and all other accounts perfected and approued by the Auditors. In the ſame Cheſt ſhall bee kept all Charter-parties, as well cancelled, as vncancelled: all bonds made to the Company, or for their vſe: and all bonds of the Companies, diſcharged and cancelled: and all other writings and muniments whatſoeuer belonging to the Company: and the Secretary ſhall deliuer out none of the Companies writings, but by direction from the Gouernour, Deputy, or Court, taking a note of the parties hand for the true reſtoring of them: and in conuenient time hee ſhall make Calenders of all the foreſaid writings. The ſaid Cheſt of Euidences ſhall haue two ſtrong lockes to it: the key of the one ſhall bee kept by the Gouernour or Deputy; and the key of the other by the Secretary.
                  81. The Secretaries Salary ſhall be for the preſent, ten pounds per annum; and when the publike Land ſhall be thorowly planted, then twenty pounds; and of his paines extraordinary, the Court ſhall take conſideration.
               
               
                  
                  Booke-Keeper.
                  82. THe Booke-keeper, at ſuch time as hee ſhall bee  be found to be neceſſary, ſhall be directed and ordered by the Treaſurer and Auditors; and ſhall receiue his Salary in the Quarter Courts, as the Auditors ſhall report of his paines and deſerts.
                  83. The Booke-keeper, vpon conference with the Secretary and the Husband, and they two in his defect, ſhall in euery Quarter Court preſent openly to the Gouernour, a true note of the Debts, both owing by the Company, and ought vnto them; together with the ground from whence they are riſen; that the Court may take order for the diſcharge of the one, and recouery of the other.
               
               
                  Husband.
                  84. THe Husband is to bee ordered by the Gouernour, Deputy, and Aſſiſtants; and to keepe his accounts in exact and iuſtifiable manner: and to bring them from time to time to the Deputy and Aſſiſtants, to be firſt examined there, and approued

vnder their hands, and then to bee preſented to the Auditors.
                  85. He ſhall at the end of euery voyage ſet out by the Company, make a ſeuerall booke of the charges of that voyage, to be preſented by him to the Auditors, and by them to the Court. His wages for the preſent ſhall be tenne pounds per annum; and twenty pounds, when the publike Lands ſhall bee thorowly planted.
               
               
                  Beadle.
                  86.  THe Beadle or Meſſenger is to bee at command of the Gouernour, Deputy, and Courts: He is to warne all Quarter Courts, and Courts extraordinary; all meetings of the Aſſiſtants, and of all ſelect Committies. His wages tenne pounds per annum for the preſent, and twenty pounds when the publike Lands ſhall bee thorowly planted.
               
               
                  
                  Generality.
                  87 THe particular Members of the Company, ſhall  bee ſubiect to the generall Courts, in matters concerning the Company or Plantation. If any man find himſelfe agreeued by a leſſer or ordinary Court, hee may appeale to a great and Quarter Court: where the matter ſhall be heard and finally ordered. If any man refuſe to obey both the Court and other, he ſhall be ſuſpended from the Courts for three yeeres, and ſo much longer till hee ſubmit himſelfe to the order of the Court.
                  88 Euery man ſpeaking in Court, ſhall addreſſe his ſpeech to the Gouernour, or Deputy in his abſence, as repreſenting the Court. And all priuate ſpeech, or directed to particular perſons, ſhall bee forborne.
                  89 No man in one Court ſhall ſpeake aboue thrice to one matter: ſaue the Gouernour, and the Deputy being to moderate the buſines.
                  90 No man with his ſpeech ſhall interrupt the ſpeech of another, before he haue finiſhed: except the Gouernour, or in his abſence the Deputy, (with approbation of the Court) ſee cauſe to

put any to ſilence for impertinency, or other vnſeemely ſpeaking.
                  91 If any man be found by ſiniſter courſe, to practiſe his owne aduantage, to the damnifying of the publike; or be found with the Companies money or goods in his hands, and refuſe to deliuer the ſame being lawfully thereunto required: If being ſummoned to the Court, hee refuſe to appeare: or appearing, performe not the order of the Court; hee ſhall be both ſuſpended from the Courts, and farther poceeded againſt, as an vnworthy member and wrong-doer to the Company.
                  92 If any man out of euill mind, practiſe to rayſe faction or diſſention in the Company: he ſhall for the firſt time be admoniſhed by the Gouernour and the Court; and at the ſecond time be ſuſpended from the Courts for three yeeres.
                  93 Whoſoeuer ſhall attempt by priuate ſolicitation to packe the Court to any vniuſt or vnlawfull end: he ſhall vpon complaint be conuented before the Gouernour and Principall Aſſiſtants; And being conuicted thereof by iudgement of the Court, hee ſhall bee ſuſpended from the Courts for three yeeres.
                  
                     
94 If any man be found through corrupt reward, to make a motion in the Court, tending to the publike hurt, or to the priuate wrong of another: hee ſhall bee foorthwith ſuſpended from the Courts for euer.
                  95 No man ſhall preſume to intercept letters, written by or to the Gouernour or Company, or to ſpread falſe rumours vpon ſiniſter intent, to the wrong of the Gouernour, Company or Colony. The offender ſhall bee ſuſpended from the Courts for euer.
                  96 No man ſhall traduce any member of this Company in the Court of any other Company, for any thing done or ſpoken in this Court. The offender for the firſt time ſhall be admoniſhed; for the ſecond, ſuſpended from the Court for one yeere; and the third time, for more yeeres, as the Court ſhall thinke meete.
                  97 To auoid the drawing of the Company into debt henceforward, It is ordered that no man, other then the Gouernour or Deputie, by the aduice and aſſent of the Principall Aſſiſtants, make or propound any new proiect of charge to the Company: but that he therewithall offer good meanes

to defray that charge, and vphold his proiect, in ſuch ſort that the Company bee neuer drawne againe into any further Debt. And the breakers of this Order, ſhall bee excluded from the generall Courts, and from hauing voice or bearing Office for one yeere after.
                  98 If any man mooue for any charge to the Companie by way of gift in what ſort ſoeuer: It ſhall be firſt referred to a ſelect Committie: And if the charge doe not exceede ten pounds, it may be ordered by the next Court: If aboue, it ſhall be reſerued to the Qarter Court enſuing.
                  99 It ſhall not be lawfull for any Owner of Land, to ſell or tranſport his Shares to another, otherwiſe then in open Court: And not before it do appeare vnder three of the Auditors hands, that the partie tranſporting his Shares ſtand cleere, and bee not indebted to the Company; or the partie to whom they are paſſed, pay the ſaid debt.
               
               
                  Lawes.
                  100  NO Lawes or ſtanding Orders ſhall be made by the Company, otherwiſe then in this manner. Firſt, after the propounding of them in Court, they

ſhal be referred to the diſcuſſing of a Select Cōmittie: the Commities ſhal preſent their labours to the view of the Aſſiſtants: The Court of Aſſiſtants approuing them, they ſhall bee brought to the Court of Preparation next before the Quarter Court, and there openly read: And laſtly they ſhall paſſe the Iudgement of the Quarter Court.
                  101 The Lawes and Orders thus made, ſhall bee fairly regiſtred by the Secretary in a Parchment book: which he ſhall bring in euery Court, and lay on the Table, that all men may peruſe them that are ſo diſpoſed.
                  102 In the Quarter Court in Hillary Terme, all Lawes and Standing Orders concerning the Company here, ſhall bee publikely read in the beginning of the Court, till ſuch time as it ſhall ſeem fit to haue them printed.
                  103 The abrogating of a Law or Order, ſhall proceed by the ſame degrees, by which the making.
                  104 All Orders heretofore made repugnant or ſwaruing from theſe, ſhall be henceforth void.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Orders and Conſtitutions for the Summer-Ilands, &c. preſented to the Quarter Court held the 6. of February, 1621. and finally enacted and eſtabliſhed in the Quarter Court held the 29. of May, 1622. THE SECOND PART.
               
                  Land in the Summer-Ilands.
                  105. 
                     THe Land in the Summer-Ilands, is partly publike, partly priuate. The priuate Land is diuided into eight Tribes, lying from the common Land, in this order: Namely, Harington and Hamiltons Tribe, Smythes Tribe, Deuonſhire Tribe, Pembroke Tribe, Pagets Tribe, Warwicke Tribe, Southhampton Tribe, and Sandys Tribe. Each of theſe Tribes is ſubdiuided into fiftie ſhares belonging to particular owners: ſaue that two ſhares in Pembroke
                     
Tribe are appropriated for euer in quality of Gleabe land to the Miniſter. To Southhampton Tribe there haue beene alſo annexed fiue other Shares or parts out of an ouer plus of Land that fell out in the Diuiſion, three whereof haue beene giuen by the Company to one of the Gouernours in the ſaid Summer-Ilands: And the other two are appropriated for euer in qualitie of Gleabe Land to the Miniſter.
                  106 The little Ilands and ſpots of Land ſcattered about theſe Tribes, and not appropriated to any Tribe at the admeaſurement of the Land as parcell of the ſame, ſhall lye in common to the vſe of al the eight Tribes: But the ſpare Land lying neere the freſh water in euery Tribe, ſhall bee diuided in proportion to euery ſhare, and ſhall be orderly layd out for the building of houſes, and for gardens and other eaſements to bee adioyned to them, that the people may liue more comfortably as in Townes together.
                  107 All the reſidue of the Land, with the little Ilands and ſpots adioyning, is and ſhall for euer continue publike Land; that is to ſay, The Land of the Gouernour and Company of the City of London for the Summer-Ilands: and ſhall not be alienated from the Bodie of the ſaid Company, or ſubdiuided amongſt the ſaid Company or any part thereof: Saue that two hundred Acres of the Iland, called

                     Dauies Iland, ſhall bee annexed to Harrington and Hamiltons Tribe, to make recompence for the alleaged ſterility of the Land in that Tribe: and excepting ſuch other Lands, as haue been already lawfully alienated or granted by former Quarter Courts, if any ſuch be.
                  108 Neuertheleſſe, the publike Land ſhall receiue the diuiſion inſuing, for publike vſes and ſeruices. Fiftie acres next to Saint Georges Towne, ſhall bee appropriated for euer in quality of Glebe Land to the Miniſter: and fifty other acres next to Harington and Hamiltons Tribe, in like ſort to another Miniſter. The Gouernour of the Summer-Ilands there reſiding, ſhall haue allotted to him and his Succeſſors, twelue ſhares of Land, containing three hundred acres: which Land ſhall lye together in Saint Georges Iland, and ſhall begin at the poynt next Peniſtons Iland at the Eaſt, and ſo ſhall take all the Land before it from Sea to Sea; ſaue that the fifty acres belonging to the Miniſter, ſhall lye neere to the Church and Parſonage houſe; and the Gouernour ſhall take charge of the three Forts in his owne Land. The Sheriffe ſhall haue alſo allotted to him and his Succeſſors there reſiding, foure ſhares of Land, containing one hundred acres, next adioyning to the Gouernours Land. And the Secretary ſhall haue two ſhares, containing fifty acres. There ſhall be alſo allotted to the Captaines of the other Forts, eight ſhares of Land, containing in the whole, two hundred acres, viz. to the Captaine of

the two Forts in Peniſtons Iland, two ſhares: to the Captaine of the Fort toward Saint Dauids Iland, two ſhares: to the Captaine of the Fort on Coopers Iland, with a platforme ouer againſt the Forts on Gurnards Head, two ſhares: and to the Captaine of the Forts at the Gurnards Head, two ſhares: which ſhares of Land ſhall be laid out of good Land, and in places moſt conuenient for the Officers aforeſaid: all the reſidue of the publike Land, ſhall be occupied for the vſe of the generall Company; and to defray the publike charges for the ſafegard of the ſaid Summer-Ilands; and in workes for the generall good of the Inhabitants thereof, according as the ſaid Company ſhall appoynt.
                  109. The Gouernours Land, at the charge of the Company, is to be furniſhed with two Tenants to euery ſhare. In like ſort the Lands of the Sheriffe, and of the Secretary, and the Glebe Lands of the foure Miniſters; the Lands alſo of the foure Captaines of the Forts aboue ſpecified. And it ſhall not be lawfull for the ſaid Gouernour, Sheriffe, Miniſters, Secretary, Captaines, or any of them, to let out his or their Tenants to hire, or to imploy them elſewhere, or otherwiſe, then in occupying of the ſaid Lands reſpectiuely, vnder a grieuous penalty to be inflicted vpon the Offender by the iudgement of a Quarter Court. And the Gouernour, Sheriffe, Miniſters, Secretary, and Captaines aforeſaid, and their Succeſſors for euer, ſhall at the yeelding vp, or leauing of their places, be it by death,

or otherwiſe, leaue the like number of Tenants to their Succeſſors, as ſhal be left vnto them from their Predeceſſors, or as they ſhall haue receiued from the Company.
                  110. For the benefit and better incouragement of all Handicrafts men neceſſary for the Summer-Ilands; it is granted and ordered, that euery Shipwright, Carpenter, Ioyner, Maſon, Brick-maker, Brick-layer Smith, Cooper, Sawyer, and all other of like neceſſary Handicrafts, that ſhall goe to the Summer-Ilands to inhabit vpon the publike Land, and there to exerciſe their Handicrafts, ſhall haue two acres of the ſaid publike Land ſet out vnto each for an Houſe and Garden, paying the yeerely rent of two ſhillings, at the feaſt of Saint Michael the Archangell, to continue in like ſort to them, their heires and aſſignes; vpon condition that they continue alſo the exerciſe of ſome Handicraft occupation, and wholly forbeare the planting of Tobacco vpon the ſame Lands, and not otherwiſe.
                  111. If any Handicrafts men aforeſaid, ſhall deſire to be placed in any of the Tribes, it ſhall bee lawfull for any Owner in euery of the ſaid Tribes, to demiſe vnto any of the ſaid Handicrafts men, two acres of his Land, or a leſſe quantity, but not aboue, for ſuch yeerely Rent as they ſhall agree on; vpon condition that the ſaid Handicrafts man continue the exerciſe of his ſaid Trade, and wholly forbeare the

planting of Tobacco vpon the ſame Lands, and not otherwiſe.
                  112. All the Lands in the Summer-Ilands, as well publike, as priuate, ſhall bee occupied to halfe profits, betweene the Owners, and the Occupiers; except the Lands granted or demiſed to the ſaid Handycrafts men, and ſuch Proprietors as themſelues ſhall inhabit vpon their owne Lands, and ſuch other as ſhall be here vnder excepted: And all other Contracts ſhall be voyd.
                  113. Yet no children, or young men, vnder the age of twenty and one yeeres, ſhall ſhare by halues, in the profits as other men doe; nor liue vpon ſhares by themſelues; but with Maſters of families; there being found to them diet, lodging, and apparell conuenient, with ſome other yeerely allowance of profit, according to their abilities and deſerts. And if any owner of Land ſhall contract with his ſeruant or Apprentice, to ſerue him at any other rates, and not at the halfe profits, till the ſaid ſeruant or Apprentice ſhall haue accompliſhed the full age of twenty foure yeeres, the ſaid Contract ſhall ſtand in force and validity.
                  114. The Gouernour, and other Officers, ſhall take care for the preferuation of the breed of Birds, by reſeruing to them thoſe Ilands whereunto they reſort.

Alſo for preſeruation of the young Tortoyſes, by ſuch orders, and vnder ſuch penalties, as by the generall Aſſembly hereafter to be ſpoken of ſhall be ſet downe.
                  115. They ſhall alſo haue eſpeciall care of the preſeruation of Timber, that no waſte be made thereof. And in particular, that no man preſume without the Owners conſent vnder his hand and ſeale, to cut downe young Cedar trees, before they be come to their growth, vnder a grieuous penalty, to be aſſeſſed at the diſcretion of the ſaid Gouernour and Councell. Neither ſhall they ſuffer any Timber, Boords, or Plankes, to be tranſported out of the ſaid Ilands, without eſpeciall warrant from the Gouernour, and Company heere.
                  116. Care alſo ſhall bee taken, that all ſorts of Trees, which defend the Ilands from winds and tempeſts, bee preſerued and maintained: and where decay hath been, that young Plants be there ſet and cheriſhed.
                  117. All Grants from the Company, of mens priuate Lands in the Summer-Ilands, ſhall paſſe vnder the common Seale of the Company; which ſhall bee ſufficient Euidence for their ſaid Land: prouided, that both the Grantees, and they from whom they deriue their eſtate, before the affixing of the ſaid

common Seale to their Grants, ſtand cleere from being any way indebted to the Company.
                  118. No man may be Owner of more then ten ſhares of Land in the Summer-Ilands; except it ſhall pleaſe a Quarter Court, to grant liberty vnto any man for fiue ſhares more, or vnder, but not aboue: which Grant muſt bee confirmed alſo by the Quarter Court next enſuing. The Tranſgreſſor of this Law, either directly or indirectly, ſhall forfait his ſhares exceeding the lawfull number, to the Company. But if they accrew vnto any man by diſcent or Legacy; in thoſe caſes there ſhall bee granted vnto him the liberty of twelue moneths, to alienate the ſhares exceeding the lawfull number.
                  119. All Grants of Land and Liberties in the Summer-Ilands, ſhall be paſſed by Indenture; the counterpart whereof ſhall be ſealed by the Grantees: and the Secretary ſhall haue the ingroſſing of all ſuch Indentures.
                  120. No Patents, or Indentures of Grants of Lands in the Summer-Ilands, ſhall be ſealed with the Companies Seale, but being read and approued in a Quarter Court: the ſame hauing been alſo firſt examined and allowed vnder the hands of a ſelect Committy for that purpoſe.
                  
                     
121. No liberty ſhall be granted, tending to the exempting of any man from the authority of the Gouernour or Sheriffe of the Summer-Ilands, or of the Councell or Courts to be there eſtabliſhed, in any caſe of Treaſon, Rebellion, Sedition, Hereſie, or Schiſme; or vpon any duty to be performed for the neceſſary defence of the Countrey, or for the preſeruation of the publike peace, and ſuppreſſing tumults within the Land, or for Trials in matters of Iuſtice, by lawfull orders to be from hence deliuered; or in caſes conſented vnto, as well by a Generall Aſſembly of the Colony there, as by the Company heere in a Quarter Court. And all Grants ſwaruing from this Order, ſhall be deemed vnlawfull and ſurreptitious.
                  122. In all Grants of Lands, a fifth of the Royall Mines of Gold and Siluer ſhall be reſerued to the Company, as another fifth is already reſerued to the Crowne.
                  123. There is alſo, and ſhall be for euer reſerued to the Company, the Moity of all lawfull wrecks: and the other Moity ſhall be to the Recouerers. But if the wrecke be driuen within the bounds of any particular mans Land; the Recouerers ſhall yeeld to the Owner of the ſaid Land the one halfe of their Moity.
                  
                     
124. There is likewiſe, and ſhall bee for euer reſerued to the Company, a fifth part of all the Ambergreece that ſhall be found; and the reſt ſhall be diuided equally betweene the finder, and the Owner of the Land where the ſame is found; ſaue that three ſhillings foure pence vpon euery ounce of the ſaid Ambergreece, ſhall be allowed to the Gouernour of the ſaid Ilands. And whoſoeuer ſhall not diſcouer to the ſaid Gouernour and Sheriffe, and ſome one other of the Councell, the true quantity of the Ambergreece ſo found, within fiue dayes after the finding of the ſame, ſhall forfeit his owne intire part to the Company, and be ſubiect to ſuch other puniſhment as the generall Court ſhall award.
                  125. In all Patents or Indentures of Grants of Lands, the Grantees ſhall couenant to imploy their people in reaſonable ſort in Staple Commodities, and not wholly or chiefly about Tobacco.
                  126. All Grants of Lands ſhall be made with equall fauours, and Grants of like liberties and immunities as neere as may bee; to the end that all complaint of partiality or vnindifferency may bee preuented.
               
               
                  
                  Officers in the Summer-Jlands.
                  127.  ALL Principall Officers in the Summer-Ilands, and namely, the Gouernour, Sheriffe and Secretary, ſhall bee choſen heere by Ballating in a Quarter Court.
                  128. The Miniſters, and the Councell eſtabliſhed in the Summer-Ilands, and all other Officers there reſerued to the choyce of the Company heere, ſhall bee choſen in a Quarter Court by onely erection of hands; vnleſſe the Court deſire to haue it paſſe by Ballating.
                  129. The Commiſſions to all Officers there, excepting Miniſters, ſhall bee onely for three yeeres in certaine, and afterward during the Companies pleaſure: onely the Gouernour ſhall, vpon no occaſion, hold that place aboue ſixe yeeres together.
                  130. The Company here ſhall not bee charged with the maintenance of the Officers there: But they ſhall be maintained there, out of the publike Lands, or by ſuch other meanes as ſhall bee heereafter ſet downe.
               
               
                  
                  Gouernour in the Summer-Ilands.
                  131. THe Gouernour to be ſent to the Summer-Ilands,
                      ſhall be choſen a man well-affected in Religion, and zealous of the ſeruice of God; a Perſon diſcreet, induſtrious, moderate, iuſt, and valiant. His Commiſſion is to bee for no longer time then three yeeres, to bee counted from the date of the ſame. Neuertheleſſe, his ſaid Commiſſion is not to take effect, till the expiration, or other determination of the Commiſſion to a former Gouernour, or till the deliuery thereof to the new elected Gouernour; either here in England, or in the ſaid Summer-Ilands, as the caſe ſhall require. Howbeit it is, and ſhall be lawfull, by a new and ſolemne Election in manner before ſet downe, to continue the ſaid Gouernour in his place of Gouernment for longer time, according to his deſerts; ſo as the ſame exceed not ſixe yeeres in the whole together. And if it happen that the Commiſſion to any ſuch Gouernour, expire before the ariuall of his lawfull Succeſſor: In that caſe hee ſhall continue ſtill in his place of Gouernment, till ſuch time as his ſaid Succeſſor ſhall ariue there: Immediatly whereupon he ſhall yeeld vp the Gouernment to him.
                  132. The Gouernours duty is to haue a vigilant eye

vpon the ſtrength and ſafegard of the Ilands, both from forraine Inuaſion, and inteſtine Mutinies. In which caſe hee hath authority to exerciſe Martiall Law, according to the manner and forme limited by his Maieſties Letters Patents.
                  133. It is alſo his duty to haue an eye vpon the Miniſters; as well that the people performe their duty toward them, and vſe them with all due reſpect and reuerence; as alſo that they performe the duty of their place, in duly obſeruing the ſolemne Diuine ſeruice, and training vp the People in the true feare of God, and obſeruance of his Commandements; In aſſured allegiance alſo and duty to the King, his Heires and Succeſſors: In obedience alſo to all other ſubordinate Gouernours and Gouernment, placed ouer them by authority deriued from his Maieſty: And laſtly, in a fraternall loue and vnity among themſelues. In all which, the example of the Magiſtrates and Miniſters, will bee of more force then any other perſwaſion whatſoeuer.
                  134 It is the Gouernors Office, to haue care of the due adminiſtration of Iuſtice to all the People, as well in caſes Criminal, as Ciuill: wherin the equity of the Lawes of England, & forme of adminiſtration of Iuſtice here vſed, is to bee followed as much as may be: Neuertheleſſe the Gouernour of himſelfe alone ſhall not make any order in Cauſes litigious, without both parties conſent: but ſhall heare and

determine Cauſes with the Councels aſſiſtance and aſſent, in ſuch manner as ſhall bee hereafter ſet downe.
                  135. In all Cauſes ciuill brought to the Gouernour and Councell at the firſt inſtance, they may proceed to hearing and determining therof in their ordinary ſittings. But if it be brought to them by appeale from ſome other Inferiour Officers; Or if appeale be made from themſelues; the Tryall thereof ſhall bee reſerued to the next Generall Seſſions.
                  136. The Gouernour ſhall not proceed as of himſelfe alone, to the Corporall puniſhment of any man, other then three daies impriſonment. If the crime deſerue higher puniſhment, hee ſhall proceede by the aduice and aſſent of the Counſell. Prouided alwaies, that matters of Treaſon, Murder, and Felony; alſo of Forgery, Periury, Conſpiracy, and ſuch like, be reſerued to bee tryed at the next Generall Seſſions, according to the Lawes and formes of Triall vſed in this Realme.
                  137. The Gouernour in the Summer-Ilands, hath power granted by his Maieſty, to miniſter a formall Oath to any perſon there whoſoeuer, for the examination, teſtifying and cleering of the truth in any cauſe whatſoeuer, as well concerning the Plantation, as any other particular buſineſſe there ariſing

for the maintenance of Peace and Iuſtice amongſt the Inhabitants. Of which power hee ſhall make vſe there, in all ſuch cauſes, and to all ſuch perſons, as the like is done by the Iudges and Iuſtices of this Realme.
                  138. The Gouernour ſhall not ſuffer any man to depart from the Summer-Ilands, againſt whom there is any cauſe or ſuit in Law depending; vnleſſe the Defendant ſhall firſt ſubſtitute an Atturney ſufficient to anſwere and vndergoe the Suit in his place; and alſo enter into bond with two ſufficient Sureties, to performe whatſoeuer Sentence ſhall paſſe againſt him. And if the Gouernour and Councell ſee probable cauſe to conceiue, that the Suit is ſet on foot vpon malice, and to ſtop the Defendant from his intended iourney: in that caſe the Plaintiffe ſhall likewiſe giue good ſecurity to pay to the Defendant double coſts and damages, if the Sentence paſſe not againſt him.
                  139. The Gouernour is to hold two generall Seſſions in euery yeere, at times to be appoynted by the generall Aſſembly hereafter mentioned: whereunto euery Tribe ſhall ſend ſixe men choſen by themſelues to ſerue for that Tribe, and the common Land twelue: and all other hauing buſineſſe, or ſummoned by the Gouernour and Councell, may, and ſhall repaire thither, and make their appearance. And no man ſhall depart till the Seſſions be ended, without leaue of the Gouernour.
                  
                     
140. The Gouernour ſhall alſo, in euery ſecond yeere once, hold a generall Aſſembly, for the making of Lawes and Orders for the particular neceſſities and occaſions of thoſe Ilands, and the Inhabitants thereof, and for the ordering of other important buſineſſe; which Lawes and Orders ſhall no further forth be of force and validity, if they receiue not confirmation afterward in a Quarter Court heere. In this Aſſembly, the Gouernour ſhall ſit as Preſident, to moderate the Aſſembly, and ſhall haue a Negatiue voyce. The Councell ſhall ſit next to him, and each haue his ſeuerall voyce: but if they all ioyne in one opinion, that alſo ſhall haue the force of another Negatiue. And laſtly, each Tribe ſhall by Election ſend out foure able perſons, to repreſent that Tribe: and the Occupiers of common Land, eight; who ſhall haue likewiſe free voyces in that Aſſembly; where all things ſhall bee eſtabliſhed by plurality of voyces, the foreſaid Negatiues reſerued.
                  141. Laſtly, it is the Gouernours duty, to ouerſee all inferiour Officers that they performe their duties. To which end he ſhall miniſter a formall Oath to all other Officers and inferiour Miniſters in the ſaid Ilands whatſoeuer, for the iuſt, true, and faithfull diſcharge of their ſeuerall places, duties and ſeruices.
                  
                     
142. The Gouernour ſhall not impoſe any Fines or Amercements for his owne behoofe: But all Fines, Amercements, Forfaitures, and Confiſcations ſhall accrew to the publike ſeruice of the Plantation; or to ſuch other vſes as are before, or ſhall be heereafter particularly expreſſed; to be leuied and kept by the Sheriffe, and to be expended or paid ouer by direction of the Gouernour and Councell.
                  143. The Gouernour ſhall not lay any Taxes or Impoſitions vpon the Lands in the Summer-Ilands; or vpon the People or Commodities, otherwiſe then by the authority of the generall aſſembly; to bee leuied and imployed as the ſaid Aſſembly ſhall appoynt.
                  144. The Gouernour ſhall not withdraw the Inhabitants from their priuate labours, to any ſeruice of his owne, vpon any colour whatſoeuer. And in caſe the publike neceſſity require imployment of many hands, before the holding of a generall Aſſembly to giue order for the ſame: In that caſe, the leuying of men ſhall be done by order of the Gouernour and whole Body of the Councell, and that in ſuch ſort, as to be leaſt burthenſome to the people, and moſt free from partiality.
                  
                     
145. The Gouernour ſhall not grant leaue to, nor ſuffer the Tenant or ſeruant of any man to returne into England, or otherwiſe to depart from the occupying of his Landlords or Maſters Land, before the time of his Couenant be fully expired; except the Owner of the Land, vnder his hand and Seale giue conſent thereto.
                  146. The Gouernour alſo, in quality of Captaine Generall, ſhall haue care that the people be trained vp to Military ſeruice: and ſhall from time to time giue ſeaſonable aduertizmēt, for prouiſion of Shot, Powder, and other Ammunition to be made. Hee ſhall alſo haue yeerely a generall Muſter or view of Armes: And ſhall yeerely returne to the Company a liſt of the names of all the trained Bands, together with a Certificate of all defects whatſoeuer.
                  147. The Gouernour ſhall not forſake his charge, nor depart out of the Summer-Ilands, during the time of his Commiſſion, without eſpeciall Licence of a Quarter Court heere, vnder paine of being diſfranchiſed for euer as an vnworthy perſon; and further cenſured and proceeded againſt, as by a generall Court ſhall be thought meet.
                  
                     
148. If it happen the Gouernour of the Summer-Ilands to dye, before the expiration of his Commiſſion, or arriuall of his Succeſſor; in that caſe the whole body of the Councell ſhall aſſemble together, and chuſe any of themſelues to ſucceed in that place of Gouernment: vnleſſe, or till ſuch time as the Company take other order. The like courſe ſhall be held for all other Principall Officers.
               
               
                  Sheriffe.
                  149.  THe Sheriffes Office ſhall be, to ſee, or cauſe the Iudgements of the Gouernour and Councell, eſpecially thoſe at the generall Seſſions, to be put in due execution. At which Seſſions hee ſhall alſo impannell the Iuries with all indifferency.
                  150. He ſhall alſo leuie, or cauſe to be leuied, all Fines, Amercements, and other forfaitures whatſoeuer; and all Taxes and Impoſitions lawfully aſſeſſed. And the ſame in quality of a Treaſurer to the Colony, ſhall keepe or conuert to the moſt profit for their vſe, and ſhall expend the ſame for no other then publike ſeruices; and that by direction from the Gouernour and Councell; and ſhall openly at euery Seſſions deliuer vp in writing, a true account

of all ſuch his receits and disburſements. The allowance for his charges, as well in executing the foreſaid Iudgements, as alſo in leuying the ſaid Fines, Amercements, Forfaitures, Taxes and Impoſitions ſhall be ſuch, as by the ſaid generall Aſſembly ſhall be ſet downe.
                  151. Hee ſhall alſo in quality of a Treaſurer to the Company, carefully collect and leuie all ſuch profits, as ſhall any way belong to the Company, by reaſon of the Royalties and other Commodities to them reſerued, or by reaſon of any forfaitures due to the Company: and ſhall cauſe them to bee yeerely tranſmitted to the Company, together with his account; for which hee ſhall receiue from them an extraordinary reward. The like ſhall he do for the forfaitures due to the particular Owners of Lands.
                  152. All Shot, Powder, Armour, and other Ammunition whatſoeuer, with all other publike prouiſions ſent from the Company to the Summer-Ilands, ſhall be conſigned to the cuſtody and charge of the Sheriffe; who ſhall not deliuer out the ſame, or any part thereof, but by order, either from the Company here, or from the Gouernour and Councel there, whereof the ſaid Sheriffe ſhall yeerely giue vp a true and perfect Account in writing, as well to the Gouernour and Councell there, as alſo to the Gouernour and Company here. And if any Officer or other perſon, by himſelfe, his Seruants or Agents,

ſhall ſell away any of the publike prouiſion of Shot, Powder, Armes, or other Ammunition, to the wrong of the Company, he ſhall make reſtitution to the double; and being an Officer, make forfait alſo of his place.
                  153. Laſtly, the Sheriffes duty is once at leaſt euery Quarter, and oftener if there bee cauſe, to viſit the eight Tribes, as alſo the publike Lands, and all the ſeuerall parts both of the one and other; and by diligent enquiry, to ſee how as well theſe Orders of the Company, and all other inſtructions, as alſo the contracts and agreements betweene the ſeuerall members of the Company, and their Tenants or ſeruants, are obſerued: and with the aduice and aſſiſtance of the Ouerſeers of the Tribes, and of the chiefe Maſters of Families, ſhall proceed to the reforming and rectifying of what is found amiſſe, according to ſuch Orders as ſhall be eſtabliſhed. And if any man be found intractable or incorrigible by the Sheriffe, hee ſhall be ſummoned by him to appeare before the Gouernour and Councell, either at the generall Seſſions, or otherwiſe, as the cauſe ſhall require.
               
               
                  Miniſters.
                  
                      THe Miniſters being to be foure, ſhall haue their Churches and Pariſhes thus placed and diuided. The firſt Church ſhall be at S. Georges Towne: and that Pariſh ſhall extend ouer all the publike

Land, ſaue that parcel which adioyneth to Harrington and Hamiltons Tribe on the Maine. The ſecond Church ſhall be on the ſaid publike Land faſt adioyning to Harrington & Hamiltons Tribe: and that Pariſh ſhall extend ouer that part of the publike Land, being as is ſaid before, on the Maine; as alſo ouer all Harrington and Hamiltons Tribe, and Smiths Tribe. The third Church ſhall bee in Pembrooke Tribe, vpon the two ſhares there bought for Glebe Land to the Parſonage: and that Pariſh ſhal extend ouer Pembroke Tribe, Deuonſhire Tribe, and Pagets Tribe. The fourth Church ſhall be on the Confines of Southampton Tribe, and Sandys Tribe: And this Pariſh ſhall extend ouer Southampton Tribe, Warwicke Tribe, and Sandys Tribe. Neere adioyning to theſe Churches ſhall the Parſonage houſes be buile. And for the better yeerely maintenance of the Miniſters, ouer and aboue their houſes, Glebes, and Tenants as aforeſaid: It is ordered, that there ſhall bee apportioned to them out of the fruits of the earth, and Cattell, growing and renewing within their ſeuerall Pariſhes, a certaine portion by way of charge vpon euery Share or Farme; ſo as to make vp each Miniſters Intertainement in that kind, to the value of one hundred pounds a yere, or thereabout. Which value of one hundred pounds the yeere, ſhall commence at the end of ſeuen yeeres after the making hereof. And in the meane ſeaſon, the proportion for their yeerely maintenance, beſides the ſaid Glebe Lands, ſhall bee ſuch as ſhall bee agreed vpon betweene the Company and the ſeuerall Miniſters.
                  
                     
155. Whereas the Owners and Occupyers of the Land, haue of their owne voluntary gift, offered the hundreth part yeerely of all their Tobacco, towards the building of the ſaid Churches and Parſonage houſes: it is ordered that the Ouerſeers of euery Tribe, as alſo of the common Land, ſhall yeerely collect the ſame, and deliuer it vpon account to the Sheriffe; who by aduice and direction from the Gouernour and Councell, ſhall take order for the erecting of the ſaid Churches and houſes; and faithfully expend that which ſhall ariſe by the ſaid Collections vpon the vſes aforeſaid; and therof deliuer vp a yeerely account to the ſaid Gouernour and Councell: who ſhall tranſmit the ſame, or a copy thereof to the Gouernour and Company here. The works being finiſhed, the Gift alſo ſhall ceaſe.
                  156. The Miniſters ſhall diligently apply their vocation, and ſhew themſelues Patternes of piety and vertue to the people. They ſhall by helpe of the Ouerſeers of the Tribes, and other chiefe men in their Pariſhes, indeuour to reforme all diſorderly perſons. If any appeare incorrigible, he ſhall be preſented to the Gouernour and Councell; who ſhall proceed to reformation by exemplary puniſhment, according to the quality of the Offenders miſdeſerts.
                  157. For the auoyding of Sects and Factions in Religion,

the Gouernour and Councell ſhall be carefull to ſuppreſſe by courſe of authority, all factious and ſeditious Preaching, teaching, and diſputing, as well in priuate, as publike.
               
               
                  Secretary in the Summer-Jlands.
                  158. THe Office of the Secretary, is to keepe or cauſe  to be kept a Regiſter-Booke of the Decrees and Orders of the Councell there; and to deliuer to the Sheriffe, and other Officers to whom it ſhall appertaine, a Copy of ſuch of them as are to bee publiſhed, or to be put in execution.
                  159. It is alſo the Secretaries Office, at the Generall Seſſions, to performe, or cauſe to be performed, the Office of Clarke of the Peace, and Clarke of the Aſſiſes: and to haue care that all Trials doe paſſe in due forme of Law; and to keepe a Regiſter Booke of all the verdicts and Iudgements: and to deliuer to the Sheriffe a Copy vnder his hand, of ſuch of them as are to be put in execution.
                  160. The Secretary ſhall alſo in all the generall Aſſemblies, hold the place of Speaker; and haue care that all things proceed and paſſe in due order: and ſhall keepe a Regiſter Booke of all the Acts there paſſed,

being firſt ſigned by the Gouernour and the Councell preſent.
                  161. It is alſo ordered for the preſent time, till a more conuenient courſe may be taken, that the probate of Wills, committing of Adminiſtrations, and all other Acts incident to Teſtamentary cauſes, ſhall be annexed to the Secretaries Office: who ſhall likewiſe keepe an exact Regiſter of them. The Miniſters alſo in their ſeuerall Pariſhes, ſhall deliuer vnto the Secretary at euery generall Seſſions, a true note of all the Chriſtenings, Marriages, and Burials, which haue been in their Pariſhes from the generall Seſſions laſt before; which the Secretary ſhall likewiſe enter in a Booke, and ſhall ſend a Copy thereof yeerely to the Company.
                  162. The Secretary at the arriuall of euery Ship at the Summer-Ilands, ſhall make a true liſt of the names of all the people thē arriuing with intent to continue and inhabite in the ſaid Summer-Ilands, of what ſex, age, and Trade they are, and vpon whoſe account they are ſent. And likewiſe at the departure of euery Ship ſhall make a like liſt of the names of all the Inhabitants that depart therein, with their ſex, age, and Trade, and whoſe Tenants or ſeruants they haue formerly bin, together with the cauſe of their departure. Both which hee ſhall enter in a Booke there to be kept, and a Copy thereof ſhall tranſmit to the Company by the ſeuerall Ships returning.
                  
                     
163. Laſtly, it is the Secretaries duty, to bee aſſiſting to the Gouernour, as well in diſpatch of all Letters and other writings to the Company; as alſo in publiſhing all Orders, Commiſſions, and other directions whatſoeuer, which the Gouernour there ſhall receiue from the Gouernour and Company heere; and to haue care with the Gouernour, that the ſaid Orders, Commiſſions and directions be duly executed; and that thereof a ſeaſonable account be giuen to the Gouernour and Company heere.
                  164. The Secretary, for his ſeruice at the generall Seſſions, and at the generall Aſſemblies, and for Teſtamentary cauſes, ſhall haue ſuch Fees as ſhall bee ſet downe by the generall Aſſembly.
               
               
                  Captaines of Forts.
                  165. THe Captaines of the Forts ought to bee men  diſcreet, and commended for fidelity. They are alſo to bee expert Gunners, and trained vp in Military ſeruice. Their duty is to haue care of the ſafety▪ of the Forts committed to their ſeuerall charges, and that they bee well furniſhed with all neceſſary prouiſions. There ſhall be alſo aſſigned by the Gouernour and Councell, a competent number of the publike Tenants to the ſeruice

of euery Fort, to be trained vp to that Seruice, and to be alwaies in readineſſe when occaſion ſhall require: which Tenants, in conſideration of that attendance and ſeruice, ſhall pay to the Company only a fourth part of their yeerely profits. If any of the Captaines of the Forts die there, his place ſhall be ſupplyed by appointment of the Gouernour and Councell there, till ſuch time as the Company here proceed to a new Election.
               
               
                  Ouerſeers.
                  166.  OVt of the ſixe perſons ſent yeerely from euery Tribe, to ſerue for that Tribe at the generall Seſſions to be held in the Spring or former part of the yeere, the Gouernour and Councell ſhall chuſe out two, to haue the place of Ouerſeers of that Tribe for the yeere enſuing. And the Gouernour ſhall openly in the ſaid generall Seſſions, miniſter vnto them a formall Oath for the due execution of their Office. Prouided alwayes, that at the humble petition of any Tribe, the Gouernor and Councell, if they ſo thinke good, may continue either one, or both of the Ouerſeers of the former yeere, for the yeere alſo enſuing. Like courſe ſhall be held for the Ouerſeers of the publike Land in all poynts. Prouided alwayes, and it is reſerued to the power of the Company here, to place ſuch Ouerſeers there from time to time, as they ſhall pleaſe to elect and nominate in any of their Quarter Courts.
                  
                     
167 The dutie of theſe Ouerſeers, is in their ſeuerall charges, to diuide with an euen and iuſt hand between the owners and their Tenants, all the Tobacco and other Commodities growing within their charge. And to the end that they may better inform themſelues what Crop is like to bee receiued out of the whole Tribe, they ſhall, about 14. daies before the vſuall time of gathering their Commodities, generally ſuruay all the Ground ſo planted throughout, and diligently obſerue what quantity each Tenant or Seruant hath planted; and the ſame regiſter in a booke; a Coppie whereof, as likewiſe of the Diuident, they ſhall ſend vnder their hands vnto the Company here. When the diuiſion is made betweene the Owner of the Land and his Tenants or Seruants, as iuſtly both for quantity and quality as they can: They ſhall caſt Lots vpon the Moities, and take that part for the Owner which ſhall fall vnto him by Lot. Which done, they are likewiſe to haue faithfull care, that the Owners part of ſuch Goods as are fit, or ſhall be directed to bee ſent, bee duely packt vp ſealed and conueied to the Ship, (vnleſſe the Owner vnder his hand and Seale giue other direction,) to bee ſent to the Company here, or as the Company ſhall direct. Other Goods vnfit to be ſent by Sea, they ſhall diſpoſe of as the Owners ſhall appoint. Prouided alwaies, that the Tobacco to bee diuided, be cured and made vp in beſt manner, before the ſaid Diuiſion bee made. And concerning the Tobacco

and other Commodities of the growth of the Ouerſeers themſelues, the ſame courſe ſhall be held, as well for diuiſion thereof betweene them and their Landlords; as alſo for diſpoſing of the Landlords Moity in maner aforeſaid. Saue that the diuiſion of the Tobacco, and Commodities of the one Ouerſeer, ſhal be performed and perfited by the other reciprocally.
                  168. Theſe Ouerſeers alſo, in their ſeuerall charges, ſhall diligently enquire what Debts are owing by Tenants or Seruants, to their Landlords. To which end the Landlords ſhall acquaint the Ouerſeers, with the ſeuerall Contracts betwixt them and their Tenants or Seruants. All which hereafter, for the auoiding of fraud or quarrell, ſhall paſſe by Indenture. And the ſaid Ouerſeers, after the diuiſion once made, ſhall cauſe ſatisfaction of the Debts appearing to be due, to be made to the Landlords, before they deliuer the Moity due to the Tenants or Seruants: Prouided that there be alwaies meanes left of liuelihood and ſubſiſtance, to the Occupiers of the Land.
                  169. And to preuent all wrongs on either ſide, betweene Landlords and Tenants or Seruants: It is ordered, that the Gouernor at euery Generall Seſſions, ſhall charge the Grand Iury, to enquire by all lawfull meanes of ſuch defaults: and eſpecially to enquire if any fraud haue beene commited

by the Tenants or Seruants, in concealing or ſecretly conueighing away any of the ſaid profits to be diuided, before diuiſion of the ſame be made. And after preſentment made, and tryall therof had, the Gouernor there ſhall cauſe a true and perfect Certificate thereof to be made vnto this Company, vnder the Iurors hands. And for the better diſcouerie of all ſuch miſdemeanors, It is ordered that all the Ouerſeers in euery Pariſh, ſhall once euery Quarter meete together at their Pariſh Church, and warne euery Pariſhioner to be there: thereby to learn what preſentments ſhalbe made of the ſaid miſdemeanors, or any other of the like nature; the better to prepare that generall information. And in caſe any ſuch purloyning, imbezelling, deceit or fraud ſhall bee proued, and the Tenant or Seruant thereof found guilty, the perſon ſo offending, either preſently, or ſo ſoone as he hath wherewith to doe it, beſides reſtitution, ſhall bee compelled to pay one fourth part of all the Tobacco, or ſuch like profits which he hath or ſhal haue growing the ſame yeere; to be ſeized vpon by the ſaid Ouerſeers in their ſeuerall charges: which fourth part being ſubdiuided into three parts; the one part ſhall be to the Landlord or Maſter of the ſaid Tenant or Seruant, another part to the ſaid Ouerſeers, as an increaſe of their Salarie, and a third part to the Informer or Informers. The like penaltie ſhalbe for any wrong done by the Landlord or Maſter to his Tenant or Seruant.
                  
                     
170. It is the dutie alſo of the Ouerſeers, to take vp all pettie controuerſies, and to enforme the Gouernour and Sheriffe of all matters of greater importance: To ſee the people diligently and diſcreetely to apply their buſineſſe: To acquaint the Sheriffe from time to time, of the eſtate of each Tribe; what perſons there are on each Owners Land: what bee their names, and what their indeuours; and in what eſtate their Farmes doe lye, that the ſame may bee yeerely certified by the Sheriffe to the Company. They ſhall alſo haue care, that the ſeuerall Lands or Farmes be wel vſed, and occupied in husbandly manner by the ſeuerall Tenants and Seruants: That the houſes be maintained and kept in repaire: And that the Timber be preſerued, according to the Orders concerning it.
                  171. The Ouerſeers, in regard of their great care and paines, if they performe their dutie according to their Oath, ſhall haue two in the Hundred waight of all the Tobacco growing within their precincts, to be taken out of each Moitie at the diuiſion made as aforeſaid.
               
               
                  
                  Councell.
                  172. OVt of the Officers aforenamed, the Gouernor  ſhall haue a Councell to aſſiſt him, which ſhall bee ordinarily theſe: The Sheriffe, The two Miniſters planted on the publike Land, The Secretary, Two Captaines of the chiefe Forts, & the firſt of the Ouerſeers of the publike Land. Neuertheleſſe at the Generall Seſſions, and vpon other eſpeciall and extaordinary occaſion, there ſhall ſit with the Gouernour, as being of the Councell, the other two Miniſters, and the firſt of the two Ouerſeers of euery Tribe. There ſhall bee alſo of the Councell, all ſuch as haue held the places of chiefe Gouernours or Sheriffes of the ſaid Summer-Ilands, and haue worthily for their times diſcharged their Offices, and not beene cenſured for miſdemeanors, either by the Company here, or by ſuch Commiſſioners as ſhall bee ſent from hence with ſuch authority. Laſtly, it is in the power here of a Quarter Court, to appoint any other particular perſon to be of the Councell there, whom they ſhall pleaſe to chooſe.
                  173. It ſhall not bee counted an Aſſembly of the Councell, vnleſſe that foure of them, or three at leaſt bee preſent, beſide the Gouernour: and that

without practice or purpoſe to exclude the reſt.
                  174. It is the dutie of the Councel there, to be aſſiſting to the Gouernour with their faithfull and carefull aduice, both for the ſtrength and ſafegard of the ſaid Ilands; and for the well Gouernement of the people: as alſo for the due adminiſtration of Iuſtice in all cauſes brought before them: and for the obſeruance of all the Lawes and Orders deliuered vnto them by authority from hence, and ſuch other particular Inſtructions as from time to time they ſhall receiue. To the performing of which dutie, the Gouernour ſhall adminiſter to euery of them, at his admittance to be of the ſaid Councell, a formall Oath. And in all meetings of the ſaid Councell, Reſolutions and Iudgements ſhall paſſe by plurality of voices: Onely the Gouernor ſhall haue both two voices, and all ſo a caſting voice in the ſaid meetings.
                  175. The Gouernour, with the whole Councell, ſhall ſit as Iudges or Iuſtices in the Generall Seſſions. Wherein by agreement amongſt themſelues, they ſhall publiſh to the people what times they will hold for their ordinary hearing of cauſes and adminiſtration of Iuſtice, in all ſuch matters as ſhal come or be brought before them: which times they ſhall not faile duly to obſerue. Neuertheleſſe, it ſhall be lawfull for the party grieued, to appeale from any ſentence giuen by the ſaid Gouernour and Councell, to a more ſolemne triall at the next Generall

Seſſions: Yet ſo, that hee put in good ſecurity, to pay double coſts and charges to the party at variance with him, if the matter paſſe againſt him at the ſaid Generall Seſſions, be it either by the verdit of Iury, or by the iudgement of the Gouernour, and whole body of the Councell, as in caſes of equity, and not tryable by Iury. The ſame Law ſhall be for all other appeales whatſoeuer.
                  176. The pleading of all cauſes both Ciuill and Criminall, ſhall be ore tenus, and plaine. The parties by themſelues, or by their more able friends declaring and alleaging what they haue to ſay each for themſelues: And the Witneſſes ſhall bee preſent, and heard viua voce, being firſt ſworne. Onely the ſentence ſhall be fully ſet downe in writing, and regiſtred in a Booke to be kept for that purpoſe.
               
               
                  Jnferiour Officers.
                  177. THe Gouernor and Councell ſhall, at their meeting  at the General Seſſions, chuſe & appoint al other Inferior Officers, neceſſary either for the due and ſpeedy adminiſtration of Iuſtice, or for other publike ſeruice in the ſaid Summer-Ilands, whoſe ſees ſhalbe ſuch & no other, as ſhalbe rated & ſet downe by the General aſſembly from time to time. Which Generall Aſſembly may alſo at their pleaſure,

alter and reforme the ſaid Officers and Offices; with reference alwaies to the pleaſure of the Companie here, as is before expreſſed.
                  178. In like ſort the Inhabitants of euery particular Tribe, as alſo of the publike Land, being aſſembled by the Ouerſeers reſpectiuely, ſhall haue power to chuſe ſuch inferiour Officers, for the behoofe and ſeruice of the ſaid Tribes and publike Lands reſpectiuely, as they ſhall finde neceſſary, with allowance of ſuch Fees from the ſaid Inhabitants, as they ſhall agree on: Which ſhall be ſubiect to the Confirmation or reformation of the ſaid Generall Aſſembly, in manner before deliuered.
               
               
                  Commiſsioners.
                  179.  THe Gouernour and Company here, by Order in a Quarter Court, ſhall once in three yeeres, if they thinke it ſo expedient, ſend or appoint Commiſſioners for the ſaid Summer-Ilands; Men fearing God, Men of grauity, wiſedome, courage and integrity vncontrouled, to examine the actions, as well of the ſaid Gouernour and Councell, as of all other Officers, or which in former times haue borne Office within the ſaid Ilands: Who ſhall alſo haue power, according to the tenour of their

Commiſſion, to proceed to the cenſuring and reforming of all Delinquents: and the ſaid Commiſſioners, during the time of their Commiſſion, ſhall be exempted from any Iuriſdiction ouer them in the ſaid Ilands: and of all their proceedings, they ſhal from thence, or at their returne, make due Certificate to the Gouernour and Company here.
               
               
                  Inhabitants.
                  180. THe Inhabitants of the Summer-Ilands, ſhall duly  frequent the ſeruice of God, and thereat behaue themſelues with all decency and reuerence, vnder a penalty to bee ſet downe by their generall Aſſembly. The Maſters alſo of Families, ſhall by aid and direction of their Miniſter, ſee their children, Seruants, and other Cohabitants, brought vp in the true knowledge and feare of God, in the hatred alſo of vice, and exerciſe of piety and vertue.
                  181. They ſhall carry themſelues loyally both in deeds and words towards the King, his Heires and Succeſſors. They ſhall alſo behaue themſelues reuerently and dutifully, as well toward the Gouernour and Company here, as alſo toward the Gouernour and Councell there; vnder penalties to be ſet down by the generall Aſſembly. If any man ſuppoſe himſelfe to haue iuſt cauſe of grieuance, he ſhall not by

mutinous ſpeech raiſe diſcontent alſo in other man; but exhibite his Petition or Complaint to the Gouernour and Councell; who ſhall tranſmit the ſame to the Gouernour and Company here, from whom he ſhall receiue right and iuſtice without delay.
                  182. The Tenants or Seruants ſhall not by vnreuerent ſpeech or writing abuſe their Landlords or Maſters, vnder a penalty to be inflicted vpon them by a great and generall Court heere. But hee that hath cauſe of complaint, ſhall exhibite his Petition in manner aforeſaid.
                  183. If any of the Company heere, by any ſiniſter meanes ſeeke to oppreſſe or wrong any of the Inhabitants there; after complaint made and prooued, either before the Gouernour and Company heere, or the Gouernour or Councell there, and certified hither, as the caſe ſhal require, beſides the forfeiture aboue mentioned in the ſaid Summer-Ilands, wherof one third part ſhall be to the party grieued; hee ſhall be alſo ſeuerely proceeded againſt in a Quarter Court here.
                  184. If any man be a Common Swearer, or profane abuſer of the Name of God, if after lawfull admonition by the Magiſtrate or Miniſter, he doe not reforme himſelfe, beſides other due puniſhment, hee ſhall be declared infamous.
                  
                     
185. If any man of vnquiet and contentious ſpirit, be a common raiſer of quarrels or brabbles amongſt neighbours; beſides other penalties to be inflicted according to Law, he ſhall be condemned by the Gouernour and Councell to be a perſon infamous.
                  186. A perſon by lawfull Sentence condemned and declared to be infamous, ſhall, during the time hee ſo continueth, be vncapable of any Office of dignity or command: But in Offices miniſteriall, and of toyle only and labour, he may, and ſhall be imployed. He ſhall not ſit or ſtand in the Church with the reſt of the Congregation, but in a lower place apart by himſelfe: and in all other Aſſemblies, he ſhall alwayes ſit or ſtand in the meaneſt place. His teſtimony ſhall not be receiued in any cauſe or buſineſſe. If he commit any crime, or breake any Law or Order, his puniſhment ſhall be double to that of another man in the like caſe. If he preſume to doe any thing contrary to this Order, hee ſhall indure ſixe dayes ſtrait impriſonment for the ſame. And euery perſon declared to be infamous, ſhall ſo continue, till hee publikely declare his repentance and reformation at a generall Seſſions; and thereupon be diſcharged from his infamy.
                  187. If any man being of an idle and vaine diſpoſition, forſake his labour, or other buſineſſe, and thereby giue example to other men to doe the like:

he ſhall be admoniſhed thereof by the Sheriffe, or Ouerſeer. If after admonition he perſiſt in his idle courſe of life, he ſhall be declared infamous. But if the ſame perſon become alſo a wanderer or vagrant from the due place of his ſeruice: hee ſhall for the firſt time be onely admoniſhed; but for euery offence after, he ſhal by order of the Sheriffe or Ouerſeers, be ſcourged on the naked backe at the whipping poſt, as a Rogue; and the entertainers and relieuers of euery ſuch wandring perſon, or of any Fugitiue from the buſineſſe of his lawfull Landlord or Maſter, ſhall for euery time or day of ſuch entertainment, forfeit ten pounds of Tobacco, or to the valew thereof: whereof the one Moity ſhall be to the vſe of the Landlord or Maſter ſo wronged, and the other Moity ſhall be to the vſe of the publike workes of the Plantation.
                  
                  188. If any man be a Drunkard, or a common haunter of Tippling-houſes; if after admonition he doe not reforme himſelfe, beſides other due penalties, he ſhall be declared infamous. And the Gouernour and Councell ſhall in their generall Seſſions, from time to time, take eſpeciall care for limiting the number, and reforming the abuſes of all Hoſteries, Tauernes, or Drinking-houſes, of what kind ſoeuer.
                  189. If any man be a common ſpender of his time in dicing and carding, or other vaine or vnlawfull gaming; or vſe the ſame 
                        〈◊〉
                      times vnſeaſonable; hee ſhall be declared infamous.
                  
                     
190. Whoſoeuer ſhall in brauery of apparell exceed his degree; if after admonition he doe not reforme the ſame, he ſhall in all publike burthens beare the double to any other.
                  191. The Sheriffe and Ouerſeers of Tribes, ſhall take diligent notice alſo of ſuch perſons, as by their orderly and induſtrious courſe of life, giue good example vnto thoſe amongſt whom they liue: whereof, and of their other good parts and abilities, they ſhall giue information to the Gouernor and Councell from time to time, who vpon that, and ſuch other information as they ſhall take, ſhall aduertize in like ſort the Gouernour and Company heere of the men of beſt quality, good carriage and ſufficiency in the ſaid Summer-Ilands: that the Company may accordingly preferre, or otherwiſe reward perſons of good ſufficiency and well-deſeruing.
                  192. No Tenant or Seruant, ſet out and furniſhed by any Owner of Land according to their mutuall agreement, ſhall, during the terme contracted for betweene them, ſhift his Maſter or Landlord, or occupie any other mans Land, or come away from the ſaid Ilands, without his Landlords or Maſters conſent in writing vnder his hand and ſeale.
                  193. Whoſoeuer ſhall by any perſwaſion whatſoeuer,

intice or withdraw the Tenants or Seruants of any Owner of Land, to forſake the occupying of the ſaid Owners Land, ſhall forfeit the one Moity of all his part of Tobacco, or other profits growing in that yeere; whereof two third parts ſhall be to the Owner of the ſaid Land, and a third to the Informer. But if any man ſhall ſeeke to draw away any of the Tenants of the publike Lands; hee ſhall forfeit the double of the foreſaid forfeiture, to bee leuied part in that yeere, part in the yere enſuing. Of which forfeitures, two thirds ſhall bee to the vſe of the Company, and one third to the Informer. And the Tenant or Seruant ſo inticed or withdrawne, or withdrawing himſelfe, ſhall be immediately returned to the ſaid Owners or publike Land, as the caſe ſhall require.
                  194. No Tenant or Seruant ſhall alienate, lend, or let to hire any Apprentice or Seruant, prouided, ſent, or contracted for by the Landlord, or Maſter, to be placed and imployed vpon his owne Land, without leaue firſt obtained from the Owner of the ſaid Land, in writing vnder his hand and Seale. The Offender ſhal forfeit one hundred pound of Tobacco, and in want of Tobacco, other goods to the like proportionable valew, to be leuied to the vſe of the ſaid Owner or Landlord: and the ſaid alienation, hiring, or lending out, ſhall be vtterly voyd: and the ſaid Apprentice or Seruant ſhall bee returned to his firſt place, imployment, and ſeruice.
                  
                     
195. If any Tenant or Seruant, being ſent ouer to the Summer-Ilands by his Landlord or Maſter, to be imployed vpon his Land there, ſhall afterward betake himſelfe to ſome handicraft trade, or other courſe of life, and either in whole, or in great part neglect the occupying of his ſaid Landlord or Maſters Land: he ſhall pay vnto his ſaid Landlord or Maſter, during the time of the Contract with him, the Moity as well of all the profits by his other earnings, as of the profits of the ſaid Land which hee ſhall occupy, to be rated, aſſeſſed, and leuied by ſuch waies and meanes as ſhall be ſet downe in the generall Aſſembly.
                  196. If any man marry the Maid-ſeruant of any Owner of Land, or the Widow of any of his Tenants or Seruants ſent ouer to inhabite vpon his Land there; he ſhall by the Gouernour and Councell, pay to the ſaid Owner, the ratable part of furniſhing out, and tranſporting the ſaid Maid-ſeruant or Widow, conſideration being had to the time that ſhee hath ſerued her Maſter, or the owner there.
                  197. It ſhall not be lawfull for Tenants or Seruants to abuſe the Owners Land on which they are placed: but they ſhall vſe it in an orderly & husbandly manner, according to the Owners directions, or according to ſuch directions as they ſhall receiue, either

from the Gouernour and Councell, or from the Sheriffe and Ouerſeers in their ſeuerall charges: who ſhall take the well-vſing of the Lands in the Summer-Ilands into ſpeciall conſideration. The Tranſgreſſor, after admonition and direction, ſhall forfeit the one Moity of his profits for that yere, to the vſe of the Owner of the Land abuſed.
                  198. The making and repairing of the Forts, alſo of Bridges, and Highwayes, and the preſeruing of the bounds of euery mans Land, ſhall be performed in ſuch ſort, and by ſuch meanes as the generall Aſſembly ſhall appoynt.
                  199. The Gouernour and Councell ſhall take into conſideration the building of houſes in the ſaid Ilands, and giue order that they may bee ſtrongly and durably built; and being built, that they be wel maintained and kept in repaire. The execution of which order, and Suruey of the ſaid buildings, ſhall be committed by them to the charge of the Sheriffe and Ouerſeers, or ſuch other as they ſhall thinke meet to appoynt. The violater of this Order ſhall be cenſured and puniſhed at the diſcretion of the Gouernour and Councel, at their next general Seſſions.
                  200. No kind of Timber-wood growing in the ſaid Ilands, ſhall be vſed for firewood, vnder the penalty to be ſet downe in the generall Aſſembly, ouer and

aboue the double valew thereof to be forfeited to the Owner of that Land.
                  201. No Tenant or Seruant ſhall cut down any Timber trees, but vpon a Suruey and ſetting out thereof by the Ouerſeers reſpectiuely: which Timber ſo cut downe, ſhall be laid vp and preſerued for the building of houſes, and other neceſſary vſes with the Owners conſent. The tranſgreſſor of this Order ſhall be amerced at the diſcretion of the Gouernor and Councell; whereof the one Moity ſhall bee to the Owner of that Land, and the other to the publike ſeruices of the Plantation.
                  
                  202. The Timber of the Land of one Owner, ſhall not be carryed from thence to the Land of any other, or to the vſe of any other perſon, without the Owners conſent vnder his hand and Seale, vnder paine of the double valew, to be forfeited to the Owner, and leuied to his vſe. But if neceſſity require, that the Timber growing vpon any priuate mans Land, be taken for publike vſe of the Company and Colony; the Owner ſhall be paid for the ſame by the Company or Colony, according to a true eſtimate by an indifferent Iury.
                  203. The Inhabitants ſhall not liue too much ſcattered or ſingle one from another, but draw themſelues to fiue in a Family at the leaſt, where it may conueniently be, ſo to eate, and worke together.
                  
                     
204. Neither ſhall they wholly apply themſelues to the planting of Tobacco; but rather to other more ſtabile and ſolid Commodities, as the Gouernour and Councell by directions from hence, or as the generall Aſſembly ſhall appoynt.
                  205. All bad, rotten, and otherwiſe vnwholeſome or vnmarchantable Tobacco, being tryed by order inacted in their generall Aſſembly, ſhall be publikely burnt, vnder ſuch penalties for concealing of the ſaid bad Tobacco, or neglecting to put the ſaid Order in due execution, as by the ſaid generall Aſſembly ſhall be ſet downe. And if the badneſſe of the ſaid Tobacco, haue happened meerly by the negligence or other default of the maker thereof: hee ſhall bee bound to continew in occupying of the Land where the ſaid Tobacco did grow, one whole yeere longer then his contract with his Landlord; and ſo toties quoties, in recompence of the ſaid Landlords loſſe vndeſeruedly ſuſtained.
                  206. It is ordered that euery Tribe, at the common charge thereof, ſhall build a ſufficient Storehouſe with two roomes; the one for keeping Corne, the other for their Armes: and that each man be prouided of one Sword and Peece at the leaſt: and that all Peeces be of two ſorts, Calliuers, and Muſkets; and of one kind of bore, to auoid confuſion by

diuerſity of moulds and bullets. And the Inhabitants of euery Tribe being aſſembled by the Ouerſeers, ſhall agree amongſt themſelues for the ſafe and cleane keeping both of the ſaid Corne and Armour; that the one may bee ſweet, and the other bright and ſeruiceable. In defect whereof, the Gouernour and Councell ſhall ſet downe a certaine Order for the ſame; which the Sheriffe ſhall ſee put in due execution.
                  207. It is likewiſe ordered, that for the preuenting of dearth, each Family ſowe or plant a conuenient quantity of Corne, according to the proportion that the generall Aſſembly ſhall ſet downe. Of which Corne, a certaine quantity (to be rated likewiſe by the ſaid generall Aſſembly) ſhall at euery Harueſt, being well conditioned, bee brought into the publike Stores before mentioned: which at the Harueſt of the next yeere ſhall bee faithfully deliuered out to the true Owners therof, at their bringing in of new Corne of like quantity to the ſame. Prouided alwayes, that in caſe of generall ſcarcity, the Corne in the ſaid Store-houſes may bee deliuered out to the Deliuerers in thereof, before the time of Harueſt; or to others that ſhall bee preſt with greater need, ſatisfying the Owners according to the true valew thereof. The penalties for neglect or breach of this order, are likewiſe referred to the generall Aſſembly.
                  
                     
208. Whereas by reaſon of diuers vncertainties and difficulties, through the great remoteneſſe of the Summer-Ilands, the particularities of ſundry matters mentioned in theſe Lawes, are referred to ſuch further Orders, prouiſions and penalties, as by the generall aſſembly to be held in the ſaid Ilands, ſhall be thought iuſt and expedient: It is therefore ordered, that the Gouernour of the Summer-Ilands which ſhall bee ſent thither next, doe within one halfe yeere after his arriuall there, hold a generall Aſſembly: and that therein, according to the truſt repoſed in him and them, they doe, with graue and mature deliberation proceed to the ſetting downe of the orders and penalties here referred to them: and thereof, together with the reſt of their proceedings, make a full and authenticall Certificate to the Company, to receiue their approbation, or reformation, as there ſhall cauſe appeare.
               
               
                  Trade.
                  209.  IT ſhall be free for all the members of this Company, to trade into the Summer-Ilands with the Colony there, by Commiſſion from the Gouernour and Company here; which ſhall be denyed to no man: and according to ſuch Orders as the Company ſhall finde expedient for behoofe of the Colony.

Prouided notwithſtanding, that if any man be found by himſelfe, his Factors or Agents, to vſe any fraudulent or oppreſſiue courſe to the wrong either of the Inhabitants there, or of the Owners of the Land: in that caſe the Company ſhall inhibite the party ſo offending, whether by himſelfe, or by his Factors, or Agents, from trading to the ſaid Ilands, during the ſpace of fiue yeeres then next enſuing; and vnder ſuch penalty as ſhall be ſet downe in a great and generall Court. And for the better diſcouery of all fraud and oppreſſion, the Cope-Marchant or Factor for euery publike ioynt-ſtocke or Magazine, ſhall keepe a true Booke of the ſale of all the Commodities then ſent and tranſported to the Summer-Ilands; expreſſing both to what perſons, as alſo in what quantities, and at what prices they ſhall haue bin ſold: which Booke ſhall be preſented to the view and conſideration of a generall Court.
                  210. If in any ioynt-ſtocke for a Magazine to be hereafter erected, the Generall Company, out of their common Caſh beare part as an Aduenturer: they ſhall ratably partake like profit, and vndergoe like loſſe, with other Aduenturers: and any Order to the contrary ſhall be void. In which caſe alſo the Court ſhal appoint the meetings for the Magazine!
                  211. The Gouernour and Company heere, as alſo the Gouernour and Councell reſiding in the Summer-Ilands,
                     
ſhall from time to time haue eſpeciall care, that as well the Paſſengers to and fro, as alſo the Inhabitants in the Summer-Ilands maintaine friendſhip and good correſpondence with all other Nations being in league or amity with his Maieſty, and the Crowne of England; and that they forbeare all hoſtile or iniurious acts or attempts againſt them, or any of them, in their perſons, Poſſeſſions, Lands, Goods, or buſineſſe, vpon penalty to be proceeded againſt as Malefactors in the higheſt nature, and diſturbers of the generall peace eſtabliſhed by his Maieſty.
               
               
                  Land in Virginia.
                  212.  WHereas the Company for Virginia, in conſideration of the great defect of the quantity of Land in the Summer-Ilands, conceiued to haue been at the time of the ſale thereof to this Company, and to make recompence for the ſame, haue ordered in one of their great and generall Courts, that there ſhall bee granted by them, and vnder their Legall Seale, a large proportion of Land in Virginia, to be and continue to the Company of the ſaid Summer-Ilands, and the members thereof for euer, for the better ſupport of the ſaid Company, and of the Inhabitants of the ſaid Ilands: It is therefore ordered, that a ſelect Committie bee forthwith appoynted, as well to purſue the perfecting

of the ſaid Grant; as alſo to take into carefull conſideration, how the planting and peopling of the ſaid Land in Virginia, may bee proceeded with in moſt effectuall ſort, and without delay, and as may be moſt for the ſupport of the ſaid Summer-Ilands: which Committy ſhall from time to time reduce into writing, and preſent to the Courts, their proceedings therein: ſo to receiue reſolution and further direction.
               
            
            FINIS.
            
            
         
      
   