
      
         
            
            
            
               
The Vertue and Operation of this Balſame.
            
               THat this Balſame may bee vſed to the
health and profit of the buyers, it muſt
bee alwaies kept cloſe, and the veſſell
wherein it is muſt be very wel ſtopt, or
elſe it will conſume and waſte away.
            Any perſon which hath his ſigh beginning
to faile him let him continually
ſmell vnto this Balſame, and hee ſhall
be holpen, and his ſight ſhall be preſerued.
            Make this Balſame warme, and rub therewith the Noſe
within and without, of all thoſe that haue a moyſt and cold
braine, ſo ſhall they be preſerued in great health thereby.
            And whoſoeuer hath a cold Rheum: deſcending from the
braine, let them rubbe their Noſtrils with this Balſam three
times a day, morning, no one, and night, and it helpeth them.
            Such as are heauy headed, dull witt
                  •
               d, or forgetfull, let all
thoſe vſe to anoint the hinder part of their head with this
Balſame, and it comſorteth the wit, and refreſheth a man
exceedingly well.
            Giue ſixe drops of this Balſam in a ſpoonefull of wine,
beere, or ale faſting, to all theſe that haue no appetite, and it
helpeth: alſo th
                  •
               ſe that vſe to drinke of it, are long preſerued
in young liking.
            If any perſon haue a flegmey ſtomacke, let them vſe euery
morning faſting, to take ſix drops of this Balſam in wine,
beere, or ale, and it expelleth the flegme, and comforteth
the ſtomacke: alſo whoſoeuer hath abundance of corruption
in their ſtomacke, which is the cauſe of great feebleneſſe,
let them vſe it as aforeſaid, and euery twelfth, or fourteenth
day purge themſelues, ſo may they ſhortly be holpen,
which might their life-time liue and ſuffer great paines.
            Being taken euery morning ſixe drops in a ſpoonefull of
wine, beere, or ale, it preſerueth one from poyſon all the
day a ter: alſo it preſerueth a man from all corrupt and poiſoning
ayre, and ſpecially good to bee vſed in time of peſtilence.
            Such as are poyſoned, let them inſtantly take ſix drops of
this Balſam in a ſpoonefull of water, and ſo continue in taing
of it twelue houres after, that is, euery houre ſix drops,
ſo ſhall they be holpen.
            Any perſon which by chance falleth, and is bruiſed on
any part of his body, let him ſtraightway anoynt the ſame
place therewith, and it ſwageth the ſwelling, and putteth
away the blackeneſſe of the ſore: alſo when a man hath a
ſtitch in the ſide, anoynt it therewith, and it helpeth.
            Neyther any olde or young folke that haue a ſtinking
breath, ſo that the ſtinke come from the ſtomacke, but it
helpeth, if it be receiued euery morning faſting, ſixe drops
with a ſpoonefull of wine the ſpace of fourteene daies, and
faſt two houres after they haue taken it.
            Sixe drops of this Balſame put into a Fiſtel euery day the
ſpace of twenty dayes, healeth and ſtoppeth the Fiſtel: alſo
it healeth all wounds old or new, laid vnto them twice a
day according to the quantitie of the wound.
            Sixe drops of this Balſam put into a broad Puſtell, which
commeth of cold and groſſe humors, in the ſpace of twelue
daies it will be made whole.
            Many which are ſicke by occaſion of cold and dry humors
which cauſeth conſumption, may drinke euery morning
and euening ſix drops of this Balſam with wine, and
they ſhall recouer their health againe.
            Any body which hath a Poſtumation, which commeth of
winde and moiſture that would ſettle it ſelfe in any place of
the body, anoint the ſame place with this Balſam three times
a day, and in the ſpace of eight daies it ſhall be healed.
            Readily doth this Balſam heale all ſores which chance in
hands, legs, or armes, or any part of the body, if it be anointed
with it three times a day.
            Peaceably and very quickly this Balſam ſwageth ſwellings,
which is not of the Dropſie, if the ſwelling bee anointed
three times a day with it, and linnen clothes laid vpon them
wer with the ſaid Balſam.
            
            Euery perſon that is taken with the palſey, let them morning
and euening drinke ſix drops of this Balſam in a ſpoonfull
of wine, and alſo anoint the party which is taken with
the ſaid palſey twice a day, and they ſhall be healed, and it
comforteth all the parts of the body marueilouſly.
            This Balſam healeth all paines in the ioynts, ſo that you
waſh the ioynts therewith; and alſo plaiſter the ſaid ioynts
with linnen cloth wet in the ſaid Balſam: this muſt be done
twice a day.
            He, or they which haue their ſinewes drawn together, let
them waſh them with this Balſam, and they ſhalbe reſtored
to their former health and ſtrength.
            Alſo it helpeth the Hemerods when they are very grieuous:
alſo it is good for ſickneſſe, which chanceth in the
hinder part which is named Tenaſmos, if a linnen cloth wet
with the ſaid Balſam be put therein. Alſo this Balſam being
mixed with ſweet Ciuet, and layd vpon a little black wool,
and put into the eares, reſtoreth hearing.
            This Balſam, made by N. P. Master of Arts, and Minister of Gods Word, is to be ſold in Maiden Lane,
at the ſigne of the Crowne ouer against Goldſmiths Hall, where it hath beene ſold, and the premiſes
approued theſe foureſcore yeares. Viuat Rex.
            
         
      
   