
      
         
            
            
            
               THE
TRVE REPORT
OF THE LAMENTABLE
DEATH, OF VVILLIAM
of Naſſawe Prince of Orange: who was
trayterouſlie ſlayne with a Dagge in his
owne Courte, by Balthazar Serack
a Burgunian, the firſt of
Iuly 1584.
            Heerein is expreſſed the Murtherers
confeſſion, and in what manner he was
executed, vpon the tenth of the ſame
month. Whoſe death was not of ſufficient
sharpnes for ſuch a caytife, and yet
too ſowre for any
Chriſtian.
            Printed at Middleborowgh,
by Derick van Reſpeawe▪
Anno. 1584.
         
         
            
            
            G. P. His Proheme to
the inhabitaunts of Flaunders.
            WHo ſo conſidereth the ſtate of
Princes (although they are as
Gods vpon earth, beeing annoynted
of God, hauing theyr authoritye
from God, and ſitting in Gods ſeate to rule
the ſword with the Law, may perceaue that
they liue in more care and greater daunger,
then the ſimpleſt ſubiect. Lamentable
therefore is their late example of the
Prince of Orange, ſlayne (by a treacherous
villain) in his owne Courte: his
death and the manner thereof, may forewarne
other Princes to be carefull, whome
they retaine into the preſence of theyr perſon.
Great is thy loſſe, and greater wil be
thy myſery (O Flaunders,) for the want
of thy Prince, who did guide thee and gouerned
thy people, with wiſedome, loue,
policie and continuall care for thy quietnes:
he was thy comfort and the ſtay of
thy ſtate in all extremities.
            The cheefeſt ſtates of thy Countrey shall

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
miſſe him: the widdowe, the ſucking
Babe and the fatherleſse childe shall haue
cauſe to bewayle his death. Yea rich and
poore, altogether may lament his miſhap,
and cry woe vpon that man that bereaued
him of life, whoſe nobleneſſe deſerued
fame, and whoſe woorthy acts and
enterpriſes, beeing honourable, are meete
to be regiſtred among the most lawdable
reportes of learned Hiſtoriographers. If
the Romaines did bemone the death of
Caeſar, the Troyans the loſſe of Hector
and the Lacedemonians the want of
Alexander, then haſt thou (O Flaunders)
more cauſe to lament the loſſe of thy
good Prince, who with wiſedome, force,
and great care, (ayded by the power and
prouidence of God himſelfe) did keepe
thy country, from the handes of him that
woulde make a Monarchie of Realmes in
his ownehandes: to the vtter ſpoile of
thee and thine, & to draw other Realmes
vnder his ſubiection. O moſt accurſed
wretch that he was, ſo ſubiect to the ſubtilties
of ſathan, to worke the vntimelye
death of ſo gracious a Prince, that hether

to hath defended your liberties, & maintayned
your right theſe many yeeres, to
the great glory of God, the aduauncement
of your wealth, and the mayntenaunce of
true Religion. It were too tedious to ſet
downe in what ſubiection all the Lowe
Countreys of Flaunders, hath beene many
yeeres yoked in by their enemies: the
effect whereof is ſo notorious & apparant
to all the world & the ſame ſo truely layd
open by many, that it is heere needeleſſe
to touche it: as alſo to handle the great
care of this Prince from time to tyme,
who continually ſought to maintaine your
liberties and to defend your Country frō
extreame miſery: which doubtles hath
sharply pinched you: and now hauing loſt
him who was the principal prop of the Low
countryes, it is like to fall out to the vtter
ouerthrowe, ruine, and destruction
of that poore cominaltye, (a matter
moſt lamentable) except God (the onelie
defender of thoſe that truste in him) doo
ſpeedely procure and stirre vp, a carefull
and godly Prince to bee the defendor of
that people and Countrey, that there by

the Townes and Villages there about may
become populous & thorowly replenished
(nowe greeuouſly impouerished through
ciuill diſcention) to the quietnes, wealth,
and peace of the ſame.
            And conſidering it is moſt neceſſary to
publish a true diſcourſe of this late lamentable
mishappe, I haue thought it good
breefely and plainely to ſet downe the true
circumſtaunce thereof: and that for one
ſpeciall cauſe, which is, that conſidering
the vntrue imaginations and fayned reportes,
of this Princes death, now blaſed a
broade, as well to his freendes as to hys
enemies▪ the trueth being layd open, and
made manifeſt to all men, that then thoſe
reports may be accounted fryuolus and to
be troden vnder foote. I therefore admonish
you, O yee people of Flaunders,
that hauing loſt the stay and ſtaffe of your
countrey, that you yet vouchſafe with patience
to remaine content with GODS
workes, who prouideth wonderfully for
you. It is your ſinnes that is the cauſe of al
your care: wherefore call vpon God in this

your time of affliction: and with prayer
and hearty repentance, to turne vnto the
Lorde, who no doubt will deliuer you from
danger: as he did the children of Iſraell,
and aſsure your ſelues, that he will ſo eſtablish
your countrey in short time, powring
thereon peace and plenty, that the remembraunce
of your great extremety now fallen
vpon you, shall in short time grow out
of memory and be made a florishing common
wealth which God the father withall
ſpeede graunt to confirme. Amen.
            
         
      
      
         
            The dyſcourſe of the Treaſon
wrought againſt VVilliam of
Naſſawe, Prince of Orange, by Balthazar
Serack, a baſe borne Gent. of Burguni,
of the age of 25. yeeres.
            VPon the 12. day of Iune laſt paſt
1584. there came to the Prince
of Orange) a baſe borne Gent.
of Burguni, who brought certain Letters
from the States of Fraunce, conſerning
matters of newes, touching the

death of the Frenche kinges brother,
who died a little before: which Letters,
the Prince in moſt thankful manner
did receiue, and gaue the meſſenger
ſuch freendly entertainement in his
owne Courte, as became a Prince in
ſuch cauſes. The Prince liking well of
this meſſenger, would ſundry times
vſe conference with him, touching the
gariſon of the Prince of Parma; whoſe
ſouldiers greatly impoueriſhed the
countries round about. This meſſenger
(in whom there remained nothing
but ſubtilty and ſecret miſchiefe) dyd
ſhow vnto the Prince, howe he coulde
at any time bring him or his ſouldrers
into the Prince of Parmaes gariſon,
whereby he might take the aduantage
of the Prince of Parmaes power, for
that this meſſenger beeing a cunning
pen man, coulde finely counterfet the
Prince of Parmaes owne hand, ſo neere
that the one ſhould not be known frō
the other. The Prince notwithſtāding
woulde not ſo deale by his deuiſe, but
yet he would enquire of him how al

things ſtood, aſwel in the Prince of Parmaes
gariſon, as of the Princes pretence
towards the Low countries, who continually
certefied vnto the Prince of Orang
the truth, which cauſed the Prince
to repoſe a greater truſt and confidence
in him, ſo that he remaind in the court
without ſuſpitiō of any treachery. But
behold what folowed, on the 1. day of
Iuly laſt paſt, which by the newe computation
of the Romiſh Churche,
was the tenth day of the ſame moneth,
this Traytot thus harbored and
lodged in the Courte of this good
Prince, ſeeing a ſmall Piſtoll or Dag
in the handes of one of the Princes
ſeruaunts, did demaund what it might
coſt him, ſaying: I haue occaſion to
ryde a iourney ſhortly, and that dagge
would be a good defence for me vpon
the high way ſide, wherefore he requeſted
the Princes ſeruant that he might
bye it of him, who thinkīg nothing of
that which hapned afterward, did ſel it
to him for the ſome of 10. ſhillings of
Engliſh mony. The Prince then being

in his Court at Delph, (a town of great
ſtrength, where the cheefeſt States
doo inhabite,) who beeing gon to dinner,
and the Garde atendant about his
perſon, this Traytor ſeeing it a meete
time to compaſſe his pretended miſchief
(which was, to bereaue the Prince
of his life, as he did) went into hys
Chamber, & charged the Pyſtol with
powder, and put three bullets in the
ſame: that doone he placed it priuelye
in his pocket, and went downe to dinner:
who after he had dyned, hearing
that the Prince would anon goe vp into
his priuie chamber, deuiſed in his
minde where he might beſt plant himſelfe,
for the finiſhing of his wicked entent,
who finding a priuie corner vpon
the ſtayres, wher he might be ſhadowed
and not be ſeene, placed himſelfe vntyll
the Princes comming.
            The Prince, ſo ſoone as he had dyned,
(which was betweene one & two
of the clocke in the afternoone) came
forth of the great chamber, with hys

Lady and Gentlewomen attendaunt,
his Lady purpoſing to walke abroade,
tooke her leaue of the Prince, who going
towardes the ſtayres which did
leade to the priuie chamber, and ſeeing
an Italian named Ma. Carinſon, who
had ſtayed to ſpeake with the Prince,
to whome the Prince verye freendly
ſpake, ſaying: Carinſon welcome, and
tooke him by the hand, willing thys
Italian that he ſhould goe vp with him
into his priuie chamber, purpoſing
there to vſe ſome conference with the
Italian Gentleman: and before the
Prince entred the ſtayres, there came
an Engliſh Captaine, called Captaine
VVilliams, who dooing reuerence vnto
the Prince, was entertained in moſte
freendly manner, laying his hande vpon
Captaine VVilliams head, wyllyng
him alſo to come vppe with him.
            The Gard then attendant vppon the
Prince: Maiſter Carinſon and Captayne
VVilliams followed: But the
Prince going vp the ſtayres, not thinking

of any ſuch matter as happened, no
ſooner came directly againſt this villenous
traytor, but he preſently diſcharged
his Piſtoll, (wherein as before mentioned)
he hauing put 3. bullets, two of
thoſe bullets went through the Princes
body, and the third remained in his bellie,
through which wicked ſtroke, the
Prince fell downe ſuddainly, crying
out, ſaying▪ 
               Lord haue mercy vpon me,
and remember thy little flocke.
            
            VVherewith he changed this life, to
the great griefe of his Lady, who greatly
lamented his death, as alſo to the
great ſorrowe of the whole countrey.
The Garde purſued the murtherer and
ſought to ſlaye him, but he ouerſcaped
the firſt Garde, and was ſtaied by the
ſecond watch Garde, which was vvithin
the Princes court.
            VVhen hee was taken, they demaunded
of him what hee had doone,
who verye obſtinatly aunſwered, that
he had doone that thinge, which hee
would willingly doo if it were to doo

againe. Then they demaunded of him
for what cauſe he did it, hee anſwered,
for the cauſe of his Prince and country:
more confeſſion at that time they
could not get of him. Forthwith they
committed him to pryſon, where
he remained aliue to the pleaſure of
the Eſtates of the country, who ſhortly
after deuiſed a torment (by death) for
this murderer, which vvas reaſonable
ſharpe, yet not ſo terrible as he deſerued.
            Greeuous was the cry of the people
that came flocking to the Princes
gates, to heare the report and trueth of
what had happened, which knowne,
euery houſhold was filled with ſorow,
who povvred forth theyr plaintes, and
did ſhedde teares, for the loſſe of ſo
good a Chriſtian, and ſo carefull a
Prince.
            The murtherer while he remayned
in priſon, was ſundry times examined
by the chiefe Eſtates of the country, vp

whoſe procurement he committed the
ſaid fact, who anſwered: at the Prince
of Parmaes requeſt, and other Princes,
at whoſe hands he ſhoulde receiue for
dooing the ſame 25000. Crownes.
            The order of the torment, & death
of the murtherer, was as followeth,
which was foure dayes. He had the 1.
day the Strappado, openly in the
Market. The ſecond day whipped and
ſalted, and his right hand cut off. The
third day, his breaſtes cut out and ſalte
throwne in, and then his left hand cut
off. The laſt day of his torment, which
was the 10. of Iuly, he was bound to 2.
ſtakes, ſtanding vpright, in ſuch order
that he could not ſhrinke downe nor
ſtirre any way. Thus ſtanding naked,
there was a great fire placed ſome ſmall
diſtaunce from him, wherein was heated
pincers of Iron, with which pincers,
two men appointed for the ſame,
did pinch and put his fleſh in ſmal peeces
from his bones, throughout moſte
partes of his body. Then was hee vnbound

from the ſtakes, and layd vppon
the earth, and againe faſtened to fowre
poſtes, namely by his feete and armes:
then they ripped vp his belly at which
time he had life and perfect memorye,
he had his bowels burned before his
face, and his bodie cutt in foure ſeueral
quarters. During the whole time of
his execution, hee remained impenitent
and obſtinate, reioycing that he
had ſlaine the Prince.
            Vpon the 16. day of Iuly, the Prince
was very royally buryed, in the newe
Church at Delph, being lapped in ſeare
cloth and Leade, according to the manner
of other Princes in time paſt.
            The Cittizenes of Antwerp, are many
times driuen to ſhut vp their gates,
by reaſon of theyr enemies, who wold
gladly take the Citty at ſome aduauntage:
The enemie hath built a Forte
vpon the Banke, betweene Antwarp
and Lullo, ſo that they doo what they
may to ſtop the paſſage of the Riuer
from them.
            
               
There is not as yet any Gouernour
choſen for the Lowe countries: but
they are in hope that ſome order will
be taken for them very ſhortly.
            God for his mercy ſake ſende quietnes
in thoſe partes, that the people
may enioy theyr owne, to the
health, wealth, and comfort of
them all now diſtreſſed.
Amen.
            
         
      
   