
      
         
            
            
               
¶ A compēdius & a moche fruytefull treatyſe of well liuynge, cōtaynyng the hole ſūme and effect of al vertue. Wrytten by S. Bernard & tranſlated by Thomas Paynell.
            Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
         
         
            
            ¶ To the high and excellent Lady mary, deare doughter to our mooſt puſaunte ſoueraygne lorde the kyng. T. Paynel, ſendeth gretyng.
            
               AFter I had gathered and tranſlated certayne chaptters of this fruytful and vertuous boke Lady mooſt excellent: I with my ſelfe imagynyng and reuoluyng to whoſe tuition & defenſe I ſhuld gyue or cōmit the ſame, youre excellence apeared to my mynde moſt meteſt, and among all other the mooſt apteſte, and for this thinge mooſt cōuenient For who can denye but y• youre grace thus well lerned (as in

dede ye are) & thus inclyned to the obſeruaciō of Chryſtes lawes, is a ryght good bulwarke, & a ſure defence agaynſt the gnawers of other mens labours & this proper boke repleniſhed wt all godly and ſpiritual lerning? I dare bebolde to ſay, that your grace (ponderyng the ſayenges & intent therof) neuer red thyng in engliſhe, that aluerde or ſtyrd you more to deuociō, to the loue of god and your neyghbour, to fulfyl his ſwete & eaſy cōmaūdementes, to exchue and vtterly auoyde all wantonneſſe, all ydelneſſe, all vanite, al trifelyng, dalyance, all worldly paſtyme and pleaſure, then dothe this boke, the whiche. S, Bernarde at his ſyſters requeſt cōpiled & made, exhortynge her, and all other to

goddes ſeruice, to his feare and loue, & to the complement of his mooſt ſweteſt preceptes & commaundementes. Conſyderynge then, the vtilite, the deuoute pretence, and ſwete argument of this treatyſe, remēbring alſo the integrite of hym that made it, & agayne the deuoute purpoſe of her it was made for, pōderynge alſo your graces mooſt curius and exquiſite inſuynge of theyr vertues and heuenly liuynge, coulde I haue dedicate this my ſimple & rude tranſlaciō (rude it is and not eloquētly paynted, bicauſe I wolde be playne) to any other, then to youre excellence a very mirour & glaſſe of all goodneſſe, of all vertue, of all deuocion, and perfet fayth? Meruell it is to heare how men ertoll your

pure and vertuous liuyng, and there with your conſtancy in all goodneſſe, your boūtifulneſſe & opende hande to the poore, verteous mooſte cōmendable, & the trewe pathway to conducte and brynge al ſuche as truely & cuſtomably vſe thē, to eternal beatitude. I wyll not at this tyme expreſſe youre many folde other vertues, and gyftes of nature, nor ſpeake of youre diuine and humayne knowledge, of youre pacience and lowly behauoure, nor of your humilite & chaſtite, thynges (conſideryng your gracys eſtate and age) to be wunderde at. But by this your clene liuynge and longe contynuance therof men maye nowe ſe, perceyue and fele, the effecte of godly and vertuous educacion the

very rote and ſpryng, of all godly operacyon, of all vertue and clene lyfe. What nedeth me (I ſay) to ſpeake of your beutyfulneſſe, of your moſt amiable and lowly coūtinance, of youre wyſe and chaſte cōmuninacyon, or of your well proportioned body in euery behalfe? The which gyftꝭ of nature to many other, are as ī
               ticementes and occaſiōs of euyl diſpoſicion. But to your grace, they are (as I coniecture) vertuous prouocations, & the freſh remembraunce of the hygh and marueylons workꝭ of almightye God, whome I hartely beſeche, and pray to continue your grace this newe yeare & euer in vertue, and to ſende you longe lyfe to his pleaſure.
         
         
            
            ¶ Here beginneth the table of this preſente boke.
            
               The prologue.
               OF fayth. Folio .iii.
               Of eſperaūce and hope. fol. v
               Of grace. Fo. vi
               Of feare. Fol. xi
               Of charyte. Fol. xviii
               Of the contēpt of the worlde fo. xxiii
               Of cōuenyent garmētes. Fo. xxviii
               Of compunctyon Fol. xxxii
               Of heuyneſſe Fo. xxxix
               Of the loue of God Fo. xlv
               Of y• loue of thy neighbour. Fo. xlvii
               Of compaſſyon Fol. lii
               Of mercy Fol. liiii
               Of examples of ſayntes Fol. lv
               Of contentyon and ſtryfe Fo. lx
               Of dyſcyplyne & correctyō Fo. lxii
               Of obedyence Fo. lxviii
               Of perſeueraunce. Fo. lxxiiii.
               Of vyrgynyte Fo. lxxx
               Of contynence Fo. lxxxiii
               Of fornycatyon Fol. lxxxvii
               Of abſtynence. Fo. lxxxxiii
               Of dronkenneſſe Fo. lxxxxvii
               Of ſynne. Fol. ci
               Of cōfeſſyō of ſyns & penaūce. fo. ciiii
               Of communyon Fo. cxiii
               Of thought Fol. cxviii
               
                  
Of ſcylence. Fo. cxx
               Of lyenge Fo. cxxii
               Of periury Fol. cxxiii
               Of detractyon Fol. cxxiiii
               Of enuy Fol. cxxv
               Of anger Fol. cxxvi
               Of hatred Fo. cxxviii
               Of pride. Fo. cxxix
               Of vayue glory Fo. cxxx
               Of humilyte Fol. cxxxiii
               Of paryence Fo. cxxxv
               Of concorde Fo. cxxxvi
               Of ſufferaunce Fo. cxxxix
               Of ſyckenes Fol. cxlii
               Of couytouſnes Fol. cxlvi
               Of cupydyte Fol. cxlviii.
               Of pouertye Fol. cxlix
               Of murmuracyon Fo. cliii
               Of prayer Fo. civ
               Of holy leſſons. Fol. clvii
               Of workes Fo. clix
               Of lyfe artyue & cōtēplatyue. fo. clxi
               Of curyoſyte Fol. clxix
               Of watche Fol. clxxi
               Of wyſdome Fol. clxxvi
               Of temptacyon. Fol. clxxx
               Of dreames Fol. clxxxiiii
               Of ſhortnes of lyfe Fo. clxxxvii
               Of death. Fol. clxxxxi
               Of Iudgement. Fol. clxxxxiii
               The brothers exhortaciō. 
                     •
                  o c. xcvii
            
            Finis Tabula.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ A very conuenient forme and maner of liuyng, for euery man o
                  •
                woman that is mynded to lyue in Chryſtes lawes.
            
               The prologue.
               
                  MY ryght webeloued ſiſter in God, it is longe ſence that ye very effecteouſly deſyred me to wryte you a fewe of good and holy admonitions. But it is (as men do ſay) a point of pryde for a man to go aboute to teach his betters: and therfore eſteming my ſelfe vnworthy, to take this thyng vpō me, I haue differde and prolonged to accō
                  plyſhe youre deſyre, but for aſmoche

as ye haue renued youre peticyon, and inſtanſtly deſyred me to the ſame. I remembrynge alſo the wordes of Chryſtes ſayenge, M
                        ••
                     h. v. whoſoeuer ſhall conſtrayne the to brynge hym a myle of his way, go with him two miles And agayne gyue to thoſe that 
                     
                        〈1 line〉
                     
                   ſhall requyre of the ſuch thyngꝭ as ſhalbe for there profyte that requyreth them, & his eaſe that ſhall gyue them. I founde that I was conſtrayned by charyte, & led there vnto through youre holy oraciōs and prayers. Therfore I haue gathered vnder the table of good holy fathers a few crūmes of breade, yf I haue not gethered them as I ought to do yet I haue done the beſt I could the whiche crūmes I ſende vnto you cōpriſed in this boke, for

your inſtruction. Therfore my welbeloued ſiſter take this boke and ſet it as a glas before youre eyes, and beholde it well, & contynually, for the cōmaundementes of God be as it were glaſſes, in the which mans ſoule ſhulde euermore be lokynge.
               For by them men ſhal know the fylthynes of ſyn (for there is no man clene frō ſyn and) amēd Iohn 1. there euyl thoughtes, wheſſhīg there faces clene frō all lubricite, and ordure of ſynfulneſſe, yf men ſet al there mynde vpō goddes cōmaundementes, & behold well theſe glaſſes there is no doute but they ſhall ſe & knowe all that ſhalbe bothe pleaſant, & diſpleaſant vnto god. Therfore my webeloued ſyſter, rede this boke willyngly, and rede it ouer

agayne and agayne, for by it ye ſhall knowe, howe ye ſhall loue bothe god and your neyghbour, howe ye ſhal regard and diſpyſe theſe wordly and trāſytory thynges, how ye ſhall deſyre & couet that is eternall and celeſtyall, howe ye ſhulde ſuffer paciently for goddes ſake all worldly aduerſytes, and lytle or nothynge regarde flattery and wordly proſperyte, howe that in your infirmytes and ſycknes ye ſhal thāk god, & not to be proude of youre health, and howe that in proſperyte ye ſhall not eleuate or exale your ſelfe, nor in aduerſyte vnderpreſſe your ſelf. Therfore my welbeloued ſyſter in Chryſt / it ſhall pertayne to your wyſdome dilygently to ſtudy, and to rede this boke & to enſue and folowe

the ſame. Thus god aimyghtye ſaue you and kepe you from all euyll.
            
            
               Of Fayth. j. cha.
               
                  THe lorde ſayeth that all thing is poſſyble Math. ix. to hym that be leueth. No man can come to etnal blyſſe without fayth, he is ryght fortunate and happye, that beleueth well, & beleuing well liueth wel, and lyuing well, kepeth well his fayth. For. ſ. Paule ſayeth, that it is impoſſyble to pleaſe GOd Hebre. vi. without fayth, and. S. Iſodore ſayeth, that no man can pleaſe God without fayth. Men are not conſtrayned to byleue, but they are drawen vnto it by goodly examples / and reſonable perſuaſyons,

for yf man ſhulde be conſtrayned to byleue, the conſtraynt and fere onſe gone, he wolde returne and wax worſe, then euer he was before. Fayth without good, and charytable Iam. ii. workes is but deade, & of none effect, for he that is not ornared wt good workes, let hym truſte nothynge to fayth, for it is but dead. He that beareth the croſſe, ought to be as ded in this world, for why to beare the croſſe, is nothyng elles but to mortifye himſelfe. And he that ſayeth he beareth the croſſe, and doth not mortifye hym ſelfe in this worlde, is a very hypocrite, and a falſe dyſſembler. But he that doutythe not at all, but fermly and ſtedfaſtly byleueth all y• is heuēly and good, loke what he demaūdeth

he ſhal optayne it. He y• bileueth Iohan. iii in Ieſus y• ſon of God, ſhall optayne etnal & euerlaſting lyfe, & who ſo byleueth not in hym, ſhal neuer come thyther. S. Iames Ia
                        •
                     , ii. ſayth, y• as the bodye wtout the ſoule is but dead, ſo in likewyſe, fayth is but dead, & of none effecte wtout good workꝭ. My wel i. Cor. xiii beloued ſyſter fayth is an excellēt, & a great thing, but of no ſubſtāce wtout charite. Therfore loke ye haue good fayth & kepe it as pure, & as net as ye may, take hede y• ye be vncorrupted, yt it cōtinue in you. And y• ye cōfeſſe the ſelfe fayth, wtout any corruptiō, or foliſh cōmunicaciō of chriſte Ieſu, ſuſpecte no cruelnes or euyl in hym / leſt ye ſo thīking by him, ye offēde, and diminiſh the loue ye haue, or ſhuld haue vnto

hym be iuſte in your fayth, and loke ye haue Ioyned to ryght fay the holy conuerſacyon, and that in dedes ye do not denye hym that ye do praye vnto with mouth, for an euyll thynge myngled with that, that good is doth infecte and mar all, as through a lytle pryde, all other goodnes and vertues are ſtayned, loke therfore y• ye (the which through grace are perfaith in Fayth) do not amis ī dede, nor yt ye beſmutter not your faith nor polute not the integrite therof by naughtie lyuynge nor that ye myngle not vyce with vertue, nor ioyne yll to good. Thus my good ſyſter God preſerue you in health.
            
            
               
               Of eſperance & hope. ij. c.
               THe lord ſayeth deſpere not Marke. xi. but loke that ye haue the fayth of God in you hope that may be ſene, is no hope, for Roma. viii what Hope is in that thynge a man ſeyth, but yf we Hope that thynge we ſe not we do patienly tary for it / wherupon Salomon Prouet. x. ſayeth that the abode and expectacion of iuſt men is ioyfulnes, but the hope of euyll men ſhall peryſhe Therfore my ryght wel beloued ſyſter tary for the lorde, and kepe his waies that is, kepe his cōmaūdementes and he ſhal ſo exalte you, that ye ſhall haue heuen for your herytage. Dere ſyſter I ſaye tarry for the lorde, and declyne from al euyl, and at the day of dome and iudgement

he ſhal exalte you, for they ye wyl not leue to doyl, do leſe but there labour to tary for his mercy, of the which they might be ſure of, yf they wolde leue there myſſe liuing. Wherupō ſ. Iſidore ſaieth that we ſhuld fere leſt y• through the great hope ye god doth ꝓmis vs, we contynue in ſyn. And agayne, y• we fall not in dyſpere, bicauſe of his iuſt puniſhmēt, & correctiō, the which are to great fautes, y• is to cōtynew in ſyn, & to deſpere of Goddꝭ mercy. And therfore it ſhalbe beſt to exchew thē both, y• is to auoyde & to renounce y• is yll, & to haue good hope in the great mercy of god, for euery good man doth enforſe hym ſelfe through hope, & fere to come to euerlaſtīg life, hope eleuathe a man to ioye, & anone aft

the remēbraūce of euerlaſtynge payne bryngeth a mā to feare: & truly who ſo deſperith to optain remiſſion & ꝑdon of his ſynnes, doth cōdemne him ſelfe more by deſperatiō then by ſin. Therfore good ſyſter, let your hope be ſted faſt in chryſt Ieſu, for mercy ſhal cōpas them y• truſt in god, truſt Pſal. xxxvi ſtedfaſtly in hym therfore, and do wel & inhabite the earth, that is y• holy church, & ye ſhalbe nouryſhed wt his goodes, y• whiche the church poſſeſſeth, for ye thing y• is done wtout y• auctorite of y• church is of no valure nor yet of no merite. Good ſyſt leue of, all varyghtfulneſſe y• is all workes which are cōtrary vnto god, or your neyghboure, and truſt in goddꝭ mercy, leue of al iniquite and ſpecyally all pryde, the whiche is called iniquite and truſte

in thy ſauour chryſt Ieſu, amēd your ſelfe, and hope in the great mercye of god, put away all prauite and all noughtyneſſe, and hope to haue pardon, correcte your lyfe, and truſt to haue lyfe eternall, to the whiche I deſyre hym to bryng you that hath choſen you before all worldes.
            
            
               Of grace. iij. chap
               
                  SAynt Paule ſay Roma. v. the, where hath ben moch ſin, there hath ben moche grace, ſo that where ſyn hath reygned vnto death, grace may Roma. vi. alſo reygne through pardon to come to eternall lyfe, for the ſalare and rewarde of ſyn is no nother thynge but death
                     •
                  , but the grace of god, is eternall beatitude

god hath diſtributed & giuen Ephe. iiii. grace to euery man accordynge to the meaſure of ye gyft of chriſt Welbeloued ſyſter, the profyte of a ſpirituall man (as ſayeth. ſ. Iſidore) is a gift of god, then yf whe profyte throughe the grace of god, it muſt nedes folow, & neceſſary it is that we laude god, of our good dedes, and not ourſelues. Nor no man can be corrected, but it muſt come of God for man hath nothynge that is good of hym ſelfe, nor the occaſion or wayes to do well cōmeth not of man, as ſayeth the Prophete Hiece. x. Hierime: good lorde ſayth he, I knowe wel that the wayes of man is not ſufficyent to ordre his affares, that is to ſaye, it is not in mannes power to wauke in the wayes of Iuſtice, yf God

lede hym not, the which fayleth nomā y• wylduly are hym ye way But there are many y• deſerue to be depryued of yt way. And whē man hath receyued any gifte of god, he ſhulde requyre nothyng elles, but well to vſe the ſame, leſt be the vſurpyng of another mans offyce, he leſe the gift that was gyuē hi before. For why he troubleth all y• hole ordre of y• body, y• is not content wt his owne office, but vſurpeth another mā
                  nes. In y• diuiſiō of goddes gyftes, y• one taketh one, y• other another, for they are neuer gyuē all Roma. xiii to one mā, but to dyuers, ſo that by humilite, ſome one may haue that another may maruel at For when it is wryten in Ezechiel Ezeche 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   that the beaſtes wynges ſmyte one vpō another, be that is ſygnified,

that the holy ſaites throughe there manifold, & diuers vertues, prouoke and moue eche others affectiōs, and that the one through good examples techeth the other. O honeſt virgyn I wolde ye ſhuld know, that with out the grace of god preuenting accompanynge, and helpyng of vs, we can do nothīg that good is, the grace of god dothe preuēt vs, to thentente we ſhulde wyll that is good, and verteous, it accompaneth vs, bicauſe we ſhuld begyn to do that good is, it helpeth and worketh with vs, to thentent we maye make perfyte and brynge to paſſe that, that is good and verteous.
               Then it is gyuen vnto vs by GOD, to wyll well, to begynne well, and to do well, it fo
                  
                     •
                  t

foloweth then that vertue is gyuen vs by god, and that vyce and ſyn cōmeth of our ſelues of god cōmeth charite, purite, and honeſtye, but as for pryde couetuſneſſe, and cupidite is of oure ſelues, for whe can do nothyng ye good is without the ayde & help of god, and throughe the grace of god whe may do great good, without Goddes grace whe be very tradius ſlouthfull & colde to all goodneſſe, but his grace cadyng vs we be ryght dilygēt to al vertues operaciō, without God, that is without his helpe, we be euer more redy to ſynne, and to al noutyneſſe, but by his grace whe be delyuered therof without the helpe of god whe be inclined to loue theſe wordely thynges more then it becōmeth

vs a great dele, but by his grace and gracious aſſiſtaūce we deſpyce theſe vayne tranſitoryous and worldly thynges, and delyre celeſtiall, we war e
                     •
                  ected out of the celeſtiall paradyſe for Adams miſtaute, but throughe his grace we truſte to come thyther agayne, throughe Adams wretchednes and ſyn we deſcended to hel. But by goddes grace we truſt to aſſende to euerlaſtīg ioye. And not withſtandynge we be ryche, wyſe, and ſtronge, yet it is all of his grace. And I wolde ye ſhuld knowe my dere ſyſter, that all the good that we haue in this worlde, we haue it of hym, and that all our aduerſytes and ſorowfulneſſe do come of our miſlyuyng, god through his great mercye deuydeth his

gyftes amonge vs but all euyl cōmeth for oure ſynnes. Of the grace of god cōmeth all proſperyte, and of our ſyn and wyckedneſſe, all aduerſite by GOddes grace we optaine that is neceſſarye, and through vyce the contrary. Therfore it is very expedy
                     •
                  t and neceſſary euermore wt thankes accordynge to remember the great benefites of God, of the whiche oure holy mother the church ſpeakyng to Chryſte Ieſu her ſpouſe ſaythe. They that remember thy grace, thy 
                     
                        •
                     an. 1, mercy, and thy benefytes, loue the, ye is to ſay, they loue y•, y• are well mynded, they are well mynnyd and of good harte, y• aſcriue no ryghtfulneſſe, nor no holyneſſe to there ꝓpre merites but al to the grace of GOD. And

they loue ye, which are ſaued and remēbre thy grace. O honeſt virgyn loke ye remēber euermore ye grace of god, for al the goodnes that ye haue, is by his grace. Heare what Paule ſayth, by the grace of god, ſayth paule, I am Cor. xv. that I am. Alſo by the grace of GOd ye are that ye are, for that ye haue diſpiſed the worlde, and vtterly left your fathers houſe, and are apoynted to ſerue god, and to lyue with the handmaydens of god, al theſe vertues, & goodnes do onely procede of the grace of GOD, and that ye are a pure and a clene virgin, and ſo dothe intende to contynewe, it is not of your ſelfe, but of the great grace of god.
               
                  
                  The ſiſters demaunde.
                  GOod brother Irequyre you Marke. x. Luke. xviii. to tell me, what this text of ſcrypture meaneth. There is no man that is good, holy, or iuſte, but onely god.
               
               
                  The brothers anſwere.
                  
                     GOod ſyſter, it is euyn ſo, as it is wrytē For god is alonly good, holy & iuſt, for he is good onely of hym ſelfe, and by him ſelfe. But men are not good of them ſelfe, but by God, and holy and iuſte throughe his grace, the whiche thynge is well declared in the cā
                     ticles. Can. 
                           •
                        i. I am the floures of ye feld and the lilies of the vallee
                        •
                     , for

I ſpred y• ſwete ſauer of my vertue throughout al the worlde.
                  I am the holyneſſe, the goodnes the Iuſtice of them that humly do truſte in me, for there is noman that can be holly or good without me, as I haue ſayde in the holy Goſpell, without me ye Iohn̄. xv. can do nothynge, I am the floures of the fleldes, and the lillees of the vallees. For as the feldes are ornated and goodly beſet wt floures, ſo all the worlde, ſhyneth and is ornated with y• faith and knowledge of Chryſt Ieſu, I am the floures of the feldes, & lilees of the valles, for I gyue abundantly of my grace to ſuch as truſt more in me, then in there owne goodneſſe. Therfore I exhorte you that ye attribute nor aſcriue nothyn ge to your owne

merites, nor that ye preſume no thyng of youre ſelfe, nor that ye put nor truſt nothynge to youre owne vertue, nor yet to your audacite or boldneſſe, but I wyll ye aſcriue all to the gyft of god, and to his diuine grace. And in all your workes thanke god, in all your dedes thanke god, and in all your conuerſacyon thank god, let youre hope be euermore in GOD, that made you of 
                        •
                     ought.
               
            
            
               Of feare. iiij. cha
               
                  MY we beloued ſiter, harken what I ſaye, harken vnto my admonition, and to my wordes, feare God aboue all thynges, and Eccleſi. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
                  
kepe alwayes his commaundementes, for the eyes of GOD, are alwayes vpō thoſe that fere hym, and vpon thoſe that fere hym, and vpon thoſe that truſte to his mercy. And Salomon Prouer. iii ſayeth, feare GOD, and leue al wickedneſſe, he that feareth god forgetteth nothynge, and a certayne wyſe man ſayeth, that the feare of god is glorye, and that gloriation is the myrth, & crowne of all exultacyon, the feare of Eccle. i. god ſhall delyte the harte, and with long lyfe gyue ioye & myrthe, for he that is without y• fere of GOD, can not be iuſtifyed Eccle. i. the feare of god, is wiſdome and diſcipline, doute not in the feare of god, nor approche not towardes hym with a double harte.
               You that feare God, ſuſtayne & kepe wel his mercy, & depart not

from hym, leaſt ye fal, ye yt feare god, byleue in hi, & your reward ſhall not be diminyſſhed. You ye 
                  Eccleſi. ii. feare god, loue hym, and youre hartes ſhalbe illuminated, and inflamed, they that feare god, beleue his wordes, and they that feare him, wyll kepe and folowe his waves, they y• feare god wyl enquere for ſuch thyngꝭ as ſhall pleſe him, & are repleniſhed with his lawes. They that fere God wyll proue there hartes, and in his preſence ſanctifye there ſoules, they that feare god, kepe his cōmaundementes, and haue patience vntyl he loke vpon them, that is vntyll they departe the worlde. Goddes eyes are alwayes vpon them that feare hym, & Eccle. xv he knoeth all there workes, wyſdome is the ende of the feare of

god, he that feareth god, is very fortunate, and god in tyme of tē
                  ptation ſhall delyuer hym from all euyll. The ſpiryte of thoſe y• feare god ſhalbe requyred, and ſought for, and be bleſſed in his ſyght. The feare of god is lykened to paradyſe, and ſhalbe couerde with all benediction and glorye. Happe is he, vnto whom god hath gyuē his feare, for the feare of god, is the begynnynge Eccle. xxv. of the loue of god. O my welbeloued ſyſter, there is nothynge that kepeth or defendeth vs better frō ſyn, then the feare of hell & the loue of god to feare god is to do no euyl, & to leue no goodneſſe vndone, the which are moche neceſſary to cauſe and to ingender in man the feare of god, that is the foūtayn of wiſdome.

blyſſed ſhall he be at the houre Eccle. i. of his death, that feryth GOd. Good ſyſter, it is a very good Iohn̄, ii
                        ••
                     
                   thynge to feare God, for the fere of god doth exile and banyſſhe ſyn, and repreſſe vyce, the feare of god cauſyth a man to be wyſe and diligēt, where is no fere of god, there ye ſoule is in greate parell and daunger. Where is no feare of God, there is mys & diſſolute liuynge, where there is no feare of God, there is abundance of ſyn. Therfore honeſt virgyn, loke that fere and hope be in your harte, and that they contynewe in you. And truſt ſo vnto the mercy of GOd, that ye alwayes feare his iuſtice.
               But yet ye ſhall vnderſtande ye there are foure maner of feares, feare humane, feare ſeruile, Iniciall,

and chaſte feare, feare humayne (as ſayeth Caſſiodore) is when we feare to ſuffer any daū
                  ger of the body, or ye feare of loſſe of our worldly goodes and ſubſtaūce, this worldly and noughtye feare is lefte in the worlde, in his fyrſt degre, for the Lorde Math. xv. ſayeth, ye ſhall not feare them yt kyll the body, & can not touch the ſoule. The ſeconde feare is called Seruile, as ſaythe bliſſed S. Auſten, for he yt for the great fere of the paynes of hell leuyth to ſynne, and dothe no good for GODdes ſake, but for feare of payne, he fearythe after the maner of a ſeruaunt, the which dothe ſuche good as he dothe, not for feare of leſinge of that he loueth not, but for feare of punyſhment whiche he feareth to

ſuffer, ſuch men feare not to leſe the ſwete imbraſynges of there ſwete ſpowſe Ieſus. But they feare to be condempned, of this feare, ſaynt Paule ſayeth. Uerely ſayeth he, ye haue not receyued Roma. viii the ſpyryte of ſeruytute in feare, but ye haue receyued the ſpiryte of chyldly adoption.
               This feare ſeruyle is good and profitable, notwithſtandyng it be not ſufficyēt nor yet perfyte, for therby, groweth by a lytle & a litle, a cuſtome of Iuſtice and of good workes. For when man begynneth to byleue the daye of Iudgment, he begynneth alſo to feare it. But he that feareth it, hath not perfyte truſt therof, nor there is no perfyte charyte in hym that fearyth, for yf he had perfyte charite, he wold not

feare for perfyte charite ſhulde Iohan. iiii cauſe perfyte iuſtice in mā. And ſo he ſhuld haue no cauſe to fere but rather a good cauſe to deſyre that all iniquite war paſte and gone, and that the kyngdōe of heuen war come. What other thynge is perfyte charite, but perfyte holines, he hath perfyte charyte, that lyueth perfytely, & he that lyueth perfetly, hathe no cauſe to be condempned, but to be crouned in heuē, he that hath in him ſelfe, perfyte charite nedeth not tofeare to be dāued but to hope to be a glorious ſaynte in heuen. And of this ſpeaketh Dauid, ſayenge. All they that Pſal. v. loue thy name, ſhalbe gloryfyed in the, ſo it foloweth ye feare is not in charite, but that perfyte charite chaſeth all feare awaye.

To this kynde of fere ſuccedeth the thyrde feare called Iniciall, that is when a man begynneth to do that thynge for Chryſtes ſake, the whiche at the begynnyng he dyd for feare of eternal dampnatiō, of this fere ſpeketh Dauid ſaieuge, that the feare of Pſal. cx. god, is the beginning of al wyſdome, for Inicial is, when a mā beginneth to loue God, whome he feared before And ſo the ſecōd kynde of feare, is excluded from the harte of man. Unto this Iniciall feare ſuccedyth the fourthe kynde of feare, called chaſt feare be the which we feare leaſt that the lorde tarry to longe frō vs, and that he wyll leue vs, and that we ſhall offende hym, and moue him by our ſynnes, and finally leſe hym. This maner of

feare doth deſcende and ſpryngeth of loue, of the which we rede in y• ſauter. The feare of god, Pſal. xviii ſayeth Dauid, remayneth eternally for euermore, fere cōmeth fyrſt to mans harte, why ſo? To prepare a place for charite, whē charite ſhal begyn to be in ye hart of man, then feare which had prepared a place for charite, is reiected and ſende from thenſe.
               Lyſten good ſyſter vnto this example or ſimilitude. We ſe that by the briſtell the threde is brawen throwe, for the bryſtell enter the fyrſt, & ledithe the threde throw the ſeme In lyke maner, feare doth fyrſt enter into mans ſoule, and after it, cōmeth charite, but after that charite is onſe enterde ſhe chaſeth feare away

This chaſt feary, is a very holy feare for it in genderth all goodnes in mās thought. This is a holy feare, yt bryngeth to mānes thought perfite charite, for ꝑfet charite, is perfite holyneſſe, this is a feare that is very chaſte, for it falleth into no auoutery, but loueth GOD aboue al thyng, and preferthe nothyng aboue ye loue of GOd, this feare is alſo caulde chyldly feare, for it feareth not god, as a ſeruāt fereth his cruel maiſter, but as a child feareth his ſwete father. But what meneth Dauid be this ſayenge Pſal. xviii, yt feare of god remayneth for euermore. When ſaynt Iohn layeth, that perfet charite dothe repell and chace feare awaye. Iohn̄. iiii
               
               This is that we tolde you before, that he hathe chaſt feare in

hym, that fereth not GOD bycauſe of the paynes of hell, nor for the tormētes of the fyer, but for the reuerence & loue he hath vnto GOd, and this reuerent, & louynge feare to God ſhall endure for euermore. He that feareth god for the paynes of hell, hath not this chaſt fere, but the feare called ſeruyle, nor he hath no perfyte charite, for yf he loued god perfetly, he wolde haue ꝑfyte iuſtice in him ſelfe, & ſhuld not feare god for feare of the pa
                  
                     •
                  es of hell, but onely for reuerence and good loue, & therfore the fere of payne is not in charite for perfyte Charite putteth all feare awaye. A ſeruaunt feareth his maiſter after another ſorte, then the chyld the father. The ſeruant feareth his

mayſter with diſpeare and hatred, the childe fereth his father with all loue and reuerence.
               Therfore I aduyſe you to feare god with all loue and reuerence I wyl not ye ſhuld be euermore vnder the yoke of feare, but that ye ſhulde lyfte vp your ſelfe vnto god the father, that made and created you as his owne doughter. Alſo I exhorte you to loue god chaſtely, and that ye prefar nothynge aboue his loue, but y• for his ſake & loue, ye eſteme lytle all worldly thynges. Ferthermore honeſt virgyn, I deſyre you to amende your liuyng as moche as ye maye poſſible, & in ſuch maner that your wordes and cōmunicaciō may be pudyke & chaſt, youre paſe all honeſt, your coūtenaūce hūble & meke,

your tongue affable, your ſoule repleniſhed wt the loue of God, your handes ful of good workꝭ, the lorde helpyng you, without whoſe ayde it is impoſſible to do well. My deare ſyſter in chryſt, yfye feare GOd, withall youre harte, ye ſhall haue great aboū
                  daunce of ryches not onely in this preſēt lyfe, but alſo in tyme to come.
            
            
               Of charite. v. cha.
               THe king hath brought 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . me into his wyne celler, & hath ordayned charite in me. This wine celler is y• church in the whiche is the wyne of prechyng of y• goſpel. Into this celler is brought ye louer of ye ſpouſe y• is y• deuoute ſoule of mā wherī charite is ordained & ſet, for eueri

thynge ought not to be equally belouyd but in diuers maners, we ſhulde not loue all thynges alyke and with one affectiō, but one more and another leſſe, for why to know what we ought to do, and not to knowe howe to order it, is no perfite ſcience, for yf we loue not ſuch thynges as we ſhulde loue, or yf we loue ſuche thynges as we ſhulde not loue, our charite is not well orderde, or yf we loue any thynge more or leſſe then we ſhulde do, oure Charite is not well ordered, for Charite well ordered, wylleth y• we feare god aboue all thyng, we ſhulde loue god with al our harte, that is with all our vnder Math. xxii ſtandyng, and wt all our mynd, & that is with all our wyll, and with all our thought, that is wt
                  
all our memory, we ſhulde alſo e
                     •
                  alte and lyft vp vnto god all our vnderſtandynge, all oure thought, all oure lyfe, of whome we haue althynge. And beware that there be no part of our lyfe in ydelneſſe, but what ſoeuer y• cōmeth to our mynde: redreſſe it vnto hym, from whome finally all feruentnes of loue dothe deſcende and flowe. Therfore my dere ſyſter it is a ryght worthy thynge & a very neceſſary, that we loue God aboue all thynge, for he is the ſoueraine goodnes then to loue the ſouerayne goodneſſe, is ſouerayne beatitude, & the more a man loueth god, the more he is fortunate, he that loueth god is reputed to be good, and yf he be good, it foloweth y• he is fortunate. Of the whiche

thynge it is wryten in the canticles. The loue of god is as ſtrō
                  ge as death, that is well ſayde, for as death doth violently ſeperate the ſoule from the bodye, ſo the loue of god, dothe violently ſeperate man from all carnall, and worldly loue, and verely the loue of GOD is, as ſtronge as death, for whē that through the loue of god, we be mortified frō vice, then what ſoeuer death dothe in mannes body, the ſame dothe the delection of god in the cupidites and pleaſures of this worlde. God ſhulde be beloued for his owne ſake, for he is the ſouerayn goodnes of all goodnes and he that hathe created vs of nought. Charite is the delectiō, by the which the lorde is loued for his owne ſake, and a mans

nyghbour forgoddꝭ ſake. Aboue all thing & fyrſt god ought to be beloued as I haue ſhewed you, that is before all other thynge, and secōdarely your neyghbour in god, that is in all goodneſſe. Charite hath two cōmaundemē
                  tes and preceptes. The fyrſt pertayneth to the dilection of god, the whiche is y• principall point of all. The ſeconde pertayneth to the dilection of your neyghbour, the which is lyke vnto the fyrſt, as it is wrytē. Thou ſhalt Math. xxii loue thy lorde god, & thy neyghbour as thy ſelfe, as thoughe he wold ſay, y• ſhuld loue thy neighbour for ye thīg & to y• ende y• doſt loue thy ſelfe, ye i
                     •
                  , ye he maye be good & come the blyſſe of heuen. And of this godly & neighbourly dilection chryſt in the Canticles ſayeth vnto his ſpouſe,

                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
charite, for if charite were in him god ſhuld be in hym, for God is charite. Alſo we ſhulde loue our neighbours & kynſfolke, yf they be good, & goddes ſeruātes, but yet we ſhuld rather loue a ſtraū
                  ger copelyd vnto vs by charite, then our kynſfolke that neyther loue nor ſerue GOd: Why ſo? For the cōiunction & copulatiō of men by charite, is of a more ꝑ fectiō & holyneſſe, then onely bodely coniunction. We ſhulde loue all faythful people, but for aſmoch as we cānot profyte thē all, we ought principally to profyte thē the which by reaſō of in habitatiō tyme, & other oportunites, are ſtraytly ioyned vnto vs by charite, but yet wt lyke loue, we ſhuld deſyre euery mans ſaluattō, & loue al maner of people

charitable that is, we ſhulde loue them to thentent they may loue God and be ſaued, yet we ought not to ſhewe the workes of mercy egally to euerye man, but to ſome more, to ſome leſſe. My welbeloued ſiſter, yf we kepe trewe, and perfyte charite, by GODdes helpe, and grace we may come to ſaluation, and for the loue of god, we ſhulde loue our enemyes, as it is wryten.
               Loue your enemyes, do good to Luke. v
                        •
                     . thoſe that hate you, and pray for them that perſecute you, that euen ſo, ye maye be the chyldren of GOD. Then good ſyſter, Charite is very neceſſary for without it no man can pleaſe GOD, he loueth not GOD that hateth his peple, nor he loueth not god, that diſpeſeth his Hevre. xii.
                  
cōmaundementes, charite is the very rote of all vertue, without charite what ſoeuer we do, it helpeth not, al our diligēce is vaine without charite, where that charite is not there raygneth fleſly cupidite and luſt, and therfore a man is called perfyte, when he is ful of charite, for without charite (notwithſtandynge a man byleue neuer ſo well) he ſhal neuer come to eternall beatitude, the vertue of charite is ſo excellent and ſo noble, that without it, all other vertues auayle not, but yf charite be in man, as it ought to be, he hath all thynge, he that loueth not GOd, loueth not hym ſelfe. Therfore nowe at this tyme, I monyſhe you, that by perfite loue ye annexe & ioine your ſelf to your īuiſeble ſpouſe

chryſt Ieſu, and that be no meanes ye couet not, theſe worldly thynges. And haſte you alſo be affection to be out of this dale of wretchednes, & thynk it a payne to be long here, nor take no pleaſure therī, but wt al your myght and deſyre be as faruent as ye may to departe vnto god youre louer, & that for the loue of him, ye eſteme and repute youre proper helthe as nothynge. And loke yt ye be euermore throw pearſed with the woundes of his excellent loue, and ſo, that ye maye ſay theſe wordes, I am wounded with charite. My welbeloued lyſter in chryſt Ieſu, harken vnto goddes wordes. Whoſoeuer ſethe, that he loued me, ſhal Iohn. xiiii be beloued of my father, & I wyl loue hym, and manyfeſtly vyſcloſe

my ſelfe vnto hym. Therfore good ſiſter, loue him in this tranſitory worlde, that he maye loue you with his father in perpetuall beatitude.
               Amen.
            
            
               ¶ Of the cōtempt of the worlde. viij. cha.
               MY Welbeloued ſyſter, Math. xix. Marke. x. Luke. xvii. harken vnto Chryſt Ieſu the whiche ſayth. Whoſoeuer wyl forſake and ſeue his houſe, his father and mother, his brethren and ſyſters, or his childrē, his feldes, or his heritage for ye loue of me and my name, he ſhal receyue a hunderth tymes aſmoch, and therwith eternal and euerlaſtynge lyfe. Wherfore good ſyſter it is for oure greate

luker & profyte, to leue al earthly Iaco. iiii. thynges for Goddes ſake to get eternall, for whoſoeuer be a frend and a fauerer of y• worlde, he is goddes enemie. Wherfore let vs not loue the worlde, leaſt that God ſhall hate vs. He ſhall eaſely deſpyſe all thynge, that rememberth euermore that he ſhal dye. Yf we dayly call oure death to memory, we ſhall wyllyngly deſpyſe all earthly thynges, yf we thynke dayly vpon the daye of oure death, we ſhall efthſones forget and deſpyſe all worldly pleaſures.
               
                  The ſiſters demaunde.
                  O My good brother I wold be wel content for ye name & the loue of god, to leue all ye is

in the world yf I had any thing but foraſmoche as I haue neyther golde, ſyluer, nor yet no other ryches of this worlde, I cā not tell what I ſhulde leue for goddes ſake.
               
               
                  The brothers anſwere.
                  
                     O Chryſtes ſpouſe ye leue many thynges when ye leue youre wyl to haue, ye leue many thynges whē ye put backe youre deſyre of bauynge, ye leue moche, when ye leue all carnall and fleſly deſyre ye leue moch, when that for the name of god ye leue all delectations and pleſures of this worlde, ye leue moch, whē ye renoūce theſe worldly, & couetus deſyres, GOd loueth more the

ſoule of man, thē he doth worldly ryches. The lorde loueth moche more the hooly & pure mynd of man, then any worldly ſubſtāce, good ſyſter the kyngdome of heuen is worthe all that euer ye haue, god axeth no more, then he hath gyuen you. Therfore rē
                     der vp vnto hym that he hathe gyuē you, ye is, a holy, a deuoute, a chaſt, a pure, a religious, a fere full mynde, and a well manerred. Then good ſyſter, the kyngdome of heuen is aſmoch worth as ye are able to gyue or make, gyue and offer vp your ſelfe vn to god, & ye ſhall ſoone optayne the kyngdome of heuen. Let not the price therof trouble you, trouble not your ſelfe for the pryce, nor thynk it not moch, for chryſt Ieſus to delyuer you, from the

handes of the deuyll to wyn, & to brynge you to god, delyuered him ſelf vp. Therfore giue your ſelfe wyllyngly and hooly vnto hym, that hath bought & delyuered you from the hādes of your enemye, for why to ſaue you, he dyd hooly deliuer him ſelf: good ſyſter ſet not by ye mucke of this worlde, that ye may optayne the ryches of heuen, ryches dothe bryng and leade man to the daū
                     ger bothe of body and ſoule.
                  Ryches bring a mā to his death, Many a man hath bene deſtroyed by ryches, by ryches many a man hath ben in extreme daunger. Many a one hathe ben banyſhed and outlawed for ryches Ryches hath bene the death of many a man Who ſo troubleth hym ſelfe with theſe earthly and

worldly buſyneſſes ſhall neuer be at reſt nor yet inquiet. The care of worldly ſubſtaūce dothe trouble a mans mynde maruelouſly, and man gyuen and occupyde aboute ſuche vyle, and earthly matters, is in continual vexation and trouble. Wherfore yf ye wyll be at reſt and in tranquilyte, deſyre noone of theſe worldly thynges. Ye ſhall be euermore in quietneſſe of mynd, yf ye leaue theſe worldly cures, ye ſhall be at reſte, yf ye auoyde and leaue al worldly actions and buſyneſſes, for ryches are neuer gotten without the great daunger of ſynne. No man melleth with worldly matters, wtout parel of ſyn, & it is a very rare & a ſeldome ſene thing that

they come to eternall reſt, that Math. xix. meldle with the worlde. He that in wrappeth hym ſelfe in worldly matters, gothe from the loue of god. He that is fixed in the loue of theſe earthly thynges, taketh litle or no pleaſure in god, theſe temporall cares and matters, elienate a mans mynde frō god, there is no mā that at once can bothe loue the glorye of heuen, and of the worlde. No man can loue god and the worlde togyther, it is a very harde thyng to applye celeſtiall, and worldly thynges togyther. Yt is a hard point to loue god and the world togyther, no man can perfetly Math. vi. loue god and the worlde, noman can egally loue them bothe, at once. O honeſt virgyn, I praye you to harken vnto me, for not

withſtandynge a man do floryſh in the glorye of this worlde, not withſtanding he be clothed with purpure and golde, notwithſtandynge he ſemeth to be excellently well arrayed, floryſhynge in golde, and precious ſtone, not we dyng he hath his garde of goodly men aboute hym, and his armed watche men, and inuironed with innumerable cōpany of ſeruantes. Yet he is euermore in payne, in anguiſh and heuines, in parell and daunger. And not withſtandyng he be among his goodly tapettes and rych hangynges, yet vexed & moch troubeled he lyeth in his beddes of golde and ſyluer, and beyng full feble and frayle he reſteth in his beddes of downe, all mortall.
                  Good ſyſter in chryſt, I do ſhew

you theſe thynges, to thentent ye may knowe how vayne theſe worldly thinges be. The felicite of this worlde is very ſhort, the glorye of this worlde is ſmall, this temporal powre is exceding frayle and bryttell. Wherfore, loke ye deſpyſe all worldly aboū daunce, and that wyllyngly ye forſake theſe earthly thinges, to come to eternall. Refuſe that is trāſitory, to come to euerlaſtyng Gyue away theſe tryflynge and worldly thynges that god maye gyue you eternall, exchew and flye the worlde, and the cōpany of man, y• ye maye come to that goodly and celeſtiall company of angelles, to the whiche company I deſyre he wyll brynge you, that bought you wt his precious bloode.
               
               Amen.
            
            
               
               Of the ha
                     •
                  yte, & cōueniēt garmentes. cap. ix.
               
                  THe lorde ſayeth Math. vi. They that are delicately and ſoftly beſene, are in greate mens houſes. A mans garment is called ſofte & delicate, bycauſe it mollefyeth & corrupte the mynde, great mens houſes delyte in ſuch wanton, & delicate veſture, but the churche of god deliteth, & taketh pleaſure in humble and ſharp arraye. In the veſture of chryſt ſeruantes & of his hand maydēs ſhuld not be, nor yet a peare newfangelneſſe, no vanite, no ſuperfluite, nor no ſygne of pryde, or of vayne glorye. Wherupon. S. Hierome ſayeth that the tender

and ſofte veſture doth not ornate nor ſet forth goddes ſeruātes, but the clereneſſe of thought.
               Therfore my welbeloued ſyſter, let vs decke vs, with ſpirituall ornamentes, that is with charite, humilite, gentylnes, obedience, and paciēce, theſe be the very ornamentes with the whiche we may pleaſe oure celeſtial ſpouſe chryſt Ieſus, for oure inuiſible ſpouſe requireth no erteryoure beutie, but the interior & inward beutie, as Dauid the Prophet ſayeth. All the glorye of the kinges doughter, that is of god, is Pſal. liiii. inwardly, and all ſuch glorye is in a good, in a humble, and in a pure conſcyēce, and in ſuch thynges they that be good, do onely glorye, but theſe idiotes do euer more glorye ī theſe exterior thinges.

Therfore let good maners be your ryches, let good liuyng be your beutye, for I wolde my good ſyſter, that that thynge myght be ſayde by you, that is red in the canticles. My ſwete Canti. x. harte ye are all goodly, nor there is not a ſpot in you. And againe it is wryten, come from the moū
                  tayne of Libano, for ye ſhall be crowned. Truly that ſoule may well be called fortunate, that ſeruyth god vndefyledly, ye ſhalbe very fortunate, yf ye maye ſerue god youre ſpouſe without any ſpot of ſyn, in deuer not youre ſelf to pleſe god with your fayre face, but with your harte, youre veſture ſhal neyther be to precyous, nor yet to vyle, but moderate and cōpetent. And ſo ſayeth ſaynt Auſten of hym ſelfe.
               
                  
I confeſſe (ſayeth he) that I am a ſhamed of my goodly araye.
               And agayne he ſayeth, that ſuch goodly araye beſemeth not his profeſſion, it pertayneth not to theſe membres, it beſemeth not theſe graye eares. Be therfore good virgyn well and honeſtly beſene, not to apeare to be bewtifull, but only for bodely health, leaſt that when ye are trymblye beſene, ye fall to ſynne, for the more that the body is wantonly ſet forth invayneglorye, ſo moch the more the ſoule is inwardly beſpotted and defyled. Therfore good ſyſter ſhewe your profeſſiō to your pace and in your habyte, & that in youre pace be ſimplicite and honeſte, in youre mouynge pureneſſe in your geſture grauite, and in youre maner of

goynge honeſte, and that therein appeare no diſhoneſte, no wā
                  tonneſſe, no pryde, no ſluggeſneſhe, nor no lyghtneſſe, for why the wyll and mynde of a man dothe appeare, and is knowen by the geſture of the bodye, the geſture of the body is the declaration of the mynde, by a mans geſture his corage is ſoone perceiued. Therfore good ſyſter let your maner of goyng and pace haue no ſymilitude of lyghtnes in it. Let not your pace oftē
                  de mans ſyght. Let it not cauſe men to gaſe apon you, or be any occaſyon, why men ſhuld ſlaūder and ſpeake euyll by you Good ſyſter clenſe youre conſcience ſo, from all malyce and iniquite, that chryſt Ieſus your ſpouſe may ſay thus vnto you. Canti. 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  
O ye are fayre, ye are fayre, your eyes are as goodly as the doues ye are fayre by perfectiō of harte & clēlyneſſe of mind, ye are fayre for your intencyon is good, and full of all ſimplicite, for all that ye haue done, ye haue not done it all to pleaſe man withall, but onely for the pleaſure of god.
               Loke your eyes be lyke vnto the doues eyes, for ſo ſhall ye kepe them vndefiled from al malyce, ſu
                     •
                  lacion, and fiction. I wryte vnto you theſe thinges good ſyſter, becauſe ye ſhulde rather reioyce inwardly of your excellent good vertues, then outwardly of your freſhe and gay clothyng Wherupon ſaynt Gregory ſayeth, that nomā deſyreth ryche, & goodly apparell but onely for vayne glorye, that is bycauſe

that mē ſhulde extoll and laude hym, and thynke thē more honorable then all other. There is no man that deſyreth to be wel decked but there onely, where he may be ſene, and ſo it is manifeſt that he deſyreth it only forvaine glorie. O good virgyn, by the deſyre of ſuch ryche and worldly apparel, men knowe we do loue this worlde, for he ye loueth not the world, careth litle or nothīg for ſuche vanites. When man reioyſeth in ſuch goodly & ryche habyte, then his harte is far frō the loue of god his maker, how moche the more we delyte in the faſhonyng and trymmynge of our bodyes, ſo moche the more farther of be we from the loue of god. How moch y• more we take our pleaſure in theſe earthly, &

tranſitory thinges, ſo moche the leſſe we deſyre celeſtial and heuē
                  ly thinges. Truely that woman that delyteth and loueth precyous aray, can not be but defyled with ſyn, the ſpouſe of chryſt louynge ſuche clenly and goodly apparell can not be without ſyn The handmayde of GOd, that hath earneſtly lefte the worlde, deſyreth no ſuch apparel, hūble and ſymple veſture is a token of the contempte of the worlde. Therfore good ſyſter I praye you that good maners maye be your habyte, and be no nother inwardes, then ye be outwardꝭ. Loke ye be in very dede the ſelfe ye wold be eſtemed and reputed to be And as ye be to mās ſight, ſo be in al your operatiōs & workꝭ, & as ye are in countenaunce,

ſo loke ye be in very dede.
            
            
               Of cōpunction the, x. cha.
               
                  THe cōpūction of the harte, is ye humi
                  
                     •
                  ite of the mynd, the whiche procedeth of the remembraūce of ſyn, and of the feare of Goddes iudgement, this cōpunction is a perfyte thyn g, by the whiche all carnall delectacyon is auoyded, and the mynde intention & ſtudy of man fixed in the meditacyon, and contemplacyon of god. We rede of two maner of cōpūctiōs, the tone is whē the ſoule of goddes ſeruant is moued, and therwith reduceth his ſynnes to memory, the other is, whē the ſoule with great & depe ſythes deſyreth

to come to euerlaſtyng ioye the ſoule of euery iuſt mā is moued by cōpūctiō foure maner of wayes. The fyrſt is by y• remembraūce of his ſyn, the ſeconde by the remēbraūce of the paynes y• be to cōe. The thyrd is by remē
                  braunce of the peregrinacion of this mortall lyfe. The fourth, by the deſyre of heuē, the whiche the ſoule of man dothe greatly couet. Euery wretched ſyn̄er knoweth that god doth then viſyte hym, when that by compunction he is prouoked to wepe, for. S. Peter dyd wepe through greate compunction, when god beheld hym, for it is wryten, that oure lorde turned hym, and behelde Luke. xxii. peter, and that incontinently he went out and wepte bytterly, & of this ſpeaketh the Pſalmiſt. Pſal. xvi.
                  
God loked; and the earth moued and trembled. The earth doth then tremble, when the poore & wretched ſynner is moued to bewayle his ſi
                     〈…〉
                  es. Wherfore good ſyſter I wolde counſell you, to call your ſynnes to remembraū
                  ce in prayer, and ſorowfulneſſe, for his prayer is not cleane nor yet acceptable, that prayeth wt
                  out cōpunction or contrition. I pray you to harken vnto the examples of holy ſayntes, ye which by cōpunction and lamentacyō haue obtayned of god pardon, and forgiuenes of theyr ſinnes. As Samuels mother by compunctyon i. Reg. 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   deſerued to haue a chylde, and ferthermore ſhe optayned of god the gyfte of prophecie Dauid by long waylyng and cōpunctiō optayned pardō
                  
of his aduenture and murther, 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . Reg. xii. for the prophet ſayde thus vnto hym. Thou ſhalt not die, for the lorde hath tranſlated thy ſynne. And good father Tobias by ſuch cōpūction & teares, was reſtored to his ſyght, and holpen of his pouerte, for the angel Raphael ſayde thus vnto hym, be glad quod Raphael, & agayne / 
                     
                        ••
                     be. xi be of good chere, for y• ſhalt be ſhortly holpē. And the glorious Magdalene through greate cō
                  punction and manyfolde teares Luke. vii harde theſe wordes of GOddes owne mouthe, thy ſynnes be for gynēthe. Good ſyſter I haue recyted theſe exāples of holy ſayntes vnto you, that your teares & lamētacyon for your miſſautes with cōpunction maye be ſwete vnto you, for cōpunction is a deſyrefull

treaſure, and to mans mynde a ioye ine
                     •
                  arrable, he that prayeth with trewe compū
                  ction, dothe prophet his ſoule very moche A ſtronge champion is no leſſe worthy of prayſe, beynge in lamentation, then beynge in battayle, conſyderynge then that after oure bapteme, we haue beſpotted and defyled our lyfe with ſtynken ſyn, ſet vs nowe baptyſe & rynſe our cōſcyence wt teares, for where is wepynge, there is ſpiritual & gooſtly fyre, the whiche ſhall illuminate & kyndle ye ſecretes of mās mynde, y• weping & the teares of penitēt ꝑſons, are vnto God as a chryſtendome. Welbeloued ſyſter in chriſt, yf ye haue cōpunctiō, ye are happe, for cōpunctiō of ye hart is the health of ye ſoule

the cōpunction of the mynde, & thought, is the illumination of the ſoule, for thē the ſoule is kynled when that by cōpunction it is moued to wepe, the cōpunctiō of teres is the remiſſion of ſynnes, for then a mans ſynnes are for gyuen hym, when with bytter wepyng and teares he remē
                  bereth them, cōpunction dothe brynge the holy goſt to man, for as ſoone as the holy gooſt doth viſyte mans mynde, by and by the poore ſynner ſhall bewayle his miſlyuynge.
               
                  ¶ The ſiſters demaunde
                  O Good brother, I requyre you to tell me for what cauſes in this mortall lyfe, we ſhulde wepe.
               
               
                  
                  The brothers anſwere.
                  
                     GOod ſiſter there are foure cauſes the firſt is, for our owne ſynnes. The ſecond for the wretchednes and miſery of this worlde. The thyrde is, for the compaſſyon of our neyghbour. The fourth is for the pleaſure of the celeſtiall, and heuenly rewarde. He wepte for his ſynnes that ſayde, I wyl Pſal. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . waſhe my bed euery nyght, and with my teares, I wyll wete the couerlet of my bed. And agayne bewaylynge the miſery of this wretched worlde, he ſayde. Alas I am in great ſorowfulneſſe, for Pſal. cxix. why my labour, that is my lyfe is prolonged, and in theſe my

wretchednes I dwel not among good men, but among ſynners, the whiche are vnderſtanded by this worde cedar, my ſoule hath ben very longe abſent from god Alſo y• good lord wepte through pite and cōpaſſyon apon Lazarus, Luke. xix. and apon the citye of Hieruſalem, ſayeng, for yf thou hadeſt knowen the tyme of the viſitacyon. &c. And S. Paule commaundeth, Roma. xii. that we ſhuld reioyce with thoſe that are in ioye, and wepe with thoſe that wepe, and beynge in greate heuyneſſe he ſayde. Who is ſycke, and I am 
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        
                      not ſycke. And they y• are good iuſte men wepe for ioye of the 
                        •
                     eward of lyfe euerlaſtyng, reherſynge the wordes of Dauyd ſay enge. We ſat apō the floodes of pſal cxxxvi Babilō, & wepte, whē we remembered

the Syō, that is, whē we remēbre our celeſtiall rewarde. This preſēt life is but death, for it is ful of miſery & wretchednes the which thynges are not in heuen, but only in this preſēt lyfe, the which is neuer at home, but alwayes as vaniſhed, for beyng in this world we be neuer in the citie, but wanderynge abrode, and as ſtraungers (as it is wryten) Hebre. xiii. we haue no parpetuall demore in this worlde, but we ſeke & ſearch for a place yt is to come, that is for heuē. Therfore good ſyſter fyrſt aboue all thynge, I wold ye ſhuld bewayle your ſynnes, ſecōdarely ye wretchednes of this world Thyrdly your neyghbour & fourthly for the loue of the celeſtiall reward. Honeſt virgyn loke ye pray to god wt good

deuocion deſyrynge hym to gyue you trewe cōpunctiō of mind and of harte contrition, for compunction cauſeth god to be with vs, as he himſelfe ſayeth, I and my father wyl come to him that Iohn̄. xiiii. hath cōpunction, and we wyl tary with hym. Where is moche wepinge and wayling, there are lightly no euyll thoughtes, and yf paraduenture at ſome tyme they approche nygh, yet they take no rote, and therfore they can not abyde, longe wepynge cauſeth a man to haue good confidence in God. Harken good ſyſter vnto goddes owne wordes. Stand vp good doughter, and Canti. ii. come vnto me, for truely wynter is gone and paſt, the floures begyn to appeare, and the tyme of loppynge is come, for we haue

harde the voyce of the turtyll in our countrey, that is to ſay, the voyce of the preachers, and of the apoſtles, are hard in goddes churche. This turtyll is a very chaſt byrde, whoſe cuſtome is, to buylde her neſt in hygh trees, and by her, is ſignified the apoſtelles and other good docters, whiche may ſay, our inhabitaū
                     ce and dwellynge place, is in heuen, the whiche turtyll rather mourneth then ſyngeth, whoſe mournynge dothe ſignyfye the teares and ſorowfulnes of good ſayntes, exortynge there frendes to mournynge and lamentacyon ſayenge, be petyfull and mourne you. Therfore welbeloued ſyſter taken an example by y• turtyll, and wepe vntyll ye may ſe the lorde in his hygh maieſte

it were better for you to wepe for the loue of chryſt Ieſus, then to wepe for the feare of hell. Thy chekes are as fayre as the turtyll doues, the nature of the turtyll is, that yf by any occaſion or chaunce ſhe leſe her mate, neuer to take no nother O chryſtes ſpouſe, folowe & be lyke the turtyll, and loke that beſyde Chryſt Ieſus ye take no nother ſpouſe nor louer. Be lyke the turtyll, & wepe bothe day and nyght with the deſyre of Chryſt Ieſus your louer, for he is nowe aſcended to heuen, where ye maye ſe hym ſyt apon the ryght hande of his father. Your chekes are as goodly as the turtylles, honeſt ſhame faſtneſſe is wont to be ſhewed, and apeare in the chekes, ye haue the chekes of the turtyll, yf

for youre ſpouſe Chryſt Ieſus ſake, ye do nothynge agaynſte his wyll, ye haue the chekes of turtyll, yf ye haue no nother louer then Chryſt Ieſus: that is to ſaye, yf ye loue no nother creature more then hym, and all other for the loue of hym: ye haue the turtylles chekes, yf for the loue and reuerence of GOd, ye leaue of al thynges that ſhulde diſpleaſe him Therfore good ſyſter bewayle & wheſhe out your ſynnes, and wheſhe them with compunctyon and many folde teares wheſhe awaye youre neglygenſes, and youre manyfold tranſgreſſyons with contynual teares, optayne by compunction and waylynge the remiſſyon of your ſynnes, & be ſorowfull & oft ſyghynges fynd the meanes

to optaine and poſſeſſe ioye euer laſtyng, bewayle your iniquites bewayle the horribilnes of your ſynnes, and by great lamentation call them to memorye, and all to be ſprynkyl them wt the aboundaunce of water, and with contynuall and bytter teares, deface them with continual deploracyon, and with manyfold teares wheſhe out, that ye haue done by iniquite and agaynſt goddes lawes, for yf ye lament not your ſynnes in this world, whē ſhall ye ſaye theſe wordes. Good lord ye haue receyued and layde my teares before you, yf ye bewayle not your iniquite in this Pſal. iv. worlde, when ſhall ye ſaye. My teares haue ben to me as bread, bothe by nyght and by day.
                  Therfore chryſtes ſpowſe I monyſhe, Pſal. xli.
                     
and exhort you to bewayle your ſyn in this mortall lyfe, that ye may be confortyd in heuen, for it is wryttē, fortunate be Luke. vi. Math. v. they that wepe in this worlde, for they ſhalbe conforted.
               
            
            
               Of heuineſſe the .xi. Cha.
               
                  THe lorde ſayeth / Iohn̄. xvi. Amen amen, this is goddes othe, & his maner of ſwerynge, as though he wolde ſaye I ſweare vnto you, that ye ſhall wepe, but the worlde ſhall reioyce, ye ſhalbe very heuy but your heuyneſſe ſhall be tourned into great ioyfulneſſe and pleaſure, and Salomon ſaveth, a mery Prouet. xv harte, cauſeth a mery counte naūce, a heuy ſpiryte is deiected

in to the heuineſſe of the ſoule. A ioyfull harte and mynde maketh a man luſtye, but a heuy ſpiryte, 
                     
                        ••
                     o. xvii dryeth vp mans bones, good chylde make no ſtryfe, nor no contradiction in good thynges, and in all thyng that is gyuen you, loke ye vſe no angery nor no euyll wordes, for tribulacion is the heuineſſe of the hart, and ye ioyfulneſſe of the harte, is mans lyfe, a troubelous mynde ingendereth heuyneſſe, but a wyſe man wyll reſyſt it, by heuyneſſe commeth death, heuyneſſe doth alter the force and ſtrēgth of mans harte, but a mery and a lyght harte ingēdereth health, heuines drieth vp mans bones. And the holy man Athanaſius, ſayeth, that a heuy and a melancolius perſon, is euermore malitius,

and cauſeth the holy goſt gyuen vnto hym by GOd, to be heuy, as S. paule ſayeth. Cauſe Ephe. iiii. not the holy goſte, that is in you to be heuy, by whome ye are marked in the day of redemption.
               Therfore good ſyſter take good hede ye cauſe not the holy goſte beynge and dwellyng in you to be heuy, leaſt he leaue you, & departe from you, put al maner of doute, and all hyghe myndefullneſſe from you. For they do cauſe the holy gooſt to be in care, & heuyneſſe, therfore leaue of all heuyneſſe, for heuyneſſe is ſyſter bothe vnto doutefulnes & hygh myndefulnes, verely ſeculer heuyneſſe is of all euyll ſpirytes y• very worſt, & very noyful to goddes ſeruantes, ſecular heuynes hurteth, & febliſhed y• ſeruātes of

god the holy goſte can not away ī no maner of meanes wt bodely heuynes Therfore good ſiſter ordre your ſelf ſo yt ye may be euermore in ſpiritual gladnes & ioyfulneſſe, the which god aloweth greatly, all ſpirituall gladneſſe is good, and thynketh apon nothynge but that good is, deſpiſynge all vayne and worldly heuyneſſe, yf ſpirytual myrth were not good, the Prophet Dauid Pſal. xxxi. wolde not ſay, be you mery, and ioyfull in God, and ye that are iuſt mē, reioyſe you, and ye that are ryght hartyd men glorifye Pſal. lxiii. your ſelues in god, and agayne The iuſt mā ſhal be mery in god and ſhall put all his truſt in hym, and all that are ryght harted men ſhall be reioyced and conforted.
               
                  〈1 page missing〉
               
               
                  
                  ¶ The ſiſters demaunde
                  O Good brother, yf heuynes be ſo euyll & noyfull to goddes ſeruantes as ye make it, how chaūceth it then, that Salomon Eccle. vii. ſayeth, that a wyſe mans harte & mynde is where is heuyneſſe, and a foles harte, where is ioye and myrthe.
               
               
                  The brothers anſwere.
                  WOrſhypfull ſyſter, theſe wordes of SAlomon, a wyſe mans harte is where is heuyneſſe, and the folyſſhe mans hart, where is myrthe, and ioye, are to be vnderſtanded onely of ſpirituall heuyneſſe, and worldly ioye, as though he wolde ſaye more playnly, a wyſe mans hart & mynde is there, where is ſpirituall

and gooſtly heuynes. And the hart of a foie is there, where is worldly myrthe and ioye, they are wyſe, that are in gooſtly heuyneſſe, but they are very foles, that are in worldly ioye. And of this thynge ſpeaketh the lorde Luke. x ſayenge, be you glad and mery for youre names are wrytten in heuen. And ſaynt Paule ſayeth, 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . Lor. vi. be as thoughe ye were heuy, but truſtynge and reioyſynge euermore in god. And againe he ſayeth, be ye mery in god, I ſaye agayne, be ye mery in god, ſo it foloweth then, that ſpirituall ioye Philip. 
                           •
                        iii is very good and confortable.
                  But the ſorowfulnes that cometh by the couetouſneſſe of worldly goodes is very euyll, of ſpirituall heuyneſſe ye haue in the Math. vi. Luke. vi. goſpel: bleſſed be they that wepe

for they ſhalbe conforted: and of Eccleſi. xxx worldly and ſecular heuyneſſe Salomon ſayeth. Heuyneſſe hath ben many a mans death, and hath no maner of vtilite ne profete in it: and of ſpiritual ioye Dauid ſayeth, his harte that ſeketh Pſal. ciii
                           •
                        . god, ſhall be in ioye, of the worldly ioye, it is wrytten. Out Luke. vi. vpon you that laugh and be mery nowe, for ye ſhall wale & wepe Yet good ſyſter lyſtē vnto ſaynt Paules wordes, ſayenge, that ii. Cor. vii ſuche ſpirituall heuyneſſe bryngeth a man to penāunce, and that worldly heuineſſe bringeth a man to death.
                  His prayer that is euermore in heuineſſe is of no vertue, nor aſcendeth not vp to GOD, for who ſo euer he be that appereth heuy to the holy gooſte,

his prayer is not acceptable, but feble, and not hable to aſcēde vnto god, wherfore leaue all heuyneſſe, leaue of to be heuy, ſet all heuyneſſe apart, gyue not youreſelf to heuynes, cōtinue not in heuyneſſe, ſet not your hart & mind apon heuynes, heuyneſſe is one of the ſeuen princypall vices, & therfore goddes ſeruātes ſhuld clerely and vtterly auoyde, and flye it. Wherupon the holy. S Iſedore ſayeth, yf ye haue loued well and mercyfully, ye ſhall neuer be heuy, for a good lyfe is alwayes in ioye and gladneſſe.
                  Therfore honeſt virgyn auoyd all heuineſſe, for as the mothe cō
                     ſumeth the gowne, and as the worme gnaweth aſūdre and conſumeth the woode, ſo dothe heuineſſe noye & hurt mannes harte.

Therfore pourge youre mynde from al worldly mournefulnes, and ſo ſhall your oration & prayer be acceptable vnto God, wepe for youre ſynnes, and reioyce in the loue of god, bewayle your myſfautes when ye remembre them, and reioyce in the hope of the celeſtyal and eternal reward be ſory for youre ſynnes and neglygences, and mery that GOd hathe promyſed you to come to heuen, be heuy for ſuche thynges as ye haue myſdone, and glad of the eternall rewarde, to the which I deſyre and pray god to gyde and to brynge you.
               
            
            
               Of the loue of god the xij. Chap.
               
                  
THe lorde ſayeth, Iohn̄. xv. he that loueth me, wyll kepe my commaundemētes, and my father ſhal loue him, and we wyl come vnto him and dwell with hym. And ſaynt Iohan ſayeth. We loue god 1. Iohn, iiii for he hath fyrſt loued vs, he ye loueth god ſhall pray for the forgyueneſſe of his ſynnes, and take hede he fal no more. My wel beloued ſyſter, loue almyghtye god, and call vnto hym for help for the loue of God, is the very lyfe, and his hatred very death. God wyll not be beloued onely with worde, but with harte and good workes, he loueth not god that diſpyſeth his commaundementes, the mynde of hym that

loueth God is not in earth, but in heuē, and euermore deſyryng of celeſtyal and heuenly thyngꝭ. Good ſyſter I exhorte you to loue God aboue all thynge. We ſhulde rather loue GOD, then our frēdes, why ſo? For he hath created and made bothe vs and them with his owne hādes, that is, through his owne propre vertue and power as it is wryten. pſal. x
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
               
               He hath made vs, and not we haue made oure ſelfe. Alſo he hath gyuen vs greater gyftes, then eyther father or mother dyd and therfore we ought to loue hym aboue them. Yt is a greate fooly to loue any thynge more then GOD, yea he ſynneth greatly that loueth anye creature more then GOD, he is in

greate arrour that preferth the loue of any creature aboue the loue of GOd, and therfore God muſt be beloued aboue al thing. O honeſt virgyn, I pray you to ſay thus by chryſt Ieſus wt loue Canti. ii. and dilection. My welbeloued god, of whome I am greatly beloued, the which paſtorth amōg the liles vntyl it be day, that is, aſlonge as it is daye, and tyl the cloudes go downewardes, that is, vntyl the cloude of this preſent lyfe, ſwage and auoide, and that the day appeare, that is, vntyl the clereneſſe of the ſpiritual beatitude & blyſſe doth appeare. It is a poynt of Iuſtice to loue god with al your harte, and wyllyngly to cleue vnto hym. And to loue the ſoueraygne goodnes is ſoueraigne beatitude, he that

loueth god is good. Yf he be good, he muſt nedes be bleſſed, & how moch more a man loueth god, ſo moch the more he is bleſſed. Dilectation and loue is the proper vertue of ſaītes, I haue ſayd theſe thynges vnto you, to thentēt that the loue of this trā
                  ſytory worlde, ſhulde not ſeperate you from god And hearewith I pray you to tell and to declare vnto vs ſomwhat of the loue of your ſpouſe Chryſt Ieſu. My Canti. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . louer is vnto me as a handfull or a ſhefe of myrre, he reſtyth apō my pappꝭ. Declare this thing a litle more playnly to vs, that we may the better vnderſtande it. My louer (I ſaye) is vnto me as a litle ſhefe of myrre, he ſhall reſt betwexte my pappes, the place of a mans hart is betwext

the pappꝭ, that is to ſay, the memory, Canti. i. ye dilectiō, the loue of chriſt Ieſu ſhalbe euermore in my hart And whether it be in proſperite, or in aduerſyte, I wyl euermore cal and reduce to my memory al the godneſſe that he ſhewed me, for he hath loued me, and ſuffered his death for me, and is aſcē dyd to heuen, to thētent I ſhuld come vnto hym. He dothe dayly call me, ſayng. Leaue the world my ſpouſe, come vnto me and ye Canti. iiii. ſhalbe crowned. The lefte hand of my louer and ſpouſe, is vnder my head, yt is to ſaye, the gyfte of the holy gooſt reſteth in me in this preſent lyfe, and I wolde the vnderſtandynge of holy ſcrypture were in my mind that I myght loue hym & know hym perfytly. His ryght hande

ſhal in brayce me, that is, he ſhal Canti. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   conuey and brynge me to eternall lyfe & blyſſe. O good ſyſter ſaye thus vnto the handemaydes of GOD, vnderſet me with floures, vnderbolſter me with appelles, Can. ii. for why, I conſume away in the loue of my ſpouſe Chryſt Ieſu. O my holy ſyſters, y• loue God aboue all thynge, and prefer Can. ii no worldly thinge aboue his moſte ſweteſt loue, vpholde me by your good examples, & ſhew me howe I maye fynde my louer Chryſt Ieſus, for I am ſycke for the loue of my ſpouſe. This loue is ſwete, this ſyckneſſe is verye hooly, this dilectyon is chaſte, this coniunction is intemerate, this copulacyon is inuiolate, this imbraſynge is with out any ſpot of ſynne.
               
                  
O my holy ſyſters ſuſtayne me with the floures of your good examples & of your hooly cōuerfation, for I am ſycke for the loue of my ſpouſe. Uerely ye kepe your bed of contemplacyon for his ſake, yf ye loue hym aboue all thynges, verely ye are ſycke for goddꝭ ſake, yf ye eſteme that is celeſtiall aboue that is earthly, verely ye conſume and waſte awaye in the dilection and loue of chryſt and in youre bed of inwarde dilection and ſwetneſſe, yf ye be ſtronge in holy operations and workꝭ, & feble in worldly worke and operatyon. Good ſyſter, yf ye loue Chryſt with all your harte, nor prefer nothynge aboue his loue, ye ſhall be with hym in great ioye in the kyngdome of heuen, yf ye folow God

with all youre mynde, and loue hym with all youre harte, without any doute, ye ſhall be with hym in heuen, and folowe hym with other hooly virgyns whether ſoeuer he go. Yf ye cleue vnto god with all deuotion, and with great deſyre do ſythe in this preſent worlde to come vnto hym, without doute ye ſhall be with hym in greate ioye, and pleaſure in the hyghe palece of heuen, and with other holy vyrgyns ye ſhall ſynge to his laude and prayſe, holy ſonges, and deuoute hymnes, as it is wrytten in the cantykels. Thou that art Can. i
                        •
                     
                   nuryſhed amonge the lilees, environed and cōpaſt with the cō
                  panes of virgyns, glorifyenge your ſpouſes with glorie, and giuynge them greate rewardes,

and giftes, whetherſoeuer ye go the virgyns do folowe you, and ſyngynge behynde you, they beſet you, and delyte and conforte you with many folde ſwete ſonges and hymnes, that is, with depe loue, and deuoute prayer. O welbeloued ſyſter let nothīge be ſwete vnto you, but only chryſte Ieſus, requere no nother loue but his onely, loue no nother mans beutefulnes but his only and loke ye wepe and wayle to come to his loue, and vntyll ye maye ſe hym ſyt vpon the ryght hande of his father.
            
            
               Of the loue of thy neyghbour the .xiij. chap
               My welbeloued ſiſter, harkē what the lord ſayeth to his Iohn̄. xiii. diſcyples. Men ſhal know that ye are my diſcyples yf one

of you do loue another. Wherof foloweth this good lernīg, that who ſo wyl be & ītēdes to be chriſtes diſcyple, muſt indeuer hymſelfe to loue his neyghboure as him ſelfe: neyghbourly loue cauſeth no harme for the conſumation of the lawe, is dilection and loue. And ſaynt Paule ſayeth. Walke ſo in loue, as god hath Roma. xiii loued vs, & delyuered hym ſelfe for vs. And ſaynt Iohan ſayeth i. Iohn̄. ii. He that loueth his brother, is in the lyght, and there is no ſhame in hym. He that hateth his brother is in darkneſſe, and knoweth not wether he goeth, for y• darknes hath blynded hym. Who ſo euer ſayeth y• he loueth god, & hateth his brother, he lyeth falſely, & there is no trueth

in hym, and this is goddes commaūdement, that he that loueth god muſt loue his brother. For i. Iohn̄. iiii prouer xvii howe ſhall he loue god whome he ſeeth not, that loueth not his brother, whome he ſeeth? And ſalomō ſayeth a frynd is alwayes in loue, and a mans brother is proued in neceſſite. And S. auſten ſayth. A man is ouercommed by humane felicite, and the deueil by louynge of oure enemye. But yet good ſyſter amonge goddes ſeruantes muſt be no carnal loue, but onely ſpirytual loue. There is nothynge more acceptable to god, then the vertue of loue, nor nothing that the deuel deſyreth more thē to quinche charite, good ſpirituall loue contayneth nor hathe no ſhame in itſelfe. And loke ye thynke

euery good faythfull man, to be your brother and remēber that one workemā made vs al, trew loue hath no bitternes of ſhame by louynge of your neyghbour, ye ſhall lerne and knowe howe to come to the loue of god, and as loue doth eleuate mās mind, ſo dothe malyce and hatred depreſſe it, ye can neuer loue GOd truely and as ye ought to do, wt out your neyghbour, nor youre neighbour without god, ye haue thē trew charite, if ye loue your frende in god, and your enemye for Goddes ſake, and the more large and faruent ye are in the loue of your neyghbour, ye more higher ſhal ye be in the loue and fauour of god. Yf ye loue youre neyghbour truely, your mynde is in trāquilite and reſt, he that

hateth his neyghbour, is beſet and compaſt with darkneſſe and enuy, by louyng of your neyghbour, ye ſhall pourge the eye of your harte and mynde, & ſe god the better. Yet good ſyſter I wolde ye ſhulde loue no man carnally, wherupon ſayeth ſaynt Iſydore. That man (ſayth he) is very depe in earth, that loueth anye mortall ma
                     •
                   more then he ſhuld do, we cannot be in goddꝭ company if we loue not one another. A frend is knowen in tyme of niceſſite. Yf we kepe Goddes commaundementes, we muſte loue oure neyghboure as oureſelfe, and yf a man loue his brother without diſſymulatyon, he ſhall ſoone pleaſe the father of heuen. He that loueth his neyghboure, can not commyt

murther, aduoutery, thefte, periure, nor beare falſe wytneſſe, nor haue anye enuyouſneſſe or ſtryfe in hym. Therfore good ſyſter let vs euermore thinke vpon the loue of GOD, and of oure neyghboure, in the whiche Math. xxil two, dependeth all the lawe and Prophettes, and let vs do ſo indede, for if we can be ſory for our neyghboure when we ſe hym in tribulation, or ſyckeneſſe, in any loſſe, or in pryſon, then we be of Chryſtes churche, but yf we be not ſory for hym, we be euen as people ſeperated from Chryſte, and his congregacyon.
               For as longe as anye parte of man is adheruet, and ioyned to the bodye, ſo longe it ſufferth with the bodye, but after it be cut of, it can not feele, nor

nor ſuffer, yf a mans hande, or foote, or any otherpart of his body be cut frō y• body or yf it be deuided in many partꝭ, or caſt into Cor xii. the fyre, the for ſayde hande or foote, feleth nothynge, bycauſe it is deuyded from the body, ſo in lyke maner it is with all ſuch chryſtians, the whiche are nothīg ſory for theyr neyghbours tribulatiō, loſſe, or neceſſite, but rather reioyleth therin, ſuche a neyghbour is deuyded from the body of the churche, and is none of chryſtes flocke. Honeſt virgin yf we kepe trewe and ꝑfyte charite, we muſt nedes loue al faith ful peple as our ſelf, for through ſuche concord, charite, and true dilectiō we ſhall appeare wt him in his glorye. We loue our frendes yf we loue them for goddes

ſake, & not for theyr owne ſake. Wherupon ſayeth S. Iſodore, he that intemperately and immoderately loueth his frende, loueth hym more for his owne ſake, then for Goddes ſake. And who ſo deſpiſeth his frende ſmyt ten with aduerſite, doth contrarye to the Iuſtice, and goodnes of god, trewloue by no maner of occaſion can be defaced, nor loſt at no tyme, for howe ſoeuer the worlde goeth it remayneth ſtedfaſt. But there be very fewe that charitably do contynewe in frenſhyp, and that is reputed to be trewe loue, that onely requyreth of his frende, his good beneuolēce, that is, loue for loue. Therfore I exhorte you, to loue your frēdes in god, that is in al goodneſſe, and in lyke maner youre

enemyes for Goddes ſake, as it is wryten. Loue your ennemies and do good to them that hate you. And yf youre ennemye be an hungerde, gyue hym meate, yf he be a thryſt, giue him drynk Luke. vi. Roma, xii. And agayne, bleſſe and ſaye wel by them, that trouble you, bleſſe them, but ſpeake no euyll by thē Dilectiō is charite, charite was neuer without dilection, nor dilection or loue without charite. Therfore good virgyn dilectiō and loue is very neceſſary, oute of the whiche do ſprynge manye great vertues, Dilection hathe two wynges, the ryght wynge is the loue of god, the left wyng is the loue of oure neyghboure, there is no man that can flye to heuen with one wynge alone, for the loue and dilection of god

without the dilection and intere loue of oure neyghbour helpeth nor auaileth not to come to heuē nor the loue of our neyghboure without the loue of God preuayleth not to come to eternall beatitude. Wyſe and prudent virgyn take theſe two wynges vnto you, that is the loue of GOD and the loue of your neighbour, for ſo without any impediment or let ye ſhall flye, and come to the celeſtyall kyngdome of heuē
               
            
            
               Of compaſſyon the xiiij. Chapiter
               MY welbeloued ſyſter, lyſten what the lorde Chryſt Ieſu Math. vii Luke. vi. ſayeth. All ſuche goodneſſe as ye wold other mē ſhulde do to you, loke ye do it vnto thē And ſ, Paule ſayeth, be mery wt thoſe that are mery, & wepe & be Rom. xii.
                  
ſad with thoſe that be ſad. And i. Theſ. v prouer xiiii agayne, receyue the poore man vnto you, & be patient with euery man. And Salomon ſayeth, he that deſpiſeth his neyghbour doth ſin, kepe your promis with your neyghbour in his pouerte, and reioyce in his proſperyte, be faythfull to your neyghbour in his tribulacyon, he that maketh a hole to deceiue his neighbour ſhal fall in to it. And he that prepareth a lake for his neighbour ſhall peryſhe in it, of the whiche thing ſpeaketh the Prophet Dauyd Pſal. vii ſayenge. He hath opened the lake and the dyche, and is fallen into it, he dothe not perfytly loue his neyghbour, that dothe not ſūccoure and helpe hym in his neceſſyte, howe moch y• more we ſuccour & helpe oure neyghbours

in there neceſſite & pouer te, ſomoch the more we approch vnto god, we ſhulde ſo care for our ſelf, that we forget not oure neyghbour. Wherfore good ſyſter loke what thynge ye wolde not that ſhulde chaunce to your ſelfe, ye ſhall not delyre it maye chaunce and happen to youre neyghbour. Be ſory for poore ſtraungers and inforce your ſelf to be ſory and to wepe for other mennes loſſes and damages.
               Be heuy for other mens tribulation, and be ſicke with thoſe that be ſycke, bewayle other mens paynes and heuyneſſe, as youre owne. Wepe wt thoſe that wepe be to all other, as ye wolde they ſhulde be to you, do not y• thyng to another, that ye wolde not a nother ſhuld do to you, forgyue

other as ye wolde be for gyuen, yf ye ſe youre enemye in miſfortune, reioyce not in his aduerſite, nor in your aduerſires death, leaſt any ſuch miſchaunce ſhuld fortune vnto youre ſelfe, be not glad of your enemyes fall, leaſt god turne his anger vpon you, myſfortune ſhall ſoone fall vpō hym that reioyſeth in his enemys aduerſite, let vs therfore be louynge to the miſfortunate, let vs ſorow & take compaſſyon vpon the poore, let vs haue mercy vpon the wretched, yf your ennemye be a hūgerd giue him meat, yf he be a thruſt, giue him drynk deſpyſe not the poore, nor the Rom. xiii pore orphalines, be no occaſyon of heuyneſſe to no man, let no man depart from you in ſorowfulneſſe, viſyt the ſyckman and

cōfort ſo the weke, that ye maye haue goddes ayde and cōfort, in the kyngdome of heuen.
            
            
               ¶ Of mercy the .xv. cap.
               
                  WElbeloued ſiſter harken what GOd Math. v. ſayeth. Bleſſyd be they, that are mercifull, for they ſhall haue and optayne mercy. And agayne, be ye mercyful, for your Luke. vi. father of heuen is mercyfull.
               And Saynt Paule ſayeth, be ye good and mercyfull one to another, & clothe you with this vertue of mercy as y• electe chyldrē 
                  Ephe. iiii. of god. Salomō ſayeth, y• pitie & Pro. xxi. iuſtyce pleaſeth god moch more, then doth ſacrifyce, mercyfulnes prepareth a place for mā aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his

merytes and deſeruynges, the pite and mercy that man hathe, is but onely for hym ſelfe, & his neyghboure, but y• mercy of god is vpon euery man, to be mercy full is as it were a ſacrifyce vnto god, it is calde mercy, bycauſe it ſhulde haue pite and compaſſyon vpon another mans miſery and wretchedneſſe. For he that wyll not be pitefull vnto other, ſhall neuer fynde ne optayne the mercy of god. Therfore good ſyſter loke that Iuſtyce, & pite be euer more in your ſyght, neuer leaue of to be mercyfull for yf ye be mercyfull to other, ye ſhal do your ſelfe great good He that is pitifull vnto other, ſhall fynde god mercifull vnto hymſelfe. Good ſyſter beſtowe ſuch thinges as ye haue, in workes

of mercy, and ſhewe mercyfulneſſe without any grudge or murmuracyon, for your workes ſhalbe eſtemed after your intention. Where is no beneuolence, there is no mercy, and take hede ye do your good dedes mercyfully, and not for vayne glorye, do nothynge for wordly laude ne prayſe, but onely to optayne ioye and rewarde euerlaſtynge, do nothynge for any temporall opinyon, but for celeſtyall remuneracyon, do nothyng for worldly name and fame, but to conquere and get lyfe euerlaſtyng, to the whiche almyghtye GOd bryng you my good ſyſter.
               Amē
               
            
            
               Of the examples of ſayntes the .xvj. Chap.
               
                  
                  THe good examples of ſayntes, are very neceſſary and profytable for the amendement of Chryſten people. And therfore good ſiſter there myſfautes and ſyn̄es, and lykewyſe there good amēdemēt are wryttē, that we mooſte wretched ſynners ſhulde not fall in to deſperacion, but rather hope & truſt after oure fall to amēde our ſelfe by penaūce, cōſideryng through the great goodneſſe of god to what amēdement, & ioye theſe bleſſed ſayntes after there falle be cōmē vnto. And therfore god to our example hath opened there good vertues, that folowynge of them and doynge as they haue done, we maye optayne the celeſtiall kyngdome of heuen,

but if we folow not the ſteppes of there payne and penaūce in this worlde, we can not be eccuſed from ſuche paynes as we haue meritoriouſly deſerued.
               The holy ſayntes for the tyme they were in this worlde, neuer ſeaſed to occupy thē ſelf in good workes, as in faſtynge, almis dede, chaſtite, continence, long animite, pacience, prayer, perſecucyon, beniuolēce, hūget, thruſt, cold, goyng bare, & in manifold other good workꝭ for goddꝭ ſake The bleſſyd ſayntes deſpyſed y• worlde, to cōquer & get the kingdome of heuē, nor beyng in this worlde they haue not taken nor yet receyued y• wretched ꝓmyſes & miſerable ryches therof, y• whiche bryng thē to the tormētes & paynes of hell, y• mys vſe them

but with all theyr intention and wyll they haue forſaken this miſerable worlde, lyftyng vp theyr eyes to hieruſalem that heuenly manſion. Theſe blyſſed mē haue auoyded ſynne, bothe in worde & dede, ī thought in ſight, in hearynge, in mouynge there eyes, and there handes, in anger, in goynge, in ſkoldynge, in furye, in diſcention, in vayne glorye, in pryde, in elation, in couytouſneſſe, in glotony, in tomochſlepe in fornication, in violence. And to ſaue bothe bodye and ſoule, they haue faſted two maner of waies Two abſtaine frō delicate meates is very good, but yet to abſtayne from vyce, is moch better, of the whiche to our mother the holy churche ſayeth. My handes haue diſtilled myr, what Canti. v.
                  
ſignifye the handes but ye good workes of bleſſyd ſayntes, and what other thynge betokeneth the myr, but the mortificacyō of the fleſh, and the mortifycacion of vices, the hādes of the church are the holy and bleſſyd ſayntes of heuen, the whiche do, & haue done manye good dedes, of the whiche ſaynt Paule ſayeth, they haue done good workes, and the handes of the churche haue diſtylled the myr of good workꝭ for they haue ſhewed examples of good liuyng, and of mortifyeng the fleſhe, of the whiche one of them ſayeth, yf ye lyue after the appetite of the fleſhe, ye ſhal Rom. viii. dye, and agayne. Ye that are in the worlde, mortifye your membres, that is to ſaye, ye that are deade in ſoule through vitious

liuynge, mortifye your mēbres, that is youre bodye, the whiche hath many mēbres. And agayne the church ſayeth. My fyngers Can. ii. are full of myr mooſt approued, then truely it is myr mooſt approued, when the fleſhe is perfetely mortifyed: and all maner of vyce and ſyn clene ſet a ſyde & remoued. Therfore welbeloued ſyſter, yf we deſyre the ſociete and felowſhyp of ſayntes, it is requiſyted we followe there examples, but yf we ſyne, we haue no maner of meanes howe to excuſe it, why ſo? For the lawe & the commaundementes of God do dayly exhorte vs to lyue wel, and the examples of good holy fathers, do dayly incite and prouoke vs to do well. And yf peraduenture we at anye tyme be

prompte & redy to folow thoſe, & there examples that are naught, why be we not moch more redye & dilygent to folowe the examples of thoſe yt are good? Let vs therfore good ſyſter praye vnto almyghtye god, yt ſuch holy vertues as he hath prepared to the ſalute & coronatyon of his ſayntes, be not to our dānatyon, but to our ſaluacyon & profyte, for we douteleſſe beleue, that yf we followe there good examples, that after this mortall and tranſytory lyfe, we ſhall reygne with them in euerlaſtyng blyſſe.
               And how moche the more we rede there holy lyues not folowīg there good example, ſo moch the more we ſhal be blamed & foūde fauty O honeſt v
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  gī I beſech god almightie, to graūt you ye v
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tu of

the holy fathers. That is the humilyte of chryſt Ieſu, the deuotion of ſaynt Peter, the charite of ſaynt Iohn̄, the obedience of Abraham, the pacience of Iſaac the tollerance of Iacob, the chaſtite of Ioſeph, the manſuetude and ſwetneſſe of Moſes, the cō
                  ſtance of Ioſue, the benignite of Samuell, the mercy of Dauid, the abſtience of Daniel, and the other good dedes of our fore fathers, ye aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   this wretched & mortall lyfe, ye maye come to theyr bleſſid company. O good virgin conſider I pray you, with what moderacyon, with what intency on, with what cōpunction chryſtes ſeruātes haue pleaſed him? Of the whiche thyng in chriſtes perſon, it is wrytten in the canticles. Canti. vii. O kiges doughter, howe

goodly are your goīges in your prynſely ſhoes. The LORde throughe his diuyne power is lorde of all creatures, and therfore our holy mother the church, is called his doughter, for by holy and deuoute preachynge, he hath reduced her to a newe maner of lyuynge. And what other thynge is vnderſtanded by the ſhoes of the churche, but onely the examples of ſayntes, by the whiche ſhe is defended, and by there ayde paſſeth ouer al worldly tribulation. Good ſiſter we do then put on our ſhoes ſpiritually, when we accepte the good examples of holy fathers, for by folowynge of them, we maye ouer come all worldly tentations.
               And agayne it is wrytten in the Canti. vi. cantycles. I went downe in to a

gardē, to loke vpō the appelles of the vales, and to know whether the vines were floriſhed or no, and wether the poone Garnettes were ſpronge or no.
               The vynes do floryſhe, when we retourne to Chryſtes church, to his fayth and to good and holy cōuerſacyō grounded vpō good workes, the poone Garnettes do ſprynge, whē that perfyte good men, throughe the examples of there good workes, edifye theyr neyghbours in vertue, and whē that be good lyuyng, good workes, & holy predicaciō they reduce thē to holy cōuerſatiō. Wherfore my ſpirituall frende I exhorte you, that as longe as ye ſhall lyue, that your good examples, and good lyuynge maye iluminate al other, for as ſayeth

ſaynt Gregory. They that hyde there good liuynge are as touchynge them ſelfe wel inflamed, but they gyue no lyght to no nother, but they that by examples of vertue, by good liuynge, by goodly ſermons, declare & ſhew to other the waies of ſaluacyon, for they are the burnyng lāpes, they ſhewe to other the wayes of ſaluacyon. Of the which thyng the lorde ſayeth. Let your lyght Math. v. that is your good workꝭ, glyſter and ſhyne in the ſyght of men, that they maye ſe them, and gloryfye youre father that is in heuen, for al glorye ſhuld be onely attributed & giuē to god. Yet neuertheleſſe good virgyn I coū
                  ſell you ſo to opē & ſo to manifeſt youre good workꝭ to y•, ꝓfyte of your neyghbour, ye your intēcyō
                  
be euer more cloſe and ſecrete in god, & that ye loke for no worldly prayſe, for it is but vayne.
               And as I haue ſhewed you before, in all youre actions, in all your workes, and in all your cō
                  uerſacyon, ye ſhall followe the bleſſed ſayntes, hauynge contynually there noble, and vertuous examples before you, conterfetynge and folowynge thē and acceptynge them as a glaſſe of good and godly lernynge, mark and conſyder well there vertues for folowynge of them, ye maye do wel, vnderſtande there good doctrynes to lyue well, for in ſo doynge nothynge ſhall ſtayne, nor yet defyle oure lyfe, nor no euyll opinyon ſhall brynge you to any ſorowe or heuyneſſe, lerne to ſhyne by good maners, haue

good wytneſſe in you kepe your good name, and beware in anye wyſe it be not defyled with the darke ſpottes of ſyn, nor imbrued with anye other opprobryuſneſſe or vyllany.
            
            
               Of contention and ſtryfe the .xvij. chap.
               
                  SAynt paule the Apoſtle ſayeth. Whē 
                  i Cor. iii. there is enuy and cō
                  tention among you, ye walke as men, and ye are carnall. And Salomon Pro. xiii. ſayeth, amonge proude mē there is alwayes ſtryfe and debate, a euyll perſon is alwayes ſekynge for contention & ſtryfe, and the euyll angell is ſent agaynſt hym. He that goeth by ioperdus wayes, is ſoone downe,

and he that is euermore at debate and wordes wt his neighbour cōmeth very ſoone to ſhame, all ſuch as haue this goodly vertue commended vnto vs by Chryſte, called manſuetude neyther ſpeaketh, nor doth euyl to no mā
                  nor gyueth no euyll examples, but doth for euery man. Al ſuch as haue this goodly vertue be neuer contentius, nor loue neyther debate, nor ſtryfe. Fewe or none do loue thoſe y• are cōtinually in ſtryfe & contention. And therfore peace and concorde is very neceſſary for all men. O deare ſyſter harken vnto ſaynt Auſtens ſayenge, O how irreprehēſyble ſhall we be, yf we wolde be as diligēt to amēde our owne vices, & ſyn, as we be to correcte other mēs? But yf we take good

hede we may ſoone ſpye and correcte many of our owne fautes. I wolde ye ſhulde knowe, that there is nothīg more vnhoneſt, then is ſtryfe & cōtention amōg vs chryſtians, the which ſhulde be in concorde loue & vnite, and no nother wyſe ſhine and gliſter in this worlde, then the ſtarres in the fyrmament. Contētyon is wont to procede of enuy and detractyon, but yf contentyon, debate, and ſtryfe, be amonge vs chryſtiās, where is charite, then where is peace and vnyte, wher is brothely concorde, and lowlyfelowſhyp. Alas, alas. all theſe thinges are come to nought, fraternall charite is greatly dimynyſhed & debated if they ye ſhuld lyue in peace begīonce to ſtryue

and ſtroggell, where is al quietneſſes, all honeſte al modeſtiuſneſſe become, wher is thē (I pray you) the contemplatyfe and the angelicall lyfe? Uerely there cā be no perfet peace, where ſlaunderous tongues do ruell, there can be no perfete charite where ſtryfe and debate doth reygne.
               Therfore good ſyſter take hede I pray you, that ye loſe not your tyme & your labour, by ſuch contencyon & ſtryfe. Loke that ye loſe not by ſuch detraction & contention the heuenly promyſes.
               Beware that by lyght & folyſhe cōmunicaciō ye leſe not the euer laſtyng ioye of heuen, refrayne your tongue, & ye ſhal be coūted a good chryſtē womā, for yf ye re frayne not your tongue, ye can not be religious. Heare what S

Iames ſayeth. Yf any man byleue Iam. i he be religious, ye is, of chriſtes religiō, & refrayneth not his tongue, but ſeduceth his owne harte and mynde, his religyon is but vayne, the tongue is but a ſmall parte & member of man, yet yf it be not wel brydylde and well ruled, it corrupteth all the body. For as a litle dow deſtrueth the hole maſſe, & as a lytle fyer Iames. iii, burneth a hole forreſt, ſo the vnruled tongue putteth bothe lorde, mayſter, & ſubiecte, to rebuke & ſhame, & prouoketh them to anger, yf the contēciꝰ tongue be vnbrydeled, there is noman y• can lyue in peace, for a debateful tongue is ful of venym, and poyſon, and yf it be not moderated and chaſted, it ſhall brynge his frendes & felowes to ſhame.

Good ſyſter it ſhall be for youre great vtilyte & ꝓfyte to charme your tongue frō euyl, & your lippꝭ frō al fraude & deceite, cōſider frō whēce & wherfore ye are cōe Ye are come frō the worlde to goddes tētes, ye haue refuſed al worldly ryches, and are come he ther to optayne the ryches of heuen, and for this cauſe willyngly ye haue choſen wylful pouerte, therfore ye muſt nowe vtterly forget all ſuche thynges as ye haue lefte and forſaken for goddes ſake. And therfore take good hede ye prefer not youre ſelfe aboue all other, & the hygher & greater ye be, the more loke ye do humble youre ſelfe in all thynge, and leue theſe conuentycles of conſpiracyon and detraction, lyſten to no murmuracyon

exchue and auoyde theſe ſlaunderous perſons as poyſō, for they infecte them, that gyue them audyence, he that bacbyteth and ſlaundereth man, and he that wyllyngly, and gladly dothe heare hym, be both in ſyn. Honeſt virgyn harkē what the pſalmiſt ſayeth. I haue not ben Pſal. xxv. ſayeth he, in the counſell of vanyte, nor I meddyll / nor am not amonge thoſe that do iniquite. Wherfore good virgyn loke ye ſyt not with the counſell of vanyte, nor medle not with them, y• ſpeake of iniquite. Nor ye ſhall not ſtriue nor cōtēd in no cauſe, for contentyon ingenderth debate, contentyon taketh awaye the tranquilite and peace of the mynde, contentyon ingenderth ſtryfe, contētiō kīdeleth the fyer

brādꝭ of hatred contention breaketh all concorde, contentiō (as Dauid ſayeth) troubeleth y• eye Pſal. iii. of y• ſoule. My fure (ſayeth he) troubeleth myne eye. Wherfore I warne and exhorte you, to contende, and ſtryue onely, howe ye may pleaſe almyghtye god.
            
            
               ¶ Of diſciplyne and correction. xviii. Chap.
               THe Wyſe man ſalomon ſayeth. My Prouer i. ſon (ſayeth he) harken vnto my diſcyplyne, Pro. i
                        ••
                     i. and forſake not thy mothers lawes, that grace may come to thyne head, and a goodly chaine to thy neck kepe diſcyplyne and for ſake it not? Kepe it wel for it is thy mother: receyue diſcyplyne & refuſe it not, he is but a very fole that

refuſeth correctyon, he that ſetteth lytle by good monityons & correctyō doth are very ſore, he that dyſpreyſeth diſcyplyne and correctyon is in greate ſynne.
               And who ſo wyl not kepe and regarde correctyon ſhall peryſhe. He that ſetteth lytle by correction, ſhalbe alwayes in neceſſyte, ſhame, and pouerte. He that wil here hī that correcteth hī ſhal cū to glory, a fole regardethe very lytle his fathers correctyō, but he that kepeth and taketh heed to correctyō is reputed to be wyſe: a worde among wiſe mē doth more then a hundred ſtrypes amonge foles. He that is wyſe & corrygyble ſhal neuer be myſcō
                  tente with hym that correctethe hym. And yet caſtigation muſte be vſed moderatly, wherof ſaint

Ambroſe ſaith, he that is menely and gentely corrected bereth reuerence and gyueth thankes vnto his correctour, but he that is vyolently and withoute meaſure chaſted and corrected, is neuer the better. They muſt be gē
                  tely ſupported and borne that by infyrmyte and feblenes cannot be corrected. And after the dyfference & qualyte of the myſdoer, ſome muſte be corrected, and ſome other gentely and louīgly ſupported. The prelates of the churche ſhulde ſupporte and be
                     •
                  e with thoſe they do correcte, and correct and chaſten al ſuche as comfort them in ſinne. And therfore Salomon ſayeth, that vnder the pyllers of goddes temple, he cauſed Lyōs o
                     •
                  
                  en and Cherubyns to be made

What other thing betokē theſe 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     gum. iii. Can. vi. Images, but y• prelates of the church, for all ſuch as take vpō thē to gouerne & to rule, are as the foūdacyō of pyllers, to ſupporte & beare that, that ſhall be laide & ſet vpō thē. Cherubin is as moche to ſay, as the fulneſſe of ꝑfytenes of ſcience & lernig, ſo that ye cherubīs declare that the forſayde prelates ſhulde be full and perfyte in the celeſtyall ſcyence. Be the Lyon is ſygnyfyed the feare of ſeuerytye and punyſhement, and be the oxe is declared pacyēce in al ſwetenes & gentylnes, be y• Cherubins is ſygnyfyed that the foundacyon ſhulde be ꝑfyte ī ſcyēce, nor ye lyōs are not graued & ſet wtout y• oxē, nor yet y• oxen wtout y• lyōs, for the prelates at ſometymes

ſhuld ſharpely and erneſtly correcte theyr ſubiectes, and ſometimes ſoftly, ſūtimes be wordes ſumtymes by ſtrokes. For he yt is corrected be worde and amendeth not, muſte nedes be otherwyſe hādeled. Uerely ſuch woū
                  des and ſores as can not be eſely heled, nor wtout payne, muſte nedes be healed with payne, he that is ſecretely & ameable warned, and regardethe it not, nor wyl not amend his fautes muſt be openly corrected and before wytneſſe, that ſo the ſore that coulde not be holpen ſecretelye, may be holpen apertly and manyfeſtly. For they y• hurte theyr neyghbour openly muſt be punyſhed openly, that be ſuch opē punyſhement, they that enſude and folowed there naughtines,

may the ſoner be holpen, & that the punyſhemēt of the one, may be the amendment of the other, for it is moch better that one be punyſhed for the ſaluatyon and ſauegarde of many, thē that for one vngracyous perſon, many ſhuld peryſhe. And Saynt Gregory ſayth, there are many that herken dilygently to theyr wordes y• chaſtē and correcteth thē. But neuertheleſſe they returne not to penaūce. Euery mā doth here of the ioyes of heuen, and it pleaſeth them, but let theym alſo here of the paynes of hel to fere theym, that yf they returne not to God for loue, at leſte way that they returne vnto hym for fere. Theſe ar y• wordes of ſaint I ſydore, they that are good mē receyue correctyon and reprehē
                  cyon

very gentely. Good ſyſter dyſcyplyne is the thynge that a mendyth all fautes, the whiche oughte not to be abiected.
               And therfore we be boūde to loue our prelates and other oure ſuperyours and to accept there wordes gētylly, for be theyr correccyon and caſtygacyon they take awaye oure wyll and cupidyte frome vs, and of theſe prelates it is wryttē in the Cantycles. The kepers of y• cyty haue founde me, they haue beatē me, and woūded me, and they haue taken away my cloke, be the kepers Canti. v. of the walles and watchemen, we vnderſtāde y• prelates and ſuche as kepe and defende the ſtate of oure holy mother y• churche, the whiche alſo do fynde oute the deuout ſoule, and be

there preachynge ſtryke & woūde her wyth ye loue of Chryſtes charytie: neyther doth this ſuffice thē but they alſo take away her cloke from her; that is, al tēporal ſubſtaūce, & erthlye delectatio, that ſo they may ſend her (free frō worldlie ryches & ſynne) to the kyngdome of Heuen.
               Wherefore deare ſyſter ī cryſt, it is verie fit yt we loue our prelates ſo yt we may receyue frō thē ye dycypline of our ſaluaciō, accordyng to the coūſel of Kyng Dauid ſaying Apprehēd diſcipline leſte Pſal. 2
                        •
                     
                   ſūtime ye Lord be wrath, & y• periſhe out of ye iuſt waye. It is expedient y• we embrace dyſcipline. Yf he that receyue it not ſhal periſhe out of ye ryght way: doubteleſſe he ſhalbe cōfyrmed in ye iuſt waye yt receuyeth diſcypline.
               
                  
Nowe therfore venerable ſiſter I monyſhe you yt you wittyngly accept dyſcipline, that you may bee freed frō y• anger of God almiḡ
                  tye & cōfirmed in the iuſt waye. Gyue him many thankes yt ſhal chaſtyſe you. If your Abbeſſe, or Prioreſſe ſhall reprehēde you for your good, be not greued: & whē they ſhal ſhewe you the way of ſaluatiō, liſtē wittyngly vnto theyr doctrine: when anye one ſeketh to aduaunce you ī ye ſpiritual courſe whyche you haue vndertakē, be not rebellyous towardes him. Loue them yt ſhal reprehende you for your offēces reuyle not them yt rebuke you: neyther render euyl for good, ne aunſwere churliſhlye to good inſtructiōs: render not vnto them croſſe wordes for their courteous

admoniciōs. And why ſo? For he that lerneth dyſcypline loueth wiſdome, & therefore yf you will loue Pro. 12 diſcipline you wyl become wiſe & prudent, if you wil paciētly endure chyding, you wyl become patiente, if you endure correctiō humbly. Honeſt vyrgyn, for this cauſe we are chaſtyſed of oure Lorde & of our ſuperiours in thys lyfe: that with y• world we be not damned. It is far better for vs to be corrēted in this lyfe by oure ſuperiours for our neglygences, then to be damned īn yt lyfe to come. It is better for vs to be chaſtyſed now for our tranſgreciōs & faultes thē to be punyſhyd in the next world. It is better for you to be ſcourged by ye hande of youre Abbeſſe, then to endure eternal ſorrow & anguyſh. It is better for you to be chaſtyſed by ye
                  
hande of your Abbeſſe thē to ſuſteyne thoſe tormentes that are endeles, thoſe tormentes y• ſhal neuer ceaſe, thoſe torments ī
                  ternal whych ſhal laſt for euer. It is better for you to be tēporal lye ſcourged wyth twigges by ye hand of your Abbeſſe or Priores thē to be eternally ſcortched in thoſe helliſh flames. Frō which he vouchſafe to delyuer you, who wyth hys precyous bloud hath redemed you.
               Amen.
            
            
               Of Obedyence. Chap. xix.
               My deare ſyſter, hear ye wordes of y• Apoſtle S. Poule Let euerie ſoule be ſubiect to ye hygher powers, for there is no power but of God. Thoſe yt are of God are ordayned. To reſyſt ye power of god is to reſiſt ye ordynaunce

of God, we ſhulde dyſpyſe no mānes power, whether he be of ye church or of ye worlde, for they be ordeyned of God. Therfore when ſo euer be inobedyence we reſyſte agaynſte oure prelates, we do iniurye vnto almyghtye god, and when that be pryde or be inobedyence, we be rebellyous and ſturbburne agaynſte oure ſuperiours, we do agaynſte goddes commaundemente, and as inobedyente perſonnes, we dyſpyſe god ſaynge, They yt here you here me, that Luc. ix. is to ſaye, they that obeye you obey me, and they that dyſpyſe you, dyſpyſe me. Good ſyſter in God they that dyſpyſe theyr p̄lates, diſpiſe god, & they y• honour theyr p̄latꝭ honoure god, & they y• be obediēt to theyr

prelates, are obedyente to god. The Prophet Samuell dothe greately prayſe obedyence, ſaynge, that obedience is moche greater and moche more acceptable to god, then is ſacryfyce i. Reg. xv. And to obey, is moche more acceptable, thē to offer vp y• fatte of ſhepe, for why, to repugue & not to wyll obey, nor accorde to our ſuperyoures, is reputed as Idolatry. Mary through pride and inobedyence murmured agaynſt her brother Moſes, and Annie. xii. by and by ſhe was ſmitten with the lepre. This Mary that rebelled agaynſte Moſes that is againſte her prelate, dothe ſygnyfye the ſoule of euery man, y• by iobedyence and pryde dothe murmour agaynſte his prelate, to y• which he wyll not obey, nor

receyue his good and holſome preceptes of ſaluation, and therfore it is ſmytten with the lepre that is with ſtinkynge ſyn. And in lyke maner Chora, Dathan and Abyron, the which by pride and inobedience withſtode Moſes and Aron, were through the repreſumptyon punyſhed as it is wrytten by Dauid. The erth Pſal. cv. dyd open and ſwalowed in Dathan, and cloſed it ſelfe vpō the congregacyō of Abyron, and y• fyre burned theyre churche and them. And when kynge Ozyas ii. Para. xxvi. be pryde and inobedyence toke vpō hi to ſence agaynſt goddes lawe, intendyng to do ſacrifyce the Lorde ſmyt hym with the lepre in the forhede to lerne hym that he ſholde haue bene a ſhamed of his folyſhe enterpryſe.

And kynge Sall throughe his i. Reg. xv. inobedyence loſt his kyngdom and was takē by his enemyes. And the whale ſwalowed in the ꝓphet Ionas, ye which flede his wayes be inobedyēce, and kepe hym in the bottome of the See thre dayes.
               Therfore we muſte take good hede we rebell not agaynſt our Iohan. i. and. ii. cap. prelettes and oure ſuperyoures leſte the Lorde vyſyte vs and ſharpely punyſhe vs be theym, for they are in his ſtede & place. Good ſyſter the lorde hath apoī
                  ted & ordeyned the prelettes of the church with other rulers for our ſoule helth, to ꝓuide for vs, & to giue hi acoūpt of our deme nour, & to cōſerue & kepe vs frō al ſin & vnthriftines, of y• which thīg ſait Paule wryteth ſayng,

Be obedyent to youre ſuperyours, Heb. xiii. and ſubiecte vnto them, for they watche to gyue acountes for your ſoules The ſuperiours & prelates of the churche ſhuld take hede & rule Chriſtes people with al ſolicitude and diligence, of the whiche thynge it is wrytten in the Canticles.
               Thre ſcore of the moſt ſtrōgeſt & valyanſtes of all Iſraell, ſtode Canti. iii. aboute Salomons bed holdīg ſwordes ī theyr handes, & wel a poited to fyghte, and euery one had his ſworde hangynge vpō his thygh for the fere of y• night The trewe Salomō is chriſt h
                     •
                   ſelfe for he is very peaſyble, and hath made peace & concorde betwyxte god & mā. By Salomōs bed is vnderſtāded y• cōgregatiō of faythful people wt whom god

doth dwell & reſt. The valyaūt and ſtronge men which do compaſſe aboute Salomons bedde, be the prelates of the church the whiche be reprouynge correctynge, and exhortyng of men to vertue, do compaſſe and defende goddes churche agaynſt vyce & other enimys, both vyſible and inuiſible: the whiche prelates are therfore called ſtronge, bycauſe they are or ſhulde be perfet in the obſeruauntes of goddes cōmaundemētes holdyng
                     •
                   theyr ſwordes in theyr handes, that is the worde of god, for in theyr prechynge they ſhulde repreſſe the vyce and ſynnes of theyr ſubiectes. And they are very wel apoī
                  ted i. Ephe. vii to warre, for it is nedefull y• they be alwayes redy to withſtande all ſpirituall battelles.

And they haue theyr ſwourdes vpō theyr thyghes, that is they ſhulde fyrſt repreſſe and correct theym ſelues of all carnall and fleſſhly luſte: and then theyr obediences and ſubiectes. They do all this for y• feare of the nyght that is agaynſte the ſecrete tem tatyons of the deuyll, the which in the nyght of this world doth proue, and attempte the forſayd prelates verye ſore, to this entente, that after they haue deceyued theym, they maye the more eaſlyer beſpot and defyle the for ſayd Salomon, that is the forſayd congregacyon of faythfull people, & goodes ſeruaūtes, in the whiche throughe grace, the trewe Salomon Chriſte Ieſus do the reſte.
               Welbeloued ſyſter I haue declayred

theſe thynges vnto you bycauſe ye ſhulde knowe that humbly we oughte to obey our prelates and ſuperyours. Obedyence is the onely vertue, that bryngeth all other vertues to the ſoule, and whē they be there it kepeth thē there, of the which obedyence the wyſe man ſayeth Obedyence is better then ſacryfyce. i. Reg. xv. For by ſacryfyce other ſtraunge fleſhe is deuoured and ſlayne, but by obedyence a mannes proper fleſhe and wyll is ruled. He that is obedyēt, ſpeketh of vyctory, for who ſo mekelye Prouer. xxi is obedyent to another mannes worde ouercommeth hym ſelfe. Adam fel bycauſe he was inobedient, Chryſt mounted vp to heuen bycauſe he obeyed his father euen to deathe, and as by

Adams inobedyence, there are many ſynners, ſo be the obedyence of Chryſte, there are many iuſte men. And as by Adams Rom. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   myſfaute and ſynne euery man and woman is in the way of dā
                  nacyon, ſo by ye iuſtyce of chryſt euerye man is in the way of iuſtyfycacyon. And as the inobedyence of oure fyrſte father ingendred deathe, ſo the obedyence of chryſte ingendred lyfe.
               Therfore my ſiſter, if for the loue of god, ye be obedyente and buxum to youre ſuperyours, ye ſhall obtayne the kyndome of heuen, ſaye nothynge nor be neuer rebellyous agaynſte theym Loke yt ī no caſe ye ſpeke agaiſt thoſe y• be ordred to rule you, honoure thoſe ye ar better thē ye in

ſcyence, and in good lyuynge, honoure euery mā as his good lyfe dothe requyre and deſerue, do reuerence to thoſe that are in hyghe degre, do them reuerence after youre poſſibylyte, be obedyente to your elders, and humble at theyre commaundement, gyue place to thoſe that be ī authoryte, and do condige ſeruyce to youre ſuperyoures, be obedyente to euerye man: in all good workes and godlye commaundementes.
               O Chryſtes ſpouſe, obey mā ſo, that ye offende not the wyll and pleaſure of God, be neuer obediente in euyll, be not obedyente to hym, that ſhall commaunde you to do that is noughtes, nor neuer conſent to euyl dede, be obedyente to no man in euyll, of

what power or authorytye ſo euer he be, notwithſtandynge he commaunde you vnder payn of deathe, it were better to ſuffre death, thē at any mās cōmaūdemente to do euyll, or agayne goddes cōmaundementes, better it were to be hanged with al abhominacyon and ſhame, then to be dampned etenally. We owe oure obedience to god onely nor to no nother mā, but onely for his ſake, our p̄lates & our ſuperyours are in goddes rowme, and for his ſake, we be obedient vnto thē. Therfore good ſyſter, loke ye be to them obedient, and god ſhall gyue you y• crowne of euerlaſtynge lyfe.
               Amen.
            
            
               
               Of ꝑſeueraūce.. xx. cha.
               
                  WEelbeloued Syſter, harken vnto ſaynte Hieromes wordes, Men do not ſeke among chryſtē mē for theyr beginynges, but for theyr ende, and theyr contynuaunce, Saynt Paule begā but eaſeſly 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . ix. yet he made a good ende, Iudas Skaryot began well, but Math. 27. he made a ſhrowed ende Iudas beginīg is alowed, but the ende of his lyfe is reproued. And ſait Gregory ſaith, y• perſeueraunce & cōtinuance is the vertue of al good workes, he laborth ī vayn that begynneth wel, and leueth of, and Saynte Iſydore ſayeth, God doth not iudge a mā after his lyuynge in tyme paſte, but

after his ende. For it is written as I fynde the, ſo ſhall I iudge the. And gloryous ſaynt Magdalane, Mar. xvi, becauſe ſhe contynued ſtyll ſekyng of Chryſt, ſhe after his reſuſcytatyon deſerued to ſe hym fyrſte of all other, it is alſo written in the Canticles. In my Canti. iii. lytle bed be nyght I ſought him whome my ſoule doth loue.
               Therfore I exhort you good virgyn, to ſeke Chriſt Ieſus ī your bed, that is in reſt and quietnes and in contēplacyō of y• mynde, and ye ſhall ſeke hym by nyght that is in this worlde, ſythynge vnto hi & deſirīg hym, yt ye may ꝑfytely fynd hi in time to come, & ſe hi reigne ī his fathers ſete, ſeke hym contynually be good life, yt ye may ſe his bliſſed face, in y• celeſtial kingdome of heuē.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  
I praye you good ſyſter to ſaye with Dauid: my ſoule is maruelouſly a thyrſte, that is it hathe Pſal. xli. great deſyre to come to god the fountayne of lyfe. And when ſhall I go, and apere before the face of god. Uerely youre ſoule dothe deſyre god, yf it loue hym aboue all thynge, truelye youre ſoule doth deſyre god, yf for his loue, it diſpyſe all earthly thynges, certaynly youre ſoule doth deſyre god, and doth loue hym, yf it deſyre to ſe hym ſyttyng in heuen vpon the ryght hande of his father. And the prophet Dauid exhortynge vs ſayth. Seke Pſal. c. i
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     . the Lord, and ye ſhalbe confyrmed, ſeke to come to his face, y• is in proſperyte & in aduerſyte, in pouertye and aboundaunce, in ſyckenes and helth, in youth

and in age, we ſhulde ſeke hym, and axe for hym, with all oure mynde, and all oure intentyon, to be confyrmed in all deuouce and holye conuerſacion, and yf we couet to ſe hym in the kyngdome of heuen, we muſte clenſe oure ſelfe frome all fylthyneſſe, for why at the daye of the generall reſurrectyon, there ſhall no man come to eternall blyſſe, nor ſe the glorye of his deuyne maieſtye, but they onelye, that are clene and pure bothe of mynde and hart. The kingdome of heuen ſhall not be gyuen to ydle perſonnes, nor yet to no vagaboūdes, but to thoſe onely, that ſeke and demaunde it, and that enforce theym ſelfe to gette it, for the Lorde ſayth. Axe and ye Math. vii. ſhall haue, ſeke & ye ſhal fynde,

knocke and the dore ſhall be opened vnto you,
               Therfore we muſt go to the gates of heuē be good prayer, and ſeke thē by good lyfe, & knocke at the gate, by perſeueraunce & the contynuall ſeruyce of God. Nor it is not ſuffycyente to begynne well, but we muſte ſtudy to beginne wel, and enforce our ſelfe ſo to cōtynew al the dayes of oure lyfe. For it were moche better not to knowe iuſtice, then ii. Peter. ii. after a man knowethe it, not to folowe it. And hereof ſayeth the Lorde.
               Suche as put to and prepayre Luke. ix. theyr handes to do wel, and after they haue begun, loke backewardes, ar not mete for the kīgdome of heuen,
               Therfore good ſiſter it is greatly

neceſſary that we with great deſyre and affectyon do knocke contynually at goddes eares, and that we neuer leaue of to do well, vntyll heuen gates be opened vnto vs, me thynkethe that to contynewe ſtyll in goddes ſeruyce is an excellent vertue.
               For they y• leaue his ſeruyce to be worldly, are made moch blacker then coles, why ſo? For throughe a certayne febleneſſe and vnluſtynes of mynde, they are dede, and cleane withoute the heate and fyre of charyte.
               And of ſuche ſayeth ſaynt Iſodore. They that returne from a good lyfe to an euyl ar through 
                     •
                  upedytye be ſmuttered with

the blackenes of vyce and ſyn̄e, and are remoued farre from the lyghte of charite. They that go frō goddes ſeruice to the world, are ſeperated from the cōpanye of aungelles, and aſſocyated to wycked deuilles. They that leaue the holy congregacion to come to a worldly lyfe, are put oute of goddes companye and do ſubmytte them ſelues to the deuylles good grace.
               Good ſyſter take good heed what ye haue done, & euer more remembre from whence ye came whether ye be come, and wherfore, ye haue lefte and dyſpyſed for goddes ſake all worldly thiges, & for his loue ye haue choſen to contynewe & dwel in holy cōgregatyō, ye haue bought heuē & paid your owne body for it,

laboure therfore with all dilygence, that ye leſe not this goodly kyngdom, the which ye haue thus conquered and gotten.
               Loke ye leſe not this kingdome y• which ye haue bough wt your owne body, harkē what. ſ. paule ſayeth. There ſhall no man be crowned, but they yt fyght lawfully, i. Timo. ii. he fighteth & laboreth lawfully, that cōtinueth all his lyfe ī good workꝭ, he fighteth lawfully that without fraude or anye diſſymulacyō cōtynueth in goddes ſeruyce, he ſerueth god worthely, y• foloweth his good workes begun. He laboureth wel in good workes, yt finyſhethe that he began well. And the churche of his membres contynuyng in goodneſſe ſayeth. The beames and the tymber of oure houſes, Canti. x.
                  
are of Cedern, the coueryngē of Cypers, that is to ſaye, the howſes of the church, are the holye congregacyon of faythfull people, and goddes ſeruauntes that contynewe in ſuche thī
                  ges as ſhall pleaſe hym, for Ceder and cypers be ſuche trees, as neuer putryfye, & they ſyngnyfye the bleſſed ſaintes of god the whiche with a marueylous and a contynuall affectyon, do deſyre hym, cōtynuyng in good operacyon, and workes as lōge as they lyue. Therfore good ſyſter loke ye be y• cyper tre in goddes houſe, by the contynuaunce of a good and a deuoute lyfe.
               And alſo that ye be the Ceder tree in the houſe of god, the whiche thyng ye maye be, yf ye wyl gyue y• example of good lyfe, &

the ſwete fragraunte ſauers of good conuerſacyon, thus I do wryte, becauſe ye ſhulde with al youre harte and mynde dyſpyſe the worlde, and contynewe in vertue. For ye ſhulde not wyll to leaue vertue, to requyre this worldly lyfe. Alſo and agayne I counſayle you to tary ſtyll in goddes ſeruyce, and neuer to retourne to the world agayn, why ſo? For in that, is lyfe cōtemplatyfe, and in the worlde, nothyng but labour, ī that, is a holy lyfe, in the worlde, a ſynfull lyfe, in that, a ſpirituall and a goſtlye lyfe, in the worlde, a carnal and a fleſſhly lyfe, in that, a heuenly lyfe, in the world, a earthly lyfe, in y•, is a peaſeble lyfe, ī ye world a troubelous lyfe, in that, is a

a quyet lyfe, in the world a mā
                  nes lyfe is full of contentyon & ſtryfe: in that is trāquylyte and reſte, in the worlde, a lytygeus and a contentyous lyfe, full of all reproche, in that, is a chaſte and a perfyte lyfe, in the world, a luxurious and a vycyus lyfe, in that, is a life ful of al vertue, in the worlde ful of all vyce and vnthriftyneſſe, in that, is a very deuoute and a holye lyfe, in the worlde a lyfe ful of al iniquyte. Nowe good ſyſter ye haue hard both of life & deth, now ye haue ſet before you both good & euyl, ye ſe both ꝑdycyō & ſoule helth, ye ſe bothe lyfe and deathe, fyre & water, put forth your hādes, take what ye thynke beſt & moſt neceſſary ye ſe before you y• way to heuen and hell, the tone leadeth

a man to lyfe eternall, the tother to perpetual death. Therfore take whiche wayes ye wyll, I deſyre you onely to take the beſt.
               
                  ¶ The ſiſters demaunde
                  WElbeloued brother, I wyl accept and receyue youre counſell, and choſe the beſt way Alſo it is moche for my profyte to folowe counſell, and to walk in that waye, that maye brynge me to eternall ioye and blyſſe.
               
               
                  ¶ The brother.
                  HOneſt vyrgyn I am right glad and thanke god that ye wyll take and folow the beſt way. Therfore loke ye leue

not the waye ye haue begon all redy, but that ye kepe your purpoſe of good lyfe as longe as ye ſhall lyue, for then ſhall youre workes be perfyte, yf they cōtynewe. God doth promys heuen Math. x. to thoſe that continew in goodneſſe. Rewarde is gyuē to thoſe that contynewe, he is not good that dothe good onely, but that contynually doth good. Therfore yf ye contynewe in fayth, & good workes, ye ſhal be ſaued.
               
            
            
               Of virginite the xxi. chapi.
               
                  THe prudent, and Math xxv. wyſe virgyns toke and put oyle in ther lampes. Harken vnto my wordes, they 
                     〈…〉
                   are cleane virgyns both of

body and mynde, are no fooles, but very wyſe and, maye go to mete theyr ſpouſe, for they haue oyle in there veſſels, that is they haue chaſtyte in theyr ſoules, but ſuche as ve onely virgyns of body & not of mynde, be very fooles, nor can not go to mete theyre ſpouſe, for they haue no oyle in theyre veſſels, ye is, they haue not chaſtite in theyr ſoules And ſ. Iſodore ſayeth. She ye is a virgyn in bodie, & not in ſoule ſhall haue no remuncracyon ne reward. And y• lorde ſpeakynge of theſe foolyſh virgyns ſayeth. I knowe not what ye be. Math. xxv.
               
               Wherfore I exhorte you, to be a virgin both in ſoule & body, y• hereaft̄ ye may be ſet in the celeſtial rhābre of your ſpouſe chriſt ieſꝰ. Uirginite is not cōmaūded

but yet our holy fathers do coū
                  ſell 1. Cor. vii. vs to kepe it, as a thynge moſt excellent. The gyfte of virginyte is double, for it hathe no carefulneſſe in this worlde, and in tyme to come, it ſhalbe excellently rewarded, without doute they that continew chaſt and in virginite, ſhalbe egal with goddes angelles. And the prophete Izaye, doth beare wytnes that virgyns aboue all other ſhalbe moſt fortunate ī the eternal beatytude, be ſayeth thoſe wordes, ſpeakynge vnto the Enuques, that is to thoſe that be chaſte & I
                        •
                     a lvi lyue chaſtly for goddes ſake.
               I wyll gyue them my houſe, & a place within my walles, and a better name then hath my chyldren a name that ſhall dure for euermore, and neuer peryſſhe.

All maner of ſynne through penaunce deſerueth pardon & forgyueneſſe, but virgynite once peryſhed and loſt can in no maner of wyſe be recouered, for not withſtandinge a man by penance doth optayne pardon therof, yet he by no maner of meanes can retourne to his fyrſt eſtate, & pureneſſe. O my good ſyſter bodely virginyte is of no valure, where is no integrite of harte, & mynde. All ſuche virgyns as glorifye them ſelfe of theyr merytes, are compared to Ipocrytes, the whiche requyre exteryor glorye for theyr good workes and dedes, the which they ſhuld haue inwardly and in conſciēce And this is it that is wrytten.
               Howe the foolyſhe virgyns had Mah. xxv no oyle in theyr veſſels, that is

howe they kepte not inwardely in theyr conſcyence the teſtimony of good workꝭ, but that they wolde be glorifyed heare in this worlde amonge men, and not in harte with God. Saynt Auſten ſayeth that the virginyte of the bodye helpeth not, where that anger dothe rule. And there is a great difference betwyxt pure virginite of the ſoule, the which is not poluted ne defyled with contagyouſneſſe, and that, that hathe ben ſubiecte to many bodely pleaſures. Good ſiſter I pray you harken vnto. Saynt Hierom wordes, ſayenge. That it profyteth nothynge, that the bodye be chaſte yf the mynde be maried. Alſo it is as nothynge to kepe the bodye chaſte, yf man refrayne not his eyes from concupiſcence

& wanton lokes. Norvirgynyte profyteth nothynge, yf theyr be in the mynde no charite, nor no humilite. Wherfore good ſyſter I wold counſel you, to take the oyle of good workes with you, and that ye garnyſhe your lampes with good & cleane maners, and that ye kyndle and lyght them with good and gooſtly vertues, that when ſo euer ye ſhall heare, that the bryde grome is commynge, ye maye go and mete hym, that is to ſaye, ye maye go and mete with Chryſt Ieſus youre ſpouſe, and be receyued and ſet in his celeſtyall chambre.
            
            
               
               ¶ Of continence the .xxij chapitur.
               
                  Good ſiſter I pray you to harken with all deuocyon vnto my admonicyon.
               The nomber of thyrte, is the fyrſt nōbre, and it ſygnifyeth the cōfederatyon of maryage. The nōbre of thre ſcore, is the ſeconde degre of nōbres, & it ſygnifeth the cōtynēce of wydowes. A hundered is the thyrd degre of nombers, the which is deputed vnto virgyns, for the glorye and crowne of theyre virginyte, Saynt Iſodore ſayeth y• ther be which in there youth lyued luxuriuſly, & in age do intēd to lyue  chaſtly, and that wyl liue then in continence and chaſtite

when voluptuouſneſſe & bodely pleaſure hath forſaken & left them, but ſuche men ſhall haue litle or no reward, for they haue taken no payne to reſyſte temptacyō. They ſhal be rewarded, & the crowne of glorye appertayneth to them, that valyātly haue foughten and warſteled for it, the fruyte of chaſtite is ſwetneſſe. Chaſtite is the ſauegard of the ſoule, and the health of the body. Luxuriouſneſſe dothe feble a mans body, and cauſeth man to ſeme olde and aged before his tyme, continuall and longe chaſtite is reputed for virginite. Therfore good ſyſter the beutifulneſſe of chaſtite, oug ht to be loued and myche made of. They that lyue continently and chaſtely, prepare them ſelfe as

and humble ſynner, is more to be laudyd a great dele, then the proude iuſt man. Therfore dyſprayſe no womē, for many a holy womā hath ben maryed, and haue had chyldren, truely yf ye blame or accuſe any ſuch, ye are culpable before god. For the holy prophete ſaynt 
                     •
                  n, was maryed. Yet neuertheleſſe ſhe propheſyed Luke. ii of Chryſt, and deſerued to ſe hym. Alſo Mary Magdalene Mark. xvi was a ſecular woman, and yet ſhe ſawe chryſt after he was ryſen from death to lyfe, and deſerued to be chryſtes meſſenger to his apoſtles, we ſhulde neuer haue them in cōtempte, the whiche god hath choſen to be his ſeruantes. Wherfore I exhort you that for the loue of chryſt, ye do them the ſeruyce, and pleaſure

ye maye or can, and that ye loue them, as mothers. And good ſyſter, ye ought to loue them as your owne chyldrē, for god hath conuerted and drawen them frō the worlde to his ſeruyce. Yf ye then deſpyſe them, bycauſe they be his handmaydēs and ſeruantes, ye do hym iniure. O good ſyſter in Chryſt Ieſu, neuer ſay, or thynke your ſelfe a drye ſtock or an vnfrutefull tree. For yf ye loue the lorde as ye ſhuld do, ye haue ſeuen goodly chyldren. The fyrſte is called ſhamefaſtneſſe, the ſeconde patyence, the thyrde ſoberneſſe, the fourth tē
                  peraunce, the fyfte is charyte, the ſyxte humilyte, the ſeuenth chaſtite. Behold nowe good ſyſter, how that by the great grace of GOD without any grefe,

or corporall corruptyon, ye haue brought forthe to GOddes honour ſeuen fayre chyldren.
               And ſo ye haue fulfylled that is wryttē. The barrē hath brought Reg. ii. forthe ſeuen chyldren. Therfore good ſyſter, ye muſte nouryſhe repaſt confort and chaſten theſe your goodly chyldren, ye muſte nouryſhe them with good maners, with deuoute contemplacyon, with the mylke of eternall ſweteneſſe, ye muſt repaſt them with the loue of heuēly paſture, ye muſte conforte them, with the breade of the worde of God. Ye muſt chaſten them, with the roddes of the feare of god, and commaunde them to flye, and auoyd all pryde, and lyghtneſſe, & that they neuer tranſgreſſe his commaundementes, and that they

neuer go ne departe from you. Nowe ye ſe then, howe that virgyns fynd out and optayne the mooſt excellentes and mooſt ſoueraūce place of the kyngdome of heuen, & not without a great cauſe, for they haue diſpiſed this preſent worlde. And therfore they are come to euerlaſtynge ioye, to the whiche I deſyre that he do brynge you to whoſe ſeruyce ye haue conſecrated bothe bodye and ſoule.
               Amen.
            
            
               
               Of fornication the .xxiij. chap.
               
                  DEare ſyſter I exhorte you, that with all deuocyon ye lyſten vnto the wordꝭ Luke. xii. of our lorde Ieſus. Loke that your loynes be gyrded, and that ye haue burnyng lampes in your hādes we gyrd our loynes when that by contynence we repreſſe all fleſhly and bodely luſtes. We holde burnyngelampes, in oure handes, whē we ſhewe good example to our neyghbour, bodely fornicacyon yf it be taken largely, is (as ſayeth ſaynt Iſodore) adultery. But fornicatiō of the ſoule,

is Idolatre. The fyrſt aſſautes of fornicacion, are by y• eyes, the ſeconde by wordes. He that is not taken by the eyes, maye ſoone reſyſt and withſtande wordes. Al fylthe polluciō is called fornication, notwithſtandynge that all the kyndes therof, bye dyuers voluptuous pleaſures, are cōmen. And of this vayne fornicacyon are in gendered dyuers greate ſynnes, by the whiche the kyngdome of heuen is cloſed vp, and man ſeperated, & put from god. And amonge all other capitall and deadly ſynnes, fornycatyon is the cheyffeſt by extencyon, that is bycauſe it is more cōmen then any other, or els bycauſe it hathe mo braunches then any other. By the vnclenlyneſſe of the flyſhe

the tēple of god is defeyled, & by takyng away of chryſtꝭ mēbers, they make it the member of a ſtrūpet, that is of that vyle woman, the whiche out of wedlock Cor. vi. doth make her ſelfe a cōmen brodel. Wherfore good virgyn, yf this be trewe, that god lyueth in you, loke that all fornicacion be deade in you. Lechery is Goddꝭ enemye, & the perdicyon of eternall blyſſe, and of all wordly ſubſtance. Fornicacyō doth not onely beſpot mās body, but alſo his ſoule and conſcyence, and not wt
                  ſtanding that he that cōmitteth fornicaciō ſemeth to lyue, yet for al that he is dead, god ſhal iuge theſe aduouterers and fornicatours Hebre. xiii. that is, he ſhal cōdempne them. Harken good ſyſter vnto Saynt Iſodore wordes.
               
                  
Yt is a great dele worſſe, to be defyled with fornycacyon, then with any other ſyn. For fornicacyon, (as I haue ſayde before) is greates of all ſyn. Fornicatiō is a very greuous ſyn. Fornicacyon ſurmoūteth, and excedeth all other fautes. Fornication is more greuous then death. Yt were better to dye, then to commyt fornycacyon, or to be in any maner of wyſe beſpotted withal Yt were better to dye, then a mā by fornycion ſhuld dampne his his owne ſoule. Lechery bryngeth a man to the paynes of hel Lechery drowneth mans ſoule in hel. Lechery ſēdeth a man to damnacyon. The eyes are fornycacyons meſſengers. The ſyght is the fyrſte cauſe of fornication, the ſoule is oftentymes

taken by a mans eyes, by y• eyes the darte of loue cōmeth to the ſoule. Wherfore my welbeloued ſyſter in Chryſte Ieſu, refrayne your eyes, plucke backe youre ſyght. Faſten not your ſyght vpō the goodlyneſſe of the fleſhe. Loke ye caſt your eyes apon no man, to dyſyre his cōpany. Beholde no mans face to loue hym in euyll, turne awaye your eyes from al vanite, loke ye neuer deſyre the beutyfulneſſe of man. O my good ſyſter tel me I pray you. What vtilite is ther, in the carnall bewtye of man? Is not man as drye as hay? And dothe i Peter. 1. not his goodly beutye vanyſhe awaye, as dothe the ſhadowe? And when death cōmeth, I pray you tell me, what goodlyneſſe ſhall remayne in the bodie? whē
                  
ye ſhall ſe his body ſwollē, and turned into all fylthy ſtynche, and ſauer, ſhall ye not then ſtop your nooſe from ſuch vnſauery ſauer? And from ſuche a ſtynkynge bodye? Tell me I praye you where ſhall his goodly and his amable face be then? Wher ſhall his ſwete wordes be, with the which he was wont to melte theyre hartes he ſpake vnto? Wher is then his ſwete and mery communication? Tell me honeſt virgyn where yt his laughynge coūtynance, and his vnhoneſt ſportes be then? Where ſhal his vayne and his vnprofytable ioyfulneſſe, and myrthe, become then? Yt is gone conſumed to nought, and vanyſhed awaye in lykeneſſe of ſmoke. This is the ende and the conſū
                  macyon

of bodely beutye. Therfore good ſyſter, lerne nowe that beutyfulneſſe is but a vayne thynge. Conſyderyng thē good 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        •
                     1. ſyſter, that bodely ſhape is but a vanite, a corrupt matter, nothynge but earth, nothynge els but duſte and aſches, loke ye behold no man to deſyre hym. Why ſo? For the worlde and all his concupiſcence and pleaſure vanyſſhet i. Iohn̄. ii. away. And all that is in the worlde, is but the concupiſcence of the fleſhe, or of the eyes. Therfore this worlde ſhulde be deſpiſed for goddes ſake with al that is in it. And you that haue lefte it for the loue of God, ſhulde neuer reioyce in the beutyfulneſſe of man. Therfore I exhorte you to loue chryſt Ieſus your ſpouſe aboue all thyng, for yf the deſyre

of carnall fornicacyon doth delite and pleaſe the ſoule, more then the loue of chaſlite, it is in continuall ſyn. But yf the moſt excellēt vertue of chaſtite pleaſe the ſoule more then fylthy fornicacyon, then there is no ſyn in it but iuſtice. And notwithſtāding a man be chaſte of bodye and in mynd luxurius, yet ſyn doth remayne in hym. Fornicacyō of ye mynde is taken for Idolatre.
               There is another ſpice of fornycaciō of y• which y• lord ſpeaketh ſayng. Who ſo loketh vpō a womā deſiryng her cōpany, cōmytteth Mah. v fornicacyō in harte & mynd Mē are more ſubiecte to the deuel by bodely fornicacyō, thē by any other ſyn̄e, or vyce. Chaſtite is the goodlyneſſe of the ſoule, and by chaſtyte man is made

egal, to the merytes of Aungels many a one for faute of kepyng there ſyght haue fallen into the daunger, and parell of theyre ſoules.
               
                  ¶ The ſiſters demaunde
                  I Pray you deare brother tel me, whether ye haue knowen anye man that hathe ben deceyued by his eyes.
               
               
                  The brothers anſwere.
                  
                     YE verely good ſyſter, I haue knowen many that haue bene deceyued, and wrapped in the deuilles ſnares, by there ſyght, & I wyl ſhewe you of ſome that I haue red of. The fyrſt is Dina

the whiche went into ſtraūg countrees to beholde and ſe the men of thoſe regyons, and anone Sychen emors the prynce of gene. xxxiiii that countrey ſonne, beheld her, and was taken with her loue, and rauyſſhed her, and defloured her. And ſo the poore wretched woman, bycauſe ſhe was deſyrous to ſe that becomde her not to ſe, loſte her virginyte.
                  And kynge Dauid ſtandynge in his chamber, ſawe a woman named Berſabe, and in contynent ii. Reg. xi. he was takē with her loue and rauyſſhed her, and for her loue committed aduoutrey, and murther, and ſo doyeng, he trāſgreſt the lawes, and beholdyng of that thinge he ſhulde not haue loked vpon, ne regarded he was in greatfaute.
                  
                     
And Samſon the ſtronge went into the regyon of the 
                        〈…〉
                     iliſtyans, where he ſawe a certayne woman and fell in loue with her and ſlepynge in her lappe, ſhe cut of the heere of his head, and delyuered hym to his enemes, the whiche by & by put out both his eyes. And ſo the poore wretched man for aſmoche as he behelde that he ſhulde not haue loked vpon, he loſt his ſyght, and was in daunger of his lyfe.
                  Nowe good ſyſter ye ſe that many a one by the ſyght of the eye, haue bene bothe in daunger of body and ſoule. Wherfore I exhorte you, to make a bargayne wt your eyes & that ye neuer loke wantonly vpon ſuche thynges as ye ſhuld not loke vpon, & beware that death enter

and deſcende not by youre eyes Iere. ix into your ſoule, but if your fleſh (as I haue ſayde before) do aſſale you, if lechery do tempt you yf miſorderd appetite do prouoke you, yf the remembraunce of fornication do yet torment you, ſet death in the preſence of all theſe thynges, & caſt before your eyes, the ende of your lyfe, call alſo to your remembraunce the paynes of hell that be ordeyned for ſyn̄ers. Let the horryble day of Iudgement be before youre eyes & in your mynde, and Imagyn with your ſelf how ſtreyght it ſhall be, for yf it were not the great mercy of God, there were no man able to abyde it. The remēbraūce of y• horryble paynes and vehement fyer of hell, ſhall quynche the heate of fornicacyō
                     
the memorye of the perpetuall flame & fyre of hel ſhal cauſe you to forget all maner of fornicacy on. For the greater heate quinched alwayes the leſſer, & ouercommeth it. And the ofte thynkynge vpon the horryble fyre of hell, quinchet the vehement and burnynge fyre of fornicacy on.
                  Good ſyſter I beſeche GOd to gyue you trew chaſtite bothe of body and ſoule.
               
            
            
               ¶ Of abſtinence the .xxiiij. chapiter.
               
                  THat is called, a perfyte faſte when we faſt outwardely, and pray inwardly. By faſtynge mans prayer is ſoone harde. By faſtynge & prayenge, mans ſoule

is ioyned to the angels, and coupeled to God. Faſtynge is as ſtronge armoure to feyght agaynſt the deuyll as may be, by faſtynge and prayenge the wycked ſpirytes are ouercommed.
               My welbeloued ſyſter in GOd, wyll ye knowe howe fornycacion maye be beſt reſtrayned, and kepte vnder? Ye good brother, yf it pleaſe you I pray you ſhew me: harken then vnto me. By faſtynge and by abſtynence, fornicacyon is ſoone layde a ſyde. By faſtynge, voluptuous pleaſure & lechery is quicly reſtrayned. Neuer fyll your ſelf, & luxuriouſnes ſhall neuer ruell you. Abſtynence ouercōmeth y• fleſh, abſtinence doth brydell bodely pleaſure, abſtynēce doth break & diminyſhe all fleſhly luſt & mo

cyon. Abſtynence dothe vtterlyè deſtrowe the power of fornicacion, hunger and thryſt doth ouer come all carnall concupyſcence and luſt. That ſoule that is gyuen to diuerſyte of meates, and drynkes, leſeth the vigure and effecte of good prayer. That ſoule that of longe ſeaſō hathe not ben repaſted, nor fed wt the word of god, is lyke the bodye yt hathe ben long without meat. Saynt hierome ſayeth, that a mā muſte faſt meanely, & wt moderacyon, leaſt that to moch faſting ſhuld febly ſhe the ſtomacke. For meat moderately takē, is both ꝓfytable for y• ſoule & the bodye. A fat bellye and moch aboundaūce of meat cauſeth dull wyttꝭ, & dull vnderſtādyng. Alſo it is moche better dayly to eate lytle, then

to eate but ſeldome and moche, he faſteth well, that exchuyt ſyn Better it is to abſtayne frō vice then from meat, but to abſtayne that ye may afterwardꝭ fyl your ſelfe, is not laudable, nor ſuche abſtinence is nothyng cōmendable. A voyde bely prouoketh a man to prayer and deuociō, and a ful belly to ſlepe and ſlouthfulneſſe, kepe the bodye drye by the deſyre of the kyngdome of heuē to thentent ye may fulfyll that is wrytten. My ſoule & my fleſh doth greatly deſyre god, y• fleſſh Pſal. xii. doth then deſyre God, when by moch faſtyng it abſtayneth and wareth drye. Good ſyſter yf ye ꝑfytly deſyre god in this mortal lyfe, he ſhal ſatiſfye & cōtēt your mind, ī y• glorious kīdome of heuē: abſtinēce doth both kil & giue

lyfe for it quyckeneth y• ſoule, & mortifyeth the bodye. Abſtynēce doth edifye & ingēder vertue in mans ſoule, & deſtroyeth the vicyouſnes of y• body. We ſhuld wt all diligēce deſpyſe glotony, the cōcupyſcens & deſyre of dilicate viandes & meates, ſhulde be left and litle regarded. A man ſhuld not care for his belye, when the belye is to moche replenyſhed, then the bodye is inflamed with wantōneſſe & lechery. We ſhuld not eare to fyll the bellye, but to ſuſtayne the bodye. For when the belye is full, then is the fyer of fornycacyon kyndeled, that body that is chaſted, and kepte lowe by abſtynence, is neuer inflamed nor hurt with the fyre of voluptuous pleaſure. The ryche man clothed in purpure, Luke. xxi
                  
the which to euery mānes iudgment & ſyght, lyued in great abundaūce, bycauſe he wold not abſtayne in this world from immoderate meates and drynkes, was caſte into the fyre of hell, & deſyred but one droppe of water to refreſhe & cole his tunge withall, yet he could not haue it Luke. xvi. nor neuer ſhal. And as be abſtinence all vertue is roted and edyfyed in the ſoule of manne, ſo be the abundaūce of meate and drynke, vice is noryſhed in mās bodye, nor man ſhall neuer obtayne the perfytenes of vertue, yf he do not fyrſte tame and refrayne the glotony of the belye. The thre childrē were not burnt nor cōſumed, becauſe they were abſtinent and ſober. And Danyell Daniel. iii. was delyuered frome the

lyon becauſe he was abſtinent. No man of hym ſelfe can repell temptacyon, yf he refrayne not Daniel. vi. and. xiiii. frō īmoderate eatīg & drīkyng.
               
                  The ſyſters demaūde
                  DEare brother I praye you to tel me how I ſhuld chaſten my body wt abſtinēce
               
               
                  The brothers anſwere.
                  
                     GOod ſyſter ye muſte nouriſhe your body vnder ſuche a faſſiō y• it waxe not prowd and rebellyous, ye muſte ſo kepe it vnder, and ſo repreſſe it, that it fall not, ye muſt ſo refreſhe your fleſſhe, that it maye do you ſeruyce, & ſo chaſtē your body with abſtinence, that it peryſhe not, if ye puniſh your

body more then nedethe, ye kyll your frēde, yf ye kepe it to wātō
                     ly, ye nouriſh your enmy. Good ſyſter in all abſtynence, beware ye hurt not your bodye, but the vycyouſnes therof, abſteyne frō meates, loke youre face be pale and not ruddy, loke youre body be leane and not fatte, eate ſo, that ye maye be alwaies a hungerde, neuer īferce nor fyll your bellye with moche meate. Be euermore a hungerde, a thryſte, in abſtynence, and leanenes, ye can not ouercome temptacyon yf ye chaſtē not your body. For by moch eatyng & drinkyng, lechery dothe encrece, y• abūdaūce of wine & daīty metes, doth ſtyr y• fleſhe to bodyly pleaſure, luxuriuſnes is euermore ioyned to ſaturite, y• cold of moch watchīg

doth quench the heate of carnal luſt, euyl ſpirytes are very moche there, where is ſuꝑfluytye of meate & drynke. Therfore good ſyſter in Chryſt Ieſu, yf ye intēd (as I haue ſayde) to avoyd and flye the tēptacyon of the bodye, kepe abſtinence, not only from meates and drynkes, but alſo from all maner of worldly delectacyon, that after this wycked lyfe, ye may reioyce in heuen wt goddes angelles.
               
            
            
               Of drōkennes. the .xxv. Chapi.
               
                  DEare Syſter, I pray you harken to goddes owne wordes. Take hed your Luke. xxi. bodyes be not greued wt ebryete & drōkēnes. And

ſaynt Paule ſayth, be not dronken wt wyne in the which is exceſſe. Epheſi. v. And Salomō ſayth, wyne is a lechetous thing, & dronkē
                  nes Prouer. xx. is full of ſtryfe & debate, be holde not wyne whē his colour is goodly & pleaſaūt, for it goth downe full ſwetely, but at lēgth it wyll byte & caſt out his venomous poyſō. Where dronkēſhip ruleth, there is no ſecretnes. Wyne hath brought many a mā to great peryl & daūger both of body and ſoule. Wyne was made in iocundyte & myrth, and not ī ebryete & dronkēnes. Where ſo pſal. c. 3. euer fulthſūneſſe doth abunde, there ruleth fornycatyō & lechere, voluptuous pleaſure foloth a wel fed bely. Dronkēnes doth feblyſhe the body, & deceyueth y• ſoule, drōkennes troubleth mās

vnderſtādīg, & augmēteth y• fury & madnes of the harte, dronkēnes doth nouryſh the flame & fyre of fornycacyō, dronkennes doth ſo alienate a mānes vnder ſtādyng, y• he knoweth not hymſelfe. A dronkē mā is ſo farre be ſydes hī ſelfe, that for the moſte parte he knoweth not where he is. It is to many a mā a lawde to drynke well, & not to be dronken, & of thoſe ſpeaketh the prophet, ſayng. Oute apō you that Iza. v. are ſtrōge to drynke wyne, & to folow drōkēnes, & again he ſaieth. Out apō you y• riſe betimes to drynke frō mornyng tyll euening. And the prophet cryeth ſayng. Awake ye drōkardꝭ & wepe awake you y• drynk wyne ī ſwetnes, Ioal. i. he ſayeth not awake you y• drīke wine for neceſſite, but you

that drinke wyne in ſwetenes, y• is, wt great delectacyō & pleſure Drōkēnes acuſtomed is deadly ſynne, dronkēnes is a greuous ſynne, dronkennes is rekened amonge murder, aduoutry, & for Gala. v. nycacyō. Dronkennes caſteth a man oute of heuen, dronkennes doth drowne & caſt mā into hel. Noe dranke wine and afterwardes dyſcloſed ſuch preuy partes of his bodye, the whiche he had Gene. ix. kepte cloſe the ſpace of ſyx hundred yeares. And Loth ouercū
                  med withe wyne, laye with his Gene. ix. owne doughter, yet he felte no ſynne, for his mynde and vnder ſtādīg was alienate. Now good ſyſter thynke & eſteme you, howe excecrable a thing y• drōkennes is, & how moch goddꝭ ſeruaūtes ought to exchewe & to auoyd it.
               
                  
                  The ſiſters demaūde.
                  GOod ſyſter it is then ſyn to drynke wyne?
               
               
                  The brothers anſwere
                  
                     WOrſhipful ſiſter to drynke wyne temperatly, is no ſinne, that is to drynke it withe ſobernes, for Saynte Paule wrytyng to his dyſcyple Tymothe, ſaith. Drinke Timo. v. a lytle wyne, to eaſe your ſtomacke, and youre many folde ſyckenes, and Salomon ſayth, Eccle. xxxi. wyne meſurably drōkē, is helth ſome both for the ſoule and the bodye, wyne withoute meaſure,

is poyſon, wyne taken withoute meaſure ouercōmeth a mannes vnderſtanding, by to moch wyne mānes wyttes be troubeled, by wine lechery dothe encreaſe, by ouer moch wine voluptuouſnes is moued and prouoked, by moche wyne voluptuouſnes is nouryſhed. God hathe gyuen & prepared wyne to reioyce mannes harte with all, and not gyuen it to be dronken with all.
                  Therfore let vs not drynke as moche as glotony, but aſmoche pſal. ciii. as neceſſyte ſhall requyre, lette vs beware we vſe not that thīg to ſuperfluyte, that god hathe gyuen and ordred to ſucker mā
                     nes bodye with al, lette vs take hede we vſe and tourne not to vyce that thyng, that god hath gyuen to man for his bodylye

helthe. Let vs beware that we turne not our carnal medycyne to the vyce of ebryete and dronkennes, many a man throughe wyne, hathe been dyſtroyed by euyll ſpyrytes, and dronkennes it ſelfe is no nother thynge, but euen a manyfeſte deuyll.
                  Therfore my welbeloued ſyſter in Chryſte Ieſu, yf ye drynk wyne moderately and temperately it ſhal be for your bodyly helth, and ye ioyefulnes of your ſoule. Drynke wyne ſoberlye, and it ſhall delyuer you from all ſluggyſhenes, and cauſe you to be dylygente and deuoute in goddes ſeruyce. For wyne meſurablye vſed, cauſeth a man to be dylygente and feruente in prayer.
               
            
            
               
               Of ſynne. the .xxvi. Cha.
               
                  SYſter lyſtē vnto goddꝭ ſaynge. Who ſo euer dothe ſynne Iohn̄. viii. is ſeruaunt to ſīne. Synne is commytted and done two dyuers maner of waies, for eyther it is done by cupydyte and deſyre, or elles for feare, as whē a man wold haue that he deſyreth, or when he feareth to come to that, yt he ſhuld come vnto. Synne is commytted in mannes harte foure maner of wayes, and foure maner of wayes in dede. It is commytted in harte by ſuggeſtion & the inſtigacion of the deuyll, by delectatyō of y• fleſhe, by volūtary cōſēt, & by ye defēce of pryde It is cōmitted ī dede ſūtimes ſecretly

ſometymes manyfeſtly, ſometymes be cuſtome, and ſometimes be deſperacyon. Under theſe for ſayd maners, we ſynne in harte, and do it in dede. Sinne is alſo cōmytted thre other waies, that is by ignoraunce, by infyrmyte, and induſtryouſly, that is malycyouſly. Eue ſynde by ignoraū
                  ce, as ſayth Saynt Paule. The ii. Cor xi. man was not deceyued but the woman, ſo that Adam cōmitted ſynne īduſtryouſly, and Eue by ignoraūce. He that is deceyued knoweth not to what thynge he conſenteth vnto: Saynt Peter cōmytteth ſynne by a certayne infyrmytye and wekenes, when Math. xxvi for the fere of a mayd ſeruaunt he denyde the lord his mayſter. Syn done by īfyrmyte is moch more greuous then that, that is

done by ignoraūce: but yet that is more greuous that is cōmytted by malice, thē y•, that is done by ignoraūce, and ſyn which is done openly, is moch more greuous thē that, yt is done ſecretely. He that ſynneth manyfeſtly, doth double his ſynne. For he ſineth hym ſelfe and gyueth euyl examples to other, it is a greate poynte & a parte of iuſtyce, for a man to know his owne iniquyte, and to be aſhamed of his miſlyuyng. It is moch better to abſtayne frō ſynne for the loue of god, thē for fere of the paines of hel. Alſo it is better not to ſinne thē after y• a mā hath ſynned, to correct and to amend his faute. Euery ſynner is beſpotted with pryde. For he y• dothe that, that is forboddō hī, dyſpiſeth goddꝭ

commaundemētes. Harken vnto me good ſyſter, harke I pray you what I ſaye vnto you. By one myſfaute many vertues do peryſh, kepe therfore your ſoule from ſynne. For he that ſynneth Iames. ii. in one, is culpable in all, by one ſynne, many merytoryous workes do peryſh. Incline nor bow not youre mynde to thoſe thynges that the bodye deſyrethe. Nor ſette not youre ſoule in the power of the fleſſhe, conſent not to no fleſſhly delectacyon, for yf ye lyue after the fleſhe ye ſhal ſone periſhe. Loke therfore that youre conſcyence be purged frō all ſynne, & that youre thought be net and cleane, puryfy youre body frō al īiquyte, & your hart frō al maner of ſpottꝭ of ſyn, the

bodye can not be defyled, but that the ſoule muſt be fyrſt beſpotted, yf the ſoule ſtomble by and by, the body is preſt and redy to folowe, the ſoule gothe before the fleſſhe, and in all iniquite & ſynne the ſoule is the fyrſte that ſynneth, the body can do nothynge, but as the ſoule wyll.
               Therfore kepe your ſoule from al iniquite, and your fleſſhe ſhal neuer ſynne.
               
                  The ſyſters demaunde.
                  
                     I Pray you good brother tell me, whether the ſoule of a ſī
                     ner beſpotted with ſynne be ſtynkynge and blacke, and the ſoule of a good iuſt man fayre, and full of all beauty.
               
               
                  
                  The brothers anſwere.
                  WElbeloued ſyſter in god, there are thre thīges blacker and worſe, then anye other, that is, the ſoule of a continuall ſynner. The yll angelles which ſhall receyue it when it deperteth the worlde, and hel, into the whiche it ſhalbe caſt for euermore. There is nothynge worſe nor nothynge more blacker in this worlde, then are thoſe thre thynges. Alſo there are thre other thynges which are the beſt of all other, that is the ſoule of a iuſt man, contynuyng in good workes. The holy angelles, the which ſhal receyue it, at the day of his departynge, and heuen, where it ſhall reſt perpetually. There are no better thynges in

the hole worlde, then theſe thre thinges are, the holy angels receyue y• iuſt ſoule, & preſent it before god, ſayenge. Behold good lorde y• thyng that ye haue choſen, and takē, it ſhall cōtynue & dwell ꝑpetually in your eternal palace. Good ſyſter yf ye pourg your ſoule of al iniquite, and yf ye continew in Goddes ſeruyce as ye haue promiſed, wtout dout ye ſhall reioye with hym in his celeſtyall chābre of heuē, ſo be it
               
            
            
               ¶ Of confeſſiō of ſynnes and penaunce, the .xxvij. chap.
               
                  THen a man begynneth to be iuſt when he accuſeth hym ſelf of his ſynnes, & here of ſpeaketh the wyſe tha ſayng. A iuſt mā fyrſt of all Prouer. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . accuſeth hym ſelfe, & there is nothing

worſe for amā thē to knowledge his fautes, & not to be ſory for thē. A ſynner ſhulde bewayle his miſdedes two maner of wayes. Fyrſt becauſe yt through neglygence, he hathe not done ſoo well as he ſhuld haue done, and agayne bycauſe yt through boldneſſe, he hath cōmitted & done y• euyll, the which he ſhuld not haue done. He that bemourneth, & bewayleth his ſynnes (takynge good hede he faule to no moo) doth cōdyng and very good penaūce, but he y• lamēteth his miſdedes, & begynneth to fall to thē agayne, is lykened to hym that weſſheth a raw bryke, y• is, he laboureth in vayne. For ye more he weſſheth, ye more fylthynes commeth therof, but he y• doth penaū
                  ce whē he might ſin, & in time of

his lyfe correcteth his liuīg, wt
                  drawīg him ſelfe frō ſyn, ſhal haue euerlaſting reſt. But he y• leueth euyl, & begynneth to do penaūce whē death calleth him, thē as it is vncertayne whether he ſhalbe dāned, ſo it is vncertaine whether he ſhall be ſaued. And therfore he y• wyll be ſure at his laſt ende to haue remiſſyō & pardone of his ſynnes, muſt do penaūce whyleſt he is ī good helth & proſperite, & in helth muſt lamē
                  
                     •
                   & bewayle his myſdedes: & cōſiderīg y• the mercy of God, is ſecret & ſo far frō mās knowleg yt ſhall be & is very neceſſary y• we cōtinually bewayle our ſynnes. Harkē good ſyſter vnto. S Iſodores wordes. A man that doth penaunce ſhuld not, nor it is not neceſſary he ſhulde haue ſure knowledge that his ſynnes

be forgyuen hym, wherfore? For ſuch ſure knowlege doth ingendre neglygence, the whiche negligēce oftētimes maketh many a one to take no hede, and ſo leadeth thē agayne to there fyrſte nautye maner of liuyng. Therfore my wel beloued ſiſter accept & take this my coūſell, & whyleſt ye maye, loke ye amende & correcte your liuing, whyleſt y• god doth giue you leue, opē your ſin lamēt your ſinnes, do penaunce cōfeſſe your ſynnes, whyleſt ye lyue lamēt your miſliuyng, and let them that be called to dye, by your amendemēt. Amende your miſdedꝭ whileſt ye may, reuoke and wt drawe your ſelfe frō ſyn, call vpon god whyleſt ye maye, and whyleſt ye lyue, ſeke for remiſſion of youre ſynnes, do penaunce

or euer death do come. Do penaunce or euer the pytte of hell do ſwallowe you, lament your diſordonate liuing, or euer that hell do take you. Bewayle and morne your ſynnes, or euer ye be drownde in the depe pyt of hell, for there is no pardon to be gotten, there is neyther ioye nor yet pleaſure, nor no lycence or ſpace to do penaunce, nor no tyme to amende, nor no place of cō
                  feſſyō, why ſo? Bycauſe that in hell is no redemptyon. In this world, (not wtſtandyng ye be neuer ſo great a ſyn̄er) yet through penaūce ye may optayne remiſſyon and pardon. Nor there is no ſyn ſo greuous, but by doing of penaunce a man may optayne and get forgyueneſſe & pardō therof Diſperacyō increaſeth a

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
dym darkeneſſe do inwrap me. O good lord ayde me and helpe me or euer I come to payne, or euer the fyer of hell deuoure me, or euer I be tormēted in hell. O my lorde god what ſhal I do at the day of thy terryble iudgement. Alas what ſhal I anſwere at the examinacyō of thy iudgement? Alas what ſhall I wretched ſynner ſaye, when I ſhalbe preſented before the Iudicyall ſeate of chryſt Ieſus? Curſed be the day that I ſinde and miſdyd and falſely tranſgreſt the commaundement of god. Wolde to god the ſon had not ſhyned, nor ryſen vpon me. O wretched day O ab hominable day, o a day vnworthy to be named, that fyrſte brought me into this worlde, that opened my mothers wome

for me to come out at. It had bē better I had neuer bē borne, thē to be ꝑpetually dāpned. It had ben better I had neuer bē borne thē to be borne to ſuffre the eternall paynes of hell. It had ben better I had neuer bē, thē to ſuffer ꝑpetual torment & payne. O heuen & earth lament me. O all ye creatures of god lament me. O all ye creatures that haue any felyng of lyfe, bewayle me, & ſhede your teares vpon me. For I haue ſynned greuouſly, vnhappely, miſerably, my ſynnes are innumerable. I haue oftentymes promiſed to lyue wel and to amende, but I kepte not my promis, I retourne euermore to ſyn agayne, and haue increaced and renued them, nor I neuer chaūged my vnthryftye maners

nor I neuer ceaſt frō doing euyl O ye holy fathers pray for me. O ye holy ſayntes pray for me. O all ye yt are good men praye vnto the lorde to haue mercy vpon me. And that it wyll pleaſe his grace, to deface my fautes, & to wype out all myne iniquite.
               O my wretched ſoule who ſhall haue mercy vpon the. Who ſhal cōfort y•. O miſerable ſoule who ſhall bewayle the. Alaswhere is the keper of mā. Where is y• redemer of al ſoules? O goodſhepparde where are ye. Alas why haue ye deſpyſed me? why turne ye your face frō me? Good lorde forget me not at the laſt. Leaue me not good lorde for euermore Leaue me not in the deuyls power. I am a ſynner, I am a wretched ꝑſone, & yet good Lorde I

come to the for help, ye are very kynde, ye are ſwete, & mercyfull Ye refuſe, nor deſpyſe no man, nor put no man from your mercy. Ah good lord ſhew thy great mercy vpō me, I hartely beſeke the denye me not that thynge, that ye mercyfully haue graunted to many other. I do not defende my miſdedes. I hyde not my ſynnes. I am ryght ſory for them. Alas wretche that I am, I haue ſynde, I confeſſe my errour, I open my faute. I knowledge mine iniquite. Good lorde I haue done amys, be mercyful vnto me wretched ſyn̄er, ꝑdō me my myſdedes. For gyue me my ſynnes. O good Lorde yf ye regard pſal. c. xxix. iniquite, who ſhal ſuſtaine it. No man can then be ſure at the daye of your examynacyon,

nor yet the iuſt man, with al his iuſtyce, for who is he, be he neuer ſo iuſte, that dare ſaye, he is without ſyn? there is no man wt out ſyn. There is no man cleare i. Iohn̄. i. from ſyn in thy ſyght, nor amōg all the holy ſaites, there is none vnbeſpotted nor they that ſerued god, were not ſtedfaſt, and iniquite hath ben founde amonge the angels, y• ſtarres be not cleare before the lorde, and heuen in thy ſyght is not clere. Thē good Iob. xxv. lorde yf no man be wtout ſpot in thy ſyght, then can not I beyng a vyle ſyn̄er, a vile pece of earth a vile worme, the chylde of man the which hathe dronke vp iniquite as water, and multiplyed and increaced in ſynnes, be cleare and without ſyn. And yet I ſyt in duſte, and dwel in a houſe

claye, and my foundacyō is but earth. Good lorde gyue me wretched ſynner thy ryght hande, I pray the good Lorde to remēbre of what ſubſtaunce and where of I am made Remembre good lorde that I am but earth, but powdre & aſſhes. Gyue me ſome maner of medecyn, where with I may be holpen, where with I may be clenſed and purifyed frō all ſyn. For I am fallen into the dept of all my ſyn̄es, I am fallē into the depe pyt of hell, delyuer my ſoule good lorde frō the captiuyte of hell, that the deptneſſe therof do not incloſe me, that hel do not ſwalowe me, and that the depe pyt of hell opē not his wyde throte vpon me, and that the profoundneſſe and deptneſſe of hel let me not to depart frō thēſe

Nowe the dredeful day of donie approchet nygh, the laſte day is come, y• tyme of death is at hāde I haue nowe nothynge left me but my graue, good Lorde forgiue me or euer I go to ye place of darknes. Helpe me good lord Iob. x. or euer I go to the land of wretchedneſſe. O redemer of mans ſoule ſuccoure me or euer I departe. Unbynde and loſe me frō all my ſynnes or euer I come vnto death.
               
                  The brothers anſwere.
                  
                     WElbeloued ſiſter in Chryſt Ieſu, I be ſeche God almyghtye to haue mercy vpon you, and to forgiue you al your ſinnes, al your n
                        •
                     ſdedes, and to pardon you of

your ſynnes all your miſdedes, & to pardon you of all that euer ye haue done, and frō henſe forwarde do as ye ſhulde do. Purpoſe ſtedfaſtly in your harte neuer to ſinne more, ſtablyſh your mynde neuer to miſdo, neuer to returne vnto ſyn, neuer to defile your ſelfe with ſynne agayne: & after penaunce retourne not agayne to vnthryftye liuyng. He is not reputed nor taken as penitent but as a geſter & a diſcem let that renueth yt he hath done penaūce for, nor he is not eſtemed to pray hūbly but rather to mocke wt god, y• renueth y• thīge for the whiche he hath done penaūce, for ſ. I ſodore ſayeth, that penaūce to be but as vayne, the which afterwardes is defyled & arayde wt ſyn, for a renued woūd

or ſore, can hardely be curyd agayne, and he that ſynneth ofte and repent hym ofte ſhall ſcacely beſaued. Therfore be ſted faſt in doyng of penaūce, and leaue not of the good lyfe ye haue begon, for euerlaſtyng lyfe is promiſed to thoſe that contynew in goodneſſe, and Dauyd ſayeth. Bleſſed be they that euermore Pſal. cv. kepe iugement and do iuſtyce, & it is wrytten. That he that contynueth vntyll the ende ſhall be Math. 24. laued. Honeſt virgyn I exhorte you to haue alwaies a ſhamfaſt coūtenaunce, & to be aſhamed of your ſynnes whē ye remēbre thē Be a ſhamed to lift vp your eyes whē ye thynke vpō thē, when ye walk hold downe your heed: let your coūtenaūce be ſorowfull.
                  Let your ſmock be made of here

let the earth be your bed, ye are but duſt, ſyt therfore in duſte, ye are but aſſhes, therfore ſyt in aſſhes, be euermore in heuines, euermore ſobbīg & ſythyng, and hauyng remorſe of cōſcyence, & in hart cōpunctyon, be alwayes wepyng, & mornyng, be always redy to wepe. The ſeruaūtes of god good ſyſter, in this worlde be they neuer ſo good ſhuld neuer be in ſuerte, goddes ſeruaū
                     tes ſhuld alwayes be watching and wt great lamētacyō & many folde teares reduce theyr myſdedes to memory. To y• laud of Canti. v. Chryſt, it is wrytten in the Can tycles, that his heyre is as hygh as is y• palme trye, & as blacke as the crow. By Chryſtes heare is vnderſtanded good faythful people, y• which kepyng in hart

the holy fayth of ye trinite. & cleuige vnto god, do yt they beleue & as hāging vpō his hed, do honour hī The palme tre growīge vpwardes of heyght, doth betokē vyctory. Chriſtes heyre is lykened vnto apalme tre, for good people moūtyng & euermore aſcēdyng to the height of vertue, ar brought through goddꝭ grace to victory, but yet they ar blacke as ye crow. For not wtſtādynge yt by vertu, they do euermore aſcēd towardes heuē, yet they knowledge thē ſelfe to be ſiners. So good ſyſter, notwithſtādyng ye lyue well and ſerue god iuſtlye & deuoutly, yet I wold ye ſhuld neuer leaue wepyng. Therfore yf ye wyll waſſhe cleane awaye youre blacke ſpotted ſinnes, loue to be euer more mournyng &

wepyng, let your teres be ſwete vnto you, let wayling & weping delyte you, be as inclining and redy to wepe, as ye were to do yll, and as redy to do penaunce, as ye were to faule. A mans me dicyne muſt be minyſtred vnto hym after as his infirmite is.
                  Greate ſynne requireth moche waylyng & great repentaunce. Good ſyſter I pray hym to comforte you, and helpe you in this worlde, the whiche the aungels do worſhyp in heuen,
               
            
            
               Of cōmunyon, that is of the receyuing of the very body and blode of Chriſt. the .xxviii. Chapiter.
               WHo ſoeuer ſhall eate the breade of the lorde and drynke of his cup vnworthelye

ſhalbe culpable of his blode & body, that is to ſay, he ſhall ſyn greatly, & fylthyly beſpotte his ſoule, why ſo? For there cōmeth yt is beſpotted & noughtꝭ to that thynge yt is good. And therfore mā ſhulde proue hym ſelfe, that is, he ſhuld reaſō wt hym ſelfe & ſo eate of this bread & drynke of Corin. xi. this cuppe. As though. ſ. Paule woide ſay, that euery mā ſhuld cōſyder his owne lyuynge and pourge his mynde of al ſynne & myſchefe, to the tent he may worthely come vnto ye bleſſed ſacramēt of ye auter. For who ſo receyueth the precyous body & blode of Chriſt Ieſu vnworthelye, he doth eate & drīke his owne iudgmēt, that is to ſay, he eateth the cauſe of his dānaciō And of this thīg ſaith. ſ. I ſidore that al ſuch

as lyue yl in chryſtes church, receyuīg dayly the bleſſed body of Chryſt thīkyng y• by ſuch dayly cōmunyō they may be pourged of theyr ſinnes. I wolde al ſuch ſhulde know ſayth he, that it ꝓfyteth thē nothyng towarde the purgation of theyr ſinnes, for it is writtē. Why hath my louer Hiero. xi. cōmytted ſo many crymes & ſynnes in my houſe, holy fleſhe ſhal neuer purge hī of his fawtes.
               Therfore he yt wyll receiue ye bleſſed body of Chryſt, muſt or euer he receiue it ſtāde ſtedfaſt ī faith & delectiō of god. And ſaīt Iohn̄ ſayth. He that eateth my fleſhe & drynketh my bloode, is in me & Iohn̄. vi. I in hym, as thoughe he wolde ſay, he is and doth dwell in me, that doynge good workes fulfilleth my cōmaūdemētes. For if

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
dwell not fyrſt in me by fayth & good workes, and I in hym, he can not eate my fleſſhe nor drīke my blode. What thing is it thē, that mē receyue, the which do cō
                  menly receyue the ſacrament of the auter? They do receyue it in very dede, but ſome receiue and eate his fleſh & drīkth his blode ſpiritually, & ſacramētally, ſome other receyue it onely ſacramē
                  tally, that is the very bodye of Chriſt vnder the ſacramēt, but not the thyng of the ſacramēte. This ſacramēt is called the very body of Chryſte borne of the cleane byrgyn Mary, but y• ſpirituall thyng therof is Chriſtes fleſhe. The good chriſtē mā being ī the ſtate of grace, receiueth this ſacramēt, both ſacramētally & ſpirytually, but ſo doth not

the euyl leuer, for he receueth it vnworthely, & therfore (as ſayth the apoſtle) he, receyuethe his 
                     
                        •
                     Corin. xi. iudgement, for he ꝓued not him ſelfe, or euer he receyued it, nor made no dyfferēce betwyxte the fleſſhe of Chriſte, & other fleſſhe. What thing doth ye myſliuer receyue thē? Truly he receyueth nother fleſhe nor blode ſpiritually, nor yet for his ſoule helth, but he receyueth his iugemēt to his dāpnatyō, not wt ſtandynge it apeare that he receiueth ye ſacramēt as other do. And ſo the one receyueth the body of Chriſte to his ſaluacyō, & the other to his dāpnacyon. He that receyued it as Iudas did, ſhalbe dāpned wt Iudas, And he that receiueth it with ſaynt Peter & other faythfull people deuoutly & laufully

is ſāctytyed in ye bydy of Chryſt wt. ſ. Peter & the other apoſtles Harken good ſyſter vnto ſaynt Auſten wordes. He that cōmeth to theauter to be howfled, being chaſt of body, cleane of harte, wt a pure cōſcyēce, & a deuout mynde, ſhall come to the heuenly auter before the face of god. Welbeloued ſyſter lyſten to the wyſdome of the ſarpēt, whē y• ſarpēt doth ītend to drīke, or euer he come to y• wel, he īforceth hym ſelf to vomyt out al ſuch venym as is in hym, & then he drynketh. I praye you good ſyſter to folowe the ſerpente in this thynge and to vomyt out all your poyſon, or euer ye come to the foūtayne, that is, or euer ye come to receyne the very body & blode of our lorde Chriſt Ieſus, vomyt oute

all hatred, anger, malyce, enuy, euyll wyll, hurtfull thoughtes, & forgyue al your neyghboures & all ſuch thynges as they haue wronfully done vnto you, that your ſynnes alſo may be forgyuē you. For the lorde ſayth, forgyue Luke. vi & ye ſhal be forgyuen, and doyng thus as I haue told you ye may come to the foūtayne of lyfe, that is to Chriſt Ieſus, the loūtayne of all goodnes. For he ſayth, I am y• breade of lyfe yt is Iohn̄. vi, cū frō heuē, & of this breade ſpeketh Da. Men hathe eatē āgels Pſa. lxx vi
                        •
                     
                   breade, and not wtſtādynge this breade came from heuen, yet becauſe it is a bodely thīg, it was nothyng cōuenyent for angels, but that thynge onely that was prefygurde & mente by yt breade & wyne. God is ye angels bread,

& the ſacramēt of ye auter is his very fleſſhe & blode, the whiche man doth eate and drīke ſpirytually, and by the ſelfe ſame thī
                  ge that angels do lyue by in heuen, by the ſelfe ſame, man doth lyue ī earth, for that thyng that man doth receyue is ſpirytuall, but as the apoſtle ſayth. Some i. Corin. i. that were in wildernes did eate this meat ſpiritually, & yet they be deade, & ſo it is now in goddꝭ church. For to ſome the body of Chryſt is very lyfe, & to ſome other it is payne, and the punyſh mēt of ſyn, withoute doute this bleſſed ſacrament is a very lyfe to thoſe y• be goddes ſeruaūtes, & to thoſe that throughe neglygēce & ignoraūce are mēbres of the deuyl it is death. Wherfore good ſyſter A exhorte you ye whē
                  ſoeuer ye receiue this bleſſed ſacramēt,

y• ye ſtedfaſtly beleue it, to be a nother thynge, thē it ſemeth to be by y• taſte. Here good vyrgyn what y• preſt ſaith when he doth cōſeerate this bleſſed ſacramēt. We deſyre & pray (ſaith the preſt) that this oblacyō may be made bliſſed, by the which we be bleſſed, and to be wryttē, by y• which all we are wrytten in heuen, & ratifyed, by the which we are rekened to be in Chryſt, and to be reaſonable, by the whiche we are delyuered frō all beſtyalyte, & that it wyll pleaſe god to make it acceptable, to that intēt that we beyng dyſpleſed wt our myſlyuyng, maye be acceptable vnto his bleſſed ſon Chriſte Ieſus. Therfore good vyrgyn Chriſte (as I haue tolde you be fore) in hym ſelfe dothe fede the angelles in heuen, and alſo in

earth, he in hīſelfe, doth noryſh all good faythful people. Chriſt by his onely preſēce doth fede y• angelles in heauē. Chriſte of hī
                  ſelfe doth fede vs by faith ī this worlde, that we faynt not in the way. Chriſt doth repaſt both angell & man of hym ſelfe, & yet he remayneth holle in him ſelfe. O how good is this bread. O how maruaylous a thynge is it, by y• whiche the angelles of heuen & we of the worlde are ſatyſfyed.
               Chryſt is y• breade of life, which is the angels fode and refectyō, and our onely redēption.
               Now good ſiſter pray vnto god wt all your hart & minde, that it wyll pleaſe hī ſo to puryfy your conſcyence, that ye may receyue the myſterye of his precious bodye and blode.
               Amen.
            
            
               
               ☞ Of thought the .xxxix. Cha.
               
                  DEare ſyſter heare I pray you what God ſaith by y• ꝓphe Iſa. Take & remoue all euyl frō your cogytacyons Ezai. l. & thoughtes, not wt ſtā
                  ding a mā ceaſe & leaue of to do euyll, yet yf he be in thoughte & ī hart defyled, he is not wtoute faute, and therfore ſayth. ſ, Iſodory. Mā doth not ſyn onely in dede, but alſo in thought & mynde, yf ſuche thoughtes do delyte & pleaſe hym. For as the vyper is kylled and dyſtroyed by his yonglinges beyng yet in her bely, ſo our owne euyl and myſcheuous thoughtꝭ cōſume and ſlay our ſoules yf we nonriſhe them within vs. Wherfore good ſyſter I counſayle you, that with

al diligēce ye take good hede to your hart & minde, for from the hart cōmeth both life and deth. Harkē alſo what y• ſpouſe ſayth in the Cantycles, to the laude of y• holy church. The heate of thy Canti. vii. heade is like y• kynges purpure ioyned to p̄lates. The heare of the church is the lytle bed of the deuoute ſoule, & it is in memory as is the kiges purpure ioyned vnto the p̄lates, for purpure is boūde by hādfulles to thoſe p̄lates, wherupō they caſt water, y• which water runneth throughe the p̄lates, vpō the cloth & ſo is purpure died, & of this doth purpure take his name. And al this doth agre & is ryght cōuenyent and meete for the deuout ſoule. For the heares of y• hed are the thoughtꝭ of the mynde y• which

are boūde vnto theſe condettes, for they are faſte boūde in holy ſcrypture, becauſe they ſhulde not rūne ouer & beloſt in vayn. Therfore kepe your hart & minde frō ſuch noyfull thoughtes, & loke it be net & pure leſt yt any ſuch vayn thoughtꝭ cū crepyng in vnto it. For god doth not onely examine mānes body, but alſo he examyneth his ſoule. God iudgeth mānes cōſcyence, God iugeth mans thought & y• ſoule of mā, yf any vayn thoughtꝭ do moue or troble you, cōſent not ī no maner of wyſe vnto thē, but īcōtynent eiect thē frō you. And as ſone as y• ſcorpiō ſhal appere breke his hed, that is breke and caſte away al ſuch euyll cogitacyōs. A faute muſt be amended there where it hathe his begynnyng, that is in mans hart, put

oute of your hart the hede of all euyll thoughtes, for there cā no thyng be hyddē frō god. God is euery where, the ſpiryte of god Sapi, i. fulfylleth all maner of places, the maieſtye of god almyghtye pereſeth the elemētes, god knoweth mās thought. Good ſyſter wyll ye neuer be heuy? Ye good brother. Thē intēd to lyue well, for yf ye lyue well ye ſhal neuer be heuy. For a ſure & a vncarefull mynde ſetteth lytle by heuynes, a good & a cleare cōſcyence is euer more in myrth, yf ye contynew in goodnes, all heuynes ſhall frō you departe, yf ye cōtynew ī holynes & deuociō, ye ſhal haue none occaſion of heuines, Yf ye lyue well, ye nede nother to fere plage, nor yet death. But the cōſcience of a ſinner is euermore

in payne, he that is gylthy is neuer at reſte. And a ſynfull mynde, is alwayes vexed wt the pryckes of his owne cōſcyence. Good ſyſter liſten what the lord ſayeth of the woman to the ſerpent, ſhe ſhall breake thy heade. The ſerpentꝭ head is thē broken Gene. iii. when a mās faute is there amē
                  ded, where it had his begynnyng. I praye GOd to puryfye your harte & your mynde frō all ſyn, and euyll cogytacyon, that ye may ſerue hym in al purenes and clenlyneſſe both of mynde and thought.
            
            
               ¶ Of ſilence the .xxx. cha.
               I Saye the prophet ſayeth. That ſcylēce is the honour of iuſtice & his perpetuall Ezai. xxxii. ſauegarde and ſuertie, & the prophet Dauid ſayeth, put ſome defence

& cuſtody aboute my mouthe Pſa. c. lx. & a dore of circūſtaūce about my lyppes. The holy fathers keping there ſilēce applide & gaue all there mynd to knowe & to ſe the ſweteneſſe of the lord, & leauyng of all worldly care, they gaue them ſelf holy to cōtemplatiō. Good ſyſter I praye you to deſpyſe & to auoyde al vnhoneſt cōmunicacyō, & to fle frō all vnclenly wordes, for vayne cōmunicaciō doth right ſone polute & defyle mans ſoule. And mā doth that thing ryght willyngly that he hereth gladly, neuer ſpeake ſuch wordes, that maye let anye vertue or goodneſſe, nor neuer ſpeake y• thynge, that ſhall not become you to ſpeake. Let no ſuch wordes ſcape you, that may hurte thoſe that heare them, flee

all vnclenly & wanton cōmunycacyon. For vayne wordes betoken a vayne conſcyence, mans tongue declareth, and openeth his conſcyence, and loke what a mans wordes be, ſuche is his harte and mynd. For the mouth ſpeaketh after the abundaunce and courage of the harte. Refrayne Math. xil. yourſelf frō all ydle wordes. Uſe to tel no vayue fables, for ydle wordes ſhall be condē
                  pned. Euery man ſhall gyue a tekenyng of his wordes, and at the day of iudgemēt euery mās Mah. xil. wordes ſhall ſtande before his face. Loke therfore that youre wordes be ful of grauyte, of ſadneſſe, and of good lernynge and that theybe irreprehenſyble.
               Loke that youre tongue be not the cauſe of yourdānatiō, enuirō
                  
your mouth wt good watche mē and ſeale vp your lippes. Put y• clauſures of ſcilence vnto them Loke what tyme ye do ſpeake, and in what houre, and ſpeak in conuenyent tyme, holde youre peace when tyme ſhall requyre, ſpeake not vntyll ye be ſpoken vnto. Let a nother mans demaunde opon youre mouthe, ſpeake but fewe wordes, & paſſe not your meaſure, for in manye wordes is ſyn. A babbeling and Prouet. x. a chatterynge made, is counted but a fole. For ſhe that is wyſe, vſeth fewe wordes. Wyſdome cauſeth fewe wordes, and it is a great foly to ſpeake many wordes. 
                     〈◊〉
                   Loke therfore ye in wordes ye paſſe not your meaſure Good ſyſter I pray hym to kepe youre mouth, ye hath choſē you to his ſpouſe and ſeruant.
            
            
               
               ¶ Oflieng the .xxxj. cha.
               
                  LYers are oftē tymes the occaſyon & cauſe, that men byleue not thoſe which tell the trueth. Man ſhulde auoyde & exchue all kyndes of lyes, notwithſtandynge there are ſome of leſſe ſyn, then ſome as whē a mā fayneth ſome pretye lye for the welth of many other. But yet bicauſe it is wrytten, the mouth that lieth kylleth Sapi. i. the ſoule, perfyte good men haue alſo auoyded this maner of lienge, nor wolde in no maner of wyſe defende anye mans lyfe by deceyte leaſt y• by helpyng of other mē they ſhuld hurte there owne ſoules. But yet I beleue y• ſuch maner of lyenge is lyghtly

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
for gyuen. My welbeloued ſyſter in god. I exhort you to flee aſmoche as is poſſyble, all maner of lyes, nor willigly ye ſhall not ſpeake that is falſe nor ſtudy to lye, notwithſtandyng ye may do another man pleaſure withall, nor ye ſhall defende no man with lyenge. There is no lye, that is iuſte. Lyes in euerye thyng are ſyn. And all that agreeth not wt trueth, is iniquite. The temporall lawe punyſhed thoſe that are falſe, & thoſe that are lyers, yf euery man reproue lieng, yf the lawe of man puniſh all falſehead, cōſider how moch more that ſuch liers ſhalbe puniſhed before god, the very witnes Math. x
                        •
                     . of word & dede, before whome, euery man muſt gyue accoūt of euery ydle worde he hath ſpokē,

& be puniſhed therfore. Of this thyng ſpeaketh Dauid ſaynge. Pſal. v. Thou ſhalt deſtrew & cōdemne al thoſe y• lye. Shal falſe witnes be vnpuniſhed? no verely. Ther Pro. xix. fore good ſyſter fle & auoyde all lyeng, & al falſe cōmunicacyon, ſpeak that thyng ye is trewe, nor neuer lye for no man. Be trewe, & deceyue no man by lienge, nor ſay not one thyng & do another. I pray god ſende you the grace to ſpeak that thing that is trew
            
            
               ¶ Of periury the .xxxij. ca
               THe lorde ſayeth. Sweare Math. v neyther by heuē, nor yet by the earth. For heuē is goddes ſeate, & the earth is his fote ſtole, nor ſweare not by thy head for thou canſt not make the leaſt heere of thy hed neyther whyte

nor blacke. But let your othe beye ye, nay naye, for yf it be anye more it is of euyl. And as he that ſpeaketh not, can not lye, ſo he yt ſweareth not cā not be for ſworn Howe craftely ſo euer a mā doth ſweare yet god yt beareth witnes euery mans cōſcyēce, taketh euery mans othe after the mynde & intent of hym that ſweareth, nor we ſhulde not fulfyll yt we haue ꝓmiſed yf it be noughtes. Good ſiſter wil ye ye I ſhew you how ye ſhall neuer be for ſworne? neuer ſweare. For yf ye ſweare not, ye ſhall neuer be forſworne. So wtout ſwearyng, a man ſhal neuer fall into ꝑiury. Leaue the vſe of Eccle. xxiii ſwearyng, for ye cuſtome therof, bryngeth many a one to ꝑiury, ſweare by ye, and by naye. For ye trueth hath no nede of othes, &

faythfull and true wordes are in the place of a nothe. The holy gooſt giue you grace to ſpeak and to vſe youre wordes moderately, and modeſtyouſly.
            
            
               ☞ Of detractyō the .xxxiij. cha.
               
                  WElbeloued ſiſter harkē vnto my wordes, and to my exhortacyō, & cōſyder wel what I ſay vnto you Detraction is a verye greuous ſyn, a greuous vyce, a greuous exclamacyon, and a verye greuous cryme, euery man doth reprehēd detractiō, euery māſpeaketh ſhame by ſtaūderous. Euery man doth diſhonour them, except ſuch as be ſlauderous & bacbyters, or ſuch as fauer thē, and take pleaſure in them, & Dauyd Pſal. c. ſayeth. I dyd ꝑſecute hym y• ſecretly

bacbited & ſlaundered his neyghbour. There is nothynge more haynus then detraction.
               Detractours barke as dogges do, and as dogges do bite thoſe y• paſſe by, ſo theſe detractours & batbyters do gnaw & byte there neyghbours good name & fame Therfore good ſyſter, remoue this ſlaūderous vice of detractiō frō your tongue. Gnawe at no mans liuyng, reprehēd nor hurt no mās liuing. Defyle not your mouth wt no nother mās iniquite, bacbyte not the ſyn̄er, but haue cōpaſſyō vpō hym, and feare that thyng in your ſelfe, that ye reproue in another, and amend that thyng in your ſelfe, that ye reproue in another, & loke that ye be as diligent to correcte and to amende your ſelfe, as ye be to

correcte & to reproue other. And when ye intende to ſlaunder another man, loke wel vpon your ſelfe, and fyrſt or euer ye backebyte or ſlaunder any other man reproue youre owne myſliuyng. For yf ye loke well vpon youre ſelfe, ye ſhall neuer hurte nor yet ſlaunder no nother man.
               Therfore take good hede that with all dylygence ye reforme youre owne ſelfe, and amende your owne euyll demeanoure. Liſten not to theſe detractours, nor gyue no eare to theſe whyſperers and mutterers. For he that ſlaundereth a man, and he that harkeneth vnto hym, are in lyke faute Theſe detractours are neuer lyke to come to heuē, that virgyn that intendeth to come to euerlaſtynge ioye, muſt ſlaunder no perſone.
               
                  
O venerable virgyn, yf ye remoue your hearyng frō there detractours & cōmen bacbyters, & refrayne your tongue from all euyll and vnclenly cōmunycacyō, ye (as I haue ſayde before) ſhalbe counted amonge the prudent and wyſe virgyns.
            
            
               ¶ Of enuye the .xxxiiij. ca
               THe enuyous man is Sapi. li. a mēbre of the deuyl By whoſe enuie deathe came īto y• world enuye conſumeth clene away all the braunches of vertue. Enuy through his peſty ferus heate, deourneth all goodneſſe enuy is the mothe, and the worme y• cōſumeth & deſtroyeth the ſoule, enuy hurteth it ſelfe ſoner thē any other mā. Enuye gnaweth & byteth it ſelfe moche

ſooner, thē any other. Enuy byteth his owne maiſter firſt of al, enuy cōſumeth a mans ſenſes & vnderſtādyng. It burneth & waſteth his breſt. It teareth his ſoule, & as a peſtiferus thyng, it pearſeth and runneth throughe mās hart. And therfore goodnes muſt wt ſtāde enuye, and charite muſt be prepared agaynſt it.
               Good ſyſter loke ye neuer be ſory of another mans vertue, nor of no nother mās, ꝑfyte, torment not your ſelf, y• your neyghbour doth proſper, there is no vertue but y• enuy hateth it, & is clene agaynſt it. And there is nothyng (except miſery) but y• enuy is as an aduerſate to it, why ſo? For nomā hateth y• wretched, y• virgyn yt deſyreth to inhabite heuē, muſt enuy nor hate no ꝑſon, the

virgin y• deſyreth to go to the maryage wt chryſt Ieſus, muſt not be ſorowfull of another mans promocion & honour. Deare ſyſter I beſeche & pray almightye god, to clenſe & to purifye youre harte & mynde frō al maliciouſneſſe & enuye, to thētent ye may ſerue him in al purenes & clenlyneſſe of lyfe.
            
            
               
                  ❧ Of anger the .xxxv. cha.
               
                  HOneſt virgyn harken Pro. xv. vnto Salomōs wordes. A gētyl and a louly anſwere, breketh anger. And haſtye wordes make anger and debate, & agayne he ſayth. Swete & gētyll wordes do mitygate anger, & encrece frēdes. The more Prouet. xv that a mā is vnpaciēt y• more mē do iudge him to lacke wiſdome.

By anger, y• eye of the harte is troubeled, by anger wiſe mē leſe there wiſdōe. By anger mē fal be ſyde thē ſelf. Many mē are ſone angery & ſone pacifyed & pleſed. Some there be yt are very ſlowe to anger, & very hard to be pacy fyed agayne. Some other there are which are ſone angery, & very hard to be pleaſed, but yet better is he y• is ſone angry & ſoone pleaſed, thē he, yt wyll belong or euer he be angarde, & long or he be pleaſed. Deare ſyſter I pray you harkē vnto. ſ. Iames wordꝭ Iames, i. ſayng. Let euery mā be (ſayeth. ſ Iames) haſty & diligēt to here, & tardius to ſpeake, & ſlow to anger, why ſo? For ye anger of man doth not effectuouſly cauſe y• iuſtice of god, nor ye anger of a virgyn can not work aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his iuſtice

a virgyn that ſhuld be y• temple of almyghtye god, ſhulde in no maner of wyſe be angery, it is agaynſt al good honeſte, that the ſpouſe of god ſhuld frete & be angery. A virgyn y• whiche prepareth in her harte a dwellynge place for god, ſhulde inforce her ſelfe to expell & eiecte all anger frō her harte & mynde. A virgyn y• deſyreth to come to GOd, & to his celeſtiall chambre ſhulde auoyde frō her harte all anger. Good ſiſter yf anger preuēt you refrayne it, yf it take you ſodēly, mitigate and appayſe it. Coule your furiouſnes, & your inding naciō, brydle in all maner of mocyons of anger. Yf ye can not auoyde anger, or ſwage it, yet let it not caſte you in to a furye, or in to moch haſtineſſe or iudyngnatyon,

let not the ſonne goo Epheſi. iiil downe vpō your anger, that is, be not longe angrye nor contynewe not in anger.
            
            
               
                  ❧ Of hatred. the .xxxvi. Cha.
               
                  HOneſt virgi herken what I ſhal ſay. Hatred doth ſeperate a mā frō y• kyngdome of heuen. Hatred remoueth a mā frō paradyſe. Hatred doth drawe a man from heuen. Hatred nother by paſſyon nor by merterdome nor yet by effucion of blode can be defaced pourged or waſſhyd away. We ſhulde not hate man but the vice of man, he that hate the his Pſa. ix viii brother is a murderer. He y• hateth his brother is ī darkenes. He loueth not god yt hateth mā Theyr is as great difference be Iohn̄. iii,
                  
twyxt anger & hatred, as there Iohn̄. il. is betwyxt a riſh & a great beme for hatred is an olde roted anger, by anger the eye of y• harte is troubled, but by hatred y• ioy of the hart is vtterly extyncte & put out. Welbeloued ſyſter harke vnto my wordes. If ſo be ye haue angerde your frend make hym by and by amendes, yf ye haue offended hym, do penaūce before hym, and yf ye haue ſlaū
                  derde or put any mā to rebuke, deſyre hym to forgyue you and make haſt to be reconciled, ſlepe not vntyl ye come to ſatiſfactiō reſt not vntyll ye be ſet at one, if your enemy do fall, reioyce not there at, nor be not glade of his death, nor yet of his myſfortune leſte parauenture lyke fortune chaūce vnto you, & leſt that god

turne his anger vpō you, take a pleaſure to be ſory for thoſe, y• are ī afflictiō, & miſfortune, haue cōpaſſyon vpō other mēnes pouerte & miſery, be heuy for other mēnes tribulatiō, wepe wt thoſe Rome. xii. y• wepe. Good ſiſter be not hard harted, reuēge not your ſelfe vpon hym, yt hathe done you dyſpleaſure. Forgyue ye god maye forgyue you, for yf ye forgyue not, ye ſhal not fynd nor yet haue forgiuenes, exclude al hatred Luke. vi. out of your harte, & beware hatred neuer remaine in you, or in your mynde. My good ſyſter, god ſend you his delectyon, and the loue of your neyghbour.
            
            
               Of pryde. the .xxxvii. cha.
               PRyde is the beginnyng and Eccle. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   the rote of al euyl, ye prowde mā is odius, & hated both of god and man, the prowde man

is lykened to the deuyll, pryde & couytous are vnder ſuch a faſſion one euyll, that pryde can not be wtout couytouſnes, nor couytouſnes wtout pryde, the deuyll by pryde ſayde. I wyll aſcēde in Iſai. xiiii. to heuen, but Chriſt wt great humilyte ſayd, My ſoule is humilyated Pſal. xliii. vnto duſte, the deuyll by pryde ſayde, I wyll be lyke god aboue, Chriſt by humylyte was obedyēt to his father vnto deth the deuyll throughe pryde was thruſte in to hell, & Chryſt by hu Phill. ii. mylyte exalted to heuen. What other thyng is ſynne, but the cō
                  tempte of god, wherby we regarde not but dyſpyſe his commaundementes. O deare ſyſter yf oure longe watchynges, out prayer, our charytable dedes, & al oure labour & payne we take,

ende with pride, god reputeth it as nothynge. Therfore extende not the wynges of pride, nor lift not vp his fethers, why ſo? For pryde hath depoſed the angels, & ouetrhrowē the myghtye, god hath deiected the proude, & doth reſyſt thē, and gyueth his grace to thoſe that are humble. Alſo Luke. i. good ſyſter, I exhorte you to reioyce more in the ſocyete & feloſhyppe of good men, then in the nobylytye of youre ſtocke or lynage, & pray you to reioyce more in the cōpany of vertuous and poore men, thē in the nobylytye of your ryche & abundant kynſfolke, Wherfore? For god makethe Rom. ii. no dyfferēce nor yet no exceptyon of perſons, and he that dyſpiſeth the poore, doth god in iure, he that dyſpyſeth the poore

man rebuketh his maker. Good ſyſter god ſende you profounde humilyte and true charyte.
            
            
               Of vayne glorye. the .xxviii. Chapt.
               WE ſhuld eſche we & auoyd vayne glorye as well in dede, as ī word. Wherfore good ſyſter, loke well vpō your ſelfe, and appropryate nothyng that is in you, to your ſelfe, but onely your myſdedes & ſynne. Kepe your ſelfe frō vayne glory, take hede ye deſyre not vayne glory, glorifye not your ſelfe, boſt not your ſelfe, preſume nothynge of your ſelfe, lyfe not vp your ſelfe wt pryde, aſcriue nothīg to your ſelfe that good is. Gloryfy your ſelfe of no good worke, dyſpyſe y• laude & prayſe of mā, enquere not whether any man prayſe or

diſprayſe you, lette not worldly laude or praiſe deceyue you, nor diſpraiſe breke or diſcōfort you, he that deſireth not to be lauded ſetteth by no cōtimelious wordꝭ nor be no iniury, all ſuch virgis as do glorifye thē ſelfe of theyre good workꝭ before mā, haue no oile in theyr veſſels, for through y• deſyre & appetite of vaine glory, they leſe theyr rewardes, the which they truſted to haue had of god They ſhuld daily behold and marke theyr ſynfull fylthynes and fragylytie, and dyſpyſe all vayne glorye, and be ryghte ſorye that they haue loſte theyre good workes, y• which they dyd for vayn glory, of the which thige y• lord ſayth. Ueryly ſaith he, Math. vi they haue receued theyr reward

y• vertues of good mē throughe the deſyre of vayne glorye, are ſubmytted vnto the deuyll. As kynge Ezechyas, the which moued wt pryde, ſhewed all his treſour i. Reg. xx. & ryches to the Caldens, & therfore the prophet brought hī worde he ſhulde leſe them. And the pharyſe y• came to ye churche to pray, loſt his good dedes, becauſe that by iactance & vayne glorye, he ſhewed & opened thē. Luke. xvlii And as the egle cōmeth from aboue to ſeke her foode, ſo man through the appetyde of vayne glorye cōmeth from the heyght of good cōuerſacyon to theſe in feryor thinges. My welbeloued ſyſter, ſet not your cōſcience in a nother mans tongue, lette a nother man prayſe you, but in no maner of wyſe prayſe not youre

ſelfe, be youre owne iudge, and iudge youre ſelfe by your owne iudgemēt, & be no nother mans. For there is no man yt knoweth you & your cōſcyence ſo well as you your ſelfe. Good ſeſter wyll ye that I ſhew you, how ye may increaſe in all vertue? Ye good brother, and I pray you ſhewe me: harken then vnto me, If ye wyl increaſe your vertues, loke ye diſcloſe thē not, but hyde thē for feare of elatyon, hyde youre good workes for feare of arrogāce, euermore flye to be ſene, or eſtemed ſuch as in very dede ye be, hyde your vertue, & opē your myſfautes, and y• vices of your hart & mynd. And if ye euer dyd well or ſayde well, neuer ſhew it in the preſēce of other, open incō
                  tynently your euyll thoughtes,

for ſynne detectyd with humilite & diſpleaſaūce is lyghtly pardoned & forgyuē, ſynne doth encreaſe by keping ī, & hydīg therof, for yf it be cloked of a lytle it waxeth great, if it be manifeſtid & ſhewed out it decreaſeth, and agayne, if it be kept in, it increaſethe, whenne vertue is cloked in, then it augmenteth and increaſethe yf it come abrode & be knowen, it vaniſheth awaye & decreaſeth. Vertue throughe vain glory cōmeth to naughtes but yf it be hyddē, & wt humilite kepte in. it augmenteth meruelouſly. Wherfore good ſyſter aſ cryue your counſell & all youre actes to god, and ī al your operatiōs & workes cal vpō god for help & aſcryue al thing to y• gift & grace of god, nor appropriate

nothing to your owne merites, preſume nothynge vpon youre vertue. Harkē good ſyſter vnto the wordes of y• apoſtle, he that glorifyeth, ſhuld glorify in god. 2. Cor. x. Therfore let all your glorify cacyon & laude be in youre ſpouſe Chryſte Ieſu.
            
            
               Of humilyte the .xxxix. cha.
               
                  ODrare ſyſter harkē vnto youre ſpouſe Chryſte Ieſus, the whiche ſayth in his goſpel. Lerne of me for I am meke & hūble of hart, Math. xi. good ſyſter humilyate yourſelf vnder the myghty hand of god, y• ī time of tribulacyō he may ex iPeter. v, alte you & helpe you, y• cōſcyēce of a virgī ſhuld euermore be hū
                  ble & heuy, yt be humilite it may be p̄ſerued frō 
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     pri
                  de, & by heuines

frō all laſciuyuſnes & wantonnes, humylyte is the moſt ſouerayne vertue a vyrgyn cā haue, pryde is a very euyl vyce and a myſcheuous, a vyrgyn that is hūble (not wtſtādyng ſhe be but euyll decked) before god is glorious in vertue, but the proude & ſtately virgyn (not wtſtanding in the ſyght of mā ſhe be good & well beſene) yet in goddꝭ ſyght, ſhe is but vyle & reproued, why ſo? For the ſoule of the iuſt mā, is goddes ſeate, and he ſayth, vpon whome ſhuld I reſt, but on Eſai. 66. ly vpon him, that is hūble, quyet, & feryng my wordes? Good ſyſter be hāble & groūd your ſelfe vpon humylyte, be the leſt of al other, neuer preferre youre ſelfe aboue other, repute not your ſelfe to be ſuperyour to other, but

thike all other to be aboue you, for y• more higher ye be, ſo moch the more, ye ought to humilitate your ſelfe in all thynge, ye ſhall come to the glory, yf ye kepe humylyte, Eccle. iii. and the more hūble and meke that ye ſhewe your ſelfe, y• more hygher ſhalbe your glory, come downe, that ye maye aſcéde, hymylyate youre ſelfe that ye maye be exalted. Exalte not your ſelfe, leſt ye be humilyated & depoſed. For it is wryttē, who Luke. xilii. ſo humilyateth & mekethe hym ſelfe, ſhalbe eleuated & exalted, and he that exalteth hym ſelfe, ſhalbe humylyated & broughte lowe, the hygher a man doth fal the more greuous is his fal, humilytye knoweth not what fallyng meaneth, humilyte is ſubiecte to no ruyne. O good virgi Philip. ii.
                  
remēbre yt god came very mekely ī to this worlde, & that he humylyated hī ſelfe in forme of a ſeruaūt, & was obediēt to his father vnto d
                     •
                  th. Good ſiſter walke & folowe his example, & foteſteppꝭ, be vyle, diſpiſed, abiecte, & diſpleſaūt in your owne ſight, for he yt iudgeth hym ſelfe here to be vyle, in the ſight of god he ſhalbe hyghly eſtemed, he that hateth hym ſelfe in dyſpleaſure, ſhal pleaſe almyghty god hyghly. O drare ſyſter, be humble & lowe in your owne conceite and preſence, that ye maye be made great & hyghe in the preſence of god almighty, how moch ye leſſe ye eſteme your ſelfe, ſo moch the more ſhal god eſteme you. If ye haue profoūde & perfyte humilytye, ye ſhall (beyng aſſocyated with the wyſe vyrgyns) reioyce

in the eternall blys of heuen.
            
            
               Of pacyence. the .xl. cha.
               THe lorde ſayth, bleſſyd be Math. v, they that lyue peacibly, for they ſhall be named the Luke. vi. chyldren of god. Then good ſiſter, yf they ye lyue in reſt & peace be bleſſid, and called the chyldrē of god, pacyence is very neceſſary for you, pacyēce is a ꝑfyte thīge of it ſelfe, a paciēt virgyn is rekened to be wyſe, & ſhe that is impaciēt & teſty, is counted a foole, ye may (yf ye ſo wyl) be marterde wtout any ſworde, that is, yf ye kepe true pacyēce. A pacyent perſon, ſhall come to the companye of angelles, but the enuyous and the impacyent ſhall be partycypant & part taker with the deuel, the peacyble

man auoydeth all dyſcorde, and the impaciēt ſtyreth vp ſtryfe & debate, a meke vyrgyn is contēt to take & to ſuffre iniury, a pacyent mayde prepareth her harte as a place for god to dwell in. Why ſo? for Chriſt Ieſusis the very peace, and is wonte to reſt Roma, vi. in peace, the doughter of peace ſhuld loue peace. O good vyrgi ye ſhulde rather prepare youre ſelfe to take and to ſuffre iniury thē to do any, lerne rather to ſuffre harme, thē to do harme. Be pacyēt, modeſtyous, & amiable, loue peace, & be at peace with euery mā, loue euery body in charyte & mekenes, & ſtryue to loue all other, better then they loue you. But yet be not to lyght in loue, breake no frenſhyp, be alwayes pacyent in mynde, be gē
                  tyll,

and affable in your wordes and cōmunicacion, ſhewe your ſelfe mery ſpryted fle all occaſiō of debate, deſpyſe ſtryfe, & lyue in peace and reſt. And good ſyſter yf it be poſſible be at one wt al the world, ouercome al ſlaūderous iniurys wt patience, with the buckler of patience, breake y• dartes of all iniury. Holde out the ſhylde of good conſcyence agaynſt the ſharpe and litigius tongue, for as. ſ. Paule ſayeth. ii. Corin. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . The wytneſſe of good cōſcyence ſhalbe ſufficient for you. Ye are well armed wt vertue yf ye hurt not hym, yt burieth you, ye are worthie of great glorye, if ye forgyue hym, & let hym go, whome ye may diſpleſe The pece of god which paſſeth al vnderſtādyng, defēde your harte & ſoule frō all parel & daūger.
            
            
               
               ¶ Of concorde the xli. ca.
               
                  THere are ſyxe thynges (ſayeth the lord) Pro. vi that my ſoule hateth and the ſeuenth is, that I deteſt and abhorre, that is, a mā yt ſoweth dyſcorde among his brethren, he is acurſed that ſoweth dyſcorde among goddes ſeruantes, he dothe Ephe. ii greatly agaynſt god, yt breaketh peace and cōcorde. And he that cauſeth dyſcorde amonge goddes ſeruantes dothe chryſte great iniury, why ſo? For chryſt is our peace, y• which hath made of two thynges one, y• is the angels, & mā to be of one accorde. The cōcord of euyll mē, is y• contrariete of good mē. And as we ſhuld deſyre ye good men might

be in peace, ſo we ſhulde deſyre that the peace, concorde, and vnite of euyl men myght be broken. For concorde and vnyte to do euyll is not laudable.
               But concorde to do well, to ſerue GOD, to folowe Iuſtice, is laudable. And the congregacyons and commyng togyther of Chryſten people into the church is to ſerue god in one ſpiryte, & in one wyll. For ſo ſhulde they do, that inhabyte goddes houſe For it preuayleth not to be togyther, if our wylles be not al one, for GOD loueth moche better the humilyte of the wyl, then the humilite of the place. We be many togyther in one houſe, of dyuers maners, of dyuers hartꝭ, of diuers mindꝭ, al theſe thigꝭ muſt

agre in one intencyon, in one mynde, and one loue in god.
               Therfore we muſte be all of one mynde, of one wyl, to ſerue god, and to loue hym wt all oure hartes, wt all your ſoules, and oure neyghboure as oure ſelfe. And therfore concorde is verye neceſſarye for vs, for yf I folow my wyll & pleaſure, & you yours, & he his, then muſt there nedes be diuiſion, cōtention & anger, the whiche thynges as ſayth paule are workes of the fleſhe. They 
                     
                        ••
                     la. v. that do ſuche thynges, ſhall neuer obtayne the kyngdome of heuē. Bileue me good ſyſter, all our faſtyng, praynge & ſacrifice pleaſeth not god ſo moch as dothe good cōcord, and therfore he ſayeth. Go thy wayes fyrſt, and Math. v recōcyle thy ſelfe to thy brother,

and then come and offer vp thy gyfte. Honorable ſyſter the vertue of cōcorde is very great, to warde god, wtout the which our ſacrifyce can not pleaſe him.
               
                  ¶ The ſiſters demaunde
                  TEll me good brother whether the deuyl be a ferde of any thynge.
               
               
                  The brothers anſwere.
                  
                     MY worſhypful ſyſter, there is nothīg yt he feareth ſo moch as concorde, and charite, yf we gyue all that euer we haue for GOddes ſake, he feareth it not. For he getteth nothīg therby. Yf we faſte he feareth it not, for yf he neuer eath. Yf we watche he feareth it not, for he neuer ſlepeth.

but yf we lyue in good concorde and charyte, he feareth it verye ſore, why ſo? For then we obſerue & kepe that thyng in earth, that he kepte not in heuē. And this is the cauſe why men ſaye that our holy mother the churche is as fearfull & as terryble to her enemyſe, as is a great cōpanye Canti. vi. of mē of war, wel armed & ſet in good ordre. For as our enemyes be in great fere, whē they ſethere aduerſaryes commyng agaynſt them in good aray & ordre, ſo the deuyll is in great feare, whē he ſeeth y• Chryſten men be well armed wt vertue, cōcorde, & vnite. Therfore all we ſhuld lyue togither in good accorde, ye is in the churche, to ouercome the deuyl. The handmayde of GOd, that wyll lyue in cōcorde & trāquilite

muſt fyrſt of all, leue and caſt a way all euyll cuſtomes, leaſt by her ꝑuerſite ſhe put other to rebuke and ſhame. Alſo ſhe muſte moderate her workes & dedes, her mouyng, her wordes, and al her lyfe, and after the lawes of God agre with all other.
                  Therfore good ſyſter, I exhorte you to liue in good accorde, and in humilite, and to reuoke all hatred and ſtryfe to peace and concorde. Uſe no ſuche wordes as may breake good agrement and concorde.
               
            
            
               ¶ Of ſufferaunce the xlij. chapiter.
               DEare ſyſter lerne modeſtyuſneſſe, and ſufferaunce of CHRYSTE Ieſu,

& marke hym well, for ſo doyng no man ſhal put you to heuines he hath ſuffered death for vs al and hathe lefte vs an example of ſufferaunce. He was beaten ſcourged, whipte mocked, beſpued, naylde to y• croſſe, crowned wt thorne, & cōdēned to be hanged vpon the croſſe, & al this whyle he held his peace, nor murmurd not agaynſt it. But yf any man doth vs iniure, it is for our ſynnes, our myſcheuouſneſſe, & ſynfull liuynge is the cauſe therof, for whatſoeuer doth chaunce agaynſt vs, all is for our ſynnes, & we ſhall y• better ſuffer al ſuch aduerſytes, yf we cōſyder vpon what occaſion & for what cauſe they do chaūce vnto vs. Therfore yf a mā do you diſpleaſure, ſpeke fayre vnto him, if he curſe

you bleſſe hym. yf he be angery Rom. xii. with you, ſpeake patiently vnto hym. Diſſolue his furiuſnes wt gētyll wordes, ouercome his iniquite wt ſoftnes, his malyce wt goodnes & his iniure with tranquilite. Good ſyſter p̄pare your ſelfe, and be alwayes redy bothe to good and euyll. And as they chaunce, ſo ſuffer & beare them, ſuffer both proſperite and aduerſyte, & as they chaunce take thē mekely, & ſet not by iniurius nor by cōtumelyus reproches, for by deſpyſyng of ſuch iniurius wordes, ye ſhall ouercome all der
                     •
                  
                  ſion, & by diſſembulyng of ſuche thynges, ye ſhal litle or nothing regarde ſuche mens fautes and errours. And notwithſtandyng good ſyſter, that men do ſtyrre you, prouoke you, aſſayle you, re

proche you, and blame you, althoughe they ſpeake iniuryuſly vnto you and do you iniury, although they prouoke you to anger, & do you great wronge, yet for al that hold you your peace, kepe youre ſilēce, care not for it diſſemble the matter, anſwer not to theyr iniures, ſpeake no crabbed wordes vnto thē, ſet aparte all cōtumeliꝰ & iniurius wordꝭ, ſay nothīg, for by holding your peace ye ſhal ſone ouer come thē O chryſtꝭ ſpouſe, ſtryue agaynſt theſe worldly greues & wretchedneſſe, be ſtedfaſt & ſtrōge in al aduerſite, ſuffre althyng patienly, take it well in worth, and ſuffre that is commen to all men.
               For he that troubeleth, and he that is troubeled are mortall, and he that doth wrong, and he

that ſuffereth wronge ſhall dye. Byleue me good ſyſter. No man can trouble you, no man can be againſt you, if god ſuffered him not, nor the deuyll hym ſelfe hathe no power vpon you, but by actes. xiii
                        •
                     
                   goddes ſufferaunce. We muſte cōe to heuē by great tribulaciō, yet all the paſſions, and aduerſities of this world are not to be Rom. vi
                        〈…〉
                     
                   cōpared to the great glorye and ioyes of heuē It is impoſſible beynge a womā, but nedesye muſt taſte the troubelſumnes, and miſery of this worlde. And beyng in this worlde, we ought to ſuffre euery thynge in lyke maner There is noman lyuyng in this worlde, but muſte nedes ſyghe & mourne atſome times, for this mortal lyfe is full of heuyneſſe,

the begynnynge of this lyfe is waylyng, & wepyng. The chyld that is nowe borne, begynneth his lyfe wt wepyng. The chylde when it cōmeth oute of his mothers wombe, or euer it laughe, it wayleth & mourneth, worldly tribulacyō is very neceſſary.
               The ſtormes of this worlde are ꝓfytable, the more we be tormē
                  ted & troubled in this world, the more we be cōfyrmed, & the more we be vexed in this vale of myſery, the more ſhall oure ioye be in heuen. Yf we be troubled and punyſhed in this world, we ſhal be, god wyllyng, foūde pure and without faute atthe day of iudgment.
            
            
               ¶ Of ſickenes the .xliij. ca
               
                  
                  THe lorde ſayeth. Thoſe that Idoloue Hebre. xii. I chaſten. God doth chaſten & correcteth men in this worlde, thre maner of wayes, he correcteth thoſe that are noughtes to theyr dampnacyon. Thoſe yt he hath choſē if they do are, to there purgacyon. And thoſe that are good mē, to y• augmentacyon of theyr glorye. God punyſſhed the egiptiens to theyr dampnation. Lazarus to his purgacion. And Iob, to his probacion. God alſo at ſome tyme dothe puniſh man or euer he ſyn, and that bycauſe he ſhulde not ſyn, as was ſaynt Paule. The whiche by the inſtygacyon of the deuyll, ſuffered ii Corin. xi
                        •
                     
                   the temptacyon of the fleſhe.

Alſo God punyſſheth man after that he hath treſpaſt, to thētent he ſhulde amende, as he that is delyuered to the deuyll to be puniſhed in body, for the ſaluacyon of his ſoule. Alſo it is verye ii Lorin. xii profytable for thoſe that are welthy and in good helth to be troubeled wt ſycknes, leaſt that be to moche helthe they take greater pleaſure in theſe tranſytore and earthly thynges, thē they ſhuld do, ſuch bodely helth as cauſeth the ſoule to be ſycke is not good But bodely tribulacyon & ſyckneſſe bringinge a mans ſoule to ſaluacyon is ryght p
                     •
                  ofytable. The apoſtle prayſeth the ſyckneſſe of the body, ſaynge. The weker I am in body, y• more ſtrō
                  ger ii. He. xii. I am in ſpiryte, A mā ſhuld neuer murmur agaynſt goddes

punyſhmentes for by ſuche correctyon he amenth his diſordinate lyfe and miſlyuynge. But yf we wolde remembre the ſyns we haue diſpleaſed God withal, we ſhulde ſuffer the ſycknes of the body moche better then we do. A man ſhulde not murmure Pſal. c. viii agaynſt GOd, when he viſete hym with ſycknes, why ſo? For god whoſe iudgemētes are iuſt, hath iudged hym to haue deſerued it. Yf then in his ſycknes he murmour againſt goddes vt ſytacyon, he eſtemeth the iudgement of GOd to be vntrewe, and ſo he prouoketh God to anger. Nor that thynge cannot be iuſte, that pleaſeth not god the ryght iudge. God dothe Apoca. iii, chaſten thoſe that he loueth, & ſcourgeth all ſuch chyldrē as he

draweth vnto hym. And taketh no leſſe pleaſure in them, then doth the father in his chyldren. God in this lyfe doth ſpare and is very gentyll to ſynners, & not to thoſe that are good men. But in another worlde he dothe not ſo. For there he doth ſpare & vpholde the iuſt, & ſharply correcte the vniuſt & myſdoer. Deare ſyſter dolor & heuines is cōmen to all men. There is no man with out ſorowe in this worlde. God doth euer more correcte & chaſtē thoſe he wolde ſhuld be ſaued. Good ſyſter be not moued, nor chafe not in your ſyckneſſe. But whē ye be ſycke, thāk god therof & rayther deſyre ſoule health, thē bodely helth. For the aduerſites of ye fleſh, is ye remedy of y• ſoule, Sicknes woūdeth & hurteth the

body but it curith the ſoule, ſicknes conſumethe vyce, ſyckenes couleth & quēcheth the heate of al bodely luſt, by ſyckenes a mā is proued, & not dyſtrude, golde is proued by fyre, pourge youre ſelfe in the chymney of tribulatyō, that ye may be & appere vn defyled, ſuffre to be burnt wt the fyre of perſecutyō, y• ye may appere immaculate & pure, for all theſe thinges that ye ſuffre are for your probaciō. Therfore my welbeloued ſyſter in god, murmour not in your ſyckenes, blaſpheme not, nor ye ſhal not ſaye. Why do I ſuffre all this trybulaciō, why doth god puniſh me? Good brother I pray you tel me what I ſhuld ſay whē I am ſicke & in tribulatyō, & how I ſhulde accuſe my ſelfe. Deare ſyſter

accuſe yourſelf after this forme & maner, I haue ſinde and done a myſſe, I am not punyſhed as I haue deſerued, I perceiue not that god taketh egall vēgeaūce vpon my ſynnes, I fele yt I am gentlier intreated thē I haue deſerued, my tribulatyō is moche leſſe, then is my faute, my payne is nothyng in cōparyſon of my ſynnes, my tormētes are nothīg lyke my myſlyuyng. O good ſyſter, wyll ye be pourged of your ſynnes? then in trybulacyō and payn accuſe your ſelfe, & extolle the iuſtice of god, it is ſuffycyēt for your purgacyō, if ye aſcriue your punyſhemēt and payne to goddes iuſtyce, yf ye humlye & mekely gloryfye god, for y• ſyckenes and trouble he ſenteth you, for god dothe correcte you with

the ſcurge of pytyfull caſtigacton, he doth vſe very gentyll correctyon, and he that lettynge you vnchaſted dyd deſpyſe you and caſte you of, dothe now correctynge you, deſyre ye ſhulde retourne vnto hym agayne. O honeſte vyrgyn, thinke and call all worldlye tormentes to your mynde, and all maner of payne all maner of crudelytye and tyranny, all oppreſſyon, all heuynes, and compayre me all theſe thīges to the payne of hell and ye ſhall fynde that youre payne is very eaſy & lyght. Good ſyſter yf ye feare any payne, feare the paynes of hell. For the paynes of this world are temporal, & the paines of hel eternall, yf a mā deſceyſe & dye ī theſe paines

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
the payne remaynethe here, but yf he be in the paynes of hell, they ſuccede ſtyll, and continew for euermore. Ueryly yf ye fortune to amende and retourne to goodnes, thē al the paynes and tribulation that ye ſuffred were your amendmēt, for trybulatyō doth loſe hym that is conuerted frō ſynne. Theſe preſēt & worldly troubles are as a purgacyon to hym that is amēded, he that is tormēted and chaſted in this worlde, is delyuered in a nother but they that are not chaſtened nor corrected here, are in daūger to be dāpned both tēporally & eternally. For they are fyrſt iudged in this worlde & fynally in a nother for euermore, and ſuch haue double paine & dāpnacyō, they are twyſevexed and trouled,

for they ar here iudged and troubled, & hereafter ī perpetuall payne. So it foloweth thē, y• it is goddes hāde y• doth puniſh you, & his indyngnacyō y• doth vexe you, and being angry with you, he hath cōmaūded ye ſhuld ſuffre ſuch tormēt & trybulacyō. That ye are broughte lowe by ſyckenes, y• ye are tormēted with the ſharpe tēptacyōs of y• fleſhe, that ye are vexed wt ſorow, and wt the paſſyōs of the mynd, that ye are troubled wt euil ſpirytes, all this the iuſtyce of god dothe ſende you for your ſynnes, your owne wepens fyghteth agaynſt you, ye are woūded with youre owne arrowes, ye are hurt with your owne da
                     •
                  te, for that, that hath cauſed you to treſpas doth trouble & vexe you, and becauſe

ye haue folowed youre bodylye luſte, ye are tormented in youre body ye cōplaine of that thing, that ye treſpaſte with all. Good ſyſter ye are tormented in youre bodye, becauſe ye haue ſynde wt the body, ye are troubled ī that thyng, that hath been the cauſe of youre trybulacyon, loke by what thynge ye fell to ſynne, in the ſelfe ye ſuffre payne and tormente. O good Chriſtes ſpouſe ye are iuſtly puniſhed, ye are iuſtly ſcourged, and iuſtly condēpned, the payne and tormētes ye are in, do iuſtly chaſten you.
            
            
               Of couitouſnes, xliiii. cha
               
                  THe Lorde ſaythe in Luke. xii. his goſpell, flye frō all couytouſnes, for the life of mā is not in the abundaunce

of thoſe thynges that he poſſeſſeth vpō earth. And ſaynt Paule Ephe. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . ſayth. Let no fornycacyon, no immundycyte, nor yet no couytouſnes, be ſpoken of amonge you, And agayne he ſayth, ſuch as are fornycators, vnclenly of lyfe, or couytous, ſhall not be parte takers of the kyngdome of heuen, & of this thynge ſayth Salomon. He that foloweth couitouſnes, Prouer. xv doth trouble his houſe, the couytous ſhall neuer be ſatiſfyed with money, he that louethe ryches, ſhall neuer haue ꝓfite be thē, there is nothīg worſe, Eccle. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . thē to loue money, for his ſoule y• loueth money, is euermore redy to be ſolde, & as couytouſnes doth drowē a man in hell, ſo doth almous dede done wt lyberalyte, eleuateth & brīgth mā to

heuen. The couytous man is lykened to hel, for as hell is neuer ſatyſfyed, no more is the auarycyous mā, and the more that he that hath the dropſy doth drīke, the more he may, ſo y• more that the couytous man gettethe the more he deſyrethe. Auarycyouſnes & couytouſnes are ſyſters, and pryde is theyre mother, for pryde was neuer without auarycyouſnes, nor auaryce wtoute couytouſnes. Good ſyſter lette not yourhandes be redy to take and receyue, but rather redye to gyue. I wolde ye ſhulde delyte more in gyuyng thē in takyng, it is a greater vertue and moch 
                     
                        •
                     cia. xx. better to gyue thē to take. Good ſyſter take heed that auaryce faſten not her rootes in you, loke there be no ſpot or ſmacke of couytouſnes

in you, yf for Chriſte ſake ye vtterly dyſpyſe al worldly thynges, ye ſhal reioyce eternally with hym in heuen.
            
            
               Of cupidyte the .xiv. cha.
               CUpidyte is the roote of all i. Timo. vi. myſchefe, no man can perfytely take vpō hym to make ſpirytuall warre, withoute he tame and refrayne al bodyly pleaſure, the ſoule of man can not be ſette nor geuen to contēp lacyon, yf it be intangled withe cupidyte and the deſyre of tranſytory and worldly thynges, the eye of the ſoule can not beholde celeſty all thynges, yf the duſt of earthlye cupidyte do blynde it, cupidyte is a greuous ſynne, & the matter and very occaſion of all other crimes, Wherfore it is no meruayle yf they be tormented

wt the fyre of hell, that ī this worlde wolde not quenche the flayme of theyr cupydyte. Good ſyſter not wt ſtādyng ye haue no money, yet that ſhal nothīg preuaile you yf ye be deſirous therof. It p̄uayleth not to be bare, yf a man be deſyrous of goodly aray, Iudas through cupydyte ſolde Chryſt, we came bare in to the worlde, & ſhall departe from hence bare, why ſhuld we thē couet or deſyre theſe worldlye and Iob 
                        〈◊〉
                     . trāſytorye thynges? And yf we know yt the goodes of the world ſhall periſſhe & come to noughtes, why do we loue thē ſo effectuouſlye? If we loue theſe tranſytory thynges more then reaſō requyreth, we offende greatlye. Therfore good ſyſter conſyder the courſe and breuenes of your

tyme, and ye ſhall manyfeſtlye knowe and perceyue, that a verye lytle thynge wyll ſerue you, If cupydyte (as I haue ſayd before) be the rote of all other myſchefe, it is neceſſary ye expell it, leſte it be the occaſyon of other, lette there be no euyl, nor no peruerſe cupydytye ī you, the good lorde gyue you of his grace to dyſpyſe for his loue onelye, the proſperyte of the world and not to feare the aduerſytes therof.
            
            
               Of pouertie the .xlvi. Chapi.
               
                  BLeſſed be they that Math. v. Luke. vi. are poore in ſpirite, for the kyngdome of heuen is theyrs. There are many power mē, whoſe pouertie maketh

thē rather wretched thē bleſſed, becauſe they ſuffre nor take not theyr pouertie pacyētly for goddes ſake, but full ſore agaynſte theyr wyll, other there be, that pacyētly do ſuffre theyr pouerte for goddꝭ ſake, & through theyr meke ſufferaūce are bleſſed, of y• which it is wrytē, bleſſed at they y• ar pore in ſpirite. Ye haue harde Math. v. good ſyſter of y• tribulacyō & pacyence of Iob. Wherfore I exhort you, to take heed that nother worldly trybulacyon do oppreſſe you, nor proſperyte exalte you, ye rede that y• patryarches were very ryche of ſubſtaunce, and meruaylous hūble & meke of ſtomacke, ſuche a one was Abraham, that ſayd. I wyl ſpeke to my lord god, which I, am but Gene. xviii. earth and aſhes. So my good

ſyſter, yf in your welth & woo ye gyue thankes vnto almyghtye god, ye ſhall beleue & well perceyue that the felycyte of this tē
                  porall lyfe vanyſheth awaye as ſmoke & cōmeth to nothyng, for ſaynte Paule ſayth, If we truſt onely vpon goodes rewarde in i. 
                        •
                     omi. xv this world, we are the moſt wretched of all other, the which take y• fruycyō of theyr goodes here, & we great payn & tormēt. Chriſte Ieſus promyſyng vs perpetuall lyfe, taught vs to dyſpyſe gold & al other giftes, & becauſe we ſhuld not fere hūger, he faſted forty dayes, becauſe we ſhulde Math. iiii. not feare to be bare, he commaūded his diſcyples they ſhulde Luke. iii. haue but one cote, becauſe we ſhulde not feare trybulacion, he ſuffred great trybulacyon. And

bycauſe we ſhuld not fere deth he ſuffred deth for vs. All theſe worldly thinges, are but fleſhly cōcuptſcence, the cōcupiſcēce of the eyes, and wordly ambition, i. Ioh
                        •
                     . ii. & the worlde ſhall peryſſhe with al his cōcupiſcence. Therfore good ſiſter let vs not loue theſe wordly thynges loſt we peryſhe with thē. Kynge Dauyd was a myghty prynce, and notwithſtā
                  dyng he had great treaſoure, & ruled his people with ſtronge hād, yet he knowledge & ſhewed hym ſelfe to be full of humilite, ſaynge, I am but poore, and ī cōmmual laboure. And agayne Pſa 87. he ſayth, I am poore & ī greate neceſſite. And againe, I am but Pſal. 28. as a poore laborynge man, in this worlde, and a pylgryme as my fore fathers haue bene before

me. Good ſyſter let not the flattery of this tranſytory worlde delyte and pleaſe you, take no pleaſure in this worldely cō
                  modite, nor reioyce not ī worldly lucre, nor be not moued with earthly loſſes. For it is wrytten, If ryches come plentifully and abundantly vnto you, ſette not Pſal. lxi. your harte nor your minde vpō them, for yf man be in amours and loue with them, he ſhall leſe them with great paine & ſorow. O Chryſtes ſpouſe lyſten vnto me, he (whome heuen and earth doth ſerue) made hym ſelfe, pore for oure ſakes. Why ſo? that by his pouertye he myght inryche vs. Therfore good vyrgyn folow y• way of Chriſt Ieſus & leaue not of to folow his fote ſteppꝭ for without doute, yf ye folowe

hym, ye ſhal come to the euerlaſtynge kyngdome of heuen. Beholde good ſyſter the virginite & pouerte of our bleſſyd lady the which was ſo in goddes fauour, that ſhe by hī deſeruyd to be his mother, & yet at y• time of. Chryſtes byrth ſhe was ī ſuch pouerte, yt ſhe had nother mydwife, nor yet maide to helpe her, her goodes were ſo ſkarce, that ſhe was fayne to laye her dere chylde ī a crybbe, and yet not wt ſtandyng her huſband Ioſephe was a very good & a iuſtmā, yet throughe pouerte he was fayn to labour for his lyuyng. For it Luke. ii. is wrytten, that he was a carpē
                  ter. Alſo we rede of the holy apoſtles yt they ſerued god in great hūger & thyrſte of y• which thīg ſaynt paule ſaythe. In hūger & ii, Corin. xi
                  
thryſte, in faſting, in colde, barenes & great watche, ye haue many examples, by y• which ye may lerne to deſpyſe theſe worldly ryches, & deſyre celeſtiall. For ſuch i. Th
                        •
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   as couet to be rych & abūdant in this world, do fal into many tē
                  ptacions, & in to many gīnes, & ſnares of the deuyll, & in to ſuch hurtful deſyres, as doth brynge thē to euerlaſtyng dānatiō. But they y• wyllyngly & ꝑfytely truſt to optayne celeſtial ryches, ſet litle by worldly ſubſtāce, for wylfulpouerte, bryngeth a mā to heuē. We come not into this world to lyue in pleaſure. But that by great watch, faſtyng, prayng, & feyghtyng agaynſt our aduerſare the deuyl, we may by the ayde of god come to the euerlaſtynge blyſſe of heuen. And therfore we

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
come bare into the worlde, & are borne bare to y• font of bapteme, that we in like maner may come Iob. i bare and wtout any impedymēt to ioye euerlaſtynge. O what a ſhame, and howe incōuenient a thyng were it, for mā y• cōmeth bare in to y• earth, to enter in to heuē wt great treaſure & ryches? Yt is moch more eaſy to nedel a gabell of a ſhyp, thē for a ryche 
                     
                        •
                     u
                        •
                     e. xviii mā to come to heuē. Yt were better to haue to lytle, thē to moche He is to auaricius ye god cā not cōtent & ſatiſfye. Good ſyſter yf we ſuffer for goddes ſake, hūger thryſte, & barenes in this world we ſhalbe wt him for euermore in his ꝑ petual kingdome of bliſſe.
            
            
               ¶ Of murmuracion the rlvij. cha.
               
                  
THe mātion & dwellīg place of our harte, is ſanctifyed by the grace of almyghtye god, & by the īhabitaciō of y• holy goſte, yt is, when charite, peace, goodnes, humilite, concorde wt other lyke vertues, are in vs.
               Theſe are our ryches, yt is good maners and vertue are our ryches. But yf we begin to ſtryue & to murmur in cōtinent we leſe theſe ſpirituall vertues, and remaine clere without them. Why ſo? For vertue and vyce can not dwell togyther. And a litle dow i. Corni. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   marthe a great dele of leuent.
               And therfore euerye good ſeruaunt of OOD, ſhulde thynk and reuolue in his mynde howe greuouſly he offēdeth that murmurth for theſe worldlye gooddes, for he īpouereſheth hi ſelf of

that he ſhulde be ryche of. Why what is our ryches? Uertue, thē yf we murmour eyther for meal or drynk, or for any other thyng we leſe vertue, for murmuraciō is a haynus & a greuous ſyn, and ſ. Gregore ſayeth. That he that murmurthe, ſhal neuer cōe Eccle. xxiii to heuen. No man yt murmurth, ſhall optayne the celeſtial court of heuē, the harte & mynde of a vnwyſe mā is cōpared to y• cart whele, that caryeth hay, & murmurth, of this cōdiciō are many chryſtē men & whomē, the whiche beyng ſubiecte & obedient to carnall deſyre, neuer ceaſe to mutter Therfore good ſiſter ſ. paules counſel is very neceſſary, ſayng Ye ſhall not murmour as ſome ii. Corin. x. of the chyldrē of Iſraell dyd in wylderneſſe to theyre deſtructiō
                  
So then it is a very daūgerus i. Corin. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   thynge to murmur. Leaſt we peryſh here, as they dyd in wyldernes. Let vs therfore charme and tempour our tongues, y• in tyme to come we miſfare not, as they dyd in this world, let vs not murmur, leſt we ſuffre ī ſoule, yt they ſuffered in body. And S, Paule i. Corni. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   giuyng vs coūſel, ſayeth. Let vs not tēpte god, as ſome of thē did the which were deſtrued wt ſerpētes, he tēpthe God that murmurthe other for meat or drynk pſal.. lviii or cloth. And agayne it is wrytten. They mourmurde in theyr tabernacles, & wold not harken Pſal. c. v to goddes ſaynge. He tempthe god that wt murmuraciō requyreth y• is ſuperfluus. They were deſtrued wt ſerpētes, why ſo? By cauſe they were full of venym &

poyſē ſo there tōgues y• murmur are infected wt deuyllyſh poyſon &. ſ. Iames ſaieth, the tongue is a ſhrode & a vnquiet thīg, & full Iames. iii. of deadly poiſō, and therfore we ſhulde exchue al murmuracyon & beware y• we be not ſmytten & that we periſh not by ſuch deuellyſhe poiſon. Welbeloued ſyſter harkē what god ſayeth. I woldye ſhulde neyther care for foode nor yet for clothyng ſayng theſe Math. v, & lyke wordes, what meat ſhall we eate, or wher wt ſhal we be clothed? As thoughe he wolde ſaye more playnly. God y• hath gyuē you lyfe, wyl, puyde ye ſhal lack neyther meat, nor yet cloth to ſuſtayne your bodes withall. He ſayeth alſo. Beholde the byrdes of the ayre, the whiche neyther ſo we nor threſh, nor make no maner

of prouiſiō, & yet God dothe nouryſh thē, that is, yf god nouryſh the poore byrde, the whiche is mortal, how moch more dilygētly ſhall he nouryſh mā & his ſoule the whiche is immortall, & to whome he hath promyſed the kyngdome of heuē. And agayne he ſayeth. Cōſyder & loke how y• goodly lyles grow, they neyther ſpyn nor carde, & yet y• lord doth clothe them. Howe moch more ſhall he clothe you his ſeruātes and handmaydes. God wyll neuer vndo his ſeruantes for lack of meat drynke or cloth. Ferther more he ſayeth. Seke for y• king dome of heuē & his Iuſtice, & ye Math. vi. ſhal lacke nothīg of al theſe for ſayde thynges, as thoughe he wolde ſaye, ſerue God in al melody & feare, & he ſhall minyſter

vnto you, all that ſhall be neceſſarie, Pſal. xxxiii for they that ſeke god, ſhal lacke nothynge.
            
            
               ¶ Of prayer the .xlviij. ca
               HArkē vnto my wordꝭ good ſyſter. To pray or neceſſite compelleth man, is called prouydence, to pray at tymes apoynted is called obediēce. But to let paſſe the tyme of prayer is called negligēce. The more ꝓfytable y• prayer is, the more ofte it ſhuld be vſed. The lorde ſayeth. Loke what ſoeuer ye demaunde Mathe. ix. by prayer beynge in good ſtedfaſt bylyue, ye ſhall haue it. And S. paule exhorteth vs to praye 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . v. cōtinually. And. ſ. Iames ſaieth That the cōtinuall prayer of a Iames. v. Iuſte mā, is moch worth. Good ſyſter or euer ye begyn to praye,

prepayre your hart vnto it, and be not as one y• wold tēpte god. Prepayre your ſelfe to prayer, & opē your harte & cōſcience, that ye may haue cauſe to optayne y• more of his grace. Amā prayeth truely whē worde & harte accordeth togyther. And y• ſoner ye the ſynfull mā leueth his miſdoing, the ſoner is his prayer harde.
               A prayer muſt be ſpokē & pronoū
                  ced wt harte & not wt thy lyppes only, & it is better to pray vnder ſilēce wt harte, thē in worde with out good intēciō. Amans prayer is thē moſte pureſt, whē it is not corrupt wt ſuꝑfluus thoughtes, ſuch mens myndes are far from god, whoſe prayers are troubeled wt worldly buſynes. Prayer is let frō his purpoſe two maner of waies. The fyrſt is, when

man intendeth not to leaue his ſynful lyuyng. The ſeconde is, when man wyl not forgyue ſuch mſfautes & iniuries as hath ben done vnto hym. A mans ſoule & mynd is thē celeſtial & wholy in the meditacyō of god, when it is not diſturbed nor troubeled wt worldly workes and buſyneſſes When a man doth pray, he calleth the holy goſte vnto hym, after whoſe cōmyng al ſuch deuellyſh tēptacyō as do vexe & trouble his minde vaniſſheth away, for the deuyll can not abyde the preſence of y• holy goſte. He y• is hurt, muſt praye continually for thoſe yt did hurt hī, or els he is in great defaute & ſyn. For as the ſurgē or medecyn cānot remedy the woūde as longe as theyr is hyerne in it, ſo y• prayer of him y•
                  
beareth maliee doth ꝓfet hī lytle Luke. xviii. or nothīg. And he doth ſyn, y• in his prayer to GOd dothe repete & opē his good dedes, as dyd y• phariſe laudīg hī ſelf more then god of his good dedꝭ O good ſiſ
                     •
                   pray to god cōtinually wt tearꝭ, pray nyght & daye, ceaſe not frō prayer. Be euermore wel armyd wt harnis made of good prayer, Let prayer neuer fall frō youre mouth, be ofte in prayer, wepe & wayle cōtinually. Ryſevp in the nyght to pray, watch and pray, watch al night in prayer, take a lytle nap and then pray agayne For continuall prayer putteth a waye all deuyllyſhe tēptacyon. Quotidiane and dayly prayer ouercōmeth y• deuelles dartꝭ & al his malyce, prayer is the fyrſt & cheyfeſt vertue agaynſt the aſſauttes of the wycked fend & his

tēptacyōs oratiō & prayer dothe ouercome all ye temptacyons of our goſtly enemy, it ſermoūteth & ouercōmeth al euyll ſpirytes. Good ſyſt let your prayer be pure & clene, and I exhorte you to pray for thoſe yt be good, yt they may cōtinew in theyr goodneſſe And for thoſe y• are noughtes, yt they may turne frōtheyr noughtinesto goodnes. Pray for your frēdes and for youre ennemies, and for all chryſten ſoules.
            
            
               Of holy leſſō the xlix. cha
               BY prayer we be purified frō al ſyn. By good leſſons we be taught what we ſhulde do, bothe are good. But yet it is better to praye, thē to rede. For whē we pray, we ſpeake to god, whē we rede, god ſpeketh to vs Good ſyſt yf ye deſyre to be cōtynually

wt god, be alwayes prayenge & redīge for deuine leſſō, is very neceſſary & profytable. By ſuche leſſons we lerne what we ſhuld do, what we ſhuld exchew, and where to we ſhulde tende, of this thynge ſayeth Dauid. The word of god is as a lanterne for my fete, y• is, for my affections. pſal. c. xiiii And as a light to my foote patthes & goyng, by diuine leſſon a mās vnderſtādng is increaſed
                     •
                   good leſſōs do inſtructe man to prayer & good workes, good leſſons do informe both life actiue & cōtemplatyue. And therfore it is wrytten. Bleſſyd is he y• doth Eccle. xiiii. thynk both day & nyght vpō the lawe of god. Prayer & good leſſons are y• wepēs, wt the which y• deuil is ouer cōmed, & the inſtrumētes, be y• which mē cō to eternal beatitude. By prayer & leſſō
                  
vyce is expelled & vertue in mā
                  
                     •
                   ſoule īcreſed. The hād mayde of god, ſhulde cōtinually pray and rede. For it is wryttē. I ſhall neuer Pſal. c. x viii be cōfoūded, if I cōſider welthy cōmaundemētes. Therfore my welbeloued ſyſt in god, pray oftē, & cōtynew in the meditaciō of holy ſcrypture, by dilygent in redynge of Goddes lawes. Uſe your ſelfe to rede ſcrypture. Let it be your dayly leſſō, your daily meditaciō. For ſuch holy and deuoute leſſons remoue the mynd frō worldly vanite, & augmēteth the vnderſtanding, ſuch deuyne leſſōs do tech mā what he ſhuld do, what he ſhuld exchue & flye, ye ſhal ꝓfite gretly yf ye folow y• ye rede. I pray y• lord to opē your hart ī his lawes & cōmaūdemētꝭ
            
            
               ¶ Of workes the .l. cha.
               
                  
THe ꝓphete Ieremias ſayeth. Thre. ii. Let vs lyft vp our hartꝭ wt our hādes to god. He y• praieth & laboureth doth lyft vp his hart & his hādes to god. But he y• prayeth & laboureth not, lyfte vp his harte to god but not his handꝭ And he y• laboureth & praieth not lifteth vp his hādꝭ to god but not his hart. Wherfore good ſyſt it is very neceſſary y• we lyft vp our hartꝭ by praier, & our hā
                  des by good operaciō & workes why ſo? Leaſt y• we be rep̄hēded to be negligēt in obſeruīg & kepīg of goddes cōmaūdemētꝭ, thī
                  kīg to optaine by only praier, or by onl
                     •
                   labut y• thīg y• we demaūd & deſyre, of this ſayeth ſ. Paule. i.. Theſſ. iii He y• wyl not labour ſhal not eat ye ſhuld euermore pray, rede, or labur, leſt ꝑaduētur ye ſpiryte of fornicacyon deceyue your Idle

mind al fleſhly & carnal deſyre is ouercomde by labour. O welbe loued ſyſter deuyde youre tyme in thre partes, in the fyrſtye ſhal pray, in the ſecond ye ſhall rede, & in the thyrde ye ſhall labour & work. Kyng Salomō throughe Idilneſſe wrapt hym ſelfe in to iii. 
                        ••
                     g. xi diuers kyndes of fornication, & through the great and feruēt deſyre he had there vnto, he worſhypped Idolles. Good ſyſter theſe thre thynges prayer, leſſon & labour, are very neceſſary. For by prayer we be pourged, by devine leſſō, we be inſtructed, & by labour & workes we be beatifyed & bleſſyd. As it is wrytten.
               Thou ſhall eat y• laboururs of thy hādes, y• ſhalbe bleſſed & wel Pſal. c. xxvii y• ſhalt be. And it at any tyme ye do leaue of reding, thē to auoyd ydelnes, ye ſhal labour for idelnes

is enmy to the ſoule, the deuyl doth very eſely deceiue thoſe that he findeth idle. O Chriſtes ſpouſe, beware leſt whē he ſhall behold & enquire of other mens doynges, that he fynde nothīge ī you, he may accuſe you of. And therfore I exhorte you, that ye be neuer idle, & pray god that ye may ſhew al other ye loue of god, not in wordes onely but alſo in good workes, for thē ye loue god whē for his loue ye do al y• good ye cā, for euery good & deuoute ſoule ſhulde manifeſtly both in worde & dede open & ſhew, y• he loueth god, of the which thynge it is wrytten. The bryde grome that is, Chryſt Ieſus, apparelīg Canti. viii the bryde, that is y• deuout ſoule ſayth, Lay me vpō your hert as a ſygnacle, & allo vpō your armes.

In y• hart, is mās thought in his armes, his labour, So y• welbeloued bryde grome is layde vpon your hart & harmes as a ſygne For by the good wyll & operacyō of man it is ſoone knowen what loue the ſoule bereth to her bryde grome Chryſt Ieſus, for the loue of god, is neuer Idle, & yf it be true loue, it doth many great workes. Therfore good ſyſter, I pray you to loue god ꝑfytely, & that for his ſake ye be neuer ydle, yf ye loue god perfytely, ye ſhal neuer be ydle, yf ye loue god truely, ye ſhall auoyde al ydlenes, if ye loue god wt all your hart, & with all your mynde, then for his ſake ye ſhal laye aſyde & dyſpyſe al ydlenes, the kingdome of heuen ſhal not be gyuen to thoſe that are ydle,

but to thoſe y• be ſtudius & dyligēt ī goddꝭ ſeruice, nor to no vacabūdes or erroniꝰ ꝑſōs, but to thoſe y• for goddes ſake do truli labour ī his ſeruyce. They y• are ſlouthful to do good workꝭ ſhal not be ꝑtakers of y• kīgdome of heuen. Lururiouſnes & bodely luſt doth ſone deceyue thoſe y• a
                     •
                   ydle & great wāderers Luxuryouſnes doth trouble hī very ſore whō ſhe fīdeth ydle, carnal appetyte & luſt giueth place to worke to diligēce, to labur & occupatiō. Amā may be diligēt labourouertred ſuch wātō luſtꝭ & deſyrꝭ, for whē y• body is wel traueled & we 
                     •
                  yd with laboure, it ſettethe not greatelye by ſuche tryfelynge matters. Wherfore good ſyſter beware and preuēt idlenes, loue no idlenes, werye youre bodye

wt labour, excercyſe your bodye wt good workes, & inquyre euermore for ſome ꝓfytable worke, y• your intentyō & mynde maye be occupied, Let your good workes and your good intentyō be euermore in god.
            
            
               ¶ Of lyfe actyue and cō
                  templatyue .the. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . Chapiter.
               I Acob ſawe a lather ſtandīge vpō the groūde, & angels aſcēdyng, Een. xxviii. & deſcēding, and the top of this lather touched heuē, All thoſe y• are p̄deſtynate to be ſaued, & thoſe that are in y• way of ſaluacyon, are ſet vpō this lather. This lather doth ſygnyfy y• church, aſwel militāt as tryū
                  phāt. The milytant is y• church of this worlde, the tryūphant y• celeſtiall church of heuē. There is vpō this lather thre orders of

men, ſeculers, actyues, & contē
                  platyues, The ſeculers are in ye loweſt degre, the actyues, in the hygher, & the contēplatiues in y• higheſt, of theſe thre orders ſumare in y• myll, ſome in the felde, & ſome in theyr beddꝭ. The myll is the ſeculer lyfe, the felde is y• wyll of y• ſeculer mā, In y• felde are the preachers of y• worde of of god, In thebed, is the loue of god, they y• are in y• myll, be they that cōpaſſe the world, and that leke & loue theſe worldly thingꝭ they y• are in the felde, are they y• eare the lāde, & ſow the worde of god amōge the people, they are in theyr beddꝭ y• vtterly dyſpyſe all worldly ſubſtaūce & ryches, at the fote of this lather, ſtande they that are worldly. In y• middle part therof, at they, that are

called acryues & in the hygheſte part therof are ye contēplatyues the which are very nye vnto heuen. For they thīke vpō nothīg, but y•, that is heuenly, they that go vp & downe this lather, are the angels, ye which aſcēde vp to god by cōtēplacyō, & deſcēde to theyr neyghbour, by cōpaſſyon, lyfe actyue is ye inocēcy of good workes, the cōtēplatyue lyfe, is the imaginacyō & ſpeculacyō of celeſty all thīges, the actyue life is comon to many, the contēplatyue to very fewe, ye actyue lyfe, vſeth well all worldly thynges, but the contēplatyue gyuen all to goddes ſeruyce, doth lytle or nothyng regarde the worlde.
               
                  ¶ The ſiſters demaūde.
                  WElbeloued brother, I praye you to open vnto me the differēces betwene the lyfe actyue and the contemplatyue.
               
               
                  
                  The brothers anſwere.
                  DEre ſyſter there is a greate dyfferēce betwene thē, for the actiue is to giue hī brede yt is a hungerde, to gyue wyſe coūſayle, to teache his neyghbours, to reduce & correct thoſe that are in erroure, to brige the proude to humylytye, to accorde thoſe yt are at debate, to vyſyte y• ſicke, to very y• dede, to redeme poore 
                        
                           
                        
                        pri
                     ſoners, to diſpēce & prouyde for euery mā as nede ſhal requyre, ye haue hard y• workes of lyfe actyue. Nowe I pray you harkē to y• workꝭ of lyfe cōtēplatyue. This cōtēplatyue lyfe kepeth togither y• chatyte of god & mā, & is quyet frō all exteryor actyō, hāgyng & clenīg onely to goddꝭ deſyre, takīg no maner of pleſure ī theſe wor
                        •
                     
                     ly

thynges, but diſpyſyng them to come to the very ſyght & fruy cyon of god, and beyng very ſory to remayne longe in this my ſerable worlde, and ponderous bodye, deſyreth effectuouſlye to come to the cōpanye of angels, there to laude god wt hympnes and other ſpirytuall ſonges, deſyrynge alſo to be among the celeſty all cytyzens of heuen, and there in the ſyght of almyghtye god to re: oyce in the eternal incorruptyon. Nowe good ſyſter ye haue hard both of the actyue and the cōtemplatyue lyfe, and therfore I wolde that with Mary. Luke 
                           〈◊〉
                        . Magdalene ye choſe the beſt parte, that is the cōtemplaty us life, y• lyfe actyue is right good, but the contēplatyue moch better, he that can profyte ī the actyue

ſhall the better come to the cōtēplatiue, of this ye may take an example by Iacob, the which loued Rachel intearely, Rachel Gene. xix. doth ſygnyfye the contēplatyue lyfe. Then they gaue him Lya, the which doth ſygnifye the actyue lyfe, this actyue lyfe dothe ſerue god in great labour & trauayle, y• is fedyng, nouriſhyng, receyuyng, clothing, vyſytyng, cōfortyng, & beryenge of ye pore, wt many ſuch workes of mercy, and yet Lya is the ſecōde chyld, for there are manye mo actyue people, then contemplatyue, but Rachell is as moche to ſay, as a ſhepe, or ſyeynge the begīnyng, for contēplatyue perſons are ſī
                     ple & as Innocent as ſhepe, far frō all worldly tumult & ſtryfe, cleuyng onely to deuyne contē
                     platyō,

and that to come to his ſyght y• ſayth, I that ſpeake vnto you, am the begīnyng. This Iohn̄. viii. Rachel had two doughters, for there are two maner of cōtēplatyues, ſome there are y• lyue ī comē, other there are, y• are ſolytary, & ſeperated frō al other, but lyfe contēplatyue is moch more perfyte, then is the actyue lyfe. And as y• egle doth fycher eyes ī the ſon beames, nor remoueth thē not, but whē he taketh ſome ſuſtenaūce, ſo deuoute ꝑſons gyuē to cōtēplacyō, at ſome times retourne frō cōtēplacyon to the actyue lyfe. For not wtſtādynge heuēly thīges are moch ꝓfytable, yet theſe inferyor & worldly thīges are ſo neceſſary ye we can not well be wtout thē. In ſo moche y• Chriſt ſpeakīg vnto the deuoute

ſoule giuē all to cōtēplacyō ſayth thus. Ryſe vp, & haſt you my welbeloued & fayre louer, Can. ii. & cū vnto me, as though he wolde ſay more plaīly. Ryſe vp & haſt you my louer by delectiō & faith, my doue by innocēce & ſī
                     plycyte, my fayre ſyſter by ye vertue of chaſtite. Riſe vp frō your ſwete eſtate, y• is frō your reſt of cōtēplacyō, ī the which ye deſyre to cōtēt & to pleaſe me ī ſalmode hipnes, prayer, & ſuch other ſpiritual ſōges & melody, haſt you therfore & cū hyther, y• is, come out to ꝓfyte your neighboures & cauſe thē by p̄dycacyō & good exāple to folow you. The vyſyō 
                     Ezechi. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . of y• beſtes in Ezechyel, y• which wēt & retorned not agayn, do ꝑtaīe to y• cōtinuāce of y• actiue life & y• beſtꝭ y• wēt & retorned agaīe, pertayne to life cōtēplatyue, for

whē mā boweth his mīde therto by & by through his infyrmyte, he is deiected & cleane tourned, but after he remēbreth him ſelfe agayne, he retourneth frō that he came fro, the which thyng cā
                     not be done in actyue lyfe. For yf a mā fall frō it neuer ſo lytle, by and by he is inwrapte & intā
                     gled wt vyce. Often tymes the ſoule of mā is exalted frome the earth to heuen, and ouercomed wt carnall infyrmytye, it deſcendeth agayn from heuē to earth. Alſo god doth vyſyte manye ſeculer men, & through his greate grace, doth lifte thē vp, in to cō
                     templacyō, Alſo by his ſecrete & vnknowē iudgemēt, he ſuffreth many a contēplatyue mā to fall to theſe earthly matters & ſo leueth them. And as he y• is deed,

& buryed doth ceaſe frō al worldly buſynes, ſo doth the cōtēplatyue mā ceaſe frome all worldly workes, and as they that come frō the actyue lyfe, be buryed in the quyetnes & reſt of contēplacyō, ſo y• contēplatyue lyfe doth receyue thē as buryed in it, that depart & come frō the worldlye lyfe, and as the actyue lyfe is y• graue of the ſeculer and worldly lyfe, ſo is y• contēplatyue the monumēt & graue of the actyue lyfe. And as good holy men at ſometymes come frō the ſecretnes of contēplatyō to the actiue lyfe, ſo they retourne agayne to the ſecretenes of lyfe contemplatyue, and theyr in warde contemplatiō, there to laude god where they lernde how to do good workes abrode to the laude & praiſe

of almyghtye god, and as it is goddes wyl that man gyuen to cōtēplacyō at ſome tymes ſhuld leaue it, & come abrode for other mēnes profyte, ſo at ſome tymes his mynde is that no mā ſhulde dyſturbe or vnquyet theim, but that they ſhulde reſt in theyr ſecrete & ſwete contēplacyon, the whiche thyng, god doth declare for byddyng the maydēs of Hieruſalē, that they awake not his ſpouſe, layng. O ye madens of hieruſalē, I adiure you, by the wylde gottes & hartes of the feldes, Canti. ii. that ye awake not my louer vntyll ſhe haue luſt to ryſe, that is to ſay, that ye call not vp nor awake not the deuour ſoule gyuē to cōtēplatyon, & ocupyed in prayer, & dyuyne lectures, nor prouoke her not to any vtward

operacyon, vntyll that ſhe wyll her ſelfe, that is awake her not vntyl y• tyme of her cōtēplacyō, be exſpyred, & vntyll ſhe wyll be awaked frō her interyor reſte & ſwete quietnes, yet ī this mortal lyfe, there is no man that can ꝑfytely contēplate god as ſaythe ſaynt Iohn̄ in his apocalypſys. There was ſcylence in heuen aboute Apoca. viii. cha. halfe an hoüre, heuen is taken for the ſoule of euery iuſt mā, as god ſayth by the prophet Eſay. Heuen is my ſeate, ſo that Iſai. lxvi when quyetnes of lyfe contemplatyue is in the mynde, then there is ſcylēce ī heuē y• is in the ſoule, for the trybulacyon of all earthly thīges are thē in quyet & far frō mās cogitaciō & thought. But for aſmoch as cōtēplacyō cānot be ꝑfyte ī this worlde

we ſayde not that there was ſcylēce, in heuen a hole houre, but halfe an houre, but he that wyl lyue ꝑfytely in cōtēplacyō, muſt leue all worldlye matters, & of this ſpeaketh God in y• Cantycles. I ſlepe, but my harte is a Canti. v. wake, as though he wolde ſaye more playnly. Whē I ſlepe and kepe me frō worldly troubles, inwardly in my mynde, I reuolue & thīke vpon celeſtyall & ſpirituall thyngꝭ. Alſo y• arche of Noe the which was double chāberd, ſygnyfyeth the lyfe actyue & cō
                     tēplatiue, of y• which two, the actyue is loweſt & the cōtēplatyue hygheſt. And it hadde (as ſome ſay) thre chābers y• which do ſygnifye thre orders of mē, that are cōpryſed in the church, that is, thoſe y• ar maried, thoſe that are

contynent, and thoſe that lyue chaſt as virgyns of this contemplaciō like god ſaieth in his goſpell. Yf ye wyll be perfyte, ſel al y• ye haue, & giue all to the poore Math. xix. and ye ſhall haue a treaſoure in heuen, & come & folow me. And agayne he ſayeth. Mary hathe Luke. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . choſen the beſt parte, the whiche ſhall not be taken from her. For the lyfe contemplatyue ſhal neyther be taken awaye in this lyfe nor in no nother, but the actyue life taketh his end in this world So doth not the lyfe contemplatyue for it continueth for euermore. The lyfe actyue doth end in this world, the cōtemplatyue begynneth heare, & is made perfyte in heuen. Good ſyſter I exhorte you for the loue of god to deſpyſe this preſent worlde, and

for his loue to leue of all worldly cares & thoughtes. Gyue all your mynde & ſtudy to god. Let no worldly care wtdraw you frō goddes ſeruyce. Auoyde & caſte frō you, al ſuch thynges as may let youre good purpoſe. And I wolde coūſell you to hate wtall your harte & mynde, all that the worlde doth loue. Be deade in this world, and with draw your ſelfe as a deade perſone frō this preſent lyfe, and as a dead ꝑſon deſyre not y•glorye of this world Good ſyſter haue no mynde vpō the worlde but euen as thought ye were beryed, withdrawe your ſelfe from all worldly buſineſſes for yf ye ſo do, ye ſhal optayne y• eternall and euerlaſtyng blyſſe.
               
            
            
               ¶ Of curioſite che. lij. cha
               
                  
                  MY welbeloued Sy
                  
                     •
                  er I exhorte you to ſtudy cōtinually to profyte in good workes, and y• ye deſyre not the vanites whiche other do deſyre. But I exhorte you to cō
                  ſyder the goodnes ye ſhulde do, for a certayne wyſe man ſayeth. In vanite
                     •
                   and vayne thinges be not curiouſe, nor it is not for your profyte, nor yet nedefull to know that paſſeth mans wyt to know And reaſō wold y• heſhuld i. Corni. iiii leue of to iuge other mens mindes that can not perfetely know what men thinke. Why ſo? For we iudg that, y• is vncertaine vntyl y• lord come y• which ſhal giue clere knowledge of al ſuch thīgꝭ which a
                     •
                   ſecret & far frō mās knowledg, & ſhal manifeſtly opē the

ſecret counſell of mens hartes. Alſo reaſon requyreth that he refrayne from ſyn, that deſyreth to correcte other mens, vnwiſe perſons of tentymes by the correction of other mens fautes, diſcloſe theyr owne. For as longe as mā knoweth not his owne fautes (the which he ſhuld both know & bewayle) he goeth curiouſly aboute to know other mens. But yf he remēbre & behold hym ſelf well, he ſhall not greatly īquire of other mens miſdedes, for he ſhall fynde in hym ſelfe, that he may be wayle & amend. Saynt I ſodore ſayeth. That we can ſoner correcte other mens vices, then we can augment, or increce theyre vertues. Nor we be not ſo dilygēt to know what good mē do as we be to knowe what euyl

they do. Wherfore good ſyſter I exhorte you reyther to amend your owne fautes thē to correct other mens. And fyrſt to loke vpon your owne myſdedes, and then vpon other mens. Be dilygent for youre owne correctyon, & careful for your owne welth & amendement. Neuer deſyre to medle with that thynge, that ye haue nothyng to do with all.
               Nor be not curiꝰ to know where of men do ſpeke, nor what other men do. Flye curioſyte, leue to be curioſe, and to know howe other men lyue. Let no curyoſyte trouble or deceyue you. Loke not ſo vpon other mens maners that ye for get your owne, & take hede ye be as diligent to correct youre owne myſdoynges, as ye wolde be to correcte other mens

Be not curioſe to know y• thing that is ſecrete, beware yeinquire not to knowe that ꝑtayneth nothyng vnto you. Kepe that thīg ſecrete that ye haue learnde by holy ſcrypture. Seke for no more thē is wryttē, ſeke for no more then holy ſcrypture doth ſhewe you, nor neuer go aboute to lern that ye ſhulde not lerne, lerne y• curioſite is a verye daungerus and a perilus preſumptiō, curioſite is a perilus ſcience, for it ꝓuoketh man to hereſy, and bryngeth a mans minde to noughtie tales & fables, & maketh a man bold in y• thyng, y• is very dark, & hard to be vnderſtāded & doth caſte hym into ignoraunt matters. Good ſiſter amēd your lyfe wt all the diligence ye can, ye ye may here af
                     •
                   come to euerlaſtīg
            
            
               
               ¶ Of watche the .liij. cha
               MY welbeloued ſiſter liſtē to y• lordꝭ ſayng. Watche, for math. xxii. ii ye knowe not whē the lord ſhall come. And agayne I ſaye vnto you all, watch you, and SPeter ſayeth. Be wyſe & watche i. Peter. iiii in prayer. For whē men ſhal ſay that theyr is peace and ſecurite, then ſhall ſodeyn death & deſtruction come vpō thē, & Salomō ſayeth. They are iuſt and wyſe, and theyr workes are in goddes Eccle. ix. handes, and yet they can not tel whether they be 
                     •
                  orthe to be loued or hated. Why ſo? For al vncertayn thynges are reſerued to the tyme ye is to come, My good ſyſter, god hath kepte & hydden frō vs the tyme of his cōmyng, that by ſuch vncertaynte & long

taryeng, we ſhulde often tymes thinke that he is euermore redy to come. For we be ignorant of his cōmynge. We muſt ſo paſſe forth the ioye of this world, that we forget not the bytterneſſe of the iudgement that is to come.
               The deuyl doth often tymes deceyue man, and ſo leadeth hym to ſyn. For when he perceyueth that man is troubeled and ſory for his miſfaute, then by a certayn ſecurite & ſurenes he deceyueth hī agayne. Wherfore good ſyſter when ſo euer we do anye good dedes, it is nedefull alſo yt we remēber oure miſdedes, leaſt that by ignoraunce of our fautes, we reioyce vnwyſely in oure good workes. And god wold we ſhulde be ignoraunt of our laſt houre, bycauſe we ſhulde be

euermore indoute therof, & redely p̄pare our ſelfes vnto it wt out any aſſurance. ſ. Iſodore ſayeth. Let not the iuſt truſt in his iuſtnes, nor y• ſynner miſtruſt nor deſpere of y• great mercy of God but let them haue in harte both hope & feare. And ſo to truſt vnto his mercy, that they forget not to fere his iuſtice. For notwithſtandyng that the conuerſacyon of holy men is probable & well alowed, yet it is vncertayne, to what ende they are prepared vnto. And therfore a man ſhulde neuer be without feare, for it is not man, but GOd that iudgeth mans penaunce & ſatiſfaccyon. And of this thynge ſayeth Ceſarius, howe moch as man is in ſuertie of his myſfautes ye are paſt ſomoch y• more he muſt take

hede & fle thoſe that are to come. Good ſyſter byleue me, yt meditacyō of death is the very lyfe of a wyſe man. Therfore ye ſhall do wyſely, if ye cōtinually do think vpō god, & at ſome timꝭ vpōdeth for a certayn wyſe man ſayeth.
               Bleſſed is he that is alwayes in feare. Wherfore good virgyn I exhorte & monyſhe you, to be alwayes in feare, in doute, diligēt, & ſubtyl againſt y• tēptacions of the deuyll, and to be in cōtinual watche, ſtryte, & battell, agaynſt hym, his ſubtyll, & crafty tēptacyons. Herken good Chryſtys ſpouſe, what god ſayeth. Bleſſid is that ſeruant, whome God at Luke. xii. his cōmyng doth finde watſhīg Wherfore yf ye wyll watch and ſet all your mynde vpon him, ye ſhalbe counted in eternall beatitude

amonge thoſe that are fortunate & bleſſed. Ye ſhalbe eſtemed to be bleſſed, yf ye lyfte vp the eyes of your ſoule with good deuocyon vnto god y• very trew lyght, and wtout dowte ye ſhall be greatly fortunate & bleſſed, if ye diligētly and effecteouſly do watche to god ward, for he hath ꝓmyſed to crowne thoſe yt watch of this it is wryttē, her eyes are lyke doues eyes vpō y•ful riuers Canti. v. y• which are waſhte wt mylke, y• eyes of y• ſpouſe, are the good & deuout peple, the which lyke doues do liue in ſimplicite, and by theyr good p̄ching & good example giuyng bring many other to the way of ſaluacion. They are eſtemed to be vpōy• riuer bicauſe they ar cōtynually ī y•cōuerſaciō & ſtudy of holy ſcripture & waſht wt mylke, yt is, they are through

the grace of god, & the bleſſed ſacramēt of bapteme pourged frō all ſyn, & what other thyng may we vederſtāde by the full ryuer, but the ꝓfoūde & ſecret lernyng of holy ſcrypture, ye which when we here it, doth cōforth & refreſh vs. Ferthermore the doues ſyt moſt comēly vpō ye ryuer to ſe ye ſhadow of the byrdes yt fle in the ayre, ye which by goyng into the water, auoide al daūger, ſo good mē by redyng of holy ſcrypture, ꝑceyue & ſe the ſubtilite & crafty neſſe of ye deuil, & by ſuch deſcripcyon of thinges, they know him as by a ſhadowe, & ſo auoydeth both hym, & his deceytefulneſſe. Therfore loke yt ye be cōtynually occupyed in ye meditacyon of holy ſcrypture, for in yt ye ſhall fynde howe to auoyde al Satās

craftynes and wylynes. And agayne good virgyn I exhorte you, to cōmyt youre ſelfe holy to the good counſell of holy ſcrypture, y• is, that ye do nothīge but as holy ſcrypture ſhal lerne and informe you, for ye ſhall fynde therin, how ye maye exchew and auoyde y• deceytes of the deuyll. Ferthermore I exhorte you to kepe you vpō y• bankes of holy ſcripture for feare of reueners, that is, leaſt y• wicked ſpiryte do ſodenly engrype you, & deceyue you. Therfore I wolde counſell you to watche, & wt all diligence to auoyde his fraude & deceytefulnes. Alas wretches as we be, why do we not lerne & vnderſtād y• all our thoughtes are openly knowē to god, or euer we put thē in execuciō? Dauyd ſayeth, God pſal. xiv.
                  
is he onely that knoweth & ſearcheth mans harte and mynde. Therfore good ſiſter let vs thīk that we be continually before God, let vs lerne & knowe yt we be but earth & aſſhes. Let vs alſo cōſider yt the lorde is ter
                     •
                  yble rewardyng euery man after his deſeruyng. He is not far frō vs, nor wyl not tary very long. He wyll come & ſaue vs. Let vs therfore watche cōtinually wt good deuocyō, yt at his cōmyng & whē he ſhall knocke at our dores, he fynde vs not a ſlepe, but brode wakīge in his lawde, loue, & holy ſeruice. Let vs therfore run Ioh
                        〈…〉
                     . 
                        •
                     ii. whileſt we haue light, leſt y• darkneſſe do ouer take vs. For Salomō ſaieth Bleſſed is he, y• heares Pro. viii me, & that kepeth dayly watche at my dore, & at my poſtornes.

For he y• ſhal fynde me, ſhal find lyfe, & ſhal haue the goodnes of god. Therfore good ſyſter I monyſhe you, that wt all your hart & mynde ye watche in the loue & ſeruyce of god, y• at the dredfull day of dome, ye may fynde hym kynde and mercyfull vnto you. Let no chance fynde you vnprepared, thynk vpō al chāces, & remēber yt there is nothynge but y• may chance. Thynk euermore vpō the wretchednes y• is to come And ī ꝓſperyte, remēber y•aduerſite may aſſayle you, thīke euermore vpō euyl, leſt any ſuch thīg chance, for it is a point of a wyſe mā, to p̄meditate & fore thynk y• loſſe of ſuch chances, for yf it be thought vpō it is y• more eaſyer to be ſuffered, & born if amā loke for amiſhap it may be y• bett born

the premeditaciō & forethynkīg of a thīg, breketh & diminiſheth the grefe therof, but yf any ſuch thyng chaūce vnloked for, it greueth a man very ſore, for ſoden harme troubeled a mā greuouſly, y• a man hath not ꝓuyded for doth vexe him ſhrodly, all ſoden tēpeſt do put men in great feare and euery ſoden thynge is moch more troubelous, then is y•, that man thinketh vpō. Therfore prepare your hart & mynde both to good & euyll, & in ꝓſperite remē
                  ber aduerſite, & inaduerſyte remēber ꝓſperite. Be alwaies wa
                     •
                   thyng, 
                     •
                  eſt euyl thoughtꝭ aſſayl
                     •
                   you. Loue holy ſcrypture, & deſpiſe all carnalite, for ſo ſhall ye come to the celeſtial court & ioye euerlaſtynge.
            
            
               Of wyſdome the .liiij. cha
               
                  
                  MY deare ſyſter har
                  
                     •
                  ē vnto goddes wordes, be you as wyſe as the Serpente, & Math. x. as ſimple as y• doue and Salomon ſayth. The ſymplycyte of iuſt men ſhall dyrecte Prouer. xi. them, and the ſubplantacyon of peruerſe perſons, ſhall dyſtroye thē. The good ſīple mans way, is goddes waye, & they that do naughtely, ſhalbe euer more in feare, the Iuſtyce of the ſymple man ſhall gyde his ſoule, but y• proude mā, ſhall dye in his naw tynes, the Innocent perſon beleueth euery body, they y• deceyue the iuſt and leade hym to ſynne, ſhall dye, and the ſymple ſhall poſſeſſe his goodes, they that are euyl, do hate the ſymple, but they that are iuſte, ſhall guyde

thē, holy & ſymple ruſticyte profyteth it ſelfe onely, & as moche as it throughe good lyfe, dothe augmēt & profyte the church ſo moch it damageth & hurteth it, yf it reſyſte not thoſe y• wtſtāde veryte and truethe. And. ſ. Hierome ſayth, that man ſhuld not requyre of goddꝭ ſeruaūtes bodely ornamētes, but y• ſīplycyte & mekenes of mynde, nor eſteme al holynes to be ī theyr tōgues, but to be onely in the pure and ſīple cōſciēce. And of two vnperfyte thīges, holy ruſticyte is moche better thē ſynful eloquence, holy ruſticyte is moch more alowed, thē vaine loquacite. Good ſyſter if your intēcyō & mynd be ſimple before the ſyghte of god, your workꝭ at y• day of iudgmēt ſhall not be obſcure and darke.

And they that can not be chaſtē by the workes of Iuſtyce, cā by no meanes be innocētes by ſymplycyte. The church doth begin the way of trueth and of ſimplycyte wt feare, and endeth it with charytye. God doth not onely take hede to mans wordes, but alſo to the harte and mynde of man, and he louethe thoſe that ſerue hī wt the ſīplicyte of hart, of this ſpeaketh god in the Can tycles ſayng. My doue is but Canti. vi. one, my perfite is alone & onely choſē out for her mother. Oure mother be generacyō is y• grace of god, to the which there is choſen out a doue, for ſhe bryngeth them onely togither, that abyde in ſymplycyte, and vnytie, For when many faythfull people ſet theyr hole mynde and intencyō
                  
vpon god, when they withe one mynde deſyre god onely, & whē they ar aſſēbled ī charyte wt one hart & one mynd, thē they ſo ioyned make of diuers mēbres but one body. And al they that lyue in ſimplicite & vnyte are but as one doue, & they that men do diſpraiſe and geſt at, in this world are greatly in goddes fauoure. Therfore good ſiſter let vs pray Sapi. v. god, that it wyll pleaſe hym to ſēde vs frō heuē the holy gooſte by whoſe ayde we may obtayne the ſīplicyte of the doue, the wiſdome of the Sarpent, & that we may be ſimple in malyce, & wyſe in doyng of good workes. A ſarpent is a very ſubtyll beaſte for we rede of y• Serpēt called Iaſpys, the which perceyuyng the inchaūter comīg towardes her,

doth laye one of her eares vpon the groūde, & ſtoppeth the other wt her tayle, leſt ſhe ſhuld heare the voyce of the inchanter. And the prophet ſpeakyng of thoſe y• are cruell & wiſe in all naughtynes Pſal. lvii. ſaith, that they are in a fury as is the deth ſarpēt ſtoppīg of her eares, becauſe ſhe wold not here y• voice of y• inchāter. Therfore good ſyſter in Chryſt Ieſu, folowe the ſarpēt in this cace, y• is, ſtoppe youre eares y• ye here no euyll wordes, praye god that the oyle of ſynners anoynte not pſalm. cxl. your hed, the oyle of the ſynner, is y• laude of a flatterer, the ſarpent ſtoppeth her eares becauſe ſhe wyl not here the inchanters voyce, & ſo muſte you ſtop your eares, that ye here not the vycyouſnes of flatterers and ſlaūderers,

the ſarpent Iaſpis is wyſe for he wyll not here yt wordes of the inchanter, leſt he ſhulde dye loone after, be you wyſe alſo, & let no euyll wordes enter in by your eares to your ſoule, leſt he diſt: oye you, therfore yemuſt nother haue the wyſdome of ye ſarpēt wtout y• ſymplicite of y• doue nor the ſimplicite of the doue wt out y• wiſdome of y• ſarpēt, to thē tēt y• the wyſdome of the ſarpēt maye 
                     •
                  uycken vp ſīplicite, to auoyde that, y• is not good, & that the ſymplicite of the doue, maye temper wyſdome to do that thīg that is good. This doue hath, vii. propre vertues ī her, y• which ye your ſelfe through ye grace of the holy goſt may haue. The doue doth ſytte very ofte vpon the riuer ſyde to ſe the commīge

of the hauke, ſo to auoyde hym & to be out of daūger. The doue choſeth euermore of y• beſt corne The doue neuer ſmyteth wt her byll. The doue doth oftē tymes fede the yonlynges of other byrdes. The doue hath no gall, the doue maketh her neſt in y• holes of olde walles, & for her ſonge ſhe hath lamētacyō & mournīg. Therfore pray god wt all dylygence, that it wyll pleaſe hym to ſende you theſe goodly vertues, that is to ſay, that ye maye reſte your ſelfe vpō the ryuer ſyde of holy ſcripture, to auoyde by the good admonycyon & lernynges therof, the wilyues of the deuyl. Choſe oute the beſte ſentences and ſainges therof to fede your ſelfe wt all, & fede the yonlinges of other beaſtes, that is to ſaye,

reuoke thoſe by good example, & ſymple cōmunycacyō, yt by ſyn are alyenate frō god, cōuert thē & brīg thē to god again. Smite not wt your byll, that is to ſay, Ye ſhall nother ſay nor do no euyll to your neyghbour. Nor ye ſhal haue no gal in you, that is, ye ſhall not be furyous nor angery, ye ſhall buylde your neſte in olde walles, y• is, ye ſhal haue al your hope ī god. Take mournyng for youre ſōge, yt is to ſay, As men of this worlde reioyce in worldlye muſyke, ſo take you your delyte & comfort in ſpirytuall ſythyng and heuynes. Therfore good ſyſter as I haue ſayd vnto you before, wt all ſtudye & dylygēce ye muſte flye & auoyde the ſubtyl craftynes of y• deuyl, and with the ſimplycyte of lyfe,

ye muſte haue wyſdome. For he that doth not mingle ſimplicite & wyſdome togyther, ſhalbe deceyued. And agayn good ſyſter I exhorte you, to p̄payre a dwelling place for god in your hart, that when it ſhall pleaſe hym to come withe the father and the holy gooſte, he may remayne cō
                  tynually in you.
            
            
               Of tēptacyō the .lv. cha.
               GOod ſyſter harken vnto. ſ. Iames wordes. Reſyſt the Iames. iiii deuyll, and he ſhall flye frō you, and ſaynte Hierome ſayth. There is nothyng ſtronger thē he is, that ouercometh y• deuyll. And lykewyſe there is nothyng more feble and wake, thē he is, that the fleſhe ouercometh. The deuyls dartes muſt be quēched

and ouercomed wt colde, wt watche & great faſtyng, our ſubtyll enemy y• deuyl loketh daily how he may deceiue vs, nor he careth not to diſtroy our bodies, ſo yt he may dyſtroy our ſoules, he doth dyſtroye our ſoules, whē be tēptacyō of ſyn he diſtroyeth y• chryſtē & faythful people, but yet he tēpteth goddꝭ ſeruaūtꝭ no more thē god doth ſuffer hī, ſuch tēptacyō is ryght ꝓfytable for goddes ſeruaūtꝭ, for by ſuch tēptacion he doth not deceyue thē, but le
                     ••
                  e & īſtruct thē, for god doth often tymes turne ſuch temptatyon prepared for mans deſtruccyon, to the cōforte & profyte of mās ſoule, for y• ſeruaūtꝭ of god could neuer ſuffre ſuch deuilyſh tēptacyō, but that god through great pytye refrained theyr malyce.

And not wt ſtāding y• deuyll doth couet & deſyre to tempt mā yet yf god ſuffre hī not he ſhall neuer p̄uayle, the deuyls minde & intēt is euermore wycked, yet by goddꝭ ſuffraūce his power is iuſt, the deuyll naturally dothe ſeke to tēpt mā vniuſtly, but yet he cā not tempte hī, wt out the lycēce & ſuffraūce of god, & of this thyng it is wryttē, The ſpiryte of god dyd vexe Saull ful ſhrowedly, i. Reg. xvi he was there as the ſpirytie, of god, Why was he euyll then? and yf he were euyll, wherfore was he ye ſpirite of god? In this place is cōpryſed ī two wordes the iuſte power of god, and the vniuſte wyll and intent of y• deuil, For this ſpirite of hī ſelfe was noughtes, he was y• ſpirite of god through the iuſt power, the whiche he receued of god,

nor it is not the deuyll, y• ſēdeth vyce to man, for he is the onely nouryſher therof, nor he can no where noury ſhe nor increace it but there onely, where he perceiueth to be great delectacyō and pleaſure, but yf we wolde reiect ſuch vyle delectacyō & thoughtꝭ he as vtterly confoūded wolde ſoone leaue vs, and ſo myghte we breake the wepē & armour of all his tēptacyō. The deuyl fayneth hī ſelfe to be a good ſpiryte & the angel of light, & wold of tē tymes deceyue goddes ſeruaūtꝭ but the dyſcreſyon of good men muſte be ſuch as may iudge betwyxt good & euyl, to auoid his fraude & trūperye, or els by this inq̄ſicyō of Ioſue ſayng. Are ye our frēde or our aduerſary? And Ioſue. v. it is wryttē in Hieremy, yf ye deuide

yt is good frō that, yt is 
                     •
                  uil ye ſhall be to me as my nowne mouth. The deuyl to y• ſyght of worldly mē is terrible, but he is but vyle to ye ſyghte of the choſē ſeruauntes of god, vnfaythfull people fere the deuill as a lyon, but they y• are ſtrōge in byleue & fayth, ſet no more by hī thē by a ſmale worme, & when they ſee hī, they diſpyſe hī. The deuyl is a very ſlyperus ſarpēt, for if his fyrſt ſuggeſtyō & tētacyō be not wt ſtāded & reſyſted, he crepethe into mā or euer he fele hī, the vycyous tētacyon of y• deuyll, is a eaſy thyng to be brokē, but yf it be not well takē hede of & auoyded, or if we let it run ī a cuſtom it wyll ſo increace & ꝓſpere, that it ſhalbe very hard to ouercome it. The deuyl or euer he tēpt mā
                  
doth fyrſt conſyder his nature, prepayre his wepens, & then beſege hym on that ſyde, where he ſuppoſeth he may by ſyn ſo
                     •
                  eſt ouercome hī, & ſ. Iſydory ſayth, that he 
                     •
                  ēpteth mā moſt in that thynge, wherto he ꝑceyueth his cōplectyō moſt inclyned, as he doth that draweth water, ye whiche wyll draw ī no nother place, but where he perceiueth that it runneth moſt ſwyfteſt. The deuyl coueteth to deceyue mā at al tymes, but ſpecyally, at his departynge, and y• is it, that was ſayd vnto ye ſarpēt at the begynnyng. Thou ſhalt lay watch for hī at his ende, not wt ſtādynge a Gene. i
                        •
                     i. mā be neuer ſo good & vpryght yet he is not ſure in this world, And therfore he muſt dayly humiliate hi ſelf, & take good heed

that he be not deceyued. Wherfore good ſyſter, it is very neceſſary we pray vnto god almygh tye yt he ſuffre vs not to be tempted in this worlde, more then we may bere or ſuffre, for god doth reſtrain our enemies power, becauſe he ſhuld not do ſuch hurt, as his wil is to do. And in y• can tycles y• holy gooſt reproueth hī 
                  Canti. iii
                        •
                     . ſaynge. Lyfte thy ſelf vp thou northe wynde, & come hyther yu ſouth wynde, & blow ouer al my gardē, & thē ſhal y• aromatyke & ſwete fragrant ſauers cū ſorth. The north wynd y• which throughe his great & feruēt colde cauſeth ſlouthfulnes, doth ſygnyfy no nother thīg but our goſtly enemy the deuyl, the which at the hathe once tēpted mā, & is īpoſſe ſſiō of hī, cauſeth hī to be ſlouthful ī al good workꝭ y• ſouthwīde

beynge both ſwete & hote dothe ſygnify y• holy goſt y• which aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he hathe neuer ſo lytle towched the ſoules of good mē loſeth thē from al ſlouthfulnes, makynge thē ſtedfaſt ī the loue of god, let therfore this north wynde, that is, this euyl ſpyryte departe frō goddes churche and from euery deuout ſoule, that he tempte no man more thē behoueth, & let the ſouthe wynde come & blow vpō the garden, & the aromatike ſauers ſhal comfort, then ſhal the holy goſt come & powre the fyre of charite into theyr myndes, & vnbynde thē frō al temptation & ſlothful negligēce. The which thynge ones done the ſwete & redolette ſauers ſhal ſprynge and come abrode, for at the cōmyng of the holy goſt, the herte y• was

ſlouthful ſhal chaunge, & be moued to good workes, and ſhall floure lyke a garden, & after the floure it ſhall bryng forth ſwete redolent, and nuryſhyng fruyte with the which he may by good example repaſt and refreſh both hym ſelfe and his neyghboure.
               
                  The ſyſters demaunde.
                  GOod brother I pray you to ſhew me what remedy ther is, agaynſt the temptacion of the deuell,
               
               
                  The brothers anſwere.
                  
                     MY welbeloued ſiſter in Chryſte Ieſu the beſt remedy for him that is yet ſore vexed & tempted wt vice and deuyllyſh temptacyons, is this, that the more he is tempted

the more he takethe hym in his prayers. And therfore yf anye worldlye thoughte do trouble youre mynde, or intyce and perſwade you to do any thīge wrōgfully, by pure prayer & deuoute watche it may ſone be ſhakē of. And therfore when ye praye, be cuſtomably wt all deuocyon in the ſight of almyghty god, that the temptacyon that is nowe at hande, maye the more eaſely be repelled and ouercōmed. Alſo good ſyſter, ye ſhall vnderſtāde that we muſt not onely ſtryue againſt ſuch deuylliſh tēptacyōs but alſo agaynſte y• vyce of the foule fylthy & ſtinkynge fleſſhe, why ſo? For ye fleſhe doth couet agaynſt the ſpiryte, & the ſpirite 
                        
                           •
                        ala. v. agaynſt the fleſhe. And therfore we ſhuld ſo contyne w in prayer

that throughe the grace of god we myght ouercōe ſuch ſuggeſtyons, ſuche carnall deſyres, & deuylly ſhe tēptacyōs, for contynuall prayer doth quench & debate ſuche vycyous impugnacyons, contynuall prayer dothe ſurmoūt & ouercome the deuyls dartes, prayer is the hed vertue agaynſt the aſſaultes of all tēptacyon. Therfore good ſiſter as I haue tolde you, by pure oraſon & prayer, with holy watche, ye may ouercome all diabolyke tēptacyō: but yf ye fele y• moleſtiouſnes of y• fleſhe, yf your fleſhe doth yet prycke you, yf as yet y• remēbraūce of carnal delectaciō doth trouble you, yf your fleſſhe do ve
                        •
                     e you, yf lechery do 
                        •
                     ēpte you, if delecraciō do ꝓuoke you to ſyn, call dethe to remēbraūce, thīk vpō ye ingemēt yt is to come

remembre the tormentes & paynes of hell, the perpetual fyer of hell, & the horryble paynes that be there, for the remembraunce of the hote burnynge fyre of hel ſhall quinche the heate of al luxuriuſnes and lychery.
               
            
            
               ¶ Of dreames the .lvi. ca
               MY welbeloued ſyſter harken vnto me. The wycked ſpirytes do oftentymes by nyght trouble mens myndes & vnderſtandynges with dyuers viſyons and oftētymes they do manifeſtly beate mens bodyes. Dreames do chāce after dyuers maners, ſome by repletion, and ſome chaunce as we know by experience by euacuatyon, & ſome by thought, for mooſte cōmenly

of that thyng that mā thynketh vpon in the day, he ſhall dreame in the nyght. And many dremes do chance by y• illuſyons of the deuyll, as ſayeth Salomon.
               Dreames haue cauſed manye a Eccle. 34. one to erre, and they that haue truſted in them, haue ben deſtrued. There are certayne viſyons which ar to be regarded for they chance by Godly reuelacion, as we do rede in the olde teſtament of Ioſeph Iacobs ſon, the which through dreames was preferde Gene. xli. before all his brethrē. We do rede lyke wyſe of Ioſeph, huſband Math. ii, to our bleſſed lady mother and mayde, the whiche in a dreame was warned he ſhulde fle wt the chylde into Egypt. Somtimes ſuch viſions are myngled wt cogitaciō & illuſions, or wt cogita

cyon & reuelacion as ſayeth Daniel. Dany. ii He that openeth the miſteres, ſhall ſhewe thinges yt are to come. And notwithſtandynge y• ſome of theſe dreames be trewe, yet we ſhuld not lyghtly byleue them. For they chāce by dyuers Imaginations & we knowe not perfetly frō whenſe or by what meanes they come, and therfore we ſhulde not be light of credēce leſt y• the fynd trāfigure him ſelf i. Corni. xi. into an angel of light & through our ſiplicite deceiue vs. At ſometymes the fyndes deceyue thoſe that be curius to take hede to dreames, & tell them the trueth in ſome thynges, to deceyue thē in many other. And notwitſtandynge ſuche dreames chance to be euē ſo as they ſayde, yet men ſhulde not byleue them, leſt they

procede of illuſiō, as witneſſeth ſcripture ſayng Yf they tel you and it chance to be ſo, yet byleue it not. Dreames ar likened vnto augures, the whiche do Iudge thynges by the chatteryng and flyght of byrdes, and they that beholde ſuche thynges, are cald auguriens, therfore men ſhulde not byleue them, notwithſtandynge they appeare to be trewe they that truſte in dremes or in theſe ſo the ſayers haue no truſte in god, & they ar likened to him yt foloweth ye wind, & to thoſe yt go aboute to take a mans ſhadowe Theſe ſo the ſayngꝭ ar but lyes dremes, and deceytefulneſſe, we ſhulde neuer beleue dreames leaſt they deceyue vs, let our hope be onely fyred in god, and as for dremes let vs not care for, ye
                  
which thynge ſhalbe very acceptable vnto god. And therfore my good ſyſter I exhorte you, that ye put not your confidēce in dremes, but in almyghtye god. For yf ye truſt to ſuch vanitꝭ, ye ſhal be ryght ſoone deceyued. Therfore regard thē not, but ſet your hope perfetly in the prouydence of god, and ſo althynge bothe in this world, and in tyme to come, ſhall proſpere with you.
            
            
               Of the ſhortnes of life the lvii. Chapiter.
               
                  DEare ſyſter, harken vnto Salomōs wordes. A
                     •
                   that ye cādo, Eccle. ix do it out of hande.
               For neyther worke, nor reaſon, nor ſcyence, nor yet wyſdome ſhalbe in the inferior ꝑtꝭ to y• which ye ar going. Amā
                  alōly

may do good ī this world, for in another worlde good workes are not loked for, but the reward of good workes. This life is very caduke & ſhorte, wher of ſ. Iſodore ſayeth, y• his thought is good and profytable yt cōſydereth by the ſpace & ende of this lyfe, how longe, & how ſhorte & lykewyſe howe miſerable it is.
               Therfore my good ſyſter in chryſte, yf ye ſeke for the trewe waye, go towarde chryſt & ſeke for eternall lyfe, for that is euerlaſtyng and this but mortall. And therfore in body ye muſte be in this worlde as a dead womā, that in ſoule ye may be quycke and goddes ſeruant, for he is eſtemed a lyue, y• is deed carnally giuyng his hoole mynde vnto GOd, to whome he ꝓmyſed to lyue after

his lawꝭ, it is a paine for a good man to lyue longe in this world for he thynketh it longe or euer he come to the perpetuall ioyes of heuen. Noman knoweth the ende of his lyfe, and whē a man thynketh hym ſelfe mooſt ſureſt therof, by and by he is gone.
               Let euerye man therfore make haſt to amēde hym ſelfe, leaſt he departe in iniquite, & ende his lyfe and his miſ
                     •
                  iuyng together For the deuyll goeth aboute to brynge thē to ꝑpetuall torment and payne at theyr laſt ende, the which in this lyfe he inticed and brought to ſyn. And not wt ſtandīg a mā be both good & iuſt yet whē he ſhal depart, he feareth he ſhalbe punyſhed, y• peſable & the gētyll departynge of good men out of y• worlde, cauſeth men to

thynk yt they depart in good eſtate, & to be aſſociated wt angels in euerlaſtyng ioye. Of this ſpeketh y• ſpouſe in the cāticles, ſayenge. My louer is come into my Canti. vi garden, to the crowne of bliſſe & of all ſwete aromatike ſauers. For GOD viſitinge his churche, cōmeth vnto thē wt greate grace, y• which he knoweth hath gyuen the good ſauers of good examples & vertues renome vnto theyr neyghbours, he taketh a delyte in gardēs, reioycyng in the vertue of good ſoules, he gathered lilies, whē he calleth his electe & choſen ſeruātes frō this lyfe to euerlaſting ioye. Wherof it is wryttē. The death of holy ſayntes, is very precious to god pſal. c. xv Cloth is endid by thredꝭ, & a mās lyfe by dayes, whē deth cōmeth

the ſoules of goddes choſen ſeruantes are in great teare, & vncertayne wether they ſhal be ſaued or dāpned. Sum good men at there departyng are pourged of all theyr veniall ſynnes. Sū other at the ſame ſelfe tyme, are in greate ioyfulnes remēbringe the ioyes yt ar to come. And it is Goddes pleaſure we ſhulde not knowe the tyme of our departīg bycauſe we ſhulde thynke y• it is euermore at hand. For the more that a man is vncertaine therof the more he ſhall applye & gyue him ſelfe to good workes. The deuyll at the departynge of all mys liuers dothe receyue theyre ſoules, ye theyre inticers to pleaſure & ſyn, maye be theyr puniſſhers & tormenters in payne. At mans departyng ye wycked ſpirites

giue & imploy all theyr diligēce to bryng to mans remēberaunce all y• euer they ꝑſuaded them to do in this worlde, and yt to brynge them & theyr pore ſoules to euerlaſtīg paine. The ſynner after his death is brought to torment and payne, but the good ſyuer to cōtinual ioye and blyſſe. And as we do byleue that good men after theyr great paynes & labour takē in this world do reſt & be in quiet, ſo muſte we beleue that mildoers be in great payne & tormētes. Good ſyſter I tell you this, bycauſe ye ſhulde knowe, yt it is very nedeful, and neceſſarie for vs, to deſpyſe all earthly thynges, & to remembre that we ſhall dye. Harke what y• apoſtle ſayeth. What other thinge Iames. iii
                        •
                     
                   is our lyfe but euen a vapur

appearing for a whyle. And Salomon ſayeth. Neuer put truſte Pro. xxvii. in the next day folowyng for ye can not tell to what chance it ſhall prepare you, & therfore my welbeloued ſyſter ye ſhuld in cō
                  tynually cōſider y• ende of youre lyfe and deſpyſe the flatterynge inticementes of this worlde to come to euerlaſtyng ioye & bliſſ In all your buſyneſſes cōſyder Eccle vii. your laſt ende, and ye ſhal neuer do annſſe. And therfore I exhort you that ye take no pleaſure in theſe worldly trifylles. For with out doute ye ſhall heuſe, truſte not to theſe temporall thynges, for theyr isno wayes to ſckape d
                     •
                  ath, a why ſhuld this wreched and ſlynkynge fleſſhe reioyce in worldly goodes, conſyderynge it is prepared to fede wormes,

This I tell you good ſyſter, becauſe ye ſhulde not for gette the ordre of youre eſtate and condycyon. Remembre ye are but aſſhes, Gene. iii. and that ye ſhall retourne to aſſhes, & that ye are but duſt, and ſhal retourne therto again, and ſo ſayde the Lorde vnto Adam. Remembre alſo what Iob was wōte to ſay vnto him ſelfe, Gene. iii. I ſhalbe conſumed as duſt, and like vnto the veſture that is eaten Iob. xiii. with mothes, call to remembraunce that ye ſhal dye, and remembre it contynually that throughe the remembraunce there of ye may eſchew and auoyde all vicious lyuynge.
            
            
               
               ¶ Of death the .lviij. cha
               
                  WHorſhypfull ſiſter I pray you to harken vnto the ſainge of y• wyſe man. O deth, Eccle. xli howe bytter a thing is it for hym that is in quiet, & reſtfulneſſe of his ſubſtance to remember the? And agayne. O death thy iudgement is good to thoſe that are in wretchednes, & pouerte. Unto this agreeth S. I ſodore, ſaynge. O death howe ſwete arte thou to wretches, and to thoſe that liue in bitterfulnes How pleſant vnto thoſe that be in heuynes and lamentacion? Death is the ende of al worldly myſere, of all wretchednes and of all calamite, death bryngeth a man to the ende of all worldly

tribulation, but alas death commeth very late & ſlowly, to thoſe that are ī tribulatiō. Wherfore good ſiſter it were better to dye wel, then to lyue wretchedlye, it were better not to be, thē to dye vnhappely and myſerablye.
               
                  ¶ The ſyſters demaūde.
                  DEre brother I pray you telme, whether we ſhulde bewayle thoſe that ate deade and wepe for our frendes that are departed.
               
               
                  ¶ The brothers āſwere.
                  
                     GOod ſiſter vnto this ſaynt I ſodore doth anſwer you, ſaynge, that not wt ſtandyng pytty enforceth and wylleth vs to bewayle ſuche as dye in good belefe, yet our fayth

do the inhybyte vs to wepe for thē. And therfore we ſhulde not wepe for the death of ſuch good people but rather thanke god y• it hath pleaſed his grace to delyuer them oute of all worldlye wretchydnes, bryngyng theym (as we do beleue) to perpetuall lyght, reſt and peace. And therfore we ſhuld not he wayle ſuch good chryſten ſoules, as we verely ſuppoſe to be ſaued. Harkē vnto me good ſyſter, I ſay that we ſhuld lament theyr deth, the which y• wycked ſpirytꝭ do hale & carye to euerlaſtyng payne & tormēt, and not thoſe the which the angels receiue to great ioye & honoure, and to the celeſtyall courte of paradyſe. I ſaye we ſhulde mourne theyr deathe the which are buryed in y• depe pyt

of hell, and not thoſe the whiche are exalted to y• perpetual ioyes of heuē, we ſhuld wepe for thoſe that dye euyll, and in ſinne, and not for thoſe that die wel. Good ſyſter when I bewayle thē that dye well, I hurte my ſelfe, and do them no good, and they that lamente and wepe for thoſe that dye, they in a maner denye the generall reſurrectyon, and that god ryſſe frome deathe to lyfe. And therfore good ſyſter we y• byleue that all ſuche as dye are in heuen withe Chryſte, ſhulde not wepe for theym, nor lament theyr death, but rather pray for theim, that yf perchaunce they be in any daunger of paine that it wolde pleaſe his gracyous mercyfulnes to delyuer theym.
               
            
            
               
               Of iudgemēt the .lix. cha.
               
                  THere are two deuine iudgemētes, the one in this worlde, the other ī the worlde y• is to come. Many are ſo iudged in this preſente worlde by ſyckenes, by pouertie and by other dyuers worldly tribulacyons, that here after they ſhall not be iudged, for ſuch tē
                  porall paines to ſome are ī ſtede & place of theyr purgacyon. Other there be that begyn theyre dāpnacyō in this preſent world, of whoſe ſaluacyon there is often tymes nother truſt nor hope becauſe they contynew in ſynne & vngracyous lyuynge. Some there be that are iudged in this worlde by tribulacyon. Some

other are iudged ī tyme to come by fyre, after the examinatiō of the ſtreyte iudge, nor the iuſtice of the iuſt man ſhal not then be ſure, and therfore Iob ſaith. He Iob. ix. conſumeth the Innocente and the wycked, for the innocēt ſhal be conſumed, and as nothynge regarded, yf his innocence becō pared with goddes innocence GOD ſhal conſume the wretched & wicked ſynner & through y• ſubtilyte of his deuyne examination his naughtyneſſe ſhalbe ſhewed him, and he hym ſelfe ryghtfully condempned. Chryſt after as the life of good mē ſhal requyre ſo in his iudgement he wyl be fauorable and good vnto thē, but to thoſe that be wycked ſynners he ſhal appere very terryble and fereful, and at the day

of iudgement Chryſt ſhal ſhewe hym ſelfe to euery man, as euery mans cōſcience was beynge vpon earth, & remaynynge ſtyll in his pece & trāquilite, he ſhall appeare terrible to them onely, whoſe proper cōſcience ſhall accuſe them. My good ſyſter harken vnto. ſ. Iſodore wordꝭ Ther Iohn̄. i. is no man clene wtout ſyn. And therfore theyr can no mā be ſure of goddes Iudgement for then we ſhalbe contable of euery idle Math xiii worde that is ſpokē. Alas what ſhall we wretches ſay at the day of iudgement, the whiche do not onely amys vſynge of ydle and fylthy wordes, but that commyt dayly ſo manye abhomynable, and enorme crymes, neuer leauynge oure noughtyneſſe, with other vnryghtfull operacyons

and workes? And yf to be that the ryght delyng mā be not thē ſure of goddes iudgemēt, what ſhall be come of vs mooſt wretched ſynners? and yf the Iuſtice of the vpright and iuſte man be in no ſurance, at the examynacy on of this ſtreyte Iudge, what ſhall we catyues do then, that dayly do augment and increace our noutyneſſe and ſyn? And yf at the daye of dome the iuſt man i. Peter. iiii ſhal ſcacely be ſaued, where ſhal we that haue ſynned without meaſure and without ende appere vpō that daye? Who ſhall not be in drede and feare when heuen and earth ſhal ſhake, and quake, & all the elementes be reſolued by heate? Of this daye it is writtē. This is the day of yre

of trybulacyō, of myſery, & vengeaūce, Iſai. xiii the daye of dym darkenes, of the trumpet and of al or ryble ſounde, vpon this day the ſtrongeſte man that euer was ſhall be troubled.
               
                  ¶ The ſyſters demaūde.
                  
                     ALas good brother what ſhall we ſaye whē y• ſtrayte iudge ſhall come vnto vs, For whē ye put me in remembraunce of his cōmīg, ye cauſe me to wepe, and by the reherſynge of that terryble and fearefull day, ye haue prouoked me to heuynes.
               
               
                  ¶ The brothers āſwere.
                  
                     
                     MY good ſyſter it is well done yf ye for feare of this eracte & ſtrayte Iudge do wepe. For or euer this day doth aproch and come, we muſte appere in confeſſyon and great waylyng before him. The acceptable and helthſome day, is whilſt we be ī this world of the whiche it is wryttē. Seke god whylſte he may be founde, Ezai. lv. call vpon hym whylſte he is at hande. The iudge cā not be ſene in this preſente lyfe, and yet he is euen by vs, he ſhal be ſene in another worlde, and ſhalbe far frome vs. Therfore good ſyſter we muſte nedes ſeke god withe all oure hart and mynde in this preſente lyfe, yf we intende here after to fynde him, for yf we dylygentlye

ſeke hym nowe abſtanynge frome all euyll workes, at the daye of iudgemēt he ſhall be fauorable and mercyfull vnto vs, for he is maruaylous gē
                     tyll and full of all mercye. For it is wrytten, that he is ſwete and gentyll to euerye man, and that is mercye is aboue all his Pſal. 144. workes. Therfore good ſyſter lette vs pray vnto this terrible & moſte iuſte iudge, with teares and greate lamentacyon, with all deuocyon, that at the day of his iudgemente, he rewarde vs not after our merytes and iniquites, but after his greate and abundaunt mercye, and that we withe other myſdoers here not this terryble ſentence. Gette ye hence ye dampnable ſynners in Math. v to perpetuall fyre. But that it

wyll pleaſe hym we may wt his elected & choſen out ſeruaūtes here theſe moſt ioyfull wordes. Come hyther ye moſte bleſſed & receyue the kyngdome of heuen the which hath bene prepayred for you ſence the begynnyng of the worlde.
               
               
                  The brothers exhortaciō
                  
                  
                     GOod ſyſter nowe I truſte I haue broughte my ſhyppe into the hauē, & made an ende of my exhortacyons and good monytyons, yet that notwithſtandyng, I retourne once agayne, intendyng to ſpeake a fewe mo wordes wt you. Ye deſyred me to wrytte you a fewe good monycyōs the

which thynge I haue accōplyſhed & done, not parauenture ſo well as I ſhuld haue done, but yet by goddes grace as well as I coulde, I haue choſen out of holy fathers ſaynges for youre inſtructyon the beſte ſentences I coulde fynde, y• which I haue preſēted vnto you in this boke, Take heed therfore my goo ſyſter, for ye haue nowe the good admonycyons and inſtructions of perpetuall lyfe, ye haue now good counſell and as it were a rule to lyue well. Nowe there cā no ignoraūce of ſyn excuſe you, ye know now how ye ſhall lyue well and vertuouſly, ye can not ſaye nowe that ye dyd a myſſe & fell by ignoraunce, why ſo? For now the law is expoūde and declared vnto you, the whiche ye

muſte folowe, the preceptes of good lyuyng are ſhewed you, & howe ye ſhall ordre your ſelfe in goddes houſe. Ye haue now the knowledge of goddes cōmaundementes, ye knowe nowe howe to liue iuſtly. Therfore take hede ye fall not, take hede that frō hence forwardes, ye forſake not ſuche thynges as ye knowe are good and vertuous. For by ſynfull liuynge, ye dyſpyſe y• goodnes of goddes lawes, yf ye lytle regarde ſuch vertuous pointes as ye do nede, and lyue naughtelye, god ſhall greatlye blame you, why ſo? For it were moche better not to know the waies of vertuous lyuynge, then to leue thē after yt we knowe them. And therfore retayne & kepe in mind and dede, the gyfte of ſcyence &

knoledge that hathe been ſhewed you, fulfyll that ye haue lerned, and with all dylygence, kepe the fruytfull preceptes and admonycyons of this boke.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprynted at Lōdon in Paules church yearde, at the ſygne of the maydens heed, by Thomas Petyt.
            Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
            
         
      
   