
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE RIGHT
WORSHIPFVL AND HIS APPROued
good friend, Maiſter Frances Young, of Brent-pelliam,
in the County of Hertfort, Eſquire: and to the moſt kinde
Gentlewoman, and my Miſtreſſe, Suſan Young, his
louing wife, and my Miſtreſſe: as much happineſſe
wiſheth, as their owne hearts
can deſire.
                  
                     SHould I (right worſhihful) as flatterers
are woont to doe, ſet downe a Catalogue
of your commendations, and enter
into a Laborinth of loue toward
you, I know your wits ſo good, that you
would quickly eſpie it, and I confeſſe
mine owne nature ſuch, as I hartily
hate. My preſent purpoſe then at this time, is neither to
rehearſe your many ſtinde fauours, which I knowe you
rather loue priuately to enlarge, then liſten publikely to
heare laide open; nor report mine owne vnthankfulnes,
which I am ſorie hath beene ſo much, yet you will forget,
although it were farre more: bui as a dutifull remembrance
of both theſe, though not able to be ſhadowed
in one ſubiect, yet ſufficient (in your conceits I know)
being but in part acknowledged, I ſend you this honourable
Hiſtorie of Prince Palmerin of England, which
coſt mee no more paiues in writing, then I hope it will be
pleaſing to you in reading.
                  
                     
                     The Epiſtle
                     This firſt part is but to reliſh your taſt, how yee can
like of ſuch worthy Knights loues, and memorable aduentures,
whereof at my laſt being with you in the Countrie,
I ſawe yee vſe no miſlike. Then finding ſuch gentle
entertainment, as I make no queſtion of, the ſecond part
ſhall bee with you very ſpeedily after. So committing
your worſhip, and my ſweete Miſtreſſe your
wife, to the heauenly protection,
I remaine yours to my
vttermoſt.
⸪
                     
                        A. Munday.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  TO THE LADIES AND GENTLEVVOMEN
OF ENGLAND, THE
Authour wiſheth ſuch a courteous moderation
in iudgement, that his labours be not haſtily
reproched, nor hatefully receiued.
                  
                     AMong the beſt choyſe of flowers (faire Ladies)
all are not ſweet: where is moſt varietie
of Medicine, ſome are not ſoueraigne: ſo
amongſt all the conceits you ſhall finde in
this Booke, all are not pithie, though the
moſt pretie. When the Lion roareth, the Lamb trembleth, when
the Captaine taketh his Lance, the Coward ferareth his life, euen
ſo, the brauery of the learned is ſo great a blemiſh to him
that hath little, that he feareth to proceede, not daring to ſtep a
foot without a pardon. Such are the ingenious inuentiōs (right
noble minded and courteous Ladies) ſo plentifully ſent to your
peruſing, that (were it not the bountiful reſpect of your gentle
iudgements, did aſſure me to taſte of your friendly fauour) I
ſhould conuert my ſtudies into ſo great deſpaire, as the verie
thought were ſufficient to kill him that dieth euery houre,
fearing diſpleaſe. But as mercy doth alway accompany your noble
ſexe, and mildneſſe repreſſe any cholerick chance, ſo know
I, that rigor cannot dwell, where is no deſire reuenge, but as of
all men are faultie, I ſhall be forgiuen for company.
                  
                     Your moſt bounden by dutie,
A. M.
                  
               
               
                  
                  In lucubrationes. A. M. Epigramma.
                  R. W.
                  VT legi, placuit, nec enim placuiſſe mireris,
                  Nam
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      tuum nomen, fronte libellus habet;
                  Laudo animum, cupio
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      tibi ſint ſaepe labores.
                  Grati: ſuecumbas ne mala verba ferens.
                  Nomines Indoctos, doctoſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      reuoluera ſcripta,
                  Indocti
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      cito fulmen ab ore venit.
                  Sed tu perge tamen, tipis ornare libellos
                  Perſoluent ſumptum gloria fama decus.
                  Quaeſo feras, animo, patienti me tibi calcar
                  Addere currenti: ſum tuus, eſto meus.
                  
                     R. W.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  THE FIRST PART
OF THE NO LESSE RARE,
THEN EXCELLENT AND
ſtately Hiſtory, of the famous, and fortunate
Prince Palmerin of England.
                  
                     CHAP. I.
                     How Don Edward ſonne to Fredericke king of England,
hauing obtained in marriage faire Flerida, daughter to
the Emperor Palmerin of Conſtantinople, returneth home
againe into England, and going on hunting, loſt himſelfe
in the vnfortunate Forreſt of great Brittaine, by purſuing
an inchated Bore, which brought him to the Caſtle of the
Giant Dramufiande, where he remained Priſoner a long
time.
                     
                        AFter that Don Edward ſonne to the aged
Fredericke king of England, had finiſhed
his long deſired marriage with Flerida,
daughter to the renowned Palmerin d'Oliua,
Emperour of Conſtantinople, (not
onely to his owne good liking, but alſo to the
content of his friends and familiars) he
tooke his voyage from the Empire of Greece (as it is at large
mentioned in the booke entituled Primaleon of Greece) toward
the realme of England, accompanied with the Princeſſe
Flerida his eſpouſed Lady, beſide, a traine méete to attend on

ſo puiſſant a perſon as the Prince was. Being arriued at the
Engliſh Court, to the no little ioy of the Knights Father, and
great delight of his kinſfolke and friends, they were welcommed
as beſéemed their royall eſtates, and ioyfully receiued
to their hearts content. It chaunced in ſhort ſpace after, the
Princeſſe Flerida waxed great with childe, a thing of no ſmall
comfort to the aged king, nor of little pleaſure to the young
Prince.
                     Now is the tediouſneſſe of their trauaile, the weariſome
labour of their long iourney, cleane caſt out of remembrance,
as of no account, and the ioyfull Prince Don Edward
deuiſeth each dainty delight, and each gallant attempt, that
either might procure the Princeſſe to pleaſure, or by any
meanes giue her occaſion of paſtime. And for becauſe the pinching
pangs, which alway frequentetth one in her caſe, might
either cauſe doubt of her good deliuery, or daunger in her well
doing, (her perſon being ſomewhat ouercharged with ſickenes)
the young Prince was as carefull in preuenting ſuch ill
chaunce, as circumſpect in prouiding to ſhunne any ſuch
chaunge. Leaning the Court, he walked with her in Prograce
through the Forreſt of England, for that he ſuppoſed the
ſight of the ſpreading Trées, and pleaſant paſſages through
the graſſy groues, would be an occaſion of the vnminding her
former fits, and driue out of memory the ſudden aſſaults that
were incident vnto her féeble nature, vſing himſelfe very pleaſantly,
and calling himſelfe Iulian, the more to encreaſe her
mirth.
                     All this while remained the aged King in his Pallace,
where the Engliſh Prince being armed, caſt his eyes on the
portrait of Gridonia, hauing by her ſide a Lion, and a tender
infant, the ſight whereof was of ſuch maruailous eſtimation
in his conceiued thought, both by the ſhew of beautie
he held, and ſhape of bountie he iudged in her, that hée
abandoned his naturall Countrey, to trie his good fortune againſt
the couragious Knight Primaleon. For the more certaintie
whereof, you may at large peruſe the effects of his

valiancie, in the diſcourſe of his memorable aduentures, and
concerning the fortunate procéeings which paſſed betwéene
them aſwell the proweſſe of the one, as valure of the other: I
muſt needes ſay it was ſuch, and of ſo great authoritie, as it bare
the title of perfect magnanimitie. But returne we to our matter.
                     The Princeſſe Flerida perceuing the courteous care, and
diligent endeuour, that her royall ſpouſe Don Edward vſed
for her greater delight, ſo louingly labouring to auoyde that
motion, that either might ſéeme to her perſon diſpleaſant, or
by any ſiniſter meanes to make ſhew of her diſprofit, deſtred
him to appoint ſuch prouiſion for her, that there ſhe emight
diſcharge her heauy burthen, and not to depart before ſhe ſawe
the fruits of her labours. To which reaſonable requeſt, the
Prince right courteouſly conſented, being right glad to fulfill
that occaſion, that might be to her content, and for that
cauſe as yet he refuſed the gouerning of the kingdome, appointing
the whole affaires thereof, to the wiſe diſcretion of King
Fredericke his father, vntill ſuch time as he ſaw the Princeſſe
in better eſtate of her health. And in this order ſought he
ech vnfrequented place of paſſage, and eche ſolitary habitation,
to remooue his Tents when pleaſed the Princes, déeming
thoſe places to his better content, then the youthfull delights
of the King his Fathers Court. But as the fayreſt
colours ſooneſt fadeth, the freſheſt flowre, ſooneſt withereth,
and the cleereſt day quickly cloudy, euen ſo the man to whom
Fortune dooth anouch moſt fréendlineſſe, is ſooneſt intrapped
by he diſſembling falſhood: and when leaſt he thinketh of any
ſecret doubt, he is deceiued by ſudden daunger. So this
valiant and renowned Prince, whom Fortune had encouraged
by his admirable conqueſts, and aduaunced his name in
reſpect of his Nobleneſſe, new reclaiming her former and
woonted courteſie, cauſeth him to taſte her preſent crueltie,
and where before ſhe helde his Honor as beſt woorthie her fauour,
now in a chollericke humor breaketh of her fréendſhip,
cauſing him to knowe, though ſhe had holpen him long,

ſhe was now minded to hurle him downe at laſt. The time being
come of her appointed treacherie, and the meane deuiſed
to accompliſh her crueltie, ſhée cauſed Don Edward to leaue
the company of the Princes Flerida, and all other his Lords
and Ladies who were there preſent with her, and walketh
to the Sea ſide, which was not farre diſtant. Returning agaiue.
hée cauſed the tents to be pitched foure miles from the
Forreſt, on a pleaſant gréene platte, by a little running riuer,
which delighted the minde of the Princeſſe, the place was ſo
fine and fitly choſen out. On a ſudden there was heard a great
tumult, in a thicket of trees neare adioyning, to ſée what it
might be, the Prince mounted on Horſebacke, and rode to the
place, where caſting his eyes aſide, hee eſpied a wilde and
mighty Bore, which ſight the Prince was not a little glad of,
but with diuers of his noble Lords, made preſent purſuite after.
Don Edward ſtill rid after the game, that the other had
quite loſt the ſight of him, which they ſought againe to recouer,
but all was in vaine, for the day being cleane ſpent, and
waxing ſomewhat darke, cauſed them to retyre againe to the
Princeſſe. Who ſéeing her Lord Don Edward not returne
with them, fell into great diſmaying, and doubting of his ſafetie,
which ſhe had iuſt cauſe to doe, for that this his ſudden departure,
was greatly lamented through the Realme of England,
and all kingdomes in Chriſtendome, before they had his
preſence againe.
                     The ſtrayed Prince, being thus allured by Fortune, affecteth
his game with ſuch great delight, that he neuer minded
the Princeſſe diſtreſſe, but gaue himſelfe wholly to his preſent
paſtime, not fearing for foreſéeing what might be the perill. His
Stéede with tediouſneſſe of trauaile, waxeth ſtract in his
limines, which cauſed the Prince to ſtay and alight, for the
darkeſomnes of the night had loſt his game, and the fayning
of his Horſe, required to haue reſt. Don Edward reſting him
at the foote of a Trée, beganne at laſt to call to minde, the deſolate
eſtate of the Princeſſe Flerida, and the griefe his Lords
would conceiue for want of his company. Faine he would
haue

ſlept, but could not, for ſtill the doubts that aſſailed his mind,
one while for the Princeſſe, another while for his Péeres,
firſt to thinke how his abſence, would cauſe her to iudge ſomewhat
of his vnkinde dealing, then how his Lords would
ſtand in feare of his danger: theſe, and a thouſand more triſtfull
terrors, with held him from receiuing that ſwéet reſt, he
gladly looked for. Alas (thought he) how hard is his hap to
whom Fortune is aduerſe? how contrary his good lucke that awaiteth
her liberality? the one is a thing euer to be doubted,
and the other ought at no time to be deſired. The night is ſpent
in theſe and ſuch like cogitations, and at the appearence of the
day, his eyes began to waxe heauy, as commonly it happeneth
vnto thoſe, whom conceiued ſorrow denieth the required reſt,
at laſt very griefe of it ſelfe conſtraineth them to ſlumber. This
carefull Prince, hauing obtained ſuch quietneſſe, as the extremitie
of his paine would permit him, ſtretching forth his
armes, calleth againe into queſtion, the retchleſſe regard he
had of himſelfe, ſo lighly to leaue his Lady, and ſo vngently
to forſake his company, which although it happened againſt
his will, he iudged they would not accept it ſo in worth. Then
mounting vpon Horſebacke, rode on to finde his company, ſo
vnaduiſedly loſt, but Fortune ſtill denying his pretended purpoſe,
by how much he eſtéemed himſelfe néere to his comfort,
by ſo much the farder of ſhe ſet him to the contrary, yet haſting
on in hope, at laſt he arriued in a great Groue of Trées,
the thickneſſe and height whereof, cauſed him to fall into admiration
with himſelfe. Through this graue ran a faire and
cleare Riuer, wherein he perceiued the reſemblance of a
Gallant and curious Caſtle, as ſtrongly fortified, as rarely
edified, the ſight whereof, ſomewhat aſſwadged the egernes of
his gréefe, likewiſe, the pleaſant ratling of the gréene leaues,
with the mellodious harmony of the pretty chirping Birds,
exiled the former heauines of his heart, and cauſed him to remember
the gladſome time, wherein he ſpent his labour, to
gaine his beſt beloued, during the warres of the Emperour
Palmerin, where firſt he named himſelf Iulian. In theſe pleaſant

conceits, hee rid along by the Riuer ſide, ſo rauiſhed
with his inwarde delight, that he little ſuſpected the imminent
daunger, for vnto that place did he chéefeſt frame his deſire,
which Fortune had appointed to worke his diſtreſſe. Don
Edward beholding the braue ſcituation of this Caſtle, ſo curious
in workemanſhip, and coſtly in outward reſemblaunce,
the Bridge at entring whereof was ſo large, yt foure knights
might eaſily haue Combatted thereon, no leſſe inſued at his
ſuddē arriual, then he meruailed at this his ſtrange aduenture.
The Porter of the Caſtell, with double diligence, more then
deſerued thankes, ſet open the gate to allure him in, which the
Prince perceiuing, misdoubted no daunger, or any ſecret guile
in his gallant proſpect, becauſe he neither ſawe any to reſiſt
his entrye, and the Porter being vnarmed made him doubt the
leſſe. It laſt, more on a youthfull courage, then an aduiſed care,
he aduanced himſelfe to the Gate of ye Caſtle, deſiring to know
the name of ſo pleaſant a place, & who protected a thing of ſuch
force. The Porter not to learne his leſſon, but ſmoothely colouring
his ſecret craft, to the good lyking of the Prince, and
furtheraunce of his Ladies pleaſure, cunningly coyned this
gentle reply. Sir (quoth he) my ſelfe am a ſeruaunt, to her
who likewiſe to your perſon oweth ſeruice, and if you pleaſe
to enter the Manſion of your Vaſſaile, what wanteth in coſt,
ſhall excéede in curteſie, and your ſelfe ſatiſfied to your farder
content. The Prince regarding the circumſtaunce of his
woords, and not reſpecting the colluſion of his wyles, alighted,
and preſently entred the Caſtle, where with humble duty
he was conducted to the great Hall, and ſerued with humility
in euery reſpect. The Lady of the Caſtell, who was chéefe in
this deuiſe, hauing woone the man, whome moſt ſhe made account,
of, to cauſe him as yet to dread no doubt, or elſe to feare
any enſuing daunger, came and welcommed the Prince with
ſuch large proteſtations, as his thoughts were quite abſent
in thinking of any perill. The Prince well noting the curteſie
of the Lady, (whoſe comely countenaunce and gallant behauiour,
not onely gaue a ſhew of ſinguler modeſtie, but alſo
bare the face of apparant honeſtly) perſwaded himſelfe, that all

the commendations in the world, were not of ſufficiencie, to
requite her great gentleneſſe. For being ſo brauely ga
                           •
                        ded with
gallant gentlewomen, and euery one at becke and call with
dutifull humilitie, hee rather déemed her a ſecond Lucrecia,
then doubted her to be a diſſembling Lais, rather one that regarded
fidelitie, then in ſuch ſort to intrap him by flattery. But
as the ſweeteſt Roſe is not without his ſharpe prickell, or the
fineſt Veluet but hath his bracke, ſo vnder the ſmootheſt countenance,
is ſooneſt found deceite, and in the fayreſt talke, to bée
the fouleſt treaſon. And there was a truſtie Damon, ſo was
there a trothles Damocles, as there was a faithfull Laelius, ſo
there was a flattering Ariſtippus, happy may he be that findeth
a friend, which preferreth the honor of his faith, before the horror
of falſhood, more accounting of the welfare of his friend, then
any thing elſe in his wordly affaires. But to returne to y• prince
who made great account, of his ſo gentle entertainment, and eſteemed
wel her friendſhip that ſhe handled with ſuch dexterity,
which to gratifie with thankes, he entred into this diſcourſe.
                     Lady, if this ſudden motion doe ſtrike me into a maze, & your
ſacred manners, inforce me to muſe, impute the one to the rare
perfection of your beauty, and iudge the other, as the raſh preſumption
of my boldnes. Firſt, your famous manſion did not a
litle daunt me, & now the faire miſtreſſe doth no leſſe delight me
the one excelling all in brauery, the other ſurpaſſing euery one
in beauty. Wherefore good lady, if it ſhall like you to report, and
licence me to requeſt, let me vnderſtand your name, and who is
gouernour of this place. The Lady as one currant in her coy,
conceytes, and not to learne how to vſe Courtier, quickely
ſounded the depth of his deſire, and as a ſkitfull pilot ſtrooke
Sayles againſt a ſtorme, then taking Don Edward by the
hand, ſhe walked to the window, and ſhaped him this anſwere.
Worthy ſir, the great fame of your nobleneſſe doth wel deſerue
that title, & the ſufficiēcy of your preſent behauior doth vrge me
to vſe it, the excuſe of your boldnes ful well we allow, in reſpect
of your bounty which we cānot miſ
                           •
                        ike, for that the authority of
your name, doth beare you out in the one. & the effects of nature
doth braue you in the other. I would my beauty were ſo ample

as might content ſuch a Gallant, or my bounty ſufficient to
entertaine ſuch a Gueſt. Letting that paſſe, I would the proportion
which hath liked you to praiſe, were anſwerable in
perfection or able to pleaſe. Touching your requeſt, both this
Caſtle and Gouernour thereof, reſteth at your commaund to
what you ſhall deſire, and if it ſhall like you to accept of one
nights lodging here, not for the good chéere you ſhall finde,
but for your good company which we fancy, you ſhall be reſolued
in euery doubt, and to morrowe or when pleaſe you, you
may depart. Don Edward perceiuing her courteous proffer,
thought it ſtood with his honour to accept it, and againſt
his honeſtie to refuſe it, and while they were vſing the time
in theſe and ſuch like familiar ſpéeches, the Tables wre couered,
and euery thing prouided to a braue and ſumptuous
banquet, which in coſt excéeded, and in delicate fare ſurpaſſed,
that in the King his father Court, he could not be more gallantly
ſerued.
                     There Banquet finiſhed, and the Tables withdrawen,
courteſie on all ſides artificially offered, he was conducted into
a notable faire Chamber, the ſumptuouſneſſe whereof ſurpaſſed,
where preparing him to Bedward, he conuayed his
good Sword vnder his Pillowe, which Sword was of ſuch
great vertue, that while it was about him, no enchantment
could preuaile, or by any meanes annoy him. Bearing in Bed,
he called to minde the great diſtance of place, and diuerſitie
of paſſage, betwéene his beloued Flerida, and his ſorrowfull
ſelfe, which with many a grieuous ſigh he often bemoned, but
at length conuinced with heauineſſe of ſléepe, for that the night
before he enioyed no reſt, turned him to the wall, to receiue the
charge which was toward him. The Lady of the Caſtle being
maruellous ſéen in Magicke, and knowing by her Arte, that
the Prince was ſound aſleepe, ſent a Damoſell to his Chamber
to ſteale away his Sword, which while he had, ſhe could
not accompliſh her deſire.
                     The Damoſell in all reſpects fulfilled her Ladies minde,
and hauing brought it to her, ſhe commaunded her to goe vnto

her Couzin Dramuſiand, and deſire him with all ſpéede to haſte
him thither, for now he might take ſecure reuengement on the
Prince Don Edoard, for the death of his father, who was ſlain
by one of the linage of this noble young Prince. The Damoſel
went ſpéedily and did her meſſage, returning with the young
Giant whom the Lady ſent for, and hauing vnderſtood the full
minde of his Aunt, entred the chamber of Don Edoard, where
taking the ſword of the Prince in his hand, brake foorth into
theſe or the like ſpéeches.
                     Somtimes thou didſt remain in the ſeruice of a man no loſſe
famous then fortunate, who little knewes now that thou art
in my keeping, but ſince my hap hath béene ſo good to gain thée,
I dare auouch to make thée more redoubted, homaged & eſtéemed,
then when thy Lord Don Edoard did gird thée about him
ſo putting it vp againe into the ſheath, he approched vnto the
Bed, and ſpake in this order. Don Edoard, awake then captine
Prince, hath was thy hap to light in my hands, and froward
thy Fortune to approch this place, bid now adiew thy
former delight, and content thy ſelfe to liue endles delleur,
the court of England was ſometime thy pleaſure, but now
this Caſtle of mine muſt be thy Priſon, all the youthfull affections,
which were wont to be thy ſollace, thou muſt forſake, &
paſſe the remainder of thy dayes in ſorrow. I rue thy caſe, but
can giue thée no comfort, I ſorrow to thinke on thy miſery, and
can giue thée no remedie: blood will haue blood againe, and cruelty
will haue the like rewarded, thou ſhalt féele the force of my
chollericke moode, and by reuengement will bee ſo ſharpe, as
will be trebble griefe for thée to ſuſtaine it.
                     The Prince being vanquiſhed with a ſudden feare, to heare
the Giant vſe ſuch words of fury, put vp his hand where he
                           •
                        
thought to finde his Sword, but failing of his purpoſe, he preſently
ſayd. In the greeneſt graſſe lyeth the moſt deceitfull
Serpent, and in the calmeſt waters the deepeſt whirlepoole: ſo
in thoſe places where aman thinketh himſelfe fartheſt of all
miſhaps, he is ſooneſt aſſayled by ſome ſudden miſchance. Well
(quoth the Giant) though my anger doth vrge me vnto great
impatience, and that I cannot brooke the open iniury done vnto

to mee, but am bent ſeuerely to reuenge me on thée and all thy
Kindred, as my after dealings ſhall make manifeſt, to their
great diſhonour, yet will I kéepe thée, being firſt chaunced into
my hands, that thou mayeſt witneſſe to the reſt my his diſpleaſure.
As for thy life, I franckly and fréely giue thée, ſéeing the
Kingly Lyon diſdaineth to vaunt on his conquered Prey, and
the Princely Eagle ſcorneth to ſtoupe to a Flye. Beſides, thy
life is not of ſufficiencie in ſuch a cauſe as this, beeing firſt the
death of my Father, next, the diſtreſſe of my Friends, now, the
preſent griefe of my ſelfe, and laſtly, euer hereafter, to all my iſſue
an eternall ſorrow: which to appeaſe, the life of one, no not of
tenne, no, nor yet of an hundreth is able to make recompence, or
ſuffice to quench my rigour. Neuertheles, in poore and meaneſt
ſort I minded to vſe thee, not as thou liſt, and as I like, not to
thine owne choyſe, but as I ſhall finde occaſion: ſo that to recount
thy poſted pleaſure, and alſo to thinke on thy preſent enſuing
paine (though it be griefe to mee to vſe it, and ſo harde thy
hap, that thou canſt, nor mayſt refuſe it) ſhall witneſſe a world
of miſeries that thou art to abide, and the rareſt Miſfortunes,
that euer man did taſte.
                     This is thy lucke, and this is my law: this thy hard hap, and
this my heauy hatred, as 
                           〈◊〉
                         thou departeſt, thou ſhalt ſufficiētly
vnderſtand, and by that time thou knowſt, what and who I
am, that haue this authoritie, thou ſhalt feele to thy greater woo
my pretended iniurie. Hauing thus finiſhed his talke, he cauſed
him to bee carried into his ſtrongeſt Priſon, which was in the
top of the Caſtle, and clapped a great pair of Gyues on his legs,
minding in this furie, neuer while hee liued to take them off againe.
Don Edoard thus ſuddenly chaunged, from Princely
pompe to preſent penurie, from the Court of his Father, to the
Cabbin of his Foes, from the preſence of his Ladie, to the loathing
of his life, encloſed in a Caſtle ſo admirable, in a priſon ſo
vncomfortable, and in a Dungeon ſo diſpaireable: cloſing his
armes together, entred into theſe ſorrowfull mo
                           •
                        es.
                     Oh poore Prince, is thy hope thou haddeſt of ſo great courteſie,
and ſo ſoone chaunged into extreame crueltie? Didſt thou
credite faire wordes to be ſuch troth, and now doeſt thou finde

them, quite turned to treaſon? Alas, who ſooner deceiued then
the well meaning man? and who more quickly beguiled then
he that means moſt honeſtly? Hath Fortune hetherto allowed
thée honour, and will ſhee now leaue thée to taſte this horror?
hath all thy life hetherto beene ſpent in delight, and ſhalt thou
now end thy dayes in this direfull diſtreſſe? Alas, then haſt no
helpe to the contrarie, wherefore thou muſt holde thée content,
there is none néere to ſuccour thée, wherefore ſuppe vp thy ſorrow.
Thy aged Father will miſſe thée, thy louing Ladie will
lacke thée, and all thy Courtly companions will ſorrow for thy
want. And what of that? Bucephalus will ſtoupe to none
but Alexander: and Mercuries Pipe will be ſcunded by none
but Orphaeus: Euen ſo my proud ſoo may no wayes be intreated,
but either muſt be conquered in ſtrength, or craftily deceyued
in ſleights, which how farre my thought is from: deliuery, ſo
farre from comfort is my poore oppreſſed heart.
                     O my déere Florida, when thou ſhalt call thy vnkindeneſſe
into queſtion, and my laſt departure from thy preſence into a
Womans opinion, I know the care will no leſſe trouble thy
minde, then my want of thy comfort cauſeth my miſerie. Alas,
though I haue thus left thee by follie, yet thinke not but I ſtill
loue thée faithfully: and although thy griefe (as I knowe) is
great, for my loſſe, yet thinke not but my ſorrowe putteth me
to extremity of my life: in that this Priſon ſo amateth me with
ſadneſſe, as I am of opinion, neuer againe to ſée you, without
whoſe companie my life cannot long endure, but eyther to diſpaire
vpon my hard Aduenture, or preſently die in ſo ſharpe an
aſſault.
                     O inuincible Prince Primaleon, what griefe will you abide
for loſſe of your brother? and what ſorrow will you conceiue for
your deare Friend: whoſe miſfortune (I feare) will cauſe you
leaue your Parents, and whoſe tryed friendſhip mooue you put
your life in perill. Except the Soldan of Niqu
                              •
                           e, Maiortes,
Gatterit, & the King Tranies, by their friendly perſwaſion, may
otherwiſe determine your purpoſe. And though their méere
Loue kéepe you at home, yet I thinke my miſhap will enforce
them to be ſorry: So that ſome of them will endeuour to heare

of me againe, although it be vnpoſſible to giue mee ſuccour, except
fauour may plead their cauſe wi
                           •
                        h the Lady of this Caſtle,
whoſe crueltie I feare will no way be intreated. In theſe and
ſuch like rufull complaints, the Captiue Prince ſpent his time:
vntill earneſt opinion of his Ladie to be preſent with him, vrged
him to breake foorth into theſe ſpéeches. Alas my good Ladie,
this cruell Priſon is not cauſe of my death, but to ſée your
perſon accompanie me in diſtreſſe, when the Court were more
méete to ſhrowde your ſéemely ſelfe, then this vncomfortable
Dungion, for you to ſet foote in: Whoſe preſence procureth ſo
fierce an aſſault in my hart, that the feare of your ſafety is more
to my perill, then a thouſand torments might be to my paine.
                     Wherefore, good Ladie, content▪ yourſelfe, and ſuffer mee to
moane, blemiſh not your faire face with rufull teares for me: the
one may endanger your proſperitie, and the other may no way
be to my profite. Thus claſping his armes together, and entring
into a farther conceit in his minde: I leaue the extremitie
of his griefe, to thoſe that haue taſted the like miſhappe, that
where before he was equal with any for good fortune, he is now
aboue all, reſpecting his ill lucke.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. II.
                     ¶In this Chapter is declared, why Eutrope the Enchauntreſſe
procured thus the hard hap of the Prince Don Edoard,
and what the Gaint was, that detained him Priſoner.
                     
                        THe Hyſtorie doeth diſcourſe vnto vs, how
when the Emperor Palmerin of Conſtantinople,
left his royall eſtate, to ſeeke aduenttures
as a wandring Knight: that he ariued
in England, accompanied with Trineus the
Emperor of Allemaignes ſonne, who for the
loue of faire Agriola in the Engliſh Court,

left his natiue Countrey, and behaued himſelfe ſo valiant, that
ſhée might eſteeme him as one of her 
                           〈◊〉
                         fauored Knight. And
in ſooth, not to diminiſh his praiſe, or hold backe one title of his
braue behauiour, the exploites both of him and the Emperour
Palmerin (béeing both to moſt vnknowne) were ſuch, as the
King of England, with all his Courtly aſſiſtaunts, not onely
commended their valure, but alſo gaue them entertainement,
agréeable to their bounty and magnanimity. For he perceiuing
that their daily endeuours, tended both to the ſafegard of their
perſon, and honour of his whole Realme, gaue them that preferment
in Court, which they deſerued in chiualry, and that honour
in name, which they both argued to haue in nature,
whereby they were encouraged to attempt the hardeſt aduenture,
and ſo be honoured in their knightly behauiour. In fauour
of their Prince, and ioue of their Country, at length they obtained
the full iſſue of their enterpriſe: which was to haue with
them the Prince Agriola, whom on a day, through leaue obtained
of the King with the Queene her mother, they got leaue
to walke into the field, not farre diſtant from the Court, accompanied
with diuerſe Noble men, and Gentlemen, as you may
reade more at large in the Hiſtorie of Palmerin d'Oliua, which
faith, That ſporting themſelues there on the top of a hill, on a
ſudden (altogether vnlooked for) there came a Giant named
Frenaque, well attended on with twentie fighting men: who
perforce tooke the Queene and her Daughter Agriola from
them, neither reſpecting the woefull meane of the Ladies, nor
gentle entreatie of the knights, who had no defence to reſcue
them, nor companie inough to reſiſt them: But at that time
were more ready to vſe a diſtaffe with Hercules, then a Speare
with Hannibal, and rather required to handle a Lute in Venus
Chamber, then lift a Launce in Mars his Campe, and for a ſoldiers
i
                           •
                        uniti
                           •
                        n, vſing ſweete Parle with their Miſtriſſe, and
their Ladies laps, for the hard lodging in the fielde. So béeing
thus altogether vnprouided, loſt the ſum of their pleaſure,
and honour of their Knighthood. Palmerin and Trineus (who had
béene with the King in walking) arriuing there, and hearing of
this loſſe, encouraged them as wel as they might, offring themſelues

to die, ere they would put vp this iniurie. So willing
them all to prouide them preſently, for that a raſh encounter,
might turne to an hard aduenture, they proceeded in purſuit after
the giant, and ouertaking him, behaued themſelues ſo worthily,
that he was ſlain by the hands of the Emperor Palmerin.
Then the yong Prince Trineus, as well that his Lady Agriola
might perceiue his hardnes, as alſo the Quéene her mother
might giue his deeds commendation, ſo valiantly menaced his
courage, that by the helpe of the other Knights, all the Giants
traine were vanquiſhed, ſo that the Quéene and her Daughter,
had ſuffered no ſpot of diſhonour by their crueltie, which greatly
they ſtood in feare of.
                     This Giant had a Siſter named Eutropa, ſo cunning in
Magicke, that neither Zoriaſtes, nor all the other Magitians,
were in this deuiliſh Art comparable to her, by helpe whereof,
ſhe had knowledge of the death of her Brother, which entered
ſo déepe into her heart, that ſhee vowed her reuengement
ſhould excéede this cruell miſchance. And hauing in her Caſtell
with her a Nephew of hers, and the Sonne of this Giant Frenaque,
named Dramuſiande, by whom ſhe meant to ſeeke her
ſharpe reuenge: ſhee tooke him in her armes, and entred into
theſe rufull complaints. Ah ſwéete Nephew, albeit thou art
fatherleſſe, yet art thou not friendleſſe, and though in thy tender
time, Fortune hath framed thy miſhap, yet eſpect a farder time,
which my Art ſhall beginne, and thy manhoode finiſh. And he
that hath thus cruelly murthered the Father, both hee himſelfe,
his lynage, friendes and familiars, will I perſecute with extreame
rygor. After theſe and ſuch like ſpeeches vttered, ſhee
prouided to fortifie and make ſtrong her Caſtell, leaſt the King
of England ſhould ſeeke both the ruine of it, and deſtruction of
the Giants kindred, when once it came to his eare the Treaſon
ſhée pretended againſt him, wherefore, ſhée armed her ſelfe
with all thoſe of her kindred, knowing that to reſiſt the power
of a King, aſked no ſmal defence. And for a further remedy, leaſt
worſt ſhould happen, ſhe enchaunted the Forreſt round about,
ſo that none could enter her Forreſte without her leaue, vntill
ſuch time as the yong Giant Dramuſiande were able to beare

Armor, and receiue the order of Knighthood. In proceſſe of time,
the young Giant grew able to beare Armor, and then his heart
began to thyrſt for reuenge of his Fathers death, the which to
accompliſh, hee was very deſirous in Trauell to aduenture his
ſtrength, according as his heart deſired.
                     But Eutropia perceiuing the courage of his minde, to excéed
the ſtrength of his perſon, de
                           •
                        iled him to ſtay his Iourney, and
ſhe would yéelde into his hands ſuch a one on whom hee might
ſufficiently reuenge the death of his Father. Thus, and with
theſe perſwaſions, ſhe changed the minde of Dramuſiande, vntill
the hard fortune of the Prince Don Edoard brought him to
her Caſtell, where he entred without any daunger, for that his
good Sworde, kept the force of all Enchauntments from him,
but hauing loſt it by her Diuelliſh deceyte, remained as I haue
expreſſed in vnſpeakeablie.
                     Leauing this matter, it ſhall not be amiſſe, to ſpeake ſomewhat
of the ſtate and condition of Dramuſiande, who albeit he
were a Giant, which commonly are of rough and impatient nature:
yet was he indued both with ciuilitie of life, and honeſtie
in behauiour, exempting crueltie, and ſurpaſſing all of his ſtocke
and parentage in courteſie.
                     For after he had a long ſpace kept Don Edoard in Priſon,
and not onely perceiued his Princely qualities, but alſo the ſobrietie
and great gentle
                           •••
                         his life, hee cauſed his Fetters to
bee taken from his féete, and gaue him leaue for recreation, to
walke about the Caſtell, vppon condition, that hee would not
ſéeme to paſſe beyond his limits, without his conſent.
                     The courteous Prince, gaue him his hand and Oath, that
he would not paſſe one foote further, then his Licence ſhould permit:
Yet notwithſtanding for all that, he gaue charge vnto diuerſe
to reſpect his walking abroade, in that hee reſpected his
Aunte Eutropaes promiſe, which was, that many valiaunt
Knightes, would Aduenture their liues in the ſearche of this
ſtrayed Prince, whome ſhe doubted not but to haue alſo as Priſoners
in the Caſtell.
                     And againſt the comming thither of any ſuch, ſhee cauſed to
lye in Embuſh in the Forreſt, a great number of Armed men,

to aide Dramuſiand againſt them, if his hard hap ſhould miſſe
of his purpoſe. Tſſus paſſed the young Giant his time in pleaſure,
and Don Eodard acqusinted himſelfe with his former
ſorrowes, (as it chanceth vnto thoſe, who of long time are kept
from the ſight of them they moſt deſire) as well for the want
of his eſpouſed Ladie, as alſo the griefe the King his Father
would conceiue for his ill luck. But yet the gentle paſtime that
Dramuſiand would often vſe with him, cauſed him to ſpend
the time in pleaſure, that elſe he would haue waſted in mourning.
Thus leauing the captiue Prince in his forced content,
we will returne to the Prince Flerida, whom we left in the
Forreſt, ſorrowfully exp
                           •
                        cting the glad returne of her Lord
Don Edoard.
                     
                  
                  
                     CHAP. III.
                     How the Princeſſe Flerida, awayting the returne of her loyal
ſpouſe Don Edoard in the Forreſt, was deliuered of two
goodly yong Princes: and how a Sauage man walking by
her with two Lions, tooke them from her to feed his Lions
withall. And of that which happened to ſir Pridos, ſonne
the Duke of Galles, in his ſearch of the Prince Don Edoard
                     
                        WHile the Princeſſe Flerida, with no leſſe
griefe of mind, then agony of her whole
perſon, remained in the Forreſt, expecting
that which came not, as well to abandon
diuers chollericke humours, that ouercharged
her impatient mind, as alſo to exile the
eger paſſions, which were ſtill approching
her weake nature, ſhee buſied her ſelfe in gathering flowers,
accompanied with the faire Attaida and diuers Ladies

and Gentlemen, for that this time of recreation, was more correſpondent
to her good liking, then heretofore ſhe could conceiue
the opinion to like any. On a ſudden, ſhe fell into remembrance
of her Lord Don Edoard, whoſe long abſence ſhe admitted to
ſome misfortune, or elſe vngentleneſſe in himſelfe diſdained her
preſence. In which of theſe reſalue her ſelfe, ſhee was doubtfull:
for that in the one ſhe might conuict her ſelfe of raſh beléefe,
though in the other ſhe might ſtand vpon good occaſion. Betwéene
theſe cogitations ſhe ſpent the whole day, yéelding her
complaints likewiſe to the vncomfortable night approching:
which indéed ſéemed to her more obſcure, more grieſly, and more
deſpairable, then any night paſſed to her remembrance. So that
vpon this hard motion, ſhe fell into a reſolute opinion, neuer to
heare good tidings of her lord Don Edoard, for that the knights
who had ſpent their labour in his ſearch, were returned without
any tidings.
                     The Lord and Ladies perceiuing theſe paſſions to be more
extreame vpon her then any heretofore, beganne to caſt with
themſelues whether they might depart and leaue her in theſe
fits, or ſtay ſtill with her, which was to their great griefe: at
length they thus concluded, to abide the returne of the Duke of
Galles, for whoſe abſence likewiſe the Princeſſe was more agréeued
then ſhe would haue bene, had he bene preſent. This
vncomfortable night gone, and the chéerefull deawes of Phoebus
diſplayed ouer the earth, the duke of Galles returned a glad
ſight to the Princes, and no leſſe ioy to her attendants, for that
ſhe hoped of wiſhed newes of her Lord, and they to heare what
was become of their Soueraigne. But their expectations were
farre diſappointed, for he was as ignorant of the Prince, as
they which cauſed a freſh hurt vpon the olde griefe: neuertheleſſe,
he intreated the Lords to take themſelues to trauaile, it
might ſo fortune (he perſwaded them) that they ſhould haue better
ſucceſſe then he had. In the meanetime, he would abide
with the Princeſſe to comfort her, for that ſhe had vowed neuer
to returne from thence, till ſhée had heard ſome tidings of her
beſt beloued.
                     The noble Gentlemen, of no leſſe loyaltie to their Prince

                        Don Edoard, then loue they bare to the Princeſſe Flerida: addreſſed
themſelues preſently to fulfill this requeſt. Among
whome Pridos, eldeſt ſonne to the Duke of Galles, and chiefe
Gentleman attendant on the Prince, rode along the ſea ſhore,
where he mette with two of his companions, who likewiſe endeuoured
themſelues in the ſearch of Don Edoard, with whom
he determined to returne, for that he was paſt hope of any good
ſucceſſe.
                     Neuertheleſſe, to auoyd the euill conceit of the Princeſſe,
and the angry moode of his aged father, hee left them, and rode
on very ſolitary, ſometime exclaiming on Fortune for his hard
hap, and then againe blaming his ſolly, when he perceiued no
remedie: In midſt whereof, he brake forth into theſe, or the like
ſpéeches. If it were méete for mortall creatures, to blame or
inuey againſt their heauenly Creator, then both iuſtly, and by
good reaſon, may I claime the like occaſion, whoſe ſorrow can
not enioy one houre of ſuccor, whoſe mone be admitted on halfe
houre of mirth, or whoſe extreame griefe, but once taſte the ſauour
of halfe a minutes reſt. The Horſe haung laboured all
day, can take reſt in his Inne at night, the little Bird, can comfort
her ſelfe on euery twigge: the Fiſh can ſport and make paſtime
to himſelfe in the Riuer: in briefe, euery creature enioyeth
a quiet and pleaſant life, man onely excepted, who excelling
all creatures, both in forme and feature, is inferior to them
all in tranquillitie of life. So that ſurueying the whole courſe of
mans life, both from the beginning and to the end, I will admit
the Phyloſophers ſentence.
                     Either neuer to be borne, or quickly to die.
                     A good while he continued theſe carefull complaints, & longer
would haue done, had not the preſence of a Dameſell cauſed
him to forget them, who was mounted on a black Palfrey, and
attired likewiſe in blacke garments, who comming ſtill toward
ſir Pridos, made him ſomwhat amazed: yet took courage
againe, in hope to be certified by her, of ſome glad 
                           •
                        idings, as cō
                        cerning
the ſtrayed Prince Don Edoard. The Damoſel behauing
her ſelfe very curteouſly, with no leſſe audacitie of wit,
then exquiſſte qualities of maiden ciuilitie: taking Sir Pridos
                        
Horſe by the bridle, ſaluted him with theſe ſpéeches.
                     Sir Knight, if my preſence doe argue a preſumption, or my
boldneſſe to breake off your ſilent cogitations, ſeeme not Maydenly
in me, or more then modeſtie in your eye, let humble intreaty
paſſe for the one, and the tydings I bring, craue pardon
for the other.
                     The paines you take are to very ſmall purpoſe, and the
griefe you ouerloade your minde withall, to as little auayle:
for proofe whereof, giue eare to my words, which ſhall ſomewhat
eaſe your minde, and héere make an ende of my trauayle.
                     
                        Don Edoard your Prince, whoſe nobleneſſe hath euer bene
more famous, then his late aduentures hath proued fortunate,
he liueth, yet depriued of his libertie, and captiue to him, whoſe
anger will not be aſſwaged of long time, which he muſt ſtay to
his griefe, & my ſorrow. Wherefore, on thy knighthood I charge
thée, to certifie the Princeſſe Flerida, how daungerous it is for
her to vſe ſuch great impatience, as may cut off her time, yet
not abate his troubles. And how ſhe might manifeſt a princely
magnanimitie of minde, in conquering this griefe, by valure of
her patience, becauſe Fortune is prepared to another miſhap,
which becauſe it will happen too ſoone, I referre it to her that
ſhall feele it, and to you that ſhall know it. And therefore giue
her to vnderſtand, her griefe is as needeleſſe, as his ſtate is
helpeleſſe, vntill the appointed time, when all extreame ſorrowes,
ſhall finiſh with vnſpeakable ioyes. And thus ſay, that
Argonida ſendeth her theſe tydings: to whom, her loſſe is as
diſpleaſant, as to her ſelfe.
                     The Damoſell ending héere her Tale, gaue bridle to her
Palfray, and left Syr Pridos: into whoſe remembraunce
the knowledge of this Lady preſently came. That ſhée was
the Daughter of the Lady Enchauntreſſe, of the Iſle where
the Eagle rauiſhed Ardeſdegno, begotten by Primaleon, at
the time when ſuch excellent Tryumphes were made, after
the Battayle fought againſt the Knight of the vnknowne
Iſle.
                     
                     And of this Argonida, Don Edoard had a ſonne, named

                        Pompides, (as it is at large rehearſed in the Booke of Primaleon)
which I will let paſſe, and returne to ſir Pridos. Who
hauing well noted the tale of Argonida, returneth to the place
where he left the Princes, and declaring vnto her all that had
happened, ſhée became more ſorrowfull then before, for that ſhe
deſired nothing more then his company, which liuing ſhe ought
to haue, and yet he aliue could not haue. Her ſorrowes tooke ſo
déepe a perſwaſion in her heart, that immediately ſhée fell into
labour, which the Ladies perceiuing, and the Gentlemen giuing
place, as was their duetie, after many grieuous pa
                           •
                        gs
(which are incident to thoſe in that taking (ſhe was happily deliuered
of two goodly men Children. The Ladie Atraida receyuing
the two young Princes, wrapped then in rich and coſtly
clothes, & then preſeuted them to the Princeſſe, holding opinion
that the ſight of them, would ſomwhat mitigate her great vexation
of mind, & ſhe taking them in her armes, mixing her talke
with teares, declaring motherly affection, thus ſaid. Ah ſwéete
Infants, I reioyce in ſo much as Fortune hauing wrought her
malice vppon mée, yet that to you twaine ſhee hath attributed
no diſloyall accident, for more then ſhe hath done, well ſhée cannot
doe, reſpecting I haue loſt a friend, and you a Father. How
happie had I béene, if in bringing you twaine into the world, I
had departed my ſelfe? Yet Nature vrgeth mee to recall my
wordes, in that the Fathers abſence, is appeaſed by the Mothers
preſence, and yet ſo ſharpe are her aſſaults, that when I
would hartily nouriſh you twaine, I am heauily brought into
diſmaying of my life.
                     Remaining in this heauie complaints, to the two young
Children, ſuch prouiſion was made, as they would be Baptized
and ſhe being demaunded how ſhee weuld haue them named,
willed that the firſt might be called Palmerin, after the name
of her Father, for that the effect of this miſfortune, might bee
well compared to his before paſſed. The other, for becauſe they
were borne in the Forreſt, ſhée deſired that his name might
haue relation to the place of his birth, which was thus determined,
Florian du Deſert, as much to ſay, as Florian of the Forreſt.
The Ceremonies accompliſhed, which were required in

this matter: the Princeſſe receyued the two Infants vppon
her lappe, one while with mournfull tunes to ſtill theyr crying,
au other while with the Teat to bring them aſſéepe, euer minding
the harde miſfortune of her Lord, and neuer ceaſing to deplore
the miſeries of her life, eſteeming the one to excel all in hard
happe, and the other to be aboue all in vnlooked for miſchaunce.
But as commonly it hapneth, no pleaſure is without his paine
adioyned, nor no quiet calme, but by ſome accident or other, is
conuerted into a rough tempeſt: euen ſo this careful Princeſſe,
whoſe extreame griefe and miſhappe, added a perſwaſion of
minde, that Fortune had done her worſt, and executed her vttermoſt
ſpight: ſo that what wanted to accompliſh her quiet, as
concerning the abſence of her louing Don Edoard, ſhe determined
a reſolute opinion, (albeit farre incomparable to her loſſe,
yet as Nature willed her, by a forced content) to aſſwage her
vrgent Paſſions, on the preſence of the two young Princes: by
whom in time ſhe had good hope to end her griefe, and on whom
as preſent occaſion did ſerue, ſhe was ſomewhat ſatiſfied. But
marke how vnkindely it happened.
                     In this Forreſt of long time remained a Sauadge man, who
not vſing the companie of reaſonable Creatures, became vnreaſonable
of himſelfe: as the courſe of his life, being brutiſh
and Beaſtly, his diet on the Hearbs and Rootes of the ground,
his Apparell framed of the ſkinnes of wilde Beaſtes, ſhewed
that he was a man in name, but not in nature. This Sauadge
man, walking as was his woont, along the Forreſt, leading
in his hand a couple of Lyons, whome he vſed ſometime to kill
the Game, that would ſerue for his nouriſhment: vnhappily eſpyed
the Princeſſe and her Traine, which mooued him to withdrawe
himſelfe into a thicket of Trées néere adioyning: where
at pleaſure he behold the Ceremonies, vſed at the Baptizing of
the Children.
                     Nowe had Fortune determined the ſecond miſhappe of the
Princeſſe: for that ſhee vrged the Sauadge man, to goe take
the two Infants, who were ſweetely ſléeping on the Mothers
lap, and giue them for food vnto his Lyons, that all that day had
receyued no ſuſtenaunce. Foorth from among the Trées hee

coms, too the no little aſtoniſhment of the Princeſſe (whoſe ſorrowful
minde, was ſubiect to any moytie of feare) and the great
diſmaying of her Courtly attendants: who at this preſence of
ſo grim a ſire, betooke themſelues to flight, not one receyuing the
courage of hart to abide by the Princeſſe, but the Lady Attaida,
who neuor ſhrunke one foote from her, but would haue aduentured
the death in the Princeſſe defence, had her might bene anſwerable
to her good ſtomacke. When the Princeſſe ſaw herſelfe
ſubiect to ſo hard a miſchance, that the old Duke of Galles,
and all the other being vnarmed, were gladde to flie, which indéede
was their beſt help: ſhee wiſhed for Sir Pridos, but hee
was departed to London, to fetch a Charriot to bring her to the
Court, which vrged her thus to content her ſelfe: Let it ſuffice
thée poore Flerida, that thou art the only ſhe, borne vnto all miſfortune.
Then approched to her the Sauadge man, and tooke
from her the two young Princes, neyther vſing any words, or
offering any harme to her, but departed preſently to his Caue,
leauing the Princeſſe ouercome with a traunce, whereout, the
Lady Attaida by her diligent meanes recouered her.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. IIII.
                     ¶How Syr Pridos being departed frow the Forreſt, where
he left the Princeſſe, came to the Court to the King Fredericke,
and declared vnto him the loſſe of the prince Don
Edoard: which was no ſmall griefe to him, and all the Cittizens
of London. And how the Princeſſe Flerida left the
Forreſt, and was brought to the Court.
                     
                        AFter that Syr Pridos had ſéene the Byrth
of the two Princes, hee reſolued to departe
from thence to London, to the ende that he
might cauſe a Charriot bee brought into the
Forreſt, to conuey the Princeſſe vnto the
Court of her father K. Fredorick. Who leaning
in his chāber window eſpied ſir Pridos
                        
come ryding in great haſte, which cauſed him to caſt a doubt, of
ſome euill newes approching: in that he iudged a ſhow of more
ſadneſſe to be in him at that inſtant, then before time hee could
perceiue in him the like. Whereof to be reſolued, he preſently
ſent for Syr Pridos, to know the cauſe of his ſo ſudden arriuall:
whoſe griefe could not conceale the loſſe of Don Edoard, but in
teares laide open a diſcourſe, which grieued the Aged King t
                           •
                        
heare it, and galled his heart to recount it. The King at theſe
vnlooked for newes, fell into ſuch extreame paſſions, both with
the teares that bedeawed his Aged bearde, and grieuous ſighes
that iſſued from his heart, that Syr Pridos could hardly kéep life
life in him, or by intreaty vſe any meanes of a patient perſwaſion,
for the Aged King was ſtroken into ſuch a debility of hope,
that betwéene the impatient aſſaults of doubt and daunger, hee
thus began to vſe ſpéeche with himſelfe.
                     O my Don Edoard, nature willes me to deplore thy loſſe,
and intire affection makes me dye for thy lacke: whoſe preſence
was the ſtaffe of myne Aged dayes, and whoſe abſence is the
Sword, that wounds me to the death. But as no Graſſe will
hang on the héeles of Mercurie, nor Moſſe abide on the Stone
Siſiphus, ſo no certaintie can be looked for at the hands of Fortune,
whoſe ſickleneſſe is ſéene in chaunge, and whoſe frowardneſſe
in chaunce. Too long haue I truſted her, and too late hath
ſhee deceiued me: the one my folly, the other her faſhion. Yet
doubt I not, but if thou enioy thy life, the ſubſtance of thy valure
ſhall excéede the ſharepneſſe of her vengeance, which will
be no leſſe welcome to thée, then long wiſhed of me. But alas,
Well may 
                           〈◊〉
                         hide my griefe, but neuer heartily forget it: well
may I awhile brooke it, but for no long time beare it: for that
the want of my comfort, will cut off my dayes, and the doubts
I conceyue bring mee in greater diſtreſſe, where if thou were
preſent, my minde would be ſatiſfied, and in ſpight of Fortune,
award all miſchances. While the King continued in this great
agony of 
                           •
                        inde, the Queene entred: who likewiſe vnderſtanding
the loſſe of her Sonne, began to adde another Stratageme
of griefe, bewraying her motherly affection, both in teares and
heauy complaints, which to appeaſe, the aged King thus began.

Madame, the honour of a noble minde, is tried in aduerſitie,
when as the extremitie of griefe, is conquered by patience of the
minde. But the minde being impatient, and not kept within
the lymittes of a moderate gouernment: the leaſt Croſſe that
happeneth, is too waightie in paine, when the ſence is farre too
weake in reaſon. It pleaſed the Almightie to giue vs a Sonne,
in whom wee receiued no little comfort, and by whome, our
Fame hath béene Knightly aduanced. And now to trie how we
can brooke a moitie of his diſpleaſure, he hath cauſed ſome accident
to happen, to keepe him from vs, whom we moſt of all deſired,
yet not depriuing vs of hope: but as to our griefe we haue
loſt him, ſo to our comfort we ſhall ſee him againe. In meane
time, let vs tollerate this ſharpe affliction, on his two Princely
Children, who till we enioy the fight of the Father againe,
ſhall with their noble Mother, comfort our ſorrowes, and we
alſo endeuour to abate their mones. So one with another ſhal
beare an equall ſhare of aduerſitie, and be partners alſo in good
Fortune, if any chaunce to happen.
                     Thus the King and the Queene remained, one while in a
perſwaſion of patience, an other while wholy vanquiſhed with
the force of their griefe: whoſe Paſſions I referre to the iudgements
of thoſe, that haue taſted the honour of Fame, and hatred
of Fortune. Returne we now to Syr Pridos, who in this
time had cauſed his Brother to ride with a Chariot to the Forreſt,
that the Princeſſe might be brought to the Court, who being
placed in the Chariot, and ready to depart: Shee gaue ſo
heauy a farewel to the place, as well for her Lord Don Edoard,
as miſfortune of her Children, that her attendaunts ſeemed as
it were drowned in ſadnes, to ſee the Princeſſe ouercome with
ſuch ſorrowe. Being come to the Citie of London, the Cittizens,
who at her comming from Greece, did not onely excell in
varietie of deuiſes, but alſo diſcouered their ioy in ſingular Triumphes:
Now with a ſorrowfull diſpoſition, they bewrayed
the terrour of their loſſe, and yet with an intermedled ſhowe of
ioy, to aſſage the dolor of the Princeſſe.
                     When ſhe came to the Court, & perceiued the great chaunge,
of woonted diſportes, both in the King and Queene, as alſo in

all the nobility, who likewiſe vnderſtanding the miſhap of the
two young Princes, altogether begin a world of lamentations.
The king diſmaying of any good hope, the Quéene diſpayring
in double extremity, the Lords and Ladies, both in
apparell and ieſture, wholly exclaiming on the cruelty of Fortune.
The Inhabitaunts throughout the whole Realme of
England, whoſe delight was many times, to fit and conceiue
maruailous opinions, of the no leſſe Knightly, then famous aduentures
of the Prince Don Edoard, nowe ſit ſighing, wringing
their handes, and pulling theyr bonnets ouer theyr eyes,
vſing as it were in a generall voyce amongſt them: Oh, none
but we vnhappy.
                     The King hauing thus paſſed this night, in no leſſe griefe of
minde, then ſickly aſſaults of his aged perſon, (the Quéene, and
the Princeſſe Flerida, equally conſidered) on the morrow hée
determined to ſend a Knight of his Court, named Argolant,
Sonne to the Duke of Horten, and Brother to Traendos (who
alſo had bin amourous of the Princeſſe Flerida) to the Emperor
Palmerin, at Conſtantinople, to let him vnderſtand the late
miſfortune of England. He being ready to depart, as he rode
thorow London, the Stréetes were adorned with blacke, and
the Citizens arrayed in black and mourning manner, bringing
him to the Sea ſhore, where he tooke ſhipping and departed.
                     The Princeſſe Flerida became very féeble of perſon, inſomuch
that there was doubt of her good recouery: but God not ſuffering
her to ende, as ſhee willingly would, gaue her ſtrength againe
by little and little, and comforted her ſelfe beſt, when ſhe
was foorth of all company, which cauſed many Knights to leaue
the Court, & liue in ſearch of the ſtrayed Prince Don Edoard,
who pitied her caſe, and his abſcence. Thus remained fayre
Flerida, as chaſt Penelope, to her abſent Lord Vliſſes: not fayling
one iote in true and faithfull Loue, though ſhée dayly contemned
the aduerſe eſtate of her life. And hee likewiſe fayled
not in conſtant loyalty, but preferred the terror of death, before
the falſifying of his faith to his Lady. Iuſtly fulfilling, that neither
diſtaunce of place nor extremity of Fortune, could part in
ſunder their mutuall coniunction of ſpotleſſe amitie.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. V.
                     ¶What the Sauadge man did with the two young Princes,
how pittie vanquiſhed the bloody tiranny, he was minded
to execute on them. And how Argolant arriued at Conſtantinople,
at what time the Emperour Palmerin was at
the Triumphes, for the birth of faire Polinarda. Where declaring
his tidings, the Emperours Sonne Primaleon, preſently
tooke himſelfe to trauaile, beſide diuers Noble perſonges,
who followed in the ſearch of the famous Don
Edoard.
                     
                        REturne we now to the Sauadge man, who
as the Hiſtory declareth, haſtened to his
Caue, with the two yong Princeſſe in his
armes, his Wife there awaighting the returne
of her Huſband, hauing in her armes
her owne childe, being about the age of one
yéere. He bing come to her, preſented her
the two young Princes, declaring that
all that day, hée had found no other Dinner for themſelues
and the Lyons, then thoſe two Infauntes, whom hée willed
might preſently be diſmembred in pieces, for that his hungry
ſtomacke required to haue meate. The Wife, in whoſe
heart motherly pittie, excelled Sauadge crueltie, for that indeede,
Women by nature, doe beare a more eſtimation of mercie,
then is requiſite in men: ſhée vſed ſuch kinde perſwaſions
with her Huſband, as alſo finding the meane to prouide other
neceſſaries for him, that ſhe ſaued the liues of the Infants, and
ſatiſfied the hungry appetite of her Huſband: ſo that louingly
ſhée became theyr ſecond Mother, and as carefully nouriſhed
them, as had they béene the fruite of her owne body. Where we
will leaue them a while, to God and good Fortune: being not

forgetfull of Argolant, whom we left ſayling toward Conſtantinople.
After ſo long being on the Seas, as is required in ſo
long a iourney, he arriued at the famous City of Conſtantinople,
on a Sunday morning, where he perceiued as gallant Triumphes
in preparation, as were at the renowned mariages of
Primaleon, and the Prince Don Edoard. The cauſe whereof
was, for ioy of the birth of the Daughter of the Prince Primaleon,
whom the Emperor gaue to name Polinarda, in token
that her beauty & good Fortune, ſhould excell any Lady liuing at
that day. In honour of this ioy, the Triumphes were proclaimed:
which procured the aſſemblie of many noble perſonages,
among whom, was Tarnaes the K. of Lacedemonia, Polendos,
King of Theſſalie, and Belcar the Duke of Duras: the preſence
of theſe States, being no ſmall honour to the Emperor,
and Fame to the Court of Conſtantinople.
                     
                     
                        Argolant, attired all in blacke Armor, rode through the Cittie,
and in ſhort time arriued at the Emperors Pallace, where
beholding the valiant behauiour, of each couragious knight, to
winne honour in this Triumphe: with an heauie ſigh he called
to memory, the vnlooked for ſorrows of the Court of England,
which was adorned with no leſſe griefe, then was the
Emperours Court with gladneſſe. Which perſwaded ſuch an
vnkinde conceite, in the heart of the gentle Knight Argolant,
who eſtéemed the loyaltie of friendſhippe, to ſerue as an eſpeciall
remedy to the afflicted mind: that he feared his newes, were
not of force ſufficient, to chaunge theyr excéeding myrth, albeit
his expectation was deceiued in that point. Then approched
he the place where the Emperor ſate at dinner, where with no
leſſe ciuilitie of ieſture, then modeſt behauiour of perſonage, hée
vayled his helmet, offering to kiſſe the Emperors hand, which
might not be permitted, in that he was ignorant of whence hée
was. Which he perceiuing, beganne in preſence of them all,
to declare his Ambaſſage, not forgetting the place and perſon,
which in euery point hée handled with duetie. The Emperour
well noting the ſadde tale of Argolant, the miſfortune of his
Sonne Don Edoard, and heauineſſe of the Engliſh Court, he
withdrew himſelfe frō the Table into his Chamber, where as

patiently as his griefe would ſuffer him: he beganne to vſe his
ſpéeches in this manner.
                     I know not whether the Gods in granting me a proſperous
courſe in youth, haue determined to ruinate my dayes in
mine age, or Fortune holding me then in fauour beyond al men
hath allowed my miſfortune now to be aboue any: if ſo it was
appointed, I would my life had ended then in tranquillitie,
who
                           •
                         I feared no endamagement, then prolonging my dayes
in hope of an aunſwerable age. to bée ſubiect to the miſerie of
time, and abiect from the honour of a noble heart. Well, what
hath paſſed to thy high good hap, and what is preſent, to the no
ſmall anguiſh of thy heart, let the remembrance of the one,
extinguiſh the Fame of the other, and the crueltie of chaunce,
roote vp the ineſtimable praiſe of thy conqueſt. Theſe and ſundrie
other heany complaints were vttered by the Emperour, &
the triumphes were now of ſmall eſtimation, for that thorow
the whole Court, theſe ſorrowfull tidings had ſtrooken a ſuddaine
alteration. But moſt of all in the heart of the noble Primaleon,
who vnderſtanding the miſfortune his déere Friende
and brother Don Eodard, ſtood not to caſt doubt of this matter
or that accident, either how Fortune might fauour him, or endamage
his ſuddaine enterpriſe, but as couertly as he might,
departed from Conſtantinople, refuſing Father, Mother,
Wife, Children, Lands, liuing and all: that the loyaltie hée
bare to his friend, might declare he preferred his ſafetie, before
his owne ſolace. And that his deedes might be anſwerable to
his good intent, he vowed to trauatle the courſe of his, to
ſearch in euery deſolate and vnfrequented place, but he would
finde his déere friend Don Eodard. Whoſe welfare he as heartily
deſired as his owne life, for that he had found the like truſtie
and vnſpotted affection in him: when through his valure,
he defended him from the Giant Gatherin.
                     
                     The Emperor was aduertiſed of his departure, by the vnaccuſtomed
penſiueneſſe of his eſpouſed Lady Gridonia, as alſo by
the great ſadneſſe of the Empreſſe his mother: whom neither
the gentle perſwaſion of the Emperor might ſatiſfie, nor endeuour
of her Courtly Ladies, might winne any meane to pacifie.

Who vſed the more diligence in the matter, onely for the
affection they bare to the Princeſſe Flerida, by whoſe vertuous
and Princely behauiour of life (which had not onely rauiſhed
the mindes of all, but obtained the good liking of euery one,
in that vertue is the chiefe ornament of noble or ignoble:) they
were all encouraged to attempt any occaſion to ſet the Empire
at quiet.
                     When the Emperour perceiued her great diſquietneſſe, that
the ſpéeches of the Ladies, as alſo of himſelfe, were beſtowed to
ſmall effect, he beganne to vſe commendations of the valiant
attempt of his Sonne Primaleon, in that his courage of minde
vrged him to ſo famous an enterpriſe. Deſiring her to conſider
the loſſe of the Prince Don Edoard, their Sonne in law:
and that the good Fortune of Primaleon, might bring ineſtimable
comfort to all Kingdomes in Chriſtendome, ſo that the
honour of his hardie attempt, deſerued rather a generall reioyſing,
then ſuch ſad complaints as they ſéemed to bewray.
                     The knights who had likewiſe béene partners in the Triumph,
and bare great good will to the Prince Don Edoard, as
alſo to the noble Primaleon, withdrew themſelues to their
lodgings, and armed themſelues preſently, poſting with all
ſpéed they might after the aduenterous Primaleon, ſome taking
one way, and ſome another. As well thoſe that vſed the Triumphes
for their Ladies ſakes, as alſo thoſe whoſe redoubted
behauiour, hath both wonne the honour of the field, and dignitie
of fame. All with a mutuall conſent, aduentured limme and
life, that the report of their déedes, might manifeſt the renowne
of their knighthood.
                     And becauſe you ſhall haue knowledge, who behaued themſelues
moſt worthy cōmendations, in this no leſſe famous then
rare aduenture, I will bewray ſome of them to you, that yonr
gentle opinion of their paines, may yéeld them in recompence
part of a condigne praiſe. The firſt that tooke the courage to
hazarde himſelfe in the field, had to name Polendos, King of
Theſſaly, Sonne to Friſol, the King of Hungaria, accompanied
with his brother Belcar. The next, was the Prince of Allemaigne,
ſon to the Emperor Trineus, and named Vernar, who

honoured the beautie of faire Bazilia, youngeſt daughter to the
Emperour Palmerin, to whom he was newly maried, and ſtood
in doubt how to proceed, leaſt Fortune ſhould not be ſo fauourable
to him as he expected, which cauſed ſome ſlackneſſe in good
will. Neuertheleſſe, after he had conſidered the honor of Mars,
and ſharpe cōflicts of Venus, how the one was laſting in Fame,
and the other linked to an effeminate fancie, hee determined to
follow his Companions, driuing into obliuion the pleaſaunt
conceyts, that hee often eſtéemed in his beſt beloued, vſing this
perſwaſion with himſelfe, That hee which vanquiſhed himſelfe
with the vanitie of Fancy, and yéeldeth the libertie of his
will to fond affection, is more méete to handle a Lute, then a
Lance, and better to court a Lady, then deſerue the braue name
of a Captaine. In this perſwaſion hee departed, intending ſo
knightly an opinion in his minde, that the honour of his name
ſhould expreſſe his noblenes, and valure of his bounty, be eſtéemed
of his fayre Bazilia.
                     
                     Thus was the city of Conſtantinople, (as it were deſolate,)
wanting the noble knights which were thence departed, which
cauſed the Emperour to viſite the chiefeſt places in the Citie, to
the no ſmall content of himſelfe, & ioy of the Citizens, who little
minded the abſence of the noble Gentlemen, in that ye Emperor
ſo louingly vouchſafed thē his cōmpany. Thē departed Argolant
frō the Court of Conſtātinople, toward the realme of England,
bearing anſwere of his Ambaſſage from the Emperor, to
his Lord & ſoueraigne, how y• loſſe of the Prince Don Edoard,
was blazed in the courts of diuers noble Princes. As in the
court of Armedes King of France, his Couſin, & Son in law to
the Emperor of Conſtantinople, as alſo in the court of Recinde
K. of Spaine, in the court of Pellagris, the Souldan of Niquee,
with the noble Maiortes, & many Princes more, to whom the
loſſe of the Engliſh Prince, was as grieuous as to himſelf. For
proofe whereof, the imployed paines of diuerſe noble mindes
might remaine as witneſſe, who walked the Forreſts and vnknowne
paſſages in many Countryes, that Martiall behauior
was neuer more eſtéemed, thē it was during the ſearch of this
ſtrayed Prince. Argolant being departed from the Emperour,

after many dayes Trauell, hee arriued at the Engliſh Courte,
whereas to the king Fredericke, the Quéene, and the Princeſſe
Flerida, hee deliuered the anſwere of his Meſſage, who
were greatly ſatiſfied in hearing the Noble Attempts of the
Grecian Knights, by whoſe endeuoured paines, they had good
and proſperous ſucceſſe.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. VI.
                     ¶How Primaleon endeuoring himſelfe in the diligent ſearch
of the prince Don Edoard, happened to meet with the Funeralls
of the ſorrowfull Lady Pandritia, Daughter to the
K. of Lacedemonia, the which ſhe ſolemnized for the vnkinde
repulſe ſhe ſuſtained by the Prince Don Edoard.
                     
                        NOw Primaleon determining his ſecrete eſcape
from the Cittie of Conſtantinople, as
I haue before declared, commaunded his
Eſquyre to bring his Courſer and Armour,
and cloſely to conuey all his Equippage and
furniture behind the Storehouſe of his Siſter
Flerida, for that none ſhould be priuie
to his intent, but only he. The Eſqu: failed
not to accompliſh the pleaſure of his Lord. And being come to
the appointed place, he armed the Prince, except his Shield and
Helmet, which he bare himſelf, ſo mounting on Horſbacke, they
both departed, vowing to reſt in no place, till hee might recouer
ſome wiſhed tydings of his Brother and Friend. Don Edoard,
without whom he would neuer returne to Greece again. Long
he trauelled, before he encountred any aduenture worthy the rehearſall.
But at length arriuing in the bottom of a valley in
Lacedemonia, whē the Sun was declined to the weſt parts, he
was diſcoraged, for that the night was obſcure vpon him, beſide
thicknes of the trées, made his paſſage more tenebrous, thē elſe
it would haue bene, ſo that very hardly he could finde his way.

Wandring on ſtill, vſing his minde with ſeuerall Imaginations,
at leaſt to the comfort of himſelfe, and ioy of an Eſquyre,
who ſorrowed to ſée his Lorde ſo ſuddenly penſiue, hee eſpyed a
gailant troupe of Ladyes, bearing in theyr hands lighted Torches,
eache one well mounted on a luſtie Stéede, attyred all in
blacke, and framing their voices to great lamentations. Primaleon
ſurpriſed with great griefe of minde, to ſée ſuch fayre Ladyes
weare the habite of Mourners, tooke the boldneſſe of himſelfe,
to beholde what they were, and drawing himſelfe ſomewhat
nearer to them to them, perceiued the chiefe Lady and Miſtreſſe
of them, her Palfrey trapped with black Veluet, her Veſture
of the ſame, and foure ancient Knights in the middeſt, bearing
a Funerall, couered all with blacke Veluet. Primaleon perceiuing
their heauy lamentations, and that they were nothing
abaſhed at his preſence, but helde on their Iourney, as though
they had not ſéene him, he tooke ſuch an earneſt deſire in himſelf,
that he muſt néeds demand the cauſe, why they mourned in that
manner. Then preſenting himſelfe before the chiefeſt Ladie,
whoſe faire face had ſuſtained a great blemiſh, by the abundance
of teares that iſſued from her Eyes: in this manner he prepared
himſelfe to giue the Onſet.
                     Faire Lady, impute it not to flattery, that I call you ſo, nor
to Folly, in ſo much as you are ſo, but rather of your nature cannot
admit your own praiſe, for the perfectiō of your mind, being
anſwered in perſwaſion of my vnfeigned meaning, which eſtéemeth
you, as I haue ſaid, albeit farre inferior to that I could ſay.
It is no more my deſire, then vnder duety I may demaund, nor
my Sute no otherwiſe diſpoſed, then may ſtand with your Honour
to replie, and my honeſty to requeſt, I being a friend to all
Ladies, and foe vnto none, inſomuch that a moytie of their deſires,
ſhould rather hinder me by miſhap, then diſhearten me by
any danger. So that in briefe my requeſt is thus: why you frequent
this ſolitary place, accompanied with theſe who are equal
with you in ſorrow, althougy not worthy compariſon (it may
be) in Soueraigntie? And why you accompanie this Funerall,
with ſuch heauie complaints? conſidering the pleaſures of the
Court were more fit for your delights, then the vncomfortable

abyding in this ſolitary Deſart. Thus much on my Knightly
Oath auouching, that knewe I, you had ſuſtained iniury at
the hands of any, I would eyther cauſe him recount what hee
hath done you in hiſhonour, or conſtraine a reuenge on his deareſt
blood.
                     The Ladie hauing well noted the courteſie of Primaleon,
as well his Knightly offer
                           •
                        , as the good opinion ſhee conceyued
of performance, ſatiſfied his Requeſt, with this gentle replye.
Syr Knight, leſſe I iudge you not to be, and more (being ignorant
of your eſtate) I may not terme yée: Neuertheleſſe, if I
fayle in the one, let friendſhip yet forget the other. Let ſuffice,
that I am one whom Fortune hath iniuryed euery way by miſhappe,
and aduantaged no way by no good lucke, ſo that to anſwere
your demaund, I am the onely Ladye, who may compare
with all for miſfortune. As touching my ame, which may in
ſome ſort vrge you to remēber my meaning: when you are not
ignorant of me: vnderſtand that I am calld Pandritia, daughter
to the famous King of Lacedemonia, and although at this preſent
in this vncomfortable Wilderneſſes, yet am I gouerneſſe
of his Princely dominions. And hereby in a Caſtle, I paſſe forth
my vnfortunate life, hauing no other company then theſe whom
you may behold, who beare part in my mone and miſhappe. As
for the eſtimation of my life, the ioy is ſo ſmall, and the griefe
ſo well acquainted, that I am rather deſperate to ende it, then
deſirous to endure it. And now I make my returne vnto my
carefull Caſtle, the which, for that it is not vnprouided of faire
Ladies, ſuch as you ſée here preſent, I haue tearmed it the Garden
of Damoſells, wherein I receiue as much ſollace by mourning,
as any Ladie taſting my miſhappe, can obtaine in myrth.
I am ſure if you haue trauelled Countreys, you are not ignorant,
how the King Ternaes my Brother, who after the death
of my Father, was enchaunted into the Caſtle Des noires Oyſeaux,
vntill ſuch time as by the valiancie of the famous Prince
Don Edoard, he was deliuered out of ſo grieuous perplexitie.
This Prince afterward remaining with my Brother in Lacedemonia,
ſo long as him pleaſed, where were ſuch Tryumphes
ordayned, as might gratifie ſuch an Honourable perſonage, I

(the more vnfortunate I) conceiued ſo good opinion of his valiant
behauiour, that I choſe him as the honor of my life, and Patron
of my Loue, eſtéeming all other but baſe in reſpect of him,
and hee to be as farre beyond them all, as I was deceyued farre
from my hope. But my Cake was dowe, and my labour ſpent
to loſſe: for that long before he had vowed his ſeruice to the faire
Damoſell Flerida, to whom he was Eſpowſed, when he departed
foorth of this Kingdome. Thus was my Loue deſpiſed, my
ſelfe diſgraced, and ſhée honoured with that Gallant, whome I
loued too ſoone, and loſt too late: which cauſeth mee refraine all
Courtly companie, betaking me to the ſorrow of my Folly, that
miſt the good happe, I deſired in Faith. And yet beholde, in remembrance
of this vnkinde Don Edoard, I haue reſerued this
Picture, as the chiefe ornament of my Chamber, imagining the
perſon preſent, when God knowes he is farre enough from me
in diſtance of place, but farther off in good will of heart. Yet often
doe I blame the Picture for the Maiſters ſake: whome had
I but halfe ſo much power ouer, as I haue of this Portrait, hee
ſhould well know, my Loue is more then he can poſſibly deſire,
and ſo much that he can neuer liue to deſerue. And as you may
perceiue this Picture addreſſed in manner of a Funerall, which
(being depriued of all Hope) I meane to Solemnize in this ſorrowfull
manner that interring it in my comfortleſſe Houſe of
Sadnes, I may forget the fond Loue I bare to ſuch an vngentle
Friend. Which to ſée accompliſhed, this carefull companie, as
you may perceiue, are ready to aſſiſt me in this heauy trauel. And
therfore courteous Knight, if you pleaſe to ſée my Funerals, and
Picture of that ingratefull Prince Don Edoard, lifte vppe the
Hearſe, and you ſhall beare witnes, what I haue giuen you in
words. Pandritia concluding her diſcourſe with an heauy ſigh:
the Prince Primaleon lifted vp the Hearſe, where he beheld the
liuely Portreit of his déere Friend Don Edoard, ſo Artificially
drawne, that he doubted whether he had bene ſlaine thereabout
or no, for vnder his head were two Pillowes of blacke Veluet,
and on either ſide of the body two burning Tapers, which enforced
the Prince to turne his talke into teares, and there he bar
                           •
                        
                        Pandritia company for all that Night, enduoring her Comfort,

but her vowed ſorrow would not ſuffer any perſwaſion in this
caſe. Ye would not Primaleon depart: but bare her company
into another valley, & what time faire Aurora began to ſhew
her cheerfull countenance, & cloare Phoebus haſtened to his chariot,
to run his courſe about the earth. Through this valley ran
a blacke and vgly Riuer, beſet with high Trées round about,
which made it very obſcure and vnpleaſant to the beholders. In
the midſt of this Riuer was an Ile, wherin was placed an ancient
Manſion, couered ouer al with black: which declared ſmal
pleaſure to thoſe who remained there, & great occaſion of ſadnes
to any that ſhould come there. The chamber of his ſolitarie
place, were adorned with many pictures, as witneſſes of the
great miſfortunes that had happened to many Louers: as the
tragicall motion of Hero and Leander, the ſorrowfull end of
Piramus and This bie, accompanied with the mournful Philomela.
Then next her ſtood the vnhappy quéene Dido, hauing the
blade of Eneas pierced through her harmeleſſe heart, the workemanſhip
ſo cunningly ordred, that you would haue iudged the
freſh blood to drop from her faire body. Medea, Progne, Arcana
Fedra, & Arife, were all worthily painted, with the whole diſcourſes
of their liues. There ſtood Orpheus wrapped about in
the fire of Hell, hauing in his hand his harpe, which in times
paſt could recouer him his wife Erudice. Acteon bare company
with theſe infortunate louers, in the ſhape of an Hart, and
torne a péeces by his owne hounds: by him ſtood Narciſſus, and
diuers other, which I omit for breuitie, as 
                           〈◊〉
                         fearefull to be
too tedious. Pandritia being now come to the dore of this foreſaid
manſion, ſhe cauſed the damoſels to beare in the funeralls
of the Prince Don Edoard, then turning to Primaleon gaue
him this farewel. Sir knight, lo here the reſt of my miſfortunes
and laſt Sepulcher of my heauy trauels: I ſhall requeſt your
company no further, for that none muſt enter here, but he that
vowes to be partner in our penſiuenes, and can abandon the
name of all pleaſures, to expreſſe his miſhaps in bemoning my
funerals. She entring, the knights cloſed the dore, ſo that Primaleon
had not the meane to anſwer her, neuertheleſſe, he ſtaied
to heare the ſorrowfull clamors they made within: which
was no leſſe irkſome to his heart, then had he ſéene the perfect
interring of his brother Don Eodard.
                     
                     
                        
At laſt hee departed, dyrecting his courſe into ſuch places, where
he thought ſooneſt to heare tydings of his ſtraied friend: So trauayling
on in good hope, we wil leaue him a while. And declare
more at large, the cauſe of Pandritia her great mourning: as
alſo what fortuned to the two yong Princes, nouriſhed in the
Caue of the Sauadgeman.
                     
                  
                  
                     CHAP. VII.
                     ¶The cauſe why Pandritia led this ſolitary kind of life. And
how the yong Prince Florian ſtraied from the Caue of the
Sauadge man, and by Sir Pridos was brought 
                           •
                        o the Engliſh
Court, and what further happened.
                     
                        THe occaſion why Pandritia bare ſuch great
affection to the Prince Don Edoard, is at
large declared in the Booke intituled Primaleon.
How that after the Prince had
deliuered her Brother Tarnaes out of the
Enchaunted Caſtle, wherein his Father
had deuiſed the way to encloſe him, and
the came home with him into Lacedemonia.
Shee oft
                           ••
                         
                        
                           ••
                        emed to mooue good liking on her behalfe to
the Prince Don Edoard, but hee by no meanes could direct his
fancy after her courſe, for that his promiſe before paſſed to the
Princeſſe Flerida, withheld the conſent ſhe gladly looked for.
                     To auoyd therefore what might happen, he refuſed to vſe her
company in talke, as before hee was wont, which very much
diſpleaſed Bellagris, who was Soldā
                         of Niquee, after the death
of Molerin, his eldeſt brother. For hee vnderſtanding the ſecret
affection and great good will, that ſhe entirely bare to the noble
Prince Don Edoard, aduentured to trie Fortune, who ſo fauourably
proſpered his intent, that vnder the tytle of Don Edoard,
he entred his ſiſters Chamber: where acquainting himſelfe

with her, to his deſire, and her deceit: time brought tho
                           ••
                        
pleaſure to a goodly Sonne named Blandidon, of whom hereafter,
you ſhall be more largely certified.
                     But Pandritia giuing credite to her ſelfe, that the noble Don
Edoard had receiued the eſtimation of her honour: grouuded
ſuch firme affection on him, as was more then we ought, and
more then he would grant. So kéeping his Picture in his abſence,
and vnderſtanding of his ſuppoſed death, ſhe vſed this ſoleunitie
in honour of his Funeralles, and attyred her ſelfe according
as became her miſfortune, departing from the Garden
of Damoſelles to her Houſe of ſadneſſe, ſuppoſing thereto end
her life with the loſſe of her loue. So remaineth ſhe in place,
where ſhe ſhut the dore againſt the Prince Primaleon, who is
likewiſe endeuoring himſelfe in his aduentures. Returne
we now to the two young Princeſſo, whom the Sauage mans
wife had carefully nouriſhed vp, as had they béene her owne
Children, ſhe could not haue vſed more motherly compaſſion.
                     In ſhort time they grew to ſuch eſtate, that their whole delight
was to hunt the ſauage Beaſtes in the Forreſt, wherevnto
Florian
                              •
                           
                         had more affection then his brother Palmerin, for
he vſed euery day to beare his bowe, and leade the two Lyons,
that hee became more expert then the Sauage man himſelfe:
and thus for ten yeares ſpace liued theſe two young Princes,
beloued w
                           •
                        ll of him, who before was their greateſt enemie.
                     It fortuned on a Sunday morning, the Princes Fletida, walked
forth into the Forreſt, as well to ſorrow for her Luue, as
to lamēt the eſtate of her infortunate life, hauing accompliſhed
what ſhe deſired ſhe returned. At this time Florian wandred
about the forreſt with his Lyons, which he tyed vp, meaning
to take by force the firſt wilde Beaſt that ſhould appeare in his
ſight. Hauing long ſtayed without any prey, he determined to
returne: but at laſt he eſpyed a mighty Hart in a groue of trées,
whereat he let ſlie an Arrow with ſuch force, that it paſſed
cleane through the body of the beaſt. The Hart féeling himſelfe
wounded, proſently tooke flight: which he perceiuing, let ſlip
the Lions after him but all in vaine, for the ſwiftneſſe of the
Hart outreached the ſpéedy pace of the Lyons.
                     
                        
And Florian ſtrayed ſo farre, that he had loſt the ſight of the Lyons
and the Harte, as alſo the way to the Sauadge mans houſe:
which cauſed him to wander in heauineſſe, till the darke Night
ouerſhadowed him, when he eſpyed two Shepheards making a
little Fire of ſtickes to warme them, becauſe the Night was excéeding
colde. Florian being there arriued, hee ſate him downe
by a Riuers ſide, in the very ſame place that his Mother brought
him into the World: where ſitting a pretty while, he eſpyed a
Knight come ryding, attyred in blacke Armor, ſpotted with red,
bearing in his Shielde, the figure of a Gryffon, with a certaine
Poeſie, which was vnknown to any, his Lady and himſelfe excepted.
This Knight was named Sir Pridos, who ſtill aduanced
himſelfe in the ſearch of the noble Prince Don Edoard, and
he rode very penſiue and ſad: till caſting his eyes vpon Floran,
his heart beganne ſomewhat to conceiue a maruellous inward
Ioy, for that his countenance bare the perfect Image of his noble
Father. Whereupon Sir Pridos, fell in diuers demaundes
with him, which Florian very courteouſly anſwered: So that
Syr Pridos fell into great deſire, that he would beare him company
to London, wherein the Kings Court, he would preſent
him, among the number of thoſe, whome renowmed Fame did
euer accompany. The young Prince Florian, more deſirous
to leade his life among the braue Gallantes, then ſo to paſſe his
time ſo ſolitarie among the vnfrequenten places, in the Wilde
Forreſt, gaue his conſent, and iournyed with Sir Pridos to the
Engliſh Court, where he preſented him to the King, cloathed in
the Skinne of an Harte, a thing of no ſmall admyration to the
King: yet did hee receiue him very graciouſly, in that he ſuppoſed
him to be one of the Sonnes of the Princeſſe Flerida, vnto
whoſe Chamber he walked with this young Prince, and in
this manner beganne to ſalute her. Fayre Daughter, among
all the grieuous vexations, that afflict your weake Nature, loe,
heere the Honour Syr Pridos doeth preſent you withall: who
in ſearching your Noble Lord, and my Sonne, hath found this
Iewell, which hee offereth to you, as the fruſtes of his labours.
And truſt me, the oftner I beholde his ſweete countenance, the
more I conceyue Opinion of his Allyance to my Sonne Don
                        
                        Edoard. The Princeſſe Flerida was not a little pleaſed with
ſo glad a preſent, in ſigne whereof ſhée imbraced her Sonne, albeit
vnknowen, and went ſtraight way to Sir Pridos, who certified
her, that he found him ſitting in the ſame place where the
Sauadge man came with his two Lyons, and tooke her two
Children from her.
                     This mooued Flerida, to ſuppoſe him for her Sonne, but
Fortune would not as yet ſuffer a perfect aſſuraunce, that eyther
hée ſhould know her for his Mother, or ſhee him for her
Childe: Neuertheleſſe, ſhée gaue him the name of Deſart, training
him vp in the company of a young Gentleman, Sonne to
Syr Pridos and Attaida, named Don Roſiran, De la Bronde:
with whome I will leaue this gentle Prince Florian, to know
what the Sauadge man and Palmerin did, ſéeing Florian returned
not as he was woont.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. VIII.
                     How grieuous the Sauadge man tooke the ſuddaine loſſe of
the yong Prince Forian, when he perceiued the two Lions
returne all waſhed in the blood of the Hart that they had
ſlaine. And how the young Prince Palmerin, walking to
the Sea ſide to ſeeke his Brother, accompanied with Siluian,
the Sauadge mans Sonne, departed thence in a Galley,
with Polendos King of Theſſalie, who ſailed to Conſtāntinople,
where he preſented them to the Emperor. And
how a Damoſel mounted on a white Courſer, and bearing
Armes, arriued at the Court of Conſtantinople, where ſhe
preſented the Emperor, with a Letter ſent from the Lady
of the Lake, which gaue him at large to vnderſtand, what
ſhould oappen to 
                           •
                        he yong Prince Palmerin.
                     
                        
                        LOng expected the Sauadge man ſhe returne
of Florian, and ſeeing it waxed darke, and
his hope deceiued, hee was out of meaſure
diſquieted for the abſence of Florian, whoſe
company, both for expertneſſe and towardneſſe
in his exerciſe, was more commodious
to him, then his griefe would ſuffer
him to expreſſe: wherefore hee concluded
thus, young Florian was ſome way diſtreſſed, and himſelfe vtterly
diſdained of Fortune. But in the morning the Lyons returned
home, al waſhed in the blood of the Hart which they had
ſlaine: when the Sauadge man percelued their guide wanting,
and they thus pollnted, what with anguiſh of heart, and chollericke
perſwaſi
                           •
                        ns in his doſperate moode, hee ſlew both the Lyons,
and entred into ſuch a diſquietneſſe, that nothing could aſſwage
his extreame paſſion.
                     The yong Prince Palmerin, ſuſtaining great ſorrow for the
abſence of his brother, walked to the Sea ſhore, accompanied
with Siluian, the Sauadge mans Sonne, where ſitting comforting
each other on the greene bancke, as naturs moued the one,
and nurture the other, they eſpied a Galley to ſtrike on ſhore,
where they twaine diſported.
                     
                        Polendos King of Theſlalie, being chiefe Captaine in this
Galley, who likewiſe directed his iourney for the finding of
Don Edoard, commanded to caſt Anker there: becauſe for recreations
ſake, he would walke vp into the Forreſt, as alſo to
finde ſwéete water, whereof he was greatly deſtitute. Palmerin
and Siluian, ſéeing the King landed, and fearing leaſt they
ſhould ſuſtaine ſome harme, in that they were ignorant what
they were: determined by courteous deme
                           •
                         nor to let them paſſe
by, ſo ſhould they haue no cauſe to moleſt them, but to depart
friendly perceiuing nothing but courteſie.
                     
                        Polendos deholding the beautie of Palmerin, with the no
leſſe ciuill, then comely behauiour of them bdth, deſired them
to goe abrdad with him, and hee would preferre them in ſuch

place, as they ſhould be raiſed to honour, and finde all things
equiual
                           •
                        t to their gentle natures. Palmerin, whoſe fancy could
hardly brooke that ſauadge kinde of life, but rather deſired to acquaint
himſelfe with Courtly exerciſe, gaue grant to that which

                           •
                        he King had requeſted, albeit Siluian vſed intreatie to perſwade
him to the contrary: but when hée ſaw all meanes that
he deuiſed, could take no effect, as well for the great loue that
was betwéene them, as the inuiolate affection he alway bare to
the young Prince, he vowed neuer to leaue his company, either
for miſery, miſfortune, or any accident whatſoeuer. The King
no leſſe delighted in minde, then greatly contented with the
manners of Palmerin, (his ſeruants beeing returned with
ſuch neceſſaries as hee ſent them for,) went abroad, and heyſed
Sayles preſently, committing themſelues to God, & the mercie
of the waues. So riding at their pleaſure, the King deſired
Palmerin (if hée might lawfull craue ſo much) to certifie him,
as concerning his byrth and Parentage, which the courteous
Prince right willingly gaue conſent vnto, declaring his life
with the Sauadge man, whom he certainely ſuppoſed to be his
Father.
                     After many dayes fayling, they arriued at Conſtantiuople,
which at that preſēt was endued with as great heauines, as in
time paſt, it ſurpaſſed in Princely delights, the Port or Hauen,
likewiſe being nakedly prouided of ſhips, for that the Occean
and Mediterranian ſeas, had ſcattered y• whole Nauy in ſearch
of the P. Don Edoard, as alſo to know what was become of
the Noble Primaleon, yet in all this time, no wiſhed tydings
heard. The Emperor vnderſtanding y• 
                        Polendos was arriued
at Conſtantinople, walked d
                           •
                        wn to the Hauen, to accompany
him to his pallace, where being come, and hearing by him no tidings
of his ſons, became very ſorrowfull, as he had cōtinued ſo
a long time. Then Polendos to put the Emperour out of this
ſadde cenceyte, preſented vnto him the young Prince Palmerin,
accompanied with Siluian. Who caſ
                           •
                        ing his eyes on the
young Prince, entred preſently into ſuch an alteration of ioy,
as had he béene his own ſonne Primaleon, he could hardly haue
béene better contented. Wherefore he commaunded a Knight

to conduct hm to the Princeſſe Gridonia, willing her to giue
him as ſeruant to the faire Polinarda, whoſe beauty was ſo excellent,
her feature agréeable in euery lyneament, her modeſtie
ſo decent, & vertue therto apparant, that ſhe was rightly termed
the Phaenix for beauty, & moſt famous among Ladies for bounty.
The Empreſſe and Gridonia, receiued the yong Prince, albeit
ignorant of his eſtate, yet as beſéemed their honors, reſpecting
who ſent him, & went ſtraightway to preſent him to the
faire Polinarda: who in time cauſed him to aduenture his good
Fortune among the pikes of miſchanches, and hazards of moſt
daunger, onely for her loue, which hée bought as déerely, as ſhe
gaue it daintily: for proofe, let ſuffice what hereafter enſueth.
But attend a ſtrange & rare euent: On a ſubdaine was arriued
in the Emperors Pallace, a comely Damoſell, mounted on a
Courſer, as white as a Swan, bearing Armor alſo anſwerable
to the ſame in colour, her haire ſpread ouer her ſhoulders, which
gaue cauſe of meruaile to all that ſaw her. She being come into
the preſence of the Emperor, to the no little admiration of him,
with all thoſe that beare him company: ſhe drew foorth a Letter,
delyuering the ſame with ſuch Maieſtie of behauiour, as was
méete to gratifie ſuch an honourable perſonage: which the Emperour
deliuering to one of his Heralds, cōmanded it to be read
in publique audience: who vnſeaking it, began as followeth.
                     
                        
                           ¶To the Inuincible, and moſt renowned Palmerin,
Emperour of Greece, Salutations.
                           REnowned Emperor, at whoſe name the enemy quaketh,
and the Subiect reioyceth, in whoſe Court, your name is
the riches of the valiant, & friendſhip the reward of any
that be venterous: I wiſh thy ſtate as permanent, as thy deeds
hath beene puiſſant, and the vnanimitie of thy friends, to proſper
in longanimitie of happy Fortune. The yong Prince that
thou haſt receiued into thy Court, albeit thou maiſt think incredible,
yet ſhall finde it certaine (when Time doeth will it
muſt be): it is deſcended of two the moſt puiſſant Kings in
Chriſtendome, and himſelfe as victorious as 
                                 •
                              uer was any.

Wherefore, let his entertainment be ſuch as his honour doth
deſerue, and his eſtimation according as his valure doth declare:
for he it is muſt needs defend the Diadem of thy domiminions,
when it ſhall remaine deſtitute of wiſhed defence,
and he it is that ſhall make thee lauded of Fortune, and loued
of thy enemies as of thy deareſt friends. Likewiſe, the two
moſt infortunate Princes of the world, ſhall enioy their libertie
by him, in which many haue, and ſhall attempt, but he alone
is oidained to finiſh this Exployr: for that he is aboue all
in the Fauour of Fortune, and he ſhall exell all in the Nobilitie
of Knighthood. Thus leauing the ſumme of my promiſe
to your gratious triall: I wiſh the noble Emperour of Greece
may liue in eternall honour and felicitie.
                           
                              By her, who is more in dutie, then by pen
or words, ſhe can any way diſclole.
The Lady of the Lake.
                           
                        
                     
                     The Emperor no leſſe amazed at this happy aduenture, then
contented at the glad newes of this noble yong Prince: deſired
of the Damoſel, who might be the Lady of the Lake. To whō
the Damoſell replied: Noble ſir, ſhe is altogether vnknowne of
me, but thus much I dare boldly aſſure your Maieſtie, that
what her Letter preſenteth, ſhall be performed in this worthy
young Prince. Theſe ſpéeches ended, the Damoſell departed:
which the Emperor perceiuing, ſent for the yong Prince, vpon
whom vſing many chéerfull countenances, he deſired his noble
Gentlemen ſtanding by, that he might be tearmed of all Palmerin,
after his owne name, for that he thought he ſhould be the
better eſtéemed
of his Lady Polinarda, in whoſe fauor he was
greatly eſtéemed, as the wearing of his Ladies colors, he might
giue ſome cauſe of beliefe. But the Empres and Gridonia, ſtill
lamented
the loſſe of Primaleon, whoſe abſence from the court,
was chiefeſt cauſe of their ſorrow.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. IX.
                     Of that which happened to Vernar the Prince of Allemaign,
in his ſearch of Don Edoard, and of the controuerſie betweene
him and Belcar, the Duke of Duras, in the vnfortunate
Forreſt of England.
                     
                        I Haue declared to you before how Vernar
the Prince of Allemaigne, and ſonne to
the Emperour Trineus and the faire Agrigola,
left the Court of Conſtantinople,
when Palmerin departed to ſéeke the
Prince Don Edoard. In which affaires,
this gentle Prince likewiſe, behaued himſelfe
ſo worthily in many rare exploytes, that his Fame remaineth
as a perfect type of his hononr in the Allemaigne
Chronicles: for which cauſe, I leaue to rehearſe them, returning
to that which happened this Prince, and is in my charge
to ſpeake of. It fortuned that hee hauing ſpent no ſmall labour
in trauaile, arriued at laſt in great Brittaine, where he had good
hope to heare ſome newes to end his labour.
                     And being entred into this vnfortunate forreſt, ryding very
ſadly, for y• his mind was ſomwhat diſtracted with remēbrance
of his faire Bazilia, at length there met him a comely Knight,
very brauely mounted, attyred in gilt armour, whereon was
wrought many Leopards by Artificiall deuice, yet crazed and
broken by ſome rough encounter that he had béene in. And in
his Shéeld he bare a Serpent, in a field of Siluer, trauailing
alſo in the ſearch of the ſtrayed Prince, as likewiſe to méet with
ſuch who profeſſed the magnanimitie of minde, to combate in
the honour of their owne good Fortune: for which cauſe he left

the Ladies in the Engliſh Court, among whom he was called
The Knight of the Serpent. Paſſing by the Prince Vernar, he
vſed ſuch courteſie vnto him, as beſéemed his Knighthoode, and
was méete for ſuch a Noble perſon: but he altogether vſing his
thoughtes, on his fayreſt Bazilia, had no leyſure to beholde the
Knights courteſie. The Knight of the Serpent ſuppoſing, that
eythere hee willingly would not perceyue, or ſéeing, ſcorned the
gentle Salutations he vſed: reuiued the Prince Vernar, with
theſe ſpéeches. Syr Knight, mee thinkes it might ſtand with
your Honour and profeſſion, and no blemiſh to you any way,
but bounty euery way, to haue thought well of him, who meant
no ill to you, and to haue gratified him like a Courtier, that diſdained
to paſſe by you, and not vſe courteſie.
                     The Prince being driuen foorth of his dumps, whereto hee
had more pleaſure, then to the Knights gentle proffer, betwéene
Iſet and earneſt thus anſwered. Sir, I muy be offended without
blame, and iudge your behauior to be very bald, that would
conſtraine me to ſpeake, not hearing your ſpéeche, when I had
more matters in minde, then would ſuffer me to ſée you much
leſſe to heare you.
                     Syr (quoth the Knight of the Serpent) this excuſe is farre too
ſimple, in denying both your Hearing and Sight: for though
ſtatelyneſſe would not ſuffer you to ſée me, yet the leawdneſſe of
my ſpéech doth iuſtifie you might heare me. Vernar hearing the
large language of the Knight, which might quickly mooue him
to anger (being before ſubiect to ouer much Melancholie▪) thus
ſhortly replyed. Syr Knight, you haue better licence to depart,
then leaue to ſtay here: for that my minde is troubled with ſuch
metters, as rather requireth your abſence, thea alloweth your
preſence. Giuing you farther to vnderſtand, that your companie
is ſo much to my heart, that the ſtrife which may ariſe betwéene
vs, will be to your great harme. When the Knight perceyued,
what ſmall eſtimation Vernar had of him, thus roundly
replyed. Syr, either your bringing vp, hath bene ouer churliſh,
or your preſent behauior ſcant currant: in that you eſtéem courteſie,
more like a Carter, then a Courtyer, and Ciuile demeanour,
more fitte to holde the Ploughe, then fine qualities to honour

your perſon. I eſtéeme it both méete and modeſt, that you
expreſſe ſuch a Friuolous motion, as doth repreſſe abruptly the
nature of Friendly manners: for greater danger is in concealing
what I deſire, then damage in concealing ſuch a ſimple demand.
I deſire rather (quoth Vernar) mine owne ruine, then I ſhould
be ſo ſimple to graunt what you requeſt: In ſo much, that it is
expedient none ſhould know my thoughts, ſhee onely excepted,
that muſt be priuie to what I thinke. Wherefore, eſteeming
thy Manhoode as ſmall to commaund, as thy might to compell,
I will bury my Thoughts with my Death, before I intend to
ſatiſfie thy deſire. So leauing off words, they fell to their weapons:
where ſhiuering their Speares and Armour, they Encounted
with ſuch Brauerie, that they were glad to take breathing:
when the Knight of the Serpent beganne thus to charge
him, I belieue Sir, you finde this Skirmiſh more hote, then
your concealed thoughtes may be eſtéemed wiſedome, and that
your Eſtate ſtandeth in a more ſharpe hazarde, then your mute
conceyts are of force to yéeld you any ſure helpe: which I hope
ſhall ſhew you the difference, betweene a careleſſe Groome, and
a Courtly Gentleman.
                     Syr (aunſwered the Prince Vernan) your opinion is as yet
farre beyond my purpoſe: for that you are as wide from your
hope, as you are ſcant wiſe to put your intent to hap. Perſwade
your ſelfe thus, that the courage I haue to your foyle, and ſecrecie
I eſtéem of mine owne faith, ſhall ere long, giue an abſolute
anſwere, whether I ſhal periſh in my determination, or thy ſelfe
preuaile in what thou demandeſt: which ſhall craue no longer
forbearance, then my Sword hath taught you manners, that againſt
my will would teach me your kinde of modeſtie. Then
fell they to a freſh Combate, which was more dangerous then
their firſt Aſſault: when being wearied with Swords, they endeuoured
by wraſtling to ſuppreſſe the ſtrength of eache, but the
equal behauiour of their force was ſuch▪ as the loſſe of their blood
was great: yet their valorous hearts would conceiue no faintneſſe.
The Knight of the Serpent had ſuch a deſire to knowe againſt
whom he fought, that once more he began to vſe fair ſpéeches
to him. I perceiue Sir, you more eſtéeme your earneſt opinion,

then you ſtand in feare of the loſſe of your life: which were
more honour for you to deliuer vnto knowledge, then ſuch a ſeuere
chaunce, ſhould happen vnto either of vs: yet is my minde
ſo affected, that I will know both your ſecret and your ſelfe, or it
ſhall value my life. As for my life (qd. Vernar) I am ſo much the
more willing to looſe it, by how much I perceyue you zealous to
know what you ſhall not. Wherevppon they beganne againe
the third time, albeit, more faintly then before paſſed: which cauſed
their Eſquyres ſtanding by, to enter into many heauy complaintes,
eſpecially the Eſquire of the Prince Vernar, who as
thus framed his mone. Oh infortunate Emperor, who is ignorant,
that Fortune at this time will depriue him of his ioy.
                     The Knight of the Serpent noting theſe words, preſently coniectured
that it was the Prince Vernar, ſonne to the Emperour
of Allemaigne, againſt whom he entred Combat, and how grieuous
the Emperor Palmerin would take the matter, if he heard
of the loſſe of either of them both. Beſide, himſelf would be loth,
any way to diſpleaſe the Gentle Prince Vernar, wherefore for
more aſſurance of him, he beheld his broken Shield, wherein he
perceiued the deuiſe of his Lady Bazilia, coloured all in Purple,
with the halfe burning Heart in the midſt: and on the Armor of
the Prince, was her Portraite curiouſly drawne: which gaue
him perſwaſion that was hée, to whom hee thus vſed his ſpéech.
Syr. Vernar, my minde conſtraineth me to giue ouer the fight,
being right ſorrie that I haue continued it ſo long: for that the
Princeſſe Bazilia is cauſe of your ſorrow, which you feared to
vtter, and now by my ſelfe declared. Pardon your friende Belcar,
who is ſo hartily ſorry, that he rather deſireth the death, then
to ſée you in any diſtreſſe. The Prince Vernar, perceiuing that it
was his friend Belcar, ran to him, embracing him in his armes,
giuing him a thouſand thanks, that he had ſo found the meane,
to cut off their quarrell. Then taking their Helme to to theyr
Eſquires, who did their beſt to binde vp their wounds, they rode
to the Citie of Brique, which was not far from the Forreſt, recounting
to each other, what had happened them in their ſearch
of the Prince Don Edoard.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. X.
                     ¶How Eutropa gaue Dramuſiande to vnderſtand of the
arriuall of a Knight at his Caſtell, whoſe valiant behauiour
ſhould put him in ſome cauſe of feare: which words
made him preſently to fortifie his Caſtell, to auoyd anie
perill that might annoy him. And how Primaleon (who
was the Knight Eutropa ſpake of) came to the Caſtell:
where he Iuſted againſt his deare Friend Don Edoard,
in which Fight they had knowledge of each other. And
how in hope to purchaſe his deliuery, he ouercame Pandare
and Alligan, two monſtrous Giaunts, entring into
Combate likewiſe with Dramuſiande, who ouercam
                           •
                        
Primaleon, and tooke him priſoner into his Caſtell▪
                     
                     
                        
                           DRamuſiande, ſtill retaining in Captiuitie
the Prince Don Edoard, was on the ſudden
aduertiſed by the Enchauntreſſe Eutropa
his Aunte, that there ſhould arriue a
certaine Knight at his Caſtell, whoſe valour
and Proweſſe ſhould goe néere to attainte
his Honour: as alſo inforce his life
to ſtand in ſome hazard. He giuing credite
vnto her perſwaſion, and likewiſe ſomewhat carefull to auoyde
the imminent perill, fortified his Caſtel with ſuch ſure defence,
as he thought ſufficient to award the Enemie, and maintaine
the intent he had vowed to proſecute. For feare ſome times
maketh a man to become wiſe: that elſe in a deſperate moode,
would ſet the world on whéeles.
                     So Dramuſiande albeit famous in his déedes, yet fearefull
to be ſurpriſed by any danger: vſeth the induſtrie of his Aunte
Eutropa, with the helpe of his Friends, whoſe courage he knew
equall to their wiſe foreſight, to be reuenged on all Knights, for

the death of his father Frenaque. Which the better to accompliſh,
he entertained into his Caſtle, two hardy and fearefull
Giants, the one named Pandare, the other Alligan, whoſe ſtature
were no leſſe in vglineſſe, then their ſtrength cruell in reſiſtance:
and becauſe he would haue euery thing in due preparation,
he determined (when néede ſhould be) how he would
haue his Caſtle defended, as thus. The noble Prince Don
Edoard againſt all Knights that came, ſhould haue the firſt honour
of the fight, next to him the Giant Pandare, ſhould giue a
freſh aſſault, which twaine, if they ſhould faile by miſfortune
(as his Auntes words made him doubt of ſome miſchaunce)
ſtout Alligan of the Obſcure Caue, would giue them their laſt
welcome: whoſe countenance was feareful to all that ſaw him,
and whoſe might was cruell, to all that ſhould hap to féele him.
                     Fortune bending her browes on the couragious Primaleon
whom ſhe had earſt aduanced to honour, and now determined
to vnhappineſſe: directeth his courſe to this vnfriendly Caſtle,
where he ſhould end his trauailes, with his owne thraldome.
                     For after he had left the ſolitarie Pandritia, in the realme of
Lacedemonia, he trauelled through Burgondie, where happening
among other Knights, to come in place of a Triumph,
himſelfe brauely mounted, all in gréene Armor, which colour
ſomewhat aſſwaged his extreame Melanchollies, and in his
Shéelde on a ground of Azure, a Sea brauely painted, he bare
for his deuice.
                     At this triumph he bare away the honour of the day, ſo trauailing
on in his iourney, hée arriued in this manner at the
Caſtle of Dramuſiande. And being come neare the Caſtle,
the Noble Prince Don Edoard came foorth vppon the bridge,
very valiantly mounted, his armour all blacke, whereon was
a reſemblaunce of little flames of fire, tormenting a Louers
heart, which was engrauen in the middeſt of his breaſt. His
Shéelde was aunſwerable in colour to his Armour: in the
middeſt whereof, was curiouſly painted the Image of a ſadde
conceited minds, ſo artificiallie framed, that the beholders
might eaſily iudge the heauineſſe of the knight, to be according

to his ſad Deuiſe. Primaleon no leſſe abaſhed at the brauery of
the Caſtle, then to ſée a Knight ſo well appointed at Armes, began
in this order to vſe his ſpéeches. Syr Knight, I would be ſo
happy, or elſe ſo hardy, to enter this Caſtle, without offering you
Combate, as well to ſatiſfie mine owne deſire, as loath to offer
you any rude demean: deſiring you, if my requeſt ſtand not with
reaſon, to let paſſe your choller, vpon Knightly courteſie.
                     
                        Don Edoard perceiuing the comely behauiour of Primaleon,
of whome hee was as ignorant, as the other was from knowledge
of him, ſhaped him preſently this anſwere. If you knew
Sir Knight, the hard entertainment, and vnfriendly vſage, of all
Knights whatſoeuer that enter this Caſtle, you would be loath
to ſpend ſpéech in ſuch a fond requeſt; but rather vſe ſpéed in a ſafe
retire: For as in other places you may increaſe your Fame, ſo in
this place you may ſtay to ſorrow for your Follie. If theſe perſwaſions
cannot withhold your intent, but that raſhly you will
runne into a continuall trouble: knowe this, you muſt firſt award
my puiſſance, who reſiſteth Knightes that ſéeke wilfully
theyr owne perill. But admit, that Fortune denie me the victorie,
and ſéeke your ouerthrowe, vnder title of your valiance, yet
are there ſuch hazards to paſſe, as doth diſcourage me to thinke,
and will diſhearten you to trie.
                     Truſt me Sir (anſwered Primaleon) your words were ſufficient
to make me feare, if I bare the minde of a c
                           •
                        auen, and not
of a Captaine: but heereof aſſure your ſelfe, that neither your
perſwaſion of daunger, nor the doubt it ſelfe that is to come, can
cauſe me feare at a ſhow, or ſhall make me fainte at a ſhadowe.
For this eſtimation I alwayes beare with mee, that the more
harde the Aduenture is, the brauer will be the victorie. So that
ſir, take this for a certaintie, I haue ſetled my hope, which neyther
you nor: any can remoue, but onely Death it ſelfe.
                     Thus concluding their ſpéeches, they couched their Speares,
and began a ſharpe encounter, wherin they behaued themſelues
ſo brauely, that they who ſtood in the Caſtle, beholding them, did
no leſſe commend theyr Valour, then the good intent eache othar
ſhewed in hope of victorie. At laſt, ſo fiercely they met togither,
that they were both vnhorſed, which very much diſpleaſed Primaleon,
                        
beeing neuer in all his life caſt foorth of his Saddle before:
then drawing his ſword, he thus approched to the Prince
Don Edoard. Sir Knight, I will trye, if your ſtrength in vſing
your Sword, be equall with y• force. I haue felt at your Speare:
which hauing made mee impatient, beeing neuer before ouerthrowen,
doth increſe my courage, to know him that hath done
that at this inſtant, which in many Attempts before could not
be done by any. Don Edoard, no leſſe offended at this miſhap,
then amazed at the courage he perceiued in his Aduerſarie: began
to ſuſpect, that the Knight againſt whom he endeuored himſelfe,
was his Brother and friend Primaleon, the cauſe that moued
him to think ſo, was the equall ſtate of their ſtrength, which
in time paſt he had often prooued: of which doubt to reſolue himſelfe,
he thus began. Syr Primaleon, as it may rather be tearmed
Preſumption, then politique foreſight, in him that would
ſtriue to be your matche, who are aboue all in Manhoode: ſo in
mée might it be accounted rather a Fooliſh hardineſſe, then any
friendly héede, to doe that in a Brauery, which ſhould excéede the
limites of Bountie, and to ſtriue with my Friend, whom in dutie
I ought moſt to honour. Primaleon hearing theſe friendly
ſpéeches: preſe
                           •
                        tly knewe that, it was his Brother Don Edoard,
when caſting his Sword to the ground hee embraced the
Prince with theſe louing ſalutations. If my heart were able to
thinke, my tongue to ſpeake, or my ſelfe to make manifeſt by any
meane, not only the inward ioy I conceiue, but the high good
fortune I doo eſtéem of my trauells, then ſhould my deare friend
and brother perceyue, my health is his happines, and Primaleon
liueth no longer, then Don Edoard reioyceth. Long haue I deſired
this happie day, and long haue I ſought this good lucke with
daunger: albeit neuer ſo proſperous as to heare of you, yet now
the moſt fortunate of all men, to come where I ſée you. Don
Edoard would haue anſwered againe, but the Giant Pandare
brought word from Dramuſiande, to breake off theyr talke, and
come to him, whoſe commandement the Prince obeying, entred
the Caſtle. Primaleon offering to goe in with him, but Pandare
beeing Armed, with a great yron Mace in his hand, and a very
ſtrong Shielde, thruſt him backe with theſe churliſh wordes.

Stay Sir Knight, I meane to ſée what thou canſt do, to deliuer
thée out of my hands, as alſo how thou can warrant thine own
life. Primaleon beholding the great pride of Pandare, with the
diſhonor he offred him in words, as alſo the diſdaine he tooke to
be thus controled, gaue him this anſwer. It is more difficult for
me to anſwere thée, as thy wordes require, then dangerous to
correct the boldneſſe of ſuch a proud Riuall: and I ſcorne to vſe
words with ſuch a Peaſant, whoſe maners are ſo far from honeſtie,
as the Maiſter can neuer come in knowledge thereof:
whoſe Plumes I may pull with ſuch a due reward, as he ſhall
thinke my warrant better then his own wiſdome, & that I can
eſcape his brags, when his owne brauerie may hap to lie in the
lurtch. Pandare vexed with y• reply of Primaleon, not knowing
whether he were beſt to anſwere him with words or déeds, at
laſt ſent him ſuch a blow with his yron Mace, that Primaleons
ſhield ſhiuered all in pieces, which grieued him, ſtāding in ſome
néed, & made his foe triumph, who hoped for his death. But hée
eſpying a part of the body of Pandare vnarmed, reacheth him
ſuch a blow in reuenge of his Shield, that he began to ſtagger,
hardly withholding himſelfe frō falling to the earth, & Dramuſiande
leaning with Don Edoard, foorth of a windowe in the
Caſtell, and perceiuing the courage of Primaleon in this daungerous
Combate: deſired to know his name, and of whence he
was which Don Edoard anſwered, according as he deſired, giuing
him further to vnderſtand, that not onely in this, but in
many other aduentures, hee had put his life in hazard, onely for
his ſake. Which when Dramuſiande knewe, hee determined
Primaleon for apartner with Don Edoard, and to kéepe them
twaine in captiuitie, till Fortune ſent more cuſtomers.
                     
                        Pandare ſéeing his blowes beſtowed to ſmal purpoſe, & that
Primaleon returned him many ſhrewde gréetings, flung down
his Sworde and Target, in a great furie, pretending the deſtruction
of Primaleon, with his yron Mace. And after many
ſore ſtrokes, paſſed on either part, Primaleon followed his determination
ſo well, y• he had ſtroken off Pandares fowre fingers,
wherewith his Mace fell to the ground, which he ſtooping
to recouer, Primaleon had gotten ſuch good aduantage, that hee

had ſtroken off his head, had not the ougly Giant Alligan of the
Obſcure Caue, bene his Reſcue, who ſtepping betwéene them,
thus ſaluted Primaleon. Syr Knight, thou haſt a freſh labour
to beginne: wherefore withdrawe thy hands from him that is
conqnered, and come deale with me, who hopes to conquer thée:
and therewithall Primaleon, being not fully prouided, receiued
ſuch a cruell blowe on the head, that it put him in ſome danger.
                     
                        Primaleon ſéeing ſuch a fearefull Enemie, and what mighty
blowes he ſtill charged him withall, he bethought him on his
Friende Don Edoard, whoſe helpe in this fierce aſſault might
doe him no ſmall pleaſure. Yet hee conſidered with himſelfe,
that doubtleſſe he was in ſome néede, or ſo kept vnder, that hee
might not aſſiſt him, elſe hee perſwaded himſelfe, he would be
as requiſite to helpe him, as hée ready to wiſh for him. Then
hee taking vp the Shielde of Pandare, betwéene Alligan and
himſelfe began a hotteſkirmiſh, as the place where they fought,
altered in colour with theyr blood, made manifeſt. Yet Alligan
for all his rough behauiour, had little hope of any good ſucceſſe,
becauſe the hardineſſe of Primaleon, hadde both martyred his
Shield and Armour in pieces, ſo that he had no defence to beare
off the blowes., but by the freſh and eager Aſſaults of the Noble
hearted Prince, he brought him vnto ſuch a lowe eſtate, that he
ſuppoſed he had quight ſlaine him. Which mooued him to ſitte
downe to reſt him, for that faintneſſe with loſſe of his blood, and
wearyneſſe in ſo long continuing Battell, made him both glad
and deſirous of a little eaſe,
                     
                        Dramuſiande perceyuing the harde euent of this Combat,
and ſtanding in doubt that Fortune by ſome ſiniſter meanes or
other, would ſéeke his ouerthrowe, and ſo depriue him of that
he looked for, and what his Aunte laboured for, Armed himſelfe
preſently, and came foorth to Primaleon, aſſailing him firſt with
theſe wordes. Syr Knight, my Friend if you pleaſe, my foe, if
you dare: in the one you may finde comfort in your diſtreſſe, in
the other any incurable miſchiefe to beare you companie, in ſo
great daunger. Mee thinkes
                           •
                         it were more honour for you to
yéelde, with no blemiſh to your Knighthoode, then to endure a
freſh Aſſault, which will be to your great hazarde. So, if you

eſtéeme of my courteous offer, I will ſée your wounds cured at
mine owne charge, and your weake eſtate comforted, as beſéemeth
a good Knight. Primaleon well nothing the honeſt words
of Dramuſiande, and fearing his faire talke might beare fauor
of a ſhrewde meaning, made him this anſwere.
                     If ſir, by the paine I haue beſtowed, & ſharpe encounters I
haue eudured, I might purchaſe y• deliuery of my deareſt friend
Don Ddward, then would I not only make eſtimation of your
courteſie, but confeſſe my ſelfe during life, yours euer bound by
duty. But as I iudge, you meane nothing leſſe, and the reward
of my trauaile deſireth nothing more, ſo my heart is bent vnto
that hautie enterpriſe, which if intreatie will not ſerue, ſhall be
gayned perforce, and where courteſſe is not eſtéemed, compulſion
may and ſhall command. The oath I haue made my friend,
doeth diſcharge my heart of feare, and the hope I haue of victorie,
bids me rather die, then be vanquiſhed, ſo ſhall I award the
reproch of the world, and be true to my friend, whoſe ſafetie I
tender as my owne ſoule.
                     
                        Dramuſiande at this pauſe, tooke occaſion to reply in this
manner: Sir Knight, for two cauſes I account it honour, to vſe
thée courteouſly. The firſt is, that I greatly pittie the harme,
which may enſue to an vnuiſed heade, which doth that in a
brauerie for a faſhion, he is glad with bitter teares, to bemoane
in folly. The ſecond cauſe is, that to conquer thée, would rather
diſcredite me, then any honour were to be gotten by the victory,
conſidering thy vnfortunate and miſerable eſtate, with the
Knightly puiſſance I ſhall beſtowe on thee. Neuertheleſſe, to
charme the proud ſpéeches thou haſt vſed, & correct the raſh behauiour
of thy vnſtayed wit, thou ſhalt know, how I can tam
                           •
                        
the mallepart, & bridle thoſe that cannot rule their owne manhood.
Vpon theſe words he laid fiercely at Primaleon, (whoſe
debility rather required quietneſſe, then ſuch extreame ſtrokes
as hee muſt néedes ſuffer:) neuertheleſſe, hee employed himſelfe
to ſuch nimble defence, as his weary trauayle would permit
him: which mooued a great compaſſion in the minde of Dramuſiande,
to ſée the weakeneſſe of the body, not agrée with the
inuincible courage of the heart, & would not for any thing haue

ſlaine him, as very eaſily he might haue done, but that hee once
more would vſe perſwaſiō, which he diſcharged after this order.
Sir Knight, thou maiſt ſée I refuſe the fight, more for the griefe
I ſuſtaine in thy hurt, then any feare I haue of thée, to doe me
harme: in token whereof I ſet thée, at libertie, as one more willing
to doe thée good, thē any deſire I haue to bereaue thée of life.
But if thou once more refuſe my courteſie, and deſperately ſéeke
thine owne deſtruction, I promiſe thee, that neither mercy may
aſſwage my rygour, nor any meane beſide, ſhall withhold me
from reuenge: for that he which is careleſſe of his ow
                           •
                        e life, it
were great pitie but he ſhould looſe it.
                     
                        Primaleon caſting his eyes vpon his armour, which he perceiued
al broken, & battered in pieces, as alſo bathed in the blood
which iſſued frō his wounds, then calling to remembrance his
Lady Gridonia, whoſe heart might hardly brooke, to heare any
miſchance of her beſt beloued, walked a little by himſelfe, vſing
theſe ſilent cogitatiōs. Madame, behold the laſt day of our heauy
departure, & my laſt farewell ſent you in teares with a bléeding
heart, ſubiect to mine enemy, whom I ſtriue to conquere,
and yet rather deſire the death, then loſe the honor of my name.
I know our next aſſault is the laſt Tragedie of my time, which
I muſt not refuſe, if I loue my friend, and yet ſhould forſake, remembring
your loſſe. Wel, hard is the hap, whē Fortune hath
determined all to extremitie, which if I ſhould ſéeke to ſhunne,
would iuſtly repay me with deſerued ſhame. O famous Emperor,
and my renowned father, whoſe thoughts are as far from
my heauy caſe, as my troubled heart is void of any comfort: yet
let this iuſt perſwaſion cut off the griefe you may ſuſtaine, that
I liues for my friend, whoſe fréedome was my felicity, and now
die for my fréend, whoſe thraldome is my miſery, which I deſire
to finiſh, ere I will ſhrinke one iot in the honour of knighthood.
Albeit the loſſe of my blood ouerchargeth mee with faintneſſe,
and my long continuance in fight, oppreſſeth me with wearines,
yet ſhall it neuer be reported, Primaleon turned backe, forgetting
bounty, or left the 
                           •
                        ield for one, hauing already conquered
twaine: for the ioy I conceiue in finding my chiefeſt friend,
biddeth me die ere I leaue him, ſo ſhall hee trie, if I loue him.

And thinke not deare father, nor my ſwéete Gridon
                              •
                           ia, that I
forget the duetie, which law of nature willeth me to beare you,
or that I deſperately run on mine owne death, to increaſe your
ſorrowe and continuall mones. But thinke as I haue ventured
vpon the honour of your loue, ſo the eſtimation of my friend
at this time commaunds mee to hazard my life. Wherein, I
ſwerue not from you in obedience, nor from my friend in amitie.
                     This pauſe had ſo hartened the noble Primaleon, that he ran
couragiouſly vpon Dramuſiande, with theſe words. Defend
thy ſelfe, for either will I win what I haue promiſed, or leaue
my life as a gage in thy preſence. Whereupon they fell very
fiercely to combate againe, which made Dramuſiande to muſe,
to ſée the noble courage of Primaleon,, & the weake defence hée
had for himſelfe, who at laſt through extreame faintneſſe fell
to the ground, as though hée had beene quite bereaued of life:
which cauſed Dramuſiande to beare him into the Chamber of
Don Edoard, cōmaunding his Chirurgions and Phiſitions, to
vſe great care and diligence in ſauing his life, if it might bée
poſſible, becauſe hée was greatly affected, to ſaue the life of ſuch
couragious Knights. Don Edoard was very penſiue for the
great daunger of Primaleon, of whoſe health hee was no leſſe
carefull then hee had béene venterous to purchaſe his deliuerie.
And when he was ſomwhat receuered, they had knowledge by
Eutropa, what great friendſhip and good will, they ſhould both
of them in time to come, ſuſtaine at the handes of her nephew
Dramuſiande, which ſhould make a double amends for all miſchances
that had happened.
                     Thus leaue we Dramuſiande, vſing all meanes he might,
for the health of Primaleon, as alſo the recouery of Pandare
and Alligan, whom at laſt he had brought to good conſtitution
of body, to his ioy, and great comfort of the two faythfull
Princes, who liued, loued, and reioyc
                           •
                        d in each others friendly
company.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XI.
                     How the Emperor of Conſtantinople, made the noble young
Prince Palmerin Knight: with diuers other yong Princes
and Lords that were in his Court, whom hee honourably
made Knight at Armes.
                     
                        
                           PPalmerin remaining long time with his
father, beloued of euery one for his princely
behauiour, and eſtéemed with the beſt
through his gentle nature: grew vnto ſuch
ripeneſſe of age, that he greatly deſired the
order of Knighthood, but the feare to looſe
the ſeruice of his Lady and Myſtreſſe Polinarda,
(to whom he had not only vowed the duty of his heart,
but the whole courſe of his life, in Knightly aduentures) withdrewe
his minde from ſo bold an enterpriſe. And ſhee likewiſe
was ioyned with him in equal affection: but that modeſtie
cauſed her to couer it, and maydenly demeanour, did moue her
to conceale it, for that ſhée would not raſhly run into the ſuſpition
of thoſe, who frame their whole endeuour to the reproach
of Ladies, neither regarding theyr honor, nor theyr owne honeſtie.
                     The Emperor remayned ſomewhat penſiue for his two
Sonnes, ſeeing neuer a Knight returned, that departed in theyr
ſearch, which cauſed him to remember the Lady of the Lake,
and to comfort himſelfe ſomwhat in her tydings as concerning
the young Prince Palmerin, by whoſe meanes he had good hope
to vnderſtand their eſtate, albeit affection would hardly permit
him, that he ſhould trauaile.
                     Wherefore he being willing to content his ſubiects, who

ſtood in doubt of their gouernment, after the Emperours deceaſe,
hée cauſed a Tryumph to bee proclaymed, wherein hee
would trie, if the towardly beginning of Palmerin, would encourage
his minde to expect any good ſucceſſe, Vpon this determination,
he willed all the young Knights, who ſhould be De
                        
                           •
                        endants againſt the other Knights of his Court, to bee readie
prepared againſt the Eaſter holy daies, ſo that the rumor of this
famous triumph, cauſed many Scaffoldes and Galleries (by
the Emperours conſent (to be built round about the Tiltyard,
which reioyced the Citizens, that theyr long time of ſorrowe,
ſhould now obtatine a generall conſent of eſtabliſhed pleaſure.
The knights marched in very gallant order, before the Emperour
of the Chappell, where after diuine Seruice was accompliſhed,
he returned to his Pallace, to make the young Prince
Palmerin night. Where firſt the Emperour embraced the noble
young Prince, then Friſol, King of Hungaria, faſtened the
ſpurre on his héele: and the faire Polinarda, by commandement
of the Emperour, did gird his ſword about him. Which gaue
ſuch an encouragement to the valiant Palmerin, that for her
ſake he attempted ſuch rare aduentures, as increaſed the honor
of his Fame, and nobleneſſe of her beautie. Then were the
other young noble Gentlemen called forth, to receiue likewiſe
the order of knighthood. As firſt, Gracian Prince of France Nephew
to the Emperor, and ſonne to the King Arnedes, Berold
Prince of Spaine, and Sonne to the puiſſant King Reciende,
with Oniſtalde, and Dramian, his two brethren. Eſtrellant, ſon
to king Friſol of Hungaria, Don Roſuell, Bellizart, the ſonne of
Bellar, Bazilland, ſonne to king Tarnaes, Luyman of Burgōdy
the ſonne of Duke Tryole, Francian who was ſo expert in muſicke,
ſonne to Polendos, king of Theſſaly, and the faire Francelina.
Polinarda ſonne to the Emperor Trineus, and brother to
the Prince Vernar, Adrian, the ſonne of Maiortes, Germaine,
ſonne to the Duke of Orleance, Attenebrant, ſon to the Duke
Tirendos, Attremoran, ſonne to the Duke Lecefin, Friſol, ſon
to the Duke Drapos of Normandie, & Nephew to king Friſol:
beſide many other, who were brought vp in the Emperours
Court, being ſome of them well nurtured in vertuous educations,

which are chiefeſt required, either in Princes, or Noble
mens children: by which, both their owne Fame is increaſed,
and a continuall renowne left to all their poſteritie. King Friſol
by the Emperours commandement, to all theſe gaue orders
of knighthood, as alſo to Florendos and Flatir, both ſonnes to
the renowned Primaleon. Theſe matters thus diſpatched,
they went vp into the Hall, which was very ſumptuouſly adorned
with cloathes of Gold, where euery Knight was placed at
dinner, according to their eſtate and nobleneſſe of birth. The
dinner ended, and the Tables withdrawne, the Emperor, with
the Empreſſe, the Princeſſe Gridonia, and the faire Polynarda,
walked to the place where they ſhould beholde the Tryumphes.
And the knights hauing euery one appointed himſelfe
as the exerciſe required, came r
                           ••
                        ing very brauely into the Tilt
yard, of whom Palmerin was choſen chiefe Defendant, which
what did ſtomacke the fonnes of Primaleon: till perceiuing the
whole day was ordained in his honour, which mooued them to
quietneſſe, ſubmitting themſelues vnder his puiſſance, to ſhew
their Proweſſe and magnanimitie.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XII.
                     How the Noble and couragious yong Knights, beganne the
Tornament, each one behauing himſelfe very valiantly.
And how two Knights arriued there among them, attired
in greene Armor, who behaued themſelues brauely, in the
preſence of the Emperour.
                     
                        
                        THe Knights being all entred within the
Liſts, and the Trumpets ſounded to begin
the triumph, Palmerin who was appointed
to begin the firſt Iuſt, gaue curteſie
to his Lady Polinarda, and to himſelfe
thus opened his preſent thoughs.
                     My good Lady, whoſe beautie is the
prize that allureth me to the field, & whoſe
curteſie, is the honour I ſtriue to attaine: let but your fauour
remaine aſſured, and I dare warrant my ſelfe the victory: for as
you are aboue all in beautie, ſo ſhall I by your bountie, conquer
all miſchances. Wherewith hee couched his ſpeare againſt
Libuſan of Greece, enduring abraue Combate, till at laſt hée
taught Libuſan to ſit his ho
                           •••
                        aſter. Palmerin nothing diſmayed,
but ioying that hee had conquered one of the chiefeſt
knights of Greece, which greatly pleaſed the Emperour, and
his Lady Polinarda, as alſo the whole company of knights,
whoſe eyes were partners of this gallant exployt. The Prince
Florendos encountred with Follane, and his brother Platir,
with Attenebrant, the Blacke Knight, whoſe valure the one
againſt the other, was no leſſe chéerfull to the beholders, then
delightfull to themſelues. Gracian and Tragandor, brake their
ſpeares with ſuch violence, that horſe and man were ſent to
the ground. Berolde, Oniſtald, and Dramian, ran againſt Truſiande,
Clariball of Hungaria, and Emerolde the Faire: but
Fortune was ſo aduerſe to the thrée firſt, that they were all diſmounted,
and the Stéede of Oniſtalde, had one of his fore legs
broken. Next them Don Roſuell, Eſtrellant, and Bellizart, receiued
the Countie Valerian, Archillagus, and his brother
Guendolin: whoſe ſtrength was farre too weake in reſiſta
                           •
                        ce,
and therefore bare diſhonour forth of the field. Francian, Dridan,
Tremoran, Germaine of Orleance, and Lnyman of Burgondy,
met ioyntly with Criſpian of Macedon, Foruolant and
the ſtrong Flauian: yet all vnhorſed, except Tremoran, who
kept his ſaddle valiantly.
                     
                        
Thus was the firſt Encounter very gallantly diſcharged, to
the no ſmall pleaſure of the Emperor & his Nobility, as alſo the
Regardants, who gaue great commendation to the hautineſſe
of this 1. Exployt. Libuſan of Greece, ſomewhat offended at
his vnfortunate fall, was remounted by his fellowes, & entred
the field, to reuenge him on his enemie, but Berolde of Spaine,
receiuing him at the point of his Launce, charmed his bold attempt,
with ſuch Knightly behauiour, that he was eſtéemed for
one of the chiefe knights in the triumph, as the reſt of his déedes
hereafter, will ſhew he deſerued no leſſe praiſe. Then Tituball, the Red Knight, Medruſian, the Fearefull, Tracandor, Truſiande,
Trofoliant, Clariball of Hungaria, and the puiſſant Frouolant
on the one ſide. And of the young Knights▪ were Gracian,
Friſoll, Dramorant, Oniſtalde, Eſtrellant, Don Roſuell,
Bellizart, Suyman of Burgondie, Bazilliart, Francian, and
the Prince Florendos, all falling to wraſtling, where they behaued
themſelues, both with pollicie, and diuerſitie of ſubtill
ſleights, that the Emperor and all the Ladies, tooke great pleaſure
to behold them: ſuppoſing that the report of this famous
Triumphe, would call home ſome of thoſe Knights, who were
in the ſearch of the two ſtayed Princes. So that in briefe, the
honour of Palmerin, and the other noble young Knights, was
cōmended of euery one: eſpecially of the fayre Polinarda, who
gaue her ſeruant Palmerin no ſmall commendations. The
Empreſſe and Gridonia ſomewhat ſad for Primaleon: yet reioyced
to ſée the towardly behauiour of young Palmerin, with
all the Knightes of his traine, who had almoſt forced all the other
out of the Liſtes. But on the ſuddaine, entred among
them two Knights brauely mounted, and attired all in gréene
Armor, who running againſt two of the young Knights, brake
their Speares very valiantly. Then laying handes to their
Swoords, they dealt ſuch Knightly blowes amongſt them, that
euery one was driuen into great admiration. Palmerin perceiuing
the hardines of theſe two Knights, and doubting leaſt his
traine ſhould be endaungered by them, bowed himſelfe to his
Lady Polinarda, and rode forward, vſing theſe ſpéeches to himſelfe:
It is not ſwéete Lady, time that I ſhould diſmay my

ſelfe, hauing your perſon before mée, whoſe ſight is ſufficient to
conquere any proud enemy: But it is that time, wherein your
name ſhalbe eternally honored, and your knight eſtéemed worthy
ſo good a Miſtreſſe.
                     So aduancing him to one of theſe ſtrange knights, who was
called of euery one, the Knight of the Sauage man: he looked on
the deuice in his Sield, which was, a wild Man, leading a couple
of Lyons in his hand. After he had well viewed the Knight,
he ioyned Combat with him, which was ſo fiertely handled on
either part, that all which had paſſed before, was farre incomparable
to this fearefull aſſault.
                     The Regardants, ſeeing the equallitie of their ſtrength,
could not iudge to whom victory was likelieſt, which cauſed the
Emperour to meruaile, deſirng that they might be parted but
themſelues would not thereto agrée in any wiſe. While they
twaine thus egerly dealt with one another: Platir ſet vpon
the companion of the Knight of the Sauage man, who was
ſoone brought vnder, by the puiſſance of Platir, ſo all the other
Knights were forced out of the Liſts: Tremoran, Luyman of
Burgondie, and Bellizart excepted, who were faine to be carried
foorth, they were ſo ſore wounded.
                     The Emperour perceiuing the rough aſſault, betwéene Palmerin
& the knight of the Sauage man, was ſo ouercome with
doubtes, that he ſcant knewe what to ſay, for that he eſtéemed
this Combate, the beſt that euer he ſawe in all his life time, not
comparing the fight which himſelfe had, with the Giant Dramaque,
nor his Encountring with Frenaque in England, neither
the Combate betwe
                           •
                        ne him & Friſol in France, for the contentiō
about the Picture of the Empreſſe Polinarda, much leſſe
eſtéeming the hardy aduenture, betweene Primaleon, and the
Prince Don Edward, giuing the onely praiſe of all, & aboue all,
to the inuincible courage of theſe twaine. The Emperor perceiuing
it drewe towardes night, and feared the endamagement
that might come to either of them, ſent cōmandement to leaue
off, and fight no more, but they deſirous ſtill of victorie, would
hardly agrée, till the Trumpet ſounded the retrayt, that euery
Knight muſt haſten vnto his Captaine. Then the two gréene

knights (becauſe they would not be knowne) departed ſecretly
that way they came, and the Emperor with all his knights, departed
to his Pallace, to a ſumptueus Banquet, that was prepared
for them, euery one forgetting the anger that was betwéene
each other at the Turnament. The Banquet ended,
the knights fell to dancing, and Palmerin ſomewhat baſhfull
to ſpeak to his Lady Polinarda, courted Dramaciana, daughter
to the Duke Tirendos, and chiefe Gentlewoman attending on
his Lady and Miſtreſſe. The prince Florendos, becauſe he
would not ſtraine ouermuch cuteſie, tooke his ſiſter Polinarda,
with whom he thought he might lawfully be ſo bold. Platir,
choſe Floriana, the daughter of Ditree, and Néece to Friſoll of
France, Gracian deſired Claricia, the daughter to king Polendos
of Theſſalie. Berold Prince of Spaine, delighted in Oniſtalda,
daughter to the Duke of Normandie. Bellizart, requeſted
Deieſa, daughter to the king of Sparta. And Francian, was amorous
of Vernande, daughter to the valiant Belcar. Thus euery
one, after once Courting his Lady, fell to dancing, and ſo
ended their paſtime for that night.
                     The Emperor departed to his Chamber, accompanied with
Palmerin, and the two noble ſonnes of Primaleon, who with
the Empreſſe Gridonia, and the faire Polinarda, all generally
gaue great commendations to the braue behauiour of the yong
Prince Palmerin. But the Emperor was ſomewhat offended,
that the two gréene knights were ſo departed, without knowledge
from whence they came, or what they were: but as their
courage made manifeſt, they were two valiant approued
knights at Armes, and deſerued the reward of honour, 
                           •
                         where
euer they came. Thus reioyced the Emperour, for that in his
Court, remained the flower of all Chiualrie: both in the young
knights, who neuer tryed themſelues before, as alſo the couragious
Palmerin, whoſe hardineſſe would giue place to no hazard,
which made the Emperour famous, and themſelues enrolled
in the booke of eternall memory.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XIII.
                     How on the next day after the Triumphes, a Lady arriued
at the Emperors Court, declaring of a Shield which was
ſent from the Sage Aliart of the Obſcure Valley, to the
yong Prince Palmerin: and was taken from her, by the
Knight of the Sauage man, who kept the ſame in the Forreſt
of the Cleare Fountaine, vntill any Knight durſt aduenture
to fetcht it from him. And how many Knights enterpriſed
to winne it, but loſt their labour, till Palmerin
came, who brought it away with him.
                     
                        ON the morrow after the Tournament, the
Emperour accompanied with Kng Friſol,
and all the other young Knights ſate in his
great hall, giuing ſuch cōmmendations to
their late taken trauell, that they eſtéemed
themſelues highly honoured, to finde ſuch
curteſie at the Emperors hands, euery one
wiſhing they might haue gained knowledge of the two gréen
knights, that behaued themſelues ſo worthily. To breake off
their talke, there ſuddainly entred before them, a Damoſell attyred
after the Engliſh faſhion, in a Robe of Veluet, and about
her middle a ſkirt of Gold: and her face endued with no leſſe
beautie, then her garments were adorned with ſumptuous
brauery. When ſhée had well beheld all the knights, and fayling
of the perſon ſhe ſought to finde, bending her knées to the
Emperour, thus vſed her ſalutations.
                     Moſt renowned Emperor, whoſe name is no leſſe honored
then your déedes held worthy of immortall memory: pardon
the rude entrance of a bold maiden, and attend the diſcourſe
I ſhall deliuer to your Maieſtie. The great and Sauadge

                        Magitian, named the Sage Aliart, of the Obſcure Valley, who
hartily wiſheth your continuall happineſſe, in faithfull oath of
his obedience, kiſſeth the hands of your Imperial Maieſty. And
becauſe your highneſſe hath bin lately conquered by much ſadneſſe,
to the no ſmall gréefe of your Courtly aſſiſtants, as alſo
himſelfe, who is your vnknown ſubiect, he promiſeth your loſſe
ſhall be recouered to your ioy, when neither Fortune ſhall let
it, nor any miſhap auouch the contrary. The cauſe of my comming
was to preſent you with a Shield, which by your Maieſties
hands, ſhould be giuen to the famous yong knight, that in
your Triumph won the honour of the day, and bears the title of
perfect knighthood as his iuſt deſert. But as I haue often heard
yet dare 
                           •
                        cantcy credite, A tale of more noueltie, then importing
any truth: that your lawes did reuenge the iniuries of
Ladies, and that your knights in ſuch cauſes would aduenture
their liues. Well it may be ſo, but I finde it not ſo, or perhaps
my miſfortune denies it ſhould be fo: for that I haue ſafely trauelled
through many a fortaine Coaſt, and found reſcue of diuers
noble Knights, in euery ſtraunge Countrey, till happening
into your dominion, where I leaſt ſuſpected doubt, and
there, too ſoone I fell into extreame daunger: which I muſt eyther
admit to mine owne miſhap, or to ſuch vnkinde Knights,
as deny to helpe faire Ladies, in ſo great a hazard. For the
Shield I had in charge to deliuer your Maieſtie, & the reward
of that knight, whoſe deſert is méeteſt, is taken from me, by a
Knight in gréene Armor, who bearing in his Shield, a Sauage
man, leading two Lyons. And thus he willed me to certifie the
Knight, whoſe valure & worthineſſe hath deſerued this Shield,
that he will méete him within theſe thrée dayes, in the Foreſt
of the Cleare Fountaine, where, if he méete him not, or ſome other
knight for him, to fetch that away, which I haue vnhappily
loſt, vndoubtedly he will beare the Shield away with him.
For this cauſe did I ſo circumſpectly behold your Knights, to
try if any Fortune had beene ſo good, to know that couragious
minde, for whom I entred my trauayle. And thus hauing done
my duetie, I referre the rudeneſſe of my diſcourſe, to your gratious
pardon, whoſe wiſedome will accept the ſimple declaration,

conſidering that Maidens are ſeldome acquainted with eloquence.
The Emperor pondering on the damoſels words, with
the friendly meſſage of the Sage Aliart, whom he neuer heard
off before, ſent her to the Empreſſe, and the Princeſſe Gridonia
who receiued her ſo honorably, as the hope they had in her glad
tydings, encreaſed their comfort. Vpon theſe newes, diuers of
the knights determined with themſelues, to goe fetch the Ladies
Shielde, reſoluing them thus, that if it were their Fortune
to winne it, the honour were ineſtimable, that they ſhoul
                           •
                        
gaine by ſo braue a victorie. Whereupon Clariball of Hungaria
Emeralde the Fayre, Criſpian of Macedon, Flauian, Rotandor
Medruſian the Fearefull, Trofollant, and the proud Foruolant,
who were no friends to the Emperour, but came to the Tournament
to ſéeke reuengement of ancient malice that they bare
vnto his Maieſtie, for that certaine of their Predeceſſors, had
felt the force of his furie. And a freſh ſpight was engendred, becauſe
the young knights had giuen them ſuch a great diſgrace
before their Ladies: wherefore they would purſue the knight
of the Sauage man, and win the Shéeld from all the knights
that ſhould come after them. When they were come to the Forreſt
of the Cleere Fountaine, they beheld the ſhéeld, hanging on
a Trée hard by the Fou
                           •
                        taine, and the noble Knight the Sauage
man, there ready to defend it. Foruolant tooke the courage
to giue him the firſt aſſault: who being ſet beſide his Saddle,
had his ſhéeld and helmet, hanged on the Trée, in ſigne hée was
conquered. He had not long ſtaid, but Criſpian of Macedō, Clariball,
Emerald, Flauian, & Rotandor, bare him cōpany, whoſe
ſhéelds and helmets were likewiſe placed, as vanquiſhed. Trofollant
ſéeing the hard hap of his companions, & ſomwhat angry
at the hauty courage of the knight of the Sauage m
                              •
                           n, thought
to haue done more then his ſtrength would permit, & ſo was
diſmounted, with his horſe vpon him. Hauing recouered himſelfe
on his féete, he drew his ſword, and began a freſh encounter.
At which time Palmerin, accompanied with diuers noble
knights, as Gracian, Dramian, Florendos, Platir, & the reſt arriued
there, & ſaw Trofollant ſent to his conquered cōpanions
whereupon the Prince Palmerin, began in this maner. My deſire

is ſir knight, neither for gaine or glory, but for friendly affection
I beare you, to bind vp your wounds, which are as grieuous
to my ſight, as to you who féele them. Yet not reſpecting
more friendſhip of you, thē I deſire to find at the hands of mine
enemy. The knight of the Sauage man, not ſtaying for his anſwer,
thus ſhortly anſwered. Sir, if the apparance of my griefe,
take ſuch deſire in you to do me good, you may do as you ſhal find
occaſion, & I remaine the more déepe in your debt. But I iudge
you are either ouerfond, or elſe forgetfull of your ſelfe, to offer
ſuch friendſhip to a ſtranger, who doth neither deſire it, nor can
any way deſerue it, you being as I ſuppoſe, rather come to ſtay
me, then ſalue me. Sir (quoth Palmerin) the eſtate I ſée you in,
doth cōmand me to vſe this ſpéech, & conſtraine me (if I might)
to be your ſuccour, neither fearing what you can doe, or falling
one iote from that I ſhould doe. But to tell you why I come, is
to deſire you by intreaty, or cōpel you by force, to reſtore a ſhield
againe, which you haue diſloyally taken from a trauelling Lady.
Conſidering you might diminiſh your honour if you ſhould
deale with her ſo vngratefully, & ſéeme an enemy to knighthood,
in not regarding to helpe the wrong of any iniured Lady. The
knight of the Sauage man, beholding the great courteſie of Palmerin,
& eſtéeming his words to be ſpoken for his aduantage:
both conquered by his braue behauiour, as alſo the inward affection
that did naturally moue him, gaue him this anſwere. I
haue often heard (Sir knight) that wordes can more déepely
wound, then weapons, & that courteſie can compell, where cruelty
may neuer conquer. Such hath bin your high good fortune
at this time, & ſuch is the knightly demeanor that I haue ſéene,
as your gentle language hath entred, where your lance cannot,
and your friendſhip woon more, then either feare or force may
conſtraine. And ſéeing you haue takē the paines to find me out,
and haue done more at this inſtant, then before could any, I deliuer
you the ſhield, as beſt worthy to weare it, both for the gifts
of Nature, which floriſh in you abundantly, & gratious Nature
which doeth adore you nobly. With theſe words, he imbracing
the P. Palmerin, preſently mounted on horſebacke, & departed.
Then returned the Prince accompanied with his knights, who
were greatly delighted in beholding the Shield: In the midſt

where, in a Field of Azure, was placed a very faire Palme
Trée, ſo liuely framed, as if it had béene a naturall Trée: and
that which was moſt wondred at of them all, was a certaine
Poeſie in Letters of Gold, engrauen round about the ſides, ſo
darkely placed, that none in the company could iudge what
they ſhould meane. At length they came to the Court, when
the Emperour was newly ryſen from ſupper, who being certified
of al that had happened, was very much diſpleaſed in mind,
becauſe his whole deſire was, to haue had knowledge of this
valiant Knight of the Sauage man.
                     
                     Then taking the Shield, and looking very earneſtly vpon it,
hée ſent for the Damoſell, to know the Poeſie that was 
                           •
                        ngrauen
about it. The Damoſell anſwered, I would moſt gracious
Emperour, it were in my power to fulfill your requeſt: but being
as ignorant therof, as you or any other, I muſt deſire your
gracious pardon. When ſhe ſaw the Emperor had giuen Palmerin
the Shield, who vowed to vſe it as became a Knight at
Armes, Making her obeyſance to his Maieſty, and al the other
Knights, ſhee preſently tooke her leaue, and departed. And the
Emperor determined among all his Knights, to conſider more
largely on this ſtrange aduenture.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XIIII.
                     In this Chapter is largely deſcribed, who was the Sage Aliart
of the Obſcure Valley: that ſent the Damoſell with the
Shield of the Palme Tree, to the Emperours Court; to beſtow
the ſame on the valiant yong Prince Palmerin.
                     
                        BEcauſe you ſhll bee reſolued, who was
the Sage Aliart of the Obſcure Valley,
and why hee tearmed himſelfe by ſuch
an vncuſtomed name, marke what this
Chapter ſhall giue in relation, and then
conſider of his procéedings afterward.
                     
                        
When the P. Don Edoard left the realme of Lacedemonia,
and as occaſion willed him, to ſtay in the Empire of Grrece, after
he had deliuered the king Tarnaes, forth of the cruel enchanted
Caſtle, he entred a Galley, and ſo departed on his voyage.
Not long had they bin on the ſeas, but that a Damoſell ſuddenly
chanced into the Galley, not vſing ſpeech to any: but taking
the principall Ore in her hand, turned their paſſage quite contrary
to another Iland, where Don Edward being landed, deliuered
a comely knight out of the hands of diuerſe cruel tyrants,
who were leading him to abide an vnmercifull death.
                     The Damdſell conducted the Prince, to the habitation of
Argonida, where being friendly entertayned, and ſtaying as a
welcōmed Gueſt, ſuch conuerſation was betwéene them, that
they had two goodly Sonnes, named Pompider, and this Sage
Aliart, of whom wée meane to diſcourſe. Whoſe Grandmother
being expert in the Science of Magicke, nouriſhed this
Aliart out of popular conuerſation, that thorowe her meanes,
hee became maruailous ingenious of wit, and very ſkilfull in
her diueliſh exerciſe, ſo that he was eſteemed the notableſt Magitian
in all the world, whoſe memory being not touched in the
booke of Primaleon, I will declare in what order hee paſſed his
whole life.
                     This Aliart, reputed of no leſſe fame then learning, was not
inferiour to any, but bare the eſtimation aboue all, ſo that none
durſt offer him iniurie, albeit he deſerued it, nor none would
contend with him, they ſtood in ſuch awe. He ſeeing himſelfe
honoured of the mighty, when they durſt doe no other, and loued
of the moſt part, for his excellent cunning, beganne to exerciſe
himſelfe in Martiall exploytes, which ſhewed him to bée
the Sonne of the renowned Don Edward. And hauing receyued
his Knighthood at the handes of the Giant Garatie, he behaued
himſelfe as famous in his exploites, as he was eſtéemed
ſingular in his practiſed Arte. And then hee vnderſtood his
Fathers impriſonment, with the noble Primaleon, in the Caſtell
at Dramuſiande, who by the ſkill of his Aunt Eutropa, endeuoured
to haue all the flower of Chiualrie in like captiuitie.
But albeit the impriſonment of theſe Princes, was vnknown

to all the Knightes, that laboured continually in their ſearch:
yet this Aliart was ſo well acquainted with the matter, as they
that kept it moſt ſecrete, for that his Arte gaue him the power
to knowe, what was done in all Countreyes in the world. For
when the Grecian knights, whoſe affection to theſe two Princes,
cauſed them to leaue their natiue Countrey, and were happened
into the vnfortunate forreſt of great Brittaine, which
was brauely repleniſhed with many couragious hearts, as alſo
ſundry gallant Ladies, preparing many hard aduentures,
there were very fewe eſcaped, but for the moſt part, were all
loſt in this vnfortunate ſearch. Among which noble mindes,
was Recined Prince of Spaine, Arnedes King of France, Maiortes,
and Sir Pridos, whoſe abſence was greatly bemoned in
the Engliſh Court. The Princes Belcar, & Vernar, Ditree, and
the Soldan, Bellagris, with the renowned Polendos. All theſe
for the honourable affection they bare to the ſtrayed Princes,
left their kingdomes and ſignories, and vnhappily were taken
priſoners in this cruel enchaunted Caſtell, which was great
griefe to their friends, and ineſtimable ſorrowe to their well
peopled Dominions. When Aliart had conſidered all theſe vnfortunate
accidents, enterpriſed ſo ho
                           •
                        ourably, and falling out
ſo vnhappily, he determined to hazard himſelfe in the ſearch of
his father, and to try his ſtrength againſt the Giant Dramuſiande,
whoſe force he little or nothing eſtéemed, but bare a great
deſire to his aduenture, which could no way be finiſhed, but by
his meanes onely.
                     In this mind he departed to the Valley of Perdition, which
was named ſo, becauſe all the noble Knights were there loſt:
and there he determined to make his habitation, to follow his
ſtudie, and prouide remedies againſt diuerſe miſchanches that
were like to happen. And becauſe his nature deſired to be ſolitary,
in that his bringing vp was forth of all company, he builded
him a little Fortreſſe betwéene two great high mountaines,
which kept the light of the Sunne away by day, and the Moone
in y• night ſeaſon. This dwelling he called the Obſcure Valley,
but others tearmed it, the Valley aboce the Clowdes: the entrance
whereof could not be found by any, as Aliart cauſed the

Giant Trabollant, to know to his coſt, with his ſon alſo, who
was Lord of a faire Caſtell in a Velley néere adioyning, which
Aliart had newly erected, & garniſhed within, with many faire
Bookes, where ſpending his time very long in ſtudie, at laſt,
he got the meane to be called Sage. Thus liued the Sage Aliart,
in this Obſcure Volley, often vſing to the Caſtle of Dramuſiande,
bemoning the miſfortune of the Knights, which he could
no way remedy, till the appointed time. The often repayring of
the Sage Aliart, cauſed both Eutropa to doubt ſomething, and
Dramuſiande to ſtand in great feare: yet could they no way
hinder him, when it was his pleaſure, to viſite the captiue princes.
And as he ſate one day very penſiue in his ſtudy, he vnderſtood
by his Art of the triumpes at Conſtantinople, when the
Emperour would try the yong Knights, that he had nouriſhed
in his Court. Againſt which time he framed a ſhield, which hee
ſent by a Damoſell, to Palmerin of England, to beare it with
him in all aduentures that he ſhould vndertake: but by the way
it was taken from her by the knight of the Sauage man (whom
hereafter I will diſcloſe vnto you,) yet reſtored againe by the
gentleneſſe of language, that the Prince Palmerin vſed with
him. Thus remayned the Sage Aliart, expecting the time, for
the deliuery of the Princes, who concealed their griefes, and
ſpent their time in ſilent opinions, as both their miſerie would
ſuffer them, and their litle reſt inferre occaſion. Yet neuer fallig
one iote in amitie, though they had a world of woes, to conſtraine
them to it.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XV.
                     How Belcar and Vernar, after they were cured of their
wounds they had receiued one againſt the other, arriued
at the Caſtle of Dramuſiande, accompanied with Polendos,
King of Theſſale, where after Combate entred betweene
them, they were all taken priſoners.
                     
                        
                        
                           VErna Prince of Almaigne, & Belcar, Duke
of Duras, remained in the Citie of Brique,
till they felt themſelues in good diſpoſition
of their health, and then they departed to
London, to the Engliſh Court, diſguiſed
and vnwilling to be knowne, to ſée if happily
they might attaine the ſight of the
Prince Flerida.
                     
                     The Princeſſe remaining ſtill penſiue, and therefore kept
her Chamber, and they fayling of theyr pretended purpo
                           •
                        e, trauailed
thorowe great Britaine, where they valiantly reuenged
the quarels of Ladies, and enlarged the report of their redoubted
Knighthood, which neither time can weare out of memory,
nor death it ſelfe by any meanes diſſolue.
                     Procéeding thus in their aduenturous trauaile, Eutropa had
gotten them within her circuite, that ſhe was as ſure of them,
as had they bene in her priſon, but yet let them alone awhile, to
try the hardnes of their Fortune. They hauing ſpent the day in
trauaile, and the darke night ouercharging them, with her vncomfortable
houres, they determined to take their reſt at the
foote of a Trée, for that they were farre from any other prouiſion.
So alighting, and giuing their Horſes to their Eſquiers,
Belcar ſat
                           •
                         him dowe, & fell ſoundly aſléepe, but Vernar, whoſe
minde was on his faire Bazilia, ſatte conferring with her
Shrine, hauing no ſtomacke to ſléepe. And that hee might the
better accompliſh his amourous deuiſes, he withdrew himſelfe
to a little Riuer, a pretty way from his friend Belcar, and there
what with the ſwéete Harmonie of the little Byrdes, and the
ſilent paſſions he vſed to himſelfe, the gentle prince was greatly
delighted.
                     
                        Polendos K. of Theſſalie, wandring that way, by Fortune
tooke his place of reſt, neere to the Prince Vernar, where hee
heard all the louely Ditties, and ſwéete diſcourſes, that hee vſed
in commendation of his fayre Bazilia, being very loath to
diſquiet him, or to be knowne that he was ſo neere. But at laſt

tooke occaſion by the braue inuentions that he had heard vttred
by the Prince Vernar, to enter into commendation of his owne
Lady, faire Francelina, and ſo they twaine, in this manner▪ paſſed
away the weary night. In the morning, when he might eaſily
eſpye the Prince Vernar, hee could not hide his preſence any
longer, but went to him with his ſalutation. I know Syr Vernar,
that your amorous Paſſions of extreame griefe, will ſcant
ſuffer your opprſſed head, to enioy any gladneſſe, becauſe the remembrance
of your faire Bazilia, hath vrged you this Night, to
bewray the ſundry aſſaults of an afflicted minde. Whoſe farre
diſtaunce from your preſence, hath made you grieuouſly to ſigh,
when you would gladly haue ſlept, wherof your Friend is a witnes,
who is not a little forrie to vnderſtand your w
                           •
                        es.
                     
                        Vernar embracing the noble Polendos▪
                         declared the great ioy
he conceiued for his company, yet ſomewhat diſpleaſed that any
ſhould be priuy to his Amorous complaints, which might cauſe
him to bee iudged rather effeminate, then any way Famous.
While they were earneſt in talking, Belcar came walking vnto
them, who reioycing at the ſight of the King Polendos, embraced
him, vſing theſe pleaſant ſp
                           •
                        eches. I care not greatly, if I
take reuengement now, for the ſharp aſſault you gaue me at the
Port of Corderia, where you bare away the prize, and I the repulſe,
but Vernar will be loath that wee ſhould fight: therefore
let vs all ioyne together like truſty Friends.
                     After many gratulations paſſed on all partes, they mounted
on Horſebacke, and rode on, recounting the Aduentures hadde
happened each other, in ſéeking the Prince Don Edoard. And
Polendos rehearſed vnto them, howe hee brought the young
Prince Palmerin to Conſtantinople, not forgetting the Letter
ſent by the Lady of the Lake, & was only procured by the Sage
Aliart, of the Obſcure Valley: which made both Belcar and
Vernar, ſomewhat abaſhed, to heare the happy ſucceſſe that had
chaunced. In continuance of this talke, they came before the
Caſtell of Dramuſiande: euery one giuing his verdicte on the
Braue
                           ••
                        e and ſtrength of this Fortreſſe, till at length, to put
them foorth of theſe thoughtes, the Prince Don Edoard came
vpon the Bridge, in the ſame order as he fought with the noble

                        Primaleon which vrged Polendos to this pauſe. Me thinkes
this Caſtle ſhould be inuincible, if it be well prouided within, of
ſuch good Knights as this which wee ſée without. Vppon this
accident, the Prince Vernar preuailed by intreatie, to haue the
firſt Iouſte with Don Edward, where preſently they Encountred
onean other, with ſuch large appearance of Knighthood, that
Don Edward loſte one of his Styrrops, and the Prince Vernar
was vnhorſſed. And hauing recouered himſelfe, he drewe his
Sworde, and came couragiouſly to him againe, but Don Edward
ſtayed, deliuering him theſe ſpéeches. Syr knight, it may
bee that your ſkill on Foote, is more agreeable to your ſtrength,
then the foreſight you haue on Horſebacke, the which I would
it might haue beene my happe to trye, but it hath not ſo pleaſed
him, to wh
                           •
                        m I am ſubiect, for that againſt euery Knight that
commeth, I am allowed but the firſt Exployte.
                     Then Belcar very deſirous to enter the Combatet, pacifie
Prince Vernar, with theſe fewe words. Syr Vernar, ſince the
Knight hath fulfilled his firſt, and we remaine to beginne a freſh
Challenge, you may not refuſe to forbeare the Fight, conſidering
he hath obſerued his dutie in the Field. Wherevpon Don
Edward and Belcar, beganne the ſecond Encounter, whoſe hap
was ſo hard, to beare his friend Vernar companie. Which Polendos
pe
                           •
                        ceyuing, began the thirde Iouſte, very couragiouſly,
which remained a whileſome what doubtfull, for that they had
battered one an others Armour very much, till at laſt, Polendos
was diſmounted likewiſe.
                     Then came foorth the Giant Pandare, commaunding Don-Edward
to goein againe: to whoſe commaund he obeyed, very
ſorie that he might not ſpeake to the knight he laſt ranne withall.
So entring into the Caſtle, the Prince Vernar thruſt in after
him, to whom Don Edward preſently ſaid. Sir Vernar, your
will hath ledde you beyond your witte, for that in this place you
ſhall abide more diſtreſſe then in all your life time: you cannot
fall into like danger, but he that is deſperate of himſelfe, would
little eſtéeme his Friends life. Vernar hearing theſe words, and
not knowing who he was, and halfe angry at his ill lucke, made
him this anſwere. Syr, I eſtéeme your witte, as litle as my

wiſdome, and your friendſhip ſo ſimple, that I will ſcant impute
any troth to your words: And this vnderſtand, that neither year,
nor any ſhall withdraw my deſire, although I buy it with mine
owne death. At which words, Pandare ſaluted him with his
Mace, ſo that betweene them twaine, was a fierce ſkirmiſh, and
Primaleon leaning in his Chamber windowe, tooke great pleaſure
to beholde the hautie courage of Vernan, whoſe name being
knowne vnto Dramuſiande, he was not a little glad of him, for
that his Father Trincus was alſo the cauſer of the death of his
Father Frenaque. Vernar ſo long aſſailed Pandare, that he had
broken his Sword to his hand, and his Shielde c
                           •
                        eane through
the middle, whereat Pandare being ſomwhat angry, caught him
in his armes, aud ſhaking him very ſore, threwe him againſt
the ground, that it was doubtfull if he had any life left in him:
wherefore he was preſently carryed into Don Edoards Chamber,
where prouiſion was made to relieue his owne eſtate.
                     Then was the Gate held open, 
                           •
                        ill Belcar and Polendos were
entred, when it was preſently ſhut againe, and then came Pandare
againſt Belcar, who receyued him very couragiouſly, but
yet was brought vnder, and carryed in to his friend Verner. Polendos
ſéeing hee muſt 
                           •
                        éeds enter Combate, and that Pandare
prepared himſelfe againſt him: firſt ſummoned him with theſe
words. Me thinkes it were for thy great honour, as alſo expedient
for reſeruing thy health, to yéelde thy ſelfe to mee, who rather
reſpect mercie, then to enter fight on a man, ſo cruelly mangled.
Doo but behold thine owne blood, and then conſider of my
pro
                           ••
                        e
                           •
                        ad bounty, ſo ſhall thy life be ſaued, and mine honor reſerued.
Sir (ſaid Pandare) if I ſhould ſubmit my ſelfe to thy will,
thou mightſt account my wit to be euer weake, or if I would
ſtand to thy mercie, I ſhould ſhewe mine owne cowardiſe, and
no manhood: Wherefore reſolue thy ſelfe, that I will yéeld with
thy death, which is the ſūme of my deſire. With that they fell to
their fight, wherin Polendos preuailed ſo happily, that Pandare
was thought paſt all recouery. Whervpon, the cruell Alligan
came foorth to defend him▪ who finding himſelfe alſo to be mated
euery way, & in fruſtrate hope of victory any way, he diſpaired of
himſelfe: and in fine, they were both ſo faint and wearyed, that

they fell downe, neyther gayning the Conqueſt of the other.
Don Edoard and Primaleon tooke Polendos into their Chamber,
where to their thrée Patients, they both vſed wholſome and
comfortable Phyſicke: being very ſorrie, that the miſfortune
of them twaine, ſhould bring ſo many Noble Princes, and Aduenturous
Knightes into that cruell Caſtell. Yet did they remaine
in good hope, which they found with as good hap, in that
at the appointed time, they were deliuered by a ſtrange Knight,
who was hardly knowne to any of them. Then Dramuſiande
went about the Cure of his ſicke perſonnes, that they might be
in good health, when any other Knights ſhould happen to come.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XVI.
                     ¶Howe Recinde King of Spayne, and Aruiedes King of
France, left theyr Royall Dominions, to wander in the
ſearche ſtrayed Prince Don Edoard. And of the Aduenture
that hapned betweene them, the Black Knight,
and the Knight of the Dogge, when they were arriued
at the Caſtle of Dramuſiande.
                     
                        RECINDE King of Spayne, hearing the
great purſuite of many Noble Knights, to
make enquyrie of the two young Princes,
Don Edoard, and Primaleon, he abſolutely
determined with himſelfe, to trye the hazard
of Fortune, if that his employed paines
might compaſſe any good lucke. And leauing
the whole Gouernment of his Eſtate, to the Duke Orliande,
and the Marqueſſe Richard, of no leſſe Valiancie then true
Nobilitie: Departed with no body, but his Eſquyre attending
on him, through many Countreyes, till he came to the Courte

of France, where he was Royallie and gratiouſly receiued by
the King Arnedes. Who vnderſtanding the ſumme of his noble
determination, and being him ſelfe affected to thoſe woorthie
Princes, commited his Kingdome to his Quéene Melitia, and
trauelled with Recinde, in this hautie enterpriſe.
                     After long trauell, they arriued at the Engliſh Courte, being
ſo diſguiſed, that they were not knowne to any, where becauſe
they could not ſée the Princeſſe Flerida, they would not ſtay, but
departed on theyr Iourney. And hearing that all the Knights
were loſt in the Forreſt of great Brittaine, and that they which
entred there, were not ſéent to returne, they made theyr courſe
that way, till miſhap brought them to this cruell Caſtle, where
on a ſudden they met with two Knights, excellently well mounted.
The one hauing his Armour ſpotted with red and crimzen
colours, and in his Shielde for his deuiſe, he bare a Dogge, vppon
an Azure Fielde. The other Knight was all in blacke Armour,
and his Shield of the ſame colour, without any other deuiſe:
theſe foure mette together, ſtriuing which of them ſhould
firſt enter vpon the Bridge. Don Edward being come foorth,
and ſéeing them at ſuch controuerſie, ſought to ende the matter
with theſe words. Gentlemen, if you come for honour, or for
zeale, to trie the magnanimity of your courage, ſtriue not in this
order, which may returne to your great diſcredites, but let him
that is boldeſt firſt beginne: ſo ſhall you finiſh what I iudge
you come for.
                     Vppon theſe words, Recinde couched his Speare, but the
Knight of the Dogge offered him this ſtay. Syr, it ſéemes you
neither regard ciuilitie, nor Knightly courteſie, to offer mee this
great wrong: who both came before you, and was prepared
before you, and therefore of right ought to beginne before you.
Recinde, ſomwhat mooued at theſe wordes, ſhaped him this
replie. Syr, if in a brauery you ſéeke to goe beyond mée, or in
peremptory wordes, to beare the Prize away, you are farre deceyued:
for that words cannot cutface me, nor your weapons
feare me, for I was firſt prouided, and therefore will not be preuented.
Don Edward perceyuing theſe queſtions were like to
grow to a Quarrell, aſſayed once more to ſet them at quiet, and

thus he began. This ſuddaine enmity, driueth me to a ſhr
                           •
                        wde
ſuſpition, that you come more to talke, then to try your manhoode,
or rather to ieaſt, then to Iuſt. If you are diſpoſed, let
the other twaine come and deale with me, in meane time, you
may try which of you ſhall be firſt, or laſt.
                     The knight of the Dogge being greatly vexed, as well at the
words of Don Edward, as alſo the ſtay Recinde helde him in:
charged him very boldly in this maner. Since you haue denied
me my right, and offered me wordes importing great rygor,
know that I will reuenge this wrong vppon your perſon, and
die in the field, 
                           •
                        re I put vp this iniury. Wherewith they ran
together very fiercely, and Arnedes prepared himſelfe to the
Blacke Knight, ſo that betwéene them began a hot ſkirmiſh,
wherein Horſe and Men were al laide on the ground. Then riſing
vp againe, and drawing foorth theyr ſwordes, they charged
one an other with ſuch mightie ſtrokes, that their ſingular courage
made manifeſt the valure of theyr noble mindes.
                     
                        Dramuſiande accompanied with Primaleon, Polendos, and
the other knights, ſtood looking forth at a window of the Caſtle:
giuing no leſſe commendation to this notable combat, then the
behauiour of the Knights did iuſtly deſerue. Yet none of them
could iudge of whence, or what they were, ſauing that Don Edward
knew the Knight of the Dogge, (by remembrance that
he was alwaies wont to beare that deuice) to be the couragious
knight Maiortes, not knowing any of the other, but cōmended
them all, as they were well worthy: Maiortes throwing downe
his ſword, ioyned Armes with his enemy, to try his ſtrength
in wraſtling and Arnedes likewiſe reciued the Blacke knight,
ſo that the blood iſſued forth vpon theyr Armor, & they althrough
great weakeneſſe fell downe on the earth. Then came foorth
Dramuſiande with his Noble Priſoners (whoſe promiſe made
vnto him by oath, would not ſuffer them to ſtart away) and taking
off theyr Helmets, Primaleon knew the Blacke Knight,
to be the Soldan Bellagris, & certified Dramuſiande, that the
other twaine were Recinde King of Spaine, and Arnedes, king
of France: who were all preſently caried into the Caſtle, that
their wounds might be cured, and themſelues recouered.
                     
                        
                        Dramuſiande vſed all the Knights very honorably, refuſing to
take extreame reuenge for his fathers death, but ſuppoſed their
impriſonment, to be puniſhment ſufficient. And for this cauſe
he ſhewed himſelfe more milde & gentle, becauſe through their
helpe, he had good hope to conquere the Iſle of the Lake, which
was kept by the Giant Almadrago, who in time paſt, had taken
it from him by force. In time, Maiortes the Knight of the
Dog, the Soldian Bellagris, the Blacke Knight, Arnedes, & the
King Recinde, had all obtained their former health, reioycing
that they were impriſoned with their deareſt friends, whome
they trauailed to ſeeke, & had ſo happily found. But the Prince
Don Edward, was not obliuious of his faire Lady Flerida, as
alſo the griefe hee ſuppoſed in his aged Father, whoſe ſorrowe
procéeded through his great miſfortune, which in time hee had
good hope ſhould turne to as great ioy.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XVII.
                     How Palmerin of England, deſirous of trauaile to ſeeke after
ſtrange aduentures, tooke the courage to ſpeake to his Lady
and Miſtreſſe Polinarda, as loth to depart without her
leaue: And hauing ſuſtained a grieuous repulſe, departed
ſecretly from the Court, not taking leaue of any, calling
himſelfe the Knight of Fortune.
                     
                        AFter that the yong Knights, had made manifeſt
their great expertneſſe in many Triumphes,
for the honour of thier Ladies, and
eſtimation they helde of themſelues, the
Emperour grewe into more pleaſant conceyts,
then of long time before hee had vſed
the like, cauſing euery night dances and deuiſes
to be performed, for the delight of the Empreſſe, and the
Princeſſe Gridonia: but the faire Bazilia ſtill refuſed their company,
for that the abſence of the prince Vernar, cauſed her ſpend
her time in penſiueneſſe.
                     
                        
                        Palmerin of England, affecting ſtrange aduentures, and deſirng
with other Knights, to make proofe of his Knighthood,
would gladly diſcouer his earneſt minde, but that hee feared to
procure the ill will of his Miſtreſſe. It chanced on a night, the
Princeſſe Polinarda was ſitting very ſolitary, and Palmerin
came and ſate downe by her, both of them ouercome with many
grieuous Paſſions, and both ſtriuing to ſpeake, yet neither
would begin. As commonly it fareth with thoſe, that march vnder
the Enſigne of amorous Venus, who are ſubiect to many efeminate
follies, as an idle head, a dulled wit, a pale and wanny
face, their thoughts ſtill ſilent, yet alwaies at worke, their
mind mute, yet neuer in quiet, ſpeaking faintly, behauing
themſelues fondly, walking ſolitarie, and vſing ſickly ieaſtures,
euer exclaiming on Cupid, but neuer remembring their owne
cowardiſe; ſtill crying, fie on Loue, when it were more meete
to correct the folly of their life.
                     Theſe are the Paſſions of a Louer, which entreth through
Idleneſſe, is kindled by Deſire, ſet on fire by affection, and if
Perſeuerance helpe not, is vtterly waſted by Deſperation.
After Palmerin had ſitten a good while, and his Lady ſtil ſilent,
he gaue her occaſion to ſpeake by theſe ſpéeches. Faire Miſtres,
if I might as fréely ſpeake with your blame, as my thoughts
are farre from any ſpot to bounty, I ſhould then eſtéeme my ſelf
happy, in gaining ſuch leaue, as I account my ſelfe honoured
by your gracious loue. Yet perſwading my ſelfe, your gentle nature
will not quip your friend, nor giue any croſſe motion that
may cut his fancie by your pardon, and on no preſumption, I
ſhall yeeld the circumſtance of my diſcourſe to your gentle conſtruction.
                     It is ſo, that feeling in my ſelfe the deſire of honour, which I
can no way attaine, but by ſome hautie enterpriſe, I haue
thought good to venter among the Pikes of miſchaunces, either
to encreaſe my renowne, or ende my life in an infamous reproch.
For many wil ſend at large their ſpéeches of defame, and
on a priuate ſpight ſeeke to worke me diſcredite: as lo, there is
the Knight that crept into his Fetherbed, when Fame doth allure
him into the Warlike field. But he hath more minde to

Maſke with Venus, then march with Mars, wearing a Gloue
for his Lady, when he ſhould vſe a Gantlet for her loue.
                     Theſe ſpeeches, faire Miſtreſſe, is more grieuous to your ſeruant
then his patience can expreſſe, or your gentle nature ſuffer
to heare. Which to auoide, as well to proue my loyaltie, which
vnſpotted I beare you, as alſo to ſhew my dutie, wherewith I
honour your noble father, I haue vowed to indeuour my ſelfe in
this attempt, which will be no leſſe welcome vnto your ſéemely
ſelfe, then it hath been long wiſhed 
                           •
                        f your vowed ſeruant. For
neither can any danger withdraw my mind, nor any doubt
cauſe me to thinke on miſhap, hauing your licence, which is the
courage of my trauaile, and your gracious loue, which awardeth
al troubles. So that in any accident which may annoy me,
or any oppreſſion, that may ſuddenly deceiue me: I liued your
Knight in fauour, and will die your Knight in fame: and as you
onely haue the flower of my loue, ſo ſhall it neuer fade, till the
latter end of my life.
                     The Princeſſe Polinarda perceiuing his intent, & her gentle
heart, loath to haue his abſence ſo ſoone, with the teares ſtanding
in her eyes, thus made her anſwere. Seruant, ſuch hath
been the courteſie at your hands I haue found, and ſo loyall the
continuance of your promiſed faith, that neither am I able to
gratifie as I would, or to giue you the honour, that by dutie I
ſhould. Your princely behauiour made me chooſe you for my ſeruant,
and your equiuolent bountie, made you loued of my ſelfe:
ſo that I loued none more then you, albeit none knewit ſo little
as you. Beſide, the eſtimation 
                           ••
                        y father hath alwaies giuen
you, with the notable deſerts, hath euer been in your ſelfe, increaſed
the loue of all to you aboundantly, but chiefly my loue,
which as yet flameth freſhly. But 
                           ••
                        nce the deſire of your departure
groweth thorow mee, and perhaps there is ſome occaſion
that grieueth you, I would be glad to know my crime, that I
may make you recompence, for I had rather giue you leaue to
tarrie, then grant you licence to depart.
                     Ladie (quoth Palmerin) though the cauſe be in you, yet is it no
crime, and though I depart for your ſake, yet am I free from any
ſuch ſuſpect: for it is onely the fauour I haue found at your

handes, and the friendſhip you haue granted to my continuall
honour: that I can no way recouer you ſuch duetie as I ought,
albeit I trauailed for your ſake, through my whole life. And
to ſée ſuch a gratious perſon vnrequited, my ſelfe being now of
yéeres, to put recompence in proofe, I might rightly deſerue to
be reproched of all men, much more to be refuſed of ſo ſwéete a
Saint. The Princeſſe ariſing in a maruellous choller, highly
offended at his paſſed talke, ſhe gaue him this cooling, to quaile
his hot attempt. I haue often truſted, and béene rewarded with
treaſon, and where I placed ſtedfaſt affection, I haue bin ſooneſt
beguiled: which now I repent, when it is too late, and bridle
my fancy, when I ſée mine owne folly. Wherefore, ſéeing my
fault is ſuch, as you can rather afford me your roome, then your
company, I giue you this command, in your poaſting voyage,
that as you wil thinke to honour me, ſéeme not to preſume into
my preſence, which I both bind you by my duty, and ſtraightly
command you to obſerue. So turning her back, ſhe flung away
in a fume: leauing Palmerin in ſuch an alteration, as one could
hardly iudge, if he had any life left in him. But as happe was,
no body was preſent to deſcrie his heauy complaintes, for that
euery body had conducted his Lady to her Chamber: ſauing the
Princeſſe Polinarda, who ſtayed not to be intreated, but went
flinging through the Gallerie, as greatly vexed, as ſhe had left
her ſeruant paſſioned.
                     
                        Palmerin departing to his lodging, toſſing and tumbling himſelfe
on his reſtleſſe bedde, and at euery thought of his Ladies
diſcurteſie, hee fell into an agonie as bitter as the death, not
ſuffering ſléepe to enter into his head, but ſtill bewayled the
eſtate of his aduerſe hap. At laſt, when Aurora was riſen, out
of the armes of olde Titan her huſband, hée determined to fulfill
his Ladies commaund, albeit to his great paine, in graunting
conſent. Then getting on his Armour, which bare the
colour of a Harte in the Forreſt, very thickly ſet with little
golden ſhrubbes, and bearing in his Shield Fortune, holding
her tottering and vnſteady whéele, and naming himſelfe the
Knight of Fortune, hee very ſecretly departed, accompanied
with Siluian the Sauage mans ſonne, whome he called brother,

becauſe they were nouriſhed together, and hee bare the
Shield of the Palme Tree, that was ſent him from the Sage Aliart,
neither taking leaue of the Emperor, nor of any, but in the
vehemency of his griefe, mounted on horſebacke, & ſo rode both
away. All the way as they rode, Siluian endeuored himſelfe by
perſwaſion, to driue away his heauineſſe, but he was as farre
from his purpoſe, as the Prince himſelfe was deuoide of patience,
who rode on, vſing no words, he was ouercome with ſuch
an extreame melancholy. Yet was his affection ſo earneſtly
grounded on his Lady, as he vowed in her behalf, to aduenture
his life, not doubting, but the duety hee would ſhewe in her abſence,
ſhould win her fauour againe, and grant him her preſence.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XVIII.
                     How Palmerin of England, vnder the title and name of the
Knight of Fortune, ſtill continued in his penſiue iourney,
till at laſt he happened on a Caſtle, where, in the honour of
his faire Ladie and Miſtreſſe, the Princeſſe Polinarda, hee
conquered a Knight, who tearmed himſelfe, the Knight of
Death.
                     
                        STill trauailed the valiant Prince Palmerin,
heauy, ſadde, and greatly lamenting his
ſo late miſfortune, neither reſting in any
pla
                           •
                        e, or abyding in any place, or abyding in
any company, but only his brother Siluian,
who he both loued and highly eſtéemed. At
laſt, happening into a a Groue of Trées, he
eſpied a very faire Caſtle, ſtanding very ſolitary, beſet round about
with a gréene bancke, at ſight whereof, the Prince alighted,
which Siluian perceiuing, alighted likewiſe, aud ledde both
the Steedes to paſture.
                     
                        
In which time, Palmerin ſeeing no body néer, and remembring
the great vnkindneſſe of his Ladie, entred into theſe heauie
mournings. O Palmerin, ſon to a poore Sauage man, and borne
in the vnfortunate forreſt of great Britaine, too ſoone preferred
to honor, and too late thrown down into hatred. What regard
haddeſt thou of a Princeſſe, thy ſelfe being a poore Peſant? Or
what eſtimation hadſt thou of modeſtie, to mooue ſo great offence
in thy gracious Miſtreſſe, whoſe loue was the only ſtate
of thy life, and whoſe fauour was the flower of thy proſperitie?
Ah ſweet Ladie, on your courteous pitie, let paſſe my preſumption,
and what hath been more then dutie, impute to may rude
behauiour, which your clemencie may both puniſh and pardon.
And yet my good Ladie, if you reſpect my truſty ſeruice, with the
conſtant loyaltie I haue alway borne to your Soueraigntie,
my fault committed raſhly, deſerueth no ſuch repulſe, in that
this ingratitude is too much for you to ſhew, and more then I
can any way ſuffer. For if you regard your owne beauty, with
the ſtayed aſſurance of your ſeruants bountie, you ſhall perceiue
my words to bee for your honour, and not worthie any
hate, in that I will preferre your name, aboue all Ladies in nobleneſſe.
And yet am I contented to abide your hard doome, and
according to your pleaſure, waſt my daies in diſtreſſe, till either
you will mooue you to recant, or my ſpotleſſe loyaltie to relieue
my miſhap, which the longer you deſerre, the more is my dolor,
and you remaining obſtinate, my paines are helpeleſſe: but that
your gentlenes giueth me hope your diſpleaſure ſhall end with
my eternall delight.
                     Thus hauing finiſhed his complaintes, he drew neare to the
Caſtle, where by good hap he heard the ſound of Muſicke, which
gaue him occaſion to enter further. And comming to a great
Hall, he eſpyed in one of the corners, one ſitting all in blacke,
with a fair long Beard, and a very graue countenance, ſhewing
by his ſad complexion, that he had more minde to moane, then to
any myrth. Palmerin would not as yet enter any further, leaſt
he ſhould break off his quiet exerciſe, which was, in ſinging many
ſadde Dittyes to his Lute, that himſelfe had framed, in the
prayſe of his Ladie. Palmerin hauing heard what ſingular reports

he gaue his Ladie, as that none might compare with her
for beautie and brauerie: was very much offended, in that hee
eſteemed all Ladyes, as counterfeite to his fayre Polynarda,
wherefore hee brake off the Knightes Sonnet, with this kinde
of Salutation. Me thinkes Syr, you either want manners, or
modeſtie, to glorie in your Lady, as thought there were none her
like: Syr, your late compariſon hath vrged me to great choller,
for that my Ladie is aboue all in beautie▪ and for honour of her
Name beſide, beyond all in Noblenes of Nature, and therefore
worthie all praiſe, becauſe ſhe is ſuperiour to any.
                     The auncient Knight, ſeeing one entred vpon him ſo ſuddenly,
and to correct his pleaſures, with ſuch ſharpe words: aduanced
himſelfe towards him with this anſwer. Syr Knight, your
bolde entraunce into this place, with the great offence you haue
offered my perſon, may happe to be ſet at ſo deare a price, as ſhal
coſt the Blood you would be loath to ſpare. Is there anie to bee
equall with my Lady, who is not méete to beare the compariſon
of any? whoſe very remembrance, maketh me liue in vnſpeakable
tormentes? If thou dareſt ſtay till I am Armed, I will
make thée eyther denye thy bragges, or buye my Ladyes honour
with the loſſe of thy life and breath. And I will ſo reward this
thy preſumption, as ſhall teach thée thy dutie, and winne me my
hearts deſire. Syr (ſaid Palmerin) ceaſe theſe words, and execute
your wrath: if I haue ſpoken any thing to your diſpleaſure,
reuenge your ſelfe, and there an ende.
                     The auncient Knight withdrewe himſelfe into a Chamber▪
where as his Eſquire preſently Armed him, & Palmerin went
foorth, where he mounted on Horſebacke, and attended his comming.
At length came foorth the Knight attired in blacke Armour,
bearing in his Shield, the portraite of griefly Death, lying
on a Toomb, couered all with blacke. Vſing no more words,
they fell ſtraite to fight, eache of them behauing themſelus very
valiantly: but the Knight of Death was at length throwne to
the earth. Then dealing a while togither with their Swoords,
Palmerins lucke was ſo fortunate, that he ouercame his enemy,
then comming to him, and taking off his Helmet, he entred into
theſe ſpéeches. Loe Sir Knight, contrary to your expectation,

you are become my Priſoner: Now muſt you gainſay, what before
you haue boldly ſaid, in extolling your Lady, aboue her whō
I honour, or prepare your ſelfe to the extreame rigour of death.
                     To whom the Knight of Death replyed: Syr, well may you
eſtéeme your valoure, and make account of your victorie, in that
you haue foyled him, who had good hope neuer to be diſmayed by
any. But concerning the harde choyce you put me to, eyther to
denye my Ladie, or to leaue my life: Suffice your ſelfe in this,
that no rigor can conſtraine me, no, not the death it ſelfe, may, or
ſhall compell me: for I rather chooſe to abide your cru
                           •
                        lty, then
I will offer my Ladie ſo great diſcourteſie: this is my anſwer,
take it as you pleaſe. Palmerin comparing the loyaltie of the
Knight, with the conſtancie of his owne Loue, and his affection
to be as ſurely planted, as was the earneſt deſire in himſelfe, ſatiſfying
himſelfe with the Conqueſt, called Syluian, and departed.
The Knight of Death returning into his Caſtle, where he
was carefully tended, and looked vnto by his Eſq
                           •
                        yre, greatly
contemning his fortune, in that he was ſo ſuddenly foyled.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XIX.
                     ¶Here ſhall you vnderſtand, who was the Knight of Death,
that the renowned Palmerin of England had conquered:
and what was the cauſe he remained in his ſolitary Caſtle.
                     
                        IT is regiſtred in ancient Hyſ
                           •
                        ories, that in
Sardignia, ſometime Raigned a King named
Euandrin, who eſpowſed Quéene Emeralda,
Daughter to the Duke Armian
of Normandie, and Siſter vnto the Noble
Duke Drapos. This King had one onely
Sonne, who was named Floraman, of no
leſſe expertnes of capacity, then Knightly behauiour in courage,
which made him liked of all that ſaw him, & loued of all y• knew
him. It ſo chaunced, that this Floraman growing to ripeneſſe

of yeares, became enamoured of Altea, Daughter to the Duke
Charles of Cicilia, who was ſubiect to the King Euandrin, ſo
that betwéene theſe twaine, was ioyned ſuch a league of perfect
good liking, and ſuch a mutuall conſent of faithfull loue, that they
ſuppoſed neither any accident could hinder their determination,
nor any extreamitie 
                           •
                        euer their plighted promiſe. But as Fortune
is enemie to the hauty courage, and prepareth her malice
againſt the well meaning minde: ſo this Loue could not pleaſe
the King his Father, but by all meanes he could, thought ſtill to
preuent it. When the King perceiued he could hardly reclaime
his Sonne, but that his affection ſtill increaſed to faire A
                              •
                           tea, he
ſent her home to the Duke her Father, meaning to matche his
Sonne to Adriana, the Quéene of Cicilia, whom Floraman denied
to loue, or in this to grant to his Fathers minde, but rather
endeuoured to follow his Lady, whoſe abſence procured the languiſhing
of his life. The King well noting the intent of Floraman,
that he could not fancy his Fathers choiſe, by ſecret treaſon
in the Duke of Ciciliaes Court, he found the meanes to poyſon
the fair Altea, to the no ſmal griefe of her noble Father & friends,
as alſo the Gentlemen that were in his Courte, of whome her
beauty was honored, and the ciuility of her life greatly commended.
The Duke miſdoubting that the vntimely death of his
daughter was procured by ſome vnnaturall meane, becauſe ſhe
was ſo ſoone ſicke, and ſo ſuddenly gone, ſent for Allaricqua her
bedfellow, and by executing ſundry torments on her, ſhe confeſſed,
that being hyred by the king of Serdignia, ſhe miniſtred the
potion, that cut off her flowring yeares. When the duke hearde
the diſcourſe of his Lord and Soueraigns vnkinde dealing, hee
cauſed the Anatomie of his Daughter to be artificially figured,
which he placed vpon a Toomb, repreſenting her Funerals, and
thervpon in golden verſes, writ the Epitaph of her rare and vertuous
life, and by her was the image of Death very liuely drawn
in perfect proportion. This rare piece of workmanſhip, he laid
in a goodly fair Chariot, and leuying a great army, went againſt
the King of Serdignia: Of whoſe comming, when Floraman
heard, he could not finde in his heart to enter Battel againſt his
Ladies father, but with a company of wel appointed knights, he

brake thorow the rankes, and entred the Campe, from whence
he tooke the Chariot, with the Picture of Altea. So ryding preſently
to a Porte of the Sea, he tooke ſhipping, and coaſted into
the Turks Dominion, and building there his ſolitary Caſtle he
liued there, bemoaning the vnkinde acte of his Father, and the
vnfortunate death of his faire Altea. To whoſe Picture, hee
would often report the afflictions of his minde: and with ſundry
Lamentable Sonnets, diſcouer her praiſe, and his owne
paine, which to his Lute hee often recorded, as the onely meane
to perſwade him from any deſperate intent.
                     In this place remained Floraman, till ſuch time as the Prince
Palmerin viſited him as you haue hearde: and although it was
the good Fortune of Palmerin to conquere him, who was both
waſted with mourning, and growne into great debilitie, by his
excéeding ſorrow) yet was Floraman eſtéemed a Knight of ſingular
Proweſſe. And when Palmerin was departed, and hée
entred into his Caſtle againe vnto his Ladyes Picture, he appealed
in this manner. Alas my Altea, impute not this Conqueſt
to any right in mine Enemie, but rather to the feeble and
weake aſſaults of your ſeruant, which extreame ſorrow for your
miſhap, hath cauſed, and griefe of mine owne miſfortune, that ſo
aduerſly chanced. Wherefore, to make amends for this great
miſchaunce, and that you may knowe your Knight eſtéemeth
none but you: I will in my aduentures, ſo blaze your memorie,
that all Ladies ſhall report, you are the onely Altea: and cauſe
them to know, ſhe is as yet vnborne, that muſt be your equall.
Long he ſtayed in that comfortleſſe place: till at laſt, the King
his Father vnderſtanding where he was, ſent for him, and becauſe
hee would not ſhewe himſelfe diſobedient, hee departed
thence, bearing with him his Ladyes Portraite, ſtill vſing his
blacke Armour, and the Shielde wherein Death was painted,
as the onely Sepulchre of his great ſorrowes: vſing no other
name for himſelfe, but the Knight of Death. And what rare
Aduentures were by him atchieued, in the honour of his Ladie,
and great reputation of himſelfe, you ſhall be at large certified in
the ſequell of this Hiſtorie.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XX.
                     ¶Palmerin of England, after hee was departed from Floraman,
the Knight of Death, happened to come where he
ſaw a combate fought betweene three Knights, and the
Knight of the Bull, named Pompides, who at the commandemens
of a Lady, kept the paſſage of a bridge, and
how the Knight of Fortune bare away the Victorie.
                     
                        WHen the renowned Knight of Fortune had
conquered Floraman the Knight of Death,
he with his brother Siluian, procéeded on
his iourney, neuer ſhewing any ſigne of a
liuely diſpoſition, but heauy and penſiue
all the way as he rode, which Siluian deſirous
(if he might) to remedy, vſed theſe
words vnto him. Good ſir, waſt not the time in woe, that
you ſhould vſe in pleaſant recreation, ſéeke not the ruine of your
ſelfe, for hee that regardeth ſo 
                           •
                        lenderly your profered courteſie:
rather extinguiſhed her memory, as ſhe hath lightly left you, or
thinke on her, when you iudge ſhe is mindfull of you. Vnto
which words, the knight of Fortune thus ſhaped an anſwere.
                     
                        Siluian my deare Brother, and friend, if thou cauldeſt diſcerne
the drops of blood, that fall from my oppreſſed heart, as
thou perceiueſt the moyſt teares that iſſue from my head, or if
thou couldeſt iudge the world of woes I abide in my ſilent
thoughts, as thou doeſt perceiue ſome motion, by outward appearance,
thou wouldeſt rather wiſh me in my graue, then to ſée
me remaine in this remedileſſe griefe, which no way can be remedied,
but onely by the laſt extremity, which is death. And
albeit, as thou ſaiſt, ſhe eſtéemeth not my Paſſions, but rather
is merry, when I mourne, and laugheth, when I languiſh: yet
ſhall it neuer be ſayde, but Palmerin liued without fraude, and

therefore dyed in faith, preferring an honourable death, before
a hapleſſe life. I would I had bene blinde, when firſt I ſaw her
beauty, or that I had ſtayed with our Father, then to enioy ſuch
an vngentle friend, where wee might haue liued in quiet eſtate,
now not enioying one houre of reſt: for albeit I liue in ſpotleſſe
loyaltie, yet am I rewarded with moſt vngentle loyaltie.
And what of that? let it ſuffice, ſhe is vnkinde, and thou vnhappie:
ſhe bent to crueltie, yet will thou liue and die in conſtancie:
deſiring no longer life, then I may be frée from any ſpotte in my
promiſed Loue. And heereupon Syluian, aſſure thy ſelfe, her
Beauty ſhall hazard my honour on a thouſand Launces, but ſhe
ſhall confeſſe her ſelfe, Palmerin is aboue all in loyaltie. Thus
paſſing the time in talke one to an other, the Knight of Fortune
in great paine, and Syluian ſtill continuing his perſwaſion, they
arriued at a Bridge, where they ſaw thrée knights before them,
who would haue paſſed ouer, but were reſiſted by a Knight in
fair white Armor, who kept the Paſſage, bearing in his Shield
for his Deuiſe, a Bulles head, and was called the Knight of the
Bull. One of the thrée Knights, very couragiouſly, gaue Combat
to the Knight of the Bull, but wan quickly ſet beſide his ſaddle.
In fine, the Knight of the Bull preuailed againſt them all
thrée, to their griefe, and his glorie.
                     The Knight of Fortune knowing theſe thrée knights that
had bene foyled, to be of the Emperours Court, as Luyman of
Burgundie, Germaine of Orleaunce, and Tenebrant: he was
not a little ſorrie for their miſhappe, and preſently menaced his
courage againſt the knight of the Bull, who met ſo ſtoutly togither,
that they were both diſmounted. Then charging one another
with their ſwords, betwéene them began a doubtfull ſkyrmiſh:
but at laſt, the knight of Fortunes happe was ſo good, that
he ſtrooke him downe: and ſetting his foote vppon him, charged
him to tell what hee was, and wherefore he kept that Paſſage.
The knight of the Bull, ſéeing himſelfe brought vnder, and hearing
his demand, which he was very loath to graunt: at laſt, diſcouered
himſelfe as thus. Syr knight, it hath bene alwaies my
deſire, to kéepe my ſelfe vnknowne to any, not that I hyde my
name for feare, but till my Noble exploytes might deſerue to

make me knowne. But ſince it is my Fortune, by you to receiue
my firſt conqueſt, and muſt declare, what you ſtand deſirous
to know: vnderſtand that I am ſonne to Don Edord the
famous Prince of England, and Argonica, the Lady of the Enchanted
Iſle, hauing to name Pompides. As concerning why
I kéepe this paſſage, thus it is. A certaine Lady who cured my
wounds I receiued at my laſt encounter againſt two knights
whom I ſlew: commanded me to kéepe the paſſage, vntill I
conquered a knight which ſhe greatly deſireth, and can no other
way come to the knowledge of him. And here haue I remained
for the ſpace of twentie dayes: yet neither happening on that
knight, nor conquered before his preſent.
                     The knight of Fortune hearing his words ſuffered him to
ariſe, and gaue him this anſwer. Me thinkes ſir it might be
more to your 
                           •
                        ame, as alſo the happineſſe of your good fortune:
not to linke your life to this ſimple enterpriſe, but to aduance
your ſelfe, to trie the hazards of all places, for in this place you
ſit idle, while abroad you might be better imployed: which if
you think amiſſe of. I leaue you to your Ladies command, and
ſo Siluian and he departed. The other vanquiſhed knights, who
greatly deſired to haue knowledge of the knight of Fortune,
were very ſorry that they ſuffered him to depart, without vſing
any conference with him. Neuertheleſſe, they ſuppoſed that it
was the renowned Palmerin: but that the deuice of his Shéeld
deceiued them, which he bare for that purpoſe becauſe he would
not be known to any, otherwiſe then by the name of the knight
of Fortune. Well, after him they rid, & Pompides went to his
Ladies Fortreſſe, where he might haue his wounds cured,
which made him very faint, he had loſt ſo much blood. Now wil
we returne to the knight of the Sauage man, who hauing deliuered
Palmerin the ſhéeld, and left Trofol
                              •
                           ant with the other
conquered knights: trauail
                           •
                        d, both with reputation of knight,
hood, and good Fortune in all attempts, till he arriued at the
Triſtfull Valley, where what befell vnto him, you ſhall preſently
vnderſtand.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXI.
                     How when the knight of the Sauage man had left the Prince
Palmerin, and the conquered knights in the Forreſt of the
Cleere fountaine, he chanced to come into the Triſtfull
Valley, where he tried his ſtrength againſt Blandidon
knight of the Swan, and ſonne of the ſorrowfull Lady
Pandritia, where he conquered him.
                     
                        FOr becauſe we will not be vnmindfull of
the knight of the Sauage man, who behaued
himſelfe ſo brauely at Conſtantinople,
as alſo in the Forreſt of the Cleere Fountaine,
you ſhall vnderſtand, that endeuouring
himſelfe in trauaile, Fortune directed
his courſe to the Triſtfull Valley, which
might rightly be called ſo, for that no Knight could enter there,
witheut great affliction and heauineſſe of minde, which made
the ſorrowful Pandritia to abide there in her Houſe of ſadneſſe
As he rode on in this Valley, he eſpyed a great trée, whereon
there hanged a great many a Shéeldes, and néere to the Trée,
was a Caue or Den, at the etrance whereof lay Trunchions
of ſpeares, broken ſwords, and other like weapons, which declared
there had béene many combats fought in that place. Out
of this Caue, there came a knight in black armor, bearing in his
ſhield vpon a ground of ſand, a faire white Swan, who hauing
eſpied the knight of the Sauage man preſently ſounded a horne,
vnto a houſe which was néere adioyning. At the ſound of this
horn, the windows of the houſe were preſently opened, & there
was laid a faire cloath of blacke Veluet, and Cuſhions of the
ſame, when there came a faire Lady, with her Damoſels, and
leaned thereon to ſée the combate, which the knight of the Swan
determined to haue with the knight he ſawe comming. This

ſight mooued the Knight of the Sauage man to ſtand in a great
maze, as well to behold the faire Ladies, as alſo ſuch a ſeemely
Knight, in a place of ſo ſmall frequentation. Out of which ſtudy
to reuiue him, the Knight of the Swan ſent his Page, who
ſummoned him in this ſort. My Lord and Maſter (ſir Knight)
whom you here behold, and can no way eſcape, hath kept this
paſſage for this ſixe Moneths, to the aduancement of his honour,
and diſgrace of no ſmal company of good & hardy knights,
as their Shields my ſuffice for witneſſe, that hang on yonder
Tree, which they haue left behind them, being vnable to withſtand
him, who as yet hath been vanquiſhed of none. He therefore
hath ſent me, and I in his name ſollicite you, that if cowardly
feare do enforce you to faint, and not daring to venture,
where ſo many hath beene vanquiſhed, you are permitted the
choiſe of two extreames, wherof you muſt chuſe one, or receiue
ſuch authority, as he wil charge you withal. The firſt, you muſt
paſſe no further, but returne from whence you came, being boūd
by your Knightly oath, to make knowne to euery one, your
ſhamefull repulſe, not ſparing to tell the truth, for fauer to your
ſelfe, but manifeſt your cowardiſe, to the commendation of my
Lord. The ſecond, if you be ſo deſirous, that you would needes
paſſe, without endamaging your ſelfe with the foreſaid perill,
you muſt fulfil that which you wil be loath, if you either eſtéeme
Knighthood, or the happy ſtate of your life. You muſt firſt giue
your Shield to be placed by the other, and your name to be written
vnder the ſame, to the intent all Knights that happen this
way, may know him that came like a Knight, but departed
hence like a fainting Crauen, ſo ſhall their extreame rigour in
ſpéech, procure the meanes to your eternall ſhame. Beſide, you
muſt vow to this ſorrowfull Lady, who with all her companie,
ſpendeth the time in wailing, neuer to reioyce, in remembrance
of her griefe, but to be part
                           •
                        er of her ſadneſſe, while your life
endureth, If none of theſe twaine pleaſe you, come to my Lord,
and he will eaſe you.
                     The Knight of the Sauage man, ſmiling at this diſcourſe,
which menared diſloyaltie, as alſo threatned danger, ſent the
Knight his anſwere, in theſe words. Goe tell thy Lord, that

he hath met with ſuch a one, as neither reſpecteth his proffers,
nor regardeth his puiſſaunce, not minding to goe forward, nor
yet to returne, till he hath cauſed him to know, that he hath as
much authoritie to conſtraine, as himſelfe hath to command.
Vpon this anſwere they met together valiantly, each charging
the other with ſuch Knightly blowes, as the Ladies gaue great
commēdation to the fight, hardly iudging who was the likeſt of
victorie. They breathed, and fell to it againe, the knight of the
Swan, accounting himſelfe well 
                           ••
                        ated, and the knight of the
Sauage man, thought him indifferently matched. At length, the
victorie chaunced to the Knight of the Sauage man, who reioyced,
that he had conquered ſo good a knight, and he vnclaſping
the Knight of the Swans Beuere (who was quite ouercome
with a grieuous trance) wrought the meanes to get life in him
againe, when as he charged him to tell, what he was, as alſo,
wherefore theſe Ladies liued there, and why he vndertooke to
kéepe that paſſage, vnto which requeſt the Knight thus anſwered.
Sir knight, if in looſing my life, I might profit her whom
I euer ſought to pleaſe, and finiſh that which muſt be brought to
ende, I would rather imbrace the death, t▪en ſatiſfie your deſire,
that craueth the thing, I would neuer ſhew to any. But ſeeing
my griefe cannot be holpen that way, nor greatly eaſed this
way, you hauing now authority to command, I wil accompliſh
your minde in euery point. I am called Blandidon, Sonne to
this ſorrowfull Lady Pandritia, who hath too long, yet longer
muſt, abide in this her Caſtle, called the Houſe of Sadneſſe.
Where, the more to my griefe, yet no way to be remedied, ſhee
hath vowed to end her life with her miſfortune, & to continue in
mourning, ſo long as ſhe liueth. Onely for the loue ſhée bare to
a knight, whō in trauel I am ſure you haue heard of, in that he
is no leſſe famous for his hautie déedes of Armes, then aboue al
knights for his atchieued victories, he is called, as I haue heard
of many, Don Edward of England. And becauſe I cannot find
the meane, to perſwade my mother frō this ſorrow full kinde of
life, but that ſhe will ſtill remaine in her v
                           •
                        wed heauineſſe, I
haue determined to garde this paſſage, making all that I conquere,
partakers of her griefe, & forcing all that refraine, to the

ſhame you haue heard, wherin I honor her, which is my deſire,
and trie many a good Knight, to the encreaſing of my fame,
though I neuer ſuſtained the like miſhap by any, nor hope to
meete the man that ſhall doe it againe.
                     The Knight of the Sauage man, hearing the tale of Blandidon,
(who was eſtéemed for a Knight of no leſſe valor then
good Fortune,) deſired him to leaue the ſolitarie place, and to
beare him company to the Forreſt of great Brittaine, declaring,
that more renowne might there be gotten in a day, then
during his life time, in that heauie paſſage. Which Blandidon
would haue graunted to right willingly, if the penſiue
eſtate of his ſad mother, had not perſwaded him to the contrary,
whom hee was loath to leaue, yet deſirous to kéepe the
Knight of the Sauage man company, whō he was very earneſt
to haue knowledge of. At length, a little before he departed, the
Knight of the Sauage man, thus perſwaded Blandidon. Sir
Knight, I account my ſelfe happie to meete with ſo good a
Knight, & would condemne my ſelfe altogether of ingratitude,
if I ſhould not requite your gentleneſſe, ſo farre as without
mine owne harme I may, whoſe company I would gladlie
haue, yet vnwilling your Ladie mother ſhould remaine deſtitute
of a guide. To reſolue you what, and who I am, you ſhall
know, that I am called the Knight of the Sauage man, by
which name, I am knowne to many good Knights, who haue
both tried me, and found gentleneſſe at my hands. No farther
can I diſcloſe my name, till I am better acquainted with
my ſelfe, then as yet I am. And now I intend to hazard my
ſelfe in the aduenture of great Brittaine, whereas many noble
Knights doe enter, and not heard of afterward, whom I meane
to beare company, or elſe to ende the great danger. Blandidon
would gladly haue aſſaied this aduenture alſo, but the faint eſtate
of himſelfe, with the great care he vſed to his mother Pandritia,
would not ſuffer him to depart. Wherefore, vſing ſuch
friendly gréeting at their departure, as beſéemed their profeſſion
and loyal intent of curteſie, the knight of the Sauage man tooke
his way on his iourney, and Blandidon to the caſtle, to comfort
his mother, as alſo to haue his wounds recured. Aſſuring you,

that this ſtrife betweene them, wrought ſuch maruellous endeuours
on either part afterward, as hath ſeldome been heard
of, which you ſhall reade in the ſequell, wherein, the vertue of
their nobleneſſe, with the vnanimitie of their conioyned faithfulneſſe,
was not more deſirous to the one, then delightfull to
the other.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXII.
                     How Floraman the Knight of Death, and Prince of Serdignia
arriued at Conſtantinople, at the Emperours Court, where
he cauſed his Tent to be pitched, in the honour of his faire
Altea. And how before the Emperor, hee made chalenge
againſt all the Knights of his Court▪ in the defence of his
Ladies beautie, where his Fortune was ſo good, that hee
ouercame the Prince Gracian, his brother Guerin, and the
other Knights that aduentured for their Ladies ſakes.
                     
                        GReat was the ſorrow that the Knight of
Death ſuſtained, for the foile which Palmerin
the noble knight of Fortune had giuen
him, whereof to be reuenged (after hee had
viſited the king his father, who had ſent for
him) he continued in trauell ſo long, that at
laſt he arriued at Conſtantinople. Where
before the Emperors Pallace, he erected two faire Tents, very
artificially made in workmanſhip, al of black Silke and Gold,
whereon was giuen to view in braue Pictures, the rare beauty
of his Lady Altea, as alſo the whole courſe of his mournefull
life▪ a ſpectacle of great delight to all that tooke occaſion to ſee it.
In the one of theſe Tents was prepared furniture for his lodging,
and in the other ſtoode his luſtie Courſers, with the
Speares and Weapons to maintaine his Tournement, and

on the top, betwéene both the Tentes, was placed the perfect
Image of his faire Altea, which he tooke from the Duke her father,
while the two Armies were waging battaile. The
Knight of Death hauing euery thing in readineſſe, with his
two Eſquires attending on him, he entred the Emperors Pallace,
attired in his accuſtomed Armour, which made the Emperour
ſomewhat abaſhed, yet very well pleaſed with the ciuill demeanor
he perceiued in him. Then kneeling downe to kiſſe his
Maieſties hand, he was not ſuffered as he would, but was kept
backe, which he abiding very patiently, began to fire his eyes
vppon the Empreſſe, and her Courtly Ladyes, to ſee if he could
finde the Ladie, that might for beauty, compare with his Altea,
and after a good whiles pauſe, in this order he began to render
his ſpéeches. Moſt puiſſant Emperour, let not my boldneſſe be
admitted to any ill intent, or my rude behauiour, to merite your
gracious diſliking, to whome I not onely vowe, my heart and
hand, but my vnfained ſeruice, to the houre of my death.
                     I am that vnhappy Knight, whoſe miſfortunes can not bee
recounted, for that all my life hitherto, hath bin nothing but miſerie,
and am threatned to ſpende all my life in infinite calamities,
which hath drawne my minde into ſuch a debilitie, that I
can neither honour your Grace as I ſhould, nor behaue my ſelfe
as gladly I would.
                     For firſt, when I had appointed my minde to a quiet eſtate,
which I thought no miſhappe could alter, or any extreamitie
chaunge, but reſolued my ſelfe on an infallible ioye, Aye me, one
fling of Fortune ouerturned all, and the Heauen of my happines
became a hateful Hell. When my youthfull yéeres allured me
to Loue, and fancie made choyce to mine owne good lyking, I eſteemed
my ſelf the happieſt of any man aliue, though my chance
were more hatefull, then my griefe can vnfolde.
                     For ſpight, not onely berefte of my Ladie, but allotted my
poore ſelfe to exreame ill lucke, when I forſooke all Courtly companie,
onely determining to waſte my tune in a ſolitary kinde
of life, which I ſpent in remembrance of her, who moſt regarded
me, and ſtill lauding her Beautie (which I eſtéemed aboue all)
there I remayned (mee thought) a merrie, though indéede a

mournfull time. Yet was not Fortune ſatiſfied, but rubbeth
a freſh gréefe vpon the gréene wound, in ſending a knight to
breake off my ſilent deuotions, who repining that I ſhould extoll
my Lady, aboue his Saint that was vnknowne to me, entred
the fight, which returned to my foile, he bare away the victorie,
and I was vanquiſhed. Thus haue I bene euer indamaged,
euery way diſtreſſed (and may ſay, that no knight can ſay)
I am the onely man for miſhap. And becauſe I will not be reputed
ſo ingratefull to my Lady, that one repulſe ſhall make me
forſake her ſwéete ſhrine, I haue vowed in all Princes courts,
to extoll her beautie, to whom (referring compariſons) I can
eſtéeme none her equall. And theſe Knights who honour their
Ladies, and dare contend with my Altea, either for beautie, or
bountie, I am ready to giue Combate to all, for that I will allow
the ſuperioritie to none. As concerning the order appointed
in this fight, which I would all to obey, and none to break:
thus vnder your gratious leaue, it is requeſted. That thoſe
knights, who eſteeme their quarrell ſo good, as to enter the field
for the beautie of their Ladyes, ſhall bring with them her Portrait,
for whoſe ſake they aduenture, which wil be to their own
honour, and fame of their Ladies. Beſide, if my hap be ſo good as
to gaine the victorie, they muſt enter my tent, to render their
Armour, and their names to be regiſtred in my booke, which I
haue tearmed the Sepulchre of Louers. But if my enemy preuaile,
contrary to my expectation, he ſhall be Lord of the riches
which remaineth in my tent, beſide, my ſelfe as his vaſſaile, to
ſtand at his pleaſure. And this fauour I muſt requeſt of your
Grace, that none ſhall not enter Combat, with the ſword, with
out he be able, to mate me in the Iuſt. This is the cauſe of my
coming, procured through the knight yt gaue me the ouerthrow,
who proteſted himſelfe to be of your Court, for which cauſe, I
deſire that I may here begin my knightly enterpriſe, I will returne
to my tent, to expect the comming, of him that dare firſt
preſume. Thus with taking leaue, he departed to his tent, the
Emperour remaining deſirous to know of whence he was:
which was declared to him by ſome of his Court, that he was

                        Floraman, Sonne to ancient King of Sardignia, at which report,
the Emperour was very ſorry, that he had not entertained
him, according to his vallor and Nobilitie of birth. On the next
day, the knights prepared themſelues before the Tent of the
Knight of Death, and the Emperour, with the Ladies of the
Court, ſtanding ready to behold the Combate, which was firſt
enterpriſed the ye prince Gracian, for the loue of Claritia, daughter
to the king Polendos, being gallantly mounted, all in gylt
Armour, and in his ſhéeld, bearing for his deuiſe, a Damoſell
her face couered with a gréene ſhadow, like vnto a Net. The
gentle Prince looking toward his Lady Claritia, who ſtood in
the window, by the princeſſe Gridonia, vnto himſelf vſed theſe
ſpéeches. Faire Miſtres, I deſire you to continue your woonted
affection toward me, and not to let fal your fauour, for that your
loue doth encourage me to the fight, in aſſurance whereof, I
ſhal cauſe mine enemy to know, that his Altea, is farre incomparable,
to my faire Claritia. With theſe wards, he ran againſt
the knight of death, encoūtring one another with ſuch knightly
behauiour, that both the Emperour, and all the Ladies, tooke
great pleaſure to behold them. At their ſecond pauſe, the knight
of Death, turned him to the picture of Altea, with theſe words.
Can my courage 
                           •
                        aint, remembring you my good Lady? or can
any diſmay me, hauing embraced your fauour? no, the honour
of your name, hath called me to the field, and your beautie is ſo
perfect, that none can cauſe me flye. Then began they a freſh
aſſault, as doubtfull to the one, as to the other: but at length the
knight of Death had vnhorſed the Prince Gracian, to the great
ſorrow of his Loue, and no leſſe to himſefe. Then was he
ledde into the Tent, wher he reſigned his armor, and his name
was written downe, in the Sepulchre of Louers. Then approched
Guerin, brother to the Prince Gracian, who for his Lady
Clariana, aduentured to the Combat, whō the knight of death,
brought likewiſe to the Sepul
                              •
                           hre of Louers. After theſe came
Flauian, Rotandor, and Emerauld the Faire, whoſe ſtrengthes
were not to compare with the knight of Death, and therefore
were all vnarmed, and brought to the Sepulchre of Louers.
                     
                     
                        
The Emperour commanded the Tournament ſhould end for
that day, and ſent for the Knight of Death, to a ſumptuous
banquet, where the Ladies and gentlewomen, made ſuch eſtimation
of him as his ſingular Proweſſe, and hauty courage deſerued.
Which made him in ſighes, to thinke vpon his Altea,
whoſe commendation was euer beſt welcome to him, yet h
                           •
                        eacute;e
diſſembled his gréefe, with a merry countenance, becauſe euery
one ſhould not be priuy to his extreame Paſſions. So after
the banquet was ended, and their Dancing finiſhed, taking
leaue of the Emperour, as alſo the whole company, he departed
to his Tent, and the Ladies to their Chambers.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXIII.
                     How the Knight of Death at his ſecond Io
                           •
                        ſt. conquered the
Prince Polinarda, who aduentured himſelfe in the behalfe
of the faire Polynarda, yet was he vanquiſhed, with diuers
other knights. And how Berolde Prince of Spaine, and
knight of the Sphere, ſuddainly arriued there, and maintained
againſt the knight of Death, the beautie of his Ladie
Oniſtalda.
                     
                        THe knight of Death on the next morning,
came foorch before his Tent, attyped in
blacke Armour, whereon was painted
in diuers places, the reſemblance of the
faire face of Altea, and in his Shéelde was
figured a knight, claſping his armes together
in great heauineſſe, and by him ſtood y•
image of vgly death, and ſtanding ſtedfaſt
                        
                           ••
                        ke
looking and beholding the Picture of Altea, vnto himſelfe
the beganne in this manner. I reioyce (my déere Altea)
that Fortune hath not altogether forgotten mee, but alloweth

my in this place, to reuenge the foyle I ſuſtained at my
ſorrowfull Manſion, in that by my good endeuour all the Ladies
of this Court, ſhall be forced themſelues to confeſſe that I
maintaine the quarrell of perfect beautie, and therefore worthy
to beare the prize away.
                     To breake off theſe imaginations, Polinard the brother of
the Prince Vernar, preſented himſelfe before the tent (when
the Emperor and the Ladies were ſet in their appointed place)
his Armour being blew, and his Shéelde, the chéerefull countenaunce,
of a very beautifull Damoſell, which he bare in the
honor of the Princeſſe Polinarda, vnto whom he vowed great
affection, but baſhfulneſſe did hinder himm from making it
knowne. The regardents of the Jouſt, willed him to beliuer
his Ladies fauour, becauſe it was the order of the fight, that
he ſhould doe ſo: to whom he anſwered. The fauour of my
Lady, which as yet I haue found very ſlender, ſhall be brought
on this knight, whom I haue hope to conquer, and I will deliuer
him that ſmall fauour I haue, to her Fame, and his eternall
diſhonour. The knight of Death replying: Many a good
Knight had thought ſo, and yet hath béene deceiued, and although
you bragge you ſo, you may hap to haue as hard a bargaine.
                     So without mor words, they encountred verie fiercely, but
Polynard was ouerthrown, with his arme gréeuouſly broken,
with incenſed him with ſuch anger, that he would haue bin at
his enemie againe, but the knight of Death, gaue him this perſwaſion.
Syr, you haue done enough for this time, when your
arme is in eſtate, you ſhall haue a freſh combate. Theſe ſpéeches
ſo vexed Polynard, that he became ſo troubleſome to them
both in talke and behauiour, that he would neither yéelde his
Armour, nor obey the orders that were appointed in the field,
which cauſed the Emperor to giue him a great check, wherupon
he departed, giuing great offence to the knight of Death, in denying
that which was his right and tytle to haue.
                     Then dealt he with fiue knights more, and vanquiſhed them
all, ſending them into his Tent, to the Sepulchre of Louers, by
which time it drew toward Dinner, and the Emperour with

the Ladies withdrew themſelues, and euery one departed, till
they had refreſhed them, as nature required. When dinner
was endes, the Emperour went to the ſtent to ſée the knight
of Death, to whom he gaue no ſmall commendations for the
worthy behauior he had ſéene in him. So continuing that after
noone in their ſport, to the foyle of many a good knight, among
whom was Truſiande, and Bellizart, that bare company with
other knights to the Sepulchre of Louers.
                     
                     And when they were ready to leaue of their paſtime, there
ſuddainly came ryding a very ſéemely knight, whoſe Armour
was beſet with gréeue Spheres, bearing in his Shéelde likewiſe
a Sphere of the ſame collour, he perceiuing the Emperor
with the company of ſo many braue Ladies, came prancing,
and ſhewing many trickes with his horſe, before the knight of
Death. At laſt he drew forth a little table, with a circle of gold
round about it, wherein was liue Pictured the faire face of Oniſtalda,
Daughter to the Duke of Drapos of Normandie, &
looking ſtedfaſtly vpon it, began thus to vſe his tal
                           •
                        ke. Swéet
Miſtreſſe, I haue enterpriſed this iourney, vnder the ſoueraign
title of your
                           •
                        , ſinguler beautie, not doubting but to vanquiſh
him, who as yet hath borne the prize from al. Therefore, let not
the fauour, which was my accuſtomed reward, he denyed me at
this time, for that your beautie maketh me enter the field,
which I will maintaine to my deſire, or ſuſtaine thd death. So
deliuering the table to the Regardants, who were appointed
to receiue it, they ſet the Spurres to the horſes, and met with
ſuch puiſſance together, that they were both throwne to the
earth, when drawing their Swords, they charged one another
ſo brauely, that this combate bare the commendation, aboue
all that had béene ſéene at that Tournament.
                     Great deſire had the Emperour, to know the knight of the
Speere, but their fierce encountring, would not ſuffer any anſwer
to be made. Retiring a little to take breath, the knight
of Death beheld his Armour, all flaſht and broken, on the faire
face of Altea, which cauſed him to fall into theſe complaints.
                     Ah my ſwéete Altea, how can I deſire your fauour, or make
account to enioy your loue, ſuffering your blameleſſe face to

be thus offended? in whoſe remembraunce I haue, and do enioy
the honour of all good Fortune.
                     On the other ſide, the Knight of the Shpere complayned to
his Lady, ſaying: How happy might I eſtéeme my ſelf, my (good
Lady) if for the price of my wounds, I might enforce my enemie
to ſay, you are the onely Goddeſſe of beauty, which either I
will do, or die, ere I depart out of the field. But if you with
draw your fauour, then ſhall mine enemie be conqueror, and I
conſtrained to liue in eternall detriment of my life. By this
time it waxed very darke, & becauſe they would not giue ouer,
the Emperour cauſed Torches to be lighted, which gaue great
cauſe of courage to them both, to ſée the good will of the Emperour,
and would not depart the field till one were conquerour.
At laſt ioyning themſelues together, through extreame faintneſſe
and wearineſſe, they fel both to the ground, but the knight
of the Sphere was vnderneath, the Ragardaunts giuing the
victorie to the knight of Death. Then leading the knight into
the Tent, where he rendred his Armour, and his name to the
Sepulchre of Louers, they knew him to be Berolde the prince
of Spaine, which when the Emperour heard, he ſent for him into
his Pallace, where he was carefully tended, vntill his health
was perfectly reſtored, yet he was maruellouſly offended with
himſelfe, that his Lady paſt without the honour of the day.
                     The knight of Death could beare no Armour a great while
after, for that he had found the puiſſance of the Prince Berolde,
of no leſſe force, then worthy commendations. But when
he had gained hs good eſtate of helth, he ſtil maintained his quarell,
againſt many ſtrangue knights, of whom by his good Fortune,
he had alwaies the victorie, repleniſhing his Sepulchre of
Louers, to his owne hearts content. And the Emperor Palmerin
gaue him ſuch honour, in the time he endured his aduentures,
that he was double encoured, to maintaine the beauty
of his Lady Altea.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXIIII.
                     How the Knight of Fortune, hauing left Pompides, chanced
to meete with the Green Knight, that accompanied the
Knight of the Sauage man, in the Turnament at Conſtantinople,
who was the ſonne of Sir Pridos, named Don Roſian,
De la Bronde, in whoſe company the Knight of the
Sauage man, was nouriſhed in the Court of England, who
trying their ſtrengths together, Don Roſiart was vanquiſhed.
                     
                        EEduring the Tournament of the Knight
of Death, many Noble Princes and valiant
Knights, left off the the ſtrayed Princes,
and came to Conſtantinople, to defend
the beautie of their Ladies. Which cauſed
the Knight of Death, hauing ſuch proſperous
Fortune, to leaue his blacke
Armour, the Image of his heauineſſe,
and fought in a gorgious new Armour, mingled with
colours of red and white, all beſet with Pellicans of gold, euery
one holding in their billes, the tormented heart of a Louer. His
Shielde alſo was anſwerable thereto, bearing in the middeſt a
golden Pellican, vpon a ground of Sinople, where, to his
braue victories, wee will leaue Knight of Death, to declare
what happened the Knight of Fortune, when hee had left
Pompides.
                     
                     After that to his owne renown, and honour of many Princes
Courtes, hee had ſuccoured the diſtreſſe of ſundry defamed
Ladies, and borne away the prize from many famous Knights,
ſuddenly comming foorth of a Forreſt in Greece, muſing vpon
the great vngentleneſſe of his Lady Polinarda, hee mette a
Knight, mounted on a gay Courſer, and attired in gréene Armour,

which was all hackt and hewen, and his Shield ſore polluted,
whom he remembred to be the knight that came with the
knight of th Sauadge man to Conſtantinop. which cauſed him
in gentle māner to offer him Salutations, whervpon the gréen
Knight put foorth this demaund. Sir, I h
                           •
                        pe by your means to
he reſolued in the occaſion which maketh mee trauell in all places,
and ſtaye in no place. The Knight of Fortune ſtayed him
with theſe words. The heauy thoughts which doo often ouercharge
me, will hardly ſuffer me to vſe any talke with you. Why
Syr (quoth the gréene Knight my requeſt is ſo reaſonable, as it
néed not offend you to make me anſwer. I would gladly know,
if in your trauell, you chaunced to méete with a Knight, in ſuch
Armor as y
                           •
                         ſée me weare, carrying for his Deuiſe in his ſhield,
as Sauagde man, leading two Lyons, in a field of ſiluer. I would
my ſelfe (anſwered the Knight of Fortune) gladly knowe where
he is, for that my trauell, is partly to ſéeke him, but I feare me,
we ſhall both miſſe of that wee loke for.
                     Syr (quoth the gréene Knight) for what cauſe do you labour
your ſelfe in his ſearch? If he hath done any thing that doth diſpleaſe
you, behold him here, that will anſwere in his cauſe.
                     The Knight of Fortune hearing theſe words, preſently returned
him this anſwere. If I ſhould report (Syr) that eyther hee,
or any other Knight hath iniuryes m
                           ••
                        , I ſhould miſreports of
them, and greatly reproach my ſelfe. For the griefe which I ſuſtaine,
is cauſed through a Damoſell, to whom I neuer gaue deſe
                           •
                        t,
or know the cauſe, why ſhe ſhould offer mee ſuch great vngentleneſſe:
and neyther is the Knight you ſéeke, 
                           〈◊〉
                         to my
griefes, and he is yet vnborne, that ſhall compell me to ſhewe it:
wherefore, you procéede in your enterpriſe, and let me continue
in bemoning my miſfortune. Syr (ſaid the gréen knight)
by how much you are deſirous I ſhould depart, by ſo much the
more I am determined to tarry, & will c
                           •
                        mpell you to ſhew why
you ſéeke the knight of the Sauadge man, or force you to abyde
the perill, which by denyall you may finde. Wherevpon, he preſently
ran againſt the Knight of Fortune, 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        Siluian could poſſible
deliuer him his Spear
                           •
                        , which made him glad to truſt to
his Swoorde, till at laſtly (after a 
                           〈◊〉
                         whiles Fight) the gréene

Knight came with ſuch force, that his Horſe ranne his noſe againſt
the ground, and ouerthrew his Maſter, which the knight
of Fortune ſéeing, alighted, and then dealte with him at his
pleaſure, vntill ſuch time as the Gréen
                           ••
                        knight waxed very
féeble, and the Knight of Fortune perceyuing it, did vſe very
much merrie to him, but the Gréene knight hauing not the good
minde to reſpect it, came againſt him couragiouſly, with theſe
wordes.
                     What Syr Knight, beginne you to fainte? nay, defend your
ſelfe hardly, for ſince you would not eſtéem my gentlenes, when
it was proffered, you ſhall féele the recompence that belongeth
to ſelfe
                           •
                        will. Then ioyned they agaiue, till at laſt the knight of
Fortune reached him ſuch a ſound ſtroake, that he brought him
on both his knées, at which aduantage, he offered the motion to
haue ſlaine him: but the gréeue knight conſidering his eſtate, beganne
in this manner to vſe his intreatie. Syr Knight, the
puiſſance I did eſtéeme in my ſelfe, in thinking at no time to
finde my péere, made mee vſe this preſumption to you, which I
buye now with too deare a price. My life ſtandeth at your courteſie,
to whome I know not well how to frame intreatie, for
that my raſh attempt, doth rather craue a iuſt reward, then any
fauour to be ſhowne. Yet thus much, on your milde nature
I perſwade my ſelfe, that you rather eſtéeme the conqueſt, then
my death, and will ſuffiſe your ſelfe with the one, though I am
vnworthie to deſerue the other.
                     Syr (quoth the Knight of Fortune,) I account of my victorie▪
much more then thy Death, and becauſe thou ſhalt knowe,
that Patience doth alway conquere my Anger, I giue thée thy
life vppon this condition, that thou make knowne to mée the
Knight of the Sauadge man: as alſo of whence, and what thou
art, and why thou doeſt ſo labour to ſéeke him? Truſt me Syr
(anſwered the Gréene knight) as concerning the knight of the
Sauadge-man, his name, nor of whence he commeth, is known
vnto me: Neuertheleſſe, if I did knowe it, and hee had deſired
me to kéepe it ſecrete, you ſhould haue my life, before I would
diſcouer him. As for my ſelfe, I am called Don Roſian, de la
Bronde, ſonne to ſir Pridos, the Duke of Galles and Cornwall,
                        
and Couzin to Fredericke, the famous King of England. This
is all that I can or will declare, which if it will not ſuffiſe you,
on Gods name take that I would hardly ſpare.
                     The Knight of Fortune, ſatiſfied with this anſwer, mounted
on Horſeback, giuing him this farewell. It had béene much
better ſir knight, to haue vſed ſuch faire language as I gaue you
then to cauſe both of vs to hazard our liues, vpon a quarrel that
hath no foundation, which to preuent againſt another time, let
this I wiſh you ſerue for a warning. And ſo Siluian and he departed
to a Caſtle, where, by a Lady named Rianda, he was cured
of ſuch wounds as he had receiued: leauing Don Roſiran
to ride whither it pleaſed him.
                     But concerning why hee departed from the Knight of the
Sauage ma
                              •
                           , the Hiſtory declareth, that it chanced in this order.
After they were come two dayes iourney from Conſtantinople,
it fortuned they met a young Gentleman, ryding a great
pace, and vſing a heauy clamor all the way as he rode, to whom
they aduanced themſelues, deſirous to knowe the cauſe of his
complaints. To whome the Gentleman declared, that thrée
knights had taken a Lady from him, deſiring greatly to abuſe
her honour: wherefore he requeſted them, as they tendered the
eſtate of Ladies, ſo they would helpe to defend her from iniury.
                     This heauy tale, vrged them to ride with the Gentleman,
till by Fortune they met with the Damoſel, in the Forreſt of
the Cleare Fountaine, that brought the Shield from the Sage
Aliart, to deliuer to the yong Prince Palmerin, whō the knight
of the Sauage man was deſirous to know. When Don Roſian
ſaw, how he had taken the Shield from her, & ſent her with
the anſwere you haue heard before, hée deſired that hée might
accompany the Gentleman, to reléeue the diſtreſſed eſtate of
the Lady, promiſing to returne to what place hée would appoint.
                     After leaue obtained, he departed with the Gentleman, and
had ſuch good Fortune, that he ſlew two of the Knights in combat,
and compelled the third to flight, himſelfe being before hurt,
and his Armour bruiſed, as you haue heard, when he met with
the Knight of Fortune.
                     
                     
                        
But becauſe you ſhall be certified why he was called De la
Bronde, you ſhall heare what in the Engliſh Ch
                           •
                        onicles is affirmed
for this matter. King Marke had by his Quéene Yſeul,
a daughter named Yſeul, who was thought by ſome, to be the
daughter of Triſtam: ſhe being ioyned in marriage with the
Duke of Galles ha
                           •
                         a ſonne by him, named Blaſanon de la
Bronde, Duke of Galles and Cornewall, who eſpowſed Marlott
                              •
                           ,
daughter to the king Charlian of Ireland, who hauing a
ſonne by her, at her requeſt, named him Marlo
                              •
                           , De la Bronde.
And in this order it did conti
                           •
                        e, to the Duke of Galles: who
becauſe he would not haue his houſe grow into obliuion, named
the ſonne of ſir Prid
                              •
                           s and Attaida, Don Roſiran, De la
Bronde. Who after he ha
                           •
                         thus bene vanquiſhed by the knight
of Fortune, was conducted by his Eſquire to a Monaſterie,
where he remained till his wounds were he
                           •
                        led.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXV.
                     How the knight of Fortune ſtayed ſo long in the Caſtle of
Rianda, that he was aduertiſed by a Damoſell named Lucenda,
who was newly come from the Emperours Court,
the knight of death, in defence of his faire Altea, had born
away the prize from all Ladies. And how vpon this report
he rode to Conſtantinople, accompanyed with Siluian, and
there in the honor of Polinarda, he vanquiſhed the knight
of death, who reſigned his Tent to the noble knight of
Fortune.
                     
                        COncerning the knight of Fortune, who remained
at the cure of his woundes, in the
Caſtle of Rianda, who ſhal vnderſtand, that
a Damoſell, who was attendant in the
Emperours Court, and Couzin to this
Ladie Rianda, deſired leaue to came and

viſite her Aunt, in the time that the Knight of Death, endured
his Tournament for the faire Altea. This Damoſell being named
Lucenea, arriuing at her Aunts Caſtell, was preſently
knowne by the knight of Fortune, becauſe he had béene daily
in her companie in the Emperours Court, which vrged him
thus to commune with her. Miſtreſſe Lucenda, it is maruell
to ſée you ſo farre from the place, where I wiſh my ſelfe euer,
both for the honour of the perſons, as alſo their happineſſe of
pleaſure.
                     
                        Lucenda right glad to ſee the Prince Palmerin, gaue him her
anſwere as thus. Truſt mee ſir, if you would follow my
counſell, not that I ſpeake by way of commaund, but rather on
earneſt deſire to intreate you, I would wiſh you to haſten
your ſelfe to them, and well to diſcharge you of the Emperours
anger, as alſo to ſatiſfie thoſe, that receiued no ſmall offence at
your ſuddaine departure. The Emperour and his Knightes
thinke more then I will ſpeake, and the Ladies iudge worſe of
you then I can ſay, in that the one imputeth it to your ſmall
friendſhip, and the other ſuppoſe, you owe them ſmall fauour.
But if you are deſirous to wipe out this blemiſh, and to make
apparance of your perfect bountie, now is it time to winne
you the Spurres, or to gaine you the report of a contin
                           •
                        all
ſhame: and now ſhall they know, if your affection be ſuch, as
preferreth their Fame, before your owne eaſe. The Knight of
Death, who came thither lately, and hath ſet vp his Tents, in
the honour of his Ladie, hath eclipſed the beautie of our Courtlie
Ladies, to the reproch of many Knights, and glory of his
faire Altea. If now there remaine in you, either the Nobilitie
of Knighthood, or vnſpotted loue you haue aduouched to your
Saint, let him kn
                           •
                        w there is one farre aboue Altea, that both
ſhall and muſt beare away the title of beautie: ſo ſhall you expreſſe
an inuincible minde, and al Ladies triumph in ſo gallant
a Champion.
                     Theſe newes ſet the knight of Fortune in a chafe, for that he
knew he had conquered him once alreadie, which made him
leaue Lucinda, and take himſelf to his Chamber, where a thouſand
heauie thoughts doe on ſudden ouercharge him.
                     
                        
Firſt, what might be thought of his long abſence from the
Court, then, how hee might incurre the diſpleaſure of his faire
Polinarda, whoſe commandement did binde him out of her
ſight, yet muſt come in her ſight, if he went to auenge her quarrell.
                     But when he conſidered euery thing as he ought, comparing
likewiſe the bold atempt of the knight of Death, he determined
to thruſt himſelfe in the face of Fortune, and either to finiſh
his tormented life, or to make known the truth of his inuiolate
loue. In the morning, Siluian armed him in a verie faire armour,
all beſet with golden Lyons, and taking his leaue of
Ricada and Lucinda, they rode both of them toward Conſtantinople,
the Knight of Fortune all the way, being very penſiue
and ſad, whom Siluian would often cheere in this maner. Good
ſir, conſider with your ſelfe, if you forſake your Lady in ſuch
great extremitie, how can you thinke your ſelfe worthy
                           •
                        at any
time to haue her fauour? Imagine with your ſelfe, the honor
you ſhall gaine in this fight, with the noble report, both of your
friends and foes: thinke againe the ſhame that may attaint
your Knighthood, if you leaue off this enterpriſe, which is the
onely type of renowne. O withdraw theſe ſad conceits, and
thinke if you were now in the field, how Polinarda would
triumph, to beare the name of all eſtimation, and the Knight of
Death die with ſorrow, to ſee his good Fortune daſht in the
preſence of ſuch a royall aſſembly. Trifle not the time therfore,
with any fond delay, becauſe danger may ariſe by lingring, and
dolor by ouermuch loytering. Theſe words of Siluian, were
greatly eſteemed by the knight of Fortune, who made ſuch
haſte, that at laſt he arriued at Conſtantinople, where paſſing
by the Pallace, & the Chamber of his Lady Polinarda, he fel into
a multitude of amorous complaints, but Siluian left him not
with his wonted perſwaſion. At laſt he came before the tent of
the Knight of Death, when he had euen then conquered a Grecian
Knight, named Titubant, who aduentured for the beautie
of Cardigna, Daughter to the Giant Fiottan, who was ſent
preſently to the Sepulchre of Louers. While they were vnarming
Titubant, the Knight of Fortune came prauncing into the

Liſtes▪ vppon a very faire Courſer that Rianda had giuen him,
who being ſéene of the Emperour, and all the Ladyes, had the
generall verdict, to be the ſéemelyeſt Knight that entered there
ſince the Tournament began.
                     The Knight of Death was ſomewhat offended, to ſée euery
one ſuch make eſtimation of this Knight, againſt whom his
malice ſo increaſed, that he auouched to worke him the greateſt
iniurie he could. It chaunced the knight of Fortune, to lift his
eyes to the Windowes, where in the Empreſſe Chamber, hee
perceyued his faire Polynarda, whoſe preſence made him (as it
were) cleane beſide himſelfe: but Syluian (being diſguiſed that
none ſhould know him) rounded him in the eare, ſaying. Syr,
you are now in place where you muſt vſe your ſtrength, and not
your ſtudie: be mindfull of your Ladie, but not to the detriment
of your owne life. Theſe wordes awaked him, when hee thus
talked to to himſelfe. My déere Miſtreſſe, I would thinke my
ſelfe moſt happie, if you would remember mee in courteſie, not
that I feare mine enimie, but that it would giue me the greater
courage to maintaine your Beautie.
                     Theſe words thus ended, the Regardaunts demaunded of
him the Picture of his Ladie, as it was the cuſtome: to which
he thus anſwered. I am loath to ſhew my Ladies fauour, for
that it is as daintie in ſight, as it is dangerous for me to ſhowe.
Neuertheleſſe, if I be vanguiſhed, I will not bee hée that ſhall
breake your Order, but will ſhewe you that I eſtéeme aboue all
Riches. This anſwere was accepted, and at the ſounding of
the Trumpets, they encountred one another couragiouſly, with
ſuch laudable behauiour in fight, as was greatly commended of
euery one.
                     At length, the Knight of Fortune threw his enemie againſt
the ground, with ſuch violence, that euery one thought he had
béene ſlayne downe right, and ſ
                           •
                        epping to him, hee would haue
ſmitten off his head, but the Emperour commaunded the contrarie,
graunting to him the Conqueſt, with the Tentes of the
knight of Death, and the picture of Altea, to vſe at his pleaſure.
                     Then came the Emperour and the Ladyes downe, to ſee the
knight that da
                           •
                         wonne this honour, 
                           •
                        ut hee perceyuing them,

comming, and fearing to be knowne called Syluian to him, and
ſlipt away among the Throng ſecretly, which highly diſpleaſed
the Emperour, till hee vnderſtood, that he would not haue himſelfe
knowne. Then the Knights triumphed, the Ladies reioyced,
(though ignorant of the Lady, for whom the Knight of Fortune
aduentured) and ſo they accompanied the Emperor ioyfully
to his Pallace, the knight of Death being brought after them,
very ſore wounded, and lead by his Eſquyres. Thus may you
ſée fayre Ladies, the vncertainty of Fortune, who raiſeth when
ſhe liſt, and throweth downe when ſhe liſt: ſo that it is better
to kéepe at her foote▪ in a quiet eſtate, then preſume to her head,
and gaine ſo ſore a fall.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXVI.
                     ¶Howe the Emperour in honour of the good lucke that had
chaunced, ordained that night a braue Dauncing, wherein
he greatly gratified the Ladies. And how on the next morning,
he went accompanied with the Empreſſe, and all the
Ladies, to the Tent of the Knight of Death: where the Ladies
tooke the courage, in the behalfe of their Knightes, to
ranſacke and ſpoyle the Sepulchre of Louers.
                     
                        AFter that the Emperour had ſéen this braue
Conqueſt, he deſired the Ladies that Night,
to ende the Triumph, with all Courtly paſtimes,
both of Maſking and of Dauncing,
which requeſt all generally gaue conſent vnto,
except the Princeſſe Bazilia, who ſtill
mourned for the abſence of her Lord Vernar.
When the knights that had bin vanquiſhed
by the Knight of Death, heard of this generall ioy, they to make
theyr Ladyes amendes, for the repulſe they had ſuſtayned, came

into the great Hall, where Courting their Ladies, they daunced
and paſſed the Night▪ with honeſt and decent talke, in their delightfull
exerciſe. The Princeſſe Polinarda, as by the mutuall
conſent of the Ladies, ſhe bare the ſuperioritie of beautie from
Altea, ſo had ſhe commendation, for her ſtately behauiour in the
Daunce, which graced her perſon maruellouſly, and made the
more liuely apparaunce of her beautie.
                     On the morrow, the Emperor was deſirous to ſée the▪ Tent
of the Knight of Death, wherefore hee gaue commaundement
that his Dinner ſhould be there prouided: and ſo walking thither
with the Empreſſe Gridonia, the faire Polinarda, King
Friſo
                              •
                           , and Florendos, with diuers of his Knights and Ladies.
where they were brauely and royallie feaſted. When Dinner
was ended, they went to beholde the whole Tent: where, at the
firſt entrance, was placed the Statue of the faire Altea, whoſe
beautie made excuſe for all the Knights, in that they were conquered
by one, whoſe fayre and ſplendaunt hewe, was eſtéemed
excellent, and that the knight of Death, had good occaſion to take
it heauily: for her, whoſe Beauty was comparable to any, the
Princeſſe Polynarda excepted. Then went they to ſée the Sepulchre
of Louers, where the Ladies beheld the names of their
Knights, with their Armour and Deuiſes they had made, in the
behalfe of their fauors, a thing which diſpleaſed ſome of the Ladyes,
in that they ſhould be thought Priſoners to the knight of
Death, which moued the faire Oniſtalda, ſeeing the baſhfulneſſe
of the Prince Berolde here Seruant, to begin thus. Faire Syſters,
it ſéemeth we are beholding vnto none, but onely the hardie
Knight, who hath done vs this honour, to defend that by his
valour, which elſe had bene depriued from vs for euer. And becauſe
we will no longer be ſubiect in this Priſon of our Loue, I
will take the hardineſſe vpon mee, to ſet firſt hand to the ſpoyling
of this Sepulchre. Wherewith ſhee tooke vp the Table,
wherein was the Image of her own beauty, which the Prince
Berolde preſently caught from her, and hid it vnder his Gowne.
Then euery Lady began in ſuch order, that they had quickly defaced
y• 
                        Sepulchre of Louers, vſing ſuch courage in their dealings,
as the Amazonians, when they came to the ayde, of the ſtately

Towne of Troye, where the Greekes were no more earneſt in
their deſire, then theſe Ladyes were in the deſtroying the Sepulchre
of Louers.
                     
                     The Emperour vpon this ſight, was very ſorie that he could
not gayne the knowledge of the knight, nor for whoſe ſake this
honour was done, therefore he knew not to which Ladie to impute
it, yet hee ſomewhat perſwaded him ſelfe, that in
                           •
                        time he
ſhould knowe him: partly coniecturing that it was the Noble
young Palmerin, which cauſed him to vſe comfortable ſpéeches
to the knights, that had to their great heauineſſe, bene captiues
in the Sepulchre of Louers.
                     
                     Then walking vnto his Pallace, the Empreſſe cauſed the Image
of Altea to be taken downe, and brought into her Chamber,
where ſhe placed it according as her rare perfections did deſerue,
which was taken in very yll part by all the Ladyes, that
their Beauty ſhould vs diſgraced by a ſtraunge Daine, and ſhée
ſo highly eſtéemed in the Empreſſe fauour.
                     The Knight of Fortune made great haſte, doubting leaſt he
ſhould be ſent for backe, and ſo haue diſcouered what hee was:
for that if the Emperor ſent, he durſt not diſobey his will, which
the better to preuent, he rode till he reſolued himſelfe he was far
enough from recalling. But as he was greatly contented with
his honourable Conqueſt, ſo was hée heauily oppreſſed, in thinking
on his Lady, whoſe angry countenance made a more déepe
wound into his heart, then the weapon of his Enemy had power
to enter. But Syluian, who was Chyrurgian to his Maiſters
Paſſions, vſed his good perſwaſions, which was of more
force with the Prince, then any other that might offer to
talke to him. For Nature willed him to accept
his intreaty, when neyther courage
nor crueltie in any other,
might compell
him.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXVII.
                     How the knight of the Sauage man, leauing Blandidon in
the Triſtfull Valley, in the Realme of Lacedemonia, tooke
ſhipping to trie the aduenture of great Brittain, but chancing
to go on land in Ireland, he came to the caſtle of the
Giant Calfurnien, who kept three Ladies priſoners in his
Caſtle. And how the knight of the Sauage man encountred
Calfurnian, and ſlew him.
                     
                        HEre haue I thought good to remember the
knight of the Sauage man, who leauing
Blandidon in the Triſtfull Valley, came to
the cittie of Lambel, where he imbarked
himſelfe toward the Forreſt of great Brittaine,
minding to viſite King Fredericke,
and the Princeſſe Flerida, and then to ſéek
the Caſtle of Dramuſiande, which was greatly talked on, for
the loſſe of the knights. And now had Dramuſiande ſet the Eſquires
of the knights at libertie, but carryed them forth in ſuch
pollitique manner, that they could neither returne againe to the
Caſtle, nor giue any report in what place it ſtood.
                     The knight of the Sauage man had ſuch a proſperous winde,
that at laſt they had ſight of the coaſt of England, but on a ſudden,
aroſe ſuch a tempeſt, as carryed them perforce vpon the
coaſt of Ireland, taking hauen at the mount of Saint Cyprian▪
                        
becauſe they could not reach the port of Moricque. The knight
of the Sauage man had a great deſire to land: but the maiſter
perſwaded him to the contrary, with theſe words. I deſire you
Sir, to take good reſpect in what you enterpriſe, for well you
know, vnhappineſſe dwelleth next doore to hardines, and danger
is the neighbour to earneſt deſire: therefore in all your actions,
vſe a good foreſight, ſo may you the better preuent any

For on yonder Mountaine, dwelleth a Giant of no leſſe vglyneſſe
of perſon, then renowned in his puiſſance, hee hath to
name Calfurnien, whoſe crueltie is ſuch, that if any chance into
his hands, it is their preſent death. Wherefore, good Sir,
be ruled by your friend, who would be loath you ſhould fall into
ſo great folly. Syr (quoth the Knight of the Sauage man)
I giue you as great thankes, as I perceiue your counſell tendeth
to my welfare: But it he be ſo cruell as you ſpeake of, it
were good to teach him ſome courteſie, if he can conceiue none
of himſelfe. And ſo much truſt do I repoſe in Fortune, that
ſhee will ſuffer me to deale with him, albeit not to conquer him
which if it returne the loſſe of my life, I eſtéeme it the leſſe, in
ſo much as he ſhall perceiue courage and courteſie, in one that
would wiſh as much in himſelfe.
                     The maiſter ſeeing no perſwaſion might auaile, ſent him
with his Eſquire Artifer on land in the little Cocke, committing
him to the reward of all good Fortune. The knight of the
Sauage man, accompanyed with his Eſquire, trauelled vp the
Mountaine, which was very thicke beſet with Trées, till at
laſt he came to a little Pauilion, before which lay a great many
Trunchions of Speares and broken Armour, belonging to
ſuch knights, as were there foyled, in ſeeking the Caſtle.
Walking on farder in a litlle path, which he ſaw traced with
very freſh blood, he was lead by the droppes thereof, to the
ſight of the Caſtle gate, which was placed on ſuch an vnmeaſurable
height, that he was faine to alight, and walk vpon foot,
his armour being very troubleſome vnto him, and walking
thorow ſuch a narrow paſſage, that hee was very wearie.
When he had attained the top of the hill, hee ſaw the Giant,
being ſuch a man, as the Maſter of the Ship reported, before
him ſtoode ſeuen well appointed men at Armes, holding fowre
knights on their knées before the Giant. Thrée Ladies looking
foorth at the Caſtle window, which the Gianteſſe kept there (as
Priſoners perforce) ſéeing the Knight of the Sauage man, and
ſorrowing any good knight, ſhould come to ſuch a Tyrant, they
all began a grieuous and ſorrowfull lamentation. The Giant
eſpying the knight of the Sauage man, ſent thrée of his knights

to take him, and bring him to his preſence, who ſtood leaning
vpon his Sword, for that he was very wearie with comming
vp the high hill: then they came to him, commaunding him
to yéeld, or elſe they would ſlay him. The knight of the Sauage
man, hearing their rough wordes, ſtoode not waiting for nice
tearmes, but made this anſwere. I rather chuſe to abide the
danger, in denying your command, then to truſt to your courteſie,
in yéelding my ſelfe, for as I little eſtéeme your friendſhip,
ſo do
                           •
                         I make leſſe account of your furie. With theſe wordes
he ſaluted one of them ſo friendly vpon the head, that hee fell
downe dead at his foot
                           •
                        : as for the other twaine, he dealt with
them ſo reaſonably, that hee paid them their debt in the ſame
coine.
                     Then aduancing himſelfe to the Caſtell gate, Calfurnien
who had knowledge of this miſhap, came foorth very ſtronglie
armed with a mightie ſhield, and a great Mace of Iron, hauing
the head very thicke beſet with Azure nailes, that no ſhield nor
armour, but it would enter into: and in this manner he ſpake
to the Knight of the Sauage man. Alas, poore knight, Fortune
was not ouermuch thy friend, when ſhe conducted thee hither,
but rather thought her ſelfe much cumbred with thée, and that
I ſhould ſacrifice thée to her for mine owne honour. The abuſe
thou haſt offered me, in 
                           •
                        laying my knights, hath prepared a rod
ſo ſharpe for thée, as thou wilt wiſh thy boldneſſe had béen better
gouerned. The courteous knight, who had neuer ſéene any
Giant before, and maruelling at his mightie ſtature, would
not vſe any perſwaſion to himſelfe of proſperous ſucceſſe, but
in this manner gaue him his anſwere.
                     Me thinks ſir, it were more commendation for you, and
greater honour euery way, to diſburden your heart of cruell attempts,
and embrace a courteous and ciuill kinde of life. For
as God hath made you more mighty then other men, ſo to thoſe
that are your inferiours, you ſhould vſe a gentle demeanour,
which would better agrée with Knighthood, then with ſauage
qualities. Calfurnien was in ſuch a rage at theſe wordes, that
he preſently returned him this anſwere. I would there were
before me, tenne of the ſtrongeſt Knightes on the earth, that I

might reuenge theſe taunting wordes on them, becauſe thy
death can not ſatiſfie my furie, and then ſhouldeſt thou perceiue
what it were to me with impatience. God Syr (quoth
the knight of the Sauage man) diſdaine not weake men, though
your owne ſtrength be monſtrous: but if it ſhall like you, to
Combate in the Court within your Caſtell, I may hap to ſaue
mine Knights a labour, becauſe a tenth is here, who though hee
be not ſo big as ten, will doe as much one. Then Calfurnien
willed the Knight of the Sauage man, to goe with him into the
Caſtell, and at length they came into a faire Court, where ſtood
a faire Fountaine, the water iſſuing foorth of the mouthes of
two Dwarffes, that were artificially made in Chriſtall vpon
it, and all about it, was very faire Iaſper pillers, the court hauing
ſuch goodly lodgings and Chambers, that he greatly pitied

                           •
                        o faire a place ſhould be kept by ſuch a cruell perſon, For as the
Hiſtorie maketh mention, this goodly Caſtell was built by
the King of Ireland, wherein he would often recreate himſelfe,
when he rode on hunting: but the father of this Giant, named
Rauiaſſor, tooke it from the King perforce, and liued therein,
with all his progenie.
                     
                        Calfurnien and the Knight of the Sauage man, being readie
appointed, charged one another with ſuch puiſſant ſtrokes,
that the victorie ſtood very doubtfull, eſpecially in the knight
of the Sauage man, who had his Shield all broken in péeces
by Calfurnien his Mace of Iron, beſide, the ſore blowes he had
vpon his body, put him in great danger of his life. Yet did he
ſo well apply himſelfe to Calfurnien, that he had mangled his
bodie, armes and legs, in diuerſe places, which mooued him to
ſuch anger, that he threw downe his Shield, taking his Mace
in both handes, intending the preſent death of the hardie
knight. But he eſcaping the ſtroke, and taking vp his Shield,
which was ſomewhat too heauy for him: held him play, till he
was glad to draw his Fauchion, wherwith he ſent ſuch a blow
vpon his owne Shield, that he could not recouer his Fauchion
out againe, which the Knight of the Sauage man, perceiuing,
ſtr
                           •
                        gke his hſeles vpwarde, ſo that he got him vpon his backe,
where, with his ſword that was halfe broken off, hee leſt him

not while he found any life in him. Then ſate he downe to reſt
himſelfe, being ſore wounded. and very faint with the loſſe of
much blood, which made him to lie ſtil a good while, ere he could
mooue himſelfe any way.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXVIII.
                     How the three Ladies that were Priſoners in the Caſtle, healed
the wounds the Knight of the Sauadge man, had receiued
by the Giant Calfurnien. And how when hee was in
perfect good health, he gaue the Caſtle to Orianda, one of
the ſiſters (and all three, the Daughters of the Marqueſſe
Beltamor) and ſo he departed towards England.
                     
                        WHen the three Ladies that were in the Caſtle,
perceiued the Giant Calfurnian to be
ſlaine, and the noble Knight of the Sauage
man, to lie in ſuch danger of his life, they
came all ſpeedily vnto him, and taking off
his Armour, were very carefull to ſtench
his bleeding of his wounds. Orianda,
the eldeſt of the Siſters, who had greater
experience in Medicine then the other twaine, and was of a
more ſharpe and ingenious capacitie, would not ſuffer her other
two Siſters to meddle in any thing, but tooke the whole
charge vnto her, to prouide him ſuch néedefull things as were
requiſite, and to ſhewe her ſelfe thankefull, for his well imployed
paines. At laſt, Artiſer his Eſquire came vp with his Maiſters
Horſe, and ſeeing the great danger he was in, became very
penſiue and full of griefe, and while the Ladies carried his
Lord into a very faire Chamber, he barred faſt the gates, ſo that

                           •
                        one might enter in, which they ſomewhat ſtood in feare of, becauſe
the Giant was ſlaine, that any ſhould come to his reſkew

There was the knight of the Sauage man kept, vntill ſuch
time as he had attained to more ſtrength, who when hee had
gotten a little health, would faine haue béene gone, but the ladies
reſtrained him to the contrary, declaring to him, the danger
that might happen vnto him, if ſo ſoone he would loade his
body with his armour, that was brought very low, and rather
required more ſtrength. Their great courteſie liked him ſo wel
that he was loath to do any thing they ſhould miſ
                           •
                        ike of, wherfore

                           ••
                        tting talking with them, he deſired them that without offence
hee might demaund, as conſidering their eſtates, their
names and Countrey, and by what miſhap they chanced into
the Giants gouernment? Artanaina, the ſecond Siſter, whoſe
beautie was equall with her Maidenly behauiour, reſolued
him of their names, and then began this. Worthy Syr, albeit
the vttermoſt of 
                           •
                        ut power, is too 
                           ••
                        mple to 
                           〈◊〉
                         our noble
paines, yet eſteeme the valour of our good 
                           〈◊〉
                        , which is the
richeſt reward wee can requite you withall. 
                           〈…〉
                        , our
eſtates, we are all three ſiſters, and daughters to the 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        Beltamor, vaſſaile to the renowned Fredericke King of England,
who vpon the enuious report of ſlanderous tongues, (our
Father being endued with great riches, and large poſſeſſions,
when he came to inhabit this place, whervpō thrée mountains,
he cauſed to be built thrée faire caſtles, determining one to each
of vs after his diſceaſe: which place both was, and is yet called,
The Mountaines of the three ſiſters) all this aforeſaide liuing,
he was in the Kings diſpleaſure diſinherited of, and we left to
abide other mens reuerſion, ſauing the three Caſtles, which
were left for honours ſake, to ſuſtaine vs in. After our Fathers
death, we reſorted each of vs, to our appointed Caſtle, keeping
them 
                           〈…〉
                         from this Giant whom you haue ſlaine, that

                           〈…〉
                         to defeate vs of them. But when wee were in

                           〈…〉
                         his minde, becauſe hee had well le
                           •
                        t

                           〈…〉
                         then were we ſooneſt of all deceiued.
For 
                           〈◊〉
                         full twenty dayes 
                           〈◊〉
                        , wee met by appointment all
together, 
                           〈…〉
                         our Caſtles, where a little Pauillion was

                           〈…〉
                        , for the time, hauing in our company

                           〈…〉
                         and louing friends. This Giant

(who by his Spyes was admoniſhed of our being there) came
ſuddenly vpon vs, thrée of our Knights ſlaine, the other glad to
take themſelues to flight: and hee brought vs with him into
this place. To which place, if good Fortune had not conducted
you, we had beene depriued of our ſmall wealth, but that which
is moſt of all, the chiefe Ornament of our honour, had ſtoode to
an vncertaine award.
                     The Knight of the Sauadge man, who had bene well acquainted
with their Father in the Engl
                              •••
                           . Court, and heard of
the good report of his thrée Daughters: 
                           •
                        eioyced that by his onely
meanes they had purchaſed deliuery, and that it was his hap
to Land in ſuch a lucky time, promiſing them to vſe ſuch meanes
on their behalfe to King Fredericke his Soueraigne, that they
ſhould againe poſſeſſe the Liuings belonging to their Noble Father,
whoſe offence hee knewe to be ſo ſmall, that he might eaſily
purchaſe the Ladies theyr owne. When he had abode there,
till he was well able to beare Armour, he deſired Orianda to
accept that Caſtle, in recompence of the paynes ſhee had beſtowed
on him in his weakeneſſe: promiſing both to her and
her Siſters, his Hand and Sword, when any néede ſhould require.
the Ladies vſed large thankes vnto him, for his ſo great
courteſie, deſiring him to make knowne his Name vnto them,
that they might commend his memorie, who had bene ſo good a
friend vnto them.
                     To which requeſt he thus anſwered: Ladies, my name is as
yet ſo little knowne, that I am the more vnwilling to ſhew it to
any, till I deſerue to be eſtéemed among thoſe, whoſe nobleneſſe
is no leſſe then their Name. Deſiring you to accept of this auſwere
as now, and thinke not that my déedes ſhall reproue my
word: but that at any time, I will imploy my ſelfe in your ſeruice.
But firſt I muſt hazarde my ſelfe, in the Aduentures of
great Brittaine, wherein ſo many Noble and famous Knights
haue receyued great aduantage, which if I may finiſh, or in tryall,
ſafely eſcape, you ſhall knowe the ſmall eſtimation I will
repoſe of my life, to trye the déepeſt doubtes for ſuch Honourable
Ladyes. Syr (quoth Artinarda) if our Prayers may preuaile,
or our wiſhes returne to any good effect, doubt not but we wil be

earneſt therein, for your proſperous ſucceſſe in great Brittaine.
And eſtéeme your poore handmaides, not ſtretching beyond the
boundes of modeſtie, yours ſo farre as courteſſe may and ſhall
commaund. After many gentle ſalutations, the knight of the
Sauage man departed, accompanied with Artiſar his Eſquire,
leauing the Ladies in more ſeuerity then he found them, not offering
them once iniury or diſloyaltie, for that hée eſtéemed the
ſmall faults of the noble and famous, were worthy as ſeuere
puniſhment, as their hauty déedes of Armes, did rightly deſerue
eternall commendation, So in this maner he left them, taking
ſhipping with all ſpéede toward the realme of England.
                     
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXIX.
                     How the Emperour walked to comfort the Knight of Death,
who remained in great heauineſſe for his faire Altea, who
by the perſwaſion of the Emperour, determined to leaue
that ſorrowfull kinde of life, and to imploy himſelfe in ſeeking
ſtrange aduentures. And how the Damoſel Lucenda,
returned vnto the Court, where ſhee gaue knowledge of
the Knight of Fortune, which greatly reioyced the Emperour,
and all the noble Knights of the Court.
                     
                        IT hath béene already declared vnto you,
the great diſpleaſure which the Emperour
tooke, for the departure of the knight, who
bare the honour away (vnknowne) in the
Triumph, wherefore, now you ſhall vnderſtand,
how the Emperour remembring
the heauie and penſiue eſtate of the
knight of Death, went accompanied with his Princes and
Lordes, to giue him ſome occaſion of comfort, which might bee
a meane, to driue foorth of his memory the continuall mournings

he vſed for his faire Altea.
                     
                     The Knight of Death being aduertiſed, how the Emperour
was comming, came to the gate, attired in a long blacke
gowne, agréeable to his ſad and ioyleſſe kinde of life, where he
receiued the Emperour, according to his obedient duetie.
Then would the Emperour vſe to giue him ſuch pleaſant
ſpéeches, as might conſtraine him to forget his rufull complaints,
but he giuing ſmall attendance thereto, made anſwere
to his Grace cleane contrary, to the no ſmall amazement of his
highneſſe, as alſo his Courtly attendance, who greatly maruailed,
to ſée how vnfortunate deſteny had ahe power to bereaue
a man, both of reaſon & vnderſtanding, which was amply
verified, in this ſorrowfull prince of Sargignia. The Emperor
to perſwade the extremity of his fits, would rehearſe diuerſe
perſwaſions of his owne knowledge, who had béene ſubiect to
the like infirmity, and either cut off their time by deſperation, or
continued in a life bemoned of all perſons: vpon which words
he tooke occaſion to vſe this talke.
                     I would ſir Floraman, not onely cōmend your loyaltie, but
likewiſe attribute high honor to your conſtancy: if teares could
call the dead to life, or the rufull mon
                           •
                        s, recouer your great
loſſe. Yet doe I conſider with my ſelfe, loue compels you to this,
and your ſetled affection, hath brought you to an immoderate
euill: but compare the impoſſibility, with the ſtate and condition
of your griefe, you ſhal find the one as needleſſe, as the other
is helpleſſe, and the extreame to be refuſed, when the maine can
not be recalled. Conſider, if ſorrowe eate into the heart, it is
not preſently to be withdrawne againe, if vexation haue woon
the chiefeſt place, perſwaſion may weare her tonge to her téeth,
ere ſhe can bridle the impatient deſire, ſo that if wiſdome be not
in man to intollerate his griefe, it may coſt him the deareſt him
before he haue a quiet life. Doe but thus remember your ſelfe,
impatience bring ſorrow, ſorrow ſickeneſſe, ſickenes conſumation,
conſumation the miſerable Anatomy of himſelfe, which is
at error to his kinred, an eye ſore to his friends, the delight of
his enemy, and the continuall heart breaking of all that loue
him, ſo that the ſooner he ends, the better he mends.
                     
                        
On the other ſide, if a man apply himſelfe to any exerciſe, as
either trauaile, for the honour of himſelfe, & fame of his Countrey
or ſpending his time in martiall exploytes, or according as
his eſtateis, the poore to take paine, the rich, paine with pleaſure
the Artificer and ſuch, to their handie craft, the noble minde, the
Courtly Gentleman, either to the exploytes of the field, or ſuch
exerciſe as may auoide idleneſſe. Then is the eye directed, the
ſence quickened, the minde preſerued, the heart quieted, the conſcience
vnpolluted, affection gouerned, loue bridled, and, luſt baniſhed,
the good name perfected, vertue eſtabliſhed, honour well
exerciſed, and Fame enternized.
                     Sée here the difference, betwéene heauen and hell, betwéene
the contempt in this life, and conte
                           •
                        t eternall to the Soule,
which who ſo ſéekes ſhall finde, but they that will not, are ouer
fonde. Thinke thus with your ſelfe, Altea is dead, though I
ſhrinke her beauty on earth, yet is her ſubſtance ſhouelled in
the clay, though I delight in her Image and Picture, yet hath
Death made an Anatomie of her fayre perſon: while ſhe liued
I loued her, being dead I remember her, and in her loue, I liue
for her, as the honour I will enterpriſe ſhall witneſſe, and the
aduentures I will hazard ſhall manifeſt. So drowne this dulled
deſire, in remembrance of your knighthood, which you enioy
for manhood, not for mourning, to diſplay your worthy deedes,
and not to play in amorous Dities, but one moneths vſing this
Medicine, truſt me will extinguiſh this mallady.
                     When Floraman perceiued ſhe earneſt wordes of the Emperour,
to be both for the honour of his name, and noblenes of
his life, he replyed thus. Moſt gratious Emperour, I ſee chat
Goates blood will molifie the Adamant, and the little drops of
raine, pierce into the hard Marble, ſ wiſedome reproouing wilfulneſſe,
ſheweth him his follie, and perſwaſion piercing into
the obſtinate, doth more by friendſhip, then others can doe with
force.
                     I confeſſe, the affection to Altea, hath both ouercharged my
minde, and cleane dulled my wit, ſo that I neither ſéeme as I
ſhould he, nor doe that I ought, but ſit musing on her loue, who
hath no life, & endamage mine owne life, by ſuch ouer fond loue.

And ſince your Maieſtie hath quickened mine idle Nature, and
reuiaed the dutie which I owe vnto Knighthood, I will remember
my ſelfe in forgetting her, and though I cannot exclude her
Loue on a ſudden, yet tolleration and perſwaſion, in time may
doe ſomething. And becauſe the honor of the field, can aſſwage
this fondneſſe, and my dutie commaundeth mee, to employ my
ſeruice, I will hazard my ſelfe on my good Fortune, to winne as
much by ſtrength, as I haue loſt by yll happe. Wherefore deſiring
that your Maieſtie would entertaine mee in your Courte,
and vnder your noble Name, to ſéeke after Aduentures, I am reſolued
to forſake all follie, and purſue that valiantly, whereto I
haue bene enemie.
                     The Emperour ſéeing the change of Floraman, to be as heartily
pretended as himſelfe deſired: he thus anſwered: I thinke
my ſelfe both highly Honoured, and greatly ſteéemed in the fauour
of Fortune, to receyue ſo good a Knight, by whoſe endeuour,
I hope himſelfe ſhalbe worthily accounted, and the Fame
of my Courte for euer extolled. Then Floraman would haue
knéeled to kiſſe the Emperours hand, but hee gratiouſly ſuſtayned
him in his armes, with great thanks on eyther ſide, liberally
beſtowed.
                     By this time was the Damoſell Lucenda returned to the
Court, whom the Empreſſe among hir other ladies, came walking
withall, to the Chamber of Floraman, where knowledge
was giuen, that ſhee could reueale the Knight who had conquered
Floraman. The Emperour being very deſirous to know,
willed her to make report of him, when ſhe began in this manner.
The Knight of Fortune who hath accompliſhed this Noble
piece of ſeruice, is the young Prince Palmerin, that Polendos
King of Theſſalie did preſent vnto you, when the Ladie of
the Lake ſent her Letter to your Highnes. For he happening to
the Caſtle of mine Aunt Rianda, when with your gratious conſents
I went to viſite her, I rehearſed the penſiue eſtate of our
Courtly Ladyes, ſéeing all theyr knights ſent to the Sepulcher
of Louers, vppon which report he came, and hath fulfilled that
which could not be done by manie. And as I returned to the
Court againe, I mette him, very haſtily riding, yet ſtayed to deſire

me, on his behalfe to craue pardon of your Maieſtie for his
ſo ſudden departure, not intending to returne vnto the Court,
till he had aſſaied the aduenture of great Brittaine, wherein he
ſuppoſed all the famous Knights to be loſt. Moreouer, he deſireth
your highneſſe, to beſtow the tent of the Knight of Death
on her that had the power to ſtaine the beautie of Altea, and to
whom he is euer dutifull affectioned, his Ladie and Miſtreſſe
Polynarda, which ſaid, he departed, leauing me to declare what
your Highneſſe hath heard.
                     The Emperour not able to conceale the pleaſure which his
heart had receiued, began thus. I promiſe you faire Ladies,
my mind did ſomewhat perſwade me that it ſhould bee he, although
I would not perfectly reſolue thereon: for in what place
ſo euer he ſhall aduenture. I dare imagine his Fortune ſuch, as
he ſhall preuaile, both to the comfort of the deſtreſſed, and to ſatiſfie
the longing of our minds. As for his Tent, it ſhall bee beſtowed
according to his deſire: neuertheleſſe, I would wiſh it
might be well vſed, vntill it ſhall be his good lucke to returne,
for I beléeue he will employ it with continuall victorie, as hee
hath endeuoured to win it by valiancie. As for you Lucenda,
I will not be vnmindfull of your good newes, as alſo eſtéeme
of you, as you do iuſtly deſerue. So returning into his Pallace,
the ioy on euery ſide, made apparance of the glad receit of theſe
wiſhed tidings.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXX.
                     How Recamon, the Knight of the Greene Tree, and Sonne to
the King of Bohemia, came to the Emperors Court, to defend
the beautie of his Ladie Lucina, againſt the faire Altea,
and the Knight of Fortune, whom he heard had conquered
the Knight of Death. And how Tremoran, on the
behalfe of the Knight of Fortune, waged Combat againſt
him.
                     
                        
                        NOt long after Lucenda had declared theſe
tidings, when the Emperour ſate with his
knights reioycing in the towardly behauiour
of the young Prince, there entred in
a knight in his preſence, bearing in his
ſhéetd a Greene Tree, and his armour of
the like color, who after his obeyſance made
began as thus. Let it not enter your-diſliking (moſt famous
Emperour) that I preſume ſo boldly before you, inſomuch as
the cauſe of my coming doth vrge me to this enterpriſe. I am
one whom promiſe bindeth to conceale my name, till I haue
tryed the aduenture of great Brittaine, wherein if I proue fortunate,
it will giue me the; greater courage to bewray my
ſelfe. It hath bene greatly famed abroade, that a Iuſt was proclaimed
in your Court, for the beautie of a Lady named Altea,
in which to aduenture my ſelf, I haue trauelled hither, to maintaine
that my Lady and Miſtreſſe called Lucina, deſerueth the
perfect praiſe aboue all for beautie. But ſince I arriued here, it
hath bene told me that a knight is departed from your Court,
bearing the renowne of this Triumph away: which newes
do not a little diſpleaſe me, in that it was my deſire to contend
with him, or any on my Ladyes behalfe. Wherefore if I may
deſire ſo much courteſie, as to know where he is, or whither
he departed. I ſhall thinke my ſelfe continually bound to you
in duetie, and will ſearch that Knight, though it be to the loſſe
of my life. Syr (quoth the Emperour) I would as gladly
heare of that knight as your ſelfe, and am as ignorant where
hr is at this time, as yourſelfe, but I thinke you ſhall not trauell
very farre, but you ſhall heare ſuch famous report of him.
as will conduct you to the place where he is, becauſe the valour
of his behauiour is ſuch, as he is vnknowne in no place, but to
be heard of euery where. Neuertheleſse, if might counſell you
I would wiſh your minde changed from ſo fond an enterpriſe,
becauſe I can hardly beleeue that the aduenture wil quite your
labour.
                     
                        
The good opinion you hold of him (anſwered the Knight)
maketh me the more affectionate to ſéeke him, and the more famous
his deeds is, the greatter eſtimation ſhall I conceyue to
deale with ſuch a one. For if Fortune ſtand my friend, and I
conquere him, that is ſo well liked of all, I doubt not, but the
reputation I ſhall gaine, will conſtraine you to thinke as well
of me, as now you repoſe a good affiance in him. Tremoran,
the ſonne to the Duke Leceſia, and Nephew to the Emperour
Trineus, hearing the proud wordes of the Knight, aduanced
himſelfe towards him, with this greeting. Imagine that Fortune
hath been greatly your friend, to ſend you hither when he
is gone, leaſt by miſaduenture, you ſhould chaunce to méete
him, who wold ſo ſettle your armor to your ſhoulders, that you
would curſe your Lady, to abide his Canuazado. Neuertheles,
albeit he is not here, yet he hath ſuch friends here, as would bee
ſorrie you ſhould depart without ſome recompence for your trauell.
And vnder the Emperours correction, I will be the man
that ſhall bring you acquainted with the Knight of Fortune, ſo
that ere you depart, you ſhall know he hath left ſuch friends behind
him, as will giue liberall entertainement to thoſe that ſeek
him in this manner.
                     The Knight was halfe offended at the words of Tremoran,
which made him preſently to giue this reply. I thinke ſir, the
good will you beare to the Knight, maketh you ſo fooliſh hardy
in that which appertaineth not vnto you, yet becauſe you dare
aduenture ſo much in his behalfe, and will welcome Knights in
ſuch a brauery, arme your ſelfe preſently, becauſe I would bee
loath a cold calme ſhould come ouer this hotte matter. The
Emperour (though vnwilling) accepted their gages, and granted
them licence to Combate. When in ſhort time Tremoran
came into the fielde, gallantly mounted, wearing blacke Armour,
as the ſigne of his heauineſſe, for the departure of the
Prince Primaleon, bearing in his Shield a ramping Lion: then
at the ſound of the Trumpets, they couched their Speares,
ſet Spurres to their Horſes, and made a very braue Encounter,
that the Trunchions of their Speares flew vp into the
Ayre, and were faine at laſt to ende their Combate with their

Swords. In fine, what with expence of Blood, griefe of theyr
wounds, and great wearineſſe in Fight, catching each other in
their armes, they fell both to the ground: the Regardants attributing
the victory to Tremoran.
                     
                     The Emperour ſéeing they were ſo fore hurt, cauſed Tremoran
to conueyed into his Pallace, and the Eſquyre of the other
Knight, conducted his Maiſter to his Lodging: where hee vſed
ſuch diligence in his Attendaunce, that hee recouered to a little
ſtranger eſtate: Then ſent the Emperour to require of whence,
and what the Knight was: word being returned, that hee was
Sonne to the K: of Bohemia, and named Recamon, vpon which
tidings, he preſently ſent for him into his Palace: where he was
honourably vſed, till ſuch time he had gained his healbh.
                     And then he departed from thence toward great Brittaine, accompanyed
with Florendos and Platir, Sonne to the Prince
Primaleon: who pittying the great ſorrowe of theyr Mother,
the Princeſſe Gridonia, aduentured among the other Knights,
in the ſearch of theyr Noble Father, as alſo to hazard the Aduenture
of great Brittaine.
                     
                     This Recamon beeing trauelling thither, and being one addicted
to a great vaine glorie of himſelfe, by the truſt hee repoſed
in his owne manhood, hearing how Floraman had attempted at
Conſtantinople, altered his minde, and came thither to defend
the beauty of the Lady Lucina, who was Daughter to the King
of Denmarke. Spéeding there ſo ill as you haue heard, he returned
with the Knights to his former determination, they leauing
the Emperour ſomewhat ſad for theyr departure, yet theyr hautie
attempt, with the glad iſſue hee looked for, perſwaded him to
take patiently their abſence for the time.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXXI.
                     How the Knight of Fortune, taking ſhipping at Totnes, at
length landed in the Realme of England, and chancing
into the Forreſt where he was borne, he met with the Sauage
man, that had nouriſhed him ſo long in his Caue.
                     
                        LOng trauailed the Damoſell Lucenda, till
at the laſt he came to the Cape of Totnes,
where he tooke ſhipping toward England,
and landed at the port of Saint Mathew,
two miles from Sorlingue, accompanyed
with a Gentlewoman, that came in the
Paſſage with him, at whoſe houſe he reſted
one night, and departed on the next morning. Then rode he
foreward, friendly talking with Siluian, and reioycing that he
was arriued in the place, where he determined to put his Fortune
in triall. Trauelling on along in a Forreſt, he came at laſt
to the Fountaine where he was chriſtened, where ſitting
downe by this water to refreſh himſelfe, he eſpyed come running
forth of a thicket of Trées, a Hart very fiercely purſued by
a Lyon, who running ſtill toward the Prince, at laſt came and
lay downe at his féete, as one might iudge, to craue his defence.
Wherewith he aroſe, and offering to ſtrike with his ſword at
the Lyon, he preſently yéelded himſelfe at his féete likewiſe.
Their two horſes moued with feare by the Lyon brake their
bridles, and ranne into the woods, after them Siluian hied a pace,
leauing the Prince with two gentle beaſts.
                     The knight of Fortune looking about, eſpied comming from
the place, where the Hart did iſſue forth, a Sauage man with
the ſkin of a beaſt made cloſe to his body, in his one hand a bow
and arrows, in the other a couple with a chaine, where with he

ledde his Lyon. When he had eſpyed the knight of Fortune, he
drew his bow and let ſlie an arrow at him, with ſuch force, that
it pierced into his ſheeld, but the gentle prince knowing him to
be his foſter father, who had nouriſhed him ſo long in his Caue
beganne to vſe reuerence vnto him▪ & to certifie him what he
was. The Sauage man hauing not the patience to heare him,
came towards him with ſuch violence, that he was conſtrained
with his ſheeld to thruſt him away, ſo that therewith he fall on
the ground. Then the Prince imbraced him, giuing him to vnſtand
how long he had nouriſhed him, with his ſonne Siluian,
who was gone to take his horſes, that had ſtarted away at the
fight of the Lyon. With theſe words the Sauage man did remember
him, and imbracing him in his armes, he walked
with him vnto his Caue, deſirous all the way to tell him, how
he had taken him out of the armes of his mother: but becauſe
he would not ſo ſoone for ſake him, he held him with other talke,
and ſo ſpent the time, till they came to the Caue, where the

                           
                              •
                           auage mans wife imbraced him very louingly: requeſting
what was become of her ſonne Siluian. Her huſband did declare,
about what buſineſſe he was gone, which did pacifie her
very well, and ſo ſhe dſired the Prince to reſt that night, in a
little cloſet, wherin he had ſlept many night when he was there
and ſo féeding on ſo ſmall pittance as they had, they went to
take their reſt. On the morrow, the woman wold haue ſhown
him the linnen cloathes 
                           •
                        he had about him, when her huſband
brought him home, but he he would not ſuffer his wife to do ſo,
becauſe he ſhould not eſteeme him ſtil for his father, and Siluian
for his brother, whoſe long tarria
                           •
                        ce abroad all that night, and
as then 
                           〈◊〉
                        , greatly dipleaſed the Prince, as alſo his parents,
who were deſirous to ſee him. At laſt, ſéeing he came not
the Prince tooke his leaue and departed, to ſée if he could méete
him by the way, becauſe he doubted ſome harme had falne him:
the Sauage man and his wife greatly la
                           •••
                        ting for his departure,
as alſo becauſe they might not ſee their ſonne.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXXII.
                     ¶How the Knight of Fortune departing from the Sauage
man, reſcued Siluian from foure cruell villaines, that tormented
him very grieuouſly, and how he ſlew the Giant
Camboldam, brother to the Giant Calfurnian.
                     
                        AFter that the Knight of Fortune was departed
from the Sauage man, he trauelled on foot
the moſt part of the day, til at laſt he came to
the place, where Polendos King of Theſſaly
receiued him into his ſhip, when as hee
brought him to Conſtantinople, which conſtrained
him to remember the great curteſie
of the Emperour, with the great vnkindneſſe of his Lady Polinarda,
on whoſe behalfe hee fell into ſuch extreame Paſſions,
that what with wearineſſe, and forcible aſſaultes of griefe,
he ſuddenly fell into a ſlumber. He had not long ſlept, but in
great feare hee awaked, for that his minde did perſwade ſome
ill aduenture toward him: then looking about him, he eſpied a
ſhip couered with greene boughes, and thither he went to ſee
what it might be.
                     Being there arriued, hee ſaw two men come foorth of the
ſhip, making great lamentations, deſiring him to flie, if hee had
regard to his owne life. But then to his greater amazement,
ſtepped foorth foure armed men, with Holbardes and Dagges
in their hands, cruelly beating Siluian whom they had taken,
and compaſſing the Prince, that he ſhould not eſcape. Then the
Prince offered to vnbind Silnian, but they told him, that hee
muſt abide: which mooued the Prince to ſuch anger, that with
his Gauntlet he ſtrook one of them ſo ſore vpon the face, that he
tumbled him cleane ouer, then with his ſword hee aſſailed the

ouer three: that two of them were ſlaine, the other eſcaped in
ſlight: which done, he vntied Siluian, requeſting him to report,
how he chanced into that miſhap.
                     
                        Siluian was ſo amazed with feare, and ſo ſore with beating,
that as yet he could not anſwere to this demand, but looking
aſide, they eſpied two men come leading their two horſes, and
after them a tall and ougly. Giant, bearing in his Shield, three
Giants heades, whom Siluian reported to be the man, that had
in this order abuſed him. The Prince was ſomewhat in feare
at his monſtrous bigneſſe, and offered him reuerence according
to his curteous ſtature: but the Giant ſéeing his men ſlain, ſtood
not to vſe wordes, but ſtrooke at the Prince very vehemently,
with which ſtroke, his ſhield was cleft in the middeſt, that hee
knew hardly how to defend himſelfe. Neuertheleſſe, ſuch was
the valure of the noble knight of Fortune, (albeit the fight was
dangerous to eyther part) that at length hée conquered the Giant,
and ſtrooke off his head: preſently falling on his knees, and
giuing thankes to God, whoſe prouidence did aide him in ſuch
a dangerous Combat.
                     The men that lead the two Horſes, came and fell downe before
the Prince, deſiring him to ſaue their liues, for that they
were conſtrained againſt their wils, to attend on that miſchieuous
wretch, who vſed them likewiſe too too cruelly. Their faire
intreaty had quickly perſwaded him: ſo that he deſired them to
report what this Giant was, and after what manner he liued.
Their anſwere was, that he was called Camboldam of Mulzell
                              •
                           ,
the Lord of Penebroque, one of the cruelleſt Tyrants in
all the world: who hauing knowledge, that a knight had ſlaine
his brother Calfuiniā. he v
                           •
                        wed to take ſharpe reuenge on euery
one that ſhould happen into his hands. Vpon this occaſion
he ſailed from his Countrey, & landing on this Coaſt in yonder
ſh
                           •
                        p, he f
                           ••
                        nt to ſee if Fortune would ſend any, to appeaſe the
hell of his bloody minde, and méeting with that yong man running
to catch his Horſes which had ſtrayed from him, he cōmitted
him to theſe which lye here dead, that they might torment
with endleſſe paine. Thus haue we certified all we can ſay, deſiring
you to vſe vs in what ſeruice yon pleaſe.
                     
                        
The Knight of Fortune reioyced in his goodlucke, and deſired
them to go into England, & certifie vnto the King Fredericke,
how the Knight of Fortune had ſlaine the Giant Camboldam,
and they ſhould commaund him, in any thing to pleaſure them.
They promiſing to fulfill his requeſt, departed preſently, and
the Knight of Fortune with Siluian, mounted on their Horſes:
and tooke their iourney preſently towards great Brittaine,
where he meant to accompany the noble Princes, or elſe deliuer
them out of their long ſeruitude.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXXIII.
                     How Siluian declared to the knight of Fortune, in what manner
of the Sheeld of the Palme Tree was taken from him,
to ſaue it from the cruel Giant Camboldan. And how happened
to ſee the Combate, betweene Platir, Floroman,
Pompides and Blandidon: As alſo how the Sage Aliart of
the Obſcure Valley, came and brought him to his Caſtle,
where he ſhewed him many goodly, and not able Monuments.
                     
                        FOrtune aduancing the honor of her knight,
in obtaining this famous Conqueſt, cauſed
him to proceede on further, to diſcouer the
depth of other, hidden doubts, and as hée
rode, perceiuing his ſhield paſt any means
for ſeruice, aſked of Siluian the ſhield of the
Palme Tree, becauſe his iourney lay
through dangerous places, and therefore eſtéemed it wiſedoms
to be alwayes prouided.
                     When he ſaw the ſhéelde was gone, wherein he repoſed
moſt affection, kéeping it for an extreame néede, he willed Siluian
to report, how and after what manner, he had ſuffered it be
taken from him, to which demand, Siluian thus anſwered.
                     
                        
All the way as we haue iournied, I was deuiſing how I might
make knowne to you this loſſe, without gayning your diſple a
ſure, or mouing you to Anger: which two cauſes, made to conceale
it all this while. When ſuch was my miſhap, that this cruell
Giant tooke me, a Damſel mounted on a white palfrey, came
croſſing ouer the Forreſt to me, vſing her ſpéeches thus:
                     
                        Siluian, deliuer the Shield thou beareſt, to me, ere thou ſuffer
it to fall into the hands of this Giant thine aduerſarie, where it
can neuer be recouered again, and may cauſe a great endamagement:
and thus much I will faithfully promiſe thée, to yéelde it
into thy Maiſters hande againe, when he ſhall ſtand in ſuch néed
as to vſe it. Her gentle ſpéeche, and the preſent daunger before
mine eyes, did vrge me rather to giue it her, then mine enemie,
ſhould enioy a thing of ſuch honour: wherefore I gaue it to her,
who preſently departed, I could not tell which way, and then
the Giant tooke me, vſing me as you found me.
                     The Knight of Fortune muſed at the Euent, and could not
iudge to what ende it was wrought: wherefore Siluian to put
him out of his ſtudy, deſired him to attend a great noyſe, which
he heard in a little Groue by them, as though it were the flaſhing
of weapons in a Combat. Directing his courſe thither, he eſpyed
foure knights on foote, very fiercely aſſailing one another: their
Armour ſo bruſed, and their Shields ſo battered, that hee could
hardly perceiue any of their Deuiſes, except it were one, which
was the head of a white Bull, belonging to Pompides, the ſonne
of Don Edward. The ſharp aſſaults betwéen theſe foure, vrged
the Knight of Fortune to breake forth into theſe ſpéeches. Gentlemen,
the great danger I perceiue you to ſtād in, with the grieuous
endamagement that may happen vnto you, conſtraineth
me to deſire, you would leaue this great rage, and end your ſtrife
friendly with reaſon, ſo ſhall you find it to your own cōmoditie,
and my ſelfe always bound to you, If you accept of my counſell.
Indéed (anſwered one of the Knights) our quarrell is grounded
on ſo ſlight an occaſion, as we might eaſily agrée to your honeſt
deſire. It doth onely conſiſt in the knight of the Bull, who will
the name of the knight he ſéeketh for, although he deſired of vs
likewiſe to vnderſtand ſome tidings of him.
                     
                        
It is vnpoſſible for me to tell his name (anſwered the knight
of the Bull) or if I could ſatiſfi your deſires, you could not any
way compell me, ſo long as I haue this hand and ſword to defend
me. Theſe words procured a freſh ſtrife, and too it they f
                           •
                        ll
againe very fiercely, and without any regard of themſelues:
which greatly pitied the knight of Fortune, to ſée ſuch couragious
mindes, ſubiect to ſo great a hazard, which he was very loth
to tarry and behold: but he greatly eſteemed one of the knights,
who was in white Armour, and dealt his blowes ſo freely, that
he was in leaſt danger of them all. Then did the knight of Fortune
once more perſwade them to leaue the fight, but they were
ſo ſeuerely bent the one againſt the other, that they ſcant knew
themſelues what they did.
                     At laſt a ſuddaine darkneſſe ſent from the Caſtle of the Sage
Aliart, ouerſhadowed them, at the departure whereof, the knight
of Eortune ſawe all the foure knights laid in a Charyot, drawn
with foure blacke Horſes, which made him ſomewhat abaſhed,
and mooued him to demand of one of the Eſquirs, that droue
the Chariot, what knights they were, that had fought this ſore
Combate: To whom he anſwered, that the knight in the white
Armour, was Platir, ſonne to the noble Primaleon, the other
was Floraman, the Prince of Sardignia: the other two knights
were Pompides and Blandidon, who entred their Combate,
about the enquiring after the knight of Fortune, which made
them leaue the Emperours Court: enterpriſing likewiſe the aduenture
of great Brittaine, if they might meete with this
knight, whoſe friendly company they alway deſired. But ſee
the miſfortune, as they arriued here, not farre from great Brittaine,
theſe two other knights met thē, demanding alſo for the
knight of Fortune, ſo words aryſing on either ſide, why they
ſhould ſeeke after this knight, they fell to this fierce ſkirmiſh,
which your ſelfe hath partly ſeene, to the loſſe (I feare) of our
noble Maiſters, except we were neare ſome place, where wee
might make prouiſion for them.
                     The knight of Fortune was greatly moued at this tale, and
perſwaded the Eſquyres, to haſten with their Maiſter to London,
where in ſhort time no doubt, they might recouer their

health, and thus in grief he departed from them. And as he rode
very ſad, he eſpied one come riding towards him, with his horn
about his necke, attired like a hunter, who began in this manner
to gréete him.
                     Behold thou noble Palmerin of England, the time wherein
thy famous déeds, ſhall bring out of obliuion, the worthy Proweſſe
that long time hath béene hid, ſo that great Brittaine ſhal
enioy the former quiet ſtate. Be not offended, becauſe I did
enterpriſe ſo boldly to name you: for I am priuie to that, which
ſhall happen by you, although your ſelfe remaineth ignorant
thereof.
                     The knight of Fortune knew not what to thinke, to heare
himſelfe named in ſuch a ſtrange place, where he perſwaded
himſelfe he was vnknowde to any: at length he beganne to
thinke that it might be the Sage Aliart of the Obſcure Valley,
yet would he not certainly giue credite to his ſuſpection, out of
which doubt to remoue him, Aliart thus ſpake againe. Be not
diſmayed worthy Palmerio, for I am Aliart your ſeruant, who
would gladly imploy my ſelfe in your ſeruice, to doe you the
greateſt honour I might. But as concerning what ſhall chance
vnto you, I neither may or will as yet declare, bnt this aſſure
your ſelfe, that you ſhall enioy a more quiet and happy eſtate,
then as yet you do.
                     Sir Aliart (anſwered the knight of Fortune) God forbid I
ſhould requeſt any thing, which you are not willing ſhould bee
knowne, but for the great bounty and friendſhip you haue vſed
towards me, I remaine while my life endureth, both with loue
and duetie to honour you. So walking on, at laſt they came
to the Obſcure Valley, where Aliart conducted the knight of
Fortune into his Caſtle, and ſhewed him many rare and excellent
Monuments, the liuely ſhape of men and women, in
faire Portraitures, which gaue a great delight to his noble
minde, ſo that he thought this Caſtle, the faireſt that euer he
had ſéene in all his life. There remained he ſo long as him
pleaſed, very well entertained by the Sage Aliart, who gaue
him to vnderſtand, how Platir and the other Knightes ſhould
be healed of their wounds without any danger. Theſe newes

pleaſed the knight Fortune very well: as alſo the great gentleneſſe,
he found into the Sage Aliart, to certifie him many things
that he deſired.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXXIII.
                     How the Knight of the Sauage man, arriuing in England, trauailed
towards the Citie of London, And how Eutropa
ſent a Damoſell, and cauſed him to enter Combate, with
the Princes Gracian, Francian, and Polinarda. In which
fight they were all in great danger, till the Knight of England
riding on hunting, chaunced to meete with them,
who ſet them at vnitie, and brought them to the Court
with him.
                     
                        THe Knight of the Sauage man, being departed
from Orianda, in the Caſtle of the
Giant Calfurni
                              •
                           n, ſo long continued on
the Se
                           •
                        s, that at laſt he arriued in England,
entending to take his way ſtraite to
London, becauſe he would ſee the king Fredericke,
and the Princeſſe Flerida, but
greatly lamented to ſée the Forreſt ſo ful of
ſtrange Knights, and Damoſels that procured perillous aduentures.
At laſt he eſpied a Damoſell on a white Pal
                           •
                        ray,
come riding towards him, her haire ſpread ouer her ſhoulders
and her garments ſéeming to be greatly miſuſed, all the way
aa ſhe rode, ſhe vſed many ſkrikes, and gréeuous lamentations,
which was greatly pittied by the Knight of the Sauage man,
who ſaw a knight came haſtily riding after her, whereupon ſhe
began to this gentle knight, in this manner.
                     Good Sir, as you regard the honor of knighthood, and the diſtreſſed

eſtate of a poore Damoſell, ſo at this time helpe to defend
me from him that ſeekes to diſhonour me, of that which
maketh me eſteemed amongſt all vertuous perſons. Theſe
words pierced ſo déepe into his noble minde, that he ſtaied the
knights coming, who was very well armed, and brauely
mounted, to whom he began in theſe words. I perceiue both
knighthood, and that armor is ill beſtowed vpon you, that imploy
your ſelfe in the perſecution of a faire Damoſel, when you
are both bound by dutie, and by law of armes to defend her.
                     Sir (anſwered the ſtrange knight) I deſire you, let not the
fained teares, and vniuſt complauit of this Strumpet, inueigle
your minde, for it is not troth that ſhe reporteth, neither am I
ſo baſe minded, to purſue her cauſleſſe. The knight of the Sauage
man, was ſo perſwaded by the Damoſell, that he would
not credite what he ſaid, bnt anſwered him thus. Sir, you ſhall
rather diſaduantage me then diſhonour her, and therefore prouide
for your ſelfe. The ſtrange knight ſeeing him ſo egerly
bent, ſaid, I am content, ſince you will enforce me to it, and
not rule your deſire by reaſon. Whereupon touching their
Speares, they met together couragiouſly, ſo that the ſtrange
knight was caſt, and the knight of the Sauage man faine to
leape off from his horſe, and drawing their Swordes, they
layde at each other very cruelly, to the great hurt of them
both.
                     In the meane time they were in figh, the Damoſell had left
them, and returned accompanied with two knights more, ſhewing
them the knight of the Sauage man, and ſaide. Behold
Sir knights, the man that hath ſlaine my Father, and now
would gladly worke the death of this my Brother (pointing to
the knight that before had purſued her) wherefore I deſire you
to take reuengement on him. At theſe words, one of the
knights alighted, and perceiued the knight that the Damoſell
named her brother, to be very ſore wounded, ſtepped betweene
them, ſaying to the knight of the Sauage man, Come
Traytour deale with me, and not with him, whoſe loſſe of
blood and wearineſſe beſide, deſireth rather to take reſt, then
the Combate.
                     
                        
The knight of the Sauage man, was greatly offended at
theſe wordes, wherefore he left the other, and went to him ſaying:
I will make thée either recant thy wordes, or elſe I will
leaue my life in this place. So charging one another very puiſſantly,
the Knight of the Sauage man, laide him at laſt along
on the earth, which the other knight ſéeing, and alſo the Armor
of the gentle knight, to be greatly broken in many places, began
as followeth, I ſée Syr Knight, you are brought into ſuch debilitie,
both with the great expence of your blood, as alſo wearineſſe,
with long enduring the fight, that I thinke it great diſhonour
to giue you a freſh aſſault, and ſmall manhood in mee, to
vrge you to ſuch extremitie. The knight of the Sauage man ſtill
incenſed with furie, for the vnkind wordes hee had receiued of
them, returned him preſently this anſwere.
                     As I haue little cauſe to eſtéeme of your friendſhip, ſo haue I
leſſe opportunity to craue your fauour, and though my wounds
be yrkeſome in your ſight, yet can I endure the vttermoſt that
you can charge me withall, wherefore ſet apart theſe words,
and execute the extremitie of thy diſloyall will. Thus breaking
off their talke, they beganne to aſſault one another very rigorouſly,
ſo that the knight ſitting on Horſe-back, conceiued great
maruaile at the hauty courage of the knight of the Sauage man.
While he occupied his eies in beholding this noble exploit, ſuch
féebleneſſe entred the minde of his fellow, that he could ſcarcely
hold his Sword, or kéepe himſelfe from falling to the ground,
and fearing he could not eſcape the death, being in ſuch great
diſaduantage, he alighted from his Horſe, and to the Knight of
the Sauage man began in this manner.
                     Me thinkes Syr knight, it were for your better aſſurance of
health, as alſo great gentlenes you might offer to theſe knights,
to ſatiſfie your deſire vpon this victory, then to hope on a farder
of me likewiſe, & ſo be depriued of that you might hardly ſpare,
which might yéeld you greater diſaduantage, then the conqueſt
you haue gotten, will enlarge your renowne.
                     Syr (quoth the K. of the Sauage man) except he recant the
ſhrewde wordes he gaue me, or confeſſe himſelfe vanquiſhed,
and to reſt at my commaund, I will finiſh his boldneſſe, by

honour of my Sworde, ſay you what you can, and hee what he
dare. Truſt me Sir (anſwered the knight) if you will not grant
to ſuch a ſmall requeſt, as ſhall both extoll your Fame, and manifeſt
your friendſhip, I ſhall be enforced to enter Combate
with you, which I am very loath to doo, conſidering your preſent
eſtate, in ſo much as I would not be hée that ſhould depriue
you of your life.
                     Good Syr (quoth the knight of the Sauadge man) this care in
you is more then I haue deſerued, or deſire you ſhould vſe vnto
me: wherefore hereupon aſſure your ſelfe, I am as able to deale
with you, as they haue found me indifferent to conquere them.
At theſe words, the knight (whom this noble Victor held in ſubiection)
fell along on the ground, through faintneſſe of much blood
that had iſſued from him, as alſo the grieuous wounds, hee had
ſo vnhappily ſuſtained. Which made this other knight to aſſaile
the knight of the Sauadge man very rigorouſly, in hope to haue
reuenged his friends hurt, with the detriment of his noble Enemies
life, but he found the knight of the Sauadge man ſo great
of ſtrength, and ſo greatly affected to a farther Victorie, that hee
partly repented himſelfe for entring ſuch hazard. Yet did he behaue
himſelfe with greater courage then the other knightes,
which made him endure Combat a longer time.
                     It chaunced the King of England, to come on Hunting into
this Forreſt, where eſpying theſe two knights ſo eager at their
fight, and commending both their expertnes, and braue behauiour,
he entred betwéene them, vſing great intreatie to leaue off
their Combate, which they preſently did, for that they would not
diſobey the kings requeſt, whom they knew, and were very glad
to ſée. The knight of the Sauadge man, lifting vp his Beuer,
came and preſented himſelf to the King, who perceiuing him to
be the knight, was nouriſhed in his Court, as alſo the man hee
had greateſt delight in, receyued him very graciouſly, in ſigne
whtreof, he ſuffered him to kiſſe his hand.
                     When the King had knowledge, that the other Knight was
Gracian, ſonne to the noble Arnedes King of France, he alighted
from his Horſe, imbracing the Prince very louingly, and
deſiring him to ſhewe the occaſion of their diſcord, as alſo what

the other Knights were, that lay on the ground. The Prince
Gracian, after he had done his dutie to the King, and to the Noble
companie, that then were there preſent beganne as thus.
                     If it ſhall like your Maieſty, the knight that lieth hithermoſt,
and is neareſt to your Grace, is named Francian, Sonne to the
famous Polendos, king of Theſſaly, In whoſe company, to mine
owne honour, and eyther of our contents, I trauelled from the
Citie of Conſtantinople, through many places where we haue
approoued our Knighthoode, and made manifeſt ſuch déedes of
Armes, as our yeares and ſkill would ſuffer vs,
                     To this place wee were conducted by a Damoſel, who reported
her ſelfe to bee Syſter to the other Knight that lyeth on the
ground: the gaue vs to vnderſtand, that this knight (meaning
the knight of the Sauadge man) had cruelly ſlaine her Father,
and did his endeuour to kill her Brother likewiſe: wherefore
ſhe deſired vs to ſtande her Reſcue, and to deliuer her foorth of
ſuch griefe, as ſhee might conceiue by his death. Francian perceyuing
her Brother in ſuch eſtate, as hee could not awarde the
heauie blowes this Knight charged him withall, entred betwéene
them: and in like manner was brought to as lowe eſtate
himſelfe. Yea, and I perſwade my ſelfe, had not your
Grace come to ende the ſtrife, my ſelfe had bene partner of their
hard miſhap.
                     The knight of the Sauadge man, hearing what the Prince
Gracian had ſaide, began in this order to diſcourſe how it happened.
My grations Soueraigne, the Damoſell of whom this
Knight hath ſpoken, came Ryding towardes mee, her haire diſpearſed
on her ſhoulders, her Face all blubbered with teares,
her Garmentes torne, and very much polluted: all the way as
ſhe came, crying how that this knight (whome ſhe after named
to be her Brother) did ſéeke to diſhonour her, and therefore deſired
mee to defend her in ſo great extremitie. When I had ioyned
Combat with the Knight, ſoone after ſhe came againe, and
brought theſe two knight, reporting to them, as hee hath informed
your Maieſtie: ſo leaning vs in this ſtrife, ſhe departed, we
know not whither. The King well noting the deceyte of the
Damoſell, which was onely to ſéeke the ruine of thoſe Noble

knights, cauſed the Helmet of Francian, and of the other knight,
to be taken off, when féeling the ayre, they came to themſelues
againe, ſauing that their wounds made them very féeble. Then
was the other Knight known to be Polinard, ſon to the Emperor
Trineus: when preſently the King cauſed Francian and
Polinard, to bée conueyed in a Chariot to the Citie of London.
And by the way, the King queſtioned with Polinard, for what
cauſe be purſued the Domoſel, when this noble knight tooke in
hand to defēd her? By your gracious leaue (anſwered Polinard)
I thinke ſhée was the moſt wicked, and deceitfulleſt Damoſell
on the earth, for through her perſwaſion, Oniſtalde and Dramiſian
my friends, were brought into ſuch ignorance, and ſuch
credite of her, that they entred Combat, and had almoſt ſlaine
one another, had not I arriued at their fight, when they were
hardly to be iudged, if there were any recouery for their health.
At my requeſt they ended their ſtrife, and rode together I know
not well which way, nor if they be aliue as yet: but I followed
the Damoſel, to know the occaſion why my brethren were fallen
to ſo great debate, whē this knight came and preuented me
as your Grace hath heard.
                     The King was greatly diſpleaſed at this miſaduenture,
and ſent preſently about, to heare tydings of Oniſtalde & Dramiſian,
that if their bodies were found dead, they might be interred
according to the nobilitie of their birth. But they were
found liuing, and by the king ſent to the Monaſterie of Cleare
Victory: where they were carefully cheriſhed, by the brethren
of that Religion, which was firſt found by Amadis de Gaule,
néere vnto Fenriſſe, & thither were his bones carried after his
death, from the great Brittaine, to witneſſe the victory hee had
got of the Kings in that place.
                     The king cauſed a great many of knights to purſue after the
Damoſell, but their labour was in vaine, for her Miſtreſſe Eutropa
who ſent her, kept her ſafe enough from them.
                     When the King was come to the Court, hée cauſed the
Princes to bée ſo prouided for, as they recouered againe their
health in ſhort time: and the knight of the Sauage man lying
in his accuſtomed Chamber, was diligently looked vnto by

the Princeſſe Flerida, and the King would often viſite him, becauſe
his minde did ſtil vſe perſwaſion with him, that he ſhould
be ſomewhat allyed to him in kindred. To be reſolued whereof,
he would intreate the Princeſſe, and he himſelfe would often
queſtion with him, to make knowne vnto them what he was,
or of whence he iudged himſelfe to deſcend: but he would neuer
by any meanes ſatiſfie their requeſt, becauſe indéed, he could not
gaine any knowledge of himſelfe.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXXV.
                     How the Sage Aliert brought the bodies of Fl
                           •
                        raman, Platir,
Pompides, and Blandidon, in a Chariot to his Caſtle,
where he healed their wounds, and ſet them againe in the
place where they fought their Combat, which made them
know one another, and ioyne together like friends. And
how a Damoſell came & talked with them, and gaue them
Horſes and Armour, with foure Eſquires to attend on
them, ſo they all departed with the Damoſell, to finiſh an
aduenture, which made her liue in great ſorrow. And how
the knight of Fortune, departing frō the Caſtle of the Sage
Aliart, happened to lodge in the houſe of an ancient Gentleman
neare London, where a Damoſel came to intreate
him of an aduenture hee ſhould take in hand, on her behalfe,
againſt the noble knight of the Sauage man.
                     
                        SAge Aliart, of the Obſcure Valley (as the
Hiſtorie declareth) cauſed the bodies of Platir
and the other knights, to be brought in a
Chariot to his Caſtle, where ſeparating
them in ſundry chambers, 
                           •
                        ee vſed ſuch
great care and diligence for re
                           ••
                        ring their
health, that in ſhort time they had eſcaped

the point of danger, and were in as good conſtitution of body as
they had beene before. For this occaſion vrged him to vſe more
circumſpection to them, that if their liues had failed thorow
miſaduenture, then had not onely their noble kindred béene oppreſſed
with griefe, but alſo their Dominions remained deſtitute
of their chiefe defence. For which cauſe he had thus prouided
for them, albeit out of their knowledge, whence ſuch friendſhip
ſhould procéede: neither how they left the place of their
Combate, and were brought into ſo ſtrong a Caſtell.
                     
                        Platir and Floraman, were at laſt lodged in one Chamber: in
like manner were Pompides and Blandidon, where they no
leſſe maruelled at their ſudden recouerie of health, then at
the Princely attendance was daily vſed to them: but which
was more to their griefe, they could gaine no knowledge of
their Hoſt, either what he was, or wherefore he vſed ſuch great
curteſie vnto them.
                     The knight of Fortune, (who as yet remained in the Caſtle
of the Sage Aliart) could neuer compaſſe the meane, to find the
Lodgings of theſe Knights, but was very penſiue, to thinke of
their great hurts receiued in the Combate: Neuertheleſſe, the
perſwaſion that the Sage Aliart vſed with him, as promiſing,
all ſhould bee ſafely recured, vrged him to exempt ſo great a
debut. When time ſerued, according as the Sage Aliart
thought conuenient, by force of his charmes, hee caſt them in a
dead ſlumber, and brought them to the place where they ſought
their Combate: where when they awaked, they found the place
beſtrewed with the Trunchions of their Speares, as alſo pieces
of their armour, and the graſſe ſomewhat died with the effuſion
of their blood,
                     Euery one well holding himſelfe to bee ſound of body, in
perfection of health, and the place ſo freſh with their blood, as
though it had béene but as then ſplit, fell all ioyntly together into
a great admiration, and Floraman beganne thus to expreſſe
his maruaile. If I ſhould ſpeake as I thinke, or thinke as I
haue occaſion, I ſhould bee offenſiue to ſome, and but ſmall to
mine owne benefite. In this place I remember we fought our
Combate, not to the griefe of one alone, but to the harme of vs

all in generall, and in this place are wée now, in good and perfect
eſtate, releeued out of a danger, and ſuccoured from ſo great
diſtreſſe, wherefore I muſt needes thinke, the aduentures of
this land to be rare: and rare, becauſe I haue not béene accuſtomed
to the like.
                     Truſt me (quoth the Prince Platir) theſe two knights were
out enemies in the Combate, and inuade vs ſtill, that we might
ende our former enterpriſe: but if ſo be their intent, they are as
vnprouided as we, and neither of vs horſe, weapon, or armour,
ſo reſcew himſelfe from his enemy. Theſe words thus e
                           •
                        ded,
Floraman came toward the other two Knights, deſiring them
(if they could) to reſolue them of this doubt. We are (anſwered
Pompides) in ſuch an vncertainty our ſelues, that had not you
moued the queſtion when you did, my ſelfe would haue requeſted
the ſame of you.
                     After a litle talke paſſed betwéene them, they fell into knowledge
of each other, when forgetting their former enmitn, they
imbraced one another, and greatly reioyced, that they had ſo
happily met, vnto their ſeuerall contentation. To breake off
their friendly purpoſes of ſalutations, they eſpied a Damoſell
come riding to wards them, mounted on a bay Palfrey, attired
all in blacke, and her countenance bewraying a ſad and ſorrowfull
diſpoſition. When ſhée was come vnto them, reſtraining
the bridle of her horſe, and wel eying them, began at laſt in this
manner.
                     Gentlemen, it ſéemeth ſome ſuch accident hath happened, as
hath defeated you of ſuch refuge, as ſometime you had, which
may ſéeme ſtrange to you, yet not rare to mée, who know the
miſaduentures of this Countrey, to the griefe of my friends,
and ſorrow of my ſelfe. Faire Lady (ſaid Blandidon) if we
ſhould rehearſe in what manner our miſchance hath happened,
we ſhould be ouertedious to you to heare it, and in danger
ourſelues, while we ſtand to ſhew it, wanting our Armour to
auoyd what may happen, and being in a place out of our own
knowledge. Admit (quoth the Damoſell) my ſelfe would
be the meane, to prouide you all of horſes and armour againe,
would you grant the ſmall requeſt I ſhould put foorth vnto

you? Ladie (aunſwered Floraman) reſpecting our owne néede,
and the duetie the owe to any diſtreſſed Ladie, hath wrought
that in me, and I am ſure the like in all my fellowes, (the conditions
fulfilled) that we will abide the vttermoſt extremitie
for you, and in your defence.
                     Euery one proteſting what Floraman had promiſed, the Damoſell
departed, returning in ſhort time with foure Eſquires,
bearing foure very faire and ſtrong armours which foure more
that ledde foure goodly courſers, all of one colour and bigneſſe:
when to the Knightes ſhoe thus beg
                           •
                        de. Loe Gentlemen,
what your preſent eſtate, & my earneſt affection hat conſtrained
me to doe, deſiring you to make eſtimation of theſe giftes,
according as you ſhall finde them in proofe. Giuing her grrat
thanks, the eſquires armed them all preſently, their armor not
differing from one another in colour and richneſſe, foure ſhields
were like wiſe deliuered them, the deuiſs where you ſhall vnderſtand
hereafter. When they were armed and mounted on
horſebacke, the Damoſell ſhewed them, that they muſt accompany
her thrée or foure dayes, in which time (through their aſſiſtance)
ſhe ſhould enter her lamentable ſorrows, and gréeuous
miſhaps, giuing them likewiſe thoſe foure Eſquires to ſerue in
ſtead of them which were departed.
                     They not denying what the Damoſell had requeſted, rode on
with her, where at this time we will leaue them, and return to
the knight of Fortune, who paſſing the time away with y• 
                        Sage
Allart, in remembring his miſhappes, his frowards chances in
Loue, and all accidences that had happened him in trauaile, determined
to take his leaue of the Sage Magitian, who would
not let him vnderſtand his birth and Parentage, for the reaſon
which you ſhall heare hereafter. But commending vnto him
the aduentures of great Brittaine, as alſo what neceſſitie the
good Knights ſtood in for want of his helpe: and arming Siliuian
with an armour, much like that which his Maiſter had alwais
worn, they imbraced to together very curtuouſly, and ſo depart
the Sage Aliart promiſing him to be in all places where he
ſhould ſtand deſtitute of his helpe, and would aſſiſt him againſt
all miſfortunes.
                     
                        
So rode the knight of Fortune, towards the anciēt and famous
Cittie of London, deſirous to ſée the Engliſh Courte, the Fame
whereof was blazed through the whole world. After thrée dayes
trauell, he arriued at the houſe of an ancient Gentleman, which
was not farre from London, and there he repoſed for that night,
conceyuing great pleaſure to conferre with his Hoaſt (who loued
to entertaine all wandring knights) about the eſtate of that
Countrey, with the noble aduentures in olde time paſſed, as alſo
at that preſent in great Brittaine. After Supper, they came
and ſate in the Porch of the Houſe, where at laſt they ſawe ending
the gate, a Damoſell accompanied with a young Gentleman:
who requeſted of the Gentleman of that place, to haue a
Lodging there for that night. The Gentleman, whoſe cuſtome
was to entertaine Straungers, commanded her a Chamber,
with ſuch prouiſion as ſhe ſhould ſtand in néede of. Shée giuing
thanks to her friendly Hoſt, for his ſo great courteſie, came and
ſate down by the Gentleman of the Houſe, which the knight
of Fortune perceiuing, remooued his ſtoole, and ſat down by her:
and among other talke, requeſted of her, for what occaſion ſhee
was ſo penſiue and heauie, which was great griefe to him to beholde,
as for her to abyde.
                     The Damoſell taking occaſion to behold him, and eſpying the
ſhield of Fortune, ſo much eſteemed and famed through all countreyes,
caſt her ſelfe downe at his feete, and in teares began this
ſorrowfull diſcourſe. I perceiue the anger of Fortune, ſatiſfied
with the former iniuries, that ſhee hath executed on my poore
ſelfe, will at this inſtaunt chaunge her rigour, and fauour her
that hath bene altogether infortunate, in that I haue found the
Knight, who not onely can, but (as I hope) will ende my miſeries
by his knightly Valour. So it is (worthy Syr) that ſometime
I had a Sonne, ingenious in euery exerciſe, but chiefely
well nurtured in Martiall affaires: and had his fortune agréed
with his towardly behauiour, then had I bin a Matrone of ioy,
where now I am the Mother of Miſfortune. It ſo chaunced,
this my Sonne to growe amorous of a young Beautifull Damoſell,
who had retained in fauour an other Knight, before my
Sonne was admitted her Seruant: but ſuch was her affection

toward my Sonne, that her loue to the firſt Suter died with
cold, and ſhe eſtéemed him as worthy of her good will.
                     This perceiued in the ſight of all, was not his from the
Knight, who began greatly to ſtomacke it, and finding oportunity
fit for his purpoſe, aſſayled violently my Sonne, who
(notwithſtanding the danger on both ſides) brought his enemy
into hazard of his life, and himſelfe the better into his Ladies liking.
When time had admitted this conquerer into better eſtate,
that his wounds were healed, and his ſtrength conquered
(not forgetting the repulſe he ſuſtained by my Sonne, as alſo
the earneſt loue he bare to the Damoſell,) hee returned with a
knight attyred in gréene Armour, bearing in his ſhield the Portrait
of a Sauage man, leading in his hand a couple of Lions,
who ſéeking reuenge on the other knights behalfe, my Sonne
tooke the courage to enter Combate with him. But ſuch was
the ſpite of Fortune, and ſo great her malice againſt mee, that
my Sonne was brought in ſubiection to this ſtrange Knight,
who not contented with the victory, cruelly cut off his head, and
gaue it to his mortall enemy. Thus conſidering the great iniury
that the Knight had wrought mée, and that none will doe
me that fauour to reuenge my vntimely loſſe, I determined not
to leaue my trauaile, till I had found you, who bearing the
name of the Knight of Fortune, (renowned in all Countreyes,
that hath either ſéene or heard of you) can compell my enemy to
confeſſe his fault, and giue him the reward that belongeth to ſo
great diſcourteſie.
                     Wherefore moſt worthy Syr, at which words he ſtaied her
thus. Faire Lady, the extreame griefe of your inward thoughts
witneſſed by the aboundance of teares the bedewe your roſichéekes,
conſtraineth me to belieue what you haue ſaide, and to
beare a part with you of accuſtomed heauineſſe. Wherefore,
conſidering your wrong, and the great vngentleneſſe of the
Knight of the Sauage man, if my Fortune may bee ſo good to
méet him, I will reuenge your iniury with his death, or leaue
my own life for a pawne with him. And the rather am I vrged
to deale with this Knight, for that there remaineth a controuerſie
betwéene him and mée, as yet vnfiniſhed, and now your

miſhap ſhall giue me good occaſion, to recompence him for both
together, if I knew certaine in what place to finde him. Truly
ſir (quoth the Damoſell) I left him at the cittie of London,
where his valour is held in ſuch eſtimation, as is more then I
can ſpeake, whereof I iudge him not a little proude.
                     The knight of Fortune, perceiuing the earneſt deſire of the
Damoſell, to be reuenged on him, whom he would as gladly
finde, promiſed her to ſens him defiance on the next morning
by his Eſquire, and that he would be as diligent on her behalfe
as ſhe was deſirous to haue it diſpatched: to which words the
Damoſell replyed. I can now ſufficiently iuſtifie what I haue
often heard, that your care hath bene ſo great to the welfare of
Ladies, as that Fortune hath the better proſpered all your affaires,
and in ſo much I can iudge it the more to others, by how
much I finde ſuch great curteſie my ſelfe, which if I die before
I deſerue, let yet your gentle nature afford me a good opinion,
for that all my life time, ſhall be ſpent in the honour of your
name.
                     The ancient Gentleman, vnderſtanding that his gueſt was
the Noble knight of Fortune, eſteemed his good luck more then
he could any way diſcloſe: wherefore he deſired pardon, that he
had not vſed him according as his famous report deſerued: and
that his ignorance might ſerue to excuſe any fault committed.
And the rather he vſed the leſſe ſuſpition toward him, becauſe
he had entertained ſo many noble and valiant Gentlemen: among
whom (as he was well worthy) he gaue great commendation
to the knight of the Sauage man, as he had heard of many,
and partly had ſéene himſelfe.
                     Which good report, incited, and greatly moued the knight of
Fortune, to vſe the more diligence in finding him: in which deſire,
as time ſerued, they brake company, and departed to their
lodgings. This couragious knight ſuſtaining ſmall reſt in his

                           〈◊〉
                         the cleare morning appeared, aroſe, and armed him
with all ſpéed, taking his leaue of his Hoſt and the Damoſell,
departing towards London accōpanied with Siluian. And drawing
ſomewhat neare the Citie, he tooke a great pleaſure to
behold the braue Towers and ſtrong Edifies, which by the

ſhining of the Sunne, gaue great contentation to his minde,
and vrged him to aligh
                           •
                        , becauſe he would take good view therof:
vſing much talke with Siluian, as concerning the great fame
of that ancient Cittie. So long he ſtayed there, till he ſuppoſed
the aged King to be riſen, when he rode into the cittie, where
both the brauery of the place, and the remembrance of the famous
Exployts, there begun and finiſhed, prouoked him to
ſome hautie attempt, that might enrowle his name among
the number of thoſe, that were held in high eſtimation, For that
the report of noble déeds doth vrge the minde of the couragious
to be equall with thoſe, who beare moſt commendation of
their approued valiancie.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXXVI.
                     How the Knight of Fortune arriuing at London, paſſed away
the time with an ancient Hermit, in ſeeing the monuments
and Funerals of many noble perſons: vntill he had ſent Siluian
to the Engliſh Court, where, in the preſence of the
King, he declared his Maiſters challenge to the knight of
the Sauage man, which he willingly accepted, albeit the
king would hardly, agree vnto it. And how they endured
the Combate ſo long, that the king accompanyed with the
Princeſſe Fl
                           •
                        rida, were faine to come▪ and intreate them
to leaue off their enterpriſe, at whoſe requeſt, they both
gaue conſent, neither of them giuing the victorie of the
other.
                     
                        
                        MAny were the gréeuous cogitations, that
paſſed the mind of the knight of Fortune,
while he was entred the famous citie of
London, as well for the vngentle dealing of
his Lady Polynarda, as alſo ſundry other
conceits that he had occaſion to thinke on.
At laſt, remembring he might not be licenced
the combate till after Dinner, he withdrew himſelfe to an
Hermitage, where after he had heard ſeruice, he was deſirous
to ſée the ancient monuments that were in the Chappel, which
for the moſt part were ruinated, yet ſome of them remained in
good eſtate of their beautie. Among all the things that were
there to be ſéene, the knight of Fortune behld an ancient Sepulchre,
which was cunningly framed in workmanſhip, albeit
long continuance of time, had both waſted and dimmed the
workes and figures thereof, ſo that one could hardly reade
what was engrauen about it, ſauing at the one end was perceiued
the name of Arbam of Norgalles, who was buried whē
King Liſuart ruled the the crowne of England. Vpon the ſight
of this ancient monument, he queſtioned with the hermit, if in
time paſt the ancient Sepulchre had not contained a much larger
quantity, to which demand, the Hermite thus anſwered.
Good Sir, when firſt I came to inhabite this place, which by
computatiō of time, I geſſe to be about 34. yéers ſince, I found
this ancient Sepulchre in the ſame eſtate you now behold it.
But as I haue heard of many, and therefore may be hold to report
it, when the Infidels did inuade this Land, they did ruinate
and ſpoyle this Tombe aboue all the reſt. Not ſparing
theſe other by it, as you may perceiue, wherein are inferred
Don Grumedan, and Don Cuillan the Penſiue, beſide other
perſonages of no leſſe nobilitie then knightly behauiour.
                     The Hermits talke, vrged him to remember the diſcourſe of
the life of this noble Don Guillan, comparing his hapleſſe life,
with his heauy eſtate, which was in like manner procured,

as his Lady Polynarda, was the original of his ſorowful mourning.
At this remembrance, falling into a great agony of mind
he was conſtrained to leane on the irons that compaſſed this
auncient Sepulchre, vttering ſuch rufull complaints within
himſelfe, as the gréefe thereof cauſed the teares to run down his
chéekes.
                     Standing a great while as it were in amaze, the Hermite
ſuppoſed he occupyed his mind about ſome euill intent, but Sriuian
ſtepped vnto him, declaring that it was his wont to be often
incumbred with Melancholy, and therefore willed him to
vſe no more doubt in this matter. At length he hapned forth of
this mute ſtudy, turning his head to hide his extreame griefe,
when Siluian went vnto him, deſiring he would noc forget his
enterpriſe, with the knight of the Sauage man, and to leaue

                           •
                        ch thoughts, as would draw his eſtate into ſuch debility, as
might greatly hinder his former determination. With theſe
words he was ſomewhat diſpleaſed, ſaying: I more doubt of
that which my late ſtudying hath called into remembrance, thē
either the feare or force my enemy can vſe to me. So taking
his leaue of the Hermit, he rode toward the Citty where he
met the Gentleman his Hoſt, and the Damoſell, on whoſe behalfe
he had enterpriſed the Combate, then becauſe he would
not enter the Citty as yet, he ſent Siluian to the Court, to manifeſt
before the King his Maiſters challenge, and to vſe great
circumſpection, what anſwer the King returned.
                     
                        Siluian well noting his Maiſters commandement departed
and in ſhort time arriued at the Pallace, where going vp into
the great Hall, he perceiued the King was newly riſen from
Diuner, walking with his knights, among whom was the
knight of the Sauage man, being well and perfectly cured of
the wounds he had receiued, when he fought againſt Gracian,
Francian and Polynarda, who were there alſo in his company.
Siluian came into the preſence of the king, where on his knée,
with ſuch duty as is required in that reſpect, he began as followeth.
Moſt puiſſant Prince, the knight of Fortune my
noble Lord and Maſter, by me in humility of his owne perſon
yéeldeth the homage of his heart and knightly Sword, at your

Graces command. Such was his intent, as in your Courts he
bowed to make proofe of his ſeruice, but Fortune not ſo agréeing,
in ſtead of aquiet entry (vnder your Graces leaue) he meaneth
to come by way of a challenge. For as he trauailed, he met
a Ladie, whoſe cauſe of miſfortune, ſhée doeth attribute to the
Knight of the Sauage man, and my Lord taking her diſtreſſed
caſe in hand, by me giueth challenge to him of Combat, to méet
him if he dare, ſo that your Grace will allowe my Lord a ſafe
entrance and returns, without the diſturbance of any to hinder
his determination, the Knight of the Sauage man onely excepted.
The king who had heard the fame of the knight of Fortune,
to be ſuch as was extolled in all Princes Courts, was very
ſory that his arriuall ſhould moue ſuch a requeſt, and would
willingly haue denied the Combate, but that the Knight of the
Sauage man came before his Maieſtie, and vſed theſe words.
My gracious Soueraigne, the Knight of Fortune is of ſuch reputation,
as neither may your Grace denie his requeſt, nor my
ſelfe refuſe to enter Combate with him. And albeit his puiſſāce
hath vrged him to a Challenge, and the aduantage gotten in other
countries, maketh him the more earneſt to haue his déedes
knowne here: yet can neither his gréeting diſmay my courage,
nor his preſence compell me to leaue the fielde. Wherefore, I
deſire your Grace to grant his requeſt, that he may haue libertie
of the Iuſt, according as hée ought: otherwiſe will I goe to
him, as well to ſatiſfie his deſire, as to compaſſe the affection I
haue of my ſelfe.
                     The King ſéeing all excuſes would not ſerue to hinder this
matter, but that the Knight of the Sauage man would néedes
take on him the fight, returned Siluian with this anſwere. My
Friend, tell thy Lord, I am both pleaſed, and offended at his requeſt
yet ſéeing his demand ſtandeth with law of armes, which
I can no way iuſtly denie, I graunt him free leaue, without
contradiction of any. But better would I haue iudged of him,
had his challenge béene to any other Knight, where being as it
is, he will not ſo lightly eſcape, as perhaps hee maketh account
of.
                     With this meſſage Siluian returned to his Maiſter, who hauing

heard the pleaſure of the king, came prnſently to the place
appointed for the combat, where the king with the Quéen, and
the Princeſſe Flerida, with all the nobility, were ready placed,
to behold this noble attempt. The Citizens likewiſe repaired
thither to ſee this combate, which was ſo ſuddenly noyſed abroade,
ſo that the place was filled with abundance of people.
The knight of Fortune entred, and made his obeyſance to the
king, and paſſed by, then came the knight of the Sauage man,
accompanied with many knights & noble gentlemen, among
which company was Argolant who brought him his ſpeare, &
Don Roſiran de la Bronde deliuerd him his ſhéeld, ſo marching
on by the king they left him, vſing this talke with the knight
of Fortune. I know not ſir knight, what ſhould be the cauſe of
your ſo great challenge, without it be to iniurie him that neuer
offended you. Sir (anſwered the knight of Fortune) behold the
Ladie here preſent, to whom you haue offered no ſmall abuſe,
which I will ſée you recompence, or conſtraine you to abide the
doome of my mercy. Truſt me ſir (quoth the knight of the Sauage
man) the Lady is altogether vnknowne of me, neyther
haue I offended her, or any body beſide, that I ſhould deſerue to
be thus vngently accuſed: but I ſée the good opinion you haue
of your owne manhood, cauſeth you to be ſo earneſt in this matter,
which I will not denym, albeit I could, yet giue no ſpot to
my honour. So departing themſelues to fetch their caréere at
the ſound of the Trumpetst, hey met brauely together, breaking
halfe a dozen Staues a péece, yet neither able to ſtirre the
other. When they ſaw they could not diſmount one another,
they tooke their ſwords and charged each other with ſuch pollitique
behauiour in their fight, that it was maruellous to heare,
what commendations were generally giuen.
                     When they had well wearied themſelues on Horſebacke,
they alighted, and endeuored to endanger each other with ſuch
rigorous blowes, that it was thought the Combat would not
long laſt, ere one of them were ſlaine. For their ſhéelds were
ſhiuered all in péeces, their Armour ſo broken, that the blood
trickled downe their ſides, then fell they to wraſtling one with
another, their gripes made the blood to iſſue foorth aboundantly,

yet neither had the aduantage of the other in ſtrength,
but both ſo equall, that it could not be iudged, who was likeſt
of victorie. The Princeſſe Flerida gréeuing at their great effuſion
of blood, departed in ſuch heauineſſe, as if ſhe had known it
to be the blood of her ſonnes, that was ſo cruelly ſpilt. The
king with all his Courtly attendaunts was ſtroken into ſuch
a maze, when he ſaw them take their ſwords againe, that he
thought the flower of all Chiualrie was there preſent before
him, and was in great heauineſſo, for that they would not giue
ouer by no meanes.
                     The knight of the Sauage man ſéeing himſelfe deſtitute of
Sword, ſheeld, and Armour, began ſomewhat to feare, that
his life would ſtand in great hazard, but yet he contented himſelfe,
that if as then his death were ordained, he ſhould ſuſtaine
the leſſe reproch, in that a knight of, ſuch honour had giuen him
the ouerthrow, wherefore at a pauſe, he thus began. Why
ſhould I diſcourage my ſelfe at the death, ſéeing I ſhall depart
in the flower and prime of mine age, and end my dayes at his
hande, who is onely eſtéemed for good Fortune? Yet the oath I
haue made to the Princeſſe Flerida, with the great duty I find
in my ſelfe, as her deſert, conſtrains mée to wiſh a longer time
if it might be, as well to exalt her honour, as to trie the aduenture
which hath endamaged ſo many good knights, whereto I
did euer bend mine affection, as the onely enterpriſe in all my
life to win me renowne. But ſéeing I am falne into ſo great
miſhap, as both Fortune doth deny me, and mine owne manhood
faile me, I will yet ſo behaue my ſelfe vpon mine enemy,
as when he hath woon the vttermoſt, he ſhall not boaſt of his
Conqueſt, and ſuch a writ will I deliuer him to ſeale, as I
hope ſhall craue no other ſignet but his heart blood.
                     In like manner the knight of Fortune ſtood debating with
himſelfe, as well vpon his preſent danger, as alſo his paſſed
dollour, not forgetting his Ladie and Miſtreſſe Polinarda, to
whom, as had ſhe bene preſent, he began this complaint. Madame,
behold now the time wherein your anger doth kill me,
and your fauour reuiue me, which except you will beare the
cruell mind to worke my Tragedy, reſtore in wonted clemencie

the encouragement of my hapleſſe labours, which ſince it
lyeth in your handes, caſt a friendly looke on the man, that in all
extremities is none but yours onely. If you deny me this ſmall
requeſt, neither ſhall I aduenture the enterpriſes of great Brittaine,
nor doe that honour to you, which my heart hath euer deſired,
ſo ſhall the flower of Chiualrie remaine in their great
miſfortune, and you through your obſtinacie accounted the loſſe
of them all. This knight hath put mee in more danger then
euer did any, yet neither of vs both enioyeth the Conqueſt: and
if the infortunate death returne to my ſhare, I ſhall thinke my
ſelfe honourably failed at his handes, but my poore heart cruelly
martyred through your hard dealing.
                     Then fell they to the Combate againe, not able to charge one
another ſo fiercely as at the firſt, yet labouring earneſtly to end
their ſtrife one way or other, which mooued the king to diſcend,
accompanied with his Knights, and fearing the loſſe of theyr
liues, ſought to ſet them at vnitie. But ſuch was their deſire
of victorie, and ſo couragious their mindes in middeſt of
moſt doubt, that the King was faine to returne, becauſe they
would giue no eare to his perſwaſion, Then went hee to the
Chamber of the Princeſſe Flerida, where in this manner he began
to vſe his ſpéech. Fayre Daughter, if my noble Sonne
Don Edward your Lord be liuing, and that he may be deliuered
by the valour of any earthly creature, I perſwade my ſelfe,
that one of theſe Knights ſhall be the meane to relieue his aduerſe
eſtate. But if in this Combate, as I greatly feare, they
ſhall ende their liues vpon this hautie attempt, then farewell
all hope that I euer repoſed, for both you ſhall loſe him, and my
ſelfe ſhall euer lacke him, where, by them I might (aſſure my
ſelfe) both to heare of my Sonne, and enioy him in my Court,
in his woonted eſtate againe. Wherefore, if you beare ſuch loue
to him, as you haue alway proteſted, and fauour me in this my
earneſt deſire, vouchſafe the paines to walke vnto them, for
that one word of of your mouth wil enfore them leaue the combate,
ſo ſhall you poſſeſſe what you haue long wiſhed, and I be
honoured in ſo great a courteſie. The Princeſſe, who ſince the
abſence of her Lord had ſeldome come abroad, but alway kept

her Chamber in her wonted lamentations, at the requeſt of the
aged king came walking downe with him, and foure Damoſels
attired all in blacke attending on her, her ſelfe apparrelled
in the ſame manner: ſauing that the vaile on her head ſhadowed
all her face, ſo that none could haue full view to behold her
beautie.
                     When ſhe was entred the place of the Iuſt, to the great amazement
of all that were preſent, ſhe came to the Knight of
Fortune, and tooke him by the arme, with theſe words. Sir
knight, if either you make account of the honour of Ladies, or
will manifeſt in your déedes that you owe them any duty, then
at my requeſt I intreate you to leaue off the Combate, as well
to auoyd the hazard of your liues, as to content this noble company,
who are ſatiſfied with your famous exployts.
                     The knight of Fortune wel eying the Princeſſe, and perceiuing
her to reſemble the countenance of his faire Polinarda, he
humbled himſelfe on his knée, with theſe words. Faire Lady,
my deſire hath bene greatly bent to end this Combate, and to
render this Knight the victory, as he hath well deſerued, but
ſéeing you haue charged me with ſuch a curteous command, I
rather deſire the death, then to yéeld any deny all.
                     Sir (quoth the knight of the Sauage man) if I ſhould report
the eſtimation I haue of your knighthood, with the forceable
charges I haue receiued at your hands, I might ſay that iuſtly,
which you haue rightly deſerued, you are the onely knight to
whom I will grant my Conqueſt. But ſéeing you haue made
grant to her, whom in duty I muſt alway reuence, and that
her intreaty hath moued you to end our debate, if I ſhould contrary
what ſhe and you haue appointed, I might worthily be
reproched among all knights, much more diſped among faire
Ladyes.
                     The Princes was ſo well pleaſed with this good agréement,
that giuing each of them harty thanks, ſhe returned to her
Chamber, and the King not a little pleaſed at this good euent,
commanded the knights ſhould bée brought into his Pallace,
where ſuch reſpect ſhould be vſed to them, that in ſhort time
they might recouer their former good health. But the Knight

of Fortune would not accept the knights offer at that time, but
departed with the Gentleman his Hoſt to his houſe againe,
whether being carefully brought in a Chariot, ſuch prouiſion
was ordained for him, that by the helpe of the Gentlemans
Daughter, who was maruailous expert in the Arte of Medicine,
his weake eſtate was relieued into indifferent good plight.
Then was the Damoſell ſought for, who was the cauſe of this
Combate, but anſwere was made, that ſo ſoone as they had entred
the fight, ſhe ſecretly ſhrunke away thorow the preace, ſo
that they could gaine no knowledge of her.
                     The knight of the Sauage man was conducted to his Chamber,
where hée had ſuch great attendance in the curing of his
wounds, as by any meanes they could deuiſe, what might beſt
ſerue for remedy. For neuer were his hurts ſo dangerous, as
thoſe that he had receiued at this Combate, nor his life in greater
hazard, then it was at this preſent, which made the Princeſſe
ſo diligent about him, that ſhe enterpriſed as much as the
ſimpleſt, that had any occaſion to trauaile for his health.
                     The King was greatly diſpleaſed, that the knight of Fortune
would not vouchſafe the lodging in his Pallace, where we will
leaue awhile the two vnknowen brothers, till they haue attained
their health, that thē we may haue more occaſion to ſpeake
of them. And loth were I to be forgetfull of the Knights of the
Court of Conſtantinople, who aſſembled themſelues in tranaile
in the Forreſt of great Brittaine, truſting to the tickle dealings
of fléering Fortune. Who if ſhe fauored them a day, frowned
on them againe for a months ſpace after, and when they
thought themſelues in ſureſt eſtate of good, hap, then were they
néereſt to their owne deſtruction.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXXVIII.
                     How Eutropa the Enchantreſſe, who had ſent this Damoſell,
that procured the Combate betweene the Knight of Fortune,
and the knight of the Sauage man, cauſed al the Grecian
Knights to come before her Caſtle, where they ſeuered
themſelues in maner of two Armies. And how ſhe ſent
two Damoſels more, who (by their faigned reports) ſet
ſuch a diſcord betweene both parties, that they prepared
themſelues to a dangerour Battaile.
                     
                        
                           EVtropa the enchantreſſe, and Aunt to the
Giant Dramuſiande, ſeeing her Caſtele
ſtored with good Knights, and fearing the
time drewe nie to preuent her wicked purpoſe,
ſhe ſought to ſet ſuch diſcord among
the Knights that were lately arriued in
England, as they ſhould without knowledge
ſpoile the liues of each other. For to this ende and purpoſe
ſhe framed her intent, that if ſhe could execute her will on
the couragious Knights, who endeuoured themſelues in the
ſearch of the ſtrayed Princes, ſhe would ſet ſuch ſtrife and enmitie
thorow all Chriſtendome, that the Paganes ſhould ruinate
and ſpoile all the Dominions, and be Lords ouer the kingdoms
and Countreys.
                     And the better to bring her deuiſes to paſſe, ſhee ſent Damoſels
continually abroad, through the circute of great Brittaine,
to ſet ſtrife and diſcention betwéene all the trauayling
Knights, and the Damoſelles were ſo diligent in theyr Miſtreſſe
commaund, that they daily brought many good Knights
into hazard and danger, as you haue partly heard, and ſhall doe
hereafter.
                     
                        
One of theſe Damoſels was the occaſion of the Combate,
betwéene Polinarda and Knight of the Sauage man, the very
ſame Damoſell brought the Horſe and Armour, to the Prince
Platir, and his companions. She alſo ſet the ſtrife betwéen the
Knight of Fortune, and the Knight of the Sauage man, for this
Damoſell had teares at her commaund, and ſuch ſubtill reports
for the auaile of her Miſtreſſe, that ſhée was onely beloued and
eſtéemed with Eutropa, yea, ſhee referred the whole ſubſtance
of her practiſe, to the deceitfull reports of the Damoſell.
                     The Knights that were lately come from Conſtantinople,
and remained a while for their pleaſure in the Engliſh Court,
were enforced by theſe craftie meanes to take their departure,
and to ſéeke the aduentures that were in great Brittaine.
                     
                     So when the Combate was ended, betwéene the knight of
Fortune, and the Knight of the Sauage man, they diſguiſed
their Armour, changed the deuiſes of theyr Shieldes, leaſt they
ſhould be knowen, and put themſelues in trauayle, which way
they were inforced, to finde the Caſtle of the Giant Dramuſiande.
                     
                     
                        Eutropa had brought all the knights into the field where the
Caſtle ſtoode, ſeuering them in two companies, and a Riuer
running betwéene them, where their Tents were pitched, and
ſuch prouiſion appointed, as thogh they had determined to fight
a maine Battaile. On the one ſide was the Prince Gracian,
Oniſtalde, Dramain, Francian, Polinard, Tremoran, Claribal,
and Emeralde the Faire, on the other ſide was the Prince Berolde,
Dridan, Belizart, Guerin, Eſtrellant, Germaine of Orleance,
Platir, Floraman, Blandidon, and Criſpian, with diuers
other. And both the ſides brought into ſuch eſtate, that they
neither could tell what the other were, nor by what meanes
they were brought into that place. At laſt foorth of the Caſtle
came two Damoſels, the one accompanied like a perſō of great
grauitie, the other hauing no body with her, but a yong Gentleman
that was her guide, who preſently went to the Pauillions
next the Caſtle, and the other to the Prince Gracian and his
company, that were on the further ſide of the Riuer.
                     After ſhe was come into the preſence of the Princes, & very

gently and courteouſly entertained, preparing her ſelfe to a deceitfull
courſe, and intermedling her talke with teares, ſhée
beganne in this manner. Sir knights, the crown of your noble
déedes, and continuall Fame of your well imployed Knight-héed,
is ſufficient to irritate your vſurping enemies, and to
confound all ſuch as ſwell againſt honourable duety, ſo that
their owne drifts ſhall prepare their iuſt deſtruction, and their
euill deuices runne into contempt of the whole world. As concerning
the preſumption I haue vſed in my raſh entry, with
the bold behauiour you may perceiue, to my reproch, I ſhall
deſire you, firſt to conſider the extremity of my griefe, and then
to pardon my enterpriſe, when you are priuy to my Paſſions
This auncient Caſtell which you may here behold, doth belong
to me that haue liued in it, both a heauy and happy time,
in that in times paſt, I haue béene better acquainted with pleaſant
conceyts, then for a long time I could enioy the like tranquility,
as they to whom my miſfortunes are very well knowē,
can witneſſe the great alteration of my former eſtate. For Fortune
among all the liberall benefits ſhe had beſtowed on me, as
wealth to maintaine me, and a quiet gouernment to protect me,
gaue me a Daughter, ſo perfect in beauty, ſo pure in modeſty, ſo
preciſe of her perſonage, and ſo exquiſite in her vſuall behauiour,
that many noble Gentlemen haue put their liues in hazard, to
deſerue her good liking, that was liked of all.
                     Great hath bin the intreaty of many Honorable perſonages,
to haue her in mariage, which I haue alwaies denied, till now,
making choyſe of one aboue all the other, I haue agréed to accompliſh
his importunate deſire.
                     This being knowne to a knight, who had long time béene a
Suter, yet neuer ſo fortunate as to gaine his intent, now preſumeth
vpon his ſtrength to take her from me perforce, & to iniure
him that hath obtained my conſent to eſpouſe her. In ſigne
wherof (pointing to the Pauillions of the other knight, on the
farder ſide of the riuer) behold where he hath placed his Tents
to inuade my Caſtle, and through the helpe of his friends, purpoſeth
to ruinate this mine ancient dwelling, & to vſe violence
to her, who is betrothed to another. When I conſidered there

was no meane to remedy the neceſſity of my caſe, but eiter to
kéepe my Hold, and there be famiſhed, or yéeld me ſelfe to my
foes, and ſo be diſhonoured: I ſent one of my Damoſels to the
Engliſh Court, at whoſe requeſt you are here arriued in this
place, where you may behold my vſurping enemy, and the great
danger I ſtand in of the hard award of fortune. And once more
haue I ſent by way of intreaty, to will them breake vp their
ſiege, and not to trouble me for her whom they cannot haue,
though they vſe neuer ſuch violence. But ſuch is the great mallice
of this knight, and his intent linked to ſuch an extreme purpoſe,
that neither gentleneſſe may intreate him, nor faire demeanour
ſerue to perſwade him. Wherfore noble Gentlemen,
as you reſpect the honour of an oppreſſed Virgin, and the oath
that your knighthood hath auouched in this behalfe, ſtand now
her friend who is voyd of all defence, and maintaine her cauſe,
which is both for your renowne, and her good fame for euer.
                     She hauing thus ended her coined proteſtation, they ſtood debating
with themſelues what anſwer they ought to make herat
laſt, the prince Gracian (they hauing referred all to his diſpoſition)
tooke the Damoſell by the hand, and thus ſhaped his anſwer.
Faire Lady, ſince this honorable company haue appointed
me (vn worthy) to anſwer on their behalfe, and that we are
perſwaded you would not informe vs of any miſreport: thus I
dare awareant for them all, that you ſhall finde them as ready
to defend you, as your enemy dare preſume any way to moleſt
you. The Damoſell hearing the anſwer of the Prince Gracian
to be ſuch as ſerued fit for her purpoſe, gaue thē all hartg thanks
and calling▪ her teares againe into remembraunce vrged the
knights to ſuch pittie, that they greatly deſired to enter Combate
with the other company. Then returned the Damoſell,
that had beene with the other knights (informing them likewiſe
of ſuch a falſe report:) when being entred the Pauillion, to
the Damoſel (with curteſie) ſhe gaue forth theſe ſpéeches. Mathe
enemy to your honour, and friend to his owne damage, wil
not be perſwaded, but will follow his enterpriſe: and in deriſion
ſcoffeth at this noble aſſembly reporting them to be ſo weake,
that they dare not ſhew themſelues.
                     
                        
Theſe words vrged Oniſtalde vnto ſuch anger, that he preſently
brake forth into theſe ſpéeches: I beléeue, that had they
tryed thoſe whom they haue aduentured to dare, they ſhould
finde the chaſtiſement of their peremptory bragges, to be aunſwerable
in effect, as they haue iuſtly deſerued. Tuſh (quoth Polinarda)
it is eaſie for our enemy to talke his pleaſure, but when
he ſhall find his trechery, rewarded with due recompence, hee
will wiſh he had vſed himſelfe more fréendely to this Ladie,
whom he hath ſo greatly iniuryed. Then Francian was deſirous
to ſend them defiance, which the Damoſell would not
ſuffer, leſt her dealings ſhould be eſpyed, but to worke the ſurer
in her deceite, ſhe ſent the other Damoſell once more, to
will them to depart preſently, whereto if they made denyall,
that ſhe ſhould ſummon them in armes, to prepare for the fight.
In maane while ſhe was gone on her meſſage, this other craftie
Gyrle, vſed ſuch familiaritie with the Prince Gracian and
the other Knights, that their heats were enflamed againſt
them beyond the Riuer. To whom the other Damoſell had
reported, that the Prince Gracian and his company, did endeuour
themſelues to take the Caſtle from her Miſtreſſe perforce,
whereupon ſhée requeſted them to defend her Miſtreſſe
right, and to cauſe them know they went about a diſloyall enterpriſe.
                     The Prince Floraman hauing well pondered the words of
the Damoſell, returned her preſently this aunſwer. Albeit
out duettie is to defend any diſtreſſed perſon, and ſo gainſay the
miſhap of any iniuried Lady, yet reaſon willeth vs, ere we preſume
too haſtily, to be acquai
                           •
                        ted with the cauſe, and well aduiſed
ere we begin ſuch a raſh attempt, elſe may our enemie
iudge, we come more vpon a brauerie, then Knighthood may awarrant
our behauiour, and ſo runne into danger our ſelues, for
that the rightful cauſe hath alwaies the victory. Wherfore thus
reſolue your ſelfe, wee will firſt know if your reportes be of
trueth or no: leaſt we enter into ſuch defectes, as we may perhappes
repent vs. With that the Demoſell began to rehearſe
their promiſe, at ſuch time as ſhe deliuered them Horſes and
Armour in their great neceſſitie, for which cauſe ſhe deſired

then to accompliſh their promiſe, threatning them, that their
Nobility might be defaced in denying their words. Truſt me
(anſwered Platir) I haue ſuch a good opinion in her dealings,
that ſhe would not vſe perſwaſion to vs of an vntroth. Wherfore
tell vs faire Lady, doth your enemy ſtill remaine reſolute
in his determination? albeit my Companions deny to ayd you
as they haue auouched, yet will I abide by you to the death, in
what I haue promiſed.
                     Then the Prince Berolde coming to the Damoſel, began as
thus. Can we (faire Lady) ſée you in ſuch great hazard, and not
Imploy our ſelues to giue you ſuccour? No, aſſure your ſelfe, for
mine owne part, and ſo I dare auouch for the reſt of my company,
that we will pawne the blood of our hearts, ere we will
ſée you remaine in ſuch a heauineſſe. The Damoſel, at theſe
words returned to the Prince Gracian, certifying them of
their willingneſſe to the fight, and not long ſhe ſtayd, but returned
to them againe, her face all be ſprent with teares, which
was chéefe vaile to couer her treaſon, and thus ſhe ſpake.
                     Now Gentlemen, your quarrel is of more force then before,
for they ha
                           •
                        ing my Lady and Miſtres in their hold, haue vowed
not to let her depart, without ſhe will render to them her caſtle.
And moreouer, they ſend you word by way of defiance, that
they are ſo ready to deale with you, as they iudge you dare not
come forth to them, either to defend the cauſe of my Lady, or to
make proofe of your loyaltie.
                     This report prouoketh ſuch an earneſt deſire in the knights
that they mounted on Horſeback, and beganne to ſhew themſelues
in the field, vſing ſuch behauiour with their often recourſes,
that the other knights could enioy no reſt, till they
were likewiſe prepared. For ſuch was the enuious dealings
of Eutropa, that in this fight, ſhe ſet the Sonne againſt the
Father, one Brother againſt another, and the deareſt fréend
to be enemies one to another: and to ſée how furiouſly they
behaued themſelues (not knowing them they fought againſt)
would haue made one iudge, there was no other meanes but
preſent death. Such was the force of her diuelliſh deuiſes,
in the Treaſonable attempts the Damoſell vndertooke, that

neiter ciuilitie was regarded, nor their owne ſafetie at this
time reſpected.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXXVIII.
                     How after the Damoſels had ended their ſubtle perſwaſions
the knights ioyned themſelues together, to a dangerou
                           •
                        
and doubtfull fight, wherein they had ſo ſore endamaged
one another, that their liues ſtood in hazard of any recouery.
And how the Sage Aliart, ſeeing the intent of Eutropa,
to worke the vtter ſpoyle of theſe couragious knights,
came and charmed them in ſuch order, that they quickely
left of the battaile. When as the Giant Dramuſiande came
forth wirh the captiue Princes (who greatly lamented to
ſee their ſonnes and kindred in ſuch doubtfull eſtate) and
tooke them all priſoners into his Caſtle.
                     
                        NOw that the Damoſels had accompliſhe
                           •
                        
the diſloyall practiſe of their Miſtreſſe Eutropa,
they departed, leauing the knights
in readineſſe to enter battaile, who had ſo
changed their Armour, and the deuices of
their Shéelds, that they had no knowledge
of one another. The Prince Gracian was
attired in gréene Armour, mingled with ſpots of white, and a
Coate of Maile ouer it of the ſame colour, in his Shéeld he bare
a red Lyon rampaunt, in a field of Sinople. Oniſtalde had his
Armour blacke, whereon in artificiall deuiſe, was made pretie
things, reſembling the ſcales of a fiſh, and in his ſhéeld he bare a
Gorgons head, his Brother Dramian being armed in the ſame
manner.
                     
                        
The Armor of Bazilliart was ſomewhat gréene, very thicke
beſet with Lyoneſſes of Gold, bearing in his ſhield for his deuiſe
an Eagle. Francian had his Armor reſembling litle flames
of fire: in his ſhielde likewiſe the ſame order of deuiſe. Dridan
was armed in blacke, bearing in his ſhield the Tower of Babilon.
Polinard had his Armour of a ſandy colour, whereon was
painted many broken Speares in token he had loſt the victory,
againſt the noble Floraman, whē he aduentured for the beautie
of faire Polinarda, & hauing for his deuiſe in his ſhield, a ſpeare
broken in the middeſt. Friſol had his Armour in colour red, beſet
with ſundry pretie antiques faces of Sable, and in his ſhield
he bare a white Lyon, in a golden field.
                     
                        Tremoran was attyred in a Carnation coloured Armour,
very brauely beſet with golden Pellicans, and the deuiſe in his
Shield, was the Image of Sagittarius. Luyman of Burgondie,
and Clariball of Hungaria, had their Armour white, and
theyr ſhieldes alike in deuiſes. Flauian, and Emeralde the
Faire, had their Armour blacke, finely beſpotted with red, and
in their ſhieldes the reſemblance of a faire Clowde, in a field of
ſiluer.
                     The Knightes on the other ſide of the Riuer, were in like
manner diſguiſed, giuing ſhewe to their enemies, of their hautie
courage and magnanimitie. The Prince Berolde, firſt aduanced
himſelfe in the field, his Armour blacke, whereon was
cunningly beſprent the teares of a Louer, and in his Shield,
a bléeding heart, rent violently in a number of péeces. Don Roſuell
and Belizart came next him, their Armour of gréene and
carnation colour, bearing in their ſhieldes, the amorous paſſions
of a Louers minde, in a fielde of Azure. Eſtrellant would
not change his Armour, but defaced the deuiſe of his ſhield,
that he could not be knowen. Trofollant had his Armor gréene,
whereon was figured many golden Doues, and in his ſhielde
he bare the Troyan Horſe, in a field of Sable. Guerin was in
white Armour, bearing in his ſhielde a Pecocke, in a fielde
which reſembled the coullour of many Needles. Rotandor,
and Criſpian of Macedon, were both Armed alike. Germayne
of Orleance had his Armour of Azure, bearing in his

Shield a beautifull Damoſell, which he kept in remembrance
of the fayre Florenda, Daughter to Arnedes King of France,
for whoſe ſake he determined to trye the aduentures of great
Brittaine. Platir, Floraman, Blandidon, and Pompides, to
whom the Damoſell of Eutropa, had deliuered Horſes and
Armour, came forth, their Horſes all alike, and their Armour
blacke, beſet with ſiluer Swannes, their Helmets very ſumptuouſly
guilded, and adored with rich Pearles, and in their
Shieldes their deuiſes were all alike, which was the ſmokie
Forge and Anuill, of God Vulcan the Smith. Both the companies
marching forward till they met, where they beheld
each other in maruailous great contempt, when taking occaſion
as it ſerued, they couched their Speares, and encountred together
very valiantly. Betwéen them continued ſuch a dangerous
fight, what with the ſore hurtes they receiued, as alſo the
great debilitie they were all brought into, that the effuſion of
their blood, witneſſed their earneſt deſire of victory, and the aduerſe
eſtates of them all, remained as a patterne of their great
perill.
                     
                        Don Edward, Primaleon, Recinde, Arnedes, Belcar, Vernar,
and the Soldan Bellagris, ſtanding with Dramuſiande in a
window of the Caſtle, beheld the fierce aſſaults of theſe couragious
Knights, whereto they gaue ſuch commendation, as the
moſt hauty exployt that euer they had ſéene, which moued Don
Edward to ſay, I haue in times paſt, not onely ſéene many a notable
ſkirmiſh, but alſo haue had experience, of the behauiour of
many noble knights, yet comparing them paſt, with this which
I now behold, I muſt néedes ſay, all the reſt hath béene counterfeite,
and this is onely worthy eternall commendations.
Indéede (quoth Primaleon) the aduentures in this place is meruailous,
which maketh mée to ſuſpend my iudgement of this
couragious aſſembly, but if it bée a naturall fight indéede, and
no imagination giuen vnto vs by the practiſe of Euchantment,
I muſt commend this for the moſt knightly aduenture, that in
all my life time I could gaine the ſight of.
                     
                        Dramuſiande likewiſe was abaſhed at this preſent ſpectacle,
and knowing it had come to paſſe by the meanes of his Aunt,

and fearing leaſt in this Battaile ſome of them ſhould be ſlaine,
he went to her, and intreated her to pacifie this grieuous Stratageme,
but her minde was bent to ſuch cruelty, that ſhe would
vſe no reſpect to his words. So long endured their violence to
each other, that faintneſſe made them let fal their weapons, and
catch hold of one another, in the manner of wraſtling: which
was great griefe to the Princeſſe in the Caſtle to behold, and
ſore paines to themſelues to continue fight ſo long.
                     The Sage Aliart vnderſtanding of this great miſhap, and
ſcorning that Eutropa ſhould attribute the triumph of this victory
wholly vnto her ſelf, came to the place where theſe knights
were aſſembled, and entring into the Campe like an ancient
olde man (hauing a rodde in his hand, where about was wound
a Serpent,) he ſtrooke vpon the ground with it, when preſently
the knights fell all to the earth, in ſuch a ſtrange and marueilous
alteration, that one would haue iudged, they had béene depriued
of their liues.
                     After he had there finiſhed what pleaſed him, he wēt vp to the
Caſtle of Dramuſiande, ſending ſuch a darke ſmoke ouer all the
Valley, (wherein might be perceiued great flaſhes and flames
of fire) that the Princes in the Caſtle were marueilouſly affrighted.
This moued Eutropa to ſuch great anger (becauſe ſhée
could not gaine the knowledge how this had hapned, no worke
her will on 
                           •
                        he knights, as ſhe had certainly purpoſed,) that ſhée
went raging all about the Caſtle, mooued to ſuch diſquietneſſe,
that no body could perſwade her.
                     At laſt this great darknes vaniſhed away, and nothing could
bee ſéene but the Knights, that lay all grouelling vpon the
ground: which cauſed Dramuſiande with his noble Priſoners,
to goe foorth and fetch them all into his Caſtle. When they
had taken off their Helmets, the King Recinde knew his
children, and the king Arnedes his ſonnes: Polendos knewe
Francian his ſonne, and Bazilliart and Don Roſuel, were viſited
by the valiant Belcar, Dridan was carried the armes of
Maiortes, and Platir was borne in by his noble Father Primaleon,
who becauſe he had left him whē he was ſomewhat yong,
did hardly knowe that it was his ſonne. In briefe, they all

lamented to ſée their kindred and friendes in ſuch great miſfortune,
and conueyed them into the Caſtle, where they were ſo
honorably vſed, that in ſhort time they had good hope to recouer
them from this danger.
                     When they had attained ſome part of their former health,
they reioyced greatly that they had happened into the company
of their deareſt friends, and declared in what maner they were
deluded by the two Damoſels, which was not ſtrange to them,
who perceiued the daily practiſes of Eutropa, to be grounded on
ſuch trecherous deceits,
                     Now did Dramuſiande greatly commend his good Fortune,
in gaining ſo many couragious and well approoued knights:
as he was fnlly reſolued, he ſhould now eaſily conquere the Iſle
of the Lake, which as yet hee would not make knowne to any
of the Knights, but vſed himſelfe ſo pleaſant in their company,
and frequented them daily with ſuch delightfull exerciſes, that
generally they bare him great good will and affection,
                     For this opinion he conceiued, that vſing them with gentleneſſe,
and ſhewing himſelfe curteous in all attempts, he ſhould
winne their good wils, which hée made more account off, then
all the riches in the world. As it is alwaies ſéene, that friendſhip
ſooner winneth the gentle minde, theu the rich promiſes and deliuery
of Coyne, can purchaſe any faithfull perſwaſion: which
craueth a more couetous intereſt, then the perſons eſtéeming
vertue, will ſtraine their mindes to amount vnto.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXXIX.
                     How Eutropa after ſhe had obtained all the Knights priſoneners
in her Caſtle, began a new trechery, to bring to ruine
the Emperour and Citie of Conſtantinople, by ſending
Letters to the Soldan of Babylon, declaring how the Emperour
was deſtitute of his chief knights, & how he might
eaſily ouercome the citie. And how the noble knight of
the Sauage man, after he was healed of the wounds he had
receiued by the knight of Fortune, left the Court of England,
and trauelled to ſeeke the aduentures of great Brittaine,
in which endeuour he arriued at the caſtle of the Giant
Dramuſiand, where he vnhorſed the Prince Primaleon
and his noble Father the Prince Don Edward. Likewiſe
how he preuailed againſt the kings Arnedes and Recinde,
and foiled the G
                           •
                        ants Pandare and Alligan: ſo that he
entred combate with the Giant Dramuſiande, each of
them fore wounding the other, yet neither could enioy
the victory. And how the Sage Aliart came againe, and
made ſuch a maruellous darkeneſſe, that the knight of the
Sauage man was carried away no body could whither.
                     
                        GLad was Eutropa that ſhe had gotten theſe
Knights her priſones, whom ſhe ſtood in
great feare of, and Chriſtendome in moſt
néed of: and yet not contenting her ſelfe
with this extreame crueltie, would practiſe
another miſchiefe, to bring to deſtruction all
the noble knights on the earth. It ſo fortuned,
that by politike meanes, ſhe was aduertiſed of the death of
Olorique Alchediane, the great Soldan of Babylon, and deere
friend to the Emperour Palmerin: who had a ſonne remaind
aliue, not of the gentle nature of his father, but a great enemy
to the whole eſtate of Chriſtendome.
                     
                        
This ſeruing for fit her diuelliſh purpoſe, ſhe gaue him by
Letters to vnderſtand, what great and gréeuous miſchances,
his Progenitors had receiued by the Emperours of Greece, in
that many Princes of his blood and linage, had béene cruelly
ſlaine before the walles of Conſtantinople, which naturall loue
and dutie, did inforce him to reuenge, elſe ſhould he be iuſtly
contemned and reproched of the whole world: where if now he
would vexe his enemy vpon ſo iuſt occaſion, & vrge him to the
ſmall defence he had left for his ſuccour, he might be Monarch
of the whole world, and haue more at command then all his
Predeceſſours had.
                     As for a conuenient time, he could with for no better then
was at that preſent: when if he would lay ſiege to Conſtantinople,
it had no other Rampier of defence, then the aged Emperour,
whoſe yeares forbad him to enter the field, and whoſe
dominions lay ready at his owne appointment. As for the noble
couragious knights, whom all the world feared, and were
the onely ſafegard to that famous City, were in ſuch place,
where they had more néed of ſuccour themſelues, then come to
defend the aged Emperour. Yea, and all other realmes were ſo
vnprouided, of thoſe that were the meane to let this determination,
that neither could they helpe him, or promiſe ſafety to
themſelues, ſo that if he would, he might bring vnder his obeyſance,
the moſt of all Chriſtendome.
                     There letters were conueyed to the Soldan of Babylon, who
prouide for the attempt which Eutropa had willed him: where
to his determination, we will forſake him at this time, till we
gaine more fit occaſſon to diſcourſe of procéedings.
                     The hardy knight of the Sauage man, was purpoſed now
to ſée the aduentures of great Brittaine, for which cauſe (when
his wounds were perfectly healed) he tooke leaue of King Fredericke
and the Princeſſe Flerida, procéeding in his trauell, till
fortune brought him to the Valley of Perdition, where he preſently
eſpoed the Caſtle of Dramuſiande. Not long had he
ſtood to take view of this Caſtle, but hee perceiued to iſſue
forth a braue company of well appointed knights, among
whom were Giants of a monſtrous ſtature, which gaue him

occaſion to ſuppoſe, that hée was arriued at the place where ſo
many famous Knights were detained Priſoners: yet was ge
driuen into a great doubt, in that ſuch comely Knights ſhould
kéepe company with ſuch ougly fellowes. At laſt, hée beheld
the Knights preparing themſelues, as it were to Iuſt: when
(after he had done his deuotions in praiers, as was his accuſtomed
vſe) he receiued a Speare from his Eſquire, which he charged
toward Pecinde the King of Spaine. When Dramuſiande
ſawe the courage of the Knight of the Sauage man, they all
came downe to the foote of the bridge, meaning, as it was their
cuſtome, the Prince Don Edward ſhould haue the firſt courſe:
but through intreatie, the King Recinde got leaue firſt to trie
his ſtrength. The Knight of the Sauage man béeing readie
prepared, encountred the King with great valure, but ſuch was
his miſfortune, that he was ſent to the earth. Arnedes, who had
alway in trauaile borne him company, preuailed through earneſt
deſire, that hée was granted the ſecond Iuſt: but he was
inforced to beare the King Recinde company. Primaleon ſéeing
his friendes receiue ſuch diſhonour before his face, without taking
leaue of the Prince Don Edward, tooke the Speare and
ran couragiouſly againſt the Knight of the Sauage man, when
they brake their ſpeares, yet neither of them any thing ſhaken.
Dramuſiande, who deſired to ſée the ende of this noble exploit,
commaunded the Speares ſhould be preſently brought foorth,
when each of them tooke their choiſe, and fell to their enterpriſe
againe.
                     At the third attempt, Fortune turning her backe to the
noble Primaleon, cauſed him likewiſe to be diſmounted to the
earth. This miſhappe greatly diſpleaſed the Prince Don Edward,
and hée taking one of the ſtrongeſt Speares, gaue the
Encounter to the Knight of the Sauage man, which was diſcharged
with ſo great magnanimitie, that both their Horſes
and themſelues were layde on the ground. Don Edward
quickly taking his féete againe, and maruayling at the puiſſant
ſtrength of the Knight of the Sauage man, who came vnto him
and ſaluted him with theſe wordes. Truſt me (Syr Knight) I
would eſtéeme my ſelfe both honoured of Fortune, and highly

preferred vnto all good lucke, if I were in a place where, to doe
you ſuch ſeruice, as is your reward through your braue behauiour.
                     For this aſſure your ſelfe, that you are the Knight who
ought to beare the general praiſe among men, eſpecially of me,
who in all his life time neuer ſuſtained ſo ſharpe a plunge, as
at this encountring you haue put me too. Syr, (anſwered the
Prince Don Edward,) I knowe not if my behauiour ſéeme ſo
praiſe worthy to you, but this I ſpeake vnfainedly (not to
cauſe you conceiue a pride in your ſelfe) that I neuer met with
a ſtranger knight, ſince I knew what belonged to the bearing
of Armour.
                     
                        Pandare came to ende their tale, giuing theſe wordes to
the Knight of the Sauage man. Since (Sir Knight) you haue
done more in the Iuſt, then euery one ſuppoſed to bee in your
power, you muſt now endeuour your ſelfe to deale with me a
while, for that all ſuch as enter this Valley, are bound to fulfill
this ancient cuſtome. But if your heart ſerue you not to fulfill
this enterpriſe, becauſe feare may ſomewhat allay your youthfull
courage, I wiſh you to yéelde your ſelfe, which will be more
honourable, then to hazard your life, where you are certaine to
loſe it.
                     O ſir (quoth the knight of the Sauage man) it ſéemes your
Father was a Senator, by your Clarkly perſwaſion, and that
you being his ſonne, would do more with words then he could
with déedes: but if your Father hath giuen you more wit
then you can beare, I meane to beate it out of you, rather then
you ſhould be ouerburthened. Pandare ſomewhat offended to
heare theſe ſtumpes, beganne to charge the Knight with his
yron Mace, and hée change blowes with his good ſwoord, ſo
that betwéene them paſſed ſuch notable behauiour in fight, that
Dramuſiande, Don Edward, and Primaleon, commended marueilouſly
the hardneſſe of the Knight of the Sauage man. At
length, ſuch was the good Fortune of this noble knight, that he
brought Pandare on both his knées, when he had ſent his head
from his ſhonlders, had not the Giant Alligan come preſently
vpon him.
                     
                        
Then was he conſtrained to leaue Pandare and award the
mighty blows Alligan charged him furiouſly withall: but ſuch
was the great foreſight of the knight of the Sauage man, that
he ſtill bare off his ſtrokes, and would not ſtrike againe, as
well to refreſh his owne wearineſſe, as to make the giant ſomwhat
ſtract with his long labour. In fine, when he perceiued
his time, and ſaw Alligan was out of breath with his long continuance
in fight, he came vpon him with ſuch freſh deliuery
blowes, and followed his enterpriſe with ſuch excéeding courage,
that he brought ſtout Alligan likewiſe vnder his obeyſance.
                     This Combate was ſo well eſtéemed of all the Princes, and
ſo greatly diſpleaſed the minde of Dramuſiande, that he approched
to the knight of the Sauage man as, thus. The good fortune
(Sir knight) which hath returned you victorie, beyond our expectations,
or your good aſſurance: me thinkes ſhould moue
you haue reſpect to your bléeding wounds, which may more 
                           ••
                        
                        damage
your perſon, then all the perill you haue ſuſtained in
fight.
                     Wherefore, let me intreate you, to finiſh your deſire in this
trauaile, and to ſtriue no farther, but yéeld your ſelfe to my
friendſhip, and by my Sword I ſweare, to vſe you in ſuch
honourable manner, as ſhall be for your health, and mine own
honeſtie.
                     If you refuſe this my curteous offer, and a priuate pride ſhal
cauſe you run without regard, I ſhal be vrged to that, I would
be very loth to do, which is to giue you a freſh aſſault, when
the eſtate you are in, doth rather require eaſe, which may be to
your gréeuous detriment, and to my great diſhonour.
                     Theſe courteous words (aunſwered the Knight of the
Sauageman) would ſerue very well to a faint hearted man,
or to him that is ſo ſore as I in bodie, but not to him that
is ſo ſound in minde: wherefore I am to thanke you for your
great pittie, and would accept it, if that I did conceiue any
ſuch pleaſure. But as it ſéemeth to me, you are the Lord
of this faire Caſtle, that at this preſent doth deaine the flower

of all Chiualrie: wherefore I would gladly haue you to vnderſtand,
that though my limmes be not in their beſt eſtate, my
heart is in ſuch ſure hope, that my life ſhall purchaſe their preſent
deliuery.
                     
                        Dramuſiande ſéeing he ſcorned his good will, and eſtéemd his
words of no better account, preſently returned him this raplie.
I perceiue Sir, it is high time to cauſe you know what
benefite you might haue receiued, in following my Counſell,
and what danger ſhall happen through your owne folly, ſo arming
his head, and commaunding his Sword and Shéeld to
be brought him, he charged the Knight of the Sauage man in
this manner. I would wiſh to ioyne combate with a Knight
ſo hardy as your ſelfe, ſo that the diſpoſition of his health were
ſuch, as my blowes might be well welcome vnto him. But
ſéeing your ſtomack ſo good, yet your body ſore hurt and ouertrauailed,
I haue ſmall pleaſure to be thought I would deale with
ſuch a one, ſauing that your fond words doth withhold my pittie,
and denying my gentle offer, doth vrge me to exact the vttermoſt.
                     The knight of the Sauage man would make him no aunſwer,
but taking vp the Shield of the Giant Alligan, which
was in much more better eſtate then his owne, he aduaunced
himſelfe to Dramuſiande, ſhewing ſuch agility and nimble behauiour
in his fight, as though he had not bene ſo wearied as
he was, but yet his dexteritie, and magnanimitie of courage,
had not the power to abaſh the hardy Dramuſiande: who was
both eſteemed and aporooued to beene of the ſtrongeſt knights
vnder the Sunne.
                     The Knight of the Sauage man, found this enterpriſe the
worſt that he had yet attempted, the happy ending whereof,
were ſufficient to win him perpetuall renowne: wherefore he
did endeuour himſelfe with ſuch goodforeſight, as all the Princes
receiued good occaſion to commend his valour. For oftentimes
the deſired hope of victory, doth encourage one to aduenture,
the greateſt danger: ſo that receiuing but a good opinion
of ſucceſſe, doth ſo animate the courage, that he followeth his
purpoſe with an inuincible pretence. Don Edward & Primaleō
                        
                        
maruelling at this hautie exployte, ſéeing Dramuſiande, neuer
gaue blow, but it was ſo fiercely rewarded, verily ſuppoſed
the perfect nobility of Knighthood, to remaine in thy neuer diſmayning
knight of the Sauage man, which after a long times
fight, cauſed Dramuſiande to vſe theſe ſpéeces. Truſt mée
(ſir Knight) the perfect proofe of your infallible minde, conſtraineth
me to lament your preſent approching daunger: in
that the gréeuous expence of your blood, cannot long ſuſtaine
you from the vnhappy death. But if Fortune appoint the ruine
of your dayes at my hands, and that (as it is no other like) but
it muſt of force be ſo, I ſhall condemne my ſelfe of monſtrous
ingratitude, in that ſuch a hardy knight ſhall be cut off in his
flowring yeares. Wherefore let me intreate you, that our
Combate may here take concluſion, and to venter no more
the daunger being imminent, which it ſelfe will may not ſuffer
you to grant, yet the ruine of your Armour, the ſore wounds
on your body, and the blood that hath coloured the ground vnder
your féete, me thinks ſhould prouoke you to ſatiſfie my requeſt.
Good counſell is better late followed then neuer, where it tendeth
to the aduancement of honour, and maintenance of the
ſpotleſſe eſtate of knighthood.
                     Sir (quoth the knight of the Sauage man) your requeſt doth
aſke ſuch a ſcope of argument, that I rather deſire to renue the
Combate then conſume time in making you aunſwer. And
hereupon aſſure your ſelfe, that neither your eloquence can
allude, or your force compell to hinder my enterpriſe, but I wil
haue it, or elſe reſigne thée my carkaſſe, to glut vp thy gréedy
minde. With theſe words they went to it againe chéerely,
deliuering ſuch forceable blows to each other, that in ſhort time
their weakeneſſe withdrew them from any more hurt. For
though the Knight of the Sauage man were in great debilitie,
Dramuſiande was brought into as great danger, that the Redants
knew not to whom to impute the moſt hurt: ſo that the
Giant would gladly that the knight had made acception of his
offer, becauſe he felt himſelfe to haue receiued ſmall aduantage
in this fight.
                     But no maruell if the Knight of the Sauage man were

weake indéede, hauing iuſted and dealt with ſo many before,
net did he alway beare ſuch a courage, that they who beheld him
ſuppoſed the contrary. Primaleon and the Prince Don Edward
came, aud were uery deſirous to ſeparate them aſunder,
becauſe they feared the death of the knight of the Sauage man,
but they laboured in vaine, for no perſwaſion could withhold
the hardy knight, who ſaluted Dramuſiande with ſuch a mighty
ſtroke vpon the Creſt, that he cleft his Helmet, and wounded
him very dangerouſly on the head, wherewith his ſword brake
in a great many péeces. Dramuſiande ſéeing his ſword was
broken, and himſelfe lie likewiſe vnprouided of weapon, came
and caught the knight about the middeſt, who receiued him in
like maner, that they threw ech other to the ground with great
violence, being iudged as men depriued of their liues, ſo that
it could not be ſaid whether had the victorie.
                     The night approching very haſtily on, the Sage Aliart knowing
of this Combat, addreſſed himſelfe thither in all the haſt,
who made ſuch an obſcurity ouer all the Valley, as he had done
before at the other battaile, in which darkneſſe he departed, and
the knight of the Sauage man was taken away, no body could
imagine how or which way, ſo that theregardants, who thoght
to haue carried him into the Caſtle, could not tell themſelues in
what he was gone.
                     
                        Dramuſiand was conducted into his fortreſſe, where he was
diligently tended by his Aunt Eutropa, who fearing leaſt at
thie time, the knights would ſéeke meanes to eſcape away,
ſhe locked them into a great hall all together, where they had
no light but what came in at a very ſmall window, at which
likewiſe they receiued ſuch things as was néedefull for them.
In this order ſhe vſed them till Dramuſiande and his Giants
had recouerd their former health, when ſhe brought them forth
againe into their accuſtomed chambers, greatly diſpleaſed that
Dramuſiande would behaue himſelfe ſo friendly to them as he
did. But ſuch was the conference he repoſed in their oath, in
that they would not attempt any thing contrary to his wil and
pleaſure, that he exempted all diſcourteſie from his heart, continuing
his wonted friendlineſſe to the captiue Princes.
                     
                        
For on this he alwayes grounded his perſwaſion, that it were
a point of marueilous ingratitude, to breake the vowed oath a
man had made to his friend, and hée that would ſo greatly diſhonour
himſelfe, ſhould bée eſtéemed and reputed as one that
alienated and eſtranged himſelfe from the courſe of all vertuous
déedes.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XL.
                     How the Knight of Fortune, ſtaying in the houſe of the ancient
Gentleman his Hoſte, had his woundes very well
recouered, and his body eſtabliſhed in ſound and perfect
eſtate of health, which moued him to depart from thence,
to ſeeke the aduenture of great Brittaine. And how in trauaile
he arriued at a little Pauillion, wherein he found the
Knight of the Sauage man, lying ſore wounded on a
Knightly Beere, and Don Roſiran de la Bronde, ſtanding
by him, vſing many ſorrowfull and heauy lamentations.
And how the Knight of Fortune, by markes he perceiued
in the face of the Knight of the Sauage man, and by conferring
with Don Roſiran about him, had knowledge that
it was his brother Florian, whom when he thought to take
further view of, was preſently carried away by the art of
the Sage Aliart. And how the Knight of Fortune departed
on his iourney, and Don Roſiran, carried the Armour of
the knight of the Sauage man to the Engliſh Court, where
he manifeſted the death of the hardy knight, and preſented
his Armour to the aged King Fredericke, who cauſed
it to be placed in the Houſe of Enſignes, amongſt the Armour
of many famous Knights.
                     
                        
                        THe renowed Knight of Fortune, (whom
through occaſion we left to ſpeake of) remained
ſo long in the houſe of the ancient
Gentleman his Hoſte, that his woundes
were perfectly healed, and his body well able
to endure the bearing of Armor. When
Siluian had prouided him new Armor like
his other, and a ſhield with his vſuall deuiſe
of Fortune vpon it, he departed which way he thought ſooneſt
to finde the Caſtle of Dramuſiande. At laſt arriuing at the
foote of a mountaine, he eſpied a little Pauillion, wherein were
a great many of lighted torches, which becauſe the darke night
was ſomewhat entred, gaue a very great ſhewe of light to the
place. This ſtrange ſight moued him to take his way thither,
as well to ſée what it might be, as to driue other fancies away
that greatly annoyed his mind. When he was entred the Pauillion,
he perceiued two ſéemely Knights, the one lying on a
ſumptuous Béere, more like a dead then a liuing creature, the
other making great lamentations, and pittious bemonings ouer
him, whom hee preſently knowe to be Don Roſiran de la
Bronde, the Couſin of the aged King of England, which made
him ſuppoſe that the Knight on the Béere, was ſome man of
great authority & eſtimation. Comming to Don Roſian, and
ſaluting him very friendly, he preſently had knowledge of him,
that he was the noble Knight of Fortune, to whom he began in
this manner following.
                     Sir, I ſée that Fortune hath greatly fauoured you, in permitting
you to ſée the dead body of the Knight of the Sauage man,
to whom you were alway a mortall enemy, yet could not bée
he that ſhould vanquiſh him in fight. The Knight of Fortune
hearing the wordes of Don Roſiran, was ouercome with ſuch
heauineſſe, that the teares trickled down his chéekes, when he
began to frame his anſwere thus.
                     Indéede, neuer had I more deſire to preuaile againſt any
man, then my minde laboured to conqure this hardy Knight,

whoſe proweſſe is no leſſe bruted euery where, then his knightly
behauiour deſerued. But now ſince death ſo hath cut off this
famed Champion, whom I laboured to know, yet could neuer
attaine my wiſh, I will end the enmity that hath bin betwéene
vs, with ſo ſharpe a reuenge of his vntimely death, as were it
poſſible for his ghoſt to imbrace my friendſhip, himſelfe ſhould
perceiue his enemy, is become as deare a friend to him as euer
was any. Wherefore of all courteſie, ſhew me the place where
he hath receiued this miſfortune, and I wil die on him that hath
bene the death of ſo good a knight.
                     Truſt me Sir (anſwered Don Roſiram) my arriuall hath
bene here ſo lately, that I am ignorant how he happened to
this miſchance: neuertheleſſe I was aduertiſed by one,) who
departed not long before you came) that at the Caſtle of Dramuſiande,
where all the knights remaine that haue bin ſo long
loſt, he hath ſuſtained this vnfortunate, hap, yet not without iniuring
him and his traine, as the memory of this knight, ſhall
remaine to him while he liueth, albeit Fortune would not ſuffer
him to end the aduenture.
                     The knight of Fortune greatly diſpleaſed, to ſée this knight
brought into ſuch extremitie, began to conceiue better eſtimation
of the aduenture, then euer he did before, albeit he was
greatly abaſhed, that ſo good a Knight had failed in that enterpriſe.
Then began he to behold the Armour that lay there by
him, being defaced and hacked in ſo many places, which vrged
him to commend them that had the ſtrength to vſe it ſo, but
more the man that had the might to reſiſt ſuch an extreme danger:
wherevpon he ſaye. I may well perſwade my ſelfe, that the
hope to end this adventure is altogether loſt: the Knight béeng
dead, who had the puiſſance to finiſh all other. At theſe
words he approched to the Béere, to ſée if he were cleane depriued
of life, when lifting vp the ſhéete of Silke, he perceiued
his countenance ſo grim and hardy, as it was at the time he
entred Cambate with him. As he ſtood wiſhly beholding this
noble Knight, his heart began greatly to conceiue an inward
ioy, and his minde began to muſe on a thouſand matters. But
chéefly the leſſe of his Brother was his greateſt thought, whom

he ſuſpected this knight to be, by diuers markes he knew ie his
face, for the better aſſurance whereof, he called Siluian, willing
him to behold the knight, and report as his minde ſerued, his
anſwer was comfortable to his Maiſters opi
                           •
                        ions, giuing credite
that it was Florian, who returned not after he departed
with the Lyons. Vpon this perſwaſion, the knight of Fortune
deſired Don Roſiran, to certifie him of the name of the Knight
of the Sauage man, inſomuch as it ſhould neither diſprofite the
one nor the other, but that he might reſolue him in a matter,
which cauſed him to vſe great ſuſpition, to which words Don
Roſiran thus anſwered.
                     Sir Knight, in what I may or can ſatiſfie your deſire, aſſure
your ſelfe I will do my beſt. As concerning his name, neither
my ſelfe, nor any other that I know, were ſo happy as at
any time to vnderſtand it, for that he vſed no other name, then
to call himſelfe the Fatherleſſe. But in times paſt, he hath often
declared vnto me, that the beſt friend he had remembrance
off, was a Sauage man, who nouriſhed him a long time, and
whom he ſuppoſed to be his Father, but becauſe he could not
certainly aſſure himſelfe thereof, he termed himſelfe as I haue
told you.
                     The Knight of Fortune, whoſe minde was maruellouſly reuiued
at the words of Don Roſiran, perſwaded himſelfe, that
the knight of the Sauage man, was his Brother Florian, for
which cauſe he offered to embrace him as he lay, but on a ſuddaine
there entred foure men, who lifting vp the Béere vppon
their ſhoulders departed away with it in very great haſt. The
Knight of Fortune endeuouring to follow them, they willed
him to the contrary, giuing him to vnderſtand, that ſuch good
prouiſion ſhould be vſed to him, as if the Diuine bountie would
agrée therto, his life would be preſerued, & his eſtate recomforted.
With this perſwaſion he
                           •
                         returned to Don Roſiran, to know
which way he intended to trauaile, becauſe he had determined
himſelfe, to go ſéeke the place where this good knight had bene
ſo ill handled, and reuenge his cauſe, though it were the loſſe
of his owne life. Sir (quoth Don Roſiran) I meane preſently
to take my way towards London, where I will preſent the armour

of my deare Friend, to the king mine Vncle (at whoſe
hands he receiued the order of knighthood) that it may be reſerued
in ſuch a place, where the remembrance of his déedes done
in his life time, may eternize the memorie of his infortunate
death. With this anſwere, the knight of Fortune was very
well pleaſed, deſiring if he could ſhewe him the way to the Caſtle
of the Giant Dramuſiande, to whom Don Roſiran replied.
Credite me Syr, I thinke few or none can accompliſh your demand,
ſuch incantations and exorciſmes are ſpread ouer all the
wayes, but as it ſhould ſéeme by this good knight, it cannot bée
farre hence, as you might iudge by his wounds.
                     Thus with ſundry embracings they departed, the knight of
Fortune which way pleaſed him, and Don Roſian with all
ſpéede rode to London, bearing before him the Armour of the
Knight of the Sauage man, which he could not put vpon his body,
becauſe it was ſo cruelly martired. Being come to the court,
he found the king ſitting very ſolitary, for want of the noble
knights that were woont to kéepe him company: and comming
into his preſence, with dutiful reuerence he began in this manner.
Moſt gracious ſoueraigne, I neither thought my heart in
quiet, nor the time ſo happy as it ſhould be, till I had preſented
your Maieſtie, with the Armour of the couragious knight of
the Sauage man, whereby you may perceiue (although the
more miſfortune) hée maintained his life in honour, and with
Fame ended his dayes in the face of Fortune, proouing himſelfe
no leſſe then he was, the man that deſerued moſt the name
of a Champion, And in reward of his taken paines, he craueth
no more of your Maieſtie, but that his Armour may beautifie
ſome place of honour, to witneſſe the vertuous behauiour he
was woont to employ it in.
                     After hee had certified the King of the whole requeſt, hee
declared at large the aduentures of this hardy knight, againſt
the Gyant Dramuſiande, and his noble Company, not forgetting
to tell him, how hée mette the knight of Fortune,
at the Pauillion, who tooke ſuch great griefe for this miſhappe,
that hee is gone to reuenge his death on him, and all
his.
                     
                        
The King thinking on this froward miſchance, and breaking
foorth into diuerſe paſſions, expreſſing the great dolour of
his minde, he commended the valiant attempt of the Knight of
Fortune, and bemoned the loſſe of his ſon Don Edward, with
his princely children, attributing this miſhap to bée procured
through his ſearch, and how many aduenterous Knights were
loſt to finde him. Now hée began to veſpayre, that he ſhould neuer
heare of him againe, ſince the Knight of the Sauage man
was dead, in whom he placed ſure truſt for his deliuery, yet
againe hée remembred the Knight of Fortune, iudging the aduenture
ſuch, as none but he could finiſh. Then went he into
the Chambers of the Quéene, and the Princes Flerida, ſhewing
them the Armour of the Knight of the Sauage man, and
by what miſfortune hée had loſt his life. As concerning theyr
heauines for theſe vnhappy tydings, becauſe I will not Gentlewoman
that you ſhould conceiue any ſorrow thorow their
dealings, I referre their lamentations to your gentle iudgements.
                     The King commaunded the armour of this good knight (to
whom he gaue the name of the Fatherleſſe) to be placed where
the auncient Kings of England kept their Armour, ſo that
their worthy déedes ſhould not growe into obliuion: and this
place was called the Houſe of Enſignes, which they alwayes
vſed to adore their Triumphes, and wherein was regiſtred the
perpetuall renowne, atchieued by ſuch, as vſed their Armour to
the aduancement of vertue. Here was the Armour of the valiant
Marlot, and alſo of the aduenterous Syr Launcelot du
Lake, as alſo of diuerſe of the Knights of the round Table: in
this place the Armour of the knight of the Sauage man, was
royally hanged vp, to witneſſe what aduentures he had knightly
diſcharged.
                     The Knight laboured in deuotion, to put out of memory the
loſſe of this hardy knight the Fatherleſſe, ſetting his minde on
euerlaſting, true and permanent things: as for the other,
as they were tranſitory and vaine, ſo to their frailtie hee gaue
them ouer. For Nature hath beſtowed ſo great a benefit vpon
vs, that ſhee hath left vs iudgement to diſcerne betwéene good

and euill, and by what meanes we ſhal purchaſe our eternal heritage,
which is the chiefeſt and beſt riches ſhe could indue vs
withall, and the onely direction wherein to ſpend the whole
courſe of my life.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XLI.
                     How the Knight of Fortune being departed from Don Roſiran
de la Bronde, arriued in the Valley of Perdition, at the
Caſtle of Dramuſiande, where a Damoſell brought him
the ſhield of the Palme Tree, which was taken from Siluian,
when he was Captiue to the Giant Camboldam. And
how the Knight of Fortune Iuſted with his Father the
Pricne Don Edward, vanquiſhed Pandare, and cut the
head of the Giant Alligan, entring Combate with Dramuſiande,
whom he likewiſe conquered, ſetting all the
captiue Princes at libertie. And how an aged man came
with two Domoſels, and healed the wounds ot the knight
of Fortune.
                     
                        AFter the knight of Fortune had taken leaue
of Don Roſiran de la Bronde, he had not
trauailed long, before he arriued in the Valley
of Perdition, when becauſe it was
night, and he knewe not well which way to
take, he alighted, ſitting downe at the roote
of a Trée, where he determined to ſléepe vntill
the next morning, but ſuch was the griefe he receiued, at the
wounds of the knight of the Sauage man, with ſundry other cogitations
that tormented his minde (being all this while ignorant,

of whence or what he was, ſo that hee could not ſuffer
his eyes to receiue any ſléepe, nor his troubled thoughts to enioy
any reſt. For ſtil deſired to be at the Caſtle, where ſo many noble
knights were held as Priſoners: vowing to redéeme them
from that aduerſe eſtate, or hee would leaue his life there, as
pledge of his valure. In the morning, Siluian brought him his
ſtéed, when preſently they mounted on horſebacke, and rode on
which way he thought ſooneſt to ende his pretence, Eutropa hauing
now brought Dramuſiande, and all his Knights to their
woonted health, that they could beare Armour and reſiſt their enemy,
ſuffered the knight of Fortune to come before the Caſtle,
where he perceiued the knights newly come foorth, making a
ſhew of reſiſtance if he durſt offer to venture.
                     This ſight cauſed him preſently to couch his ſpeare, when on
ſodaine a Damoſell came riding on Horſebacke, with a ſhield
vpon her arme, and this ſtaied him. ſir knight, I deſire you before
you begin your Combate, to take this Shield for your better
defence, becauſe this is the day you ſhal haue moſt néed of it,
and this day it ſhal ſtand you in cheefeſt ſtéede. Here ending her
talke, & deliuering him the ſhield immediately ſhe departed in
ſuch great haſt, that he could not haue the leiſure to ſpeake vnto
her, or to giue her thanks for her ſo great courteſie. Then he deliuered
his Shielde of Fortune to Siluian, faſtening the other
vpon his arme, when he knew it to be the Shield of the Palme
Tree, that was taken from Siluian, when he ſlew the Giant
Camboldam of Mulzella, which made him to expect ſome good
aduenture, for the wordes the Damoſel ſpake when ſhe tooke it
from Siluian, how y• ſhe would reſtore it again, when he ſhould
haue moſt neede to imploy it in ſeruice. This moued him to approoue
the ſhield, becauſe of the ſpéeches of the Damoſell, before
the Emperor of Conſtantinople, whē the Sage Aliart ſent her,
as you haue heard before: likewiſe becauſe, this was the moſt
dangerous aduenture, that in all his life time he enterpriſed, he
could not wiſh for a more fit occaſion, then at this inſtant to
make not wiſh for a more fit occaſion, then at this inſtant to
make triall of his ſhield. Don Edward being ready prouided,
menaced his corage to yt knight of Fortune, who receiued him,
with ſuch exquiſit behauior of fight, that Don Edward was ſore

hurt, but the good knight by receiuing his ſtroke vpon the ſhéeld
eſcaped the force of the lance, The knight of Fortune vpon this
good lucke would haue entred the combate with the ſword, but
Pandare comming forth of the Caſtle, commanded the Prince
toreturne, ſo that he could not ſatiſfie his requeſt. Don Edward
entring ye caſtle, the knight made ſuch ſpéed that he entred with
him: which when Pandare perceiued, he ſhut the gate, and came
vanting with his ſword toward the good knight, who in ſhort
time diſhartned Pandare, becauſe his blows could not pierce the
ſhéeld,
but he ſo ſpoiled the armor of the giant that in ſhort time
he brought him vnder his obeyſance, being greatly cōmended of
Dramuſiand, Don Edward, & Primaleon, for his noble exployt.
                     The Grecian knights had partly knowledge of him, in that
ſome of them were at Conſtantinople, when the damſel broght
the ſhéeld, which they knew by the beautie, and the braue deuice:
and ſuch was their opinion of this knight, that if he fayled
to end the aduenture, they doubted they ſhould neuer get deliuery
from that cruell Caſtle. Yet ſo great was the pleaſure
they conceiued of him, as they could not tell wether they ſhould
go to welcome him, or enter the combate, and ſo deliuer him:
but ſeeing how he vſed Pandare, vrged them to beléeue he ſhould
haue good ſucceſſe in this hautie enterpriſe.
                     
                        Alligan ſéeing Pandare was néere loſing his head, came and
fiercely aſſailed the knight of Fortune, but he welcommed him
with ſuch a pure paiment, as he made him quickely retyre to
take his breath.
                     
                        Dramuſiande ſéeing Alligan ſo ſhrewdly handled, was ſo vexed
he knew not well what to ſay: for he thought it vnpoſſible
to conquer this hardy knight, hauing ſuch a ſhéeld as could not
all this while be pierced, ſo that he began vtterly to denounce
Fortune, that had fauoured him ſo long, and would now leaue
him at the laſt. Alligan (albeit very vnwilling) began againe
to aſſaile the knight: but ſuch was his reward for his trauaile,
that he was brought vnder his ſubiection, and left his head on a
gage to the knight of Fortune.
                     
                     When Dramuſiande ſaw that Alligan was ſlaine, in a
great rage he called for his Armour, vowing to execute ſeuere

reuenge on the good knight, in the meane time, the Prince Don
Edward came vnto him, requeſting ſuch friendſhip at his hands
as he would ſuffer him to haue a ſight of his face. Floraman ſéeing
he was vnwilling to diſcouer himſelfe: ſaide to him, that he
ought not to deny ſuch a ſmall requeſt, to ſo noble a Prince as
Don Edward was.
                     When he heard Don Edward named, who was reported to
be ſuch a ſingular knight in Proweſſe, and for whoſe ſake, ſo
many valiant Princes had left their countrey and kindred, to
finde him who was loſt, none could tell where, he cauſed Siluian
to take off his helmet, when the Prince delighted with his
comely contenance, preſently ſaid. I hope (Sir knight) as
God hath endued you with ſuch a ſéemely and honourable ſhape
ſo he hath reſerued you to finiſh this perillous and ſtrange aduenture,
for that your behauiour doth eneourage vs all to ſo
good an opinion. Neuertheleſſee, if Fortune do allow you the
victorie, I deſire you to vſe curteſie to this Giant, who prepareth
himſelfe to encounter with you, for that his gentle vſage
to vs, doth conſtraine me to ſpeake ſo fauourable in this caſe.
The knight of Fortune, had not not the leyſure to make him anſwer,
becauſe he perceiued Dramuſiande comming towardes
him, when Siluian hauing armed his head, they began to charge
each other very furiouſly, ſo that now began the proofe of the
fight, for al that had paſſed before, was nothing in reſpect of this
preſent exployts.
                     The ſtrokes of Dramuſiande entred the knight of Fortuns
ſhéeld, as eaſily as it would haue done in any other, which vrged
the good knight to think, that the promiſe made of the ſhéeld
was falſe and of no truth, ſéeing it failed when he ſtood in moſt
extremitie. But then he perſwaded himſelfe againe, that if he
gained the victory, it ſhould not be attributed to the vertue of
the ſhéeld, but rather to the gotten by the valour of his perſon,
which ſhould be eſtéemed of more renowne, then to atchieue
the conqueſt by ſuch a prouided meane. Wherefore repoſing no
longer confidence in his ſhéelde he truſted to his ſtrength, and
the good ſucceſſe he did aſſure himſelfe off: vſing Dramuſiande
in ſuch ſort, as he had little cauſe to boaſt of his bargains. But

to ſpeake vprightly, ſmall was the aduantage on either ſide for
they were both ſore wounded, both alike wearied, and both in
great danger of the preſent death, which made all the Princes
heauy, and the regardants ſorrowfull, to ſée ſuch an vnfriendly
ſpectacle,
                     
                        Dramuſiande retyring to take pauſe, beganne to ſuſpect that
this was the Knight ſhould bring him and all his vnder obeyſanue,
of whoſe comming, his Aunt Eutropa alway caſt a
great doubt: which to preuent, hee thought beſt to render him
ſome of the Princes, and ſo to will him leaue off his enterpriſe:
but when he conſidered, that to preſent ſuch a condition to his
enemie, might expreſſe his cowardiſe, and extinguiſh the good
report of his woonted knightly déedes, he determined to end his
life with ſo good a champion, rather then to be reproched by continuall
infamy.
                     The knight of Fortune walking vp and down, communing
with him ſelfe in this manner. If doe looſe my life to deliuer ſo
many of my deare friends, I account it the chiefeſt honor of my
life, and the beſt aduenture that euer I enterpriſed. Then ſuddainly
turning his thoughts to his faire Polinarda, in this manner
he began to vtter his amourous complaints. Madam, if at
any time you reſpected the vowed dutie of your ſeruant, then
at this time vouchſafe to remember me in your Princely fauor,
ſo that if the victory returne according as I wiſh, I may manifeſt
the honour of mine attempt, to your ſoueraigne bounty, by
which I liue, and in which I haue hope to confound my enemy.
                     Then they began againe in ſuch wrathfull manner, that all
ſuppoſed there was no other remedie, but the death of them
both, ſuch was their féeble eſtate, and ſo great the loſſe of their
blood, that Dramuſiande was conſtrained to fall downe, hée
could no longer ſuſtaine himſelfe, when the Knight of Fortune
ſate downe by him, as glad to haue a little reſt, he was become
ſo faint. Don Edward, and the other Princes came running to
Dramuſiande, and tooke off his Helmet, that he might receiue
the Aire, deſiring the Knight of Fortune to conteut himſelfe
with the victory, and not to worke the death of the friendly Giant,
to which he anſwered.
                     
                        
Although mine intent was to part his head from his ſhoulders,
yet will I not at this time execute ſuch crueltie, reſpecting
the honour you haue done me to intreate for him, and I
haue done as much as my heart deſired. The Princes conducting
them both into ye caſtle, were ſo diligent about thē, at their
dangerous eſtate required, eſpecially to Dramuſiande, who
was reduced into very weake eſtate.
                     As they were ſo buſie about thē, they heard a great knocking
at the gate, which the prince Platir opened in all ſpéed: where he
beheld an ancient man, apparelled after the Grecian faſhion,
who entred the Caſtell, accompanied with two comely Damoſels,
carrying in their handes two golden Boxes of precious
Oyntment, wherewith they enbalmed the Knight of Fortune,
as alſo the other Knights that had receiued any hurt.
                     The auncient man would not ſuffer any to be about the
wounded knights, but onely the two Damoſels: wherefore he
commanded all the other foorth of the chamber, promiſing them
they ſhould recouer their woonted health againe. This promiſe
did greatly content the Princes, who deſired nothing ſo much,
as the health of the Knight of Fortune: in that by his conquering
the Giant, they had receiued their former libertie againe,
and all the cruell Enchauntmentes that Eutropa had practiſed
in the Valley of Perdition, were now fully finiſhed, and her
power to be no more eſtéemed. The anciēt man tooke his leaue
of the Princes, commaunding the Damoſels not to depart
from thence, till they had all recouered their ſound eſtate of
health againe.
                     The Princes did daily accompany the Knight of Fortune,
and Don Edward woud often viſite the Giant Dramuſiande,
labouring to ſhew him great courteſie, becauſe he would not be
vngratefull for the frienſhip hee had found at his handes. In
this manner did the Princes paſſe away their time, vntill their
deareſt friend had gained a good conſtitution of his body, which
the Damoſelles accompliſhed, before they would depart from
the Caſtle.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XLII.
                     How the Princes in the Caſtle of the Giant Dramuſiande, for
ioy of their deliuery by the puiſſance of the renowned
knight of Fortune, ſent Floraman the Prince of Sardignia,
to the court of the king of England, to whom, in the preſence
of the Queene and Princeſſe Flerida, hee declared
the ioyfull newes of Don Edward, as alſo of the other
Princes that had bene long time kept priſoners. Which
cauſed the king to ſend Argolant againe, to the Emperor
of Conſtātinople, to declare the glad finding of the prince
Don Edward, with his ſonne the noble Primaleon. And
how Sir Pridos came to the Engliſh court, to verifie the
Prince Floraman.
                     
                        
                           DRamuſiande being thus happily ouercome
and remaining in ſuch great debilitie, as it
was doubtfull of his ſpéedy recouery, the
Princes would not depart from thence, till
the knight of Fortune were able to beare
them company, to whō the Damamoſels
neither ſpared labour, nor good endeuour,
ſo that they had good hope in ſhort time he ſhould be of ſtrength
to trauaile with them. In the meane time, they determined
with themſelues to ſend a Meſſenger to the King of England,
that he might vnderſtand the good Fortune that had happened
to them, which would make amends for the great ſorrow hee
had ſuſtained of a long time.
                     
                        
The Prince Floraman, becauſe of his great wiſedome and
iudgement, was appointed by generall conſent to beare theſe
glad tidings: who went into the Armourie, belonging to the
Giant Dramuſiande, and put on his owne Armor, which was
battered & broken, as alſo coloured with the blood which came
out of his body in the ſkirmiſh, before he was taken priſoner
into the caſtle. When he was armed, he tooke his leaue of them
all, and rode in ſuch haſte that on the ſecond day he arriued at
London, where he was very much beheld, becauſe his armour
was ſo greatly bruſed.
                     At length he came to the Court, at what time the king was
ready to goe on Hunting: to whom Floraman preſented himſelfe,
deſirous to kiſſe his Graces hand. After his Eſquire had
taken off his Helmet, the king had knowledge of him, when he
imbraced him with theſe words. Certainly ſir Floraman your
Armour brought into ſuch a great alteration, doth witneſſe the
great danger hath bene incident to your perſon: which truſt
me is as gréeuous to me in beholding, as it hath bene yrkoſome
to your ſelfe in abiding. It ſéemeth you ſhould bring but ſorowfull
tidings, being in ſuch great miſchance as it ſéemeth you
haue taſted: Neuertheleſſe, hauing often receiued ſuch a ſad reports,
I can the better endure this, therefore ſay on.
                     My gracious Lord (anſwered Floraman) if you would vouchſafe
to returne into your Pallace, where I might behold your
Quéene, and the Princeſſe Flerida, I ſhall diſcouer ſuch ioyfull
newes, as your long continuing wiſhes ſhal be now prenſently
ſatiſfied.
                     At theſe words, the King tooke Floraman by the hand, and
walked with him to the chamber where the Quéene and princeſſe
were ſitting, who welcommed him very gratiouſly, and vſed
him according as his noble birth required. Floraman being
neuer ſo happy, as before this inſtant to haue a ſight of the
Princeſſe Flerida, eſtéemed himſelfe the gladdeſt Knight aliue,
to bring tidings to ſuch a rare Princeſſe of beautie, then after
he had done his dutie, according as the place and perſons beſéemed,
he began to ſalute them with theſe ſpéeches following.
                     To be tedious in words (my gratious Soueraigne) or to trifle

the time with long circumſtances, might offend your patience
to ſtay to heare it, and cumber my memory taſtand to ſhew it.
Wherefore to vſe breuity in ſch a caſe, as you haue long deſired,
and at laſt deſerued: I thinke it expedient conſidering
your heauineſſe, and therefore attend how it hath luckily happened.
Don Edward your noble ſonne, Primaleon with the
other Princes and Knights, that haue bene ſo long time loſt,
and now found at laſt, in remembrance of their obedient duetie,
do all kiſſe the hand of your Maieſtie. Their long oppreſſion
hath now obtained a happy end, and their grieuous ſorrowes
finiſhed with a generall delight, in that they haue recouered
their wonted libertie, albeit it hath bene bought with a
ſharpe reſiſtance. It will not belong before they come themſelues,
for honour and dutie willeth them to ſtay as yet, becauſe
the renowned Knight of Fortune, whoſe Proweſſe hath
fréede them from bondage, hath not recouered ſuch health as
may permit him to iourney. Vntill which time, they remaine
in the Caſtle of Dramuſiande, who hath kept them priſoners,
till this long aduenture hath bene ſo worthily brought to end,
and thus haue I certified your Grace what hath bene giuen me
in charge to accompliſh.
                     Theſe words moued them to looke on ech other, doubting
whether they might giue credance to the report of Floraman or
no, who ſéeing them al in ſuch an amazement, as though they
did hardly beléeue what he had ſaid, began againe to perſwade
them as thus. I truſt your Grace doth not thinke, that I
would preſume to manifeſt before you a tale of vntroth, which
to do, might remaine a blemiſh to mine honour, beſide the offence
vnto your Grace did deſerue no pardon. And therefore I
deſire you, not to miſtruſt what I haue bene ſo bold as to diſcloſe,
nor credite me, your noble ſonne Don Edward is a line,
and yeſterday I left him with the other Princes, for the cauſes
which I haue already declared.
                     The king perceiuing the earneſt proteſtations of the Prince
Floraman, came to him, and imbraced him with theſe wordes.
I haue that opinion (Sir Floraman) in you, that you wold not
dalude vs with any falſe report, yet blame not my hardneſſe of

beléefe, becauſe I haue béene ſo often certified of tydings, which
gaue an impoſſibilitie to what you haue declared, ſo that for
this cauſe I was filled with the more ſuſpect. Neuertheleſſe,
yet ſuch is the confidence I repoſe in you, and ſuch is the grauitie
that accompanieth your dayly attempts, that I am reſolued
of your ioyfull tydings, and giue you a thouſand thanks
for your imployed pain, then which nothing can be more acceptable
to me, nor any thing more welcome then theſe long deſired
tydings.
                     The Quéene and the Princeſſe withdrew themſelues into a
Chamber, manifeſting ſuch ioyfall diſtourſes to each other, as
might witnes their great contentation, yea ſuch were the ſeuerall
motions of gladneſſe, that tooke place within their ſorrowing
mindes, as themſelues had not power to expreſſe it, nor I
the leyſure to declare it: The king was deſirous to know, by
whom Don Edward and the other Princes, had beene ſo long
time kept Priſoners, as alſo how the knight of Fortune behaued
himſelfe, in that ſo many had ventured, yet none ſo happie
to preuaile as he. Floraman rehearſed the whole ſtate of their
impriſonment, from the firſt to the laſt, with the continuance
of accidents happening in that time: but when he declared the
laſt combate of the knight of Fortune, againſt the Gyant Dramuſiand,
the king was taken with a maruellous aſtoniſhment
which vrged him to enter into theſe ſpéeches.
                     Certainly, the war that the Gyant Frenaque made againſt
my father, hath bene the cauſe that all this miſchiefe and aduerſe
miſhaps hath chanced: ſo that my life had likewiſe come
into danger, had not God in mercy vſed more reſpect vnto me:
but tell me Sir Floraman, is the Gyant Dramuſian de yet liuing?
                     Certes my good Lord (anſwered Floman) I left him in very
grieuous and doubtfull eſtate of health, and your ſonne as
carefull for his welfare, as he is for his owne proſpertie, and he
deſireth your Grace, at ſuch time as he ſhall come to your court
that you would entertaine him as gently as you will receiue
himſelfe, ſo great is the affection of your ſon to him, and ſurely
his behauiour hath deſerued no leſſe.
                     
                        
The King well pleaſed with this report, promiſed to fulfill
the deſire of his Sonne in any thing: and ſo hée went to the
Chamber of the Princeſſe Flerida, to whom hee rehearſed all
the talke that had paſſed betwéene him and the Prince Floraman.
                     
                     Theſe newes were ſo blazed thorow the Cittie of London,
that many came to welcome the Prince Floraman, and many
tooke the way to the Caſtle of the Giant Dramuſiande, ſhewing
ſuch ioyfulneſſe for recouery of their loſt Prince, that the
paſſed ſorrowe was nothing thought vpon. The gladneſſe of
the Citizens being vnderſtood by the Princeſſe Flerida, exiled
from her heart all her former feare, and made herb
                           •
                         more conuerſant
with the Courtly company, then of long time ſhee had
béene, and would ſit talking with ſuch as returned from the Giants
Caſtle, witneſſing that the Prince Floraman had before
declared.
                     The King thought good, to giue knowledge of this happy
chance, to the Emperour Palmerin of Conſtantinople, and calling
Argolant (who had béene Ambaſſador thither before) gaue
him his commaundement following. Becauſe you carryed tydings
to the Emperour, when the great miſhap befell to my
Sonne, I am minded you ſhall now goe giue him a cauſe of as
great ioy, as then you did of heauineſſe.
                     Declare vnto him, how my Son Don Edward, with his noble
Sonne Primaleon, and all the other knights that were loſt,
are now deliuered from their Captiuitie, and enioy their former
libertie againe.
                     With this Meſſage, Argolant armed himſelfe, and departed
ſpéedily towards Cōſtantinople. Within thrée dayes after,
the King deſirous to ſée his Sonne and the other Princes, determined
to ryde to the Caſtle of Dramuſiande, but the arriuall
of Syr Pridos, changed his minde preſently: certifying
him, that ſo ſoone as the Knight of Fortune, and the
Giant Dramuſiande were able to abide trauaile, they
would not ſtay, but come to the Court with all the ſpéede they
might.
                     
                        
The King imbraced ſir Pridos, and conducted him to the chamber
of the Princes Flerida: who reioyced greatly to ſée him, but
more gladly would haue had ſight of her huſband Don Edward,
whom till ſhe ſawe, ſhe thought all their words to be but tales
and fables.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XLIII.
                     How the Damoſels, hauing cured the wounds of the Knight
of Fortune, and the Giant Dramuſiande, tooke their leaue
and departed to the ancient man againe. And how Don
Edward with all the Princes, left the Caſtle and came to
London, where they were royally welcomed by the King
Fredericke.
                     
                        OFtentimes would the Prince Don Edward,
with his company of renowned
Knights, viſite the Knight of Fortune: vntill
at laſt they had attained ſuch ſtrength,
as they could well endure to beare Armor,
when hee concluded to abandon the Foretreſſe,
but would appoint ſuch a knight to
gouernoit, as ſhould render it into his hands, whē he were willing
to receiue it. And to Eutropa (albeit her diſcourteous dealings
deſerued ſmall fauour, her Nephewe being vanquiſhed)
hée would giue her another Caſtle, as well to manifeſt his noble
minde, which had the power to pardon her extreame cruelty
ſhowne to him, as alſo to cauſe her leaue that helliſh & abhominable
exerciſe of life: wherein ſhe had not onely vexed him,
but a number of Princes of great reputation. This granted,
and well eſtéemed by general conſent, the Prince Berolde was
appointed to goe giue her knowledge therof: but preſently they

heard ſuch a noyſe in the Caſtle, as they ſuppoſed it would haue
fallen downe on their heads: beſide, there aroſe ſuddenly ſuch a
terrible darkeneſſe, as they could neither behold one another
nor had they power to abide there altogether. At laſt, in the aire
(as they iudged) they heard a gréeuous crie, which ſounded in
their eares after this manner. Don Edward, ſeeke not to pleaſure
her, who ſhall requite thy fréendſhip with great vnthankefulneſſe,
nor labour thy ſelfe toward her good, whoſe extreame
cruell nature delighteth in thy griefe. I am that Eutropa who
all this while hath plagued thée and thy noble friends, and will
continue in tormenting thee and thine, vntill this world hath
made an end of me. I go now to the place where I ſhall haue
leyſure, to forget the iniurie thou haſt done vnto me, and power
to fulfill my deſire in thy continuall vexation.
                     Theſe words thus ended, and the Aire waxing ſomewhat
cleare againe, they might perceiue the Enchantreſſe in the
Aire, inuironed with a darke and gloomy myſt like a cloud, and
and how ſhe cut the Aire with a great many fiery flaſhes about
her. When ſhe was departed forth of ſight, they remayned in a
great amazement: yet being all glad that they were rid of her,
who was ſo ill affected to them.
                     The Damoſels, who by the commandement of the ancient
man, had ſtayed there till the knights were perfectly rerouered,
came to the Prince Don Edward, vſing theſe words.
                     Good ſir, giue vs leaue now to depart: ſéeing the knight of
Fortune, and the Giant Dramuſiande, are out of danger, and
ſtrong enough to endure the trauaile of their Armour. Truſt
me Ladies (anſwered Don Edward) your great courteſies hath
ſo ſeuerely bound me, that I might be iuſtly reproached of ingratitude,
to ſuffer you depart, not vſing ſuch honourable recompence
as you haue well deſerued. Neuertheleſſe, ſuch is the
ſimpleneſſe of this place to your worthy deſert, and ſo great affection
to ſee you liberally rewarded, that if you would vouchſafe
the courteſie, to come to the Engliſh Court, or report
where I may ſend to your abiding, what I will do, I leaue to
your good opinions to report.
                     Sir (quoth the Damoſels) the vertue which is alway reſident

in your noble minde, and fameth your knightly déeds throughout
the whole world: that neither Enuy can blot out, nor accident
of time haue power to extinguiſh, ſo that we may well be
eſtéemed happy, who hath ſo good a Champion to defend her
honour. As for your Princely offer, we find our deſerts ſo
ſimple, as we were loth to preſume in place to ſéeke any recompence:
yet if our preſence at London, may either profite
you or pleaſure your friends, we will be as ready to come, as
you can be deſirous to wiſh vs there. But ſuch is now our
buſineſſe, that your friends being reduced into their former
eſtate, we muſt néeds depart, wherfore we deſire you to voucheſafe
vs leaue.
                     Ladies (quoth Don Edward) he that ſhould ſéem to deny you
and you not giuing conſent thereto, ſhould by his boldneſſe
with my blood, that would offer them iniury, who haue deſerued
more then I can ſay. And therefore when you ſhall thinke good
to depart, you may right willingly, for here is none will gaine
you, or that dare deny you. The damoſels perceiuing the great
humanitie of this gentle Prince, failed not to giue him courteous
thanks according: ſo taking their leaue of the Knight of
Fortune, with all the other Princes, they went to the gate of
the Caſtle, where they found two Palfrys appointed for them,
and being mounted thereon, returned to the place from whence
the ancient man brought them.
                     
                        Don Edward ſéeing al was in good readineſſe, and that Dramuſiande
was méetely ſtrong-againe, he offered the caſtle to the
knight of Fortune, who wold not refuſe it vpon condition, that
from that day forward it might be called the Fort of Fortune:
ſo leauing Pompides there to kéep it, they departed al towards
London, accompanied with Dramuſiand, bearing the Armour
wherein he had combatted againſt the knight of Fortune.
                     
                     The Citizens being admoniſhed of the coming of their long
loſt Priuce Don Edward, gathered themſelues in ſuch heapes
in the ſtréets, that the Princes could hardly paſſe, without hurting
ſome of them with their Horſes. Some of them preaſed to
ſée the Prince Don Edward, becauſe he had bene ſo long abſent
from them, other ſome to ſée the giant Dramuſiand maruelling

that the knight of Fortune had the power to conqure him, who
had ſubdued ſo many. Thus paſſing on, they arriued at laſt at
the Court, where Don Edward caſting his eies on the princeſſe
Flerides Chamber, the teares trickled downe his chéekes, remembring
how long time he had bene from thence, and had not
ſéene her, whom he moſt honoured and intirely loued: but ſéeing
he was come againe at laſt, and at his gentle behauiour ſhould
recompence what had béene amiſſe, he quieted himſelfe, leaſt any
ſhould behold his amorous paſſions.
                     King Fredericke at the entrance of the Cour, came and receiued
them all graciouſly: giuing them ſuch Princely entertainment,
as their nobilitie of birth, and hoyourable eſtate required.
Don Edward and Dramuſiande, were the laſt that preſented
themſelues to his Maieſtie: where knéeling downe, and
humbling himſelfe to kiſſe his hand, the Prince began as followeth.
                     My Soueraigne Lord and Father, if I either haue, or may
find fauour at your highnes hands, then let me not at this time
be denied of the ſame, as to entertaine this Giant, not after the
cruell deſerts of his Father, but euen as the moſt curteous and
friendly knight in the world. The king imbracing his ſonne, receiued
him in his armes from the ground: bedeawing his white
any heary Beard with aboundance of teares, which through
meere loue he ſhed for the preſence of Don Edward, when hée
began to anſwere him in this manner.
                     What he is my ſon, who conceiuing ſo great deſire, as I of
long time haue to ſée you, that could find in his heart, to deny any
thing that you ſhould require? Then comming to Dramuſiande,
who endeuoured to kiſſe his Graces hand, imbracing him
in his armes, he thus began.
                     My intent was not to ſhewe courteſie to him, that hath
béene the cauſe of my long continuing heauineſſe, but the report
my ſonne hath made, of your great bountie and gentleneſſe,
hath conquered the extremitie that I once had ſworne
to vſe vnto you, ſo that hee which would now offer to vexe
you any way, ſhould be enemie to me, and ſo not eſcape vnpuniſhed.
                     
                        
The knight of Fortune humbling himſelfe in his preſence, the
King caſt his armes about his necke, with this gréeting. My
minde did aſſure me, Sir knight, that the heauy ſorrowes I endured
too long a time, ſhould be ended by the valour of your hautie
déedes of Armes, who is ſo welcome to my Grace, as no liuing
creature on the earth could be more.
                     My ſoueraigne Lord (anſwered the knight of Fortune)
what I haue done, hath bin thorow Gods appointment, whoſe
power aſſiſting me beyond my deſert, haue finiſhed the aduenture,
which no pollicie could otherwiſe bring to paſſe. In honor
of this happy victory, they went al to the chiefe Church of London,
where ſeruice was accōpliſhed with great ſolemnity, and
then returning to the Pallace, the Quéene and the Princeſſe
Flerida, receiued them all with great bounty, the knights vſing
ſuch courteous demeanour, as beſeemed the roialty of theyr perſons,
being right glad to haue a ſight of the fayre Princeſſe.
While Flerida was vſing courteſie to the other knights, the
king lead the Quéene to the Prince Don Edward, ſaying, Madame,
behold now your Sonne, for whom you haue wiſhed ſo
long, now may you at leiſure make knowne vnto him, the gréeuous
paſſions which for his abſence you haue ſuffered. And I
deſire you to entertaine theſe noble Princes, with as great fauour
as you can any way deuiſe, for that we are greatly bound
vnto them, conſidering the danger they haue paſſed, to finde
our Sonne Don Edward. Then he ſhewed her the noble Primaleon,
to whom ſhe went, embracing him in her armes, and
gaue him a ſwéete kiſſe for his welcome. The like ſhe did to the
Prince Vernar, the king Polendos, Recinde, & Arnedes, with
all the Princes and Knights.
                     Then Flerida comming to her brother Primaleon, imbraced
him in her armes, with theſe wordes. Let it not be offenſiue to
you my noble brother, that I haue ſtayed ſo long, not welcomming
you as I ought: for ſure the glad comming of my Lord
Don Edward, made me vnmindful of any other body. Your reaſon
Siſter is allowed (anſwered Primaleon) and he that ſhould
blame you for it, were not worthy to be eſtéemed among thoſe
that ſéeme to profeſſe honour and vertue.
                     
                        
Then the King commanded their lodgings ſhould be preſently
prouided, which they found in euery point ſo royally adorned,
as they could not ſpeake ſufficient in praiſe of the court of England.
Thus ſtaied they a good while in the Engliſh Court, euery
one deſirous to returne into their owne Dominions, more
to ſet ſuch things in order as their Deputies had failed in, then
for any deſire they had to leaue the Court of England. But becauſe
thoſe whom they left in charge with their kingdomes, had
dealt in ſuch order with their ſubiects, as they were ready to rebell
againſt their rightfull Prince, therefore they thought, the
ſooner they departed, in the leſſe time they might allay all the
troubles againe.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XLIII.
                     How Trineus the Emperour of Allemaigne, hearing of the
happy deliuery of the Princes, out of the Caſtle of Dramuſiande,
left the Court, and with the Empreſſe Agriola, trauailed
till he arriued in England, where he was very royally
and Princely entertained.
                     
                        REport had blazed in all Countreyes, how
the Princes and Knights that had béene ſo
long time loſt, and could not he heard off,
were now at libertie, and the aduenture of
great Brittaine fully ended. Trinens the
Emperour of Allemaigne, who had ſpent
his dayes in great ſorrowe & grieuous complaints
for his two Sonnes, Vernar and Polinard, now vnderſtanding
that they remained in the Engliſh Court, his
heart was ſuppriſed with ſo great ioy, that not bewraying his
intent to any, hee determined to trauaile, till hee came into
England. So accompanied with the Empreſſe Agriola,
                        
and ſuch knights as beſéemeth his royall eſtate to haue with
him: hée paſſed thorow Germaine, where, at diuers Cities hée
was honourably receiued, & at laſt landed on the Coaſt of England.
King Fredericke had knowledge of the comming of the
Emperour Trineus, wherefore he commanded the Chamber
ſhould be prouided, wherein the Empreſſe from her childhood
had talke with her, at ſuch time as the Emperor Palmerin and
he came to preſent their ſeruice to the King of England. Many
noble Eſtates prepared to goe meete him, thrée miles from the
Citie of London, and the king accompanied with Vernar and
Polinard, came to receiue him into the Citie.
                     But to rehearſe vnto you, the royall and gratious entertainment
they receiued by the king, with the ſumptuous and rare
deuiſes, fcamed by the Citizens to welcome him withall, would
aſke a greater time, then I can well ſtay ſo long from diſcourſing
of our Hiſtory, but ſo great was the kings fauour, and ſo liberall
the expences of his dutifull ſubiects, that they ſaid within
themſelues, England had no fellow. When they were come to
the Pallace, the Quéene and the Princeſſe Flerida, being very
gorgiouſly attyred, againſt the comming of ſuch a great State,
receiued him with ſuch royaltie, as is not here to be ſpoken of.
With great honour they were conducted to their Chamber, all
retyring backe, except Vernar and Polinard their ſons: whom
the Empreſſe commanded to ſtay with her, becauſe ſhée had a
great deſire to talke and conferre with them.
                     All the knights determined with themſelues to prepare ſome
notable ſhewes of pleaſure, wherewith they might delight the
minde of the Emperor, that he might perceiue, what loſſe both
Chriſtendome, and their noble Parents ſhould haue had, if fortune
had determined their continuall ſeruitude to the Giant
Dramuſiande, and had not wrought the meane to grant them
their libertie.
                     The Emperor and Agriola, paſſed away the time in pleaſant
communication, to heare what aduentures their noble Sons
had paſſed, & yet ſafely to eſcape ſuch a bitter plunge, for which
they both lauded Fortune, and eſtéemed their age, the happieſt

time of their life. Then would he often declare to Agriola, what
ſharpe aſſaults he had endured in that chamber, being amorous
of her loue, and beſtowing his affaires in her ſeruice: wiſhing
for the time againe, wherein he ſpent his flouriſhing youth ſo
valiantly.
                     But knowing that his deſire, was vnpoſſible to be receuered,
he delighted to rehearſe what pleaſant cenceits had paſſed
betweene him and her, as well when ſhe was coy, as when ſhe
made acceptation of his courteſie, and ſhewd her the ſecret places
of danger, which full many a time he made hazard in, when
he had deſire to ſpeake with her. But n
                           •
                        w conſidering how his
ancient time had cut off ſuch amorous drifts as then he put in
practiſe, betwéene teares and pleaſant talke, he paſſed this remembrance
in his ſilent thoughts, knowing that youth muſt
of force giue place to age, and as then he had pleaſure in amor
                           •
                        us
deuiſes, ſo new to content his age with ancient diſcourſes.
And often would he rehearſe what ſtrange and rare aduentures
his ſonnes had reported, during the time they ſought for
the ſtrayed Prince, as alſo the pleaſures of Conſtantinople:
which was a meane to perſwade his vrgent paſſions, and to
forſake ſuch complaints as were booteleſſe to be rehearſed.
                     The faire Aurora had no ſooner left her old and ancient huſband,
and ſhewed her bright beames vpon the earth, but that
galleries and ſcaffolds were made about the Tiltyard, where
the knights determined to ſhew the Emperour their valour.
                     The knights of England and Allemaign, held both one ſide
together, and the Grecian knights maintained the other ſide:
each one behauing themſelues with ſuch hautie courage, that
the Emperour did aſſigne them ſingular commendations. For
ſometime Fortune maketh cheyre of a weake Champion, and
alloweth him to be as aduenturous as the moſt hardy knight:
euen ſo the weake and ſtrong preuailed ſo well together, that
both ſides were praiſed, aad the noble eſtates ſufficiently pleaſed.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XLV.
                     How Argolant arriued at Conſtantinople, where in the preſence
of the Empreſſe Gridonia, Polinarda, and the faire
Bazilia, he declard how the knight of Fortune had deliuered
Don Fdward, Primaleon, and the other captiue Princes,
out of the cruell Enchanted caſtle of Eutropa and Dramuſiande.
                     
                        
                           ARgolant (who by the commandement of
the king of England) was departed on his
voyage towards Conſtantinople, to declare
vnto the Emperour Palmerin, the good ſucceſſe
of his ſonne Primaleon, and the other
Prince indeuoured himſelfe ſo well in his
iourney (thorow the helpe of good wind and
weather) that at the laſt he attained the end of his trauaile. And
as he rode through the Citïe, he eſpied the Emperour among a
great many of Souldiours, whoſe beard was growne ſo white,
with anguiſh of minde, and his face ſo wanne by reaſon of his
continuall mourning, that he ſtood in doubt whether it were
the Emperour or no, but that he was certified thereof, by the
people which made their recourſe thorow the ſtréetes. Who
told him, that report was giuen abroade, how the Soldans
of Babylon and Perſia, had gathered a mightie Armie, intending
to beſiege their Cittie, which made the Emperour in his
owne perſon, to goe ſée to the fortifying of the walles, that
his Rampiers of defence might bée readie to reſiſt the enemie,
Argolant comming before the Emperour (who preſently
knew him) alighted, and knéeling downe, humbly
kiſſed his hand, to whom the Emperour thus ſpake. You
may ſée Argolant in what neceſſitie the citie of Conſtantinople
is now vnhappily falne, which in times paſt, hath vrged me to

the opinion, that neither warres could ſurplant it, treaſons inuade
it, nor any diſloyall accident once vſe ſpight againſt it. But
ſuch is the alteration of times, and ſo vncertaine the fauour of
Fortune, that the famous monuments of moſt honour and antiquitie,
are as ſoone ſubuerted as the weakeſt defence, ſo that it
remaineth to me to ſay, which once I could iuſtly ſay, I haue
béene happy. For ſuch is the danger threatened to our eſtate,
and ſo doubtfull the miſchance that may ſuddainely annoy vs,
as my Subiects ſtand euery houre in feare of their liues, and
my ſelfe in diſpaire of mine own ſafety. Becauſe I want thoſe,
whoſe names in the eare of mine enemy, hath carried as great
eſtimation of hot reſiſtance, as they now being abſent, doe ouercharge
me with a cold comfort. But how fareth thy Soueraigne
Lord, the king of 
                           
                              •
                           ngland? to demand for other tidings,
were as néedeleſſe, as I ſuppoſe them helpeleſſe.
                     If it ſhall like your Highneſſe (anſwered Argolant) the king
my Soueraigne and Lord, ſaluteth your imperiall eſtate, with
all happineſſe that he can wiſh, or you poſſibly deſire, as for my
charge, if you will vouchſafe the place, where the Empreſſe Gridonia,
and the other Ladies may be preſent, you ſhall all be certified
(I truſt) to your contentations. The Emperour at theſe
wordes rode ſtraite to his Pallace, not ſtaying till he came
where the Empreſſe, Gridonia, and the faire Polinarda, were
ſitting altogether, but Argolant miſſing Bazilia, wife to the
Prince Vernar, began on this wiſe to intreate the Emperour.
Let it not be offenſiue to your highneſſe, in that I trifle time ſo
long, becauſe I want one here to be partner of my happy tydings,
which is the faire Bazilia, whoſe heart (I am right ſure)
thought the abſence of her Lord Vernar too long.
                     The Emperour ſuppoſing there was ſome glad tydings toward,
in that they concerned not one alone, but all ſuch as had
long time béene oppreſſed with heauineſſe, and knowing likewiſe,
the Princeſſe Bazilia would hardly leaue her Chamber:
tooke the paines to g
                           •
                        e for her himſelfe, when being al ſet down
together, Argolant in this manner vttered his Ambaſſage. As
it is not vnknowen to you moſt mightie Emperour, as alſo
theſe gracious Ladies, who ſince that time haue endured no

ſmall oppreſſion of heauy conceits, that at my laſt being in this
place, I brought the vnfortunate report, which cauſed (as you
know ful well) a grieuous miſhap, enſuing vpon the loſſe of our
no leſſe famous then redoubted Prince Don Edward, which
prouoked your noble ſonne Primaleon, with a number of valiant
Princes and Knights of your court, to purſue in his ſearch:
So now, I durſt not preſent my ſelfe, where my former newes
cauſed ſuch griefe, without I might bring thoſe tidings, as ſhuld
(in recompence (cauſe a mutuall and generall gladneſſe: which
loath to conceale from you too long, thus it is.
                     The knight of Fortune, the myrrour of Chiualrie, the onely
Lampe and Load-ſtone, to draw the aduenterous minde to all
valiant attempts, as his exploytes in your Court againſt Floraman,
who for his fayre Altea, made the onely challenge for
the ſupreame title of beautie, may not onely remaine a witnes,
but as a perfect example of all worthineſſe, to ſuch as ſhall enſue
after him, for his memory, and their learning. This worthy
Champion attempted the aduenture of great Brittaine, where,
by the Magique of Eutropa, and might of Dramuſiande, (ſonne
to the Giant Frenaque, whom you ſlew before your departure
forth of England) our Prince Don Edward, your ſonne Primaleon,
with a number of Princes and noble Knights, were all
this while kept as priſoners, onely to reuenge the death of the
aforeſaid Giant Frenaque. Wherein he ſpedde ſo happily, that
(notwithſtanding the cruell enchantments, diſperſed ouer the
whole forreſt, and retaining the knights in ſuch a ſeruitude, as
they might doe nothing without the conſent of this wicked Eutropa)
he withſtood her helli
                           ••
                         charmes, the force of her nephew
the giant, & fulfilled that hauty attempt, which could be finiſhed
by no other. And our Prince Don Edward chancing firſt into
this miſhap, was appointed to endure the firſt Iuſt againſt
all that came: ſo that through the helpe of two Giants (whom
the Knight of Fortune hath valiantly foyled) all the wandring
Knights were caught captiue in this Caſtell. In fine, when
this famous Conquerour had found the way to this Fortreſſe,
and behaued himſelfe againſt the reſiſtaance with ſingular
magnanimitie: hée entred the Combate with Dramuſiande,
                        
where a bloody and doubtfull fight was preſently begun.
                     The Emperor ſuddenly ſtaying Argolant at theſe words, in
a maze and great feare put forth this demand. Good Argolant
before you procéed any further, reſolue me of a doubt, wherein
the laſt report of your diſcourſe hath brought me: know you
where as now the knight of Fortune remaineth, and whether
he be aliue as yet or no? for if he fare otherwiſe then well, my
ſtate cannot endure without bearing him company: to which
Argolant replyed. At ſuch time, my gratious Lord, as I departed
from the Realme of England, I left him in ſuch good diſpoſition
as himſelfe could wiſh, or your Maieſty deſire, when euery
one reioyced for the good ſucceſſe he had againſt the Gyant
Dramuſiande.
                     
                     But may I (quoth the Emperor) vpon your faith and knight
heed, aſſure my ſelfe of this report? If it may pleaſe you my
good Lord, anſwered Argolant, to giue credite to my Meſſage,
then beléeue me, that the knight of Fortune is in good eſtate of
health, and hath done what I haue manifeſted before this honourable
aſſembly. Likewiſe the Forreſt of that diſloyall Eutropa
is ſubdued from all her Enchantments, ſo that Don Edward
our infortunate Prince, Primaleon your noble Sonne,
and all the other captiue Princes, in deſpite of her and the giant
Dramuſiande, are reléeued from their long & vnhappy impriſonment.
Then turning to the Princeſſe Bazilia, he began courteouſly
to ſalute her, as thus. It ſtood with good reaſon, faire Lady,
that your preſence ſhould be partaker of theſe happy tidings
inſomuch as you, I am ſure, haue ſuffered no ſmall afflictions,
for the abſence of your deare friend the Prince Vernar, whom
I can aſſure you to be in as good health as you can wiſh: ſauing
that he is not here, as you could willingly be content, & he himſelfe,
as in ſhort time he will, I dare awarrant you.
                     
                        Gridonia rauiſhed with the report of Argolant, was ſo ſuddenly
ouercome with excéeding ioy, that ſhe caught the Princeſſe
Bazilia in her armes, (either of them cured of one ſickneſſe) that
one could hardly iudge, whether their preſent gladneſſe excelled
their paſſed gréefe, or in what order they receiued theſe newes,
but it ſufficeth, they had good cauſe to be pleaſant.
                     
                        
The Empreſſe came, and took either of them by the hand, conducting
them into her Oratorie, where in heartie and ſolemne
deuotions, they gaue thankes to God for this proſperous ſucceſſe.
In the meane while, the Emperour deſired Argolant
to rehearſe the names of ſuch noble Princes and Knights, as
were partners in this long captiuitie, which when he had heard
he greatly reioyced that the floriſhing noble mindes of all Chriſtendome,
bare parts of the miſhappes of the renowned Engliſh
Prince, a token of their great loue and friendſhip, in that
they diſdained not the terrour of ſuch hard miſfortune, to beare
him company, whom all hautie hearts did honour. And the rather
was his ioy the greater, becauſe the knight of Fortune
contained the magnanimitie of courage, as (notwithſtanding
all bitter brunts to threaten the contrary) he was the choſen
Champion to accompliſh this rare aduenture.
                     Now he called to remembrance, the letter ſent by the Lady
of the Lake, the ſame day as Polendos king of Theſſaly deliuered
him that royall preſent, as alſo the meſſage of the Sage
Aliart, which had now diſcouered the full effect of their promiſes.
Through all the Cittie, was preſently noyſed the recouery
of the Grecian Princes, which cauſed euery one to make
ſmall account, of the preſumptuous brags of the Soldanes of
Babylon and Perſia, in that they iudged themſelues vnder the
ſureſt defence that might be, now they had obtained thoſe,
whom they euer eſtéemed. The Emperour cauſing Argolant
to be brought to his chamber, went ſtraight to the Cloſet of
the Empreſſe, where he rehearſed all that Argolant had declared,
as concerning the ſucceſſe of the knight of Fortune.
                     
                     
                        Argolant departing on the next morning, was deſired by the
Emperour, to will the knight of Fortune make haſt vnto Conſtantinople,
becauſe he had a great deſire to ſée him. And now ye
Emperour with all his court was indued with as great ioy,
as he conceiued ſorrow at his departure, which he had good
cauſe to do, hauing loſt his chéefeſt defence, in the abſence of the
Princes and knights, that were kept priſoners in the Caſtle
of Dramuſiande, by the accurſed meanes of the Enchantreſſe
Eutropa, and now poſſeſſing the fréedome of his loſſe, he might

well eſtéeme the volour of this hardy knight. But ſuch are the
changes and mutabilities of Fortune, who when the heart is
drowned in gréefe paſt any hope, ſhe ſendeth a happy ſucceſſe,
to requite the former miſchance, and likewiſe, where moſt pleaſure
hath continuall reſidence, there ſhe ſooneſt prouideth the
greateſt miſhap.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XLV.
                     How the Engliſh knights and the Grecian knights, in honor
of the Emperour Trineus and the faire Agriola, enterpriſed
a braue Tournament, wherein each one behaued himſelf
very valiantly. And how three ſtrange knights arriued
there, whoſe noble behauiour vrged the royall aſſembly
to great admiration.
                     
                        EIght dayes after that the Emperour Trin
                              •
                           us
was arriued at Court, the knights among
themſelues determined a triumph,
for which cauſe, the Tiltyard had many
ſcaffolds and galleries built about it, that
they might the better behold this hauty attempt.
When the Emperour with the fair
Agriola, the king Fredericke, the Quéene, the Princeſſe Flerida,
Don Edward, Primaleon, with the other noble Ladies
and gentlemen of the Court, were come to the place appointed
for them to ſée this Tournament, the Engliſh knights entred
the liſts, where they meant to manifeſt the affection they bare
to their Ladies, that in honour of their fauours, they feared not
to hazard the vttermoſt of their liues.
                     After them entred the Grecian knights, euery one brauely
mounted, and attired in faire new complete Armour, which

graced with their perſons maruellouſly, the Prince Gracian by
their generall conſent, was choſen Captaine, to whom they referred
the ſtate of their conduct for that day, becauſe Palmerin
of England would not enter the Iouſt againſt his friends, left
his valour ſhould turne to their diſaduantage.
                     At the ſound of the Trumpet they all prepared themſelues
encountring one another with ſuch knightly courage, that the
Eſtates preſents, with ſuch a whole multitude of people, attributed
great cōmendation to this hardy exployt, for that they diſmounted
one another on either ſide, as it was doubtfull to ſay
which company were likeſt of victory.
                     
                        Gracian ran fiercely againſt Eutrope of Beltran, an Engliſh
knight of great ſtrength, and very well eſtéemed, but Fortune
turned her backe towards him that day, ſo that he could
not withſtand the knightly puiſſance of the French Prince.
Platir encountred with Normant the Proude, & gaue him ſuch
a colde welcome, that they were faine to carry him forth of the
field.
                     In like manner Carlente ſped, at the hands of the Prince
Berolde, & conſequently the Engliſh knights (albeit their déeds
did iuſtly merite eternall commendations, both at the Tilte
and Tourney) were vrged to the repulſe, becauſe the Grecian
knights were the ſtronger ſide.
                     
                        Berolde breaking through the rankes, vſing ſuch ſingular
behauiour in all his attempts, as was greatly liked of the Regardants,
came to Clariball of Hungaria, who ſetled themſelues
ſtoutly againſt ech other, that they endured both a doutfull
and a dangerous fight, neither hauing the aduantage of the
other, but ſuch an equall condition paſſing betwéene them, as
the Emperour with all the royall company were greatly affected
therewith.
                     The king Recinde (albeit the ſharpe ſtrokes his Sonne receiued,
vrged him to take it ſome what impatiently) yet the
generall applauſe which was giuen vnto him, conſtrained him
to thinke well of his valiant procéeding. Eutrope came now
to the aſſiſtance of Clariball, accompanyed with Syr Pridos,
Archirin, Lābert, Roquendar, Rugerald, Flocandriſſe, Alberraz,
                        
                        Lamonſtrant, and Brutamont, againſt whom to maintain
the quarrell of the Prince Berolde, came Gracian, Friſol, Luyman,
Oniſtalde, Dram
                              •
                           an, Tenebrant, Don Rouſel, and Bazilliarde,
all theſe behauing themſelues very gallantly at Armes:
yet at this brunt was too weak, to reſiſt the hot aſſaults of the
valiant Engliſh Princes, which was ſtil maintained with freſh
ſupply of noble minds.
                     They being in ſome doubt to gaine the ouerthrow, ſuddenly
entred the field, Platir, Floraman, Francian, Germaine of Orleance,
Vernar, Polinard, with others, ſo that as then began the
brauery of the fight, which, as it was well worthy, paſt not
without notable praiſe, and the Engliſh Knights came ſtill afreſh
to fiercely on them, that the Greciā
                         Knights were through
néere conſtraint vrged to retire.
                     But behold, on a ſudden, to aide the Grecian Princes, there
entred thrée ſtrange Knights very brauely mounted: the firſt
of them bearing in his ſhield on a groūd of ſand, the God Satur
                           
                              •
                           us,
compaſſed about with Starres: the ſecond had for his deuiſe,
in a gréene field, the Image of the Houſe of Sadnes: the

                           •
                        hird would not haue his Shield knowne, and therefore bare it
couered.
                     Theſe thrée ſéeing how the Engliſh Knights preuailed maruellouſly
in their reſiſtance, couched their Speares, and ran among
the thickeſt of them, whom to the great danger of both
ſides began a fierce battaile, ſo that Vernar, Tremoran, Tene
                           
                              •
                           rant
and others, were faine to be carried out of the field, they
were ſo ſore wounded.
                     In like manner were diuerſe of the Engliſh ſide, till the Re
                        
                           ••
                        eite
was ſounded, when the Prince Gracian with his company
retired into his Campe, and the Engliſh Knights conducted
the Emperour and the King into the Pallace, where ſweet muſicke,
and other delightfull exerciſes, ioyned them all friends in
their former vnity.

                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XLVII.
                     How the three Knights that came to the Tournament, were
knowne to be the Knight of the Sauage man, the Sage Aliart
of the Obſcure Valley, and Blandidon. And how Aliart
diſcouered in the preſence of all the Princes, how Palmerin
of England, and Florian of the Forreſt, were the
ſonnes of the noble Don Edward, and the Princes Flerida:
for proofe whereof, he brought the Sauage man, and his
wife (who had nouriſhed the two young Princes ſo long
in their Caue) into their preſence, by whom this great ioy
was fully confirmed.
                     
                        WHen the Triumph was ended, and the Emperour
with King Fredericke returned into
the Pallace, the Tables were ready prepared,
when immediately they ſate downe to
take their repaſte, being ſei
                           •
                        ed in ſuch honorable
and comely order, as the princes were
greatly in loue with the court of England.
Againſt ſupper was done, the King gaue in charge, that the
Knights ſhould prepare themſelues to the dancing: which done,
a ſumptuous Banquet ſhould preſently be ſerued on the tables.
                     The Dancing and the Banquet finiſhed, and they ſitting
pleaſantly ieaſting one with another, they entred the Hall the
thrée Knights, who had behaued themſelues ſo brauely in the
Tournament. Many deſired to come néere them, becauſe they
would know of whence they were: but to hinder their intents,
ſuch a miſt on a ſudden aroſe in the Hall, as the lights were dimmed,
the Torches burned very ſcarcely, and the Ladies being
diſmaied, caught their Knights in their Armes.
                     To put them out of this feare, the miſt departed, and the Hall

was as cleare as it was before, when ſtraight way they beheld
in the middeſt, a Lion and a Tiger enduring a great fight together,
and to ſet them at vnitie, there entred a faire Damoſell
with a golden rod in her hand, wherewith ſhe touched them
both, and they humbled themſelues at her féet. This done, ſhee
departed, and they aroſe againe in the forme of two fierce and
vntamed Bulles, which cauſed ſuch an aſtoniſhment to all the
beholders, that they wiſhed themſelues to be foorth of the Hall.
But the Knights ſéeing their Ladies ſo greatly diſcouraged, perſwaded
them that it was but ſome deuiſe, artificially prouided
for the delight of the Emperour: but they would hardly beléeue
them, becauſe the two Bulles fought ſo vehemently the one againſt
the other, and being ouercharged with wearines of fight,
fell to the ground, breathing from their mouthes an horrible
and ougly blacke ſmoke, as was before.
                     The Hall auoided of all theſe accidents, and in the ſame eſtate
it was at firſt, they might behold that thrée Knights, with
their heads vnarmed, ſo that he, who would not haue his ſhield
known, was found to be the gentle Knight of the Sauage man:
who preſently went to the king, and kneeling downe, kiſſed his
hand, with theſe words. My gracious Soueraigne, I earneſtly
intreate at your hands, this Knight may receiue the courteous
entertainement, your Grace will afford him at my requeſt,
for this is the Sage Aliart, your Maieſties moſt affectionate
ſeruant, to whom your griefe hath been ſo diſpleaſant, that he
thought himſelfe not in perfect quietneſſe, till he might manifeſt
his humble deuoite to your Grace.
                     King Fredericke, who had often heard report of the Sage Aliart,
by reaſon of the renowne and fame, was ſpred abroad of
him, ſtoode in a doubt how it ſhould bee hée, becauſe his youthful
yeeres was much vnlikely to embrace ſo great cunning and
learning, as was euery where famed of him: neuertheleſſe, giuing
credit to the Knight of the Sauadge man, hée embraced
him with theſe ſalutations. Certainely, ſir Aliart, I am bound
in duty to make good account of you, as well for your vertuous
dealings, which doth iuſtly deſerue it, as alſo for bringing
me my Fatherleſſe Knight, inſo ſound and good diſpoſition of

health, wherein you haue not onely honoured me, but likewiſe
approoued the vnſpotted faith of your Knighthood.
                     My gracious Lord (anſwered Aliart) the deſire I haue to
manifeſt the loialtie of my ſeruice, vrgeth me to this opinion
that might I liue neuer ſo long, I could not accompliſh ſo
much as duty doth require in me, reſpecting the great friendſhip,
I haue found at your Graces hand vndeſerued. But ma
                           •
                        
I vnder your Soueraigne pardon, preſume to diſcloſe ſo great
a ſecrete, as ſhall both content your Highneſſe, as alſo this illuſtrious
aſſembly? The King ſuppoſing ſome glad tydings
toward, requeſted all the Princes to vouchſafe their audience
when being euery one quietly placed to their owne content,
Aliart humbling himſelfe to the Princeſſe Flerida, began as
followeth.
                     Madame, it were hard for me to diſtinguiſh, betwéene your
extreame griefes paſſed, and the ſwéete ſolace you enioy at this
preſent: for albeit, this is to be thought beyond compariſon, yet
in time when you were heauie, your wofull complaints were
equally as vehement, as they that were priuie to their aduerſe
caſe, could eaſily beare with the vrgent cauſe. But referring
long diſcourſe of matter, you are to eſtéeme your ſelfe highly
honoured, by this no leſſe hauty then happy, and famous
Knight of Fortune, who for your ſake hath ſuffered the annoiance
of paine, in recompence of the dangerous trauaile
you ſuſtained for him, at ſuch time as you were deliuered of
two Children in the vnfortunate Forreſt, when your Lord had
left you. For when the Sauage man had taken him, and this
redoubted Knight, your Sonne Florian, his Brother, to ſacrifice
them to the rauenous iawes of his gréedy Lions, pittie
ſo pierced the heart of his poore and louing wife, that ſhée ſaued
them from the bloody ſlaughter, and nouriſhed them as carefully,
as ſhe did this other, who is her owne Childe. And Madam,
let not be forgotten the wordes ſir Pridos rehearſed vnto you,
(at ſuch time as you had loſt both huſband and children) which
was reported to him by the Ladie Argonida: for loe at this
inſtant her promiſe is accompliſhed, your noble Lord Don Edward
is reſtored, and your two loſt ſonnes ſafe and ſound recouered,

whoſe Knightly valure, hath ſufficiently diſcharged the
ſorrowe, that then your afflicted perſon ſuffered. The Knight
of Fortune, is your Sonne Palmerin, to whom you gaue that
name, in honour of the Emperour Palmerin, your Father, who
by the meanes of the Knight Polendos, receiued your ſon into
his Court, when he likewiſe cauſed him to be tearmed by his
owne name.
                     And this aduenturous knight of the Sauage man, is your other
Sonne, which according to the place of his birth, you called
him Florian of the Forreſt, him haue you nouriſhed & brought
vp by your motherly care, albeit he was knowen to you for no
other then a ſtraunger. Thus to knit vp your former ioy,
I thought good to preſume ſo farre, as to make you partners of
that, which was not knowen to any, but onely God and my
ſelfe.
                     The Princeſſe Flerida, and Don Edward wel viewing one
an other, were ſuddenly rauiſhed with ſuch an inward ioy, as
it is impoſſible for me to giue iudgement thereon: then Palmerin
and Florian came & imbraced each other, which moued the king
and all there preſent vnto ſuch delight, that they could not conceale
the great pleaſure they conceiued, whereupon the king entred
into theſe words.
                     Truſt me Syr Aliart, theſe newes were altogether vnlookt
for at this preſent, albeit they haue béene earneſtly deſired long
before this time, but yet doe me the fauour, to certifie me how
you are aſſured of that which you haue giuen foorth for a manifeſt
troth, it may be, here are ſome that dare hardly aduenture
to beléeue it. If I ſhould my good Lord (anſwered Aliart) fable
in ſuch a caſe. I were well worthy ſuch ſeuere puniſhment as
is due to him that ſhould falſely informe a Prince. But neuertheleſſe,
to giue you the better aſſurance thereof, marke what
ſhall enſue, and then anſwere how you are ſatiſfied.
                     Then drewe hée foorth a little Booke, whereon hauing
read a prettie while, the Sauage man and his Wife entred
the Hall, who had nouriſhed Palmerin and Florian ſo long in
theyr Caue, when preſently the two Princes beholding
them, went and imbraced them both with great courteſie, the

the like did Siluian, who hauing learned more ciuility in court,
then when he remained with his Father in the Caue (knéeled
downe vnto them as was his duetie. The Princeſſe Flerida
receiued ſuch excéeding ioy, that ſhée imbraced them both very
louingly: and Palmerin thinking it great diſhonour to him,
to be vnmindfull of his nurſes that had vſed him ſo gently, tooke
them by the hand, and brought them before the King: giuing
him to vnderſtand, that they twain had deſerued a good reward,
in recompence of the great affection his Brother & he had found
at their hands.
                     The King taking them from the ground in his armes, promiſed
that their labour ſhould be honorably rewarded: ſo lifting
his eyes vp to heauen, he vttered his ioy in this manner. O heauenly
Father, this is the laſt good happe that euer I deſired to
ſée, wherefore now if it be thy pleaſure, take me out of this
miſerable world, before vnconſtant Fortune determine any
more miſchance to me. This done, he tooke his two Nephews,
and brought them to the Princeſſe Flerida, before whom they
humbled themſelues on their knées, kiſſed her hand a great many
times, and ſhe caſting her armes about their necke, in teares
remembred the great danger ſhe ſaw them both in, when they
endured the bloody Combate, at ſuch time as ſhee was faine to
ſet them at vnitie.
                     Then Don Edward their noble Father, in remembrance of
the valiant behauiour, he had ſéene in them both at the Caſtle of
Dramuſiande, receiued them in his armes, with ſuch courteous
gréetings on either part, as the ioy in ſuch a caſe did vrge
them to manifeſt.
                     The Emperor Trineus, a partaker of this Fortunate ſight,
came to both the Princes, and vſed many friendly ſpéeches to
them, in like manner did the Empreſſe Agriola, the Kings
Recinde and Arnedes, with all the Princes and Ladies, whoſe
ioyes were not ſmall for this happy ſucceſſe. Then Palmerin
vſed great courteſie to the Prince Primaleon, for that he vnderſtood
him to be father of his Lady and Miſtreſſe Polinarda, and
Sonne to the Emperor his Grandfather, who had vouchſaued
him his honour, dnring the time he remained in his Pallace

at Conſtantinople. The Sauage man and his Wife were very
graciouſly entertained, who ſéeing the two Princes in dignity,
beyond their expectations when they were in their Caue, did
greatly reioyce that Fortune had ſo fauourably preſerued their
noble liues. Palmerin ſéeing the time that euery one prepared
themſelues to their chambers, commanded Siluian to conduct
his father and mother, to a faire and rich Chamber which was
prouided for them. Euery one departing, the king accompanyed
Aliart to his Chamber, where he deſired to know, what the
other knight was that came in his company? If it pleaſe your
Grace (anſwered Aliart) to morrow morning you ſhall be reſolued
to the vttermoſt, in the meane ſpace aſſure your ſelfe
that he is ſuch a one, as his valour deſerueth to be remembred
amongſt the moſt renowned. Thus with a generall gladneſſe,
euery one went to take their reſt, forgetting all gréefe that was
paſſed before in remembrance of the fortunate ſucceſſe, that had
happened at this inſtant determination of ioy.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XLVIII.
                     How on the morrow, Blandidon was knowne, and Aliart bewraied
himſelfe and Pompides, to be the Sonnes of the
Prince Don Edward & Argonida the Lady of enchāted the
Iſle. And how the Emperour Trineus with the other Princes,
determined to depart from the Court of England, but
were deſired firſt to goe ſee Caſtle of the Giant Dramuſiande,
wherein the Princes had remained Priſoners ſo long
time.
                     
                        THe pleaſures in the Court of the aged
King of England, of the Prince Palmerin,
and Don Florian his Brother, that
the Cittizens paſſed away the night
merrily, in making of great Bonefires &
ringing of Bels, to manifeſt the ioy which
they likewiſe conceiued for this happy accident.

In the morning the king went to the chamber of the
two Nephewes, where he found Primaleon and the Prince
Vernar, merrily diſpoſing themſelues together: and ſo accompanied
with Arnedes and Recinde, they went to the chamber
of the Emperour Trineus, who béeing already ſtirring, prepared
themſelues to go heare diuine Seruice, which was accompliſhed
with maruailous great ſolemnitie. When they returned
vn to the Pallace, ſuch was the aſſembly of people to ſée the two
Princes, that they could hardly aſcend the ſtaires to the great
hall, the people were gathered into ſuch a preaſe.
                     The ſtrange Princes endcucured themſelues to entertaine
the Sage Aliart very honourably, ſo that from the highteſt to the
loweſt he was greatly made account of, inſomuch as euery one
thought his labour well imployed to do him ſeruice, and euery
one were deſir
                           •
                        us to queſtion with him, how Don Florian
was guarantized of his wounds, which he had receiued at the
Caſtle of Dramuſiande. When dinner was ended, they went
all to the chamber of the Empreſſe Agriola, with whom the
Quéene and the Princeſſe Flerida had dined: and the king deſiring
ſilence when they were all placed, began in this order to
the Sage Aliart.
                     
                     Let it not ſéeme diſpleaſant vnto you good Sir, that I preſume
to remember you of a promiſe made yeſter-night, as alſo
to deliuer me from a doubt that I haue conceiued of your ſelfe,
which is (if I may requeſt ſo much fauour) to tell me of whence
you are, becauſe the great cunning and ſcience, I haue heard to
be in you, doth argue you are diſcended of ſome noble linage. To
which demand Aliart preſently returned this anſwer. I was
determined (déere Soueraigne) neuer to bewray my ſelfe to
auy: but ſince your Maieſtie hath commanded me, whoſe
words are more of force to compell me, then any prince or potentate
may or can conſtraine me, I will certifie you of that,
which neither friend nor foe could yet get of me. This knight
whoſe name you are deſirous to know, is called Blandidon
as concerning his birth and Parentage, the Prince Florian
can at large giue you to vnderſtand, for which cauſe I will

paſſe no furder to diſcouer what he is. But as touching my ſelf,
this knight here named Pompides, and my ſelfe are Brethren,
both of vs the ſonnes of the Prince Don Edward, and Argonida,
the Lady of the Enchanted Iſle, as hath béene affirmed to
vs by the oath of diuerſe.
                     
                        Don Edward ſitting by his beloued Flerida, & loath to conceale
any thing that might profite in this caſe, humbling himſelfe
to the King his Father, began as followeth. Deare father,
what Sir Aliart hath deliuered to your Grace, I muſt and will
auouch to be moſt true, they are both my Sonnes, wherefore
I deſire you to entertaine them as your Nephewes. And my
ſwéete Flerida, let it not ſéene as diſliked of you, becauſe it was
long before I entred acquaintance with you: and ſuch were the
craftie deuices Argonida vſed with me, that what with perill
of my life, and the pleaſure I had alſo in her company, theſe
twaine are the fruits of our long familiar labours.
                     The King came to them, aud imbraced them very louingly,
when preſently Florian (at his inſtant requeſt) declared the
hautis Exploytes and Knightly déedes, hée had both tryed and
found in the noble Blandidon. Flerida forgaue her Lord Don
Edward this offence, ſmyling at the ſubtill inuentions Argonida
vſed, to gaine the deſire ſhe bare to the Engliſh prince, when
immediately Aliart and Pompides came and ſubmitted themſelues
to her, whom ſhée welcommed as hartily, as had they
béene her owne children, and ſo continued pleaſantly talking
with them, till time required they ſhould depart to their Chambers.
                     
                        Palmerin of England held y• 
                        Sage Aliart in great eſtimation,
when he perceiued he was allyed to him in kindred, ſo that altogether
he framed his delight to be in his company, and would
not attempt any thing, but he ſhould be priuie to it. The Triumphes
and ſumptuous feaſtes continued daily aboundantly,
and euery night there was Marking, Dauncing, & rare deuiſes
put in execution: ſo that the Grecian Knights, highly honoured
the Ladies of England, whoſe braue geſture of Courtly entertainement,
was not onely eſtéemed of them, but as much commended
(at their returne) in the Court of Conſtantinople.
                     
                     
                        
After a long continuance of this excéeding ioy, Arnedes and
Recinde concluded to depart to their kingdomes, leauing their
ſonnes to accompany the other Princes in their pleaſure: which
the Emperour perceiuing, determined to iourney towards Allemaigne
alſo. But when they prepared themſelues to take
their leaue, Don Edward and the other Princes, deſired them
to vouchſafe the paines, to ſée the Caſtle of Dramuſiande,
wherein ſo long time they had béene kept as priſoners. This
requeſt pleaſed the Emperor very well, ſo that he deſired Arnedes
and Recinde to beare him company alſo, and then they
would depart together. Intreaty had quickly wonne them, ſo
that on the morrow they departed themſelues thither, accompanied
with the Ladies and Gentlemen of the Engliſh Court,
who greatly longed to ſée the Caſtle ſo much ſpoken off, that
had cauſed great Brittaine to ſtand in ſuch feare, and by the
proweſſe of the Noble Palmerin, was brought into ſubiection.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XLIX.
                     How the Emperour Trineus, the King of England, with all
the Princes and Ladies, rode towards the Caſtle of Dramuſiande,
where by the way, they ſaw the Caue of the Sauage
man, wherein the two Princes had beene ſo long
time nouriſhed. And how all the way as they rode, the
Sage Aliart preſented them with many rare and braue deuiſes,
vntill ſuch time as they arriued at the Caſtle. Where
they met with a ſtrange knight, who in honor of the beautie
of his Lady Miragarda, Iuſted with diuers of the Princes,
and departed againe from thence, vnknowne to any
but the Sage Aliart, who diſcouered to Palmerin of England
his name, and whence he was.
                     
                        
                        IN the morning, the Knights, who had behaued
themſelues ſo worthily in the triumph,
prouiding them of new and rich Armor,
made great haſte, becauſe they would
bee ready to goe with the Giant Drauſiande,
onely becauſe they would gratifie
their Ladies, in bearing them company to
ſée this Caſtle. At their departure foorth of London, the King
by ſound of Trumpet and Heralde, cauſed them to be proclaimed,
that no Citizens ſhould offer to follow them, becauſe hée
had determined (being ſo many of themſelues) that none ſhould
enter the Caſtle, but the Ladies and the Knights. For that
night hée concluded to lye in the Forreſt, and therefore ſent ſuch
prouiſion of Tents and Pauillions, that when they were arriued
there, they found euery thing to their owne contentment.
                     The Princeſſe Flerida, was deſirous to ſport her ſelfe about
the Forreſt, and walking By the place, where ſhée had ſuffered
the extreame panges of her trauayle, the Sauage man came
and humbled himſelfe vnto her, declaring how in that place
he tooke the two Princes from her, and nouriſhed them in his
Coue, which was néere adioyning. On this report, the knights
were deſirous to ſée his Caue, ſo taking leaue of the Princeſſe,
they walked with him thither: where, after Primaleon, Maiortes,
and the Soldane Bellagris, were entred, they began euery
one to be greatly amazed, ſéeing this Caue to containe ſo large a
breadth and length: which made them ſuppoſe it to be in manner
an intricate De dalus. All about on the walles was hanged
Tapiſtrie, not of Gold, Silke, Caddis, or ſuch maner of ſtuffe,
but the ſkinnes of Beaſtes, which the two Princes had ſlaine,
very finely laboured into an artificiall frame, and ſo decked
foorth the Chambers, that the Knights marueyled in ſo deſart a
place, to finde ſuch a fayre dwelling. A great while they ſtood
debating with one another, about the ſtrange conceyts they
perceiued in this Caue, which made them to iudge, that in

times paſt, it had béene the ſolitary dwelling of ſome noble man
exiled from his Countrey, but therein they were greatly deceyued.
For this ancient edifice, was erected by the Enchantreſſe
Mellia, who kept that place a great while, during the raigne of
the king Armace her Brother, Vrganda and ſhe liued both at
one time, as it is rehearſed in the Hiſtory of the Emperour
Splandian, Sonne to the valiant & moſt magnificient king Amadis,
and the Princes Oriana his Wife, Quéene of the great
Brittaine. When the Princes and knights had ſatiſfied their
mindes in beholding this place, they returned to the Pauillions
to their Ladies, who welcommed them all very louingly,
and Primaleon ſitting downe by his ſiſter Flerida, rehearſed to
her the manner of the Caue where the two Princes were nouriſhed,
which did not a little content her minde, in that the
place was not ruinated and put into obliuion. This night they
repoſed themſelues in the Forreſt, as honourably ſerued, as if
they had béene in the Engliſh Court, and in the morning they
prepared themſelues towards the Caſtle, being all the way delighted
with ſuch fiue deuiſes, ſent by the cunning of the Sage
Aliart, that euery one tooke great pleaſure in this Princely
iourney. There were Hunters who purſued wilde Bores,
Harts, Bucks, and all ſuch noble game, and came wearily, falling
downe at the Ladies feete, but when they offered to touch
them, they were preſently ſkipping on the farder ſide of the Riuer,
theſe deuiſes ſo pleaſed the Emperor with all the company,
that they gaue great thankes to Aliart who frequented them
with ſuch pleaſant paſtime al the way as they rode. At laſt, they
arriued at the Valley of Perdition, where they had a ſight of the
Caſtle of Dramuſiande, which went ſomewhat to the heart of
the Princeſſe Flerida, ſéeing the priſon wherein her louing Don
Edward had ſo long remained. The Emperour Trineus, & king
Frederick, fel into great commendation of the ſumptuous building
of the Caſtle, then which, they had not often ſéene a fayrer:
which mooued thē to intreate Dramuſiande, who was the founder
of ſuch a ſingular péece of workmanſhip: to which demand,
Dramuſiande preſently gaue this reply. My gratious Lords,
this Caſtle was firſt builded by mine Aunt Eutropa, & through

her meanes, it hath remayned thus long out of knowledge.
Truſt me (ſaid the Emperour Trineus) a Fortreſſe of ſuch
ſtrength and beautie, ought not to be in the hands of one, who
could imploy it to ſuch great abuſe, but commonly we ſée, the
wicked do thriue as well as the good, and enioyas great account
in this world, as they that maintaine all their actions by iuſtice
and equitie. So riding on, at laſt Dramuſiande willed them to
a ſuddaine ſtay, where he began in this manuer to vnfold the
cauſe. Me thinks I ſée at the entrance of the Bridge, a ſéemly
Knight ready appointed to the Iouſt, but I can perceiue no
body that offereth him reſiſtance, which maketh me ſupoſe,
that he hath attempted to kéepe this paſſage. At this vnlooked
for accident, they ſtayed to behold the Knight who was very
well mounted on a gray Courſer, his Armour ſpotted with
white and blacke, which greatly pleaſed the eyes of the beholders.
In his ſhéeld he ba
                           •
                        e the naked body of a Lady, the beauty
of whoſe countenance was ſo excellently figured, that Altea (for
whom Floraman accompliſhed ſuch chiualricus déeds at Conſtantinople)
might not ſéeme to offer compariſon to this beautifull
ſpectacle, neither the faire Princeſſe Polinarda, might not
preſume to equall her ſelfe, with the braue ſhape of this Lady,
and at the lower end of this ſhéeld in letters of Gold was written
Miragarda.
                     
                     While Princes occupied their eyes in beholding the ſingular
forme compacted in his ſhéeld, they perceiued his Eſquire
come towards them, who after he had done his dutie to them
all, began to ſalute them with theſe proteſtations. Faire Lords
and Ladies, the noble knight my Maiſter, whom you behold
on the Bridge, by me giueth you to vnderſtand, the cauſe of his
trauailes vnto this place. He is of a far countrey, from whence
he had aduentured himſelfe (in honour of his good fortune, and
at the command of his Lady, whoſe humble ſeruant he remayneth
at this houre) to try his knighthood at this Caſtle, which
hath béene blazed abroad to be moſt infortunate.
                     But being here arriued, he is aduertiſed how the Enchantment
is fully finiſhed, and the ſtrength of the Giant Dramuſiande,
with all his retinew conquered, by the valour and

hautie Prowes of a knight named Palmerin of England, who
hath deliuered the Princes, that were kept Captiue by the
cruell meanes of the diſloyall Eutropa, which newes are moſt
welcome vnto him, in that he deſired nothing more. Yet for
that he is loth to returne to his Lady, being at the place where
knighthood hath bene tryed, and he to paſſe backe againe not
approued of any: he craueth to enter the Iouſt with ſuch as are
diſpoſed, referring the Combate of the Sword, becauſe he will
aduenture for pleaſure.
                     This challenge encreaſed ſuch courage in the knights, that
they entred into ſtrife who ſhould firſt runne with the ſtrange
knight, which the king perceuing, returned the Eſquire with
this anſwer. My friend, tell thy Lord his enterpriſe is worthy
perpetuall renowne, & if he containe ſuch courage in proofe,
as both his Meſſage and himſelfe giueth in ſhow, his Lady
ſhall haue occaſion to vſe him, according as his valiant attempt
deſerueth. The Eſquire receiuing the kings pleaſure, returned
to his Lord, to whom he had no ſooner made it knowne,
but Tremoran ſhewed himſelfe before the bridge, inuiting the
ſtrange knight to the Iouſt, who ſtayed not to accompliſh his
deſire, but encountring him with ſuch a pleaſant charge, that
Tremoran was forced to leaue his ſaddle.
                     This chance ſomewhat diſpleaſed Luyman of Burgondie,
who thinking to reuenge the repulſe of Tremoran, was ſent
himſelfe to kéepe him company. Belcar being deſirous to ſhew
his proweſſe among the young Knights, couched his Speare
againſt the ſtrange Knight, who ſent both Horſe and man to
the ground, when preſently Don Roſuell tooke the cauſe in
hand, and was made pertaker of the ſame miſhap.
                     In like manner Guerin, Friſol, Blandidon, Floraman, & diuers
other were ſerued, which moued the King Polendos vnto
ſuch choller, that he would haue ventured againſt the ſtrange
Knight, had not the prince Don Edward perſwaded him to the
contrary. Then there went a great murmuring amongſt the
knightes, who ſuppoſed the Sage Aliart had brought this
Champion by his Art. to be a diſgrace vnto all their attempts,
and that he had vſed ſuch meanes vnto him, as he might not be

vanquiſhed, but herein they greatly deceiue themſelues, for it
was onely the noble force of the knight, which was continually
animated, by beholding the faire face of his Ladie, which was
ſo brauely proportioned in his ſhield. Floraman being greatly
bent againſt the Knight, and beléeuing that his victorie, procéeded
from the beauty of his Lady, would once more put his Fortune
in hazard, thinking the feature of his faire Altea, to be as
ſoueraigne in authoritie, as the ſtrange Miragarda, wherevpon
he thus began to conferre with himſelfe.
                     Albeit Madame, I haue ſuffered your name to be abſent a
while from my thoughts, yet hath your beautie bene alwayes
extant in my memory, ſo that I neuer vowed the title to any
but you, although miſhap would haue vrged me to the contrary.
Wherefore, at this time let your beautie ſo fauour me, that I
may foyle mine enemy, in the perfect honour of your fame.
                     Then they encountred one another againe couragiouſly, paſſing
the firſt courſe with the breake of the Staffe: but at the
ſecond time, Floraman and his Stéede was throwne to the
ground very violently, when making recourſe to his former
ſecrete spéeches, be began as thus. I perceiue now Altea, that
my miſfortune chanceth thorow your froward opinion of mée,
and that the more I attempt in your honour, the more you repay
me ſtill with hatred, which will vrge me to forſake your
ſeruice, and neuer aſſay any thing hereafter on warrant of your
courteſie.
                     The Emperour Trineus and all the Princes, were very ſad
to behold the ſorrowe of Floraman, as alſo to ſée Oniſtalde and
Pompides reduced into like miſchance: whereat the ſtrange
Knight triumphed, which Don Florian ſtomaking, to ſee his
friends on euery ſide foyled, and the Knight to vant himſelfe
in ſuch ſort, giuing a Conge to the Empreſſe and her Ladies,
ranne violently againſt the ſtrange Knight. Thrée times
they met, yet neither preuayling againſt the other, when the
ſtrange Knight looking on his Shielde, and perceyuing the
faire face of his Lady, to be ſomewhat raiſed with the Speare,
began in this order to talke to himſelfe. Now can I execute my
ſelfe of the diſhonour I haue receiued, in ſuffering her faire

face to be polluted, to whom I owe moſt dutifull affection? for
neither can I preuaile againſt him that hath done it, nor endure
long the Combate, I am ſo attached with ſorrow.
                     At the fourth attempt, they met ſo furiouſly together, that they
were both layde along on the earth, when becauſe the night
approched ſo faſt on, Palmerin could not compaſſe the meane
to enter the Iuſt, which made him ſuppoſe hée ſhould diſpleaſe
his fayre Polinarda, but Aliart to put him from that opinion,
he came to him with theſe wordes. Good Syr, let it not ſéeme
offenſiue to you, becauſe you haue not Iuſted with this Knight,
for if your valoure ſhould returne him any diſaduantage, your
Lady and Miſtreſſe would thinke great vngentleneſſe in you.
I thanke you Syr Aliart (anſwered Palmerin) for your courteous
perſwaſion, in wiſhing me from that which might be my
hurt, albeit vnknowen vnto me, yet by your Arte made manifeſt
to you. But may I requeſt the name of his knight, wherein
you may make mee greatly beholding to you, as alſo it will
cauſe me vſe more circumſpection in mine attempts, wherein I
onely deſire to eſcape the anger of my Lady Polinarda, to which
queſtion, Aliart ſhaped this reply.
                     Your courteſie is ſuch, and ſo great in mine affection, that I
cannot conceale the thing, which may doe you pleaſure, wherefore
you ſhall vnderſtand, that this knight is named Florendos,
who putteth his noble déedes in proofe, for the honour of her,
whoſe Image you may perceiue figured on his Shielde euen
as you hazard all your actions, to purchaſe the fauour of her
who is your Lady, and his Siſter. At theſe words Palmerin
imbraced Aliart, giuing him hartie thankes, in that he had ſatiſfied
his earneſt deſire, which he vowed to kéepe ſecrete, and
not diſcouer to any.
                     
                        Don Florian being mounted on Horſebacke againe, was
ſomewhat offended, that he had receiued no better ſucceſſe againſt
the ſtrange knight, whom he perceiued with his Eſquire,
ryding away in great haſt, as loath to be knowne, becauſe he
had not ſped according to his hauty deſire, for which cauſe hee
departed in no ſmall ſorrowe.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. L.
                     How after the ſtrange knight was departed, Sage Aliart bewraied
to them the faire Miragarda. And how they entred
the Caſtle of Dramuſiande, which Palmerin gaue againe
to the giant his friend: who in his honour cauſed it to bee
called the Inuincible Fort of Fortune. Departing from
thence, Aliart brought them to his Caſtle in the Obſcure
Valley: where he ſhewed them many rare and ſtrange deuices,
from whence the kings, Recinde and Arnedes, (taking
their leaue of the Emperour, and the king of England)
departed home into their countries. And how in a
while after the Emperor and the Princes iourney from the
court of England, when as Don Edward diſcouered to
Soldane Bellagris that Blandidon was his ſonne, begotten
on the ſorrowfull Lady Pandritia.
                     
                        THe ſtrange knight being very ſpéedy in his
departure, the Emperour with the other
Princes, ceaſſed not to commend his redoubted
enterpriſe, greatly deſiring to
know what he was, which made them very
importunate ſo the Sage Aliart, but they
laboured in vaine, for he would not in this
matter ſatiſfie their deſire.
                     But to the Prince Primaleon hee told in ſecret, that hée
was a perſonage of great authoritie, whoſe valour was excellent,
and his vertue equally thereto apparant: and that the

Ladie whoſe Portraite he vſed in his Shéeld (to whom he bare
ſuch affection, as he would in nothing diſobey her will) cauſeth
him to abſent himſelfe from the company of all other, till hée
haue attained that title which his Lady deſireth, and himſelfe
deſerueth. And to ſatiſfie his Ladies pleaſure, he hath ventured
his life to arriue at this place, thinking the aduenture of
Dramuſiande to be reſerued for him: but when he perceiued it
was already finiſhed by the Proweſſe of the knight, to whom
he voweth his humble ſeruice, he could not with his honour but
proffer you the Iouſt, to cauſe you know both his bountie and
courage is ſufficient, to haue enterpriſed ſuch a hautie and pecillous
aduedture.
                     Then Don Eward deſired him to ſhew the name of the Damoſell,
to whom he had vowed ſuch earneſt affection, whoſe
will Aliart loth to gaine ſay, beganne in this order to anſwer
his requeſt. The Lady to whom this Knight hath vowed
his ſeruice, is named of euery one the faire Miragarda, whoſe
face if any would take occaſion to contempleate, ſhould behold
the perfect, rare and ſubſtantiall Image of only beauty. As concerning
her birth, ſhe is daughter to the Countie Arla
                              •
                           , and
of great authoritie in the dominion of Spaine, whoſe ſinguler
forme when this knight had beheld, he could not chuſe but
thruſt himſelfe among the pykes of hazard, inſomuch as none
that hath ſeene her, could withdraw their effections, but haue
aduentured limme and life for her, who is beyond any in compariſon.
                     Truſt me (ſaid the king Recinde) I haue bene well acquainted
with the County himſelfe, but as for ſuch exquiſite perfection
to remaine in his daughter, I neuer before this time could
gaine the knowledge: for indéede when I left the kingdome of
Spaine, ſhe was ſo litle that none did make account of her beautie.
Then alighting from their horſes, and taking their Ladies
each one by the hand, they entred the Caſtle of Dramuſiande,
ſo greatly delighted with the ſumptuous building, and braue
conueyance of the commodious places, the galleries and chamber
made ouer ſuch little fine Brookes and Riuers, that they

                           •
                        magined all their commendations not ſufficient for this place

                        Dramuſiande endeuoured himſelfe for their entertainment, according
as the time of the yéere, and their ſuddaine comming
would permit him, but in ſuch good order was euery thing
diſpoſed, with fine, neate and excellent quicke diſpatch, that the
Princes were very well pleaſed, and Dramuſiande accordingly
thanked.
                     On the next morning they concluded to depart from thence,
becauſe the Princeſſe Flerida was become ſomewhat ſickly,
when Palmerin deliuered the Caſtle againe to Dramuſiande,
who both in reuerence of his worthineſſe, and memorie of his
owne good lucke, called it the Inuincible Force of Fortune. Departing
thence, the Sage Aliart conducted them the way to his
habitation, frequenting them ſtill with ſuch ſinguler deuiſes,
that the Ladies by their weake nature were ſomewhat diſmaied,
but the Princes themſelues maruellouſly delighted.
                     When they were arriued at the Obſcure Valley they behold
the Caſtle of the Sage Aliart, which was ſo ingeniouſly edified,
and ſtrengthened ſo ſure by his induſtrie, that if I ſhould ſtay to
recite their opinions hereon, I ſhould weary your minds with
a tedious diſcourſe. There they ſtayed for the ſpace of foure
dayes, hauing ſuch royall ſeruice by the meanes of Aliart, that
they ſuppoſed in their owne Courts, it was vnpoſſible to bee
more Princely ſerued.
                     
                        Arnedes and Recinde deſirous to their owne Kingdomes,
tooke their leaue of the Emperour and all the company, the one
taking the way towards France, & the other towards Spaine,
hauing no body with them, but ech one an Eſquire attending
on him, as for their Sonnes, they left them ſtill with the other
Princes, for that their yeares were more fit to endure trauaile
then as yet to incline themſelues to the eaſe of the world.
                     Then returned the Emperor and king Frederick, with the
reſt of their traine to the Engliſh Court, where in a while after
the Emperour and the faire Agriola tooke their leaue likewiſe,
when was ſuch greefe on either ſide for their departure,
as becauſe your iudgements is ſufficient conceiue, I ceaſſe
to ſpeake of the Soldane Bellagaris and Maiores, hauing kiſſed
the hands of the king Fredericke, came & embraced the prince

                        Don Edward, for whoſe ſake they had left their Countries, to
be partners in his impriſonment, when the Prince accompanying
them part of the way, began in this order to the Soldane
Bellagris. I truſt Syr you are not of ſo baſe memory, but you
remember the pleaſure, that vnder colour of my name, you receiued
with your your Siſter in Law Pandritia, in the realme
of Lacedemonia, which for the Ladies cauſe, I cannot admit
into obliuion, your labours being growne to ſuch a knightly
iſſue. Aſſure your ſelfe that this knight named Blandidon is
your ſonne, which vntill this time I haue kept in ſecret, yet
thought to diſcouer it to you when time and place required, becauſe
you ſhould amend the default of your faith, paſſed vnder
ſuppoſition of my ſelfe. Wherfore you brother being long ſince
dead, and her people ſorowfull at her auſtere kinde of life, you
ſhall manifeſt your honour to eſpouſe her at laſt, beſide, you
ſhall enioy a Princeſſe of excellent beautie, and a Sonne highly
eſtéemed for his knightly bountie. Bellagris pauſed hereon
a prettie while, debating in his minde on the qualitie of his
enterpriſe, which he ſuppoſed to craue a déeper iudgement, then
the remembrance of his offence which was done paſt, at laſt
hauing remained mute for a good ſpace, he required the Prince
Don Edward with this anſwer. Credite me Sir, I was neuer
more amazed at any thing, which either Fortune hath ſent
me by miſchance, or mine owne folly by accident, then at this
report which you haue vouchſafed to diſcloſe, being as farre
from my thought, as I am from my natiue Country. Neuertheleſſe,
I make ſuch eſtimation of Blandidon, that I accompt
my ſelfe happy to haue ſuch a Sonne, and for the affection I
beare to him, I wil accompliſh that, which elſe I neuer thought
to haue done, and hereupon I bid you hartily farewell, vowing
to ſend you word of my procéeding, ſo ſhortly as poſſible I
may.
                     Thus departed the Soldane Bellagris and Maiortes accompanied
with Polendos, Belcar, and Vernar, whom the loue of
his faire Bazilia called home to Conſtantinople. Shortly after
the Prince Primaleon left, he Engliſh Court, trauailing alone
by himſeife without any company becauſe hee meant to trie

the aduentures, that Fortune could any way preſent vnto him,
not ſparing his perſon, but would ieopard himſelfe in the places
of moſt perill and danger. Knowing very well, that the life and
loyalty of the couragious, ought to be imploied in their defence,
whom miſaduenture kept in reſtraint, or the terror of the time
in any ſorrowfull ſeruitude.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LI.
                     How Primaleon, being departed from the Court of England,
arriued in the Realme of Lacedemonia, where he intended
to viſite the ſorrowfull Lady Pandritia. And how
in the Triſtfull Valley, he met with the Knight, who behaued
himſelfe ſo well in the Iuſt before the Caſtle of Dramuſiande,
on the behalfe of the beautie of his Lady Miragarda,
hauing giuen himſelfe the name of the Knight.
Where they twaine entred into a dangerous Combate,
till Pandritia and her Ladies, were faine to come and ſet
them at vnitie, and how Primaleon had the knowledge,
that it was his ſonne Florendos.
                     
                        
                           PRimaleon hauing left the Engliſh Court,
and be taken himſelfe to the honour of good
Fortune, made little ſtay in any place,
till hee arriued in the Kingdome of Lacedemonia,
where not forgetting his laſt
conference with the ſorrowfull Lady Pandritia,
as touching the manner of her ſolitarie
and Sauage kinde of life, he concluded
to viſite her againe, to try if ſhée continued in her former
conſtancie.
                     
                        
Becauſe ſome, either vpon mallice or miſbeliefe, haue reported
the conditions of women, to be lincked to vnconſtancie, and
that no certaintie might be repoſed in any of their dealings: but
if they wept, it was for wantonneſſe, if they ſmilde, for ſubtilty,
ſo that their teares was as full of treaſon, as their pleaſant conceyts,
mired with ſpightful attempts. Which opinion Gentlewomen,
how farre it is from my thought of your Noble Sexe,
ſo farre I wiſh diſliking from you, in miſconſtruing any of my
ſaying.
                     Long rode Primaleon, without any aduenture worthy the rehearſall,
till at laſt being come to the Triſtfull Valley, (where
no knight entred, but was preſently conuinced with ſadneſſe)
he eſpied two Horſes comming from the Caſtle of Pandritia,
one of them hée knew to belong to the knight, that maintained
the Iuſt before the Caſtle of Dramuſiande, which made him
ſomewhat amazed, to ſée him wander without his Maiſter. At
laſt, caſting his eye about, hee eſpied the knight ſetting behinde
a Trée, attyred in blacke Armour, and in his hand the Shielde
with the Portraite of his Lady, whereto hée vſed many amorous
complaints: which Primaleon deſirous to heare, alighted,
and deliuering his Horſe to his Eſquire, drewe néere vnto the
Knight, who was ſo farre rauiſhed with beholding his Ladies
counterfaite, that he perceiued not the comming of Primaleon,
but thinking no body to be néere, continued his diſcourſes after
this manner.
                     Madame, if the deſire of him, who hath but once had the ſight
of your ſwéete face, can be quallified by no meanes, till he come
againe into your preſence, how happy may they eſtéeme themſelues
who not onely haue the continuall view of your heauenly
beauty, but are partakers of your incomparable courteſie,
which being ſufficient to inueigle the mindes of the gods, hath
larger force to intrap the heart of any earthly Gallant. How
often doe I imbrace your Picture with an vnfained heart? And
how after powre foorth my complaints in the middeſt of all
miſhaps: liuing by the nobilitie of your name, as the Elephant
doeth by the Ayre, and reioycing in your Shrine, when God
knowes I am too far from the ſubſtance: Oh Florendos, borne

to great happineſſe if thou eſtéeme thy Parentage, but brought
into infinite miſhaps through thine owne perſwaſion, in that
thou doeſt contemplate a thought without end, and beginneſt
to loue her, who endeth in likeing thée. Well mayſt thou call
thy ſelfe Miragarda, and good occaſion had he that gaue thée that
name, for which my poore heart hath paide indifferently, but
more ſhall do if thou vſe me with rigor.
                     Continuing theſe and a great many ſuch like ſpéeches, Primaleon
well knew that it was ſonne Florendos, whoſe gréeuous
paſſions cauſed him to call to memory, the like ſorrowes
which himſelfe had endured, when he ſpent his trauayles for
the Princeſſe Gridonia: wherefore, drawing néere vnto him
he would not as yet take any knowledge of him, but ſaluted
him in theſe tearmes. Sir Knight, would you not impart ſome
of your gréefes to him, who ſorroweth to ſée you ouercharged
with ſuch heauineſſe? Truly Sir (aunſwered the Triſtfull
Knight) I receiue ſuch contentation in my troubled thoughts,
and haue vſed them ſo long to my good liking, that I would bée
loath any ſhould be priuie to my paſſions, but onely my ſelfe, to
whom they are alway welcome. But what are you that make
your ſelfe ſo hardy, as to diſturbe me from my contended exerciſe?
certainly if you dare expect a while, I will either force
you to repent this diſcourteſie, or bring you as a vaſſaile to my
Lady and Miſtreſſe.
                     So calling his eſquire to arme him, Primaleon mounted preſently
on horſebacke: ſo greatly offended at his Sonnes words,
that he would make him no anſwer, but ſtayed his comming
a pretty way from him. When the Triſtfull Knight was ready
prouided, and had bethought himſelfe of his vngentle wordes,
he came vnto Primaleon with theſe ſpéeches. Sir Knight (pardon
me I pray you) if I haue forgotten my ſelfe towards you,
aſſuring you that I am ſorry for the wordes I gaue you in my
choller. Tuſh Sir (anſwered Primaleon) that is nothing to
me, to whom you may vſe what talke you pleaſe: but prouide
your ſelfe, for I am determined to trie your courage, becauſe
you would attempt to giue me the dare. At theſe words they
couched their Speares, which were deliuered on either ſide

with ſuch force, that the Triſtfull Knight was ſent to the earth,
Primaleon bearing him company, becauſe the girts of his Saddle
were broken. Being either of them greatly abaſhed, they
drew their Swords, and charged one another with very fierce
ſtrokes: Primaleon vſing no pittie vnto his ſonne, but hacked
his armour as eagerly, as had he bene his greateſt enemy in the
world.
                     By this you may perceiue, that furie little regardeth fréendſhip
or affinitie, but is ſo extreame, both in the Father, and in
the Childe, that it ſtretcheth beyond reaſon, or the limits of nature.
Long was the fight, and very dangerous on either part
their armour ſpoyled, their bodies ſore wounded, and their
ſtrengths ſo much altered, that one would haue ſuppoſed death
to be the next remedie.
                     Then withdrawing themſelues to pauſe a little, they caſt
their eyes vpon the Houſe of Sadneſſe, the windows being couered
with blacke, where Pandritia and her Damoſels ſt
                           ••
                        d
to behold the Combate, which was a great gréefe to them to
ſée, as to the two Champions to endure it ſo long. Primaleon
being greatly afflicted to behold the Ladyes, as alſo angred at
the hautie courage of his ſonne: ſtayed his hand, and entred into
theſe ſpéeches. Sir knight, I will trie at this very inſtant
if the Portraite of your Lady will ſtand you in any more néed,
or the deuotions that you vſe vnto her, to deliuer you out of my
hand, which if ſhe faile you beyond your expectation, you ſhall
know how vaine it is, to ſpend your time in ſuch fooliſh cogitations.
                     Truſt me ſir (replyed the Triſtfull Knight) if I ſtood in néed
of her ayde, to make reſiſtance againſt you, I thinke ſhe would
as willingly grant thereto, as you are witleſſe to moue ſuch a
raſh preſumption, which ere long I haue no doubt, but you ſhall
déerely know the price of.
                     After they had fought a good while againe, and Primaleon ſéeing
what ſore wounds he had giuen his ſonne, beganne to
rue his daungerous eſtate, whereupon he vſed theſe ſpéeches
following, I thinke it beſt Sir Knight, to leaue our weapons,
and for to end our Combat with ſome louing words: which

may returne to our greater honour, then ſo to ſéeke the ſpoile of
one anothers life.
                     Not ſo Sir (ſayd the Triſtfull Knight) for at firſt you might
haue remedied all this miſhappe, but ſéeing you would not eſtéeme
of it then, my ſelfe thinkes ſcorne to graunt it now.
During the time of their talke, Pandritia came foorth of her Caſtell,
accompanied with the Damoſelles, being deſirous to pacifie
the daungerous ſtrife, wherein they perceyued theſe two
Champions to remaine, ſo Primaleon ſeeing the courteſie of
Pandritia, left the Triſtfull Knight, and thus ſaluted her. Madame,
I truſt ere long you ſhall receiue more contentation,
then the griefe you were in, at the firſt entrance of this Caſtle:
which cannot be more welcome to you, then it hath alwaies bin
deſired of me.
                     Sir (anſwerered Pandrita) pardon me becauſe I haue no
knowledge of you, but for your good wil I giue you harty thāks,
being vrged by the great diſtreſſe I ſée you in, to make entreatance
that you would leaue the Combate, and vpon the report
of your name (if I may without blemiſh to mine honour) you
ſhall enter my Caſtell, where I will doe the beſt for the relieuing
your weake eſtate.
                     Credite me Madame (ſayd Primaleon) I haue ſo earneſtly
deſired to doe you ſeruice, that I haue not ſpared the trauaile
of my perſon from a farre Countrey, to bring you ſuch tydings,
as I hope ſhall agrée with your good nature: and becauſe you
ſhall not remaine in ſuſpition of me, I giue you to vnderſtand,
that I am called Primaleon, Sonne to the famous Emperor of
Conſtantinople.
                     
                     When the Triſtfull Knight heard theſe wordes, he was ouercome
with ſuch extreame ſorrow and heauineſſe, becauſe
he had entred Combat with his Father Primaleon, that he had
much adoe to ſuſtaine himſelfe: which the Prince ſéeing, came
to him with theſe words. Florendos, let no grieuous motions
ſéeme to abate your courage, for I had knowledge of you
before we fell to the Combat, as for what hath paſſed, I franke
and fréely forgiue, being glad that I haue tryed your right to
be of ſuch reputation.
                     
                        
The Triſtfull Knight knéeling downe, and in great humility
kiſſing his Fathers hand, hée ſuſtained him graciouſly in his
armes, and great were the ſalutations that paſſed betwéene
them. Pandritia being glad to ſée the Prince Primaleon, conducted
them both into her Houſe of Sadneſſe, where they were
lodged in a goodly chamber, and their wounds attended by the
Ladies, with very diligent and louing reſpect.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LII.
                     How Primaleon and the Triſtfull knight, being healed of the
wounds they had receiued in the combat, by the courteous
entertainment of the ſorrowfull Lady Pandritia, after
they had ſtaied there a little ſpace (and Primaleon certifying
her of the happy deliuery of the Prince Don Edward)
they both departed from thence, the Prince toward Conſtantinople,
and the Triſtful knight in his iourney towards
Spaine: when Pandritia likewiſe for theſe ioyfull ridings,
left her Houſe of Sadneſſe, and went to the Garden of Damoſels.
And how after Primaleon, and the Prince Vernar
were arriued at Conſtantinople, the Soldan Bellagris, ſent
a Meſſenger to the Emperor, who gaue him to vnderſtand
of the dealing of the Soldan of Babilon, who had ſtaid
his army, to contend with certaine Lords of his dominions,
that rebelled, and entred into armes againſt him.
                     
                        
                           FLoredos the Triſtfull Knight, and his noble
Father the Prince Primaleon, made
their abode for the ſpace of certaine dayes,
in the carefull Caſtle of the ſolitary Pandritia,
where they were ſo carefully viſited
and their feeble eſtates ſo louingly tendered,
that in ſhort time they recouered their

perfect health. In which time, Primaleon had certified her, of
the proſperous ſucceſſe of the Prince Don Fdward, whom ſhe
verily ſuppoſed to be dead long before: ſo that ſhée conceiued
ſuch great delight in this report, as at the requeſt of the Prince,
the left her Houſe of Sadneſſe, and returned to her Manſion
named the Garden of Damoſels, vſing more pleaſant conceits,
then for a great while ſhe might ſuffer to thinke on. Primaleon
hauing borne her company longer then willingly hee would,
and declared to her the the names of the Knights that were
priſoners with Don Edward, as alſo the manner of their happy
deliuerance, accompanied with the Triſtful Knight, he tooke
his leaue of her, ſhe being loath they ſhould depart ſo ſoone, but
perſwaded by their earneſt affayres, gaue them the courteſie,
and ſo they left her.
                     They twaine thus ryding together, the Triſtfull Knight deſired
his Father, that hée might leaue his company, becauſe the
affection to his Lady, directed his trauaile into Spaine, who
not denying his ſonnes requeſt, becauſe himſelfe was minded
to ryde alone, to the ende hee might make the better proofe
of his valour, imbraced one another, the Triſtfull Knight riding
towards her, for whoſe ſwéete ſake he liued in great affliction
and anguiſh of minde, where at this time wée will leaue
him, and returne to the Prince Primaleon, who not encountring
any aduenture, by this time is come to Conſtantinople,
whereas full often he wiſhed himſelfe, becauſe he had heard of
the Soldanes Army, which was of ſuch force, that it cauſed the
whole Empire to ſtand in great feare. Primaleon being entred
into the Citie, kept cloſe his Beuere, becauſe he would not
be knowne to any: but intended to come ſuddainly vpon his
friends, which wold make him to be the better welcome. Being
come to y• Pallace, & hauing deliuered his Horſe to his Eſquire,
he went vp into the great Hall, in the ſame Armour that he vſed
againſt the Triſtfull Knight, which was very much defaced
with the blowes he had receiued, cauſing great aſtoniſhment to
all that were preſent, who gaue him way to come before the
Emperour. Then knéeling downe, and deſiring to haue the
Empreſſe and the Ladies preſent, he would diſcourſe 
                           〈◊〉
                         his

Highneſſe, what had happened lately in England: which the
Emperour deſirous to heare, yet not knowing what or who he
was all this while, receiued him from the ground, ſaying. That
the honour of the place from whence he came, ſhould make him
a great deale the better welcome: and ſo he conducted him to the
Empreſſe chamber, where (by good hap) the princeſſe Gridonia,
Polinarda and Bazilia, were preſent, when the Emperor tooke
occaſion to begin as thus. Faire Ladies, this Knight commeth
from the Court of England, and would not declare his meſſage
to me, vntil ſuch time as he might come to your preſence, before
whom he deſireth to ſhewe his Ambaſſage, which I wiſh to be
otherwiſe then I thinke for, becauſe of the tariance of my ſonne
Primalaon, whoſe abſence is no ſmall cauſe of my heauineſſe.
With that the Emperour ſate downe by the Ladies, whom
Primaleon began to behold very earneſtly, becauſe he perceyued
them growne into great alteration, eſpecially the Emperour
his Father, whoſe countenance was much changed, then
when he ſaw him laſt, and the Princes Gridonia, had greatly
offended his faire face, with the continuall mourning ſhée vſed
for the abſence of her Lord: ſo generally beholding them all, and
ſtaying from ſpeaking an indifferent long ſpace, to the great amazing
of the Emperor, as alſo the company of the courtly Ladies:
at laſt he vnclaſped his Beuer, & began in this order. I deſire
you, my gratious father, to pardon my long ſilence, as alſo
the great time of mine abſence from your royall Court, hauing
no other Meſſage to preſent you, but the good health of your noble
friends in England, as alſo of your Sonne Primaleon, who
humbleth himſelfe before your gratious preſence. The Emperor
was ſuddenly wrapt with ſuch an inward ioy, y• for a great
time he remained as it were in a trance, in like maner the Empreſſe,
Gridonia, Polinarda, & al the Ladies, who came running
altogether, & imbraced him with ſuch ioy, as it is impoſſible for
me to giue iudgement thereon. After hée had vſed curteſie to
them al, the Princeſſe Bazilia came & kiſſed his hand, to whom
he ſaid. Faire Siſter, feare you not, your Lord Vernas will not
long abſēt himſelfe frō you, but you ſhal haue him here right ſoon
I dare warrant you. Then was he vnarmed, when the Emperour

could not ſatiſfie himſelfe, till he heard the ioyfull newes
lately chanced in England: but when he vnderſtood, how Palmerin
was ſonne to the Prince Don Edward, and his daughter
Flerida, he receiued great contentation, in that he was nouriſhed
in the company of the princeſſe Polinarda, who concealed
her ioy from any one, Dramacian excepted, to whō ſhe was
accuſtomed to diſcloſe her ſecrets. Great was the pleaſure for
the returne of Primaleon, whom the nobles and gentlemen of
the cittie came dayly to welcome: but to their greater content,
within a while after, the Prince Vernar with a great many of
the Princes & knights of Greece, arriued at the Court, whoſe
company was not ſo long deſired, as now they were ioyfully
and hartily embraced. In the middeſt of this great triumphing
and ſolace, a Meſſenger ſent from the Soldane Belagris, preſented
himſelfe before the Emperour, who diſcloſed his meſſage
in this manner.
                     Illuſtrious Prince, the Soldan Bellagris, my Lord and maſter,
in humble duty kiſſeth the hand of your excellency, giuing
you to vnderſtand, that ſo ſoone as he was arriued at his court
he was aduertiſed how the Soldon of Babilō
                         hauing with him
a great and puiſſant armie, prepared himſelfe to ouerrunne
your country and Empire, and to make a generall ſpoile of your
people and Dominions, your eſtate being weakned through
the loſſe of thoſe knights, who haue left your Court to ſéek the
aduentures of great Brittain. But when he was taking Ship,
and his Army at poynt to hoyſe their ſailes, word was preſently
brought him, how certaine Lords in his Realme, had leuied
a number of his owne ſubiects, to enter armes againſt him, for
that they were able no longer to ſuffer his oppreſſing tyranny.
Vpon this occaſion he ſtayed his armie, to bring them in obeyſance,
that had béene ſo hardie to rebell againſt him: which
thing he can hardly do, without the loſſe of 20000. Pagans, but
when he ſhall finiſh with them, thou he intendeth to viſite
you. Which that you might preuent, my Lord thus willed me
to make knowne vnto you, wiſhing to ſée the houre of his own
death, before your imperiall eſtate ſhould be any way be diſtreſſed.
                     
                        
Gramercy my good friend (ſaid the Emperour) at this inſtant
I perceiue the great good wil which the Soldane thy Lord
hath alwaies borne vnto me, to whom I pray thée commend
me with honourable thankes, proteſting to do as much for him
if (as God forbid) he ſtand in the like néede. I thinke it beſt for
you to take your reſt a while, becauſe hauing endured ſo long
trauail, you cannot elſe chuſe but be very ſore laboured: yet firſt
I deſire thée to rehearſe, how fareth thy Lord ſince his coming
home? My Lord (anſwered the Meſſenger) euer ſince his arriual,
hath delighted to diſcourſe of the ſtrange aduentures, which
not long ſince are brought to ende in great Brittaine, which
how rare they be, I know your highneſſe hath heard, wherfore
I néed not to reherſe them. You ſay true (quoth the Emperour)
and aſſure your ſelfe that the impriſonment of the Engliſh
Prince Don Edward will cauſe the Caſtle of Dramuſiande, to
remaine in perpetuall and renowned memory. Thus concluding
their talke, the Emperour went to the Empreſſe chamber
where, in the preſence of the Ladies, he rehearſed the Meſſage
from the Soldan Bellagris: and on the morrow the meſſenger
departed, bearing with him the Emperours letters to his Lord.
Now was the Court and Citizens repleniſhed with as great
ioy, as before they were filled with heauineſſe, when they ſtood
in feare of the Armie of the Soldan of Babylon.
                     
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LIII.
                     Here the Hiſtory diſcourſeth at large of the Triſtfull Knight,
who after hee was departed from Conſtantinople, in the
company of the other Princes and knights, that went to
purſue the ſearch of the Prince Don Edward, through occaſion
of ill weather on the ſcas, landed vpon the Coaſt of
Spaine. And how in trauaile he came to the Caſtle of the
Giant Almarol, where he became enamoured of the faire
Miragarda; for whoſe loue he foyled the Giant, and kept
the paſſage there a great while, in the honour of her picture▪
                     
                     
                        
                        BEcauſe the Authour, hath all this while
made no mention of the prince Florendos,
(who at this preſent tearmeth himſelfe the
Triſtfull Knight) and endeuoured himſelfe
likewiſe in the ſearch of Don Edward: now
as well to excuſe his owne negligence, as
alſo to fauour the hard Fortune of this
Knight in trauayle, you ſhall bée perfectly reſolued of all his procéedings.
                     At ſuch time as he departed from Conſtantinople, in the company
of diuers Knights who purſued the Prince Primaleon, euery
one taking a contrary way, his courſe directed him to a hauen
of Sea, where imbarking himſelfe in a Merchant of England,
time and occaſion ſo ſerued, that they tooke their departure.
Hauing endured ſo long on the ſeas, that they knew themſelues
to be within a ken of England, on a ſuddaine a contrarie
winde came vpon them, and held them in ſuch danger betwéene
hope and feare, that at laſt in great hazard of their liues, they
chanced vpon the Coaſt of Spaine, where they tooke landing on
a Rocke, which at this day is called Lisbone.
                     
                     
                        Florendos, ſéeing himſelfe ſo farre from the place, whither he
directed his courſe, and would haue ſo gladly attained, rode on
ouercharged with extreme heauines, & complaining on fortune
for his vnlucky trauaile. After he had paſſed through the Prouince
of Portingall, and by his hautie Chiualrie obtained a generall
commendation, he happened to come to the Riuer Theſin,
where ryding on, & contemplating his amorous thoughts,
he eſpied a goodly Caſtle ſcituated vpon a Rocke, which gaue
him great occaſion of pleaſure to behold it. This Caſtle vrged
him to aduance his courſe thither, but there lay a blocke in his
way, which was a great let to his former pretence, for vnder the
gréene ſhade as he rode, he perceiued three Ladies of ſuch ſingular
beautie, as in all his life time he ſuppoſed neuer to haue
ſéene the like. Theſe Ladies continued a very ſerious diſcourſe
among themſelues, ſo that they tooke no héede to the arriuall

of Florendos: who gaue a great good liking to them all, but eſpecially
ſhée that ſat in the middeſt, to whom the other twaine
ſhewed very great reuerence, being of moſt ſtately beautie, as
alſo of a ſingular and erquiſite behauiour. But ſhall we ſay, that
Florendos was enamoured at this faire ſpectacle? O no, hee
could as well eſchew it, as the Bird faſt caught in the Fowlers
ſnare, and he liked her no better, then he that did moſt honour
and heartily loue her: ſo that hee changeth his mirth into
mones, his talke into teares, and his whole cogitations, to a
Louers complexion: aiming the whole courſe of his affection
on the Lady, whoſe face had the power to detaine his fréedom,
and her behauiour the operation, to be chiefe ſtarre within the
compaſſe of his Sphere. Still he ſtroue with himſelfe, to goe
backe againe, and ſhun the blaze that had ſet on fire his ſences:
but affection had hung ſuch a clog on his conceits, and one looke
brought his heart into ſuch a Labyrinth, that Ariadnes thread
could do him no good, but only the ſaint that had giuen him this
glaunce. While he remained in theſe muſes, ſuch occaſion the
Ladies receiued, that they leaue the field, and walke into their
Caſtle, which gaue ſuch an vnkind corſey to the heart of Florendos,
that now his mind was in ſome more outrage then
before: yea, they were no ſooner gone, but he fell into ſuch rigorous
accuſations againſt himſelfe, partly becauſe timeritie
withheld him from ſpeaking to them, and then againe, how neceſſary
his cauſe was to haue mooued ſpeech, ſo that betwéene
the one & the other, he was euē as a man diſtraught of his wits.
Then began he to feele the ſeuerall accidents, which loue imprinteth
in the hearts of thoſe, that delight to dally vnder her
Banner, and how the little ſon of the Goddeſſe Citherea, can
pierce more déepe with his aiming ſhaft, then the hardy enemie
can enter with his launce: ſo that he confeſſed himſelfe to bee
in more ſuretie when the Bullets flew about his eares, then
when Beautie had ſent her charges to warre againſt his eies,
which was able to do more in an houre, then the other had power
in the ſpace of a yeere. Well, ſad as he was, he walked to
the Caſtell, where finding the gate ſhut, hee fell into his former
agonies: but by Fortune, caſting his eyes aſide, hee beheld a

Shéeld hanging on the wall, wherin was liuely giuen to view,
the Portrait of the Lady (who was miſtreſſe of his hart) which
he iudged to be handled in ſuch perfection, that it wanting nothing
but in reſemblance of the perſon. Vnder this ſhéeld in
golden letters, was artificially written the name of Miragarda
whereby Florendos verily ſuppoſed that it belonged to her who
iuſtly deſerued it: becauſe her beautie did not only merit to be
viewed, but would likewiſe inuegle the hearts of the ſtouteſt
that durſt conceiue the hardineſſe in themſelues, to come to her
place of abode. Yet were not thoſe letters placed there to that in
tent or purpoſe, but only to aduertiſe ſuch knights, as took occaſion
to trauaile that way, to be carefull to themſelues for feare
of the Giant Almarol, who was Lord of that Caſtle, and kept
that Shéeld there in the behalfe of this faire Miragarda, againſt
any knight that durſt preſume to take it from thence. While
Florendos ſtood vſing a thouſand amorous deuotions to this
ſingular picture, he eſpyed the Giant to come forth of the caſtle,
armed with a Iacke of Azier, no leſſe faire then ſtrong, and
mounted on a ſturdy blacke Courſer, when to Florendos he
began to vſe theſe words.
                     Credit me ſir knight, the myſtery of theſe letters, hath gottē
ſuch a maiſtery of you, that I feare you will repent when firſt
you ſaw them, and that fortune was ſo much your enemy to
conduct you to this place. Truſt me (anſwered Florendos) if I
did not more fauour the portrait, then I ſtand in feare of thy
puiſſance, and regard more her ſwéete face who owes it, then I
reſpect theſe words thou vſeſt in thy ruffe, I ſhould hardly ſhew
her my deſire, or giue thée thy dutie, which ſince thou wilt haue
no forbearance but ready payment, I will cauſe my ſword at
this time to ſeale thée quittance. Theſe words, cauſed one either
ſide cruell blowes with their weapons, not ſo dangerous to the
one, but as doubtfull to the other: yet fortune fauouring the
Prince Florendos, brought the Giant Almoral into ſuch eſtate
that he had bene made ſhorter by the head, had not Miragarda
preſently diſcended, who perceiuing Almoral brought into ſubiection,
vſed theſe words to the Prince Florendos.
                     
                     Sir knight, I deſire you to make acceptation of the victory &

beare not ſuch a bloody minde to deſire the loſſe of his life, but if
for my ſake you will do ſo much, then fauour him to whom I
am very much beholding, as well for his gentleneſſe, as alſo becauſe
he did gard me, and of this Fortreſſe. Florendos ſéeing he
had gotten ſuch good lucke, that he might ſpeake to her, to whom
before he durſt not, requited her preſently this anſwer.
                     Madame, of ſuch force are your gratious ſpéeches, as alſo the
good opinion I conceiue of your ſéemely ſelfe, that I not onely
vow my heart at your command, but alſo my hand to mainetaine
your cauſe, wherefore I grant him his life, deſiring that
your gentle nature wold afford me the like, for that your beauty
claimed ſuch a conqueſt of me, as none but your ſelfe can any
way mitigate. Miragarda giuing him great thanks for his curteſie,
departed into the Caſtle againe, accompanyed with the
Giant: Florendos ſtill remaining without, complaining on the
wound he receiued by her beautie, and not of the hurts he had
gained through the Giant. In whoſe company he enterpriſed to
kéepe the ſhéeld of Miragarda, entring the Combat in her defence,
with all the Knights that made their iourney that way,
which indéed were nany, through the ſingular report of her
beautie, yet fortune at that inſtant preferring Florendos,
cauſed him ſtill to remaine the Conquerour.
                     Thus remained the Prince in extreame conflict of his loue,
frequencing dayly his Ladies picture, with his amorous and
penſiue complaints, which Miragarda tooke ſuch pleaſure to
behold, that ſhe fained for to loue him, onely becauſe ſhe would
ſcorne at his fond and fooliſh dealings. But when Fame had
blowne abroade the aduentures of great Brittaine, how the
knights were continually loſt in the Caſtle of the Giant Dramuſiande:
Miragarda conceiuing ſuch an opinion of him, did
earneſtly requeſt that he would take his iourney thither, perſwading
him that the aduenture of the Fortreſſe, was only reſerued
to be finiſhed by his valour.
                     
                        Florendos loath to diſobey her commandement, tooke vpon
him to crauaile, that he arriued in England, at ſuch time as he
heard the aduenture to be finiſhed, and the Princes were preparing
themſelues to come to the Caſtle, where on the bridge

he attended their comming, and behaued himſelf againſt them
as you haue heard before. But now gentlewomen, whoſe rare
excellencie is ſuch as you may perceiue, that it vrgeth the gentle
minde to attempt the déepeſt danger in your gratious ſeruice,
you ſhall be reſolued how the faire Miragarda chanced to
this Caſtle, and why the Giant Almorol defended her as you
haue heard.
                     At ſuch time as the King Recinde, was Priſoner in the enchanted
Caſtle, and that many Princes of Spain had betaken
themſelues to his ſearch, the Quéene remained in ſuch gréeuous
ſorrowes, that nothing could moue procure her to any
pleaſure. Whereupon, the Countie Arlae preſented his daughter
Miragarda to the Quéene, to the end that we might receiue
ſome pleaſure by her company, but the noble Gentlemen delighted
with this rare péece of beantie, enterpriſed Iouſts and
Triumphes, onely to winne her to whom they were ſo affectioned.
So that expences of them were ſo great, to doe her
pleaſure who litle regarded it, that many of them were brought
into great neceſſitie, onely by the riotous charges her beauty ſet
them at.
                     The Quéene ſéeing her Lord ſo long abſent from his Kingdome,
and that the noble Gentlemen of the Court, ſtriuing to
excell one another in braue and rich deuiſes, were brought to
an hard exigent of many of their liuings, which was onely
procured through the loue of Miragarda, by the aduiſe of the
Countie and her honourable Councell (who pittied to ſée this
great inconuenience) ſent for the Giant Almoral, to whom
were giuen certaine knights and Gentlewomen to attend vppon
her, and he ſhould kéepe her till ſuch time as he ſhould appoint
her Mariage, which at that inſtant he could not diſpatch,
becauſe of the great diſcord that was riſen about her, amongſt
all the Princes and knights of the Court. And ſo he ſent her to
the Caſtle of the Giant Almoral, vntill the princes ſhould be in
quietneſſe againe, where in the meane time, ſhe often vſed to
walke in the gréene féeldes for to delight her ſelfe, euen as ſhe
did at the time when Florendos come and found her, and there
ſhe liued, till ſome one might reléeue her from Captiuitie, as

hereafter you ſhall vnderſtand how euery thing happened, during
the time of her abyding there.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LIIII.
                     How Palmerin departed from the Realme of England, and in
his trauaile met with the Prince Gracian, lying faſt a ſleep
vnder a greene tree, who gaue him to vnderſtand of an
hard aduenture, befaln to the Prince Platir and Floraman:
And how he riding to helpe them, met with a Damoſell,
who brought him to the place where they were fighting
the Combate, and there Palmerin ſlew Dramaco, who was
Lord of the Caſtle, and redeemed three Ladyes from their
tirannicall ſeruitude.
                     
                        SO Long remained Palmerin in the Court
of the King of England with his noble father
and his fréends who reioyced in his
company, that euery one ſuppoſed he would
not trauaile again, which he could hardly
kéepe himſelfe from all this while, but
that the earneſt intreaty of the King, with
the Princes Flerida his Mother, vrged him to ſtay longer then
gladly he would.
                     At laſt, when they perceiued al means could not ſerue to hinder
his determination, but that he laboured night & day in purſuing
his pretence, they gaue conſent he ſhould depart whither
pleaſed him, ſo taking his leaue of the aged King his Father,
Mother, and all his Fréends, who were not a little ſorrowfull
to enioy his abſence, he gaue thē euery one a gentle Conge, & ſo
left them in their great heauineſſe. But within a while after,
Don Florian ſéeing his Brother Palmerin was gone, and how

his honour was imbaced by ſtaying ſo long from trauaile: hee
began a freſh ſadneſſe throughout all the Court, eſpecially to
King Frederick, whoſe affection was more inclined to him, thē
to the Prince Palmerin, becauſe hee had nouriſhed him in his
Court, and therefore his loue was a great deale more ſurelie
grounded on him.
                     But firſt to diſcourſe what happened the Prince Palmerin,
who riding encumbred with a thouſand conceites, durſt not
take his way to Conſtantinople, fearing to diſpleaſe his Lady
Polinarda, but remembring how neere they were in affinitie,
he had good hope ſhe wold make more eſtimatiō of his ſeruice.
Contenting himſelfe with this thought, hee rode on till he arriued
in a very vnfertile Valley, whoſe ſcarcitie of Trees, or of
any other thing delightfull to the eye, vrged him to diſpence
with his thoughts a ſudden ſadneſſe, till at laſt (after hee had
ridden a good while) he came to a faire and mightie bigge Tree,
whoſe compaſſe of Boughes, contained a fine and very coole
ſhadowe vnder it, where he eſpied a Knight to lie faſt aſleepe,
hauing neither horſe nor Eſquire to beare him company, which
made him ſomwhat amazed, and loath to leaue him in that dangerous
eſtate, he moued him with his lance, and theſe ſpéeches.
Sir Knight, this place is not for ſuch an one as you, to repoſe
your wearie limmes in, becauſe you are as vncertaine of any
ſafetie, as you may aſſure your ſelf it is to be feared. The knight
ſuddenly awaked, and ſetting hand to his Sword, preſently
ſtarted vp: When Palmerin had knowledge of him to bee the
Prince Gracian, whoſe company was not a little welcome to
him, being in ſuch a ſolitary and vnfrequented place of paſſage,
wherefore hee began in theſe tearmes following. Sir Gracian,
let not my preſumption be admitted to any offence, but rather
eſtéemed of in this ſort, that I am yours any way to command
in ſeruice. Graciā
                         being glad to ſee the Prince Palmerin, knowing
that his puiſſance might remedy part of his miſfortune,
which being willing to diſcloſe, he imbraced the Prince in his
armes, and in this order began to vtter his tale. As it is not vnknowne,
worthy ſir, how your knightly chiualry hath brought
to end the aduēture which was tearmed beyond any poſſibility,

ſo knowe I that your affection is inclined to ayde thoſe, whoſe
miſaduenture requiret the helpe ſo good a Knight, and how
happie your arriuall at this time is, let the ſpectacle you ſhall
ſhortly ſée, remaine as an vndoubted and infallible witneſſe,
which becauſe delay in words may turne to ſome danger, thus
it is.
                     If you follow on the way you ſée right before you, it will not
be long before you ſhall come to the place, where the Princes
Platir and Floraman abide in great danger, to whom you may
yéelde maruailous friendly ſuccour, if you make haſt to them,
who would gladly be ſo happy as to haue a ſight of you.
                     In the meane time, if Siluian will doe me the fauour, that I
may mount vp behinde him, if we come not vnto you, I deſire
you to except vs at the Forgetfull Stone, where haue you no
doubt but we will meete together.
                     
                        Palmerin being ſory to heare theſe newes, but highly commending
his Fortune, that he came ſo luckely to the aide of the
two Princes, promiſing to fulfill the requſt of Gracian, he ſet
Spurres to his Horſe, and rode as faſt as poſſible he might towards
them. He had not rode very long, but that he came to a
place, where two pathes ſeruing two ſeueral wayes, made him
to ſtand in a muſe which way he were beſt to take, but to driue
him from his doubt, he eſpied a Damoſell come riding towards
him, vſing ſuch heauy clamours, as if one had purſued her to depriue
her of her life. Palmerin abaſhed at this vnlooked for aduenture,
ſtayed his Horſe to queſtion with her, but ſhe perceiuing
his intent, in a great feare gaue him theſe ſpéeches.
                     Good Sir offer me not the diſcourteſie, to be a hinderance to
my happy trauaile, for that you may endamage me, with greater
harme if you ſtay me, then the diſcourſe of my miſfortunes,
can yéelde you any content to heare, which I am afraide to diſcloſe,
becauſe I doubt your valour can giue me no comfort in
this great miſhappe. Truſt me Lady (anſwered Palmerin)
as for my valour, I can hardly make you any warrant of it,
but ſo great is my deſire at this inſtant, that I muſt requeſt
you ſhewe me the cauſe of your grieuous lamentation. Well
Syr (quoth ſhée) ſince you are ſo deſirous to vnderſtand the exextremitie

of my caſe, come with me, and you ſhall be certified
hereof, as much as you can poſſible craue. So riding on with
her, at length he eſpyed a goodly Caſtle, and heard a great ſlaſhing
and bruit of weapons, to which noyſe the damoſell brought
him, & ſhewed him where ten knights had ſetled themſelues in
fight againſt twaine, who defended them with ſo great pollicy,
and charged their enemies with ſuch courage of minde, that in
a little ſpace they had laid fine of them dead on the ground.
                     By theſe knights ſtood certaine men, holding two faire and
comely Ladies, with whom they would haue entred into the
Caſtle, but that theſe two Knights kept themſelues ſtill againſt
the gate, ſo that it was not poſſible for them any way to
enter in.
                     
                        Palmerin beholding the Combate very fierce on both ſides,
their blood cruelly waſted, & their ſtrengths altogether brought
into great weakeneſſe, had not ſtayed long before he perceyued
a mighey bigge knight to come forth of the Caſtle, who was
very ſtrongly armed and mounted, with him ten well appointed
men, that garded his perſon, and were very diligent about
him. Aduauncing himſelfe, to the remainder of thoſe that
were left aliue of the ten knights, and endured ſtill the Combate
with the other twaine: verie Maieſtically he gaue foorth
theſe wordes. Retire you Varlets, and let me breake the
bones of theſe Caitifes, who haue procured me to high and heauie
diſpleaſure. When Palmerin ſaw the two Knightes in
very féeble eſtate, ſo that this freſh reſiſtance were the vtter
loſſe of their liues, he ſtepped to the knight, replying in this
manner. If thou haue either regard of Knighthood, or the
honourable conditions, thou oughteſt to vſe in any martiall attempt,
then leaue them whom thou ſéeſt are too weake to reſiſt,
and prouide thy ſelfe for me, who haue enterpriſed their
quarrell.
                     The knight offended at theſe words of Palmerin, couched
his ſpeare, and ran againſt ech other with ſuch puiſſance, that
being not able to reſiſt the encounter, they were ſent together
violently to the earth. Then falling to the combate of the
Sword, the other armed men came in defence of their Lord,

when by good Fortune, the Prince Gracian came and ayded
them with ſuch couragious helpe, that they foure aſſayling the
knight and his companions, in the end preuailed, and ſiue them
all outright, which cauſed the other ſtanding by, and ſéeing their
Lord and his knights ſlaine before their faces, to run into the
Caſtle, and betake themſelues to darke Sellers and Vauts,
onely becauſe they ſtood in feare of loſing their liues.
                     
                        Palmerin ſéeing the field was theirs, and no body came to offer
any more reſiſtance, he went to the Ladyes, who were very
pale of colour, by reaſon of the great feare they ſtood in, when the
cruell Dramaco tooke them, ſeeking to diſhonour them, and to
offer them what villany he could: wherefore the Prince in theſe
words began to ſalute them.
                     Faire Ladyes, ſhew me I pray you the occaſion why this
villanous wretch endeuoured himſelfe to your diſhonour, becauſe
I am ignorant how it hath happened, yet being certified
of your miſfortune, came to do you the beſt ſeruice I might. Platir
and Floraman, when they had knowledge how it was the
Prince Palmerin, ſtayed the Ladyes anſwer, comming and
imbracing him with great courteſie, gaue him harty thanks for
his friendly ſuccour. Nay truſt me (anſwered Palmerin) giue
your thanks to the Prince Gracian, for I had not come vnto
you at this time, if he had not declared vnto me the heauineſſe
of your eſtate. Then taking the Ladies by the hang, they went
into the caſtle, where they found no body but two aged women,
who ſate wringing their hands for the death of Dramaco: and
ſéeing them coming in that had ſlain him & all his companions,
diſſembled the greef which remained in their harts, & ſubmitted
themſelues, fearing leſt they ſhould taſt of the ſame cup themſelues,
onely requeſting that their liues might be ſaued, which
the renowned Palmerin of England did preſently grant them,
Then were they and the Ladies brought into a goodly Chamber,
where their Eſquires bound vp their wounds, and made
prouiſion to get them their ſtrength againe: but Palmerin deſirous
to haue more knowledge of the knight which was ſlaine,
queſtioned with one of the old women, who was his mother,
when ſhe preſently returned him this anſwer.
                     
                        
The Knight whom you to my griefe haue ſlaine, was called
Dramaco, hée being my ſonne, and begotten by the valiant Giant
Lurcon, ſometime my huſband: whom Primaleon ſlew in
Conſtantinople, at ſuch time as he enterpriſed to reuenge the
death of the famous Perrequin of Duras. Here haue wée long
liued to our owne content, vntill froward Fortune conducted
you hither: what more you are deſirous to heare, pardon mée,
for my griefe will not permit me to rehearſe it. The Prince contented
himſelfe with this report, when departing from her, hée
went to viſit the Ladies, to vnderſtand of them, in what manner
their miſhaps had chanced.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LV.
                     How the Lady declared to the prince Palmerin, in what manner
they were brought to this Caſtle of the hardy Knight
Dramaco, and how they met with the Prince Gracian,
who ſent Platir and Floraman to reſcue the Ladies from
thence: where Palmerin found them at the Caſtle, labouring
ſtill in their aduenturous enterpriſe.
                     
                        
                           DRamaco and his companions being thus
happily foyled, & the knights remayning in
the Caſtle till their wounds were healed,
Palmerin determined to depart frō thence,
but firſt he deſired the Ladies, to tell him
how it happened, that they became ſo oppreſſed
by this cruell Dramaco. The eldeſt
of the Ladies, perceiuing the earneſt deſire
of the Prince Palmerin, ſatiſfied his requeſt in this manner.
Worthy Sir, we are the daughters of a Lady, who inhabiteth
not farre from this place in her Caſtle, where we liued in ſuch
quiet content of life, and ſo well guarded (as we ſuppoſed) from
any enſuing danger, that we feared no miſhap, being ſo well
gouerned by our Lady Mother.
                     
                        
But as none can auoide what the deſtenies haue ordained, but
muſt abide the doome of their appointed fortune: ſo we allowed
to this great vnhappineſſe, haue felt part of the rygour of this
cruell tyrant. For he being addicted to ſuch a cruell nature,
that the Noble he rewarded with bloody murther, fayre Ladies
and Damoſelles he defaced of their honour, and vſed all alike
in his villainous furie: he ſent tent Knights to the aforeſayde
Caſtle of our Mother, who finding vs altogether vnprouided of
refuge at that time (inſomuch as our woonted ſafetie gaue vs
ſmall cauſe of doubt:) without reſpect to her teares, or our complaints
brought vs away by extreame violence.
                     By the way as they brought vs, we met this Knight, meaning
the Prince Gracian, whom they diſmounted from his
Horſe: and becauſe they perceiued him ſuch a comely Knight,
they ſaued his life, but tooke his Horſe, and left him on foote to
goe whither him pleaſed, thinking ſcorne to accept the Combate,
which by ſundry meanes he offered vnto them. Leauing
him there alone, they brought vs with them to the Caſtell,
when theſe other two Knights ſwiftly purſuing after vs, ſtood
our defence in ſuch order, that they would not ſuffer vs to bee
lead into the Caſtell.
                     Then Dramaco ſéeing theſe Knights, preuailed ſo well againſt
his ſeruants, came himſelfe to accompliſh what they
could not fulfill, but then how well you ſtood our friend, the
happy effect remaineth as a ſubſtantiall witneſſe. When
Palmerin had well marked the diſcourſe of the Lady, theyr
great miſfortune and the monſterous crueltie of Cramaco, hée
reioyced that he found Gracian in ſuch a luckie time, by whoſe
meanes he had brought the aduenture to ſuch a good and happy
concluſion.
                     Then Gracian rehearſed, how in the time hée ſtayed at the
trée, Platir & Floraman came that way (after the knights that
conducted the Ladies had taken his horſe, and left him there in
the order as you haue heard:) to whom he declared the miſhap
of the Ladies, whereupon they rid haſtily after them, and continued
the Combat, as you haue already heard, vntill ſuch time
as one of the Ladies eſcaping away, met the Prince Palmerin,
                        
and brought him to defend their oppreſſed cauſe. After they had
ſifted euery matter, according as themſelues deſired to knowe,
the Prince Palmerin gaue the Caſtle to both the Ladies, & taking
his farewell very gently of them all, he mounted on horſebacke,
leauing them at the cure of their woundes at the Caſtle.
                     The Ladies were very carefull to helpe the Princes, who
at length were brought to their former ſtrength: where they
paſſed away the time pleaſantly with the Ladies, recounting
the ſtrange aduenture which they had happily paſſed. But the
death of Dramaco comming to the eare of theſe Ladies mother,
cauſed her to come thither to ſée her daughters, who, when ſhe
was there arriued, gaue great thankes to the Princes for their
imployed paines, and gratified them with ſuch honour, as ſhée
could deutie expedient for the time and place.
                     When the Princes ſaw euery thing in due and deſent order,
they determined to depart from thence: deſiring the Ladies
to vſe courteſie to the ancient mother of Dramaco, becauſe ſhee
was innocent, and not culpable in his miſchieeous practiſes. At
their requeſt, the Ladies willing to ſhewe, that liberalitie is a
vertue of great commendation, gaue her the caſtle of her ſonne
Dramaco, for which ſhe rewarded them with very courteous
thankes.
                     So the Princes going into the Armoury of Dramaco, where
they prouided themſelues each one of a notable Armour: and
from his ſtable likewiſe tooke three of his faireſt Stéeds, which
might better ſerue their neceſſitie, then to abide there, and put
to no exerciſe. Then leauing the ladies there in the Caſtle, readie
to depart to their owne abiding, they vowed to ſtay in no
place, till they had attained the Citie of Conſtantinople, where
how they ſped, you ſhall heare more hereafter.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. LVI.
                     How Palmerin, after he had left the Princes and the two Ladies
in the Caſtle, rode on accompanied with Siluian his
Eſqure, til at laſt he arriued on the ſea ſhore: where finding
a ſhip lying at Anker, he entred into it, when preſently ſo
ſonne as he was in the ſhip, the Cable burſt in the middeſt,
and the billowes of the Seas brought the ſhip to a ſtrange
Iland, in which Palmerin went on land, and encountred a
ſtrange and hardy aduenture as a Fountaine. And how Siluian
met with Francian and Oniſtalde, to whom he declared
the miſhap of his Maiſter: for which cauſe, they betooke
them preſently to his ſearch. In like manner, Siluian
arriuing at the Caſtle of the Giant Dramuſiande, vrged
him vpon his report, to aduance himſelfe preſently in trauaile.
                     
                        WHen Palmerin was departed from the Caſtle,
where he left the Princes, and the Ladies
with their Mother, he rode without
any aduenture, for the ſpace of thrée dayes
together, till at laſt comming to the Sea
ſide, which by reaſon of diſtemperature
made a great raging, he alighted and gaue
his Horſe to Siluian, deſirous to looke a
while on the ſurges, which would driue other penſiue matters
foorth of his minde: Walking along on the ſide of a Rocke,
he eſpied a Shippe hard by him which lay at Ancker, but no
Marriners nor any body elſe, hee could perceiue in it, or neare
it: which made him deſirous to goe aboard, to ſee if there were
any body there, of whom hée might be reſolued from whence
the veſſel was, and wherfore they ſtrooke on land in ſuch an vnfrequented
place. A while he ſtayed, ſuppoſing they had bin all
gone on land, to fetch freſh water, or ſuch neceſſaries as was
néedfull for their vſe: but when he ſaw no body came in all that

ſpace, neither could he perceiue whether any had bin gone there
on land, he prepared himſelfe to enter the ſhip. But Siluian desired
him to change his minde from ſo fond an enterpriſe, and
that in an aduenture of no better countenance, it was but méer
folly to hazard his perſon, but when he ſaw his words might attaine
no perſwaſion from his attempt, he ſuffered him to enter
the ſhip according to his own deſire. No ſooner was the prince
fully entred, but the Cable rope which held the Ship burſt in
the midſt, when Siluian preſently cried to his maſter, who
offred to caſt himſelfe on land againe by the boughs of y• Trees,
but all was in vaine, for yt Ship lanched forth in the déepe, and
with a full gale of wind rode merily vpon the ſurges. In ſhort
time Palmerin had loſt the ſight of the ſhore, ſtil thinking what
fortune did intend by this ſodain aduenture, & not diſhartning
himſelfe, but iudging all for the beſt, he repoſed on the mercy of
God, and fauour of the waues, expecting ſome good iſſue of this
vnlooked for chance. Siluian remained in ſuch he auineſſe for the
loſſe of his maiſter, that he thought to ſtay in that place, till he
had heard ſome tidings of him, either good or bad, but ſéeing that
in thrée dayes no news would happen, he rede ſadly frō thence,
leading his Maiſters Horſe in his hand, when he eſpyed two
knights in white Armour, beſet with Pellicans of red & Carnation
colour. Siluian preſently knew them to be Francian and
Oniſtalde, who demanded of him, what was become of his maſter?
but when Siluian had declared the manner of his miſhap,
how he entred the ſhip, and the Cable brake on ſuch a ſuddaine
they feared ſome miſchance would annoy their deare friend,
whoſe happineſſe they wiſhed as their owne health. Wherfore
they concluded that Siluian ſhould not go ſtrait to London, becauſe
king Fredericke would conceiue great gréefe, if he ſhould
know of this vnlucky chaunce, but deſired him to ſhew them
which way he thought they might ſooneſt find him, and on pain
of death he ſhould not go to London, nor reherſe the loſſe of the
Prince to any, but ſuch a one as he knew to beare his maiſter
great affection. Siluian promiſed to accompliſh their pleaſure,
and ſo they departed from him, vowing not to ſpare any labour
by Sea or land, vntill they might heare of the noble Palmerin.
                     
                     
                        
Then Siluian being not fully reſolued what he were beſt to
do, tooke his way ſtrait to great Brittaine, where arriuing at
the Caſtle of the Giant Dramuſiande (who entertained him
with kinde and louing courteſie) he diſcouered to him the loſſe
of his Lord: when preſently Dramuſiande clapping his armor
on his backe, promiſed neuer to returne vnto his Caſtle, without
he might attaine the good recouery of the famous Prince.
Siluian ſeeing the affection of the Giant to be ſo great to his maſters
welfare, as himſelfe could wiſh, preſented himſelfe to
ſerue him as his Eſquire, till he might be ſo happy as to finde
the Prince againe: thus leaue we them to the good fortune of
their trauaile.
                     Returne we now to the noble Palmerin of England, who enduring
the ſharpe brunts on the Seas, too long as he thought,
at laſt the ſhip ſtaying at the ſide of a Rocke, where, the Sea
had left an Iland which was vnhabited, and there he forſooke
the ſhip, being very glad that he had gained the ſhore. Leauing
the Sea ſide, he betooke himſelfe to trauaile in a little path right
before him, which in a little while brought him into a faire
gréene Meddow, in the middeſt whereof was placed a Marble
Stone of the height of a man, with an inſcription vppon it:
Take heede thou goe this way no further. When he had read
this Poſey (the Stone being placed there as he ſuppoſed, to
cauſe all Paſſengers be afraide they knew not of what,) his
minde was greatly moued to ſée the end of this accident, and
being accompanied continually with a hauty courage, he went
on, taking great pleaſure to behold the high Rocks, and the
greene Trées, which ſpread their boughs ſo brauely ouer the
path as he went.
                     
                        Palmerin ſéeing no aduenture would happen all this while,
the Marble Pillar giuing ſuch a terrifying manner of words)
went on ſtill without any feare, till at laſt he was be nighted,
when laying him downe in the graſſe to take his reſt, he made
his Helmet his Pillow, and ſo determined to ſléepe there for
that night. But ſuch were the motions in his mind, that the
more he thought to take quiet reſt, the farther off he was from
his intent. For one while the remembrance of his fayre Polinarda
                        
preſented it ſelfe as beſt worthy his memory, becauſe hée
had béene ſo long abſent from her, yet durſt not enterpriſe to
come into her preſence: and thē the loſſe of Siluian, whose counſell
alway ſerued, as an eſpecial remedy to his amorous aſſaults,
and wanting his company now in this heauy caſe, hee was forced
to vtter diuers and ſundry complaints.
                     Thus ſpent hée all that night, in a Courtly debate betwéene
reaſon & his earneſt deſire, the one to perſwade him from that
dangerous kinde of trauaile, and to exclude from his mind, the
fond allarmes giuen by his fancy: the other, how continually
it wrapped him in an intricate or endleſſe vexation of his ſences.
But as often we ſée, Reaſon is ſubiect to the amorous Deſire,
ſo the prince not able to reſiſt the aſpiring drifts of his eger
paſſions, reſigned both his will and wit, to follow the loue and
amitie he had begun to his Lady and Miſtreſſe. When hée had
waſted the night in this ſmall order of reſt, & the chéerefull morning
deliuered her faire countenance, he went on, ſtill muſing
on the wordes he had read vpon the Pillar, which he eſtéemed
to be flat mockage, becauſe he could perceiue nothing that deſerued
ſuch a forewarning.
                     But as he trauailed in a faire plaine field, ſtill vſing his
minde with his former exerciſes, hée came to a Fountaine of
ſingular beautie, the Pillars whereof, was of fine wrought Azure,
& the water iſſuing forth at the mouthes of diuers beaſts
very artificially made. The Prince ſtanding a good while in a
muſe at this Fountaine, how ſo much water ſhould aſcend vp
ſuch a high Mountaine, and why ſuch a faire thing ſhould ſtand
in ſuch a vacant place, could not readily thinke with himſelfe
what he might iudge thereon, for at the lower end of the aforeſaid
Pillars, lay two cruell Tygers, and two fierce Lions, who
as hée ſuppoſed kept Paſſengers that they ſhould not drinke at
this Fountaine.
                     This ſtrange ſight made him ſomewhat abaſhed, and to ſtand
in feare, that it was ſome Enchantment practiſed, to get him
into ſome preſent danger: becauſe the beaſtes behaued themſelues
in ſuch order, as though they might eaſily be brought vnder
ſubiectiō of the chaine, which was of ſuch bignes, as was requiſite

to holde ſuch furious beaſtes, yet were they tyed at ſuch
ſhortneſſe, that they had very litle ſcope of walking. Palmerin
knew it was néedles, to aſke leaue to drinke at this Fountaine,
of thoſe that had no reaſō to make him anſwer, albeit they were
too ſtrong in force, to offer him reſiſtance: wherefore he attempted
to try the friendlineſſe of Fortune, and to put his life in hazard
vpon this aduenture. Then aduancing himſelfe to taſte of
the water, vpon one of the Pillars in letters of Gold, was engraued
theſe words: Behold here the Fountaine of the wiſhed
water. And going a little farther, he eſpied an other, which was
thus: He that hath the courage to drinke of this Fountaine,
ſhall bring to ende any enterpriſe that belongeth to the aduancement
of Honour and Fame: ſo that he ſhall accompliſh
as much, as may be comprehēded in the ſtrength or proweſſe
of a man. But ouer againſt it, was written theſe words: Paſſe,
and drinke not. This made the Prince not a little aſtonied, in
that as the one gaue him encouragement to approach the fountaine,
ſo the other ſtood in the way to hinder his determination.
But yet he concluded to try the aduenture, in that he iudged it
was impoſſible, to méete with an occaſion of more hautie enterpriſe.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LVII.
                     How Palmerin encouraged at this rare aduenture, entred the
ſight againſt the Beaſts that kept the Fountaine, and at laſt
(albeit with great danger) he vanquiſhed them all & then
approched to drinke of the water. Alſo when he departed
from thence, he arriued at a Caſtle, whereon he ſawe foure
Shields placed, and being vrged by the Poeſies hee ſawe
written on them, to try the ende of this vnlooked for accident,
hee entred the Combate againſt foure knights that
came forth of the Caſtle, whereof he ſlew three, and ſaued
the life of the fourth, to diſcouer to him the ende of this
ſtrange aduenture.
                     
                        
                        MAny were the doubtes the Prince conceiued
in his minde, as concerning what
might happen by this gorgeous ſpectacle,
becauſe the poeſies were placed in ſuch vncertaine
manner, that he verilie ſuppoſed it
was but ſome trappe or ſecret fetch, to allure
him to venture on his owne deſtruction.
                     Wherfore hee determined to depart from thence, and not
meddle with the Beaſts, becauſe he ſaw their faire ſhew of gentleneſſe,
was but onely to haue him approch the Fountaine.
When he had walked a little way from thence, he began to accuſe
and blame himſelf, that either ſeare ſhould cauſe him to forget
his duty, or any occaſion withdraw his mind from ſuch an
honourable attempt.
                     Then returning couragiouſly backe againe, he aduanced
himſelfe againſt one of the Tigers at the corner of the Fountaine:
who like wiſe gaue himſelfe in ſuch manner againſt the
Prince catching hold vpon his Shield ſo forceably, that the
handle brake off, and detained it in ſuch wiſe, that the Prince
could not by any meanes get it againe, but charged him with
ſuch a ſound ſtroke ouer the legges, that the Tiger could not
vſe himſelfe ſo well as he would.
                     To ſuccour the féeble eſtate of the Tiger, came the other
thrée Beaſtes, behauing themſelues ſo furiouſly againſt the
Prince, that he thought this the moſt doubtfull aduenture, in al
his life time he had attempted. Hauing wounded one of the
Lions verie ſore, ſo that he was conſtrained to fall to the earth,
the Prince ſtouped downe to recouer his ſhield, which the Tiger
had abandoned, but the other Lion approched ſo néere vnto
him, that catching hold vpon his Helmet, he drew him within
his reach ſo violently, that hee was enforced to fall vpon his
knées, whan the other Tiger cruſhed him with his pawes ſo
cruelly, that had not his Armor been the ſtronger, he had torne
the Prince in a hundred péeces.
                     
                        
When he perceiued himſelfe attainted with ſuch an extremitie,
that his life ſtood on the very point of danger: with his ſword
he ſaluted him ſo déepe through the heart, that the Tiger ſprawled
on the earth cleane bereft of life. In bréefe, the courage of
his noble minde, did animate him with ſuch hardineſſe, that (albeit
with great paine and trauaile) hee made a diſpatch of all
their liues, when then he ſate him downe to take a little reſt,
becauſe the Tiger had preſſed him to the ground with ſuch extreame
violence, that he thought verily all his bones had bene
broken. After he had red him for a prettie while, he went to the
Fountaine, being deſirous to quench his thirſt, but he perceiued
another little Poſey, which was ſo darkly couched, that he
could not gather any meaning of it, wherefore he preſently
drauke of the water, finding no more pleaſantneſſe in it, then
any other running Riuer or ſpring. But he iudged both the
Fountaine and the aduenture, to be placed there by ſome cunning
Enchantreſſe to diſharten the timerous, and glut the eyes
of the valiant with a faire and pleaſant ſhow.
                     When he ſaw no other hazard to be tried in that place, he
went on ſtill in the path, that was made from the Fountaine,
but at laſt on a ſuddaine, he eſpyed a very goodly and well fortified
Caſtle, ſo finely moated round about, with a draw bridge
at the entrance, and the Trées ſhadowing it in ſuch a delicate
manner, that his minde was altogether delighted in beholding
this rare and ſeemely caſtle.
                     Before the gate there ſtood foure very faire Iaſper pillars,
and vpon ech of them was hanged a knightly ſhéeld, which
Palmerin taking perfect view of, beheld in the firſt vpon a Siluer
ground, this Poſey, No man dare conceiue the courage to
take me downe. No (quoth Palmerin) by your leaue I will be
ſo bold as to trye, for if the taking downe of a ſhéeld ſhould
feare me, no matter if the aduenture did worthily foyle me, and
ſince your proteſtations are ſo hautie, I will enforce you to
humble your ſelfe to me, as well to ſerue my néede becauſe I
want a ſhéeld, as alſo to prooue the bragges contained in theſe
words. When Palmerin had faſtened the ſhéeld to his arme,
he eſpyed a knight comming forth of the Caſtle, with a verie

great Maieſtie, béeing ſtrongly armed, who ſeeing the Prince
without a Helmet, (the Lyon hauing bruſed it in ſuch ſort, that
he could not weare it) proudlie began to vtter theſe ſpéeches.
He that will preſume to take downe one of theſe Shieldes, being
not armed according to finiſh ſuch an enterpriſe, muſt taſte
the puniſhment due to his fault committed, becauſe hee may
learne againſt another time, to arme his head, which ſtandeth
in moſt danger.
                     With theſe words, (not ſtaying to heare the anſwer of Palmerin)
he began to charge him with very mightie ſtrokes, and
ſtill aimed to hit him on the bare head, but Palmerin preuented
his determination ſo well, that cloſing faſt vpon him, hée
brought him downe vpon both his knées, & making ſemblance
as though he would haue ſlaine him, the knight deſired mercie,
and yeelded himſelfe to the Princes courteſie. Palmerin ſauing
his life, demanded of him if hee had any more to deale withall,
to whom hee anſwered, that the chiefeſt danger was behind,
wherupon the Prince arming his head, with the Helmet of the
vanquiſhed knight, went to the ſecond Pillar, whereupon the
Shield in a Campe of Azure, he read as thus, I am more perillous,
and therefore worthie to be feared, for in me conſiſteth
the greateſt danger. Truſt me (quoth the Prince) it may bée
thou ſaiſt true, yet ſhalt thou not ſuppriſe my minde with any
cowardly feare, and ſo leauing the firſt Shield, he took downe
the ſecond, when preſently came forth another knight, who
ſpake to the Prince in this manner.
                     Trulie ſir knight, you haue done vnwiſely to hazard your
ſelfe in this place, eſpecially to take downe the ſhielde, which
requireth no rther ranſome then your heart blood. Sir (anſwered
Palmerin) if you ſee that dutie, or knightly behauiour
hath failed in me, behold me here ready to deliuer a recompence
with my Sword, ſo leauing their words, and ſetting themſelues
ſtoutlie the one againſt the other, in the ende the Prince
reached him ſuch a ſure warrant on the Creaſt, that the ſword
pierced ſo deepe into his head, as he fell to the earth, diſcharged
of his life.
                     Then pauſing a little while, at laſt he went to the third Piller,

wherein the middeſt of the Sheild vpon a field of Sineple,
in Azure Letters was written theſe words: By mee is to bee
gotten the honour of this aduenture. When he had taken it
downe, he expected the comming of the third Knight: who very,
ſoone after came forth in great haſte, and without vſing any
words, entred a more dangerous Combate then the other
twaine paſſed: but I alemerin hauing cut off one of his armes,
and wounded him very ſore in many places on his body, brought
him with long enduring the fight into ſuch weakneſſe, that hée
fell downe, and yéelded vp the ghoſt at his feet.
                     This good Fortune cauſed the Prince to aduance himſelfe
to the fourth Pillar: where viewing the Sheild, he beheld in
Letters of gold this good encouragement: In me remaineth the
happy victorie. Theſe words made him deſirous to end this
fortunate aduenture: when taking downe the ſhield, came out
the fourth Champion with theſe ſpéeches. I did not think your
fondneſſe had béene ſuch, that you could not content your ſelfe
with a ſufficient conqueſt: wherefore that your paiment may
witnes your iuſt deſert, prepare your ſelfe to receiue my hardy
blowes. Palmerin not accuſtomed to make anſwere, in place
where knightly ſtrength ought to ſhew it ſelfe, deliuered him
his mind in halfe a ſcore ſtrokes wellaid on, that (notwithſtanding
he was of more force then the other thrée) yet he ſerued him
of the ſelfe ſame ſauce, for ioy whereof, he kneeled downe and
hartily gaue thanks to God, that his prouidence had permitted
him to enter this hauty exploit. Then demanded he of y• knight
that had ſtood by al this while, and ſéene his noble behauiour, if
there were any other aduenture in the Caſtle, that he ſhould hazard
himſelf againſt: to which requeſt he made this anſwere.
Credit me, worthy ſir, there are as yet things to be finiſhed,
which I perſwade my ſelfe may be accompliſhed by your worthineſſe,
becauſe I well perceiue, in ſpight of any thing to the
contrary, your valor muſt and will enter into this place. For in
you haue I ſéene that, which I neuer thought to find in any, as
your preſent behauiour conſtraineth me to confeſſe, that vertue
ſo gouerneth all your actions, as ſhée will ſée you Conquerour
in any attempt you vndertake.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. LVIII.
                     How Palmerin hauing vanquiſhed the three Knights, entred
the Caſtle, where he likewiſe ſlewe a Giant that offered
him reſiſtance. And how he paſſed ouer a blacke riuer in
great danger, where he met with the Enchantreſſe Eutropa,
Aunt to the Giant Dramuſiande, who threw her ſelfe
headlong into the riuer, thinking to haue pulled the prince
after her, but ſhe failed of her pretence. Likewiſe, how the
Knight (whoſe life he ſaued) reported to him the death of
the three Knights of the Emperours Court, when they
aſſayed to enter into the Caſtle, and deliuered to him Bazilliart
and Germaine of Orleance, who were kept priſoners
there in a Dungeon, and certified him, that the Caſtle
was called, the perillous Iſle.
                     
                        AFter that Palmerin had vanquiſhed theſe
foure Knights, and he ſawe no more come
to offer him reſiſtance, accompanied with
this other knight, he entred the Caſtell.
Which being a thing of ſuch admirable
beautie, all about the Courts were pillars
of Iaſper ſtone, ten cubits in length, whereon
many goodly chambers, and faire lodgings
were built, the Court paued with Marble, wrought into
colours of red and gréene, with euery thing ſo curious and ingeniouſly
framed about the Caſtle, that the Prince ſuppoſed it
the moſt excellent thing that euer he had ſéene. When hee had
wearied his eyes with beholding this ſumptuous Paralell, hée
walked thorow a faire Gallery, which brought him into a Hall
of ſingular beautie: at the entrance whereof a mighty giant preſented
himſelfe before the prince, holding in his hand a knagged
Mace of yron, which hee held vp in ſight to reſiſt his paſſage.
Palmerin perceiuing his bold intēt, would not ſeeme to diſmay
himſelf: but remēbring how fortunately he had begun without,

determined to ende as valiantly within. And ſo ſetling him
to the Giant, found him play a while, but in the ende he payde
him home, ſo that he made him quiet enough for ſpeaking any
more. Hauing thus worthily conquered his enemy, he walked
a while vp and downe the Hall, till at laſt thorow a little gate,
he entred into a more ſumptuous Gallerie, wherein he could
finde no way out, but firſt hée muſt paſſe ouer abroade place
of water, where ouer was layde a little Boord or Planke, of ſo
ſmall breadth and ſtrength, that he ſuppoſed it not able to abide
the leaſt wayght in the world. Faine he would haue béene on
the further ſide, but this vnhappy place hindered his determination,
which mooued him to ſo many grieuous conceites, that he
began greatly to blame his aduerſe Fortune. For if the Boord
did breake, he ſhould fall into a water ſo blacke and ougly, that
the Riuer Stix whereon Acheron carryeth the damned ſoules
to hell, might not be compared to this fearefull lake. Well, ouer
he would though it coſt him his life, wherefore diſarming himſelfe,
becauſe the heauineſſe of his armor might be the chiefe occaſion
to breake the planke: with a good courage he beganne to
venture vpon it, hauing nothing to defend him withall but his
Swoord, what euer might happen. When he had attained almoſt
the middeſt, this olde rotten planke began ſomewhat to
cracke, ſo that Palmerin then verily ſuppoſed, there was no other
remedy, but he muſt fall into the helliſh gulfe, wherefore
calling his faire Polinarda to memory, he began in this manner
to deſire her fauour.
                     Madame, if hitherto I haue aduenture my life, both in Martiall
exploytes, and dangerous attempts for your ſake, crauing
nothing at your handes but your ayde and fauour, I ought at
this inſtant, by greater reaſon to wiſh for the ſame, ſéeing that
now I try the greateſt hazard, onely to aduance your honour.
Whoſe friendſhip if I may be ſo happy as to finde, which is the
onely meane to encourage me in this diſtreſſe, I ſhall aſſay ſuch
renowne on your behalfe, as you ſhall be faithfully ſerued, and
my ſelfe for euer fully ſatiſfied.
                     Thus concluding his ſpéeches, to his no little ioy, he had gained
the further ſide, when he perceiued an olde withered Creature,

to come forth at a doore into his preſence, her face al wrinkled,
her haire ougly blacke, and diſpearſed all abroad ouer her
her ſhoulders, ſo ſtaying awhile began in this manner.
                     What eſtimation ſhall I make of my ſelfe? or what ſhall I
iudge all my cunning to auaile, which can warrant me ſafetie
in no place, but ſuffers me to be vanquiſhed by one knight ſo often?
Then ſtretching forth her hand to take hold on Palmerin,
verily thinking to plucke him after her, ſhe caſt her ſelfe headlong
into that filthy puddle, ending her life as wickedly, as her
tretcherous and villanous déeds had deſerued.
                     The Prince ſéeing ſhe had failed of her intent, and ouercome
with ſadneſſe at this wretched ſight, went through diuers
chambers to get downe, where he found many Mayden feruants,
of whom he enquired for the knigt, whoſe life he ſaued in
the Combate, and when he had found him, he deſired him to
ſhew the name of this Caſtle, as alſo what ſhe was that had ſo
deſperately drowned her ſelfe.
                     Worthy Sir (anſwered the knight) the proofe of your noble
valour is ſuch, that I cannot conceale any thing from you,
which may do you pleaſure to know, wherfore marke what I
ſhall ſhew vnto you. This Caſtle is called by the name of the
Perillous Ile, whereof ſome hold opinion, that the Sage Vrganda
was the firſt founder and Lady, and that in this place ſhe
hid her ſelfe becauſe after her heath this Caſtle remained Enchanted,
ſo that no perſon could attaine to inhabite here, in
this order ſhe left this faire Pallace, and the Fountaine which
you ſée a little from the Gate. And becauſe you may the eaſier
beleeue it, it was no longer agoe then ſithence our time, that it
was inhabited by any, who could giue aſſurance of the ſcituation
of this Ile, but only the Dame who is drowned, who was
named Eutropa, Aunt to the Giant Dramuſiande. For after
he was vanquiſhed by the prowes of a famous knight of England,
ſhe coeceiued ſuch inward ſorrow, that ſhe had almoſt diſtraught
her ſelfe of her wits, and to reuenge his miſhap, ſhe
ſent with all ſpeede to the Soldan of Babylon, that he ſhould
prepare a mightie Army, wherewith he might ruinate the Citie
of Conſtantinople, and the whole Empire of Greece.
                     
                     
                        
But her diueliſh deſire could not take effect, becauſe the Soldane
had enough to doe with his owne ſubiects, who had raiſed
themſelues in a mutany and open rebellion againſt him, for
which cauſe, ſhee ſeeing all her drifts could not accompliſh her
wiſh, came vnto this place, accompanied with the thrée knights
that you haue ſlaine and my ſelfe, ſo were we performed (more
by her damnable Art, thē any volantary affection of our ſelues)
into this Iſle, where round about ſhe hath ſo diſperſed her enchantments,
that ſhe might allure all wandring knights vnder
her power, either to ſlay them preſētly, or to kéepe them in continuall
orizon. And to ſatiſfie her inſatiable and bloody deſire, we
here haue maintained her ſafety a long time, being alwayes ſo
fortunate, that many knights we ſlew, & ſome we tooke captiue.
But it chanced not long ſince in an euening, that Fortune conducted
hither fiue noble knights, who after we had ſlaine thrée
of thē, the other twaine conquered me, and two of my fellowes,
but yet at laſt they were brought in ſubiection of the fourth
knight, and remaine as priſoners here in the Caſtle. I pray you
ſir (ſaid Palmerin) ſhew me the names of the thrée knights that
were ſlaine, as alſo the Priſon where the other two are, that I
may beſtow vpon them their former libertie: to which demand
he made this anſwere. The firſt Knight was called Medruſian
the Fearefull: the ſecond, Titubal the Blacke: and the third was
Foruolant the Strong: whom I am ſure ſometime you haue
ſéene, in the Emperour Palmerins court at Conſtantinople. Indéed
(quoth Palmerin) I haue ſéene their great ill wil, & wicked
diſpoſition, which was alway bent to moleſt & trouble him, that
wiſhed them moſt good, and euer honoured them: wherfore the
leſſe I eſtéeme their loſſe, but rather reioyce that the world hath
cut off their enuious practiſes. During the time of this talke,
they were come to the place where the two Priſoners lay, who
were without any company, by reaſon of y• ſmal abode Eutropa
as then had made in that place, wherein ſhe had determined to
execute ſuch tyranous cruelty, y• this Caſtle ſhould be ten times
more feared, then that where Dramuſiande made his abiding.
But the Sage Aliart, to whom all her drifts and practiſes w
                           •
                        re
diſcouered, willing to ſtop all the miſchiefes that this Enchanttreſſe

did ſtriue to commit, cauſed Palmerin to enter the Ship,
which he had ſent for that purpoſe, only thorow him to diſapoint
her vile pretence. Downe went the Knight with the Prince to
the priſon, carying a Torch lighted in his hand, becauſe it was
ſo déepe vnder the ground, as a man might ſhoote with a Croſſebow
in length, which moued Palmerin to be greatly agaſt, thinking
on the paines the two knights endured, in ſuch an obſcure
and vncomfortable Priſon, which made him to enter into th
                           •
                        ſe
words. Certainly this Caſtle can I hardly beleeue to be erected
by Vrganda, for that as the report goeth of her, ſhe was neuer
w
                           •
                        ont to vſe cruelty to any wandring knights. At laſt they came
to a grate, which they opened, & ſaw whereas the two knights
were, attending the cōming of ſome to do them villainy as they
ſuppoſed, rather then to ſet them at liberty, which was the leaſt
part of their thought, whē preſently the Prince knew them, the
one was Bazilliart, the other Germaine of Orleance, who had
great yrons vpon their legs, and yron chaines about their middles,
which cauſed him preſently to fall into teares, and not able
to ſuffer that they ſhould abide any longer in that heauy caſe, cō
                        manded
the knight to take off their chaines and irons. But Bazilliart
did not like this very well, becauſe he feared they ſhould
now be lead to ſome tormēts: wherefore he began to ſpeake vnto
them as thus. Sir knight, you might doe vs more pleaſure, to
let vs reſt in this captiuity, then to lead vs now to any place of
puniſhmēt. Sir Bazilliart (ſaid Palmerin) they that impriſoned
you in this place, would hardly conſent to deliuer you ſo ſoone.
Then minding to put them out of this feare, he would not hide
himſelfe any longer, but but off his Helmet: when Germaine of
Orleance catching him in his armes, renued his acquaintance
in this order. I ſée well, Sir Palmerin, that hereafter I muſt abandon
all fooliſh feare, becauſe your proweſſe is wholly applyed
to redéeme their captiuity, on whom fortune bēdeth her lowring
browes, as Dramuſiande can amply teſtifie. After they had
ſaluted one another very courteouſly, they came preſently forth
of this noyſome priſon, and then they were all conducted into a
very faire chamber, where after they had refreſhed their hungry
ſtomacks, they diſcourſed with each other, what had hapned in
their ſundry aduentures.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. LVIIII.
                     How during the time, that Palmerin remained in this Caſtle
called the Perrillous Iſle, accompanied with Bazilliart,
Germaine of Orleance, and Sa
                           •
                        ransfort the Knight that
keepeth the Caſtle, Francian and O
                           •
                        ſtalde (who at their
departure from Siluian, tooke vpon them them to trauaile
in the Princes ſearch) arriued there at the Caſtle, with
whom Palmerin departed from ahence. And how ſayling
on the Sea, he attained the Coaſt of Spaine, where being
deſirous to ſee the faire Miragarda, he changed his Armor,
and vnder the title of the Diſpayring Knight, he trauailed
toward the Caſtle of the Giant Almarol.
                     
                        LOng time theſe Knightes ſpent in their
friendly diſcourſes, till it drewe towards
night, when the Knight of the Caſtle named
Satransfort, had prouided two faire
beds, one for the Prince Palmerin, and another
for his two companions, who that
night tooke more quietnes, then ſince their
firſt comming into the Caſtle. In the morning
they concluded to depart from thence, but firſt they deſired,
to ſée all the Chambers and commodities in this goodly
Caſtell, which they found ſo rare and excellently ordered,
that they could not chuſe but commend it, as it did highly deſerue.
                     Then walked they from thence to the Fountaine, yéelding
no leſſe laud to the noble Conqueſt of Palmerin, then the dangerous
attempt of ſuch an exployte did worthily merite. Returning
vnto the Caſtle, where, at the earneſt requeſt of Satransfort,
they ſtaied for the ſpace of foure dayes, and comming

foorth in an afternoone, to ſit in the pleaſant ſhadow vnder the
gréene Trées, they eſpied a farre off two knights come haſtily
ryding, who were preſently knowne by their Shields: for they
were Francian and Oniſtalde, endeuoring themſelues to ſéeke
the Prince Palmerin. At ſuch time as Siluian had declared vnto
them the loſſe of his Lord, ſuch was their good fortune, that they
came to the place where Palmerin entred the ſhippe, and there
they found paſſengers ready to croſſe the ſeas, ſo that by intreatie
they ſealed with them, hauing ſuch fayre winde and tyde,
that at length they diſcouered the Perillous Iſle. This place
made all the Paſſengers greatly abaſhed, becauſe they were
both ignorant of the ſoyle, and knew not the danger they might
receiue in that place: yet at the requeſt of the two knights, they
were ſomewhat pacified, & ſet them on land in the ſame place,
where Palmerin entred firſt on ſhore. When they had attained
the top of the hye Rockes, they came to the Pillar that had the
fearefull ſentence vpon it, which vſing very litle regard (becauſe
the affection they bare vnto their deare friend, incited them forward)
they came as I haue told you, both into y• fight & knowledge
of the Prince and the Knights: where they were receyued
very curteouſly, and imbraced on another, in token of their
mutuall and inuiolate friendſhip.
                     During the time of their abiding there, they viſited the noble
aduenture of the Fountaine, and alſo the dead bodies of Tituball,
Medruſian & Foruolant: then came they to the place where
Eutropa drowned her ſelfe, all the way extolling the worthy
Proweſſe of him, that had the power to atchieue and ende ſuch
ſingular exploytes. When occaſion ſo fell that they would
néedes depart, Palmerin left the Caſtle, in the cuſtody of the
gentle knight Satransfort, intending to make a preſent of it to
the noble Sage Aliart. So friendly departing from thence, they
came to the Sea ſide, where they inbarqued themſelues among
diuers Paſſengers: the foure Knightes by themſelues, and
Palmerin alone as was his deſire. When they were enired the
ſeas, from the ſight of any land, Sage Aliart who conducted the
ſhip of the Prince, made him to ſayle a contrary way from the
other Knights, ſo that he knewe not where he ſhould land: althought

he had determined to goe to Conſtantinople, to ſée his
Lady the faire Polinarda, for whoſe ſake his heart endured diuerſe
grieuous thoughts and paſſions.
                     At length, ſuch was his fortune, that he attained the Coaſt
of Spaine, which pleaſed him very well, becauſe he would try
his valour in the preſence of the faire Miragarda, to the intent
that he might know, if her beauty were comparable to his Miſtreſſe
Polinarda. When he was come to the chiefe city of Portugal,
he heard maruellous commendations of Florendos the
Triſtfull Knight, who becauſe his father Primaleon had bruiſed
his armour very ſore, made himſelfe a notable faire new armor,
and hauing done many famous Actes in the Court of Recinde
King of Spaine, came home at laſt to the Caſtle of the Giant
Almarol. Miragarda ſo ſoone as he was there arriued, would
néedes know of his ſucceſſe before the Caſtle of the Giant Dramuſiande,
albeit ſhe had béene admoniſhed thereof before, yet
would ſhe neuer accept of that which the Triſtfull Knight had
done in England, but was of this mind, that whatſoeuer he had
done, ſhe made no account of it. But being deſirous to ſée, if his
déedes might bee agréeable to the reputation hee had deſerued,
commanded him to kéepe the paſſage there at her Caſtle, thinking
that ſo many good Knightes would endeu our themſelues
thither, ſo that this aduenture ſhould be as much renowned, as
was the Caſtle of Dramuſiande.
                     
                     The Triſtfull Knight, loath in any thing to diſpleaſe the
faire Miragarda, cauſed ther a Sheelde to be made with the
Image of her beauty, the report whereof allured ſo many
Knights thither, that in her defence he had conquered more
then two hundred, from whom he tooke their ſhields, and in remembrance
of his victory, hanged them vp on either ſide the
faire Portraite of his Lady. Miragarda perceiuing by the
Shieldes, the Proweſſe of Florendos the Triſtfull knight, receiued
an vnſpeakeable contentment, yet making no ſhew of
praiſe, for this ſo hauty an enterpriſe: where to his noble victory
we will leaue him, & returne to the prince Palmerin, who is
trauialing in Portugal. In al this time, he had made him an excellent
faire armour, ſpotted with colours of ſcarlet and white:

which gaue ſuch great delight to them who beheld it, that euery
one was deſirous to make himſelfe the like.
                     In his Shield on a plaine of Sinople, was curiouſly figured
the Image of Deadly Hope, which was ſo ſingular well ordered,
for the liuelineſſe of her face and lineaments, as alſo the
ſéemels ſhadowing of her attire, that euery one iudged it a very
naturall proportion: her name was likewiſe preſented vnder
her, ſo that through this deuice, he was named of euery one the
Deſpairing Knight. In this manner he ridde toward the Caſtle
of Almarol, very deſirous to trie his force, in this aduenture
eſteemed of ſo great fame, not fearing the perill, if Fortune
ſhould vnkindly turne her ſelfe from him. But perſwaded himſelfe,
that it was vnpoſſible to attaine the top of Honour, if a
man doe not hazard his perſon in thoſe places, where victorie is
worthily preſented to the minde that beareth the affection, to
leaue perpetuall renowne to his poſteritie.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LX.
                     How Palmerin, vnder the title of the Diſparing Knight, came
to the Caſtle of the Giant Almarol, where hee ſaw the
ſhields of diuers famous Knights and his very friends, were
hanged among the number of the vanquiſhed: whereupon
he entred the Combat againſt the Triſtfull Knight,
whoſe ſtrength was ſuch, that neither of them could win
the victorie. And how Miragarda tooke ſuch anger thereat,
that ſhee commanded the Triſtfull Knight, to abſent
himſelfe from thence, and to weare no armour for the
ſpace of twelue moneths.
                     
                        
                        CErtaine aduentures, which are not to bee
mentioned, were finiſhed by the Prince
Palmerin, in the time hee trauelled towardes
the Caſtle of the Giant Almarol:
where when hee arriued, hée was
greatly abaſhed, to ſee it placed on ſuch a
hie Rocke, which was a ſore trouble for any
to come vnto it. The Deſparing Knight being come ſomewhat
néere it, eſpied two Knights were entred the Combat,
which being deſirous to ſee, hee ſet ſpurres to his Horſe, to bee
there before they had mad an end: but before he could come thither,
the Triſtfull Knight had vanquiſhed his aduerſarie, and
placed his ſheild among the other: by which meanes Palmerin
had certaine knowledge of the conquered Knight, who was
called Carmelant, as the writing vnder his ſheild made manifeſt.
                     
                        Palmerin beholding ſo manie Shields about this Trée,
eſteemed the valour of the Triſtfull Knight of great reputation:
at laſt hee perceiued the ſhelds of Friſoll, Eſtrellant,
and Tenebrant, who were his friendes, and of great renowne,
whereat he was ſo amazed, that he knew not what
to ſay.
                     But when he ſaw the Picture of Miragarda, which repreſented
ſuch beauty, as his ſenſes were rauiſhed, he could procéed no
farther till he had vſed theſe ſpéeches. Certainly Madam, I ſee
at this preſent the thing I neuer thought to doe, and cannot
thinke amiſſe of your knight, who may wel hazard his life for ſo
hare a Goddeſſe: but yet I deſire to approue my ſelfe againſt
him, bearing this opinion with me, that the beautie of his beſt
fauored and beloued, neither is or may be equalled with her, for
whoſe ſake I will aduenture the Combat.
                     The Triſtfull Knight hearing theſe words, could not withhold
himſelfe, but returned the Prince this anſwere. If your
chaſtiſement and correction ſir Knight, were giuen according
as your proud wordes haue deſerued, you ſhould bee repaied
with extreame crueltie. Wherefore, fearing leaſt in fauouring

you, I ſhall deſerue a raſh report my ſelfe: I will try if your valo
                           ••
                        
be ſuch as may maintaine the diſhonour you haue vngently
offered Hereupon they fetched their carire, and met together
with ſo great a force, that they were both enforced to abandon
their horſes, and drawing foorth their ſwords, they deliuered one
another ſuch rigorous blowes, as one would haue iudged, neither
of them able to endure.
                     The Giant Almarol abaſhed at this noble Combate, called
the faire Miragarda to come and ſée it, hauing ſpread a faire
cloath of Gold along the windowe, and a very rich Cuſhion
whereon ſhe leaned, her Damoſelles ſtanding by her to behold
this Knightly Chiualry. When ſhee had preſented her ſelfe in
the windowe, the two Champions retired themſelues to take
a little pauſe, by which meanes the Triſtfull knight gained the
commoditie, to contemplate his faire Miragarda with theſe
tearmes. What man is he, albeit his ſtate were oppreſſed with
neuer ſo much debilitie, that would not aſſure himſelfe to remaine
victor, maintaining the qua
                           •
                        rell of ſo excellent and rare
a Iewell? In like manner, Palmerin complained to his faire
Polinarda, but to breake of theſe cogitations, they began couragiouſly
againe, the Triſtfull knight beholding his Lady with
great griefe, that he could not vanquiſh this Knight, hauing before
fayled ſo many. Very forceable were the aſſaultes they
gaue one another, their Armour cut and cruelly mangled, their
blood effuſed on the ground where they fought, their Shieldes
broken in an hundreth pieces, ſo that they were faine to take
breath againe, as vnable to endure ſuch penitrable and grieuous
trauaile.
                     
                        Palmerin ſtanding leaning vpon his Swoord, beholding his
Armour reduced into ſuch eſtate, aud remembring the cauſe of
his entrance into the Combate, with a ſad conceyt he beganne
to ſay. Madame, either I am not ſufficient to doe you ſeruice, or
elſe you eſtéeme ſo litle of mine affection, that I am vnworthy
to be your ſeruant. As none but you grant me the honor of this
fight, hauing the onely power to maiſter me: ſo I deſire you to
aſſiſt me with your friendly fauour, ſince I haue made hazard
of my life, to aduance the fame of your loyaltie, and ſuffer not

this Knight to remaine the Victor, ſéeing, in mine eye, his Lady
neither may nor will preſume aboue you. The Triſtfull
Knight walked vp and downe, debating with himſelfe on the
ende of the combat, which he began ſomewhat to feare, becauſe
in all his life time, he had not dealt with a more hardy and valiant
Knight, wherefore lifting vp his eyes to the place where
Mirgarda ſtood, he began to diſcouer his minde as thus.
                     I had ſometime (déere Miſtreſſe) a Siſter named Polinarda,
whoſe beautie, both of others and my ſelfe, was eſtéemed the
moſt rare and perfect on the earth, but after I had beh
                           •
                        lde the
inequall ſtate of your ſurpaſſing beauty, I perceiued my iudgement
on her to be very groſſe, in ſo much as ſhe neither may
or ought, to paragon her ſelfe with your heauenly perfection.
Wherfore ſwéete Miſtreſſe doe me the honour, that your fauor
may ſupport me againſt mine enemy, and ſuffer me not that
haue béene vanquiſhed by your beautie, to be brought into ſuch
ſubiection to any other.
                     Then féeling themſelues ſomewhat refreſhed, they charged
one another againe very valiantly, and continued fruſtrate of
their expectations ſo long, ye they caught one another about the
middeſt, endeuouring that way who ſhould gette the maiſtrie,
but they laboured in vaine, for their ſtrengthes were of ſuch equalitie,
that one could hardly iudge who had the greater aduantage.
                     
                        Miragarda commended this Combat, for the beſt that euer
ſhe had ſeene, and deſired that the victory might returne to the
Triſtfull Knight, but both her wiſh and expectation was deceiued,
for the night approching ſo faſt vpon them, they had not
the commoditie to trie for the conqueſt.
                     Then came foorth the Giant Almarol, and by his intreatie
they parted themſelues, becauſe indéede they could hardly ſée
one another, ſo Palmerin returned about halfe a mile from that
place, where he remained till his woundes were healed, determing
when he had gained a little more ſtrength, to come againe
to the Caſtle, where he would ſo knightly behaue himſelfe, that
he would beare the Shielde of Miragarda from thence, as the
honour of his prize to Conſtantinople.
                     
                     
                        
                        Almarol conducted the Triſtfull Knight into his Chamber,
which was there in the field, where he alwaies vſed to lodge:
but Miragarda being greatly offended, that he had not the power
to vanquiſh the Prince (ſtanding vpon the triall betwéene
her beauty, and the Lady of the valiant Palmerin) ſent a meſſenger
to Florendos with theſe tidings. That he ſhould ſtraightway
abſent himſelfe from that place, and not to weare any Armour
for the ſpace of twelue monethes, becauſe he had not béen
ſo fortunate, to vanquiſh his enemy in ſo iuſt a cauſe. This gréeting
was ſo diſpleaſant to the Triſtfull Knight, that he became
reſolute, to make his life in ſorrow, agreeable to his penſiue
name, verily ſuppoſing, that Fortune had determined his vtter
detriment.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LXI.
                     How the Triſtfull Knight, at the commandement of his Ladie
Miragarda, departed from the Caſtle of Almarol, accompanied
with his Eſquire Armello, who brought backe his
Maſters Sheeld and Armor, and left it at the Tree among
the other conquered Knights. And how Florendos met a
Shepheard in his trauell, with whom he ioyned in ſuch amitie,
that they vowed neuer to leaue one another. And
how the Prince Palmerin returning to ende the Combat,
was certified by Armello, in the cauſe of his maſters departure,
wherefore he likewiſe preſently departed from
thence.
                     
                        
                        WHen the Triſtfull Knight had receiued this
ſharpe Meſſage of Miragarda, being loth in
any thing to diſobay her minde, hee called
his Eſquire Armello, to whom he bare
great loue and affection, and going into a
little thicket of Trees, the briniſh teares
trilling downe his cheekes, he began to his
Eſquire this heauie diſcourſe. Armello my
friend, ſoo here the guerdon that frowning Fortune, in recompence
of my trauailes hath ordained for me: which how patiently
I ſuffer, both God, thy ſelfe, and theſe ſollitary woods remaine
my witneſſe, that I am neither moued at this miſhap,
nor ſtorme againſt her great diſcurteſie: but ſay with the Philoſopher,
Patience is the moſt noble conqueſt. Yet had I alway
this opinion with me, that my truſty trauaile deſerued a better
reward, and that but onely reſpecting my faith, I did worthily
merit ſome moitie of friendſhip. And what of that? thy ioy, thy
mirth. thy happineſſe, and all thy comfort in the world, is changed
to the hard lot of all miſfortune, onely be thou patient & preuaile,
vſing this for thy continual Epithite: Quid non facit Amor?
Yet haue I one hope, which will be my chiefeſt remedie in this
extreame affliction: that Death will ſpéedily finiſh my heauie
complaints, and cut off the miſeries wherwith I am ſo cruelly
aſſaulted.
                     Wherfore my good friend Armello, as thou wilt manifeſt thy
wonted curteſie, and pleaſure me now in mine extreame néede,
take here my Horſe and Armor, and depart to Conſtantinople,
and there giue forth for a certaine truth, that Death hath claimed
his due at my hands▪ and that I haue ended my life in this
vnfortunate aduenture: wherein I know thou ſhalt not do amiſſe,
becauſe my griefe doth aſſure me, I ſhall ende, and that
right ſoone. Onely let me requeſt at thine hands, that thou
conceale my late miſhap to thy ſelfe, and let neither friend nor
foe vnderſtand it, but ſay to euery one, thou art a witnes of my
death.
                     
                        
                        Armello hearing the words of his Maſter, which ſtrooke into
his heart a grieuous and extreame paſſion, with the teares
in his eyes, he began in this manner. Truſt me my Lord, I
know no place that can content me more, or be any thing like
to my deſire, then in your oppreſſion to beare you companie:
whom if I ſhould forſake, God knowes the danger might happen
to you, as alſo the ſorrow I ſhould conceiue of my ſelfe.
Neither doe I thinke it expedient to blaze abroad your death,
becauſe a number of miſhappes might ariſe thereby, which entring
ſeuerely the minds of your friends, will much more ſéeme
diſpleaſant to your Parents and alliance. Wherefore, a while
beare with the furie of Miragarda▪
                         and thinke not but her own
raſh dealing, will ere long moue her vnto repentance: by
that time ſhee hath conſidered your faithfull ſeruice, how
her aſpyring minde hath beene honourably maintained by
you, ſhee will recall her vngentle wordes, and recompence
you with that you haue deſerued worthily: therefore expect a
while good Sir, and all will frame well enough I warrant
you.
                     I know (anſwered Florendos) the perfection of thy truſtie
zeale is ſo carefully bent for my welfare, that in the deſpaire I
am at this preſent, I haue ſmall occaſion to thinke on it. For I
know my fault is ſuch as I ſhall not be fauoured, and her ingratitude
ſo ſeuerely bent againſt me, as were all the torments
in the world adioined, they might not deſerue compariſon with
her great diſpleaſure. Yet what is that knighit in all the world,
that would haue been vanquiſhed, ſeeing he defended the onely
Phaenix of beautie? or where is he that would not haue made
hazard of his laſt extremitie, being encouraged to the Combate
by ſuch an excellent meane? And can ſuch crueltie dwel in
ſuch a pooreleſſe perſon, or ſuch an angry minde harbour vnder
ſo faire a face: Well, Fo
                              •
                           ſan & h
                              •
                           c 
                              •
                           lim meminiſſe iu
                              •
                           abit. But tel
me, how can I eſteeme of my ſelfe, hauing been conquerour ouer
ſo many, and could not bring in obeyſance this one knight?
Certainely I perſwade my ſelfe, that on him I haue vſed leſſe
proweſſe, then in any aduenture wherein thou haſt ſeene mée,
Wherfore, I haue good occaſion to take it heauily, & to lament

the honour I haue loſt, being exiled from her gracious preſence.
Therefore good Armello, receiue here my Horſe and Armour,
and ſuffer me to walke alone in heauineſſe, that am the cauſe of
mine owne hurt.
                     After he had ended theſe ſpéeches, he forſooke Armello, and
wandring along by a Riuer ſide, till at laſt he ſate him downe
vnder a Tree, deſir
                           •
                        us to receiue a little reſt, but the vexations
of his minde would hardly ſuffer him. When hee awaked, hee
perceiued a great heard of ſhéepe féediug in the Paſture ground
by him: and vnder a tree neere by, hee ſaw a Shepheard playing
on an Inſtrument, whereto he recorded ſo many ſwéet ditties,
that Florendos tooke great pleaſure to ſit and heare him,
perſwading himſelfe, that the Shepheard was not of ſuch baſe
condition as he ſeemed, becauſe his deuiſes was ſo excellent wel
ordered, both in the commendation of Loue, as alſo the great
iniuries he had receiued thereby. The Triſtfull Knight well noting
his complaints, and that Fortune had conducted him to
the place, where he might enioy a partner to liue in heauineſſe,
he came and vſed ſuch friendly meanes, that in ſhort time they
grew into good liking of each of other, Florendos béeing very
glad, that hee had met ſuch a friend to the ſolitarie life. After
that the Shepheard had vttered the ſecrets of his mind, and the
Triſtfull Knight had bewraied the ſum of his griefe, they vowed
ſuch amitie to remaine betwéene each other, that no miſfortune
ſhould haue power ſo ſunder their friendſhip.
                     
                        Armello hauing ſtood muſing a good while, that his Maſter
was gone out of ſight, and determined to trauell without any
company he came backe againe to the caſtle of Almarol, where
at the foote of the Trée, directly vnder the Shield of the faire
Miragarda, he placed his Maſters Shield and Armour among
the vanquiſhed Knights. And there in the preſenc
                           •
                         of Mirag
                              •
                           rda,
hee vttered ſo many rufull and grieuous complaintes,
that they would haue mooued any gentle heart to compaſſion:
but ſhee being entered into ſuch great diſdaine, eſteemed them
not worthie of any account, but triumphed in the paines of
the Triſtfull Knight, whom at this time wee will leaue in the
Shepheards company.
                     
                        
Now the prince Palmerin hauing his wounds wel cured, and
prouided him of a new Armour, becauſe his other was cruelly
defaced, returned to the caſtle of the Giant Almarol, intending
not to depart from thence, before he had conquered the Triſtfull
Knight. When he was arriued at the Caſtle, he heard the lamentations,
that Armello vſed, whereby he vnderſtood, that the
Triſtfull Knight was the renowned Prince Florendos, which
moued him to great diſpleaſure, becauſe he had entred the Combat
againſt him. And then he ſuppoſed, that the hatred of Miragarda,
might worke an occaſion of ſome greater miſchance, in
that the loſſe of ſo valliant a Prince as Florendos was, might
cauſe the great griefe of the Emperour Palmerin, as alſo the
Lords and Ladies of his royall Court. Theſe thoughts vrged
the Prince to ſo great vnquietnes, that he could not determine
whether he might abide there in that place, or purſue after the
Prince Florendos, to cauſe him abandon that Triſtful kinde of
life, and be a remedie to eny miſfortune that might annoy him,
by meanes of the princeſſe Miragarda, whom he ſuppoſed to be
the fayreſt Lady that euer he had ſéene. Thus muſing vpon a
thouſand matters, as alſo the beauty of Miragarda, to compare
with the heauenly hew of his Lady & Miſtreſſe, at laſt, remembring
the effect of his duty, hée ſet ſpurs to his Htrſe, and galloped
from thence, not reſpecting which way he went, but deſirous
to attaine the Citie of Conſantinople.
                     
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LXII.
                     How the Giant Dramuſiande, accompanied with Siluian, arriued
at the Caſtle of the Giant Almarol, where being amorous
of the Picture of the Miragarda, hee entred the
Combate with Almarol, and foyled him. And how Miragarda
gaue into his cuſtodie her Portrait, as alſo the keeping
of the paſſage, againſt the Knightes that came thither.
                     
                        
                        HEre we muſt remember the Giant Dramuſiande,
who after he had trauailed many
ſtrange Countries, accompanied with
Siluian, to finde againe the Prince Palmerin)
arriued at the Caſtle of the Giant
Almarol, within a while after the Prince
was departed from thence. When he had
beheld the Caſtle hee deſired ſo long to ſée,
and could perceiue neither any body néere or about it, he came to
the Trée which he ſaw was laden with the Shields of the vanquiſhed
Knights, whoſe names being ſubſcribed vnderneath euery
one made him to haue knowledge of diuers that had bene
there foyled.
                     At laſt, at the ſoote of the Trée, he eſpyed the armour & ſhéeld
of the Triſtfull knight, which made him greatly to muſe: that
the Armour of the Conquerour ſhould deſerue no better eſtimation,
then to be placed there among the number of the vanquiſhed.
Néere to the Armour he beheld Armello, who hauing endured
his teares and pittifull complaints a long time, at length
chanced to fall faſt aſléepe, but Dramuſiande deſirous to heare
ſome tidings, vſed ſuch meanes, that he awaked him. But when
he vnderſtood of the aduentures of the Fortreſſe, as alſo the departure
of the Triſtfull knight, he began greatly to rebuke himſelfe,
in that his Fortune failed to encounter with ſo good a
Knight, whoſe Shield he would haue placed as higheſt on the
Trée, but that Armello deſired him to the contrary.
                     
                        Dramuſiande taking good viewe on the picture of Miragarda,
was brought on a ſuddaine into ſuch an alteration, that his
ſtout and hauty ſtomacke could not any way reſiſt, the cutting
cares that ouercharged his mind, yea he was brought into ſuch
a great quandary, that he could not hold his Launce, but trembling
as a leafe ſtirred with the wind, euē ſo he ſtood (as it were)
cleane bereft of his ſences, whereupon he began to vtter theſe
ſpéeches.
                     Madame, beholding in this Portrait, the beauty wherwith

Nature hath plentifully adorned you, I wiſh and deſire to kéep
this Paſſage, that I might by my faithfull ſeruice, make you renowned
thorow the whole world. For ſince your countenance
hath the courage, to conquere this heart of mine, which as yet
was neuer done by any, I deſire that vnder your noble conqueſt,
I may endeuor my ſtrength to exalt your Princely beauty,
which who ſo dare preſume to ſpeake againſt, ſhall receiue
the puniſhment due to ſo great an offence.
                     While he continued in this amorous thought, the Giant
Almarol came brauely forth of my Caſtell, whom Miragarda
had ſent, being offended to ſée the Giant Dramuſiande, wherefore
aduancing himſelfe in his preſence, Almarol deliuered him
this greeting. Sir Knight, I thinke it might be more for your
auaile, to ſet your ſheild in the rancke of the vanquiſhed, then
thus to buſie your ſelfe in beholding this Portrait, which thing
I would rather perſwade you too by gentleneſſe, then to ſhew
you the conſtraint that may happen by my force, to which
words Dramuſiande replied thus.
                     If I were perſwaded, that the Miſtreſſe of this picture, wold
be pleaſed with ſo ſmall a matter, I had rather accompliſh thy
deſire, then to doe any thing that might returns the contrarie,
for then my trauaile ſhould be little, my loſſe leſſe, and my heart
at libertie, where now it remaineth captiue. And becauſe I
would gladly receuer it againe, I entend to enter the Combats
with thee, to the intent thou maiſt report, thy words could not
foile mee, nor yet thy workes had the puiſſance to daunt mee.
Almarol, who naturally was accuſtomed to cruelty, and not of
ſuch courteſie as was the gentle Dramuſiande, receiued theſe
ſpeeches in very angrie manner, and being both ready prouided,
encountred with their Speares valiantlie together. Being
both throwne beſide their Horſes, they charged one another
very fiercely with their Swordes, and Miragarda ſtanding
in her window to behold this exploite, gaue great commendation
to the behauiour of Dramuſiande, whom ſhe feared
would ouercome the Giant Almarol. When they had ſore hurt
and well wearied themſelues, they retired a while to take a
little pauſe, when Dramuſiande beholding the faire Miragarda
                        
was ſuddenly ſtroken into ſuch amaze, that the remembrance
of the Combat was cleane out of his minde. Almarol ſéeing into
what eſtate he was brought, only with beholding the face of
Miragarda, awaked him out of his ſtudy with ſuch a ſure ſtroke
on the Creaſt, that the Sword cleft it, and wounded him very
ſore vpon the head. Which Dramuſiande taking in very il part,
returned to Almarol with ſo great fury, that he inforced him to
ſtart this way and that way, as glad to auoide the blowes
wherewith he was charged. At laſt Almarol fell to the earth,
when Dramuſiande ſetting his foote vpon him, vnclaſped his
Helmet, becauſe he would haue ſmitten off his head, but Miragarda
preſently ſent downe one of her Damoſels, named Lardemia,
who ſtaied Dramuſiande with theſe words.
                     Moſt noble knight, the Princeſſe Miragarda by me doth
ſent intreaty, that you would ſatiſfie your ſelfe with the honor
of your victorie, and not to depriue the Giant of life, whoſe loſſe
might be more griefe to her, then all your indeuours can any
way recompence. Madame (anſwered Dramuſiande) I not
onely grant him life, at the requeſt of ſuch a gracious Princeſſe,
but vow my ſelfe to keepe her famous Shield, if ſo bee ſhe
can except of my loyall ſeruice, and if Fortune conduct any
Knight hether, that can conquere me, I deſire her (ſetting all
pittie aſide) that ſhe will ſuffer me to enioy the death, ſo ſhall
both my trauailes and troubles, poſſeſſe a long wiſhed ende.
Lardemia hauing lead Almarol into the Caſtle, out at the window
returneth him this anſwere. Sir knight, my Lady and
Miſtreſſe ſendeth you a thouſand thankes, and in recompence
of your courteſie, committeth the ſafegard of her ſhield into
your hands, wiſhing good Fortune may alway gouerne your
enterpriſe.
                     
                        Dramuſiande at theſe words was greatly cōtented, becauſe he
deſired aboue all things to pleaſure the faire Miragarda, whoſe
beauty had depriued him of his wonted libertie, forcing him in
loue to grow ſomewhat amorous. For which cauſe he remained
there, kéeping this faire Portraite, accompliſhing ſuch hautie
déedes of Chiualrie, as was altogether ſuppoſed incredible:
but the honour which he got, had no long time of tarriance, for

that fortune hauing a while fauoured him, at laſt in her anger
ſhe forſooke him: euen as ſhe is accuſtomed to falſifie her promiſe
to thoſe whom ſhe perceiueth haue any entrance into proſperitie.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LXIII.
                     How Dramuſiande, keeping the ſhield and paſſage of the Giant
Almarol, entred the Iuſt with the Prince Gracian and
Don Roſuel, of whom he had the victory, and ended their
ſtrife with friendly acquaintance.
                     
                        ON the next morning, Dramuſiande to accompliſh
his promiſe to the faire Miragarda,
came foorth and ſate downe at the Tree,
where the Portraite and the Knightly
Shields were placed, vſing ſuch grieuous
complaints, that Siluian marueiled to ſée ſo
mighty a man brought into ſuch ſubiection
by the force of loue. The faithfull and truſty
Eſquire Armello, kéeping them company, and frequenting ſtill
his grieuous mones, thought none worthy to kéepe ſuch a precious
treaſure, as was the ſhield of the faire Miragarda, but onely
his Lord and Maiſter, who did beſt of all deſerue it: wherfore
being not able to conceale the paſſions his heart conceiued, began
in this manner to the Giant Dramuſiande. I knowe well
ſir Knight, that Fortune hath greatly fauoured you, in that my
maſter is abſent, and you kéepe the Iewell of his ioy: but durſt
hée ſhewe himſelfe in this place, which he is conſtrained to forſake
by the command of Miragarda, you ſhould well perceiue,
that her faire Portrait is to be kept by none but he: whereto
Dramuſiande replied thus.
                     
                        
My friend, the faith and affection thou beareſt to thy Maiſter,
ſéemeth to me worthy of great commendation. And as his déeds
remaine a true confirmation and witneſſe of your woryes, yet
you muſt not vſe any euill ſuſpect to him, who is altogether vnknowne
of you, and would alſo enter combate wich your Maiſter,
were he preſent in this place. And if it were any chauce to
to be vanquiſhed by him, I would content my ſelfe to be placed
among theſe other conquered, whoſe aſſurance haue béene as
likely as mine, and peraduenture it might be more to my profite,
if I left my Shield vnder her obeyſance, whoſe will I onely
ſéeke to ſatiſfie, by ending my life in ſuch a hautie enterpriſe.
Againe, it might ſo fortune, if it were your chance to ſée me combate
wiſh your Maiſter, you would conceiue another opinion
th
                           •
                        n as yet you doe, and iudge me either better or worſe, then I
perceiue at this preſent you make your account. Wherefore I
perſwade my ſelfe, that I am as well worthy and able to kéepe
and defend this ſhield of the faire Miragarda, as the knight your
Maiſter, who is vnknown to me, albeit I confeſſe, not ſo worthy
of her, as he that hath ſo déerly deſerued her, not onely (I am
ſure) by this notable cōqueſts, but alſo by proofe of this knightly
curteſie. For if I ſhould that way equal my ſelfe with him, It
might well be thought no trueth remained in me. And if you
ſhall ſtay here a certaine ſpace, I doubt not but you ſhall ſée as
hauty attempts ended, as at any time haue béene by your Maiſter
finiſhed.
                     While he continued theſe ſpéeches, hée eſpied a farre off two
knights, come riding along the Riuer ſide: one of them had
his Armour coloured blacke and white, with diuers borders of
Gold finely wrought vpon it, bearing in his Shield for his deuice,
a murthered body in a campe of Sinople: the other had his
Armour of a gréene colour, very thicke beſet with Lyons of
Gold, & in his ſhield two Lions rampant. Theſe twaine were
no ſooner arriued at the Caſtle, but Dramuſiande incontiuently
knew them: for the one was Don Roſuel, and the other was
the Prince Gracian, who ſometime had béene his Priſoners,
and whoſe amitie hée alwayes made great account of. But
albeit their friendſhip was very acceptable to him, yet the promiſe

he had made Miragarda, commanded him to the contrary,
confidering alſo that loue had gotten the maiſterie of him,
and directing his minde in this enterpriſe, made him neither to
ſpare friend nor foe, but vſed all alike that trauailed thither.
Then mounting on his ſtéed, he came forth before them, when
they perceiuing he prouided himſelfe to the Iuſte, were very
well pleaſed, becauſe they deſired to approue their ſtrength, in
the behalfe of the faire Miragarda. But caſting their eyes on
her beautifull Picture, which they beheld in the middeſt of the
Shieldes that Florendos had conquered, they were ſuppriſed
with ſuch a ſuddaine amazement, that they had quite forgotten
for what cauſe they came thither: which Dramuſiande ſeeing,
addreſſed himſelfe to them, with this manner of ſalutation.
                     Sir Knights, the Portraite of this Lady is not here placed,
to be contemplated with ſo great eaſe, but hée that deſireth to
enioy ſuch a Iewell, muſt firſt combate againſt me, who denyeth
him that priuiledge, till I am vanquiſhed, and if that Fortune
in this reſpect doe fauour him, yet ſhall he féele a double
torment by remayning Victor.
                     Truſt me (anſwered the Prince Gracian) if a mans life may
ataine the honour of ſuch a ſingular perſonage, behold him who
hath the courage to aduenture firſt. So concluding his ſpéeches,
he met Dramuſiande valiantly with the breake of the Speare,
which was with ſuch force, that hee was throwne to the earth
with ſo ſtrong a violence, that for a great while he was voyde
of any feeling. This mooued Don Roſuel to ſuch diſpleaſure,
that to reuenge his friend, hée pricked foorth againſt Dramuſiande,
who being ready prouided with another Speare, ſent him
to beare the Prince Gracian company.
                     This rude encounter made them both maruaile, and ſuppoſed
that their enemy was the renowned Palmerin of England,
whereof being deſirous to be reſolued, Gracian as the hardieſt
of them both, with his ſwoord drawne in his hand, entred into
theſe tearmes. Sir Knight, althogh Fortune hath béene your
friend to foyle vs in the Iuſte, yet I pray you to diſcende on
foote, to the ende we may finiſh the Combat with the ſwoord,
becauſe I would trie your valour to the vttermoſt, if I may

depart from hence with the benefite of my life. Dramuſiande,
who was euer accuſtomed to great bounty and gentleneſſe, ſeeing
the deſire of the Prince Gracian, on whom he had gotten
the honour of the victory, would not in that reſpect ſatiſ
                           •
                        ie his
mind, but made him anſwere in this maner. Sir Gracian, I do
not make ſo ſmall eſtimation of your life, that I would be the
man ſh
                           •
                        uld bring you into ſuch danger, beſéeching you not to
take in all part, that which I haue already ſo boldly ventured, being
my ſelfe bound by duty, to doe any thing I may for your honourable
welfare.
                     
                        Gracian hearing himſelfe named by the Knight, of whom he
had no knowledge, was greatly abaſhed, and replyed thus.
                     Worthy ſir, ſince my fortune hath béene ſo good, as to obtaine
the friendſhip of ſo hardy a Knight, I eſtéeme my ſelfe the happieſt
vnder the Sun, deſiring to haue knowledge of you, if you
ſhall finde it expedient. At theſe wordes, Dramuſiande tooke
off his Helmet, when preſently they both ranne and imbraced
him: conceiuing ſuch an vnſpeakeable ioy for his company, that
their miſchance was now put cleane out of memorie, becauſe
they iudged it no ſhame, to be foyled at the handes of Dramuſiande:
of whom they requeſted, for what cauſe he remained in
that place. To ſatiſfie their deſires, he recited the whole occaſion
of his iourney, and how he made promiſe to Miragarda (after
he had conquered the Giant Almarol) to kéepe the Shield in
that place, vntill ſome Knight by his proweſſe could bring him
vnder his obeyſan
                           ••
                        . Certainly (ſaid Don Roſuel) then I perceiue
you intended to keepe it all your life time, becauſe I knowe
nothing but death can ouercome you. Truſt me (quoth y• prince
Gracian) I haue in times paſt, both extolled & verily belieued,
that my faire Claritia might be equall with any for her beautie,
but hauing now beh
                           •
                        ld this admirable Miragarda, I exempt
from minde all other, deſiring to accompliſh the meane that I
might doe her ſeruice. And credite me (ſaid Don Roſuel) I haue
ſo forgotten the loue I bare to my Lady, that if I depart not the
ſooner from hence, I ſhall fall into contempt, both of her, and
all other Ladies, giuing the onely laud to this péereleſſe Miragarda.
Then mounting on Horſebacke, he ridde away ſo faſt as

poſſible he could: in like maner the Prince Gracian poſſed preſently
after him, neither of them vſing any friendly departing
to the Giant Dramuſiande, who could not refrain from laughter,
to think on the weake ſtomacks of theſe two Princes.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LXIIII.
                     How Palmerin of England trauailing toward Conſtantinople,
laid him downe to ſleepe hard by a faire Caſtle, from
whence came foure Ladies, who carried him into the Caſtle.
And how one of the Ladies bearing him louing affection,
but he diſdaining her great good will, vrged her to
keepe him there as her priſoner.
                     
                        PAlmerin of England, after he had left the
Caſtle of the Giant Almarol, happened on
the frontiers of Nauarre, in the Dominion
of France, which he perceiued altogether to
be inhabited and gouerned by mighty Giants,
whoſe vnciuility of life, wrought many
cruel ſpoiles and villanous deeds in theſe
parts: among whom Palmerin behaued himſelfe ſo worthily,
that the effect of his déeds returned his due commendation. Cō
                        tinuing
his trauaile along the Coaſt, at laſt in a faire gréen valley
he eſpied a goodly and well fortified Caſtle, and neere vnto
it, was a faire largs Poole, well ſtored with choice of fiſh, where
the Prince alighted from his Horſe, to let him feede a while in
the paſture. In the meane time, he looking all about and could
ſée no body, that on a ſuddaine might come to endanger him, ſat
downe by the water ſide, the beholding wherof, droue many ſolemne
fancies out of his remembrance.
                     As he was about to take a little nap, his Miſtres Polinarda
approached his thoughtes, as alſo the remembrance of his

manifold courteſies, which he receiued while he remained at
Conſtantinople: ſo that ſome of theſe motions prouoked him
to good opinion of ioy, but other ſome to a number of heauie
lamentations, as eſpecially the ſharp command of his miſtres:
which being loath to breake, mad him to abſent himſelfe from
Conſtantinople, longer then otherwiſe hee would gladly haue
done.
                     In theſe thoughts hee fell into a ſound ſleepe, when foure
Damoſels came walking foorth of the Caſtell, who beholding
the Prince his chéekes all dewed with teares, and his eye lids
very redde with ouermuch wéeping, were all conſtrained to
great compaſſion. Then one of the Damoſels, being of rare
and excellent beautie, called for certaine of her ſeruants, who
with their helpe, caried the Prince into a faire Chamber in the
caſtel, cauſing his armes to be faſtened together with a chaine,
to the ende he might vſe no reſiſtance againſt them. When
he awaked, and found himſelfe in this great alteration, he was
ſo ouercome with griefe, that he knew not what to ſay: but the
Ladie bearing great affection to him, (at euery inſtant changed
colour, which witneſſed the ardent loue ſhée had conceiued
in her minde) at laſt made manifeſt the ſum of her deſire,
whereto Palmerin by no meanes would giue conſent. For,
being deſirous to ſhunne any occaſion, whereby hée might bée
thought diſloyal to his Lady, determined to depart from thence
without Horſe or Armour, onely to auoide her importunate
ſute.
                     This moued the Lady to ſuch extreame griefe, that ſhe violated
the bondes of Reaſon, whoſe limits duty had alwaies warned
her to kéep within: and ſéeing that neither tears nor intreatis
might mollifie the heart, ſhe commanded him to be brought
into her Chamber, where irons were made faſt about his legs,
and great ſpéeches giuen forth to terrifie him, becauſe he would
vſe no pittie to her outragious paſſions. Palmerin not eſtéeming
either her ſelfe or her words, bare greater affection to
clogging irons, then to all the amorous ſpéeches the Lady could
vſe: who at laſt turned hee hot loue into extreame hatred, ſo
that abſenting her ſelfe out of his companie, cauſed him to bée

vſed in very rigorous manner. But her crueltie had no long
time of laſting, for her woonted affectiō cauſed her to repent her
haſty fury, and in her mind ſhe thought to diſcharge the Prince,
ſéeking all meanes poſſible to baniſh him out of her memorie,
for which cauſe ſhe incloſed her ſelfe in her Chamber, labouring
both by examples and preſent proofe, to extinguiſh the furious
flames of her continuall Paſſions. But when ſhe ſaw nothing
would ſerue, but her griefe was driuen to an impoſſible cure, ſhe
concluded to kéepe the Prince in Priſon ſo long, that at length
ſhee would glut her ſelfe with his remembrance. Or elſe, at
laſt the Prine would be ſo wearie, that he not able any longer
to endure the cruell practiſes ſhe vſed, would repent him of his
ſo long deniall, and ſo bee enforced to accompliſh her amorous
deſſre. But Palmerin hauing already made faithful vowe of his
loue, by no torment or cruelty would be perſwaded to violate
his promiſe, to the no ſmall griefe of the Lady, who frequented
himſelfe ſtill with her woonted ſute, as alſo for his obſtinacy encreaſed her ſeuerall deuiſes of cruelty.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LXV.
                     How Don Florian remaining in the Court of England, made
ſuch entreatie on the behalfe of Orianda, and her ſiſters,
the Daughters of the Marqueſſe Beltamor, remaining in
the Caſtle of the Giant Calfurnien: that they were reſtored
into Kings fauour, and married to three noble Gentlemen
of his Court. And Don Florian departing out of England,
arriued at the Caſtle of the Giant Almarol, where he
entred the Combate with Dramuſiande, where ending
their ſtrife with great friendſhip, he departed accompanied
with Siluian, deſirous to finde his brother, the noble
Palmerin of England.
                     
                        
                        
                           DOn Florian of the Forreſt, of whome no
mention hath béene made, ſince the Prince
Palmerin departed out of England, ſtayed
a certaine time in the Court of the King
his Vncle, to intreate fauour for Orianda
and her Siſters, the Daughters of the
Marqueſſe Beltamor. For remembring
the great ſeruice they had done to him, at ſuch time as the giant
Calfurnien had wounded him ſo ſore: willing to diſcharge the
promiſe he made them at his departure, which might manifeſt
his honour, and redéeme them from that miſery wherin they remained,
approached the preſence of the King in this manner.
I haue alwayes heard my Soueraigne Lord and Vncle, that
laudable déedes ought to be recompenced with the like, and that
ingratitude and vnkinde dealing, ſhould euer be baniſhed from
the heartes of Princes, wherefore, fearing leaſt my ſelfe ſhould
be found faulty in ſuch a hainous crime. I ſhall deſire your gratious
furtherance in a cauſe, as ſhall preſent my duty, and your
owne honour.
                     It is ſo my good Lord, that at ſuch time as I imbarqued my
ſelfe from Greece, the tempeſt ouer-reacht me with ſuch a violent
meane, that our Ship attained the Coaſt of Ireland, where
I would needes goe on land, albeit both the Maſter, and all in
the Ship perſwaded me to the contrary. Being then on land,
ſuch was my Fortune that I met with the Giant Calfurnien,
whoſe ſtrength, although it was redoubted indeede, yet good hap
gaue me the honour of his death.
                     In this bloody fight, I receiued ſo many grieuous and dangerous
woundes, that I could no way haue eſcaped the death
my ſelfe, had not three Ladies, Daughters to the Marqueſſe
Beltamor, (whome this cruell Giant kept there perforce) vſed
ſuch honourable and goodly prouiſion, that to their no ſmall
labour and trauaile, I recouered a ſound and perfect eſtate.
Aſſuring you my Lord, that I not onely maſte high eſtimation

of their friendly courteſie: but alſo confeſſe my ſelfe indebted
to them for euer, to ſpend my heart blood in their gratious
ſeruice.
                     Wherefore remembring their infortune, that for their Fathers
offence they are diſherited, I promiſed to vſe ſuch interceſſion
to your Grace, as they ſhould be reſtored to their loſt
patrimonies. In the meane time they liue in hope, and I expect
your wonted noble forgiueneſſe on their behalfe.
                     The King perceiuing the deſire of Florian, with the great
friendſhip he had receiued by theſe Ladies, returned him preſently
this auſwere. Indéede I confeſſe, the Marqueſſe their
Father, both intended and accompliſhed a treaſonable enterpriſe
againſt me and my ſtate: yet would I not that his daughters
being ignorant and innocent of their Fathers crime, ſhall
ſuffer puniſhment for his offence. And ſince he hath ſuſtained
Law according to deſert, and his whole poſſeſſions are fallen
into our hands, we returne them to the vſe and profite of the
Damoſels, in recompence of the friendly fauour you haue receiued
at their hands. And for their more honour, I will that
the eldeſt of them be married to Don Roſiran my Couſin, and
your great friend Argolant, ſhal not refuſe to marry the ſecond:
as for the third, we reſtore her to the Marquiſate of her father,
and will ioyne her in marriage with Beltamor, Brother to the
forenamed Don Roſiran.
                     
                     
                        Don Florian kiſſing his highneſſe hand, in token of the vnſpeakable
pleaſure hée receiued at the Kings wordes, by the
meanes of Don Edward his noble Father, ſent a poaſt with al
ſpéede to bring the Ladies to the Court, as wel to ſée the Kings
will accompliſhed in effect, as to make proofe of his good will habare
to the Ladies.
                     When theſe Ladies were come, end euery thing in due and
decent order finiſhed, Don Florian tooke leaue of the King his
vncle, and alſo Don Edward, & the Princeſſe Flerida, becauſe
he would try the aduentures at the Caſtle of Miragarda, whoſe
beautie was ſo renowned thorow the whoſe world.
                     With great griefe they ſuffered him to depart, ſo that when
in trauaile, he had paſſed the Court of the King Redinde, hee

arriued at the Caſtel of Almarol, when Dramuſiande had euen
then vanquiſhed thrée Knights, whereof one was the valiant
Pompides, which made Florian ſomewhat abaſhed, becauſe he
was ignorant that it was the gentle Dramuſiande. Wherefore,
being deſirous to hazard himſelfe in the Combate, he prepared
his Speare to encounter with him, which Dramuſiande
ſeeing (not knowing him to be Florian of the Deſart, the ſon
of his deare and louing friend Don Edward, againſt whom he
would not haue entred the fight in any caſe) to ſatiſfie the will
of his Lady Miragarda, he met ſo ſtrongly with him, that
they were both diſmounted to the earth. Vp againe they roſe,
and fell to it very violently with their Swordes, in ſo much
as Dramuſiande would not beaſt of his bargaine, nor Florian
bragge of the choiſe he had made, for that the Combate was ſo
dangerous between them, as it was not to be iudged who was
likeſt of victory.
                     
                        Miragarda leaning in her window, extolled maruelouſly
the hautie valure of them both, ſo that excepting the Combate
of the Triſtfull Knight with Palmerin, ſhe gaue the onely commendation
to this ſingular fight, which continued with ſuch
outrage betweene them, that they were conſtrained to retire, to
take a little breathing. Dramuſiande féeling the Proweſſe of
his aduerſary, ſuppoſed him to be Florian of the Deſart, and
therefore concluded many times to diſcouer himſelfe, without
bringing their Combat to any ende. But fearing leaſt it ſhould
be reported, that he gaue ouer for want of courage to maintain
his quarrell, changed his opinion, in that hée was ſo deſirous,
to finiſh the intent of the faire Miragarda, to whom ſecretly
he began in this manner. My déere Miſtreſſe, I know that the
merite of my trauailes, ſhall bée to burie their commendation
in the pi
                           •
                        te of obliuion, by you that little regard them, yet is it
great and inſupportable griefe, to him that is ſo vnkindly requited.
Neuertheleſſe, ſo great a conqueſt haue you gained of me,
and my whole endeuours lincked to fulfil your good liking, that
I can no waies contrary what you haue ordained, but remaine
more affectioned to doe you honour, then al my actions can merite
your fauour. Regard then the Knight againſt whom I

maintaine your cauſe, and the fore
                           •
                         of his deliuerer attempts,
will witneſſe in what neede I ſtand of your friendly furtherance,
which I beſéech you not to denie him at this preſence,
who in faith and loyaltie, is more yours then his owne, leſt my
enemie winning the victorie, caſt in my téeth, that he hath
brought me vnder in beholding your beautie.
                     
                        Don Florian deſirous to finiſh his enterpriſe, came and charged
Dramuſiande the ſecond time, ſo that Almarol debating
with Miragarda, and Lardemia, eſtéemed maruellouſly the valour
of the Giant, in kéeping the Shield, as alſo the knight that
offered him reſiſtance. Siluian ſtanding in doubt that Dramuſiande
would be ſlaine, which would be great griefe to his
Lord and maſter, came to the Eſquire of Don Florian, whom
hee preſently knew, which made him very ioyfull, beléeuing
now verily, that he ſhould ſaue the liues of them both: wherefore
he came to Florian with theſe wordes. I deſire you Sir, to
paſſe no further in this doubtfull fight, for he whom you labour
againſt, is Dramuſiande your truſtie and loyall friend. Siluian
had no ſooner ſpoken theſe wordes, but that they preſentlie
threw downe their Swords, embracing one another with ſuch
gentle ſalutations, as though they had been the greateſt f
                           •
                        iends
in the world. Florian was greatly amazed, to ſée Siluian there
without his maſter, wherefore hee demaunded of him how all
things had hapned: but when he vnderſtood the loſſe of his brother,
hee remained in griefe beyond all perſwaſion, ſo that he
determined to goe ſtraight to Conſtantinople, and if he failed of
him there he would ſéeke all the world ouer, but he would find
him againe.
                     So taking leaue of Dramuſiande, accompanied with Siluian,
he departed from thence, not deſiring to ſée the faire Miragarda,
leaſt he ſhould be brought into like opinion, as was the gentle
Giant Dramuſiande. Not farre from thence, hee met with
Pompides, lamenting very heauily that hee had been ſo vanquiſhed:
then preſenting himſelfe to beare the Prince company,
they imbraced very courteouſly, and ſo ridde on loouingly
and friendlie together, deſirous to meete with ſome

one to cure their wounds, that they might make the more expedition,
in ſéeking after the renowned Prince Palmerin of England.
                     
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LXVI.
                     How Don Florian and Pompides, being cured of the wounds
they had receiued, in maintaining the Combat againſt
Dramuſiande, arriued at the Caſtle of the Princeſſe Arnalte,
who was the Lady that kept the Prince Palmerin
priſoner. And how in diſcourſing with her, about the faire
Miragarda, they at laſt got Palmerin with them, and ſo
departed from thence.
                     
                        THe Giant Dramuſiande being very ſore
wounded, was carried in to the Caſtle of the
Giant Almarol, where as great care was
vſed to him as might be poſſible: but ſo dangerous
were his hurts, that of a good while
after he was not able to endure the trauaile
of armor. In which time, Miragarda would
not ſuffer Almarol to enter the fight any more, becauſe ſhe had
ſéene him thrée times vanquiſhed: ſo that many knights comming
thither to try the aduenture, were faine to ſtay while Dramuſiande
was recouered, or elſe to returne and loſe their labor.
                     
                        Don Florian and Pompides iourneying ſtill together, happened
into the houſe of an ancient knight, whoſe ſkill was very
great in the ſcience of Chirurgery, where they paſſed away the
time, in diſcourſing the hauty aduentres enterpriſed, at the
Caſtle of Almarol, on the behalf of the rare and excellent Princeſſe
Miragarda, to whom Pompides attributed high commendations,

though he were maruailouſly offended at his infortunate
foyle.
                     When they had well recouered their ſtrengths againe, yéelding
great thanks vnto theis gentle Hoſt, they departed from
thence, intending to iourney toward Conſtantinople, thinking
there to find the noble and couragious Knights, who had worthily
prooued themſelues, as the onely and perfect flower of all
Chiualry. Wherevpon they took ſhipping at the next Hauen,
and Fortune fauouring their honourable intent, in few dayes
brought them before the Caſtle, wherein the noble Palmerin of
England remained Priſoner. Staying to reſt themſelues a
while, they beheld a Damoſell mounted on a white Palfray,
accompanied with two Eſquires, to come foorth of the Caſtle,
to whom the Knights preſently tooke their way, and with a
friendly gréeting, requeſted to whom that goodly Caſtle belonged,
it their demand might be no hindrance to her haſty affaires:
whereto the Damoſell made this anſwere.
                     Albeit Gentlemen, the buſines wherin I muſt preſently imploy
my ſelfe, are matters of waight and great importance, yet
the gentle demaunds both of your ſpéech and outward behauiour,
hath commanded me to ſtay til I haue ſatiſfied your deſire.
This Caſtle was firſt founded, at the commandement of the
noble & couragious Prince Bazelie, ſometime the king of Nauer
                              •
                           ed
he being now deceaſed, the Princeſſe Arnalte his faire
Daughter, is come to unhabite this ancient and famous Manſion.
For ſhe being vnwilling to gouerne her people, by reaſon
ſhe is but yong of yeeres, as alſo vnmarried, committed the guiding
of ſo waighty a charge, to ſuch honourable perſons in her
Court, as ſhee knew both vertueus, wiſe and diſcrete, to vſe
Iuſtice to the vſurping enemie, and equitie to her louing ſubiects
in generall. During the time ſhe hath remained here, report
hath blazed abroad the aduentures finiſhed at the caſtle of
the Giant Almarol, in the maintenance of the beauty of faire
Miragarda, whoſe ſtately magnificence being ſo highly cōmended,
is the cauſe as ſhe ſuppoſeth, that ſhée is not beloued of a
knight, who remaineth in the Caſtle, and to whom ſhe heareth
great loue and affection.
                     
                        
On this beliefe, ſhe hath cōmanded me to goe ſée the Princeſſe
Miragarda, whereby ſhe may be certified, if her beauty that is
ſo highly extolled, may ſurmount that wherewith nature hath
ſo plentifully adorned her ſelfe. Which if it ſo fall out, that the
Princeſſe Miragarda carry the credit from her, then is ſhe minded
to deliuer the Knight, and he ſhall remaine no longer her
priſoner: but if my Lady prooue ſuperiour to the canonized ſpectacle,
then know I ſhe will put the knight to death, conſidering
the iniury he hath offred her, who hath ſo much abaſed her ſelfe,
as to beare an vngrateful perſon ſuch affection, of whom ſhe can
gather no knowledge or acquaiatance. Don Florian well
pondering the Damoſelles wordes, and being ſomewhat pleaſantly
diſpoſed withall, demanded if the beauty of her miſtreſſe
might compare with the indifferent condition ſhee had of her
owne. Mruſt me Sir (quoth ſhe) if you finde any thing in me,
that deſerued to beare the title of beautie, when you ſhall
chance to haue a ſight of my Lady, you will ſay you haue made
a very ſimple compariſon. Fayre Damoſell (ſaide Florian)
would you followe my counſell, you ſhould here make ſtay
your haſty iourney: for credite me, Miragarda is much more
beautiful then you. Lady (quoth Pompides) let not theſe words
ſéeme to ſtay you from your Miſtreſſe commaund; but procéede
in your enterpriſe, and you ſhall ſée that, which neither of vs is
worthy to vſe any talke of: ſo ſhal you ſaue the life of the knight
whom ſhe loueth, and certifie your Lady with a certaine report,
as for what it hath pleaſed this Knight to ſay, his
wordes are but ieſting, for he neuer ſawe the faire Miragarda.
It ſéemes then Sir Knight (anſwered the Damoſell) that you
haue béene affectioned to the faire view of this Princeſſe, that
you can ſo readily ſtand for a witneſſe, in the behalf of her beautie.
I deſire you therefore, to returne with me to the Princeſſe
my Lady, ſo ſhall you ſaue me a iourney, in that you are able to
ſpeake vpon iudgement, where perhaps I might ſtray by vſing
affection. So alighting from their Horſes, they went altogether
into the Caſtle, when the Damoſell gaue her Lady to vnderſtand,
that ſhe had met with two Knights, who were lately
come from the Caſtle of Almaroll, and could at large informe

her, concerning the beauty of the faire Miragarda. The Princeſſe
Arnalte being very glad of theſe newes, cauſed a fayre
Chamber to be prouided for the two knights, where when they
had diſarmed themſelues, and taking a little eaſe, being wearie
with trauaile, ſhée came and courteouſly welcommed them to
her Caſtell, ſhewing all the commodities that might vrge them
to pleaſure, and walking forth to the Pondes ſide, ſitting them
downe vnder the Cipreſſe Trees, in a very pleaſant ſhadow, ſhe
began in this manner.
                     Gentlemen, albeit I am ignorant how you can accept my
wordes, or in what manner it ſhall pleaſe you to ſhape mee an
anſwere, yet will I not be ſo timerous, but that without any
ill ſuſpect I may craue ſuch leaue, as to cut off a doubt, which
hath of long time been concealed. At ſuch time as the King my
Father, who gouerned all this countrey, had finiſhed the courſe
of his terreſtriall time, I betooke my ſelfe to liue ſolitarie in
this habitation, till the Gouernors of my Kingdome had choſen
me ſuch a Phéere, as might in all reſpects ſatiſfie the will of my
late deceaſed Lord and Father. But Fortune, the enemy to al
mine actions, permitted an vnknown knight to happen to this
Caſtell: whom I made ſuch choiſe of, that he was the onelie
man I loued, becauſe I neuer liked any but him, ſo that according
to my affection, I concluded him as Lord, both of mee
and all my Princely poſſeſſions. But hee neither regarding
bountie nor beauty, applieth himſelfe ſo diſdainful to my gentle
deſire, that he rather taketh pleaſure in irons, wherewith I
haue charged him, then in the Princely offers whereto I haue
chaſen him. And although his great deſpiſing me is an inſupportable
torment, yet haue I diſſembled my diſquietnes, ſuppoſing
that his affection to ſome other hath ouercharged his wittes, ſo
that he could not perceiue the honour wherewith I preſented
him. And yet this opinion I vſed fondly with my ſelfe, that no
ladies beauty was ſufficient to win him from me, the Princeſſe
Miragarda onely excepted, whoſe report filleth euery Climate,
with extolling her benefit. Yet becauſe I had ſome doubt of her,
I commanded one of my Damoſels to take her iourney thither,
to ſee if my beautie might not ſtand equall with hers, if ſo

be, ſhe were onely perfect without compariſō, then had I determined
to ſet the knight at libertie: but if I were found to deſerue
as high a title as ſhee, then would I reward him with puniſhment,
according as his diſdainfull nature did worthily deſerue.
Horian well noting the proud minde of Arnalte, determined
to cauſe her abide in her vaine opinion, as thus.
                     Truly Madam, I would with you not to vſe any other torment
to the Knight, then to let him perſiſt in his obſtinate and
p
                           •
                        ruerſe minde: for in the ende, the puniſhment of his owne
follie will be all, when himſelfe ſhall lament the ſtate of his
loſſe. And hereupon aſſure your ſelfe, that yt Princeſſe Miragarda
is as faire as ſhe is famed, yet are you very li
                           •
                        le beholding to
the Knight, conſidering that if both your features were liuely
to bee ſeene in one vniforme, it might hardly be iudged which
ſhould be ſooneſt abaſed. The Princeſſe Arnalte, was very wel
pleaſed with theſe words of Floriā, & ſtedfaſtly ſetting her coū
                        tenance
vpon him, euen as lightly ſhe grounded her loue on
Palmerin, ſo according to the mutability of an vnſtedfaſt womā,
ſhe began to gr
                           •
                        w in as great good liking of him, vtterly aboliſhing
Pelmerin out of memory, as though ſhe had neuer ſeene
him in all her life. Wherefore, being in euery part repleniſhed
with an vnſpeakeable ioy, ſhe tooke each of the knights by the
hand, and returned with them into the Caſtell, where againſt
their comming, the Table was ready couered, but before they
ſat downe, Florian deſired to ſée the knight, at whoſe requeſt,
he was immediatly ſent for. But when Florian and Pompides
had a ſight of him, they were not able to conceale the great ioy
they ſuſtained, eſpecially Siluian, who as they imbraced his
Maſter, he caſt himſelfe at his féet, being neuer ſo glad in all
his life, as he was at this preſent. Which made Arnalte ſo amazed,
that ſhe wiſhed they were al departed her Caſtle. Wel,
downe they ſat, and were feaſted with honour and great reuerence,
the Supper being ended, Palmerin and Pompides were
l
                           •
                        dged in one Chamber together, and a very faire Chāber was
prouided for the Prince Florian, to whom ſhe gaue ſuch friendlie
entertainement, that they ſtaied there the ſpace of eight
daies. Then Florian and the other Knights would néedes depart,

ieauing the Princeſſe very penſiue and ſorrowfull, to depart
from his company ſhe deſired ſo faine, but he made her promiſe,
that ſo ſoone as he could, he would returne to her. Hereon
they all departed merrily away, the Princeſſe Arnalte greatly
commending her good fortune, in that ſhe hoped of the Prince
Florians returne, when ſhe had no doubt to win his heart, but
he being a litle out of her ſight, was fallen into ſuch obliuion of
her, that he made a ieſt to his brother & Pompides, of the great
fauour Arnalte had beſtowed on him.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LXVII.
                     How Palmerin of England, Don Florian his brother, and
Pompides, being departed from the Caſtle of the Princeſſe
Arnalte, met the faire Florenda, daughter to Arnedes
King of France, at whoſe requeſt, Florian ran with twelue
Knights, who kept the Princeſſe company in her prograce.
And how during the time of the Iuſt, a Damoſell came and
intreated Palmerin, to haue his helpe in the finiſhing of a
ſtrange aduenture: with whom he preſently departed, and
after the Iuſt was ended, Pompides and the Prince Florian
rode after Palmerin, to giue him aide if hee ſtoode in
neede of any.
                     
                        WHen theſe thrée Knights were thus departed
from the Princeſſe Arnalte, Palmerin
by the way, r
                           •
                        de with Siluian aſide, to
whom hee expreſſed the great perpleritie
wherein he remained, for the loue hee bare
his faire Lady and Miſtreſſe Polinarda: to
whom he feared to approach, becauſe of the
cōmandement ſhe gaue him, at ſuch time as he departed from
Conſtantinople.
                     
                     
                        
Whereto Siluian vſed this kind of perſwaſion, what ſhe had
giuen him in angry ſpéeches, was rather to try his conſtancy,
then to mooue him conceiue any opinion of diſcourteſie. But
Palmerin would hardly giue any credance to his wordes: becauſe
he ſuppoſed we had heard already, that he could not vanquiſh
the Triſtfull Knight, entring the Combate on the controuerſie,
betwéene the beauty of her and the Princeſſe Miragarda
which oppreſſed his minde with many grieuous thoughts, and
was much diſpleaſant to Florian and Pompides, who were altogither
ignorant in the cauſe of his heauineſſe.
                     When they had ridden for a few certaine dayes, they came at
laſt into a valley in the Kingdome of France: where vnder a
fine ſhadowe of Trées, they perceiued foure faire Tents erected,
whereupon was placed twelue goodly Shieldes. But that
which was moſt to their admiration, was a braue company
of Ladies, who diſported themſelues there vnder the gréene
Trées.
                     The Knightes reioycing to finde company in ſuch a ſolitarie
place, betooke themſelues preſently toward the Tentes, but on
a ſuddaine came foorth of one of the Tents, a Knight attyred in
a very faire Armour, all thicke beſet with golden Glaſſes, who
hauing put on his Helmet, mounted on his Stéede, and tooke a
ſtrong Lance in his hand, preparing himſelfe couragiouſly to
enter the Iuſte. When Palmerin perceiued the intent of the
Knight, he cauſed his company to ſtay a while, when preſently
an Eſquire addreſſed himſelfe from the Ladyes, ſaluting the
Princes in this manner. God ſaue you Gentlemen, Florenda
Daughter to the famous King of France, who abideth in theſe
Tents with her courtly attendants, by me gréeteth you in all
courteſies poſſible, giuing you to vnderſtād, that delighting her
ſelfe to ride in Prograce, ſhe ſtayeth here in this pleaſant valley,
til the heat of the day be ſomwhat more declined. And for as
much as ſhe hath ſeene in you, the perfect appearance of knightly
and worthy behauiour ſhe deſireth, if you will fauour her requeſt
ſo much, that you would breake a fewe Lances with certaine
of her Knights, the fulfilling whereof will cauſe her to reward
you with all honourable thankes.
                     
                        
Truſt me (ſaid Palmerin) we all deſire to fulfill any occaſion,
that may be found pleaſant to the Princeſſe Florenda, and ſeeing
it is her pleaſure to ſee vs Iuſte, certifie her, that we remaine
at her gratious cōmand. No ſooner had the Eſquire deliuered
his anſwere, but the Princeſſe Florendos Knights came
foorth of the Tentes, when Don Florian hauing obtained leaue
for the firſt Iuſte, encountred the firſt Knight with ſuch hautie
courage, that he ſent him to meaſure his length on the earth. In
this manner he ſerued fiue without breaking his Lance, but
on the ſixt he ſheuered it in pieces, wherefore Pompides deliuered
him his Launce, being very glad to ſee him ſpéede ſo luckily.
The Princeſſe ſomewhat mooued, to ſee her Knights foyled ſo
faſt by one, exhorted the other to make better proofe of their Chiualrie,
but in the meane while, a Damoſell came croſſing the
valley on a blacke Palfray, and yeelding her ſelfe at the foote of
the renowned Palmerin, began to vtter theſe ſpeeches.
                     I deſire you Sir Knight, for the honour you haue receiued in
your knightly déedes of Armes, at this inſtant to conceiue ſuch
courage as to followe me, & you ſhall receiue the greateſt praiſe
in giuing me ayde, as in all your life time you neuer gained the
like. Palmerin, who bare Armes only to ſuccor the weake eſtate
of the diſtreſſed, deſired Pompides to kéepe his Brother Florian
company, not fayling to ayde him in finiſhing that noble enterpriſe,
and he would not be long before he returned to them againe,
ſo giuing a Conge to the Ladies, he rede away in all the
haſt with the Damoſell.
                     One of the Ladies belonged to the princeſſe Florenda, ſéeing
Palmerin to depart on ſuch a ſuddaine, came to Pompides with
theſe wordes. Truely Sir, it ſéemeth you deſerue not to beare
Armour, or that you are afraide it ſhould be too much bruiſed,
that ſuffer your Companion to depart alone, not knowing the
miſhap of the Damoſell, or the hard Fortune that may hap to
attach the Knight. Lady (anſwered Pompides) the Gentlewoman
is in the gouernmēt of ſo good a knight, as I dare awarrant
ſhe ſhall haue little cauſe to feare, but becauſe you ſhall net
account me of ſuch cowardiſe. I will preſently direct my courſe
after him, rather to behold his hardy pr
                           •
                        weſſe, then to thinke

he ſhould ſtand in néede of my helpe. Wherevpon he tooke his
leaue of the Lady, & endeuoured himſelfe that way the Prince
was gone before him, but he had ſo far outreacht him, that Pompides
could not ouertake him a good while after. Florian hauing
diſmounted eight of the Kuights, could deale with no more becauſe
his laace was broken, but one of the ladies came and preſented
him with another, deſiring him to breake that one lance
for her ſake. Florian thanked the Lady very courteouſly, promiſing
to employ that lance, as a Preſent come from the hands of
her, to whom he would aduenture his life in ſeruice: which to
witneſſe, he prepared himſelf againſt the ninth knight, who hauing
a good opinion of himſelfe, began in this order to ſpeake to
the Prince. I haue a great deſire, ſir Knight, to try your valour
which is of ſuch eſtimation, being in hope that I ſhall manifeſt
that to you, which you haue not yet ſeene. Thus concluding his
ſpéeches, and caſting his eye vpon Carmelia, the handmayde to
the princeſſe Florenda, whom he had choſen as chiefe miſtreſſe
of his heart: he couched his ſpeare againſt the Prince Florian,
thinking to honour his Saint with his ouerthrow. But reckoning
without his Hoſt, he was faine to make a new account,
and poſſeſſe the place on the ground himſelfe, being now as ſorrowfull
for his ill Fortune, as he was pleaſantly diſpoſed before
he entred the Iuſt. Hauing thus vnhorſed them all the laſt
Knight came and tooke his turne, being the valiant Germayne
of Orleance, who had vndertaken the charge to conduct the
Princeſſe, being her affectionate and loyal friend: he bare in his
ſhield, a Tyger bearing a white Lyon in pieces, and not knowing
the Prince Florian, to reuenge the diſhonour his companions
had receiued, encountred the Prince with ſuch courage,
that at the third attempt he was enforced to keepe his friendes
company, not a little diſpleaſed to be foyled in the preſence of
her, to whom he had vewed the honour of all his victories. The
Princeſſe ſéeing the Iouſting was finiſhed, deſired the Prince
that ſhe might ſee his face, as alſo to report his name, & of whēce
he was: at whoſe requeſt he alighted, and hauing taken off his
Helmet, deſiring her pardon, offered in humilitie to kiſſe her
hand, but ſhe would not ſuffer him ſo to do. Germaine of Orleance,
                        
who had knowledge of him preſently, came and imbrac
                           •
                        
him in very c
                           •
                        urteous manner: and turning to the Princeſſe
Florenda, he vttered his ſpéeches on this wiſe. Faire Miſtres,
I account it no diſhonour to be vanquiſhed by this Knight, for
that in all his attempts he euer remaineth victor. When the
Princeſſe vnderſtood, that he was Florian of the Deſart, ſomwhat
allied to her by kindred, ſhe came running to him, and imbraced
him with a maruellous proteſtation of exceeding loue.
And then commanding the Tents to be taken downe, becauſe
it was the time of her departure, ſhee deſired Florian to accompany
her to the French Court, where ſhe might do him more
honour, then ſhe was able in that ſolitarie place. But Florian
deſired pardō, for at that time he could not ſatiſfie her deſire, becauſe
he would follow the Lady, who allured his Brother and
Pompides, to ſtray from him in that manner. The Princeſſe
vnderſtanding, y• the knight, who went with the lady, was the
famous Palmerin, took Florian by the hand, with theſe words.
Now truſt me ſir Florian, it grieueth me that I was not ſo fortunate
as to know him in the time he remained here, being the
knight that I alwaies deſired to ſée: wherefore I deſire you to
make haſte after him, and at your returne to paſſe thorow the
kingdome of my father, that I may do him the ſeruice my hart
deſireth. Then the lady, whoſe words procured Pompides to depart
after Palmerin, came to the prince Florian, with theſe ſpeeches.
Sir, I would faine haue knowledge of the knight, who
hath betaken himſelfe to trauaile after my Lord your Brother,
deſiring you to certifie him, the ſorow I conceiue for the words
I gaue him. Faire lady (anſwered Florian) he is ſuch a knight,
as I am ſure will bée ready at all times, to employ himſelfe in
your ſeruice: he is named Pompides, my brother and euer approoued
good friend, I humbly pray you (ſaid the lady) that you
would excuſe me to him, in the greateſt offence I haue vngently
offred. Florian promiſed he would accompliſh her will, ſo taking
leaue of the Princeſſe Florenda, and all her noble company,
he poſted apace that way as the Prince Palmerin tooke,
ſtanding in great feare, leſt any miſchance ſhould happen vnto
him.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. LXVIII.
                     How the Damoſell hauing brought Palmerin from the faire
Florenda, conducted him to the Caſtle of the Duke of
Ronſillion, where he enterpriſed the Combat, to redeeme
three Ladies, whom the Duke kept as priſoners there, to
put them to death.
                     
                        GReat haſt made the Lady that conducted
Palmerin, all the way vſing no words, till
they came to a litle village in the Dukedom
of Ronſillion, where ſhe deſired the Prince
to ſtay a while, and ſhe would go in the village,
where ſhée would not ſtay but returne
to him preſently. In the meane while, Palmerin
tooke off his Helmet, and ſat him downe to reſt him, becauſe
he was ſomewhat weary with trauaile, when the Damoſell
returning, and beholding him to be ſo young and beautifull,
ſhe deſpaired with herſelfe, that he was not able to fulfill
her earneſt deſire, for which cauſe ſhe preſently fell into teares.
                     
                        Palmerin not knowing the cauſe of her ſorrow, deſired her
that ſhe would expreſſe it to him, whereupon ſhe began to anſwere
him thus. Alaſſe Sir Knight, no other cauſe haue I to
lament in this order, but that I am the onely infortunate woman
in the world, who haue trauelled through the whole kingdome
of France, thinking to find a valiant and renowned
Knight, but now I perceiue I am greatly deceiued. For when
I thought to intreat the Princeſſe Florenda to giue me one of
her moſt ſtrong and hardy Knights, I finding you in the company
of thoſe, who vnhorſed her Lords with great valiancie, I
had ſo good an opinion of you, that I intreated you to follow
me, not rehearſing the perillous danger. I ſhould bring you too.
So that now being at the place, where you ſhould put your

déedes in proofe, I finde you ſo young and of ſuch ſmall force,
that I am voyde of all hope to haue any good ſucceſſe. Faire Lady
(anſwered Palmerin) I ſhall not faile to doe as much as my
power will permitte, and perhappes cauſe you to haue a better
opinion of me, then I ſee as yet you are willing to vſe. Therefore
I deſire you to tell me, to what intent you haue cauſed m
                           •
                        
to trauaile with you, and doubt not but I will aduenture my
life, to doe you ſeruice in what thing ſoeuer. O Sir (quoth ſhe)
how happy were I, if the effect of your deedes would agrée with
your wordes, for in this Village there remaineth three Ladies
Priſoners, the Daughters of one of the moſt noble Lordes in
this Countrey, who becauſe their Father would not giue them
in Mariage, to the Duke of Ronſilion and his two Brethren,
they found the meanes to murther him, and theſe three Ladies
they kept here in a Caſtle, to whom they haue graunted the
commodity, to finde a knight that can preuaile in the Combat,
and then they ſhall be reſtored to their former libertie. So that
this is the prefixed and appointed day, when the Combat muſt
firſt be tried, againſt Bramerin the chiefe gentleman belonging
to the Duke, and one of the moſt renowned knights in all this
Countrey. If it chance that he be vanquiſhed, then muſt you
hazard your ſelf, againſt Cliaſter and Alfarin his two kinſmen,
yet all theſe being conquere, will not returne this victorie, for
then muſt you deale with the Duke and his two brethren, who
are knowen to be ſuch ſtoute and noble Knightes, that no one
will conceiue the courage to deale with them. Yet muſt the Ladies,
this day finde a knight to auenge their quarrell, or elſe the
Duke hath ſworne they ſhall looſe their heades, and to put the
Ladies in ſome hope, I went and told them I had brought a
knight, who would vndertake to deale in their cauſe, which the
Duke no ſooner hearing, but hee began to be greatly offended.
Surely ſaide Palmerin, I muſt néedes venture my ſelfe again
thoſe, that will take vpon them to vſe cruelty to any faire Lady,
and will alwaies diſallow, that a King or Prince ſhould ſuffer
any iniury, to be vſed to a Lady within his Dominions, and in
token that my deeds ſhall agrée with my words, I will goe preſently
to the abiding of the Duke, where I will inuay ſo much

againſt him, that his owne wicked will ſhall worke his ouerthrow.
The Damoſell perceiuing the noble minde of Palmerin,
and the little doubt he had to deale with his enemy, vſed better
affectition to him now thē ſhe had before, whereupon ſhe broght
him to the Caſtle where the Duke made his abode, to ſée the
ende of this noble enterpriſe.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LXIX.
                     How Palmerin being come to the Caſtle, entred the fight on
the behalfe of the three Ladies, wherein hee vanquiſhed
Bramerin, and ſlew Cliaſtar & Alfarin. And how he fought
with the Duke and his two brethren, againſt whom hee
preuailed, and reſtored the Ladies.
                     
                        THe Prince and the Gentlewoman being
come to the Caſtle, where where were aſſembled
a great multitude of people to ſée
the Combate, the drawe-Bride was let
downe by the Dukes commaundement,
when Palmerin prepared to enter the Caſtle,
but Bramarin being prouided, and ſeeing
his enemy before his face, came vnto
him with theſe wordes. Abide Sir Knight, and before you approach
any farther, you muſt deale with me: but I belieue you
haue made ſuch an ill bargaine, that when you ſee your ware,
you will not bragge of your peny worthes. Truſt me Sir (anſwered
Palmerin) how euer it happen, I muſt hold me content,
but I am of this opinion, that to whom the right belongeth,
to them will returne the beſt aduantage: and therefore I am
fully determined to the fight, becauſe I feare I ſhall lacke daylight
to finiſh mine enterpriſe. Syr, ſayde the Knight, you ſhall
not néede to complaine on the lacke of time, for I warrant you
wee ſhall ende, and that right ſoone: at leaſt wiſe, if ſo be that
I chance to faile, you ſhall deale with ſuch fellowes in the

Caſtle, as will be loth to prolong the time with you.
                     So giuing ſcope to their Horſes, they met with their ſpeares
ſo nobly together, that Bramerin was throwne to the ground,
void of any féeling, which Palmerin perceiuing, alighted from
his Horſe, and ſet his Sword to his throate with theſe words.
Yéeld Varlet, and ſweare henceforth neuer to iniury any oppreſſed
Lady, or by my Sword, thou ſhalt die the death. Bramerin
ſéeing his life to ſtand in ſuch a ieopardy, deferred not to fulfill
his deſire. When Palmerin mounting on Horſeback again,
entred the Caſtle, and in the Court eſpied Chaſter and Alfarin,
each of them in a very faire gréene Armour, thicke beſet with
Azure flowers, who when they beheld Palmeria, they ran both
at once againſt him very fiercely, but with his Sword hee ſaluted
one of them ſo ſoundlie on the head, that he made him ſure
enough for doing any more harme. Which his fellow perceiuing,
came & behaued himſelfe with very great courage againſt
the Prince, but in the ende, Palmerin brought him vnder his obeyſance,
when demaunding if he would yeeld, he made anſwer
no: becauſe he thought ſome would come to his reſkew, but
Palmerin ſéeing him ſo obſtinate, failed not to ſend his head from
his ſhoulders. Al this while, he was ſo happy to eſcape without
any hurt, whereupon he came to the gentlewoman, and aſked if
there were any thing els, wherin ſhe would haue him to imploy
his ſeruice. Certainly ſir (quoth ſhe) I ſee no danger can withdraw
your coruage, but now you muſt hazard your ſelfe, againſt
the Duke & his Brethren: and their vſe is to Combat aboue in
the Caſtell, where I pray God to ſend you as fortunate ſucceſſe,
as hitherto you haue had againſt theſe iii. knights, in hope wherof,
I will not leaue your company, but be partner of al the Combats
you ſhall try, to deliuer theſe three diſtreſſed Ladies. After
the Gentlewoman had thus concluded her talk, ſhe ſhewed him
the ſtaires, which he ought to aſcend, where he might find the
Duke, and his brethren, when Palmerin commanding Siluian
to ſtay his comming without, tooke his ſword and went vp,
till at laſt he came into a very faire Hall, where he beheld three
Ladies ſitting attyred all in blacke, and endued with ſuch ſingular
beauty, that he greatly lamented their vngentle oppreſſion.
                     
                        
He had not long ſtood beholding them, but he perceiued thrée
Knightes very well armed to come before him: and to the Ladies,
one of them began in this manner. Faire Ladies, why
ſhould you procure ſo great miſfortune to your ſelues, and alſo
labour to worke our ruine and deſtruction? you are the cauſe
our three knights haue béen ſo cruelly abuſed, whoſe deathes
I entend to reuenge ſo ſharpely, and your liues ſhall ſatiſfie
part of our loſſe, wherat your Champion ſhall be but little pleaſed,
and we not with all this fully ſatisfied. The Duke who
ſpake theſe words, came from the Ladies accompanied with
his Brethren, bearing all one manner of deuiſe in their ſhields,
which was Cupid chaſed away, leauing his Bow and Arrowes
all bloody, and broken in peeces, the Duke aduanced himſelfe
to Palmerin, on this wiſe. Sir knight, ſuffiſe your ſelfe with the
ſlaughter of my knights, and yeelde your ſelfe friendly into my
hands, for ſurely it would bee to my great griefe, to bée the
death of ſo good a Knight, whereto Palmerin ſhaped his anſwer.
Sir, thing not to abuſe me, albeit I am in place, where
you ſuppoſe you may command me, for I am come to no ſuch
ende, but rather to conſtraine you to vſe recompence to theſe ladies,
whom you haue ſo highly offended, then for any fauour I
ſeeke at your hands. With that the Duke and his Brethren
ſtrooke freely at Palmerin, and he on the other ſide charged them
couragiouſly, the Ladies weeping, deſtred God in the force of
the Prince, to ſhew ſome fauour and louing regard vnto them,
for they well perceiued how dangerous the fight was, eſpecially
on his ſide to contend againſt three. Yet in the end, ſuch was
his valor and high good fortune, that by one and by one he ouercame
them all, but the Duke ſeeing his Brethren vanquiſhed,
and himſelfe left alone to abide all the hazard, tooke occaſion to
pauſe with theſe words.
                     I pray you Sir Knight if your thinke it good, to tell me your
name, and of whence you are, that I may know him I ſhall
vanquiſh, or at leaſt that ſhall remaine victor ouer mee. Sir,
ſaid Palmerin, the knowledge of me is ſo needeleſſe, that I
will no ſtand to ſatiſfie your deſire, firſt, let vs make an end of
our Combat, and then perhaps I will let you vnderſtand more.

Belike (quoth the Duke) you make ſuch account of the victory,
that you will admit no leiſure to Parley: well, ſince you are ſo
bent, I do not yet conceiue ſuch weakneſſe of my ſelfe, that I
will make ſute to you for any fauour. Then they began againe,
the great effuſion of their blood, witneſſing the perillous danger
of their fight, but at laſt the Duke was conſtrained to fal downe
at the foote of the Prince, as il pleaſed as he was ſhrewdly handled,
eſpecially becauſe he thought neuer to ſee his Lady and Miſtreſſe
againe. Wherefore humbling himſelfe, he deſired the
Prince to ſaue his life, who being alwaies accuſtomed to great
pittie, and ſeeing him ſo affectionate towardes his Lady, tooke
him from the ground in his armes, promiſing to vſe the matter
in ſuch ſort, that he would make him to be highly eſteemed of
her. The Duke receiued the Prince offer, but vpon this condition:
that if ſhe ſcorned to be mercifull vnto him, then ſhould he
preſently bereaue him of life, becauſe it was vnpoſſible for him
to ſuffer ſuch furious and ſharpe aſſaults, as hee daile proued for
her ſake.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LXX.
                     How Palmerin hauing conquered the Duke and his brethren,
procured ſuch meanes with the three Ladies, that he cauſed
them to be married together. And how Florian and
Pompides arriuing there, Palmerin departed with them towards
Conſtantinople.
                     
                        AFter this great broyle was fully finiſhed,
and all thinges ordained in a decent order, on
a ſuddaine there entred the Hall about
twentie Souldiers, and two Knightes very
well armed, who ſpake aloude, that it was
neceſſary he ſhould be ſlaine, that had killed
the moſt famous and noble Knight of the

world: wherewith they came to Palmerin, who defended himſelfe
with his Sword, intending to be his Butcher that ſhould
firſt lay hands on him. But the Duke ſéeing ſo great a tumult
riſen without his knowledge, put himſelfe betwéene them, deſiring
a farther pauſe, that all matters might be taken vp quietly.
Then was the Duke canducted to his Chamber, and
Palmerin went to the Chamber of the Ladies, where his
woundes were very diligently dreſſed by Organel the Dukes
Chirurgion, who was as carefull for him, as euer hée was
for the Duke his Lord. During the time that Palmerin ſtaied
with the Ladies, he reported to them the great eſtimation both
the Duke and his Brethren made of them, how alſo the cauſe of
his ſharpe dealing, was onely becauſe they denied his loue, with
diuers other reports, which the Ladies eſteemed both laudable
and honeſt: ſo that they granted themſelues, onely to bée ruled
and gouerned by the aduiſe of P
                              •
                           lmerin, becauſe he had ſtood ſo
much their friend, and therefore they promiſed to graunt what
he did thinke well of, ſeeing he determined nothing, but what
might ſtand with his owne honeſty, and maintenance of their
honour. Palmerin was ſo ioyfull to ſée the Ladies conformable
to his appointment, that he made more account of the conqueſt
of them, then he did of the honour he receiued in the Combate.
Wherefore he walked to the Dukes Chamber, where after hée
had imbraced him, he declared the good agreement and conuerſiō
of the Ladies, whereat the Duke receiued ſuch content, that for
a great while he remained as it were in a ſound: but being come
to himſelfe againe, he began in this manner to vtter his ſpee
                        
                           •••
                        s.
Sir knight, if at your hands I haue receiued any damage,
I muſt needs confeſſe your recompence is double, if ſo bee your
deeds agree with your words (as blame me not Sir, if I am
ſomewhat hard of beleefe) you haue brought me the onely comfort
and 
                           〈◊〉
                         of my life. Worthy Sir, ſaid Palmerin, what I
haue ſpoken, your Grace ſhall find the effect according, & doubt
you not, but both you and your Brethren ſhall now at laſt purchaſe the
delight, which neither your long ſtudy nor compulſion
could bring to paſſe. While they continued this talke, the two
knights that were in the 
                           〈◊〉
                         with the ſouldiers, came into the

Dukes Chamber with their Helmets off: when Palmerin ſéeing
they were his two brethren, Florian & Pompides, ran and
imbraced them with very great ioy, deſirous to know how they
had ſped at the Iouſting before the Princeſſe Florenda, which
Florian rehearſed from point to point, as alſo in what manner
they happened thither. The Duke ſéeing theſe three Knights to
be all brethren, ſuppoſed them to be perſons of ſome great birth:
wherefore he commanded Organeli, becauſe it drew towards
night, to conduct them to their chambers, where Palmerin certified
them what he had done in the Caſtle, as alſo the Marriage
he had appointed, betweene the Duke, his brethren and the
thrée Ladies, and thus they diſcourſed, till ſléepe commanded
them to leaue off. In the morning, the Duke and his brethren
married the Ladies: Dragonell the ſecond brother, choſe to him
Armiſia the ſecond ſiſter, and Darofant eſpouſed Ariſmena the
yongeſt of all. Then was the feaſt ſolemnized with marueilous
great royaltie, when Palmerin diſcouered himſelfe and his brethren,
which made the Duke to conceiue the better opinion of
himſelfe, that he had beene foyled by ſuch a worthy Knight: to
whom he ſheweth great honour, during the time their ſtaying
there, which was longer thē they would haue doue, but only to
pleaſure the Duke and the Ladies. At length, taking their leaue
of all the honourable company, they departed from thence, intending
to goe ſtrait to Conſtantinople, if no other chance did
come to turne them againe.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LXXI.
                     How Targiana the Turkes daughter, commanded her knight
Albayzar to goe to the Caſtle of the Giant Almarol, there
to maintnine her beautie againſt the Princeſſe Miragarda.
And how he arriued there, and entred the Combate with
Dramuſiande, whom he was not able to vanquiſh, wherefore,
in the night he tooke downe the Shield of Miragarda,
and brought it thence away with him.
                     
                        
                        NEw muſt wee a while, leaue the Prince
Palmerin and his brethren, who hauing left
the Duke and the Ladies, are trauailing in
their iourney towards Conſtantinople,
and now let vs ſée what hath happened at
the Caſtle of Almarol, in maintaining the
beautie of the faire Miragarda. I haue already
certified you, that Olori
                              •
                           que Alchediane the Soldane of
Babilon, had left a ſonne behind him, who was a great enemy
to all Chriſtendome, who ſeeing himſelfe brought into the deſpiſing
of Fortune, determined to follow the courſe of knightly
aduentures, and to make his valour knowne among the number
of the moſt famous knights. It happened, that firſt he went
to the great Turks, Co
                           •
                        rt, which being ſtored with couragious
knights, he had the better meane to try his hardineſſe: which
proued ſo effectuall, that aboue all there, the Fame was attributed
to this patterne of all their Chiuallry named Albayzar,
who became the amorous ſeruant of Targiana, the Turkes
daughter, to whom the onely name of beautie was giuen, thorow
all the Turkes Dominions.
                     And as Loue is vſually an augmenter of their mindes, who
endeauour themſelues to be vnder his obeyſance, hauing now
en
                           •
                        lamed the hart of Albayzar maketh him to forſake his wonted
liberty, and to wander in the ſolemne conceits of his inucigled
fancy, which made him to brooke his paſſions more meekely,
hauing receiued the originall of his griefe from ſuch an excellent
occaſion. Pargiana likewiſe bearing him good affection,
would 
                           〈◊〉
                         if Loue had ſuch a ſoueraigntie 
                           •
                        uer him, as in proteſtations
& ſweete pa
                           •
                        ley he often confeſſed, ſo hauing her platforme

                           〈◊〉
                        , and the order of her inuention ready coined, ſhe calleth

                           〈…〉
                         Chamber winde was was her woont, and there
ſhe began this ſolemne deuiſe.
                     Sir 
                           〈◊〉
                         if your 
                           〈…〉
                         ſuch an in
                           ••
                        llible
foundation, as you haue often both ſaid and ſworne, it ſhall bee

                        
                           〈◊〉
                         as eaſie for you to driue me from doubt, as to prouide your
ſelfe againſt any encroching danger. And I haue often told
you, that it is requiſite I ſhould vnderſtand the depth of your
déeds, as wel as to be lead away with your amorous & fabulous
words, for you haue often told me, that I am the faireſt Princeſſe
liuing on the earth, and that you would venture your life
in maintenance thereof: to bring you to your triall, giue care
to the aduenture I ſhall giue you in charge to finiſh.
                     It hath bin blazed abroad, that in Spaine, at the Caſtle of the
Giant Almarol, there remaineth a Princes named Miragarda,
who is reported to be the onely Goddeſſe of beauty, becauſe the
Gods neuer frame one more beautifull then ſhe, yea, and by the
iudgement of thoſe that haue ſeene her Picture, truly and iuſtly
figured by the perfect proportion (being a Shield placed before
the caſtle, which who deſireth muſt firſt aduēture his ſtrength)
this report I tell you, affirmeth her to be no leſſe faire, then the
aduenture of it ſelfe hath béen tried famous. To this place
ſhould I haue you to depart preſently in trauaile, and in my fauour
and defence of beauty, ſhew your hauty courage againſt
the Giant her Champion, whom if Fortune will ſuffer you to
vanquiſh you can neuer do me greater pleaſure, then to bring
me hither the Shéeld of the faire Miragarda. And at your returne,
I pray you to iourney to Conſtantinople, where in the
Court of the Emperour Palmerin, you may witneſſe your ſelf
againſt all thoſe, that dare denie you to be the moſt faithful ſeruant
to the faireſt Princeſſe aliue: the fulfilling hereof, maketh
you Lord both of me and mine. My gracious Lady (anſwered
Albaizer) I ſee at this preſent the perfect loue you beare
me, in that you will vouchſafe to employ me in your honorable
ſeruice, whereto I will preſently betake my ſelfe, promiſing to
bring you the Shéeld of Miragarda, which I will place at your
féet, becauſe all the Ladies in the world ought to humble them
ſelues to you.
                     Thus breaking off his ſpéeches, he took his leaue of her, wearing
a very fine greene Armour, wheron was wrought many
golden Spheares and in his Sheeld vpon a field of Siluer, hee
bare for his deuiſe a Phaenix, where vnder was written in golden

Letters, the name of Targiana. Trauailing thus through
diuers Kingdomes, at laſt he arriued at the Caſtle of the Giant
Almarol, ſoone after the combat that Dramuſiande had finiſhed
with the Prince Florian. Albayzar perceiuing the number of
ſhields at the Trée, eſtéemed greatly the valure of him, who had
the power to accompliſh ſo rare exploits: but when hee beheld
the Picture of Miragarda, he could not chuſe but confeſſe the aduantage
ſhe had aboue his Lady Targiana. Neuertheleſſe, hée
would put her will in due execution, albeit that night he could
not, time was ſo farre ſpent: but in the morning he preſented
himſelf before the Caſtle, when Dramuſiande aduertiſed of his
arriuall, armed himſelfe, and came foorth on Horſeback, ſo after
a litle friendly greeting paſſed betwéen them, they couched their
Speares, and at the third encounter, ſent one an other to the
ground couragiouſly. Then drew they forth their ſwords, deliuering
ſuch cruell aſſaults to one another, that Miragarda and
her Ladies did highly commend them: but yet ſhée ſtood in feare,
leſt Albayzar ſhould vanquiſh Dramuſiande. Albayzar, who
all his life time had not felt ſuch hardy blowes, thought not his
promiſe ſo certain, as when he departed frō the Princeſſe Targiana,
& Dramuſiande found his enemy ſo ſtrong, that he could
hardly aſſure himſelfe of any victory: for ſo cruelly did they deale
with one another, and wounded one another in ſuch grieuous
maner, that one would not haue thought, how poſſible the life
could remaine in them: whereupon Dramuſiande began thus
to the faire Miragarda. My good Lady, doe not now refuſe your
ſeruant in ſo great a néede, that he which hath neuer done you
ſeruice, ſhall cauſe your Dramuſiande to loſe the recompence,
which he thinketh by his trauels to haue worthily deſerued.
On the other ſide. Alybazar was in his cōplaints to the Princeſſe
Targiana, deſirign her but to remember him in fauor, and
that was ſufficient to ouercom his enemy: ſo commending him
ſelfe to his God Mahound, he began again afreſh with Dramuſiande.
Long they fought, yet neither could preuaile, for they
thought themſelues indifferently matched, ſo that the night approaching
on, made thē to leaue off their Combat, and to finiſh
it on the next day if they could. Dramuſiand entred his lodging,

meaning on the morrow to ende their ſtrife one way or other,
and Albayzar retired being of the ſame minde: but knowing
no where to reſt him for that night, that hee might the better
deale with Dramuſinde on the morrow, he returned to the trée
of the Shields, where remembring the promiſe he had made to
his Lady, euery one being faſt aſleepe, he tooke downe the ſhield
of the Prineſſe Miragarda, which hée purpoſed to beare with
him into Turkie. But firſt he would paſſe the Court of the Emperonr
Palmerin, according as his lady Targiana had commanded
him: and fearing leaſt he ſhould be purſued, he ſtayed in no
place, till he was twenty miles from thence, bearing the ſhield
couered that no body ſhould know it. And there where he lodged,
he ſtayed vntill his wounds were healed: very ſorrowfull
becauſe he could not vanquiſh Dramuſiande, to bring the perfect
prize to his Lady Targiana.
                     
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LXXII.
                     How after Albayzar departed with the Shield of Miragarda,
Dramuſiande left the Caſtle of Almarol to followe after
him. And how Armello brought word to the Prince Florendos,
of the Shield, which made him preſently leaue his
ſhepheards kinde of life, and with his fellowe ſhepheard
tooke themſelues to trauaile.
                     
                        NOw Dramuſiande hauing dreſſed his
wounds, ſo well as he might in ſo ſhort a
ſpace, in the morning returned to the Trée,
intending to ende the Combate, or to leaue
his life in the field: but when he began to
gréete the Picture of Miragarda, according
as hée was woo
                           ••
                        , and found himſelfe diſpoſſeſt
thereof, hée was taken with ſuch ſorrow, that he could abide
in no place.
                     
                        
When he had ſought all about the Trée, and could not finde
it, he began to ſuſpect, that the Knight againſt whom he maintained
the Combat, had caried it away with him: wherefore as
ſecretly as might be, he concluded to perſue preſently after him,
not ſtaying till the Princeſſe Miragarda was certified thereof,
becauſe hee could not yéelde account of that, which ſhée had ſo
faithfully committed to his kéeping. Then was he determined
to ſéeke all the world ouer, but he would be reuenged on this
diſcourteous Knight, whoſe treaſon he rehearſed to the Giant
Almarol, of whom he tooke his leaue, not ſtaying til his wounds
were healed, nor yet thinking on the danger wherein he tooke
himſelfe to trauell.
                     After that Dramuſiande was gone, Miragarda vnderſtood
how her ſhield was ſtollen by a Knight, after whom Dramuſiande
had determined to trauaile which made her to take it ſomwhat
heauily, thinking though Dramuſiande were gone to recouer
it againe, yet when this miſhap ſhould be knowne to the
Triſtfull Knight, he would now take his weapons to followe
him, that offered her ſo great diſcorteſie, for in him ſhe repoſed
a better confidence then in Dramuſiande. Armello ſeeing the
ſhield was ſtollen, and that Dramuſiande was gone in that order,
had good hope now of his maiſters good Fortune, which
made him trudge in haſt fromthe Caſtell, and all the way he
went by the Riuer Theſin, till at laſt he found him kéeping
Shéepe by a Fountaine: where ſtaying himſelfe a while, he
heard the ſound of a Flute, which often ſtayed, to vtter the
complaints of an euercharged minde, ſo that Armello was
greatly mooued to heare his lamentations. Then came hée a
litle neere to behold his face, which was ſo much offended with
eſſuſe of teares, that Armello could not iuſily ſay, whether it
was he or 
                           〈◊〉
                         at his féete fate another Shepheard very ſimply
apparelled, and playing many delightfull deuiſes vpon his
Flute, ſo that Armello verily thought that place a wilderneſſe
of woes.
                     The ſight made him in ſuch caſe, that he kn
                           •
                        w not how or
which way to beginne his tale, for well he knew his Lord had
minded ſuch a 
                           〈◊〉
                         life, at ſuch 
                           〈◊〉
                         as he left the Caſtell of

the Giant Almarol, yet hardly did he knowe that this was he:
wherefore encouraging himſelfe, he approched vnto them with
theſe ſpéeches. I pray you my friend, to report to me if you can,
ſome tidings of a young knight, whom Loue hath cauſed to vndertake
a ſolitary kinde of life, when his eſtate doeth rather
command him to vſe knightly Armes.
                     Truſt me my friend (anſwered the Shepheard) I am my ſelfe
ſo cruelly vrged with the outrages of loue, that I can hardly endure
to make you any anſwere, for I am he whom Loue hath
allowed to all miſfortune, but neuer to no day, houre minute
of quietneſſe. With that the Prince Florendos began in this
order. Oh ſir, doe not you ſéeme to blame Loue ſo much, if you
haue ſuſtained any loſſe, impute it to the féebleneſſe of Fortune
and not to Loue, let me alone to complaine of Loue. Armello
caſt good view vpon him, and knew that it was the Lord, albeit
he was changed out of all remembrance, wherefore, falling
down at his féete, he deſired him, not to execute on himſelfe ſuch
extreame griefe, as he would not fauour himſelfe with ſome pittie,
which would greatly diſpleaſe her, who had power to command
him otherwiſe. Then was Florendos ſomewhat offended
with himſelfe, if he had done any thing that might diſpleaſe
his beſt beloued, which Armello ſéeing, ſtayed him thus.
                     Sir, I haue taken the paines to come hither, that you might
vnderſtand a matter greatly for your profite. Dramuſiande
hath long time kept the ſhield of Miragarda, and many knights
hath he brought vnder her obeyſance, but ſuch is the miſfortune,
that her Shielde is ſtollen from thence by a Knight, of
whom ſhe hath no hope to recouer it, but only by your meanes.
Florendos, to whoſe heart was already ſtroken a ſuddaine ioy,
began in this manner. What will you Armello wiſh me to goe
ſuccour other, ſeeing me ſcant able to helpe my ſelfe, how may
I in this weaknes preſume againſt any one, when being in my
chiefeſt ſtrength, I could not conquer one onely knight? Neuertheles,
becauſe I wil not ſtill remaine in ſorrow, which hitherto
hath daily and vſually borne mee company, I will followe
the Knight that hath borne away the Shield of my Lady, and
will (if I can) make him to yéelde it me againe, but if Fortune

ſend him the victory againſt me, then I ſhall be out of all troubles
and ſorrowes in this world. Thus riſing vp, he deſired his
fellow ſhepheard (who was his only delight to accompany him
in heauineſſe) to beare him company, and leaue that ſad & ſilent
kind of life, to follow the noble exerciſes wherin he had béene alwaies
trained, for albeit he was as then ſimple, yet had he béene
tried a good knight at Armes. The knight, though he was content
with his ſorrowful life, yet had he not that power to refuſe
the requeſt of the gentle P. Florendos, for whoſe amitie they
left their ſhéepe, and went into a Towne hard by, where they
remained till they were ſtrong enough to endure trauaile. And
in their time of ſtay there, they made each of them a fine new
blacke Armor, both alike, without any deuiſe at all, becauſe the
Prince would not be knowne, which made him not to ſend for
his Armor at the Caſtle of Almerol. Then departed they from
thence, and trauailed to ſéeke the ſhield of the faire Miragarda,
but they trauailed not lōg togither, for that a miſaduenture vnhappily
parted them, as you ſhall be certified more hereafter.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LXXIII.
                     What and who the Knight was, that bare Florendos company
while he was a Shepheard, and what was the occaſion
that they parted company. And how Albayzar proceeded
with the Shield of Miragarda.
                     
                        BEcauſe you ſhall vnderſtand, who the
knight was that kept Florendos company
all this while, the Hiſtorie declareth, that
after the Knights (who were Priſoners
with Don Edward) were departed from
the realme of England, Floramā
                         the prince
of Sardignia, tooke his trauailes on the
Coaſt of Spaine, purpoſing to trye the aduentures of the

Princeſſe Miragarda. And becauſe he arriued at the Caſtle of
Almarol, when Florendos was gone into England, to try the
aduenture at the Caſtle of Dramuſiand, he had leiſure ſufficient
to behold and muſe on the faire Portrait of Miragarda, which
ſéemed apparant in his eye, that he entred into prayſes, and ſurpraiſes
of this beautifull Image.
                     Which made him deſire, that ſom knight would take his way
thither, to the intent he might ſhew ſome ſeruice to the gratious
Princeſſe, the ſeemelineſſe of whoſe Picture, cauſed him verily
beléeue, that there was none in the world might compare
with her for beauty. But as he remained in this opinion, the
old remembrance of Altea claimed one title in his cogitations,
which vrged ſome motion of ſtrife to ariſe, becauſe he became
no leſſe affectionate to Miragarda, then the knight that on
her behalfe had won ſo many ſhields, wherevpon hee began in
this order. O Floraman, why wilt thou vndertake to exerciſe
Armes, ſéeing thou haſt not the power to appeaſe thy tedious
trauailes, but labouring to get out, thou enrolleſt thy ſelfe the
farther in? Thou waſt once content to be vanquiſhed at Conſtantinople,
wherby thou mightſt ſhun any more to follow this
deceitfull Loue, and art thou now deſirous to enter Armour,
when both Fortune flies from thée, and thou not able any way
to endure it? Oh blinded affection, that muſt roue on euery
ſtranger, and knoweſt how ſtrange Loue made thée of late.
But ſéeing too late, I come to the knowledge of mine errour, and
haue gone ſo far, that I cannot returne without my féet wet, I
purpoſe to purſue her, by whom Fortune hath allowed mee a
labourſome life, reſigning ioy to thoſe that are wont to be familiar,
& contenting me with heauines, ſince I can no way eſchew
the happe. And ſéeing a graue is meeteſt for a dead man, a ſolitarie
Wilderneſſe for a comfortleſſe wretch, I meane to beare
her company with my mournfull heart ſo long, that ſhe ſhall die
to ſée me, and I twiſe dead at any time to ſeeke her, then ſhall
my miſhappes haue a ful concluſion, and diſpaire ſtrike me dead
once for all.
                     Thus breaking off his lamentations, he walked along by the
Riuer Theſin, forſaking Horſe, Armour, & al knightly behauior,

entring a little ſhade of Trées, where he determined to liue ſolitarie.
And the greateſt contentation he had, was when he ſat
kéeping Shéepe, to play mournfull deuiſes vpon his Flute, and
to write and graue in the barke of Trées, certaine amorous ſonnets,
and Paſſions of a Louer, which as the Trees grew, ſo
his ſeuerall Sonnets flouriſhed vpon them.
                     And albeit he was reſolute to liue from al company, yet when
Florendos came vnto him, he found him ſo néere agréeing to his
complexion, and his manners and motion coyned in the like
ſtampe, that he was glad to receiue him for a partner in his heauineſſe.
So that they liued together with Hearbes and roots,
pangs, griefe, ſobbes, ſighes and ſalt teares, the daily foode and
ſuſtenance of a Louer, this was both their ſollace and ſorrow,
till Armello cauſed them to depart from thence, as you haue
heard diſcourſed already.
                     It ſo fortuned, as theſe two careful Princes rode along by the
Sea ſide, they eſpied a little Galley comming towards them,
wherein ſat a Lady endued with ſuch ſingular beauty, attyred
in blacke, and accompanied with ſuch a modeſt behauiour, as euery
one might iudge her to bee ſome perſon of Nobilitie. At
this Ladies feete ſat two aged women, who eſpying theſe two
Princes, commanded the Marriners to row to the Shoare,
when beholding the Princes very rufully, the Lady ſaluted
them in this ſort. Sir Knights, I deſire the one of you to doe
me ſo great fauour, as to come abord my Galley, to aide me in
a cauſe, which deſireth the helpe of one onely Knight. Faire Lady
(anſwered Florendos) we beare Armes for no other purpoſe,
but to imploy our ſelues in the aide of diſtreſſed perſons, ſo entring
the Galley, he commanded Armello his Eſquire, to take
his Horſe, and expect his comming at the Caſtell of the Giant
Almerol, where he would not faile to méete him.
                     Thus leauing the Prince Floraman, the Galley launched
forth, that it was quickly out of ſight: wherefore he rid on, deſiring
the company of Florendos, to whom he became maruellous
affectionate. After he had trauailed thrée daies, he came to
a very ſtrong Bridge, at the foure corners whereof, was foure
very faire ſtrong Towers erected, being deſirous to approch

there vnto, he eſpied a Knight willing to paſſe, but an other denied
him, ſaying: if he would leaue his Shielde behind him,
and giue vp his name to be ſigned in writing, as was the cuſtome
of the Fortreſſe, he ſhould be permitted to paſſe quietly.
Such an ill cuſtome (anſwered the Knight) was not ordained
to hinder ſuch as my ſelfe, but rather for ſuch, as could not make
their part good againſt their enemie: this ſayde, he gaue his
ſhield that he bare to his Eſquire, and receiued another of him,
and ſo encountred with the knight of the bridge, but he not able
to withſtand the force of the Speare, was diſmounted from his
Horſe, and throwen into the water. Horaman ſomewhat abaſhed
at this hardy encounter, approached néere the Bride,
where he behold in the Eſquires hand, the Portrait of the faire
Princeſſe Miragarda, which made him deſirous to ſtay, to ſée
how this enterpriſe would take concluſion. The Knight of
the bridge was no ſooner giuen the turne ouer, but there in one
of the Towers one ſounded a Horne very vehemently, at ſound
wherof a knight came forth, bearing in his hand a mighty Axe:
wherwith approching to the knight, he charged them with many
ſharpe and dangerous ſtrokes, but in the ende, ſuch was the
valour of the other Knight, that hee laide him flate vpon the
ground, giuing his place to another, becauſe he had no leiſure to
ariſe. Then came foorth a tall and ougly Giant, bringing in his
hand a Mace of iron, & to the knight he deliuered theſe taunts.
Thou deſtroyer of my blood, doe thy duty to defend thy ſelfe, for
to reuenge the horrible iniury thou haſt offered me, I intend to
cutte thy body in ſo many pieces, that the Fowles of the ayre
ſhall be glutted with thy carkaſſe. The knight refuſing to giue
him any anſwere, couered himſelfe with his Shield, ſo that
betwéene the Giant and him, began a terrible and dangerous
Combate, but in the ende, the Knight who was named the valiant
Albayzar, ſo coniured the giant, that he left him not while
there was any life in him. Albayzar being very ſore wounded,
and ſeeing no more reſiſtance come, entred the Foretreſſe,
where he ſtayed till he was able to deale with Floraman, who
deſired to haue a ſling at him, for to get the Shield of the faire
Miragarda. For being in that low eſtate, he did eſtéeme it great

diſhonour to aſſaile him: becauſe couragious mindes, rather deſire
to encounter thoſe who haue might to reſiſt them, then to
deale with ſuch as haue no power to defend themſelues. Wherfore
he paſt the Bridge, not knowing whither he were beſt to
take his way: for his deſire was, not to abſent himſelfe farre
thence, becauſe he would not looſe the commoditie to ſight with
Albayzar: in the meane time he waſted away the idle houres,
in this woonted ſilent and amourous Paſſions.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XLXIIII.
                     Here is declared, to whom the Fortreſſe vpon the Bridge belonged,
where Albayzar behaued himſelf ſo worthily, and
why the Cuſtome was ordained. And of that which happened
to Florendos, ſailing in the Galley with the Lady.
                     
                        IN circumſtance of the Hiſtory it is mentioned,
that the Duke Artilio in Spaine, had a
daughter, who liuing to enioy his poſſeſſions
after him, was nouriſhed in company of the
faire Belizarda, daughter to the King Recinda.
But loue hauing gained the power of the
aforeſaid Lady, cauſed her to be fancied of the
Prince Oniſtalde, with ſuch continuance betwéene them, that
in the end their deſires happened to take effect.
                     But after the Prince had receiued the order of Knighthood,
in the Court of the Emperor Palmerin, hee changed his minde,
and became affectionate towards a Princeſſe in the Emperors
Court, ſo that he forgat the Ducheſſe, in ſuch ſort, as neuer ſince
his departure, it was her fortune ſo ſée him.
                     The Ducheſſe perceiuing his vnkind dealing, and ſhée not
able to er
                           •
                        lude it from her memorie, ordained this Cuſtome at
the Bridge, where ſhe had a Caſtle, and cauſed the paſſage to be
kept by the Giant Lamortan, with two Knighes more of his linage,
who ſuffered no Knight to paſſe the Bridge, without leauing
his Shield and name in writing, perſwading her ſelfe by
this deuiſe, at length to recouer her beloued Oniſtalde.
                     
                     For his ſake were many Knights in great danger, who aſſailed
themſelues in that ſtrange aduenture, till the valiant
Albayzar came who ended the cuſtome, to the great griefe and
vexation of the Ducheſſe. Neuertheleſſe, for the bountie and
valure ſhe perceuied in him, ſhe commanded that hee ſhould bee

honourably vſed, till he had recouered the hurt of his wounds, ſo
that Albayzar ſtayed there in the Fortreſſe of the Dutcheſſe a
good while, till at laſt he departed from her, and tooke his iourney
toward Conſtantinople.
                     
                     Now as concerning the Prince Florendos, who ſaled al the
night with the Lady, till in the morning they diſcouered a Caſtle
in the middeſt of the Sea, which was very artificiall founded
vpon a Rocke: where taking occaſion to ſtrike on ſhore, ſhe
began to Florendos in this manner. Sir Knight, now will I
declare for what cauſe I haue brought you to this place, letting
paſſe my boldneſſe vnder your knightly courteſie. Within this
Caſtell abideth a Damoſell, of as little vertue as beauty, who
vnderſtanding that I had eſpouſed one of the faireſt Lords in
this Countrey, deuiſed the meane to acquaint her ſelfe with
him, by reporting that a Knight had depriued her of one of her
Caſtels, ſo that by her intreaty, ſhe won him to ſtay her Champion
in her diſtreſſed cauſe. At the time as ſhe had gotten him
to her Caſtle, ſhe fell into ſuch vnlawfull liking of him, that ſhe
vowed neuer to ſuffer him to depart from thence, vnleſſe ſuch a
Knight came, as could preuaile againſt fiue Knightes of maruellous
ſtrength, but againſt more then one Knight, ſhee will
not ſuffer Champion to enter combat, ſo that I ſtand in doubt,
neuer to recouer my louing Lord and Huſband againe, Faire
Lady (ſaith Florendos) ſend you to ſummon theſe fiue Knights
to the ſight, meane while I will prouide my ſelfe to ſtand in
your defence.
                     Shortly after, he aduanced himſelfe toward the Caſtel gate,
he eſpied the fiue Knights to com forth at a falſe doore, who
were all ſtrongly armed, and to the Prince one of them began
in this order. Sir knight, wee eſteeme it beſt for you to yeeld
your ſelfe, ſeeing Fortune hath been ſo much your enemie to
conduct you hither: ſo ſhall you find vs friendly to you, where
otherwiſe you may incurre your ſelfe double deſpite.
                     Truſt me (ſaid Florendos) firſt I intend to trie your crueltie,
before I will vſe any regard of your gentlenes: afterward
I will make you anſwere of my further intent. Vpon this they
came and aſſailed the Prince, and he likewiſe behaued himſelfe

with great agility againſt them: ſo that they confeſſed, they had
neuer found ſuch valour to remaine in one Knight, and he, neuer
to haue aſſayed a more perillous aduenture. Often they
ſtaied and fell to it againe, the Prince hauing ſlaine two of
them, and the Lady vſing reprochfull wordes vnto them, that
they fiue had not the power to preuaile againſt one, which ſet
the other in ſuch a chafe, that they began to charge him with vnmercifull
blowes, ſeeing they had no way to eſcape from him,
becauſe on the one ſide the ſea hindered them, and into the Caſtell
they could not retyre, for the lady within had commanded
the gate to be made faſt. Wherefore two of them fell downe
dead before him, when the laſt Knight ſéeing the danger he ſtood
in, tooke the point of his Sword in his hand, and humbled himſelfe
before the Prince, as thus.
                     Moſt worthy Knight, ſince fortune hath allowed you the honour
of this victorie, and that you haue preuailed againſt all my
companions, let pitty enter into your heart, to ſaue the life of
him, who moſt humbly ſubmitteth himſelfe to your mercy.
I grant thée thy life (ſaid Florendos) becauſe I will not bée
thought of ſuch a bloody mind, to kill him that is not able to reſiſt
me.
                     Then ſat he downe to reſt himſelfe, the Lady vſing great
care to bind vp his wounds: when the Lady within the Caſtle,
ſtanding in feare leſt her ſtubbornnes might procure the greater
iniury, ſent one of the damſels, who opened the gate, which Florendos
ſéeing, tooke the Lady by the hand, and entred the caſtel,
where they met the Lord that had béen priſoner ſo long, who
imbraced his Lady with very great thankes, for bringing the
Knight that had won him his liberty, to whom he began in this
order.
                     Worthy ſir, your Knightly déedes haue gained ſuch honour,
that I cannot make eſtimation of them according as they haue
worthily deſerued, but if it ſhall pleaſe you to reſt here a while,
we will yéeld you what courteſie we can, and then we will depart
together. Florendos gaue him great thankes, and ſtayed
there to ſée the Lady that kept the caſtle: but he could not attaine
to his deſire, becauſe ſhe had made her ſelfe faſt in her Chamber,

ſo that no one might come to haue a ſight of her.
                     Then went he to ſée the place, where the Lady vſed to impriſon
the Knights, amongſt whom he found the Prince Guerin:
who reioyced maruelouſly to ſee Florendos, and knowing that
he had finiſhed this hard aduenture, he accounted himſelfe happy
to be in his company.
                     After that eight daies were expired, they departed in a Galley
from thence, to the houſe of the Knight and the Lady, where
Guerin and hee found themſelues ſo gratiouſly vſed, as if they
had béen in the Court of Conſtantinople.
                     
                     Within a while after, they tooke their leaue of the Knight
and the Lady, who gaue to each of them a very good Horſe, and
in their trauelling together, they parted from one another, becauſe
Florendos deſired to iourney alone, that he might better
approoue the aduenture, which Fortune had reſerued for him.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. LXXV.
                     How Palmerin, Florian and Pompides, in their trauaile met
with a Damoſell, who brought them to the Caſtle of Dramorant
the Cruell: where they found Albayzar with the
ſhield of Miragarda, who had vanquiſhed twelue knights,
and ſlew Dramorant the Lord of the Caſtle.
                     
                        
                           PAlmerin and his brethren, continuing in
their trauaile towardes Conſtantinople,
riding thorow a Forreſt, ſaw a Lady come
riding towards them in very great feare:
who being come ſomewhat neare them,
Florian ſtaied her Palfray, ſaying: Faire
Lady, I pray you to ſhewe vs the cauſe of
your feare? Alas ſir (quoth ſhe) how can I ſtay to report any
thing, ſéeing I dare ſcant aſſure my ſelfe in your company? for
when I enterpriſed my iourney to the Court of the French
Quéene, two knights came and reſiſted me, endeuouring them
ſelues to abuſe mine honour. But Fortune was ſo fauourable
to me, that at my cry, a Knight came who defended my cauſe:
and behaued himſelfe ſo worthily againſt them, that in open
fight he ſlew them both. Then paſſing by a Caſtle at the end of
this ſtone wal, he was aſſailed by twelue Knights: who, I feare
me, will be the death of him, if he be not ſpéedily holpen by ſome
good reſcue, and truſt me Gentlemen, the loſſe of him would be
very great, being one of the moſt hardy knights in al the world.
I pray you Lady (ſaid Florian) bring vs to the Caſtle where the
knight remaineth in ſuch danger as you ſeeme to report: for it
were great pittie, to ſuffer ſuch a knight to die for lacke of helpe,
Although (quoth ſhe) I was otherwiſe determined, yet will I
bring you to the place, as well to try your worthineſſe, as alſo
ſhew my good will to the Knight, who in his owne danger hath
pleaſured me ſo much.
                     This ſaid, they rode on together, & in ſhort time they heard

the clattering of the weapons, where they found the knight to
haue ſlaine fiue or ſixe of the Knightes, behauing himſelfe alſo
very manfully againſt the other, whereat the Prince fell into
great admiration, which the Lady ſéeing, how they ſate ſtill and
looked on, began to enter into theſe wordes. Why Gentlemen?
if you determined to doe nothing when you came, it had béene
more honour for you to haue kept on your iourney, rather then
to ſuffer ſo good a knight to be ſlaine in your preſence, and you
ſtand by refuſing to aid him, which maketh me iudge, that your
weapons are very ill beſtowed on you. Faire Lady (anſwered
Palmerin) the Knight doeth ſo well diſcharge his dutie, that
we ſhould offer him great wrong if we preſumed to aid him: for
ſo might we cut off the praiſe, which he ſhould worthily beare
in the obtaining the victory, which is the only cauſe of our ſtay.
Mary, if we ſhould perceiue the Knights, to haue any dangerous
aduantage ouer him, then would we ſhewe him ſuch ayde
in their reſiſtance, that you ſhould recall your words, and haue
a better opinion of vs. While they continued this Parle, the
Knight (who was the famous Albayzar) of the twelue knights
had left but foure aliue, which vrged Florian to this opinion in
words. I belieue that this knight is ordained, to darkē the déeds
of all Knights, yours onely accepted déere Brother Palmerin,
wherevnto I know he neither can nor may approch, neuertheleſſe,
I know not any one that profeſſeth knightly Armes, but
would ſtriue to exalt his déeds, ſeeing the behauiour of ſo noble a
Champion. In fine, they perceiued all the Knights to be ſlaine,
except two, who were conſtrained to yéelde themſelues to this
noble conquerour, when preſently came forth Dramorant himſelfe,
very brauely mounted & ſtrongly armed, which Albayzar
ſeeeing, mounted on his horſe, & came to the prince Palmerin and
his Brethren in this manner. I pray you gentlemen, to beſtow
one of your ſpeares vpon me, to receiue the knight that prepareth
himſelfe againſt me, aſſuring you, that I will not forget to
remēber your courteſie in ſo doing. Sir, ſaid Palmerin, becauſe
it is dutie to fauour ſuch a Knight as you, I am content to giue
you mine, but mée thinkes, ſeeing your ſelfe ſore hurt, you
ſhould reſt awhile, and referre the Iuſt to one of vs.
                     
                        
                        Albayzar taking the Speare of Palmerin, ſaid: If Fortune bée
ſo much mine enemy, that ſhe ſuffer me to be brought into this
knights ſubiection, you ſhall haue the better leiſure and loue, to
manifeſt the proweſſe which remaineth in you. Then his Eſquire
ſeeing his maſter to want a ſhield, came and preſented him
the Portrait of the faire Miragarda, but Albayzar refuſing it,
ſaid. That it was rather made to looke on, then to employ it
to any vſe in fight. So preparing himſelfe to run at Dramorant,
who ſéeing him deſtitute of a ſheeld, caſt his owne to the ground
with theſe words. Albayzar, I am very ſory to ſée thée in this
poore eſtate, becauſe the victory I might obtaine in vanquiſhing
thée, cannot returne any great honour to me: and becauſe thou
ſhalt not thinke me, to haue any aduantage of thée, I giue thee
this priuiledge which neuer yet had any. Here ending his talke,
they fetched their courſe, and met each other with ſuch puſiſance,
that they were both forced to fall to the ground, very ſore
hurt: then riſing and taking their Swordes, they beganne ſo
fierce a Combat, that Palmerin did highly commend the valour
of Albayzar, whom he would gladly haue knowledge of, which
made him to begin in this manner.
                     Truly I make ſuch account of him, that detaineth in his
puiſſance the Shield of Miragarda, as I verily beléeue, Dramuſiande
who had it in kéeping, hath bin vanquiſhing & brought
into his ſubiection, which doth vrge me to great maruell, ſeeing
I could obtaine very little more at his hands, ſo that were
this Knight ſo well diſpoſed as I, I would hazard my ſelfe againſt
him, to bring the ſhield to the place from whence he hath
brought it. Credite me, ſaid Florian, I can hardly beleeue
that Dramuſiande is as yet vanquiſhed, albeit the déeds of this
Knight may mooue vs to thinke it: wherefore let him firſt finiſh
his combat, and then we may be reſolued out of this doubt.
Albayzar & Dramorant ſtroue ſo long together, that Palmerin
would haue parted them, but his labour was in vaine: for Albayzar
would by no meanes giue ouer, till hée had diſcharged
Dramorant of his vitall breath. When himſelfe being at the
point ready to faint with his long trauaile, as alſo the loſſe of
his blood: Palmerin, Horian, and the Lady came and ſuſtained

him, leading him into the Caſtle, where they were better receiued
then they looked for, and had good leiſure to attend the
wounds of Albayzar, which were very many, as alſo verie
dangerous.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LXXVI.
                     How Florian and Albazar made defiance each to other, and
appointed to end their ſtrife in the Court of the Emperour
Palmerin.
                     
                        BEcauſe you ſhall vnderſtand
more of Dramorant the Cruel,
the Hiſtorie declareth, how
Eutropa the aunt of the Giant
Dramuſiande, had a Brother,
who was named Dramorant,
one of the ſtouteſt Giants that
in his time liued. He being in
his flouriſhing yéeres, became
amorous of a faire Damoſell,
the daughter of a wiſe and diſcreete
Gentlewoman, who
would not giue her conſent to the marriage, wherefore he tooke
her away perforce, and had a Son by her, named Dramorant,
whoſe hauty and valiant déeds in time obtained the name of
Cruell. It chanced the mother died in her trauell, which ſtrooke
ſo déepe to the hart of the Giant, ſeeing her dead by whoſe loue
his life was maintained, that he through extreame griefe dyed
ſhortly after, wherfore the child was kept by his grandmother,
vntill ſuch time as he grew in yeares and ſtrength, more then in
decent and vertuous manners: for his whole endeuour was,
to kill the innocent, rauiſh and ſpoile fayre Ladies, with his
continuall inclination to all deſperate and cruell attempts, ſo
that he was feared of the Countrey round about him, vntil ſuch
time as Albayzar came, and preuailed againſt him as you haue
heard before. Palmerin, Florian, and Pompides, keeping him

company in the Caſtle, vntill he had attained a better diſpoſition:
Florian deſired him to report, how he had gotten the ſhield
of Miragarda. For (quoth he) I know not wel what to thinke,
becauſe he that kept it, is well knowne to be one of the beſt
Knights that euer profeſſed armes.
                     Sir ſaid Albayzar, I haue woon the ſhield by Proweſſe and
worthineſſe, and haue vanquiſhed him that vndertooke to kéepe
it. Moreouer, I haue vowed not onely to preſent it my Lady
Targiana, whoſe Knight and obedient ſeruant I am till death,
but alſo to ſhew it in all Princes Courts in the world, to manifeſt
to all Knights, who dare auouch the contrary, that my
Lady Targiana, is the moſt faire and noble Princeſſe liuing.
And in this opinion, I will firſt goe to the Court af the Emperour
Palmerin, to make proofe of that which I haue here profeſſed.
                     
                        Florian hearing his ſpéeches ſo proude and arrogant, greatly
enuied thereat, and returned this anſwere. I am of the opinion
Sir, that this enterpriſe will returne you ſmall aduantage:
for you ſhall finde in his Court, Ladies, to whoſe beautie your
Targiana will ſéeme altogether counterfeyte. But that which
is more, you ſhall finde ſo many Knights to enter this challenge,
that I doubt you ſhall receiue more ſhame by this ridiculous
intent, then either fame or praiſe can any way beare you
company.
                     
                        Albayzar in a great anger, ſtaied Florian with theſe termes.
Sir knight, you ſée wel in what eſtate I am at this preſent, but
if you dare take the paines to come to the Emperous Court,
whither I intend to goe ſo ſoone as I may poſſible: I will cauſe
you to know, how farre the beautie of my Targiana doeth ſurmount
any Lady that you can name, if ſo be you dare enter the
Combate with me: and hereon I giue you my hand, that I wil
not faile to be there as ſoone as you, if ſo be I may poſſible, wher
our déedes ſhall witneſſe the worthineſſe of the cauſe that we
maintaine.
                     The thrée Princes vpon this departed preſently, leauing Albayzar,
to whom we will returne when occaſion ſhall ſerue:
but they endeauoured themſelues ſo well in trauaile, that they

arriued in the kingdom of Hungaria, being glad they had attained
ſo néere to Conſtantinople. But Palmerin remained in his
former doubts, as concerning the commaund of his Lady and
Miſtreſſe: but Siluian the onely Phiſition of theſe extreame
Paſſions, gouerned his maiſters cogitations excéeding well.
Neuertheleſſe, his two Brethren perceiued ſomewhat, yet they
durſt not intrude themſelues in the matter, but rid on till they
came to a place, where they would take ſhipping to paſſe into
Greece. And while the Mariners were prouiding for their departure,
the Princes delighted to walke along in a faire plaine,
where they had not long ſtaied, but they eſpied a Coach couered
all with blacke, and thrée Eſquires that droue it, making very
dolefull and grieuous lamentations. Vpon this mourneful ſpectacle,
Florian approached the Coach, and lifting vp the cloath,
he beheld a knight lying in gréene armor, ſo imbrued with blood,
that one could hardly iudge of what colour it was. This mooued
Florian to great heauines, and being deſirous to know the
cauſe of his miſfortune, he came to one of the Eſquires, willing
him to report, by what miſchance the Knight was ſlaine. The
Eſquire hauing ſmall leiſure to ſtay, made him ſhortly anſwere
in this ſort.
                     If you deſire to vnderſtand ye infortunate hap of this knight,
follow me, and I ſhall bring you to the aduenture, where you
may atchieue ſuch rare renowne, that neither death, nor time
is able to extinguiſh out of memorie. Surely (quoth Florian)
I haue alwayes deſired to imploy my ſelfe, where I ſuppoſed to
be the greateſt danger, yet could neither feare diſmay me, nor
any doubt hinder me. And thus concluding his ſpéeches, he followed
the Coach, deſirous to ſée the ende of that the Eſquire
had told him. Palmerin and Pompides ſéeing him gone ſo ſoone,
walked ſoftly along the valley, when in a while a Damoſel preſented
her ſelfe before them, mounted on a blacke palfray, and
ſaluted them in this manner. I deſire you gentlemen, that one
of you would ſo much fauour me, as to goe with me to the ſuccour
of a Lady, whom thrée knights endeuour to abuſe, & to put
herto death in moſt cruel maner. Pompides hearing the cōplait
of the Damoſell, began as thus to the Prince Palmerin.
                     
                     
                        
Séeing this preſent enterprſe, doth not require your force to be
ſhowne therein, I pray you giue me leaue to accompany the Damoſell,
that I may try how Fortune wil aſſiſt me in this cauſe.
                     
                        Palmerin, who deſired to be alone in the company of Siluian
was very glad that Pompides ſhould aſſiſt the Damoſell: ſo taking
leaue of each other, Pompide
                              •
                           
                         departed about his enterpriſe,
and Palmerin to the accuſtomed remembrance of his Lady
Polinarda, wherein he waſted ſo much time, that he could not repaire
to any place of lodging, but was glad for that night, to
take his reſt in a little thicket of trées. Where he had ſooner laid
him downe, but he heard one complaine in very doleful maner:
when drawing neare, the better to heare him (the night being
ſo darke as they could not deſcrie one another) he heard the heauy
waight begin as thus. O fond Florendos, why doeſt thou
thus complaine of thy griefe, ſéeing thy Lady Miragarda doeth
take ſuch delight therein, that ſhe forceth not of his vtter ruine,
who ſubmitteth himſelfe chiefely vnder her gratious regard? I
knewe right well, that all trauaile may be ended, in the deſire of
one to doe you ſeruice: but what ſhall he doe, to whom you vſe
ſuch entertainment, that you may not permit him leaſure, that
doeth you moſt honour, nor will ſuffer him to be forgotten and
depriued of life, whereby hee might haue leſſe occaſion to complaine
of your crueltie? So ending his mo
                           •
                        es with a grieous
ſigh, he ſate him down and fel aſléepe: then Palmerin perceiuing
it was the prince Florendos, determined oftentimes to make
himſelfe knowne, but fearing to hinder him of his enterpriſe,
changed his minde: bewailing as much the heauines of Florendos,
as he did the extreame caſe of his owne miſfortune. And
when the day appeared, hee departed as ſecretly as he could
thence away: deſiring to attaine the Emperours court, where
he might conclude the ſeuerall motions of doubt and feare,
which Loue preſented to his oppreſſed minde.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. LXXVII.
                     How Florian, accompanying the Coatch with the dead
knight, met on the Seas with Arduramet, the baſtard Brother
of the valiant Albayzar, where they defied each other
to the Combate. And what haphened to Pompides, following
the Lady.
                     
                        
                           FLorian of the Deſart, kéeping company
with with the Coach & the three Eſquires,
being a great way out of ſight from his brethren,
one of them began thus to conferre
with him. Syr, ſeeing you deſire ſo much to
knowe the Knight who is ſlaine, and that
you ſeeme affectionate to reuenge his wrōg
if neede were, giue eare, and I wil diſcourſe
thereof to you at large. You ſhall vnderſtand that this Knight
is named Sortibran, the eldeſt Brother of the famous King
Friſol, whoſe worthineſſe hath 
                           〈…〉
                         beene ſuch, that hée euer
bare the name of the moſt 
                           〈…〉
                         in all his kingdome.
                     So it is, that Fortune very little 
                           〈◊〉
                         to him, as yeſter-day
conducted an Eſquire 
                           〈…〉
                        , who with wéeping
teares, deſired So
                              ••
                           bran to 
                           〈…〉
                         doubtful cauſe, wherto
he courteouſly gaue his conſent, not thinking on the trecherous
intent of the Eſquire, who brought him into a place wherefoure
of his enemies awaighted his comming, and ſetling himſelfe
againſt them all, in the ende Sortibran was there cruelly
ſlaine. We being aduertiſed of this great miſhappe, came
to fetch him to his Caſtle, where he might ſee his wounded body
honourably interred, meane while, one of his young Sonnes
is gone to the Court, to ſooke ſome knight that will reuenge his
Fathers death. Therefore, if you deſire to Dſiſiſt and ſuccour

him in this caſe, you ſhall not onely enlarge your eternall renowne,
but alſo ſhall worke ſuch occaſion, that none may or
dare preſume to commit any ſuch Treaſon. Florian promiſing
the Eſquires to accompliſh them requeſt, rid on with them,
till they came to the Sea coaſt, where they entred a Galley,
that attended their comming, and hauing there ſh
                           •••
                        ed the
body of Sortibran, they ſailed away with a pleaſant gale of
winde.
                     Not long had they been on the Seas, but they were diſcouered
by foure Turkiſh Galleyes, 
                           〈…〉
                         preſently and borded
them, when 
                           〈…〉
                        , who
was a Moore, 
                        
                           〈…〉
                         into their veſſell,
where beholding 
                           〈…〉
                         
                        Florian, and iudging
him to be a noble Knight, he entertained him very courteouſly,
commanding the Eſquires, to caſt the dead body of their Lord
into the Sea, and the next morning they heyſed ſailes, to goe on
their iourney.
                     This Arduramet was the baſtard brother to the Prince Albayzar,
who was trauailing to ſeeke him, to giue him to vnderſtand,
that the Soldane of Babylon his Father was dead, after
whom it was his right to ſucceede his place. Arduramet in talking
with Florian, demanded of him, that any time he had heard
of the Prince Albayzar, and reported ſuch marks and tokens
to him, that he knew well it was he, that had vanquiſhed Dramorant
the Cruell.
                     
                     Then bethinking him of the Combat, aſſigned betwéen him
and Albayzar, to be performed in the Emperours Court, and
that his buſineſſe had ſo chanced, as he could not meete him there
at the appointed time, he begā to be greatly offēded with himſelf,
in ſo much, that Arduramet deſired him to ſhew the cauſe of his
heauineſſe.
                     But when he had vnderſtood each ſeuerall clauſe, in a great
anger hée began this to rage: Thinkeſt thou there is any
Knight in the World, that may or dare attempt againſt my
Lord and Brother Albayzar: certainely thou art much beholding
to Fortune, from deliuering thée from ſo great a danger.
                     
                        
Neuertheleſſe, if thou haſt ſo great a deſire to ſhew thy proweſſe
as here thou doſt ſéeme to vſe in proteſtation, let vs now goe to
the Court of the great Turke, where I will make thée confeſſe
before the Princeſſe Targiana, that Albayzar is the moſt honorable
knight liuing on the earth, and ſhe, the onely and perfect
Goddeſſe for beauty. Beſide, if thou thinkeſt he hath offred thée
any wrong, if thy ſtomacke ſerue thée thereto, reuenge thy ſelfe
on me, who will die in his cauſe, for proofe wherof, receiue there
my Gloue, if thou dare.
                     
                        Florian, who deſired to manifeſt his valour in ſtrange countries,
receiued very gladly the challenge of Arduramet, who
thinking to honour his Brother with the Conqueſt of Florian,
went to the Court of the great Turke, where to their determination,
at this time we will leaue them.
                     Let vs now remember Pompides, who trauailed with the
Damoſel till they came to a thicket of Trées, where he heard
one make a very great clamour, and looking aſide, beheld a
Knight offering monſtrous diſhonour to a Lady, and two
Knights ſitting by on Horſebacke, laughing at the ſimple ſhift
ſhe made, to defend her ſelfe from the villainous intent of the
knight.
                     
                        Pompides not able to ſuffer ſo great ſhame in his ſight, couched
his launce againſt him that abuſed the Lady, ſo that he ran
him cleane thorow the head, and laid him dead on the ground
before him: and dealing roughly a while with the other twaine,
he ſerued them both of the ſame ſauce, as the iuſt deſert of them
that would abuſe themſelues in ſo vile a ſort.
                     Then came the Lady, and ſubmitted her ſelfe at the féete of
Pompides, but the feare ſhe ſuſtained by their crueltie, would
hardly ſuffer her to vſe any ſpéech: wherefore Pompides taking
her in his armes, and ſeing the heauy eſtate, and great perplexitie,
he comforted her in this manner.
                     Faire Lady, let no feare as now ſéeme to diſmay your mind,
for here is no body, but ſuch as will imploy themſelues in your
defence.
                     My Lord (quoth ſhee) theſe bloodie minded men haue
brought me into ſuch feare, that albeit I ſée dead before

my face, yet the remembrance of their crueltie doeth ſtill make
me afraide: wherefore I deſire you to depart, and leaue me to
mourne my great miſhap, elſe ſhall I ſtill be fearefull, as the
Bird on the branch in danger of the Fowler.
                     
                        Pompides began to ſmile, to ſée the little truſt the Lady repoſed
is his company: neuertheleſſe, minding to ſatiſfie her deſire,
who was very beautifull, as alſo of a vertuous and honeſt diſpoſition,
he departed from her, accompanied with the Damoſel
that had brought him thither. Who reported to him, how the
Knights that would haue rauiſhed the Lady, met with her as
ſhe trauailed toward the Court of king Friſol, who were newly
come from the ſlaughter of Sortibran, and méeting with her,
endeuoured by their faire ſpéech to allure her to their luſt, but
when they ſawe ſhe would not conſent, they would vrge her to
it perforce. So Pompides departing from her, followed after
Palmerin, becauſe he deſired to trauell ſtill in his company.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LXXVIII.
                     Of that which happned to Palmerin of England, after he was
departed from the Prince Florendos, and how while hee
was fighting with the Giant Bracandor, Albayzar arriued
there and holpe him to ouercome his enemies.
                     
                        AFter that Palmerin had left Florendos ſléeping
at the Trée, he came into a Forreſt,
halfe a mile from the Citie of Buda, where
the King of Hungaria lay, and there he perceiued
a company of Knights and Ladies
by a Fountaine, wherefore fearing leaſt
their company might bee ſome hinderance
to is trauaile, he turned his Horſe to ride an other way, for it
was all his intent to abandon place of reſort, becauſe hee

might the better commune and diſpute of his Loue. As
he was ryding, he turned his head, and eſpied theſe pleaſant
company by the Fountaine, to be very fiercely fighting
together: wherfore he turned againe to goe thither, where
he ſawe this great conflict, but before he came, all was done and
quiet, becauſe the enemy had takē them that gladly ſtroue with
reſiſtance, who were the Dutheſſes of Pontus and Duracā
                         trauailing
to the Court of their noble Father, in the company of
the prince Ditree, who in this vnfortunate ſkirmiſh was ſlain.
Which vrged Palmerin to great heauineſſe when he ſaw him,
as alſo the heauy cry the Ladies made, being in the hold of Bracandor,
a mightie Giant, inhabiting there in a Rocke, and had
ten Knights there daily waiting on him.
                     
                        Palmerin pitying the Ladies miſhap, couched his ſpeare, and
ran againſt the Giant with ſuch force, that he laid him along
on the earth, in manner as though he were ſtarke dead: which
the ten Knights ſtanding by & ſéeing, came altogether running
vpon him, but he defended himſelfe ſo wel, that they had not the
power to vnhorſe him, for his hardy blowes made them quickly
coole their courage. Bracandor being riſen vp againe, commanded
the knights to retire, becauſe he would reuengo his iniury
himſelfe: wherevpon they gaue ouer, when the Giant and Palmerin
ſternly dealing with one another, Bracandor in the ende
began greatly to faint. The Knights ſeeing the danger he was
in, forced not of their Maiſters commaund, but came and beſet
the Prince Palmerin, who (albeit he receiued many dangerous
hurts) paide them their due, but little to their profit.
                     The Ladies continued in prayers for his good aſſiſtance, eſtéeming
him the beſt knight that euer they had ſeene: and Bracandor
ſeeing the maruellous force of one onely knight, beganne to
blaſpheme his God, and ran in ſuch violent manner againſt the
Prince, that had not God indued him with great pollicie and
force, the leaſt of his blowes was ſufficient to haue ſlaine him.
Bracandor beholding ſix of his knights ſlaine, through his dangerous
woundes, and diſpaire of himſelfe, fell to the ground:
Palmerin being well pleaſed to be rid of ſuch an enemy, in ſhort
time ſent the other foure to beare their Maiſter company, to

whom he came, offering to take off his Helmet, that hée might
haue preſently cut off his head.
                     But Aſtapardo came foorth accompanied with ten knights,
and charged him ſo ſudainly, that he had not leiſure to commend
himſelfe to his Miſtreffe. Palmerin was reduced into very great
perplexitie, yea, and his death appointed in this furious ſkirmiſh:
had not the puiſſant Albayzar preſently arriued there,
who ſeeing the great iniury was offered to one knight, and that
it was he which gaue him his ſpeare, when he fought againſt
Dramorant the Cruell: he ran againſt Aſtapardo in ſuch manner,
that his ſpeare went quite thorow his body and Armor, and
the other behaued themſelues ſo well, that the moſt part were
ſlaine, the reſt ſaued their liues by flight. Palmerin ſéeing himſelfe
deliuered from ſo great a perill, came & offered great thanks
to the Prince Albayzar: but he not ſuffering him to vſe any ſuch
courteſie, without making knowne what or who he was, ſet
ſpurres to his Horſe, and rid away in great haſte.
                     Then Palmerin returned to Bracandor, and finding him to
be as yet aliue, he commanded the Eſquires to leade him after
him, and ſo he rode to the City of Buda, accompanied with the
Ducheſſes and the Ladies, who were very ſorie for the death of
Ditree and their other Knights, but well pleaſed againe by the
noble and hautie déeds of Palmerin.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. LXXIX.
                     Here ſhal be declared vnto you, what and who the Giant Bracandor
was, & wherfore he came to remaine in that place.
                     
                        SVch report the Hiſtory deliuereth vnto vs,
that in the Perilous Iſle there remained a
Giant named Bucarquant, who ruled the
Iſle in ſuch cruel maner, that his ſubiects the
did ſtand in more doubt of him the death.
So that to put him beſide the gouernement
of the Iſle, they concluded to conſpire his
death by poyſon. As for his Sonne Bracandor,
who was innocent of the wicked and diuilliſh déedes of
his Father, yet fearing that gouernement would prick him to
the like cruelty, they chaſed him out of the Iſle, giuing him no other
company, then his Nephew Aſtapardo. Theſe twaine
went into the Kingdome of Hungaria, where they purpoſed to
people a little Mountaine, to which they had giuen the name of
the Inhabited Rock, for in no other place might they be ſuffered
to liue in quiet, becauſe reuenge would be ſought for the cruell
déeds of Bucarquant. There they had gotten a company of bloody
minded and diſhoneſt knights liuing by robbery, deflowring
faire Virgins and Ladies, and all villainous déeds that might be
deuiſed, till at laſt they heard of theſe Ducheſſes, who went to ſée
King Friſol their Father in law, accompanied with the Prince
Ditree and other Knights. Suddenly they came and ſet vpon
them, ſo that the Prince and the Knightes were ſlaine, as alſo
fiue of them belonging to Bracandor, till to their reſcue came
the Prince Palmerin, who behaued himſelfe as you haue heard
before.
                     When they were come to the Citie of Buda, the King Friſol
vnderſtanding the death of his Sonne, tooke it ſo heauily, as

ſuch a great loſſe did forceable conſtraine him, yet hee diſſembled
his griefe, and came with the Ducheſſe to the Prince Palmerin,
giuing very great thankes for his courteſie, and commanded
he ſhould be vſed with maruellous good reſpect, till his wounds
were healed, and his ſtrength ſomewhat better increaſed. The
Citizens tooke the giant Bracandor, & without the kings leaue
they put him to death, burning his bones, that nothing might
be left to be ſéene of ſuch a cruell villaine. Soone after, King Friſol,
not able to withſtand the extremitie of his griefe, méekely
yéelded his daies to the ſtroke of death, which was no ſmal griefe
to his noble Linage, but as well to his loiall & obedient ſubiects,
who greatly lamented the loſſe of ſuch a gratious Prince.
                     His Obſequies and Funerales moſt magnifically finiſhed,
Eſtrellant the Son of the Prince Ditree, receiued the name of
their rightfull and renowned king, who committed the gouernment
of the Scepter to one of the moſt noble Lords in all Hungaria,
becauſe his time of eaſe was not as yet come, but would
follow the exerciſe of a valiant Knight at Armes. And Palmerin
ſtaied a while in the Citie of Buda, till his ſtrength would permit
him to beare Armour, and then hee followed his intent,
which was alwaies to ſée the places of greateſt aduenture.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LXXX.
                     How Don Florian being in the Court of the great Turke, entred
the fight with the Baſtard Arduramet, and vanquiſhed
him.
                     
                        HEere muſt we remember Arduramet and
the Prince Florian, who being landed,
came to the Turkes Court, where Arduramet
receiued great thankes of the Turke
himſelfe, for the Priſoners he had taken in
his fortunate voyage. Then comming to
the Princes Targiana, whoſe gentle nature

afforded him a gracious welcome: Arduramet deliuered his
ſpeeches in this manner. My gracious Lady, ſince the time I
departed from your excellencie, I haue endured along and tedious
trauell, to recouer my Lord and Brother Albayzar. And
albeit it was not my Fortune to méete with him, yet haue I
heard ſuch report of his déeds, as my heart is contented, and my
labours finiſhed, aſſuring you, that he hath woone ſuch renown
againſt the Chriſtians, that they which haue no knowledge
of him, doe daily deſire both to ſée him, and to make proofe of
their puiſſant behauiour againſt him.
                     Beſide, I haue heard, that he hath conquered the Shield of
the faire Miragarda, wherewith he is gone to the Court of the
Emperor Palmerin, to maintaine againſt all knights that dare
auouch the contrarie, your ſéemely ſelfe, to be the onely Goddeſſe
of beautie on the earth. And during the time I was in
his ſearch, it happened I tooke certaine priſoners: among
whom I found this Knight, who both told mee newes of my
Lord Albayzar, and how hee had aſſigned to fight againſt him
in the Emperours Court, wherupon ſuch words aroſe betwéen
vs, that we haue appointed a Combat to be tried and ended in
this Court.
                     
                        Florian ſéeing the great pride of Arduramet, was ſtricken
with ſuch coller, that hée began to vtter his mind in theſe ſpéeches.
Arduramet, we are arriued in this place, where I muſt entend
the meane to accompliſh my promiſe. And albeit Albayzar
is a valiant knight at Armes, as the effect of his déeds do manifeſt
no leſſe: yet will I maintaine and prooue againſt you, that
he hath not won the Shield by any manner of Conqueſt. As
for the Prince Targiana, her beautie I both eſtéeme and confeſſe
of ſuch authoritie, as he that ventureth the field in her fauour,
cannot chuſe but ſpéed happily in all his déedes. But if it
ſhall pleaſe her to licence mee the Field, I will defend againſt
you, Albayzar, and all the Knights of your law, that I rather
deſerue to be receiued in her ſeruice, then you all, or any that you
can eſtéeme of.
                     
                        Arduramet, who could not ſuffer theſe braue words, eſpecially

of one that was his priſoner, in a rage caſt his Helmet on the
ground, & began to raile in theſe tearmes that follow. Oh Mahomet,
why doeſt thou ſuffer in my preſence, a Chriſtian to preſume
in ſo vile and preſumptuous brags? My gratious Lady, I
deſire you to aſſure this miſcreant the Field, for I vow not to
leaue him, til I haue reuenged this rare and monſtrous iniury.
                     
                        Targiana commanded Florian to take of his helmet, to whoſe
will in gentle manner he preſently obeyed: but he was ſo offended
with the words of Arduramet, that his beauty was farre otherwiſe,
then it was alwayes accuſtomed, for which cauſe, the
Princeſſe commanded Arduramet to depart, and to make himſelfe
ready to enter the combate. As for the Prince Florian, her
affection was ſo greatly placed on him, that ſhe tooke him priſoner
vnder her protection: and the better to aſſure him ſafe from
danger, ſhe commaunded fiftie Knights ſhould be preſently armed,
to ſée that none might come neare to hurt him, during the
time he ſhould combate with Arduramet.
                     
                     Then Florian kiſſing her hand, departed to the place appointed
for the fight, and ſhe vp into the Chamber, to ſee how euery
thing happened, and then came the f
                           ••••
                        e knights into the field
by the aduice of Targiana, where Arduramet was prauncing
like a noble champion, and the great Turke himſelfe ſtood in the
window by his Daughter, deſirous to ſée the ende of this noble
enterpriſe.
                     
                        Ardumaret bowing himſelfe to the Princeſſe Targiana, couched
his Speare againſt the Prince Florian, with theſe words.
Now, my Lady, I will cauſe this Knight to knowe, that your
ſeruants can, and will bring all other into their ſubiection: but
Florian brake his Speare ſo valiantly vpon him, that hee ſent
him to the ground with maruellous violence, wherat the great
Turke was ſomewhat diſpleaſed, but Targiana greatly triumphed.
                     
                        Arduramet ſorrowfull for this miſhap, came to the Prince
with his Sword in his hand, as thus. Sir knight, my Sword
ſhall make amends for this fault, which if thou offer not the
ſooner to reſiſt, I will trench my Blade in the bellie of thy
Horſe. I perceiue well (ſaid Florian) it is néedleſſe to vſe any

aduantage to ſuch a knight as you, and ſo deſcending from his
horſe, betwéene them began a dangerous Combate. Wherein
Florian ſo cruelly martired the Armour of Arduramet, that the
great Turke would gladly haue had them parted, fearing the
death of Arduramet, but Targiana deſired him to let him trie it
out, becauſe her minde did aſſure the victory to the ſtrange
knight.
                     
                        Arduramet ſéeing himſelfe ſo ill intreated, thought many
times to haue yeelded himſelfe: but thinking on the ſhame hée
might get in ſo doing, concluded to fight till his latter gaſpe,
which in ſhort time he did, and fell downe dead at the féete of
Florian, who departed out of the field, and came to the princeſſe
Targiana, in whoſe preſence he fell on his knée, vttering theſe
ſpéeches. Faire Lady, it is not vnknowne to you, that through
miſchance and vnhappie aduenture, I haue bene brought into
this land, where I am ſtrange to all, and not knowne of any:
where, ſéeing your bountie hath allowed me the victory, I deſire
in recompence of the great honor you haue done me, that I may
hencefoorth imploy my ſelfe in your ſeruice, wherein I ſhall manifeſt, how greatly I am bound to your gentle and curteous nature.
Targiana ſomewhat changing colour, looked earneſtly on
her Father, and then came and receiued Florian very gratiouſly,
allowing him to be her onely knight: whereat the great Turke
was very well pleaſed, and he ſtayed there in the ſeruice of Targiana,
who was no leſſe affectionate towards him, then he was
willing to doe that which pleaſed her.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. LXXXI.
                     How Dramuſiande and Florendos ſought together, and hurt
each other very dangerouſly, and how Palmerin arriued
there, and wrought the meanes to relieue their feeble eſtates.
                     
                        THe Giant Dramuſiand, of whom no mention
hath béen made ſince his departure
from the Caſtle of Almarol, trauailed many
Countries, to find the Knight that had
taken the Shield of Miragarda thence: in
which tranaile, he proued both famous and
fortunate, that at laſt he arriued at the Caſtle
of Dramorant the Cruel, who was his
kinſman, and there he vnderſtood, that he which had ſlaine Dramorant,
was the Knight that carried away the ſhield of Miragarda,
which made him the more affectionate and deſirous to
ſéeke him. And as he rode through the Dominions of Hungar i
                           •
                        ,
he met a Knight riding very ſad and full of heauines, attired in
blacke Armour: to whom he vſed a courteous gréeting, but the
Knight made him no anſwere at all, whereupon he tooke him
by the hand, ſaying: Sir Knight, why do you not make anſwer
to thoſe that offer you courteſie?
                     The Knight being in a ſad conceit, and at theſe words reuiuing
himſelfe, caſt his eyes on Dramuſiande very grieuouſly,
with this anſwere. Truſt me ſir knight, this heart of mine is ſo
afflicted, theſe eyes ſo ouerwatched, and theſe eares with ſilent
opinions ſo much dulled, that I am ignorant whether you ſaluted
me or no: but if you ſhould thinke I heard you, and refuſed
to anſwere you with the like, credit me, you ſhould very much
deceiue your ſelfe. I perceiue well (quoth Dramuſiande) you
haue ſpoken the truth, wherewith I hold my ſelfe well contented:
but could you report me, where I might finde a knight,
who beareth a Shield, wherein is pictured the faireſt face that

euer nature framed, hauing on it the letters of her name, which
are, the péereleſſe and inequall Miragarda.
                     
                     At theſe words the knight gaue a grieuous ſigh, ſaying: Surely
ſir, I doe greatly deſire to méete with him my ſelfe, becauſe
my trauels are to no other end, and I ſeeke him, onely to combate
with him, to bring backe the Shield, with his head to the
Caſtell of Almaroll, from whence he was ſo bold as to take it
away. So that this enterpriſe toucheth me more then any one
aliue: wherefore, I deſire you to giue euery our trauell, and betake
your ſelfe to reſt of your life, for mine hath been preſerued
in the danger of this aduenture, which maketh me the more deſirous
to follow it. Dramuſiande (who was ignorant of this
Knight) ſeeing him to vſe his intent in that order, endeuoured
to know him, but his labour was ſpent to no ende or profit.
Wherefore they were ſo incenſed with ſuch anger, that they
gaue ſcope to their Stéedes, and met together ſo nobly, that they
were both diſmounted to the ground, and then they fell to it a
freſh with their ſwords, ſo that their Armour and expence of
their blood, witneſſed the dangerous eſtate of both their perſons.
For Dramuſiande thought, no two Knights in the world could
handle him ſo, without it were the noble Palmerin, or Florian
his brother, which made him a great while to think this knight
was one of them, till at laſt faintneſſe one either ſide willed
them to breath, when Dramuſiande looking on his battered armour,
began on this manner.
                     Oh wretched Fortune, am I brought into ſuch debility, that
I haue not the power to vanquiſh this one knight? 
                           〈◊〉
                         me déere
Miſtres, I know this miſhap chanceth, onely becauſe you haue
no mind to remember me. This fight haue I attempted vnder
your gracious name, wherein ſuffer me not to be vanquiſhed,
but grant me ſo happy, that I may render your Shield againe
into your cuſtody: and afterward (in recompence of my dutifull
and faithfull ſeruice) put me to death if it be your gracious pleaſure.
                     The Knight on the other ſide was as grieuouſly paſſioned,
thinking verily to finiſh his daies in this Combate: wherefore,
he began in this order to vſe his complaints. Madam, I ſhould

be very happy (conſidering the deſire I haue alwayes had) at
this preſent houre to ende all my troubles, becauſe your delight
hath euer béene, to bring me to the laſt extremity of my vitall
courſe. Yet am I highly one way contented, knowing that I
die in the honourable ſeruice, wherwith I haue continually endeuoured
to gratifie your deſire.
                     So breaking of his ſpéeches, they fel very egerly to their combate,
and at laſt was brought vnto ſuch feebleneſſe, that they
were both forced to fall to the ground: but Fortune, who preſerued
them to a greater conqueſt of honor, cauſed at that very inſtant,
the noble Palmerin of England to arriue in that place,
who knowing Dramuſiande, ſuppoſed verily that he was ſlain,
wherefore he came to the other knight, and taking his Helmet
off, and perceiuing that it was the noble Florendos, he became
ſo ouercharged with griefe, that he could hardly ſuſtaine himſelfe
from falling to the earth.
                     Then he commaunded Siluian to goe to the Citie, and preſently
to bring Chirurgions with him, becauſe he thought verily
they were almoſt paſt recouery: and Siluian knowing, that
the death of theſe two knights, might be an occaſion to put his
Maiſters life in danger, vſed ſuch diligence, that in ſhort time
hee returned with two very expert Maiſters in Chirurgerie.
Palmerin deſired them to manifeſt their knowledge at that
preſent, in recouering the health of thoſe dangerous wounded
Knights, and his recompence ſhould excéed in liberalitie: ſo
when the Chirurgians had ſearched their wounds, they found
them not ſo dangerous, as their weakeneſſe and wearineſſe,
wherefore they promiſed (by the grace of God) to bring them into
as good eſtate of health as euer they were. The Prince reioyced
at their good anſwere, and cauſed Siluian to fetch a Coach
from the Citie, wherein they were brought to the houſe of an
ancient Gentleman, and there Palmerin bare them company,
vntill they were able to trauaile againe.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. LXXXII.
                     How Albayzar came to the Court of the Emperour Palmerin,
and of the conditions he made there, to begin his aduenturous
intent.
                     
                        VEry well prouided, and full of renowned
Knights, was the Court of the Emperour
Palmerin, at ſuch time as Albayzar (hauing
left Palmerin of England, where hée
ſlewe Bracandor) arriued there: when alighting
from his Horſe, he came vy into
the great Hal, in very faire gréene Armour,
beſet with golden Speares, with two Eſquires attending on
him, where finding the Emperour ſitting with the prinoipall of
his knights, he thronged thorow them, and reuerenced himſelfe
before the Emperour, with theſe ſpéeches.
                     Moſt dread and puiſſant Emperor, I haue béene conſtrained
to viſit your Court, for two cauſes which I hold as eſpecial: the
one to ſée the noble mindes that are alwayes here abyding, the
other to try my ſelfe againſt them all, on her behalfe that hath
ſent me hither. Giuing you to vnderſtād, that for the loue of the
faireſt, and moſt noble Lady in the world, I haue béene at the
Caſtle of the Giant Almarol, where by force I haue obtained
the Shield of the faire Miragarda, which by force I beare, onely
to honour that Saint, to whom I homage my heart, and will
enforce all knights to yeeld as vaſſailes. So that if your Highneſſe
will licence me the Field, I will compell all the Knights
of your Court, as alſo any other that dare auouch the contrary:
My Lady and Miſtreſſe Targiana, the onely Daughter to the
great Turke, my Lord and Soueraigne, is ſhe that ſhall beare
the prize all for beautie.
                     And theſe conditions I doe require in mine attempt, that the
Defendant, on his Shield ſhall bring the liuely Portayt of his

Lady, with her name to be verified at the foote thereof, becauſe it
ſhall be the onely recompence the Conquerour ſhall gaine. And
there be any, who will manifeſt themſelues to be but indifferently
fauoured of their Ladies, they ſhall be ſworne to giue in
writing the name of their Miſtreſſe.
                     As for him that hath the good hap to vanquiſh me, he ſhall not
onely be Lord of the ſhield of my Lady Targiana, but ſhall haue
likewiſe deliuered to him, all the ſhieldes which Fortune ſhall
allow me by my proweſſe. And furthermore to be granted, that
the knight diſmounted in the Iuſt, ſhall not haue the licence to
fight with his Sword, but as vanquiſhed, deliuer his Shield,
and ſo depart.
                     Now expect I your anſwere moſt redoubted Emperour, as
concerning ye requeſt of him, that hath trauailed many a ſtrange
Countrey: and now commeth to make triall of the valure and
puiſſance of your knights, if ſo be they can conceiue the courage
to aduenture the combat on the behalfe of their Ladies. When
he hadde ended his ſpéeches, a great tumult aroſe among the
Knights and Ladies of the court, who were very deſirous to ſée
Albayzar in the field: the Ladies, to know the valour of their amorous
ſeruants, and the Knights to manifeſt the cauſe to deſerue
their loue, euery one wiſhing to quallifie this preſumptuous
challenge.
                     The Emperour would make no anſwere to Albayzar, till
ſuch time as he had conferred with his Councell: when then he
returned with this reply. You haue (ſir knight) attempted ſuch
a hauty enterpriſe, as if wée ſhould deny, we ſhould not onely
grant our cowardiſe, but alſo hinder you of many noble Exploits,
to the griefe of your ſelfe, as alſo of ſuch knights, as haue
a deſire to ſhew themſelues in the field. Wherefore, the fielde
is licenced you at what time you pleaſe, and your conditions allowed,
which were before ſpecified: but I deſire you firſt to reſolue
me of one thing, are you not allied to the Soldane Oloricque
of Babilon, becauſe it ſéemeth you reſemble him ſomwhat
in fauour? My lord (anſwered Albayzar) the curteſie you haue
offered me, moueth me in humility to kiſſe your gratious hand,
aſſuring you that I am the ſon of the Soldane Oloricque, and

am called by the name of Albayzar.
                     
                     The Emperor aroſe immediatly and imbraced him, ſaying:
I would gladly ſee you in my Court, in another eſtate then you
are at this preſent, but loue ſhall now excuſe your enterpriſe.
And then he commaunded, a Chamber ſhould be prouided for
him, but he made refuſall thereof, becauſe he had ſworne not to
depart the field, till he ſaw the iſſue of his hauty deſire.
                     The Empreſſe and Gridonia ſent vnto him, deſiring that he
would ſuffer them to view the Shields of Targiana and Miragarda:
whereon they entred into iudgment, that although Targiana
was very faire, yet was ſhe nothing comparable to the
Princeſſe Miragarda. With ſeuerall ſuppoſe they went from
hand to hand, till at laſt they came to the Princeſſe Polinarda,
who was ſomewhat offended, to ſee the princeſſe Miragarda ſo
ſingular and faire: which made her now to wiſh, that the noble
Palmerin of England would now arriue at the Court, for ſhée
perſwaded her ſelfe, that his worthineſſe would aduance her to
the glory of the Shields. So that ſometime ſhe was minded to
ſend for him, but then by and by ſhe altred her thought: ſo that
ſhe miniſtred occaſion, to ſome diſdainfull minde of that noble
Sex, how no ſtability or conſtancy, is to be found in a woman.
                     Then was the picture of Altea brought, which for a precious
Iewel, ſupplied a roome in the Empreſſe coffer: and comparing
her with the faire Miragarda, ſhe was found to differ very far
in beautie. Albayzar receiuing his Shields, departed to the
place appointed for the Turnament, where the Emperour had
commaunded two Tents to be erected: and on a Pillar neare
adioyning, was placed the faire Portrayt of the Princeſſe Targiana,
and Miragarda was ſet at her féete, in ſigne of being vanquiſhed.
And becauſe it was as then ſomwhat late, the knights
had not the oportunitie to trie themſelues that night, wherfore
they referred their determination till the next morning.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. LXXXIII.
                     What happened to Albayzar, at his firſt running at the
Tilt.
                     
                        ON the morrow, the Knights preaced apace
to the Iouſt, when ſtriuing who ſhould bee
firſt, cauſed a murmure to ariſe amongſt
them: wherefore the Emperour commanded
the Iudges of the field, that no one ſhuld
approach the Tilt, but firſt to be permitted
by their appointment. Then was Criſpian
of Macedon allowed the firſt Iouſt, but Albayzar would not
receiue him, becauſe he brought not in his Shield the Portrayt
of his Lady, according to the order appointed: in like caſe all the
other Knights had failed in that point, wherfore the Iouſt was
ſtaied for foure daies, in which time, euery one had his Lady to
be artificially figured.
                     On the fifth day, Emerald the Faire, who was reputed in the
Court, for a good and hardie Knight, preſented the Regardants
a Shield, wherein was pictured the faire Artezaura, and hauing
done his duty to the Courtly Attendants, hee ran againſt Albayzar,
who met with ſuch puiſſance, that he ſent him headlong
to the ground. Then Eſcarol entred the Field, preſenting his
Shield, wherein was engraued his Lady, and Artinella bianca
written vnder her: whoſe ill fortune was ſuch, that he was ſent
to kéepe the Prince Emeralde company, and their Shields placed
vnder the faire Targiana.
                     
                     The next were Altaris and Rugeralde, both of them the ſeruants
to Belliana, daughter to the Duke of Conſtance, each of
them beating her Picture in his Shield: whom Albayzar ſerued
euen as he had done the other. Wherfore the emperor commanded
the Iuſt to ceaſe for that day: greatly eſtéeming yt noble
valour that he had ſéene accompliſhed by the Prince Albayxar.
                        
The Emperor came to the Iuſting place the ſecond day, a great
deale ſooner, and the Ladies hied to the windows, to ſée which of
their ſeruants ſhould accompliſh the beſt endeuour, but Albayzar
was on horſeback, attending him that ſhuld firſt come, who
was Sir Badiart the Knight to Lucenda, but the ſlendernes of
her beauty, and ſimpleneſſe of her Knight, made his Shielde be
placed amongſt the other. After him came Ricardoze, for his
faire Adoreta, Argolant, friend to Poliphia, Archanero of
Sclauonia, the knight of the faire Iuliana, Leonardin & Baruolant,
French knights, and both affectionat to the Princeſſe Arnalte,
Alisban, the ſeruant of Armenia, and diuers others that I
will not name, to auoide prolixitie, but Albayzar ſtill remained
victor, to the little content of the Emperour, who ſaw his
Knights ſo foiled, as alſo the noble Primaleon, who determined
if he remained ſtil conquerour, to enter the combat againſt him.
Oftentimes would Albayzar frequent the Image of his Lady,
with his Amorous diſcourſes, being ſo blinded in Loue, that the
picture of Miragarda, whom euery one commended, he ſuppoſed
inequall to his Lady Targiana. The Retrait ſounded, euery one
retyred, & the Emperour after ſupper, required the Prince Albayzar
to the dancing, where the vanquiſhed knights durſt not
ſhew themſelues, becauſe they were aſhamed to come before
their Ladies. The dancing done, euery one betooke themſelues
to their Chamber, & the Prince Albayzar departed to his Tent,
enioying very litte reſt, becauſe of the deſire he had to bee at his
paſtime. In the morning, Albayzar was very earely in the
Field, rehearſing diuers purpoſes before his Lady Targiana, no
leſſe proud and ſtately, then like the franticke fittes of a Louers
inuention. And while he ſtood muſing to his Lady, the
Iudges of the Field cauſed a Trée to be placed by the Pillar, to
hand the Shield vpon that Albayzar won, and on the toppe
they ſet the Shields of the Princeſſe Miragada, in token that
it had béen attained in Combate, whereas the other was but
the figure of his owne amorous loue. Then entered the Field
Bellizar, the Sonne of the Prince Belcar, very brauely Armed,
before him was carried the Picture of his Lady, the faire
Dioniſia, Daughter to the king of Sparta, & in his owne Shield

he bare for his deuiſe, a Scithian Artcher with his bow and quiuer
of Arrowes. But albeit he was a ſtrong and hardy Knight,
at the ſecōd méeting he was diſmounted, & Albayzar forced out
of one of his Stirrops, which he recouered againe quickly.
                     After Bellizart, came Don Roſuel his brother, preſenting his
Shield, bearing the Portraite of Dramaciana, the handmayde
to the Princeſſe Polinarda, but he was likewiſe diſmounted at
the ſecond Iuſt. Whereat the Emperour was greatly grieued,
and ſory that he had granted the field to the Prince Albayzar,
for the Knights of the Court were almoſt diſhartened, becauſe
the two noble Brethren was ouercome ſo ſoone, and their
Shieldes placed among the vanquiſhed Knights.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LXXXIIII.
                     What happened on the ſixt day of the Iuſt.
                     
                        
                           ALbayzar ſtayed very long the ſixt day, before
any came to preſent themſelues at the
Tilt, wherefore the Emperour went to the
chamber of the Princeſſe Gridonia, where
he leaned in the window, beholding Albayzar
to ſit in the gate of his Tent, vſing many
amorous cogitations to the Picture of
Targiana, as cōcerning the trauailes he had
attempted, onely for her loue and fauour. But while he was buſying
his eyes and mind on this beautiful proſpect, a knight entred
the fielde armed in blacke, whereon was diſpearſed little
flames of fire, bearing in his Shielde the like ſhew, which hée
preſented to the Iudges, and couched his Lance to doe his duty.
But Albayzar ſéeing he wanted the Image of his Lady, refuſed
to enter the Iuſt with him, which the knight ſéeing to be denied
for ſo ſmall a matter, came to Albayzar with theſe words.
                     
                        
Sir knight, you aſke much of him, who wanteth to anſwere
that which you ſéeme to craue, for if the ſhield I haue preſented
lacke that you would haue, and I as much wiſh, it is onely to
cōtinue it in reſemblance to him, that hath borne it many a day
with grief, but neuer a houre of ioy or gladnes. Yet haue I ſéene
the time, I could haue preſented you a picture which could haue
enforced you to a great maruaile, & my ſelfe very little to eſtéeme
of your might, but ſo vnhappily hath Fortune frowued, and my
preſent hope ſequeſtred from any good hap, that I can preſēt you
with nothing, but this dolefull apparance, which in midſt of my
miſfortunes, I beare with an afflicted mind, the onely image of
him, that ſometime hath had, and yet in time may, a ioyful countenance
of his Lady and Miſtreſſe, deſiring you to excuſe me,
for this is the beſt auailes, that Fortune hath left me.
                     Sir Knight (anſwered Albayzar) I willingly would, that
the picture wherwith you threaten me, were at this preſent in
your gouernment, for then would I make you knowe, that I
beare another, whereto all Ladies liuing ought, and muſt giue
place. Neuertheleſſe, ſéeing the Emperour hath ſtayed ſo long
in regarding your honeſt ſpéeches, and the extremitie of griefe
which you haue reported, conſtraineth me to breake my promiſe,
I francke and fréely permit you the Iuſt. Then couching
their Speares, they paſſed the firſt courſe very gallantly,
but at the ſecond, the Knight was ſent to the earth with his
héeles vpward, & Albayzar ſo greatly terrified with the ſtroke,
that he loſt both his Stirrops, and was conſtrained to hold by
the mane of his Horſe, or elſe himſelfe had borne him company.
But when he perceiued the Knight ready to charge him
with his Swoord, hee leaped from his Horſe, aduancing his
Shield to beare of the hardy blowes of the Knight, ſo that betwéene
them beganne ſuch a dangerous Combate, that the regardants
hardly knewe, to whome to impute the moſt aduantage.
But Albayzar, to whom Fortune had béene alwayes
friendly, ſuffered him to charge the Knight with ſuch
mightie blowes, that by litle and litle he perceiued him to faint,
wherefore at laſt, ſcant able to hold out any longer, he retired
himſelfe, entring into this diſcourſe.
                     
                        
I know right wel, that weapons were inuented to maintain
honour, as alſo to diſcharge any perillous aduenture, wherefore,
it had beed much better for me, to haue paſt my life without
frequenting them, then to abide the miſchance wherein I remaine
at this preſent. Alas poore wretch, I thinke to vanquiſh
Fortune, but in the ende I finde my ſelfe vanquiſhed, I knew
well enough, that he which kéepeth himſelfe from falling in her
ſnares, hath little cauſe to doubte any peruerſe or frowarde
chance, but fonde ſoole that I am to complaine in this manner,
being the Author of mine euill, and wilfully ſéeke mine owne
dammage. Whereupon he valiantly aſſaulted Albayzar againe,
who in ſhort time ſubdued him, and laid him at his foote:
and being vnarmed, was found to be Floraman the Prince of
Sardignia, which made the Emperour ſomewhat offended, fearing
that Albayzar would vanquiſh all the Knightes of his
Court. Then was Floraman carried into the Pallace, the Ladies
greatly lamenting for him, becauſe of his inuiolate & faithfull
conſtancy, but albeit Albayzar remained victor, he was verie
ſore hurt, and brought into great weakeneſſe and danger.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LXXXV.
                     How after Albayzar was healed of his wounds, he returned
to the field, and continuing the Iouſt, vanquiſhed diuers
Knightes.
                     
                        
                           FLoraman remained ſore hurt for the ſpace of
two monthes, onely through the griefe he
ſuſtained for his miſhap, which was a cauſe,
that the medicines preſented to him were
beſtowed al in uaine: wherefore the Emperour
accompanied him diuers times, becauſe
his behauiour was ſo vertuous and honeſt, it
made euery one deſirous to beare him company.
                     
                        
But all the honourable viſitations, & friendly good well beſtowed
vpon him, had not power to appeaſe his extreame griefe, for
that he rather deſired the death then any other comfort, ſo that
no ſollace was ſo ſwéete to him, as the remembrance and often
deſiring of death. When time had brought him to his former
ſtrong eſtate, the Emperour deſired him not to leaue the Court,
to whoſe will he would not ſhew himſelfe diſobedient, but ſtaied
there for Palmerin of England, and the renowned Florendos
thinking Albayzar not able to reſiſt againſt them.
                     But Albayzar in his pride thought the contrary, for not contenting
himſelfe with his victories paſte, he was no ſooner in
diſpoſition to beare Armour, but he preſented himſelfe againe
in the Field, perſwading himſelfe to be Lord ouer all thoſe, that
durſt conceiue the courage to deale with him. For ſuch is the
nature of a proud and arrogant minde, that ſpéeding a while
well to his content, he thinking alway to remaine in that good
Fortune, but we hauing an ancient Prouerbe. Deſire hath no
reſt, till it lie in the duſt. In this prodigall opinion, he put on a
ſingular faire Armour, not regarding the miſhap that might
chaunce vnto him, becauſe Fortune as now, had placed him on
the top of her whéele, whereon to wiſe man will repoſe a ſeat of
aſſurance, for that her variable and mutable condition, doth alwaies
bring her moſt fauoured to greateſt miſery. The firſt day
after his health, in the morning he Iuſted with Flauian, Rotandor,
Ariagnonel, Claribal of Hungaria, Ar
                              •
                           ruando and Tragandor,
who were all foiled, and the ſhieldes of their Ladies placed
among the conquered. After dinner, he ran with Luyman of
Burgondie, for his Lady Altuena: Dridan the ſecret friend of
Princeſſe Polinarda, Dramian, for his faire Florian, Gracian,
for his faire Claritia, Francian, for his Bernarda, Berolde, for
his Oniſ
                              •
                           alda, Blandidon, Pompides, and Platir, with diuers other,
againſt whom he preuailed to his great honour and praiſe,
and the aduancement of the faire Targiana, hauing all the honour
giuen to her Shield, which was ſo honourably placed in
the middeſt of all the other, that the Grecian knights ſéeing the
hauty valure of Albayzar, quite forgot all the courage they
would vſe in ſuch an honourable attempt.
                     
                        
                        Primaleon armed himſelfe diuers times, deſirous to chaſtiſe
the pride of the Prince Albayzar, but the Emperour would not
ſuffer him to procéede, becauſe he bare great affection to the Soldane
Olorieque, which he would not ſéeme to change to his valiant
Sonne.
                     
                        Albayzar ſoiournied very long in Conſtantinople, without
finding any to Iuſt withall, wherefore heperſwaded himſelfe,
to attaine as great credit by not finding any to deale with him,
as he did in vanquiſhing thoſe that came to the Tournament.
But Palmerin, Florendos, and the Giant Dramuſiand, would
not haue ſtaied ſo long from thence, if it had not béen for diuers
aduentures, which conſtrained their determination, ſo that
their abſence was the cauſe Albaizar was ſo much eſtéemed, and
in euery Princes Court, nothing at this preſent was talked of,
but the expert valiantneſſe of this noble Moore Albayzar.
Whom the hiſtory willeth vs to leaue a while, becauſe we haue
forgot the Prince Florian too long.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LXXXVI.
                     What happened to Don Florian of the Deſart, remaining in
the Court of the great Turke.
                     
                        LOng time ſoiourned Don Florian in the
great Turkes Court, highly eſtéemed among
the hardy Knights, and moſt honoured and
beloued of the Princeſſe Targiana, whoſe amorous
company made him forget his martiall
enterpriſes, in ſo much, as hee wholly
ſhaped himſelfe to pleaſe her fantaſie.
                     Their loue tooke ſuch déepe perſwaſiō on either part, y• 
                        Florian
burſt his lance in y• face of Venus, & Targiana yéelded her chiefeſt

Iewell, vnder the obeyſance and conqueſt of Cupid, being both
of ſuch an indifferent opinion together, that Loue was the only
Miſtreſſe of all their actions.
                     During the time that Florian remained in this ſtate, and Targiana
buſied her mind on their wonted amorous deuiſes, report
blazed the great victories of Albayzar in the Turks court, which
newes were accounted of ſo great eſtimation, that the behauiour
of the Prince Florian was almoſt forgotten, a thing which
was very vnwelcome to him. Wherefore, one night talking
with the Princeſſe Targiana, ſhee began to recount the dutie,
wherein the déedes of Albayzar had bound her by courteſie, and
how ſhe could hardly fulfill the promiſe, ſhée made him at his
departure. On the other ſide, ſhe thought that Fortune would
allure Florian to ſome dangerous enterpriſe, and then ſhould
ſhe abide in ſorrow, thinking on the hard miſhap, that might
eſtrange the remainder of her daies.
                     
                        Florian perceiuing the cauſe of her heauines, and yet diſſembling
as though he knew it not, thought now time to play his
part, whereupon he began to her in this manner. My good Lady,
if in your opinion, the déedes of Albayzar are of ſuch account,
that in thinking on them, you forget mine, you offer me an vngentle
reward of great diſcourteſie, ſéeing I receiue no other
content, but onely in your company. And hee maintaining the
honour of your beauty, againſt which I know none is able to
contend, I know aſſuredly if the taſke were mine, I ſhould
make both men and monſters offer you reuerence. As for the
victories Albayzar hath attained, they ought of right to bee giuen
to you, ſéeing the noble are vanquiſhed by your beautie, rather
then by the courage and ſworde of Albayzar, to whom you
attribute ſo large commendation. But would you grant mée
leaue to go & ſéeke him, and to fight vnder the ſoueraigne fauour
of your name, you ſhould then ſée to which of vs you are moſt
bound, who ſhould beſt deſerue to be admitted in your ſeruice.
                     
                        Targiana ſtanding ſtill aprettie while, at laſt ſhe tooke Florian
by the hand, and began in this order. I deſired (worthie
ſir) one thing long ſince, and now I am of the opinion, that
my deſire will enforce me to accompliſh the ſame, wherein your

requeſt may be ſatiſfied, and mine own will ſufficiently contented,
and thus it is. I meane in the habite of a trauailing gentlewoman,
accompanied with your ſelfe, two Damoſels, & foure
Eſquires, to iourney from hence, to the Court of the Emperour
Palmerin: and the better to winne my Fathers conſent in this
caſe, I will deſire of him, that I may viſſte mine Aunt the
Quéene of Aſſyria, which requeſt I know he will not deny me,
ſo that by this meane I ſhall haue opportunitie, to procéede in
this, to content both your and mine owne deſire. But firſt I
meane to ſend a meſſenger to the Prince Albayzar, that he ſhal
not depart from Conſtantinople, till ſuch time as he haue further
tidings from me, through which meane, we ſhall be in the
more aſſurance to finde him, at ſuch time as we arriue at Conſtantinople,
aſſuring my ſelfe, that he which hath ſo great deſire
to pleaſure me, ſhall not refuſe to grant ſo ſmall a requeſt.
                     
                        Florian, who alwayes deſired to eſcape the handes of theſe
Infidels, and ſéeing the time to preſent him with a fit occaſion,
began greatly to commend the enterpriſe of Targiana, ſaying
to her, that ſhe ought preſently to put her deuiſe in execution,
elſe, her deſire might happen to catch a ſuddaine death. Becauſe
it is the natural property of ſome women to thinke a thing ſpéedily,
and to forget it preſently, yet often times they are haſty to
ſuch things, as in the end proue hurtfull to themſelues: for example
let ſuffice the Princeſſe Targiana.
                     
                     Who on the next morning, came into the chamber of her father,
and therewith teares (which is great pitie to ſée in a woman)
ſhe began to rehearſe, how ſhe had beene aduertiſed, that
the Quéene of Aſſyria, her Aunt, by miſaduenture was fallē into
a ſuddaine ſickneſſe, for which cauſe ſhe humbly deſired him,
that he would permit her the leaue to goe and viſite her. The
great Turke, who had not other ioy, then his faire Daughter
Targiana, as loath to diſpleaſe her, granted her requeſt: but hee
could perſwade her to take no other company, thē the two Damoſels,
the foure Eſquires, and Florian, who was vſually called
in the Court, the Chriſtian knight. They departed on their
iourney, very brauely and gallantly appointed, arriued in ſhort
time within y• Dominion of Conſtantinople, where riding thorow

a pleaſant valley thicke beſet with Trées, the Princeſſe deſired
to ſtay a while, till the heat of the day were ſomewhat paſſed.
Not long had they reſted them, but they eſpied foure knights
come riding towards them, who ſéeing the Princeſſe Targiana,
and being lately come from Conſtantinople, wher they had bin
vanquiſhed by Albayzar, in whoſe Shield was her picture ſo
naturally drawn, that the knights haue bin ouermuch blind
if they had miſtaken her: wherefore knowing, and perſwading
themſelues it was ſhe, one of them offred her theſe ſalutations.
Faire Lady, we eſtéeme it as lawfull and honourable, that they
to whom your beauty hath bene a cauſe of great loſſe and dammage,
ſhould haue the aduantage in recompence of their miſhappe,
to bring you to their Ladies, before whom your ſelfe
may manifeſt, the great difference that is betwéen you in beautie.
                     
                        Florian aroſe vp in an anger, and gaue them this anſwere:
Gentlemen, if you be well, follow your way, if you haue receiued
any miſchance, impute it to your folly, and not any occaſion
procéeding by your Ladies: as for this Lady, ſhee is not ſo
fond as to goe with you, nor I ſo fooliſh as to accompliſh your
will in ſuch a vaine requeſt. You anſwere ſo brauely (ſayde)
one of the Knights) that now we are fully determined ſhe ſhall
goe with vs: and if you ſéeme, or dare offer to offend her,
we ſhall quickly coole your courage, becauſe you are diſpoſed ſo
ſuddenly to chafe.
                     Then Florian mounted on horſbacke preſently, and came vnto
thē with theſe ſpéeches. Now am I determined, to try if your
worthines will proue according to your words, you may come
to me one after another, or all foure at once and if you pleaſe: for
diſloyalty can neuer ſhew it ſelfe, but where it is continually reſident.
Tuſh (ſaid one of the knights) do not hold ſuch a proude
opinion with your ſelfe, for one of vs alone will find you worke
enough and that is my ſelfe, who will be ſo bold as to ſtay your
haſtineſſe: as for my followes, I iudge they would thinke it diſhonour
to them, if they ſhould deale with ſuch a one as you. Florian
not able to abide theſe words, ran with ſuch courage againſt
this craking cōpanion, y• his ſpeare paſſing cleane thorow him,

he threw him dead to the ground: then the other comming violently
vpon him, he ſerued them in ſuch ſort, that two more of
them were ſlaine, the other was glad to ſaue his life by flight.
Florian being diſcharged of theſe foure knights, alighted from
his Horſe, and came before his lady Targiana: who was ſo wel
contented with the victory of her knight, as ſhe would haue béen
diſpleaſed, if Fortune had alotted him the contrary. And in this
pleaſure, ſéeing the night approch ſo faſt vpon them, ſhee commanded
the Eſquires, to plate their thrée Tentes in the bottom
of the Valley, neere to a gréene bancke, whereby there ran a
pleaſant little Brooke: thinkiug to finde more pleaſure, then to
remaine all night by the dead Knights. In quiet reſt they paſſed
there the night, becauſe the tediouſneſſe of their iourney, did
gladly wiſh them to enioy ſome eaſe.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LXXXII.
                     Of that which happened to Don Florian, departing out of the
Valley, where he vanquiſhed the foure Knights.
                     
                        WHen the cleare morning had awaked, the
Princeſſe Targiana and her company,
they packed vp their prouiſion, and departed
on their iourney, greatly deſiring to
be in the Court of the Emperour Palmerin.
In the afternoone they came into a goodly
forreſt, where ſtood an excellent faire foū
                        taine
very ingeniouſly framed, & it was reported, that the Emperor
Marcellus (who in his time, was curious to cauſe rare edifices
and braue inuentions to be framed) had erected this faire
fountain in the forreſt. Which ſéemed to be true for two cauſes:

the firſt, that this Emperor was very much affectioned to haue
his dwelling in a ſolitary place, néere to ſome pleaſant ſpring, or
ſome ſuch faire and coſtly Fountaine: and the ſecond, becauſe
the name of Marcellus was in many places about the Fountaine,
néere whereunto was two Knights, who ſuffered their
Stéeds to receiue the water.
                     
                        Targiana ſeeing ſuch a ſingular proſpect, in a place ſo conuenient
for repoſe, deſired the Prince Florian to pauſe there a while,
whereto he preſently agréed: when the Princeſſe taking off
her Maſke, the two Knights, who very well regarded her, affirmed
that it was ſhee, for whom Albayzar maintained his
valiant Iouſte. Wherefore, they conſented betweene themſelues,
to take her with them to their Ladies, through whom
their ſhame might be the better couered, which they had attained,
by receiuing the infortunate foile in the Iuſt: ſo putting
their Helmets on their heades, they approched néerer to the
Princeſſe, when one of them began as thus. Madam, you ought
not to wiſh ill to choſe, who receiuing a ſharpe repulſe by your
beautie, conceiue the courage of minde to ſéeke a remedie: for
you ſhall vnderſtand, that a Knight hath vanquiſhed vs at Conſtantinople,
who maintaining the excellent ſtate of your beauty,
hath woon the ſhields whereon were figured our Ladies, and
hath honoured you, with placing them at your féet. Wherefore
to let our fault paſſe with the more méeke penance, it behoueth
you to depart with vs: ſo ſhall our offence be the leſſe eſteemed
of thoſe, that both may and muſt command vs.
                     Me thinketh ſir (quoth Florian) that you ſhould not blame
the innocent, but the little defence in your ſelues to keepe your
Shieldes, without further preſuming on Fortune, who may
happen to prouide you a farre worſſe inconuenience. I perceiue
then (ſaid the Knight againe) that this Ladies beautie, cauſeth
you to vſe your tearmes ſo bluntly, which I doubt you are not
able to maintaine, albeit you may make good account of your
manhood.
                     That ſhall you trie ſir (quoth Florian,) and ſo cloſing his
Helmet, he charged them in ſuch order, as thy were both aſhamed
(againſt the dutie of Knighthoode) to aſſaile him, whoſe

ſtoutneſſe ſtill detained Targiana, with the death of one of thē,
which the other ſéeing, fell on his knees before the Princeſſe
with theſe words. Madame I deſire you to appeaſe your anger
with the death of my fellow, and the grieuous woundes that I
ha
                           •
                        d receiued, and let mercy pleade my cauſe, though I be vnworthy,
yet thinke I, that my life would but little pleaſure
you.
                     
                        Targiana beholding his repentance, deſired Florian that hée
would forgiue him: who preſently granted, commanding him
that the dead body ſhould bo caried away, whereto the Knight
not daring to gainſay, willed his eſquire, to lay him ouerthwart
before him vpon his Horſe, and ſo they departed together, the
Knight more grieued with himſelfe, then he was before he had
ſéene Targiana. Who walking on with Florian ſaid, that ſhee
thought there was no place of aſſurance in all the Countrey.
Truſt me, ſaid Florian, I neuer before ſawe it in this order, but
yet it ought not to be maruailed at, for one the one ſide the ſhield
of Albayzar, & the other ſide your beauty, cauſeth theſe aduentures
to happen as they do. For thoſe that haue bin vanquiſhed,
gaining the ſight of your excellent feature, cannot chuſe but
threaten themſelues with greater danger, for Nature framed
you onely, to bring all thoſe to extremity, that dare conceiue the
hardineſſe to behold you. Targiana ſéeing Florian ſo déepe in
his praiſes of her, ſtayed him with a Conge ouer the lippes, and
ſéeing a very faire Trée not farre from them, ſhe tooke him by
the hand, ſaying. Let vs goe walke a while vnder yonder faire

                           〈◊〉
                        , for my minde aſſureth me, that things will happen more
ſtrange, then any we haue yet ſéene. Madame (quoth Florian)
I would wiſh to come where is the greateſt danger, that you
might know how little I eſtéeme 
                           ••
                        neritie, being accompanied
with her, who is the onely ſhield of my ſafety. And if Albayzar
hauing but your picture, ouercōmeth the moſt puiſſant knights
in the world, what might I do, hauing the ſéemely perſō? which
maketh me to deſire, that Fortune would ſend a hazard, aboue
all other, then ſhould you ſee the forceable magnanimity of your
beauty engraned in this heart of mine, with ſuch a hauty diſpoſition,
that death, no, nor a thouſand deaths is able to withſtād

him, who preferreth the title of your excellencie▪ as the chiefeſt
honour vpon my Knightly Sword.
                     Theſe two Louers thus walking & talking, found the words
of the Princeſſe Targiana to be true indéede, for at the foote of
this Trée, they eſpied a goodly knight laid along, & no company
with him, for his Eſquire was accompanied to depart frō him,
that his Maiſter might the better report the amorous cōplaints
which were alwayes reſident in his penſiue minde, and this
knight had one very faire blew Armour, his helmet ſeruing vnder
his head the office of a Pillow, where he lay without receiuing
any reſt, but gaue forth ſighes & complaints in very dolefull
manner. Which Targiana & Florian deſirous to heare, and
loath to diſturbe him being ſo ſeriouſly buſied, withdrew themſelues
a litle ſo cloſely as they could, when the knight, not thinking
any to be ſo neare him, began to vnfold his griefe after this
order.
                     My Lady, how haue I béene offenſiue to you, that you ſhould
offer me ſo great vngentleneſſe? leauing me aliue to wiſh daily
for death, and yet you are ſo obſtinate, that you will not ſuffer
me die, onely that I might paſſe my time, in vneſtimable opinion
of endles torments. And to my greater griefe, I often wiſh
to prolong my life in doing you ſeruice, wherto you vſe ſuch vnfriendly
meanes, that you will not permit me to be imployed
therein, but as the onely Authour of mine euill, and daily occaſion
of my mercileſſe Paſſions, forget the extremitie I abide for
your loue, and in a neuer dying death, compell me to waſt 
                           〈◊〉
                        
courſe of my life. Which truſt me ſerueth very ſtrange, for that
I neuer ſaw affliction in any man, but there was ſome meane
whereby to tollerate it, as for mine, it kéepeth at one certaine
ſtay, and when it commeth to the beſt change, it falleth from an
Ague Quartaine, to a Quotidian, as if all miſhap were onely
meant to me. Other men ſuſtaine their griefe in hope of a ſhort
ende, but my Fortune is ſuch, that mine extreames will neuer
take ende, which vrgeth me to this beliefe, that you triumph
to ſée me tormented, and iudge me vnworthy to liue in your
ſeruice, in which vexation, I content my ſelfe ſo well as I
may.
                     
                        
But me thinks you ſhould remember, that rigour is not to
be ſhowne to him, who hath not deſerued it: which hauing conſidered
as you ought, you ſhall find, that you haue giuen too raſh
a recompence to him that hath deſerued a better reward, & that
your vngentlenes hath bin more, then either cuſtome can bold
you, or curteſie beare you in. And thus he ended her complaint
with ſuch a grieuous ſigh, as though hee had fetchht h
                           •
                        s latter
gaſpe. Florian attached with griefe, to heare the heauy tale of
this diſtreſſed knight, tooke his Lady Targiana by the hand to
returne: but the Knight hearing the noyſe, which the Silke apparell
of the Princeſſe made in the Buſhes, ſtarted vp, and putting
his Helmet on his head, came to the Prince Florian with
theſe words.
                     Abide Sir Knight, and becauſe againſt another time, you
ſhall learne more manners and diſcretion, defend your ſelfe, for
I truſt you ſhall report my Proweſſe, where you take occaſion
to rehearſe my complaints. Séeing Sir (quoth Florian) you are
ſo minded, it were folly for me to offer any excuſe, and therefore
procéede in your determination. So drawing their Swordes,
they beganne a very braue fight, charging one another in ſuch
dangerous manner, that Targiana commended this exployt aboue
all that ſhe had ſéene before. While they were thus animated
againſt one another, a Knight in gréene and white Armour
chanced to arriue there: in his Shield hée bare for his
deuiſe a Speare, which was pierced in many places, with
blowes that he had receiued he had two Eſquires attending on
him, and was deſirous to knowe the cauſe, why theſe two
Knightes endured the Combate ſo cruelly. Wherefore, hée
came to the Princeſſe Targiana, to knowe of her: but when he
had beheld her a while, he quite forgat what he ſhould demand:
and becauſe he was one of the knights that Albayzar had vanquiſhed,
he had knowledge of her preſently, wherfore, he ſet her
vp behind one of his Eſquires, and riding away with her, gaue
her theſe ſpéeches. Faire Lady, ſéeing theſe Knight are not
able to beare you company, I know none ſo worthy as my ſelfe
to kéepe you, for through you. I ſhall recompence all the diſhonour
I haue gotten.
                     
                        
                        Targiana ſéeing, that neither her faire intreaty, nor reſiſtance by
her ſmall ſtrength could pacifie him, & that Florian maintained
the Combate ſo fiercely, he could not heare her cry, beganne in
this order to perſwade him. I know not, Sir Knight, how you
dare preſume to make entrāce vpon an others poſſeſſion, ſeeing
that although you haue the power to carrie me away with you,
yet my good will and affection, ſhall alway be eſtranged to you.
And ſéeing there is no remedie, I pray you ſuffer me to goe on
foote to yonder Fountaine, where abide mine attendance, who
ſhall goe with me: aſſuring you, that they haue no weapons,
wherewith to aſſiſt againſt you, or defend me. I am content
(ſaid the Knight) to ſatiſfie your deſire, as he that moſt deſireth
to honor you in ſeruice: ſo they walked downe to the fountaine,
where at this time we minde to leaue them.
                     
                        Don Florian and the Knight were ſo earneſt in their enterpriſe,
that they neuer perceiued when Targiana was carried away:
but if they had ſeene her they were brought to ſuch weakneſſe
that they could not haue reſcued her. In which dangerous
eſtate, Fortune was ſo friendly vnto them, that Dramuſiande
(trauailing toward Conſtantinople, to recouer the ſhield of the
faire Miragarda) arriued there: where ſeeing the extremitie
that theſe two Knights were in, and knowing by the Armes
the Knight of the Dragon, as alſo beholding another Knight to
endure the Combate ſo well, he was greatly abaſhed, and fearing
to loſe the man he moſt loued, he gaue his horſe the ſpurs,
and ran betwéene them with theſe words.
                     Gentlemen, I deſire you at my requeſt to ende your debate,
for that your weakneſſe rather requireth reſt, then to continue
your diſcord in ſo extreame danger: at leaſt▪ Sir Palmerin
(ſpeaking to the Knight of the Dragon) you ſhould not refuſe to
grant my deſire, for in ſo doing, this other knight I hope ſhall
haue occaſion to thanke me. When Florian heard the name
of Palmerin, he conceiued ſuch griefe, that throwing his ſword
from him, he fell to the ground in manner as he had béene dead:
wherefore Palmerin, ſéeing ſo great debilitie in him, that he had
found ſo vertuous and valiant, commaunded Siluian to vnloſe
his Helmet, that he might receiue the ayre. But when hee

knew that it was Florian of the Deſart his brother, he was readie
to fall to the ground himſelfe, had not Dramuſiande vſed diligence
to ſtay him. Florian riſing, and ſéeing his brother Palmerin
ſo ill intreated, began to him in theſe words. How might I
recompence the great offence I haue committed, that forgetfulneſſe
ſhould ſo much gouerne my ſences, as not to know the
hardy blowes of my noble Lord? My noble brother (anſwered
Palmerin) ſeeme not on your part to take any thing amiſſe that
hath happened, but rather let vs bethinke with our ſelues, howto
requite the courteſie we haue found in our deere triend Dramuſiande.
                     
                     
                        Florian contented himſelfe with his Brothers anſwere, but
when his Eſquire had giuen him to vnderſtand▪ how a Knight
had carried away his Lady Targiana, he was ouercharged with
grie
                           •
                        e beyond all meaſure, and in this great heauineſſe, he determined
to make purſuite after him. But Palmerin would not
agree thereto: and moreouer Dramuſiande ſhewed him the danger
wherein he was at that preſent, making him faithfull promiſe,
that ſo ſoone as his wounds were brought into better eſtate
himſelfe would vndertake the trauaile, as earneſtly as hée
did the Shield of Miragarda. Yet for all this, the griefe of the
Prince Florian was ſo great, that neither counſell nor friendly
intreatie could perſwade him. But Dramuſiande hauing accompliſhed
the meane, to ſet both the Princes on Horſebacke,
departed with them from out the forreſt, when Florian caſting
his eye towards the Fouutaine, and thinking on her he had loſt
by ſuch miſfortune, the teares ſtanding in his eyes, he began as
thus.
                     Thou Valley, whoſe ent
                           •
                        ance ſéemed ſo pleaſant to mee, I
know that the iſſue will value my miſhap too deare: for neuer
will I ceaſe to trauaile, and yeeld my life among all miſchances,
till I haue found the ſwéete content I haue loſt, which by
no meane I know I can euer forget. When they departed the
Forreſt, they came to a Monaſtery, where their wounds were
cured with great facilitie: and Dramuſiande ſo ſoone as hee had
brought them to the place, went backe to the Valley, purpoſing
to fulfill that he had promiſed to Florian. And here the Hyſtory

leaueth theſe thrée Knightes: returned to him that had carried
Targiana away, perſwading himſelf in her company, to attaine
the title of immortall praiſe.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LXXXVIII.
                     Here ſhal be rehearſed, who the knight was that carried Targiana
away, and what happened to him in her company.
                     
                        REmembrance is made in the Hiſtory, how
the King of Denmarke had thrée Sonnes, al
of them prooued to bee noble and valiant
knights, eſpecially the eldeſt, who was called
Albanis of Freze, ſo renowned thorow his
fathers Kingdom, that there was no knight
durſt encounter with him. He being come to
the age of fiue and twenty yeeres, and hearing the braue report
of the Princeſſe Miragarda, he became ſo affectionat to her, that
leauing his Fathers Court, he trauailed to the Caſtle of Almarol,
accompliſhing many notable déeds by the way, and arriued
there at ſuch time, as Albayzar had carried the ſhield thence.
                     When he ſaw he could not attaine his will to enter the combat
he ſtaied till fortune would ſuffer him to ſée the princeſſe Miragarda,
at whoſe view hee became ſo ſeuerely vanquiſhed,
that he vowed if it were poſſible to bring her ſheeld againe, and
if Fortune did ſtand his friend ſo much, he purpoſed to make her
greatly beholding to him: but ſhe was of ſuch a ſtrange condition,
as I haue told you, that ſhee reioyced to receiue euerie
one, without making ſhew of their welcome. Albanis preuailing
in diuers aduentures, came to the Cittie of Conſtantinople,
where ſéeing the number of ſhields this valiant Moore
                        
had woon, and the great renowne was held euery where of his
valour, he purpoſed to manifeſt his courage againſt him. But
albeit his worthineſſe was very great, and that he brake thrée
Speares on the valiant Albayzar, yet was Fortune ſo much
againſt him, that he receiued the foyle, & his Shield was placed
among the conquered Knights. Being departed from thence,
out of opinion euer after to ſerue Miragarda, hee arriued in the
valley where Florian and Palmerin fought: where beholding
Targiana, he eſtéemed her the faireſt Creature that euer he had
ſéene, and knew it was ſhée, on whoſe behalfe Albayzar ſped
ſo happily. Wherevpon, he concluded to bring her with him to
Conſtantinople, to trie if Fortune would fauour him better againſt
Albayzar, hauing in his preſence the faire Targiana, to
whom he offered great honour and curteſie, which was not of
power, to altar the faithful affection ſhe bare to the Prince Florian.
                     
                     Wel, on they rid, and drawing néere to Conſtantinople, in an
euening they met a Knight in blacke Armour, riding very ſad
and heauily, to whom Albanis gaue ſpéech of friendly ſalutation:
but the Blacke Knieht rid on without making any anſwer,
whereat Albanis was ſomewhat diſpleaſed, and deſirous
to ſhew ſome courage before Targiana, he turned to the Blacke
Knight in this manner. Sir, albeit my words are ſo little eſtéemed
of you, that you haue made no ſhewe of a courteous anſwere,
yet doe I thinke it had béene your dutie, to offer ſome
friendly motion to this Lady: wherto the Blacke Knight made
this reply.
                     Good Sir, if I haue béene obliuious of my ſelfe towards this
Lady, I am ready to recompence the ſame in what ſhe ſhall
commaund: but if you ſéeme ſo diſcourteous in ſpéech, becauſe
I haue not ſaluted you, truſt me you are very farre from reaſon,
for my minde was ſo buſied with other affaires, that I neither
ſaw you before me, much leſſe did I heare you. I would faine
knowe, ſayde Albanis, from whence ariſeth the cauſe of your
doubt, to ſée if it be ſufficient, to excuſe your vnciuill behauiour.
Syr (quoth the Blacke Knight) I would wiſh you to
kéepe on in your iourney, for to tel the cauſe of my griefe to you,

would gladly pleaſure me, and but little profit you. Albanis being
deſirous to know what he had demanded▪ was ſo importune
on the Blacke Knight, that he tooke the Field at his pleaſure,
and encountred Albanis with ſuch force, that the horſe fell
downe with his ſhoulder broken, and before Albanis could recouer
himſelfe, the Blacke Knight alighted, and forced him to abide
his mercy, which done▪ he was riding away, but Targiana
came and ſtayed him thus.
                     Sir Knight, I deſire you, euen as you make hazard of your
perſon in many dangers and magnanimitie doeth accompany
you againſt all aduerſity, that you will not abandon thoſe who
liue in affliction, but beare the gentlenes of mind to keepe them
c
                           •
                        mpany. And if ſo be you trauaile to the Emperours Court,
ſuffer me to be a partner in your iourney, for that my buſineſſe
lyeth in that place, to expect a Knight▪ who conducted me in my
trauailes hither. Lady (anſwered the Blacke Knight) I
thought this knight had vndertook to conduct you, but now perceiuing
the contrary, and that you are minded to goe thither,
where of force I muſt be: I will pleaſure you in ſo ſmall a requeſt,
albeit the extremitie of my li
                           •
                        e ſtood thereon.
                     And thus they departed together, leauing Albanis more ſorrowfull
then euer he had bin. The Blacke Knight by the way,
requeſted of her, wherfore the Knight had enforced her to goe
with him, to whō 
                        Targiana ript vp the whole matter, wherefore
the Blacke knight gaue her greater honor, then he had done before,
for he knew it was ſhe, in whoſe cauſe Albayzar kept the
Shield of Miragarda, which made him ſomewhat to excuſe the
déede of Albayzar, for that the beauty of Targiana, would haue
vrged any Knight to aduenture the hardieſt exployt.
                     They arriued at Conſtantinople, whē 
                        Albeyzar was appointed
to depart from thence, and to carrie the Shields away with
him, becauſe none durſt aduenture to recouer thē, which made
the Emperor greatly agrieued, eſtéeming this y• greateſt ſhame
that euer happened in any Princes Court. On the other ſide,
Primaleon was ſo chafed, becauſe his Father would not grant
him to Combate with Albayzar, that he was minded to ſtay
his comming foure miles without the Citie, and to beare in

his Shielde the Image of Gridonia, which he had ſecretly cauſed
to be made, to ſée if he might vanquiſh Albayzar, and bring
backe the Shields to the ladies that had loſt them. But Fortune
ſo hindred him, that his purpoſe tooke not effect: and alſo
would not ſuffer Albayzar to depart thence with ſo great glorie.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LXXXIX.
                     How the Blacke Knight entred the Combat with Albayzar.
                     
                        THe Blacke Knight lodged that night without
the City, in the houſe of an ancient Gentleman,
becauſe he would not be knowne,
and the next morning, Targiana attyred her
ſelfe very ſumptuouſly, in a Gowne of the
Turkiſh faſhion, of Crimſon Sattin, adorned
with braue bi
                           •
                        laments of gold and precious
ſtones, and mounted on a Palfray as white as a Swan,
her Damoſels and Eſquires likewiſe very braue in apparrell,
and attēding on her in ſeemely order, in this maner ſhe came into
y• city, accompanied with the Black Knight, & arriued at the
Iuſting place, whē 
                        Albayzar had euen then conquered an Engliſh
knight, and placed his ſhield among the other. The Emperour
with all his Courtly company, behelding the braue geſture
of the Blacke Knight, with the noble company he brought with
him, had good opinion that he ſhould end the Iuſt: which made
the Ladies and the knights, to throng to the beſt places of ſight,
becauſe now they looked for ſome notable exploit: but that which
cauſed the greateſt amazement, was the beauty of the Princeſſe
Tagiana, with the rich and ſumptuous ſhew of her apparrell,
which made the people run on heāpes, with very great murmuring:
whereat Albayzar ſomewhat abaſhed, caſt his head aſide,

and ſéeing his Lady Targiana, he could hardly ſuſtaine himſelfe
from falling to the ground. The Blacke Knight ſtaide a good
while beholding the ſhields Albayzar had conquered: but when
he ſaw the portrait of the faire Miragarda, the teares ran down
his chéekes, and he began in this manner.
                     Madame, how is it poſſible, that the thing wherein Nature
hath ſhowne all her ſkill to make it ſurpaſſing faire, ſhould bee
in the power of him, that might be glad to be vanquiſhed by you?
for my ſelfe, I would triumph to be found ſo Fortunate at this
preſent, becauſe I deſire to die to maintaine the truth, and I
hope to diſcouer the deceit of Albayzar, in ſuch ſort, that his recompence
ſhall returne what he hath iuſtly deſerued. Albayzar
greatly reioyced to ſée his Lady Targiana, for whoſe loue ſhe had
attained ſuch eſtimation of honour, wherby he had ſo farre ouerſhot
himſelfe in his prodigall pleaſure, that he ſtood in a maze,
whether it was ſhe or no. The Black Knight hauing ended his
complaint, and ſéeing Albayzar ſo farre diſtracted, put himſelfe
a little néerer, and awaked him with theſe wordes. Albayzar,
whereon doeſt thou vſe thy mind ſo mutely? I aduertiſe thee,
that the Princeſſe in my company is called Targiana, the daughter
of the great Turke, who hath taken the pains to come hither
to ſée thy valour, which is ſo much blazed & commended through
the world. Albayzar at theſe words alighted from his horſe, and
hauing taken off his helmet, he came and kiſſed the hand of Targiana,
with this manner of ſalutation. Madame, I know not
how I may requite my ſelfe to you, hauing honored me ſo highly
aboue my deſert. Targiana receiued him very gratiouſly, giuing
him hearty thanks for his noble ſeruice, whereof ſhe made
ſuch eſtimation, that Florians deeds were preſently forgotten,
yea, and ſo farre banniſhed out of memorie, as though ſhe had
neuer ſéene him in all her life, manifeſting rightly the inconſtancie
of ſuch as regard their ſeruants, according as they are raiſed
in authoritie. Albayzar hauing done his duty to the Princeſſe
Targiana, mounted on horſebacke, and began thus to the
Blacke Knight. Sir Knight, I would faine know, what moued
you to bring my Lady hither, as alſo if you haue deſire to enter
the Iuſt, for vpon the preſenting your ſhield, you ſhal be receiued.
                     
                        
Sir (quoth the Blacke Knight) after the ſtrife is concluded
betwéene
vs, ſhe ſhall diſcourſe the certaintie thereof her ſelfe.
But as concerning the ſhield, which you ſay I muſt preſent, to
be allowed the Iouſte, I am at this time vnprouided thereof,
becauſe thou haſt diſloyally ſtolne it, which elſe I might haue
worne here to honour my Lady. Wherefore I haue thus determined
by my puiſſance, to cauſe thee confeſſe the ſame, before
this honourable aſſembly: and if Fortune fauoureth thee ſo
much, as to ſuffer me be vanquiwed at thy hands, faile not to
reuenge thy ſelf on me, as on the greateſt enemy that euer thou
haddeſt: but if I vanquiſh thée, I deſire no greater victorie, in
recompence of the trayterous wrong thou haſt offered me, then
to carry backe the Shielde of my Lady Miragarda, to the place
where it hath alway been accuſtomed to remaine. I am content
(anſwered Albayzar) that if Fortune permit thée conquerour
ouer me, thou enioy all theſe Shields ſhe hath ſuffered mée
to vanquiſh, and that thou bring me to the Caſtle of Miragarda
where ſhe ſhall ordaine for my life as pleaſeth her: and the like
ſhall my Lady Targiana deale with thée, if mine accuſtomed
good happē returne me the Victorie. Syr (quoth the Blacke
Knight) my will is thereto as ready as thine: albeit thou ſhalt
finde no more friendſhip at my hands, then I will offer to my
greateſt enemie.
                     The Emperor with all the company, were ſuddenly ſtrooken
into a great maruaile, when they had heard the wordes of the
Blacke Knight, eſpecially Primaleon, who deſired greatly to
haue knowledge of him, whereupon, the Iudges commanded
them the Field, and Targiana entred with them, according as
Albayzar requeſted.
                     The Trumpets ſounded, and the Knights mette ſo couragiouſly
with each other, that Albayzar was thrown to the groūd
his héeles vpward, and the Black Knight was diſmounted with
the Saddle betwéene his legges, becauſe the girtes of his horſe
were broken, or elſe he had kept on horſeback ſtill, which made
the Emperour to iudge, that Albayzar ſhould not depart with
ſuch honour as hee thought for. When they had drawne their
Swordes, they laid at each other in ſuch terrible manner,

that Albayzar thought he had neuer met with a ſtrōger knight
and the Blacke Knight very well eſtéemed the ſtrength of Albayzar:
ſo that the generall verdict was, neuer had been ſéene a
more hauty combat. For Albayzar was encouraged by his Lady
Targiana, & the Blacke Knight ſo animated with the picture
of Miragarda, that betwéene them was declared the deedes of
incredible proweſſe.
                     At laſt, Albayzar ſéeing his Armour ſo bedewed with his
blood, and himſelfe brought into ſuch extremitie, hee retyred to
take breath, and began thus to complaine. What do the noble
victories which I haue attained againſt many noble mindes,
preuaile me now in any thing? ſeeing that at this inſtant, I
muſt loſe all the glorie I haue gotten. Oh my Lady Targiana,
if I haue had the power to vanquiſh the beſt Knights in all the
world in your abſence, why ſuffer you one Knight to preuaile
ſo much againſt me in your preſence? to looſe my former honor,
is more deere to me then life, which falling out ſo contrary as
it doth, maketh me to thinke, that you are more affectionate to
ſome other then you are to me, which is the onely cauſe the victorie
will not fall on my ſide. But yet▪ what Princeſſe is there
in all the world, more braue in bountie, beyond you in beautie,
or better deſerueth the title aboue all titles then you? truely,
I may loſe the victorie of this Combat, through defect of my
weakneſſe, but not by any fault that is in your excellency, wherto
the faireſt aliue may not ſeeme to aſpi
                           •
                        e.
                     The Blacke Knight on the other ſide, ſéeing his dangerous
eſtate, and that he could not aſſure himſelfe any good ſucceſſe, ſilently
to the picture of Miragarda, he entred into theſe ſpeeches.
Madame, ſeeing it hath pleaſed you, to vſe me in affaires that
haue greatly touched me, I deſire you not to forſake me in this
enterpriſe, which is wholly yours, wherein, though Alba
                              •
                           zar
hath vanquiſhed many Knightes to his honour, and praiſe of
Targiana, who excelleth all theſe figured Ladies in beauty, yet
ſhew you your ſelfe excelling all other in that ſingular gift, to
ouercome him that hath conquered ſo many. For I perſwade
my ſelfe, you wil not fauor him that hath done you ſuch wrong,
as diſloyally to beare the Shield from your Caſtle: but let me

that am your true and faithfull ſeruant, giue you the honour of
this hautie attempt, and afterward deale with this curſed carkaſe
of mine, euen as it ſhal ſtand with your gratious pleaſure.
After this they fell to to the combate a freſh, when the Emperor
ſéeing the ſmall defence they had for themſelues, ſuppoſed they
could not long continue the fight, and Primaleon through opinion
which came by nature, in griefe of mind receiued perfectly
the cruell wounds of the Blacke knight, as though he had felt
them vpon his owne body, becauſe he ſuppoſed him to be of his
linage. And by the cruell behauiour they vſed to ech other, the
Empres & Gridonia departed, as not able to abide the grieuous
ſight of theſe two champions, who after they had griped one an
other by the cloſing their arms, Albayzar, 
                        
                           •
                        s too weake to reſiſt
any longer, fell to the ground, whereat the Blacke knight reioyced
and vncloſed his helmet to haue ſmiten off his head, but the
Emperour called to him to vſe more mercy, yet he makking as
though he heard not, lifted vp his ſword, when the Princeſſe
Targiana fell before him on her knées, with theſe ſpéeches. Syr
Knight, firſt I deſire you to ſtrike off my head, and afterward
proceed in what ſhall pleaſe you, for loth would I be to ſee him
die that hath ventured his life in danger, to do me ſuch honourable
ſeruice. The Blacke Knight ſeeing the modeſtie of the
Princeſſe, was moued with pittie, wherewith he granted Albayzar
his li
                           •
                        e, and then the iudges came into the field to haue
the Blacke Knight honoured, according as became a victorious
conquerour. But he would not depart out of the Field before
the Portrait of the faire Miragarda was placed in the middeſt,
where, againſt all reaſon, the Princeſſe Targiana ſupplied the
roome, whom he led with him, to be honoured according as her
hie eſtate did deſerue. The Emperour commaunded Albayzar
ſhould be led into his Tent, meane whiles the Blacke knight
kiſſing his highneſſe hand, vpon his knee began in this manner.
Moſt dread and mighty Emperour, I deſire that this Princes
may be regarded aboue all in your Court, for you ought to ſhew
more honor to her, then to any other perſon that I know. Whē
the Emperour knew that the Blacke knight was his noble nephew
Florendos, his heart was ſuppriſed with an vnſpeakable

ioy: and chiefely his Father the Prince Primaleon, who cauſed
Albayzar to be brought into the Palace, & vnderſtanding that
Targiana was the daughter of the great Turke, lodged her with
the faire Princeſſe Polinarda his daughter, who greatly deſired
it at the hands of the Emperour, and there was we as honorably
ſerued, as had ſhe béene in the Court of the great Turke her
Father the Prince Florendos and Albayzar, had great care
vſed to their dangerous wounds: and the ſhield of the Princeſſe
Miragarda, was now held in chiefeſt eſtimation.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XC.
                     How a Damoſell of Thrace brought a ſtrange aduenture to
the Court of the Emperour Palmerin.
                     
                        WHile Florendos and Albayzar remained
at the cure of their wounds, the Empreſſe
and Gridonia, as glad that the victory
chanced to Florendos would often come
and viſit him, reporting their iudgements
on the ſingular forme of Miragarda, which
talke partly wrought as much for his
health, as the medicines that were applied
to his wounds. Likewiſe, the Emperour and Primaleon,
would often viſite Albayzar, vſing comfortable ſpeeches, wherby
he might forget the griefe he ſuſtained, becauſe he was vanquiſhed:
but Albayzar diſſembled with a good countenance, deuiſed
with himſelfe how he might worke iniury to Florendos,
which afterward he did, as you ſhall perceiue at large in the ſecond
volume of this Hiſtorie. In the meane while, the Court of
the Emperour, was ſtored with the moſt renowned knights,
and Ladies of incomparable ſtate of beautie in all the world: ſo
that there wanted no other thing there, thē the two renowned
Knights of England, whoſe preſence in the Court, made the
Emperor to thinke, y• then no force might preuaile againſt him.

While they were in their triumphing, the Empreſſe, Gridonia,
Targiana and Polinarda, ſitting vnder the Cipreſſe Trées néere
a very faire Fountaine, a Lady of a maruellous and mighty
ſtature preſented her ſelfe before them, whoſe ſéemly ieſtures
and ſumptuous ſhew in apparell, made them beléeue ſhee was
of great authoritie. Her attyre was of Sattin, cut and laide
out with cloath of ſiluer, a purple Robe compaſſing her bodie,
wheron was placed a number of rich and coſtly precious ſtones,
her long ſleeues hanging down
                           •
                        , were thicke beſet with Birds,
Harts, and other braue deuiſes of Foules and Beaſts of gold,
that the eie could neuer be wearied, beholding a thing of ſuch ineſtimable
value: there attended on her two Knights, the one
hauing in his armes a very faire coffer, which was cloſed with
little Lockes of Gold, and brauely garniſhed with Pearles and
precious ſtones of maruellous coſt and reputation.
                     When the Emperour and all were placed, to regard the cauſe
of her arriuall, ſhe receiued the Coffer of the Knight, and with
a little Key of Gold that hung about her necke, ſhe opened it:
whereout ſhe tooke a curious and coſtly Cup, which was ſo artificialle
compoſed, that beholding the outſide, might eaſily be diſcerned
what was within, which was nothing but water, ſo hard
congealed and frozen, that it was impoſſible to moue any moity
thereof. After ſhe had held it a while in her hand, ſhe deliuered
the Coffer againe to the Knight, whereon ſhe ſet the Cup, and
looking wiſhly vpon all the company, at laſt ſhe began to vtter
theſe ſpeeches.
                     Moſt noble Emperour, I haue been in ſo many Princes
Courts, to make triall of the ſtrange aduenture contained in
this Cuppe, that, not finding any to ende the ſame, I am wearie
to ſeeke auy further, as alſo out of opinion of any good hap.
Except that now in your Highneſſe Court, which is moſt honoured
and eſteemed vpon the whole earth, I may find ſuch expected
Fortune, as of long time I haue failed in, which doth encourage
me ſomewhat, conſidering there is not the like. But
firſt before the triall be attempted, I will diſcourſe the cauſe of
this rare aduenture, becauſe each one of theſe noble gentlemen,
may be the better affectioned to her, who holdeth his heart as

chiefe Miſtreſſe of his thoughts. There was ſometime ruling in
Thrace, a king who was name Sardamant, ſo excellent well
ſéene in the Art of Magique, that for the qualitie of that gift, he
ſurpaſſed all other liuing in his time. This King had a daughter,
of no leſſe beauty then Courtly behauiour, who was greatly beloued
of two knights, the one called Brandimar, the other Artibel,
but they kept cloſe their ſecreat loue from each other, til fortune,
the enemy to their good hap, diſcouered their good liking to
the diſpleaſ
                           •
                        re of both. It chanced that this Princeſſe, being named
Brandiſia, eſteemed chiefly the ſeruice of Artibel, which her
Father miſdoubting, kept her cloſe in a Tower: but Loue had
woon ſuch a perfection betwéen them, that Artibel accompliſhed
a deuiſe without ſuſpition, as oftentimes to viſite & ſollace with
his faire Brandiſia, for by a Ladder of Ropes, he climed ſo often
to the window of the Princeſſe, that time conuerted the iſſue of
their delights, to vna bellae figliola. Brandimar paſſing oftentimes
by the tower of Brandiſia, deſirous to ſée his delight, which theſe
walles encloſed, one night by chance, ſaw when Artibel came
downe by his accuſtomed Ladder of ropes, which made him ſo
offended, that forgetting the league of amity between thē, he ſet
vpon him, where with their cloaks wrapped about their armes,
and their rapie
                           •
                        s drawn, after a few words, they fel to ſtrokes,
which by fortune the king heard, and comming thither with his
gard, he found Brandimar almoſt ſlaine. Whereupon Artibell
was committed to priſon, and Brandimar hauing declared all to
the King, ſhortly after yeelded his life. The king knowing that
his daughter was conceiued with child, kept Artibell in priſon
till time of her deliuerance, vpon which day hee cauſed him to
be beheaded, and in this Cup, he ſent her the hart of her beloued
Artibell. The Princeſſe perceiuing the cruell reuenge of her father,
and deſirous to accompany her déere friend in death, tooke
the Cup, and making a thouſand complaints ouer the heart of
Artibel, ſhe continued mourning ſo long, till ſhe had filled this
Cup with her teares. Afterward thinking this not ſufficient,
to manifeſt the faithful loue ſhe bare to the knight, ſhe tooke the
Cup and ſent it to her Father, vttering to the Meſſenger theſe
ſpeeches. Tell my Father, that it may be, he hath ſent mee this

true and faithfull token, of my moſt affectionate & loyall friend,
only that I ſhould ſhew in the maſſaring of mine owne life, my
hart was iointly vnited, with this harmeleſſe heart of my deare
Artibell, whom ſince I loued in life, I wil not forſake in death,
neither for my Fathers rigor to him, and cruelty to me, but will
honour his death with loſſe of my life, my Father being the Author
of all this euill. So taking out the heart, and the meſſenger
departed with the Cup, ſhe tricked her ſelfe in her braueſt apparel,
& putting the heart of her friend Artibel between her breſts,
with theſe words. Oh Artibel, receiue thine own Brandiſia, ſhe
caſt her ſelf headlong out of the chamber window, where death
tooke his due of this faithfull and conſtant Princeſſe. The king
ſorrowfull for his Daughters death, ſolemnized her Funerals
with great honour and dignity, and taking the Child, whom he
hath named Leonarda, he put her in the ſelf ſame tower, accom
                        
                           •
                        anied
with Ladies & gentlewomen, where ſhe was nouriſhed
for the ſpace of foure yeeres. At the end wherof, he made an Enchantment
halfe a mile from his place in a Valley, wherein he
likewiſe Enchaunted the yong princeſſe Leonarda, which Enchantment
he had vſed in ſuch order, that none might ſée her, nor
yet come neare vnto her, for a far off might be diſcerned a goodly
Fortreſſe, but when any endeuoured to come neare it, it vaniſhed
away, & nothing could be ſéene. When he had ſo done, he
tooke this Cup, wherein he had congealed & frozen the teares,
vſing his Art ſo vpon them, that he hath brought them into this
ougly blackneſſe which you now behold. And at the houre of his
death (ſeeing his kingdome ſhould remaine deſtitute of an heire
to ſuccéed him) he commanded this Cup ſhould be carried into
all Princeſſe Courts in the world, to paſſe the hands of many
noble Knights, vntill the teares came to the firſt eſtate and condition.
So ſhould the knight be found, that ſurpaſſeth al other in
worthineſſe and conſtancy of Loue, as alſo that is able to expell
and end the enchauntment of the princeſſe Leonarda, who ioyning
mariage with her, ſhall gouerne the ſcepter and Diademe
of Thrace. But if ſo be, the Knight▪ who hath the power to accompliſh
this aduenture, ſhall haue vowed his faith to ſome other,
ſo that the princeſſe cannot marry with him, the commandement

of the king is ſuch, that the Princeſſe Leonarda, ſhall
ioyne in Mariage with him, that this aforeſayde Knight ſhall
command.
                     Aud one thing more you ſhall vnderſtand, that if any knight
may equal himſelfe in faith and loyalty, with him that hath the
power to molifie theſe teares, the aduenture is ſuch, as they wil
turne to their former obſcure eſtate againe, but if ſuch a one
come, as may not in that excellent gift be comparable to the
Knight, then is there nothing can cauſe them to to change their
colour. So that if any knight aduance himſelfe to this cup, and
is not a faithfull and conſtant Louer, the teares ſhall remaine
as darke as you ſée them at this preſent. Likewiſe, after the Enchantment
ſhalbe fully finiſhed, that the Lady and the Knight,
may beheld themſelues in the teares, they ſhall ſée the perfect
forme of thoſe perſons, who are their deareſt friends, and their
greateſt enemies. And if any will knowe thoſe that are leaſt in
fauour, vpon the taking of this Cup, they ſhall féele a ſauour ſo
ſtrong, that they ſhall hardly be able to endure it, and to the contrary,
he that is more beloued then his fellow, by higher degrée
in affection, ſhall cauſe a greater brightneſſe to be in the Cuppe.
Wherefore moſt redoubted Emperour, I deſire you that your
Knights may try this aduenture, and your ſelfe to giue the firſt
attempt, becauſe you may the better declare the loue you beare
to your gratious Lady the Empreſſe.
                     Lady (quoth the Emperor) you deſire me to fall into troubleſome
extreames, by deſiring me to aduenture ſo great a matter.
Neuertheles, I will once hazard vpon Fortune, to pleaſe them
that cannot finiſh this hard accident, albeit I thinke my ſelfe
not able to do it. For the like matter haue I enterpriſed, trying
my ſelfe with the Glaſſe of the King Tarnaes, being the like aduenture
as this, and ended by the vertuous and noble Prince
Don Edward, and 
                           •
                        s I thinke not to end this, ſo ſhall the Empreſſe
excuſe me, conſidering my ancient time. Then aroſe a
great noyſe among the Knightes, who deſired to try the Cup,
beauſe their Ladies ſhould bee the better aſſured of their conſtant
Loue.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XCI.
                     Of thoſe that came to try the aduenture of the Cuppe, and of
that which happened vnto them.
                     
                        GReat affection had the Emperour, to ſhewe
ſomewhat his conſtant loyaltie in the aduenture
of his Cup: wherefore receiuing it
at the hands of the Damoſel, he turned him
toward the Empreſſe, and ſaid. Truſt mée
Madame, if it be true, that faithful loue may
conuert theſe teares, then I perſwade my
ſelfe to haue ſome title in it. So holding the Cuppe a great
while, and perceiuing that it changed not the colour, he began
to be ſomewhat offended with himſelfe: wherefore the Damoſell
receiued it againe of him, and to mooue him from ſadneſſe,
gaue him theſe ſpéeches. My gratious Lord, I ſée that age
hath decayed the force of your affection: but had this aduenture
béene deliuered you when time was, I know it could not haue
remained thus at this preſent. Primaleon preſently came and
tooke the Cuppe, but his Fortune was no more fauoured, then
the Emperor his Father: which vrged him to ſome cauſe of anger,
fearing that Gridonia would haue giuen him but ſlender
thankes. Then came the Prince Vernar, and in his hand the
Cup receiued a little brightneſſe: whereby the Ladies knewe,
that the Damoſell had reported nothing but the trueth. After
Vernar, came the King Polendos, and in his hand the Cup became
as blacke againe as euer it was: whereat the Ladies began
to laugh, and the Damoſell of Thrace ſpake to him in this
order. Syr Polendos, if the loue you beare your Lady, be of no
more effect then it ſéemeth at this preſent, I iudge ſhe hath cauſe
to be but little beholding to you. Gentlewoman, anſwered Polendos,
it is ſo long time ſince amorous thoughts haue let me,
that it is no maruaile, if Fortune ſéeme ſo aduerſe to me now.

Then aroſe the prince Gratian, thinking to end the aduenture,
by the faithfull loue he bare to his faire Claritia, and in his hand
the Cup receiued more brightnes then it did when the Prince
Vernar had it, whereat his heart was rauiſhed with vnſpeakeable
ioy, and giuing the Cup to his brother Guerin, it became
as blacke againe as euer it was. The ladies greatly delighted to
ſée the variable quality contained in the cup: ſo that they had an
aſſured meane, to ſée which of their knights might excel in loyaltie
of loue. Berolde P. of Spaine, the onely beloued of the faire
Oniſtalda, aduanced himſelfe to take the cup, vſing this ſilent
opinion to himſelfe. Madame, I haue euer deſired your helpe in
all mine affaires, but at this preſent I craue no ſuccour at your
hands, for that the merit of my conſtancy, promiſeth me a large
title in this honourable aduenture. Then taking the cup, it ſeemed
brighter then euer it had béene, and the frozen teares began
ſomewhat to melt, which mooued the Princeſſe Oneſtalda to ſo
great pleaſure, that ſhe could not conceale it, but the Ladies ſitting
by did perceiue it. After him came the P. Platir, the knight
of Fidelia, daughter to the king Tarnaes: but albeit he bare her
great good will, the Cup was not ſo bright in the hands of Berolde,
but while he held it, it became as black. Then came Bellizart,
ſeruant to the faire Deniſia, & Dramian the knight of Florian:
but both of them ſped alike in their enterpriſe. Francian,
who loued the faire Bernard, tooke his turne next to trie the
Cup, but he ſped ſo ill, that he wiſht himſelfe out of the place: for
in his hand the cup loſt all the brightnes, that the other knights
had brought it into, whereat he was greatly agrieued, and the
Emperor laughing a good at him, began merrily in theſe words.
Sir Francian, you may cōmend your fortune to be in ſuch libertie,
for the Ladies will not receiue any haſtie occaſion, whereby
they may thinke good to fal in loue with you, and you may ſhape
your ſelfe of like diſpoſition, at no time to be haſtie in truſting
them. After him came Friſol, Oneſtalde, Eſtrellant, Tenebrant
Luyman of Burgondy, Pompides, Bla didon, Germaine of
Orleance, Dridan, Polinarde, Tremoran, Baromont, & Albanis
of Freeze: amongſt which company, the beſt fauoured were
Polinarde, Beromont, and Germaine of Orleance, yet none of

them might be compared to the Prince Berolde. The Damoſel
of Thrace was in great deſpaire, thinking the aduenture would
not be ended in the Emperours Court, when preſently came the
ſorrowfull prince Floraman, & at the Emperors requeſt he tooke
the cap, ſaying: My Lady, remember the danger wherin you ſée
me, as alſo the griefe I ſuſtaine for your ſake: wherout you may
deliuer me if you pleaſe, & ſet me once againe in my ioyfull ſtate.
When he had ended his ſpéeches, the Cup receiued ſuch a maruellous
brightneſſe, & the congealed teares melted ſo ſuddenly,
that the whole aſſembly, thought the aduenture to be fully finiſhed:
but the Damoſell knowing the contrary, went to the Emperour,
who, in her preſence, ſpake thus to the Prince of Sardignia.
I know well Sir Floraman, that this aduenture was
reſerued for you, becauſe the firmeneſſe of your faith, gaue mée a
great deale more aſſurance, then the experience I haue to report
this enterpriſe: and truſt me I am very glad it is ſo fallen out,
becauſe now, all other will hold you in the eſtimation, that my
ſelfe of long time repoſed in you. The ladies, who euer bare good
affectiō to Floramá, were now a great deal more vrged towards
him: which y• damoſell perceiuing, & that euery one ſuppoſed the
aduenture to be ended, to the Emperor ſhe began in this maner.
My gratious Lord, I deſire you that all y• knights may abide in
this place, for albeit the cup is brought into this good effect, yet is
not y• brought to paſſe which muſt be finiſhed. I know ſaid Floraman,
that fortune is wont to cauſe me begin euery enterpriſe
with ioy, but at the concluſion thereof, ſhe threatneth my death.
Then Don Roſuel & diuers knights aſſaied the Cup, ſome ſpéeding
well, & ſome ill, euē as their conſtancy did differ in quality.
At laſt, whē the whole cōpany were minded to retire for y• time,
they eſpied a knight in gréene Armour, to preſent himſelf before
him, whoſe ſtoutnes of behauior cauſed al to feare that tooke occaſion
to behold him, there was none y• knew him but Primaleō
                        
who preſently ſaid, that it was the giant Dramuſiand, wherfore
he deſired the Emperor to ſtay a while, when aduancing himſelf
to méet him, Dramuſiand came & imbraced him with very great
reuerence. When he had opened his helmet, Primaleon brought
him before the Emperor: where humbly vpon his knée, he began

in this maner. I deſire you my gratious Lord and Father, that
you wil receiue this knight with your accuſtomed honor, for that
his valiant and noble behauior, hath made him as much renowned
as any on the earth. The Emperour knowing that it was
Dramuſiande, would not ſuffer him to kiſſe his hand, but imbracing
him in his armes, began as followeth. Albeit your friendly
dealing, did long time detaine my life in an vnexpected danger,
yet the good report of your Proweſſe, and noble behauiour ſince
that time, hath vrged mee to forget all, vowing my ſelfe your
friend to command, and ſo I pray you for euer to vſe me. Dramuſiande
very often thanked the Emperor, and Primaleon preſented
him to the Empreſſe and Gridonia, who albeit they
made a ſhew of a friendly welcome, yet could they not do it hartily,
conſidering the griefe they ſuſtained for the impriſonment of
Primaleon. For they ſay, it is the nature of women, not to forget
and forgiue their iniuries, but to ſéeke reuengement, when
they are thought to be out of all remembrance. The Emperour
tooke Dramuſiande by the hand, and reported to him, how they
were gathered together, to ſée who could finiſh the aduenture of
the Cup, wherfore he deſired him to make trial therof, to ſée if he
were ſo happy as to end it. I ſhal (quoth Dramuſiand) do what
pleaſeth your Grace to command mee, and if Fortune ſtand ſo
much my friend, that I may preuaile aboue al in this enterpriſe,
I ſhall manifeſt the ſoueraigne duty, wherein loue hath bound
me: but if I faile therin, I ſhal haue the leſſe cauſe of maruell, becauſe
it is not the firſt time that fortune hath forgotten me. So
receiuing the cup of the damoſel, it became almoſt as cléere, as it
did in the hand of the Prince Florian, whoſe hap was as yet ſuppoſed
for the moſt perfect, and then the Emperour commended
Dramuſiande, to think that a perſon ſo ſtrong and valiant, ſhuld
haue ſuch faithfull countenance and honour in loue. The day
was ſo far ſpent, that they al returned to the Pallace, the Emperour
deſiring the damoſel not to depart as yet, becauſe he would
haue Albaizar and Florendos, ſhould make their trial likewiſe,
for he verily thought, that one of them ſhould haue the power to
ende it. The Damoſell promiſed to accompliſh his pleaſure,
wherefore ſhe walked with them, and made her abiding in the
Emperours Pallace.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XCII.
                     How Florendos and Albayzar proued the Aduenture of the
Cup, and how Palmerin and Florian arriued at the Court.
                     
                        
                           DRamuſiande (as the Hiſtory reporteth) hauing
left Palmerin and Florian, to followe
the Princeſſe Targiana, was aduertiſed,
that the Knight that carried her away, had
béene conquered by one, who conducted her
with him to Conſtantinople, aud that it
was the Prince Florendos, who likewiſe
had conquered the valiant Albayzar: whereat hee was ſomewhat
diſpleaſed, becauſe he thought none ſo woorthie to reſtore
her ſhield, as himſelfe, ſeeing it was taken thence, at the time
when he kept it. Yet ſéeing that Florendos had gotten the aduantage
hée diſſembled his griefe in the beſt manner he could:
and tooke leaue of the Damoſell (who reported al this vnto him
and ſtayed not till he came to Conſtantinople, as I haue declared
already: where, a while I will craue pardon to leaue him.
Palmerin of England, and the Prince Florian of the Deſart his
Brother, ſtayed twenty two dayes in the Monaſtery, where
the Giant Dramuſiande left them: and when they were very
well healed, and appointed with new Armour, which Siluian
had cauſed to made for them, they departed thence, greatly
thanking the Religious, for the good diligence they had vſed
to them, in their weakeneſſe. When they were neare to Conſtantinople,
becauſe they ſuppoſed it was not time as yet to enter
the Citie, they alighted from their horſes, to contemplate of
diuers accidents that happened in their minds. Elorian, in whō
the paſſions of Loue could take no certaine place, but diſſembling
euery thing to content his fancy, layde him downe vnder
a Trée, to muſe on the aduentures, which Fortune ſhould
permit him to enterpriſe: and Palmerin with many along looke

towards the Citie, recounted the great fauour he found in the
Emperors Court, as alſo his gentle departure from the Princeſſe
Polinarda: ſo that he was determined not to enter the Citie
at all, had not Siluian vſed his perſwaſions to the contrary.
                     When they had vſed their conceits about ſuch matters as liked
them beſt, they mounted on horſebacke, & rode toward the
Court: where they arriued, at ſuch time as the Emperour was
riſen from dinner, and the Empreſſe with her Ladies come into
the great Hall, to ſée a farther triall of the Cup, by the Prince
Florendos and Albayzar, who though they were not perfectly
healed, came foorth of their Chambers, to manifeſt the conſtant
loue that they alwayes conceiued in their loyall hearts.
                     
                        Palmerin & Florian went vp into the great Hall, leauing Siluian
at the Court gate, leaſt perhaps they ſhould be knowne:
and when they were come before the Emperor, Albayzar, who
lay vpon a cloth of blacke Veluet, beholding the beautie of the
Princeſſe Targiana, aroſe, & tooke the Cup in his hand, when it
became as cleare as when the prince Floraman held it, whereat
Targiana receiued gread pleaſure, but Albayzar was not ſatiſfied,
becauſe he ſaw the aduenture was not concluded.
                     
                        Palmerin (who becauſe he would not be knowen, bare a Dragon
for his deuiſe in his Shield) and his Brother Florian ſtanding
with him, ſéeing the Cup that was ſo blacke, changed into
ſuch brightneſſe in the hand of Albayzar, began to conceiue a
great occaſion of maruaile, deſirous to knowe how the chance
had happened.
                     The Emperor very often beholding them, and iudging that
they were perſons of ſome great authority, cōmanded that they
ſhould be placed by him, where he began to diſcourſe at large of
the cup, deſirous to know likewiſe of whēce they were, but they
excuſed themſelues ſo honourably, that the Emperor held himſelfe
cōtented. While theſe two Engliſh princes held talke with
the Emperor, the Prince Florendos, who was leaning on the
lap of his ſiſter the Princeſſe Polinarda, aroſe, & muſing on the
beauty of Miragarda, he began in his mind to vſe theſe ſpéeches
madame, now would I, that you might ſée the triall of my troth,
which might moue you hereafter to vſe me, according as you

proue me loyall in truth. So taking the Cup of the Damoſell,
it receiued a farre more brightneſſe then euer it had before, and
the teares were brought into ſuch eſtate, as though they had not
béen frozen at all: whereat the Emperour and Primaleon were
very ioyfull to ſée ſuch a perfect proofe of Amitie in the Prince
Florendos, which made them to requeſt of the Damoſell, if the
aduenture were as yet ended.
                     Moſt noble Emperor (quoth ſhe) the Cup & teares are tranſformed
to the greateſt perfection that any yet could bring them:
but command them to come néere, who haue not as yet made any
proofe at all, and then if the Cup receiue no change, eſtéeme
this Knight the moſt conſtant & faithfulleſt Louer in the world.
But if ſo be the Cup do alter againe, beleeue aſſuredly, that that
Knight ſhall excéede him, either in knightly déeds of Armes, or
elſe in the Amorous conſtancy of a Louer.
                     The Emperour ſeeing that al his knights had aſſaied the cup,
he deſired the Knight of the Dragon & his fellow to make triall
alſo: but Palmerin was ſo buſie in beholding his faire Polinarda,
that he heard not the Emperors words, wherfore Florian, who
was frée from a Louers paſſions, albeit he could diſſemble with
Ladies indifferently, aduanced himſelfe with theſe wordes to
his Lady Targiana. My Lady, I defi
                           •
                        e your aſſiſtance in paſſing
this danger, and to forſake me in all other, onely let me enioy
this in recompence of my deſert: and as for the thing you
hold of greater eſtimation, reſerue that for him, to whom you are
in greater affection. Now as theſe words were farre diſtant
from the loyalty of a louer, ſo did his holding the Cup manifeſt
the ſame: for while he held it, there is nothing in the world can
be iudged more blacke or grieſly, then the Cup ſéemed at that inſtant.
Targiana, who knew him, yet would not be known therof,
for the griefe ſhe conceiued at this accident
                           ••
                         retired into her
Chamber, repenting that euer ſhee had beſtowed her loue on
him, who was eſteemed of ſo ſmall fidelity. The Damoſell of
Thrace, receiuing the Cup againe of Florian, ſaid. Sir Knight,
if Fortune ſpéed you no better in déedes of Armes, then your actions
manifeſt your faithfulneſſe in loue, I would 
                           •
                        ounſell you,
neuer hereafter to purſue aduentures.
                     
                        
Faire Lady (anſwered Florian) if you recompence your ſeruants
according to deſert, it would greatly grieue me to fal into
ſo hard deſtiny, but your farre diſtance from reaſon, maketh me
to eſteeme it the leſſe, for if I ſhould paſſe on farther, and ſuffer
my ſelfe to be inueigled in your ſnares, I were the leſſe to bee
pittied, when I ſeeme to bewaile the languiſhing of my life.
                     This anſwer of Florian, albeit it ſéemed acceptable to many
of the knights, yet the Ladies receiued it in great contempt: becauſe
their naturall quality is ſuch, to yéelde according to the
déedes of thoſe, who ſubmit themſelues to abide their pleaſure:
and contrariwiſe, their naturall inclination is, to vſe ſuch recompence,
as their ſeruice they haue receiued neuer deſerued.
                     The Damoſel of Thrace came to the Knight of the Dragon,
deſiring him to try the Cup, according as diuers other had done
before him, perſwading him, that of a perſon ſo knightly as hée
ſéemed, there was to be expected a very good iſſue. Palmerin ſéeing
the matter brought to this extremity, caſt his eye on the
Damoſell, and his heart on her, whoſe obſtinacy cauſed him to
die with griefe, entring into theſe ſpéeches. If this aduenture
be of a truth, then I pray you my Lady, henceforth to excuſe the
fearfulneſſe of him, who dares not preſume to think what is in
your mind. So receiuing the Cup, it contained the ſame quallitie,
as it did in the hand of the Prince Florendos, becauſe it
could not exceede farther.
                     The Emperour being very glad, tooke the Cup to prooue the
reſt of the Damoſels words, and in the bottome of the teares,
he beheld the Empreſſe as pleaſant as euer he had ſéene her,
which made him to thinke the aduenture was ended, but doubting
the contrary, he requeſted of the Damoſell, if the Cup ſhuld
alway remaine in that ſtate, whereto the Damoſell anſwered
thus. It muſt 
                           〈◊〉
                         be tried, if it wil turne againe to the former
blacknes, but I deſire you that this Knight (meaning the prince
Florian) make triall thereof no more, for he hath ſo little deſire,
to kéepe his loue faithfull to any Lady, that the Cup in his hand
will ſtand in great danger, at which pretty triump, the Ladyes
conceiued good occaſion of laughter.
                     
                        
Then the Emperour commanded, that al the knights ſhould
take the Cup againe, but their labour was in vaine, for it neuer
ſéemed to alter the colour, wherefore the Empreſſe tooke it, and
beheld the Emperour ſo perfectly in it, as if ſhe had verily ſéene
his face. After the Empreſſe, came Gridonia and Bazilia,
wherin they ſaw them that they chiefly eſtéemed, but when the
Princeſſe Polinarda took it, ſhe perceiued the noble Palmerin of
England in ſuch heauines, that (not able to endure his extreame
grieuous countenance) ſhe deliuered the Cup from her, fearing
to let it fall, her hand ſhaked ſo maruelouſly. But none knew
what was the cauſe thereof, except the Emperour, whoſe amorous
youthfull time gaue him occaſion to thinke, that ſhee had
ſéene ſome one in the Cup, who greatly deſired to doe her ſeruice
which made him to round her in the eare, ſaying: Faire Daughter,
you make mee iudge that you want a ſeruant. At which
words ſhe began ſo ſweetely to bluſh, that with her rare beauty
it gaue her an excellent colour, whereat the Knight of the Dragon
became more and more afflicted.
                     The cup paſſed from hand to hand, till it came againe to the
Prince Palmeriu, who beholding in it the ſwéet face of his faire
Polinarda, tooke occaſion to ſpeake in this maner to himſelfe.
My gratious Lady, I very well perceiue by your countenance,
that you haue not forgotten him, who was only borne to do you
ſeruice, yet doth the miſerie of his time, conſtraine him to liue
without hope, deſiring nothing elſe but to accompliſh your pleaſure.
Then he deliuered the Cup to his Brother Florian, who
beheld in the bottome of the teares, the Princes Araalte of Nauarre,
and the faire Targiana, as alſo many other Ladies, who
were as greatly offended with him, as were theſe twain whom
he had deceiued, wherefore the Damoſell taking the Cup from
him, ſaid. Doe you now (Sir Knight) behold the iſſue of your
vnfaithfull Loue (whereto he preſently ſhaped this anſwere.
It ſéemeth that your ſex canno hartily fauour the Knights that
oweth them moſt affection, which maketh many not force of
their conſtancy to you, but yet thus much I dare aſſure you,
that Ladies, both haue and ſhall be a great deale better ſecured
of me, then of diuers that haue tried the aduenture of this Cup,

and to whom it hath ſhowne more fauour then to me.
                     The damoſell making him no anſwere, turned to the Emperour,
ſaying: I deſire your highneſſe, that n
                           •
                        w the proofe may
be made, of thoſe that are moſt and chiefeſt beloued: wherein
(credit me) you will receiue great pleaſure. Agréed (quoth the
Emperour) and I intend my ſelfe to mak triall firſt, for ſo ſhal
I perceiue, that being but ſlenderly fauoured of the Empreſſe,
I haue loſt the power to end the aduenture. So holding the
Cup, it remained in the ſame order ſtill, without any change or
apparance of heate: wherefore the Damoſell ſaid. My Lord,
you muſt confeſſe your ſelfe, that your time is paſt, and therefore
deliuer the Cup to the Empreſſe, who hath ſo truly and faithfully
loued you.
                     In the Empreſſe hand it continued to ſtill, wherfore Primaleon
and the King Polendos, who being faithfully beloued of
their Ladies, made the cup ſtill to containe the chiefe brightnes.
After theſe two Princes, Don Roſuell aduanced himſelfe to
make triall at his Loue, which was ſo little, that the heate the
Cup contained, vrged him to deliuer it to the Prince Platir,
who found it not altogether ſo hot, as when Don Roſuell had
it. It paſſed the hands of them all, ſome with good hap, & ſome
with ill, till it came againe to the Prince Florian, but he paſſed
it as lightly as the other, becauſe his heart was exempted frée
from any Louers griefe. From him Albayzar tooke it, whom
Loue fauored ſo much, that he held it a great while. Then came
the turne of the Knight of the Dragon, whoſe hap proued worſe
then all the reſt: for the Cup was ſo enflamed round about him,
that it ſéethed euen as water doth vpon the fire, which cauſed
great feare to all that beh
                           •
                        ld it, but more griefe to him that hee
had the patience to abide it. For now he verily thought to conſumate
his daies, and that the vexation of his life, ſhould end by
this ſupportable meane, which made him that he would not let
go the Cup, but kept it ſo conſtantly, that euery one thought
there was no remedy but death.
                     Truſt me (ſaid the Damoſell) the vnfained loue of ſo true a
knight, deſerueth not to be rewarded with ſo ſharp a recōpence:
and with theſe words ſhe offered to take the Cup from him, but

he gaue backe, anſwering her thus. Faire Ladie, I deſire you
to ſuffer me abide the doome, which my miſhap hath alway ordeined
for me, and wherein I may end the troubles that are incident
to a mourning and continual diſpairing life. The Emperor
not able to abide ſo great crueltie executed in his preſence,
aroſe & caught the cup from him, which was immediatly quenched,
as though it had neuer bin ſo violent, whereat he receiued
no ſmall cauſe of amazemen. Then the prince Florendos, albeit
he was weake, yet deſirous to be partner in conſtancy with the
Knight of the Dragon, receiued the Cuppe from the hand of the
Emperour, when preſently the rigour that the Princes Miragarda
vſed towards him, cauſed him to ſuffer the ſelfe ſame torment,
as did the noble Prince Palmerin. For the flame which
aroſe out of the cup, had ſo inuironed the body of the prince, that
he was ſéene ſighing and lamenting in the midſt thereof, which
mooued all the Ladies to ſhed aboundance of teares, and to vſe
many extreame words againſt the cruelty of Miragarda, which
Florendos (though he were in the midſt of the flame) could
hardly ſuffer to hear her blamed, for whoſe ſake he was ready to
make a ſacrifice of himſelfe. The Emperor ſéeing many meanes
applied to quench the flame, yet none of them all had the power
to preuaile, put himſelfe in the midſt thereof, and tooke the Cup
from Florendos, thinking that then it would preſently bequenched:
but all their labor was to no effect, for the flame continued
about him as it did before. The Empreſſe Gridonia, with al the
lad
                           •
                        es and knights, fell into ſuch rufull complaints, that it was
maruailous to heare the noyſe that was made: at which grieuous
ſpectacle, Polendos the king of Theſſalie, came to the Damoſell
of Thrace with theſe words. I deſire you, faire Lady,
ſéeing you haue found the thing you ſought for, that you would
vouchſafe the courteſie, to ſuccour the dangerous caſe of the
Prince Florendos, I am ſo agrieued (quoth the damoſel) at this
great tumult which is made, wherein they wil not vouchſafe to
heare me, that I know not what to ſay: but doe you giue order
to appeaſe this murmuring, & I wil work the meane to deliuer
the Prince from danger. By the Emperours commaundement
the diſturbance was quieted: when the Damoſell preſented her

ſelfe before the Emperor, ſaying. I aduertiſe you moſt dread and
gratious Emperor, that the aduēture of the Cup is already paſt
and finiſhed: but the flame which doth compaſſe the prince Florendos,
can no way be extinguiſhed, but only by the vertue that
conſiſteth in the teares, which by the hand of the Knight, who
hath ended the Enchantment of the Cup, muſt be ſprinckled on
the flame wherein he is encloſed, and then I dare aſſure you the
prince ſhall be brought into his former eſtate. For the fire being
ingendred, by ſuch a cruell woman as he loueth, cannot be any
way quenched, but onely by the teares of ſuch a pitiful Lady, as
was this conſtant and faithfull Brandiſia. Then ſhe deliuered
the Cup to the Knight of the Dragon, who put his fingers therin,
and ſprinckled a few of the teares vpon Florendos: when
preſently the fire vaniſhed away, leauing Florendos (whom all
men thought verily to be dead) aliue and in good eſtate, to the
great content of the Emperour and all the company.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XCIII.
                     Of another aduenture that happened in the Court of the
Emperour Palmerin, and of that which after followed.
                     
                        
                           FLorendos, being thus happily deliuered (to
the great ioy of the Courtty company,)
wiſhed that ſhe, who intreated his faithful
Loue with ſo great cruelty, had béene in
place, when ſhe might haue ſéene the triall
of his inuiolate faith. The Emperor being
deſirous to know the Knight, whoſe ſpotleſſe
loyaltie had ended this Enchantment (but miſdoubting
that it was y• noble Palmerin of England) deſired very earneſtly,
that he would make himſelfe knowne vnto him: when Palmerin
putting his hand to his Helmet, to diſcouer himſelfe, he
was hindered by the aduenture which hereafter followeth.
                     
                        
On a ſudden there entred the Hal a Lady, accompanied with
three mighty and ougly Giants, whoſe Armour was of on colour
and faſhion, their Helmets being carried after them by thrée
men, ſo that their ſwart and euill fauoured faces, cauſed the Ladies
to tremble, as alſo many of the Knightes to change their
colour. Theſe proud and ſtately Giants thronged through
the middeſt of the Knightes, aduancing themſelues before the
Emperour, without ſhewing any courteſie or reuerence, where
they ſtayed, for that the Damoſell had in charge to declare: who
ſéeing ſo great Nobilitie about the Emperour, was ſomewhat
offended, yet notwithſtanding, ſhe ſeaſed her fury, and began in
this order.
                     I perceiue right noble Emperour, that the renowne which is
blazed all the world our, of your Princely Court, is too little,
reſpecting the honourable company I ſee at this preſent, which
vrgeth me to enter into due land therof, as it hath rightly & iuſtly
deſerueth: ſo that I am of the opinion, you might ſubdue & gouern
the whole world, if you would diſtribute your force, which
as I iudge, is no way able to be matched. But yet fortune who
in all your affaires hath hitherto proſpered you, may now vngently
(as enuious at your long quiet & peaceable felicity) turne
her backe towards you, & ſo ſuddenly in her fury ouerturne your
good Fortune, that the glory you haue gained in the prime of
your yeeres, may now be defaced, when your aged eſtate forbiddeth
you to follow the trauaile of Armes, and your long happineſſe,
vnwilling to enter the warres, wherewith I come to
ſummon you, from the Soldane of Perſia, principal Captaine of
the Law of Mahomet, as alſo from the great Turk, and y• noble
Gouernours of the Coūtrey belonging to the Soldane of Babilon,
named Albayzar, who in ſtrange aduentures, hath put
himſelfe to make triall of his valour, vpon hope of long expected
good Fortune. From all theſe before named, I am to let you
vnderſtand, that when time was, there were certaine Heathen
Princes, here ſlaine before the walls of Conſtantinople, whoſe
death hath vrged them to great impatience, and to ſéeke reuenge
for the great wrong you haue offered them. But the Gods, the
protectors and defendor of your welfare, fauouring you beyond

their expectation, haue heretofore hindred the determination of
theſe Princes: for when they were prepared to the ruine of your
kingdomes, and vtterly to race out your fame & memorie, there
hath ſuch quarrels and ſeditions ſprung vp amongſt them, that
they haue murthered one another, which happening many and
ſundrie times, hath not ſuffered them to put their pretence in
execution. Wherefore, to auoid any more ſuch miſchance, as
alſo to fauour you in the euil which may happen: they haue ſent
vs to your Highneſſe with certaine conditions, the performing
whereof, ſhall end all hatred, and ioyntly ioyne them as your
continuall friends.
                     The firſt is, that you ſhall ſend Polinarda, Daughter to the
Prince Primaleon your ſonne, to the Soldane of Perſia, aged about
xxv, yéeres: a Prince as much renowned, as he is puiſſant
and incomparable in riches, to whom ſhee ſhall bee eſpouſed as
beſéemeth ſuch a noble Prince. The ſecond, that Florandos his
Sonne, ſhall promiſe to marry with Armenia, Daughter to
the Soldane before named, who is a Princeſſe of ſuch ſingular
heauty, that ſhee is thought to excell all Ladies liuing on the
earth. To her Dowrie, the Soldane will giue all the title hée
hath in theſe parts about your Empire, without deſiring any other
recompence, on the behalfe of the faire Polinarda: but onely
that it might ſtand with your pleaſure, to ſend to the great Turk
a Chriſtian Knight, who as I remember is named Florian of
the Deſart, for that by his deceit, he hath brought his Daughter
Tragiana from thence into your Court: whoſe mariage he hath
already prouided, to the Prince Albayzar, now Soldan of Babylon,
becauſe the Soldane his Father is lately deceaſed. Thus
haue I reported the whole ſumme of my Ambaſſage, attending
how your Highneſſe ſhall anſwere the ſame: and if you wil not
agrée with the Heathen princes, theſe Giant haue in charge
to tell you that, which perhappes may enforce you to a greater
maruell.
                     The Emperour hauing noted the words of the Damoſell,
ſmiling thereat, began to ſay. Truly Lady, I deſire to heare
what the Giants muſt report, becauſe perhappes I ſhall haue a
better opinion of their words, then of thoſe which here you haue

ſpoken. As concerning the amitie which your Princeſſe requeſt
with me, the conditions are lincked to ſo many contraries, that
I rather chuſe perpetuall warre, wherein my ſelfe, my friendes
and ſubiects will more willingly die, then to hold league with
them in any ſuch order. And for the Knight whom you requeſt
to haue, I am altogether ignorant where he abideth: but if hée
were here preſent in my Court, I would not ſuffer him to receiue
any iniury, and I perſwade my ſelfe, as the Princeſſe Targiana,
is rather come hither with her will, then by any compulſion
that hath béene vſed to her. No other anſwere haue I determined
to giue you: wherefore, let your knights declare what
they haue in commiſſion.
                     With that, one of the Giants aduanced himſelfe before the
Emperour, and very vnreuerently entred into theſe ſpéeches.
The Heathen Princes, whoſe iuſt & law full requeſt you thinke
ſcorne to grant: by me doe ſend defiance to thée, and to all that
dare vndertake, by any meane or motion to offer thée ſuccour.
                     Yea, I pronounce open warre againſt thée, and on their behalfe
call my gods for my record: that we not onely intend thy
death, but all thoſe who dare preſume to beare Armour againſt
vs. The places of moſt renowne in thine Empire, ſhall be changed
to a waſt and deſolate wilderneſſe, as thou ſhalt well perceiue,
when thou ſéeſt thy men to be murdered. thy women cruelly
ſpoyled, thy Virgines violated, thy Children martired: yea,
and the Infant torne from the mothers breaſt, and gored on the
tops of our Lances, in witneſſe of our great, grieuous, and vnſpeakeable
fury.
                     The Channels of thy ſtréetes, ſhall powre foorth the blood of
thy murdered ſubiects, thy Citie which now ſtandeth abounding
in wealth, exceſſiue in pride, and ſurpaſſing in prodigality,
ſhall with fire be vtterly conſumed, thy whole kingdomes and
ſignories raced and ruinated: ſo that they which ſhall eſcape this
bloody tiranny, may ſit downe, and ſighing ſay; Here ſometime
ſtood the citie of Conſtantinople, there, and in th
                           •
                        ſe places were
ſometime faire cities, braue buildings, and incomparable habitations
for riches and proſpect: now are they equalled with the
ground, not one ſtone left on another, in witnes of any ancient

Monument, but bu
                           •
                        ned, conſumed, and all in generall defaced
and ſpoyled, thy ſelfe being the onely cauſe of this cruell and horrible
iudgement, wherein they will be ſufficiently ſatiſfied, of
their iniury receiued before this thy citie. Thus haue I manifeſted
the charge, which I receiued from the Soldane of Perſia,
and in refuſing pis pr
                           •
                        ffer, I ſay thou ſheweſt not the duty of
a Prince: and if thy Knight es dare preſume to maintaine the
contrarie, my Companions and I will vndertake, to enter the
Combate with ſeuen of the ſtouteſt of them, and will vrge
them to confeſſe the fault thou haſt made, or ſeale the pledge of
our endeuour, with deliuering thée theyr heades, in recompence
of the follie thou haſt ſhowen, in refuſing to enter leag
                           •
                        e
with the Soldane of Perſia. The Giant here breaking off his
ſpéech, one of the other Giants named Berocant, deliuered the
ſcrole of the def
                           •
                        ance to the hand of the Emperour: who ſéeing
the ſtearne countenances they made, began to ſmile, and anſwered
them thus.
                     I ſée (Gentlemen) ſuch a cholericke humour ariſe in you, that
I ſtand in doubt to grant what you demand. Beſide, I iudge if
I ſhould grant to come in league with the Soldane of Perſia,
that my Néece Polinarda would not conſent to goe with you:
but as concerning the Combate you haue enterpriſed againſt
my knights, I would wiſh you to vſe your ſelues with more diſcretion,
and not to ſhame your ſelues vtterly with them, who
thinke it ſhame to enter the fight with you you. While the Emperor
continued theſe ſpéeches, the Knight of the Dragon was
ſo incenſed with anger, that hee could not content himſelfe to
reſt in any place: wherefore, diuers knights aroſe, being fully reſolued
to accept the challenge, but the Giant Dramuſiande hinderes
them all, turning to the Emperour on this wiſe.
                     Moſt high and mightie Emperour, the great benignity and
courteſie of Princes, is often an occaſion to encourage a wilful
offendor: euen ſo, the lenity of your noble heart, with the gratious
patience that gouerneth all your actions, hath cauſed theſe
preſumptuous Pagans to conceiue ſuch boldneſſe, that they neither
reſpect the place nor the perſon, the rigour of a Prince, nor
the foll
                           •
                         of their owne rediculous vſage.

Which to puniſh according to deſert, I, as one at your gratious
command, will enter the field with one of them, where I ſhall
giue Berocant to vnderſtand, that pride muſt haue puniſhment
in place of Iuſtice, And if none of theſe other knights, will enter
the fight with the other, my ſelfe will defie them all, cōming
one by one: thus deſiring your highneſſe not to thinke amiſſe of
me, my hand is ready to performe, which my heart hath ſuffred
me to pronounce.
                     The knight of the Dragon, & Florain of the Deſart, approched
preſently to Dramuſiande, deſiring him that he would ſuffer
them to aſſiſt him, as defending the challenge of the other two
giants. Dramuſiande. ſéeing them ſo well prouided, would not
refuſe their knightly offer: whereat Gracian, Berolde, Pompides,
and Floraman were ſomewhat offended, becauſe ther was
none of them al, but would gladly haue taken part with the Giant
Dramuſiande. The Giants, named Arbuſar, Albaroco,
and Berocant, refuſed the offer which was made them: anſwering,
that if there were no Giants for them to deale withal, they
diſdained to take armes againſt men of no more might.
                     
                        Elorian hearing them ſpeake ſo arrogantly, in a chafe tooke
Arbuſar by the arme, ſaying. Thou counterfeit Monſter, ſ
                           •
                        me
not to excuſe thy ſelfe ſo fondly from entring the Combate: for
in recompence of thy deſerts, I will preſent the Emperor with
thy head from thy ſhoulders. And to giue thée the better occaſion
to fight, thou ſhall vnderſtand, that I am the Knight, who
brought the princeſſe Targiana into this Countrey: and for this
Knight thou ſéeſt with me, I knowe his hardineſſe will ſu
                           ••
                        er
him to deale with Albaroco, now refuſe the combat i
                           •
                         you dare.
The Giants hearing him to confeſſe, that he had brought the
Princeſſe Targiana from her countrey, became ſo full of choler,
that they deſired the place might be aſſigned, where they preſently
determined to hazard the fight.
                     The Emperor commanded the place ſhould be ſhowen them,
whereabout he cauſed ſuch good regard to be placed, as in ſuch
dangerous affaires he was woont to doe: but it was ſomewhat
diſpleaſant to him, that 
                           
                              •
                           orian ſhould venture on ſuch ougly
follows, & iudging the other knight to be Palmerin of England
                        
he was in great feare, leaſt now he ſhould chance to loſe them
both. At ſuch time the knights were entring the Field, the Damoſel
of Thrace taking Florian aſide, ſecretly vſed theſe words
vnto him. Sir knight, if Fortune bend her ſelfe againſt you, that
in this dangerous attempt your ſtrength doe faile you, commend
your ſelfe to the clemency of ſome lady, and doubt you not
but to eſcape the hazard luckily. God forbid, ſaid Florian, that I
ſhould truſt in them, who haue not the power to helpe themſelues,
much leſſe can they any way ſend me ſuccour: or that I
ſhould proſtrate my ſelfe to de
                           •
                        ice their fauour, whoſe greateſt
libertie, is continuall thraldome to an aduenturous minde.
With theſe words, they all mounted on horſebacke, and rode
into the field, the Emperour with all the Ladies and Knights,
hied themſelues to the windowes to ſée this hautie exployt: and
Albayzar likewiſe deſirous to ſée it, came to one of the windowes,
deſiring that the victory might fall to the Giants, as he
had good hope, beholding their valiant and noble courage.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XCIIII.
                     What happened in the fight againſt the Giants.
                     
                        AFter that the Iudges were placed to diſcerne
the fight, the Trumpets ſounded, and
they encountred one an other very couragiouſly:
euery one dealing ſo roughly with his
enemy, that this was ſuppoſed the moſt
dangerous Combate that euer was ſéene.
The Emperor was ſtill affectionate to behold
the marueilous courage of the Knights of the Dragon, as
for Dramuſiande and Florian, they behaued themſelues with
ſuch deliuer behauiour, that Primaleon, Florendos, and all the
Knights, gaue great praiſe to the hautie valour of them all.
                     
                        
The Empreſſe & Gridonia departed from the window, greatly
pittying the danger on either part: but the Princeſſe Polinarda
ſtaied to ſée the end, accompanied with Targiana, who was
as much gréeued to ſée the boldnes of Florian, as ſhe was pleaſed
in beholding the courage of the giants: by whoſe helpe ſhe
thought to haue reuenged the great inconſtancy ſhee found in
the prince Florian. And then he gaue the damoſel of Thrace to
vnderſtand, that it was not for want of ſtrength he preuaild no
better in the triall of the cup: for albeit the giant Arbuſar, deſended
himſelf well, he could not reſiſt againſt Florian, who ſaluted
him with many mighty and cruel ſtrokes, driuing him into ſuch
wearineſſe, that he could hardly indure to ſtand on his féete. At
laſt faintneſſe and wearineſſe conſtrained them to retire: when
Berocant ſéeing his fellows ſo dangerouſly wounded, began to
rage with himſelfe in this manner. O gods, is it poſſible, that
the force of Berocant, Arbuſar, and Albaroco, ſo highly eſtéemd
throughout the whole world, ſhould be brought into ſubiection
by one only giant and two knights? why grant you not vs our
accuſtomed ſtrength, but in our greateſt néed leaue vs deſtitute
of all ſuccour? How happy might I eſtéeme my ſelfe, if I might
vanquiſh him, who ſometime conquered Dramuſiand, and deliuered
the number of knights he kept as Priſoners? If you
will not ſuffer me to haue aduantage ouer him, then would I,
that here were with him foure of the beſt knights on the earth,
ſo loſing my life on them, I might the better broke this my hard
fortune. The Knight of the Dragon, had no other recourſe for
his amorous thoughts, but only to the beautiful face of his Lady
& Miſt
                           •
                        es, whoſe vngentle words at his departure from Cō
                           ſtantinople,
armd him with greater patience to abide the death
if his froward hap ſhould now prouide it for him. As for the
prince he had no body to apply his thoughts vnto, but only cō
                        mitted
himſelfe to the gouernment of Fortune, whom he only
kept for his Lady and Miſtreſſe. Euery one vſing ſome pretty
fancy to himſelfe, during the time they remained breathing, aſſalted
one another again very valiantly, when the knight of the
Dragon hauing brought Albaroco to his foote, to honor his miſtreſſe with his conqueſt: he opened his helmet, and before her

part his head from his ſhoulders, as glad of the victory, as before
he ſtood in doubt how to obtaine it. Then he aduanced himſelf
to aſſiſt Dramuſiand againſt Berocant, at whom he fiercely
let fly a ſt
                           •
                        oke, but their often trauerſing the ground, cauſed
the blow vnfortunately to fall on Dramuſiande, giuing him a
greater wound on the ſhoulder, then any he had receiued at the
hands of Berocant: wherfore Dramuſiand turned to him with
theſe words. Truſt me ſir knight, I eſtéeme the ſuccour you
giue me, to be oppreſſion and no friendſhip, wherefore I pray
you ſuffer me to end this cauſe my ſelfe: and if perhaps you ſée
me vanquiſhed, then put your valour in triall, to kill him who
ſhall remaine victorious ouer me: for the death I rather chuſe,
then the ſhame which may fall to me, by this vngentle manner
of ayde. The knight of the Dragon hauing thus againſt his
will iniuried his friend Dramuſiande, retired greatly diſpleaſed
with himſelfe, and A
                              •
                           buſar was reduced into ſuch weakeneſſe
that Florian quickly gaue him his paiment, ſo ſore wounded
himſelfe that the Iudges would haue had him carried out of the
field: but he would not conſent thereto, before he had ſéene the
iſſue of the fight, which was ſo diſpleaſant to Albayzar and
Targiana, becauſe the giants were ſo cruelly vſed, that they
went from thence, as not able to ſuffer ſuch a gréeuous ſight.
                     The Emperor, Primaleon, and the king Polendos, ſeeing the
knight of the Dragon had woūded Dramuſiand ſo ſore, greatly
doubted leſt Berocant ſhould now ouercome him, but ſuddenly
Dramuſiand cauſed them to change their opinion, for he followed
his enemy with ſo great courage, that he forced him to fall
downe dead at his féete. Then came the Iudges, and with great
honor conducted the thrée Conquerors forth of the field, where
the Emperor with his royall traine met them: when Palmerin
and Florian hauing opened their helmets, came to the Emperour,
and with very great reuerence kiſſed his hand▪ who receyued
them with maruellous princely courteſie. The Empreſſe,
Gridonia, Bazilia, and Polinarda, attended the comming of the
Emperour, becauſe they vnderſtood that he brought with him
the two Engliſh knights: who when they came before them,
were receiued according to their knightly bounty.
                     
                        
When Palmerin came to humble himſelfe before the princeſſe
Polinarda, ſuch a ſudden feare did ouercharge him, that he could
not withhold himſelfe from falling to the ground: and the Emperour
ſuppoſing, that it was cauſed through leſſe of his blood,
commanded Primaleon, Polendos, Vernar and Berolde, to cary
him preſently into a Chamber, where he was reſpected with
great diligence for his health. Dramuſiande and Florian, were
likewiſe honoured with very Princely vſage: the Emperor remaining
as ioyfull for this good hap, as Albayzar was ſorrowfull,
to ſée the thrée Giants ſpéed ſo ill.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XCV.
                     What happened in the Court of the Emperour, after the combate
of the Giants.
                     
                        CErtaine dayes after this cruel Combat, the
prince Florendos ſeeing Dramnſiande and
the Engliſh Princes out of any danger, determined
to reſtore the Shield of Miragarda,
in the place from whence the Prince
Albayzar tooke it, and to preſent him to
her, where he ſhould abide the doome of her
iudgement. When he had well prouided
himſelfe of Armour and other neceſſaries, he aduanced himſelfe
before the Emperour and his Father, to deſire their ſufferance
in this attempt: but they were very loath he ſhould goe, leaſt
any danger ſhould happen to him by the way, through ſome
treacherous meane deuiſed by Albayzar, wherfore they gained
of him, to ſtay yet for eight dayes longer. In the meane time, the
Emperour had concluded, through aduiſe of his Councell, to
ſend the Princeſſe Targiana home againe to her Father, accompanied
with the King Polendes, and diuers other Princes
and Knights: but firſt he would content the deſire of her loue,

wherefore with great royalty, he married her to the Prince Albayzar,
and to honour them the more, he held open Court, and
cauſed many Triumphs and braue deuiſes to be accompliſhed,
to gratifie theſe honourable perſonages.
                     The Emperour ledde Targiana into the Chappell, where he
gaue her to the Prince Albayzar, whoſe heart greatly reioyced,
to receiue the ſwéete content he had ſo long deſired: but the chiefeſt
grief that eclipſed his ioy, was becauſe the Prince Florendos
ſhould preſent him to the faire Miragarda, which thought,
made him not ſo pleaſant with his beloued, as otherwiſe hee
would haue béene.
                     When time came for their departure, Targiana humbly ſubmitted
himſelfe to the princeſſe Gridonia, and all the ladies, but
eſpecially to the princeſſe Polinarda, who had vſed her very graciouſly,
during the time of her abyding there. The Emperour
with all his Knights, rode with her two miles from the Citie,
committing her to the charge of Polendos, and the other Princes,
who could not perſwade Florendos, but he would needes
preſent Albayzar at the caſtle of Almarol, to witnes his vnfained
faith to his Lady & Miſtreſſe Miragarda. The Emperor taking
leaue of Targiana, returned with his traine to the Cittie,
endeuouring himſelfe to change the mind of Florendos, but all
was in vaine, for two dayes after he departed from Conſtantinople,
accompanied with Albayzar, whom he would not ſuffer
to weare Armour, but permitted him one of the Eſquires belonging
to Targiana, and himſelfe tooke twaine, one to carrie
the Shields of Miragarda, which was couered, and the other
to carry his owne, thus in their iourney we intend to leaue
them.
                     The Damoſel of Thrace, ſéeing the Prince Palmerin in good
diſpoſition of health, in the preſence of the Emperour, ſhe ſpake
to him thus. Worthy Sir, I thinke you are ſufficiently certified,
that I cannot depart from hence without your company,
ſéeing you haue finiſhed that, which of many yeares haue béene
thought impoſſible: wherefore, moſt humbly I beſéech you, that
you would imploy your ſelfe, to ende likewiſe the miſerable eſtate,
of the diſtreſſed and moſt infortunate princeſſe of Thrace
                        
whoſe enchantment can no way be be expelled, but only by you
whoſe renown ſhall be more then I can ſpeake of, for you that
ſhal ioyne in marriage with her, and ſo make your ſelfe king ouer
all Thrace. But if perchance, the deſire you haue to follow
aduentures, wil not ſuffer you to ioyn with her in this honourable
eſtate, then ſhall ſhe ſtand at your appointment to marry
with ſuch a one as you ſhall thinke méeteſt for her, wherfore I
deſire you to ſet a part all excuſes, and to enter vpon this iourney,
ſo ſoone as poſſible you may.
                     Faire Lady (anſwered Palmerin) I am ſo much vſed to trauaile,
that I know the better how to continue it, and neuer
did I refuſe to aide any perſon, whoſe intent might be no preiudice
to her, whom I am alwayes bound to obey: and therefore
aſſure your ſelfe, that ſo ſoone as I ſhall be prouided of Armour,
(becauſe Albaroco hath ſo diſappointed me) I will not ſtay to
accompliſh your deſire. The Damoſell was very well pleaſed
with this anſwer of Palmerin, but the Emperor (who wiſhed
more good to him, then any other of his Nephews) conceiued
great gréefe to leaue his company ſo ſoone▪ wherefore, he
went to the chamber of the Empreſſe, who alſo was very ſorry
when ſhe heard theſe newes.
                     Likewiſe the Princes Polinarda hearing that Palmerin
ſhould ſo ſoone leaue the Court, went to her chamber amated
with great griefe, and many paſſions of the minde: which Dramaciana
perceiuing, & knowing well the cauſe of her heauines,
caine to perſwade her in this manner. Faire miſtreſſe I neuer
thought that any miſfortune could depriue you of diſcretion,
which you haue alwaies vſed: but if your gréefe be grounded on
the departure of Palmerin, why do you not conſider y• his deſire
is, euer to be where he may behold you
                           •
                         & (though in truth) he deſerueth
to enioy the moſt excellent princes on y• earth, yet dare
I aſſure you, that your beauty is ſufficient, to yéeld the heart of
him vnder your obeyſance, who onely deſireth to be your ſwéet
friend in loue. And without good hope in this deſire, I know he
could not long enioy his life, but that he perſwadeth himſelf to
enioy that gladſom and long expected felicity: wherfore. I deſire
you, to vſe ſuch courteous fauour towards him, as may vrge

him the ſooner to returne to the Court.
                     
                        Folinarda hauing receiued ſome content by the words of
Dramaciana, made her anſwer in this manner. How can I
well brooke the ſudden voyage of Palmerin, whom aboue all
I loue, and in heart giue moſt honour? yet will I not make him
ſo priuy to my thoughts, albeit I ſuſtained the hazard of death,
becauſe, perhaps the beauty of Leo
                              •
                           arna Princeſſe of Thrace,
may alter the affection he hath vowed to me.
                     I beléeue (quoth Dramaciana) that inconſtancy cannot harbour
in the heart of him, who proued himſelfe ſo loyal in the aduenture
of the cup: but to preuent the worſt, if you will vouchſafe
me the leaue, I will in priuate talke vſe ſuch meanes with
him, as I ſhall quickly ſound the depth of his intent. Polinarda
eſtéeming this deui
                           •
                        e, returned preſently this aunſwere. I
thinke ſo well Dramiciana of this pretty inuention, that I am
very well content that you procéed therein: but of all Loues I
pray you, vſe the circumſtance of your matter in ſuch ſort, that
he perceiue nothing therein to be done with my will.
                     
                        Polinarda thus concluding her ſpeeches, went and ſate down
by the Princeſſe Gridonia her mother: mean while, the Engliſh
Prince remembring his haſty iourney, as alſo the ſmall kindneſſe
he perceiued in his Lady, paſſed all the day in many ſilent
thoughts. But whe
                           ••
                         the euening came, he went to the Empres
Chamber, where the Knights and Ladies danced: and doing
his duty to them all, he came and ſate downe by Dramaciana,
with whom being very familiar, he entred into theſe ſpéeches.
Swéet friend, if I either might, or could vtter my complaints
to any, by whom I had opinion to receiue redreſſe, with verie
glad conſent I would: but ſéeing my ſorrowes grow to a greater
extreame, and to none but you I dare bewray them, I will
requeſt ſo much courteſie at your hands, as to reſolue me in one
or two queſtions: and thus they are. What is the cauſe my Lady
Polinarda dealeth ſo hardly with me, as to driue me to the
vtter deſpaire and contempt of my life? if ſhe thinke me to deſerue
no greater fauour, truſt me, I may iudge her ouermuch
vnkind, for that all my care is, by what meane or motion, to lay
my heart at her foote in loyall ſerucice.
                     
                        
But ſhe ſéeth full well my griefe, and couereth her ſelfe with
ſuch a cloſe conceit, that ſhe will not ſéeme to know it: onely
becauſe ſhe is either daintie of her courteſie, or elſe thinketh
ſcorne to recompence my trauell. I deſire you to beare witneſſe
with my faith, which neither forceth paine, torment, or any miſerie,
ſo that ſhe would not forget the knight who ſuffreth al for
her ſake, and cannot expreſſe what he would ſuffer, ſo that it
might but pleaſe her to eſtéeme thereof. And truſt me, ſwéete
friend, I neuer in all my life entered ſo farre in ſpéech hereof to
any perſon, nor would I haue gone ſo farre at this preſent, but
that the proofe of your fidelitie, hath conſtrained me to ſpeake
what you haue heard, knowing very well, that with a truſtie
friend, a ſecret is buried in the bottome of the ſea.
                     Sir Palmerin (anſwerd Dramaciana) the long time you haue
abſented your ſelfe from hence, hath mooued me to thinke, that
your mind was addicted to ſome other purpoſe: ſo that I iudge,
you rather complaine for cuſtom then cauſe, as you are al wont
to do, when you hold the fiſh with the baire, which you greatly

                           •
                        are not for, whether you were beſt to take it, or let it goe. And
now I am aduertiſed, that you go to end the Enchantment of
Leonarda, the heire and princes of Thrace, whoſe loue (I feare
me) will cauſe you forget your old friends, wherefore you may
with greater eaſe beare ſo ſmall a burthen.
                     Truſt me, anſwered Palmerin, the beautie of Leonarda, nor
all the rich proffers of preferment in the world, ſhal haue power
to alter any qualitie in me, by which I might be iudged, either
inconſtant of faith, or negligent in promiſe: for which cauſe I
haue the greater deſire to ſpeake with the princeſſe Polinarda,
that ſhe may be aſſured of the loyaltie, which this poore heart of
mine ſhall continue to her to the death.
                     Well, quoth ſhe, if your conſtancie be ſuch as you report, I
thinke in ſo ſmall a matter, it will not be changed. But as for
ſpeaking with my Lady, I know at this time it is vnpoſſible:
wherfore, for a further triall of your truth, prepare your ſelfe to
depart with the Damoſell of Thrace, and in your abſence I wil
ſo manifeſt your conſtancie, that at your return you ſhall ſpeake
with her at your pleaſure. So that in y• mean time you wil promiſe

me, that no occaſion be moued to offend ſo good a Princes.
To theſe words Palmerin thought to haue made anſwer, but
the Dancing being done, he was hindered of his purpoſe, ſo
that Dramaciana and he were conſtrained to part company, he
being very glad that he had diſcloſed part of his griefe, to her
that would ſollicite his ſute in ample manner, and this night
he tooke better reſt, then he had done ſince his departure out of
England.
                     
                     The next morning he roſe very early, when a faire new armour
was preſented him, and in his ſhield he bare a man torne
in péeces by a Tiger. Then went he with the Damoſel to take
leaue of the Emperor, who brought him to the Empreſſe chamber,
to whom he humbly did his duty, as alſo to Gridonia, Bazilia,
and all the Ladies, but ſuch was his heauy farewell, to the
Princeſſe Polinarda, as al the Ladies preſent could not refrain
from teares. Thu
                           •
                         left he the Emperour in great ſorrow, Primaleon,
Dramuſiande and his brother Florian, were very ſorry
to leaue them whom he moſt loued, but notwithſtanding all
intreaty, he departed with the Damoſell and Siluian towards
the kingdome of Thrace.
                     
                     Soone after, two Allemaigne Ambaſſadours arriued at the
Court, yéelding the ſeate and gouernment, of the ancient Emperour
Trineus deceaſſed, to the Prince Vernar his ſonne, theſe
newes were great griefe to the Emperour, as alſo the Prince
Vernar who left the Court, accompanied with his Lady Bazilia,
being great with child, and ſoone after deliuered of a goodly
young Prince named Trineus after his Grandfather.
                     To accōpany theſe princes, there went Florian of the deſart
Floraman, Dramuſiand, Albanis of Freece, Gracian, Pōpides
and many other, and when they came to the Citie of Cullen,
there was the prince Vernar choſen Emperor, with ſuch magnificiall
Triumphs as neuer were ſéene the like in the dayes of

                           •
                        is Predeceſſours. Then ſent he for his Brother Polinard, to
enioy ſuch titles as were fallen vnto him, and Florian, with
the other Princes and Knights, ſtayed a while in the Court
of the Emperor Vernar, when ſoone after they departed to ſeeke

aduentures, as you ſhall at large perceiue in the ſecond Volum
of this Hiſtory.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XCVI.
                     Of the daungers which the King Polendos and the Princes
paſſed, conueying the Princeſſe Targiana by Sea: And
what happened to the Prince Florendos, in the Fort of
Aſtribor.
                     
                        THe King Polendos, & the hundred knights
that bare him company, to conduct the princeſſe
Targiana home againe, ſayling at their
pleaſure, Fortune was ſo aduerſe to them,
that they tooke the Coaſt of Africa, where
they were aſſaulted by ten Galleyes, belonging
to the King of Mamercos, chiefe Gouernour
of Cenia, who as then had all the Countrey vnder his
ſubiection.
                     The K. Polendos, ſéeing himſelfe on the point of ſo extreame
danger, dealt with them in ſuch braue and forceable manner,
that he ſuncke them all, and tooke their Captaine, who was the
Couzin to the Knight of Tunis, not looſing one of his Knights in
this noble ſkirmiſh. With the glory of this Conqueſt, he came
to the Princeſſe Targiana, who was glad to ſée her ſelfe deliuered
from ſo great danger, and honoured in ſuch worthy wiſe by
the King Polendos, who with this noble Priſoner ſet forward
their voyage to Turkie, the winde ſeruing them ſo well, that in
ſhort time they arriued at the citie, where the great Turke was
reſident. When to witneſſe the honourable cōpany there vnder
Sayle, they diſcharge their Ordinance in ſuch a braue peale,
that the people, not accuſtomed to ſo ſuddaine a gréeting, came
running on heapes to the Hauen, to knowe the cauſe of ſuch a
braue warning.
                     
                        
The great Turke himſelfe, deſirous likewiſe to vnderſtand
theſe newes, came ryding with his courtly attendants toward
the Hauen, whom Polendos eſpying, tooke the faire Targiana
by the hand, & accompanied with his noble train of princes and
Knights, armed in very rich & ſumptuous order, preſented her
before her Father, when falling on her knées and bedewing her
face with a fewe teares, ſhe humbled her ſelfe to kiſſe his féete.
The great Turke mooued with naturall remorſe & pitie, embraced
her very louingly in his armes, and came to the king Polendos
& his company, vſing them with marueilous Princely and
gratious fauour, lodging them in his own pallace, and feaſting
them in ſuch noble wiſe, that the Emperors court, they thought
themſelues at no time better vſed. Thus continued they in all
poſſible pleaſure, till the day came of their departure, when the
Turke vſed ſuch intreaty to thē, that he perſwaded them to ſtay
one day longer. And then he prepared ſuch a priuely Feaſt, as in
all the time of their being there, they neuer had the like, paſſing
their dinner time, in talke of the Emperor Palmerin, as alſo the
honorable vſage of his daughter at Conſtantinople. The tables
were no ſooner withdrawne, but there entred fiftie armed and
well appointed knights, each one hauing his ſwoord drawen in
his hand, cōmanding not one ſhould offer reſiſtance, except he
would preſently looſe his life. The great Turke entred at a falſe
or ſecret doore, giuing to thē theſe ſpéeches. Yéeld Polendos, and
grant thy ſelfe and thy company to be my priſoners, otherwiſe,
you ſhall all preſently looſe your heades. Polendos with all his
Knights, tooke one corner of the Hall, kéeping their Swords in
their hands, and then himſelfe ſpake to the Turke in this order.
I would gladly knowe, for what cauſe you offer vs this great
diſcourteſie, conſidering how well your Daughter hath béene
vſed at Conſtantinople, as alſo the honour we haue done you,
to conduct her ſafely to your Court. Polendos (anſwered the
Turke) to the Emperor thy lord, thy ſelfe and theſe thy friends,
I meane no harme, but I am ſo offended with the knight, who
tooke my Daughter hence with him into Greece, that I promiſe,
you ſhall not depart from hence, till the Emperour deliuer
that Knight into my hands.
                     
                        
Truſt me (quoth Polendos) our hope would ſtand in hard
ſuſpence, if we ſhould ſtay here on this condition, wherefore we
eſtéeme it more honour, to end our liues in the face of our enemies,
then to be thy vaſſailes here in continuall Priſon. And
hereupon aſſure thy ſelfe, that the Emperour would more gladly
leaue all the knights in his Court, then to ſatiſfie thy deſire
with him, who is one of the moſt hardy and nobleſt knights on
the earth, to whom likewiſe I wiſh as much good, as to mine
owne ſoule. Well, ſayd the Turke, then muſt you reſolue your
ſelues, either preſently to abide the death, or ſubmit your ſelues
to remaine my Priſoners.
                     At theſe words, the Princeſſe Targiana caſt her ſelfe on her
knées before her Father, deſiring him not to vſe ſuch cruelty to
them, who had done her ſo much honor in the Emperors court,
as alſo deliuered her in the peril of her life, being dangerouſly
aſſaulted as they came in the voyage. The Turke ſeeing how
imporunate his Daughter was on him, in a great anger conuayed
himſelf forth againe, becauſe he would not ſée the ſlaughter
of ſo many good knights. Then Targiana ſéeing her Father
gone, intreated the king Polendos and his company, that
they would ſuffer themſelues to remaine as Priſoners, and not
to abide the danger, if they ſhould offer reſiſtance, being naked,
and hauing nothing to defend them withal. And during the
time they were in priſon, ſhe would either deuiſe or accompliſh
ſuch meanes, as ſhe had no doubt but to purchaſe their liberty.
Vpon this good perſwaſion they yeelded themſelues, when they
were preſently carryed into a deepe dungeon in a ſtrong tower,
and there were laded with as many irons as they could poſſible
beare, whereat Targiana receiued great griefe, cloathing her
ſelfe in mourning apparell, and would neuer ſhew any merry
countenance, during the time the Knights were in Priſon,
where they remained a long time, as you ſhall reade in the ſecond
part of this Booke.
                     The Turke commanded the Chriſtian Galleys to be kept in
ſafe and ſure protection, and preſently ſent word to the Soldane
of Perſia with all the other Princes, how he had diuers of the
Emperours knights priſoners, on whom he determined ſharp

reuenge, for the great iniury which Florian of the Deſart had
done him. Theſe newes they eſtéemed very ſtrange, neuertheleſſe,
being very fearefull any way to diſpleaſe him, they made
reſemblance of a good opinion in this matter, giuing him counſell
to kéepe them, vntill the Prince Albayzar were returned,
whom elſe the Emperour might cauſe to be ſlaine.
                     The great Turke truſted very much on their deuiſe, ſuffering
the captiue Princes, that they might ſend their Eſquires
to the Emperour Palmerin, to aduertiſe him of the miſerie
wherein they remained, but the Eſquires by no meanes
would forſake their Maiſters, deſiring, as they had accompanied
them in proſperity, ſo not to leaue them now in this great
miſchance.
                     Which when Belcar perceiued, he commanded his Eſquire,
to go and certerfie the Emperour, what great miſhap had befollen
vnto them. When the Eſquire was come to Conſtantinople,
theſe newes were nothing welcome to the Emperor, nether
to Primaleon, who before him entred into theſe words.
My gratious Lord and father, this miſchance is onely procured
by your meanes, for that you dealt ſo courteouſly with them,
who had neither quality nor any motion of deſert in them. But
now I would gladly ſée, what thing you can accompliſh any
way to pleaſure them, for I iudge, that all your power is not
ſufficient to deliuer them from the bondage wherein they are.
Wherfore I thinke it beſt, that you ſend with all ſpéed to ſéeke
the prince Albayzar, through whom you may recouer the king
Polendos and your knights, other way I cannot perceiue, that
may pleaſure them or profite you.
                     My Sonne (anſwered the Emperour) if the impriſonment
of Polendos and my knights were perpetuall, I would not
ſéeke to ſet them at liberty by this meane, for I had rather
they ſhould enioy the death, then to accompliſh that which
might be my continuall reproach, for this difference I alway
craue, betweene me and all the world that the good may be perfectly
diſcerned from the euill. Albayzer is not guilty in the
iniury which the Turke doeth ſéeme to offer my Knightes:

therefore it were againſt honour, that he ſhould ſuffer for anothers
offence, but this is it whereat I am moſt amazed, that
Targiana will ſuffer this great diſcourteſie, conſidering the honour
ſhe receiued in our Court.
                     My deare Soueraigne (quoth the Eſquire) there is no cauſe
to complaine of her, for her intreaty could no way preuaile with

                           •
                        er Father, whereupon hee rehearſed the whole diſcourſe

                           •
                        nd manner of their impriſonment, which the Emperour ha
                        
                           •
                        ing
heard, departed with the Empreſſe into his Chamber very

                           •
                        rie, where we muſt forſake him, and returne to the Prince

                           
                              •
                           lorendos.
                     
                     He trauailed ſo long, accompanied with the noble Albayzar,
                        
                           ••
                        at being in the Dominions of Spaine, they came to a faire

                           •
                        aſtell, which Albayzar knowing very well, began thus to open
his intent. Sir Florendos, I haue heretofore paſſed this
place, in the greateſt danger that euer I was in, fror through
giuing aide to a Damoſell, whom bloody minded wretches
ſought to diſhoneſt, I ſlewe them with ten more, as alſo their
Lord named Dramorant the Cruell, who kept this Caſtell, at
which exployte, the noble Palmerin of England, Florian and
Pompides his Brethren, were preſent, and can teſtifie what I
haue ſpoken. Therefore I pray you let vs goe to the Caſtell,
for that I aſſure my ſelfe, the Lady to whom I gaue it, at ſuch
time as I deliuered her out of danger, will receiue vs with a
courteous and friendly welcome. I am content (quoth Florendos)
ſéeing we haue no other place to lodge in this night, that I
can ſée néere here about.
                     Thus breaking off their talke, they had not rid two ſtones
caſt, but they beheld foure armed Knights come towards them,
and an Eſquire who came before them, vttering theſe words to
the Prince Florendos. Sir Knight, the great Aſtribor ſendeth
ſtrait commandement, that you and your companious, do preſentle
yéeld your Armour vnder his obeyſance, the deniall wherof
ſhall cauſe him vſe more cruelty toward you, then he would
willingly offer to any good knight.
                     No other thing doth he requeſt of you, except you can report to

him tydings, of a knight who hath ſ
                           •
                        aine Dramorant his Brother,
ſometime Lord and rightfull poſſeſſor of this caſtle, which
was giuen by that Knight to a Damoſell, whom he keepeth in
priſon, till Fortune ſend the Knight hither, to ſacrifice them
both to his Gods, for reuenge of his brothers death.
                     
                        Albayzar aduanced himſelfe to make anſwere, but becauſe
he was vnarmed, Florendos thus replied to the Eſquire. Goe
tell my Lord Aſtribor, that I am not the Knight he would ſo
gladly finde, but I am well acquainted with him, and am ſure
that hée hath ſlaine his Knightes deſeruedly, as for mine Armour,
becauſe I cannot very well ſpare it, I am c
                           •
                        ntent he
ſhall goe without it at this time, except I had more knowledge
of him, how to haue it when I ſhall returne. Well, ſaid the Eſquire,
ſince you will not yéelde it by gentle meanes, you muſt
prepare your ſelfe againſt theſe Knights, who are here appointed
by ſufficient authoritie, to take their Armor away perforce,
who refuſed to yéeld it according to cuſtome.
                     
                        Florendos ſeeing the Knights prouided to Iouſt, he encountred
with them, and ſent two couragiouſly to meaſure their
length on the ground, the one being ſlaine outright, the other ſo
ſore wounded, that he was not able to rec
                           •
                        uer himſelfe.
                     Then came foorth Aſtribor himſelfe, very brauely mounted,
and ſéeing Florendos deſtitute of a Launce, he gaue his Horſe
the ſpurs, and ran againſt him with ſuch force. that Florendos
was conſtrained to fall to the ground, but recouering himſelfe,
he dealt with Aſtribor in ſuch couragious manner, that bringing
him vnder his obeyſance, he cut off his head in recompence
of his diſloyall actes.
                     Certaine Knights that were in the Caſtell, and had ſéene
their Lord and Maſter ſo conquered, lett their Armour, cōming
toward the Prince Florendos, to whom in reuerent manner
they yéelded themſelues.
                     But he would not enter the Caſtell, before the Lady might
come ſoorth of Priſon, whereupon Albayzar entred, and
found her in a Dungeon, very cruelly vſed, ſo that a great
while ſhe could not remember him, but at laſt ſhee fell on her

knées, and to reward his gentleneſſe, ſubmitted her ſelfe to kiſſe
his hand, who would not ſuffer her, but ſuſtained her courteouſly
in his armes: willing her to thanke the Prince Florendos
and not him, becauſe he was not ſuffered to beare Armour.
                     The Lady at theſe words fell into a great rage, and as though
ſhe were diſtraight of her wits, began thus to ſay. Curſed be
he that hath ſo diſhonoured yon, for credit me, knightly Armes
were better beſtowed on you, then on him, or any of his linage:
wherefore, I am thus perſwaded, that Ladies ſhall haue loſſe
of ſo good a knight as you, whoſe heart aud hand was euer ready
to aide them.
                     
                        Albayzar not ſuffering her to runne ſo farre in his praiſe, framed
his talke to another purpoſe: deſirous to knowe, in what
maner Aſtribor had happened thither. Syr (quoth ſhe) you ſhal
vnderſtand, that this Aſtribor was brother to Dramorant the
Cruell, a man of more malicious nature, then euer was the Giant
his brother: he was no ſooner aduertiſed of his death, but
with ten knights he came vnto this Fortreſſe, where finding
ſmall force to reſiſt him, he entred, cau
                           •
                        ing all he found here to
be put to the ſword, reſeruing me in priſon, till he might chance
to haue knowledge of you, when then he intended to burne vs
both together: and till he might come by you, he ordained this
cuſtome, which is ſo worthily finiſhed.
                     
                        Albayzar being certified of euery thing at his pleaſure, cauſed
the Prince Florendos to be vnarmed: and his woundes were
very carefully reſpected by the Lady, who had good knowledge
in the Art of Chirugery. There they ſtayed longer, then the
Prince Florendos willingly would: for no place were it neuer
ſo pleaſant, could ſatiſfie his fancy, but onely the place where remained
his beſt beloued.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XCVII.
                     Of that which happened to Palmrin of England, in the company
of the Damoſell of Thrace.
                     
                        SVch ſpéede the noble Palmerin of England
made, in the company of the Damoſel, with
whom he trauailed, that without any aduenture
to hinder them, they quietly entred
the kingdome of Thrace: whereat the Damoſell
was very ioyfull, ſéeing euery thing
fell ſo fit as ſhe deſired, and the labour ſhe
had ſpent ſo many yéeres, began as now ſo happily to proſper.
This Damoſell being very well knowne, and highly honoured
through all the kingdome, great reſort of people came from many
Cities and Townes, to receiue her ioyfully, who had béene
ſo long time abſent.
                     The people beholding the prince Palmerin, gaue foorth theſe
ſpéeches to one another. Behold our gratious Lord and Soueraigne,
happy ſhall his ſubiects be, to be vnder the gouernment
of ſuch a noble Prince, in whom remaineth both courage and
clemency: who ſhall finiſh the enchanted eſtate of our Princeſſe,
enioy her as his onely Quéene and Lady, and gouerne the
Scepter ouer vs, according as our deceaſed Prince did appoint
it.
                     But Palmerin applied his whole cogitations, how he might
manifeſt his loyaltie to the Princeſſe Polinarda, more then he
reſpected the honour which was done vnto him: and though hée
had good hope to ende his enterpriſe, his intent was preſently to
returne to his Lady and miſtreſſe. In this opinion they rode on
togither, til they came to the city of Limorſana, where the principall
lords and rulers, came to receiue him with all triumphes
poſſible: conducting him to the royall Pallace. and in all reſpects

vſing him as their king and Emperour. Then came he to the
chamber of the Quéene Carmelia, who was Aunt to the princeſſe
Leonarda, where doing his duty vnto her, ſhe receiued him
as nobly, as had he bene her owne ſonne, becauſe ſhe verily
thought he ſhould marry with the Princeſſe.
                     But ſhe was farre from the intent of the Engliſh Priuce,
who ſéeing them ſo verily to beléeue, that he ſhould be their Gouernour
of Thrace, was ſomewhat offended, remembring his
promiſe to his Lady Polinarda. Wherefore he tooke leaue of
them, courteouſly bowing himſelfe to the Quéene Carmelia, &
went to his chamber, where he was vnarmed by Siluian, and
the Damoſell that came all the way in his company.
                     At ſupper he was accompanyed with the Quéene Carmelia,
many Lords and noble Gentlemen of that country, who ſhewed
great courteſie to the Engliſh Prince, till the houre of reſt
came, when euery one departed to their chambers, and Palmerin
to his lodging, where he could take no reſt, becauſe he deſired
ſo much the deliuery of the princeſſe Leonarda. In the morning
Siluian armed him very early, ſo that when the Lords
came to his chamber, they found him ready to depart thence:
wherfore they accompanied him to the Chappel, where ſeruice
was ſolemnized very royally by the Archbiſhop of the cittie, and
then they rode with him, neare the place where the Princeſſe
was Enchanted, reporting to him the dangers and feare, that
in this aduenture ſhould chance vnto him.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XCVIII.
                     How Palmerin tooke his way to the Enchaunted Princeſſe,
and of that which happened to him.
                     
                        IN ſhort time, the Lords had brought the
prince to the place where Leonarda remained
enchanted, where he beheld in a pleaſant
valley, a company of braue and ſtauely
Towers among the gréene trées: the buildings
ſéeming ſo excellent to the eye, that
nature could not haue inuented them more
gallant: ſo that he thought them to be framed by the Celeſtiall
powers, rather then by any earthly creatures.
                     
                        Palmerin was glad to ſée a thing ſo pleaſant, though he were
ſorrowfull to be abſent from his Lady Polinarda: and comparing
the great felicitie of him, who ſhould enioy the Princeſſe
Leonarda, with the mournfull thoughts that frequented his
mind, he could make choyſe of nothing, but onely the hope hée
had to be fauoured of his lady: whoſe remembrance, cauſed this
aduenture to promiſe him more pleaſure, then the hazard of ſuch
a doubt could moue him to feare. A thing, which truly is a great
grace in a diſcréete man, becauſe that diuers tunes we ſée, the
doubtfulleſt things to haue the pleaſanteſt iſſue: and that which
ſéemeth moſt pleaſant at the beginning, doth proue to be the
ſharpeſt danger in the ending. Euen ſo this noble Prince Palmerin
contained ſuch a courage and magnanimity of mind, that
no feare or diſmaying had power to ſupplant his thoughts, becauſe
good fortune ſuffered him, to returne from euery attempt
with honour.
                     
                        
One of the chéefe knights that kept him company, preſented
himſelfe to him in this manner. Moſt worthy Sir, to whom
Fortune hath alway béene ſo great a Friend, that no danger or
diſtreſſe could offer to diſmay you, ſéeme not now to diſcourage
your ſelfe in this aduenture, for your accuſtomed proſperity, can
not forſake you at this preſent. Yet ſometime a raw procéeding
returneth an vnexpected and vndeſerued puniſhment: but as
this caſe ſtandeth, your noble ſelfe accompanied with ſo great
aduiſed care, cannot moue a foote further then vertue ſhall warrant
your ſafety. Pardon me good Sir, if I haue béene ouer lauiſh
in my ſpéech, which I intended to no other iſſue, but onely
to aduertiſe you, that this aduenture is perillous, and therefore
craueth the more héed, and that a friendly admoniſhment, is
better then too late repentance?
                     Sir, anſwered Palmerin, your counſaile, ſhewing ſo great
grauity and foreſight, I eſtéeme a great deale more then at this
time I will vtter: for if Fortune ſpéede me in this enterpriſe,
I will not be vnmindfull of your friendly good will. This promiſe
preſented with ſo great humanitie, enflamed a ſuddaine
enuy in the hearts of ſome there preſent, who for the hope they
had to ſée him king, began to enter into more diſſembling prayſes,
then any true or faithfull ſubiect would ſéeme to offer. For
they began to perſwade him, that no aduenture, how dangerous
ſoeuer it proued, might attaine the power to aſtoniſh his
perſon: but he declining from ſuch vainglorious prayſes, as
was the dayly gifts and workes of flatterers, courteouſſy tooke
his leaue of them all, and ſet ſpurs to his Horſe, riding towards
his determination.
                     An example ſurely worthy of great praiſe to all Princes
and rulers liuing on the earth, that they ſhould not incline
and leane to ſuch, who onely ſtudy with ſwéete words, flattering
tales, and falſe reportss, to reſt and bring them aſléepe in
ſo vile an exerciſe. Which painted faces if they would ſuppreſſe,
their Subiects, Friends, and Seruants, ſhould bée equally
regarded, their renowne plentifully encreaſed, and accordingly
honoured, yea, the vertuous ſhould be richly rewarded,

and the vicious rightfully for euer reproched, then would
not the plaine dealer, be gouerned by ſuch as haue béene noted,
but the good ſhould be openly diſcerned from the euill, and
all enioy one hope for a continuall quiet: but to our matter,
Palmerin being come ſomewhat neare the place, the light beganne
to darken, the Ayre to be maruellouſly troubled, and
miſtie, ſo that the Lords of Thrace were ouercome with ſuch
feare, that ſome fell beſide their Horſes, ſome hurt themſelues
very ſore, and they all made haſt to the Citie as faſt as
they could, where tho darkeneſſe likewiſe was very terrible.
                     
                        Siluian, whom Palmerin had willed to ſtay behind him, ſéeing
this ſuddaine feare, tooke ſuch courage that he would follow
his Maiſter, but the Enchantment would not ſuffer any to
enter there, ſaue onely the Knight, who had the power to ende
it: that Siluian was forced to returne to the Citie, where
hée found the people in a great aſtoniſhment, at that which
happened ſince the departure of Palmerin. Who remembring
the wordes of the ancient Knight, beganne to diſlike the enſtance
of ſharpe an euill, for he thought eaſily to finde the
way of this aduenture, but he was greatly deceiued, when hée
felt ſuch paine, as he ſuppoſed would haue rent him aſunder.
Likewiſe he thought not to finde any in this place, who had
the power to torment him, beyond the loue he bare to his lady:
but he found his expectation altered, when an inuiſible motion
diſmounted him from his Horſe, wherevpon in an anger hee
drewe his Swoord, thinking to preuaile againſt him that ouerthrew
him, but ſéeing his blowes to be ſmitten againſt the
winde, he thought to mount on Horſebacke againe, and then to
ride forward.
                     But all his labour was in vaine, it was not poſſible for
him to finde his Horſe, but that which was more to his diſaduantage,
not onely his Swoord was taken from him,
but likewiſe all his Armour was caught away on a ſuddaine,
and the darkeneſſe was ſo violent, that hée had not the commoditie
to goe forward, nor yet to goe backe againe, to the
place where he commaunded Siluian to tarrie.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XCIX.
                     ¶What happened to the Prince Palmerin, in this daungerous
aduenture.
                     
                        PAlmerin hauing loſt his Horſe and Armor,
as you haue heard already, became
full of heauineſſe, becauſe he was in reſpect
naked, and ſo hard an aduenture required
better prouiſion: his ſtrength on a ſuddaine
beganne to faile him, his armes and
legges denied their wonted nimbleneſſe,
and on a ſuddaine he heard a mighty and terrible thundering,
that ſtill he expected when the earth would haue opened vnder
him.
                     Vpon this he heard a fearefull hollowe voyce, but looking about
him, he could perceiue no body, and then was he ſnatcht
vp ſuch a mighty height, that he ſtill looked when he ſhould be
violently throwen downe againe. This feare had not the
power to hurt him, but to his greater comfort, the light excluded
the darkeneſſe away, when he found himſelfe to be in the
middeſt of a little Iland encloſed rounde about with a Lake
ſo blacke and ouglie, that he thought it to be one of the floods of
Hell.
                     Néere to him he eſpyed an olde withered Trée, and vnderneath
it ſtoode a Knight armed with the Armour of Palmerin,
with his Swoorde like wiſe in his hand, whereupon he began
to the Prince in this order. I deſire (Syr Knight) to ſée
at this preſent, by what meanes thou canſt defend thy ſelfe

from me, who with this Swoorde will mangle thy fleſh and
bones, whereon the wilde Beaſtes of the Countrey ſhall feed:
ſo that thy renowne famed ouer all the whole earth, ſhall here
take full end, where none can approach to beare witneſſe of thy
death.
                     The Prince, who was neuer accuſtomed to any feate,
was nowe ſurpriſed in maruaylous manner, whereat no maruaile
ought to bee vſed, in that hée was deſtitute of any thing
for his defence, and to ſtriue by the armes with ſuch an enemie,
hee founde it altogether inſufficient: yet notwithſtanding,
the extremitie which Fortune had allotted him,
hée approched to the Knights, offering to aduenture ſo vppon
him.
                     But as they thought to cloſe together, a darke Cloude ſuddainly
ouerſhadowed them, ſo that Palmerin could no way diſcerne
the Knight, but thinking as it were to gripe him, his
Sword was ſuddainly put into his hand, and his Armour hée
perceyued vnder the Tree, but the Knight was gone he knew
not which way.
                     
                        Palmerin héereat was ſomewhat abaſhed, but ſéeing this aduenture
ſo repleniſhed with fearefull aſſaults, and that the end
of all would be changed into rigour, he armed himſelfe againe
with ſuch a courage, that not only his ſtrength was encreaſed,
but alſo his minde nobly addicted, to accompliſh that which he ſo
mucgh deſired.
                     The light beganne to be chéerefull againe, when Palmerin
diſcerned the faire Caſtell, whereto he could not attaine,
without croſſing that ougly Lake, which to paſſe hée coulde
deuiſe no meanes, but it woulde ſtand on the hazarde of his
life.
                     Beſide, the Banke on the other ſide, was ſo ſtéepe approching
downe to the water, that he could not iudge with himſelfe
howe to get vp, becauſe 
                           〈◊〉
                         w
                           •
                        ight of his Armour, would

                           〈◊〉
                         a great hinderaunce to him, to 
                           〈◊〉
                         on the ſide where hée
would be: yet more to hinder his determination, hee eſpyed
there a companie of mo
                           •••
                        ous and miſhapen Beaſts, who on

a ſuddaine fought ſo furiouſly together, that in the end they had
vtterly ſpoyld and killed one another.
                     Their gréeuous fight being thus ended, hée went about the
Iland, to ſee where he might haue paſſage to the other ſide, at
laſt he eſpied a Boate, hauing foure Ores in it, which were
handled and gouerned by foure Apes, eche one tyed with a
mighty Chayne, and at the one ende of the Boate ſate a mighty
Lyon, all embrued in blood, as though he were Maiſter and
conducter of the Paſſage, who fed himſelfe with nothing elſe,
but the fleſh of his Paſſengers.
                     While Palmerin tooke occaſion to beholde this ſight, he eſpied
a man on the farder ſide, crying to the Beaſtes to carry him
ouer with them, whereat, he became very much amazed, and
thought no man to be ſo fooliſh, as to hazard himſelfe vnder ſuch
a Pilote.
                     The man was no ſooner entred the Boate, but the Lyon
ſtraight way rent him in peeces, giuing part of him to his companions,
to ſuſtaine their life.
                     The Prince who ſtood and behold all this, knew not how to
determine with himſelfe, for he ſawe no way to paſſe, but the
terror of death was both before and behind him, wherefore ſeeing
there was no remedy, hee concluded to put himſelfe to the
rigour of the Beaſts, and to ſhift with them by ſtrength of his
armes, for he ſawe himſelfe wholly deſtitute of any other
hope.
                     Héereupon he looked how hée might diſcende downe, for the
Rocke was ſo ſlipperie and ſtéepe, that hée thought there was
no other way, but to breake his necke, in this extremitie hée
committed himſelfe to God, and afterward to his Miſtreſſe
he beganne in this manner. Madame, it is not the loſſe of life
which appaleth me, but the hope of your fauour that ſuſtaineth
me in doubte, but if I well conſider with my ſelfe, the ending
of my life in this aduenture, will be the greateſt good that euer
may happen to me becauſe then my inſupportable paines ſhall
attaine a perfect and full concluſion. Yet knowing the
gréefe which molleſteth me, procéedeth from none but onely

you, I fixe my ioy and comfort to this ende, that your helpe in
this and all other extreames, is the onely aduancement of my
good fortune.
                     Héere taking occaſion to ſtay, hée ſuffered himſelfe to ſlyde
ſoftly downe the Rocke, and attained the Riuer ſide without
any harme: whereupon, the Lyon and his fellowes came to receiue
him into the Boate, but hée perceiuing all this was Enchauntment,
drew his ſword and offered reſiſtance, when preſently
the beaſts vaniſhed, he knew not which way.
                     Then Palmerin leaped into the Boate, and with all diligence
rowed himſelfe to y• farther ſide, but when he was landed there,
hée had more cauſe of maruaile, becauſe now hée ſawe no way
how to get vp vpon that Rocke.
                     Walking a litle aſide, hée beheld a Rope that reached to the
ground from the top, which was ſo ſlender and rotten, that hée
thought it not able to abide the waight of his Armour, wherefore,
to make himſelf the lighter, he determined to leaue his Armor
there, yet not knowing what occaſion he ſhould haue to vſe
it, when he ſhould come to the top of the Rocke, he bound
himſelfe about the middle with the Rope, when preſently hée
was pulde vp with maruailous ſpeede, and when he was at
the toppe, he could not perceiue them that had drawne him vp.
Then he knew he was in the Field where the beaſts were
ſlaine, and that euery thing the Enchauntment preſented to
him, was for no other cauſe but to abate his courage: where
fore, he addicted himſelfe ſo aduenturous, that all the feare in the
world, had not the power to diſmay him.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. C.
                     How Palmerin ended the Enchantment, of the Princeſſe
Leonarda.
                     
                        FOr all that night, Palmerin reſted himſelfe
vnder a Trée, and in the morning he beheld
the Towers very brauely: wherefore he
walked on, and at laſt eſpied his Horſe tyed
to a Trée, in no worſe caſe then when he
left him. So mounting vpon him, he rode
a little further, where hee met with two
Knights, who without any words, couched
their ſpeares againſt him: the firſt receiued vpon his Shield,
and the Knights preſently vaniſhed away: the ſecond burſt his
Lance vpon him, whervpon Palmerin followed him, to requite
him with a blow of his ſword, but he loſt the ſight of him, in like
maner as he did of the other knight.
                     Then Palmerin looking about, eſpied a man readie to draw
a Bridge, which was the paſſage ouer a water, which made
him to gallop thither apace, ſo that he entred the gate before he
had the power to locke it. When he-ſawe himſelfe in ſo faire
a Caſtle, he aduanced himſelfe to ſée the brauerie of the Chambers:
but two Giants came and laid at him with their Maces,
ſo that he was enforced to fall on the ground, but recouering
himſelfe, & thinking to faſten halfe a good blowes on them,
they were gone, nothing remaining before him but a great
ſmoake.
                     This cauſed him, to make the leſſe eſtimation of any thing

that chaunced, and whatſoeuer reſiſted him, hee would but
little force of, ſo comming into the Court of the Caſtell, he perceiued
a little gate on high in the wall, whereto he muſt aſcend
by a paire of ſtaires, ſo narrow and dangerous, that a man
would haue hardly truſted himſelfe on them.
                     
                        Palmerin, deſirous to ſée the ende of his labours, aduentured
to goe vp vpon them, and when he was on the middle ſteppe,
all the walles about him beganne to ſhake very vehemently, ſo
that Palmerin doubted the whole Caſtell would fall vpon him,
and till came to the top of the ſtaires the Enchantment laſted,
where he was no ſooner come, but a general terror did ſhew
the Enchantment to be fully ended.
                     
                        Palmerin entring through that little doore, came into a darke
entrie, where there was a great gate, made faſt with great
Lockes and boltes of Iron, and hard by the gate lay a mightie
Serpent, whoſe horrible bigneſſe and oughly forme, made
the Prince to be greatly amazed, about whoſe necke vpon
a Chaine, was hanged the Keyes that ſhould open the
gate.
                     The Prince knewe not how to paſſe this gate, except he
might winns the Keyes from ſo terrible a Porter, whom hee
charged with many noble ſtrokes, and the Serpent breathed
ſuch horrible veneme and ſmoke, hauing the Princes Swoord
in one of his noſtrilles: that with a terrible 
                           •
                        ore hee ſlewe
through one of the windowes. The people ſéeing it flye ouer the
Cittie, which made them iudge, that Palmerin as then was in
ſome painefull trauaile, for whoſe good ſucceſſe they prayed very
often.
                     When he ſaw the Serpent was gone, he found the Keyes
on the ground, wherewith he vnlocked and opened the gate, entring
into ſo faire a Hall, that the Perilous Iſle, where Eutropa
caſt her ſelfe into the Lake, nor the ſumptuous Caſtle of the
Sage Aliart Obſcure Valley, might compare with this rare
and excellent Monument, which was ſo engeniouſly deuiſed
by the King of Thrace.
                     
                     He walked all about, and found all things new to bee

in perfect eſtate, for that the Enchantment was fully finiſhed,
but at laſt he came to a Chamber, where he perceiued certaine
Damoſels talking, and by them ſtood an armed man, who likewiſe
tooke pleaſure to conferre with the Damoſels.
                     The Prince loth to trouble them, entred into a verie faire
Garden, where on a gréene banke, by a faire Fountaine, he
beheld diuers Ladies of excellent beautie, but eſpecially, the
faire young Princeſſe Leonarda, who had no ſooner eſpied him
but ſhe came to him very courteouſly in this manner. Credite
me Sir Knight, I finde my ſelfe ſo largely beholding to
you, that I cannot recompence you ſo nobly as you haue deſerued,
but in time I ſhall endeuour my ſelfe to requite the honourable
bounty receiued at your hands, meane while, I
ſhall requeſt you, to accept my good will in ſatiſfaction of your
noble déedes, which are imprinted ſo déepe in my heart, that I
ſhall not faile to accompliſh, what your Proweſſe hath bound
me in.
                     My gratious Lady (anſwered Palmerin) the beauty which
Nature hath aboundantly adorned you withall, is ſufficient
to content the greateſt trauailes, attempted by the hardyeſt
Knight in the world: if ſo be Fortune had allowed him the lybertie
to receiue ſo great a benefite of ſuch a gratious Lady.
But ſéeing the aduenture here ſo wonderfull, that theſe preſent,
put them paſt into darke obliuion, I ſhall intreate you
to tell me, if I haue any greater danger to paſſe, then this
which it pleaſeth you to preſent before me, for truſt me I ſhall
diſpaire to accompliſh them, knowing right well, that the
hope of ſo rich a Treaſure, as is your beautie, ought to be reſerued
for the Knight who is indewed with greater Preweſſe
then my ſelfe.
                     Theſe words procured a ſwéete bluſhing in the Princeſſe
face, whereof to be reſoued, ſhe replyed thus. I know not,
Sir Knight, what danger you ſuſtaine at this preſent, becauſe
all the dangers and hazards of the Caſtle, tooke end at ſuch
tune as you came into this Garden. But then to breake off
their talke, there came in the Lords and Gouernours of the

Citty, who ſéeing the Serpent fly ouer the Citty, which they
knew very well to be the end of the Enchantment, they came
with great Maieſty riding to the Caſtle, where comming into
the Garden, they humbled themſelues on their knées before the
Princeſſe Leonarda, offering likewiſe to kiſſe the hand of the
noble Palmerin, which he would not ſuffer: but receiued them
courteouſly as his friends and companions. The Quéene Carmelia
ſent a Coach to the Caſtle, wherein the Princeſſe. Leonarda
was brought to the Pallace of her Vnckle, who receiued
her as became her high eſtate and dignity: and the Prince
Palmerin likewiſe they vſed great honour and Princely obeyſance,
but when he came to the Camber, he found there Siluian
who was not a little glad to ſée his Lord ſo ſauely returned.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. CI.
                     Of that which Palmerin did, while he remaineded in the Court
of Thrace.
                     
                        NOw at the requeſt of the Quéen Carmelia,
Palmerin granted to ſtay in the court of
Thrace for eight dayes, in which time, the
Lords to fulfill the commandement of their
deceaſſed King, went to the Camber of the
Queene Carmelia, in whoſe preſence they
charged the Duke Rialdo, to giue the Engliſh
Prince to vnderſtand what their King Sardamant had
commanded to be fulfilled.
                     On this they all came to the Princes Chamber, where they
found him talking with Siluian, as concerning his ſpeedy departure

from thence: which they knewe he had appointed as the
next day following, but they making themſelues ignorant therof,
at laſt the Duke Rialdo entred into theſe ſpéeches.
                     My Lord, as I thinke you haue not forgotten, what commandement
our deceaſſed king Sardamant, left to be performed
in the marriage of the Princeſſe Leonarda his Néece.
                     So it is, that willing to accompliſh his ſtraight and heauie
charge, as alſo not to ſuffer ſuch a noble Prince, who hath merited
ſo graciouſly, to be ingratefully recompenced, likewiſe on
our parts, that we cannot eſteeme for ourſelues a more happy
felicity, then ſuch a King to rule vs, whoſe déeds rightly deſerue
to be Monarch of the whole world: theſe cauſes conſidered
and nominated, we humbly deſire you, to accept your owne by
right, and our dutie to ſée faithfully accompliſhed, which is, to be
our gratious King and Seueraigne, ſo that our happy and tranquill
eſtate, remaine feared of the ſtranger, and beloued of our
friends and neighbours. Except the increaſe of wealth, doe alter
the noble mind, which had alwaies hitherto continued vpright,
as to ſome it happeneth: but falling into ſo great miſhap, your
eſtimation would be the leſſe accounted of, So that the honourable
pains you haue beſtowed, to reſtore vs the princeſſe Leonarda
our Queene, ſhould be blotted with ſuch obliuous reports,
as though they had béene neuer ſéene or done.
                     I aſſure you Sir, anſwered Palmerin, the refuſe which I
make, to accept a reward ſo happie and fortunate, is onely becauſe
I verily iudge, the Princeſſe Leonarda ought to be kept
for ſuch a one, as may better my eſtate in wealth and worthineſſe.
                     The Damoſel of Thrace, who had brought him thither, ſtanding
by and hearing the anſwere he made, came vnto him in
this manner.
                     Sir Palmerin, I know right well, that loue hindreth you to
enioy what your déeds hath deſerued, and cauſeth you to muſe
on ſuch a one, as peraduēture thinketh not ſo well of you, which
is the onely cauſe, that you refuſe the recompence of your honorable
and famous labours.
                     
                        
The words of the Damoſell, ſéemed very reaſon able to the
Duke and his company, but ſéeing they could obtaine no other
anſwere of Palmerin, they returned againe to the Quéene Carmelia,
concluding, that he ſhould giue a noble Lord to enioy the
Princeſſé Leonarda; according as the King Sardamant had
ſo ordained: whereto Palmerin gladly agréed, ſaying.
                     I account this honour (worthy Gentlemen) the greateſt that
euer fortune could ſent me, in ſuffering your Princeſſe to ioyne
in Marriage according to my minde: and therefore thus aſſure
yourſelues, that I ſhall beſtew ſuch a Prince vpon her, as both
ſhe and you ſhall be contented to receiue.
                     The Lords of Thrace gaue him very harty thankes, reporting
his anſwere to the Queene Carmelia, who made ſuch acceptation
thereof, as it worthily deſerued: but Leonarda was
ſomewhat offended, and would haue fallen into anger, had not
the Damoſell of Thrace vſed theſe words vnto her.
                     Faire Princeſſe, me thinkes you ſhould not thinke ſo ill, of
the conſtant faith and loyaltie of the Prince Palmerin, who wil
kéepe his vowe he hath made to her, which perhaps is nothing
inferior to you in beauty and wealth: and this I can aſſure you,
that Palmerin hath a brother, a Prince ſo ſaire and vertuous in
all his déedes, as if he ioyne you in marriage with him, I know
you will gladly held your ſelfe content.
                     The Damoſell vſed her perſwaſions ſo well, that the Princeſſe
Leonarda was very well pleaſed: of whom Palmerin tooke
his leaue that night, becauſe he would be gone ſomewhat early
in the morning, which the Quéene Carmelia ſeeing, ſhe tooke
him aſide, and thus charged him.
                     I pray you Sir to remember my Couzin Leonarda, and to
ſend her ſuch a Lord, as her birth and worthineſſe hath continually
deſerued.
                     And if you thinke it good, that I might cauſe her to be brought
to the Court of the Emperour Palmerin, I ſhould eſtéeme it the
greateſt honour that in all my life time might happen vnto me.
For that I perſwade me, he would ſo wel entertaine her, as the
faire Polinarda, who is his Néece, with whom ſhe would likewiſe
greatly delight her ſelfe.
                     
                        
Furthermore, becauſe all the chiefe knights of the world, be
at the Court of Conſtantinople, I would gladly this kingdome
ſhould be ruled by ſuch a Prince, as hath bin trained vp by that
famous Emperour.
                     Madame ſaide Palmerin, I aſſure you, the Emperour will
eſtéeme this honour highly, and entertaine her according as ſhe
doeth deſerue: therefore I wiſh you to ſend her ſo ſoone as may
be, becauſe the ſooner ſhe commeth, the better ſhall ſhe be welcome.
                     I pray you (quoth the Quéene) how eſtéeme you of the Damoſell,
that brought the Cup thither?
                     Truely anſwered Palmerin, I know no one ſo conuenient,
by reaſon of the good ſpirit and wit ſhe hath, which doeth greatly
grace her in reporting her meſſage.
                     Preſently the Quéene called for the Damoſell, giuing her to
vnderſtand what was determined. Wherevpon there were
letters of credit made for her: which done, Palmerin tooke leaue
of the Quéene and the Princeſſe Leonarda, being accompanied
with moſt of the nobles foorth of the Citie, where after many
circumſtances of friendly departing, they left him, and returned
againe to the Citie.
                     
                        Palmerin being very well armed, ſtill vſing his Shield, to be
called the Knight of the Tiger, trauailed on in his iourney
accompanied with Siluian, yéelding his body to trauaile,
and his heart to his Lady and Miſtreſſe,
as in the ſecond part you ſhall
ſée very gallantly diſcourſed.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                     THus Gentlemen, you haue heard the firſt
part of our Engliſh Princes labors, wherin,
if you find the Tranſlation altered, or
the true ſence in ſome place of a matter
impaired, let this excuſe anſwere his default
in that caſe. A worke ſo large, is
ſufficient to tire ſo ſimple a workeman as
himſelfe: and beſide, the Printer may in
ſome place let an error eſcape. So betweene theſe two reaſons,
let the Author paſſe vncontrowled, which will haſten
him the ſooner to ſend you the ſecond part: wherein he dares
promiſe you, ſuch plentifull varietie of choice conceits, as
cannot be ſo long expected, as they will bee thought worthy
of a welcome, Meane while, he repoſeth himſelfe on your
wonted courteſies: deſiring to heare nothing, that may diſharten
him from his intent, or hinder you from the end of ſo
braue a Hiſtorie.
                  FINIS.
                  
                     Anthony Munday.
Patere aut abſtine.
                  
                  
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE
SECOND PART, OF
THE NO LESSE RARE, THEN
excellent and ſtately Hiſtorie, of the famous and
fortunate Prince Palmerin of England.
and Florian du Deſart his brother.
                  CONTAINING THEIR KNIGHTLY
deeds of Chiualry, ſucceſſe in their loues purſuite,
and other admirable fortunes.
                  Wherein Gentlemen may finde choyſe of ſweete inuentions,
and Gentlewomen be ſatisfied in Courtly
expectations.
                  Tranſlated out of French, by A. M. one of the
Meſſengers of her Maieſties Chamber.
                  Patere aut abſtine.
                  LONDON
Printed by Thomas Creede, and Bernard Alſop
1616.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE VVORSHIPFVLL
MAISTER FRANCIS
YOVNG OF BRENT PELham,
in the Countie of Hertford Eſquire, and to
Miſtreſſe Suſan Young, his Wife, and my
kinde Miſtreſſe, he
                        •
                     lth, and happineſſe
intirely wiſhed.
                  
                     
                        ALPHONSVS king of Naples, (Right
Worſhipfull) a King renowmed in ſundrie
volumes of Antiquitie, for his wiſedome,
Bountie, and Affablilitie of Nature,
lying very ſore ſicke in the Citie of
Capua, hauing tryed the very vttermoſt
cunning his Phyſitions could vſe on him, yet all would
not helpe to recouer his health, determined with himſelfe
to take no more Medicines: but for his recreation
cauſed the Storie of Quintus Curtius (concerning the
deedes of Alexander the Great) to be read before him,
at the hearing whereof hee conceyued ſuch woonderfull
pleaſure, as Nature gathered ſtrength by it, and chaſed
away the frowardnes of his diſeaſe.
                  
                     Wherevpon in ſome ſorte, hauing ſoone recouered
his health, hee diſcharged his Phyſitians, with
theſe wordes: Feaſt mee no more with Galene, and Hyppocrates,
ſith all their skill would not ſerue to aſſwage my

ſickeneſſe: but well fare Quintius Curtius that holpe mee ſo
ſoone to my health.
                  By this example may be gathered (right worſhipfull)
how neceſſary it is (oftentimes) to reade Hiſtories,
which in the iudgement of the wiſe are eſteemed as
healthfull to the mind, as Phiſick is accounted holeſome
for the body: yea, oftentimes more, for that the ſodaine
inward conceit of delight (wherewith Hiſtories are plentifully
enriched) may ſooner breake and qualifie the extreamity
of a painfull diſeaſe, then the long and labourſome
applying of Phyſicall receipts. Yet, not to condemne
the one, nor extoll the other more then it deſerueth,
I allow of both very well: but I muſt needs thus
confeſſe with Ariſtotle, that Hiſtory is the Schoolemiſtreſſe
of Princes, and the onely Trumpet that ſoundeth
in the eares of all noble perſonages, the famous deeds of
their worthy progenitors.
                  
                     Plato likewiſe affirmeth, that the name of Hiſtory was
giuen to this end, that by recording matters of antiquity,
our fleeting memories might be ſtayed, which otherwiſe
would ſoone be loſt and retaine little.
                  Seeing then (right worſhipfull) that Hiſtories carry
ſuch credite among the learned ſort, and haue not bene
a little eſteemed of both Emperours, kings, and famous
Potentates? as a teſtimony of my vnfained affection
and dutie to your worſhippe: I offer you the ſecond
part of this excellent and famous Hiſtorie, which
how bad the rude tranſlation thereof may ſeeme to
the daintie eares, I know: but how ſingular it is of it
ſelfe, no better deſcription then the reading ouer can
be made.
                  I preſume therefore, maiſter Young, as the Romanes
did, who were woont to place the pictures of their

moſt eſpecial friends, at the very entrance into their ſtately
Pallaces, therby to declare their zealous and vnſpotted
affection to him. In like maner haue I ſtampt your worſhips
name in the face of this hiſtorie, as well to countenance
the Book with ſuch a worſhipfull perſonage, as to
credit my ſelfe with your woonted and fauourable good
liking: for I account my ſelfe, and my labours free from
the reproach of wounding tongues, being allowed but
the leaſt moitie of your gentle iudgement. It ſhall bee
needleſſe for me to wade into tedious circumſtances,
when to the wiſe and learned a word is ſufficient: wherefore
Palmerin repoſeth himſelfe on your kinde conceite,
and wiſheth ſuch happy continuance to you, your wife
my gentle Miſtreſſe, and whole iſſue, as the world being
partaker of your vertues, my ſelfe acquainted with your
fauourable opinion, and my Booke defended by your
worthy ſelfe, you may remaine, as in yeeres, ſo in happineſſe:
and the longer your courſe, the larger your comfort.
                  
                     Your worſhips at command,
A. Mundy.
                  
               
               
                  
                  To the Reader.
                  
                     ACcording to my promiſe, I haue finiſhed the
ſecond part of Palmerins famous hiſtorie:
how plētifully it is enriched with ſingular
conceite, ſweete inuention, and commendable
purpoſes, leaue to thy iudgement, not
doubting but that thou 
                        〈◊〉
                      cenſnr
                        •
                      therof
vnpartially. And leaſt thou ſhouldeſt 
                        •••
                     edge, that this ſecond
part broakes off abruptly, not ſhewing what become of the Princes,
after they were conuayed by the Sage Aliart to the Perillous
Iſle: vnderſtand, that the third part ſhall acquaint thee
therewith, as alſo the full concluſion of euery matter herein
handled, which if thou be deſirous to haue, giue theſe two former
Bookes the friendlier welcome, and it will haſten the tranſlation
of the other with the greater ſpeede.
                  
                     Thy vnfained friend to his power.
A. Munday.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  THE SECOND PART OF
the famous Hiſtorie, of the noble
and valiant Prince Palmerin of England,
containing other moſt ſing
                        •
                     lar and
knightly deedes by him atchieued,
and worthily finiſhed.
                  
                     CHAP. I.
                     Of that which happened to the Prince Florendos, after that
he had left the Caſtle of Dramorant the Cruell, where hee
vanquiſhed Aſtribor.
                     
                        I Haue made rehearſall vnto you in the firſt
part of this Hiſtorie, how the valiant
Prince Palmerin of England, who cauſed
himſelfe to be called the Knight of the Tiger
happily brought to the end the cruell enchantment,
wherein the faire Leonarda
Princeſſe of Thrace, was long time detained,
and hauing ſtaied long in that realme,
he concluded to take his leaue of the Quéene Carmelia, and the
young Lady, deſiring them humbly, that they would not
ſéeme
to hinder him from his voyage to Conſtantinople, within
whoſe walles was incloſed the ineſtimable treaſure of his
knightly and loyall minde, which indéede was the faire
Princeſſe Polinarda, the ſoueraigntie of whoſe beautie was
of ſuch power, as made him refuſe the Crowne of Thrace,
which was preſented vnto him, (according as the Sage Aliart
made rehearſall before theſe famous aduentures) by the principall
noble Gentlemen throughout the realme of Thrace,
                        
who hartily deſired if it might be poſſible, that the noble Palmerin
of England, (whoſe honeſtie, valour and Knightly courteſie
was agréeable together) ſhould fulfill the commandement
of their King Sardament, which they would haue béene
very loth to contrary, had he thereto conſented. But Palmerin
made knowne his minde and ſecret intent, as well vnto them
as alſo to the Princeſſe, both what he intended, and what hée
would ſée eſpecially performed, wheron his honor ſhould ſtand
for a warrant, which they in the end gratefully accepting, humbled
themſelues, to take their farewell of him, and he framing
the like toward the Quéene, the Princeſſe, and them all, departed
with a princely conge, and rode on in a thouſand thoughts
toward Conſtantinople, bearing his aforenamed deuiſe of the
Tiger in his ſhield, where, to his proſperous iourney we will
leaue him a while, and returne to the Prince Florendos, ſon to
the noble Primaleon, who hauing ſlaine Aſtribor, and giuen liberty
to the Lady that was priſoner in his Caſtell, departed on
his iourney with Albayzar, in whoſe company he paſſed the
Realme of France, without any deſire to approach the Court,
becauſe he doubted if the King and the Quéene Melicia, knewe
of his being there, they would ſtay him longer then he willingly
would.
                     Therefore continuing on his way, he entred the kingdome
of Nauarre, wherein when theſe two worthy Knights had trauailed
two dayes, at length they entred into a faire and goodly
Valley, through the middeſt whereof there ran a pleaſant Riuer,
which had diuerſe ſorts of trées planted about it, very pleaſant
to the beholders. The ſight hereof greatly reuiued the penſiue
minde of the Prince Florendos, who could not bridle his
thoughts from the remembrance of the Caſtell of the Giant
Almaroll, wherein the Iewell of his happineſſe remained, and
before whoſe walles he had ſpent ſome part of his youthful time
i
                           •
                         knightly tryall.
                     They had not long trauailed in this pleaſant Valley, but
within a while (to their greater delight) they eſpied by the Ryuer
ſide, a ſtrong and well fortified Caſtell, whereto as they
were about to aduance themſelues, they beheld a Damoſell

(accompanied with two Eſquiers who were on foote) preparing
herſelfe towards them, to méete them: which Florendos
perceiuing, and knowing himſelfe to be armed if the worſt
ſhould happen, he gaue forth himſelfe nobly to méet them, to
whom the Damoſell ſpake after this ſort.
                     Sir knight, the faire Arnalte, Princeſſe of Nauarre my Ladie
and Miſtreſſe, commaundeth you, in reſpect of the daunger
that may happen vnto you by this aduenture, that you faile not
to accompliſh one of theſe thrée conditions wherewith I ſhall
preſent you. The firſt is, that you muſt returne vnto the place
from whence you now came, where you ſhal ſweare, that ſhe is
the onely Princeſſe of beautie in the whole world. Secondly,
that you muſt enter Combat all the way as you ryde, with any
that dare maintaine the contrarie. Or if you will not accept of
theſe two conditions, you ſhall then make promiſe, that you
will neuer beare Armes in any cauſe, wherein knighthood may
be witneſſed, or you merite renowne by any ſuch enterpriſe,
neither on the behalfe of any diſtreſſed Lady, or in triall of your
knightly loyaltie.
                     Thus Gentlemen, if you cannot put on the minds to ſatiſfie
my Ladies will, you muſt hazard your ſelues to endure the manifold
perils contained within this Valley: wherein, if either
your cunning faile you, or the ſufficiencie of her noble demaund
foile you, you muſt content your ſelues to abide perpetuall impriſonment,
wherin nothing will be ſo bitter vnto you as life,
and nothing better vnto you then preſent death: this is héere
prouided for thoſe, who dare endue themſelues with the hardineſſe,
to refuſe to obey the conditions I haue tolde you. Wherfore
Gentlemen, if you will follow my aduiſe, I would counſel
you to take your oath in maintenance of her beauty, which can
no way impeach you of diſhonour, or diminiſh any iote of your
knightly valour, conſidering you ſhall iuſtifie nothing but a
truth, wherin you can neuer faile, and rid your ſelues of a great
deale of trouble, which ſurely to knights is an infamous blot:
for I aſſure you, ſuch as fall into the daunger through their
owne folly, may well ſit and repent their extreme miſhaps 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        
                           •
                        et no power to remedy their great miſfortunes.
                     
                        
Faire Damoſell (aunſwered Florendos) I take in verie
great diſdaine what your Miſtreſſe commaundeth me, in reſpect
of her vaine glorious requeſt, and for that my Knighthood ſtandeth
vppon better regarde: and this I aſſure you, that I take
leſſe pleaſure in your counſell, then I dread the perill in confounding
your Ladies claime: this alwaies conſidered, that her
conditions are ſuch, as ſhe may neither demande, nor I defend.
Yet to aduantage me the more, I would requeſt, if you would
doe me ſo much fauour as to declare, to what ende this ſtately
enterpriſe of your Lady tendeth: for it ſéemeth immodeſt in her
to wil ſo much, and I ſhould ſhew my ſelfe very vnmannerly
to thruſt my ſelfe into ſuch vnreuerent ſeruice.
                     I promiſe you ſir Knight (aunſwered the Damoſell) the enterpriſe
is ſo full of doubt vnto the hardieſt Knightes, as it is
conuenient that firſt we ſhould receiue their oathes, before wée
diſcouer to them the will of the Princeſſe Arnalte, whereof if
they ſhould be acquainted before hand, they would not aduance
themſelues to promiſe any thing. And if it chance that my Lady
compell them to yéelde by méere conſtraint, they ſhall beare but
bad eſtates when they depart out of her hands, becauſe ſhe was
ſo gentle to y
                           •
                        queſt, and they ſo daintie in making promiſe.
                     Damoſell (quoth Florendos) I very well perceiue the ſcope
of your meaning, how with threatning words of enſuing danger,
you would bring me like a yong Nouice to that, which your
Lady would haue me ſo gladly performe: but ſurely I am not
ſo childiſh as to ſatiſfie her minde, by promiſing any one of the
cōditions you haue rehearſed, for I rather deſire to be acquainted
with ye moſt difficult dangers, wherewith you ſéem ſo much
to menace me, and whereto I very willingly giue my conſent,
rather then I will be ſo baſe minded as to accompliſh her commandement,
and ſo you may depart and tell her. The Damoſel
with this aunſwere returned to the Caſtell of her Ladie, from
whence in ſhort ſpace after, came forth ſix knights very gallantly
mounted and armed, and bearing their Launces downward,
approched to ye prince Florendos, to whom they deliuered forth
theſe ſpéeches. Sir knight, it is thought good by our lady and miſtres,
y• you ſhould vnderſtād at this preſent, the danger which

the ancient cuſtome vſed in this place, doth bring all Knights
into, that dare ſéeme to denie it, and for that our Lady hath béen
ſo courteous as to demand, and thou ſo impudent as thou wilt
néedes deny, thou ſhalt well know that we may, can, and will
compel thée. Few words and ſwéet (anſwered Florendos) your
Lady may do much, but not command: you as much, but not
compell, and for my ſelfe, I will neither command nor compell,
but bid you hartily welcome to what you dare doe. At theſe
wordes they gaue the ſpurres to their Horſes, and all ſixe fetched
their carire againſt the good and hardy Knight Florendos,
who likewiſe prepared himſelfe to receiue them couragiouſly,
which in ſooth he did with ſuch knightly proweſſe, as at the firſt
he depriued one of them of his life, and in ſhort ſpace the other
were left deſtitute of their Lances. Then he began to take hart
a freſh, and ſetled himſelfe manfully toward the other fiue, to
endure the ſharpe charges wherewith they aſſaulted him. The
fight hereof mooued Albayzar to immeaſurable griefe, who
wiſhed that he were then ſo happie as to maintaine the cauſe
of that good Knight, for that he would reuenge the iniury which
the other vncourteouſly offered him, and which he perceiued to
be ſo great, as he wiſhed rather to be preſently voyd of life, then
to want his Armour in ſuch an extremity.
                     
                        Florendos enuironed on euery ſide with his enemies, knew
not well which way to ſhun the perril, but the moſt vnhappieſt
thing of all, one of the Horſes of one of the Knights, gaue him
ſuch a cruell ſtroke, as hee was conſtrained to fall to the earth.
But it was not long before he recouered his feete againe, when
preſently he tooke himſelfe to a Trée, to reſcew himſelfe a little
from their mallice, which when the Knights perceiued,
they deliuered vnto him theſe ſpéeches. Syr Knight, this Tree
neither can nor ſhall defend you from our power, and therefore
it is very ſlender helpe for you to truſt vnto, wherefore wée
iudge it far better to render your ſelfe to the priſon of our Lady
and Miſtreſſe, then to ſuffer ſo great danger, as we ſee you in
by the great effuſe of your blood. I had much rather (anſwered
Florendos) endure the death, making an ample proofe of a noble
minde, then to render my ſelfe into the hands of ſuch cruell

and diſcourteous perſons as you are. Wherfore if you be Gentlemen,
ordare conceiue ſo good an opinion of hardines in your
ſelues, do me the knightly fauour, as to let me deale with you
one after another, which is honeſty in me to requeſt, and honor
in you to grant. Otherwiſe, if you be ſo faint hearted of your
ſelues, as you dare not fight but altogether, then diſmount from
your horſes, and I will ſhew you how much the vertue and honour
of a good knight is eſteemed, aboue the brutiſh manners of
the cowardly mind: whereunto one of the Knights preſently
thus replied.
                     I ſée no reaſon ſir, why you ſhould ſo much preſume on your
ſelfe, in that there is no one of vs, but thinketh himſelfe able enough,
to compell you to ſubmit your ſelfe. But ſo little account
do we make of the vanquiſhing you, as we deale with you altogether,
rather to pleaſe the humor of the Princeſſe Arnalte, thē
for any diſhability in our ſelues to quite you man for man. Neuertheleſſe,
ſéeing you haue ſuch a deſire as we ſhould come to
you on foote, we are content to giue ouer our horſes. Wherupon
they preſently alighted and came together to aſſail Florendos,
who receiued them very gladly, and behaued himſelfe toward
them ſo brauely, as in ſhort time they reputed that they left
their horſes. For Florendos had not long fought with thē, but
he diſcharged one of them of his life quickly, and continued his
deuoir ſo gallantly with his ſword toward the other foure,
as one after another, he ſent thrée more to kéepe the other company.
At length when Florendos had brought the laſt of them
into ſubiection, and was about to part his head from his ſhoulders,
the Princeſſe Arnalte ſuddenly came, accompan
                           •
                        ed with
her domoſels, deſirous to ſaue the life of the knight, wherupon
ſhe ſpake to Florendos after this manner.
                     Sir knight to the end that this great victory which you haue
atchéeued, may not call your name into diſhonor, by murdring
him who hath no power to defend himſelfe, I beſéech you that
you would giue me the life of this knight. And for the diſcourteſie
you haue ſuffred by him and his fellows, amends may be
made in other maner, for I will put my ſelfe by way of duty, to
acompliſh any thing that it ſhall like you to ordaine, prouided

alwaies, that my honour and authority be no way impeached
therby. Madam (anſwered Florendos) why ſhould life be granted,
whē a finger is not to be giuen to ſuch perſons, as ſo much
forget their owne honour, to imploy themſelues in ſuch vnnatural
attempts: neuertheleſſe, your vertuous and honeſt ieſture
hath gained ſo much power ouer me, that I will not refuſe to
graunt you any thing, conditionally, that you will do me ſo
much honour, as to tel me the reaſon why you cauſe to be maintained
this ſo bad cuſtome.
                     Sir knight, anſwered the Princeſſe Arnalte, fearing that by
long ſtaying in this place, your wounds may turne you to greater
daunger then you expect, I pray you do me ſo much fauour
as to go with me into my Caſtle, where, hauing prouided to redreſſe
your wounds, as alſo thoſe which my knight hath receiued,
I will not faile to anſwer in what you pleaſe. Florendos
hauing need to ſuccor himſelf, by reaſon of his dangerous fight,
would not refuſe to agree to the will of the Princeſſe Arnalte,
who cauſed one of her Damoſelles to ſée the curing of his
wounds, which in ſooth were in no greater danger, then that he
might eaſily trauell the day following. After that the Princeſſe
had cauſed thoſe to bee buried that were ſlain, ſhe tooke Florendos
by the hand, and walked with him very chéerfully and pleaſantly
diſpoſed, which courteſie he held in great reputation, hauing
made his proweſſe ſo nobly knowne againſt her Knights.
But then as ſhe walked, ſhe began to contemplate the beautie
of the Prince Florendos, with very great admiration, whereupon
preſently came to her remembrance the Prince Florian
of the Forreſt, which cauſed a crimſon colour to a mount into
her chéekes, ſo that all her face deliuered an amiable bluſh,
which Florendos well noted at the beginning, whereupon hée
was donducted by the Princeſſe to the ſide of a window, the
proſpect whereof was ouer a faire running riuer, when ſhe receiued
the hardineſſe to ſprake to him in this manner.
                     I know wel, ſir knight, that the cuſtome of my Caſtle ſéemeth
vnto you, to be ordained againſt all reaſonable regard: but hauing
vnderſtood for what occaſion I maintaine it in this order,
you will not be any wayes offended thereat. It is ſo Sir, that

my Lord my Father leauing me in the cuſtody of ſundry noble
Gentlemen of this Realme of Nanarre, he deſired them at the
very houre of his death, that they would ſée I ſhould be married
to mine owne pleaſure & contentment. Attending which time,
I withdrew my ſelfe (to auoyd popular frequentation) into
this my Caſtles, where hauing by Fortune ſoiourned a while
there chanced to arriue here a comely Knight, a moſt braue,
gallant and an honeſt Gentleman, and and ſo worthily accompanied
with vertue and proweſſe, that my good liking coupled
with equall loue, I deſired aboue all other to match with him,
holding opinion alſo, in him I ſhould iuſtly ſatiſfie my Lord
and Fathers commandement, ioyning hereunto that I ſhould
greatly grace my ſelfe, and ſuch in ſooth was this braue Knight.
But he being come from the Caſtle of the Grant Almorall,
was ſo altered in nature, that he neuer made account of my
freendſhip, refuſing altogether mine honeſt offer, & caſting the
remembrance of my great good will, into contemptuous and
vnkind forgetfulneſſe. Whereupon I cauſed him to be taken
and layd in priſon, which I did with very kind and tender regard,
becauſe I ſaw he was vnarmed, which could promiſe no
ſecurity to himſelfe, if I ſhould haue ſhowne my extreameſt rigour.
                     For Fortune was ſo happy a friend to him, as ſhe ſent an
other Knight vnto this place called Florian of the Forreſt,
whom you do very much reſemble, whoſe behauiour gained
ſuch power ouer me, as not onely made me ſet at liberty this
firſt knight, but that which gréeued me far more, he made me
ſo forgetfull of my ſelfe, as I ſuffered him to gather the fruit
of my garden, which my honour commanded mée to kéepe
with better regard. Furthermore, beſide all this, he ſo farre delighted
me with his flattery of purpoſe, as I permitted him to
depart, for that he made mee a faithfull promiſe to return ſo
ſpeedily as it was poſſible, and then hée would not fayl to come
and marry mée. But after that I had attended him a very long
time, and ſaw him not returne according to promiſe, I conconcluded
my ſelfe to come into this pleaſant valley to make

thoſe ſweare which profeſſed arms, that they ſhould not break
ſpeare, nor put armor on their backs againſt any other knight,
then this onely one, who hath offered me this great deſpight.
And I held this opinion, that any valiant knight happening
into this place, whom I could get to maintain, that the beauty
of Miragarda, in no reſpect might be equalled with mine, wold
cauſe Florian (who is curious in ſearching ſuch hauty aduentures)
to take the hardines, to come proue againſt the knight,
the contrary, by the aide of whom, I might chance to recouer
my long deſired Florian of the Forreſt. And if that eaſily my
knights might conquer any other knights, they ſhould make
them alſo ſweare to maintaine the conditions, which my damoſell
declared vnto you at your firſt comming.
                     Many knights fearing the perill, wherein they might fall
by comming this way, and not daring to take ſo hardy an oth
vpon them, haue bene glad to returne and not ſtay here, when
as my knights haue come forth, and preſented themſelues to
defend my beauty.
                     Madame (anſwered Florendos) I know verie well the
knight of whom you ſpeak, and aſſure your ſelf that very hardly
ſhall you bring him into this place, without he liſt himſelfe,
in that he is ſo noble and valiant a knight of Armes, as you
can hardly ioyne him with any equall: therefore I pray you,
do not greeue your ſelfe, although, he be forgetfull in ſatiſfying
his promiſe, for I can aſſure you, that it is not his cuſtome
to affect greatly the ſeruice of Ladies, eſpecially in any amourous
opinion, or queint conceit of loue. As for your knights, I
cannot but yeeld their honeſt attempt very great commendation,
and eſtéeme likewiſe very much of them, who aduanced
themſelues to maintaine your beautie, which in ſooth is ſufficient
to binde in ſeruiceable duty, all thoſe that haue deſired to
render you ſembleable good will and liking. Neuertheleſſe, I
would perſwade you, that hereafter you would not mainetaine
this cuſtome, and likewiſe I would deſire you, that you
would deſtow on me ſuch knights as you with hole by impriſonment,
who ſhalbe able to honor you more by their knightly
ſeruice, being at liberty, then you ſhal aduantage your ſelfe by

kéeping them in ſuch ſeruitude. Sir anſwered Arnalte, the great
honeſty wherwith you are accompanied, hath gained ſuch power
ouer me, that I cannot ſée how I ſhold reefoſe, but that I
muſt néeds grant what you deſire. But I find my ſelf brought
into ſundry maruailous extreame paſſions, for that by your
words, you make me altogether out of hope, that I ſhal recouer
againe my Knight: for whoſe ſake I will that the impriſoned
knights be deliuered you, and for that you ſhal be the more certaine
of my words, I deliuer into your own hands the keys of
the priſon, which I would not giue into any knights hands in
the whole world, but only to you. The prince Florendos had
no ſooner receiued the keyes, but he deliuered them to y• Prince
Albayzar who was very deſirous to ſée the priſoners, wherefore
he ſtaied not long, but tooke his way downe into the Caſtle,
with a lighted torch in his hand, for that the dungeon was very
déepe, and opening a little Tower, there he found many priſoners,
whereof he knew diuers incontinent, whom he failed
not to ſalute, for that he knew them among the knights at Cō
                           ſtantinople,
when he fought the combat there, in mainteuance
of the beauty of the faire Princeſſe Targiana, by means wherof,
they ſéeing themſelues deliuered by him, they knew not wel
what to thinke. But when they were come vp into the Caſtle,
and that they perceiued they enioyed their libertie by the means
of the Prince Florendos, they failed not to come & humble thē
ſelues at the féete of the young Prince, who knew them all incontinent:
to wit, Blandidon, Floraman, Reccamon, & Tenebrant,
the preſence of whō ſo greatly reioyce him, as he held
it for eſpeciall good fortune, that he came ſo luckily vnto the caſtle
of the Princes Arnalte, who ſeeing that the day gaue place
vnto the night, and that it was time to haue ſome refection, cō
                        manded
her Attendants to couer for ſupper, for Florendos and
the knights who were come forth of priſon, to whom the Princeſſe
vſed very ſtately entertainment, in reſpect of the honeſt behauiour
of the Princes Florendos, which was very deeply imprinted
in her heart, conſidered alſo, that his great courteſie had
bound her to vſe ſuch liberality.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. II.
                     Of that which happened to the Prince Florendos, after that
he departed from the Caſtle of the Princeſſe Arnalte.
                     
                        NOw Florendos ſtayed all this night in the
Caſtle of the Princeſſe Arnalte, more at
her importunate ſute, then vpon his owne
voluntary pleaſure, for that he well knew,
the little coales of enuy kindled on her ſtomacke,
which ſhe couered with ſhamefaſtneſſe
and modeſtie, was farre diſagréeable
to his curteous nature, by reaſon whereof, he no ſooner diſcouered
the cleare and bright day, but he aroſe and put on his Armor
which was much defaced, by reaſon of his ſore fight, & after he
was ready to trauel and follow his enterpriſe, he ſtaied not, but
came to take his farewell of the Princeſſe Arnalte, as alſo of
Blandidon, Tenebrant, and Reccamon, but in no caſe would he
leaue the company of Floraman the prince of Sardignia, becauſe
they two liued maruellous affectionate the one of ye oth
                           •
                        r, ſince
the time that Armello, the Eſquier of Florendos, came & found
their ſolitary kinde of life, ſo nigh vnto the Caſtle of the Giant
Almaroll. The Princeſſe Arnalte remained ſo greatly paſſionate,
for the ſudden departure of the Prince Florendos, that
ſhe could not admit any thing into minde, but ſtill ſhe receiued
thereat very much diſpleaſure: without vſing any remembrance
at all of the Prince Florian of the 
                           
                              •
                           eſart, whom ſhée
had now altogether thruſt into forgetfulneſſe, and was ſo ſore
troubled for want of the preſence of the Prince Florendos, as
ſhe tooke her farewell of the reſtored priſoners, to whom (for
griefe, ſhe could not vſe ſuch gratious behauior, as ſhe had done
the day before. Florendos rid certaine dayes in the company of
Albayzar and Floraman, when he concluded to trauell to the

Caſtle of Almaroll, to ſée what entertainment the faire Miragarda
would make to the Prince Albayzar, and whether ſhe
could now 
                           •
                        nde (contrary to her former cuſtome) his noble imployed
ſeruice agréeable to her curious nature. Theſe thrée
knights following their enterpriſe, they perceiued (after they
were entred ſomewhat within the Realme of Spaine, at the
foote of a mountaine, a knight, ſtanding very ſadly betwéen two
great Oakes, he was armed in blacke Armour, and bare in
his Shield a white Bull, in a fielde of Sable, and mounted on
a very gallant Courſer, ſo that theſe thrée Knights conceiued
very good opinion of him, and to him they would haue approached,
but that ſuddenly an Eſquier ſtept before them, who hauing
ſaluted them very courteouſly, deliuered his minde after
this order.
                     Gentlemen, the knight (which ſtandeth by theſe Dakes) giueth
you to vnderſtand, that he hath enterpriſed to guarde this
paſſage, in that he hath kept it a lōg time againſt many knights:
not for that he hath deſire to offer any knight diſcourteſie, but
onely to ſatiſfie the will of a Lady, to whom he remaineth affectionate,
loyal, and obedient. Therfore if it may ſtand with your
liking, to grant ſuch things as he will demand, the paſſage ſhall
be at libertie for you: but if you enterpriſe to doe the contrary,
he will put in triall to make you confeſſe perforce, that which
you cannot reaſonably deny or refuſe to grant.
                     Declare vnto vs (quoth the Prince Florendos,) firſt the wil
of thy Maſter, and ſoone after we will make thée anſwere: becauſe
very hardly can we determine of the matter whereof we
are ignorant, by reaſon that thou concealeſt it ſo cloſely.
                     Hee will cauſe you to confeſſe (anſwered the Eſquier) that
Arnalce the Princeſſe of Nauarre, is the fayreſt creature vnder
heauen, and moſt worthy of knightly ſeruice. It ſéemes
to me ſayd Albayzar, that we ſhall find this ſame knight, who
(to ſhunne the Combate at her Caſtle) hath accorded and promiſed
to fulfill her impecious conditions. Therefore I iudge it
in mine opinion, & for good cauſe I know it aſſuredly, that his
enterpriſe is very dangerous, and ought no longer to be maintained.
Let it happen what pleaſeth Fortune (ſayd Florendos)
                        
and afterward turning to the Eſquire, he anſwered him in
this order. My friend, you may goe & aſſure your maiſter of the
Iouſte. While the Eſquire was buſie in ſpéech to the Prince
Florendos, Floraman, no ſooner perceiued him to returne to his
maiſter, but he deſired Florendos, that he would graunt him the
Combate, againſt the Knight that kept the paſſage, which requeſt
he would not denie him: wherevpon Floraman gaue the
ſpurres to his horſe, and ran couragiouſly againſt the Knight
of the princeſſe Arnalte, they both encountring together with
ſuch great force, that they were both diſmounted to the earth,
with their héeles vpward, but they recouered themſelues
promptly, and like good knights ſet their hands to their ſwords,
wherewith they began to ſtrike one another very daungerouſly,
vſing ſuch knightly dexteritie, as Florendos and Albayzar
greatly delighted to behold them.
                     And for that Floraman was reputed for a good Knight, they
were abaſhed greatly, that any aduantage ſhould happen to
the Knight of the Princeſſe Arnalte, for the loue of whom hée
fought very brauely. But that which was moſt diſpleaſant to
Floraman, (who did his dutie like a good and vertuous knight)
was, leaſt the Princeſſe Florendos and Albayzar, ſhoulde
take any euill opinion of him. On the other ſide, the Knight
of the paſſage thought on the bonde, wherein the loue of the
Princeſſe Arnalte, had tyed him, which did the more harten
and encourage him.
                     Theſe two knights continued Combate ſo long, that being
ouercome with extreame trauaile, they were conſtrained to retire
to take breath, the ſtraunge knight reioycing thereat, began
to vſe this language towardes Floraman. I know Sir
knight, that you might better breake your will and ſaue your
life, then be depriued of them both: for when you ſhall come to
confeſſe, that the Princeſſe Arnalte, is the fayreſt Lady aliue,
you ſhall not be any iote ſpared by fauour, alwayes conſidered,
that you ſhall but confeſſe the truth. If I did conſent to thy
will (anſwered Floraman) I ſhould maintaine a thing farre beyond
any dutie: for in how much Arnalte is faire and worthy
to bée ſerued, by ſo much the rather thou makeſt me to thinke,

that the world enioyeth ſome ſuch, to whom ſhe is not in any
thing to be compared, for that diuine beautie hath made them
ſo ſingular faire, as the Princeſſe of Nauarre may in no wiſe
be equalled with them. And on the other ſide, I haue in time
paſt loued a Lady my ſelfe, in reſpect of whom, (the whole
world being filled with the report of her prayſe) I will rather
die, then accord to the preſumption thou wouldeſt haue me confeſſe.
                     
                        Floraman had no ſooner concluded his ſpéech, but they returned
a freſh to y• Combat, charging one another more ſuriouſly
then they had done before, ſo that it could not be iudged, whether
the one had any aduantage of the other, or who was likelyeſt
to win the victory, they maintained the ſight ſo brauely.
But in the end, the Knight that kept the paſſage, beganne by a
little and a little to feele that feebleneſſe ſomewhat aſſailed him,
and that ſtroke by ſtroke his word turned in his hand, and his
Armour was broken in many places, and likewiſe the Armour
of Floraman was in no better caſe then his enemies, but he followed
his ſtrokes more wiſely, and dealt ſo gallantly at this
ſecond charge, that once againe they were conſtrained to retire.
                     
                        Floraman, who was accompanied with ſuch gratious gifts,
as imbraceth the heart of a vertuous Prince, would proue if he
might poſſible chaunge the Knight from his fonde opinion:
Whereupon he ſpake to the Knight in this maner.
                     Sir Knight, you ſée very well that your enterpriſe is not
truth, according as you haue iudged it in conceit, wherefore I
pray you to confeſſe, that there are many Ladies in the world,
whoſe beautie the Princeſſe Arnalte may no way paragon. I
know well Sir, (ſayd the Knight of the paſſage) that the
weakeneſſe where into you ſée me brought, giueth you the hardineſſe
to vſe me with ſuch perſwaſions of reproofe: but ſo it is,
that I am ſo greatly affectionate towards the Princeſſe Arnalte,
as I haue deliberated with my ſelfe to ſuſtaine y• death,
before I will graunt to that which you ſay. When he had deliuered
the end of his purpoſe, he charged Floraman afreſh, who
in ſhort time laide him along on the ground, whereat Florendos
and Albayzar was ſomewhat afraid, to ſée him brought into

to ſuch daunger, wherefore quickly they opened his Helmet, but
when they had beheld him a while, they knewe him to be Syr
Albanis of Friſe, the Prince of Denmarcke, the ſight of whom
made Floraman very penſiue, for that he bare him maruellous
good will.
                     
                        Florendos and Albayzar conducted theſe two Combattants,
into the houſe of a knight, whoſe abode was neare to the mountaine,
and as they walked together, they demanded of Albanis
of Friſe, vpon what occaſion he enterpriſed to gard the paſſage.
Worthy Gentlemen (anſwered Albanis) I will not defer to
tell you the ſum of your deſire, aduertiſing you, that Fortune
guided me one day into the Valley, where the Princeſſe Arnalte
maketh her preſent abode, & I was ſo rauiſhed in beholding
her beautie, that I remained her vowed ſeruant in good will,
wherevpon ſhe put to me three conditions, how I ſhould approoue
againſt all wandering Knights, and maintaine it by my
proweſſe, that ſhe was the faireſt Princeſſe in the world, aſſuring
you that I came into this place, rather for the deſire I
had to doe ſeruice to the princeſſe of Nauarre, then for any feare
I had of her ſix Knights.
                     But now my deſteny is ſo farre vnfortunate, that I am fallen
into the hands of Sir Floraman, which hath made me looſe
the hope, that till this houre I entertained. They which make
profeſſion of Armes (ſaide Florendos) ought not to be abaſhed
when any miſfortune befalles them, and I aſſure you that Arnalte
is a Princeſſe which merriteth very much, yet not ſo
much as many others haue deſerued, who are farre aduantaged
aboue her, therefore I wiſh you Sir Albanis, to thanke God,
who cauſed you to fall into the hands of your friendes, perſwading
yourſelfe, that we would be loath to ſée you any way iniured.
                     Continuing this talke, they arriued at the houſe of the
Knight, who receiued them very gladly, for that he was accuſtomed
to lodge all wandering Knightes, and ſuch diligent attendance
was vſed, that in ſhort time the woundes of Albanis
were méetly healed, and certaine daies he was accompanied
by the Prince Florendos, who was attached with vnmeaſuraable

griefe, for the deſire he had to finde the Caſtle of Almarol.
Yet he diſſembled his griefe as much as he could poſſible, and
forced himſelfe to mirth to gratifie his friendes, as it is a wiſe
mans part, to forget his ſad and melancholike affections, to
content thoſe perſons with whom he is ioyned in friendſhip.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. III.
                     How the Damoſell of the Princeſſe of Thrace, arriued at the
Court of the Emperour Palmerin. And of that which happened
to the Knight of the Tiger.
                     
                        THis Hiſtorie maketh mention, how the
Emperour was in the Empreſſe chamber,
accōpanied with the worthieſt lords of his
Empire, when as the Damoſell of Thrace
chanced to enter the Court, which ſéemed
to her much changed, becauſe ſhe ſaw not
the Knights which were accuſtomed to bée
about the Emperor, at whoſe féete ſhe failed not to humble her
ſelfe incontinent, but hée cauſed her to be taken vp preſently,
and to be entertained with very gracious behauiour, then hée
deſired to vnderſtand how all things happened to his Nephew
Palmerin of England, in the aduenture he vndertooke for Leonarda
the Princeſſe of Thrace, the naming of whom, cauſed
the Princeſſe Polinarda to giue a moſt ſwéet and delicate bluſh
in her face, in whoſe preſence the Damoſell of Thrace began to
vſe her language after this manner.
                     If I ſhould rehearſe to your Maieſtie; the moſt Knightly
proweſſe of your noble Nephew, I ſhould find my ſelfe ouerthrowne
in a great perplexity, for that I know his worthy
déedes are reſerued to bee deliuered, by one of more prompt and
diſcréete memorie then my ſelfe. Neuertheleſſe, to diſcharge the

great bond of Friendſhip, wherein his Princely courteſie hath
ſo ſtraitly bound mee, I will report what I haue ſéene, during
the time he was in my companie, which when hee tooke occaſion
to leaue, he went to the place where the Princeſſe Leonarda
was Enchaunted: and where hee witneſſed ſuch Knightly
valour, as will render to his Name perpetuall honour, hauing
finiſhed an aduenture ſo ſtraunge and admirable. The whole
diſcourſe whereof, the Damoſell deliuered in circumſtance to
the Emperour, giuing him to vnderſtand, the hard cauſes of diſtreſſe,
eftſoones offered to the knight of the Tiger. But when
ſhe came to report the manner of his paſſing the Lake, wherewith
the Iſle was compaſſed about, the daunger of the Boate,
and the faſhion how it was drawn with the Cord, the Ladyes
that were preſent, remained ſo mightily ouercome with griefe,
as the ſwéet and delicate colour, wherewith their diuine Faces
were moſt plentifully endued, began very ſadly to alter, thinking
on the great perills which the Noble Palmerin of England
had paſſed, putting his life to ſuch extreame points of hazard, for
the deliuerie of the Princeſſe Leonarda.
                     
                     I haue heard reported (ſaid the Emperour) many ſtrange
Aduentures, and haue knowne ſome worthily atchieued in my
time, but I neuer heard in all my life of any ſo perillous as this:
for I know well that the imagination of the King Sardamant,
was very farre different to any other Kings. But well I perceyue,
that the Proweſſe of Palmerin, excelleth very farre the
valour of all other Knights: for I aſſure you, that as yet I neuer
ſaw the Knight that might be equalled with him, without
great impeachment, or that could finde the meane to diſcharge
ſo great daungers.
                     After that the Damſell had ſufficiently ſet to ſale, the praiſe of
the thriſe noble Palmerin, in the eares of ſo many gratious perſonages,
ſhe changed her talke after this manner. To him that
hath thus woorthily deſerued, I did beſtowe my vttermoſt endeuor,
to bring him within the compaſſe of affection to the princeſſe
Leonarda, whoſe good minde was altogether placed on the
entertainement into her Princely Fauour, the Knight of ſuch
a hautie diſpoſition. But as it ſéemeth to me, he is either altogether

blinded in his owne conceite, or elſe his heart of affectionately
placed on ſome other perſon: for I aſſure you, he made
no account of the Crowne of Thrace, bnt did flatly refuſe it, as
alſo to eſpouſe the Princeſſe Leonarda, who was brought into
his preſence, by the principall noble Gentlemen of the Court,
according as it was ordained by the Teſtament of King Sardamant
her Grandfather. By reaſon whereof, the Lords requeſted
the Quéene Carmelia, that ſhee would ſend to your
highneſſe their Princeſſe, to remaine in the company of the
Princeſſe Polinarda, (your Neece, and the Daughter of the
prince Primaleon) as alſo of other noble ladies, wherwith your
renowned Court is plentifully enriched, whoſe gratious conuerſation
may not onely entertaine the heart of Leonarda,
with the precious dignitie of vnſpotted vertue, but alſo by imitating
their honourable examples, ſhe may the more highly be
eſtéemed in the acceptable fauour of ſuch noble perſonages, as
preferre the renowne of Ladies, with the felicitie of their owne
life.
                     The Prince Palmerin very well liked of the intent of the
Queene Caemelia, by meanes whereof ſhe doth humbly deſire,
that it might ſo ſtand with your Highneſſe pleaſure, as not to
make deniall of this requeſt to her, ſeeing you haue not hitherto
re
                           •••
                        ed the entertainement of any, in the fulfilling whereof, ſhe
ſhall eſtéeme herſelfe and her whole Kingdome, perpetually
bound to your excellency. And becauſe your highnes may eſteem
of the greater truth, what I haue made report of, ſhe commanded
me to preſent your Maieſty with this her letter of credite,
wherein full well you ſhall perceiue the reſidue of her pleaſure:
may it like your highneſſe to pardon this blunt diſcourſe of an
vneloquent maiden.
                     The Emperour very gratiouſly receiued the letter, which
when he had peruſed, he thus framed his anſwer to the Damoſell.
Vertuous and ſage Lady, I not onely pittie the great
paiue you haue ſuffered in trauelling thus farre, but alſo giue
you thanks for ſuch a good endeuour, not forgetting to honour
you with bountifull courteſie, for the good newes you haue
brought me of my Nephew Palmerin, in regard of whom,

both his Princely deſerts, and my vttermoſt requitall, which is
but his duty, I deſire of God my power may ſtretch ſo farre, to
requite you according as you haue worthily merited.
                     And for the Lady, the regard of whom cauſed my nephew, to
hold ſo ſmall eſtimation of the Princeſſe Leonarda, I know
her care is beyond iudgement, in deuiſing by what meanes ſhe
might gaine the power, to requite a cauſe of ſo great honour.
And where you deſire I would yéeld my conſent, that the princeſſe
Leonarda, might come to remaine in my Court, aſſure
your ſelfe, that I am well contented, and thinke my ſelfe highly
honoured by ſuch a requeſt. And the better to declare how
gratefull I accept her comming hither, and how thankfull I
would be for your great trauaile, I giue to you the countie of
Salin, which by reaſon of the death of the county Arlae, remaineth
vacant, he not hauing left any heirs to repoſſeſſe the ſame.
The Damoſell preſently threw her ſelfe at the Emperors féet,
offering to kiſſe his hand, in ſigne of her thankfull mind, but he
ſuſtained her in his armes very graciouſly, which he was not
accuſtomed to do to any ſtranger, yet ſuch was the eſtimation
he had of her.
                     The damoſell behaued her ſelfe in the ſame manner of duty
to the Empreſſe, as alſo toward the Prince Primaleon, and
Gridonia, but they (to witneſſe their beneuolent mindes, and
the honour wherewith they would entertaine ſuch a fréendly
gueſt) by their great intreaty and courteſie made ſtay of her
humble offer, whereupon ſhe returned to the Emperour, and
deliuered her mind theſe words.
                     I can hardly withhold my ſelfe at this inſtant (my gratious
Lord) being ſo deſirous as I am, to vnderſtand of the couragious
mind of the Prince Palmerin, both in dealing, and
eſcaping from a Tiger ſo hideous and fearefull, as alſo being ſo
happy to end ſuch an aduenture: but your gracious fauour is
ſo agréeable to my deſirous thoughts, and ſo plentifull in meaſure
beyond my poore demerits, that I ſhall leaue the report
thereof in your highneſſe memory, till ſuch time as I returne
with the Princeſſe Leonarda: for I aſſure your Maieſty, that
my heart is vnſpeakeably ſatiſfied with pleaſure, in that I ſhall

ſpéede ſo well, as to be reſolued by your excellencie, in the thing
I haue ſo long time wiſhed for. Wherefore moſt humbly I deſire
you that I may depart, for the deſire I haue, to enforme the
Princeſſe Leonarda, of your gratious fauour, cauſeth me to
iudge euery day a yeare, till I haue in this cauſe fulfilled my
dutie.
                     Faire Damoſell (anſwered the Emperour) it ſhould like
me very well, if you made your abode here ſtill with me in
my Court: but for that I perceiue your great deſire, to returne
with anſwer of your thankfull meſſage, I wiſh to you: as to
my ſelfe, in the whole courſe of your iourney. The Damoſell
humbly tooke her leaue of the Emperour, and all his company,
and came to the Chamber of the Princeſſe Polinarda, who had
ſecretly withdrawne her ſelfe, to reueale to Dramaciana her
waiting Gentlewoman, the good opinion her hart had ſuddenly
conceiued of thoſe ioyfull tidings: ſo then with her a while
the damoſell kept company, when preſently ſhe beganne to
coniecture, that it was the beautie of this Princeſſe which had
cauſed the Prince Palmerin, to refuſe the gouernement of
Thrace.
                     
                     The Princeſſe Polinarda, very modeſtly began to queſtion
with the Damoſell of euery particular chance that had happened
to the knight of the Tiger, for whoſe ſake ſhe honoured the
Damoſel with very Princely courteſie, and ſhe deſired her that
ſhee would bee the Meſſenger of her vnfayned good will to the
Princeſſe Leonarda, whome ſhee would not willingly ſhould
ſtay, but come vnto the Court preſently. The Damoſell made
promiſe to performe euery thing to the vttermoſt, ſo, departing
from the Princeſſe, ſhe went through the palace to her ledging,
where ſhe locked vp the honourable Preſents, which the Empreſſe
and Gridonia had (ſince her comming) ſent vnto her: ſo
hauing all things in readineſſe, ſhee departed, farre more Rich
and more ioyfull then ſhe was before.
                     The Damoſell wee intend to leaue in her iourney, becauſe
we will returne to the Noble and renowmed Knight of the Tiger,
who after hée departed from the kingdome of Thrace, tooke
the ſtraighteſt way that hee could poſſibly chuſe, to bring him

vnto Conſtantinople, wherto when he drew ſomewhat neare,
by chance one day hee arriued in a very great Forreſt, which
was farre from any houſes or reſort of people, and likewiſe the
Trées much defaced and ſpoyled, ſo that it ſéemed a waſt and
deſolate wilderneſſe. Ryding along very ſad and penſiue in
minde, he heard the trampling of a great many horſes, and caſting
his eye that way where he heard the noyſe, he eſpied ten
or twelue Knights very well armed, croſſing ouerthwart the
Forreſt. Wherevpon, he gaue his horſe the ſpurres (being deſirous
to doe them ſeruice, if ſo be they had néede to vſe his aide)
and followed them that way they rode, when in ſhort time he
ouertooke one of their company, who could not ſo ſpéedily iourney
as the other did, by reaſon that his horſe had receiued an attaint
in one of his legges, with this Knight, Palmerin deſired
friendly to conferre, which made him vſe his ſpéeches in this
maner.
                     I deſire you Sir, if I may demand ſo bold a requeſt of you,
as to report vnto me the cauſe, why theſe Knights iourney ſo
ſpéedily, and whither they goe through this vnfrequented Forreſt.
I know well Sir (anſweeed the ſtrange Knight) that
their enterpriſe doeth not concerne you in any thing, therefore
is it as néedeleſſe to tell you, as you haue ſmall occaſion to
demand of their purpoſe, but for that I ſée your acquaintance
with the cauſe, can neither impeach them with your mallice,
nor pleaſure them with your aide, I am content to reſolue you
in what you requeſt.
                     You ſhall vnderſtand Sir, that thrée leagues diſtance from
this place, there is a Lady, a very courteous creature, remaining
in a ſtrong and well fortefied Caſtle, who hath a daughter
of moſt exquiſite perfection in beautie, with whom a Knight of
this Countrey, named Feliſtor, is very deſirous to marrie, but
her Lady mother will not ſuffer to be ſo beſtowed, hauing already
giuen her to be eſpouſed, to another rich Gentleman
of this Countrey, named Radimar, wherefore the Lady and
her daughter haue conſented with this Gentleman, to goe vnto
a Caſtle of his owne, where they will ſecretely knit vp their
determinate purpoſe, and deceiue the long and labourſome expectation

of Feliſtor. But being aduertiſed of their cloſe intent,
hath determined to hazard his Fortune in the extreameſt danger,
either to hinder them, & helpe himſelfe, or to leaue the conqueſt
in a doubtfull eſtate. And he that may the better preuaile,
if fortune darken not the Sun-ſhine of his good hap, he hath placed
a ſecret ambuſhment in a little wood, by which, the Lady
and her daughter muſt of neceſſitie paſſe, & hauing giuen ſtrait
charge to them in ambuſh, that the life of Radimar be put to the
ſwoord, as ſoone as they may lay hands on him, for that the countenance
of him is a blemiſh to his earneſt intent, he will then
marry the Damoſell, in deſpight of any dare ſay the contrary.
And becauſe this marriage may be the better accompliſhed, I
am to aſſiſt him with my company, onely for the good wil which
I vnfainedly beare him, but Fortune is very contrary in fauour
to me, for that my horſe bath taken ſuddainly an attaint,
whereby I ſhall hazard the breach of my promiſe, which would
no more diſlike my friend, then it will be grieuous to me, if ſo it
would happen.
                     To preuent the worſt therefore, I pray you Sir to thinke ſo
well of me, as to lend me your horſe, and to content your ſelfe
in meane time, with that whereon your Eſquire rideth, and he
I iudge will take mine in good part, which courteſie will cauſe
me (in place where I haue power anſwerable to my will) not
to forget ſuch a fauourable pleaſure.
                     Truely Sir (anſwered Palmerin) I ſée well if I ſhould doe
you ſo great a pleaſure, you are bent to vſe my gift in a deede of
greater diſhonour, for that it better ſtandeth with your credite,
to defend the cauſe of a diſtreſſed Lady, then to be an inſtrument
whereby her honour may receiue ſuch diſgrace, and
therefore as I found you, I leaue you, being ſo deſirous to be
with your companions, as I cannot at this time ſtay to make
you any other anſwere, and ſo he poaſted to ouertake Feliſtor,
which the ſtrange Knight perceiuing, preſently entred into
theſe ſpéeches.
                     Alas fond foole, thou makeſt ouer much haſt to entertaine
thine owne miſfortune, in that the ſimpleſt of them before
thée, is able ſufficient to teach thée and thy fellowe your duties,

but I wiſh that ſo ſoone as my companions, haue giuen due
chaſtiſement to ſhe pride wherewith thou art fondly accompanied,
thy horſe may fall to my ſhare, as well to teach thée what
thou oughteſt haue done at my courteous requeſt, as alſo that
I may diſcharge my promiſe made to my fréend.
                     The knight of the Tiger had attained ſuch length of ground,
that he vndeſtood, not the preſumptuous language of the
ſtrange knight, but yet he once looked back, whereby he gaue
him to know, that ye hauty diſpoſition of an aduenturous mind,
is not to be moued at the fearefull foreſhew of ſuppoſed danger,
where contrariwiſe, the cowardldy wretch eſtéemeth euery
flaw a tempeſt, and a little motion of miſchance, the vtter ouerthrow
of all his ſoueraigntie.
                     The noble Palmerin of England purſued theſe Knights ſo
long, that he was ouercharged with the gloomy fogge of night,
ſo that he could not perceiue how to follow them any further
by the trackes of their horſes, by reaſon whereof he was conſtrained
to alight, when he gaue his horſe to his Eſquire, entending
to repoſe himſelfe ſo well as he could in this deſolate place,
vntill Aurora faluted him with her beautifull countenaunce. But
in vaine did he beſtow his labour, to take his reſt in the deſtined
houres of ſléepe, for the earneſt deſire he had to defend the
cauſe of the iniuryed Ladie, would not ſuffer him ſo much as to
cloſe his eyes.
                     Wherefore the day began no ſooner to péepe, but he cauſed
Siluian to bridle the horſes, when preſently he tooke the way
which Feliſtor and his company had paſſed before but when
he could ſet no eye on them, he beganne to be very gréeuouſly
mooued, imitating them, which can enioy no quietneſſe of mind
till they haue deliuered the innocent from their cruell oppreſſors,
which among all the déeds of knighthood, beareth the largeſt
title of honour.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. IIII.
                     Of that which happened to the knight of the Tiger, againſt
thoſe that were in ambuſh to take the Damoſell.
                     
                        THe valiant knight of the Tiger ſo long
purſued the ſearch of the knights, that he
had almoſt ſpent one halfe of the day, in
the meane while Feliſtor had knowledge
giuen him by his ſecret ſpies, that the Lady
and her daughter were ſet forth on their
way, & in their company foure good knights
with whom when Feliſtor met, ſo cruell was the conflict betwéene
them, as in the ſhort time the foure kuights were al ſlaine,
and he hauing taken the Lady and her daughter, returned that
way from whence they came, and Palmerin ſeeing he could
not haue a ſight of them, turned againe, & met with the knight
whom he had talked with all before, who to the Prince deliuered
theſe words.
                     I ſee well ſir knight, that either you haue great deſire to méet
with my companions, or elſe ſuch ſuddaine kindneſſe is come
vpon you, that you returne to lend me your horſe, which I will
not now receiue, becauſe I will not be ſo much beholding to
you whereto the knight of the Tiger anſwered.
                     Truſt me ſir you do much miſtake me, and ouer fondly deceiue
your ſelfe, I intend you not ſo much fauour, nor ſhall you
be indebted to me for ſo much fréendſhip, but if you had a
horſe better then mine, I would do my good will to borrow
him of you whether you would or no, becauſe I would follow
the intent I haue entrepriſed, to giue aide to thoſe, whoſe neceſſity
requires my helpe. I cannot chuſe but laugh (ſaid the
ſtrange knight) in that I perceiue you haue fayled of your

way, and ſpent the whole night to no purpoſe, onely for the deſire
you haue to méete with Feliſtor, whom now I perceiue
comming hitherward, hauing with him the Lady whom he
entended to eſpouſe: now ſir ſhall you haue leyſure enough at
this preſent time to fulfill your wiſh, if your ſtomacke ſo ſerue
you.
                     
                        Palmerin perceiuing the knight told the truth, he cauſed
Siluian to gird his horſe well, claſped faſt his helmet, and not
fearing what danger might happen to him, prepared himſelfe
to ſalute the troupe as they came, the firſt whereof was
Feliſtor, who hauing the Damoſell by the arme, made great
proteſtation of his amorous good will, but ſhe rid wéeping very
bitterly, and ſo did the good Lady her mother. Sixe knights
were in company with Feliſtor, and foure more he had cauſed
to ſtay in the Ladies Caſtle: ſo when Palmerin had ſufficiently
viewed them all, he came to comfort the Ladies in this
manner.
                     Faire Ladies, your teares are ſo gréeuous for me to behold,
and your preſent danger hath conquered me with ſuch ſurpaſſing
pittie, as I muſt aduenture my life for your deliuery, when
I will either purchaſe your former quietneſſe, or leaue my life
to content your enemies: yet haue I often heard, that ſmall
force will ſerue to chaſtiſe thoſe perſons, that haue no regard to
their owne honour, becauſe being confounded in their enuious
ſtomacke, by their owne diſloyall actions, they containe ſo little
manhood, as the report of knightly dignitie, being but laide
before them, no brauer conqueſt, then their owne manifeſt diſgrace.
                     
                        Feliſtor hearing the Knight of the Tiger, to vſe ſuch braue
language, became ſo offended with himſelfe, as he had not the
power to make any anſwere, but in the middeſt of his choller,
without remembring to arme his head, he began fiercely to aſſaile
the Knight of the Tiger, who ſaluted Feliſtor with ſuch a
friendly blowe on the head, as hée cleft it downe to his ſhoulders,
and valiantly addreſſing himſelfe to the other Knights,
he behaued him
                           •
                        elfe with moſt maruellous proweſſe. The Damoſell
ſéeing the Prince in ſo great danger, and fearing hée

would hardly eſcape their hands, gaue her Palfrey the bridle,
and ſo rode ſolitarily muſing along the forreſt, which the knight
of the Tiger perceiuing, began very much to gréeue at: neuertheleſſe,
ſo valiantly he dealt with the other knights, as when
he had ſlaine thrée of them, the reſt tooke themſelues preſently
to flight, whereupon the knight (whoſe horſe was attainted
with trauell, and who had ſo pleaſantly iybed with the Prince)
came and humbly yéelded himſelfe, deſiring that he would not
remember what diſcourteous words had paſſed from him,
whereupon the knight of the Tiger (according to his courteous
nature) did very gently entertaine him.
                     The Lady ſéeing her enemies ſo happily vanquiſhed, receiued
in her heart vnſpeakeable ioy, but when ſhe looked about,
and could not ſée her daughter, her ioy was preſently amated
with ſorrow: wherefore that ſhe might the better recouer her
againe, ſhe came and fell downe before the knight of the Tiger,
giuing him moſt humble thankes for his ſo noble ſuccour, and
deſiring if it might ſo pleaſe him, as to lend her his aſſiſtance,
till ſhe had found her daughter, for whoſe abſence ſhe remained
more oppreſſed with gréefe, then ſhe was before, being in the
danger of her cruell enemies.
                     Madame (quoth the knight of the Tiger) you ſhould attribute
the honour of this victory, to the miſfortune of your vnkinde aduerſaries,
in that ſuch as they do alwaies receiue recompence,
according as the wickedneſſe of their liues deſerueth, for diuine
iuſtice will not ſuffer them to eſcape vnpuniſhed, who are careleſſe
in cōmitting ſuch heinous offences. As for your daughter
I iudge her to be within this Forreſt, therfore it is good that we
trifle no time in vaine, but haſtily beſturre our ſelues in the preſent
ſearch of her: for I promiſe you I will not leaue you, till I
haue ſafely deliuered her into your owne ſecurity, whereto the
Lady replied.
                     I ſée well Sir knight, that both vertue and magnanimitie
ſhineth brauely in your noble heart, and I would that my
poore power were of ſufficiencie, to requite your princely bountie:
neuertheleſſe, I truſt that God will repay your good deſerts,
which I am farre vnable to do at this preſent, yet will

I remaine all my life time dutifull in good will, to ſhewe
what acceptable thankes I can, at your noble commaundement.
                     Thus the Lady concluding her ſpéeches, the Knight of the
Tiger, Siluian, and the Lady, rode on which way they iudged
the Damoſell had taken, but they iourneyed all that day, and
moſt part of the night, yet were they neuer the nearer their purpoſe:
and it is not to be maruailed why ſhe ſhould ſtray ſo far,
for that the feare ſhe had, leaſt her honour ſhould be impeached,
cauſed her to take thoſe occaſions vpon her, which in her iudgement
might beſt preſerue it.
                     They hauing thus trauailed very late, they were conſtrained
to alight to eaſe their horſes, which Siluian did preſently vnbridle,
that they might refreſh themſelues in the Paſture: then
gaue he to his Lord and the ſorrowfull Lady, ſuch prouiſion for
their ſuſtenance as he carried with him, wherewith they ſufficed
themſelues ſo well as they could, for that they knewe in
ſuch a deſolate place, it were very ſtrange to looke for courtly
dainties.
                     Faire Auba had no ſooner deliuered the faire morning in
ſight, but they preſently mounted on horſbacke, and rode about
the whole Forreſt, yet not finding her they ſo gladly looked for,
which made the Lady conceiue ſo great griefe, as the Knight
of the Tiger by no perſwaſion could appeaſe: wherefore he deſired
her to goe to her Caſtle, in that it was vnfit for her to
take ſuch vnaccuſtomed paines, wherewith (with much adoe)
at laſt ſhe conſented: then they rode to her Caſtle, where they
arriued about the Euening, but the entrance thereof was garded
with the foure knights, which Feliſtor had giuen charge to
remaine there. This began a freſh to vexe the Lady, firſt to ſée
her daughter ſo vnhappily loſt, and then to be forbidden the entrance
into her own houſe, theſe two extreames mouing many
other paſſions, cauſed her to repute her ſelfe, as the vnhappieſt
vnder the Sunne.
                     The Knight of the Tiger, ſéeing the Lady in ſo great affliction,
beganne to flatter the eyes of the Knightes, with
ſhowes of moſt gratious behauiour as it is the cuſtome among

aduenturous mindes, to diſſemble their intents with deuiſes,
of amiable conceit, which ſometime preuaileth more in pollicie,
then déedes that manifeſt knightly power. And ſo it fortuned,
that the Knights of Feliſtor came to receiue them, for they being
ſo many, made them ſo venturous: but their chiefeſt intent
was to haue murthered the knight of the Tiger, and then to cary
backe the Lady with them.
                     But herein they found themſelues greatly deceiued, for the
Knight of the Tiger, perceiued no ſooner the bride to bee let
downe, but he entred thereon, and beganne very valiantly to
charge theſe foure knights, who ſetled themſelues altogether againſt
him, and one of them began to vſe theſe words. I perceiue
well Sir Knight, that your great folly will be an occaſion of the
preſent ending of your life, which ſéeing you are wilfully come
to ſéeke, we will deliuer you anſwerable paiment to your bold
enterpriſe. Theſe words the Knight of the Tiger, nothing at all
regarded, but dealt ſo roughly with them, as two of them were
quickly diſpatched of their liues, and their fellows fearing leaſt
they ſhould be brought into like eſtate, caſt downe their weapons,
and yéelded themſelues.
                     The Lady ſéeing this happy ſucceſſe, alighted and entred into
her Caſtle, greatly abaſhed at the noble bountie of the
Knight of the Tiger, and ſorrowfull beſide, becauſe ſhe knewe
not how to recompence ſo great courteſie. And as ſhe ſtood conſidering
the no ſmall danger he ſuſtained, to deliuer her out of
the hands of Feliſtor, and his company, ſhe beheld her daughter
comming, conducted by fiue Knights, who were in a certaine
Tent, wherto in her ſtraying ſhe happened to come. When the
Damoſell was gone into the Caſtle to her mother, and that
theſe Knights beheld the blood of thoſe ſlaine Knightes before
their faces, they were attached with ſuch a ſudden feare, as they
would very gladly haue béene further thence.
                     But the Lady (who perceiued the cauſe of their diſmaying)
went to them incontinent, and hauing imbraced them, deſired
that they would not ſuffer any cauſe of doubt to ariſe, but that
they would ſhewe their thankefull mindes to the Knight of the
Tiger, who had deliuered her out of ſo great danger. Herevpon

they humbly went and ſaluted the prince, who kept them
company there the ſpace of eight daies, at the end whereof he
departed thence, taking his iourny toward the place, where his
heart deſired to be.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. V.
                     Of that which happened to the Knight of the Sauage man, after
he departed from the Court of the Emperour Vernar.
                     
                        BEcauſe it is a long time ſince our Hiſtory
hath made any mentiō, of the noble knight
Florian of the Deſart, we will now leaue
the Tiger, in his way to Coſtantinople,
and returne to the Prince Florian, who being
departed from the Court of the Emperour
Vernar, in gréene guilt Armour, and
bearing in his ſhield a Sauage man, leading two Lions in a
ſiluer field, euen according as he did, be
                           •
                        ore he was knowne
to be ſonne of the Prince Don Edward, purſued the intent of
his hauty deſire, for during the time he carried this ſtrange deuiſe,
he atchieued as honourable exploits, as euer did any, euen
as the firſt part of this Hiſtory hath largely made mention.
                     This braue knight, ſeeing the places of moſt famous aduentures.
Fortune conducted him into the realme of Ireland, euen
to the place where he nobly woon the Caſtles of 
                           •
                        he thrée Siſters,
who were the daughters of the Marqueſſe Beltamor, but
theſe Caſtles were now in the cuſtody of others, who were
vtterly vnknowne to the knight of the Sauage man, by reaſon
whereof, he was conſtrained to lodge in the Cell of an ancient
Hermit, who diſcourſed vnto him, how the two brothers

of the Giant Calſurnien, were within thoſe Caſtles, one of
them being named Brocalon, the other Baleato, that had long
time béene nouriſhed in the Profound Iſle, with their mother
Collambra, and by whom they were giuen to vnderſtand,
what great miſfortune had happened to the giants Calfurnien
and Camboldam of Murcela, their brethren, for the loſſe of
whom (contrary to their will and mother) they armed themſelues
like good and hardy Knights, vewing to take vengeance
on them, who had ſo much defaced their noble ſtocke,
                     And that they might the ſooner execute their bloody enterpriſe
they embarqued themſelues in a Galley, hauing in their company
other knights of their linage, and at length landed on
this coaſt of Ireland, where (long before it was known to any)
they were Lords of the Caſtles of the thrée Siſters, as alſo of
that which belonged to their brother the Giant, putting all
to the Sword that they found within thoſe Caſtles, and fortified
thēſelues with very great ſtrength, leſt they ſhould chance
by any meanes to be aſſayled.
                     The knight of the Sauage man, could ſuffer the Hermit procéed
no further in his tale, but he muſt néedes demand this
queſtion of him. I pray you good Father do ſo much as reſolue
me in one thing, do not theſe Giauts vſe to come forth of their
Caſtles, to walke for their delight along this Forreſt? Certainly
Sir (anſwered the Hermit) I would be loth to reſolue
you in this demand, for ſuch a queſtion ſéemeth to me, to manifeſt
an earneſt deſire in you, to offer the combate to theſe
Giants, which I would be ſorry you ſhould do, in that the
meaneſt of them is of abilite to reſiſt thrée of the beſt knights
in this realme. Therefore I deſire you, if your affection be
bent that way, that at my requeſt you would bridle it within limits
of regard, and to remember, that it is diſhonour to a
noble mind, to adenture his life more wilfully then wiſely,
and yet to couer my intent vnder the title of ſeeking renowne,
and I muſt iudge him altogether voyde of Knightly regard,
which ſées the danger to be beyond his compaſſe, and yet will
deſperately throw himſelfe into the hazard: truſt me, no pittie,
if ſuch a one be well corrected. Wherefore good Sir, to

auoide the worſt that may happen to you, I deſire you to let no
ſuch minde remaine in you, but that you would witneſſe your
valour in thoſe occaſions, which may repreſent more hope of
victory, and ſéeme of better equalitie with your Knightly force,
for in doing otherwiſe, you ſhal cauſe any good minde to thinke,
that deſperate hope hath rather conducted you hither, then any
carefull aduiſe, which way to returne victor from theſe Giants.
And it is their woont to walke abroade in the mornings, when,
here they murther one, there, they villeinouſly mangle another,
hauing ſworne to continue this crueltie, vntill they can
meete with the two Sonnes of the Prince Don Edward, on
whom their intents is to be famouſly reuenged, for that their
Brethren were ſlaine by their hands.
                     I perceiue Father (ſaid the Knight of the Sauage man) that
you make no conſcience in condemning thoſe, who aduenture
then liues to redeeme the wretches eſtate, of poore Soules ſuppreſſed
by ſuch cruell tyranny, for if you remember your ſelfe,
Armour ought not to be borne by any, but onely ſuch as imploy
their pains to ſuccor thoſe, who are no way able to ſhield themſelues,
and the order of Knighthood is giuen vs to this end, not
that we ſhould faint at a ſhadow, or be conquered by wordes,
before we ſee the deedes, wherefore father, perſwade your ſelfe,
that Fortune ſhal no ſooner preſent me with the occaſion, but I
will put my hap in aduenture.
                     At theſe words the aged Hermit began to ſhed teares, to ſée
that he could not remooue him from his determination, neuertheleſſe,
he laboured ſtill in perſwaſion, but his paines was beſtowen
to ſmall purpoſe, for he was not ſo full of intreatie, as
the other was reſolutely bent, ſo, they paſſed away the night in
friendly communication. In the morning Florian was preparing
himſelfe to depart, at what time he heard a great noyſe
without the Cell, when going to the doore, he eſpied a Damoſel
came haſtely riding, and ſhe ſeeing the Knight of the Sauage
man, came vnto him for ſuccour, in that ſhe was egerly purſued
by the Giant Brocalon, who was in ſame white Armour, and
well mounted on a luſtie Courſer, from which he alighted, ſpeaking
thus to the Damoſell.
                     
                        
I ſée well Damoſell, that you haue taken a place of ſmall aſſurance
to your ſelfe, for that your knight will deliuer you into
my hands, which if he ſhould not doe, he ſhould preſently perceiue
the eſtate of my diſpleaſure, whereto the knight of the Sauage
man thus anſwered. Truſt me Syr, you are deceiued as
farre as I can perceiue, for here is none that oweth you dutie,
much leſſe any that will ſtand in feare of you: and I doubt not,
but the diſloyall tyrannie which thou vſeſt, ſhall well enough
be tempered, ere thou and I part. Theſe wordes cauſed a ſore
Combate betwéene them, the brauery whereof much delighted
the aged Hermit, who ſtill prayed for good ſucceſſe to happen to
the Knight of the Sauage man, but ſo gallantly did hee continue
the fight, that the Giant was enforced to take a breathing,
which was very acceptable to the Prince, in that his Shielde
was greatly defaced, and himſelfe ſurcharged with very much
trauaile, but yet he was in farre better ſtate then the Giant,
who ſéeing his blood trickle downe his Armour ſo faſt, began to
vſe theſe ſpéeches.
                     How comes it to paſſe, that one Knight hath the power to
preuaile ſo much againſt me? Certainly I feare me, that the
hope I haue alwayes had, to vanquiſh thoſe Knights that ſlew
my Brethren, by this one Knight will be brought into ſome
doubt, yet if I muſt néedes end my life, I had rather it might be
at one of their handes, for that their valour carrieth ſo large
commendation, then by this Knight, who is vtterly vnknown
to me.
                     Thus concluding, he began to charge the Knight of the Sauage
man with very rough and forcible ſtrokes, who notwithſtanding,
ſo duly awaited his oportunitie, as at length he
brought his enemie vnder his ſubiection, when taking off his
Helmet, he preſently parted his head from his ſhoulders, the
ſight hereof was no ſmall ioy to the aged Hermit, as alſo to the
Damoſell, who came and humbled her ſelfe to the Prince in
this manner.
                     It is vnpoſſible for me Sir Knight, to render you thanks according
to your worthy deſerts, neuertheleſſe, I will report
ſuch laudable language of your Knightly déedes, in the Court

of Vernar the Emperor of Allameigne (whither at this preſent
I direct my courſe) as your Fame ſhall remaine in continuall
memory. And very gladly would I bee acquainted
with your name, which I the more earneſtly deſire for two
cauſes, the one, that I might the more exactly diſcourſe your
noble valour, to the amazement of all other that cannot deſerue
ſo well, the other, that I might know the noble Gentleman,
whoſe gratious bountie I might repay with my contiuuall
prayers.
                     Faire Damoſell (quoth the Prince) if you deſire to knowe
my name, that I may doe you ſeruice to the vttermoſt of my
power, I will declare it vnto you, rather for that cauſe then any
other, but I aſſure you, my déedes are of ſo ſmall eſtimation,
as credite me, you may more worthily caſt into diſcountenance,
then giue them any ſuch praiſe as it hath pleaſed you
to vtter. And let it not ſéeme in your eares, as an vnaduiſed
ſpéech, which at this preſent of neceſſitie I muſt diſcloſe, becauſe
mine eye and my heart haue taſted both on fierie Plannet,
but rather let it obtaine ſuch an acceptable opiniō of beliefe
in your modeſt thoughts, as, I remaining captiue, and at your
mercy, may finde you as ready to pittie me, as your beauty was
to wound me, vpon theſe ſpéeches the Hermit tooke occaſion to
begin thus.
                     Sir Knight, it is a déepe point of wiſedome to flée the ſubtill
temptatiō of beautie, which is not ſo glorious in the eye, as it is
grieuous in the heart, nor ſo ſwéete in conceite, as it is ſower in
triall, the reaſon is, for that iealouzie, frenzie, beggerie, murder,
with many other miſchiefs, are always waiting on her as yokfellowes.
You haue already eſcaped one extreame danger, and
now are like to fall into a more greater, for the one could haue
béene but hnrtfull to the body, the other hangeth more waity on
the ſoule, remember this my ſon, for thy fall will be as grieuous
to me, as to thy ſelfe.
                     Father (ſaid the Prince) Beautie is ſo familiarly welcome
into the eyes of all men, as you ſée they haue no power to
eſcape from her, and her delights ſo agréeable in their hearts
likewiſe, as were they of flint, ſhe would mooue affection, euen

ſo, if you did but contemplate the heauenly grace of this beautifull
Damoſell, you could not otherwiſe chuſe, but offer your
ſelfe as her humble ſeruant, which if you did refuſe to doe, I
ſhould perſwade my ſelfe, that good nature had altogether forſaken
you, as alſo I might iudge him very colde in kindneſſe,
that could not be moued by ſuch a forcible motion.
                     I ſee well (quoth the Hermit) that the pleaſure of the fleſh,
makes thee forgetfull of the health of thy ſoule, wherefore, I
will pray that thou maieſt be conuerted in time, leaſt thou féele
the puniſhment of thy follie, when it will be too late for thée to
helpe thy ſelfe: whereto the Prince anſwered thus.
                     I pray you Father tell me, can you conquere theſe earthly
delights, when you ſit wreſting many matters in your Study?
Or wil the looking on your booke, abate the ſecret inflamations
of your heart? I haue heard of many of your calling and profeſſion,
that haue laboured to kill that in other, which (for all their
learning) hath quickned in themſelues, and by ſeeking to draw
a throne out of anothers heele, haue prickt themſelues therwith
to the very heart: tuſh father, be religious in reaſon, I haue ſeen
an olde Billet burne freſher, then a young Bauen, and you (for
all your holineſſe) if I ſhould inueigh againſt the ſecret delight
of Loue, would take me for an heretique: but it is good that I
argue, to ſhew my folly, and that you allow not, to declare your
wiſedome. Well (quoth the Hermit) I will betake my ſelfe to
my Oratorie, and you to your youthfull and worldly pleaſure,
the deſert whereof will (no doubt) in the end reward you. And ſo
he went into his Cel, making ſuch ſpeed, til he had ſhut the doore
after him, as if the Giant Brocalon had beene aliue againe, and
had followed him: wherat the knight of the Sauageman laughed
heartily, then comming vnto the Damoſell, he began to ſalute
her in theſe tearmes.
                     I could wiſh (faire Lady) to be ſeruant to ſo kiude a Miſtreſſe,
if it might as ſhall like you to allowe me your ſeruice:
in ſooth I iudge you would like of my behauiour, if you doe
not, I will be content to auoide, when it is your pleaſure.
Worthy Sir (anſwered the Damoſell) I cannot be ſo much ingratefull
for your great good will, in defending me, when I was

in greateſt diſtreſſe, but that (to my power) I muſt witneſſe
ſome ſhew of a thankfull minde: in mean time, I deſire to haue
your company for theſe two or thrée dayes, till I be out of
theſe places of ſo great danger, and then ſhall I account my
ſelfe then more highly beholding to you.
                     Lady (quoth he) I receiue ſo great pleaſure in your courteous
anſwer, as I thinke my ſelfe the happieſt man a liue
to attaine ſuch bountie: wherewith he preſently tooke his horſe,
cauſing his Eſquire to mount the Damoſell, who by the way
recounted to the Prince Florian, how by a tempeſt of the Sea,
ſhe was caſt on the coaſt of Ireland, comming from Denmarke
and carrying Letters of e
                           •
                        ediſe to Baſilia the Empreſſe of Allemaigne.
And when I perceiued (quoth ſhe) that I was in this
countrey, where my Couzins (the Daughters of the Marques
Baltamor) remained, I intended to beſtow a little labour in
ſéeing them, but my 
                           •
                        ortune was ſo hard, as I met with the
Giant Brocalon, who not contented with the murdering my
two Eſquires, that bare me company, purſued me to haue fulfild
his villanous wil on me, ſo it was your good hap to be my
reſkew, for which I thinke my ſelfe more beholding to you,
then I can expreſſe: the Prince taking her by the hand, returned
this anſwer.
                     I promiſe you faire Lady, I reioyce that it was my fortune
to do you ſuch ſeruice, and doubt not but you ſhall finde me ſo
gentle a companion, as will guard your perſon from any danger
that may happen to you: but I would either I were ſo
happie, or you ſo courteous, as to giue liberty to the priſoner,
whom your ſingular beautie hath ſecretly fettered. They
continuing theſe pleaſant purpoſes of ſpéech, at laſt they came
to a goodly Riuer, the pleaſant ſight whereof, inuited them to
alight from their horſes, to eaſe themſelues a little, where ſitting
louingly together, the Prince began amor
                           •
                        uſly to diſpoſe
himſelfe, toward the ſober and chaſle Damoſell: in the meane
while, his Eſquire went to a Caſtle néere at hand, to prouide
ſome viands for his Maiſter, who had faſted ſince he came to
Hermits Cell, which he refuſed, to haue the Damoſels ſwéete
company.
                     
                        
Many affable ſpéeches the Prince ſpent, that the Damoſell
might the better entertaine him into his fauour, at length he
was ſo bold as to giue her a gréene gowne, when I feare me
ſhe loſt the flower of her chaſtity, but whether it were ſo or no,
I know not, but mine Authour ſaith, that the Eſquire at his
departing left her a Maiden, and at his comming againe, he
found her a woman.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. VI.
                     What happened to the knight of the Sauage man, before he
had taken his farewell of the Damoſell.
                     
                        SVch and ſo great was the pleaſure, which
the knight of the Sauage man conceiued by
the preſence of the Damoſell, as all that
night they paſſed the time away, by the riuers
ſide, till at length the Prince began
to waxe heauy a ſléepe, like vnto thoſe that
entertaine Loue, but for the preſent time,
rather to ſuffiſe their appetite, then any thing elſe, for he made
ſo ſmall account of a Louers paſſions, as his humour once ſatiſfied,
he had preſently forgotten it. The Damoſell ſéeing the
Prince to vſe no more regard vnto her, fell into extreame conceite
of gréefe, in that ſhe had ſo lightly beſtowne her honourable
chaſtitie on the knight, who (ſhe feared) would commit her
courteſie to vtter obliuion, which if it ſhuld happen ſo vnkindly
(quoth ſhe) I (being vnworthy to ſhew my face among perſons
of credite) wiſh, that the preſent loſſe of my life, might
falue vp the ſtaine and blemiſh of my former riches. A heauy
and pittifull diſcourſe ſhe continued, during the time, the knight
of the Sauage man ſlept ſoundly, at laſt ſhe looked about, and
eſpied two Eſquires, attending on a Knight of ſuch huge ſtature,

as he ſéemed to her to exéede the Giant Brocalon. And
as he walked, many times would he ſtand ſtill and muſe with
himſelfe, then pull and rent his haire, as one would haue iudged
him depriued of his wits: at laſt in his extreame paſſions)
he called his Eſquiers, and commanded them to wait ther neare
vnto him, for that he would repoſe himſelfe vnder the Trees.
                     Hereat the Damoſell was greatly abaſhed, ſo that (ſtanding
in ſome feare) ſhe awaked the Knight of the Sauageman, with
theſe wordes: Good Knight forſake this drow ſines, for danger
is nearer thée then thou art beware of, here is another Brocalon,
come to iniure vs, and therefore helpe now or neuer to defend
vs.
                     At theſe words the Prince ſuddenly ſtarted vp, and when he
had put himſelfe in good regard for his enemie, hee aduanced
himſelfe néerer vnto him, and ſéeing his Eſquires walking their
horſes, and their Maiſter lying vnder a Trée in great griefe of
minde, he ſtayed himſelfe in ſecret a while, when he heard him
breake foorth into theſe ſpéeches.
                     I ſée it is great folly for me to repoſe any credite in the Gods,
who either want power, or elſe are wilfully bent, to euerthrow
him that hath moſt truſted them, and good cauſe haue I to
thinke ſo, for that my Brethren being vanquiſhed by one onely
Knight, they make ſo ſmall eſtimation of me in their fauour,
as they will not ſuffer me to meete with him, that I might either
beare my Brethren company, or take that reuenge, which
both my griefe, and nature compelleth me. For how can I
chuſe but blaſpheme your names, and deny to giue you the honour
I haue done, in that you ſuffer the knight ſo much to diſhonour
vs? If you haue altogither caſt me into obliuion, I wil honor
your Altars with no more teſtimonies of my affection, but
that truſt I had in you, I will repoſe in my ſelfe, and ſo for euer
henceforth I deſpiſe you.
                     Theſe heauy complaintes cauſed the Prince to iudge, that
he was Baleato, The Brother to the Giant Brocalon, who hauing
intelligence of his Brothers death, ſought to finde him
that had done the deede, this good hap was very acceptable to
the Prince, in that he found him without any of his knights

to aid him, ſo walking aſide, Baleato at the laſt had eſpied him,
who made him to ariſe with theſe ſpéeches. What is he that
dare imagine himſelfe ſo hardy, as to trouble me in my ſilent
purpoſes? I aſſure thée, that thou art but little beholding to fortune,
who is thy vtter enemy in conducting thée hither, eſpecially
in the time of my fury, which thou wilt find more gréeuous
then thou art able to endure. And for the Damoſell that kéeps
thée company, as I haue good occaſion (receiuing part of my
g
                           •
                        éefe by meanes of ſuch a one as ſhe) I will appeare the anger
of my Gods, in offering her as a Sacrifice to them: and ſo will
I deale with all of that Sexe that I can méete, for that Brocalon
(the beſt knight in the world) was ſlaine in following ſuch
another as ſhe is.
                     
                        Baleato (anſwered the Prince) reſerue theſe threatnings
for thoſe that are affraide of thee, and prepare thy ſelfe to deale
with him, whom neither the words nor weapon can terrifie,
as for the Damoſell, aſſure thy ſelfe, that I will not onely defend
her, but I will alſo humble that proud min
                           •
                        e, which
makes thee thinke none ſo good as thy ſelfe, ſo ſhalt thou learne
how to vſe thy betters, and deale more courteouſly with the
people of this countrey. And becauſe I will mooue the mallice
the greater againſt me, thou ſhalt vnderſtand that I am he, that
hath ſlaine Dalfurnien and Brocalon thy brethren, and haue
good hope to ſend thée after them: wherefore put thy ſelfe in a
readineſſe to entertaine me, for I as much diſdaine to haue any
aduantage of thee, as thou proudly thinkeſt me vnable to
deale with thée.
                     The Giant (extreamely moued to heare the braue language
of the Prince, began to rage after this manner. Thou cruel deſtroyer
of my blood, thou maiſt aſſure thy ſelfe to haue in thy preſence,
the greateſt enemy vnto thée in the world: and therefore
ſhew the vttermoſt of thy manhood, for I carry that hope with
me to bathe theſe hands of mine in thy blood, and beſide, to rent
thy curſed heart in péeces, and throw it for foode to the Fowles
of the aire.
                     Then they began a fierce and cruell Combat, wherein the
Prince ſo nobly behaue himſelfe, that the forcible ſtroakes of

the Giant were deliuered te ſmall purpoſe: but at length he perceiuing
what ſubtilty the Prince vſed, beganne to ſtrike vere
roughly at him, ſo that his ſwoord was broken in thrée pieces,
and his body wounded in diuerſe places, whereat the Damoſell
was very much diſpleaſed, doubting leaſt ſhe ſhould
now ſée the ende of him, who had all this while ſo valiantly defended
her.
                     The Prince ſéeing himſelfe in danger, caſt his Shield before
him, to receiue a mightie ſtroke which the giant gaue, but
the blowe lighting on the Shield, entred ſo farre in, as he could
not pull it out againe, which the Prince perceiuing, cloſed with
him, and driuing him ſtill backward till he came to the Riuers
ſide, he ſtrooke his legs from him, ſo that he fell ouer the bancke
into the water, where, with the waightineſſe of his fall, and his
head going forward, he brake his necke, to the no ſmall ioy of
the Damoſell, as alſo of the Prince, who reioyced he was rid of
ſuch an enemy.
                     Then mounting on horſebacke, they rid againe to the Cell
of the olde Hermit, for that the Princes woundes were ſomewhat
dangerous: in the meane while, the Eſquires of Baleato
returned to the Knights which were in the Caſtles, to giue
them vnderſtanding of their Maſters death, how that hee
which had ſlaine his brother Brocalon, had now likewiſe diſpatched
him.
                     When they were come to the Cell, the good olde Hermit (albeit
he was ſomewhat offended with the Prince) yet be receiued
him very louingly, and on ſuch a poore bed as he had, he cauſed
him to lie down, vſing ſuch good regard vnto him, as within
fewe dayes his dangerous eſtate was well recouered. Then
did he deſire the Prince, that he would ſuffer the Damoſell to
depart on her iourney, giuing her to vnderſtand, how ſhe might
now trauaile without danger, for that ſhe knowe her ſelfe the
Giants were both ſlaine, and alſo he ſaid, it ſtood not with her
honeſt report, that ſhe ſhould ſo kéepe company with a Knight
at Armes, whoſe affaires lay in ſo many ſundry places, as it
was not decent for her, nor honour to him, to be ſéene after ſuch
effeminate order.
                     
                        
The Prince was very well content that ſhe ſhould depart,
albeit the Damoſell found her ſelfe greatly agreeued, that he
did vſe no more eſtimation of her, hauing ſealed the Fort of her
maidenly honour, which none had the power to obtain before,
neuertheleſſe, when ſhe ſaw no remedy, but that ſhe was forced
to make a vertue of neceſſity, with teares ſhe tooke her leaue of
the Prince, who feigned himſelfe in amourous ſpéeches, very
ſad and ſorrowfull for her departure.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. VII.
                     How the knights, which belouged to the Giants Brocalon
and Baleato, ſurrendred vp the Caſtles, vnto the noble
knight of the Sauage man: And of that which happened
to the Prince Florendos, after he arriued at the Caſtle of
the Giant Almarol, where remained the faire Princeſſe
Miragarda.
                     
                        ON the next day following, the knights,
(which belonged to the Giants) had now
intelligence of the death of their Lords,
whereupon, they preſently determined
with themſelues, to go ſée if the knight of
the Sauage man, would entertaine them
into his fauour, for ſince they had no refuge
or defence left them, wherin they might repoſe any hope of aſſurance,
they concluded to ſurrender vp the caſtles into his hands
knowing themſelues farre vnable to withhold them from him.
In this determination they came to the Hermits Cell where
they found the knight of y• 
                        Sauage man lying on his bed, for that
he was not very well diſpoſed, they comparing his yong yéeres
with the nobleneſſe of his late exploites, receiued great cauſe
of admiration, at laſt, he that iudged himſelfe, to be the hardieſt

of courage amongſt them, ſuddenly entred into theſe ſpéeches.
                     If I ſhould deny, ſir knight, that Fortune hath entertained
you into eſpeciall regard, I ſhould ſéeme very much forgetfull
of my ſelfe, in that the puiſſance of Brocalon and Baleato,
two Giants, reputed of no ſmall courage, as (by your
noble hardineſſe) brought to vtter confuſion: therefore this remaineth
as a choſen argument, that ſhe, not onely hath called
you into the dignity of her fauour, but alſo, that ſhe maintaineth
her affection towards you with ineſtimable bountie, let
not any then ſéeme ſo hardie, as to offer a checke or reproofe to
your valour, for that their beſt Fortune is vnlike to be equall
with yours, but let them rather imagine themſelues happy, if
they may deſerue the good countenance of ſo worthy a Champion.
                     The due conſideration hereof, hath conſtrained vs to enter
into ſuch hardineſſe, as to come and preſent our ſelues to your
noble mercy, this good opinion guided vs, that he which hath
ſo worthily ouercome, and remaineth in the honour of a famous
conquerour, will not ſtaine that laudable title, by offering
diſcourteſie to thoſe, who humble themſelues as obedient
ſeruants, in ſigne whereof, receiue at our hands the keyes of
the Caſtles, which our Lords ſometime enioyed, and withall,
receiue the hearty good will and affection of them, who remaine
onely at your noble comandement: to which courteous words
the Prince returned this anſwer.
                     Your ſpéeches are ſo honeſt, and ſo well repleate ſhith ciuill
courteſie, as I am ſorry that my preſent caſe, will not ſuffer me
to let you vnderſtand, how thankefully I accept your great
gentleneſſe: but you ſhall beare me company to the Court of
England, where I will cauſe the king my Grandfather to ſatisfie
that, which my diſhablity will not ſuffer me. Then tooke he
the keyes of the Caſtles, wherewith he was very much contented,
ſéeing the iſſue ſo fortunate, where the beginning ſeemed
ſo doubtfull.
                     The knights ſtill kept the Prince company, in reſpect of the
honourable promiſe he had made them, wherof they were not a

little glad, in that they hoped to gaine good fauour in the Court
of England, where, the report of this noble Conqueſt in ſhort
time was ſo blazed, as it mooued a generall conſent of gladnes,
not ſo much for the recouery of the Caſtles, as that they were
woon by the proweſſe of the Prince Florian.
                     
                     The good King Fredericke, for ioy of this good happe, ſent ſir
Pridos, the Duke of Galles, in all the ſpéede that might be, to ſée
if he could méete with his noble Nephew: who taking a Galley
preſently, in ſhort time arriued in the Coaſt of Ireland, not
very farre from the Hermits Cell. Where finding the Prince,
and declaring the ſum of his meſſage, the Prince concluded to
depart thence, notwithſtanding his wounds were not thorowly
healed: ſo taking leaue of the gentle Hermit, and deſiring
the other Knights to accompany him, they committed themſelues
to the Seas, whereon they had not long ſayled, but they
arriued at the Cittie of London, thorow which they were honourably
conducted to the Kings Pallace. When tydings being
come to the King, that they were arriued in the Court, accompanied
with his Sonne Don Edward, hée came to méete
them, when caſting his armes about the necke of the Prince
Florian, the teares ran downe his white beard, for the inward
ioy he conceiued in his preſence: as for his Father Don Edward,
he would not hide his earneſt affection, but welcommed
his ſonne with very great kindneſſe, and his mother the Princeſſe
Flerida, pittying his hurts, but glad of his company, ſhewed
her ſelfe a louing mother vnto him, and would not depart
day nor night from him, till ſhe perceiued him to be thorowly
recouered.
                     The King of England did very honourably entertaine the
Knights which came with his Nephew, and for that he would
ſhow he made eſtimation of them, he accepted them into offices
(according to their degrées) in his Court, for which great bountie,
they witneſſed themſelues not vnthankefull, but ſo behaued
themſelues, as they did great credit to the King in his Court.
                     The Prince Florian being in good eſtate of health, newes
came vnto the Engliſh Court, of the impriſonment of the king
Polendos and his companie, in the Court of the great Turke,
                        
which vnhappy tidings moooed the king and his whole Court
to great gréefe, conſidering withall the ſtate of ſorrow, wheren
the Emperour of Conſtantinople remained: and the more extreame
did they take the cauſe, in reſpect of the ſmall hope was
to be had of their liberty againe, in that the great Turke had
ſworne to put them all to death, except the Emperour would
ſend him the knight, who ſo boldly carryed away his daughter
the Princeſſe Targiana. Theſe newes comming to the eares
of the Prince Florian, he began to fall into theſe ſpéeches. Far
better it is for me to go render my ſelfe, and ſuffer the extrame
rigour of that cruell Infidell, then that (for me) ſo many good
knights ſhould liue in danger: for ſéeing by my occaſion the
cauſe did firſt ariſe, no better meane to ſalue it vp againe then
my ſelfe.
                     I cannot beléeue (ſayd the Prince Don Edward) that the
Turke is ſo forgetfull of himſelfe, as to ſéeke the death of ſo many
for ſo ſmall a matter, by reaſon Albayzar, (one of his owne
kindred) ſhould then ſtand in hazard of his life: but if it be as
the report goeth, the Emperour ought to be carefull in the kéeping
of Albayzer to the end, that the ſafegard of his life might
redéeme the other their woonted liberty: whereto the Prince
Florian thus replied. I am perſwaded good Father, that the
Turke will hardly be remooued from his determination, which
maketh me the greater to miſdoubt the ſafety of thoſe knights,
the abſence of whom (I am aſſure) ſo gréeuouſly offendeth the
good Emperour, that I am perfectly reſolued to goe and comfort
him: conſidering it is a part of dutie on my behalf, not to
be ſo farre from him at this time, ſéeing he is depriued of them
that ſhould defend him. The aged king Fredericke, his Father
Don Edward, nor his mother the Priuceſſe Flerida, could diſſwade
him from his determination, but contrary to their wils
he departed from the Court, taking his iourney toward Conſtantinople,
being armed after his accuſtomed maner, and bearing
in his Sheeld his vſuall deuiſe. Thus the happy ſucceſſe
which may fall vnto him, at this time we intend to leaue him,
becauſe we will returne to the Prince Florendos, who by his
time is wel néere the caſtle of the giant Almarol, hauing in his

iourney done many noble déeds deſeruing commendation, but
for that they are rehearſed in the Engliſh Chronicles, it would
ſéeme impertinent to this place to rehearſe them: neuertheleſſe,
I muſt needs tell yée, that Floraman the Prince of Sardignia,
in this iourney atchieued very great renowne, and ſo continued,
till their arriuall at the City of Rioclaro, which at this preſent
is called Tamar.
                     
                     
                        Florendos ſéeing himſelfe ſo neare the place, where he had
ſpent a great time in languiſhing afflictions, entred into a thouſand
imaginations with himſelfe, firſt conſidering the beginning
of his loue, and then the happy continuance thereof, enforced
him to a number of ſad coniectures, wherein he paſſed that
night as quietly as he could.
                     In the morning they rid on toward the Caſtle of Almaroll,
when Albayzar beganne to vſe ſome doubt of his entertainement,
for that he iudged women were but ſlenderly acquainted
with pittie, eſpecially hée looked for ſmall fauour of the
Princeſſe Miragarda, who contrariwiſe was not ſo cruell towardes
ſtrangers, as ſhée was toward her deareſt and beſt beloued
friendes. Florendos had no ſooner diſcouered the Trées,
which were planted about the Riuer Theſin, and with all, the
walles of the Caſtle of Almaroll, but his heart was immeaſurably
touched with ſuddaine feare, remembring how many
ſtormes he had endured, and the perilles whereto he muſt now
render himſelfe againe afreſh, a ſpectacle certainely of woonderfull
griefe, wherein he ſomewhat bare the Prince Albayzar
company, who remembring that he was vanquiſhed, knew no
other remedie for himſelfe, but to abide the mercy of Miragarda.
                     
                     When they were come to the Caſtle, they found all the
gates faſt locked, wherevpon they went to the Trée where the
Shieldes were hanging, where, well beholding them all, Florendos
at laſt eſpied his owne, at the ſight whereof he ſecretly
ſighed, and imagined how he might be thankfull ſufficient to
his Eſquire Armello, who had (ſince his departure (ſo well garded
it: but in ſooth he was not ſo much beholding to his Eſquier,
as he did eſteeme himſelfe, becauſe Armello was fallen

amorous of Lardemia, the Damoſell attendant on the faire
Princeſſe Miragarda, and ſtayed in that place to contemplate
the beauty of his beloued Miſtreſſe, rather then for any care he
had of his Maiſters ſhéeld and Armor, for he was gone ſo farre
ouer ſhoes in loue, as he had no other pleaſure then the remembrance
of the Damoſell, who tooke great delight to ſée him ſo
gréeuouſly attached for loue.
                     
                        Armello ſhas ſo ſet on fire in affection, as he could not know
his Lord and Maiſter, and ſome other cauſe there was to hinder
him, for that he was ſo, diſguiſed in blacke Armour, but
when he perceiued the Prince Floraman, and had likewiſe eſpyed
the ſhéeld of the Princeſſe Miragarda, he preſently did
coniecture, that the blacke Knight, was his Lord the Prince
Florendos, to whom he reuerently drew néere, vſing theſe
ſpéeches.
                     I hope (my good Lord) you haue no occaſion to hide your ſelf
from him, who hath ſuch earneſt affection to do you ſeruice, and
ſpecially hauing recouered ſo rare a Iewel, as is the Shéeld of
the faire Miragarda, at whoſe commandement, you made your
departure from this place, and well worthy is ſhe to be impeached
of high ingratitude, if ſhe ſhould not now fauourably entertaine
you, who hath ſo nobly and worthily deſerued.
                     
                        Florendos being not able to conceale himſelfe any longer, opened
his helmet, and then embraced his Eſquire Armello, to
whom he deliuered the Shéeld of Miragarda, willing him to
ſet it in the place where it was woont to ſtand, before that the
Prince Albayzar ſo diſcourteouſly tooke it away, and bad him
alſo take the Shéeld of the Princeſſe Targiana, and to ſet it at
the féete of the portraiture of Miragarda, which did not a little
offend the Prince Albayzar to behold.
                     At length came foorth of the Caſtle the Giant Almarol, very
well Armed, and gallantly mounted on a white Courſer,
for he ſuppoſed that theſe thrée Princes came to demand the
Iouſt, but when he beheld the Shéeld of Miragarda, in the
place where it was wont to be, being ſuddainly abaſhed, he
knew not well what to ſay. At laſt he knew the Prince
Florendos, by reaſon that he had lifted vp the Beuere of his

Helmet, whereupon he caſt his Lance to the ground, and with
ſtretched out armes came and embraced the Prince Florendos
entertaining him with theſe words.
                     I did alwaies perſwade my ſelfe (worthy and renowned
Prince Florendos) that you would bring to end that honorable
exployte, which I now perceiue you haue happily atchieued, a
deſert ſo laudable and knightly, as the Princeſſe Miragarda
cannot otherwiſe chuſe, but requite you with better entertainment,
then ſhe had done heretofore. And if ſhe continue her
former obſtinacy, & vſe not that gratious acceptation towards
you, which your nobleneſſe doth worthily merite, and her duetie
commandeth ſhe ſhould fauour you with all, I will ſo ſhake
the honour of her name with ſpéeches of importance, that the
world ſhalbe acquainted with her monſtrous vnkindneſſe,
who I hope will beare me company in iuſtly condemning her,
that can affoord ſuch great diſloyaltie to ſo good a Knight.
                     Thus breaking of his ſpéeches, & without ſtaying to heare
the anſwer of the Prince, he preſently ran into the Caſtle,
where he declared to the Princeſſe Miragarda, the noble and
Knightly returne of her loyall Seruant Florendos, which
newes enflamed her heart with vnſpeakeable ioy, neuertheleſſe
ſhe diſſembled the matter in ſuch ſort, as though ſhe had
made no account thereof, which the Giant perceiuing, both
how ſlender eſtimation ſhe ſeemed to haue of Florendos, as
alſo of the 
                           〈◊〉
                         bringing backe againe her Shéeld, being
not able to withhold his choller any longer, he began to touch
her very highly with the Princely ſeruice of Florendos, how
to her vniuerſall praiſe and his owne renowne, he had witneſſed
the true teſtimony of an inuincible minde, which ſhe
countenancing with ſo ſmall regard, did notoriouſly impeach
herſelfe of ingratitude, and too iniuriouſly requite him that had
deſerued ſo well.
                     All theſe words did ſéeme nothing to moue her reſolute will,
but with a hardy countenance ſhe gaue ſhow to the Giant,
that ſhe was the Lady and Miſtreſſe of a ſelfe-willed conceit,
albeit within her ſelfe, ſhe remayned greatly affectionate of
the Princes returne, but becauſe her modeſt ſhamefaſtneſſe

ſhould not be diſcoured to the giant, ſhe made the matter to him
of no regard at all.
                     The Giant being not a little vexed, in a great fury 
                           〈◊〉
                        
foorth of her preſence, very much accuſing her obſtinate minde,
and comming to the Prince Florendos, they could not hide the
great diſcourteſie of Miragarda, which the Prince contented
himſelfe withall, becauſe he was woont to haue no other entertainement,
but for that he would diſpatch the cauſe of Albayzar
he deſired Almaroll to goe againe to his Lady, and to know her
pleaſure, as concerning him that caried away her Shield, and
whom he had brought backe againe.
                     The Giant preſently returned to the princeſſe, giuing her to
vnderſtand, that the Knight which had caried away the Shield,
was brought thither backe againe by the noble Prince Florendos,
who deſired to knowe her will, what ſhould be done with
him? Miragarda taking a little pauſe, at laſt commanded that
Albayzar ſhould be brought into her perſence, and that Florendos
ſhould abide without.
                     When Albayzar was come before her, ſhe straitely charged
him to goe yéeld himſelfe priſoner, vnto the king Recinde her eſpeciall
good Lord, and that he ſhould not faile to goe thither, becauſe
he ſhould remaine there as priſoner, vntill the great
Turke had ſet at liberty the king Polendos with al his knights
She receiuing his oath, that he would not faile to doe as ſhe
had commanded him, willed him to depart, wh
                           •••
                         he (giuing
her humble thanks for fauouring him ſo much, conſidering his
offence deſerued greater puniſhment) offered gently to kiſſe
her hand, but ſhe would not ſuffer him, and ſo he departed from
her.
                     When he was come foorth againe from the Caſtle, to take
his leaue of the Prince Florendos, he caſt his 
                           〈◊〉
                         on the protraiture
of the princeſſe Targiana, not without many a bleeding
ſigh from his heart▪ and ſuch countenance in ieſture, as bewrayed
the extreamity of his ſuddaine pa
                           ••
                        ions.
                     A great while he ſtood rehearſing to himſelfe, theſe amorous
conceits wherewith he was meruailouſly charged, at laſt he

deſired Almaroll to doe him ſo much fauour, as to goe & intreate
the Princeſſe Miragarda, that it might ſtand with her pleaſure,
not to ſuffer the ſhield of his beſt beloued Targiana, to hang in
the rancke among thoſe that were conquered, in reſpect ſhe had
deſerued no ſuch dignitie. But in no caſe would ſhee agrée to
this requeſt, ſo highly did ſhe eſtéeme her ſelfe in ſuperioritie, aboue
all other Ladies, whereof Albayzar being certified, he departed
in choller and extreame melancholly, & the thirtéenth day
after her departure from the Caſtle of Almaroll, he arriued in
the Court of Recinde King of Spaine, who receiued him with
very Princely Courteſie.
                     And after he vnderſtood who had ſent him, and for what
cauſe, he was not a little pleaſed thereat, becauſe by him, the
King Polendos might haue libertie againe, as alſo his Sonne,
who was priſoner amongſt the other Knights: of theſe newes
he preſently cauſed the Emperour of Conſtantinople to be aduertiſed,
that he ſhould now ſet his former griefe apart and reioyce,
in that he had in his cuſtody ſuch a one, as ſhould bring
home againe all the Knights that were priſoners to the Turke.
The Emperor greatly commended the pollicie of the Princeſſe
Miragarda, and wiſhed if it might be poſſible, to haue her company
in his court, as well to regard her with honour equall to
her worthy deſerts, as alſo to mittigate the afflictions of his
Nephewe the Prince Florendos, who deſired alwayes to fulfill
thoſe occa
                           •••
                        ns, that might witnes to her his faithful ſeruice
But when he perceiued that his Lady made no account of his
trauailes, neither regarded the torments he endured for her
ſake, he determined to guard her Shield againe, vntill ſome other
Knight did purchaſe his office, by triall of his valour, and if
his miſfortune happened to be ſo great, as he ſhould receiue the
folie in this new attempt, he vowed neuer more to beare Armes
againſt any, but euen to commit his whole courſe to the cruelty
of Fortune, ſéeing that all this while, ſhe would not allow him
one fauourable looke.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. VIII.
                     Of the Combats that the Prince Florendos fought, the ſecond
day after he had enterpriſed to guarde the Shield of
the Princeſſe Miragarda.
                     
                        WHen the Prince Florendos had paſſed one
day before the Caſtle of Almaroll, without
any friendly countenance of his Lady, or
once comming into her preſence, he began
to commune with himſelfe of his hard fortune,
and what little hope he had to gaine
his deſired ioy, becauſe her frowardnes caſt
into contempt his faithfull ſeruice. On the ſecond day, to expell
the heauie thoughts, wherewith he was ſo grieuouſly charged,
he came to the place before the Shield of his faire Miſtreſſe,
which when he had aduiſedly behold, he vttered his complaines
after this manner.
                     I knowe certainely (ſwéete Lady) that he which beſtoweth
his time in your ſeruice, receiueth a very grea
                           •
                         
                        
                           ••
                        compence, by
hauing the meanes to behold your faire Image in this portraiture,
which is of power ſufficent to bring into his ſubiection, the
heart as hard as Adamant, if the Goddeſſe would affoord thoſe
fauourable words vnto it, which ſometime ſhe did to the image
made by Pigmaleon, how highly (in ſo doing) might ſhe manifeſt
her courteſie, and what a precious Iuell were he enriched
withall, that gained ſo great an honour.
                     But I ſee well, that you haue preuented ſuch a happy cauſe,
in that this remaineth as a Net, to entangle the mindes of
them, which liue frée from ſuch thraldome, in which extreamitie,
the party ſo inueigles deſireth, as well to be comforted by
your gratious ſpéech, as to be ſo gratiouſly tormented by your

ſilent counterfeit, for that it depriueth him of his former felicity
As for me, ſéeing there is no other remedie, I muſt féede mine
eyes with this entiſing ſhadowe, and ſatiſfie my fancy in midſt
of my ſhadow, in that I behold the thing with mine eye, which
as a dagger ſtabbeth me to the heart, and leaueth him depriued
of any mean, which might adde ſome eaſe to my miſfortue. But
albeit your portraite is dumbe and ſenceleſſe, and cannot (as I
would it could) perceiue my heauy aflictions, yet ſo fond is my
conceit, that it maketh me weary of my wretched life, hauing
played the Miſtreſſe thereof ſo deuoutly in my thoughts, as in
ſtead of th
                           •
                        perſon, I reuerence her picture, thinke then how dutifull
I would be to your ſelfe, that am ſo forward in eſtéeming
your ſhadow.
                     And this foreſaid content ſhould be very welcome to me, if I
were perſwaded that you tooke delight therein, which hardly I
can beleeue, in that my long abſence in your ſeruice, and my
preſence now to offer you my dutie, is not worthy to be once
looked on, this maketh me thinke, that you haue committed me
to forgetfulneſſe: therefore I account it as vaine to mourne any
longer, ſeeing the affection I haue alwayes ſo faithfully borne
you, is rewarded with ſuch an vnkinde recompence. While
the Prince Florendos continued this ſad diſcourſe, the Princeſſe
Miragarda ſecretely behelde him at a 
                           •
                        hinke in the windowe,
for it was her woont to ariſe very earely in the mornings,
to heare the pleaſant noates of the pretty chirping birds,
that would come and ſing in the Trées planted by the Riuers
ſide.
                     And when ſhee perceiued that his grieuous lamentations
procéeded from the depth of his heart, ſhe was ſomewhat abaſhed
thereat, but yet in ſuch ſort, as ſhe did neuer the more pittie
his dollorous eſtate: for ſuch a proud opinion ſhe held of her ſelfe,
that the greateſt deſartes in the world were not ſufficient to
anſwere her beautie, neither that Florendos could endure too
much griefe for her, ſuch was her mercileſſe iudgement of the
paſſions of loue. The carefull Prince abiding in his woonted
mones, on a ſudden heard a great noyſe (not farre from him) among
the Trees, which cauſed him to breake off his amorous

lamentations, and as he aduanced himſelf to ſée what the matter
was, he eſpyed thrée knights come riding, attired in very
rich and coſtly Armour. The firſt of them was in gréene Armour,
ſhadowed with ſiluer very beautifully, and in his Shield
he bare for his deuice, this word writen in Greeke letters, Normandie.
                     
                     The Armour of the ſecond, was white and Azure, mingled
together artificially, with ſtreames of greene enterchangeably
figured thereon, and in his ſhéeld in a field of Sinople, he had
liuely pictured the God Apollo in his ancient habit. The Armor
of the third was Carnation colour, all beſet with Croſſets of
gold very gallantly, and in his Sheeld in a field G
                              •
                           ules he bare
for his deuiſe, Orpheus wrapped about with the flames of hall,
which was ſo ingeniouſly made, as there wanted nothing but
life to grace the picture.
                     The two foremoſt Knights came ſinging very pleaſantly,
that the Prince Florendos tooke great delight to heare them,
and they accorded in ſuch good muſicke together, as the Prince
Floraman (who was very well ſéene in that Art) commended
it aboue all that euery he heard in his life, ſo ſweetly did their
voyces conſent together, beſide, the eccho of the Riuer, the trées
and the mountaines did anſwer their notes ſo familiarly, that
it was almoſt as commendable as an inſtrument, which the
Princeſſe Miragarda (ſtanding in her window) tooke great
pleaſure to heare, and it did very much comfort the ſad mind of
the Prince Florendos.
                     
                     But the Prince of Sardignia, being ſomewhat acquainted
with the Song, tooke a knife and engraued the ſame on the
barke of a Tree, that for the worthineſſe thereof, it might there
remaine till time had conſumed the Trée, and as the Tree grew
in bigneſſe, ſo the letters might be ſéene in more leageable maner,
which when he had finiſhed, as well for his owne content,
as to marke the perfectneſſe of the Song, he rehearſed to himſelfe
in forme following.
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                 The Song which the two knights did ſing, as
they came riding to the Caſtle of the Giant Almarol,
and which was engrauen on a Tree, by Floraman
the Prince of Sardignia.
                                 
                                    FAire Madame, if you can vouchſafe to ſee,
                                    the liuely picture of a carefull minde:
                                    For lorne with griefe, do you but looke on me,
                                    and iudge if Fortune be not moſt vnkinde,
                                    That he which ſues and ſerueth faithfully:
                                    Should be repaide with extreame cruelty.
                                 
                                 
                                    Wh
                                          •
                                       t greater torments to a gentle minde,
                                    then to be ſcorned where he liketh moſt?
                                    What ſtate of refuge can he hope to finde,
                                    where each thing doth at his miſfortune boaſt?
                                    Condemnd, confounded with, rebuke and blame:
                                    Yet ignorant from whence the cauſes came.
                                 
                                 
                                    So heauy is the waighty yoake of Loue,
                                    when queinteſt lookes affoord diſcourteſie:
                                    That wiſe is he that doth the paſſions proue,
                                    and yet can keepe himſelfe at libertie.
                                    But he whoſe wits is rauiſhed by ſtealth:
                                    Had need of Phyſick in his greateſt health
                                 
                                 
                                    Some men in loue commend their happineſſe,
                                    their quiet, ſweete, a
                                          •
                                       d delicate delight:
                                    And I can boaſt of Fortunes frowardneſſe,
                                    Her extreame rigour and ſeuere deſpight.
                                    But for the ſweetneſſe other men haue felt:
                                    I came too late, my part was elſe where dealt.
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    Yet can I ſay, no man hath beene more iuſt,
                                    nor ſeru'd his Lady with more due regard:
                                    But ſhe being gouerned by her owne miſtruſt,
                                    denies her ſeruant his deſirde reward.
                                    This my misfortune waxeth more and more:
                                    Yet will I ſuffer, though I die therefore.
                                 
                                 FINIS.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     THe thrée Knights had no ſooner eſpied the Prince Florendos,
walking before the Caſtle of Almaroll, but they preſe
                           •
                        tly
left their ſinging, and pulled downe the Beuers of
their helmets, becauſe they doubted that they ſhould be known:
and when they came before the Trée where the ſhields hanged,
they began greatly to commend his valour, whoſe nobleneſſe
had gained ſuch braue prizes, at length the knight in the greene
Armour, ſtedfaſtly beholding the portrait of the faire Miragarda,
began very brauely to vſe his language, as thus.
                     The beautie of that heauenly face which this Picture repreſents,
is of authoritie ſufficient to bring to her obeyſance, the
heart that neuer thought to loue, yea, of the worthieſt knight in
the whole world, albeit my minde was farre otherwiſe, before
I ſawe that with mine eye, which hath béene daily cōmended ſo
much in mine eare: Neuertheles, if any of thoſe Knights which
hath enterpriſed to defend ſo rich a treaſure, dare be ſo hardy as
to breake a couple of Lances with me. I will doe my endeuour
as becōmeth a good knight, on condition he prouoke me not, to
doe him more iniury then willingly I would: becauſe I feare
that the Lady which oweth this faire Picture, would very ſeuerely
puniſh me, for offering offence to any of her Knights, as
contrariwiſe ſhee will entertaine them with eſpeciall fauour,
that take vpon them to enter the Combat for her: to whom the
Prince Florendos thus replied.
                     It were pitie Sir, to put you foorth of ſo good a minde, ſéeing
your ſtomacke ſerueth you ſo wel for the purpoſe, and becauſe I

am ready prouided for the Iouſt, I force not greatly to beſtow
the breaking of a Launce or two on you: and therefore take the
field at your pleaſure, for I will ſanctifie you in this requeſt.
                     With theſe words they parted to fetch their courſe, and met
together with ſuch force, that their Launces ſlewe vp into the
ayre in pieces, and ſo paſſed on brauely, not being any thing ſhaken
at this firſt encounter. The Giant Almaroll, ſeeing them
deſtitute of Launces, cauſed ſome to be brought forth of the Caſtle,
and being deliuered to their Eſquiers, they went and ſerued
their Lordes withall, who valiantly met againe to breake
their Launces the ſecond time: but their encounter was ſo forcible,
that the Prince Florendos loſt one of his ſtirroppes, on
which ſide he was in ſome danger, to haue fallen beſides his
horſe: Neuertheleſſe, the Knight in the gréene Armour meaſured
his length on the ground, but he recouered himſelfe againe
quickly, and being out of meaſure diſpleaſed at his fall, drew his
ſword with theſe words.
                     Syr Knight, for that I made the meanes to ſummon you to
the Iouſt, albeit the foyle hath happened to me, yet am I not
offended thereat, ſo that you will now ſo much honour me, as
to let vs trie one another a while with our ſwords and if in the
ende it be your good hap to vanquiſh me, your valour ſhall haue
the larger eſtimation. I knowe not (anſwered the Prince
Florendos) how theſe Gentlemen in your company eſteeme of
your requeſt, becauſe I ſée them preparing themſelues to offer
me the Iouſt: therefore let my intreatie at this time perſwade
you from this deſire, in that we ſhall haue time enough
to trie our manhood together, when you ſhall not thinke your
ſelfe greatly aduantaged, nor I finde my ſelfe ouermuch iniured.
                     Thus concluding, he gaue his horſe the ſpurres, and ranne
couragiouſly againſt the knight in the white Armour mingled
with Azure, who in ſooth receiued him very brau
                           •
                        ly, breaking
their Launces with ſo great force, as the Prince Florendos loſt
both his ſtirrops, but yet recouered himſelfe well enough from
the fall: as for the other Knight, the ſtroke of the Prince was

                           〈…〉
                        , that his Horſe and he ſells 
                           〈◊〉
                         both together,

and his horſe tumbling vpon him did ſomwhat hurt one
of his legs.
                     When Florendos had prouided himſelfe of another Lance,
he gaue a ſigne to y• third knight to encounter with him, which
the Knight perceiuing, and being ſomewhat moued at the miſfortune
of his companions, failed not to put himſelfe vpon the
aduenture, but ſuch was the courteous regard he had of his fellowes,
as at the firſt offer they miſſed in their meeting, whereupon
they tooke the ſecond caréere ſo worthily againſt ech other
as they brake their Lances brauely, and paſſed on for the third
encounter. The Prince Floraman and Almorall, made great
eſtimation of the noble behauiour the
                           •
                        e thrée Knights vſed, and
likewiſe the Princeſſe Miragarda did very much commend the
noble exploites, which Florendos and the other knights ſhewed
before her preſence, but then the knight being deſirous to
try the end of his Fortune, began to aduance himſelfe forward
and the like did the Prince Florendos, when they met together

                           〈◊〉
                         couragiouſly, that the knight was diſmounted to the earth,
the Prince Florendos being in litte better caſe, for had he not
caught hold on themane of his horſe, he had bene forced to beare
the knight company, but he eſcaped the fall very well, and being
well mounted againe, the knight with whom he had firſt
Iouſted, came vnto him with theſe words.
                     Such is my earneſt deſire (ſir knight) to try my fortune once
more againſt you, as I find my ſelfe very much agreeued, till I
haue felt as much by your ſword, as I haue done by your lance,
therfore as you are a Gentleman, and one that hath worthily
de
                           •
                        erued your knighthood, let me gaine ſo much fauour at your
hands, as now preſently you would, ſatiſfie my requeſt: the
Prince Florendos ſhaped him this anſwer.
                     Your language is accompanied with ſuch great honeſty and
cou
                           •
                        te
                           •
                        e, and beſide, I do eſteeme thereof ſo well, as it would be
a great blemiſh to mine honour, if I ſhould deny your knighly
deſire, and ſo alighting from his horſe, he drew his Sword
to enter the Combate, but the Knight which bare in his
Shield the deuice of Apollo, ſtepped betweene them after this
ſort.
                     
                        
Noble Florendos, you haue good occaſion to content your
ſelfe with this victory, in ſo much as you haue woone it of thoſe
who are your eſpeciall friends, and we would haue you know,
that we are not offended at our miſchance, being vanquiwed
by a Prince of ſo great and ſinguler proweſſe. And for that you
may be the better perſwaded of my words, you ſhall vnderſtand
that he which is ſo earneſt in prouoking you to the Combat, is
your déere friend the Prince Berold, the other is your own brother
the Prince Platir, who to their great paines (I thanke
them) haue honoured me in trauaile with their worthy company,
as for my ſelfe, I am your humble Seruant the Sage Aliart
of the Obſcure Valley who had knowledge of you, ſo ſoone as I
did ſée you, yet would not I make any ſhew thereof (being deſirous
my ſelfe to be vnknowne) to the end that the faire Princeſſe
Miragarda, might yet once more behold your Knightly
valour, and then to eſteeme of you according to your noble deſerts.
                     The Prince Florendos tooke of his Helmet, and comming
to the Sage Aliart, did embrace him very courteouſly, giuing
them to vnderſtand how he was heartily ſory that he had iouſted
againſt his Brother, and his other two deare friendes,
whom he ſpared not to entertaine very gratiouſly, and the like
did the Prince Floraman, for that they had witneſſed their
friendſhip to him in 
                           〈◊〉
                         places, ſo they ſitting downe all together,
paſſed away the greateſt part of the day, in rehearſing
their manifold and Knightly aduentures, which they lengthened
with large diſcourſe, becauſe they would gladly get a ſight
of the Princeſſe Miragarda, who was ſo dainty in ſhewing
her ſelfe, as very ſeldome would ſhe come to the open window,
but looke forth at ſome priuy or ſecret place, for that her greateſt
felicitie was, when ſhe might ſée the fiield died with the blood
of thoſe, who came to contend for the ſingularity of beauty, in
triall whereof, ſhe was not a little proud that the victory returned
alwaies to her, which made her take the greater deilght,
when ſhe perceiued the liues of them that tried the Combats,
to ſtand in danger, which ſhe did oftentimes behold in the ſundry
Combats fought before the Caſtle.
                     
                        
Theſe thrée knights continued ſtill in talke, at laſt they
were told of the entertainment which the Princeſſe Miragarda
afforded to the Prince Albayzar, which did the better content
them then any thing elſe, for that they greatly deſirad their
liberty, whom the great Turke did hold as priſoners, and whoſe
cruelty they knew would be ſeuere, if it were not mittigated by
this meane.
                     When they had ſpent all the day in hope to ſée the Princeſſe
and could not any way accompliſh their deſire, knowing beſide,
that the Princes Florendos, and Floraman, determined
to ſtay there ſtill at the Caſtle, they friendly tooke their leaue
of them, taking their iourney toward the Cittie of Conſtantinople,
which was the cauſe why they left the King of Spaines
Court. Thus the Prince Florendos accompanied with his beloued
friend Floraman, concluded ſtill to guard the Sheeld of
his faire Miſtreſſe Miragarda, againſt all thoſe that durſt come
to vſe any controuerſie therewith: and ſtil he bemoned his hard
Fortune, that his true and faithfull ſeruice could be no better
eſtéemed.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. IX.
                     Of a ſtrange aduenture which chanced before the Caſtle of
the Giant Almarol, and what happened to the Prince Florendos.
                     
                        NOw our hiſtory reports, the thrée knights
which iouſted againſt the Prince Florendos,
did not linger or loyter in any place, til
they came into Greece, and not very farre
from the cittie of Conſtantinople, where
by chance as they trauailed, they met with
Leonarda the Princeſſe of Thrace, being

worthily guided by many noble Gentlemen, ſome that imployed
themſelues in knightly ſeruice, to gaine the good opinion of
Princeſſe, and others that vttered many amorous conceits,
to inueigle her fancy towards them in marriage, and ſo they
paſſed away the time till they arriued at Con
                              •
                           ſtantinople,
where the Princeſſe was entertained with maruailous great
honour: but becauſe the Hiſtory doth make mention hereafter
of her royall receiuing into the Citty, I will now ſpeake no
more thereof, but returne againe to the Prince Florendos,
who walking along the Riuers ſide to take the freſh aire (the
next day after the three knights departed from him) he eſpyed
two Boats well furniſhed with Oares, in the foremoſt wherof
ſate foure Damoſels, attired in very ſumptuous apparell,
and ſitting about the poope end of the Boate, ſounding and
tuning their Lutes, whereto their voyces deliuered ſuch pleaſant
ditties, as they might well haue bene compared with the
three Knights that had taken their way to Conſtantinople, if
ſo be they had ſtayed ſtill at the Caſtle of Almaroll, to haue
made triall.
                     When they drew neare to the Caſtle, the men beſturred their
Oars merily, and the Ladies continued their pleaſant ſong, very
often making ſignes of courteſie towards the other Boate,
which was couered with a Tilt of ſurpaſſing riches, and there
(vnder a pauilion of ineſtimable value) ſate a Lady on pillows
and Cuſhions of Veluet imbrodered 
                           〈◊〉
                         with Gold, whoſe
countenance (which in ſooth was maruellous beautifull) ſhewd
her to be the Gouernes ouer all the other, for ſhe had on a light
robe of Carnation Taffata, cut and layd out with very beautifull
Silks, that it ſéemed of great coſtlines and value to the beholders,
by reaſon that there wanted not gold, Pearle, and precious
Stones, to ſet it forth to the vttermoſt, and for that ſhe
might be the better diſcerned, the heate of the day being paſt, &
the Sunne declining to the neather Regions, ſhe gaue commandement,
that the Mantles of the Pauilion ſhould be lifted
vp, when the Princes Florendos, and Floraman, might at
will behold the exquiſite perfection of her beautie, and at her
féete they might ſee ſitting on a cloath of blacke Veluet, two

aged Gentlewoman, betwéene whom ſat a very faire Damoſell:
and by her ſide lay a ſéemely Knight in gréene armour, bearing
in his ſhield for his deuice, in a field of Sinople, Cupid faſt
lincked in chaines of gold, his bowe and arrowes lying before
him broken in pieces, and the knight himſelfe ſéemed, as a man
altogether vanquiſhed and ouercome, for that the Damoſell aduanced
her ſelfe aboue him.
                     The Marriners were brauely decked with the colours of
their Ladie, whereof (I may ſay to you) they were not a little
proude, for that in behauiour they ſéemed ſo pleaſant, as no
accident what ſoeuer could haue power to change them: and
in theſe great ſhewes of delight, they brought their Boates to
the ſide of the Caſtle, continuing theſe ſwéete harmonie, which
by the Eccho of the water, gaue an acceptable noyſe to their
eares, who at the windowes of the Caſtle ſtoode to behold
them.
                     The two Princes, Florendos and Floraman, thought the
time too long, till they might haue further knowledge of theſe
Ladies but eſpecially the Prince Florendos, who being earneſt
in deſire to knowe the Knight in the Boate, caſting his armes
together, thus communed with himſelfe. I am of the mind that
the very e
                           •
                        treameſt rigour of miſfortune is reſerued for me,
and that it is adioyned me to lament, when others reioyce, in
that I am daily and hourely toſſed in the ſurges of vncertaine
chanches, when each one elſe can haue harbour in the hauen of
happineſſe: and if I ſpeake amiſſe, let the world enter into
iudgement on me: firſt, the whole courſe of my life in Knightly
ſeruice, and the reuerent dutie I haue alwayes borne to
my Miſtreſſe, yet what I haue gained in the one, I haue loſt
in the other, which is a ſpeciall argument, that I am altogether
vnfortunate. Hee would haue procéeded furder in ſecret
complaint, but Floraman ſtayed him with his friendly imbraſing,
and ſo walking together, they behelde to come from the
Boate, where the Lady ſate, a very modeſt and ciuill Damoſel,
and out of the other Boate came two Eſquires, who after they
had vailed their bonnets to their Lady and Miſtreſſe, went orderly
together before the Damoſell.
                     
                        
When they came before the two Princes, the Eſquires very
reuerently did their dutie to them, and the Damoſell gaue them
a very gracious ſalutation as ſhe paſſed by them: at laſt, they
came before the Trée where the Shieldes were placed, when
the Damoſell (beholding the portraite of the faire Miragarda)
turned to the Eſquires with theſe words.
                     This diuine motion of vnequall beautie, cauſeth me to enter
into a hard opinion, which is that our Lady and Miſtreſſe
will returne as greatly diſpleaſed, as ſhe is arriued here with
ſuppoſe of pleaſure, for that the baſe Stone of Saint Vincents
Rocke, may not preſume to paragon it ſelfe with a pure and
perfect Diamond. So, ſhee procéeded on towards the Caſtle,
where, in the windowe (by reaſon of this ſuddaine aduenture)
the Princeſſe Miragarda was very ſtately placed, before whom
ſhe ſhould haue deliuered her meſſage, but that ſhe was maruailouſly
damped by the glimpſe of her ſingular beutie, which was
an occaſion of her pauſing a while: a thing not ſtrange in women,
who are quickly abaſhed at a ſimple cauſe, and therefore
the more worthy of a fanourable conceite, but after the Damoſel
had attained more hardineſſe (yet not without very maidenly
and ciuil baſhfulneſſe) ſhe ſaluted the Princeſſe Miragarda
with theſe ſpéeches.
                     Let it not ſéeme (faire Princeſſe) offenſiue in your gracious
eye, that I thruſt my ſelfe into your preſence after ſuch bold maner,
for that countrey Maidens are ſildome acquainted with
courtly qualities, and beſide, a meſſenger is pardonable, becauſe
ſome audacitie muſt be vſed in declaring a meſſage, and therefore
preſuming on your noble fauour, I omit néedeleſſe and prolixious
phraſes, becauſe they are not incident to the matter I
haue to diſcloſe, neither is it neceſſarie to offend your cares
with long and tedious proteſtations.
                     You ſhall therefore vnderſtand (moſt gratious Princeſſe)
that Arnalte the Princeſſe of Nauarre, my eſpeciall good Lady
and Miſtreſſe, by me kiſſeth the hand of your excellencie, who
for the deſire ſhe hath to doe you ſeruice, and to ſpend ſometime
in your ſo farre famed and commended company, hath béene
ſo bold to trauaile thus farre, and here ſhe is arriued with ſuch a

ſmall traine as attendeth on her, not daring to enter on land
or preſume to your Caſtle, before ſhe be firſt reſolued, if it
ſtand with your good liking to affoord her entertainement, otherwiſe
being very loth to offend you, ſhe will returne from
whence ſhe came: to which words the Princeſſe thus replyed.
                     Faire Damoſall, your requeſt is honeſt and commendable,
and for my part I eſtéeme very well thereof, but yet lyeth not
in me to grant your Ladies requeſt, which is no ſmall gréefe
vnto me: and I aſſure you, that the comming of the Princeſſe
of Nauarre is as acceptable to me, as the greateſt good Fortune
in the world beſide, that might happen to me: but as concerning
her friendly deſire, truſt me, the cuſtome of this Caſtle
is flatly againſt it, in that the entrance is as well defended
againſt women (whoſe company is very ſtrange here) as againſt
men, that daily imploy themſelnes in deeds of honour.
And if I (for the good affection I bare to your Lady and Miſtreſſe)
ſhould preſume on my ſelfe to breake the cuſtome, the
Giant Almaroll, whoſe authority here ſtretcheth further
then mine) I am ſure would in no wiſe agrée thereto, and therefore
I deſire you not to imagine any ill, in that I do not grant
to your Ladies requeſt, for there is great truſt committed to
thoſe Knights without, that (on their perill) none muſt enter
into this Caſtle. And ſo I pray you to returne my acceptable,
thankes to your Lady, excuſing me by my allowable anſwer
and this you may aſſure her, that my griefe is greater then ſhe
can iudge, or you imagine, in that I am deſtitute of the power
to accompliſh her courteous will.
                     Madame (anſwered the Damoſell) I ſhall not faile to declare
at large to the Princeſſe Arnalte, your gratious pleaſure,
ſo that I doubt not, but ſhe will very well accept of your
friendly aunſwer: and the rather, becauſe her daunger will
be the greater, if ſhe preſume vnaduiſedly on her owne peri
                           •
                        l,
ſo that ſhe is highly bound to your courteous nature, in ſending
her ſuch a forewarning.
                     And ſo ſhe humbly tooke her leaue of the Princeſſe Miragarda,
whoſe anſwer ſhe thorowly deliuered to her Lady and

Miſtreſſe, whereat ſhe receiued ſo great vnkindneſſe, as ſhe
would hardly ſuffer the Damoſell to report the allowable and
ſufficient excuſe of the Princeſſe, and ſhe grew into ſo great
melancholly, as neither one nor other might ſpeake vnto her,
which when the knight in the gréene Armour perceiued he aroſe,
and began thus to pacifie her.
                     Madame, you ought not to take in euill part, that the princeſſe
Miragarda maketh réfuſall of your entry into her Caſtle,
for that perchance ſhe is a fraide, leaſt your beauty ſhould ſtaine
or blemiſh hers, and then you know (when ſuch a doubt ſtandeth
in the way) ſhe ſhould ſéeme very vnwiſe, in committing
hee caſe to ſo great hazard: wherefore I pray you, let this
perſwaſion (which I imagine to be the cauſe of your deniall)
ſo quietly content you, as no further choller remaine vpon your
ſtomacke.
                     Theſe words which the knight vſed, were of ſuch force in
the eares of the Princeſſe Arnalte, as ſhe contented her ſelfe
with the anſwer the Damoſell brought her: and becauſe ſhe
would not preſently depart thence, without ſeeing ſome further
occaſions, ſhe commanded the knight to go to the place where
the Shields hanged, and from thence to bring her the Shield,
wherein the Princeſſe Miragarda was pictured, becauſe ſhée
would carry it away with her.
                     The knight eſteemed this commandement very highly, in
that the Princeſſe would imploy him in any cauſe of ſeruice,
wherfore, without fu
                           •
                        der delay he went on land accompanyed
with the damoſell that carried the meſſage to the Princeſſe, to
whom when ſhe had made knowne his intent, ſhe preſently
went to the two Princes, Florendos and Floraman, whom
ſhe ſummoned with theſe words.
                     Gentlemen, the knight which you ſée, is come in the company
of my Lady and Miſtreſſe, deſireth you to ſend him the
Princeſſe Miragardaes Sheeld, for that his Lady would vſe it
in thoſe occaſions, which in her iudgement ſhe eſtéemeth to be
well thought on: and if you ſhould ſéeme ſo bold as to denie his
demand, and carry ſuch an opinion of your ſelues, as he may
not ſpéed of his purpoſe by faire meanes, know you then,

that he ſhall be conſtrained to fetch it away againſt your wils,
yea, in deſpight of any thing you dare doe to the contrary, which
truſt me he would be loth to doe, ſuch and ſo great is his gentle
nature, as he would not willingly offer iniury to any knight of
this Countrey: vpon theſe wordes the Prince Florendos thus
anſwered.
                     Gentle Damoſell, the Knight (as it ſéemeth to me) is ignorant
of the daungers which this Shielde doeth promiſe to
him, who cannot content himſelfe to feede his eyes, with the
beholding and contemplating a thing of ſo rare beautie and
excellency, but hee muſt needes enter into ſo proude an imagination,
as for his owne pleaſure or his Ladies, he muſt carry
the Shield away with him, and that there belongeth no more
to the matter but ſo: truſt me (faire Damoſell) the Lord hath
néede of him, and he himſelfe hath no néede of the Shield, if
he haue, hee may chance goe without it at this time, vnleſſe
he bring a larger Commiſſion, or get my good will to deliuer
it him, and commonly I am not accuſtomed to ſend a Shield
by a woman, becauſe it is a thing ſhe knoweth not how to vſe,
therefore, ſhe will haue it, bid him be ſo good as to fetch it himſelfe.
                     And becauſe you ſhall carry a ſound meſſage vnto him,
I pray you doe mee ſo much fauour as to let him vnderſtand,
that I will at this time, take the matter ſo hardily vpon
mee, as to defende the Shielde againſt the vttermoſt hee
can doe, when, if his Fortune ſerue him ſo well, as to conquere
me, the Shield ſhall without further trouble, be deliue
                        
                           •
                        ed
him: and if he prooue ſo happie, as to carry away the Shield
by his Proweſſe, I ſhall eſteeme my ſelfe the moſt fortunate
man aliue, for that when I looſe it, I ſhall looſe my
life, and then will my wonderfull vnfortunate race haue a final
ende.
                     Neuertheleſſe, you muſt let him vnderſtand, that ſéeing he
doth eſtéeme ſo well of his Lady, as (for her ſake) he will intrude
himſelf into deſperate aduentures, it is neceſſary he bring ſome
witneſſe or teſtimonie of her gratious fauour, which may bee

placed at the féete of this faire portraite, leaſt perchance for
want thereof, when the victorie ſhould chance to him, Fortune
doe turne her backe, and ſo his expectation may be vtterly deceiued:
now you knowe my minde, you may depart and tell
him.
                     The Damoſell returned to the place where the Knight attended,
to whom when ſhe had told the anſwere of the Prince,
Florendos, he tooke his leaue of his Lady, and accompanied
with two Eſquires, came brauely marching toward the prince,
to whom when he drew ſomewhat neare, he began very proudly
to vtter theſe ſpéeches.
                     I ſée well Sir Knight, that good counſell is not to be vſed
towards them, who are of ſo ſmall diſcretion, as they cannot
take it when it is offered: it is méete therefore, that they be
taught by diſcipline the principles of their duty, when friendly
perſwaſion is yrkeſome to their cares. I willed you by a
friendly meſſage, that you ſhould ſend me the Shield wherein
is the Image of Miragarda, becauſe I would be loth by conſtraint
to come and fetch it from you: but I perceiue you had
rather l
                           •
                        ſe it to your great detrimeut and ſhame, then to giue
it me friendly, whereby you might haue gained commendation.
And for my Ladies fauour which you demand, wherewith
you would honour the feete of this picture, I promiſe you
here vpon my Knighthood, that if it be my ill hap to be conquered,
you ſhall then be made acquainted with the pledge of my
Ladies fauour: therefore doe your vttermoſt endeuour to bring
me vnder your ſubiection, for you ſhall ſee that I will giue
you ſuch a lecture, which I feare me you will very hardly conſtrue.
                     Truſt me Syr (quoth Florendos) your language is very
braue a
                           •
                        d bountifull, repleniſhed with large circumſtance of
wo
                           •
                        ds, if your manhood prooue anſwerable thereto in déedes:
whereof I knowe not how a man might be better reſolued,
then to draw his ſword (as I doe now) and commit the cauſe
to preſent triall. Herevpon theſe two Knights prepared themſelues
to the Combate, but as they were offering the one towards
the other, they heard the Caſement of a winde we in

the Caſtle ſuddenly to open: which cauſed the Prince Florendos
to looke vp, when he eſpied the princeſſe Miragarda, whom
he had not ſéene before ſince his comming to the Caſtle, by reaſon
whereof, he remained ſo inwardly rauiſhed in delight, with
gazing on this delicate ſpectacle, as the Combate was quite and
cleane out of his minde, which the ſtrange Knight perceiuing,
he tooke him by the arme, and thus awaked him.
                     Sir knight, he that preſumeth to enter Combate with me,
ought not to be ſo forgetfull of himſelfe, as it ſéemes you are:
therefore either prouide to defend me, or I promiſe you I will
goe away with your Ladies Shield. The Prince Florendos
ſéeing that the ſtrange knight had him by the arme, he remembred
himſelfe preſently what he had to doe: whervpon he withdrew
his eyes from the place where they were ſo greatly affectioned,
and hauing his heart aboundantly charged with griefe,
he began thus to frame his anſwere. It doeth greatly diſpleaſe
mee ſir, to enter the Combat with you, for that you take mee
in ſuch a time, which I eſtéeme more, then the conquering you
can returne m
                           ••
                         
                        
                           •••
                        uantage.
                     Sir, (anſwered the ſtrange knight) to the end you may perceiue,
what ſmall ſuccour your preſent imaginations doth promiſe
you, defend your ſelfe ſo well as you can, and ere 
                           〈◊〉
                         you
ſhall be perſwaded of your owne folly.
                     With theſe words, he ſtrooke Florendos ſuch a terri
                           •••
                         blow
on the Creſt of his Helmet, as the waightines thereof, conſtrained
him to bow down his head, but he was not ſlacke in the requitall
thereof, which was ſo worthily handled, as the knights
ſhield was broken in two pieces: whereat the knight was offended
without meaſure, for when he beheld the Image of his
Miſtreſſe ſo cruelly martired, he 
                           〈◊〉
                         ſo extreamely to rage
with himſelfe, that he fought like 
                           〈◊〉
                         that was voyde of all reaſon
or iudgement, which when the Prince perceiued, he neuer
left following his knightly intent, til he had brought the knight
almoſt out of breath, yet did hee not ouercharge himſelfe with
any extreame labour, but euen at his owne will and pleaſure
ſo continued the fight, that he was as freſh at the ending as at

the beginning, and ſo worthily did behaue himſelfe, that the
knight (who had more deſire to reſt himſelf, becauſe he was out
of breath, then to endurr ſo hot a combat) was brought into ſuch
feeble eſtate, that he was conſtrained to fall to the Earth, verie
greatly trauelled, and ſore wounded. The Princeſſe Arnalte
(whoſe inconſtancy you haue ſufficiently heard heretofore) was
ſo ſore diſpleaſed when ſhee ſaw her Knight conquered, as ſhee
commaunded her ſeruaunts preſently to rowe away, forſaking
her Knight, and making no more account or eſtimation of him,
then as if ſhe had neuer knowne or ſeene him before.
                     The Prince Florendos, hauing thus brought his enemy vnder
his obeyſance, opened his Helmet to ſée if hee knewe him,
then the Knight did humbly yéelde himſelfe, deſiring (when hee
had taken what ſharpe reuengement on him hee pleaſed) ſo to
deale with him (if his minde were bent to ſuch rigour) as at his
hands hee might take his lateſt breathing, for that hee hadde ſo
fondly thruſt himſelfe into the place, where he had committed ſo
great diſhonour: the Prince returned this anſwer. (It ſuffiſeth
me Sir Knight) that I haue conqueſt of thée, 
                           〈…〉
                         I will
that thou goe and preſent thy ſelfe to the Princeſſe Miragarda,
and to ſuffer the Iudgement that it ſhall pleaſe her to aſſigne

                           •
                        hée, ſpea
                           ••
                         to the Giant Almaroll, and hee will cauſe thée to
know the Princeſſe minde.
                     The Giant (by the intreatie of the Knight) went to knowe
the pleaſure of the Princeſſe, who returned with this anſwere,
that the Princeſſe ſent commandment vnto Florendos, to take
the Oath of the vanquiſhed Knight, that hee ſhould neuer ſerue
any other Lady then the Princeſſe Arnalte, and that hee ſhould
beare the Deuiſe in his ſhield after an other m
                           ••
                        ner, in reſpect
ſhe did thinke it farre vnr
                           ••••
                        able, that Loue ſhould be helde
captiue vnder the power 
                           〈◊〉
                         Vaſſall: wherefore hee ſhould
cauſe Cupid to be painted in his Shield, holding a Knight bathed
in blood downe to his féefe.
                     Albeit this iudgement of the Princeſſe Miragarda was ſomwhat
ſharp and rigorous, yet the Knight would not gainſay her
determination: ſo cauſing ſome regard to be vſed in his wounds

on the next day he departed thence very ſadde and ſorrowfull, to
thinke in what diſpleaſure the Princeſſe Arnalte ſo ſuddainly,
went away.
                     The Prince Florendos remained a while at the Curing of
wounds, and in the meane time the Prince Floraman maintained
the cuſtome, accompliſhing many hauty and noble déedes
only to mooue the affection of the Princeſſe Miragarda, in more
amiable and gentle maner to the good and hardy knight Florendos:
but ſhe (for all this) would vſe no eſtimation of the great
paines which the Prince did daylie ſuffer for her ſake.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. X.
                     ¶Here ſhalbe declared, what, and who the Knight was, that
came in the company of the Princeſſe Arnalte, & for what
cauſe hee and ſhe trauelled to the Caſtle of Almarol, and of
the great entertainment which was made in the Court of
the Emperor Palmerin, at the arriuall of Leonarda, the Princeſſe
of Thrace.
                     
                        HEre it ſhall not be much amiſſe to let you
vnderſtād, who the Knight was, that came
in the company of Arnalte the Princeſſe of
Nauarre, for that (if occaſion ſo ſerue) you
may haue the better knowledge of him
hereafter.
                     It is reported before in the firſt part of this
Hyſtorie, that Darpos the Duke of Normandie,
the ſonne of Friſoll, king of Hungaria, had to iſſue two
ſonnes, whereof one was named Friſoll after his Grandfather,
of whom mention is made many times in the Hiſtorie, and the
other was called Dragolant, who (for that it is long time ſince
he was reported a Knight at Armes) is now the farther out of
remembrance. This 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           
                         being a gallant young Gentleman,

and méetly endued with ſtrength to beare Armour, beſide,
the great fame of the noble exploytes of his Father and
Grandfather, did ſo imbolden him in couragious deſire, as he
loathed to ſpend his life in eaſe or ſlothfull idleneſſe, wheruppon
he left the place where he had bene nouriſhed and brought
vp, addicting his mind to the ſearch of Knightly aduentures,
forgetting the Court of the Emperour Palmerin, where firſt
the renowne of his déeds, might haue giuen the greater grace
to his perſon.
                     In this his hautie deſire, accompanied with one Eſquire
to beare his Sheild and helmet, he tooke his voyage towards
the Realme of Spaine, being very earneſt in affection to 
                           〈◊〉
                        
the Caſtle of the Giant Almaroll, that he might approou
                           •••
                        
valour againſt the Knight that kept the Princeſſe Miragardaes
Shield, but as he iournied thitherward, he was conſtrained
to paſſe through the Realme of Nauarre, where by chaunce
he happened to the paſſage, which was guarded by the Princeſſe
Arnaltaes knight, whereof two were vanquiſhed by his
noble valour.
                     Princeſſe Arnalte well noting his worthy behauiour, as
alſo that he was a braue and luſtie young Gallant, ſhe vſed ſuch
friendly perſwaſion to him, that he went with her into the Caſtle,
where ſhe entertained him with ſuch honour, as ſhe was
accuſtomed to vſe towards them, who reſembled Dragonalt in
bounty and proweſſe.
                     This young Prince beholding Arnalte intiched with ſo great
beauty, and vnderſtanding that her dowry was to be Quéene
of Nauarre, began to waxe maruailous amorous of her, being
farre inueigled with her loue, as he iudged in his owne opinion
that in her conſiſted the detriment of his his life, and dignity of
his honour.
                     At length it ſo fel out, that the Lady and Miſtreſſe of his dutifull
thoughts, was maruailous deſirous to go ſée the faire
Princeſſe Miragarda, which being a meane for him to vtter his
earneſt affection, he made a reuerent offer to beare her company
in her iourney, for that he well knew, the more he did entertaine
himſelfe into her company, he might in the more familiar

manner procéed in his loue. The Princeſſe Arnalte was
not curious in accepting his gentleneſſe, in that his preſence did
rather adde an eſtimation of honour of her, then impeach her of
any vndecent cauſe, wherefore all things being in a readineſſe,
with as much conuenient ſpéede as might be, ſhe ſet forward
towards the Caſtle of Almaroll, accompanied with the Ladies
and Damoſels, and ſix Eſquiers, as you haue heard before, as
alſo with this noble and aduenturous prince Dargonalte, who
to witneſſe the intire loue he bare to the princeſſe, many times
by the way aſſayed very knightly occaſions, wherein Fortune
did ſtill affoord him the victory.
                     The Princeſſe receiued no ſmall pleaſure at his happy chances,
in that ſhée eſtéemed ſo well thereof, as ſhe thought him
worthy to poſſeſſe her loue, which Dragonalt aduiſedly pondering,
frequented the Princeſſe with very amiable conditions,
ſo that in ſhort time they came to a Citie, ſtanding on the
bankes of the Riuer Theſin, which made two leagues from
the Caſtle of the Giant Almaroll, where they ſtayed till they
had prouided two Boates to paſſe along the Riuer, wherein
they came to the Caſtle of Almaroll, and Dragonalte had the
entertainement as you haue heard before, by the noble and valiant
Prince Florendos, whoſe valour did mooue ſuch a hatred
in the Prince Arnalte, towards her affectionate & loyall friend
Dragonalt, that ſhe angerly departed from the Caſtle of Almaroll,
towards her owne place of abode in Nauarre, entending
neuer to ſée him againe.
                     But it is not to be doubted, but that this ſuddaine choller
would take as ſuddaine a cooling in that, as ſhe could be eaſily
intreated to anger, againſt them who had but little offended
her, euen ſo could ſhe be as eaſily woon, to forget her deſire of
wreakefull vengeance, her vnſtayedneſſe was ſuch, and her
good will to loue ſo great. In this manner it chaunced Dragonalt,
who continuing his affection to the Princeſſe Arnalte,
in the ende was ſo fortunate, as he obtaind her good will in mariage,
ſhe making him Lord of her ſelfe, and King of Nauar
                              •
                           e:
wherefore we ought not to deſpaire of that, which is in the
hand of Fortune to giue vs, as you may perceiue in the courſe

of this Hiſtory, which here leaueth Dragonalt & his Quéene togither,
returning to Leonarda the princeſſe of Thrace, who being
ready to depart the Realm of Thrace, for the deſire ſhe had
to be in the Court of the Emperour Palmerin, the Quéene Carmelia
her Grandmother, ſent her away worthily accompanied
with Ladies and Gentlewomen, for the better gouernement
of her in her iourney: beſide ſhe gaue charge to the Lords
and Gentlemen that went with her, in no caſe they ſhould
depart from her, vntill they had preſented her to the Emperour.
                     In this order ſhe ſet forward towards Conſtantinople, being
met diuerſe times on the way by many braue Gallants,
who vnderſtanding her ſetting forth, did honour her with their
dutifull attendance, vntill ſhee came to the Emperours
Court, where was aſſembled togither ſo many braue Knights,
ſo richly Armed, and carrying ſuch fine deuiſes, as one would
haue iudged, that they did rather prepare to incampe themſelues
for warre, then to ſhew knightly diſports to delight the Emperor.
Many came thither to behold the brauery others to doe the
princeſſe Leonarda ſeruice, and ſome beſide, who had good hope
to winne her in marriage, ech one did ſtriue who ſhould behaue
himſelfe moſt gallant, and who might witneſſe the greateſt title
of knighthood, as wel to pleaſe the eye of the yong Princeſſe,
as to deſerue the eſtimation of the whole Court, their honourable
eſtates ſeruing them very well ſo to doe.
                     The prince Gracian, Berolde, the Sage Aliart, Platir, and diuerſe
other knights of the Emperors Court, going in the company
of the aged Emperor himſelfe, went to meet the Princeſſe
two leagues from the Citie, who being aduertiſed of their comming
(by reaſon that the Prince Primaleon with other Princes,
rid ſomewhat before the reſt) did preſently leaue her Coach,
and mounted on a goodly white Palfray, whoſe harneſſe was
very rich and coſtly to beholde: the Princeſſe her ſelfe, was
brauely attired after the Greekiſh faſhion, that ſhe might the
better delight the eyes of them which did behold her, her Robe
was of Carnation Veluet, very fairely imbrodered with paſement
Lace of Gold, her Clocke was of Scarlet, cloſed before

with ſumptuous Diamonds, which were placed very thicke in
maner of buttons, and all the compaſſe of the Cloke was likewiſe
garniſhed with Diamonds, hauing betweene euery Diamond,
a ranke of very glorious Orient Pearle, which ſhined
in the Sunne ſo gallantly, as they did maruailouſly decke and
ſet forth here coſtly Veſture, and beſide, the glimpſe of them ſo
ſweetly dazeled in her face, as the youthfull Knights, whoſe
thoughts were frée before from the aſſaults of loue, were now
ſuddenly entrapped with her ſingular beautie.
                     The Emperor, albeit he was farre in yeeres, yet he did attire
himſelfe very youthfully, to giue the greater grace to the yong
Princes that bare him company, ſo comming to the Princeſſe
Leonarda, he entertained her with very ſtately and accuſtomed
honour, afterward he gaue place to the Prince Primaleon
his Sonne, who kiſſed her hand in very gentle manner, and ſo
did all the other Princes that came with the Emperonr, whoſe
preſence witneſſing ſo great eſtate, did much content the mind
of the young Princeſſe, who was no ſmall deale abaſhed at the
great honour, which the Emperor did ſo nobly affoord her, as to
grant her licence to remaine in his Court, in remembrance of
which courteſie, ſhe would haue ſtouped downe to kiſſe y• Emperors
hand, but her remembring how his court was gratiouſly
honored by her preſence, would not ſuffer her to humble her ſelfe
ſo much, giuing her to vnderſtand in very friendly ſpéech, that
in her comming to abide in his court, he did accept it as a thing
of no ſmall contentation to him. Then ſetting forward on their
way, that they might the ſooner enter the Cittie, the Emperour
on a ſudden eſpied an occaſion, which withdrew his mind from
thinking on the beautie of the Princeſſe Leonarda, for he ſaw
a prettie ſpace from the cittie of Conſtantinople, vnder an 
                           •
                        ake
ſtanding neere to the Hermitage of S. Lois, which was a little
out of the common way, a knight armed in Carnation coloured
Armour, ſo thicke beſet with little 
                           〈…〉
                         of Gold, as the
whole Armour was gallantly ſet forth 
                           •
                        erewith, his Helmit
likewiſe was after the ſame maner, and in his Shéeld he bare
for his deuice in a field of Azure, a Cipreſſe trée, very thicke
hung with Nuts of Gold.
                     
                        
This Knight was mounted on a luſtie bay Courſer, hauing
attending on him two Eſquiers, one of them carying a Shield
couered ouer with cloath, ſo that the deuice thereof could not be
diſcerned, the Knight hauing eſpied the Emperour, ſent preſently
one of his Eſquiers vnto him, who being come before the
Emperour, rained his Palfrey, and began to ſalute him in this
order.
                     My gratious Lord, the Knight whom you behold vnder
yonder Oake, is ſuppriſed with a maruellous earneſt deſire, to
trie againſt theſe Knightes of your Court, the renowned valour,
which hath beene ſo much reported of them through the
whole world, and he willed me to certifie you, that it is a long
time ſince he bare Armour, or followed any Knightly aduenture,
therefore he would now gladly make proofe of the good opinion
he holdeth of himſelfe, and becauſe he might the better
ſpéede in his purpoſe, and not be denied in his honeſt requeſt,
he is determined this day to guard this paſſage, not doubting
but he ſhall defend himſelfe ſufficiently, againſt any that dare
iudge ſo great hardineſſe in themſelues, as to paſſe by without
aſking him licence. Wherefore he humbly deſireth your Maieſtie,
that you would command your Knights to Iouſt with
him, for he hath promiſed to refuſe none of them, except the
Prince Primaleon your Sonne, againſt whom he will neuer
conſent to beare Armes.
                     The Emperour was ſo ioyfull at theſe tydings as might be,
and the rather he would conſent to the knights requeſt, for that
it was a meane, whereby the Princeſſe Leonarda might receiue
ſome pleaſure: conſidered alſo, that it did very well like
him, becauſe ſhe ſhould perceiue the noble valour and proweſſe
of the Knights that remained with him in his Court, and hauing
opinion, that the Knight which had enterpriſed to guard
the paſſage, was one well ſeene in hautie exerciſes, he returned
the Eſquier this anſwere.
                     My friend, ſay vnto the Knight thy Maiſter from me, that I
freely giue him leaue to proceede in his honeſt requeſt, and I am
partly ſorte, that my aged yéeres will not ſuffer me to be one in
the number of thoſe, who (I am ſure) will hazard their honour,

to get libertie of thy Maiſter for the Princeſſe Leonardaes paſſage,
and in her company I promiſe thée will I abide, till either
they haue woonne it valiantly, or loſt it vnfortunately.
Then came he againe to the Princeſſe Leonarda (the Eſquire
being departed with this anſwer to his Maiſter) and to her he
began with theſe ſpéeches.
                     Madame, do you thinke it reaſonable, that any one ſhould
denie me the way within mine owne dominions and eſpecially
at ſuch time as I am in your company? Certainely, the
Knight that hath enterpriſed thus to hinder vs, ought to be
one of no ſmall courage: except he doth imbolden himſelfe by
meanes of your beauty, and hoping to moue you towards him

                           〈…〉
                        , doth offer his perſon to endure a doubtfull

                           〈◊〉
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           •••
                        antly had the Emperour concluded his intent, when
Reccamon, who in his Court was eſtéemed for a good and hardy
Knight, gaue the ſpurres to his Courſer againſt the ſtrange
Knight: but his fortune was ſo farre contrary, as he was preſently
diſmounted from his horſe, hauing nothing at all moued
the knight that kept the paſſage: whereupon Friſoll coutched
his Lance againſt the ſtrange Knight, who cauſed him to
bea
                           •
                         
                        Reccamon company. Then galloped he his horſe to fetch

                           〈◊〉
                         Lance, for that he had broken his other vppon Friſoll,
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        Grecian being ſomewhat offended, aduanced himſelfe
againſt the Knight, who méeting him in the middeſt of the
way, gaue him ſuch a forcible ſtroke, as he was conſtrained to
fall to the earth: by means wherof Berolde put foorth himſelfe,
whom the Knight cauſed to ſpéede as Gracian had done.
The Emperour hereat was greatly abaſhed, beholding the
ſhame which his Knight receiued, whereupon Dramian went
to trie his fortune, which in ſooth was to aduerſe to him, as his
horſe & he fell downe both together, which he perceiuing, ſaid,
that his enemie ought not refuſe to iouſt with him once more:
the ſtrange knight hearing his words, gaue a ſigne to Dramian
that he ſhould giue ouer and run no more, but he would
not be warned by his friendly motion, when putting himſelfe
vpon the ſecond triall, he was againe throwne to the earth, verie

ſore and dangerouſly wounded. This moued the Emperour
to be much agreeued, doubting leſt the iſſue of this enterpriſe,
would returne to the diſhonour o
                           •
                         the Knights of his
Court, then Don Roſuell, ſéeking to reuenge the iniurie his
companions had receiued, gaue himſelfe forth brauely to méete
the ſtrange Knight, but his entertainment was ſuch, as his
fellowes had receiueed before him. When the hardy Prince
Platir ſaw the ill hap of the Princes, he ranne couragiouſly againſt
the ſtrange Knight, and after they had broken their
Lances, they met together verie forcibly with their bodies,
and their horſes fought together likewiſe ſo cruelly, as in the
ende, Platir and his horſe was compelled to fall downe to the
ground, but the ſtrange Knight ſate ſtill very gallan
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
was not any thing hurt by the rough encounter.
                     The Emperour was ouercome with extreame griefe, 
                           〈◊〉
                        
his knights beaten downe ſo faſt by the valour of one Knight,
ſo that he knew not well what to ſay, and the Prince Primaleon
was as greatly moued as the Emperour his Father, becauſe
he ſuſpected that the knight vnknowne, was the noble
and valiant prince Palmerin of England, whoſe proweſſe was
worthely eſtéemed in all Princes Courts in Chriſtendome:
but he neuer remembred or iudged this ſtrange Knight to
be the redoubted prince Florian of the For
                              •
                           eſt, becauſe 
                           〈◊〉
                        
were giuen abroade, that he remained in the king of 
                           〈◊〉
                        
Court.
                     In briefe, the famous behauiour of this vnknowne knight
made them ſtand in their dumps, ſo that they kn
                           •
                        w not well
what to thinke, neuertheleſſe the Knights continued on the
Iouſt, to wit, Eſtrellant, Bellizart, & Francian, who were one
after another placed among the vanquiſhed, ſo there remained
no more knights to Iouſt: but on a ſudden, euen as Francian
was caſt foorth of his ſaddle, Pompides and Blandidon happened
to arriue there, which the Emperour ſeeing, and knowing
them to be ſuch as merited his fauour, he afforded them
a gratious welcome, deſiring them, that they would do their
endeuour to make frée the paſſage, to the end that the Princeſſe
Leonarda might enter into Conſtantinople.
                     
                     
                        
We are contented (mightie Emperour) anſwered Pompides,
to make a proofe of our good fortune before you, as well to
witneſſe the regard we haue of your excellency, as to trie if we
may attaine to purchaſe that, which ſo many good knightes,
haue ſailed in. No ſooner had Pompides thus vttred his minde,
but he gaue the ſpurs to his horſe againſt the ſtrange Knight,
who in ſooth compelled both him and Blandidon, to ſpeed as the
other knights had done before.
                     Then when he ſaw, that all the Knights of the Emperours
Court were vanquiſhed, he liſted vp his Helmet, and came
vnto the Emperour, before whom he fell on his knées to kiſſe
his Maieſties hand: but when the Emperour perceiued, that
the knight who had ſo hardly kept the paſſage, was his Nephew
the Prince Florian of the Forreſt, he was then as ioyfull
of his happy victory, as before hée was agrieued to ſée his
knights ſo vanquiſhed: yea, themſelues did thinke it no diſhonor
to them, to be ouercome by the noble Prince Florian, who
hauing kiſſed the hands of the Emperour and Primaleon, offered
to doe the like to the Princeſſe Leonarda, but ſhée ſéeing a
Prince of ſuch young yeares, to be accompanied with ſuch ſingular
proweſſe, could not ſo much account the
                           •
                        eof, as in her
eye ſhe did imagine it worthy her great good will, which ſuddainly
(at this inſtant) ſhe gaue in ſecrete to the hardy Prince
Florian, for that his vertuous deſeruings (in her conceit) did
well beſéeme her fauourable acceptation. And for the Prince
Florian, whereas (vntill this preſent) his heart could neuer
faithfully make any certaine eſtimation of loue, but euen for
the preſent humour (as you haue heard before) now, the ſingular
courteſie of the Princeſſe Leonarda, as alſo the ſufficency
of her equiualent beautie, cauſed ſuch a hot ſkirmiſh betweene
loue and liberty, as he muſt needes yéeld himſelfe ſubiect to affection,
being conquered and brought vnder by his extreame
charges, ſo that nothing agréed ſo well with his labouring
thoughtes, as when he ſuppoſed the Princeſſe to commaund
him ſeruice, and he (in good will) applied his dutifull attendance.
                     The Emperour Palmerin, ſéeing ſuch libertie of the paſſage

graunted by him who had now more minde to gaze on the faire
Princeſſe, then to remember the happines of his obtained victory
came in this maner to the Princeſſe of Thrace. Madame,
the knight, who all this while imployed himſelfe to hinder our
paſſage, is now not onely contented to grant vs libertie, but alſo
will friendly beare vs company: wherefore I am perſwaded,
that we ſhall not againe be hindred in our iourney, by any
knight that dare attempt as much as he hath done, for hauing
my noble Nephew Florian in our company, I imagine it a very
hard aduenture, which ſhould in his preſence ſéeme to impeach
vs.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XI.
                     How the Emperour with his noble company, entered the
Citie of Conſtantinople, and of the gratious entertainement,
which was made to Leonarda Princeſſe of Thrace,
at her arriuall there.
                     
                        AFter the Iouſts were ended, which the noble
and valiant Prince Florian had enterpriſed
in guarding the paſſage, the Emperour
deſirous to make knowne to the princeſſe
Leonarda, the magnificent entertainment
he could affoord her in his Court, ſet
forwards on his way towards Conſtantinople,
the Princes, Primaleon and Florian of the Forreſt, leading
the way very brauely, as hardy Champions to reſiſt any
dangerous aduenture, that ſhould forbid them the entrance into
the Citie.
                     When they were come into the Citie, they were receiued
by the people maruellous triumphantly, who had prepared
Scaffoldes, and Theaters, 
                           〈◊〉
                         was preſented many

ſtrange Hiſtories and rare inuentions, for the entertainment
of the young Princeſſe of Thrace, as alſo to delight the aged
Emperour, which albeit he was indifferently contented withall,
yet there remained an eſpeciall cauſe of griefe on his ſtomacke,
to wit, the impriſonment of the King Polendos, and
the noble Princes in his company. Belcar, and diuerſe other
approoued Knightes at Armes, rid on haſtily before the Pallace,
to aduertiſe the Empreſſe, and the Princeſſes, Gridonia,
and Polinarda, of the comming of Leonarda the Princeſſe of
Thrace, who came on feete a prettie way from the Pallace,
where they met the Princeſſe, whom they failed not to entertaine
with very gratious courteſie, whereat the Princeſſe
receiued great contentation, thinking that they which receiued
her with ſuch great eſtimation at her firſt arriuall,
would continue her in fauourable iudgement while ſhe ſtayed
there.
                     After that the Empreſſe and Gridonia, had ended their l
                           •
                        
                        uing
ſalutations, the Princeſſe Polinarda, did next aduance
her ſelfe, ſhewing very Princely and amiable geſtures of courteſie
towards the Princeſſe Leonarda, whoſe beauty ſhe iudged
worthy of great commentation: for I aſſure you, that
whoſoeuer did indifferently beholde theſe two Ladies together,
could hardly iudge which of them ſurmounted the other in
beautie.
                     The Princeſſe Polinarda, aduiſedly marking the diuine face
of the faire Leonarda, beganne to growe in great opinion of fauour
towards the prince Palmerin, commending maruellouſſy his ſta
                           •
                        neſſe and iuſtneſſe in fidelitie, in that he would not forget

                           〈◊〉
                         loyalty to her, hauing offered him ſuch an eſpeciall treaſure
as was the Princeſſe Leonerda, and for whom he had ſufe
                           •
                        ed
ſo great paine and trauaile, yet could not be perſwaded to
accept her in choyce.
                     Theſe two faire and beautifull Ladies, holding one another
familiarly by the hand, followed the Empreſſe into her Chamber,
where her ſelfe, Gridonia, and all the other Ladies, ſate
downe to contemplate the ſwéet and delicate faces of theſe two
Princeſſes. Florian was no ſooner entred into the Chamber,

but hee humbled himſelfe to kiſſe the Gmpreſſe hand, who embraced
him very louingly a great many times, for that ſhee had
bene alwayes more affectionate to his Mother, the Princeſſe
Flerida, then to all the reſt of her Children, in reſpect of whom,
ſhee receyued maruellous contentment, to behold her Sonne
the Prince Florian, of the Forreſt, who (hauing done his dutia
to the Empreſſe (came and ſaluted the Princeſſe Gridonia,
offering the ſame manner of honour, as before he had done vnto
the Empreſſe, but ſhe would not ſuffer him to regard her ſo
much: wherefore ſhe caſt her armes about his neck, giuing him
ſuch worthy entertainement, as ſo Noble a Prince deſerued to
haue. From her he went to the place where the Princeſſe Polinarda
ſate, before whom he knéeled vpon one of his knées offering
her the ſame maner of courteſie, as he had before vſed to the
Empreſſe and the Princeſſe Gridonia, but ſhée very maidenly
and modeſtly did interrupt him, and taking him by the hand, began
thus to parley with him.
                     I ſée now (Syr Florian) that at this preſent you come to
make ſatiſfaction, for the offence which you haue this day giuen
to the Princeſſe Leonarda, by hindering her of the libertie of
the way, wherefore I my ſelfe would adiudge you firſt to be
puniſhed, for offering ſuch diſcourteſie, if I did not perſwade
my ſelfe, that you are able to make her recompence diuerſe
wayes, by your Knightly ſeruice, for the vnſufferable faulte
which you haue this day committed: To which wordes, the
Prince thus replyed.
                     I would that Fortune would make ſo good account of mee,
as that the Princeſſe of Thrace would abaſe her ſelfe ſo much,
to take in good parte my ſimple ſeruice, if I might attaine to
ſo great happineſſe, that any déede in me, might deſerue the good
lyking of ſuch a gratious Princeſſe, I ſhould thinke my ſelfe
the moſt Fortunate vnder Heauen, and that no hazard could be
ſo daungerous, as I ſhould not for her ſake eaſily ouercome.
Wherefore (fayre Madame,) I heartily deſire you, that you
ſhould perſwade the Princeſſe Leonarda, to accept me as her
Knightly ſeruaunt, which honour if ſhe doo affoord me, the eſtimation
I ſhould account of my ſelfe would be ſuch, as (my heart

being encouraged by ſuch a laudable cauſe) I ſhould worthily finiſh
my aduenture, which might like her to imploy mée in: the
Princeſſe Polinarda, returned him this anſwer.
                     Woorthy Syr, the Princeſſe Leonarda ſhall purchaſe to her
ſelfe ſo great honour (by your Noble Knightly behauiour, in entertaining
you for her vowed Seruant and Champyon, and I
perſwade my ſelfe, that long circumſtance néede not to be vſed,
ſhee will ſo gladly accept your honeſt offer: Wherefore if you
doubt that ſhee will not ſo much ab
                           ••
                        e her ſelfe, 
                           〈◊〉
                         receyue
your friendly motion, I dare take the hazard here vpon my ſelfe,
ſo that I imagine, ſhe will not cauſe me to be deceyued. Therefore
in ſigne of your permanent loyaltie, which ſhall bee to her,
and none elſe but her, thinke not ſcorne to goe kiſſe her Princely
hands, which ſhall bee as the ſeale of a perpetuall bond, that
you ſhall beſtow your Knightly ſeruice on her, and ſhe likewiſe
ſhall admit you her continuall fauour.
                     The Princeſſe Leonarda ſwéetly bluſhing, to beare Polinarda,
ſo pleaſaunt in diſcourſe, turned to her with this affable
aunſwere. Madame, you cannot wiſh or commaund mee
the thing, that I would be ſo forgetfull of my ſelfe, as to make
refuſall thereof, and I eſtéeme my 
                           〈…〉
                         honoured, to
receyue the Prince Florian, for my 
                           〈…〉
                         Champyon, in
that I vnderſtand, he is brother to the 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        Palmerin of England,
towards whome I am ſo highly bound and indebted, as
comparing my regard of him, with the good opinion I conceiue,
(knowing Florian to be your beloued Kinſman) I will not report
the ſumme of my thought, but deſire I may be able to requite
your kindeneſſe.
                     
                        Polynarda contented herſelfe very well, with the gentle
aunſwere of the fayre Princeſſe Leonarda, as well to be reſolued
of the ſpeciall entertainment, which ſhee gaue to her Noble
Couzin Florian, as alſo to remooue the ſuſpition ſhee had of
her ſingular Beautie, fearing leaſt her moſt fauoured Friende
the Prince Palmerin of England, ſhould fall into any lyking
to matche with her, becauſe ſhe reſerued him altogether for her
ſéemely ſelfe.
                     The Prince Florian was not a little prowd of his good fortune,

and the Emperor would haue called him to him, but that
he ſaw how familiar the two princeſſes were in talk with him,
whervpon he determined (if good hap would ſo permit) to make
a marriage betwéene him and the Princeſſe of Thrace, whom
he gaue as bed fellow to his Née
                           •
                        e Polinarda, aſſuring you, that
theſe two vertuous Ladies liued and loued ſo intirely together,
as the one could neuer be without the others company, and
what occaſions of ſecrete ſorrow ſo euer hapned, the one would
not 
                           〈…〉
                         of the other, in reuealing their cloſe conceits,
for they 
                           〈◊〉
                         of this minde, that it could not be called firme and
faithful friendſhip, when all kind of ſuch cauſes ſhould not paſſe
common betweene them.
                     At length the Emperor (accompanied with the Prince Florian)
withdrew himſelfe into his Chamber, where he quiſtioned
with him about the proſperous eſtates, of the King of England
his Grandfather, and his father the Prince Don Edward,
not forgetting his deare daughter, the faire Princeſſe Flerida,
whom he deſired (if it might be poſſible) to ſée before he dyed:
and after he had communed with him about many matters, hee
cauſed the Prince to be brought into his Chamber, where the
good Knight could not 
                           ••
                        ſſe the night ſo quietly as he was accuſtomed,
the 
                           〈…〉
                         princeſſe Leonarda was ſo earneſt
in his thoughts, as 
                           〈◊〉
                         and tumbled, but could not enioy
any wiſhed reſt.
                     On the next day in the morning, when the Emperour had
béene at the Chappell to heare diuine Seruice, the Table was
couered in the Princeſſe Fleridaes Chamber, where he dined
in the company of the Empreſſe, Gridonia, Polinarda, and the
faire Princeſſe of Thrace: but after that the Tables were
withdrawne, and they had 
                           ••
                        tten a prettie while talking together,
there entered a Damoſell attired all in blacke, with two
ſéemely Eſquiers attending on her, ſhe humbled herſelfe before
the Emperour, with kiſſing his hand, and did the like to
the Empreſſe, Gridonia and Polinarda, who very gently imbraced
the Damoſell, for that ſhe knewe her to be one of the
wayting Gentlewomen vpon the Princeſſe Targiana, at ſuch
time as ſhe was there abiding in the Emperours Court, and

before the Empreſſe ſhee ſtayed ſtill, when the Emperor hauing
knowledge of her, came and demanded other, as concerning
the welfare of her Lady and Miſtreſſe: to which wordes
ſhe anſwered in this manner. Dread Prince, and my moſt
gratious Lord, I deſire you that you will not receiue any diſpleaſure,
for that you ſée me rather inclined to the Empreſſe
then to your excellencie, becauſe the Princeſie Targiana commaunded
me to addreſſe my ſelfe vnto her highneſſe, as to one
whom ſhe vnfainedly regardeth: but for your grace deſireth to
vnderſtand, how the Princeſſe my good Lady 
                           •
                        a
                           •
                        eth, it is ſo,
that ſhe neuer came foorth of her Chamber, ſince the day that
the Prince Polendos your Sonne, and the other Princes and
Knights were committed to priſon, during all which time, ſhe
hath not ceaſſed moſt gratiouſly to wéepe and lament, inſomuch
as her faire beautie is maruellouſly altered and chaunged,
yet hath the Turke her Father laboured as much as may
be, to diſ
                           •
                        wade her from this mournefull kinde of life, but all in
vaine he waſteth his endeuor, for ſhe tooke her oath in his preſence,
that ſhe would neuer giue euer vexing her ſelfe with continuall
waiting, vntill your knights enioyed as frée libertie, as
they had when they came with her from Conſtantinople.
                     
                     The Turke her father fearing leſt her extreame griefe, would
be a cauſe of ſhortning her youthfull time, hath promiſed to reſtore
them for the libertie of the Prince Albayzar, whom they
of Babilon haue requeſt of him, that they may enioy him among
them againe: for this cauſe the great Turke hath ſent
hither an Ambaſſadour, who will be here either this day, or tomorrow
morning, when your Highneſſe ſhall vnderſtand the
ſumme of the matter.
                     And for that the Princeſſe Targiana feareth leaſt you
ſhould denie to graunt what he requireth, which may mooue
ſuch an inconuenience, as your Maieſtie would repent the
great honour you beſtowed on her in your Court, ſhe put me
faithfully in truſt, to bring theſe tydings vnto the Empreſſe,
in whoſe preſence I haue made you acquainted with that I
had in charge, becauſe it te
                           •
                        cheth you more then it doeth any other
perſon. Moreouer, ſhee carefully pondering euery car
                           •
                        e

with her ſelfe, and doubting leaſt the mallice which her father
beareth to the Princeſſe of your Court, will ſéeke a ſecrete reuenge
ſome way, as treaſon intended betwéene him and his
Ambaſſadour, towards your Highneſſe, to preuent the worſt
that may happen, ſhe deſireth you to returne her Father good
words, but not forgoe the Prince Albayzar (whom you know
her lawfull huſband) before firſt your Knights be foorth of her
fathers power, and that they haue attained ſuch a place of aſſurance,
as (al deuiſes notwithſtanding) no harme may come vnto
them, but if after their libertie, ſuch miſfortune happen them
(as ſhe would be very loath) your Maieſtie may (as you ſée
cauſe) finde your ſelfe agrieued with the offenders.
                     Faire Damoſell (anſwered the Emperour) I accept very
gratefully the good aduice of the Princeſſe Targiana, and I ſée
very well, that the honour ſhe receiued in my Court (albeit it
was but ſmall) is now double and double rewarded: and perſwade
your ſelfe, that I am determined to follow her counſell.
The Emperour concluding his minde, the Damoſell came againe
to the Princeſſe Polinarda, to preſent her with the gratious
commendations of the faire Targiana: but when ſhe behelde
the rare and ſingular beautie of the Princeſſe of Thrace,
which ſet by her, the damoſell tooke the hardineſſe to demaund
and if that Lady were not the Princeſſe Miragarda, for whom
and by whom, the Prince Albayzar was vanquiſhed.
                     In ſooth faire Damoſell (anſwered Polinarda) this is not the
Princeſſe Miragarda, but this is Leonarda, the Princeſſe of
Thrace, whom the noble Palmerin of England deliuered out
of the enchantment, wherein ſhe remained a long and tedious
time: at theſe wordes the Damoſell tooke occaſion to beginne
thus.
                     By your fauour, Madame, I knowe now who this Lady is,
becauſe I haue not forgotten the ſtraunge aduenture of the
Cuppe, which was brought by a Damoſel into his Court: and
I aſſure you that Palmerin of England was of a very ſtrange
nature, that he could both make ſo ſmall account of ſuch a faire
Princeſſe, as alſo in refuſing the ſtately gouernment of the
Kingdome of Thrace Polinarda, deſirous to mooue the Damoſell

from talking in that matter, willed that ſhe would report
to her the welfare of the Princeſſe Targiana, that had ſo
friendly giuen them to vnderſtand before, of the tidings which
were brought thither by the Ambaſſadour: who beiug arriued
at Conſtantinople, the Emperour ſent the chiefeſt Princes
and knights of his Court, to receiue him with very friendly and
courteous entertainment: but when the Damoſell heard that
the Ambaſſadour was come, ſhe preſently departed thence towards
Spaine, to go find out the Prince Albayzar, promiſing
the Princeſſe Polinarda to returne by Conſtantinople, before
ſhe made her returne into Turkie.
                     
                     The Emperour deſſred the Damoſell, to preſent the meſſage
of his good will to the king Recinde, as alſo to the Prince
Albayzar, and after that he had beſtowed diuers rich and coſtly
giftes on her, ſhe betooke her ſelfe to trauaile, being verie
glad, that ſhe was eſpyed by none of them which came with
the Ambaſſadour, who (as I haue already declared) was receiued
in very Princely order, not as he were an enemie, but as
became beſt the eſtate of him, to whom he was ſent, who in
ſooth was of ſuch a noble and vertuous minde, as when he
ſhould deale roughly and extreamely with his enemies, hee
would entertaine them as his vowed and profeſſed friends, and
ſuch was his courteſie to this Ambaſſadour.
                     To the Emperours pallace he was conducted very worthlie,
riding among the chiefeſt Princes and knights of the
Court, and the Emperour himſelfe (to doe him the greater
honour) came and receiued him at the gate of his Pallace: but
the proud Turke would not one vouchſafe to vaile his bonnet,
or offer any honourable ſigne to the Emperour, ſuch was his
malicious ſtomacke towards him, who had in no caſe offended
the Turke his Lord.
                     The Emperour perceiued well the ſmall regard he had of
him, by the words which the Princeſſe Targiana had ſent him
by her Damoſell, but yet he ſuffred him to do what he thought
beſt, vſing ſtill ſo great courteſie vnto him, as at laſt he was
conſtrained to ſhew more decent ieſture, when he preſented
the Emperour with a letter from his Lord the Turke, the

ſeale thereof was of pure Gold, and faſtened about with a
ſumptuous Chaine. The Emperor receiued it at his hands very
gratiouſly, and hauing viewed the tenour thereof, he deſired
the Turke to go take his reſt in his Chamber, and the next day
he would ſatiſfie him in the occaſion of his Ambaſſage.
                     I deſire your grace (anſwered the Turk) that it may ſo ſtand
with your pleaſure, as to make me preſently anſwer, without
deſer
                           •
                        ing any furder time, which when I haue receiued, I will
goe 
                           •
                        eſt my ſelfe in mine owne Tents, which I haue commanded
to be prouided for me without the walles of your citie,
for if I ſhould do otherwiſe, the great Turk (my gratious Lord)
would find himſelfe much offended with me: the Emperour replyed
in this faſhion.
                     You ſhall doe what you imagine conuenient in your owne
conceit, neuertheleſſe, I ſhould not be any whit agreeued, if my
Ambaſſadour did lodge in the Pallace of the great Turke, that
he might the better fulfill his dutie in the charge committed
to him. I beſéech your grace (ſaid the Turk) to let theſe néedleſſe
ſpéeches goe, and remember your ſelfe of the hundred Knights
of your Court, which are held as priſoners by my Lord the
Turke, and ſée that you make ſome prouiſion for them, for my
Lord hauing them in his power (to reuenge diuers iniuries,
which he hath receiued by ſome of your Subiects) he determined
to put them to death: but to witneſſe his gratious and noble
nature, he is content (at the earneſt intreatis of his daughter,
the faire Princeſſe Targiana) to giue them their liues, and
to reſtore them in change for the Prince Albayzar, who is
kept priſoner in the Court of the King of Spaine, by the commandement
of the Princeſſe Miragarda.
                     
                     But truſt me, you are to thinke your ſelfe in no ſmall fauour
with the Princeſſe Targiana, whoſe teares were of ſuch
power, as to ſ
                           •
                        ue the liues of your knights, whom my Lord
the Turke had determined you ſhould neuer ſée againe, vntill
your Highneſſe had ſent him the knight of the Sauage man,
that he might reuenge the iniurie which he (too forgetfull of
himſelfe committed, in carrying away by Sea his daughter
Targiana, a deed truly worthy of ſharpe puniſhment: the Turke
                        
there pauſing, the Emperour tooke occaſion to beginne thus.
                     Certainly, I confeſſe my ſelfe greatly bound to the Princeſſe
Targiana, but farre more to the faire Princeſſe Miragarda, in
that (had not her wiſe foreſight beene the greater) my Knights
had ſuffered the extreame rigour of death: but this I aſſure you,
(that ſince cruell Fortune had ſo throwne the Dyce on mee, I
rather would haue loſte twice ſo many more as they are, then
to ſend your Lord the Turke my Knight of the Sauadge man, in
the preſence of whome, here I faithfully promiſe to deliuer the
Prince Albayzar, prouided alwayes, that you make me ſufficient
aſſurance of them, whome the Turke holdeth in vnkinde
ſeruitude, whereof (how I may be certainly perſwaded) I pray
you vouchſafe me the knowledge, how and in what manner the
caſe muſt be ordered.
                     The courſe which you muſt take in this matter, (anſwered
the Turke) is thus, your Maieſtie muſt ſend vnto my Soueraigne
and Lorde, the Prince Albayzar, vppon his inuiolable
Oath, which (by mee) he voweth to you, and which you may account
of ſo great and ſufficient truth, and he will not faile (by ſo
great a bond) to ſend you the prince Polendos your ſonne, with
the other Princes and Knightes that are in his companie, and
this you may be bolde of, that my Lorde more willingly would
looſe his life, then falſifie his faith towards your Excellencie.
                     The Emperour leaning vpon his arme, and noting well the
words of the Embaſſador, pauſed a good ſpace, without making
any anſwere, which the Prince Florian perceiuing, being better
acquainted with the infidelitie of the Turkes, then the Emperour
was: and fearing leaſt hee would haue giuen credite to
this ſubtill aſſurance, preſently ſtarted vp, and began as thus.
Moſt worthy Emperour, if you but conſider the cauſe why the
great Turke detayneth your Knights in Priſon, you ſhall well
perceiue the ſmal truſt you ought to repoſe in him, in that the occaſion
was ſo little, and the aſſurance of his troth is much leſſe.
                     Againe, if you ſuffer the Prince Albayzar to eſcape vpon his
worde, you may chaunce (ſooner then you would) to repent your
ſelfe: For if you remember his vnfaithfull dealing to the Giant
Dramuſiande, in the time hee kept the Shield of the Princeſſe

                        Miragarda, how (contrary to his vowed promiſe) he
brought it from the Caſtle of Almaroll in the night, and comming
with it into the Court, did brauely giue it foorth in ſpeeches,
that he had woon it by his knightly endeuour, which diſhonourable
dealing he found in the end too coſtly.
                     Therefore it is very neceſſarie, that the King Recinde regard
him more carefully then hitherto he hath done, in that
the libe
                           •
                        tle of his perſon, will be the cauſe of ſending home againe
your Knights. And if this Ambaſſador will take vpon
him to maintaine, that this meſſage which he preſenteth you
from the Turke his ſoueraigne, is onely with regard of royall
clemency, I will defend the contrary againſt him, yea, and
I will enforce him to confeſſe, that this proceedeth on the earneſt
inſtance made by the ſubiects of the Prince Alb
                              •
                           yzar,
who are importune in ſute, to haue their Lord and gouernour
at libertie: for if it ſo fall out, that the Turke doe not ſatiſfie
this their continuall requeſt, he ſhall be conſtrained to guard
himſelfe from them, who were wont to defend him with their
eſpeciall aide. Knight (anſwered the Ambaſſadour) thou ſhalt
aſſuredly vnderſtand, and I promiſe thee by the authoritie of
my ambaſſage, which alloweth me to enter in armes againſt
thée, that I will not faile to make thée know, with what reuerence
thou oughteſt to entertaine, the vnreproueable word of
my Lord and Soueraigne, and I doubt not beſide, but to giue
due recompence to thy diſloyall and vnſeemely dealing: whereto
the Prince Florian thus replyed.
                     It is the moſt acceptable thing I make account of, for thée to
enter the Combatte with me, in reſpect of good encouragement
I haue thereto, and of the ſmall honor that will fall to thy
ſhare. The Emperour perceiuing his Nephew in ſo great chollere,
touched him with the Scepter which he held in his hand, to
the ende he ſhould procéed no further, and he was ſomewhat inwardly
offended, that he did giue ſo hard and rough ſpéeches: but
neuertheleſſe, hee eſtéemed well of his good Counſell, which to
maintaine, hee came to the Embaſſadour in this manner. You
ought not to be offended, when my knights aſſiſt me with their
good and carefull aduiſe, and eſpecially for the Prince Florian
                        
my Nephew, who is not ignorant long ſince of the cuſtome &
maners vſed in the Turkes court. And for the great Turke himſelfe,
I haue that opinion of his faith and promiſe, as he hath
himſelfe, beleeuing well, that he would not for all the honour
he profeſſeth, violate or breake his word in any thing: but yet I
dare not build or aſſure my ſelfe thereon, leſt they (who now
are priſoners) take occaſion to complaine of my fond dealing,
remembring the hard vſage they haue all this while ſuffered.
Moreouer, if I ſhould preſume ſo venture ſo raſhly, the King
Recinde (I know) would not ſo willingly conſent with me,
whoſe ſonne is amongſt the Princes as a priſoner, & til he haue
him in his owne aſſurance, he will not grant libertie to the
Prince Albayzar: wherefore you may thus giue your Lord to
vnderſtand, that if he will ſend me home my priſoned knights,
I will not faile to ſend him the Prince Albayzar: this requeſt
is but lawfull, and I promiſe on my honor to performe it. But
if it ſo chance, that he doubt of any faithfull dealing herein, I
will giue him a pledge of aſſurance, his owne daughter the
Princeſſe Targiana, who I am ſure will make anſwere for
me, as well for the perfect knowledge ſhe hath of my fidelitie,
as alſo for the deſire ſhe hath to recouer home her huſband:
the Ambaſſadour ſtanding a while muſing, at laſt replyed thus
to the Emperour.
                     I ſee well, that by the knowledge of ill doing, men attaine to
follow that which is good and lawfull, and ſo I take my leaue of
your excellency, aſſuring you, that the Princeſſe Targiana wil
aduenture her life, onely vpon your word and promiſe: in
that you withhold him who is her onely felicitie, and who hath
done ſuch noble ſeruice to my Lord her Father. In ſo doing
(ſaid the Emperour) ſhe ſhall very highly pleaſe me, and for the
good will I beare her, I pray you (on my behalfe, and with my
heartie commendations) to kiſſe her Princely hand: for ſuch is
the eſtimation I haue to her, as ſhe hath power to diſpoſe of
me, in anything ſhe taketh pleaſure to imploy me.
                     The Ambaſſadour made promiſe to fulfill his commandement,
when (with a courteous obeyſance) he tooke his leaue, and
departed from the Emperor, who (after his departure) ſate and

conferred with his Knights, commending greatly the wiſdome
of the Princeſſe Miragarda, in ſending the Prince Albayzar
to the King Recinde, for whome (it would ſo come to paſſe)
that he ſhould yet againe recouer his Sonne Polendos, and the
other Knights.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XII.
                     ¶Of an Aduenture which happened in the Courr of
the Emperour Palmerin, and of that which followed
afterward.
                     
                        THe next Day after the Embaſſadour from
the great Turke was departed the Emperours
Court, the ſame day in the afternoon,
as the Emperour ſate accompanyed with
diuerſe and ſundrie of his Princes, Lords,
and Knights, he perceiued to enter the great
Hall, a bigge and goodly Aged man, ſo much
weakened and ouer-ſpent with yéeres, as
it ſéemed hee was ready to fall to the Earth. The Emperour
iudged him a perſon of ſome Authoritie, by reaſon of his goodly
gray-locks, and his faire long-milk-white beard, for he thought
that ſuch a ſéemely and Fatherlike man, would not deceiue the
World with falſhood and diſſembling.
                     The Princes and others that kept the Emperour company,
deſired very earneſtly to vnderſtand what he would ſay, oftentimes
beholding him very aduiſedly, who when he was come
before the Emperour, offered to ſtoupe downe to kiſſe his
Highneſſe hand, but he taking pittie on him, would not ſuffer
him ſo to doo: then did he make ſuch humble Salutations as he
could, when the Emperour demaunded of him, for what occaſion
he was come.
                     My gratious Lord (ſaid this Aged man, with a voyce ſo fainte
and lowe, as very hardly he could be vnderſtood:) for that your

Court is alwayes ſo fortunate, as to entertaine Noble and aduenturous
Knightes, who are euer ready to ſuccour them that
be deſtitute of their aide and aſſiſtance, I had good hope that they
would not refuſe to affoorde mée theyr fauourable refuge, in deliuering
me out of the great daunger, whereinto by miſfortune
I am ſuddenly brought. Theſe heauy and ſadde ſpéeches, he accompanyed
with ſuch aboundance of teares, as hee mooued the
heart of the Emperour to great compaſſion: then pawſing a
prettie ſpace, with a déepe and dolourous ſigh, hee began thus againe.
I moſt humbly beſéeche your Maieſtie, that you would
at this time comfort me with your gratious aide, to reuenge the
iniurie that is extreamly offered mee, which in ſooth is ſo great
and grieuous, and commenced by ſuch perſonages, as I cannot
reporte the ſumme thereof without excéeding ſorrowe, which
might much offend your Highneſſe. Wherefore, I pray you
to beſtow on mée ſuch a Knight, on whoſe good Fortune I may
liue in ſome hope of eaſe, and I will bring him into the place
where hee may atchieue ſuch rare Renowne, as in all his life
time he can neuer attaine the like: to which wordes the Emperour
replyed thus.
                     Albeit in ſuch perillous affaires, it is not neceſſarie to ſende
a Knight, without I were firſt acquainted with the cauſe, yet
ſuch is the great and excéeding pittie, which I take, to ſée your
grieuous ſighes and manifold teares, as I muſt néeds conſent
to your requeſt: but it were a great diſcredite to you, that in a
man of ſuch an Ancient and goodly time (as you are) there ſhuld
be found Forgerie or deceytfull dealing, which my good opinion
will not ſuffer mée to iudge ſo of you. And this Knight which
you ſée ſtanding by me, is called the Prince Florian, of the Forreſt:
albeit ſome name him the hardie Knight of the Sauadgeman,
he is my Nephew, and one in whome I put the greateſt
truſt, to giue ayde and ſuccour in a matter of ſuch importance,
and I ſée hee prepareth himſelfe to forſake the Court, and to aſſiſt
you with his Noble and approoued valour, in any cauſe that
you ſhall haue neede to vſe him.
                     The Aged man, ſéeing the maruellous courteſie of the Emperour,
fel down before him on his knées, and after he had kiſſed

his hand, ſpake as followeth. It is not in vaine I ſée well
(moſt famous Emperour) that both young and olde ſo thunder
your ſurpaſſing Bountie, for the occaſion which my ſelfe receyueth
at this time, giueth me good cauſe to thinke, that the vttermoſt
I haue hearde in your noble Commendation, hath rather
beene ſparing ſpeech, then ſufficient to comprehend your Hero
                           •
                        
                        call
deſertes, and I ſhall thinke my ſelfe the moſt happieſt aliue,
hauing ſéene that with mine Eye, which hath bene ſo often bruted
in mine Eare. The Knight of the Sauadge-man aduanced
himſelfe to kiſſe the Emperours hand, in ſatiſ
                           •
                        action of the honourable
ſpéeche he vſed of him to the Aged man, who was ſtill
ſo earneſt in his ſuite, as the Prince Florian was conſtrained
to arme himſelfe preſently, and departed from the Court in ſuch
great haſte, as hee had not the leiſure to take leaue of the Empreſſe,
and his other Friends.
                     The Emperour fell into queſtioning with the Knights of his
Court, if any of them did knowe that Auncient man, in whoſe
company his Nephew Florian was ſo ſuddenly gon, but not one
of them all could report of whence, or what he was. Primaleon
was very much offended, that the Emperour his Father would
command his Nephew Florian, to depart ſo ſoone with the aged
man, not knowing firſt into what place, or to what aduenture
he would conduct him: wherevpon the very ſame day, Berolde
the Prince of Spaine, Platir, Blandidon, Pompides, Gratian,
Polinard, Reccamon, Albanis, Don Reſuel, & all the other moſt
renowmed Knights of the Emperors Court, departed to folow
the Prince Florian, for that they feared leaſt any euill ſhould
happen to him, vnder the guilefull dealings of this Aged man.
                     When the Emperour ſaw his Court left deſolate (in a manner)
of the noble Knights that was woont to kéep his company,
he found himſelfe very grieuouſly perturbed in minde, fearing
leaſt ſome finiſter chaunce ſhould happen to his Nephewe Florian,
who rode on ſtill in the company of his Aged Guide, without
reſting in any place, til the next day in the morning, when of
neceſſity they muſt ſtay to giue refreſhing to their Horſes, and
when they had ſuffered them to féede indifferently, they mounted
againe on Horſebacke, and reſted not all that day likewiſe,

till they were come within the ſight of a fayre Caſtle, which
ſtood on the top of a fayre Rocke, a Fortreſſe very del
                           •
                        ctable in
the eyes of them that did behold it, at the foote whereof a goodly
Riuer had his courſe, ſo déepe and dangerous, as they that went
vnto the Caſtle, were conſtrained to paſſe ouer in a very ſmall
Boate, wherein two men could hardly paſſe at one time. The
Aged man being very wearie with ryding, and deſirous to haue
a little eaſe, alighted from his Horſe, vſing his language in this
manner to the Prince Florian.
                     
                     This is the danger (Sir Knight) wherin we muſt hazard our
liues, if we be ſo bold as to venture our ſelues both together in
this little Boate: therefore I pray you that you will alight, and
you (for the more ſecuritie) ſhall paſſe ouer alone, then your Eſquyre
and I will come one after another, becauſe we will bring
ouer with vs the Horſes. You reaſon wel (anſwerd the Prince
Florian) in reſpect of your Aged and vnweldy péeres, as alſo in
wiſhing me for my beſt auaile, therfore I intend to follow your
counſell, for that I ſée neceſſitie compelleth vs to doo as you ſay.
At theſe words he diſmounted from his Horſe, and entred into
the little Boate, commanding him that had the charge thereof,
to paſſe him ouer, but ſcantly had he attained the middle of the
water, when ſuddenly ſuch a blacke and ougly clowde ouerſhadowed
him, as the Aged man and the Eſquyre (being on land)
had loſt the ſight of him, which when the Eſquire perceiued, hée
was about to leape into the water to followe his Lord, but as
he was in this deſperate intent, he eſpyed a great Hill ſuddenly
before him, which would not ſuffer him to paſſe any further.
                     Vpon this, he turned to goe to the place where he left the aged
man, but he was ſo quickly rapt away and gone, as the Eſquire
could not poſſiby imagine which way he had taken, then the Eſquire
began to iudge, that the teares which the Aged man ſhed
in the preſence of the Emperour, was to no other end, but only
ſhadow the treaſon which he wretchedly wēt about, ſo there he
ſtood muſing a great while, and after he had canuaſed out a thouſand
imaginations▪ a he concluded to ſearch his Maiſter about all
thoſe parts, and if it were not his fortune to find him, he would
then return to y• Emperors court, to make known the vnfortunate

loſſe of his Lorde and Maiſter, to the ende that the Princes
(who were his Friends) might take vpon them to enquyre
after him, for ſuch was the opinion of this loyall Eſquyre, that
the diligent ſearch of a great many Knightes, might happily recouer
his Lorde againe.
                     The Noble Prince Florian of the Forreſt, had no ſooner gotten
the further ſide of the Riuer, but the Clowde conueyed away
the Boate (wherein he paſſed) in ſuch ſort, as hee could by
no meanes haue a ſight of it, wherevpon, hée began to aduance
himſelfe towardes the Caſtle that ſtood vppon the Rocke, not
fearing any daungers that might happen to him: but becauſe
the Rocke was high and troubleſome to climbe, and the Armor
hee had on very weightie withall, hee was conſtrained to reſt
himſelfe thrée or foure times by the way, ſo that the Night had
chaſed away the gladſome Day, before hee could arriue at the
Caſtle.
                     When hee came vnto the Caſtle Gate, there came foure verie
gallant Damozells to receyue him, and after they had cauſed
many Torches to be alighted, they ſhewed themſelues very dutifull
to entertaine him into the Caſtle: which courteous offer
the Prince would not ſéeme to denye, for that the Beautie of
them did ſo much blinde him, as he had no minde on the Daungers
that might ſuddenly happen, but hee fedde his Eyes with
beholding them altogether, as one that had his will free and out
of Bondes, becauſe hee would neuer greatly hurt himſelfe with
affecting Ladyes. With theſe Damoſells the Prince entered
into the Caſtle, the Court whereof was paued with fayre and
goodly Marble Stones, and when they had paſſed through this
Courte, they came into a very great Hall, which was builded
with maruellous Artificiall Antique worke, at the Entraunes
wherof, the Prince was receiued by a Damoſell, who had thrée
more attending on her, but ſhe was of ſo great and huge ſtature
as a Gyant, albeeit ſhee was indeede a Woman, and not paſt
ſixtéene yéeres of Age, a very gentle and milde natured perſon,
who tooke the Prince Florian by the hand, and lead him with
her into an other fayre Hall, which was hanged with Tapiſtry
of ineſtimable value.
                     
                        
The Prince being come into the place where it pleaſed the
Damoſell to bring him, he then tooke off his helmet, when his
beautie ſéemed ſo acceptable in the eyes of the Damoſell, as at
that very inſtant ſhee gaue her whole affection vnto him, yet
was ſhe ſomewhat abaſhed, that ſhe ſhould eſteeme ſo well of
him, whoſe dealings was not vnknowne to her, neither of
whence or what he was: the conſideration whereof, turned her
ſuddaine good liking into as ſuddaine hatred & diſdaine, which
ſhe would gladly haue diſſembled, and therefore thus beganne
to parly with him.
                     Sir knight, my heart is at this time greatly ſuppriſed with
ſorow, for a grieuous iniury which is offred me, wherof I haue
good hope to be reuenged, in yt ſo courteouſly you vouchſafed to
come into my Caſtle to ſucc
                           •
                        ur mée, wherefore I pray you
that you will goe reſt your ſelfe for this night, becauſe your trauaile
doth require ſome eaſe, and to morrow morning I will
recite the cauſe, wherein you may doe me very much pleaſure.
                     Madame (anſwered the Knight of the Sauage man) I imagine
with my ſelfe, how déeply I am indebted for this excéeding
fauour, and how much I am bound to him that conducted me
to this place, where I reioyce that it is my good fortune to doe
you any ſeruice, which I account of ſo great honour, as were
my life of greater value then it is, I would hazard it in any extreame
perill, which your excellency did thinke well off to commaund
me.
                     The Damoſell (who was not accuſtomed to be entertained
with ſuch Courtly language) preſently returned him this reply.
I thanke you Sir for your friendly offer, & I pray you that
you would make a good Supper to night, that you may in the
better quietneſſe of minde take your reſt, and tomorrow morning
we wil diſcourſe of that, which I haue occaſion to vſe your
aide in, and ſo for this time I did you hartily good night, then
ſhe tooke her leaue in ſuch ſwéete and gratious manner, as her
ſecrete intent of treaſon could be no way diſcerned.
                     The knight the Sauage man remained greatly 
                           •
                        onten
                           •
                        ed,
hoping to ſpeede ſo well in the fauour of the Damoſell, as furder
cauſes of friendſhip ſhould ariſe betwéene them, it may be,

he thought to ſpéed ſo well with her, as he did of the Damoſell
which the Hermit rebuked him for, but what haue I to doe
with his ſecret intent. The Prince is in his chamber, ſet down
to ſupper, and there is very worthily ſerued by the Damoſels,
who gaue him entertainment at the gate of the caſtle, among
them all, he thought beſt of her which waited of the Cup, for
that in ſooth ſhe was very well adorned with perfect beautie,
which made him forget his former affection to the Lady of the
Caſtle, ſuch (you may perceiue) was his conſtancie in loue.
Well (in briefe) he began very queintly to deuiſe with this Damoſell,
and ſhe likewiſe mooued conceit with her companions,
the Prince glanced at her in amorous toying, and ſhe iybed
with him in double conſtruing, but Supper being ended, he
was brought by theſe Damoſels into his bed Chamber, where
(after he was in bed) ſhe (who had bene ſo famialiar with him
all his Supper time) came to him with theſe amiable ſpéeches.
Sir knight, if the time and place were ſo commodious vnto
me, as it is not, you ſhould well perceiue the good account I
make of you, but ſéeing Fortune is ſo aduerſe to my determination,
and the burning Lamps of affection, muſt be quenched
with a déepe and ſorrowfull ſigh, I
                           •
                        pray you accept of this
King, whereof I make no ſmall eſtimation, as an earneſt penny
of further good will.
                     So concluding, ſhe left the King in his hand, and not attending
the Princes anſwer, ſhe departed after the other Damoſells,
and he remained as well pleaſed as could be, by the
friendly language the Damoſell had giuen him, for the loue of
whom, he put the King on one of his fingers on his left hand,
but incontinent the Prince was ſo depriued of his power, and
brought ſo farre out of courſe with himſelfe, as he could not
moue or ſtirre any part of him, for there was a Stone in the
King of ſuch vertue, as he had no ſooner put it on his finger, but
preſently all naturall féeling was taken from him. The Damoſelles
were no ſooner returned vnto their Lady, who was
named Arlencea, but preſently (bringing them in her cōpany)
ſhe came into the chamber where the Prince Florian lay, who
was ſo maruailouſly enchanted, as he had no power at all to

diſcerne them, then ſpake ſhe vnto her Damoſels in this manner.
I ſée now my friends, that our iourney is not imployed altogether
in vaine, and I iudge that my mother Colambia will
now liue in great contentment, hauing power to reuenge the
death of her ſons, Brocalon, Baleato, Calfurnien, and Camboldam,
all my Brethren, but as ſhée pronounced theſe wordes,
ſhe caſt her eyes vpon the Prince, and ſéeing how young and
ſwéet his countenance was, ſhe entred into theſe termes. I am
greatly abaſhed, in thinking how ſo noble and valiant force
ſhould conſiſt in a knight of ſo young yeares, and if all they had
not the power to ouercome this one man, ſurely I muſt néeds
thinke good fortune was on his ſide, this matter doth mooue me
to a doubtfull opinion, and as it ſeemeth to me, his viſage is
ſomwhat comfortable vnto fortunes fauourites, which makes
me repute him, as neare allied to her by ſupernaturall affinitie,
and I aſſure you, I could very willingly remit the offences hée
hath done, if the death of my brethren did not prouoke mée to
ſéeke ſharpe reuengement on him, who was the death of ſo many
good and hardy Knightes. Thus, regard of her enuie, and
his amiable perſonage, did mooue a ſecret contention within
her, willingly ſhe would haue ſaued him for his Knightly proportion,
but the loſſe of her brethren was ſo grieuous vnto her
as all fauourable pittie did quite and cleane forſake her, ſo that
ſhe was preſently minded to cutte off his head, but as ſhe was
at the very inſtant to doe the déede, the aged man (who was
ſent to ſéeke Florian, and had brought him thither) arriued there
before her, who knowing how to fit her fancie, preuailed ſo
much with her, as he changed her angry moode, wherevpon he
began as thus.
                     You haue no accaſion (Madame) to feare that the knight wil
eſcape from you, hauing brought him into ſuch an extreame alteration,
wherefore, I pray you to change this ſharpe and ſeuere
humor, and reſerue his life till you haue brought him vnto
your Mother, who will take pleaſure in ſéeing him die, that
hath cut off the flowres of her honourable linage, and that we
may deliuer him the ſooner, I thinke it beſt that wee doe imbarque
our ſelues, to goe ſéeke the Iſland where ſhe remaineth.
                     
                        
Albeit my minde was otherwiſe bent (anſwered Arlencea)
yet will I not refuſe to followe your counſell, wherefore I deſire
you to goe to morrowe morning very earely to the Port,
and there ſée prouided for me a proper Ship, for I cannot enioy
any quietneſſe, in that I feare to looſe this Knight againe,
So, breaking off her minde, Arlencea and the Damoſels left
the Prince Florian in the Chamber, brought into ſuch vnhappy
ſubiection, as to ſuffer and endure the ſharpe ſentence of his
enemies.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XIII.
                     Here ſhall be diſcouered what and who the Damoſell was,
that thus had gotten the Prince Florian, and of that which
happened to him during the time of his voyage.
                     
                        REmembrance is made in this hiſtory, that
Collambra had no ſooner intelligence of the
death of the Giants Brocalon, and Baleato
her Sonnes, whom the Prince Florian
of the Forreſt had ſlaine, but ſhe concluded
to couer her griefe, & practiſe all the meanes
ſhe could deuiſe, or that fortune would preſent
onto her, whereby ſhe might be reuenged on him that had
done the
                           •
                        e mu
                           •
                        ders, for ſuch was the earneſtneſſe of her damnable
and wicked minde, as the compaſſed a thouſand horrible
inuentions, but the immeaſurable rage wherein ſhe was continually,
would not ſuffer her to determine certainely of any
thing.
                     Herevpon ſhe came into an Iſland ſomewhat nearer, where
ſhe had good hope to finde ſuccour and aide in her pre
                           •
                        ent purpoſe,
by the meanes of an auncient Knight named Alfarnao,
who had béene nouriſhed long time by her huſband, and made

his aboade within that Iſland, hauing very great knowledge
in the acte of Nigromancy, and a man altogether brought vp
in ſubtill and craftie deuiſes: hée hearing the continuall complaints
that Collambra made, was mooued to take compaſſion
on her, ſo that he promiſed to helpe her in any thing hée could
poſſible, to take reuengement on the knight of the Sauage man,
whome hée knewe by his arte to be in the Court of Conſtantinople,
wherevpon he came to Collambra, vſing to her theſe
ſpéeches.
                     Madame, if ſo be it ſhall like you to follow my counſell, I
dare promiſe to make you forgoe this extreame griefe wherewith
you are accompanied; wherto Collambra thus replied. I
would not haue come to you from ſo farre off, if I had not perſwaded
my ſelfe on your aſſured friendſhip: for the good opinion
I conceiued of you, did cauſe me to addreſſe my voyage
hither, being altogether minded to follow your friendly counſell.
Since I perceiue good Madame (ſaid Alfernao) that you
repoſe ſo great aſſurance on my fidelity, you ſhall perceiue
what a platforme I haue laid for you. It is ſo, that the knight
of the Sauage man is at this preſent, in the Court of the Emperour
of Greece his grandfather, where he is growne ſo amorous
in loue, that he intendeth not to depart of a long time from
Conſtantinople: and he hath made himſelfe ſo aduenturous
in promiſe, (onely for the loue of his ſwéete Saint) as he will
not forſake the greateſt danger, wherein any one ſhall haue occaſion
to vſe him.
                     Vpon this, I am determined to goe to the Court where hée
now remaineth, and there proſtrating my ſelfe before the emperour
in ſpéeches very ſad and pittifully couched, beſide, no
teares ſhall want to grace the matter. I will earneſtly requeſt
of his Maieſty, that it may be his pleaſure to ſuccour me in affaires
of great importance, whereout it is impoſſibly for me
to eſcape, or alſo helpe my ſelfe, whereout the aide of one of his
beſt Knights, euen he that is eſteemed the hardieſt amongſt
them all, I wil deſire that I may haue no other but onely him.
This requeſt I know hée will not denie me, ſhaddowing my
intent with ſuch behauiour of vertue, as I can well enough, ſo

that he will preſent mée his Nephew Florian, in that he is eſtéemed
the moſt Noble and valiant amongſt you all: and hauing
once gotten him, I will conduct him to a Caſtle, which is vpon
the frontiers of Greeece and Hungarie, where abydeth the Ladie
Arlencea, your onely Daughter: vnto whom I w
                           •
                         make
knowne the horrible ſhame which this Knight hath doone her,
and that ſhee ought to take ſharpe vengeance on him, who hath
offered her ſo great and famous iniurie, for without her aide, I
ſhall not ſo eaſily execute the ſumme of my enterpriſe.
                     But you muſt not forget to deliuer mee your King, which
hath the power to depriue the ſences of any man, if once he put
the 
                           •
                        ame vpon his finger, and this King will I cauſe one of the
Damoſels attendant on your daughter, to put into the hands of
this Knight, which he will preſently put on his finger: and then
will not I faile to bring him to you, to receyue ſuch due reward
as you ſhall thinke your ſelfe ſufficiently contented withall:
Collambra ioyfvlly returned this anſwere.
                     My deare friend Alfernao, I know well that the remedy of
my paſſed trauells, and the vengeance for my children, lyeth altogether
in you: which if you accompliſh (as I know you can)
I ſhall thinke my ſelfe for euer beholding to you: and well you
may perſwade your ſelfe, that you doe beſtow your paines for
her, who will not ſhew her ſelfe ingratefull towards you, but as
I intend to follow your aduiſe, ſo will I compaſſe ſome meane
or other, that may declare my thankfulneſſe.
                     Then Collambra did preſently prepare a Ship, wherein her
Daughter was embarqued, accompanyed with foure Damoſells
and as many Knightes, the Winde and Sea ſeruing them
ſo well, as in fewe dayes they tooke Landing on a plaine, not
farre from the Caſtle, which the ancient Knight Alfernao had
named to the Damoſell Arlencea, wherein hee left her with
her companie, and tooke his way to the Court of the Emperour
of Greece, from whence (by the ſubtill meanes you haue hearde
before) hee brought the Prince Florian of the Forreſt, whome
hée deliuered into the Caſtle, where this Arlencea the Damoſell
Giant made her abode, and how hee was vſed there, you
haue hearde declared alreadie. Nowe come wee to the place

where wée left, giuing to vnderſtand, that the Auncient Knight
on the next morning had prouided a Coatch, wherein (with as
much ſpeede as could be) they poaſted to a Porte of the Sea, fearing
leaſt by the way, the Knight of the Sauadge-man would
be knowne of ſome: but after Arlencea was imbarqued with
this good Knight, the Marryners hoyſed theyr Sayles, and hauing
a pleaſant gale of winde, they committed themſelues to the
mercie of the Seas: whereon we intend a while to leaue them,
and returne to the Eſquyre of the Knight of the Sauadge-man,
who fearing leaſt the Ancient Knight would offer ſome iniurie
to his Lord and Maiſter, failed not to take which way hee iudged
would bring him to Conſtantinople. Hee trauelled all the
firſt day, and Fortune was ſo vngentle to him, as hee could not
méete any perſon to demaund his way, but on the next day as he
paſſed ouerthwart a Forreſt, he perceiued vnder a trée Knight
very richly Armed, hauing in his Shielde (which was borne by
his Eſquire) a golden Tyger in a field of Sinople: wherevpon
hee preſently rode to the Eſquyre, whome when he behelde, he
knew that it was Syluian, and the Knight before him, to be the
Noble Palmerin of England: whoſe preſence gaue the Eſquire
more aſſurance then he had before; neuertheles, with the teares
trickling downe his cheekes, hee beganne to the Prince after
this manner.
                     My Lord, albeit the newes I haue to declare vnto you, of
my Brother and my Maiſter the Prince Florian, bee not ſo agreeable
to you as I would they were, yet can I not but I muſt
needs report them, being perſwaded, that it is in you to remedy
this miſfortune which is chaunced to him. Then diſcourſed he
whole circumſtance of the matter to the Prince Palmerin, who
commaunded the Eſquyre, to bring him preſently to the place
where his Lorde paſſed the Riuer, to goe to the Caſtle, which
ſtoode on the high Rocke: hée being very grieuouſly paſſionate,
as well for the miſfortune which had happened to his Brother,
as alſo breaking his voyage to Conſtantinople, to which place
his earneſt affection called him.
                     Then hee complained greatly on Fortune, who did applye
her-ſelfe (as hee thought) to no other ende, but onely to breake

his determined purpoſes, in dayly preſenting him with continuall
perils, wherewith he could by no meanes eſcape without
great loſſe of his blood and danger of his life: in theſe gréeuous
agonies he fellowed the Eſquire, vſing as ſpeedy diligence as
might be, leaſt ſome ſhould offer his brother diſcourteſie, and
they arriued at the Caſtle on the next day about the euening
tide, when the Eſquire ſhewed the Prince the Riuer which he
could not paſſe, ſpeaking to him in this ſort.
                     You may now (my Lord) behold the dangerous paſſage,
where I loſt the knight of the Sauage man my noble Maiſter:
to which words the Prince made this anſwer. Curſed may
they be, that were the firſt inuenters of theſe cruell enchauntments,
the extremitie whereof, hath bene the ouerthrow of
many a good and hardy Knight, and hath made wretches and

                           •
                        owards to triumph in their miſfortune.
                     Then came they downe to the riuer, where the Prince Palmerin
and the Eſquire could not finde any Beate for prſſage,
nor yet the man that had conuyed the Prince ouer, by reaſon
whereof, they went along by the Riuers ſide, till they came
to a place where the water parted in twaine, and an entrance
there was into a little Iſle, whereto the Prince prepared
himſelfe to goe, as he ſounded the depth of the Foord: but a
Knight (who had couered his armour with the Skinne of a
wilde Beaſt, which he had ſlaine) cryed aloud to the Prince in
this manner.
                     Noble Palmerin, be not ſo hardy I deſire you as to paſſe ouer
for the water is farre more déepe then it ſéemeth, and you may
ſuddenly fall into vnrecouerable danger: which to preuent, I
counſell you to goe downe a little further along by the Riuer
ſide, and I will not faile to ſhew you the place, where you may
goouer in moſt ſecuritie.
                     
                        Palmerin well noting the words of the Knight that ſpake
to him, preſently ſtayed his horſe, and maruailing who this
Knight ſhould be, at laſt he knew him to be his brother the
Sage Aliart, whereupon he came to his brother Florians Eſquire,
and commanded him to goe to Conſtantinople, and ſtay
there, for that his preſence did hinder him, when he was diſpoſed

to conferre with Siluian about the faire Polinarda, and
he tolde him, that he ſhould ſooner heare tydings of his Maiſter
at the Court, then in any other place.
                     The Eſquier would haue gladly kept the Prince Palmerin
company, but he would in no wiſe ſuffer him, but commaunded
him to goe to thoſe places, where he might ſooneſt haue vnderſtanding
of his Lord, and ſo the Prince departed from him,
when, in ſmall time he came to a place of the riuer, which was
more broade and leſſe déepe, then the knight 
                           •
                        ried againe vnto
him, that he might there venture hardly, becauſe it was the ſureſt
place of paſſage.
                     The Prince ſtaied not, but on the aſſurance he had in the
Knights word, he entred the Riuer, which was not ſo déepe,
but they paſſed ouer very eaſily, the rigor of the water hauing
not the power to hurt the Prince, ſo they recouered the other
ſide ſafe and ſoundly, which the Knight perceiuing, he came
and offered himſelfe to take the Princeſſe horſe, but he would
not ſuffer him, then he alighting, came & embraced the Knight
with theſe words.
                     What ſhould I thinke my Lord and Brother, that you ſo
friendly come to ſuccour me in my greateſt néede? certainely I
may aſſure my ſelfe, that Florian my Brother, ſhall be deliuered
from his preſent danger, by your meanes, which is of ſo
great authoritie, and furniſhed with ſo high & ſingular knowledge.
My gratious Lord (anſwered the Sage Aliart) is it
your cuſtome, not to make any account of any miſchance that
may happen, becauſe you imagine that your knightly proweſſe
is able to aduantage you in euery attempt, but I pray you
at this time to forſake ſuch opinion of your ſelfe, and be perſwaded,
that Florian your brother is in great danger of looſing
his life, for which I am very hartily ſory, in that Fortune
would not ſuffer me to finde him in this place. But ſo it is (as
I haue gained the knowledge by peruſing my Bookes) that a
Knight did cauſe him to forſake the Emperors Court, to bring
him hither to this Caſtle, rendring him into the handes of a
Damoſell Giant, the Daughter of Collambra, who is mother
to the Giants, Calfurnien, Camboldam, Brocalon, & Baleato,
                        
whom you and your brother Florian haue ſlaine.
                     It ſéemes to me (ſaid the Prince Palmerin) that we ſhould
forſake this Caſtle, and prepare our ſelues towards the Profound
Iſle, to embarque our ſelues, to trie if Fortune will ſo
much fauour vs, as to permit vs his recouery: but I feare me
ſome miſfortune is come to him already, the feare whereof
confoundeth me in extreame griefe: whereto the Sage Aliart
thus replyed.
                     My Lord, it is not neceſſary that we ſhould goe trifle the
time in the Profound Iſle, for if Florian be loſt, this will be the
greateſt hazard that can come vnto vs, wherefore I thinke it
moſt conuenient, that you doe your endeuour to ſéeke him
foorth, not ſparing day and night to trauaile: and I will take my
courſe another way, wherein I will vſe ſuch diligence, as I will
aduenture my life for him.
                     I beléeue wel (anſwered the Prince) that you will not ſpare
any aduice, which may in any thing profite my Brother, and
therefore I am determined to follow your counſell: wherevpon
they rid away very ſpéedily, vntill they came where two ſundry
wayes cauſed them to part from one another,
when they ceaſed not to trauell earneſtly,
for that the loſſe of the
Prince Florian was ſo
grieuous to
them.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XIII.
                     Of that which happened to the knight of the Tiger, following
the ſearch of the Prince Florian of the Forreſt his brother.
                     
                        
                           PAlmerin and the Sage Aliart, hauing taken
their farewell one of another, rode on
which way Fortune conducted them, the
Prince himſelfe trauailed all that night, for
the deſire he had to helpe his brother would
not ſuffer him to take any reſt, but this horſe
began to waxt very ſtrackt and féeble, by
reaſon of his excéeding great labour, ſo that the Prince was
conſtrained to vſe this ſpéech to Siluian.
                     
                     Thou ſéeſt well (my truſty friend and ſeruant) that Fortune
hath ſet her ſelfe directly againſt me, yet if I ſhould giue ouer
my preſent enterpriſe, I ſhould blemiſh my credite with perpetuall
infamie: therefore I intend to take the horſe whereon
thou rideſt, and ſend thée away with mine (for that he is not
able to hold out long,) vnto the néereſt Port of the Sea thou
canſt finde, where thou maiſt take ſhipping to the Profound
Iſle, which in times paſt belonged to the giant Brauorant, who
was the Father to the Giant Calfurnien, and there will I not
faile to ſend and aduertiſe thée, of the whole eſtate of my iourney,
if the time do not afford me contrary ſucceſſe. But if my
trauaile fall out ſo vnfortunate, as my newes ſhall ſéeme gréeuous
and irkeſome to thée, then I deſire thee to goe to Conſtantinople,
and giue my Lady and Miſtreſſe Polinarda to vnderſtand,
that I cannot make any account of my ſelfe, looſing the
lampe and loadſtone of my life, for, in that I am depriued of
the ſame, I muſt néeds knit vp and conclude my trauailes.
                     Moreouer, thou ſhalt aſſure her, that the ſum of my felicitie,
conſiſteth in no other thing, then in the remembraunce of

her gatious ſelfe, and contentment I did alwaies receiue, in
thinking how long I haue liued in languiſhing for her loue,
which was ſo déepely imprinted in my ſoule, as I was able to
put to flight all thoſe feares, which the earneſtnes of my deſire,
with the compaſſe of the time did preſent vnto me.
                     But now that death hath depriued me of the meane, whereby
my life was alwayes ſuſtained, I haue no other remedie,
whereby to comfort my afflicted heart, but onely the contentment
I receiue in my paſſions, hauing in remembrance that
ſwéete ſhe, for whoſe ſake I liue to ſuffer. And if it come ſo to
paſſe, as the hurtfull Plannets be diſplaced, and I remembred
in the acceptable opinion of my Lady, I ſhall commit to forgetfulneſſe
all the angry ſtormes, which hitherto hath (euen)
weather beaten my fainting ſpirit, and giuen courſe to a thouſand
calamities to fall vpon me: for I aſſure thée, that no accident
whatſoeuer can haue power to endamage me, ſo long as
my very ſouleis ſet at worke, to contemplate the rare ſingularities
wherewith her diuine ſpirit is aſſociated.
                     Then if theſe ſpirits are reſecued to ioyne together in familiaritie,
mine ſhall not a little triumph, being thought wr
                           •
                        
                        thy
to offer ſeruice to her, whom, who ſo taketh occaſion to behold,
ſhall finde his wits ſuperficially metamorphiſed. But
it is ſo, that attending this long expected honour of felicitie, I
know not how it can be poſſible for me to liue, being abſent
from her heauenly preſence. For when I remember how in
times paſt, I haue often vſed to behold her delicate Face, now
(being fo farre from that happy meane) my griefe encreaſeth ſo
aboundantly, as me thinkes Death did me a good pleaſuce, if
he would bring me forth of the Laborinth of my reſtleſſe deſires.
Therefore I deſire thee Siluian, to preſent her my vnſpotted
faith, and aſſure her of my firme and ſtedfaſt loyaltie,
which conſidered in truth, will moone her to pittie my ceaſeleſſe
trauailes, which for none aliue (but onely her) I endure:
yea, and endure it with ſuch extreamitie, as is beyond the
iudgement of any to perceiue. And becauſe the danger is ſo
doubtful which I now haue enterpriſed, as neither haue I any
aſſurance to truſt vnto, or hope to returne from ſuch a troubleſome

aduenture, I deſire thée to be as faithfull a ſeruant to
my Lady, as thou haſt bene to him that loued her ſo déerely,
for in ſo doing, thou mayſt happen vpon a more honourable recompence,
then either I, or my vttermoſt power can giue thée:
which (comming ſo to paſſe,) will not a little content me, in
that he which hath proued ſo loyall and iuſt of faith, ought not
to be reſpected with ſuch an vncertaine reward, as to be left
the inheritour of my tea
                           •
                        es and torments, in ſatiſfaction of ſo
honeſt and truſtie ſeruice. And I cannot thinke, but when my
Lady Polinarda ſhall conſider the honorable obeyſance, wherewith
I haue dayly and hourely regarded her, and thy vnfained
ſeruice to him, who hath thought ſo well on her, ſhe will
ſhew her ſelfe gratious and reſpectiue to thée, as well to witneſſe
her owne princely nature, as alſo in remembring thy vertuous
and loyall deſerts. But if thy angry Starres do ſo much
repine at thy happy welfare, as ſhe ſeemeth daintie in the
knowledge of thée: good Siluian let it not ſéeme ſtrange to thee,
in that thou beareſt a part with thy Maiſter in miſfortune, for
ſhe neuer fauouring me, muſt of neceſſitie frowne on thée
                           •
                        
and this vnkind dealing may mooue thee thus to iudge, that
ſhe is wedded in affection to ſome other, who muſt ioyne
that happy content, which I deſerued to haue by my vnhappy
trauailes.
                     Thus breaking off his dolorous complaints, he remained
ſo gréeuouſly afflicted in his ſpirit, as the teares which aboundantly
trickled downe his chéekes, rendered a certaine teſtimony
of his troubled heart, which he being willing to diſſemble
(leſt Siluian ſhould perceiue it) he gaue his horſe the ſpurs,
and without any more words departed thence, leauing Siluian
ſo mightily ouercome with heauineſſe, as he was conſtrained
to the earth: but when he had ſomewhat pacified
himſelfe, he mounted on his Maiſters horſe, which he doubted
would not bring him to the Profound Iſle, becauſe he had bene
ſo ſore trauailed already by his Lord and Maiſter.
                     This good Eſquire riding on very ſad and penſiuely, at laſt
ſpyed two Knights, whom he knew by their deuices in their
Shéelds and their Armor, to be the Princes, Berold, and Platir
                        
to them he called, and deſired that it might pleaſe them to ſtay
a little: whereupon, the Knight (who knew him preſently)
ſtaied, being abaſhed to ſée him ſo badly horſed, but when they
perceiued the teares run downe his chéekes, then they began
to doubt ſome further harme, which made them demand of him
for his maiſter, as alſo what happened to him, to be in that caſe.
                     My Lords (anſwered Siluian) I know well how to reſolue
you to your demand, though the report be not ſo agréeable to
you as I could wiſh: then he diſcouered to them the miſfortune
of the Prince Florian, and how his Lord was ridden after
him, to giue him ſuccour. But the aduenture is ſo dangerdus
(ſaid Siluian) wherein my Lord muſt aſſiſt his brother, as his
life will ſtand to extreame hazard, before he can helpe him according
as he would: and beſide, it is doubtfull he ſhall come too
late, becauſe his horſe will hardly hold out: to which words Platir
thus replyed.
                     
                        Siluian your Lord is ſo fortunate, and hath finiſhed ſuch rare
and incredible aduentures, as I will not be perſwaded, but
that he will deliuer out of danger his brother, the hardy Florian
of the Forreſt: and therefore content thy ſelfe, for he which
had the power to end ſuch noble exploits as he hath done, I
am ſure cannot faile this preſent occaſion. But for the departure
of the Prince Florian, truſt me, it did not a little offend
me, and being now by you aduertiſed, that (without preſent
aide) he is in danger to be loſt, both I and my companion
will not faile to follow him, becauſe it were againſt reaſon to
looſe ſo good a Knight: and go you to the place (which you tell
vs) the Prince Palmerin hath commanded you, and there ſhall
you likewiſe heare tidings of vs, ſo ſoone as we ſhall poſſibly
haue the commoditie to ſend to you.
                     The Prince Platir vpon theſe words tooke his leaue of Siluian,
when he and his companion rid away very haſtily, where
(to the ſucceſſe of their iourney) we will leaue them, remembring
we forget the knight of the Tiger, who (after he departed
from Siluian) made ſuch diſpatch of way, as at length he
came to a little Village by the Seacoaſt, where he entred a
Venetian Gally, to paſſe by Sea to the Iſland of Collambra,
                        
which was very much famed abroad, by reaſon of the Giant
which poſſeſſed the ſame: aſſuring you, that no Veſſell whatſoeuer
might take landing there, during the time theſe Giants
liued, becauſe their crueltie was ſo inſupportable, to them
which durſt arriue in that Iſle. When this Galley came neare
vnto the Iſland, they were conſtrained to rowe cloſe to the
ſhoare, becauſe the winde was ſo ſore vpon them, as for two
dayes they were greatly hindered, and on the third day likewiſe
the wind aroſe ſo extreame and violent, as the Mariners
iudged, in the middeſt of winter it could 
                           〈◊〉
                         be more rigorous:
ſo that they were driuen into a certaine place, where diuerſe
other Ships (being glad to auoide that troubleſome tempeſt)
had taken Anker, in one of theſe Ships was the Sage Aliart,
being very ſore paſſionate, leaſt ſome miſfortune ſhould happen
to Florian of the Forreſt his Brother. Neuertheleſſe hée
receiued ſome comfort in beholding the other veſſels, hoping
that fortune might be ſo fauourable to them, albeit the winde
were ſo contrarie to their Nauigation, they might yet happen
vpon ſome coaſt or other, as might happily bring them together
to the Iſland of Collambra.
                     
                     The knight of the Tiger vnderſtanding that the Sage Aliart
was there, and alſo being acquainted with his aduiſe, receiued
great contentation in his minde, and becauſe the tempeſt endured
all that day, he left the Galley, contenting the Maiſter
thereof for his paines, and came into one of thoſe ſhips which
were in the Hauen: but he would not goe into that Veſſell
where the Sage Aliart was, for that he doubted leaſt their being
together, would be a hinderance to their ſeuerall determinations,
which while hee was conſidering how farre different
they were, the Princes, Berolde and Platir, likewiſe arriued
there, entending to beare Palmerin and the Sage Aliart company
in their voyage. But when they vnderſtood, how the Prince
Palmerin deſired to trauaile without their company, they embarqued
themſelues with the Sage Aliart, and ſetting forth of
the hauen together, they kept company with the ſight of one
another, vntill the darke night did ſeparate them aſunder: for
the winde riſing againe, kept them (in ſhort time) ſo farre

aloofe the one from the other, as they had cleane loſt the fight of
any land, yet they ſailed on couragiouſly, not dreading the furie
of any winde nor rough billowes of the water, to the mercy
whereof we intend to commit them.
                     The courſe of our Hiſtory willeth vs now to returne to the
redoubted Knight of the Sauage man, who was conducted to
Collambra, in the order as I haue told you before, by the commaundement
of Ailencea, the Damoſell Giant, who ſayled
with ſuch a ſpéedy pace on the Sea, as her pleaſure was greater
then I can ſpeake of, for that ſhée had in her cuſtodie the
Knight of the Sauage man, with whome ſhée (and thoſe that
bare her company) in foure dayes, and ſoure nights (being ſo
fauoured of the winde and weather) came within the ſight of
the Iſland, where the proude Gianteſſe Colambra made her
reſidence: into whoſe handes, Fortune would not ſuffer to
fall the Knight of the Sauage man, but raiſed ſuddenly ſuch
a mightie tempeſt, as they were all in doubt to be caſt away,
and in little more then an houre, they were caſt ſo farre from
the Iſland, as the Pilot could not iudge into what countrey the
winde had driuen them, by reaſon whereof, both he and the
Marriners remained ſo far out of quietneſſe, as they could not
tell to what Saint they ſhould commend themſelues for preſent
ſuccour.
                     When Arleneea perceiued this ſudden alteration, ſhée was
likewiſe ſo inwardly vexed, as ſhe wiſhed that ſhe had neuer
ſéene the Prince Florian, for ſhe had none in her company that
could promiſe her any ayde, except it were Alfernao, and hée
was ſo worne with age, as he could leſſe helpe then any of the
other: then ſhe beganne to encourage the Pilot to defend her in
cauſing the marriners to make expedition, but al was in vaine,
for their hearts did ſo faint, and their ſtomackes ſo failed them
(ſeeing ſo great danger and trouble towards them) as the ayde
which they ſhould haue giuen to remedy this doubtfull trouble,
was not of any account at all, and their vnderſtanding did forſake
them ſo amazedly, as they knew no way to helpe the perils
extant before their eyes.
                     
                        Alfernao ſéeing the Mariners ſo out of heart, came to Arlencea
                        
with theſe words. Madame, I deſire you not to abaſh your
ſelfe, for in the aſſurance of your excellency conſiſteth all our
liues: and for this miſfortune which hath come vpon vs, it hapneth
to them cuſtomably which frequent the ſeas, and though
now you ſee the waters ſo rough and impatient, in a moment
you ſhall ſée them calme enough againe. Wherefore, I pray
you come forth of your Chamber, to the end the Pilot and the
Mariners may behold you, for I am perſwaded that in ſéeing
you, they will receiue a freſh encouragement.
                     In this order as I tell ye, Alfernao did endeuour himſelfe
by friendly counſell (as much as in him lay) to cauſe her forget
this fearefull motion, and Arlencea (at the requeſt of Alfernao)
came preſently out of her Chamber: but when ſhe beheld
y• furiouſneſſe of the water, ſometime liſting the Ship vp, as
it were to heauen, and then throwing it downe againe to the
depth of hell, the water likewiſe beating in aboundantly, her
heart would not ſerue her, to kéepe the Mariners any longer
company, but ſhe went in againe to her Chamber, ſo full of
diſpaire and fearefull frightings, as (being not able to ſuſtaine
her ſelfe) ſhe laid her downe vpon a pillow betwéene two of
her Damoſels, when, wéeping very bitterly, ſhe entred into
theſe ſpéeches.
                     I ſée well Alfernao, the ſmall recompence they ſhall receiue,
which enterpriſe ſuch déeds as are diſhonourable and far
from dutie, and I beléeue certainely, that the Diuine powers
are determined to puniſh vs, for the great iniury and diſloyaltie
we offer, in ſéeking the death of this good and hardy knight,
who ſlue my brethren one after another in plaine fight, not
offering or taking any aduantage of them: which hautie
derds, albeit I cannot let them paſſe without great maruell,
yet do they make me verily thinke, that he fought in a good
and a lawfull cauſe, in that he deſpiſed the exceeding crueltie
and tyranny, wherein my proud and preſumptuous brethren
liued, which diſorder of life, being rightly chaſtiſed by the proweſſe
of this Knight, we ſet our ſelues againſt all reaſonable
regard (in my iudgement) to practiſe his death for well doing.
And we being forgetfull to ſift the iuſtneſſe of the cauſe, goe

about to depriue this good Knight of his life, in the reuenge of
whoſe innocencie, the wrathfull anger of the Heauens is fallen
vpon vs: wherefore, to auoyde and flie the extremitie betime,
leaſt wee fall into a woorſe inconuenience, I am reſolued to
chaunge my angrie moode, thinking it better to take the Ring
from him, which cauſed him to ſléepe ſo ſoundly, then thus to abide
the ſharpe countenance of the wreakefull powers, whome
(whether I will or no) I muſt obey.
                     
                        Arlencea hauing ſpoken what pleaſed her, commanded the
Chamber doore to be opened, where the knight of the Sauadge-man
lay, and when ſhe had taken the Ring from him, hee was
in as good eſtate as hee was before, yet not without great maruell
in himſelfe, when he perceiued he was in a ſhip on the Sea,
and ſo compaſſed about with faire Damoſells, who wept verie
grieuouſly, to ſee themſelues in ſo great daunger. The Prince
in this amazement, came foorth of his Chamber, when he ſaw
how the furious waues of the Water did toſſe and turmoyle
their Barke, and how the Pilot, the Marriners, and euery one
in the Ship, theyr harts were dead, becauſe 
                           •
                        hey knew no way
how to helpe themſelues: Wherupon he beganne with noble
words to chéere and encourage them, but the extream feare they
had generally conceyued, cauſed them to make ſmall eſtimation
of his words.
                     Then was he more and more abaſhed, but eſpecially to ſée
himſelfe in ſuch a place, where it was the leaſt parte of his
thought to haue come, and how he came ſo Embarqued from the
Caſtle, where the Damoſells came and entertained him ſo exceeding
friendly at the Gate thereof. This ſtrange aduenturs
made him oftentimes deſirous to demund how and after what
ſort he chanced thither, but the danger which hee ſaw imminent
before his eyes, would not affoord him ſo much leiſure, but compelled
him to ſettle his thoughtes on that which was more neceſſarie.
The Marriners by the often int
                           •
                        eaty, and friendly behauiour
of the Prince, began ſomewhat to comfort themſelues,
which when as he beheld, hee went into the Chamber to Arlencea,
where ſitting downe by her, hée beganne his ſpéeches after
this order.
                     
                        
Madame, I would I might intreate you to forſake thoſe
fearfull paſſions, and to regarde him who eſtéemeth maruellous
well of your diuine Beautie, the tempeſt beginneth by little and
little to looſe his force, and therefore let my perſwaſion ſomewhat
appeaſe you, for theſe teares wherewith you offend your
gratious countenance, is as grieuous for me to beholde, as it is
bootleſſe for you ſo much to hurt your ſelfe.
                     
                        Arlencea hearing the courteous language of the Prince,
and noting withall his ſéemely countenance, reioyced that ſhee
had ſo ſpared his life at the intreatie of Alfernao, and the malicious
reuenge which ſhe ſought before, was now changed againe
into good opinion of Loue, whereat the Knight of the Sauadge-man
was very well pleaſed, but Alfernao remained moſt grieuouſly
paſſionate, knowing well that his enterpriſe could come
to no good ende.
                     The Night being ſpent, at the breake of day the tempeſt calmed,
when the Pilote gaue them to vnderſtand, that they were
arriued on the Coaſt of Spaine, which words diſpleaſed Alfernao
in the hearing, and while he ſate vttering ſilent complaints
to himſelfe, the Pilote diſcouered the Cittie of Malaga, which
then was helde and kept by the Turkes: then the Prince tooke
Arlencea by the hand, and led her foorth on the hatches to ſhew
her the land, when cauſing her to ſit downe, he deſired her that
ſhe would report vnto him, after what manner he was brought
into the Shippe, wherein he had ſlept ſo long, without knowledge
of himſelfe.
                     Worthie Syr (aunſwered Arlencea) ſo that it ſhall pleaſe
you to let all former angrie occaſions paſſe, and pardon what I
ſay in your Knightly courteſie, you ſhall be reſolued in your earneſt
deſire, and therewith aſſuring you, that Loue hath brought
mee into ſuch eſtate, and hath mooued ſuch a forcible affection in
mée towardes you, ſo as I will not conceale any iote of the
trueth from you. Then ſhée recounted at large the whole enterpriſe
of Collambra, and the aged Knight Alfernao, whoſe
treaſon did ſo aſtoniſh the Prince, as hee brake foorth into theſe
ſpéeches.
                     
                        
Madame, the deſire wherewith I came to doe you ſeruice,
did not deſerue the vnkinde dealing wherewith you haue vſed
me, but ſince it is ſo, that my trauaile hath béene imployed in
vaine, I deſire you to affoord me ſo much fauour, as to report
the guile whereby Alfarnao brought me hither, who I knowe
was perſwaded to commit me to the cruelty of your Mother,
which ſhould be ſo great towardes me, as nothing would content
her but my death. And let it not offend you, that I goe
into my chamber to arme my ſelfe, becauſe I will compell all
theſe in your company vnder my obeyſance: and this you may
perſwade your ſelfe, that I will not forget your gentleneſſe in
any trauaile whatſoeuer, but will maintaine your excellency,
being ſo bound by your good deſertes, whereto Arlencea thus
replyed.
                     My Lord, I deſire you to conſider, that your ſingular courteſie
ioyned with the vnfained good will I beare you, cauſed mee
to diſcouer this damnable treaſon intended againſt you, which
I thought too vnkind for him, to whom I could find in my hart
to ſubmit my ſelfe: in recompence whereof, I deſire you would
remember, that I ſhall not onely looſe the preſence of Collambra
my Mother, and likewiſe my patrimony, but alſo I ſhall
receiue ſuch a common bruite of ill report, as euery one will
wound me with malicious ſpéech, in yéelding my ſelfe into your
hands, who haue ſo cruelly ſlaine my Brethren.
                     Madame (anſwered Florian) I pray you forget the remembrance
of looſing your Mothers fauour, or any other ſuch opinion,
in regard of the good may happen to you, for if Fortune
fauour me no worſe then ſhe hath done, I wil not faile to make
a double requit all of your kindneſſe: and that you may repoſe
the better aſſurance on my words, I here proteſt my ſelfe at
your commandement.
                     In the meane time, while Florian ſpent the time in this
talke, he vnderſtood how they in the Shippe went about ſome
enterpriſe againſt him, by meanes whereof he left Arlencea,
but ſhe followed him into his Chamber to helpe to arme him,
and ere he had girded himſelfe in his Mayle coate, Alfernao,
with foure other in his company, came to the Chamber doore

to lay hands on him, but they miſſed of their purpoſe, for Florian
comming to them, by maine ſtrength thruſt them foorth of
the Chamber, with theſe wordes. The time is now come Alfernao,
wherein thy traiterous dealings ſhall be worthily recompenced.
                     Then lifting vp his ſword to haue ſmitten him, the other
fiue ſtepped before and defended him, wherewith the Prince
was ſo much mooued, and he beſturd himſelfe ſo among them,
as two of them quickly tumbled at his feete, the other two ſéeing
that, and knowing the ſmall pittie Florian would ſhewe
them, tooke heart afreſh, and came to the Prince, aſſailing him
couragiouſly, but he laying before them the treaſon of olde Alfernao,
gaue them ſuch cruell and terrible ſtrokes, as he cut off
the arme of one of them hard by the ſhoulder, and the fourth (for
feare) was glad to leape into the Sea.
                     Then Alfernao ſeeing his life brought into ſo great danger,
came and humbled himſelfe before Arlencea, in this manner.
Madame, if the vnfained loue I haue alwayes vſed, in doing
ſeruice to your mother and your ſelfe, deſerueth any gratious
reſpect, then is it neceſſary that you affoord it me, and if that
loyaltie ought to be recompenced as it hath worthily merited,
then I deſire you to intreate for me the fauour of this Knight,
for your word (I knowe) may preuaile ſo much with him, as
his anger will be pacified, and my life ſaued.
                     The Damoſell Giant was ſo amazed at the noble proweſſe
of the Prince, as ſhe knew not how to addreſſe her ſelfe to him
to mooue intreatance, but being (as it were) in a quandarie,
had not power to anſwere Alfernao, nor yet to fulfill what he
had requeſted: neither would Florian deale extreamely wiſh
him, ſéeing him on his knées before Arlencea, for whoſe ſake
he thus began.
                     Truſt me, Madame, Alfernao had good Fortune to render
himſelfe to you, for that you haue the power to preſerue his
life, contrary to his deſerts, if I ſhould goe to the vttermoſt.
Arlencea did maruellouſly eſtéem the great humanitie, which
the Prince vſed to Alfernao, who (at her commaundement)
was put in ſure guard, fearing leaſt he ſhould practiſe any

more treaſon, and the Prince beganne to eſtéeme very well of
Arlencea (according as her honeſt and vertuous nature deſerued)
as well for the laudable bountie of her gentle minde, as alſo
for vſing him ſo kindly as ſhe had done: but albeit he was
ſubiect to voluptuous pleaſure, yet beholding the chaſt regard
this Damoſell had of her ſelfe, ſhe bridled her affection, and determined
to beſtow her as wife on his great friend the Giant
ant Dramuſiande, for he iudged it the part of a friend, to wiſh
ſuch an one to his friend, as hee knew to be acquainted with
vertue and chaſtitie, and to ſubdue that wicked deſire in
himſelfe, which ſhould mooue him to violate his faith to his
friend.
                     And for the Damoſell her ſelfe, albeit ſhe preferred the noble
behauiour of the Knight of the Sauage man, worthy the vttermoſt
ſtraine of her abilitie, yet had ſhe an eſpeciall regard of
her honour, knowing it to be the chiefeſt ornament to make
her eſtéemed of: and therefore ſhee behaued her ſelfe diſcréetely
and wiſely, gayning the good commendation of all that knewe
her as the Hiſtorie hereafter will declare vnto you.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XV.
                     Of that which happened to the Knight of the Sauage man,
after he was come on land.
                     
                        WHeu the Noble Prince Florian, had thus
vanquiſhed Alfernao, and his companions,
being ſo neare the ſhore, he determined to
goe on land, wherevpon he commaunded
the Pilote to drawe to the ſhore, which he
preſently did, landing them in a hauen belonging
to Recinde the King of Spaine,
where they reſted themſelues certaine dayes, becauſe Arlencea
                        
and her Damoſels were ſomewhat ſickly with their trauile,
and Alfernao deſired the knight of the Sauage man, that he
would giue him leaue to returne into his owne country, ſéeing
he was arriued in a place of aſſurance, and where he little néeded
to feare any danger: to which demaund the Prince ſhaped
this anſwer.
                     I am wel aſſured Alfernao, that the Court of Conſtantinople
is greatly troubled by your meanes, therefore I intend you
ſhall depart no whither elſe, before you haue ſworne to me to
go to the Emperour againe, to let him vnderſtand what hath
happened to me, from the time that your falſe teares made me
forſake the Court, euen vntill the infrant that we came hither,
which you may do well enough, without any feare of puniſhment
that the Emperour will lay on you, becauſe his clemency
is farre greater then thy euill deſerts, which in ſooth ſhall
neuer be laid to thy charge, in reſpect of the great good will I
beare to Madame Arlencea, whoſe friendly pittie hath deepely
bound me, in deliuering me out of the perill, wherein your malice
hath craftily caught me, euen as you may at large declare
vnto the Emperour.
                     My Lord (ſayd Alfernao) libertio is ſo highly eſtéemed,
and ſo greatly deſired by them who are well acquainted with
it, as ſometimes the deſire to recouerit, by him that was ſo
wilfull to forgo it, maketh him for to put his life in great ieopardie:
then, ſeeing himſelfe brought into ſuch miſhappe, that
he commeth in ſuch ſort to repen thimſelfe, as he wiſheth rather
continuall ſeruitude, then to haue liberty once, and then to looſe
it.
                     In this order it fareth with me at this time, who being deſirous
to liue out of thraldome, am content to obey your noble
commandement, yet not without feare of ſome inconuenience:
but ſuch is the hope I haue in the Emperours bountie,
as I truſt to be pardoned for the heinous offence, wherein I
haue diſpleaſed his imperiall Maieſtie, then comming to Arlencea,
he ſaid.
                     Madame, bethinke your ſelf in what it ſhal pleaſe you to cō
                        mand
me to your mother, if ſo be it fall out, y• I happen to the

place where ſhe is, to which words Arlencea replied thus. You
may giue her to vnderſtand from me, that I thinke it neceſſary
ſhe become friends with the Knight of the Sauage man, if
ſhe deſire that I ſhould remaine her obedient daughter, and
I requeſt that ſhe would forget the death of my Brethren, in
that ſeeking to reuenge their loſſe, ſhe cannot otherwiſe doe
but cut off her daughters life: and this you may very well aſſure
her, that if ſhe refuſe to graunt my requeſt, ſhe ſhall from
henceforth neuer more ſée me, for I haue yéelded my ſelfe to obey
the commandement of the Knight of the Sauage man, who
doth me ſuch honor, as I eſteeme the greateſt good fortune that
euer could come to me, in conducting me to the Emperours
Court, where I ſhall be acquainted with the gratious behauiour
of diuers noble and vertuous Princes, and likewiſe I ſhal
learne to amend my vnciuil conditions, ſeeing the rare qualities
vſed in that renowmed Court.
                     Madame (anſwered the Knight of the Sauage man) to ſée
you in this good and vertuous minde, I cannot chuſe but conceiue
great contentment, and when it ſhall be my fortune to
come to the Court, you ſhall perceiue how well I thinke of you
in the meane time, to render you ſome aſſurance of that which
I ſay, I pray thée Alfarnao, report to the Emperour, in what
good mind thru diddeſt leaue the Lady Arlencea, and that
I humbly requeſt his Maieſty, that ſhe may lawfully receiue
Baptiſme, to the end, that the Empreſſe may beſtow ſuch
a Lordly care on her, as her vertuous qurlities doth well deſerue.
                     
                        Alfernao promiſed to fulfill his whole commandement, and
ſo he tooke his leaue of them, not able to endure the ſight of the
amiable courteſie, which Arlencea vſed to the knight of the Sauage
man, who ſoiourned there a pretty ſpace, while he had
prouided him of neceſſary things for trauaile, becauſe he intented
to ride about the countrey there, to ſhew the eſtate
thereon to Arlencea, and her Damoſels.
                     When all things were in readineſſe, he ſet forward with
his faire company, and the firſt day, ſomewhat towards the
euening, they arriued within a faire and goodly valley, well

furniſhed with Trées, where, comming neare to a pleaſant
Fountaine, they eſpied where two ſeuerall Tents were pitched,
and not farre from them, they beheld foure Damoſelles
walking for their recreation vnder the gréene trées, to ſhroud
themſelues from the parching heate of the Sunne: vpon which
occaſion, Arlencea thus ſpake to the Prince.
                     If I iudge (amiſſe good Sir) theſe Damoſels I coniecture
receine farre greater pleaſure then I, in that they are frée to
their contentation, and I haue put my libertie into his hands,
who maketh but ſmall account thereof. The prince made ſhew
as though he vnderſtood not what Arlencea ſaid, wherefore to
change her preſent fantaſie, which procéeded of the intire loue
ſhe bare to him, in other familiar talke he paſſed away the time
vntill they came ſomewhat neare to the Tents, which were as
rich and faire as could be deuiſed: and while Florian ſtood ſtill
taking pleaſure to behold them, a Damoſell came and vſed this
conference with him.
                     Me thinkes it is a thing very ſtrange (Sir Knight) that
one man ſhould take vpon him to conduct fiue Damoſelles, in
that it cannot chuſe but be a very great charge, whereof I will
ſomething eaſe you, if ſo be it ſhall like you to follow my counſell,
which ſhall not be to your diſaduantage: wherto the prince
thus anſwered.
                     Albeit I cannot thinke ill of your courteous ſpéeches, wherewith
you kindly come to ſalute me, yet ſhall you not perſwade
me to any thing, except it be accompanied with vertue and honeſtie:
therefore I deſire you to ſatiſſfie mée of your opinion,
which ſtanding with reaſon, I ſhall not faile to follow, as one
that would not willingly diſobey any good counſell. I am content
(ſaide the Damoſell) to an were your demaund, wherefore
you ſhall vnderſtand, that we are foure Damolles, and
are garded here by foure knights, who will not be long before
they come hither, with whome (if you pleaſe, you may try the
I ouſt, and which of them ſhall happe to be vanquiſhed, muſt of
neceſſitie deliuer you his Lady, and you muſt be content to doe
the like, if Fortune denie you the fauour of victorie: but if ſhe
reſpect you with her friendly eye, and allowe you for her happy

conquerour, all we foure ſhall be deliuered to you, which cannot
be greater hinderance vnto you, in conducting nine ladies, then
theſe fiue. On the other ſide, if Fortune throwe you in diſcountenance,
and commit you to our knights as vanquiſhed, foure
of theſe Ladies muſt be taken from you, but the fift you ſhall be
ſuffered to enioy ſtill: thus you ſée the I ouſt cannot be any way
diſagréeable to you, for which way ſo euer it happens, you cannot
lacke both pleaſure and profite.
                     Gentlewoman (anſwered the Knight of the Sauage man)
you ſéeme ſo well acquainted with gentle behauior, as to gaine
you, I will ieopard the aduenture to looſe my ſelfe: and I promiſe
you I thinke the time too long, vntill I haue made a conqueſt
of you: whereto the Damoſell made this anſwere. I
pray you ſir, doe not thinke you ſhall purchaſe vs ſo lightly, in
that the deſire you haue to defend thoſe Ladies which you conduct,
will hardly permit you to ſpéed ſo ſoone, ſuch hardy valour
you ſhall finde in thoſe Knights, which haue attempted to defend
vs.
                     The Damoſell had no ſooner ended her words, but a Dwarfe
(being néere at hand vnderneath a trée) began to ſound a trumpet,
which he did with ſo high a note, as it brought a gallant
Eccho from the whole valley: then the Prince looking aſide, eſpied
foure knights come prauncing along the valley, armed in
white and gréene Armour, their helmets very richly gilded, and
vpon them they had faire garlands of flowers, and in their
Shields (which their Eſquires brought after them) was portraited
ſiluer Swannes in a field of Sinoble. When they were
come to the place, where the Damoſell talked with the Prince,
ſhe rehearſed vnto them what cōmunication had paſſed: whervpon
one of them thus anſwered her.
                     Madame, ſo it may be your pleaſure, I will not feare to
aduenture any danger, but I would be loath to be ſo vnhappy
as to looſe you, without I might expect greater profit to happen
for I would more willingly be depriued of my life, then to abide
ſuch a hard and irkſome extremitie, as to be forced to commit
you into the cuſtodie of another, being more deſirous to
kéepe you my ſelfe.
                     
                        
Truſt me ſir (anſwered the Damoſell) if you ſéeke thus to
excuſe your ſelfe with words, that you would not wlllingly
endure the Iouſt, then will you proue me falſe in my words
to the Knight, to whom the Ladies (which beare him company)
are greatly beholding, in ſéeing him to aduenture the triall
ſo worthily himſelfe, againſt vs that haue each one a knight to
defend her. Madame (ſaid the knight) this Gentleman eſtéemeth
it a great trouble to him, to be burdened with ſo many
Ladies, and therefore he would willingly be vanquiſhed, to the
and he might be diſcharged of them: ſo, in ſéeking to ſhun ſmall
occaſions of harme, he ſteppeth into a maze of greater danger:
whereto the Prince gaue this anſwer.
                     Truly ſir, you are very farre from my meaning, and ſo farre
as I giue you to vnderſtand, as I do not onely entend to guard
theſe Damoſels which are in my compnny, but that which is
more, I will diſburden you of thoſe foure Ladies which you
preſume to defend, and carrie them away with me. And if you
do not manfully behaue your ſelfe on their behalfe, truely I
ſhall be much diſpleaſed with you, for I am woont to make no
account of the victory, except I may atchieue it with great loſſe
of my blood. Well then ſir (anſwered the knight) ſeeing you deſire
to make your valor ſeene to theſe Ladies, prepare your ſelfe
to entertaiue me: with which words he clapt downe the Beuer
of his Helmet, and hauing couched his Lance, he fetcht
his courſe againſt the knight of the Sauage man, who welcommed
him very brauely: and albeit the knight brak his lance
worthily, yet ſuch was the rough charge the Prince gaue him,
as he was conſtrained to meaſure his length on the earth, being
ſo greatly amazed with his fall, as he lay a good ſpace without
mouing himſelfe, in the meane while, the knight of the Sauage
man came to the Damoſell, with whom he had talked
before, ſpeaking to her in this manner. I perceiue Madame,
his Knight is not able to kéepe her, whom he hath enterpriſed
to defend, wherefore I pray you diſcharge your ſelfe of the promiſe,
which you ſaid I ſhould enioy, by reaſon of your cuſtome
here appointed: to which words the Damoſell framed this
reply. You haue done your dnty ſo well, and like an approued

knight at Armes, as I might be worthily apprehended of ingratitude,
if I ſhould withhold that from you, which you haue
ſo well deſcrusd: therefore ſince the lot hath firſt fallen on me,
whom this knight did enterpriſe to defend, I ſubmit my ſelfe
to you, deſiring you, that you would entertaine me among
theſe other Ladyes, which requeſt I make in requitall of his
miſfortune, who hath thus vnluckily loſt me.
                     The Prince very fauourably reſpected the Damoſell, and
would haue made her anſwer, but the ſecond knight cryed to
him, that he ſhould prepare himſelfe, whereupon they ſet the
ſpurres to their horſes, and encountred with ſuch valour, as
the trunchions of their ſpeares flew vp gallantly into the aire:
then comming againe to their ſecond triall, the Prince gaue
the knight ſuch a forcible ſtroke, as he threw him to the earth,
with one of his legs broken.
                     The other two Knights, ſéeing the great diſhonour their
fellowes had receiued, and doubting they ſhould ſpéed no better
themſelues, they ran both together againſt the Knight of
the Sauage man, and dealt very diſcourteouſly with him, yet
had they not the power to vnhorſe him, but ſo ſoone as he could
gaine the opportunitie (béeing loath to truſt too much to their
gentlenes) he alighted from his horſe, and drawing his ſword,
he came to them with theſe words. Indeed Gentleman, you
haue gotten the aduantage of me now, in that you two ſo diſhonourably
aſſaile one onely Knight: yet cannot all this diſcourage
me in purchaſing the Ladies, whom I will haue
from you before I depart, or you ſhall haue the beſt blood in my
helly: to which words, one of the Knights made him this anſwer.
                     I cannot tell how things may fall out, but before you haue
theſe Ladyes, you ſhall buy them at our hands ſo déerely, as
while you liue you ſhall know the price. And ſo they alighted
from their horſes, running very furiouſly on the knight of the
Sauage man, who entertained them with ſuch braue and
ingenious ſleights of fight, as in ſhort time one of the Knights
(being not able to hold out any longer) was conſtrained to fall
at the Princeſſe féete: which when the other knight perceiued,

and ſaw his life was brought into ſuch extremitie, put foorth
himſelf nobly to defend the ſtrokes wherwith the knight of the
Sauage man charged him, who doing his deuoire to bring him
vnder his obeyſance, the knight (which began the iouſt, and had
ſitten all this while in great anger) ſéeing his fellowes Maiſtred,
by the proweſſe of the hardy Knight of the Sauage man,
and the great danger wherein he was that endured the Combate,
came with his ſword drawne to aſſiſt him.
                     The Prince ſéeing that, and how he which was ready to
yéeld, tooke heart a freſh by his fellowes company, redoubled
his ſtrokes vpon them, and ſayd. I would gladly that more
ſuccor would come & helpe this knight, to the end that the victory
which I ſhall obtaine, might yéeld me the larger eſtimation
of renowne: and that I might likewiſe make knowne to theſe
Ladyes, how their beantie ought to be reſerued for thoſe
Knights who are more vertuous, and can better defend them.
In briefe, ſuch was the preweſſe of the Prince towards them,
as one of the Knights, (being very ſore wounned) fell downe
to the earth, the ſight whereof ſo grieued the other, as he ranne
and fell downe before the Ladies, deſiring them to ſhield him
from the surie of the Prince, who ſmiling to ſee the behauiour
of the knight, entred into theſe ſpeeches.
                     Sir knight, you haue taken vp your Hoſtage in a place of
good aſſurance, otherwiſe, I would giue thee ſuch a recompence
as thy malicious and difloyall ſtomacke deſerueth: then comming
to the Ladies, he began in this order. Faire Ladies,
I deſire that you would mount your ſelues vpon your Palfrays,
for I would willingly be out of this place, leſt the remembrance
of the ill hap of theſe Knights cauſe you to be forgetfull
of the honeſt promiſe, which you made me before I began the
Iouſt.
                     In ſooth worthy Sir (anſwered one of the Damoſels) it is
very hard to put out our memory, their ſlender and vnhappy
fortune, that could not withſtand the force of one Knight, but
becauſe you haue deſerued ſo well, we ſubmit our ſelues moſt
willingly to your worthy ſelfe to diſpoſe of vs as it ſhall ſeeme
beſt in your iudgement, humbly deſiring, that vertue be not

blemiſhed by any inordinate meane, which oftentimes happeneth
to a Ladies great diſhonour, being too late to recouer it againe,
when ſuch an eſpeciall iewell is loſt.
                     Ladies (anſwered the knight of the Sauage man) I am not
accuſtomed to vſe diſcourteſie to any your ſexe, eſpecially, not
to them of whom I make account, but ſuch is my miſfortune
as when I haue well deſerued, my due recompence is farre
enough from me. Then taking one of the horſes of the vanquiſhed
Knights, he rid away with the Ladies, leauing the
knights in the Tents, to remember the great loſſe they had ſuſtained:
being thus depriued of their gratious ladies, who with
their Eſquires rid on merrily, reioycing that they werein the
Cuſtody of the noble and aduenterous knight of the Sauage-man.
                     
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XVI.
                     Of the aduentures, which chanced to the Knight of the Sauage
man, conducting theſe Ladies to the King of Spaines
Court: and of that which happened to the Knight of the
Tiger, in his voyage to the Profound Iſle.
                     
                        AFter the Knight of the Sauage man, had
left the Valley, where he vanquiſhed the
foure Knights, he determined to iourney
through the Realme of Spaine, being very
glad that he was ſo worthily accompanied
with Ladies, and intending to let them vnderſtand,
what eſtimation he made of their
ſingular beauty, which indéed was ſo pleaſing in his eyes, as

willingly he could haue afforded them a point of his courteſie:
but for the Damoſell Giant Arlencea, the regard he had of her,
and the promiſe wherein he had bound himſelfe, beſide cauſed
him to qualifie his amorous humour, becauſe his friend Dramuſiande
was of ſuch account with him, as made him hee
would not leuell at her ſo pleaſant, as perhaps he did at the other.
                     In their company he ſhewed himſelfe merry and iocond, ſo
that at laſt hée tooke off his Helmette, and gaue it to his Eſquier,
when, the Damoſelles beholding his faire vſage, and
how youthfull and comely he was withall, they ſeuerally fell
into ſo good opinion of him (the dapper boy of the Goddeſſe Citherea,
hauing ſomewhat touched them) as they repented the
wordes they ſpake, when they firſt humbled themſelues vnto
him.
                     The Prince behaued himſelfe to all of them very gratiouſly,
becauſe he would not haue malice to growe on either ſide, and
to the Damoſels he brought forth of the Valley, he procéeded in
earneſt conference, to wit, of whence they were, and wherefore
they remained in the company of thoſe Knights whom he had
ſo nobly vanquiſhed: then on of the Damoſels, with a very modeſt
countenance returned the Prince this anſwere.
                     Moſt worthy ſir, to witneſſe the regard we haue of you, and
the dutifull affection wherewith we honour you, I will preſume
(on the behalfe of all the reſt) to ſatiſfie your preſent demaund.
You ſhall therefore vnderſtand, that the first of theſe Damoſels
is named Armelia, the ſecond Iulianda, the third Sabelia, and
my ſelfe am called Artiſia, we being all of one Citie, not farre
from the Valley called Arſeda, wherein thoſe foure Knights
(whereof two were Brethren, and ſo were the other twaine,
yet being ſo allied together, as they were all Couzins one to another)
made their abode, being all deſirons to doe vs ſeruice,
that they might thereby in time marry vs.
                     And becauſe wee ſhould not miſſe ſo great an honour as
mariage is, by the licence of our Mother, we came oftentimes
to recreate our ſelues by this Fountaine, which you perceiued
neere the Tents where you found vs, and there would

the Knightes vſually take delight, to féede our eyes with ſuch
pleaſant ieſtes déedes, as they could daily attempt in the
Forreſt.
                     Moreouer, that we might the better perſwaded of their loue,
they would offer the Iouſt to any Knight that paſſed through
the valley, ſummoning them thereto by the Dwarffe which
ſounded the Trumpet, aſſuring you, that they were alwaies the
Conquerours, vntil this time, which fortune made vnhappy to
them, by your noble and valliant proweſſe.
                     Ladyes (anſwered the Knight of the Sauage man) it were
great ſhame for me to looſe them, whom Fortune (by my happy
victory) hath deliuered into my hands, wherefore, I promiſe
not to forſake you, vntill ſome other knight bring me into ſuch
extremitie, as I ſhall be deſtitue of power ſufficient to defend
you: but I beleeue he will very bardly vanquiſh him, who ſubmitteth
himſelfe ſo earneſtly to your direction. And thus much
will I doe for you beſide, I will conduct you to the King of
Spaines Court, and bring you likewiſe to ſée the Caſtle of the
Giant Almaroll: afterward, if you ſhall finde it ſo conuenient
for you, to leaue my company, I am content to let you depart
at your owne pleaſure.
                     All the Damoſelles (vpon this motion) deſired him earneſtly,
that he would bring them into thoſe places which he had
promiſed, for that it is the nature of women, to deſire to ſée nouelties,
and Arlencea, who was inflamed with the ſelfeſame
deſire, was as forward in moouing the requeſt as any of them,
yet ſhe feared leaſt the company of theſe other Damoſelles,
would alter the Princes former determination to her, but ſhée
néeded not to caſt any ſuch doubt, for the Princes will was as
reſolute as ſhe could wiſh it.
                     Thus they iourneyed on till night came vpon them, when,
they went to a Caſtle néere at hand, where they were all very
friendly entertained, and the Prince cauſed good attendance
to bée vſed to the Ladyes: ſo heare we will leaue him
and them togither, and will (as our Hiſtory willes vs) procéed
to tell you, how the knight of the Tiger, the fiftéene day after
he was imbarqued, came within the ſight of the Profound Iſle,
                        
which the Pilot knew very well, and ſo gaue the Prince Palmerin
to vnderſtand, whom he ſet a ſhoare in the moſt conuenient
place he could find, committing him to God and good fortune.
                     The knight of the Tiger rode about to vifite the Profound
Iſle, which ſeemed to him very pleſant and fertile: but the night
ſuddenly hindering him, he was conſtrained to alight at the
foote of a mountaine, where he ſuffered his horſe to refreſh himſelfe,
and began to mourne, for lacke of the company of his approoued
friend Siluian, whoſe preſence was agréeable to him,
as well for the remembrance that he was nouriſhed with him,
as alſo for the fwéete and louing counſell he would giue him,
when he was in extreme grief and heauineſſe, becauſe he knew
beſt how comfort him.
                     Thus for want of his company, he was conſtrained to paſſe
that night among the gréene leaues, vſing his Helmet as a
pillow vnder his head, and there he toſt and tumbled very vnquietly
all night, vntill the cleare morning had chaſed away
the vncomfortable darkeneſſe: then he aroſe, and mounting
on horſe-backe, rode on very heauy and penſiue, yet ſomewhat
comforted by the pleaſantneſſe of the Iſle, which he iudged
more worthy to be peopled, then to ly waſt and deſolate. About
the euening tide, he came where was a little Iſland,
which was compaſſed about with very ſtrong wals: into this
Iſland he entred, and tooke vp his lodging in the houſe of an ancient
Knight, who was accuſtomed to giue entertainment to
ſuch Knights, as beſtowed their time in ſéeking aduentures-and
becauſe he ſaw the Knight of the Tiger, without an Eſquire
attending on him, he came and tooke his horſe himſelfe,
and afterward he helped to vnarme him, vſing him with ſo
great humanity as was poſſible.
                     The knight of the Tiger was glad of this friendly entertainment,
and deſired to be informed by his Hoſt, of the cuſtomes
and manners of that Countrey: ſo, when he was riſen from
Supper, and had repoſed himſelfe a little, he requeſted his hoſt
to tell him, to whom ihat Iſland belonged, and what were the
maners and cuſtomes thereof, that he might report it in other

places where he came: to which demand, the ancient Knight
his Hoſt made this anſwer.
                     My Lord, you came now in good time to be reſolued of that,
which I perceiue you are ignorant in, for if it had béene your
fortune to come hither a little ſooner (being in your ſwéeteſt
times of yeares) your life would haue béene in very great danger,
For you ſhall vnderſtaud, that it is not long time ſince a
Giant named Brauorant the Cruell, was the Lord and poſſeſſor
of this Iſland, who delighted to ſet ſpies at all his Ports, to
informe him when any Knights or Damoſels did arriue in
this Iſland, and when any ſuch happened to come, he would
vſe them extreame cruelly, the Knights he would depriue of
their liues, and the Damoſels he would villanouſly force, and
afterward ſend them away ſtarke naked, diſpoyled of all their
rich and coſtly cloathing.
                     And for this purpoſe he kept a great company of vaſſayles,
who did nothing elſe but imploy themſelues in following his
wicked humor, and when as any Merchants (by fortune) came
to caſt Anker into this Iſle, his vaſſailes would compell them,
to ranſome themſelues with great extremitie, before they
would ſuffer them to depart hence: but if they chanced to
find fault with his tyranny, and refuſed to pay their ranſome,
which they knew to be laide on them without all right or reaſon,
then would he murther them, or put them to ſome villainous
death or other. But the heauenly powers ſeeing the great
oppreſſion and crueltie, which this bloody minded hel-hound
continually vſed, and chiefly towards them that neuer offended
him, in their diuine prouidence, they thought good to cut off
ſuch a tyrant, and ſo it fortuned this Giant died, whoſe ſoule I
thinke was carried to the place, where his vnnaturall déeds deſerued
to haue recompence, for that he could imploy his life no
better. He thus dying, left behind him foure ſons which he had
in iſſue, who were in all things to be compared to the Giant
their father, the two eldeſt of his ſons were named, Calfurnien
& Combaldam, who being not content to liue on ſo ſmal teuenues
as this Iſland yéelded, went to inhabit another country:
but albeit they were thus departed hence, the ſupreme authoritie

would not long ſuffer them, to liue in their vnſupportable
crueltie and tyranny, but made a diſpatch of their curſed
liues, and that by the hand of one onely knight, who was called
(as report hath here blazed) the Knight of the Sauage man, ſo
named, for that he beareth figured in his ſhield a Sauage man.
It may be, you haue better knowledge of this Knight, then I
haue, for that ſuch a one as you ſéeme to be, cannot chuſe but be
acquainted with thoſe noble mindes, as imploy themſelues in
ſéeking hautie aduentures, whereby their fame is thundered
through the whole world. As for the two other Brethren, they
were nouriſhed in this Iſland vnder their mothers wing, againſt
whoſe will (after they iudged themſelues able to endure
armor) they determined to depart hence, to reuenge the death
of their brethren, Calfurnien and Camboldam. The earneſt
deſire they had to be gone, would not ſuffer them to tary longer
here, but taking ſhipping, away they went, and after they had
ſpent a great time in the bloody and horrible life their predeceſſours
ſpent before them, and in ſéeking the aforenamed knight
of the Sauage man, it ſo fell out, that the good and hardy knight
himſelfe, chanced to come where they were, with them he entred
the Combate, and behaued himſelfe ſo worthily againſt
them, as he likewiſe ended the liues of the other two Giants,
whoſe death deliuered the inhabitants of the countrey (where
they dwelled) out of a great deale of feare and trouble, ſo that it
is to be iudged, that the Knight was ordained to be the onely
meane, to defend the miſerable afflicted people, out of the life of
flauiſh ſeruitude, wherein they had remained long time by their
cruel Giants. The mother of theſe merciles hell-hounds before
named, who is called Collambra, could not long endure the ſorrow
ſhe ſuffered for the death of her children, wherfore ſhe practiſed,
& compaſſed all deuiſes ſhe could, wherby to get the knight
of the Sauage man into her cuſtody, & that ſhe might ſpéede the
better in her cloſe intent, ſhe ioyned with a Magitian a friend
of hers, one whom he loued well, named Alfernao, who is gone
to the Emperors court of Conſtantinople, hauing ten daies allowed
him to accōpliſh his intent, & to worke ſo craftily (as wel
he can (y• the knight of the Sauage man muſt be brought hither.
                     
                        
And becauſe no occaſion ſhal want that may helpe any way,
a Damoſell Giant named Arlencea, who is the Daughter to
this Collambra, accompanied with a certaine nūber of knights
and Damoſels, is ioyned in company with this Enchauntor,
vpon whoſe promiſes ſuch aſſurance is made here, as the
Knight of the Sauage man ſhall bée brought hither. In this
great hope which the cruell Collambra hath, to reuenge her
deuilliſh will on this good knight, ſhe is gone to a Citie foure
leagues diſtance hence, being accompanied with a great many
of her friends, as alſo with one of her brethren, who (though
he be young) yet is he maruailous bloody and cruell, and reputed
for an eſpeciall Knight at Armes, who is alſo a Giant, and
named Eſponuautable, who hath conuerted his countrey into
as great cruelty, as when it was gouerned by the Giant Brauorant
the Cruell: and to ſpeake vprightly, Brauorant was not
altogether ſo terrible, as hee is whom I lately named to you,
wherefore I hartily pray, that the good Knight of the Sauage
man fall not into the hands of this Giant, neither that the treaſon
may preuaile which is laide for him: the ancient Knight
knitting vp his tale with a ſigh, the Knight of the Tiger thus
began.
                     My good friend, it is hard for him to eſcape the daunger,
whom fortune hath determined to fall into it, and ſéeing it is
ſo, I could wiſh that ſhe would ſuffer the Brother to Colambra,
to ſéeke reuenge on me for the death of his Nephews: perhappes
he might fall into his handes, who hath a good will to
puniſh his wicked life, and make him knowe the deſert of crueltie,
as well as his kindred hath taſted it before him. And for
the Knight of the Sauage man, hée is one that I knowe very
well, and I hope he wil eſcape the hands of his enemies, as one
that is reſerued to bring to an end many worthy and hauty aduentures:
wherefore, in reſpect that hee is my eſpeciall good
friend, I deſire to know the certaintie of that you haue rehearſed,
for if he ſpéede ill, I cannot take it quietly, and therefore becauſe
I wil ſatiſfy my mind, I am determined to morrow morning
to goe ſeeke this Giant, not doubting, but if Fortune fauour
me, to repay his wicked and euill deſerts, with ſuch recompence

as is méete for ſuch an offender, I ſée well Syr (anſwered
the ancient Knight) that you are ignorant of the Giants
force, in preſuming ſo to combate with him: alas Sir, hée
will not make any account of the enterpriſe, if ten ſuch as you
came and waged the fight with him: therefore I cannot chuſe
but miſlike your iudgement, in that any one will repute your
enterpriſe, rather for want of diſcretion, then vpon any good or
ſound aduiſe.
                     The Knight of the Tiger tooke in good part, the councell
which his hoſt laboured to haue him follow, but yet he did not
intend to be ruled by him: ſo, after he and his hoſt had talked
an indifferent ſpace, he withdrew himſelfe into his Chamber,
where he tooke his reſt better then he had done the night before,
and he reioyced greatly, that his brother Florian was not
as yet arriued there, as alſo that himſelfe was there ready
to helpe him, if ſo be hée were brought to this cruell Collambra.
                     
                     In the morning, after he had taken leaue of his courteous
Hoſte, hée departed to follow what hée had intended, and comming
into a Forreſt, where through he ſhould trauaile to the
Citie, where Collambra made her aboade, he heard the roaring
noyſe which the Sea made, whereto he would néedes goe
to ſée if he could eſpy any veſſell, wherein the knight of the Sauage
man his brother might be imbarqued: but as he rode towards
the Sea coaſt, hée heard a great bruit or noyſe ſomewhat
néere him, and riding forward to ſée what it might bée,
he eſpyed a Shippe lying at Anker, and hard by it was tenne
Knights (belonging to Collambra the Mother of Arlencea)
maintaining a firce Combate againſt thrée other Knightes,
which he (ſo ſoone as he had ſéene them (knew them to be Platir,
Berolde: & the Sage Aliard of the Obſcure Valley, who had put
their liues in hazard, onely to giue ſuccour to the Knight of the
Sauage man.
                     
                     This ſight mooued him ſomewhat to reioyce, till ſuddenly
he was aſtoniſhed againe, beholding not paſt twentie paces
from theſe Knights that fought the Combate, a Giant of a
maruellous ſtature, and Armed in rich and coſtly Armour,

who cried to kill and murder thoſe thrée Knights, that preſumed
to make ſuch reſiſtaunce, and ſo hacked and hewed
their enemies, as now one tumbled on this ſide, then another
on that ſide, and the moſt of them being very dangerouſly
wounded.
                     The Giant ſéeing this, beganne to waxe meruailous worth
with himſelfe, when, mounting on horſebacke, he came to giue
ayde to his Knights, which the Knight of the Tiger perceiuing,
and fearing leaſt his arriuall would be hurtful to his three deare
friends, he poaſted till he came before them, when, he ſaluted
the Giant with theſe words.
                     Art thou not aſhamed Eſpouuantable, to offer thy ſelfe againſt
them whom thou ſéeſt ſore wounded, and haue ſcantly
power to defend themſelues? let them alone and addreſſe thy
ſelfe to me, who as my mortall enemy) came now to ſéeke thée,
for that I would deliuer that vnfortunate Iſle, out of thy cruell
and bloody tiranny. The Giant ſtayed a while to behold him,
who had ſummoned him to the Combat in ſuch braue manner,
and perceiuing that he bare a golden Tiger in his Shield, hée
knewe preſently that this was the Knight, whom the world
did hold in ſo great eſtimation, for he thought no other durſt be
ſo bold as to ſpeake ſo proudly: neuertheleſſe, regarding not the
preſence of the Knight of the Tiger, but in ſéeing his Knights
ſo vanquiſhed, he fell into theſe ſpéeches.
                     I ſée well that the valour of theſe ſtrange knights, is far different
to them of this countrey, which maketh me the more deſirous
to hazard my Fortune, for that my happy conqueſt will
yéelde me the more contentment, then comming to the Knight
of the Tiger, he began againe thus.
                     I deſire you Syr Knight to doe me ſo much fauour, as to
tell mée, if any of you belong to the Emperours Court of Conſtantinople,
or if you be the Sonnes, or of the linage, of the
noble Prince Don Edward, you might greatly content mée,
if you would reſolue mée héerein, for I am perſwaded, that
you could not thus long maintain y• fight againſt my knights,
without you be ſome of them which I haue named.
                     I am content (anſwered the Knight of the Tiger) to ſatiſfie

thée in that thou deſireſt, wherefore I giue thée to vnderſtand
that theſe Knights were brought vp in the Court of the Emperour
of Conſtantinople, in the company of my ſelfe, who am
the Sonne of the Prince Don Edward, and brother to the renowned
knight of the Sauage man, on whoſe behalfe, I earneſtly
deſire to requite the treaſon, which thou and other of thy
kindred haue practiſed, to bring him vnder your ſubiection in
this Iſland.
                     Art thou Palmerin (ſaid the Giant) the eldeſt ſonne to the
Prince Don Edward, who vanquiſhed Dramuſiand and Camboldam,
and didſt win the Iſlle which no man elſe could, thruſting
all them forth which kept the ſame?
                     For what cauſe deſireſt thou to know (anſwered the knight
of the Tiger?) Marry for that I greatly deſire ſaid Eſpouuantable
to enter the Combat with thée in the preſence of my ſiſter
Collambra who would receiue vnſpeakeable contentment, in
ſéeing thée ſeuerely tormented, for the diſhonour thou haſt done
to her kindred: to which words the Prince replyet thus.
                     I am euen the ſelfe-ſame man whom thou haſt ſo great deſire
to knew, and I am glad to ſee thée ſo willing to fight the
Combate, although it be in the place which thou thy ſelfe haſt
appointed, becauſe I will make knowne publikely to all, how
the heauenly powers haue ſent me to chaſtiſe thy wicked life,
as alſo the crueltie of thy Siſter Collambra. Well then
(ſaid the Giant) to the end thou maiſt the better folow thy enterpriſe,
faile not to prepare thy ſelfe againſt the morning, and
this night will I cauſe the Field to be prouided, wherein we
entend to fight the Combate: and if thoſe thy companions
would be likewiſe ſet to worke, I haue thrée Couzins, which
ſhall maintaine the Combat againſt them, and I will furniſh
them with Armour out of the Armoury of my brother Bravorant,
becauſe I ſee their Armour is greatly out of order, hauing
fought ſo long againſt my knights: vppon which words, Berolde
tooke occaſion to ſpeake th
                           •
                        s.
                     Thou ſhalt do vs great pleaſure, to lend vs Armour
that haue neede of it, and ſo we will not refuſe the Combate:
as well to accompany and do ſeruice to the Prince Palmerin,
                        
as to deſtroy and aboliſh the memorie of them, who haue kept
the people here in ſuch tirannous ſeruitude. I ſée then (quoth
the knight of the Tiger) that the combate betwéene the Giant
and me, muſt be ended firſt.
                     Noble Palmerin (ſaid the Sage Aliart) we deſire you to ſuffer
vs the Combate firſt, for it may ſo fall out, as you hauing
obtained the victory, againſt the Giant, feare will make his
Couzins to forſake the field the day following: wherefore, to
ſhunne the miſfortune that may happen to vs, we deſire you to
cauſe the Giant to agrée to this requeſt, which if you do, you
ſhall endue your ſelfe with perpetuall renowme, and doe vs a
great pleaſure, who are your humble ſeruants at commandement.
                     Séeing it is your earneſt deſire (anſwered the Knight of the
Tiger) I am content that it ſhall be ſo, according as your ſelues
thinke beſt to order it. The Giant went away as ioyfull as
might be, for he promiſed himſelfe the victory, and did verily
make account to kill the knight of the Tiger, before the knight
of the Sauage man arriued there, and in this ioy he came to
his ſiſter, who ſate wéeping and wringing her hands, becauſe
her knights were ſo vanquiſhed, as alſo for the long tarryance
of her daughter Arlencea, fearing leaſt ſome miſchance
ſhould hinder them, becauſe they ſtayed ſo long: the conſideration
hereof, made her heart ouerwhelmed in extreame paſſions,
yet was ſhe ſomewhat contented by her brothers preſence,
who prouided ſuch neceſſaries for himſelfe, as he ſhould
vſe in the Combate in the day following againſt Palmerin of
England.
                     
                     The Giant being thus gone about his buſineſſe, the Prince
Palmerin demanded of his friend, for what cauſe the Giants
Knights did enter fight with them? whereto the Sage Aliart
thus replied. My Lord, this Giant cauſeth a number of
Spies for to lucke about this Countrey, who ſeeing but any
ſtrangers to come on the land here, or that any Ship do but
once lie here at Anker, they ſet vppon them with maine force
preſently: in like manner chanced this miſfortune to vs, who
comming on land in this place, were no ſooner offering to

mount on horſeback, but we were aſſaulted with theſe knights
from the Giant, who came himſelfe to encourage and animate
them againſt vs, we being ready to fall into extreame danger,
had not you ſo happily arriued, being ſent (doubtleſſe) to ſuccour
vs, that our enterpriſe might not come to an vnfortunate
end, which could not otherwiſe be, in that the knight of the Sauage
man
is not yet brought hither.
                     Here making a pawſe, they went to ſéeke ſomewhat to ſup
withal, and to prouide ſomething to lay to a litle wound, which
Berolde had receiued on his arme, for which cauſe Palmerin deſired
him, that he would not aduenture the Combat the day following,
but Berolde would by no meanes be perſwaded.
                     The Sage Aliarts Eſquier, tooke the Prince Palmerins horſe,
he ſtaying there all that day in his friends company, all of them
watching very diligently for the ſight of any Shippe, wherein
the Prince Florian ſhould be brought captiue into his enemies
hands: but when the darke night would not ſuffer them to looke
any longer, they entred all into the Shippe which had brought
them thither, for that they iudged themſelues in more aſſurance
there, then to tarrie on the land all the darke night, accounting
them rather gouerned by arrogancy and folly, then any wiſedome
or diſcretion, that would truſt them, who made no account
of their faith, eſpecially, being their profeſſed and ſworne
enemies.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XVII.
                     Of the Combate betweene the Giant Eſpouuantable, and
the noble knight of the Tiger: and of the battell betweene
Berolde, Platir, and Sage Aliart, and the three Couzins of
the Giant.
                     
                        CLeare Phebus had no ſooner ſhewed his
golden face on the earth the next morning,
but theſe foure Knights departed from the
ſhip, thrée of them being armed but badly,
by reaſon their armor had béene mangled
very cruelly the day before: but yet though
they were ſo ſlenderly prouided, they
would not forſake the Combate againſt the Giants Couzins:
ſo leauing the Shippe in the cuſtodie of the Marriners,
they rid on, accompanied with their Eſquiers, who bare their
Lances and their Shields, vntill they came to the place where
the Giant remained. Being come thither, they beheld before
the Caſtle, the place appointed for the combat, which was paled
round about very handſomly, & ſcaffolds made of very great
height, whereon was aſſembled an innumerable company of
people, who came onely to ſée the Combat, for that they iudged
it would be the moſt famous that euer was fought in y• Countrey,
wherein they heartily deſired that the giant might be depriued
of life, for that he vſed the people with ſuch extreame rigor,
and yet they durſt not ſpeake againſt him, no not the chiefe
nobles and gentlemen of the Country, but they ſtood in awe of
him for his cruell dealing, being glad to honor him to his face,
though they ſcorned and diſdained him behind his backe. And
thus he liued Lordly ouer euery one, vſing all alike as ſlauiſhly
as might be, ſo that none durſt diſpleaſe or offend his raſcall
vaſſails, leaſt they ſhould raiſe ſuch a ſcandall among them, as

the tyrants puniſhment would be too hard for them to ſuffer, ſo
that many times they practiſed the death of the Giant, that
they might be diſcharged of his cruell oppreſſions: but let vs
come againe to the former matter.
                     The knights entred into this place, which they knew was
ordained for the combate, and there they ſtood attending for the
Giant, who in ſhort time after came to one of the windowes of
the caſtle, accompanied with his ſiſter Collambra, he being armed
as he was the day before. At laſt the Giant lifted vp the
Beuer of his Helmet, to the end the Chriſtian knights might
be diſmaied, beholding his ſterne and vigorous countenance,
and I aſſure you, albeit he was yong, yet was he ſo mighty and
tall of ſtature, hauing ſuch an vgly and fearefull face, as was
ſufficient to terrifie the hearts of them, who were not accuſtomed
to ſée ſuch a hideous proportion. For his face was alwayes
bitterly frowning, the ſkin whereof ſwart and wrinkled, his
lips bigge and boyſterous, and gaping ſo farre aſunder, as his
téeth were ſéene very monſtrouſly, ſo that the Anatomie agréed
well with his name, he being called the Fearefull Giant. The
Giant ſtood leaning on a Cuſhion of blacke Veluet in the window,
and ſhewed to his ſiſter the Knight of the Tiger, deſiring
her to comfort her ſelfe, for that he intended to reuenge y• death
of her ſonnes on him, becauſe he that had ſlaine them was not
as yet come: this he ſpake becauſe he would not let her know
what talke had paſſed on the day before, betwéene him and the
knight of the Tiger, leſt ſhe ſhould chance to diſcorage her ſelfe,
or doubt of the ſufficiency of his ſtrength, which both he and ſhe
eſtéemed equall to deale with ten good and hardy Knights. In
the meane while the Giant ſtaied in the window, there came
an Eſquire of his, with men with him laden with armor, into
the place where the Combate ſhould be fought, and they comming
before the prince and his company, after that the Eſquire
had ſaluted them, he entred into theſe ſpéeches.
                     Gentlemen, my Lord the giant willed me to let you vnderſtand,
that he is not accuſtomed to make a conqueſt of thoſe
knights, who ſhal afterward excuſe thēſelues, that their miſfortune
was for want of armor: and becauſe he will auoid ſuch an

impeachment, he hath ſent you here choice of armour, willing
you to take them, which you ſhall thinke moſt conuenient for
you. And he willed me to bring him word, whether you will
rather yéeld to the mercy of his Siſter Collambra, or abide the
triall of himſelfe and his Couzins: the Prince Platir anſwered
the Eſquire thus.
                     Truſt me (my friend) I cannot thinke it méete to receiue
thy Maiſters armor, which we thanke him for, that he would
ſo courteouſly ſend vs, becauſe I carry this mind with me, that
it is better for vs to looſe our liues without his aid, them hauing
his armour to fall into his hands vanquiſhed, for our armour
his not ſo much ſpoyled, but we may very well endure the triall
of this Combate: wherefore, we will trie our Fortune in this
armor we haue, conſidering, ſkill muſt be vſed as well as defence,
which if we imploy as we ought, there is no doubt but
we ſhall haue the victory.
                     I am content to follow the aduiſe of Platir (ſaid Berolde.)
And ſince you find it ſo conuenient (quoth the Sage Aliart) me
thinkt it were good the meſſenger returned backe to his Maiſter,
and let him vnderſtand, that he may come when pleaſe
him into the field. I reioyce greatly (ſaide the Eſquire) in the
counſell of this young knight, that you will not take this Armor,
which my Lord the Giant ſendeth you: therefore let him
that hath the aduantagr boaſt of his winning in the end.
                     Thus the Eſquire departed into the Caſtle of Collambra
againe, giuing the Giant to vnderſtand, what the
Knights had ſaid, whereat he fumed and fretted greaely, to
ſée what diſdaine theſe Chriſtian knights made of him: wherevpon,
he tooke his leaue of his Siſter in this maner. Madame,
I pray you abide at this window all the while the Combate
endureth, for I ſhall be greatly iniuried if I want your preſence.
                     So departing, he went vnto his Couzins, who were all in
blacke armor, conformable to their griefe and ſorrow, and bearing
for their deuices in their ſhéelds, the portraitures of Brocalon
and Baleato, their Couzins, figured in a field of Sable
they promiſing neuer to change their deuiſes, vntill they had

reuenged the death of the Giants the ſons of Collambra, who
were déerely beloued of their vnckle the Giant Eſpouuantable.
With them he tooke his way to the place appointed for the
combate, the people reioycing when they ſaw him comming
with his Couzins, who were in ſtature able to deale with ſixe
ſuch as the thrée knights were: which made the Giant to ride
very merily, perſwading himſelfe, that the knight of the Tiger
and his companions, ſhould looſe their liues in the field that
day: then comming ſomwhat néere them, he began to vſe theſe
words. In ſooth my friends, it were better for you to yéeld your
ſelues, then to abide the terrour of my combate. Not ſo ſir (anſwered
the Knight of the Tiger) but albeit thy arcogant pride
ſhould ſéeme to fray vs, in theſe peoples iudgements, we are
content to abide the vttermoſt: not doubting (God aiding vs)
but to bring downe thy haughty ſtomacke, and theſe likewiſe
that beare thée company.
                     Vpon theſe words the Giant ran againſt the knight of the
Tiger and his Cozins againſt the other knights, that the trampling
of the horſes made the earth to groane, and they were not
ſo quicke and ſpéedy in their courſe, but the knight of the Tiger
and his companions were as nimble as they, méeting ſo
brauely in the middeſt of the Carrire, where the Giant broke
his lance on the Prince Palmerins ſhéeld with ſo great force,
as he was conſtrained to catch hold on the mane of his horſe,
otherwiſe he had fallen beſide him: neuertheleſſe the Giant
was caſt out of his Saddle with great violence againſt the
ground, whereat he was maruailouſly offended, but the knight
of the Tiger reioyced that he had broken his lance ſo well.
                     The other ſix knights were all likewiſe diſmounted, except
the Prince Flatir, who kept his Saddle ſtill: yet was the
charge ſo rough vpon him, as he had almoſt borne his fellowes
company, but that he recouered himſelfe gallantly, hauing loſt
both his ſtirreps. The knight of the Tiger ſéeing the Giant
comming towards him, caſt himſelfe beſide his horſe quickly,
becauſe he feared the Giant would haue kiled his horſe: then
being on his féete, he ſpake to the Giant thus.
                     Content thy ſelfe a while thou counterfeit Monſter, and let

thy Cozins procéede in that they haue enterpriſed, for they that
deale with him are ſuch, as they ſhall find ſufficient to abate
their lofty minds: and after they haue tried their fortune (becauſe
we will not hinder them, neither do they the like to vs)
thou and I will quickly decide our controuerſie, when, do not
doubt but thou ſhalt perceiue, the little regard I haue of thée,
and the vttermoſt thou canſt doe.
                     I ſée well (anſwered the Giant) that becauſe thou hadſt ſo
good fortune to diſmount me, it makes thee ſo bold to ſpeake
thus brauely: but I receiue greater contentment thē thou canſt
deuiſe, to ſee thee here in this place, where at mine owne pleaſure
I ſhall giue thee puniſhment, and with my ſword repay the
ſhame of my fall. Then drew he his ſword forth of the ſcabbard,
ſaying to the Prince, that he had cauſed that weapon to
be made, onely to take reuenge therewithall, for the death of
his Couzins Brocalon, and Baleato: with theſe words he ran
fiercely on the Knight of the Tiger, and gaue him ſuch cruell
and forcible ſtroakes, as had he not defended them worthily,
his life would haue bene in great danger.
                     Verie rigorous was the blowes the Giant gaue the prince,
ſo that moſt part of his ſhield was cut in peeces, and he had
very little left to award his enemy, and a great while it was
before he could wound the Giant, yet at length he gained ſuch
opportunitie, as he wounded him grieuouſly in three or foure
places: which made the Giant to faint and waxe ſomewhat
wearie, both with the great loſſe of his blood, and alſo with his
extreame ſweating and chafing, to ſee himſelfe ſo hardly matched
by one knight, but all his fretting the prince regarded not,
he followed his intent ſo worthily, and redoubled ſtroake after
ſtroake ſo roughly vpon him, as the Giant was conſtrained to
retire, to take breathing awhile.
                     The knight of the Tiger was not ſorry therat, for that he as
gladly deſired reſt of the giant, though not by any ſuch extreame
occaſion, conſidering alſo, he deſired to ſee how his
three friends continued the fight, with the giants three Couzins,
who in ſooth were brought to ſuch a narrow point, as
they had not the power to defend their enemies, for they both

had and did charge them ſo worthily, as the Prince did much delight
himſelfe in beholding them, they being ſo couragious, nimble
and quicke, as they were at the beginning of the Combate.
But the Prince Platir dealt ſo gallantly with him that was his
enemy, as he had the general praiſe, and was iudged worthy the
honour of that day, aboue his other two companions.
                     The Giant beholding his Couzins in ſuch danger, and himſelfe
to haue loſt the moſt part of his blood, likewiſe that he had
ſuch a ſtrong and puiſſant enemy: his heart began to faint, but
becauſe he would not haue them know, in what great feare and
debilitie he was, he came againe as luſtily (as he could) to the
Combate.
                     As for the Knight of the Tiger, he was ready and willing to
entertaine him, which was more rough and ſharpely giuen to
the Giant, then the firſt encounter was: and in the meane
time they tried thus hardly together, the Knight which fought
againſt Platir was ſo faint and féeble, as hee fell downe to the
ground before him, when Platir taking his Helmet from him,
ſtrooke off his head, and ſhewed it to Collambra, as ſhe ſate in
the window.
                     When ſhe ſawe that Fortune was thus fully bent againſt
her, ſhe preſentle ſhut the window, and wéeping bitterly for
this pittious ſight, ſhee pulled and rent her haire very cruelly,
which the Giant beholding, that ſhe diſpaired of his victorie,
and would not vouchſafe him any longer her countenance, he
determined to ſell his life as déerely as he could, to him that laboured
to take it from him, and then beganne to aſſaile the
Prince very furiouſly: but he perceiuing the Giants force
could not endure long, ſo hackte and hewed his Armour in preces,
as at laſt hée cutte out great collops of his fleſh, and
dyed all the graſſe with the blood of the Giant Eſpouuantable.
                     
                     And the Knight of the Tiger looking aſide, eſpied the Couzins
of the Giants all ſubdued, and their heads preſented (as
the firſt was) by the other two Knightes, euery one then
expecting the ende of the Combate, betwéene him and the
Giant: and truely hée maruelled much that the Giant helde

out ſo long, wherefore he layde ſuch cruell ſtroakes vpon him,
as at the length he (being not able to ſuſtaine himſelfe) fell
downe flat to the ground vpon his backe, committing his ſoule
into the hands of them, who ſtrengthened him in his wicked
and abhominable déedes.
                     Then the Knight of the Tiger tooke off his Helmet, to ſée
whether he were aliue or dead, but when he ſaw no life was
left in him, he tooke his ſword by the point, and beate him with
the hils ſo about his head, as he made his eyes and his téeth to
fall out, and then he cut off his legs by the knées, which being
done, he thanked God of his happy victory, & the people for ioy
gaue ſuch a generall ſhoute, as the earth did ſéeme to tremble
there withall, they were ſo glad of their deliuery from the
monſtrous cruelty, wherin theſe Giants had ſo long time kept
them.
                     And in this great ioy, they concluded altogether to goe and
beſet the Caſtle where Collambra was, that none of that bloody
linnage might be left aliue: for except ſhe were likewiſe diſpatched,
the people feared their former ſeruitude. In the meane
while Collambras knightes guarded the peoples entrance into
the Caſtle, one of her Damoſels came and humbled herſelfe
at the Prince Palmerins feete, with theſe ſpéeches.
                     I deſire you Sir Knight, that you would take pittie on my
Lady Collambra, and on vs that are her Damoſels attedant
on her, for we haue no other defence for our ſelues, then the thrée
Knights, who labour to kéepe the people foorth of the Caſtle, in
that they would put my Lady to death, whom I pray you
vouchſafe to defend from their exueltie: for more willingly
would ſhe receiue chaſtiſement at your hands for her offences,
then to fall into the peoples power, who are voide of reaſon in
their reuenge.
                     The knight of the Tiger (fearing hée ſhould not come time
enough to giue her ſuccour) ſpake to his thrée friends in this
manner. I deſire you my brethren and friendes, to goe and
aſſiſt Collambra, becauſe the people ſéeke to put her to death.
Theſe thrée knights willing to ſatiſfie the Princes requeſt, began
to thruſt through the preaſſe, and preuailed ſo much by

their ſtrength, that at laſt they attained the Caſtle, gate, which
was defended by Collambraes Knights, one of them being
ſlaine, and the other two ready to yeeld themſelues, at what
time the Knight of the Tiger and his companions, were come
to the place where this great hurly burly was: which he being
deſirous to pacifie, thruſt into the Caſtle Collambraes
knights, and turning his face to the people, deſired them to depart
to their houſes, and to aſſure themſelues, that he would
not faile to ſet them in ſuch a ſure ſtate of libertie, as they
ſhould not be moleſted with ſuch cruell tiranny, as they had bin
too long a time.
                     The people conceiued ſuch contentment by the words of the
Prince Palmerin, as they preſently departed thence, crying all
in this manner: that the Iſland ought to be giuen to the knight
of the Tiger, for that it was his owne by right, and they did
heartily deſire that he would accept it, they being content to
humble themſelues as his vaſſailes and ſubiects, ſo that he
would not be perſwaded by the flattering words of Collambra
whoſe mallice was not inferiour to the cruell Giants.
                     
                        Palmerin made them promiſe to deale in ſuch ſort, as they
ſhould be all contented to their owne willes: ſo, giuing them
a courteous farewell, he went into the great Hall to reſt himſelfe
a while, and afterward he came to Collambra, who ſate among
her Damoſels, her haire all diſperſed about her ſhoulders,
hanging her head downe to the ground, and making ſuch
pittifull lamentation, as her Damoſels could not chuſe but
bedeaw their chéekes with teares, beholding the extreame
heauineſſe of their Lady and Miſtreſſe, who at this inſtant remembred
the death of her huſband, the loſſe of her Sonnes,
and deſtruction of her houſe, and the death of her Brother, who
came onely for her ſake thither, as well to defend her, as alſo to
ſée the death of the Knight of the Sauage man, but now, being
paſt all hope to haue him, and fearing leſt by him, ſhe had likewiſe
loſt her daughter Arlencea, of whom ſhe made moſt high
and eſpeciall account: all thoſe occaſſions conſidered together,
compelled her to immoderate mourning.
                     
                        
The knight of the Tiger hearing the great complaints of
Collambra, was diuers times to offering comfort her, but he
iudging his words would rather more vexe her, then pacifie
her, let her alone to comfort her ſelfe to well as ſhe could: but
the prince Platir ſéeing how Collambra howled and made ſuch
a pittifull and heauy noyſe, beganne thus to ſpeake vn to the
knight of the Tiger.
                     
                     I thinke it good, and ſo do my two friends and companions
that this Caſtle remaine vnto vs as our owne for euer, and to
chaſe hence this cruell woman, or cauſe her to be brought into
ſome ſuch place, where her mallice may haue no power to endanger
vs, or put any other good mind in feare. Friend Platir
(anſwered Palmerin) I will agrée to whatſoeuer you thinke
expedient, but I pray you do not prouoke me to do Collambra
any outrage, nor yet to brinn her into my company, for I
cannot endure to behold one ſo full of griefe as ſhe is.
                     Theſe thrée knights perceiuing that the ſight of this cruell
Giantneſſe, did much offend the Prince Palmerin, they concluded
to haue her brought where their ſhip lay at Anchor, to carry
her with them to Conſtantinople, becauſe the Emperour
ſhould diſpoſe of her as he thought méete: and they ſtayed not
long to put their intent in execution, but cauſed her to be conueied
in a Chariot, to the Port where their ſhip rode, leauing
her there in the company of the Sage Aliart, vntill they had determined
further for the ſtate of the Iſland.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XVIII.
                     Of that which happened to the noble Prince Palmerin, of
England, before he departed from the Profound Iſle.
                     
                        IT ſo fell out out (as the Hiſtorie reporteth)
that Collambra) ouercome with excéeding
griefe and anguiſh of minde) was brought
into ſuch a weake and féeble eſtate, as ſhe
fell on the ground in a trance, being no otherwiſe
reputed thē for a dead body. Then
the Prince Platir, who deſired the ruine of
her whole progeny, commaunded his Eſquire to take her vp,
but ſhée was ſo heauie and weightie, as they (hauing no other
helpe) could ſcantly lift her, ſo bringing her downe the ſtaires,
conueyed her into a Chariot, with certaine Damoſelles that
attended on her, and ſo ſhe was caried away from her Caſtle
to the ſhip, being followed all the way by a number of men and
women on foote, who made ſuch woefull and bitter lamentations,
as it mooued them to pitie, who had béene greatly iniured
by her crueltie.
                     When they were come to the ſhip, they conueyed her thereinto,
with two damoſels of hers, who would by no meanes depart
from her, but determined to beare her company, & take part
of the ill fortune that might happen to her, ſuch & ſo great was
the amity they bare vnto Collambra, who ſéeing her ſelfe in the
ſhip, and in the cuſtodie of them that were her enemies, being
depriued of al hope to come backe againe, ſhe determined to caſt
her ſelfe into the ſea, iudging that to be the onely way to end her
ſorrowes, & ſo to be frée from the practiſes of her foes. Berolde,
Platir, & the Sage Aliart, being in y• ſhip with her (but Palmerin
by no meanes would come where ſhe was (endeuoured to cōfort
her as much as they could come where ſhe was) endeuoured to
comfort her as much as they could, but ſhe made no account of

their perſwaſions, for ſhe ſaid, without he might ſée her daughter
Arlencea againe, ſhe ſhould neuer giue euer her ſorrowfull
wailing, which ſhe continued in the company of thoſe Knights,
who knew very wel, that nothing was ſuch a ſoueraigne remedy
to deſperate folkes, as death it ſelfe: wherefore they concluded
to leaue her in the company of the Sage Aliart, to preuent
any crueltie ſhe might offer on her ſelfe, as for Platir and Berolde,
they went on ſhoare, and comming aga
                           •
                        ne to the Citie, they
found the Prince Palmerin among the people, who deſired him
to accept their faithfull homage, as to their onely Prince and ſoueraigne,
in reſpect of the great and inſupportable tryanny,
from which they were deliuered by his noble proweſſe.
                     
                        Palmerin receiued their courteſie in very gratious and gentle
manner, but in no caſe would he accept the gouernment of
the Iſle, for that (quoth he) it appertaineth to my brother Florian,
of the Forreſt, otherwiſe called the Knight of the Sauage
man, hée hauing aduentured his life to deſtroy thoſe tyrannous
Rulers, which ſometime did poſſeſſe the ſame, as for me,
and theſe my friendes, we came hither onely but to finde
him.
                     But if ſo be my brother Florian refuſed to be your gouernor,
I will not faile to ſatiſfie your iuſt and reaſonable requeſt,
whereto reaſon commaundeth mee to condiſcend, and till the
time I vnderſt and my brothers minde, in his name I will receiue
and make account of your homage, and aſſure your ſelues,
I will ſée you haue a gouernour that ſhall like you all: in the
meane time, I pray you makes account of me, and behaue your
ſelues as good and obedient ſubiects to him, who with great danger
of his life, and loſſe of his blood, hath bought and redéemed
your quiet libertie.
                     The principall Lords of the Iſland (who were there preſent
before the prince) made anſwere, that they would in all things
fulfill his commaundement, as thoſe that honoured him with
vnfained reuerence, in ſight whereof, they reſigned vp to him
all their Caſtles and Fortreſſes, the keyes whereof they humbly
deliuered him.
                     
                        Palmerin in hauing viſited their Caſtles, and ſet all things in

due and neceſſarie order, for the better encouragement of the inhabitants
of the Iſland: hée gaue the Forts and Caſtles into
their hands againe, who had the cuſtodie of them before, commaunding
them to be very carefull and reſpectiue in the well
guarding and ordering them, vntill ſuch time as his brother arriued
there.
                     The Prince Palmerin was entertained by the people of this
Iſle very honourably, and he cauſed the treaſure which belonged
to Collambra, to bée locked vp within her Caſtle, that it
might bée deliuered to his Brother Florian: but as he was about
to appoint a Porter, at the place of moſt aſſurance in
this Caſtle, he perceiued Siluian to enter, accompanied with
the ancient Knight, who had béene the Hoſte to the Prince at
his firſt arriuall in the Iſle, for he being enformed of the victory,
which Palmerin had atchieued againſt the Giant Eſpouuantable,
would néedes come with Siluian to the Cittie, the
ſight of whom did not a little reioyce the heart of the Prince
Palmerin.
                     
                     The ancient Knight being come into his preſence, humbled
himſelfe at his féete, with theſe words. My gratious Lord, in
that I haue not vſed you with ſuch entertainement as your nobilitie
deſerued, I humbly deſire, that you would vouchſafe to
pardon me. Palmerin aroſe and tooke him vp, and imbracing
him very gratiouſly, ſpake thus vnto him.
                     I haue not forgotten the excéeding friendſhip, wherewith
you vſed me when I was in your houſe, for the which I account
my ſelfe greatly beholding to you: and for that at this preſent,
my power will not ſtretch to make you any ſufficient amends,
I pray you to accept the gouernment of this Iſland, the Lord
thereof I know will be very well contented therewithall, for if
Fortune vouchſafe to call me to any dignitie, I will not faile to
remember your great kindneſſe.
                     Doe you thinke my Lord (anſwered Argentao, which was
the name of this ancient Knight) that the people here, will
admit any other gouernor then your ſelfe? Yea truely (anſwered
Palmerin) for that he which is the Lord hereof, is my brother,
to whom this Iſland doth appertaine by duty. I feare me

my Lord (ſaide Argentao) that ſome harme hath happened to
him, by them of the ſtocke and Image of the Giant Brauorant,
but ſince it ſtandeth ſo with your gracious pleaſure, to call mée
(vnworthy wretch) to ſo great credite and honour (which I
knowe it is your will I ſhould not refuſe,) I eſtéeme my ſelfe
the moſt happieſt man aliue, deſiring you to vnderſtand the
will of the people, for if they doe not imagine well of me preferment,
it were better for me to content my ſelfe with mine own
poore houſe, where it liked you to accept a lodging, and whereof
I pray you to diſpoſe, as your owne alwayes at commaundement,
and to thinke of me, who (during my life time) vowe my
ſelfe your humble vaſſaile and obedient Subiect.
                     The people hearing the wordes of Argentao, who was a
Chriſtian Knight, one of very good life, and alwaies a great enemy
to the Giants, did very well allow to accept him for their
gouernour, promiſing generatly before the Prince, that they
would honour him with dutifull loue and obedience.
                     The Prince Palmerin ſent to call the Sage Aliart, commaunding
Siluian to ſtay the meane while in the Shippe, who
being come thither, and entred into the Ship, he was preſently
taken with exceeding feare, when he beheld the ougly frowning
countenaunce of Collambra, which he iudged as ill fauoured,
as the report went of Eſpouuantable her Brother,
whom the people of that countrey thought to be inuincible, before
they ſaw him ſo nobly conquered by the valiant Palmerin
of England.
                     
                     
                        Siluian hauing declared the pleaſure of his Lord, the Sage
Aliart preſently departed to the Citie, and being come to the
Princes his friendes, hee found them determining to ſend to
Conſtantinople the Eſqurer of the Prince Berolde, who was
named Albanis, willing him to depart thence with the Ship,
and to preſent the Emperour of Greece with the newes of this
happy victory in that Iſland, alſo to deliuer to his Maieſty the
Gianteſſe Collambra.
                     
                     When they had concluded on the Eſquiers meſſage, he departed
from them to the Ship to Collambra, when, the Pilot
hoyſing his Sayles, and the winde ſeruing them very gallantlie,

they rode on at pleaſure, and cut the Seas with maruellous
expedition. But the Prince Palmerin peceiuing, that his thrée
friends had written their mindes to them they beſt thought
on, he was ſorry that he had done as much, neuertheleſſe, he
thought it not fit he ſhould venture ſo boldly, to commit his
ſecrets to any one elſe, ſauing his friend Siluian.
                     
                     Then to driue fancies out of his mind, he deſired his friends
to beare him company in viſiting the Iſle, whereto they willingly
conſented, and Argentao cauſed two of the Giants
Foiſts to be put in a readineſſe, wherein he and the principall
Lords of the Iſland bare them company, in riding about the
Iſland.
                     After they had ſéene the moſt part of the Profound Iſle, they
came to another, which was called the Perillous Iſle, being very
well peopled, and fortified with a number of goodly Towers
and Caſtles of no ſmall riches, that the nobleſt Prince in the
world could not wiſh for a more ſtately gouernment. Argentao,
who was very well acquainted with the cuſtomes and maners
of that Iſland, gaue them to vnderſtand the rare ſingularities
thereof, deſiring them not to thinke it ſtrange, that they
ſaw the people ſo ſcant, and they that were there, ſo fearefull, for
it was the extreame cruelty of the Giant Brauorant, that made
them forſake their houſes, looking euery houre when they ſhold
be put to the Sword.
                     Theſe knights receiued great pleaſure in beholding theſe
two Iſlandes, and ſo they rowed about vntill it was the next
day in the morning, when, then came they to the place (as you
may reade in the firſt part of this Hiſtory) where Palmerin
went on ſhore to end a ſtrange aduenture, there they landed,
and mounted on their Horſes to get vp on the high Rocke, but
the way was ſo narrow, and the Rocke ſo ſteepe, as they were
faine to alight againe, and giuing their horſes to their Eſquires
they went vp the Rocke on foote after one another.
                     But before they were come to the place where Palmerin
found the Monument, with theſe letters engrauen thereon.
Take heed thou paſſe no further: they were ſo weary, as they
were glad to mount on their Horſes againe, and ſo in ſhort

time they attained the top of the rocke, where they reſted themſelues,
being abaſhed to ſee ſuch a huge mountaine. But when
Argentao and the thrée knights were come to the Fountaine,
they had then a greater cauſe of aſtoniſhment, then any they
had ſéene as yet, for their they ſaw monſtrous huge Beaſtes,
like vnto them which Palmerin flew, when they would not
ſuffer him to drinke of the water: and I aſſure you, that theſe
Beaſts were ſo cunningly and artificially framed, as one wold
haue iudged them to be aliue, they made ſuch a vigorons and
fearefull ſhew, being chained by the neckes with the ſelfe ſame
chaines as they were, whom Palmerin (by his noble valour diſcomfited.
This rare and ingenious figure declared, what great
ſtudy and practiſe Vrganda compaſſed, to leaue ſuch a ſtrange
edifice in remembrance of her knowledge.
                     
                        Palmerin ſeeing this rare monument to ſurpaſſe all that euer
he had ſéene before, ſuſpected that the Sage Aliart had done it by
his Art, to cauſe them wonder at it. Wherefore he deſired that
he would ſatiſfie him whether it be ſo or no, the Sage Aliart
made this anſwer.
                     My Lord, ſhe which inuented the aduenture of this fountaine,
did will, that he which was ſo happy to atchieue the honour
thereof, ſhould be recompeuced according to his worthy
deſerts: and to leaue to all poſtericies a perpetual remembrance
of him, ſhe ordained that theſe cruell beaſts, which are framed
in the naturall ſhapes of them which you ſlew, ſhould remaine
ſtill in this place, to the end that they which chance to come into
this Iſland, may render continual laude and commendation
to your worthy proweſſe. Yet thinking this not ſufficient enough
to your prayſe, ſhe cauſed to be erected the portraitures
of thoſe knights which belonged to the Enchantneſſe Eutropa,
and whom you worthily brought vnder your obeyſance, they
being liuely carued in marble, of the ſame height and proportiō
as they were: and here they are figured defending their ſhields
which you may yet ſée hanging on their ſeuerall Pillers, euen
in the ſame manner as they were, when you fought for them
before this Iſland was conquered.
                     And for the Iſle it ſelfe, it ſometime belonged to the Sage
                        
                        Vrganda, to whom you muſt thinke your ſelfe greatly beholding,
ſéeing that by her meanes, your noble déedes remaine regiſtred
for perpetuall memorie.
                     Certainely (anſwered Berolde) I cannot deny, but he muſt
néedes iudge himſelfe well fauoured of her, yet ought we to regard
him the more, who had the power to end ſuch a perillous
aduenture: and I may ſay to you, that ſome would make them
as fearefull as theſe Beaſtes made by Arte, becauſe they giue
ſhewe of ſuch rauenous crueltie, as they would of them which
were one here aliue.
                     Doe you not ſée (ſaid Platir) the poeſie engrauen on this Piller,
which doth inuite vs to drinke at this Fountaine: And then
the letters which are within, commaundeth vs to defend our
ſelues? truſt me, ſince the danger is awarranted by the Prince
Palmerin, I will yet ſée further into this aduenture. With theſe
words he approached to the Fountaine, and hauing drunke of
the water, commended the ſwéeteneſſe thereof aboue all other
waters.
                     
                        Argentao, and they of the Profound Iſle, did greatly maruel
to ſée ſtrange ſights: in like manner did Platir, and Berolde,
albeit they were good and hardy knights, yet did they admire
with the other for company, extolling his hauty and noble
proweſſe, who (by his famous conqueſt) brought the Iſland to
be inhabited.
                     After they had a long time diſcourſed on the ſingularitie of
this Fountaine, they tooke their way to the Caſtle, where hard
by the riuers ſide, ſtood foure faire Iaſper pillars, whereon hanged
foure ſhieldes, like vnto them which Palmerin won from
the foure Knights, and there ſtood the images of the Knights in
Columbs of Marble, hauing the like Armor and Shields as the
liuing knights had, and ſtanding as though they vſed regard to
their ſhéeldes, whereon their ſeuerall names were written in
letters of Gold.
                     
                        Palmerin was as greatly amazed at ye fight hereof, as he was
the ſame day he approoued the aduenture, & while the kuights
tooke pleaſure to behold this ſtrange monument, he perceiued
to come ouer the Bridge an Eſquire, who was ſent thither by

                        Satrafort the gouernor of the Caſtle: the Eſquire had no ſooner
ſéen the knight of the Tiger, but he preſently returned into the
Caſtle, to giue his Maiſter to vnderſtand, that the Lord of the
Iſland was arriued there: wherevpon, Satrafort come forth to
receiue him, and with humilitie conducted him into the Caſtle,
wherein they were no ſooner entred, but Platir began after this
manner.
                     Me thinkes the ſtrange fights of this Countrey, is farre contrary
to them in all other parts of the world, in that theſe motions
ſhew the great danger of the aduentures paſſed, and the
brauery of this caſtle doth euidently witneſſe, that the ſkull and
knowledge of the Sage Vrganda, ought to be eſtéemed aboue
all other. The Prince Platir could not chuſe but maruell very
much, ſéeing the ſundry rare monuments, which the Sage Vrganda
had erected in that place, where ſhe made her continuall
abyding, becauſe ſhe would alwayes ayde thoſe whom ſhe
made account of for her ſo ſpeciall friends, as you may reade at
large in the booke of the valiant Amadis of Gaule. But to come
againe to our former purpoſe, theſe Knightes hauing ſéene the
lower parts of the Caſtle, at laſt came to the place where Palmerin
of England (in times paſt) found the Giant Demetail, the
fight hereof cauſed them to paſſe on further, and after they came
to the blacke riuer, wherein the malicious Eutropa caſt her
ſelfe, when the Prince Palmerin tooke her by the hand, being ou
the plancke, which was ſo dangerous, the ſight of this perillous
aduenture, made them forget all the brauery they had ſéene before.
Siluian began to thinke on his maſters fortunate ſucceſſe,
in atchieuing ſuch a worthy & famous aduenture, and the conceit
of the manifold troubles he had paſſed, was of ſuch force in
the gentle Eſquiers minde, as he began to ſhed teares: but the
Knight of the Tiger perceiuing how Siluian wept, while his
other friends were buſied in beholding the occaſions there preſent,
he came and embraced Siluian, vſing theſe words.
                     I would haue thée thinke (my good friend Siluian) that the
knight, who hath the rare beauty of the princeſſe Polinarda, imprinted
in his heart, could not faile to accompliſh theſe aduentures,
how dangerous ſo euer they were at firſt to him, and I

aſſure thée, that the vnfained leue I beare to her, made me to
trie the hazard of this vncouth place, from whence (in the ſoueraigntie
of her name) I returned victor: wherefore, I pray thée
refraine thy teares, and perſwade thy ſelfe aſſuredly, that the
earneſt deſire I haue to do ſeruice to my Lady, encouraged me
in all my trauailes.
                     Then he left Siluian, and came againe to his friends and
companions, ſpeaking to them in this order I pray you my
friends to forſake this place, which doth nothing elſe but trouble
your thoughts with ſilent vexations of griefe, thinking on
things of ſo ſmall importance: for me thinks Satrafort ſaith, it
is time that we go to ſupper. At theſe words the knights departed
thence,
commending highly the valour of the knight of the
Tiger, and Satrafort brought them into a faire great chamber,
the windowes thereof being ouer a faire Garden very thicke
beſet with trées, and a prettie ſmall riuer taking his courſe thorow
it. In this place the knights were ſet to ſupper, being
ſerued with ſuch great pompe and ſtate, as there wanted nothing
that could be deuiſed, and Satrafort being deſirous to
witneſſe their great welcome into the Perillous Iſle, ſhewed
himſelf ſurpaſſing bountifull, and beſide, he was ſo glad of the
preſence of the noble Palmerin of England, as he ſpared no trauaile
to purchaſe thoſe things that might yéeld him contentation.
                     All Supper time, they delighted themſelues in pleaſant diſcourſes,
vntill the tables being withdrawne, they aroſe, with
courteſie one to another, and then Satrafort brought ech of thē
into his chamber, which were hanged with rich cloathes of tapiſtrie,
that the Enchantreſſe Eutropa, and the Giant Dramuſiande
had left there, becauſe the houſe ſhould be decked at all
times, that when any of his friends came, they might haue the
better entertainment: as for them whom he thought not well
on, they durſt not be ſo bold as to preſume thither, becauſe as
he vſed his friends with courteſie, ſo did he his enemies with
crueltie.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XIX.
                     Here is yet continued what happened to Palmerin of England
in the Perillous Iſle.
                     
                        THeſe foure knights were no ſooner riſen on
the next morning, but they walked into
fields about the Caſtle, which were very
faire and fragrant to behold, in that the
Sage Vrganda did take great delight in her
life time to be very buſie there, during the
time the Spring laſhed, in planting and ſetting
yong and tender grafts, which were done in the manner
of walks and Arbours, hauing kept ſuch iuſt proportion and
meaſure in ſetting them, as ſurely they would content any
friendly eye. The walkes were paued with large ſtones, of
colour of white and gréene, and the trées about them were ſo
brauely branched, as in the Summer time the Sunne could
not offend any with heate, there was ſuch a delicate ſhaddow,
and in the winter, the cold and ſharpe winde could not come at
them, by reaſon the trées were ſo thicke and high. In the Garden
there ſtood a goodly Ceſterne, to receiue the water that fell
when it rained, and from it by pipes and other deuiſes, the water
was ronueyed into all the neceſſary roomes in the Caſtle:
this ceſtern was incloſed round about with Chriſtal, and bound
with barres of ſiluer maruailous beautifully. Theſe knights
could not ſufficiently content their eyes, with the diuerſitie of
braue deuiſes about the Caſtle, and ſo long they walked till a
meſſenger came and called them to dinner, when, though they
were loath to go ſo ſoone in againe, yet (remembring their courteous
Hoſte) they went preſently. The reſt of the day they
ſpent in their former exerciſe, vntill the night came ſtealing

on them, and euery man being in his loding, could not entend
to ſléepe, they were ſo buſie in praiſing the deeds of the Sage
Vrganda.
                     
                     When Aurora had ſaluted the knights with her amiable
countenance at their windowes, Satrafort came into their
chambers, to giue them the mornings courteſie, and comming
to the Prince Palmerin, ſhe began to vſe theſe ſpeeches. As it
ſéemeth to me (worthy Sir) the nouelties of this Iſland is continually
chaunging, and they appeare more ſtrange euerie
houre then other, for in the Gareen where you were yeſternight,
at this inſtant is ſtanding a goodly Lodging, inuented
and builded (me thinks) very ingeniouſly, and as it cometh to
paſſe, it excéedeth all the occaſions you haue yet ſéene: for as I
made an offer to enter into it, I was forcibly kept backe by
two monſtrous Giants, who will not ſuffer any to come in at
the doore. Wherefore I thinke it good that you trie their courteſie,
for I am perſwaded, that the reward which is due to your
Knightly trauailes, beſtowed in the conquering of this Iſle,
vndoubtedly is within that place.
                     Theſe news did ſo greatly amaze the Knights, as they ſtarted
vp preſently, and armed themſelues, and comming into
the Garden, they found in the middeſt thereof, the ſtately
Lodging which Satrafort had declared to them. The workemanſhip
whereof, ſéemed miraculous ſtrange, the walles being
of Marble, and ſo ingeniouſly built, as it is vnpoſſible to
finde the like.
                     The couerture of the houſe was of Azure ſtone, which with
the glimpſe of the Sunne did ſhine ſo brauely, as it greatly delighted
the Knights to behold. On the top of all the houſe, ſtood
a Piller of Siluer of a great bigneſſe, and there leaned againſt
it a faire Table, compaſſed with exquiſite deuiſes of Arte:
on the higheſt part thereof was figured the heauens, and the
ſeauen Planets in liuely Images pictured therein, Mercurie
being Lord as then, who was attired in the ancient habite,
which they of ancient time did report him to weare: in the middeſt
of the table was pictured Hercules, tearing in peeces the
théefe Cacus.
                     
                     
                        
At the foure corners of this houſe was foure goodly trées,
who were iuſt of the height of the houſe, and their branches
ſpreading brauely all abroad: and round about the houſe was
glaſſe windowes of maruailous coſtlineſſe, which gaue light
plentifully into all places of the ſame, the glaſſe hauing ſuch ancient
Hiſtories figured in gold on it, as the Knights could not
looke ſo much as they liked: which made Platir to ſpeake thus.
It ſhould ſéeme if Vrganda made this her Study, and delighted
to decke it ſo brauely without, no doubt but ſhe would make
it farre more ſumptuous within, wherefore, I thinke it good
that we trie the crueltie of the Giants: and if fortune doe accept
vs in her fauour, we ſhall ſpéed of the treaſure incloſed within
this houſe, and I deſire that I may be the firſt in prouing the
aduenture, if ſo be the Prince Palmerin like well of it, for I
would be loth to go againſt his will in any thing.
                     Why do you not procéede in your determination? (anſwered
Palmerin) I promiſe you I cannot miſlike of any thing you allow,
and therefore I pray you get vs libertie of the gaints to
enter: but if it be ſo, that you cannot ſpéed as you would, we
will aſſiſt you if we ſée any danger. The Prince Platir hearing
the words of Palmerin, would not trifie any longer time,
but haulng drawne his ſword, and buckled on his ſhéeld, he
went on nobly againſt the Giants, who taking their Maces
in their hands prepared themſelues to receiue the Prince Platir:
and when he had ſet his ſéete on the firſt ſtep, which was
not paſt the height of one Cubite, one of the Giants caſt his
Mace to the ground: and comming two paces froward (as
though he had bene a liuing body (he tooke the Prince Platir in
his armes, and hauing throwne him downe the two ſteps to
the groued, returued againe to his companion.
                     
                        Platir being greatly offended to ſée himſelfe ſo vſed, came and
made a ſecond aſſault: but he was ſerued againe as he was
before. Which when the Prince Berolde perceiued, hée
went and tried his fortune: but hee ſped according as Platir
did.
                     
                        Palmerin being agréeued to ſée his friends ſo abuſed, deſired
to reuenge this ſpightfull iniurie, and ſo aduanced himſelfe to

trie the aduenture, not knowing whether the Sage Aliart wold
hazard himſelfe or no: but becauſe he would be one, he ſtepped
before the Prince, knowing the aduenture was not reſerued for
him, and making no account to beare his friends company in
their foyle, therfore he went to it ſmyling, but the giants ſhewed
him ſo much fauour, as they did but thruſt him foorth againe,
becauſe an Image of golde (which ſtood at the doore within)
cried out aloude thus: Take heede you ſuffer not the Sorcerer
to enter the Chamber, where my Treaſure lyes, becauſe he
is not worthy.
                     
                     Then ſuddenly theſe two Giants tooke Palmerin by the
arme, and thruſt him downe one of the ſtaires, which made
Palmerin haue an ill opinion of this aduenture, and then he
remembred all his good fortunes paſſed, thinking now he ſhould
make a concluſion of all, ſéeing he could not atchieue the conqueſt
of this, which ſéemed to him leſſe then any other he had
attempted.
                     In the meane while his thoughts were occupied in this conceit,
the Sage Aliart, (who knew well his inward afflictions)
came to the gate againe, more to be partaker with his friendes
in their foyle, then for any opinion he had himſelfe to ende the
aduenture, and he no ſooner offered to charge the Giants, but
without making any ſhewe of reſiſtance, they humbled themſelues
at his féete, granting him frée libertie to enter at his pleaſure.
                     The ſight hereof pleaſed well the Sage Aliart, and as hée
ſtood beholding the workemanſhip of the doore, the Image of
gold (which ſtood thereas the watchman) opened in the preſence
of them all, a little Cheſt, which ſhe held vpon her knées, and
hauing taken a key of gold out of it, threwe it downe before
them on the ground.
                     The Sage Aliart ſtouped and tooke it vppe, and without any
further delay opened the doore, when, Palmerin, Platir, and
Berolde, comming to him, did all enter with him, they attributing
the cauſe of their repulſe as thus, that Vrganda had
not left the aduenture to be diſcouered by them, in that her
wiſedome was diſcouered by ſo ſtraunge a meane, this firſt

chamber being her library, and wherin ſhe was alwayes woont
to ſtudy: the ſight hereof did very much delight their eyes, more
then any thing elſe they had ſeene in the whole Iſland. This
Library was round about garniſhed with bookes, which this
Sage Lady was alwayes woont to contemplate on, the bookes
lying vpon very ſumptuous Deſkes of Gold, and the Deſkes
being ſupported with beaſts of Antique worke, being all of the
ſelfe mettall. The couerings of theſe bookes were of cloath of
Gold, hauing at euery corner placed pretious ſtones of incredible
value: but the riches of this Chamber might not compare
with the next to it, the walles whereof was round about
decked with coſtly pictures of ladies, manifeſting moſt rare and
ſingular beauty, they being all in ſuch rich Robes and deuiſes of
apparell, as one would haue iudged them liuing creatures, ſuch
was the rare inuention of erte, beſtowed on theſe Images of
Goddeſſes, and diuers other beautifull Ladies. The Princes
gazing on theſe delicate figures, attributed to them maruellous
commendation, wiſhing that their ladies were there preſent, to
ſée ſuch braue and ſumptuous monumēts: and they iudged that
the ſight of theſe beautifull Pictures did as well content their
eyes, as though they had ſéene their beſt beloued Ladies, being
the bett rupt in minde of them by theſe ſéemely ſhadowes. All
along one part of this chamber, was the portraits of ſuch kings
and Queenes, as liued in ye time of this Sage Magitian Vrganda,
her owne picture likewiſe being in the middeſt of thē, ſhe ſitting
in a chaire of gold, hauing her booke lying before her, wheron
ſhe made ſemblance as though ſhe read. On the right ſide of
her counterfeit was placed Oriana, the daughter of king Liſuart,
king of great Brittaine, and on the other ſide was Briolania,
the Quéene of Sobradiſa: then Leonorina, the Princeſſe of
Conſtantinople, and with her the two faire princeſſes Melicia,
and Olenda, each of them hauing their names impozed vnder
them in letters of gold. And ſuch was the rare beauty of theſe
ladies which I haue here named, as not one of thē was etalted
aboue the other, but all of them equall together: which maketh
me to think, that they which raigned, & had the cōmendation of
beautie in the time of the valiant King Amadis, had worthily

the praiſe is vſed of them, and their knights gained immortall
renowne in aduenturing for them. In another place was to be
ſéen Yſeul the faire, Geneuera the Quéene to king Arthur, and
friend to ſir Launcelot du Lake: Yſeul with the white hands,
was accompanied with many beautiful ladies, which ſomtime
floriſhed in great Brittaine, and of her Bracando was ſtudious
to leaue moſt worthy report, becauſe ſhe was highly eſtéemed
of him. In another place ſtood the Empreſſe Polinarda, and Agriola
the Empreſſe of Allemain, Gridonia, Flerida, and Francelina,
figured ſo néere their iuſt proportions, as there wanted
nothing but life it ſelfe: all of them worthy high praiſe for their
delicate ſwéete faces, but Flerida was ſuppoſed to excéed them
all. In another place of the Chamber was placed their ſhaddowes,
who (in the court of the Emperor of Greece) cauſed many
knights to take aduenturous trauails on them: the firſt
was Polinarda, the Daughter of the vertuous and magnanimous
prince Primaleon, accōpanied with the faire Miragarda,
Leonarda ye princeſſe of Thrace, Altea, Sidelia, daughter to the
king Tarnaes of Lacedemonia, & Arnalte the princeſſe of Nauarre:
as chiefeſt of theſe was placed the Princeſſe Polinarda
who ſéemed in beauty to be aduantaged aboue the other. And
there was the prince Florendos pointed, to ſée if fortune wold
reſpect him any more in that place, and to ſpeake indifferently,
ſuch was the workmanſhip beſtowed like wiſe on Miragarda,
as one could hardly iudge whether Polinarda did excell her or
no. Oriana and Briolania were of ſuch equalitie together, as it
would haue tried a ſharpe wit to ſay, which of thē was faireſt:
but yet the portrait of the faire Oriana, was ſet forth with more
ſhew of grauity, as wel beſéemed the daughter of ſuch a famous
king, aſſuring you that her ciuill and gratious countenance,
was able to haue woone the victory of the preciſeſt eye.
                     But what if vpon theſe beautifull motions, each one of theſe
knights ſhould haue fallen from affecting his beſt beloued? for
I promiſe you, that nether Oriana, Briolania, Polinarda, Flerida,
nor Miragarda, was not to be cōpared to Yſeul the faire: yet
notwithſtanding, no one of them could be moued to that opinion,
for each of them was ſo deceitfull in regard to his Saint, as

all other beſide did but offend their eyes. For thus they perſwaded
themſelues, that true and faithfull hope being grounded
in the heart, and firmely fixed in the eyes of any man, could
not be remoued by any ſiniſter occaſion, in that their thoughts
were ſetled, and their liking ſatiſfied: but they that are changed
with euery countenance, and euery face liketh them, but
none contenteth them, they are ſuch recreants from Loue, as
they are not worthy to come within his court.
                     The Princes commended the beauty of Yſeul, as it worthily
deſcrued, but yet they thought their owne Ladies fairer
then ſhe, and ſo they ſtood maruailing at theſe delectable inuentions,
whereon they could not gaze ſufficient, their deſires
were courſing in ſuch an endleſſe Laborinth. Beyond them
all, the Prince Palmerin was rauiſhed in affection, ſéeing the
counterfeite of her that did ſo much torment him, ſhe being
attired in the ſame manner, as ſhe was when he took his
farewell of her: whereupon he fell into ſuch an arrogant conceite,
as though it were his Lady Polinarda indéed, and fearing
he had moued her to any offence, he began in this manner to
ſpeake to the Picture.
                     Madame, I know you are ſhe who onely hath the power to
command me, but what profite do I receiue in vſing ſuch ſpéeches
to her, who maketh her ſelfe deafe, and will not heare me?
And yet do I couet y• you would but reſpect my words, which
fauour would but ſtrengthen my loue, and lengthen my life.
But I ſée wel madam, you make no accoūt of the words which
may and can preuent my vnhappy deſtinie: wherefore, by how
much I vtter them to my great detriment and grief, by ſo much
the ſooner ſhall I knit vp my ſmall lamentations, and this I
aſſure you, that I am he who onely liues to die for your ſake.
Platir vſed the like language towards Sidelia, the Daughter
to king Tarnaes of Lacedemonia, to whom he was ſhortly after
eſpouſed. Berolde the Prince of Spaine finding not his Lady
and Miſtres in this place, failed not to praiſe her, as though
ſhe had bene in preſence: for it is the cuſtome of a true and faithfull
louer, who delighteth in her he made his choiſe of, whether
ſhe be abſent or preſent, yet to commend & extoll his only felicitie,

and ſo did the Prince Berolde thinke it a great iniurie,
that any ſhould commend their Ladies, aboue his beſt beloued
Oniſtalda, who in ſooth did well deſerue her place among the
other.
                     And if the Sage Vrganda forgot to place her in her Study, it
was for no other occaſion, then becauſe the place was ſo furniſhed
with them, who were eſteemed the moſt ſoueraigne in
beautie through the whole world, When they had ſufficiently
contented their eyes with theſe braue ſhowes, the Sage Aliart
ſpake vnto them in this manner. I perceiue my Lordes, that
theſe images haue depriued you of naturall vnderſtanding, in
that they cauſe you to forget them, whom your duty commandeth
you to vſe with honour: wherefore, I pray you doe not
ſéeme ſo fond in prayſing theſe figures, which are no other but
ſhapes without ſubſtance, for in the beholding theſe, you do but
miſpend your time, looking for that recompēce which they haue
not the power to giue you. And therefore it ſhall be more neceſſary
for you, to goe to them whom the Pictures repreſent, who
in time will more ſufficiently content your hearts, then your
eyes receiue pleaſure in looking on theſe toyes, which Vrganda
giueth you to ſee at this prefent, by her Enchauntment.
                     
                        Palmerin hearing the words of his Brother the Sage Aliart,
returned to him with this anſwere. Doe you maruaile (Syr
Aliart) if they which behold the liuely preſentations, of ſo
faire and beautifull Goddeſſes, finde good cauſe to buſie their
braines, and receiue their memories? Credite me, I thinke no
man but would be rauiſhed in delight, to ſée things of ſo rare
and excellent importance.
                     
                        Palmerin ſpake in this manner, becauſe he would not haue
his friends ſuſpect his amorous thoughts, ſo departing thence,
they went againe to the Caſtle, where (prouiſion being made)
they ſate downe to dinner, which being ended, they concluded
to depart from the Iſland: wherevpon, Palmerin cauſed Satrafort
to be called into his preſence, with the other Gentlemen
that came in his company, when, Palmerin ſpeaking to his
Brother the Sage Aliart, began to vſe his ſpéeches thus.
                     
                        
If I ſhould not conſider with my ſelfe (my noble friend
and Brother) which way Fortune might aduance me to ſuch
eſtate, as I ſhould be able to recompence the manifold courteſies
I haue receiued at your handes, you might repute mée of
a moſt baſe and ignoble minde: wherefore to witneſſe to you
the great feare I haue, leaſt I ſhould be condemned amongſt
the vnthankefull, I here frankely and fréely giue you the Perillous
Iſle, which I haue conquered with great trauaile and loſſe
of my blood, deſiring that you would accept thereof, in that it
ought rather to be vnder your gouernment, then any other that
I know.
                     Wherefore, I pray you not refuſe my gentle gift, and I
would it were of ſuch eſtimation, as I could finde in my heart
to beſtow vpon you, for I perſwade my ſelfe, that it was the
will of Vrganda, it ſhould be reſerued for you. And for Satrafort,
I perceiue he is as willing hereto as my ſelfe, deſiring you,
that you would account of him as his nobleneſſe and vertue requireth,
that you may diſcharge the duty wherein I am greatly
bound to him.
                     My Lord (anſwered the Sage Aliart) they of this Iſland
haue good occaſion to be offended, ſéeing you will commit it into
the handes of him, who is not worthy to come within it: neuertheleſſe,
the earneſt deſire I haue to doe you ſeruice, willeth
me not to make refuſall of your gratious offer, and I accept
Satrafort, not as my fubiect, but as my louing friend and companion,
as well for the valour of his perſon, as likewiſe to let
you perfectly vnderſtand, that I am he who vowes himſelfe alwayes
at your commandement.
                     Thus concluding his ſpéeches, he offered to take ſhe Prince
Palmerins hande to kiſſe it, but the courteous Prince would
not permitte him, then taking the Sage Aliart in his armes,
he beganne againe as followeth. My louing Brother, if Fortune
rayſe me to any ſuch preferment, as I may finde ſomewhat
worthie your good deſertes, you ſhall well peceiue the
affection I beare you: in the meane while, imagiae the beſt of
mee.
                     
                        
The Prince Berolde and Platir, commended marueilouſly
the liberalitie of Palmerin, whoſe preſence was more acceptable
to Satrafort, then the Sage Aliart, ſo that he would gladly
haue changed his maiſter: neuertheleſſe, he concealed his
mind cloſely to himſelfe, doubting leaſt he ſhould purchaſe the
diſpleaſure of his new Lord, to whom he aduaunced himſelfe
to giue him his faith for his dutifull obedience, praying the
Knight of the Tiger, that he would continue him in his woonted
noble fauour. Palmerin vſed ſuch friendly behauiour towards
him, as he remained well content withall, and hauing
left the Sage Aliart to giue order about the cuſtoms of the Iſle,
he imbarqued himſelfe in the ſhip with Argentao, being deſirous
to goe on firme land ſo ſoone as he could poſſible, conſidered
alſo, that hee would haue Arganto returne to his gouernment.
                     And becauſe he would the more commodiouſly rip vp his ſecret
griefe to Siluian, he tooke his leaue of the princes Berolde
and Platir, giuing thē to vnderſtand, that he muſt of neceſſitie
goe alone by himſelfe, for that hee had an aduenture aſſigned
him, where he promiſed to be on the day enſuing.
                     Theſe three thus parting, Platir and Berolde being glad to
pleaſe the Prince Palmerin in any thing he thought méete, they
entred the ſame Foyſt, wherein they were brought thither,
and ſo humbly taking their farewell of Palmerin, they ſayled towards
Conſtantinople, the wind and weather ſeruing them ſo
commodious, as in few dayes they attained the firme land.
                     In like manner did the Prince Palmerin in another Countrey,
after he had taken his leaue of Argentao, who likewiſe
returned into the Profound Iſle, where his Subiects receiued
him very 
                           ••
                        atiouſly, accounting them highly bound to the
Prince Palmerin, in ordaining them ſuch a Gouernour, who
would in no caſe ſuffer the people of that Iſland to be ſo cruelly
dealt withall, as they had béene before of the bloody Giants.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XX.
                     How Alfernao arriued at the Emperours Court of Conſtantinople,
and of that which happened to him.
                     
                        NOt many dayes after the Knight of the Sauage
man, was departed from the Citie of
Conſtantinople, the Emperor was aduertiſed
of his loſſe, by the Prince Florians Eſquire,
which cauſed no ſmall griefe thorow
the whole Court: but it came ſo to paſſe,
that Alfernao arriued there vpon the ſudden,
euen as the Emperour ſate leauing on the Table, lamenting
for the want of his Nephew Florian, and when he had cauſed
him to come before him, Alfernao fell downe at his féete
with theſe words.
                     Illuſtrious and moſt gratious Emperour, I humbly deſire
your maieſty, that you would thinke of me in your woonted fauour
& clemency, not remembring my paſſed tranſgreſſions,
for if your Grace looke into the depth of them, I ſhall be found
worthy of moſt grieuous puniſhment, which your royall clemency
hath power to moderate, in that you are accuſtomed to
vſe mercy to them, whoſe offences deſerue rigorous intreating.
I am (dread Prince) that ancient man, who came and requeſted
your highneſſe aſſiſtance, and diſſembling with teares
and faint ſpéeches, (which were nothing elſe but méere deceite)
that I had great néede of the ayde of one of your Knightes:
wherevpon you granted licence to your noble Nephew, that
he ſhould leaue your Court and goe in my company, but I intending
deceit, was deceiued my ſelfe, and could not execute on
him what I had determined.
                     Then began Alfernao to diſcourſe to the emperor, the whole
ſucceſſe of his Nephewe Florian of the Forreſt, who had ſent

him to informe his Maieſtie of all that hapned to him, that the
report of the Eſquire might be the better belieued: whereto the
Emperour thus anſwered.
                     Certainly Alfernao, you haue brought my déere Friend and
Nephew, into the greateſt danger that euer could happē to him,
and albeit I haue good reaſon to the contrarie, yet not for thine
owne deſerts I pardon thée, but for bringing me ſo good tydings
of him, whome the Heauens would not ſuffer to fall into the
hands of the cruell Collambra: but truſt mee Alfernao, your
dealing ſhall remaine to me for a ſufficient example, how I giue
credit hereafter, either to teares or faire ſpéeches, eſpecially comming
from ſuch a one as you ſéeme to be. As for Arlencea, I eſtéeme
maruellous well of her courteous dealings towards my
Nephew: and if it fortune that ſhe come into my Court, I witneſſe
my good will to requite her honeſt and vertuous deſerts:
in the meane time you may goe to your Chamber, and reſt your
ſelfe, and if you pleaſe to ſtay the comming of my Nephew and
Arlencea, you ſhall beare record of their entertainment, in hope
of which, I remit all that is paſt.
                     I would gladly (anſwered Alfernao) go where the Empreſſe
is, that the feare which ſhee hath conceyued by the Knight of the
Sauadge-mās Eſquire, may be perſwaded in hearing the truth.
While he was thus ſpeaking, the Empreſſe (accompanied with
her Ladyes, came to the Emperours preſence, whereof he was
very glad, which made him beginne thus.
                     Madame, I perceiue that the deſire you haue to vnderſtand
what is become of my Nephew Florian, hath cauſed you to come
ſo ſuddenly hither, which hath ſaued this man a labour, for that
he was comming to you.
                     The Empreſſe and their Ladyes, being all in their accuſtomed
places, he commanded the Nigromancer Alfernao, to expreſſe
againe vnto the Empreſſe his former diſcourſe, that ſhee
might likewiſe be acquainted with his deceytfull treaſon: but
the report diſpleaſed her very much, as alſo all her Ladyes and
Gentle-women, rayſing ſuch a hatred in themſelues againſt
Alfernao, as they deſired the Emperour they might departe
the place.
                     
                        
The Prince Primaleon ſéeing the great choller of the Ladies
began very pleaſantly to ſmile at them, all the Princes in the
Hall likewiſe bearing him company: and in the meanetime
this laughter laſted, they heard a great noyſe without in the
Pallace, diuers running to know the occaſion, they beheld Albanis
the Eſquire to the Prince Berolde of Spain, to come leading
by the hand the Gianteſſe Collambra, the ſight of whom,
made the people to flocke on heaps excéedingly, and ſuch wondring,
as all the Pallace ſounded with the Eccho of their noyſe.
                     
                        Albanis entred the great hall holding Collambra by the
hand, her face being ſo fearefull, as moued the Emperour to
ſtart ſuddenly. Alfarnao had no ſooner eſpyed her, but his heart
came in a manner dead, neuertheleſſe, he couered his gréefe ſo
cunningly as he could, and hauing embraced her, began in this
manner.
                     Madame, it ſhould appeare, that the ſame miſfortune which
hath brought me hither, hath had the like authority ouer you:
wherefore I deſire you to take all patiently, and commit our
vnhappines to Fortunes vnſtedineſſe. When the cruell Collambra,
(who had all this while eyed the Emperor) heard the
words of Alfernao, ſhe began to cry aloud, (ſuſpecting that
ſhe was betrayed) as though with her voyce, ſhe would haue
ſhaken the Hall in péeces: and after ſhe had wept bitterly a
pretty ſpace, ſhe ſpake as followeth.
                     O Alfernao, I ſée at this inſtant, thy monſtrous and diſloyall
dealing, in that thou haſt forgotten the good and kind affection,
which my huſband Brauorant in his life time did alwaies
beare thee, in that thou haſt deliuered me into their hands, to
whom thou haſt alſo betrayed my daughter, thou hauing vſed
the matter ſo, as I ſhall neuer ſée her againe.
                     Madame (ſaid Alfernao) I know well the doubt you make
of my loyalty, and I ſée I muſt be conſtrained to ſatiſfie you,
by rehearſing my manifold and extreame mifortunes, as well
to qualifie your anger towardes me, as to cauſe you ſée
how equall our vnhappineſſe is, in that one vnhappy Planet
hath ſtroken vs both. Then he began to rip vp the whole circumſtance,
of that which had happened ſince his departure

from her, and at the end of his diſcourſe, he gaue her to vnderſtand,
that Arlencea her daughter willed her to forget the death
of her children, and the enuie ſhee bare to him that had killed
them, which if ſhe did not agrée vnto, ſhe ſhould be in daunger
neuer to ſée her againe: Collambra returned him this anſwere.
Credite me Alfernao, I am not ſo much offended at my preſent
miſfortune, as at theſe thy wordes, wherefore to knitte vp
the matter, I giue thée this aſſurance, that I die, in thinking
Arlencea my daughter is ſo forgetfull of her ſelfe, as to endure
the courteſie of him that hath murthered her brethren, and the
death of them is the more yrkeſome vnto me, in that ſhe honoreth
him, who hath ſo much diſhonored me. With theſe words
ſhe caſt her ſelfe downe on the ground ſo furiouſly, as if was a
good whi
                           •••
                         ſhe would vſe any more talke: ſo, during y• time
ſhe was in this rage, Albanis, the Prince Beroldes Eſquire,
aduanced himſelfe to make knowne to the Emperour his meſſage,
not forgetting to declare the whole circumſtance, of that
which happened in the Perillous Iſle, both how Palmerin had
ſlaine the Giant Eſpouuantable, and how his thrée Couzins
were depriued of their liues, by the proweſſe of his Lord Berolde,
Platir, and the Sage Aliart.
                     
                     Theſe newes did greatly ſatiſfie the Prince Primaleon, and
Gridonia: then further proeeding in rehearſing the dangers,
which mooued them all to great admiration. Vpon this Alfernao
declared how the people of the Profound Iſle, had choſen
the Knight of the Sauage man for their head and Gouernour,
and becauſe he was abſent, Palmerin had placed Argentao to
rule the Iſle. More (quoth hee) the Knightes haue left this
Iſland, and are gone into the Perillous Iſle, where they are determined
to ſoiourne for a while, and then afterward they will
come hither vnto your highneſſe Court: to this the Emperour
anſwered thus.
                     I perceiue that the moſt noble and knightly aduentures, are
reſerued for my Nephew Palmerin, of whoſe welfare I doubt,
if he be depriued of the company of the Sage Aliart, therefore, I
would both he and the Prince Florian were here together, for
that (I promiſe you) I doe euen long for their company. Then

breaking from the ma
                           •
                        ter, he deſired Alfernao to tell him, if
the Prince Florian did intend to tarry long in the Realme of
Spaine.
                     
                     My gratious Lord (anſwered Alfernao) he is not determined
as yet to returne vnto your Court, before hée haue firſt
ſhowne to A
                              •
                           lencea, the Caſtell of Almaroll. Theſe words
were not welcome to Leonarda the Princes of Thrace, ſhée
hauing already giuen entertainment to the Prince Florian in
the chiefeſt place of her heart, for ſhe doubted leaſt the ſight of
the Princeſſe Miragarda, would quite extinguiſh the remembrance
of her: but when ſhée thought that the Knight of the
Sauage man, would enter Combate againſt him that kept the
Shield of Miragarda, ſhe quite and cleane forſooke her former opinion,
and lauded Fortune, in ſending her ſo good 
                           〈◊〉
                         for
her ſeruant.
                     
                        Polinarda perceiuing the troubleſome thoughts of her eſpeciall
friend, very ſoftly gaue her this comfort. Madame, and
my ſwéete friend, ſuffer your Knight to frequent thoſe places
where his own affection ſerueth him, for I dare aſſure you, that
the beautie of neuer a Princeſſe in the world, can attaine the
power to change his fancy, and therefore I pray you be not diſcouraged
by the beauty of the Princeſſe Miragarda, your owne
being ſo ſufficient, as I am perſwaded, ſhe will not be hired to
contend with you.
                     Madame (anſwered Leonarda) I am not able to iudge how
much I am indebted for your gratious fauour, and ſéeing loyall
friendſhip commandeth nothing ſhould be concealed betwéene
vs, I will let you vnderſtand thus much, that your preſent comfortable
words, hath brought me out of a tedious cōceit, wherein
my ſpirit was grieuouſly paſſioned.
                     The Emperor commanded the Magitian Alfernao, to comfort
Collambra, and to aſſure her, that for her daughter Arlenceas
ſake, hée did affoord her his fauourable welcome into his
Court: and if ſhée would conſent to be baptiſed, euery one
would ſo greatly honour her, as ſhe ſhould quickely forget the
death of her Children. Collambra ſéeing Alfernao comming,
could not ſuffer him to declare what the Emperor had aſſigned

him, but as a woman mad and deſperate, ſpake vnto him in
this order. How doſt thou (Alfernao) recompence the good
déeds thou haſt receiued at my huſbands hands, to render thy
ſelfe ſo willingly on my enemies ſide? and by the perſwaſion of
them, thou commeſt to will me forſake the law, wherein I
haue bene nouriſhed and brought vp all my life time: I promiſe
thée, I will both finiſh my life, and thy treaſons together,
to the end it may be an example to them, who enterpriſe things
againſt their dutie, and ſpecially dealing with me, who reſted
my hope the fidelity, whereof thou madeſt me aſſurance by promiſe.
With theſe words ſhe ran to one of the great open windowes
of the hall, and before any one could get to her to ſuccor
her, ſhe threw her ſelfe headlong downe into the Court, and
Alfernao comming (as though he would haue hindered her)
threw himſelfe likewiſe downe after her, Collambra ſell ſo
waightily on the ſtones which were ſharpe, as ſhe was bruſed
all in péeces, not hauing the remembrance to ſpeake one word
afterward, but Alfernao liued vntill the next morning.
                     The Emperor and Primaleon were ſorry to ſée ſuch a deſperate
murder, but the Emperor and the other Princeſſes reioyced,
that they were ſo well deliuered of the cruell Collambra:
yet did they gréeue to ſée ſuch a bloody ſtratagem, and being
not able to endure this pittifull ſight, they withdrew themſelues
into their Chambers. The two yong Princeſſes Leonarda
and Polinarda, paſſed away the time, in diſcourſing ſeuerally
the valiant proweſſe of their knights, vntill ſuch time as
they were called to Supper.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXI.
                     How the Princes and Knights which were Priſoners to the
great Turk, arriued at the Court of Conſtantinople, wherupon
the King Recinde deliuered out of priſon the Prince
Albayzar.
                     
                        ON the next day the bodies of Collambra
and Alfernao were buried, and the Emperour
ſitting conferring with Albanis, the
Prince Beroldes Eſquire, about many
matters of the Profound Iſle, an ancient
Knight (whom his Maieſtie had giuen
charge to guard the Port of Conſtantinople,)
entred the great Hall, and being come into the Emperors
preſence he kneeled downe, and ſpake as followeth.
                     Inuincible Emperour, if theſe newes which hath béene rehearſed
of your noble Nephewes, did moue content, amid your
manifolds diſcontents, the tidings which I bring you at this
preſent, will be no leſſe welcome to you then the former: for I
aduertiſe your Highnes, that within your hauen is entred foure
Gallies from the great Turke, wherein are Polendos, Belcar,
and all the other Princes and Knights of our Court, which
haue bene kept thus long in priſon by the Princeſſe Targianaes
Father, I came to let your Maieſtie vnderſtand hereof
before they were landed, becauſe it is m
                           •
                        ete you ſhould be acquainted
therewith, before any other.
                     The Emperour remained ſo ioyfull of theſe tidings as poſſible
might be, and without making any anſwer, he departed
forth of the Hall ſo rauiſhed inwardly with ioy and gladneſſe,
as he could not tell (for a prettie while) whither to goe: in like
manner it happened oftentimes to them, who haue newes

brought them of thoſe things which they are moſt deſir
                           •
                        us to
haue. At length he came downe the ſtaires into the open court,
where he ſate downe in a chaire, vntill he might ſée them come
in at the gates: in the meane while, many knights of his Court
came to tell him of the arriuall of his ſonne Polendos, but he
did not make them any anſwer, for that his minde was buſied,
in remembring how many miſfortunes had come to him one in
another necke, and yet (notwithſtanding) they haue all come
to a proſperous end, whereupon he humbly deſired the heauenly
Powers to continue him ſtill in their woonted fauourable
protection, for it is the nature of men of good iudgement, to
doubt of danger after they haue once receiued good ſucceſſe, for
that it hath bene euermore ſéene, that felicitie and miſerie doe
not equally happen, but a dram of pleaſure, hath commonly a
pound of paine. In this maner the good Emperour diſcourſed
ſecretly with himſelfe, and comparing euery cauſe ioyntly together,
the teares did plentifully run downe his white beard,
thinking how Fortune fauoured him in his Age, when hee was
worſt able to witneſſe his dutie to her: Neuertheleſſe, he feared
he ſhould not long enioy the company of his Knights, their impriſonment
had gone ſo néere his heart, as hee feared betwéene
two extreames to be ſuddenly rapt away.
                     While the Emperor was thus winding vp the endleſſe bottom
of vncertain thoughts, the prince Primaleon his ſōne came
and knéeled before him, giuing him to vnderſtand how the Galleys
whre arriued: wherevpon he commanded his Horſe ſhuld
be brought him, & ſo preſently he tooke his way to the Port, accompanied
with his ſonne, all the Princes of the Court, and the
chiefeſt inhabitants of the Citie, each one greatly deſiring to ſée
the priſoners. When the Emperor came to the port, he ſaw on
land, Polendos, Belcar, Oniſtalde, with diuers others, & that he
might the better welcom them, he alighted frō his Horſe, being
very much abaſhed to ſée his Knights in ſuch order, theyr Faces
pale & black, their ſtrength weakened, and their boards and haire
growne ſo long, as they which ſawe them when they departed
frō 
                        Conſtantinople, in the company of the Princeſſe Targiana,
began now ſcantly to know them: when they were all come on

ſhoare, the Emperour contained them with the ſelfe ſame courteſie,
and his mild nature did dayly afford towards his eſpeciall
friends.
                     The Prince Belcar preſented himſelfe to the Emperour,
offering to kiſſe his highneſſe hand, but he receiued him in his
armes, imbracing him very louingly, and vſed ſuch gratious
courteſie towards him, as he did vnto the Prince Primaleon
his ſon, as well for that he had bin brought vp in his Court, as
alſo becauſe he was the ſonne of his owne ſiſter, and the hardy
Friſoll king of Hungaria his brother and eſpeciall good friend
As he continued this fauorable vſage to Belcar, Oniſtalde, ſon
to the King Recinde, and his owne ſonne Polendos, came and
knéeled downe before him, then leauing Belcar he returned to
them very gratiouſly, declaring in the ſight of euery one his incomparable
beauty: ſo departing from the Port, he walked with
them on foote towards the pallace, refuſing to mount on horſebacke,
his mind was buſied with ſuch excéeding ioy, as well for
the recouery of them, as for the Princely commendations Targiana
had ſent him, whō he had now proued his ſpeciall friend.
The Prince Primaleon went in the middeſt betwéene Belcar
and Oniſtalde, and the other Prince and knights came louingly,
cōmuning with their friends, in which order they all followed
the Emperour: who being no ſooner come to the Pallace,
but there he found the Empreſſe accompanied with her ladies,
attending their comming at the outtermoſt Gate, ſhe hauing
giuen the knights her amiable welcome, the Emperour commanded
they ſhould be brought to their chambers, for that
their great trauaile on the Seas required ſome reſt.
                     The Princes were conducted into the Emperors chamber,
according as it was the cuſtome for thoſe whom he eſtéemed, at
their arriuall, and they were ſcant out of the great hall, when,
they perceiued to enter a Turkiſh Eſquire, who coming before
the Emperor, began to ſalute him with theſe words. My gratious
Lord, Almaneor Ambaſſador from the great Turk, commanded
me to let your maieſtie vnderſtand, that he is loth as
yet to take landing, fearing leſt he ſhould hinder the pleaſure
your highneſſe conceiueth, ſéeing your knights ſo ſafely returned,

he being come with them, and hath here ſent them vnto
your maieſtie: wherefore, he deſireth you would not iudge amiſſe
of him, in that he hath done, and if ſo be he haue in ought
mooued offence to your Highneſſe, he will to morrow morning
come and be ſorie for it, when he wil make you acquainted with
the ſumme of his ambaſſage, which will cauſe you to looſe part
of the contentment, which at this preſent your knights hath animated
you withall.
                     Certainely my friend (anſwered the Emperour) I am ſorry
that I did not make more remembrance of him, but let him
commit the fault to my knights with whom I will enioyne in
making amends againe to morrow, becauſe I ſhall ſée him to
day, he being willing to reſt himſelfe this night in his galley.
The eſquire departed with this courteous anſwere of the Emperor,
who taking the Empreſſe by the hand, withdrew themſelues
into their chamber, where they paſſed the night with
greater contentment, then they had done of many daies before.
                     But when faire Phoebus in the morning had diſplayed his
golden face on the earth, the Empreſſe walked to the Chappell
to heare ſeruice, the Emperour and the knights being farre behind
her, and ſeruice being ended, they all dined with the Empreſſe
in her chamber, for that ſhe had determined to feaſt Polendos,
Belcar, Oniſtalde, and the other Princes, who were
ſerued at dinner with maruellous great ſtate.
                     The Tables being withdrawne, the Emperor commanded
the principall knights of his court, to goe welcome on land the
great Turkes Ambaſſadour, to whom he would ſhew himſelfe
honourable, as well for that he would not be thought vngreatefull,
hauing recouered home againe his knights, as alſo to vnderſtand
the will of the great Turke.
                     
                     
                        Polendos, Belcar, and the reſt of them that had béene priſoners,
went foremoſt to receiue him on ſhoare, becauſe they
would not haue him thinke, that they had forgotten the kindneſſe
he ſhewed them on the Seas: where Primaleon was
ſomewhat diſpleaſed, becauſe his nature could not ſuffer him
to vſe ſuch kindneſſe, towards them he knewe his profeſſed enemies.
                     
                        
                        Polendos with his company being come to the Port, (hée
with ſuch as he thought good (tooke a Barge, and went aboord
the Galley to the Ambaſſador, and brought them on ſhore with
them very nobly, with ſuch a noiſe of drums, phifes, trumpets, &
clarians, as the Turkes wondred at this royall entertainment.
The Ambaſſador nothing the great courteſie of Polendos, who
was diligent in ſhewing him the greateſt honour might be,
knew very well, that this excéeding humanitie came from him
that was their Lord and gouernor: wherevpon he conſidered,
that a Prince ſo wel beloued of all, as the Emperour Palmerin
was, ſhould finde more friends to aid him in his neceſſity, then
enemies to moleſt him.
                     All this while, the Emperor attended the Ambaſſadors comming
to the Empreſſe chamber, accompanied with his ſonne
Primaleon, and many Princes and Knights of his Court, and
the Ambaſſador (who was the ſame man that came before, to
requeſt in the great Turks name, the fréedome of Albayzar, in
change of thoſe Princes that were priſoners in Turkie) being
in the Preſence of the Emperour, made him ſuch humble
reuerence as his Maieſtie well deſerued, and not vſing any
ſuch proude behauiour, as he did at his firſt comming to Conſtantinople.
                     
                     The emperor welcommed him very gratiouſly, deſiring him
not to be offended, becauſe he did not accept of him y• day before
according as willingly he would haue done. Moſt worthy Emperour
(ſayd the Ambaſſadour) I am not of ſo ſmall diſcretion,
but I knew well how buſie you were yeſterſtay, in receiuing
home them, whō you haue ſo long looked for: but letting theſe
néedleſſe matters paſſe, I muſt requeſt to know your highnes
minde, as concerning the libertie of the prince Albayzar, whom
you would not ſende to the great Turke my Lord, for that you
doubted he would not ſende home them, whom he kept as priſoners.
As touching the deliuerance of them, my Lord hath
bin ſo hardy as to truſt to your gentlenes, onely at the intreatie
of his daughter Targiana, hée hauing no aſſurance for the
Prince Albayzar his daughters huſband, but onely the word
of her who is your great friend: & deſireth that you would now

ſend home her beloued Lord Albayzar, of whom the great
Turke himſelfe willed not me to vſe any ſpéech, hauing ioyned
me to ſpeake of thoſe things, which will but little pleaſe you in
the hearing them: the Emperour returned him this anſwer.
                     I know not what the great Turke your Lord hath determined
to make me acquainted withal, but I am ſo accuſtomed to
doubtfull occaſions, as let his mallice ſtretch neuer ſo far, and
his deuiſes purchaſe what ſcope he can, yet haue they no power
to make me feare. But for the Princeſſe Targiana, I am to
thinke my ſelfe highly in her debt, in that her earneſt intreatie
wonne the libertie of knights, and ſurely it gréeueth me, that
her father would be ſo enuious towards me, who would with
all my heart, haue his daughter againe in my Court, that I
might recompence ſome part of her gentleneſſe ſhe hath vſed to
me, and for that ſhe would ſo kindly pledge her ſelfe vpon the
aſſurance ſhe repoſeth in my fidelitie.
                     Moreouer, I promiſe you Sir, I haue written to the King
Recinde, that he ſhould not faile to ſend me the Prince Albayzar,
and I beléeue certainly it will not belong before he come
hither: wherefore, I pray you to ſtay here till he come, and in
the meane time I will vſe the matter ſo, as the Turke your
Lord ſhall be rid of his doubt, and the Princeſſe Targian a ſatiſfied
to her owne contentment.
                     I am of the opinion (ſaid the Ambaſſadour) that the Prince
Albayzar will be here, and that quickly, for the Damoſel (who
was ſometime ſent in ſecret to your miſtreſſe, was diſpatched
with her meſſage twenty dayes before my ſetting forth, that
ſhe ſhould let the King Recinde and the Prince Albayzar vnderſtand
of my cōming, and certifie them likewiſe of the liberty
of our knights: by meanes whereof, they will not faile to come
hither to your Court, vntill which time I am determined (by
your licence) to ſoiourne here, but I will not declare my Lord
the Turkes minde, before I ſée the Prince Albayzar, neuertheleſſe,
I here preſent you with his gratious letter, and after
you haue well vnderſtood the contents thereof, I will declare
what I haue in charge.
                     
                        
There pauſing, he tooke forth of his boſom a letter written in
p
                           •
                        rchment, and ſealed with the Armes of the great Turke, the
which he humbly preſented vnto the Emperour, who preſently
cauſed it to be opened, and perceyuing thereby, that the Turke
willed him to giue faithfull credit to what the Ambaſſador ſaid,
he deſired him to report the cauſe of his arriuall: whereto the
Ambaſſador thus replyed.
                     My gracious Lorde, I knowe you haue not forgotten the
day, when the Princeſſe Targiana came vnto your Court, neyther
the ſubtiltie wherewith ſhe was entiſed, and brought forth
of her Fathers Courte, by the guilefull dealings of your Nephew,
the Knight of the Sauadge-man, who was hindered in
ſuch ſort in his iourney, as he could not bring the Princeſſe Targiana
vnto your Court: but ſhe being here, was entertained by
your Excellencie, the Empreſſe, and the Princeſſe Polinarda,
in ſuch gratious manner, as ſhe eſtéemeth her ſelfe (during life)
bound to you for your manifolde courteſies. And my Lorde the
Turke (in regard of your Noble fauour toward his Daughter)
would gladly (in any thing hee could) witneſſe his beneuolent
minde to you, forgetting all iniuryes paſt, for his faire Daughter
Targianaes ſake: but with this condition by the way, that
your Maieſtie offer him nothing againſt right or reaſon, for if
you do
                           •
                        , hée ſhall be conſtrained by forcible ſtrength, to reuenge
the ſhame and iniurie he hath receyued by the Knight of the Sauadge-man.
                     
                     And for the ſubſtance of his minde, it is thus in briefe, he deſireth
you to ſend vnto him the Knight your Nephew, becauſe he
would chaſtiſe him for his haynous offence. And if you refuſe to
ſatiſfie his requeſt, he commaundeth me to let you vnderſtand,
he is your enemie, and will ſo reuenge that Knights abuſe, as
all the world ſhall take example by him.
                     I cannot belieue (ſaid the Emperor) that the Turke your lord
will ſeem to threaten him, at whoſe hands he requireth nothing
but Iuſtice, the which I being very willing to doo, cannot thinke
well of your preſent procéedings, for that in ſooth you demaund
no Iuſtice. Beſides, it is not reaſonable to graunt what your

lorde requireth, for if Florian be accuſed for bringing away his
Daughter, I anſwer, that he did it at the earneſt intreatie and
deſire of her ſelfe: So that your lorde (I perceyue trauelleth in
vain after my Nephew, the Knight of the Sauadge-man whom
I will not ſend vnto him, if I wiſt he ſhould be as welcome to
him as to my ſelfe. And if I ſhould ſeeme to content the will of
your lord, I cannot ſend my Nephew except he pleaſe himſelfe,
and I am perſwaded he will not conſent vnto it, much leſſe his
Father, who is a Prince of great authoritie.
                     If this reaſon I haue made you, will not content the will of
your lorde the Turke, I am willing to receyue whatſoeuer he
pleaſe, eyther to bring or ſend me, but I am ſorie I am ſo farre
ſpent with yéeres, that I cannot ſhewe him what I haue beene
ſometime. Neuertheleſſe, for a ſufficient witneſſe of my ſelfe,
I will ſende him the Knight whome hee demaundeth, that hee
may tell him what I would doo my ſelfe, and let him be bolde,
that Knight will doo his errand to the vttermoſt. As for other
aunſwere I wiſh you not to looke for at my handes, wherefore
I thinke it good you goe to reſt your ſelfe, and when the Prince
Albayzar commeth, if you 
                           •
                        inde the time ſo conuenient for you,
you may departe when you pleaſe: and in the meane time, I
will honor you with ſuch courteous entertainment, as you ſhall
thinke well off.
                     I was aſſured before (anſwered the Ambaſſadour) of the
anſwere you would make me: wherefore hauing fulfilled my
charge, I néede not for this matter henceforward vſe any more
words.
                     When the Ambaſſadour had thus concluded, P
                              •
                           lendos deſired
the Emperour, that he would ſuffer him to entertaine the
Turkiſh Infidell, while he ſtayed there, wherevnto the Emperour
gladly conſented, and Polendos bringing him into his Lodging,
failed not to let him ſee, that enimies were better welcommed
in the Emperours Court, then Friendes were to his lorde
the great Turke.
                     
                     
                        Primaleon remained very well contented, hauing heard the anſwer
of the Emperor his father, as alſo for that he had ſo def
                           •
                        ded

the cauſe of the Knight of the Sauage man, for the loue of whom
the Princeſſe Leonarda was diuerſely mooued, fearing leaſt he
ſhould fal into the great Turkes hands, who would appeaſe the
anger of his ſtomacke, in ſacrificing the good and hardy Knight
to his Gods.
                     The ſudden dumps of this yong Princeſſe, was well perceiued
by her ſwéete friend Polinarda, who hid her knowledge
thereof for the preſent time, vntill they had brought the Empreſſe
to her chamber: then they two walking together to their
Lodging, Polinarda demanded the cauſe of her griefe, wherevpon
the Princeſſe Leonarda, being ignorant that Targiana
had béene brought to Canſtantinople by the noble Florian of
the Forreſt, or how elſe the matter ſtood, but ſhe deſired Polinarda
(if ſo it were her pleaſure) to declare how theſe occaſions had
happened.
                     When the Princeſſe had herein ſatiſfied her minde, ſhée remained
in ſorrow without meaſure, as well by occaſion of ſuſpecting
the beautie of Targiana, as alſo to thinke on the ingratitude
of the Knight of the Sauage man, ſo that at that very inſtant
ſhe reputed him as a man without faith, loue, or regard of
loyaltie, and ſhe would gladly haue deuiſed the meane, whereby
to baniſh the remembrance of him forth of her heart. Which
the Princeſſe Polinarda perceiuing, and willing to preuent
any miſchance, that ſhould happen to her Couzin, ſhe began to
vſe her talke in this manner.
                     Madame, thinke you the Prince Florian will be the ſame
man to you, as he was to the Princeſſe Targiana? You muſt
not thinke ſo, for their loue (as it was then) was not to be allowed
among perſons of honour, and that which made him ſo
ready to thinke well on her, was for no other occaſion, but that
he might finde the meanes to get out of the hands of the great
Turke her Father: and from that Court he could neuer haue
eſcaped, had it not béene by the aide of the princeſſe Targiana, ſo
that to ſatiſfie her will, & helpe his own neceſſity, he made himſelfe
ſo hardy to bring her into Greece, where being arriued, he
left her, knowing that it was no honorable ſigne, that a chriſtian
Knight ſhould make loue to an Infidell Moore. Now therfore

it is not for you to ground your iudgement on that which
is done and paſt, for that your beauty farre excelleth the blacke
hew of the Princeſſe Targiana, and you being accounted as one
of the moſt renowned Ladies through the whole world, muſt
iudge thus with your ſelfe, that he will not a little boaſt of his
good fortune, being entertained into your gratious ſeruice.
                     And on my word you may aſſuredly build, the Knight of the
Sauage man is onely yours, and he would not follow the aduentures
he hath enterpriſed, but onely in hope to gaine your
fauourable acceptation: wherefore I pray you let the conſideration
of that I haue ſpoken, cauſe you to forſake the conceit you
haue of my Couzin.
                     Madame, (anſwered Leonarda) you haue woon ſuch power
ouer me by your friendly words, as I am forced to forget my
former imaginations: but yet it is to be doubted that your Couzin
will be inueigled, ſéeing be hath the conducting of ſo many
Ladies through the Realme of Spaine.
                     
                     Good ſwéete Lady (ſaide Polinarda) I pray you let not your
ſpirits be troubled with theſe ſuſpitious paſſions, for your
Knight is not of ſo weake iudgement, as any other ſhould
make him to forget you, for ſuch aduentures happen commonly
to trauelling Knights, to méet in many places with Ladies and
Damoſelles, the company of whom maketh them to haue the
better remembrance of thoſe, who ruleth their thoughts by the
ſoueraigntie of loue: as for my Couzin, I dare giue you my
faith that he is none but yours, and thereof (on my word) you
may aſſure your ſelfe.
                     Theſe ſpéeches that Polinarda vſed, did ſo perſwade the yong
Princeſſe of Thrace, as ſhe quite forſooke her iealous thoughts,
which before was caried with ſo many contraries, as there
was hardly any place for reaſon to harbour. As it often happeneth
to them, who play the wantons with the little blind boy of
the Goddeſſe Cytherea.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXII.
                     How the Knight of the Sauage man (accompanied with the
Damoſels) arriued in the King of Spaines Court, and of
that which happened to him there, againſt the Prince Albayzar.
                     
                        THe Ambaſſador from the great Turke, ſtaied
certaine dayes in the Court of the Emperour,
in the company of the Prince Polendos,
who made better account of him
there, then his entertainement in Turkie
deſerued, and many along looke made the
Ambaſſador, waighting the cōming of the
Prince Albayzar, the Emperour and Primaleon could not ſufficiently
commend the courteſie of the Princeſſe Targiana; in
that her teares ranſommed the Chriſtian priſoners foorth of
their trouble.
                     Here wée muſt come againe to the Knight of the Sauage
man, who iournied ſo ſpéedily (after he had vanquiſhed the foure
Knights in the Valley, and gotten the Damoſels) as he arriued
in the Citie of Bruſia, which at this time is called Tolledo,
where the King Recinde as then made his aboad, who was
not a little glad, when tydings came to him of the libertie of his
ſonne, and the other Knights, which were held in captiuitie by
the great Turke.
                     
                     So ſeene as Florian was come to the kings Pallace, he called
his Eſquire to him, deſiring him to goe let the Quéene and
her Ladies vnderſtand, that a ſtrange Knight was come thither,
who enterpriſed (if her maieſtie thought it ſo conuenient)
to approue himſelfe againſt the King Recindes Knights. The
Eſquire being acquainted with the will of his Lord, preſently
went into the Pallace, where he was brought to the Quéenes
Chamber, the King himſelfe being there, for that he had dyned
there in the company of the Quéene and her Ladies, whom
the Eſquire beholding, iudged them very faire and beautifull,

marry he found a great difference betwéene them, and the Ladies
he had ſeene in the Court of the Emperour Palmerin.
                     
                     The Eſquire aduancing himſelfe into their preſence, went
firſt and humbled himſelfe to the king Recinde, then comming
to the Quéene, he knéeled downe and ſpake as followeth.
                     Madame, a ſtrange knight, in whoſe company I came vnto
your Court, hauing paſſed thorow your Realme, is now deſirous
to try himſelfe in Armes, againſt the Knights of your
royall Court, for the great deſire he had to doe ſeruice to the
King your huſband, but ſuch is your intent, as he procéedeth on
the requeſt of certaine Ladies he hath brought in his company,
which preuaileth ſo much with this good knight, as (if your Maieſtie
ſo accept of it) he would venture the Iouſt with the
Knights of your Court, who wil maintaine the beauty of their
Ladies, to excell them he hath brought with him. And that he
might procéede in his enterpriſe, he rather intended to aſke
leaue of you then of the King, becauſe he knowes he ſhall not
any way offend his excellency. The King and the Quéene were
verie glad of theſe newes, in that Fortune had ſent them the
tryall of thoſe matters they moſt deſired, which was in a manner
very dainty there, for that the Emperours Court of Greece
carryed ſuch a braue report, as all the noble Knights in the
world went thither to try their valour. Beſide, if any aduenture
were approued in the Realme of Spaine, they were altogether
done at the Caſtle of Almaroll: ſo that theſe two aforenamed
places, had the generall triall of famous knights. The
King of Spaine ſéeing the Quéen returned the Eſquire no anſwer,
he ſpake to her in this manner. Truſt me Madame, you
ought not to refuſe the gentle offer of the knight as wel to ſatiſfie
their minds, which haue deſired to ſée ſuch hauty exployts,
as alſo to auoyd the ſecret hard iudgment of your ladies, who (I
am ſure) would gladly ſée y• courage of their fauoured knights,
the Quéene mildly returned this anſwer. Since it liketh you
ſo wel my gratious Lord) that the requeſt is to be alowed, thou
mayſt (Eſquire) ſay vnto the knight, that the King and I do
                           •
                        
thinke very well of his comming to our Court, and that we
do
                           •
                         permit him the libertie of the Iouſt, againſt any

that will enter the fielde with him, whether it be for the Iouſt
or Combate, that is as the occaſions ſhall happen, but howſoeuer
it be, the King alloweth him the fréedome of the fielde, and
if the Knight deſire to reſiſt himſelfe, hée ſhall be moſt hartely
welcome, then to morrow morning he may put his intent in
execution.
                     The greateſt reſt or quiet (anſwered the Eſquier) which the
Knight my Maiſter deſireth to haue, is that he may finde ſuch
Knights, on whom he may beſtow the breaking of ſome Lances,
but ſince your Maieſty hath ſo fréely granted him the Iouſt
I will not faile to let him vnderſtand your gracious pleaſure: in
the meane while, I hope your Knights will put themſelues in a
readineſſe.
                     The Eſquier was no ſooner departed, but the King went
and looked foorth at one of the windows, and ſeeing the Knight
in the fielde, among ſo many Ladies, hée ſaide to the Quéene:
Madame, come hither, and you ſhal ſee the ſtrangeſt aduenture,
that euer you did in all your life. Certainely (ſaid the Quéene,
when ſhee had well beheld the Knight and the Damoſelles) it
ſhould ſéeme they haue a good opinion of the Knight, they behaue
themſelues ſo amiably in his company, and one of the ladies
appeareth in ſtature, as it were a Gianteſſe. Indéede ſaid
the King, her ſtrangeneſſe makes me to eye her the more, and
for the Knight, I iudge either he is very fooliſh, or elſe he is compelled
by the commandement of ſome great Princeſſe, to leade
about with him theſe Damoſels.
                     While the King and the Quéene ſtood thus ieaſting on the
Knight and the Damoſels, the Prince Albayzar (who was
giuen to vnderſtand of this aduenture) came foorth of his
Chamber, and when he came to the Pallace gate, he mounted
on Horſebacke, and came to the window where the King and
Queene looked foorth, and hauing giuen them the ſalutation of
the day, and queſtioned ſomewhat about the enterpriſe of the
Knight, he determined to trie the Combate with him. But his
haſty intent was ſtaied at this time, for that a Knight very
well armed came into the fielde, monnted on a luſty Courſar,
and bearing for his deuiſe in his Shielde, a white Hart, in a

field of Sable. The knight being in the place where the Iouſt
was determined, the Eſquire (who had béene before ſent with
the meſſage to the Quéene) ſpake vnto him in this order.
                     Sir, the Damoſels knight, ſaith that he is not accuſtomed
to Iouſt, without that which ſhall be his recompence if hée remaine
victor.
                     Wherefore I pray you let him vnderſtand, what ſhall bée
his deſert if he chance to conquer you: for if the victory fall on
your ſide, he will yeeld the Damoſell vnto you, which you ſhall
thinke beſt on in all the company: the Spaniſh Knight replyed
thus.
                     The knight (my friend) as it ſéemes to me, is farre beyond
the ſcope of my minde, in that he would trouble other folkes,
with them that he would be gladly rid of himſelfe: wherefore
you may ſay vnto him, that I am ſuch a Ladies ſeruant, towards
whom I haue dot yet ſo well deſerued, as (if I were
vanquiſhed) to yeeld her vp into his cuſtodie. And I come for
no other cauſe into this place, but to let him well and truely vnderſtand,
that the beauty of thoſe Damoſels, may not compare
with the heauenly face of my Lady. And if my fortune proue ſo
good, as my triall will preuaile. I ſhall content my ſelfe without
expecting any other recompence at the Knights hands: therefore
till him I would gladly know, for whom he preſumeth to
hazard the Iouſt.
                     The Eſquire hauing brought the Spaniſh Knights anſwere
to his Lord, hée did content himſelfe very well therewith:
Marry tell him (quoth he) that I haue not the leiſure to name
the Lady, in whoſe cauſe I fight, but if hée be ſo happie as to
conquer me, I will withall my heart ſatiſfie his requeſt. The
Eſquire went to him againe with his Maiſters minde, which
when the Spaniard heard, hée preſently entred into theſe
words. I perceiue that thy maiſters proud and hauty ſtomack,
which made him ſo bold to enter the fielde, cauſeth him now
to be ſo braue in ſpéeches: wherefore I muſt take paines to aſſwage
his courage, becauſe I will helpe him away with one of
his Damoſels.
                     The King Recinde and Albayzar, who marked well their

large language, deſired to ſée if their déedes would counteruaile
their wordes, eſpecially if the Damoſels knight were ſuch a
one as he made himſelfe to be. At laſt they broached their horſes
with their ſpurs, and ran together with ſo great force, as the
Spaniſh knight, who was the ſeruant to Policia, the daughter
to Duke Ladiſlart, receiued ſuch a pleaſant ſtroke, (the Damoſell
Knight hauing broken his ſtaffe ſo iuſt vpon him) 
                           •
                        as
his Shield was rared thorow the midſt, and himſelfe throwne
to the ground with his heeles vpward: but hee recouered
himſelfe quickly like a good Knight, and drawing his ſword,
came to reuenge the foyle hee ſuſtained in the Iouſt, which
the Damoſelles Knight beholding, he ſtayed him with theſe
ſpéeches.
                     Sir knight, I came not to craue licence for the combat with
the ſword, wherefore I pray you pacifie your ſelfe, and let me
Iouſt with theſe fiue Knights, who I ſee attend for me, and if
I be ſo happy to eſcape out of their hands not diſaduantaged, I
ſhall be content to pleaſure you in your owne deſire.
                     The Spaniſh knight was ſo offended at this miſhap, as he
cared not if he had dyed there preſently, but that the king commanded
him to auoyd the place.
                     Then one of the fiue knights entred the field, but he was
welcommed like the firſt, and ſo in briefe did they all beare
one another company: which Albayzar ſeeing, ſaid, that the
Damoſeles might not be woon without good paines were beſtowne,
they hauing ſuch a good and hardy Knight to defend
them. The Damoſels Knight hauing broken foure Launces,
withdrewe himſelfe, attending when his Eſquire ſhould
bring him another. Then Albayzar (ſeeing the Knights neceſſitie)
ſent him one of his owne Launces, which was blacke,
and the head was of pure Gold, but the Damoſelles Knight
would not receiue it, ſpeaking to him that brought it in this
manner.
                     Thou mayeſt ſay vnto Albayzar, that the little loue and
good will I beare him, maketh mee diſdaine to receyue any
thing hee ſendeth. Aduauncing himſelfe towards, hee tooke a
Launce that was ſent him by the King, wherewith he charged

another knight that came againſt him, in ſuch ſort, as he was
caſt out of his Saddle ſo boiſterouſly, that for a good while he remained
ſenſleſſe. In the meane while the Damoſells Knight
gallopped on to the end of the courſe, becauſe he could hardly
ſtay his horſe▪ the vanquiſhed Knight aroſe and departed out
of the field and then the Prince returned backe againe to the
place, where Albayzar ſate to behold the iouſt, who came and
tooke him by the arme, vſing theſe ſpéeches to him. Sir knight,
I iudge that the little knowledge you haue of me, hath made
you to deſpiſe and contemne the Lance I ſent you, but yet I
parden your folly in ſo doing.
                     I deſire (ſaid the Damoſels Knight) to beléeue the words
I ſent you by your Eſquire, and perſwade your ſelfe, that I
know you to be Albayzar the Souldan of Babylon, with whō
I would willingly enter the Combat: Albayzar hearing theſe
words, anſwered him thus.
                     I am content (becauſe you know me ſo well) that you ſhall
not take a ſurfeit by looſing your deſire, and if you will ſtay till
my 
                           〈◊〉
                         be brought hither, I will breake this Lance on
you, becauſe you preſumed to refuſe it: and afterwards, I
will entertaine you with the Combate, when, I doubt not
but to giue ſeuere chaſticement, to your proud and mallapart
ſtomacke.
                     I would with all my heart, aunſwered the Damoſelles
Knight, that thou we
                           •
                        t armed, for my mallice is ſuch againſt
thee, as I cannot tell it, but thou ſhalt féele it. Albayzar preſently
ſent for his Armour, and the King ſéeing their fury, and
noting the high wordes that had paſſed betweene them, came
down into the field to them, to the end he would not that Albayzar
ſhould fall into any miſfortune, before he had bene firſt
in the 
                           ••
                        perours Court, to which place the Turke had ſent
the impriſoned knights, becauſe he would recouer home again
Albayzar 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        : for which cauſe the king Recinde would not
permit them to trie the combate, and ſcantly would he ſuffer
them to iouſt together, ſo greatly he feared leſt the Damoſelles
Knight, would endaunger the perſon of the Prince Albayzar.
                     
                     
                        
The Quéene was verie well pleaſed, in that by the meanes
of the Damoſels knight, ſhe perceiued the valor of the knights
of the Spaniſh Court, and the Damoſels (albeit they reioyced
not in their ill fortune which were vnhorſed) yet they greatly
commended the proweſſe of their knight, that had defended
them ſo well. And ſtill they looked for the comming of the Spaniſh
Ladies to them, delighting that they had no better ſeruants
to venter for them, but the Ladies themſelues gréeued, to
ſee their good friends ſo vnfortunately foyled.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXIII.
                     How the Damoſels Knight and Albayzar Iouſted together.
                     
                        NOt long it was before the Prince Albayzars
eſquires returned with their maiſters
armour, which was blacke, and ſtreamed
all ouer with little ſtroakes of Gold, and
when the Prince of Babylon was armed,
and had taken the ſame Lance which Florian
refuſed he came before the king, ſpeaking
to him in this manner. I deſire you (my gracious Lord)
that you would not diſſwade me from my enterpriſe, becauſe
I know my ſelfe able to reproue this Knight, that ſhewed himſelfe
ſo diſdainfull towards him, whom I am ſure you would
not haue receiue any ſhame in your Court: to which words the
king thus replyed.
                     
                        Albayzar, I am ſo earneſt in regard of your well doing,
as I would be ſorry any thing ſhould happen to you here but
well, wherfore, to grant you the Combate againſt the ſtrange
knight, truſt me, I neither dare, nor will conſent to it, as well
for the care I haue of your perſon, as for that I will giue no

occaſion to the Emperour Palmerin, whereby he may thinke any
ill by me.
                     Well then (quoth Albayzar) I hope this Lance ſhall do ſo
much as I would haue it, but if it do not, I may well complain
on your highneſſe, in that you will not ſuffer me to puniſh the
pride of this knight. Good Sir (ſaid the Damoſels knight) doe
not thus waſte the time in needeleſſé words, it were good you
prepared your ſelfe to the Iouſt, and if I be prouder then you
would haue me, puniſh me as you ſee occaſion: but yet doe no
more then you dare do, for if fortune ſo friend you, as you remaine
victor ouer me, let my paiment be ſuch as you ſhal pleaſe
and there is an end.
                     I pray you (quoth Albayzar) do me ſo much fauour, as to
tell me who you are, for I aſſure you, I would gladly know for
two cauſes: the firſt, that I might not be ignorant of the knight
whom I ſhall vanquiſh: the ſecond, if ſo be I ſpeed not according
to my deſire, that I may the better enquire after you as I
trauaile abroade: the anſwer of the Damoſels Knight was
this.
                     It is not my wil to ſatiſfie thy honor ſo much, but perſwade
thy ſelfe, that I am the greateſt enemy that euer thou hadſt
in all thy life, and I gréeue that I may not haue libertie of the
Combate againſt thee, becauſe I long haue wiſhed to haue my
fill on thee: but ſince it is the pleaſure of the King it ſhall not
be, I will not preſume to exceede his higheſt will, neuertheleſſe
I will awaite the time, when I may deale with thee according
to my deſire.
                     If I be not deceiued (anſwered Albayzar) I think I know
know you, for I thinke I haue ſeene you ſometime in the Caſtle
of Dramorant the Cruell, where you made your ſelfe ſo
bold to vſe ſuch language, as I haue not yet forgotten: wherefore
aſſure your ſelfe, that the ſpeeches thou diddeſt vſe there, &
the brauery thou ſeemeſt to haue at this preſent, ſhall be the
deſtruction of all ſuch, as dare afford their ayde in the iniury I
haue receiued. But for that I may a little eaſe my ſtomacke,
both in taking reuenge, and quailing thy vſurping boldneſſe,

which I cannot ſo deale with all as I would, till fitter time
ſerue: or my purpoſe: I deſire that thou wouldeſt breake one
Staffe with me, vnder the name of ſome 
                           •
                        word Lady, that I
may ſee whether ſhe deſerue better in praiſe then my Lady
whom I run for, the 
                           •
                        aire Princeſſe Targiana.
                     
                     I will take her (ſaid the Damoſels Knight) which is the
ſ
                           •
                        mpleſt in beautie of all theſe in my company, for my fauourite
at this time, & in her ſeruice I am determined to iouſt againſt
you. I would wiſh (quoth Albayzar) becauſe the Lady I haue
named (is the gratious Miſtreſſe of my fight▪ is knowne to be
of great and high authoritie, that you would name your moſt
fauoured to be ſuch a one, as may be thought worthy to equall
her.
                     You preſſe me ouermuch (anſwered the Damoſels knight)
in that you would haue me reueale that which I will not, but
this I aduertiſe you, that Fortune hath made me ſeruant of a
Lady, in whoſe gratious fauour I 
                           〈◊〉
                         and will not let the ſoueraigntie
of her name be ſh
                           •
                        wen in any 
                           〈◊〉
                        , but onely
ſuch as are of great importance: yet ſince I ſee you af
                           •
                        ect ſo
much, I am content to breake one Lance with you for her
ſake. And becauſe your thoughts may be the better ſatiſfied, I
aſſure you, that ſhe is tarre more excellent in beautie then the
Princeſſe Targiana, and ſo ſingular aboue her, as her name is
not worthy to be talked on, in reſpect of my royall and incomparable
Miſtreſſe. And I deſire that you would not requeſt
to know her name, becauſe I haue vowed to keepe it in ſecret,
that I may the better make others maruaile, what and who
ſhe ſhould be. I cannot ſuffer (ſaid Albayzar) thy reproachfull
ſpéeches, eſpecially when thou ſeemeſt to diſpraiſe her, whoſe
beautie no Lady liuing can any way equall.
                     Then theſe two Knights departed to fetch their car
                           •
                        ire,
and ranne together with ſingular courage, Albayzar hauing
before his eyes the loue of his Lady Targiana, and the mi
                           •
                        
                        
                        
                           •
                        ie
that his enemie had offered him, and the Damoſelles
Knight was accompanyed with the ſecret good will of the
Princeſſe Leonarda: in briefe, theſe two Knights were ſo

greatly affectionate towards their Ladies, that they encountred
together with ſuch force, as their Launces flew vp into
the aire in pieces, and ſo they paſſed on, not being ſhaken any
thing at all. When they were come to the end of the race, they
failed not to take newe ſtaues, which were broken againe
like as the firſt were, and yet no further aduantage on either
ſide.
                     The King of Spaine made great eſtimation of the noble valor
which he perceiued in the Damoſels Knight, and deuiſed
how he might accompliſh the meanes to knowe who he was:
for he doubted not but Albayzar would diſcharge his dutie wel
enough, becauſe the Shield of the Princeſſe Miragarda, had
made his valiancy well knowne the Court of the Emperor
Palmerin.
                     
                     Theſe two Princes were very much amazed, ſéeing
they could haue no more aduantage ouer one another, wherevpon
they tried the third Launce, wherewith they mette together
ſo forcibly, as the Damolles Knight loſt one of his
Stirroppes, and was caſt vppon the croupper of his Horſe:
in like manner, Albayzar forſooke both his ſtirropes, and
was conſtrained to catch holde about the necke of his Horſe,
and greatly offended they were both of them, hauing Iouſted
ſo many times, and yet could not ſpeede of that which
they ſeuearely deſired, wherefore, they determined not to depart
then, before one of them ſhould bee caſt beſide his
Saddle.
                     Then theſe two redoubted Knights, went to prooue their
fourth Launce, which hauing in their hands, Albayzar ſpake
to the Damoſels knight thus.
                     I pray you Sir fauour mee, in dooing that which I muſt demand
of you: the Damoſels Knight would paſſe no further, before
he had returned him this anſwere.
                     Of trueth Sir, I am thus intended, not to depart
hence before I ſee you on the ground, therefore I pray you
trauaile not your ſelfe, in deſirig any other thing of
mee.
                     Certainely Sir (ſaid Albayzar) I would not haue thought

you had béene ſo vncourteous, neuertheleſſe, I will yet intreate
you once more, that you would goe preſent your ſelfe before the
giant Almaroll, (if ſo be I prooue ſo fortunate as to foyle you)
and ſay to him, that by your meanes I haue acquited the bond,
wherein the Princeſſe Miragarda ſo ſtraitely tied me, in that
ſhe may ſee the Knight, that Iouſted againſt the beauty of my
Lady Targiana: and if it happen that fortune fauour you with
the victory, I will doe any thing you ſhall command me.
                     You offer me ſo faire play (ſaid the Damoſels Knight, as I
cannot otherwiſe chooſe but conſent to your requeſt. Thus they
pointed to fetch their courſe, and they met together ſo directly,
as their Launces being broken, they buckled together mightily
with their bodies, hauing giuen each other ſuch a rough gréeting,
as the Damoſels knight was compelled to forgoe both his
ſtirrops greatly amazed: but Albayzar meaſured his length on
the ground, ſo ſore ſhaken, as he lay in ſtudy a prety while.
The Damoſels knight ſéeing him ſo aſtoniſhed▪ ſaid vnto him:
You may know what aduantage you haue gotten, in that you
haue not leaue to trie the Combate with me. Then he cauſed
his Helmet to be opened, that he might receiue ſome aire, and
when he had ſitten a good ſpace, grieuing at his miſfortune, eſpecially
in the preſence of the King Recinde, hée aroſe, being
holpen vp by Gentlemen, whom the King commanded to honour
him ſo much: wherevpon the Damoſels Knight beganne
thus againe.
                     
                        Albayzar you may perceiue how little fortune fauours you,
and what aduantage I haue woon, maintaining the beauty of
my gratious Miſtres the princeſſe of Thrace, to whom I pray
you preſent your ſelfe, when you ſhall arriue in the Emperour
Palmerins Court, and there you ſhall ſay to her thus: That a
ſtrange Knight, who calleth himſelfe the Damoſels Knight,
hoth vanquiſhed you, & commanded you to ſubmit your felfe to
her excellency. And when thou haſt ſéene her, let thine own eies
be iudge, whether the beauty of Targiana may preſume to compare
with hers, when it thou be not too deepely drowned in
thine owne conceit, thou wilt recant thy former blaſphemous

error, and thou maiſt aſſure her, how I am greatly grieued,
that this preſent ſeruice is of no more importance, being the
firſt that ſhe hath receiued of me as yet: Albayzar in a rage
made this anſwere.
                     I will not faile in kéeping my promiſe to thée, and if the gods
vouchſafe me liue ſo long, I will preſent thy head to my Lady
the Princeſſe Targiana, in reuenge of the ſhame I haue this
day receiued at thy hands. I would be ſory (ſaid the Damoſels
Knight) that thou ſhouldeſt die in this minde: then returning
his face to the King Recinde, he ſaid. I deſire your Grace that
you would ſuffer me to depart, and that you would not be offended
becauſe I declare not who I am: but this you may perſwade
your ſelfe, that there is no one Knight in the world, that
doth more wiſh your good, and is readier to doe you ſeruice then
my ſelfe: to which words the King thus replyed.
                     Since it is not your will (Sir Knight) then you would be
knowne, I will not be he that ſhall moue you to the contrary:
but if at any time you paſſe this way, I deſire you to viſit me,
for in ſooth you ſhall be welcome. I thanke your Grace moſt
humbly (anſwered the Damoſels Knight) and the great honour
and courteſie I haue found at your hands, ſhall not be
forgotten ſo long as I liue. Then taking one of the Launces
that were left, he gaue a reuerent ſhewe of obeyſance to the
King, the Quéene, and all the Ladies (who tooke great delight
in him, beholding his knightly behauiour) and ſo he departed
with his company.
                     The King returned into his Caſtle, accompanied with the
Prince Albayzar, whoſe heart was ſo intruailouſly ouercome
with griefe, as he would not ſpeake to any, nor ſuffer any to
ſpeake to him. The quéene and her ladies were ſorrie, they had
no further knowledge of the Damoſels Knight, and beſide they
were offended at the Prince Albayzars foile, as well becauſe
his gentle behauiour was ſuch, as for the reputation he gained
when he carried away the Princes Miragardaes Shield.
                     The Damoſels Knight was not very farre from the Citie,
but the darke night drew on, and they being in a Forreſt, and
néere to a faire Fountaine, concluded there to reſt themſelues

for that night: ſo, after they had refreſhed themſelues, they
laid them down among the gréene leaues: the Prince himſelfe,
he went and lay a pretty ſpace from the Damoſels, and laying
his head on the roote of a Trée, the beautie of Leonarda the
Princeſſe of Thrace, preſented it ſelf in his amorous thoughts,
charging him with ſo many contrary Paſſions, as all that
night he could not lay his eye lids together, yet was his loue ſo
irreſolute, as the leſt thing in the world could haue made him
forget all quite.
                     While the Prince Florian lay thus buſied with a thouſand
imaginations, Arlencea, who was marnailouſly affected towards
him, ſeeing her companions were all faſt aſleepe, went
to the place where the Prince Florian was laid, where, ſitting
downe by his ſide, ſhe began to fall into theſe ſpéeches. It ſéems
to me (moſt worthie knight of the Sauage man) that the iniury
which I heretofore haue done you, doth as yet remain freſh
in your memory, in that you make no account of her, who
liueth and dieth onely for your loue. And that I ſpeake the
truth, you may be perfectly reſolued, in that (without regard of
mine owne honour) I come to ſéeke you out, the cauſe being
this, that my intreatie might moue you pittie her, who preferreth
the loue of none aliue but you: which courteſie, if you
ſhall ſeeme to refuſe, my conceite of griefe will be ſo extreame,
as I muſt needs giue entertainment to my lateſt enemy, who
will ſet both ſoule and body in quietneſſe, when you (that
might haue comfort of both) remaine deaſe, and will make no
account of me.
                     So breaking off, ſhe laid her head, on the Princes breaſt, fetching
ſo many grieuous ſighes and groanes, as though the life
would haue forſaken her body, whereupon the Prince tooke
her in his armes, and with very amiable ſpeeches (though not
ſuch as ſhe gladly looked for, he began to comfort her thus.
                     Madame Arlencea, I do not ſo little eſteeme of you, that I
would willingly conſent to doe the thing, which ſhould ſeeme
diſpleaſant or offenſiue to your honour, deſiring you to thinke,
that before I was ſo much bound to you as now I am, I intē
                        ded
to accompliſh that which your ſel
                           •
                        e deſireth: but ſince the

time that your great fauour, deliuered me out of the daunger
whereinto Alfernao brought me, I forſooke altogether the folly
of ſo vaine a humor, being loath to reward her ſo vngently,
whoſe courteſie, neither time nor death can make me forget.
And thus perſwade your ſelfe, that I haue prouided a huſband
for you, according as your noble bountie doth well deſerue: yea,
he is ſo good a Knight, as you will refuſe to make choyſe of the
Knight of the Sauage man, whom you may at all times vſe, as
your friend and ſeruant.
                     There pauſing, he kiſſed her hand, and brought her again to
the place where the other Ladies ſleyt, and he departing againe
to his owne lodging, ſhe began to be aſhamed of her folly, noting
well the wittie words of the Knight of the Sauage man:
for whoſe loue ſhe was ſo extreamely paſſioned, as ſhe was cō
                        ſtrained
to diſcouer the flame that did ſo torment her, to one of
her Damoſelles, the very ſame that gaue the fatall ring to the
prince. To her ſhe ripped vp her whole diſcourſe of the words
which had paſſed that night, deſiring her earneſtly, with the
teares trickling down her chéekes, that ſhe would giue her ſuch
aſſiſtance, as ſhe might enioy the loue of the Knight of the Sauage
man: the Damoſell anſwered her Lady thus.
                     Truſt me Madame, you haue not any occaſion to finde your
ſelfe agréeued, for by good reaſon the Knight ought not to ſatiſfie
your will, in that ſuch a Prince as he is, ought not to trauell
himſelfe for Damoſelles, and then to receiue ſhame and diſhonour
by them: but yet to content your minde, and becauſe you
thinke me willing to doe you what pleaſure I can, I will goe
to the knight, and vſe ſuch friendly perſwaſions with him, as I
will vnderſtand the depth of his intent. Arlencea imbraced the
Damoſell for this genile anſwere, and ſpake to her againe in
this manner.
                     I know well, my ſwéete wench, that if I ſhall haue any remedie
in this caſe, I muſt enioy it by thy meanes, wherefore I
pray thée goe, and fortune be with thée. But if it come ſo to
paſſe, as neither perſwaſion, nor any thing elſe will mooue him
to loue me, I pray thee intreate him, that he would pardon the
fault I committed, in diſturbing him of his quiet eaſe.
                     
                        
Madame (ſaid the Damoſell) repoſe yourſelfe altogether on
me, and ſo ſhe went to the Knight of the Sauage man, whom
ſhe found in a ſlumber, when ſitting downe by him, ſhe began
in this manner. Me thinkes that he which enforceth Ladies
to liue in ſorrow, becauſe he wil vſe no more regard vnto them,
ought not ſo eaſily to take his reſt. The Knight of the Sauage
man hearing the voyce of a woman, opened his eyes, and ſéeing
it was not Arlencea, but the Damoſell whom he loued beſt
amongſt them all, he beganne friendly to embrace her, giuing
her better words then he did to the Gianteſſe her Lady: whervpon,
the Damoſell beganne to him thus againe. Syr Knight,
I deſire that you would vouchſafe to tell me, what is the cauſe
you make no more account of my Ladies loue, ſéeing ſhe hath
(for your ſake) forſaken her mother, forgotten the cruell murdering
her Brother, and likewiſe hath loſt the libertie of her
ſelfe?
                     Madame (anſwered the prince) I feare I ſhall not haue time
enough to diſcourſe the whole matter to you, becauſe it is now
vpon this point of day, wherefore I intend to ſet Madame Arlencea
a part a while, and demaund of you, for what occaſion
you haue forgottē me, ſéeing I remaine yours in affection, ſince
the day that Alfernao deliuered me into the power of your Lady
Arlencea?
                     
                     I pray you Syr (ſaid the Damoſel) that you would not be offended
at my niceneſſe all this while, it was but onely to auoid
the malice of my Lady: in her abſcence, I pray you thinke ſo
wel on me, as you may be pleaſed for my diſpleaſing you, and I
haue the better will to come to mooue my Ladies ſute againe.
The Knight of the Sauage man hearing her courteous anſwer,
and that he might now breake a Launce in the face of Venus,
he tooke her in his armes: but becauſe the day came on apace,
and they vnwilling that any ſhould ſée their ſecret pleaſure, I
durſt not ſée what they did, for feare I ſhould be ſhent for my
labour.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXIIII.
                     Of that which happened to the Damoſels Knight, in going
to the Caſtle of Almaroll.
                     
                        VPon the point of day breaking, the Damoſell
gaue her Ladie Arlencea to vnderſtand
the anſwere of the K. of the Sauage man, &
the prince ſéeing the Ladies walking, came
and gaue them all the mornings courteſie,
afterward, when they were all mounted on
horſeback, they beganne to ſet forward on
their iourney: and becauſe Arlencea was ſomewhat mooued
with her euill Fortune that night paſt (which the P. perceiued
very well) he came vnto her, and vſed ſuch kinde and gentle language
to her, as in a while ſhe forgot the cares which had troubled
her ſo much.
                     The Prince began to deuiſe pleaſantly, with the foure Damoſels
he woonne in the Forreſt, and ieſted with them in ſuch
merry conceites, as the iourney ſéemed nothing troubleſome
vnto them: but this pleaſed not Polyphemia, (who was the
Damoſell that Arlencea ſent, to mooue her ſute to the Prince)
for ſhe thought that ſhée deſerued better countenance at his
hands, then all the other.
                     The Knight of the Sauage man knewe well by the countenance
of Polyphemia, that ſhe grieued to ſée him vſe ſuch paſtime
with the other Damoſels wherevpon, he began to ſmile
to himſelfe, and becauſe he would vexe her the more, he would
now embrace one Damoſel, and come to another and kiſſe her,
and one after another he would be very familiar withall, and
that with very much pleaſure, Poliphemia ſéeing the dealings
of the Knight of the Sauage man, went on the further ſide behind

all the Damoſels, diſſembling (ſo much as ſhe could poſſible)
the extreame afflictions of her amorous thoughts, for that
the regard of her honour commaunded her to kéepe ſecret, what
had paſſed betwéene the Prince and her: but hée making as
though he ſaw her not, continued on his pleaſure with the other
Damoſels. And when for recreations ſake, they tooke delight
to walke on foote a while, he would giue each of them (one after
another) a greene Gowne, and ieſt and iybe with them ſo pleaſantly,
that poore Polyphemia knewe not well how to take it:
yet hoping to haue ſome of them partners with her in her miſfortune
(as indéede ſhe had) before they came to the Caſtle of
Almaroll.
                     
                     It chanced fiue dayes after their departure from the Spaniſh
Court, that they came into a faire gréene field, which was gallantly
decked with Natures tapiſtry, & there the Ladies tooke
delight to ſtay a while, becauſe they would make them Noſegayes
and garlands of the flowers: when they had diſported
themſelues ſo long as they thought méete, they put their Garlands
on their heads, & mounted on their horſes againe, being
very merry and pleaſantly diſpoſed. But to change their iocund
humor, they beheld to come from a ranke of trees, a bigge
tall Knight, in manner of a Giant, mounted on a horſe meete to
carry ſuch a mightie perſon: his Armour was all azure colour,
ſpotted very thicke with little ſiluer flowers, and in his Shield
he caried for his deuiſe, Hidra the ſerpent with ſeuen heads, in
a fielde of Sinople. This big knight had two Eſquiers attending
on him, one of them carried his Lance, & the other a battel-Axe,
the knife there of being of gold: and when he was come to
the place where the Knight of the Sauage man and the Damoſels
ſtayd, he began his language in this manner.
                     I aduertiſe thée (knight) that it is a long time ſince I deſired
to goe to the caſtle of Almarol, where my heart became affectionate
to the faire Princeſſe Miragarda, and in ſuch good lyking
did I growe of her, as I determined to try my fortune againſt
the Knight that kéepes her ſhielde, being in good hope to vanquiſh
him, that I might afterward take both his office, and his
place. But it hapned to me farre contrary to my deſire, & I am

perſwaded, that her fauour makes him more victorious, then
his owne force is able: the conſideration hereof doth not a little
offend me, ſo that I am determined to reuenge my ſelfe by other
means. Wherfore aduiſe thee wel of theſe two conditions
I ſhall put to thée, which of them thou ſhalt beſt like of, either
to enter combat with me, or to ſurrender theſe damoſels which
beare thée company.
                     My friend (anſwered the knight of the Sauage man) I aſſure
thée, that I am not the man thou thinkeſt me, neither
ſhalt thou find ſuch a one, as is wont to be vanquiſhed by thy
hauty words: and becauſe thou ſhalt not be deceiued in me,
I giue thée to vnderſtand, that I am not accuſtomed to feare
ſuch fellowes, as ſpeake with ſuch a glorious pride in themſelues,
neither can the huge ſtature of a Giant diſmay me, for
if thou durſt preſume to take the worſt Garland from any of
theſe Ladies heads, I would ſel thee my life, but I would make
thée reſtore it againe.
                     The affection (ſaid the knight) which thou beareſt to ſome
of theſe, maketh thee not to eſtéeme the danger wherein thou
maiſt fall: but ſéeing thou wilt be ſo luſtie, I am content, for
courteſies ſake, to offer thee this condition, that he which ſhall
be diſmounted of vs ſwaine, may haue for his paines foure of
theſe Damoſelles, as for the other foure, they ſhall ſtill attend
vppon their Lady, whom I ſee likewiſe in thy company:
to which wordes the Knight of the Sauage man thus
replyed.
                     I could wiſh thou hadſt as many Damoſels in thy power, as
thou ſéeſt here in name, to the end that either thou mightſt win
theſe which I conduct, or I might be the maiſter of thine. But
except thou intendeſt to take theſe ladies from me by force, for
otherwiſe thou ſhalt not haue them, I pray thée get thee going
about thy buſineſſe. I ſee well, ſaid the knight, that our contention
cannot be ended without laying hands to our weapons, &
ſo to try the concluſion: then he called his eſquire, who brought
him his Lance, which when he had couched, he ranne couragiouſly
againſt the Damoſels knight, who met him brauely in
the mid way, & encountred with him ſo worthily, as the pe
                           •
                        ces

of their lances flew whiſtling in the ayre, and in this encounter
the knight loſt both his ſtirrops, & meeting together with their
bodies, their horſes began fiercely to fight one with another, ſo
that the ſtrange knight was caſt to the ground, and the damoſels
knight had almoſt borne him company, becauſe his horſe
was ſlaine by the other knights horſe. Arlencea and the Ladies
did greatly feare, leaſt the knight would ouercome the Prince
Florian, who leaping from his horſe, that tumbled with him on
the ground, drew his ſword, and ſtood ſtill to heare what the
knight would ſay: but he ſeeing the Damoſels knight ſo ready
to the combate, began to be ſomwhat offended with himſelf
for the rough ſtroke of the Lance, made him more to feare the
knight then he did before. When he had ſtood a pretty ſpace, he
buckled his Shield, and drew his ſword out of the ſheath,
comming to the Prince with theſe words. If thou art (Knight)
ſo much a friend to thine owne life, as to agrée to the condition
I made ſhée before we iouſted, thou ſhalt ſée that I will kéepe
my promiſe to thée. I pray thee (ſaid the Damoſels knight) vſe
no ſuch friuolous ſpéeches to me, for I am thus determined, to
make thée beare me cōpany on foote, becauſe thou ſeeſt my horſe
is ſlaine: and ſo without waſting any more time in words, he
began to charge the Knight very fiercely, which when the
Knight both ſaw and felt, he likewiſe laid on with huge and
waighty ſtrokes, till in the end he receiued ſo many wounds, as
what with the loſſe of his blood, and faintneſſe of his body, he
was conſtrained to fall downe to the ground: when, the damoſels
knight ſet his foote on him, and taking off his helmet, made
ſhow as though he would haue ſmitten off his head, but the
Knight yéelded himſelfe to his mercy, deſiring that it might
pleaſe him to ſaue dis life: whereto the damoſels knight thus
anſwered.
                     I am content to giue thée thy life, on condition thou wilt fulfill
what I command thée. I know no aduenture (ſayd the
Knight) ſo perillous, which I would make any account off, for
ſauegard of my life. Thou ſhalt firſt then (quoth the Damoſels
Knight) tell me what and who thou art, and afterward,
thou ſhalt take one of the Horſes, whereon thy Eſquires rides,

and take thy way preſently to the Court of the King Recinde,
and there (before the Quéene) thou ſhalt ſay on my behalfe, that
the Damoſels knight, who Iouſted in their preſence againſt
the prince Albayzar, ſaluteth them with his humble duty, and
deſireth ſuch fauour at the kings hands, that he will thinke no
ill becauſe I made not my ſelfe knowne to him, but thou maiſt
aſſure his Highneſſe, that I will not faile to make my ſelfe
knowne, at my returne from the Caſtle of the Giant Almarol.
And becauſe I may get thither the ſooner, I will take thy horſe,
in recompence of mine which I haue loſt in iouſting againſt
thée: the knight aroſe, and made this anſwere.
                     Worthy Sir, ſince Fortunes great vnkindes hath brought
me iato this extremitie, I ſhall not faile to obey whatſoeuer
you commaund me, and for my name, I am called Trofolant
the Feareful, of whom you haue heard ſometime, if you remember.
Very true (quoth the damoſels knight) but I pray you not
to make me knowne in any caſe, but declare what I haue ſaid
to you, and ſo you may now depart on your way to accompliſh
your promiſe.
                     Then the Prince mounted on Trofolants horſe, & ſo tooke his
leaue of him, ſetting forward on his iourney with the damoſels,
till he came to the end of his pleaſant Valley, where he leaned
himſelfe againſt the ſtump of a trée, becauſe he eſpied before him
thrée knights very richly Armed, and one of them cryed aloude
to him, that he ſhould ſtay till they came to him. The Damoſels
knight hearing theſe words, would goe no further, but ſtaied to
heare what they had to ſay to him. When they were come néerer,
the ſame knight ſpake againe in this manner.
                     Sir knight, I would gladly haue one of the ladies which are
in your company, wherefore, I pray you beſtowe her on me, to
whom you beare moſt affection your ſelfe. Truſt me Sir (anſwered
the Damoſels knight) they doe all like me ſo well, as
he which dare be ſo bolde to take one of them from me, I iudge
will put his life in great daunger. My fancy (ſaide the ſecond
knight) doth beſt eſtéeme her that excéedeth them all in ſtature
(meaning Arlencea.) And I will content my ſelfe (quoth the
third knight) with her that rideth next the tall Lady (meaning

                        Polyphemia) becauſe me thinkes her beautie excéedeth all the
other: wherefore I pray you ſir knight, content your ſelfe with
the other Ladies, and ſticke not with vs for theſe three, for we
will ſo well behaue our ſelues to them, as they ſhall haue no occaſion
to complaine on vs.
                     I perceiue then (anſwered the Damoſels Knight) that you
would gladly haue theſe Ladies, whom I am determined to
defend againſt you: if any of you therefore haue ſuch minde to
them, there is but a little Riuer betweene vs, which you may
eaſily paſſe, and if your Fortune be ſo good, you ſhall carry them
with you when you go backe againe. With a good will (anſwered
the firſt knight) and ſéeing your ſtomacke ſerues you ſo wel,
I will ſhewe you the ſmall aduantage you ſhall get in dealing
with vs.
                     Vpon theſe wordes he paſſed the Riuer, and hauing placed
his Launce in his reſt, ran valiantly againſt the Damoſelles
knight, who entertained him with ſuch a puiſſant ſtroake, as
he was compeld to fetch an errant in the duſt, being ſo greatly
amazed with the fall, as he had not the power to ſtir himſelfe a
great while. When the other two Knights ſaw their fellowe
foyled, they came ouer the riuer together, and being abaſhed at
the valour of the Damoſels knight, they durſt not venter to try
it one after another, but ranne both together againſt him, who
(though they offered him wrong) would not refuſe them: but
breaking his ſtaffe nobly vpon one of them, he 
                           •
                        ent him to kéepe
the firſt knight company, hauing his arme broken by the force
of his fall. Then drew he foorth his ſwoord, and welcommed
the third ſo friendly, as in a little while he tumbles downe before
him.
                     The Damoſels Knight after this victorie, commaunded his
Eſquier to alight, & tooke off the knights helmet, that he might
take aire, and when they were all before him, he commaunded
them to ſhew obeyſance to the three Damoſelles, whome they
would néeds haue had, before they knew the price of them and
if they did not as he willed them, he ſware they ſhould all looſe
their liues.
                     The Knights perceiuing they had reckoned with a wrong

Hoſte, promiſed they would not doe any thing contrary to his
will: whereuppon one of them came to Arlencea, with theſe
words. Madame, in that you are ſhe whom I make moſt account
of, I beſéech you command me, in any thing my poore power
can do you ſeruice.
                     I haue ſo little neede (ſaide Arlencea) of your ſeruice, as it
would gréeue me to vſe your aſſiſtance in any thing whatſoeuer:
neuertheleſſe, that you may be an example to ſuch, who
(following your qualities) commit many outragious facts to
Damoſels, and to encreaſe his renowne who hath now nobly
vanquiſhed you, and deliuered me and my company from you,
I command you to go to the King of Spaines Court, and there
on my behalfe, let all the Ladies vnderſtand, what deſert is
come to you for your wretched dealing: and ſay, that I aduertiſe
them, no one of them preſume to trauaile abroad, without
the company of ſome ſuch knight, as is able to defend them againſt
all vnlawfull actions.
                     And you Madame (ſaid the ſecond knight to Polyphemia)
what ſhall it like you for to command me? Marie (quoth ſhe)
that you take the ſame courſe that your commpanion doth, not
forgetting to tell the Ladies, that I pray they may liue in ſafetie,
without hauing affiance in any Knight whatſoeuer: for
that ſuch as enterpriſe to conduct them in their trauails, whom
they put in truſt with their honourable loue, and euen bow
their ſoules to them in loyall affection, yet haue they moſt
néede to ſhunne their company, rather then any other, and let
them not doubt of it, for if they proue they ſhall find my words
true.
                     The Damoſels knight vnderſtood well enough, the couert
ſpeeches of Polyphemia, but yet he diſſembled, as though he
knew not what they meant.
                     And you Lady, ſaid the third knight, will you be ſo cruell, as
to commit a greater taſke to me, then theſe two Ladies before
you haue done to my companion? I am (quoth ſhe) ſo cruell, as
I would haue thée baniſhed the company of thy very deareſt
friends: then the Damoſelles Knight himſelfe began thus to
them againe.
                     
                        
Since it is the will of theſe thrée Ladies, that you ſhall carry
theſe meſſages of the King of Spaines Court. I pray you tell
the Ladies there, that I deſire them to repoſe their truſt in me,
if they ſhall imagine themſelues in any danger, and let them be
well aſſured, that I will aduenture what hazard ſoeuer, if my
helpe may yéeld them any aſſiſtance: notwithſtanding, one of
theſe thrée Ladies is deſirous to haue them thinke the contrary
but as for her counſell, I deſire them humbly to make no account
thereof. And becauſe I may know who you are, I pray
you tell me your names before you depart, for that I may demand
another day, whether you haue fulfilled your promiſes or
no. My Lord (quoth the firſt Knight) we are all thrée of the
ſame Court whereto you ſend vs, by meanes whereof, we
grieue more to go ſhew our miſfortunes there, then in any
court whatſoeuer it might like you to ſend vs. And for our
names, you ſhall vnderſtand, that I am called Grouanell, and
this other knight is my brother named Braboſan, we twaine
being the ſonnes of the Countie Loban, and the third knight
(who is our Couzin) he is called Claribard, a knight greatly
renowmed in the Court of Spaine.
                     
                     Truely Gentlemen (ſaid the Damoſels knight) you ought
not to thruſt your ſelues into ſuch diſhonourable actions: neuertheleſſe,
I muſt excuſe you, for that the beautie of women,
hath ſometime inueigled the wiſeſt heads, but I would wiſh
you to be better aduiſed albeit I my ſelfe do often féele the heat
of the ſame fire. So ending, he rode on with his charge of Ladies,
being very glad that he had ſped ſo well of theſe knights
in their preſence, and they likewiſe commended his high good
fortune.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXV.
                     How Trofolant and theſe other three Knights yeelded themſelues
in the Spaniſh Court. And how the damoſels knight
arriued at the Caſtle of the Giant Almaroll.
                     
                        IT was long before the Damoſeis Knight
could reach to the Caſtle of the Giant Almaroll,
becauſe he was hindered in his
way by many knights, who ventured
themſelues to take the Damoſels from
him, which he had taken charge of, in conducting
them. But it chanced as the King
Recinde ſtood pleaſantly talking in his window with the
Quéene, and many Knights in the Chamber with him beſide,
he beheld to enter a goodly tall Knight, his face being couered
with his Helmet, his armour broken in many places, and ſo
beſprent with blood, as the fine deuiſes thereon could hardly
be diſcerned. His ſhéeld which was carryed after him by his eſquire,
was ſhiuered in the ſelfe ſame manner, and becauſe his
deuiſe therein could not well be ſéene, euery one was in great
admiration of him: but he went with ſuch proud ieſtures, as he
made eſtimation of neuer a knight there (who came to entertaine
him at the Pallace gate) but paſſed on till he came into
y• Chamber where the King was, to whom when he had made
obeyſance, he returned to the Quéene with theſe words.
                     Madame, I haue Combatted with a Knight, who not long
ſince was in this Court, and Iouſted againſt the Prince Albayzar,
he hath in his company nine Damoſels, and I deſired
him to beſtow the one halfe of them on me, whereto he
would by no meanes conſent, but made me anſwer, that he
could wiſh I had as many Ladies in conduct as he had, for then

would he take mine from me, beare his Ladyes company
in trauaile. Vpon this proude anſwer, I intended to take
them from him perforce, which he would not ſuffer, but made
ſuch reſiſtance againſt me, as in the end I was not onely conquer
                           •
                        d,
but in great danger to looſe my life, had not this valiant
and redoubted knight granted me mercy, vpon condition I
ſhould performe what he did command me. But ſuch was
his great humanitie, as he would adioyne me no other puniſhment
then this, that I ſhould come and preſent my ſelfe
to your maieſtie, to craue pardon (on his behalfe) that he would
not let himſelfe to be knowne when he was in your court, but
at his returne, he will not faile to come in better acquaintance
with your highneſſe: in the meane while, he craueth that you
would pardon him for his offence paſt.
                     I know not (ſaid the king) how I ſhould remit this iniury,
in that he hid himſelf from me, who moſt of all deſired to know
him, and more earneſt I am now, ſéeing your Armour ſo
much defaced. My good Lord (anſwered the Quéene) I deſire
you would not be offended at that which is paſt, for I cannot
thinke that ſuch a Knight as he is, would deſire to paſſe vnknowne
to your grace, without he were compelled ſo to do by
ſome earneſt occaſion.
                     Then ſaid the King to the knight, I pray you Sir tell me
who you are? Thoſe that know me (ſaid the Knight) call me
Trofalont the Fearefull. I haue (anſwered the King) oftentimes
heard much talke of you, and the Knightly déedes which
you haue atchieued: and for this cauſe would I the more gladly
haue knowledge of the Damoſelles Knight, wherefore I
pray you tell me if you know him, or can iudge of whence hee
ſhould be?
                     My Lord ſaid Trofolant, I promiſe you I neuer ſaw him in
all my life till now, but I iudge him to be one of the ſonnes of
the Prince Don Edward, for I am perſwaded that no one
Knight elſe could haue conquered me, whereof I am not a little
aſhamed, yea, and ſo much gréeued thereat, as I take my
leaue of your highneſſe, now that I haue diſcharged his commandement.
                     
                        
Quoth the Quéene, I giue you licence to depart at your own
leiſure. And I would no other thing with you, ſaide the King,
but that you would take a better Armour at my handes, becauſe
your own is not in caſe to doe you ſeruice: beſide, I would
not that any of the Knights which ſerue the Emperour ſhould
depart my court deſtitute of horſe or Armour.
                     My Lord, anſwered Trofolant, I thinke my ſelfe highly
bound to your maieſtie, for the Princely offer you haue made
me: but I am determined to goe euen as you ſée me, becauſe I
will deride Fortune to her face, and ſo he departed. The King
gaue the Queene to vnderſtand, that Trofolant was reputed
as good a Knight as any other: but he would not beléeue, that
any of the Sonnes of the Prince Don Edward would come
into his Court, and depart againe without his knowledge.
                     While the King was commending the valour of the Damoſelles
Knight, Grouanell, Braboſan, and Claribard entred
into the Chamber, who hauing made reuerence to the King
and the Quéene, came and preſented themſelues before the
Ladies: to whom they rehearſed their great miſfortune, and
that which the Damoſelles Knight and Poliphemia had commanded
them.
                     The Ladies knew well that Poliphemia had receiued ſome
iniury by the knight, whoſe noblenes made the king to ſpeake
thus. Gentlemen, I promiſe you I greatly deſire to know
the knight who hath thus vanquiſhed you, and I intend to ſend
ſome of my knights after him, that they may bring him hither
once more.
                     If it ſhall like your highneſſe (anſwered one of the Knights)
he, whoſe good fortune ſerued him to ouercome vs, your grace
muſt well thinke, that it will be hard to bring him hither, except
he liſt himſelfe.
                     Truſt me (ſaid the King) it makes me maruell very much,
that he is accompanied with ſo many Damoſels, in that one
Knight cannot long endure to be patient, being in the conuerſation
of but one woman.
                     With theſe wordes the King departed from them, and the

knightes withdrew themſelues into their chambers, being not
offended that the Damoſels knight had vanquiſhed them, becauſe
he had ſhowne ſuch incredible proweſſe in that Court, againſt
the Prince Albayzar.
                     
                     But returne we to the Damoſelles knight, who made ſuch
expedition in his iourney, as he came néere to the Caſtle of the
Giant Almaroll, wherefore he ſtayed a while by the Riuer
Theſin, ſpeaking to the Damoſelles in this manner. We are
now arriued at the place (faire Ladies) where it is conuenient
to diſplay the force of your beautie, in fauouring him that
will enterpriſe the Combatte on your behalfe, for I aſſure
you, the picture of the Princeſſe Miragarda is here at the Caſtle,
which is of ſuch excellency, as the knight who hath the
kéeping thereof, cannot (as yet) be vanquiſhed, the cauſe is
(as I iudge) rather by the ſingularitie of this faire Princeſſe,
then the force or valour that is in the knight, againſt whom
I intend to try my ſelfe. Wherefore I pray you (faire Ladies)
to ſeperate your ſelues aſunder, and bethinke your ſelues vnder
whoſe name I ſhall enter the Combate, and be you all preſent
by, for I know I ſhall purchaſe ſome aduantage by your
company.
                     
                        Poliphemia (who had the greateſt opinion of beauty in her
ſelfe amongſt them all) ſpake to the Prince in this order. I
know very wel (Sir knight) that the victory which they gaine,
that enter the Combate for the Princeſſe Miragarda, procéedeth
of their force and loyall friendſhip, which truely is very far
off from you: wherfore, if Fortune chance to forſake you in the
Combate, ſhe doth no more then you deſerue, ſéeing the great
inconſtancy of you towards them, on whoſe behalfe you ſéeme
to enter the Combate.
                     The other Damoſelles were ſomewhat abaſhed, hearing
Poliphemia ſpake ſo plainely, wherevpon the Prince Florian
returned her this anſwere. I perceiue Lady, that you are very
iniurious towards me, without any great occaſion, and you
offer truly great diſcourteſie, to conceiue ſo bad an opinion of
me: wherefore, to put you out of ſuch an ill ſuſpition, I am determined

to enter the Combate, vnder the fauor of your beautie,
when you ſhall well perceiue, that you were in a very contrary
iudgement.
                     So riding on, they came at laſt to the Caſtle, at what time
Miragarda and her Ladies came forth, to recreate her ſelfe
vpon the water, being accompanied with the Giant Almoral.
The Damoſels knight no ſooner beheld the beautie of th
                           ••
                         faire
Princeſſe, but his heart was preſently depriued of libertie:
yet had he a good qualitie, for the paſſions that tormented him
by the beautie of Ladies, was of no longer continuance then
while they were before him.
                     After that Miragarda was gone a pretty diſtance off, he ſaid
to the Damoſels: What ſay you to the beautie of this gallant
Princeſſe? We ſay (anſwered Poliphemia) that you ſhould
not diſmay your ſelfe any iote: in that each of vs conceiueth this
opinion of our ſelues, that we may equall her in beautie. Miragarda
was no ſooner returned againe, but ſhee ſate downe a
while at the Caſtle gate, greatly delighting her ſelfe to behold
ſo faire a company.
                     
                        Florendos (who was not farre off) being Armed for all aſſailes,
was ſomewhat moued, ſéeing her that made him liue in
continuall langout: and the Giant Almorall beholding him,
beſide, knowing well that Miragarda did greatly delight, to ſée
him Combat with ſtrange Knights, called to him with theſe
words. Sir Florendos, doe that which your dutie commandeth
you, for the Princeſſe Miragarda ſtayes onely to behold
you.
                     
                        Florendos taking good view of the Damoſels, and ſéeing
the Knight prepare himſelfe to the iouſt, he preſently mounted
on his horſe backe, and comming to the Knight, he began in
this manner to ſalute him, I pray you Sir Knight to tell me,
vpon what occaſion you are come hither? if ſo be you are compelled
to bring theſe Damoſels to this place as your pennance,
and would be gladly deliuered of them, peraduenture I may
fortune to do you ſuch a pleaſure.
                     I promiſe you Sir Florendos (anſwered the Damoſelles
Knight) I came not hither to enterpriſe to take the guard from

you, whereof you make ſo great eſtimation: but onely to ſee,
if theſe Ladies did repoſe any truſt in the proweſſe of him, who
hath conducted them thorow many countries.
                     I cannot tell (ſaid Florendos) what anſwer I ſhould make
him, that hath ſo good knowledge of me, neuertheleſſe, I would
deſire you breake a couple of Lances with me, that we may
giue a little pleaſure to the Princeſſe Miragarda. And if it ſo
fall out, that the iouſt be more hindrance to the one then to the
other, it ſhall be lawfull for him to enter the combat: the Damoſels
knight anſwered thus.
                     Sir Florendos, I would be loth to Combat againſt you, although
I dare be ſo bold to iuſt a little, as well to ſatiſfie your
deſire, to the Princeſſe Miragarda, as to delight theſe Damoſels
that beare me company: for whoſe ſakes, I will likewiſe
breake two Lances with Sir Almaroll himſelfe, and force not
greatly to enter the Combate with him afterward. I know
very well (ſaid Florendos) that the aſſurance you haue in your
owne deeds, makes you vſe ſuch hardy language: Therefore I
agree to whatſoeuer you iudge reaſonable, and you may aſſure
your ſelf, that Almaroll will not faile to accompliſh your own
deſire.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXVI.
                     Of the Iouſts which were enterpriſed betweene the Damoſels
Knight, and he that kept the Shield of the Princeſſe
Miragarda: And of the Combate which the Damoſelles
Knight had with the Giant Almaroll.
                     
                        WHile theſe knights were preparing themſelues
to the iouſt, Almaroll ſteppee betweene
them, deſiting them to ſtay a
little, till the Princeſſe Miragarda (who
was beneath on the ground) might goe
vp into the Caſtle, and take her place at the
window. The Knights (who were readie

to Iouſt (ſet their ſtaues to the ground, and ſtaied till the Princeſſe
Miragarda was come to the window, Florendos contemplated
her face a while, and hauing taken his leaue on her, gaue
his horſe the ſpurres againſt the Damoſels Knight: who met
him in the middeſt of the Carrire, with ſuch great force, as the
trunchions of their lances flew vp into the aire, and they paſſed
on nothing ſhaken at all. Then their Eſquiers brought them
new Lances, wherewith they ran together againe couragiouſly,
and burſt their ſtaues as nobly as they did before, wherevpon
they prepared for the third triall.
                     
                        Florendos was ſomewhat agrieued, hauing felt the proweſſe
of his aduerſarie, and feared leaſt any miſfortune ſhould happen
to him, in the preſence of his Lady. And the Damoſelles
Knight was in great doubt whether it was Florendos or no,
beſide, he was ſomwhat offended that he had begun the Iouſt,
perceiuing well the minde of the Prince his couzin, if Fortune
ſhould diſcountenance him in the preſence of his beautifull
Miſtres: which to preuent, he came to him with theſe wordes.
Me thinkes it were neceſſary, Sir Florendos, that you and I
ſhould content our ſelues, ſéeing that neither of vs can boaſt of
the aduantage of the Iouſt, beſide, you cānot purchaſe any great
renowne, in conquering one of your affectionate ſeruants, who
verily would be ſorie, that you ſhould receiue any miſfortune at
his hands, in that it might hinder you in place of moſt hope.
Wherefore, I pray you giue me leaue, to breake two or three
Launces with Sir Almaroll, which will yéelde ſome contentment
to theſe Ladies that beare me company.
                     
                        Florendos returned him this anſwere, I perceiue, ſir knight,
you haue ſo little deſire to deals with me, as you feare nothing
that may happen to you, you witnes ſo well your knightly behauiour,
wherefore I pray you do not forſake me in this order,
before you tell me of whence and what you are. To tell you my
name, ſaide the Damoſels Knight, and afterward to Iouſt againſt
you, is much againſt my will, ſo that I cannot reſolue
my ſelfe, vpon which of theſe two points I ſhould reſt: neuertheleſſe,
becauſe I would gladly content you, I am well pleaſed
to venture againe with you.
                     
                        
Then theſe two Princes ranne together with ſuch force, as
they burſt their ſtaues to their hands, wherevpon, their horſes
hurt each other ſo cruelly, as both they and their Maiſters fell
to the ground: the Damoſels Knight hauing the ſhoulder of
his horſe broken, but Florendos his horſe was ſlaine outright,
which did ſo greatly vexe him, as he drew foorth his ſword, being
very willing to enter the Combate, which the Damoſels
Knight perceiuing, hée ſtayed him with this friendly language.
                     Sir Knight, I would gladly intreate you to forbeare ſo
much reſiſtance againſt your friend, who deſireth (in any
thing he may to doe you ſeruice, I beare ſo much good will vnto
you, and loath I am to enter the Combate with you, not
for any feare I haue of your valor, but becauſe the duty of frienſhip
forbiddeth mée ſuch vngentleneſſe. And this perſwade
your ſelfe, that I am of no leſſe courage then your ſelfe, and
could make as good aſſurance of the victorie, but that it would
grieue me to ſée you iniured: wherefore, that no diſcourteſie
may happen on either ſide, I pray you ſheath your Swoord
againe, and reſerue the triall therewith, till ſuch a one
come, as ſhall ſéeke you with a more mallicious intent, then
I doe.
                     The Princeſſe Miragarda, who had heard the whole diſcourſe
that paſſed the Damoſels Knight, could haue béene content
(for the boldneſſe ſhe ſaw in him) to ſée the Combate tried
betwéene them: then Florendos ſpake to him againe in this
manner. I can very hardly content my ſelfe (ſir knight) without
I might ſée the one of vs diſmounted, or elſe that you would
tell me who yoe are: to which words Arteſia (one of the Damoſels)
made this anſwere.
                     I will tell ye Sir Knight, this order was he woont to vſe
with ſuch knights, as he knewe to be leſſe gouerned by diſcretion
then himſelfe, with them would he neuer ende the fight,
making his excuſe by vs, as your ſelfe may behold at this time:
for ſéeing the Princeſſe Miragarda doth not fauour him, he is
content to knit vp thus, without paſſing any further triall,
thinking vs vnworthy of his good will.
                     
                        
Truly my friend (anſwered Poliphemia) you haue ſaide that
which is moſt certaine, and I belieue our knight is of the ſame
opinion himſelfe: Florian ſmiling, made him this anſwere. I
ſee very well now (faire Ladies) that the paines I haue taken
in conducting you, is made of no account at all: neuertheleſſe, I
haue this aduantage, that your entiſing words want power to
deceiue me, for I am, and will be maiſter of my ſelfe.
                     Theſe wordes albeit he ſpake them ſomewhat ſoftly, yet the
Princeſſe Miragarda did well vnderſtande them, by reaſon
whereof, ſhe tooke him preſently to be one of ſlender fidelitie:
but ſhe iudged Florendos to be one at libertie, and that loue had
no power ouer him. But he himſelfe deſired not to liue in ſuch
libertie, if he could haue compaſſed any remedy for ſo great a
torment, as the beautie of his faire Miſtreſſe enforced him to
endure.
                     And now to returne to Florendos he could not be ſo wel perſwaded
by the Damoſels Knight, but that he deſired to enter
the Combate with him, which the giant Almaroll perceiuing,
he cauſed to be brought foorth a goodly bay Courſer, and ſent it
to the Damoſels knight, with this requeſt. That he would put
himſelfe in a readineſſe, to the ende they two might trie themſelues
together, which would giue ſome delight to the princeſſe
Miragarda: and becauſe ſhe ſhould haue the better will to the
Combate, he was content ſome reward ſhould be ordained, in
requitall of his paines that remained the conquerour: vppon
which motion the Damoſels knight made this reply.
                     Looke (Sir Almaroll) what it ſhall pleaſe you to appoint, you
ſhall not finde me contrary thereto. If ſo be then (quoth Almaroll)
that the victory happen on your ſide, I pray you to giue me
(as my reward) this Lady named Arlence
                              •
                           , whom I will not
faile to eſtéeme as chiefe miſtreſſe of my affection: and if it come
to paſſe that Fortune make her choyſe of you, you ſhall receiue
for your recompence, the horſe wheron you are mounted, which
I warrant will be as good as any in the world.
                     Truſt me (ſaid the Damoſels Knight) I haue already determined
with my ſelfe, to beſtow her vpon ſuch a Knight as I
make good account of: yet will I accept this horſe, if ſo be the

victorie fall on my ſide: and if it come to paſſe that I am vanquiſhed,
if the Lady her ſelfe can finde in her heart to ſatiſfie
your requeſt, you ſhall not finde me to hinder it any thing. I
am content (anſwered Almaroll) hearing you ſpeake ſo reaſonably,
for I preſume, that ſhe will not refuſe the knight who
is ſo willing to doe her ſeruice.
                     So (without any more words) they placed their Lances in
their reſtes, and being couered with their Shieldes, gaue their
horſes the Spurs, and encountred together ſo brauely, as the
Damoſels Knight forſooke both his Stirrops, but Almaroll
was caſt to the ground with his Sable betwéene his legs, who
was not a little offended to haue ſuch a diſgrace, eſpecially in
the preſence of his new choſen friend.
                     The Damoſelles commended greatly this gallant beginning,
but chiefely they whom Florian woon from the Knightes
that kept the Valley. Almaroll hauing recouered his feete, drew
foorth his ſword, and came marching towards the Damoſels
Knight, who preſently alighted, left the Giant ſhould offer any
harme to his horſe: and then they charged one another with
ſuch cruell ſtrokes, as moued great admiration to all there preſent.
And the more couragious was the prince Florian, as well
to delight the Damoſels, as to declare his nobleneſſe in fight
to the Prince Florendos, not forgetting withall, that Miragarda
ſhould well perceiue, he ſtood in no feare of her knight, by refuſing
the Combate.
                     On the other ſide, Almarol behaued himſelfe very gallantly,
for the deſire he had to gaine Arlencea, and ſuch was the regard
of her loue with him, as in all his life he neuer fought more
brauely.
                     Theſe two champions continued ſuch notable courage, as in
ſhort time their armour was broken in many places, and their
bodies ſo grieuouſly wounded, that the blood ranne from them
very pitifully: but Almaroll (being not ſo nimble and quicke
as his aduerſarie) was brought into the greateſt danger, by
meanes whereof, he was glad to breake ſquare a little, to take
breathing.
                     But the damoſels knight would not to ſuffer him, for he followed

his intent ſo faſt vpon him, as he was conſtrained to fall
to the earth, ſéeming rather to be dead then aliue: the ſight
whereof did gréeue the Prince Florendos out of meaſure, and
was ſo much offenſiue to the Princeſſe Miragarda, as ſhe departed
from the window, commanding that Almaroll ſhould
be brought into the Caſtle, which was preſently done, and Florendos
went with him into his Chamber, to ſée ſome prouiſion
might be made for his wounds, which in ſooth were very dangerous.
                     Then was the Damoſels knight brought ſomewhat aſide,
where the damoſels vnarmed him to dreſſe his wounds, which
were not in any great danger, whereupon he cauſed himſelfe to
be armed againe, and mounted on horſebacke, intending to depart
thence. But as he was about to ſet forward on the way,
two Knights of ſome ſtrange countrey) arriued at the Caſtle,
who came deſirous to try the aduenture. One of theſe knights
was in Carnation colloured Armour, very thicke beſet with
Griffins of ſiluer, and in his ſheeld was figured a white Hart,
in a field of Sinople: the other knight was in blacke armour,
and bearing in his ſhield the ſame deuiſe his fellow had.
                     Theſe two Knights no ſooner beheld the Damoſels knight,
but he in the carnation Armour ſpake thus to his Companion.
It ſeemeth to me Sir, that we are come vnto the place, where
we ſhall haue no accaſion to vſe our armor, if he which kéepeth
the ſhield of Miragarda, be not in caſe to endure the Combate:
this knight ſhould ſéeme to be he, wherfore, becauſe it ſhall not
be ſayd, we came hither in vaine, I will goe diſburden him of
one of his Ladyes, ſhe will be as méete for my company, as for
his.
                     Certainely (anſwered the other knight) I cannot content
my ſelfe with things of ſo baſe eſtimation, hauing before mine
eyes the Shield, wherein is pictured the beautie of the faire
Princeſſe, the regard whereof, maketh me account nothing
more worthy. At theſe words, his companion caſt his eyes
on the Image of Miragarda, which hung in the ſeemelieſt
place of the Pillar, whereuppon he entred into theſe ſpéeches.
                     
                        
I ſée now (my good friend) that they which haue aduentured
to this place, haue not beſtowed their labour in vaine: for more
willingly would I looſe my life for her, whoſe heauenly viſage
this Shield repreſents, then to content my ſelfe with hope of
any further glory. I aſſure you (ſayd the firſt knight) I intend
not to depart from this place, without I carry this Shield with
me: yet would I (if it were poſſible) firſt make tryall of my
worthineſſe, againſt him that durſt deny me to take it hence.
So, aduancing himſelf to the trée where the Shields were placed,
he offered to take downe the Shield.
                     The Damoſels knight perceiuing his intent, and knowing
that Florendos was buſie about the hurts of the Giant Almaroll,
he would not ſuffer that in his preſence any one ſhould offer
ſo great wrong to the Prince Florendos: wherefore in regard
of the good will he bare him, he broched his horſe with the
ſpurs, and when he came to the place where the Shield of Miragarda
hanged, he looke the knight 
                           •
                        y the arme, and puld him
backward with ſo great ſtrength, as he 
                           •
                        ell beſide his Horſe
headlong to the ground, and withall ſpake to him in this manner.
I may well perſwade my ſelfe (ſir knight) that you deſire
not to trie your fortune in this aduenture, being ſo forgetfull
of your honour, as to procéede ſo cowardly, not attending the
preſence of him, who hath the authoritie to defend this Shield:
in his abſence therefore, I will trie if you be ſuch a gentle companion
as dare preſume to carry it hence by your manhood.
                     
                        Miragarda (who was come againe to the window, to take
better aduiſe of the Damoſels knight) vnderſtanding the braue
words he had giuen the knight, did greatly content her ſelfe in
his preſenc
                           •
                        , in that he tooke vpon him ſo worthily to defend her
ſhéeld, againſt the knight that offered to take it away: who,
when he had gotten himſelfe on foote againe, he dr
                           •
                        w forth his
ſword, and in a phrenzie or a madneſſe, (as it were) he came to
aſſault the Damoſels knight, which his companion perceiuing
he came betwéene them with theſe words.
                     I pray you Sir to amount vpon your horſe, and in the mean
time, I will trie if the valour of this knight, may anſwer the
proude attempt he made to you. Vpon this, he adua
                           ••
                        ted

himſelfe againſt the Damoſelles Knight, who for the great deſire
he had, to witneſſe his courage to the princeſſe Miragarda,
prepared himſelfe brauely to méete his aduerſarie, which hée
diſcharged ſo nobly (hauing his full deſire at him) as neither
his ſhielde, armour, nor maile-coat could defend the puſh of the
Lance, but it paſſed cleane thorow his body, ſo that the ſtrange
knight tumbled beſide his horſe to the ground, being altogether
depriued of his life.
                     When the Damoſels Knight had gotten his Launce out of
the Knights body, he praunced till he came vnder the window
where the Princeſſe Miragarda ſtood, expecting the comming
of the other Knight, who méeting him in the middeſt of the
courſe, brake his Launce on the Prince: but when they came
together, the Damoſelles Knight caught hold on his enemies
Shielde, which hée pulde from him with ſo great force, as he
brought his head on the necke of his horſe, where (not permitting
him the leiſure to recouer himſelfe) he gaue him with his
owne Shield ſuch a cruell ſtroke on the Creſt of his Helmet,
as the knight was ſo giddy therewith, he could hardly tell how
to recouer himſelfe. In the meane while the knight was thus
amazed, the prince tooke off his helmet, and gaue him ſuch another
heauie ſtroke, as hee fell beſide his Horſe, foming forth
blood out of his mouth aboundantly.
                     
                        Florendos (being in the Chamber with the Giant Almaroll)
was greatly abaſhed, ſéeing a combate fought at his Ladies
Shield in his abſence: wherefore, fearing leaſt any diſpleaſure
ſhould come thereby to him, he forſooke all other occaſions,
and went preſently thither, where (hauing well viewed
the two Knights) he receiued no ſmall admiration at this aduenture,
which when the Damoſels knight perceiued, he ſpake
to him in this order.
                     Sir Florendos, ſée here the deedes wherein I haue imployed
my ſelfe, onely becauſe I would doe you ſeruice, I am as yet
ignorant (anſwered Florendos) wherein I ſhall thinke my
ſelfe beholding to you, for I ſée two Knights here brought into
very badde eſtates, yet I knowe not vpon what occaſion.
You ſhall Sir Florendos (ſaide the Damoſelles knight) be reſolued

hereof. This knight which you ſée here ſlaine, wold haue
caried away the ſhield of the princeſſe Miragarda, and he which
is yet liuing (but in very ſlender abilitie) was the fauourer and
aider of the others attempt: but I haue giuen them to vnderſtand,
that a thing of ſo high eſtimation, might not be woonne
without ſome labour.
                     Thus in regard of the offence they were about to offer you,
and to witneſſe the good will I vnfeinedly beare you, I tooke
vpon me to hinder them in ſuch a diſloyall enterpriſe, for proofe
of my words, you may behold whether they be true or no.
                     I pray you Sir (quoth Florendos) tell me who you are for I
deſire to know the name of him, whoſe proweſſe hath ſo déeply
indebted me to him? Sir (Florendos anſwered the Damoſels
Knight) I will ſatiſfie you, becauſe I ſée you are ſo deſirous:
wherefore I aduertiſe you, that I am Florian of the Forreſt,
your Couzin and obedient ſeruice, who will not ſuffer you to
receiue iniurie, in any place where he ſhall be preſent: Florendos
in great ioy replied thus.
                     Now is my minde (which hath béene troubled a good while)
very well eaſed, in both knowing and ſéeing the proweſſe that
is in you: wherefore I humbly deſire you to thinke ſo well of
me, that you would ſpend a litle time here with me, that I may
commune with you about matters of ſome importance. Beſide
you ſhall cauſe the wounds of the Giant Almaroll to be the ſooner
healed, in that he will not grieue ſo much, hauing receiued
the foile at ſo noble a knights hands.
                     I doe not thinke (anſwered the Damoſels Knight) that you
would wiſh me to tarrie here, in that I haue promiſed to viſit
other places, which if I ſhould faile to doe, I ſhould gaine the
ill reports of a number: wherefore I deſire you ſuffer me depart
hence, and that you would take the oath of this laſt knight
which I conquered, that he ſhall make you faithfull promiſe
(after you haue knowledge of his name) to trauell to the court
of the King Recinde, where he ſhall declare to the Quéene for
what occaſion I did combate with his fellow and himſelfe, and
I deſire you againe, not to receiue any ill opinion by my ſudden
departure.
                     
                        
                        Florendos laboured to diſſwade him from his iourney, but
he would by no meanes be mooued from his determination:
wherefore, after a friendly embracing, he ſet forward on his
way, accompanyed with the Damoſels, who held him in greater
reputation then they had done before: but he began to waxe
contrary to them, in that he eſtéemed of them euery day worſe
then other.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXVII.
                     Of that which happened to the Damoſels Knight, as he returned
to the Court of Recinde, King of Spaine.
                     
                        EArly on the next morning, the Damoſels
knight ſet forward in his iourney to the
Court of the King Recinde, intending
when he came thither, to diſcharge himſelfe
of ſome of the Damoſels, becauſe he would
haue none in his company but Arlencea,
and the Gentlewoman that attended on
her, to do her ſeruice: being loath to forſake her, tiil he had
brought her to the place, where ſhe might be marryed, according
as her honeſt behauiour deſerued, and to the end ſhe ſhould not
thinke him to be vnmindfull of her.
                     As he rode on thus muſing with himſelfe, he heard the
voyce of a Woman crying very pittifully, in a Wood, which
was hard by the way: and becauſe the cry was ſo lamentable,
he gaue his Horſe the Spurres, and ridde till he came
where he heard the noyſe. He then looking a ſide, beheld

on the banke of a goodly Riuer, a knight, whoſe armour was of
Azure colour, very richly wrought all ouer with little fillets
of Gold, in his ſhield was pictured a golden Lion, in a Siluer
field, and at his feete he held a Damoſell by the haire of the
head, whoſe beautie deſerued not ſuch deſpightfull vſage, as the
Knight ſhewed to her, for he held his Sword drawne in his
hand, and made ſhow to cut off her head, if ſhe refuſed to obey
his luſt.
                     Not farre of, he eſpyed another knight tumbling among the
greene leaues, who laughed at this pittifull ſight ſo heartily,
that he was ready to fall in a ſowne, beholding what hard ſhift
the Damoſell made to helpe her ſelfe: and after he had laughed
a good while, he ſpake theſe words. It doth me good to ſée
that fortune enforceth you to take ſuch great pains, for by this
meanes I ſhall be eaſed of ſuch buſie labour, when I come to
take my pleaſure on the Damoſell.
                     The Damoſels Knight perceiuing the ſhame which theſe
knights endeuoured to offer to the Damoſell, he cryed to them
aloude, that they ſhould forbeare their villany, or elſe he would
cauſe them to buy their pleaſure dearely. The Knight which
had the Damoſell by the haire of the head, ſéeing the Knight
that ſpake ſo boldly to him, returned him preſently this anſwer.
Are you offended Sir, to ſée me vſe the Damoſell in this
manner? Truſt me, were not the water ſo broad which is betwéene
you and me, I would quickly make you know the price
of your boldneſſe. Nouertheleſſe, if thou dareſt tary long, I will
not faile but come to thée, when thou ſhalt well vnderſtand,
that thou méeteſt with ſuch a knight, as will ſoone allay thy
brauery. I pray you my companion (ſayd the other knight that
lay by) doe not offend your ſelfe with fretting, or raging, for I
iudge it beſt that we go to this Knight, who hath ſo many Damoſels
in his company, where we may take our choyce, and
that without trouble.
                     I deſire you my friends (anſwered the Damoſels Knight)
that you would tell me where the ford for paſſage is, to the end
I may make triall of your valours. If you haue ſo great deſire
to come to vs (ſaid the firſt knight) you muſt ſwim ouer, for I

know no other way for you. Then began he againe to pull and
hale the Damoſell very cruelly, becauſe he would mooue the
Damoſels knight to more anger: who being earneſt in reuenging
great ſhame and villany, and making no account of
the danger in paſſage, he alighted from his horſe and lept into
the riuer, which he paſſed very well, and recouering the furder
ſide, the knight that lay among the gréene leaues ſaid to his
companion. Doe not trouble your ſelfe from your determination,
for I will quickly quaile the luſtineſſe of this Knight:
whereto the Prince thus anſwered. It is hard for me to ſay
how things may come to paſſe, but I intend to hinder the pleaſure
you make ſuch account of.
                     So, without any more words, he ſetled himſelfe cloſe to the
knight, and gaue him ſuch friendly entertainment, as he tumbled
to the ground, with his left arme broken in ſhiuers. The
other knight ſéeing the miſfortune of his fellow, left the Damoſell
to defend himſelfe from the waightie ſtrokes of the Damoſels
Knight: who handled him in ſuch ſort, as he was conſtrained
to craue aid at her hands, whom he ſought to haue abuſed,
with theſe word. I beſéech you faire Damoſell, to forget
the iniury I haue done you, and intreate this knight to
ſaue my life. The Damoſels knight held his hand and would
not ſtrike, becauſe he expected what the Damoſell would ſay:
then ſhe (beholding the amiable countenance of him that would
haue forced her) was ſuppriſed with exceeding gréefe, ſo that ſhe
pittied more to ſée him ſo neare his death, then ſhe required reuenge
for his diſhoneſt enterpriſe: whereupon ſhe ſpake to the
Damoſels knight in this manner.
                     Let me intreate you (my Lord) to ſaue the life of this wicked
man, it may be, hereafter he will be warned from falling
in the like offence. I promiſe you faire Damoſell (ſayd Florian)
you cannot command me the thing that I would not
willingly conſent vnto, but becauſe the knight hath deſerued
greater puniſhment, then as yet he hath ſuffered, I giue
him his life vpon this condition: that he ſhall take his companion
with him in the beſt manner he can deuiſe, and they both
ſhall trauaile to the King of Spaines Court, where they ſhall

declare to the Ladies, what ſhame they would haue offered
you, and they ſhall promiſe neuer to weare armour againe,
without it be their pleaſures to ſuffer them.
                     The Knights promiſed in all reſpects to accompliſh his
will: whereupon, their Eſquires prouided a knighly Béere,
whereon the Knight was layd, that had his arme broken, and
ſo he was carryed with his companion to the court of the king
Recinde.
                     
                     The Damoſels knight walked along by the Riuers ſide,
holding the Damoſell by the hand, who by reaſon of her exréeding
ſeare, had forgotten her Eſquire, whom the knights that
would haue rauiſhed her, had bound faſt to a trée, and they had
put a gagge of wood in his mouth, becauſe they would not bee
preuented of their purpoſe by his crying.
                     But it was not long before the Damoſell embraced him,
when ſhe deſired the Prince that he would returne againe,
to deliuer the Eſquire out of this miſerable vexation: and when
they came to him, there they found their two Palfrayes, vpon
on of them, the Prince cauſed the Eſquire to mount, commaunding
him to ride along the Riuers ſide, till he could
finde ſome place to get ouer on the other ſide, to bring him his
horſe.
                     In the meane while, the Eſquire went about that he was
comanded, the Prince vnarmed himſelfe, to drie his garments,
which were full of water, and then he queſtioned with
the Damoſell, how ſhe happened into that place, and vppon
what occaſion the Knights ſo ſought to diſtdneſt her: to which
words ſhe made this anſwer,
                     You ſhall vnderſtand (ſir Knight) that I was borne in
this Countrey, and do belong to the Princeſſe Miragarda, I
know not whether you haue heard of her before or no. Yes indéede
haue I (ſaid the Prince) for the name of the Ladie is ſo
much renowmed through the whole world, as many Knights
(by meanes of her beautie) haue wrought themſelues much diſhonour.
                     So it is then (ſaid the Damoſell) that I tooke occaſion to trauaile

a little the Countrey, but Fortune was ſo vnhappie to
me, as I chaunced to méete with theſe two Knights, who demaunded
of me, into what place my iourney lay: I then miſdoubting
no harme, becauſe their behauiour ſeemed very honeſt
to me, declared vnto them the whole ſtate of my iourney,
whereupon, one of theſe Knights ſpake thus vnto his companion.
                     I thinke it good, in reuenge of the ſhame we haue receiued
at the Caſtle of the Giant Almaroll, that we ſhould eaſe ou
                           •
                        
anger on this Damoſell, who is one of them attendant on the
Princeſſe Miragarda: in reſpect that her beautie will render vs
ſufficient pleaſure, to forget the foyle we tooke at the puſh of the
Launce.
                     The other Knight being equall with his fellow in this vngracious
intent, did preſently allow of the others iudgement:
So they caſt lots which of them ſhould abuſe me firſt, and it
fortuned to fall on him, whom you ſaw pulling me ſo cruelly
by the haire of the head. Then becauſe my Eſquire (grieuing
to ſée me ſo ill intreated) cryed aldude that ſome might come
ſuccour me, they dealt with him ſo diſcourteouſly as you haue
ſéene: and had it not béene for your gratious aſſiſtaunce,
God knowes the ſorrow that I poore ſoule ſhould haue endured.
                     Truely Madame, (anſwered the Prince) I reioyce that it
was my chanc
                           •
                         to be your reſkewe, yet had it béene better for
me not to haue come hither at all, ſuch a ſecret wound haue
I receiued by your ſingular beautie: but if you conſider my
good deſerts, and withall the readineſſe you ſhall finde in mée
to your welfare, I iudge you may beſtow that on me by gentleneſſe,
which the vncourteous Knights would haue taken from
you perforce.
                     The Damoſell noting his words, regarding his ſwéet countenance,
remembring his noble behauiour and Princely
courteſie, made him aunſwere, but I knewe not how: if
it were incident to his purpoſe, hee is beſt able to to anſwere it,
if not, then there was no harme 
                           〈◊〉
                        . A newe 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        
willeth me to let them alone, and hearken to the Damoſelles
Eſquire, who being returned, cried to the prince, that he ſhould
preſently mount on his horſe, to giue aſſiſtance to the other Damoſels,
who a Knight in blacke Armour ſought to leade away
perforce.
                     The Prince hearing the words of the Eſquire, was incenſed
with ſuch a ſudden fury, as not tarrying till he was all armed,
he ranne to the riuer, and did ſwimme ouer in very great
haſt, willing the Damoſell to come after him, and paſſe ouer
the Foord, which the Eſquire could ſhew her, and bring her likewiſe
into the company of the other Damoſels. So ſoone as Florian
had paſſed the riuer, he perceiued Poliphemia come riding
towards him, crying and tearing her haire very pittifully, that
he ſhould make haſt to ſuccour her miſtreſſe: which he being very
deſirous to doe, was glad to follow after her on foote, becauſe
the knight that carried her away, had grieuouſly wounded the
legges of his horſe.
                     But Fortune ſo much fauoured Arlencea, as ſhe ſpied the
Damoſels Knight comming, who ouer-tooke them before they
had gotten halfe a miles diſtance from the riuer: and then hée
perceiued how the knight had ſet vp Arlencea behinde him, and
his Eſquire could very hardly cauſe her to ſit ſtill on the horſe,
ſhe ſtroue ſo often to get the ground, wherfore he rid by, to hold
her on the horſe.
                     The Damoſels knight, ſéeing the knight in blacke Armour
had clapt his Helmet on his head, and would haue diſmounted
to defend himſelfe, he aduanced himſelfe towards him, and
Arlencea held him faſt on his horſe, till the Damoſelles knight
had ſtroken him ſuch a blow betwéene the necke and the ſhoulders,
as he fell to the ground like a dead man: and taking off
his helmet, he would haue parted his head from his ſhoulders,
but yet he pacified his furie, becauſe he would ſend him likewiſe
to the Ladies in the Spaniſh Court.
                     Then he cauſed the Eſquire to be vnarmed, who held Arlencea
on the horſe behinde his Maiſter, but he wept very bitterly,
deſiring the Prince to haue compaſſion on him: and
comming againe to the knight (who was all this while on his

knées) he commanded him to declare what was his name. I
am called Rocamor (ſayd the knight) a friend to thoſe two
Knights which you did lately vanquiſh, and in reuengement of
their iniurie, I intended to carry away this Lady.
                     Well then (quoth the Damoſels knight) this is my will,
that you faile not to accompliſh the charge I ſhall commit to
you, for if you do, I ſweare you ſhall preſently looſe your life:
the Knight anſwered thus. Good Sir, to the end I may eſcape
ſo great danger, I vow my ſelfe obedient to whatſouer you
command me.
                     I will then (ſayd the Damoſels knight) that you preſently
take your way to the king of Spaines Court, and there preſent
your ſelfe to the Ladies attendant on the Quéene, reporting
to them what hath paſſed betweene you and me, beſide
you ſhall neuer while you liue beare armes againe, without
it ſhall pleaſe them to licence you. The like charge I haue giuen
thy two companions, and they haue promiſed me they will
fulfill it.
                     I beſéech you Sir (anſwered the knight) to tell me who
you are, to the end I may declare his name, that command me
thus to ſubmit my ſelfe in the King of Spaines Court. You
ſhall ſay (quoth the Prince) that the Damoſels knight enioyned
you this pennance, and I will ſo bold as to borrow your
Horſe, becauſe you haue dealt ſo diſcourteouſly with mine. So
cauſing Arlencea to mount on horſebacke, he left the knight,
and returned to the place where the other Damoſell ſtayd his
comming: by the way he conferred with Arlencea, how diſhonourably
the knights of that Countrey, behaued themſelues to
wandring Damoſels.
                     And when he was come to the reſt of his company, he ſaw
amongſt them Siluiana (which was the name of her whom the
Knights would haue rauiſhed) to her he af
                           •
                        oorded a gentle welcome,
and the Damoſels were not a little glad, at the returne of
their Lady Arlencea, whom they feared they ſhould neuer
haue ſéene againe.
                     The night drew on a pace, and there thiy concluded to paſſe
that night, becauſe they knew of no other prouiſion neare at

hand, euery one tooke a modicum of their ſmall refection, and
afterward they layde them downe to their reſt: but Siluiana
could no ſuffer any ſléepe to enter her eyes, ſuch was her good
opinion of the Prince, and ſo farre in loue was ſhe with him,
as ſhe rather tooke delight to diſcourſe al the night thereon, then
to entertaine ſuch quiet reſt as her fellowes did.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXVIII.
                     What the Princes Florendos did to the vanquiſhed knight
and how thoſe knights whom the Prince Florian had cō
                        quered,
arriued at the King of Spains Court.
                     
                        AFter that ſhe Damoſels knight was departed
from the Caſtle of the Giant Almaroll,
the Prince Florendos being deſirous
to execute the charge was left with him,
came to the vanquiſhed knight, deſiring
that he would ſatiſfie him, of whence and
what they were, and to what end they cam
thither, whereto the knight thus anſwered.
                     You ſhall vnderſtand (worthy Sir) that we were borne
in the Realme of Spaine, and haue béene held of good account
in the king Recindes Court, as for our names, you ſhal know
that I am called Brandamor, and my companion had to name
Sigerall. We two being deſirous to ſeeke knightly aduentures,
among many other which we paſſed with honour, we
concluded 
                           •
                        o make triall of the conqueſt of this ſheeld, wherein
is figured the heauenly face of the Princeſſe Miragarda.
                     
                     But Fortune not, minding the former regard ſhée had of
vs, cauſed vs to be conquered by the Damoſelles Knight,

before we could accompliſh the meane to enter the Combate
with him, whoſe charge was onely to defende the Shielde. I
aſſure you my friend (anſwered the Prince Florendos) the
bold and diſcourteous enterpriſe you tooke in hand, deſerued
greater chaſtiſement then you haue as yet receiued, for one cannot
deale ſeuerely enough with thoſe, who put foorth themſelues
in ſuch actions, as doeth reproach them with high diſhonour.
                     Wherefore, that you may purge your ſelfe of this notorious
crime, you ſhall here faithfully proteſt vnto me, that you will
goe ſubmit your ſelfe to the King Recindes Court: and if ſo be
your preſume to contrary what I haue adioyned you, I ſhall enforce
more grieuous affliction on you, then theſe wounds can
doe which you haue on your body.
                     The Knight (being not as yet thorowly receiued out of the
feare, which the Damoſels Knight had frighted him withall)
vowed faithfully to Florendos, that he would execute to the vttermoſt
what he had commanded him: wherefore hauing his
wounds dreſſed, he preſently betooke himſelfe to his iourney,
leauing the buriall of his companion to the Prince.
                     In few daies after, he arriued at the king of Spaines Court,
being very loth to enter in, becauſe he was ſo well knowne to
the King, & the chiefe noble men of his Court, but notwithſtanding
his great vnwillingneſſe, the regard of his oath ſo much
preuailed with him, as he entred the Pallace.
                     The Ladies which beheld him, did not repute him amongſt
the number of thoſe vanquiſhed by the Damoſels Knight, becauſe
his Armour was ſo faire and vnbroken, nor blemiſhed in
any place: beſide his Shield was no whit impayred, but the deuiſe
thereof to be ſéene at pleaſure, ſo that the Ladies delighted
greatly to behold him.
                     
                        Brandamor being come into the Chamber of preſence, the
King and the Quéene being there both together, he opened his
Helmet, and knéeling downe before the Quéene, rehearſed the
the whole circumſtance of his charge, as concerning the behauiour
of the Damoſels Knight.
                     
                        
In the reporting of this his great miſfortune, ſéeing ſo many
of his friendes preſent, the colour aroſe ſo redde in his face,
as neither the King nor the Quéene knew him, no, not they
that had beene daily conuerſant in his company, but generally
they reputed him for ſome ſtraunge Knight: ſo that the
Queene demanded of him, what he was, and for what occaſion
he enterpriſed to Combate with the Damoſels Knight, Brandamor,
then gaue her to vnderſtand, how the Damoſelles
Knight had ſlaine his companion Sigerall, and how before he
had vanquiſhed them, he Iouſted againſt the Knight that garded
the Princeſſe Miragardaes Shield, likewiſe that he Combatted
with the Giant Almaroll, and had brought him in very
great daunger of his life. Wherevpon, the King entred into
theſe ſpeeches.
                     Certainely, I cannot chuſe but wonder, hearing the noble
proweſſe of this vnknown Knight▪ and I promiſe thée knight,
thou deſerueſt to haue the ſame puniſhment which hath happened
to thy companion, and I aſſure thée, I would ſee it executed
on thée my ſelfe, if I did not perſwade my ſelfe, that the
beautie of the Princeſſe Miragarda hath rauiſhed the minds of
other Knights, who might boaſt of better aſſurance in themſelues
then he could.
                     At theſe wordes, Brandamor came and kiſſed the Kinges
hand, by which occaſion the king knew him, which made him
to iudge the more worthily of the Damoſelles Knight, and he
commaunded his Chirurgions ſhould vſe good reſpect vnto
Brandamor, becauſe he had well deſerued by his valour in
times paſt. But ſcantly was he departed their preſence, when
the two Knights that (would haue rauiſhed Siluian) arriued at
the Court, they being ſo féeble and weake, as they were conſtrained
to leane on their Eſquiers ſhoulders, till they came into
the Kings preſence, where he that had the leaſt hurt, began
to vſe his language in this manner.
                     My gracious Lord, the Damoſels knight, whoſe renowne
is ſo highly commended in this Court, hauing vanquiſhed vs
in the open fielde, commaunded vs to come and ſubmitte our
ſelues to your excellency, to be iudged according as our déedes

haue deſerued: in reſpect whereof, we come to preſent our
ſelues to the Ladies of this Court, whom we intreate ſo to
worke on our behalfe with your Maieſtie, as the offence may
be pardoned, which our fleſhly willes procured vs to commit.
Then theſe two knights diſcourſed at large, how euery thing
had happened to them, vppon which occaſion the King thus
ſpake.
                     Surely, it doth not a little content me, that God hath ſuffered
you to receiue puniſhment for your miſdéedes, by the hands
of the renowned Damoſels knight, on whoſe behalfe, and for
the loue I beare him, I will proceede againſt you, according as
your hainous offences haue worthily deſerued: & I aſſure you,
the more I heare the noble valour of this knight, the more deſirous
I am to haue knowledge of him.
                     My Lord (ſaid the knight) you haue very great occaſion to
eſtéeme of him, for I am of the opinion, that all the worthines
which ought to be in a knight, is in him: for his ſake therefore,
we humbly intreat your maieſtie, to vſe ſuch perſwaſion with
the Ladies, as they will ſuffer my companion and me to beare
Armes, which were forbidden by the Damoſels knight, vntill
the Ladies of your Court haue pardoned the iniurie, which we
offered to the Damoſell, whom this Knight by his hardineſſe
tooke from vs.
                     I promiſe you my friendes (ſaide the King) my good will is
ſo ſlender in this caſe, as you ſhall receiue no fauor by my ayde.
The Knight noting the Kings anſwere, deſired the Quéene
that it might ſtand with her pleaſure to command her Ladies,
to entertaine them into their fauorable iudgements: and they
would ſo witneſſe their good affections towardes them, that
ſo long as they liued, they would be ready to ſpend their liues
for them.
                     The Quéene had not the leiſure to make them any anſwere,
becauſe the Knight that would haue carried away Arlencea,
came and humbled himſelfe on his knées before the Ladies,
declaring to them how the Damoſelles knight had commaunded
him, to come and render himſelfe to their mercy, without
which, he would not permit that he ſhould weare armour any

more, the conceit thereof was ſo grieuous to him, as he tooke
the hardineſſe to intreate the Quéene to aſſiſt him in his ſute:
whereto ſhe returned this anſwere.
                     It ſéemeth to me, that the Ladies of my Court remaine
greatly indebted to the Damoſels Knight, for whoſe ſake I wil
not ſeeme to hinder you, but commit you all thrée to their diſcretions,
to whom you are ſent. The knight which had laſt of
all deliuered his meſſage, no ſooner beheld the other two, but he
preſently knewe them: the one was called Ferrobreque, and
the other Gentafort, they being both diſcended of a giants race,
the ſight of them cauſed him not to take his miſfortune ſo heauily,
as he did all the while before.
                     The Ladies vnderſtanding the pleaſure of the Quéene, concluded
to giue them leaue to weare their Armor, warning them
on perill of their liues, not to vſe them in any places, where
Ladies or Damoſels ſhould be iniured, but to paſſe on and let
them alone, whether the cauſe were iuſt or vniuſt, they ſhould
not intermeddle withall.
                     This charge ſeemed very vnfriendly to the knights, but they
durſt not ſéeme to diſlike thereof: wherevpon they were conſtrained
to allow of their ſentence, afterward they tooke leaue
and departed from the Court.
                     A good ſpace it was, before any more tydings came to the
Spaniſh Court of the Damoſelles Knight, but at length thrée
Knights armed very brauely, arriued at the Pallace, about
the Euening tide, the King, the Queene, and the Ladies, being
walking in a faire Gallerie, the proſpect whereof was out into
the Court, where they might beholde theſe three Knights,
who ſent an Eſquire, to declare their willes to the King
Recinde.
                     
                     The arriuall of the Eſquire, cauſed many to aſſemble into
the Gallery, where the Eſquire being come before the King,
he humbled himſelfe on his knees with theſe words. Renowned
Prince, theſe three ſtraunge Knights, commaunded mée
to let your Highneſſe vnderſtand, that they haue trauailed a
long time, in the ſeruice of the thrée Daughters of Galiaſter,
Duke of Arragon, who were iudged faire in the eyes of theſe

thrée Knightes, albeit they were found verie falſe in their
loue. For they (after they had long time entertayned theſe
Knightes as chiefe of their affections) were married vnto thrée
other Gentlemen, who were brought vppe in their fathers
Court, and with theſe receiued great contentment, not conſidering
the offence they haue committed, in beiug ſo forgetfull
of their owne honour, as to marrie with ſuch as beſéemed not
their degrees.
                     Theſe thrée Knights are ſo highly offended hereat, as they
haue concluded neuer to eſpouſe any other Damoſels, but onely
ſuch, as being wearie of their owne ſeruants, will vouchſaf
                           •
                        
to admit them entertainment. But if any ſuch as are foreſaken
of their Ladies, ſhall alledge, that this change is not equall,
theſe thrée knights will iuſtifie the triall thereof againſt them
by Combate.
                     And becauſe theſe Ladyes may fauour them in their demands,
without any preiudice to the renowme: I will declare
to you the eſtates of theſe knights. The firſt is named
Luſtramar, the eldeſt ſonne to the Marqueſſe Aſtramor. The
ſecond is called Arpian, ſonne to the Duke of Archeſte. The
third is Gradian, the County of Artaſia: who doe altogether
humbly deſire theſe Ladies (by your Highneſſe licence) that
they would ſhew their good willes vnto them, becauſe they are
ſo deſirous to make knowne to them, the hauty valour of their
inuincible ſtomackes: for here will they abide all this day, in
the ſame manner as you ſee, to make proofe of Armes againſt
their amourous ſeruants.
                     But if it ſo fall out, that they find the Ladies of this Court
more deſirous to keepe their old Seruants, then to entertaine
theſe ſo newly come, they will be content to depart
hence, euen as they came hither, and being once gone from
hence, they will viſite moſt of the Princes Courts in Chriſtendome,
to trie if Fortune will be ſo fauourable to them,
as to knit vp their earneſt deſires to their contentment. The
king Recinde was greatly abaſhed at theſe ſudden newes, and
the knights were moued much at this aduenture, eſpecially,

regarding the eſtates of them that would Combate for their
Ladyes: and for them thus much I can ſay, that there were
many among them, who would gladly haue forſaken their old
fauoured ſeruants, on condition they might marrie with theſe
three noble Princes.
                     The King and the Quéene allowing well their worthy enterpriſe,
they ſtayed a great while, looking when ſome one
knight or other of the court, would be ſo venterous as to deale
with them: but ſéeing none would come, they prepared themſelues
to depart, at the very inſtant as the Damoſels Knight
arriued there.
                     This valiant and renowmed Knight was no ſooner eſpyed,
but they that knew him, came and met him, letting him vnderſtand
the enterpriſe of the thrée ſtrange Knights: which being
rehearſed to him, the Damoſels receiued very much ioy
thereat, for that they being wearie of him, and hope to depart
with theſe thrée knights, and the Prince vnderſtanding their
intens, ſaid vnto them. You ſhall now do what your ſelues
imagine expedient, and I will recempence my ſelfe by theſe
meanes on theſe thrée knights, for the great trauaile I haue
taken dayly in your ſeruice. I haue béene ſo greatly deceiued
in your loue (ſayd Arteſia) as I am content to change your
company. And we are of the ſame minde (ſaid they, whom he
had woone from the Knights in the Forreſt) vpon this, he ſent
them to the thrée knights, (who were preparing themſel
                           •
                        es
to the Iouſt) and willed them to come and deliuer them out
of his handes, who would compell them to ſtay in his company.
                     I 
                           ••
                        are me (quoth the King) that theſe Knights wil not attaine
the cheefe of their enterpriſe, againſt the hardy Damo
                           •
                        ſels
Knight. Arteſia and her companions forſooke the company
of Arlencea, and put themſelues apart from them: which
the Ladies of the Court perceiuing, they could not chuſe but
maruell thereat, knowing very wel the proweſſe of the knight
that had conducted them. Some iudged the occaſion, to be the
Damoſels deſire of themſelues, that they might be at their
owne libertie: others reputed the cauſe to ſome vnfaithfulnes

they had found in their Knight.
                     
                        Gradian ſéeing the day waſt apace, tooke the hardineſſe to
aduance himſelfe foorth firſt, making ſhow of the Iouſt: which
the Damoſels Knight beholding, he gaue his horſe the ſpurs,
and encountred Gradian with ſo great force, as he made him
fetch an errand on the ground: then hee came to Arteſia with
theſe words.
                     It is neceſſarie that once againe you come and obey that I
ſhall command you. Then he receiued another Launce, which
one of the Kings Pages brought him, and with it he vnhorſed
Arpian, becauſe he had not learned to ſit faſt in his Sadle. Luſtramar
was very angry at the miſfortune of his friends wherfore
he encountred the Damoſels Knight ſo nobly, as he cauſed
him to forſake one of his Stirrops, but himſelfe was ſent to
kéepe his fellowes company.
                     Theſe thrée knights, ſéeing the diſhonour they had receiued
in the Iouſt, offered to trie the Combate with the Sword, and
chiefly Luſtramar did ſéeme moſt deſirous of it: but the Damoſels
knight excuſed himſelfe, ſéeing the day departing ſo ſpéedily,
and the darke night ready to ouercharge them, yet would not
Luſtramar be content with his anſwere, which when Poliphemia
perceiued, ſhe came vnto him with theſe words.
                     I pray you (Sir knight) content your ſelfe, and ſéeke no 
                           •
                        urther
occaſions at this time, for I aſſure you, that our guide is
ſo litle woont to be conquered, as they that deale with him, are
very well contented (hauing felt him indéede) to put vp the ſoyle
of a fall. I haue found ſo ſmall aſſurance (anſwered Luſtramar)
in Womens words, as (for your counſell) I will not forbeare
to follow my enterpriſe. Then I promiſe you (ſaid Arteſia) you
will not boaſt of your bargaine in the end.
                     While theſe two knights prepared themſelues to the Combate,
the king Recinde (who was deſirous to know the Damoſelles
knight) came himſelfe to the place, where theſe two
knights were offering to charge one another, when hee ca
                           •
                        
                        ſed
them to be parted, and they all 
                           •
                        oure were very honourably
brought into the Pallace.
                     
                        
The Damoſelles Knight humbly ſaluted the Quéene, and
hauing taken off his Helmet, hée kneeled downe to kiſſe her
hand: but the King (who knew him preſently) imbraced him
very louingly, ſpeaking thus to the Queene. Madame, I pray
you to make good account of the deedes of honour you haue receiued
by this Knight, for he hath finiſhed as rare aduentures
as euer did any: aſſuring you that he is the prince Florian of the
Forreſt, otherwiſe called the knight of the Sauage man, Sonne
to the Prince Don Edward, and the Princeſſe Flerida your
great friends. The Queene hearing theſe wordes, tooke him vp
in her armes, and imbracing him very gratiouſly, charged him
with his great diſcourteſie, when he paſſed by the Court, and
would not ſuffer himſelfe to be knowne.
                     
                        Luſtramar and his companions, knowing that he which had
vanquiſhed them, was the noble knight of the Sauage man,
they made no account of the foyle they had receiued: but on the
next morning when they had departed thence, they deſired the
Prince to eſteeme of them as his vnfeined friends.
                     Two dayes after, the Knight of the Sauage man, was deſirous
to leaue the Court of Spaine, whervpon he tooke his leaue
of the King and the Quéene, leauing Siluian there in the court,
becauſe ſhe was well knowne, as alſo Arteſia, and her companions,
who wept at their parting, for the loſſe of that they could
not recouer againe. The Queene tooke her leaue friendly of the
Gianteſſe Arlencea, becauſe the Prince Florian did make ſo
good account of her, and the King Recinde brought them foorth
of the Citie, where taking a courteous farewell on all ſides,
with charging him to doe his commendations to the Emperor,
and his children in the Emperours Court, the King returned
againe into the Citie, and the Prince rode on his iourney.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXIX.
                     Of that which happened to the knight of the Sauage man,
when he came to the Caſtle, where Arnalte the Princeſſe
of Nauarre made her abode.
                     
                        
                           FLorian of the Forreſt, not forgetting to
take new armour, when he departed from
the King of Spaines Court, yet kéeping his
deuiſe in his ſhield of the Sauage man ſtill,
becauſe he had greater delight therein, then
in any other: in this manner he trauelled,
atchieuing many rare and ſingular aduentures,
which (for breuities ſake) I let paſſe, becauſe they were
not of ſuch importance, as to be placed among his other knightly
déeds. After he had coaſted along through diuers Countries,
it was his fortune at length to arriue in a very pleaſant valley,
euen there where the Caſtle of the Princeſſe Arnalte ſtood: ſhe
being rid abroad on hunting, as alſo to ſée a Combate fought
betweene Dragonlat, the ſonne of Drapos, and another
Knight, who would not confeſſe the Princeſſe Arnalte to be
the faireſt Lady on the earth. And I aſſure you, that the preſence
of Arnalte gaue ſuch encouragement to Dragonalt, as
he vanquiſhed his aduerſary, without any great endamagement
of perſon or armour: which was of Azure colour, and bearing
in his ſhield the ſame deuiſe which Miragarda had enioyned
him, when he came with the Princeſſe to the Caſtle of Almaroll,
where he left the honour of the day, and vppon which
occaſion Arnalte did greatly ſtomacke him. But the Knight
being beautifull, gratious, and often fortunate in triall of aduentures,
continued in ſuch earneſt affection of ſeruice to her,
as ſhe in the end began to fauour his courteous deeds, with
more regard then ſhe had done before.
                     
                        
But returning to the knight of the Sauage man, whom
the Princeſſe (being in company with her Damoſels) had eſpyed
comming a far off: whereupon ſhe came to Draganolt,
and after ſhe had very graciouſly ſaluted him, ſhe ſaid, Behold,
here comes the onely man in the world, who is my cruell enemy,
and of whom I deſire to be ſeuerely reuenged: wherefore,
(my eſpeciall good friend) I deſire now to ſée the very vttermoſt
of your redoubted behauiour. And if fortune regard you with
ſuch happineſſe, as you enioy no danger in the fight, I wil not
faile to recompence you in ſuch ſort, as you ſhall be thorowly
ſatiſfied and contented.
                     The promiſe which you make me (anſwered Dragonalt)
is of ſuch eſtimation in my thoughts, as your words is onely
able to aſſure me the victorie, albeit fortune ſhould ſéene to
ſet her ſelfe againſt me. And perſwade yourſelfe, that it is vnpoſſible
for me to be vanquiſhed, if you continue me in your acceptable
fauour: in hope whereof, I will not onely enter the
Combate with the Knight (for the deſire I haue to reuenge
your wrong) but I will likewiſe depriue him of his Ladyes,
yea, and of his life, if it ſhall like you ſo to command
me.
                     While Dragonalt ſpent other amorous ſpéeches, with the
Ladie and Miſtreſſe of his conquered thoughts, the Knight of
the Sauage man and his company, came to the place where
they ſtayed: then Dragonalt (to content the honor of the princeſſe,
aduanced himſelfe forward with theſe words.
                     Sir Knight, I am to let you know, how you arre arriued in
the place, where it is thought méete that you make triall of my
valour, which you ſhall finde of ſuch authoritie, as will enforce
you to obey the commandement of this Princeſſe: whom I
will cauſe you to confeſſe, that ſhe is the faireſt Lady liuing
on the earth, and is beſt worthy of knightly ſeruice. And when
I haue diſpoyled you of your armour, you ſhall goe and ſubmit
yourſelfe to this my Lady and Miſtreſſe Arnalte, the Princeſſe
of Nauarre, who ſhall accept into her ſeruice thoſe Damoſels
in your company, becauſe we pittie to ſee you ſo ouercharged:
whereto the Prince Florian thus replyed.
                     
                        
If the Princeſſe of Nauarre (my friend) be ſo deſirous to be
ſerued with my Damoſelles, it is very great ſhame to you,
that you haue not ſought me before this preſent, for you might
haue found me better acquainted with Damoſelles, then I
am now, and by whom the Princeſſe Arnalte might haue receiued
far more honoour: but as for thoſe which are with me, I
thinke I ſhall defend them well enough from comming in her
ſeruice. Moreouer, if I ſhould be ſo impudent, as to confeſſe
the large title you haue made of her, I ſhould imagine my ſelfe
depriued of my wittes: for I am (my ſelfe) the ſeruant of ſuch
a gratious Ladie, as the Princeſſe Arnalte may no way equall
in beautie, and that I ſhall make you confeſſe before I
depart.
                     
                        Dragonalt being offended to heare the words of the knight
of the Sanage men, tooke a ſtrong Launce from his Eſquire,
and bowing himſelfe to the Princeſſe to aſſiſt him with her fauour,
he broched his horſe againſt the prince, who likewiſe prepared
himſelfe to the Iouſt: and they encountred together ſo
valiantly, as Dragonalt breaking his Launce on the Knight
of the Sauage mans Shéelde, lifted him vppon the croupher of
his horſe, but Dragonalt himſelfe was caſt forth of his Saddle.
Vpon this the Prince Florian caſt himſelfe from his horſe, and
Dragonalt hauing recouered his feete, they beganne to charge
one another very furiouſly, for Dragonalt intended to accompliſh
his promiſe, or he would fight till the Knight of the Sauage
man were depriued of his life.
                     But he found himſelfe greatly deceiued, for the noble Florian
handled him in ſuch ſort, as the Prindeſſe Arnalte well
perceiued, that the ſtrength of her knight began to faile, and
no maruaile, for he was gréeuouſly wounded in many places:
whereat the knight of the Sauage man was greatly offended.
And fearing he ſhould kill him outright, he pauſed awhile,
becauſe he would ſuffer him to take breath, when, he deſired
him to giue ouer the Combat, & returne to the Paſſage which
he had enterpriſed to guard: but Dragonalt gaue him this
anſwer. Your counſell (S
                           •
                        r knight) were neceſſarie to be
followed, if I made more account of my life, then the honour of

the fight: therefore I let you vnderſtand, that I intend not to
giue ouer the Combat. Then began they the Combat a freſh,
wounding one another ſo cruelly, as Arnalte and the Damoſels
did greatly pittie to ſée the Knight ſo cruelly bent, that their
blood altered the colour of the graſſe where they fought: in the
end Dragonalt not able to endure any longer, fell downe at
the knight of the Sauage mans féete, to whom the Princeſſe
preſently, and fearing he would cut off the head of her friend, ſhe
ſpake to him in this manner.
                     I pray you (ſir knight) do not take his life from him, conſidering,
the victorie is ſufficient for an honorable mind. I promiſe
you Madame (anſwered the knight of the Sauage man)
I wil not hold my hands, without he recant his former words,
or you promiſe me a gift that I intend to demand of you. I
pray you (ſaid Arnalte) let him riſe, for I am content to grant
what euer you requeſt, prouided alwayes, that you ſeeme not
to impeach mine honor. Then the Knight of the Sauage man,
gaue Dragonalt into the hands of the Princeſſe Arnaltaes damoſelles,
who preſently vnarmed him, and conueied him
into the Caſtle, to haue his woundes dreſt, the daunger
whereof was not ſo grieuous to him, as the conceyt of his
minde, becauſe he was againe conquered in the preſence of
his Ladie.
                     The knight of the Sauage man lodged without the caſtle
(Arnalte now thinking, that ſhe ſhould neuer be reuenged on
him) and there he ſoiourned three dayes, at the end whereof, he
came to take his farewell of her: and finding her in the Prince
Dragonalts Chamber, he fell in conference with her, the reprouing
him, for the ſmall account he ſeemed to haue of her,
whereupon he made her this anſwer.
                     Madame, if you were as firme and conſtant, as you are
both kinde and beautifull (which is a thing moſt neceſſarie in
you) I durſt awarrant you, that your Knights could not
be conuicted in this manner: beſide, there is no knight, but
would willingly ioyne with them in doing you ſeruice: and
I aſſure you, that had you not offred to compell me againſt my
will, I would willingly haue granted your owne deſire, ſo deſirous

I am to doe faire Ladies ſeruice, remembring alwayes,
that ſuch as you are, ought to be well eſtéemed and not forgotten.
And you ſhall vnderſtand, that I haue béene both in the
Court of England and Spaine, which are not a little renowned
by the beauty of the faire Ladies, that there are nouriſhed. Likewiſe
I haue ſéene Florenda, daughter to Arnedes the king of
Fraunce, whoſe beautie is honoured of a great many: but ſhée
whom your Champion named, and thoſe that I haue rehearſed
to you my ſelfe, may not compare with the Ladies of the Emperour
Palmerins Court.
                     There haue I ſéene Gridonia, Polinarda, Leonarda the princeſſe
of Thrace, and Sidelia, Daughter to the King Tarnaes, of
Lacedemonia. I haue ſéene alſo the Princeſſe Targiana, daughter
to the great Turke, for whoſe loue, Albayzar the Soldane
of Babilon, hath ſuffered very dangerous trauailes: all theſe
(in my iudgement) are highly aduanced in beauty beyond you,
and ſo it will be granted of any, that is not wedded in affection
towards you.
                     But let it not offend you that I ſpeake more plainely, it is
your crueltie and pride together, that doeth much deface your
title of beautie, which you cannot deny your ſelfe, making ſo
light account as you doe of ſir Dragonalt, not remembring that
he is a worthy Knight, and Sonne to one of the moſt valiant
Princes on the earth.
                     And if this triall is not ſufficient to cauſe you loue him faithfully,
truſt me I muſt needes ſay, that he hath put himſelfe in
danger for an vnfaithfull perſon, whom neither knightly bountie,
nor regard of her owne duty hath power to mooue. In reſpect
therefore that you made me promiſe to grant what I requeſted,
my deſire is, that in recompence of his noble deſerts,
you would accept of him as your Lord and Huſband: ſo ſhall
you both fulfill your promiſe to me, and accompliſh the commandement,
which the King your Father charged you ſhould
fulfill: I now reſpect your anſwere, to ſee if a man ſhould build
any aſſurance of your word. Sir Knight (anſwered Arnalte) do
me the fauour to tel me firſt who you are, and afterward I will
doe my good will to ſatiſfie your requeſt.
                     
                        
The knowledge of me faire Lady (ſaide the Knight of the
Sauage man) ſhall be no hinderance to the matter, wherefore
I aduertiſe you, that I am called Florian of the Forreſt,
Sonne to Don Edward the Engliſh Prince, and Flerida, the
Daughter to the Emperor Palmerin: D
                              •
                           agonalt hearing theſe
words, ſpake thus.
                     If in the victory you haue obtained (Sir Knight) I ſhould
looſe nothing elſe, but the reputation of a good Knight, I could
not be any iote offended, being vanquiſhed at his handes, who
alwayes returneth from the Combat conquerour: but ſeeing I
am fruſtrate of the hope that ſhould yéeld me content, I cannot
chuſe but complaine on Fortune, who hath cauſed me fall into
ſo great perplexitie.
                     
                        Arnalte, vnderſtanding that the knight of the Sauage man,
was the Sonne of the noble Prince Don Edward, ſhe began
to bluſh, remembring what had paſſed betwéene her and him,
and very deſirous ſhe was to match with him in mariage, but
ſeeing ſhe might not doe as ſhe would, ſhe contented her ſelfe
with his requeſt, declaring her minde in this manner. I did not
thinke (Sir Knight) that he which could ſo nobly vanquiſh the
enterpriſe of knights, would ſtudy and practiſe how to deceiue
poore ſimple women, neuertheleſſe the behauiour of the Prince
Dragonalt enforceth me to obey your deſire. Vpon this condition,
that within one yéere, you and hee ſhall bring mee to the
Court of the Emperour Palmerin, as well for the vnfained reuerence
I beare to his Maieſtie, as alſo to be acquainted with
thoſe gratious Ladies which you haue named.
                     God forbid Madame (ſaide the Knight of the Sauage man)
but I ſhould agrée to this lawfull requeſt, and the rather, becauſe
I knowe your preſence will greatly honour the Emper
                           •
                        urs
Court. Then Florian offered to kiſſe the Princeſſe Arnaltes
hand, but ſhe imbraced him very courteouſly, and Dragonalt
would haue humbled himſelfe at his féete, but he would
not ſuffer him to riſe from his bed, for he made ſuch eſtimation
of him, as hee ſent for the chiefe gouernours of the Realme:
who hauing knowledge of the Knight of the Sauage man,
iudged the mariage of Dragonalt and the Princeſſe to be according

as it ought, and to do them the greater honour, the
Prince Florian cauſed the marriage to be ſolemnized preſently
in the Caſtle.
                     On the next morning, he came to take his leaue of the prince
Dragonalt, and the Quéene Arnalte, to whom hauing made
promiſe, that he would not faile to accompany them to the
Emperours Court, he tooke his way on his iourney, where we
will forſake him a while, and ſpeake ſomewhat of the Prince
Albayzar.
                     
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXX.
                     How the Prince Albayzar embarqued himſelfe, to ſaile into
Turkie, after that he had preſented himſelfe to the Princes
of Thrace.
                     
                        
                           ALbayzar the Soldane of Babylon, was deſirous
to leaue the King of Spaines court,
thrée dayes after he had tried the Iouſt againſt
the noble Prince Florian of the Forreſt,
and taking his farewell of the King, the
Quéene, the Ladies, and thoſe knights of
the Court who were his friends, he ſet forward
on his way, accompanied with two Eſquires, making
ſuch ſpéedy haſte, as it was not long before he attained to the
Cittie of Conſtantinople.
                     
                     Then comming to the Pallace, with a very proude and
ſtately ieſture, he entred the Chamber of Preſence, where he
found the Emperour, the Empreſſe and her Ladies, beſide the
chéefe Princes and Knights of Court: he making no reuerence
to any, ſtood viewing among the Ladies (whom he had
ſéene before) which of them he might repute for the Princeſſe
of Thrace. At laſt, iudging her to be the Princes, that ſate next

vnto the faire Polinarda, he came before her, and knéeling down
ſaluted her with theſe ſpéeches.
                     Madame, at the very inſtant I was about to depart from the
King of Spaines court, a knight arriued there, being accompanied
with nine Damoſels, and he trying the Iouſts with the
moſt redoubted Knight of the Court, vnhorſed them brauely
one after another. The ſight hereof made me deſirous to hazard
my fortune, but ſuch was my ill hap, that he ſerued me as
he had done the other knights: and hauing thus conquered me,
he enforced me to make my faithfull promiſe, that I would
come and ſubmit my ſelf before you, and declare the meſſage he
would command me, for the condition was ſo made on either
part when we began the Iouſt. This Knight charged me to
ſay vnto you, that it was no ſmall griefe vnto him, ſince fortune
would not preſent him with any eſpecial occaſion, whereby
he might declare the good will he bare you: neuertheleſſe,
he deſired you very humbly, that you would make acceptance of
this his firſt ſeruice: though it be not of ſo great eſtimation as
your ſingularitie deſerues. And now I remaine to know, in
what cauſe it ſhall like you to imploy me, that I may doe you
ſeruice. Albayzar being well knowne in the Emperors court,
great ioy was made on all ſide for his arriual, and the Emperor
himſelfe was very well pleaſed, to ſée him come in ſo good diſpoſition,
for the good regard he had of the Princeſſe Targiana
his Lady, whoſe vertuous deſerts had bound him to be very
carefull of Albayzars health, proſperity, and ſafe deliuerance.
                     The Princeſſe of Thrace aroſe, and taking Albayzar by the
hand, ſpake thus vnto him. I pray you (Sir Albayzar) to doe
what it ſhall pleaſe the Emperour to command you, which I
iudge will be nothing hurtfull vnto you, ſéeing the great deſire
he hath to reioyce the Princeſſe Targiana, with your preſence.
                     
                        Albayzar tooke in very good part the gentleneſſe which the
Princeſſe of Thrace vſed towards him, and hauing giuen her
hearty thankes for her courteſie, he came and ſaluted the Empreſſe,
and the Princeſſe Gridonia, afterward he came to the
Emperour, who taking him in his armes, entred into theſe
ſpéeches.
                     
                        
I aſſured am (Sir Albayzar) that the Soldane Olorique,
your Father, receiued more great contentment when I imbraced
him, then I can doe: yet am I deſirous to doe you all
the honour you can, as well from the friendſhip I beare to your
father, as to recompence ſome part of the great courteſie, which
I haue receiued by the Princeſſe Targiana, your eſpouſed Lady,
who may commaund any thing ſhe ſhall thinke good in my
court, and I am ſory that you cannot perſwade your ſelfe, how
you may doe as much.
                     My gracious Lord (anſwered Albayzar) I am not of ſo ſimple
vnderſtanding, but I can well perceiue what great honour
you haue alwayes offoorded me: but yet I cannot forget the
ſhame I receiued here in your Court, when I was vanquiſhed,
and likewiſe, how you haue not done Iuſtice to the
Prince Florian, for the iniury he offered the Princeſſe Targiana,
albeit the great Turke her Father requeſted it at your
hands, which is no more but right and Iuſtice, and which you
daily permit to euery one, but kindred preuaileth ſo in you
towardes him, as you will not heare what Iuſtice calleth
for.
                     I ſée well then (ſaid the Emperour) that reaſon cannot preuaile
with you, I certifie you once more yet, that the princeſſe
Targiana came hither more on her owne good will, then compelled
or enforced therto by Florian of the Forreſt, my Nephew
But referring this talke, becauſe it is not to be vſed among
friends, I pray you imagine your ſelfe welcome, and goe reſt
your ſelfe in your Chamber, while the Gallies be prouided,
which haue expected here your comming, ſince my ſonne Polendos
and the other Knights arriued at Conſtantinople. My
Lord (ſaid Albayzar) I take the time ſo commodious for mée
now to ſaile, as I will not vſe ſo good opportunitie, and therefore
I intend to ſtay no longer in this Countrey. Eeuen as
pleaſe you for that (anſwered the Emperor) it is not méet that
I ſhould diſſwade him that is ſo reſolute.
                     The ambaſſador (who had ſtaied there all this while) came
very reuerently to the Prince Albayzar, and to hold that the
Gallies were ready, the Sea in good caſe, and the winde very

well for their voyage. The Prince Albayzar tooke his leaue of
the Emperor, the Empreſſe and her Ladies, and being accompanied
with the princes, Primaleon, Polendos, Belcar, the Giant
Dramuſiande, and others, they came to the Port where the
Galleys lay: but the Giant Dramuſiande, ſéeing the ſmall account
Albayzar made of the Princes that bare him company,
he ſpake vnto him in this manner. I ſée well Albayzar, that
the Emperor is worthy to be blamed, for ſhewing honour to
ſuch an vnthankefull perſon as you are, who ſeemes not to regard
the Prince Primaleon, he (at his Fathers requeſt) cōming
to grace you with his company, albeit he needed not to abaſe
himſelfe ſo much.
                     Tuſh Sir (anſwered Albayzar) it is long ſince I knew the
ſmall good will thou couldeſt allow me, but this I tell thée, that
a noble mind diſdaineth familiarity to them, whom he accoūteth
for his better enemies, and thus thou maiſt perſwade thy ſelfe,
that I am an enemy to all of the Emperors Court, and ſo thou
maiſt tell him from me: wherefore then ſhould I vſe any courteſie
to the Prince Primaleon, to whom I will ſhewe the very
worſt I can. Wherefore (ſir Dramuſiande) grieue not to ſee me
behaue my ſelfe as I doe, among mine enemies, for I promiſe
you, I will returne with as much expeditions as I can, to witneſſe
before the walles of his Citie, that which I haue at this
houre in my minde.
                     I could wiſh (ſaide Dramuſiande) that thou haſt béene there
where thou wouldſt be, and wert returned hither againe, that
I might reuenge the iniurie thou didſt me, when thou waſt ſo
bold, as to cary away the ſhield of the princeſſe Miragarda. Albayzar
was about to make him anſwere, but the Prince Primaleon
tooke Dramuſiāde by the hant, & with the other knights
returned to the pallace, where they gaue the Emperor to vnderſtand,
what good will the Prince Albayzar bare him. The Gallies
being launced into the déepe, the Marriners hoy
                           •
                        ed their
ſayles, hauing their wind ſo at will, as in ſhort time they reached
the great Caire, where the great Turke made his abode, who
iudged that the Emperour Palmerin would be offended, for the
had entertainement he gaue his Knights.
                     
                        
But when he had knowledge of the arriuall of the Galleys,
he was ſo ioyfull, as he came himſelfe to receiue the Prince at
the hauen, being not deſirous to queſtion of the Emperors honeſt
vſage towards him, for then he feared leaſt his owne intent
of treaſon would reprooue him.
                     
                        Albayzar remained a certaine time in the great Turkes
Court, attending the comming of the principall eſtates of Babilon,
whom he would haue there preſēted at the ſecond ſolemnizing
of his marriage, which was honoured with the preſence
of the Soldane of Perſia, the King of Bythinia, the King of Gaſplia,
the King of Terbifonde, beſide many other Princes and
Knights, who concluded all together to paſſe the Seas, and lay
ſiege to the citie of Conſtantinople, and becauſe they would the
more ſuddainely execute their intent, they ſeuerely returned into
their dominions, to make preparation for their traiterous
enterpriſe.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXXI.
                     Of that which happened to the Knight of the Tiger, after he
was departed from the Perillous Iſle, taking his iourney
towards the Citie of Conſtantinople.
                     
                        THe Knight of the Tiger, (of whom our Hiſtory
hath beene ſilent along time) entred
the Foyſt with Argentao, the Gouernour
of the Profoūd Iſle, at what time the wind
was ſo contrary, as he was faine to take
landing in the ſame Iſle, where he ſoiourned
for certaine daies, at the earneſt importunitie
of the inhabitants, who could thinke themſelues neuer
enough ſatiſfied with his company: but yet the long deſire he

had to ſée the Citie of Conſtantinople, made him imagine the
time too tedious till he came thither. At length (with much a
doe) hee departed thence in a Galley, accompanied with his
friend Siluian, being in a uew Armour which he cauſed to bée
made in the Profound Iſle, but kéeping his deuiſe of the golden
Tiger, which was renowned thorow all countries in Chriſtendome:
hauing ſayled a long time, hee came at laſt to the
Coaſt of Scotland, where his minde ſerued him well to goe on
ſhoare.
                     And after he had trauelled thrée dayes in that Countrey, he
came into a goodly Valley, along the middeſt thereof was a
great riuer, and not far off, he beheld a faire houſe ſtanding on
the riuer ſide, hauing a bride for paſſage to it, the which was
kept by a Knight in gréene Armour, who bare in his Shield a
white Bull, which deuiſe made him ſuſpect that it ſhould be his
brother Pompides.
                     
                     On the other ſide the bridge, which croſſed ouer another part
of the riuer, he eſpied another Knight, who ſeemed as hardy a
man as the knight of the Bull, being in very rich Armour, and
he might not paſſe the bride, without hée did firſt Combate
with him that defended it: as for him that would not endure
the fight, hée muſt yeeld himſelfe to Armiſia the King of Scots
daughter, to whom the houſe belonged. This ſtrange Knight
attending while the other got on horſebacke, he put his fortune
in triall to ſet at libertie the paſſage, but he failed in his intent
as you ſhall heare hereafter, and rendred himſelfe to the
mercy of Armiſia: who ordained the cuſtome to this ende, that
ſhe might haue her houſe furniſhed with Kinges of good courage,
whereof ſhe knew ſhe ſhould get a number, becauſe this
paſſage was one of the chiefeſt in all Scotland, and none could
get to the other ſide of the riuer, without they paſſed at this
bridge, which was ſo large, as foure Knights might eaſily combate
thereon, and it was ſo well fenced on either ſide, as they
could not bee in daunger of the Riuer while they fought the
Combate.
                     The Knight of the Tiger ſtayed a while, to ſée the ende of
the Combate betwéene theſe Knights, and viewing well the

Knight of the Bull, who had lifted vp the Feuere of his Helmet,
to ſpeake to a Damoſell which ſtood looking foorth at a
window) he was then perfectly perſwaded, that it was his
Brother Pompides, who hauing concluded his familiar talke
with the Damoſell, tooke his Lance, and came further forth vpon
the Bridge, whereupon the ſtrange Knight ſpake to him in
this manner.
                     I feare me (Sir knight) that we ſhall be hindered by the
night which draweth faſt vpon vs, before we can make an end
of our Combate, whereto I ſée you prepare your ſelfe, onely to
witneſſe your ſeruice to the Damoſell in the window. What
is that materiall to you Sir? (anſwered the Knight of the
Bull) if for her ſake I enterpriſe the fight, doubt you not but I
will be as good as my promiſe.
                     So without any more words, they ranne together very
couragiouſly, and after they had broken their Lances, they
met ſo fiercely with their bodies, as they fell both beſide their
horſes, to the ground.
                     When they had recouered themſelues, they drew their
ſwordes, wherewith they fought a very doubtfull and daungerous
Combate, the aduantage whereof fell to the Knight
of the Bull, yet not ſo eaſily, but he was glad for to reſt himſelfe
as his enemie: which when he perceiued, he leaned
himſelfe againſt the wall, giuing theſe ſpéeches to the ſtrange
knight.
                     How ſay you now Sir? doe you not perſwade your ſelfe
now, that I haue power ſufficiently to accompliſh what I
haue promiſed? Wherefore I would counſell you to reſerue
your manhood for other occaſions, better then to loſe your
life here, and therefore bee ruled by my aduiſe, goe ſubmitte
your ſelfe to the Princeſſe Armiſia, who will not deale diſcourteouſly
with them, that will ſo render their ſeruice vnto
her willingly: the ſtraunge Knight returned him this aunſwer.
                     Sir knight, I know as well as you, what profite or danger
can come to me, if I ſhould doe as you perſwade mée,

therefore I pray you let this talke paſſe and let vs end what we
haue begun.
                     And ſo without attending any anſwer, he began to charge
the Knight of the Bull againe, who entertained him in ſuch
ſort, as in ſhort time he felt himſelfe to feeble, to re reſiſt the hardy
ſtrokes his enemy gaue him, ſo that in the end, being vnable
to continue any longer, he had loſt ſo much blood, yt he fell
downe before the knight of the Bull, who taking off his helmet
ſpake vnto him in this manner.
                     You ſhall vnderſtand now (Sir knight) that be cauſe you
ſcorned to follow my counſell, you ſhall now▪ whether you will
or no) goe ſubmit your ſelfe to the Princeſſe Armiſia, and if
you refuſe to doe it, I will not fayle to part your head from
your ſhoulders. I know not Sir (anſwered the ſtraunge
Knight) which of theſe two conditions I ſhould chuſe, wherewith
you preſent me, ſo dangerous they both ſeeme to me, for
I would more willingly receiue my death at your hand, then
goe ſubmit my ſelfe to her, who can be pleaſed with nothing
elſe, but adioyning me a moſt ſhamefull death.
                     The knight of the Bull being ignorant of the reaſon, why
he feared ſo much to goe render himſelfe to the Princeſſe Armiſia,
deſired that he would tell him his name. Truely Sir
(ſaid the ſtrange knight) I intend not ſo much to ſatiſfie your
will: for it is yet ſome contentment to him that is vanquiſhed▪
when the conquerour hath no knowledge of him.
                     The knight of the Bull ſéeing him ſo obſtinate, ſent his Eſquire
to the Princeſſe Armiſia, deſiring her, (if ſo it were her
pleaſure) to grant this Knight his life. Armiſia, who was alwaies
very courteous to them that had any preferment in her
fauour, commanded one of her Damoſelles to goe to the
knight of the Bull, and tell him that he ſhould giue the knight
his life, after he had knowledge who he was.
                     The Damoſell was no ſooner come to the Bridge, but ſhe
preſently knew the vanquiſhed knight to be Adraſpe, ſonne
to the duke of Sizana, who had ſlaine the Prince Doriell, brother
to her Lady and Miſtreſſe Armiſia, for the reuenge of
whoſe death, the guarding of that paſſage was firſt ordained.

Vpon this, the Damoſell began to crie aloude and teare her
haire very pittifully, ſaying he was now come that had ſlaine
the Prince Doriell, which her Lady hearing, ſhe came downe
immediatly, with her Damoſels waiting on her, both ſhée and
they wéeping very bitterly, when ſhe ſpake to the Knight of
the Bull in this manner.
                     I pray you Sir Knight let me haue your aſſiſtance, to be deliuered
out of the grieuous paſſions wherein I haue long time
remained: for you ſhall vnderſtand, that the Knight whom you
haue conquered, is the very ſame that flew my brother Doriell,
for whoſe death the King my father liueth in extreame
heauineſſe.
                     The knight of the Tiger marking her words, ſpake in this
order to his friend Siluian: I ſée wel it is more dangerous to fall
into the hands of a woman, who is deſirous of vengeance, then
to deale with a hundred good and hardy knights. Wherefore I
pray thée take my horſe a while, and I will goe ſée, if by my entreatance
his life may be ſaued. Then came he to the Bridge,
and deſired the Knight of the Bull, that would not offer the
knight any more cruelty: and turning to the Princeſſe Armiſia,
he ſaluted her with theſe ſpéeches.
                     Madame, if any anciant enmitie cauſeth you to deſire the
death of this Knight, I pray you admit to memorie, that a Lady
of ſo great calling as you are, ought not to be void of lenitie
and pittie, and chiefely at ſuch a time, when you haue moſt power
to execute the extremitie of your will. And if my reaſons be
not ſufficient to appeaſe your anger. I pray you yet conſider
with your ſelfe, that no perſons vſe crueltie where they may
ſhew pittie, but they repent themſelues afterward when their
collericke moode is ouerblowne and paſt.
                     The honeſt and vertuous language of the knight of the Tiger,
had not the power to mooue any pittie in the Princeſſe Armiſia:
but ſhe commanded the knight of the Bull, that he ſhould
cut off the head of her enemie, then the Prince gaue her theſe
wordes. I promiſe you Madame, if neither pittie nor perſwaſion
may preuaile with you, I will ſtand ſuch an eye-ſore in
your way my ſelfe, as you ſhall not execute your malicious

humour. I would with all my heart (ſaid the Knight of the
Bull) that it might pleaſe the Princeſſe to grant this knight
his life: but ſince you preſume ſo boldly to defend him, I will
not refuſe (albeit I am ſo ſore wounded) to let you vnderſtand
that you neither can nor ſhall hinder me, in fulfilling what my
Lady hath commanded.
                     The knight of the Tiger did not vſe theſe wordes, to the end
that hee would enter the Combate with Pompides, but onely
to change the rigorous humour of Armiſia, and becauſe he saw
the Knight in ſuch danger. But ſuch was the cruell minde of
the Princeſſe, as ſhée continued ſtill in one ſong, calling for
the head of the vanquiſhed knight Adraſpe, who with the
great expence of his blood, and griefe to ſée the wreakefull will
of Armiſia, ended his life while the knight of the Tiger and
Pompides were preparing themſelues to the Combat: Armiſia
ſéeing Adraſpes was dead, could not be yet contented therewith,
becauſe his head was not ſmitten off as ſhe commanded.
Wherefore, becauſe Pompides did not accompliſh what ſhe
willed him, ſhée flang away in a furie, and went into her
Chamber.
                     
                        Pompides, who was brought into great extremitie for her
loue, did ſo grieue at her departure, as he was conſtrained to
ſet him downe vpon the bridge: but the knight of the Tiger
perceiuing his heauines, tooke pitty on him, and came to comfort
him, which Pompides ſéemed to diſdaine, becauſe he iudged
that his preſence procured his miſfortune. Siluian ſéeing his
maiſter not returne, came walking with his horſe before the
bridge, whom Pompides hauing eſpied, he knew preſently that
the knight of the Tiger, was the renowed Palmerin of England,
in which perſwaſion, for the great ioy hee conceiued, he
came to him with theſe words.
                     I am well aſſured my gratious Lord, that the comfort I receiued
at this preſent inſtant, will deface and extinguiſh all my
former miſhaps. Palmerin tooke off his Helmet, and hauing
imbraced Pompides, beganne to perſwade him in good hope of
his Lady, who had no ſooner forgotten her anger, but ſhee reprooued
her ſelfe of great vnkindneſſe, and then ſhee ſent to

intreate Pompides that he would pardon her, and if ſo it were
his pleaſure, to bring the knight into her houſe with him, whoō
ſhe ſaw ſo familiar with him.
                     
                        Pompides vnderſtanding the will of the Princeſſe, took his
brother by the hand and walked into his Chamber, where,
when they were vnarmed, the Princeſſe came her ſelfe to viſit
them, entring into theſe ſpéeches to the knight of the Tiger.
I beſéech you Sir knight to excuſe me, in that I made no more
account of your honeſt and courteous words: for I aſſure you,
the great danger wherein I was at that inſtant, would not
ſuffer me to regard any perſwaſion whatſoeuer, but onely to
reuenge my ſelfe on my cruell enemy. And becauſe you ſhal not
conceiue any ill opinion of me, I will tell you for what cauſe I
enuied the Knight ſo much.
                     You ſhall vnderſtand Sir, that I am the daughter of Meliadus
the king of Scots, in whoſe Court Adraſpe the eldeſt ſon
to the Duke of Sizana (whom Pompides hath ſlaine)▪ beganne
to waxe very amourous of me, but becauſe I knew him to bée
one of very bad conditions, I made no regard of his earneſt
ſuite. Neuertheleſſe he was ſo importunate and voyde of reaſon,
as he would not be anſwered. Wherupon I was conſtrained
to complaine to the Prince Doriell my Brother, of whom
when Adraſpe perceiued himſelfe to bee hated and deſpiſed,
he practiſed which way he might beſt be reuenged on him, and
following his ſecret trayterous intent, it was not long after
before he had the opportunitie for to execute his mallicious ſtomacke.
                     It ſo chanced, that one day my brother and he had appointed
to walke abroade together, when, Adraſpe being priuily
armed, and hauing at hand ſuch as prouided for his purpoſe, he
ſlew my Brother, whoſe death the King my father could not
accompliſh to reuenge, becauſe hée ſhould then deale with
one of the chéefeſt Princes of his Realme, and his beſt aſſured
friend.
                     Yet was not his heart frée from continuall vexation, in reſpect
that nature could not otherwiſe chuſe, which I pittying,
and willing to aſſiſt my father to the vttermoſt I could,

I left the Court, and cauſed this houſe to be erected in this
place, which being the chiefeſt paſſage in all this Realme, I
enterpriſed to haue ſome valiant Knight defend this Birdge,
promiſing to marry with him, if he could be ſo happie as to
kill Adraſpe. And he (as he was alwayes accuſtomed) bearing
a proude and loftie minde, would oftentimes come to ſhow
himſelfe here, onely to vexe me with the remembrance of my
Brothers death: and ſtill hee would Combatte with my
Knights, being euermore ſo fortunate as to vanquiſh and kill
them.
                     But after the knight of the Bull tooke this charge vpon him,
Adraſpe (who had heard of his noble proweſſe) remained two
moneths before he could come hither againe: yet at the laſt,
came to trie his Fortune againſt the Knight of the Bull, who
hath depriued him of his life as you ſée, and ſatiſfied my wil that
made me to ordaine this cuſtome,
                     Madamy (anſwered the knight of the Tiger) you ſhould haue
had my helpe in taking his life from him, if you had told me
at the firſt what great wrong he had done you, for the very
earth will open to ſwallow thoſe, that intend or practiſe any
treaſon againſt their Prince, yea and the Prince himſelfe cannot
be frée from ſuch ſecret conſpirators, when fauour ſhall
ſtand in ſtéede of Iuſtice to ſuch wicked offendors: wherefore,
if they be ſharpely puniſhed, the reſt will be the better warned
by their tran
                           •
                        greſſion.
                     And I aſſure you Madame, you haue done as well beſéemed
a vertuous Princeſſe, in cutting off that branch, when fortune
made the inſtrument of your vnhappineſſe: beſide, the duetie
wherein you are bound to the knight your father, did command
you ſhould ſée ſo good a déede executed.
                     Now therefore let me humbly intreate you, that you would
kéepe your promiſe to Sir Pompides, who is my Brother, the
nephew to king Frederick of England, and ſonne to the prince
Don Edward, who is father to him and me, and friend to
you.
                     I ſée well (ſayde Armiſia) that I haue wrought the contentment
of the Knight my father, and taken vengeance for the

death of the Prince Doriel my brother, by the proweſſe of him,
whoſe preſence is no ſmall honour to me: neuertheleſſe, I may
thinke my ſelfe little beholding to him, in that he hath concealed
himſelfe ſo long from me, who would haue allowed him
more honourable entertainment. And I pray you Sir, let it
not offēd you, that I deſire to know, whether yon be the prince
Palmerin, or Florian of the Forreſt, his Brother: not that I
am affectioned more to the one then the other, but becauſe I
would know, which of them Fortune hath made me ſo happy
to ſée: the Prince returned her this anſwer.
                     
                        Florian of the Forreſt (Madame) is ſo farre off this place, as
very hardly can one tell where to meete with him: wherefore,
you may perſwade your ſelfe that I am Palmerin, whom (if
you pleaſe) you may command as your ſeruant. The Princeſſe
Armiſia embraced him very gratiouſly, reioycing that
ſhe might any way accompliſh the meanes to honour him, becauſe
the king Meliadus her father, was brother to the Quéene
of England, the Prince Don Edwards mother.
                     The death of the proude Adraſpe, was reported the ſame day
in the king of Scots Court (which was but foure leagues from
this place) and the name of the Knight that had ſlaine him:
whereupon the king vpon the next meaning tooke his Coatch,
and being accompanied with many worthy knights, he came
to ſée the Prince Palmerin of England: and hauing giuen him
many gratious ſalutations, he tooke Pompides by the hand,
promiſing to make as good eſtimation of him, as he did of the
Prince his ſonne while he liued. While the aged king ſate familiarly
talking with Armiſia his Daughter, the Archbiſhop
of Esbreque arriued there, by whom, Pompides and Armiſia,
were preſently married together, and then departing thence,
they went very ſtrongly to ſeeke to the Duke of Sizana, Father
to the proud Adraſpe, whom the king vowed to put to death,
or kéepe him priſoner: but he reckoned without his Hoſte, for
the Duke being aduertiſed of his intent, fled i
                           •
                        to Ireland,
whereupon his goods and liuing fell into the Kings handes.
They in England hauing knowledge of Pompides marriage,
made Triumphs and Bonfires, for the good fortune that had

happened to Pompides, who was very well beloued of euery
one, as well for being the Sonne of the Prince Don Edward,
as for his vertuous bounty and knightly courage.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXXII.
                     How the knight of the Tiger, tooke his leaue of Meliadus
the king of Scots, and of the Princeſſe Armiſia his Daughter
and what happened vnto him during his voyage.
                     
                        WHen the Nuptials of Pompides were ſolomnized,
to the great contentment of the
King of Scots, and his whole Realme, the
Knight of the Tiger tooke his leaue of the
King, and the Princeſſe Armiſia, accompanied
with his brother Pompides, to whom
(before he was embarqued) he gaue to vnderſtand,
the charge wherein all Princes were bound that receiued
royall dignitie, deſiring him very earneſtly, ſince fortune
had brought him to ſo great felicitie, that he would vſe himſelfe
modeſtly and wiſely, becauſe Fortune was ſo vncertaine in
her ſelfe, that ſometime ſhe put thoſe perſons in greateſt feare,
whom ſhe had placed in moſt aſſurance, whereby ſhe letteth
them vnderſtand, that ſhe can quickly diſpoſſeſſe them of their
happineſſe, at ſuch time as they little looke for any ſuch alteration.
                     But to the end you may enioy your dignitie with moſt aſſurance,
I counſell you to entertaine your ſubiects with amitie,
adminiſtring Iuſtice rightly vnto them, which let bee done
with ſo good zeale, as it be not conuerted in rigour and cruelty,
whereby you ſhall cauſe them to ſay, that their Gouernor is become
tyrannous and vnmercifull to them.
                     My Lord (anſwered Pompides) your wordes ſauouring of

ſo good iudgement, as they are worthy of moſt high commendation,
I cannot but thinke my ſelfe much bound to you, for
this your noble and friendly counſell, aſſuring you that I will
lodge them faithfully in my heart, and accompliſh them according
to your gracious commaundement, for in doing otherwiſe,
I ſhall iudge my ſelfe vnworthy to be named your Brother.
                     After many ſuch like ſpéeches had paſt betwéene them, they
imbraced one another, Pompides returning to the Citie, and
Palmerin entring the Shippe, cauſed the ſayles to be hoyſed,
when the winde ſeruing them ſo well, as (after they had ſpent
ſuch time as is méete for ſo great a iourney) the Prince tooke
landing in Hungaria. When he had paſt through diuerſe places
of the Countrey, it was his chaunce to arriue in a goodly
Forreſt, where at length he came to a very faire Fountaine,
which was couered with an Arke of maruellous ingenious
workemanſhip: and becauſe the weather was excéeding hot, he
alighted to refreſh himſelfe at this Fountaine. In the meane
while Siluian ſuffered the horſes to graſe in the paſture, and
when the Prince had waſhed his hands and his face, he eſpyed
a little from him downe further in the Forreſt, a Damoſel running
very ſpéedily, with her haire hanging about her ſhoulders,
and tearing her faire viſage with her nailes, crying and wéeping
out of meaſure: at laſt ſhe eſpyed the Knight of the Tiger, to
whom ſhe came running a great pace, and caſting her ſelfe at
his féete, ſhe remained fearefully looking about her a good while,
hauing not the power to ſpeake one word.
                     The Knight of the Tiger ſéeing her perplexed caſe, began to
pittie her very much, and doubted leſt he that had feared her,
would make purſuite after her, he called for his Helmet, which
he had no ſooner claſped on his head, but he beheld comming
the way that the Damoſell came, a giant very ſtrongly armed,
carying in his hand a huge Mace, who ſéeing the Damoſell, had
demaunded ſuccour of the Knight of the Tiger, ſpake vnto her
in this manner. Truſt me Damoſell, you betake your ſelfe
to very ſimple aſſurance, in that this knight wanteth ſtrength
to defend you againſt me.
                     
                        
So without any more words, he ſtrooke at the Prince with
his Mace, who put his Shield before him to reſiſt the ſtroke,
which was ſo rigorous, as his Shield flewe in two pieces: the
Prince was ſomewhat offended hereat, wherefore (drawing
his ſword) he gaue the Giant ſuch a blowe on the arme, as afterward
he could hardly ſtrike to any great purpoſe. The Damoſell
remaining ſtill in extreame feare, by the cruell intreatance
the Gigant had vſed to her, would haue departed to hide
her ſelfe in the Forreſt, becauſe ſhe iudged the Knight of the
Tiger vnable to ſubdue her enemy: which Siluian perceiuing,
came vnto her, and counſelled her to ſee the end of the Combat,
wherevpon ſhe gaue him theſe words. I pray you gentle eſquier
and my friend, that you would not ſéeme to hinder me, for this
Giant, nay rather a Deuill (whoſe force none is found able to
reſiſt) will aſſuredly put me to death, after that he hath ſlaine
your maiſter. I would yet (ſaid Siluian) that you would ſtay to
ſée the ende of the fight: for peraduenture it may happen otherwiſe
then you expect.
                     The knight of the Tiger (who was deſtitute of a Shield, to
auoid the cruell ſtrokes of his ſtrong enemy) behaued himſelfe
ſo politiquely and nimbly, as hee lent the Giant many ſore
blowes, who was cōſtrained becauſe he could not lift his mace
in his right hand) to vſe his left, thinking yet to deale well enough
with the Knight of the Tiger: but the Prince was ſo
fierce vpon him (hauing giuen him many grieuous and mortall
wounds) as his heart began to faile him, ſo that he retired, not
able to reſiſt ſo many waighty ſtrokes, neuertheles, the prince
ſéeing he had almoſt brought him to buy, let flie ſtill ſo fiercely
on him, as he could not haue the meane to charge him againe.
The Giant perceiuing himſelfe in ſuch extremitie, leaned his
backe againſt a Trée, when he defended himſelfe a great while
ſo well, that the Prince could hardly reach to hurt him, hee
waged fight euery way ſo preciſely with his Mace, which hee
held in both his hands, watching the time when he might giue
the Prince ſuch a ſtroke as he willingly would.
                     The knight of the Tiger, he might not preuaile againſt the
Giant, without hazarding his perſon in great danger, he went

and reſted himſelfe againſt a Trée like wiſe, which when the
Giant beheld, he ſpake vnto him in this order. I pray thee Sir
Knight, let me find ſo much friendſhip at thy hands, as to let
me vnderſtand what is thy name, becauſe I haue euermore
thought that no ten of the beſt knights on the earth, could not
do as much as thou haſt done, neither that they could haue bene
able to reſiſt me halfe this while.
                     I am content (anſwered the knight of the Tiger) to ſatiſfie
thy will ſo much, on condition thou wilt promiſe to tell me thy
name, and the cauſe why thou doeſt purſue this Damoſell. So
much (quoth the Giant) thou ſhalt commaund at my handes,
wherefore, thou ſhalt vnderſtand that I am called Vaſcalion
of Ocrance, Sonne to the Giant Lucran, who was ſlaine at
Conſtantinople by the hands of Primaleon, with whō he was
ſo hardy as to enter the Combate, to reuenge the death of Don
Perrequin
of Duas, and to haue in marriage Gridonia, the ducheſſe
of Ormeda, who was afterward eſpouſed to Primaleon.
At what time my father was ſlaine, he left me in the kéeping
of one of my Brethren, named Dramoque, who is likewiſe
ſlaine be one of the ſonnes of the Prince Don Edward of England,
and this Knight is yet in the ſearch of Knightly aduentures.
But I aſſure you, I am not a little agréeued to ſée my
ſelfe in this caſe, becanſe I am almoſt depriued of any hope,
to reuenge the Death of my Father and his Brother, before I
dye.
                     And for this Damoſell, it is ſo, that fortune cauſed me to méet
with her to day, and as I vnderſtood by her, ſhe is going to the
Court of the Emperor Palmerin, to viſite Leonarda the Princeſſe
of Thrace: now, for that I am deſirous to do all the iniurie
that I may, to any of that Emperours Court, I endeuored
my ſelfe to rauiſh this Damoſell. But at the time I was about
to fulfill my pleaſure on her, an Eſquire of hers (who had
eſcaped my hands) came and hindered me with the ayd of fiue
Knights, whom I haue left to hold Combat with ten of my
Knights▪ becauſe I would follow this Damoſel, who tooke her
ſelfe to flight, ſo ſoone as the fiue Knights began to charge me.
Thus haue I told you the whole circumſtance of my minde,

now it remaineth that you reueale your ſelfe to me, according
as at firſt you promiſed.
                     Beléeue me Vaſcalion (anſwered the Knight of the Tiger)
it is neceſſary that thou ſhouldeſt receiue ſharpe chaſtiſement,
for vſing thy life in ſuch wicked actions, the proofe hereof thou
mayſt now behold thy ſelfe: for thou being not content with
the death of thy Father and his Brother, ſéekeſt to reuenge thy
villainous will on this innocent Damoſell. I let thée know
therefore, that I am a kinſeman to Primaleon, and the ſame
man that ſlew thy Fathers Brother, which made me be called
Palmeran of England, Sonne to prince Edward and faire Flerida
the Siſter of Primaleon, for whoſe ſake, I intend to take
thy life from thée before I depart.
                     
                        Vaſcalion (at theſe words) began greatly to diſmay himſelf,
for he knew well that his ſtrength was not ſufficient to hold
out long againſt him, but yet he preſently aduanced himſelfe,
to ſhew what deſire he had to be reuenged on him that had
ſlaine his Vuckle.
                     
                        Palmerin being very glad, when he perceiued the Gianc had
forſaken the Trée, which ſerued him all the while as a Rampire
of defence, aſſayled him with ſuch furious ſtrokes, as the
Giant would gladly haue reſted himſelfe againe: but the
Prince followed him ſtill ſo earneſtly, as at length he tumbled
on the ground before him, when (not content to ſée him ſo conquered)
he ſet his foote vpon him, and when he had taken off his
Helmet, he preſently parted his head from his ſhoulders. The
ſight hereof made the Damoſell ſo glad, as ſhe had now forgotten
the feare wherein ſhe was when the Giant purſued
her, and then came the Knight of the Tiger to her with theſe
words.
                     Faire Damoſell, I iudge that the fiue Knights who are in
Combate for your occaſion, cannot otherwiſe chuſe but be in
great daunger: wherefore, I will goe ſéeke them foorth to ſuccour
them, in the meane while you may come faire and ſoftly
after with my Eſquire, who (for your better eaſe) ſhall take you
vp behinde him on his horſe. Then tooke he that way which
he ſaw the Giant come, when he purſued the Damoſell, and

it was not long before he heard the clanching of the Swordes,
wherevpon he gaue his horſe the ſpurs, and neuer left gallopping
till he came to them, where he ſawe they had ſlaine foure
of the Giants knights, and of the other ſixe, there were but two
that could defend themſelues to any purpoſe.
                     The knight of the Tiger knew Dramian the king Recind
                              •
                           s
ſonne, by his Armour and the deuiſe he bare in his Shield, then
alighting from his horſe, he put himſelfe among his friendes,
charging one of them that fought ſo ſtoutly, as he tumbled réeling
to the ground: which the other fiue perceiuing, they were ſo
greatly diſmayed, as in ſhort time, the knight of the Tiger and
his companions made an ende of their wretched liues.
                     The Damoſell arriued there very ſoone after, when the ſight
of Siluian made the knight of the Tiger preſently knowne to
theſe fiue knights, who were not a little glad of his company,
being all his knowne and approoued friends.
                     The firſt was Dramian, ſonne to the king Recinde, the other
were Friſoll, ſonne to the Duke Drapos of Normandie,
Luyman of Burgundy, Tremoran, and Brandedon: al theſe fiue
knights were conducted by their Eſquers, to a little village not
farre from the Forreſt, where they were carefully attended till
their wounds were healed.
                     The Knight of the Tiger kept them company two or thrée
dayes, when afterward he tooke his leaue of them, ſetting forward
the next way he could deuiſe, to bring him to Conſtantinople,
where the Emperor was preſently giuen to vnderſtand,
of the death of Vaſcalion and his tenne knights, which newes
were highly welcome to all in the Emperours Court.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXXIII.
                     How the Knight of the Tiger, arriued at the Emperors court
of Conſtantinople, & of an Aduenture which was offered
to him at his arriuall.
                     
                        BEcauſe the Prince Palmerin was deſirous
to be at Conſtantinople, he left the company
of the Damoſell and the fiue knights of
the Emperours Court, continuing ſo long
in trauaile, as at length he came into the
Empire of Conſtantinople, without the
finiſhing any aduenture worthy the rehearſall:
for I aſſure you the deuiſe of the Tiger he bare in his
ſhield, made ſuch report of him in all places abroad, as very few
or none would willingly meddle with him. But the néerer the
Prince approched to Conſtantinople, the more he found himſelfe
paſſioned for the loue of his Lady, remembring her vnkind
ſpeeches, & the ſharpe entreatance ſhe vſed to him, when he departed
from the Court, which were now ſo earneſt in his
thoughts, as he durſt hardly now offer to come again in her preſence.
Siluian labouring as much as he could poſſible, to cauſe
him forſake that fond humor, perſwading him that the Princeſſe
furie could not chuſe but be now thorowly forgotten, and
he durſt awarrant, that ſhe had repented her ſelfe many times
ſince that ſhe had vſed him ſo vngently.
                     The Knight of the Tiger hearing the wordes of Siluian, began
to comfort himſelfe indifferently, and riding on, they came
at laſt to haue the citie in their ſight, which the Prince ſtood and
and beheld a great while, with the teares running downe his
cheekes, and many a ſcalding ſigh ſent from his hart, beholding
the Chamber wherein his Lady and Miſtreſſe lay.
                     
                        
When he had paſſed this cogitation ſo well as he could, hée
claſped on his Helmet, and taking his Shield and his Launce,
hee commaunded Siluian to goe before into the cittie, and
prouide ſome place where he might alight, becauſe he would
come vnknowne, if ſo be any aduenture might be preſented to
him when hee arriued at the Court. And ſo it came to paſſe,
that a knight came to the Emperors Court, the day before the
arriuall of Palmerin, hauing two Eſquires attending on him,
who carried his Helmet, Shield, and Launce: and comming
very proudly into the Emperors preſence, he vſed his language
in this manner.
                     I giue thée to vnderſtand (moſt redoubted and famous Emperour)
that I Arnolte, the Lord of Aſtronomicall Iſle, and the
giant Brauorant, were very great friends together, for that our
gouernments were ſomewhat néere one another, and to confirme
this friendſhip long continued betweene them, my Father
concluded, that I ſhould marry with Arlencea, Daughter
to the Giant Brauorant: but becauſe both my yeares and diſcretion
ſerued not as then, they prolonged our marriage for
the ſpace of fiue yeeres. In which time Brauorant departed
this life, ſo likewiſe Camboldam, Calfurnien, Brocalont, and
Baleato, who were ſlaine by the two ſonnes of prince Edward
of England, your nephews. And to aboliſh altogether the houſe
of Brauorant, Collambra his wife (by the counſell of the Magitian
Alfernao) ſent Lady Arlencea her Daughter into this
Countrey, to the end that by their deceit, they might cauſe the
Knight of the Sauage man to forſake this Court, that reuenge
might be taken on him for the death of her Sonnes, which
would remedie her inward ſorrowes, ſeeing him brought into
her ſubiection.
                     But now it is thought vnpoſſible to helpe this miſfortune,
for Alfernao is ſlaine by Collambraes meanes, who threw her
ſelfe headlong downe in the preſence of her enemies: thus are
they not onely depriued of their liues, but that which is worſt
of all, Arlencea is vtterly loſt, being in his keeping that hath
ſlaine her whole linage. 
                           ••
                        d becauſe I haue deſire to finde
her, I enterpriſed to trauell hither, being minded to deale with

the knight of the Sauage man, and not doubting but to diſcharge
him of his life: but he is not now in this Court, whereat
I am not a little offended, for if Fortune refuſe mee, I
ſhall not account it any iniurie to be vanquiſhed at his handes,
who is daily woont to remaine victor in all places where hée
comes.
                     Beſide, if I be depriued of my life, I ſhall make an ende of
thoſe careful thoughts, which maketh me deſirous to be diſſolued:
and for this purpoſe I intend to waite his comming.
Now if in the meane will, your Maieſtie will giue me leaue
to make ſome triall at Armes, againſt the Knightes of your
Court, I ſhall count my ſelfe highly pleaſured: the Emperour
returned him this anſwere.
                     Truſt me (my friend) you haue enterpriſed to ſéeke your
owne ruine, wherefore I would counſell you to giue your
minde to ſuch thinges, the fruite whereof may yéelde you
more commoditie then this is like to you. And I aſſure you,
that neither Florian, nor Palmerin his Brother, is at this inſtant
in my court, whom I would wiſh to be heare: neuertheleſſe,
if in the time you expect their comming, you be ſo deſirous
to make knowne your valour, I grant you the libertie
of the field, where the Knights of my Court ſhall not ſaile to
viſite you.
                     I deſire nothing more (anſwered Arnolfe:) And ſo without
any more wordes he entred the Field, where he Iouſted
againſt three Knightes, two of them being vnhorſed, and the
third vanquiſhed in the Combat with the ſword: then the day
declining, they gaue ouer for that time.
                     On the next morning he entred the Field againe, being in
blacke Armour and hauing painted in his Shield little flames
of fire in a Field of Sable. The Knight of the Tiger ſtayed
not long, before hee came and ſhewed himſelfe in the Field,
armed as he was woont to be, but very much diſguiſed with
ſhadowes, leaſt hee ſhould be knowne, and his deuiſe of the
Tiger was ſo defaced, as one could not iudge what proportion
it ſhould be.
                     As he paſſed along by the Empreſſe Chamber windowe,

he chanced to ſée his Lady Polinarda, whereat he was ſomewhat
abaſhed: but ſéeing that Arnolfe was ſo ready to Iouſt,
he let paſſe all fond conceits, and praunced into the Liſts to
know the ſtate of the enterpriſe, which was preſently declared
to him by one of the Iudges of the Feeld, whereupon the prince
aduanced himſelfe to the Giant Arnolfe, ſpeaking vnto him in
this manner.
                     Thou ſhalt vnderſtand Arnolfe, that thou art now to deale
with a kinſeman to the knight of the Sauage man, wherefore
if thou haſt any thing to ſay vnto him, reuenge it on me, who
is one of his linage. Arnolfe was ſo iocound when he heard
theſe words, as he preſently gaue his horſe the ſpurs againſt
the knight of the Tiger, they encountred together with ſo great
force, as the Prince forſooke one of his Stirrups, but Arnolfe
was ſent to the earth with his héeles vpward.
                     This braue beginning cauſed the Emperor and Primaleon
to reioyce, they iudging the ſtrength of Arnolfe vnequall to be
compared with the knight of the Tiger, who alighting from
his horſe, came and receiued Arnolfe at the point of the ſword,
he being not a little mooued at his ſore fall, eſpecially, hauing
receiued ſuch a foyle at his hands, who was allied to the knight
of the Sauage man. The Combate beganne and continued
with great fury, which moued the Emperour to theſe wordes.
I perceiue now, that Arnolfe might haue vſed leſſe boaſting
of his prowes, becauſe he ſéemeth far vnable to make reſiſtance
againſt the knight that fighteth with him. It is reaſon good
Father (aunſwered Primaleon) that euill perſons ſhould be
puniſhed, that example may remaine to others, to beware how
they meddle in ſuch vnduttfull attempts. Arnolfe and the
Knight of the Tiger ſo hacked one another, as their Armour
witneſſed their cruell rage and furie, eſpecially the Gyant,
whoſe fleſh was ſo cut and mangled in many places▪ that the
blood tricked apace downe his armour, the great loſſe whereof
cauſed him giue ouer to take breath awhile, when he deſired the
knight of the Tiger to tell him his name: whereto he returned
him this anſwer.
                     
                        
I tell thée Alnofe (ſaid the Prince) I am a very néere kinſman
to the knight of the Sauage man, hauing no leſſe deſire to
end thy curſed life, then I haue to do the like to all ſuch as thou
art: Arnolfe replyed thus. I am in the place where of long
I deſired to be, and I aſſure thée, I receiue no ſmall c
                           •
                        ntentment
in dealing with thée: for if I be ſo happie as to depriue
thée of life, I ſhal perſwade my ſelf to be reuenged on my greateſt
enemy. But if Fortune giue thée the power to vanquiſh me, I
ſhall be likewiſe well content, becauſe I ſhall the ſooner viſite
Brauorant and his ſonnes: to reuenge whoſe death, I will either
end thy dayes with my ſword, or offer vp my ſpirit here at
thy féete.
                     The knight of the Tiger perceiuing him ſo obſtinate, began
to charge him more roughly then as yet he had done, following
his intent ſo gallantly, as he neuer left him, till he tumbled
on the ground before him ſtarke dead: when, taking off his
Helmet, and ſéeing he had no life left in him, he knéeled downe,
and thanked God for his victory.
                     Then came Primaleon, and other Princes, who conducted
the Knight of the Tiger into the Empreſſe Chamber, where taking
off his Helmet, he knéeled downe before the Emperour,
who weeping for ioy to ſée him, imbraced him in his armes very
gratiouſly. Afterward he came and humbled himſelfe before the
Empreſſe, with kiſſing her hand, doing the like to Gridonia,
and to the other Ladies: but when he came to his 
                           •
                        ady and miſtreſſe,
ſuch was his ſpeech and behauiour, as it cauſed ſuſpition
of their loue, to all then preſent.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXXIIII.
                     Of the talke which the Prince Palmerin had, with the Princeſſe
Polinarda his Lady.
                     
                        SO greatly buſ
                           •
                        ed was the Prince Palmerin
for certaine dayes, in viſiting his
friends, as he could not attaine the felicitie
his heart deſired, which tormented him
ſecretly, though he bare it foorth with a
good countenance: for neither could he find
the meanes to ſpeake with his Lady,
nor with Dramuciana her Gentlewoman, that he might diſcouer
his griefe to her. To the end therfore, that he might ſomewhat
remedy his affections, he made his caſe knowne to Siluian,
who entring the Empreſſe Chamber, deſired Dramaciana
to ſpeake a word or two with her: and ſo well did Siluian
handle the matter, that Dramaciana came to ſpeake with the
prince Palmerin, at her chamber window, which was vnderneath
her Ladies Chamber, and ſo ſhadowed by the Arches of
ſtone towards the Garden, that one might very hardly perceiue
him.
                     
                        Palmerin receiued no leſſe contentment, in ſpeaking with
Dramaciana, then he would if it had béene to his owne Lady, who
made her Gentlewoman acquainted with all her ſecrete
paſſions: wherevpon he iudging that the houre of his good fortune
could neuer come to paſſe, without the aſſiſtance of his
Damoſell, opened his whole minde vnto her, whereon when
ſhe had ſufficiently ſcanned, very modeſtly ſhe gaue him this
anſwere.
                     You may well thinks (moſt famous and renowned Prince)
that ſhe who is ſo willing (as you perceiue me) to doe you ſeruice,
would be loth to hide any thing from you, which might returne

your benefite: and this you may perſwade your ſelfe, that
the dutifull good will I beare you, maketh me ſo hardy at this
time, not knowing whether I ſhal be deceiued, or if you intend
otherwiſe then I make account of. It is not méete my friend
Dramaciana (anſwered Palmerin) neither doth the time ſo permit,
that I ſhould be ſuch a ſhameleſſe perſon, as to render inturie
for courteſie, neither would I wiſh you to iudge me ſuch
a one: wherefore (ſetting all ſuch doubts aſide) I deſire you to
certefie me, what end (as you thinke) will my long ſeruice come
vnto: for the hope I haue receiued by your meanes, hath euermore
ſuſtained me vntill this preſent, from the cruell extremities,
which elſe had beene ſufficient to kill me.
                     He that knowes ſo well (ſaid Dramaciana) how to declare
his griefe, ſhall neuer make me beléeue that he can be depriued
of good hape, conſidered alſo, that your noble behauiour cannot
be blemiſhed by fogetfulneſſe. And this you may build vpon,
that the Princeſſe Polinarda, hath béene as grieuouſly paſſioned
during the time of your long abſence, as you haue béene
daily tormented with fearefull and diſpleaſant thoughts, as
you ſay you haue ſuffered. If theſe newes (anſwered Palmerin)
ought to be ſufficient to content me, that I pray you to waſt no
more time, but acquite your ſelfe of the promiſe it hath pleaſed
you oftentimes to make me: for it is not conuenient that theſe
words (whereby you doe ſo highly pleaſe me) ſhould be changed
into flattery and deceite, which might growe to ſuch a ſeuere
cauſe, as might be both the loſſe of me and my Lady: Well then
(quoth Dramaciana) I haue already prouided the place where
you may ſpeake your minde to the Princeſſe my Ladd, which
ſhalbe at a cloſe and ſecret window, whereto you may come, as
you enter the chamber by the Princeſſe Fleridaes garden. And
I pray you behaue to your ſelfe in ſuch order, as you ſhall not
neede to ſpeake together againe ſo ſecretly, becauſe the place
and the honor of the Princeſſe cannot agrée together, without
occaſion of your great danger. I may now perfectly behold (anſwered
Palmorin) of what account your good will hath béene alwaies
to me, which when I call to remēbrance, it cauſeth me to
abandon all ye vnhappy occaſions, wherwith I haue bin too long

acquainted, and enuious deſpite can no more moleſt me, hauing
your fauorable furtherance on my ſide. But when I conſider ye
ſwéet contentation I ſhall receiue, hauing the meanes to ſpeak
with my gracious miſtreſſe, I find my ſelfe thrown into many
doubtfull perplexities, in reſpect of my vnworthines & her honorable
dignity: ſo that I ſhall be abaſhed, and feare yt her diſpleaſure
will withhold me, from diſcourſing my long and tedous
trauailes for her ſake. Certainly ſir Palmerin (aunſwered
Dramaciana) it were fond you ſhould conceale the Princely
déeds, wherwith ſo many renowmed Potentates haue bin acquainted:
for if you haue bene ſo valiant and hardy, as to ſpend
your time hitherto in trauailes of excéeding danger, & yet haue
finiſhed them all worthily, it is néedleſſe you ſhold now diſmay
your ſelf, preſenting your perſon in the place, which is frée from
any hazard or miſfortune, And if you wil tel me, how this feare
& affliction was ſo coupled together, I will tel you what remedy
I can for it, but I would haue you to ſtriue with your ſelfe, yt all
feare may be out of your mind, when you come to reueale your
ſecret thoughts to my Lady and miſtres. Palmerin well noting
the friendly words of Dramaciana, made knowne vnto her the
very depth of his amorous afflictions: but ye knight drawing on
a pace, & the talk of the prince (in a maner endles), they brake off
their conference at that time, ſhe ſhewing him the place, and appointing
him the houre to ſpeake with his Lady. Palmerin taking
leaue of Dramaciana, went to his chāber, where he ſpent
the night in thinking on the talk had paſſed betwéen ye gentlewoman
and himſelf: ſo the good hope he had through her means
made his hart not ſo ſorrowfull as it was wont to be, but ſomwhat
he behaued himſelfe pleaſantly remembring the heure of
his felicitie drew néere. The time being come, which Dramaciana
had charged him to reſpect, he took his way to the appointed
place, and paſſing ſo couertly as he could through the garden,
he entered the princeſſe Fleridaes chamber, leauing Siluian
without, to giue him knowledge if any came to trouble him.
                     
                        Palmerin walking vp and downe the chamber alone, admitting
many cogitations to his preſent attempt, he began to
thinke on the greateſt detriment that might happen to him,
for he knew very well, that he came to Combate amorouſly

with him, who had the power to depriue him of his wonted
courage, and could driue him to ſo ſtraite a point, as no refuge
he might haue to flie vnto, but her Princely and fauourable
bountie, which if he did not afford him, he could not make account
of any conqueſt. Then offering to approach the window,
he eſpyed the Princeſſe coming, whoſe ſight abaſhed him with
ſuch ſudden feare, as he found his voyce too faint to ſpeake, and
the iudgement wherewith he had béene alwayes acquainted,
was now ſo weake and ſimple, as one would haue taken him
rather for a Ghoſt then a liuing man: the which ſhe perceiuing
and greatly pittying, withdrew her ſelfe a little from the window,
remembring the good counſell that Dramaciana had giuen
him. At laſt he ſtepped to the window, which the princeſſe
ſeeing, aduanced her ſelfe to him, when, after a little pauſing, he
entred into theſe ſpeeches.
                     Madame, if this houre of good fortune would allow me the
recompence, to end my long and laborſome trauailes, I ſhould
haue no occaſion to find my ſelfe agréeued, for well I aſſure my
ſelfe, that your preſence hath the power to make me forget all
the paines I haue ſuffered, during the time I haue borne the
yoake of loue, to whom I haue alwayes remained faithfull and
ab
                           •
                        dient, in regard of her fauour that brought me to this place,
where I receiue vnſpeakeable content, in requitall of my paſſed
afflictions in trauaile, which I eſteeme of no importance,
in compariſon of the dignity now preſent before mine eyes,
which is of ſo high and honourable authoritie, as I eſtéeme my
fortune to excéede all others. But I could wiſh, that his golden
face of beautie, which is ſo ſplendant to my drouping
thoughts might neuer be ſhadowed with any cloud of miſfortune,
in that my ioy, honour, and felicitie hath euermore bene,
in making eſpeciall account of my excellencie, who I iudge
will pitte to ſée me liue in continuall ſeruitude. And ſince the
extremitie of gréefe hath compelled me to take this boldeneſſe
on me, I would deſire you to thinke, I come yet with
this regard: as well to auoyde any impeachment that might
happen to blemiſh your renowme, as for the deſire I haue that

your gratious fauor might end my carefull and continuall verations,
which you muſt iudge to be great, if you conſider all
things paſt aduiſedly. For ſuch hath bene my dutifull remembraunce
of you, as my conceite did imagine any thing
to your honour, I neither forſooke griefe, danger, trouble, or
any miſfortune whatſoeuer, (theſe hauing bene alwaies the familiars
of my life) that I might eternize your name for time
of memory, repoſing ſo good hope in your noble ſelfe, that
the eud of my trauailes ſhall agrée with your gentle acceptation,
which I am enforced earneſtly to requeſt. But albeit
my labours haue bene great and gréeuons in your ſeruice,
yet am I not ſo forgetfull of my ſelfe, but I repute this preſent
gratious fauour of your excellencie, to be farre beyond that I
haue done, and the rather, becauſe I know your ſwéete and amiable
nature, will not ſeeme altogether left vnrewarded.
Then if it come paſſe, that you make a friendly account of
me, I ſhall finde my ſelfe ſo dutifull towards you, and my deſire
will be ſo comformable to yours, as looke what liketh you,
will content me, and how you diſpoſe of me, I caunot but accept
gratefully, ſuch and ſo great is the content I receiue in
the trauailes I haue done for your ſake, as no winde can blaſt
mee, if your bounty ſhaddowe me, nor any feare foyle me, if
your fauour ſtand by me: to which wordes the Princeſſe thus
anſwered.
                     I did not thinke (Sir Palmerin) that you would cauſe me
to come into this place, to hold me with theſe friuolous & néedeleſſe
words, and I promiſe you but for reaſon, I ſhould thinke
my ſelfe ſo deceiued, as I could hardly withhold my ſelfe from
leauing your company. The firſt is, becauſe you were nouriſhed
and brought vp in this Court, being likewiſe my kinſeman
friend, which hath made me the more willing to regard
your trauailes. The other to ſatiſfie the earneſt intreatie
of Dramaciana, to whom I perceiue you are a greater
friend then to me: but ſeeing the fault is in mee, I will rather
blame mine owne timeritie then you, though you ſéeke to
ſatiſfie your deſire, without any conſideration of my honour,
whereby you let me ſufficiently vnderſtand, what ſmal regard

you haue of the danger, wherein you may fall ſooner then you
thinke for, only through your vnaduiſedneſſe. I cannot deny,
but I am greatly indebted to you, yet in no ſuch déepe ſumme,
but I can eaſily come forth of it, without any preiudice to my
renowme: for I do not eſtéeme it reaſonable, to recompence
your noble ſeruice with mine owne diſaduantage, becauſe the
good fame and commendation you haue gotten, may content
you, if you haue no other reward. But if your good will be ſo
great towards me, as by your ſpéeches you ſéeme to make it, it
is méet for you to make it known to the Emperor your Grandfather
and mine, as alſo to the Prince Primaleon my Father,
not doubting but they will be very willing to match vs both
together, as for me, I ſhall eſtéeme it the greateſt good fortune
that may happen to me, hauing gained the loue and liking of
you, whoſe proweſſe and Princely deſertes, are worthy moſt
gratious eſtimation. Thus if conſent knit vp the long deſire
of vs both, we may ioyne in one agréement of gladneſſe: and
this I prgy you to accept as my anſwer, for without their good
wils, I neither may nor can accord vnto you.
                     I promiſe you Madame (aunſwered Palmerin) it is very
hard for me to receiue contentment in their commending my
déedes, whom I cannot regard or make any account off, and if
I ſhould ſéeme to refuſe to go to the Emperour and the Prince
Primaleon, I might be thought very vnwiſe: but firſt I would
be perſwaded thorowly of your good will, which is the principall
in this action. And if it ſo fall out, that they will not conſent
vpon the words I ſhall vſe to them: yet when I am reſolued
of your acceptation, I ſhall take the boldneſſe on me (ſéeing
time and place ſo ſeruing) to let them vnderſtand our ſure
and inui
                           •
                        lable conſent and loyalty together.
                     And albeit my fond timeritie vſed towardes you, may
cauſe you iudge me farre vnable to ſpeake with ſuch a
                           •
                        dacitie
in this cauſe, I would haue you yet this to thinke on me now
that the faithfull affection, wherewith I haue continually ſerued
you, will compell me enter in this boldneſſe to them, as
tell you. And if they doe 
                           •
                        oi ſéeme to leane me to be contented,
by ſuch laudable recompence as I may receiue at others

handes, it is the regard they haue of my trauailes and aduentures,
daily vſed in the honour of your name, and no other, maketh
me thinke to deſerue this great fauour. But if your nature
cannot then agrée, when they would be loth I ſhould be any otherwiſe
rewarded, I muſt and will content my ſelfe to obey
your pleaſure, yet ſhall I finde my ſelfe deceiued in the opinion
I haue hitherto conceiued, in that to be depriued of the preſence
of his Lady, is the chiefeſt miſfortune that can happen to
a faithfull Louer.
                     What then is left to comfort ſuch a carefull minde? None
but this, that the abſent friend hath this commoditie, to fit and
rip vp many ſad and ſorrowfull diſcourſes, wherewith he may
chaſe away the remembrace of their deceytes, whoſe preſence
was dearer to him then life it ſelfe. But yet ſuch is the cuſtome
of Loue, to mingle among the ſharpeſt conflicts ſome hope: If
it be but onely to ſwéeten their mouthes a little with ſome delightfull
taſte, who waſte their time in ieaſt and dalliance, vnder
his amorous Enſigne. And with this gay foyle, he graceth
his Copper for curant Gold, being the only meane to ſhaddow
his deceitfull dealings: yet a number that ſpend their liues in
his ſeruice, gaine ſuch knowledge of his trumperie, as in the end
they are glad to forſake him. Which I dare not take the
hardineſſe on me to doe, for that I am ſo ſurely bound to him
as when I ſhall leaue him, I deſire to be loued of none but you,
in regard of whoſe good will, I haue thruſt my ſelfe into all dangers,
whatſoeuer returning victor rather by the aide of your incomparable
beautie, then by the force or valour that remain
                           •••
                        
in my ſelfe: there pauſing, ſhe replied in this manner. I did nor
thinke (Syr Palmerin) to receiue any ſuch anſwere for the
words I gaue you, wherefore you make me iudge that they are
of no eſtimation at all with you.
                     But ſince I perceiue that loue hath ſo fondly blinded you,
as he will not ſuffer you to ſée, the more then modeſt readineſſe
in me to pleaſure you, I am content to giue you yet
a further and greater aſſurance of me: for▪ I would not
that ſuch a noble and renowned Prince as you are, ſhould depart
from me offended or iniured, perſwading my ſelfe that

you will not ſéeme to enterpriſe any thing, whereby but a motion
of impeachment may come to mine honour, for if you
did, I ſhould thinke very hardly of the diligent ſeruice you haue
done to me all this while.
                     Therefore once againe I humbly intreate you, to ſpeake to
the Emperour, and Primaleon my Father, to knowe the eſtate
of their good willes, whereof if you ſhould faile, I giue you
perfect aſſurance of mine: if this anſwere (which truely dutie
accounteth but bad obedience to my ſuperiours) wil not ſuffice
you, I will verily perſwade my ſelfe, that the loue you
ſéeme to beare me, is rather to diſgrace, then preſerue my honour.
                     If now ſwéete Madame (anſwered Palmerin) I refuſe to
doe as you aduiſe me, it were but reaſon you ſhould thruſt me
foorth of your ſeruice, knowing (as I doe) that the ouerthrow
of my bliſſe, and erecting me to happineſſe, conſiſteth duely in
my gratious Miſtreſſe. Thus concluding, he tooke her by the
hand, which he kiſſed a number of times together, not without
the expence of many a ſalt teare and reking ſighes, which made
the Princeſſe bluſh and grieue at inwardly, pittying to ſée the
great humilitie of the Prince Palmerin, to whom ſhe betrothed
her ſelfe in the preſence of the Princeſſe of Thrace and
Dramaciana (who gaue him counſell to vſe the matter in that
order, & by whoſe meanes Polinarda ſo ſoone contented.) They
being altogether at the windowe, the matter was knit faſt for
the more aſſurance, and there did Palmerin kéepe them company
all that day, and muſt part of the night, till pittying to ſée

                           〈◊〉
                         lady ſtand ſo long, compelled him to take his leaue for that
time.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXXV.
                     How certaine Knights arriued at the Court of the Emperour
Palmerin, who were aduertiſed how the Turks had prouided
a great Armie, to come and beſiege Conſtantinople.
                     
                        DVring the the time this great ioy was
in the Court of Conſtantinople, for the
comming of the prince Palmerin, the Emperour
had tidings brought him, how the
Prince Albayzar had leuied a great and
mighty Armie, to come and beſiege the
Cittie, and aſſure the Meſſenger, that the
Lord (who was the Soldane Bellagris) was preparing himſelfe
in a readineſſe to come and aide him.
                     The Emperour being at this time ouercharged with age,
found himſelfe farre vnable to deale in theſe affaires, the conſideration
whereof did not a little diſpleaſe him. Neuertheleſſe
he fayled not to make prouiſion (as wiſedome willed) to entertaine
the enemy, whereupon, he writ to the Soldane Bellagris,
ſending him heartie thankes for the good forwardneſſe h
                           •
                        
ſaw in him, eſpecially in a time ſo néedfull, and when the meſſenger
to the Soldane was diſpatched, the Emperour ſent preſently
to informe of theſe newes, Arnedes the King of France
his Sonne in law, Recinde the king of Spaine, Don Edward
the Prince of England, the Emperour Vernar of Allemaigne,
Maiortes, and many others.
                     The Armie of the Turkes was no ſooner heard of, but the
Knights who followed their noble aduentures) returned to
Conſtantinople, knowing they ſhuld make better trial of their
valour there, then in any other places: and ſuch was the rumour

ſpread abroad to the Turks intention, as in ſhort time the Citie
of Conſtantinople was furniſhed with many noble and redoubted
knights, where aduentures was preſented to them
day by day: but the Emperour would not ſuffer them to purſue
after ſuch occaſions, (becauſe they were nothing elſe but
deceite and villany) wayting ſtill for the time when he ſhould
be aſſaulted by Albayzar, who was now ſetting forward on
the Seas, being accompanyed with diuers approoued knights
at armes, as alſo a number of cruell and bloody minded Giants,
intending to make a generall ſpoyle of all the Emperors
Dominions.
                     But till we haue better occaſſion, we will leaue them a
while, and returne to the Prince Palmerin, who (during the
brute of the Turkes Army) was aduertiſed of the death of Satrafort,
the gouernor of the Perillous Iſle, being taken by Trofolant
the Fearefull, who was deſcended to the giants kindred.
And as it is rehearſed in the firſt volume of this Hiſtory, that
Trafolant was vanquiſhed in the Tournament by the Prince
Florendos, and had the like miſhap the day following, by the
proweſſe of the Knight of the Sauage man, who guarded the
ſhéeld of the Palme Tree, in the forreſt of the Cleere Fountain
which the Damoſell from the Sage Aliart brought to the Emperour
Palmerin, that he might deliuer it to the Knight his
Nephew, who had woone the honour of the day in the Tournament.
                     It was likewiſe his fortune after, when he trauailed to
the Caſtle of the Giant Almaroll, to be vanquiſhed there by
the Prince Florendos, who guarded the ſhéeld of the faire Miragarda:
and returning thence, he met with the Damoſelles
Knight, when, offering to take one of his Ladies from him,
they fell to the Combate, and in the end was likewiſe vanquiſhed.
The conceit of his ſo many and ſundry foyles, and all
by the Knights of the Emperours Court, cauſed him to deuiſe
by what meanes he might worke ſome iniurie to them that
belonged to the Emperour, in reſpect he was ſo ſeuerely bent
againſt them, as he would take vpon him to reuenge the death
of Calfurnien and his brethren.
                     
                        
But to the ende he might the better execute his treacherous
enterpriſe, hée tooke his way to the Profound Iſle, thinking
there to inuent ſome treaſon by the aide of Collambra: but his
intent was there diſapointed, for it was told him, that ſhe was
brought to the Emperours Court of Greece. Then he determined
to goe viſit the Perillous Iſle, being accompanied with
two Knights that were his kinſemen, with whom he knewe
well how to diſſemble the treaſon on his ſtomacke: and Satrafort
thinking them to be of the Emperours Court of Conſtantinople,
entertained them very louingly into his Caſtle, where
when they had ſoiourned for certaine daies, they murthered Satrafort
and all his houſhold.
                     But the pleaſure of this victorie was very ſhort to them, for
Argentao the gouernour of the Profound Iſle, came by a ſecret
wile ſuddenly on them with his power, and taking Trofolant
in the Forreſt, ſent him preſently to the Emperours Court:
where was no little ioy of his comming, in that he ſaued Palmerin
a iourney, who was taking his leaue of his friendes, becauſe
he would goe to take the Traitors that had done ſuch
villanie.
                     
                        Trofolant was condemned by the lawe, and publiely executed,
according as his trecherous dealings deſerued: and
Argentao was honourably recompenced, that he might haue
the better occaſion to be carefull and circumſpect in his office.
So ſoone as Trofolant was put to death, the Sage Aliart arriued
at the Court of Conſtantinople, whoſe preſence gaue greater
aſſurance to the Emperour and his Knightes, and he gaue
them heartie thankes, in that they were ſo ready to goe recouer
the Perillous Iſle. After the Sage Aliart, there came to the
Court, the Prince Floraman, Albanis of Frieze, Reccamon,
Leyman of Burgunuy, beſide many other princes and knights,
who had euery one forſaken their ſeuerall countries, to aſſiſt
the Emperour of Conſtantinople with their aide, becauſe they
had heard of the Turks preparation.
                     The very ſame day was tydings brought to the Court, how
Fredericke the king of England was dead, which newes cauſed

                        
                           •
                        o ſmall griefe among the Princes, eſpecially to the Emperour
himſelfe, who being as aged as King Fredericke, was iudged
himſelfe not of long continuance behind him, in that this was
a ſpeciall preſident for him to regard, King Fredericke being
one he made moſt chiefe and high account of. Prince Edward
was then crowned King of England, to the great ioy of all his
ſubiects, he being ſuch a vertuous and magnanimous Prince:
and the funerals of king Frederick was ſolemnized in Greece,
with very great ſtate, their Beacons burning, and Bonfires
made through the whole Empire, according as it was the cuſtome
in that Countrey.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXXVI.
                     Of an aduenture which happened (during the troubles at
Conſtantinople) in the Realme of France, and after what
manner it chanced.
                     
                        THe Hiſtory reporteth that certaine Ladies
in the Realme of France, enuying the renowned
of Polinarda of Greece, Miragarda
of Spaine, and Leonarda of Thrace,
(whoſe beauties defaced greatly the Ladies
in all other Countries) began to complaine
very much on the French knightes,
that either by the want of courage, or their little regard of loue,
their beauties remained vnknowne in other Realmes, Countries,
and Prouinces.
                     Vpon this occaſion they found themſelues ſomewhat agréeued,
and to the end they would remedie the cauſe, foure Ladies
of the king of France his Court (thinking to excell
all other in beauties) enterpriſed to eſtabliſh an aduenture,
to mooue the mindes of many Knights to come endure
their triall, againſt ſuch as would maintaine their beauties.

The firſt of theſe Ladies was called Manſia, the ſecond Telanfia,
the third Latrania, and tge fourth Torſia, each of them
hauing a Caſtle called after their owne names, to the end that
thoſe knights who deſired to ſée them, ſhould come to the Caſtles
where they remained.
                     Many and ſundry ſtrange knights trauailed to theſe Caſtles,
and ſhewed ſuch rare and incredible proweſſe, that the
renowme of theſe foure Caſtles ſhall neuer be forgotten: as
you may at this day yet behold in France, where the Caſtles
of theſe foure Ladies are yet honoured with moſt ſpeciall eſtimation.
                     Theſe foure Ladies being couetous of their owne glory,
would know which of them was aduantaged in beautie aboue
the other. Telanſia ſerued the Princeſſe Graciana, the
ſecond, daughter to Arnedes king of France, hauing ſuch an
opinion in her ſelfe, as ſhe thought ſhe excéeded all the Ladies
in the world in beautie, Manſia, Latrania, and Torſia, who ſerued
the Quéene, were forged in the ſame ſtampe with Telanſia:
but Manſia held her ſelfe of greater reputation then all
the other, becauſe ſhe was higher in the kings fauour.
                     It came ſo to paſſe, that thrée of theſe Ladies were married
ſo ſoone as they beganne this aduenture, which neuertheleſſe,
they would haue continue ſtill, fearing leaſt any other Ladies
ſhould take the preheminence aboue them. Torſia, who
remained vnmarried, perſwaded her ſelfe to excéede the other
thrée: in briefe, theſe Ladies were ſo earneſt in their intents,
and ſo willing to ſée the iſſue thereof, as they concluded to entertaine
no knight into their ſeruice, before his fortune ſerued
him to ſée them all, for then afterward he might the better ſubmit
himſelfe in obeyſance to her, whom he iudged the cheefeſt
in his affection.
                     Moreouer, they ordained that the knight ſhould firſt of all
binde himſelfe, to endure the Combatte againſt foure ſeruants
to any other Ladie, the one after the other: and if hée
proued ſo fortunate as to vanquiſh them, he ſhould then bée
called her Knight, for whom he had fought the combate. Beſide,
this knight ſhould not be licenced to goe ſéeke aduentures

afterward in any ſtrange Countrey, becauſe his Lady remainned
the victoreſſe, carrying the true title of ſupreame beautie.
Theſe foure Ladies were agréed to eſtabliſh this aduenture,
in the ſame manner I haue told you, that their beauty might
purchaſe like commendation as the princeſſe Miragardaes did,
by the noble triall of her ſhield, which was kept at the Caſtle
of Almaroll.
                     
                     The King of France his Sonnes (who were accounted the
moſt puiſſant at Armes in all that realme) becauſe their affections
were placed elſe where, made no account of this aduenture,
neither Germaine of Orleance, becauſe his minde was
likewiſe at Conſtantinople. The other French knights remained
doubtfull to proue this aduenture, remembring with what
conditions theſe Ladies would be ſerued. As for them that
were ſo hardy to venture, they hauing ſeene the beautie of the
firſt, were ſo caught captiue, that they promiſed to endure the
hardeſt perill in obtaining her loue. But when they had ſéene
the ſecond Lady, they preſently committed the firſt to forgetfulneſſe,
making the ſame promiſe, that they would looſe them
ſelues to purchaſe her: then looking on the third, their wittes
were ſo buſied, and their thoughts were ſo laboured, as then
none but ſhe was faire in their iudgements. At length, when
they came to ſee the fourth ſwéete and delicate face, all the other
thrée were counterfeit in reſpect of her, and they ſerued
but as foyles to ſet her beauties out to ſale: ſo that from the firſt
to the laſt, their opinions were ſo variable, and their mindes ſo
rauiſhed in contemplating them all, as not forcing what might
happen to them, either trouble, miſerie, daunger, or death it
ſelfe, they threwe themſelues into the face of Fortune. And
many Knightes that had béene vanquiſhed by his proweſſe,
who defended ſo nobly the Shield of Miragarda, did yet aduenture
boldly to trie this enterpriſe: but they could not vanquiſh
the foure Knights theſe Ladies preſented them, who tooke vpon
them to be the ſeruants of any Lady, ſo that this aduenture
continued a long time, before that any of theſe Ladies could
vaunt of the conqueſt.
                     And I aſſure you, the renowne of this famous enterpriſe,

was ſo blazed abroad in all places, as the Knights trauailed to
this place early, and laboured very earneſtly to deſerue the fauour
of theſe foure Ladies.
                     The Prince Floraman of Sardignia trauailing through the
Realme of France, intending to goe offer his aide to the Emperor
of Conſtantinople, met with a damoſel, as he entred into
a Forreſt, ſhe hauing in her company two other Damoſels,
and becauſe ſhe was deſirous, that the Prince of Sardignia,
ſhould behold her beautie, ſhe tooke off her maſke, and gaue it
to one of the Damoſelles. Floroman who trauailed continually
mourning in his ſpirit, for the loſſe of faire Altea, his Lady,
paſſed on giuing them no ſalutation: which when they perceiued,
one of them followed him, and ſpake vnto him in this
manner.
                     I would know (ſir knight) what you meane, to paſſe ſo by
theſe Ladies, offering no ſigne of courteſie or ſalutation? perhaps
you did not ſée my Lady as you paſſed by, which may at
this time well ſerue to excuſe you. And becauſe your ſadneſſe
maketh my Lady to think, that your heart is paſſioned or moued
by ſome occaſion, ſhe deſireth you to take your lodging 
                           •
                        or
this night: in one of her Caſtles not far hence, where ſhe will
not faile to entertaine you, in the moſt gratious manner ſhée
can deuiſe: to which words the Prince Floraman thus anſwered.
Faire Damoſell, if I haue bin any thing forgetfull towards
your Lady, I humbly deſire her to pardon me: for ſhe may perſwade
her ſelfe, that not ſeeing her, I paſſed by, without vſing
any courteſie, rather then by any other occaſion.
                     So turning his horſe, he ridde with the Damoſell after her
Lady, who was entred into her Caſtle, before Floraman had
the power to ouertake her, whereat he was greatly agréeued:
and comming to the Damoſell that brought him thither, he
preſently entred into theſe ſpéeches.
                     I pray you (faire Gentlewoman) tell mée the name
of this Caſtle, which in my iudgement ſéemeth one of the
fayreſt that I haue ſeene in all my li
                           •
                        e: and I pray you,
what Lady was that, which entered in ere I could ſhew her
my dutie?
                     
                        
The Caſtle (anſwered the Damoſell) is farre more beautifull
within, then this ſumptuous building which you ſée without,
and I aſſure you, the knight hath good occaſion to reioyce,
that can paſſe by here without ſome aduenture happen to him.
But becauſe you may account my words of truth, and that it is
impoſſible for you to depart hence without triall of your proweſſe,
I eſpie thrée knights vnder the gréene trées on your left
hand, who will not preſume ſo néere this Caſtle, but they haue
ſome further meaning. As for the Caſtle, it is called the Caſtle
of Latrinia, which is the Ladies name whom you ſaw to enter,
on whoſe behalfe many knights put themſelues in danger,
agtinſt them that de
                           •
                        end thrée other Ladyes of the French
Court, onely being in contention for their beauttie. But to the
end you may giue the ſounder iudgement in this caſe, and be
the more earneſt in trying the Combate, on the behalfe of the
beautie of my Ladie Latriana, I will worke the meanes that
you ſhall ſée her: and if it come to paſſe that you be afterward
vanquiſhed, you may the better know, whether it be by your
owne imbecilitie, or the imperfection of her beautie for whom
you enter the Combate: Floraman returned her this aunſwere.
                     I haue bene alwayes ſo vnfortunate (faire Damoſell) in
maintaining the like enterpriſes, that I will not now make it
daintie inhazarding the inconſtance of flattering Fortune. I
haue often heard of Madame Latrinia, and I take her to be
one of the foure Ladies of this Realme, who excéede all the
other in ſoueraigntie of beautie: I could wiſh (i
                           ••
                        ti were poſſible
ſo good hap might come to me) to be entertained into her
gratious ſeruice, but the greater part who are giuen on the other
ſide, maketh me to be doubtfull herein, according as it is
permitted to the fréedome of a mans will.
                     As the Damoſell and Floraman continued this talke, they
came before the Caſtle, an as they offred to paſſe on, theſe thrée
knights ſtepped before them, vſing theſe words to the Prince
Floraman. We would know Sir knight, if you be determined
to imploy your ſelfe on the behalfe of any of the foure
French Ladies, becauſe that each of vs, being no ſeruant to

her whoſe cauſe you maintaine, ſhall then be conſtrained to
enter the Combate with you. Sir (anſwered Floraman) I
may not lawfully refuſe the Combate, becauſe I haue not ſéene
any of theſe foure Ladies: one of the thrée Knights replied to
him againe thus.
                     If it be ſo Sir, that as yet you haue not ſéene theſe Ladies,
you ſhall be ſuffered to enter the Caſtle, where you may contemplate
the beauty of Latrania: and if it chaunce you to remaine
affectionate to her, as many other haue done before you,
we deſire you not to enter her ſeruice, becauſe you may ſo ſhun
the danger of the Combate. The Knight laying his hand vpon
one of his companions, ſpake thus to Floraman. Her whom
I hold my honour by, they that haue the ſight of them all foure,
would chuſe my Lady Manſia for his Miſtreſſe: then another
of them ſaide. And my ſelfe with this Knight, wee are altogither
addicted to the ſeruice of Telanſia, and for this cauſe
we abide in this place, to ſée if any Knight that holdeth on the
other part, dare be ſo bold as to come into this place, that wée
may try our fortunes, in gaining the recompence the Ladies
haue ordained for him, who ſhall be ſo happy as to remaine
victor.
                     
                        Floraman (who was greatly enflamed towards theſe Ladies,
remembring ſtill the loſſe of his fuire Altea) entred the
caſtle, where Latrania receiued him very gratiouſly, he excuſing
himſelfe towards her, becauſe he did not his dutie to her
as ſhe paſſed by him in the Forreſt: and I aſſure you, Floraman
iudged the Lady of the Caſtle ſo faire, as hee could willingly
haue offered himſelfe to ſuſtaine her quarrell, but that
he feared leaſt he ſhould be reputed vnfaithfull, vnto his beſt
beloued Altea.
                     
                     There he ſtayed in the Caſtle till the morning, when hée
would haue departed thence, the Lady vnwilling to ſee him,
ſhe was ſo much offended that he had not offered to maintaine
her beautie. Vpon this, Floraman went foorth to the thrée
Knights, when one of them came vnto him, and demanded if
the beauty of Madame Latrania, had 
                           ••
                        onne any power ouer
him: to whom he anſwered, No.
                     
                        
Certainly, ſaid the Knight, I greatly deſire to deale with
thée, that I may giue due correction to thy proud ingratitude.
Gentlemen (anſwere Floraman) I pray you put your ſelues
in a readines, to reuenge the ſhame, which you ſay I haue done
to Madame Latrania, whom I may as well ſerue as you, becauſe
I haue better knowledge of her deſerts then you haue: neuertheleſſe,
ſuch is my humor at this preſent, as I dare not aduenture
my ſelfe on her behalfe.
                     Then I entend (ſaide the Knight) to make you knowe the
offence you haue done vnto her. And ſo he gaue his horſe the
ſpurres againſt Floraman, who (albeit in the Iouſt he loſt one
of his Stirroppes) encountred the Knight ſo valiantly, as hee
ſent him to the ground headlong, ſo aſtoniſhed, as he could not
tell where he was. Which the other two perceiuing, they deſired
him likewiſe to runne with them: Since my Lance is yet
whole and ſound (anſwered Floraman) I am content to doe
you ſo much fauour. Then he ran againſt the ſecond Knight,
ſeruing him like as he had done the firſt, and the third came after
to kéepe them company.
                     The firſt knight being offended that hee was ſo vnhorſed,
deſired Floraman to ſtrike halfe a dozen blowes with him, to
the end he might amend the foile he receiued in the Iouſt. The
Prince of Sardignia ſéeing no excuſe would perſwade the
knight, alighted from his horſe, and hauing drawn his ſword, he
dealt ſo nobly with him, as in ſhort time he perceiued what
great diſhonr he gained, in prouing his valour againſt him: for
he continued ſo roughly in the fight, as the knight was compelled
to ſtep aſide to take a breathing, which made Floraman
giue him theſe words.
                     I beléeue ſir knight, you iudge me as ſufficient to ſerue Latrania
as your ſelfe is. No truely (ſaide the Knight) for it is
not your force, but the beautie of the other, to whom ſhe may
no way equall her ſelfe, that hath brought me into this daungerous
eſtate. I am very well content (anſwered Floraman)
to heare you ſay ſo much, but the greater aduantage ſhould I
haue, if your Lady were preſent to heare you: and I aſſure
you, ſhe hath good occaſion to accept well of you, for that you

haue ſpoken as became a man greatly affected to her.
                     Then beginning afreſh againe, the Knight (though very
faintly) defended himſelfe ſo well as he could. Latrania leaning
in one of the windowes of the Caſtle, ſeeing the great
daunger whereinto the Knight was brought, came downe to
the place where they fought the Combate: and being come before
the Prince Floraman, ſhe deſired him to ſaue the Knightes
life, whereto (at her requeſt) he willingly conſented, ſpeaking
to her in this manner.
                     I would gladly to honour you the more, end the Combate,
but becauſe you thinke it not ſo conuenient, the Knight may
thinke himſelfe highly beholding to you, for that you haue ſaued
his life, which I was thorowly intended hee ſhould looſe,
ſéeing the ſmall regard he made of you, as your ſelfe did heare,
when I let him reſt himſelfe.
                     
                        Latrania gaue him very honourable thanks, and returning
into her Caſtle, ſhe grieued excéedingly, that this good and hardy
Knight could not thinke ſo well of her, as to be her Champion
in her cauſe.
                     
                        Floraman willed the Knight to tell him his name. I promiſe
you (anſwered the Knight) I entend nothing leſſe, for our
Combate was hindred by the Lady, to whom you haue giuen
greater aduantage thereof then to me. Thou haſt reaſon (ſaid
Floraman) to vſe thy ſelfe thus, for that one ought not to be
knowne in theſe affaires, eſpecially, hauing receiued his ſhame
in the preſence of one of theſe Ladies. So, taking his leaue of
the other Knights, he rid away preſently, they being very deſirous
to haue knowne what and who he was.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXXVII.
                     Of that which hapned to certaine other knights, who would
proue the aduenture of theſe foure Ladies.
                     
                        IN the mean while the French Court kept
at the Cittie of Parris, many knights tooke
pleaſure to come thither, the moſt part
whereof, were the affectionate ſeruants of
theſe foure Ladyes, and there they would
practiſe Iouſts, combats, and other honeſt
paſtimes ſuch as amorous perſons are wont
to take delight in. But I aſſure you, the French men themſelues
were not ſo forward in affectiō, for that they were dayly
in the preſence of theſe Ladies: neuertheleſſe, the ſtrange
knights) whom loue conducted thither to ſee them) felt thoſe ſecret
and ſundry aſſaults, which he enforceth them to endure,
who yéeld themſelues obedient to his lawes.
                     Theſe foure Ladies were not a little prowde, to ſee themſelues
ſo eſtéemed, but the knights gaue themſelues moſt on
Torſiaes ſide, becauſe ſhe was not in the Company of the other,
who vſed with their beautie, very gratious entertainement
towards their knights, that they might vſe them with
the greater regard. But Torſia (who iudged her ſelfe more
worthy then the other) ſhe was very ſquemiſh and diſdainefull,
not making account of the trauailes which the Knightes
endured for her ſake, thereby to make her beautie the more honoured
and extolled: for her ſelfe made ſo great eſtimation
thereof, as ſhe iudged that thoſe knights, who aduentured on
her behalfe, were greatly honoured by making proofe of their
valor, in defence of her beautie, and this was the cauſe ſhe was
leſſe ſerued of the French knights, then of other.
                     
                        
But the ſtrange knights, they gaue themſelues altogether
to her ſeruice, deſiring to trie fortune, and knowing there was
no victorie more noble, then that which was moſt doubtfull
in the obtaining. While the knights of the French Court delighted
themſelues to behold, theſe newcome louers, Albayzar
(who came to the caſtle of Almaroll, where he robbed Dramuſiande
of the Princeſſe Miragardaes ſheeld) paſſed by Paris,
deſiring to ſoiorne there for the ſpace of two dayes, at the end
whereof he departed thence, for he would not enter the Combate
with ſuch, as would praiſe theſe Ladies aboue the Princeſſe
of Targiana. Yet he returned againe to the Court, and
would ſée theſe foure Ladies before ſhe went, he not eſtéeming
the knights two Daughters, Florenda and Graciana, whoſe
courteſie did well deſerue, that the knight ſhould enterpriſe
ſomething to their honour, for they were as beautifull as theſe
other foure Ladies, among whom Albayzar gaue the praiſe to
Torſia, ſo that her beautie beſt contented him, which was the
cauſe, that in all places where he came, he prayſed her aboue the
other thrée.
                     Albeit ſéeing the French knight were ſo affected to theſe ladies,
as they made no occount of his ſwéete friend Targiana, he
trauailed thence to Conſtantinople: where he enterpriſed to
maintaine againſt the knights of the Emperours Court, that
tge Princeſſe Targiana excelled in beautie, all the Ladyep and
Damoſels in the world.
                     At the ſame time Palmerin of England, and the prince Florendos,
paſſed by the French Court, and ſtaying there, they had
ſo great deſire to approoue themſelues againſt Albayzar.
Dramuſiande likewiſe paſſed by ſoone after, being very willing
to ſée theſe foure Ladies i but the intent he had againſt Albayzar,
would not ſuffer him to goe hither. And I aſſure you, had
it not beene for the enterpriſe of Albayzar, this aduenture in
France had bene as worthy of commendation, as the noble
proweſſe ſhewen at the Caſtle of Dramuſiande in England,
and that of Miragarda in Spaine.
                     
                     While many Knight trauailed to ſée the Prince Albayzar,
Pompides, and Blandidon (who iudged themſelues to be

Brethren) came to the Court of France, where they thought
ſo well of the beautie of theſe Ladies, as (ſetting all other remembrance
of loue aſide) they t
                           •
                        ied the Combate, wherein
their liues were brought to great danger.
                     Theſe two knights renowned among them that ſtayed in
the French Court, were both of them ſo inueigled with the
beautie of Torſia, as they diſcourſed to each other their intents▪
beganne to mallice one another cruelly: whereby they
ſhewed the ſmall iudgement of them, who called Loue by the

                           〈…〉
                        , ſeeing that ſo many miſfortunes tooke their originall
by him.
                     
                        Pompides conquered with the onely regard of Torſia, ſéeing
that Blandidon would not giue him place by entreatance, concluded
to trie the Combate with him: agréeing thus betwéene
themſelues that hee that was the conquerer, ſhould remaine
there to defend the Ladies beautie. Blandidon, who was as
deſirous as he could, to purchaſe the acceptable fauour of Torſia,
agréed to enter the Combate, vnder the ſame condition
which Pompides oppoſed: and that theſe two Knights might
the ſooner execute their willes, they came and humbled themſelues
before the Quéene, in whoſe preſence Pompides ſpake
in this manner to Torſia.
                     
                     Madame, this knight and I who are brethren, and ſo conquered
by the grace and beautie wherewith you are accompanied,
as notwithſtanding, both nature and friendſhip) we intend
to make proofe at armes, which of vs twaine ſhall be iudged
worthy to be receiued in your ſeruice: deſiring you humbly
not to be offended at what we haue enterpriſed, and that
you would vouchſafe to entertaine him for your ſeruant, whom
fortune ſhall fauour in atchieuing the victory.
                     Great and ſudden admiration was among them all, hearing
the braue attempts of theſe two Knights, but eſpecially, the
other thrée Ladies, who ſéeing Torſia ſo highly preferred, beganne
to be diſmayed and changed their colour: which Torſia
diſſembling, although ſhee had no knowledge of their
ſecret enuie, was iocond and pleaſant to her ſelfe as could be,
then caſting her eyes on the Quéene, to whom ſhe made ſigne

as though ſhe would anſwer, ſhe ſpake to Pompides and Blandidon
in this manner.
                     It may be ſéene by you (Gentlemen) that the merits of theſe
thrée Ladies, hath not as yet gained any knowledge of your
valour, ſéeing you enterpriſe to hazard your ſelues together for
one ſelfe-thing: wherefore I admoniſh you, that it is méete
you ſhould defend the cauſe one after another, for otherwiſe
you goe contrary to our determinations, and then he that
can be ſo happy to vanquiſh the knights, that come on the
behalfe of theſe other Ladies, ſhall be iudged worthy of that
honourable reward, méete for ſuch a famous and noble conquerour.
                     Theſe two Knightes were indifferently ſatiſfied with the
anſwere of Torſi
                              •
                           , wherevpon many knights that deſired to
ſée her, went and preſented themſelues in the field. The firſt of
them was Rupert Roſſelin, a knight of good eſtimation, who
maintained the quarrell of Telancia: Brician of Rochfort,
who loued Manſia, and the Countie Brialte, the affectionate
ſeruant to Latrania.
                     
                     
                        Pomdides and Blandidon came no ſooner into the Parke,
but they entred both together, becauſe Torſia had not declared
which of them ſhould enter firſt, to maintaine her beautie againſt
the other Knights: therefore they deſired the Quéene,
that it might pleaſe her to vnderſtand the will of Torſia, who
ordained that he which was firſt diſcloſed to his companion,
ſhould enter firſt into the field. Then Blandidon (who was
diſcouered at the beginning to Pompides) had the meane to
trie himſelfe firſt: wherefore, without any more tarying, he
entred the middeſt of the field, at the entrance whereof, the
Ladies were placed very ſtately. Florenda and Graciana ſhewed
themſelues maruellous rich in beautie: but they were nothing
pleaſant, becauſe neuer a knight would eſtéeme of them
in his proweſſe. Brician of Rochfort, who prepared himſelfe
firſt to encounter with Blandidon, regarding Manſia (whom
he iudged worthy of the chiefeſt victorie (ſpake ſomewhat anangrily
to himſelfe thus.
                     Faire miſtres, I may thinke this enterpriſe not worthy to be

preſented before you: yet ſomewhat doe I content my ſelfe,
who remaining victor, you will not diſdaine to call me your
ſeruant: Blandidon who earneſtly deſired to witneſſe his
bountie in the preſence of Torſia, contemplated her in his ſpirit
thus.
                     I doe not demand (Madome) any fauour at your hands for
receiuing now ſuch a benefit of you, I ſhall not purchaſe any
glory in conquering my enemy. Then ran he couragiouſly againſt
Brician of Rochfort, and encounted with him ſo brauely,
as their Launces flew vp in pieces, yet neither of them in
danger to be vnhorſed: which Brician perceiuig (who was
reputed for a good Knight at armes, hée deſired Blandidon to
breake once more with him, to which requeſt he made no refuſall,
but ran the ſecond time, and met Brician with ſuch force,
as he was conſtrained to forſake his ſtirrops, & caſt his armes
about the necke of his horſe, to ſaue himſelfe from falling to
the ground, and Blandidon was caſt on the croupper of his
horſe. After theſe two knights had taken their ſeates againe,
they prepared themſelues with the third Staffe, which was
diſcharged by Brician ſo ſtrongly, as his horſe and himſelfe
tumbled on the ground and Blandidon was in danger to haue
borne him company. But he ſéeing his enemy had drawne his
ſword, alighted from his horſe to receiue him: and I aſſure you
their Combate was eſtéemed one of the moſt dangerous that
euer was ſéene in that Countrey.
                     
                        Brician of Rochfort, deſirous that his miſtreſſe Manſia ſhold
perceiue how willing he was to purchaſe her loue, and Blandidon,
vanquiſhed with the beauty of her, who cauſed him to hazard
ſo great danger: redoubled their ſtrokes ſo fiercely vpon
one another, as at length Brician, ſore weakened in fight, and
depriued of the beauty of his Lady, fell downe to the ground.
Blandidon preſently tooke off his Helet, and made offer to
part his head from his ſhoulders, except he would confeſſe Torſia
to excell the other three in beauty: but while Brician lay in
this extremity, one of the Maidens of honour cried to Blandidon,
that the Ladies adiudged him the victory euer Brician of
Rochfort, who was caried to his lodging, & Blandidon hauing

loſt very much blood by the wounds he receiued, was compelled
to withdraw himſelfe, hauing not the power to endure
what he had attempted. For he that ſhould remaine victor,
ought to maintaine the combat for the ſpace of one day, againſt
the other knight that came, and the vanquiſher (if they were
ſo fortunate) they ſhould be bound (being in any likely diſpoſition)
to beginne the Combate afreſh againſt the other three
Knights whom he ſhould ſubdue, before he might haue the
praiſe of the victorie.
                     
                        Pompides being ſorry to ſée Blandidon ſo wounded, was
(neuertheleſſe) glad, that the honour of the day happened to his
ſide, and vpon this he perſwaded himſelfe, that the Ladies ſeruice
would fall to his ſhare. The next day following, he fayled
not to preſent himſelfe in the field, where he had not long
ſtayed, before Rupert Raſſelin entered, being in blacke armour
croſſe ſtrickt with little fillets of Gold, and his Shield (which
was of the Indian colour) the God was figured, who brought
all other vnder his obeyſance. This knight was mounted on
a goodly roane Courſer, and ſo ſoone as he heheld Telanſia, who
was very faire, and of whom he was greatly affectionate, he
ſpake to himſelfe in this manner.
                     Who is hee that either can or may iniurie mée, hauing your
ſéemely ſelfe before me? Therefore I pray you good Madame,
that you would vouchſafe to accept his loyal heart, who wil neuer
reefuſe to doo you ſeruice, eſpecially, if he may know in what
to pleaſure you: and perſwade your ſelfe, that I will ſoone diſcountenance
this Knight, who maintained the beautie of Torſia,
to excell yours. Pompides knowing well by the behauiour
of Rupert Roſſelin, the little content this poore Louer receyued
beholding the beautie of Telanſia: but he was ſomewhat offended,
that Torſia was not as yet come to the place where
the combate ſhould be fought, and being paſſioned for this
cauſe, he ſpake to Roſſelin in this order
                     Thou muſt remember knight, that thou art not come hither
to waſte the time in contēplating of her beautie, who tranſformeth
thée from all ſenſe and reaſon. I perceiue well (anſwered
Roſſelin) that Torſia repoſeth but little hope in your valour,

becauſe ſhe diſdaineth to honour you with his preſence. You
are ſo full of words (ſaid Pompides) that if I ſhould ſpend the
time in giuing eare to you, the day would ſoone be gone, without
trying either the Iouſt or combate. So, without any more
words, he ran againſt Roſſelin, encountring him in the middeſt
of the carrire, ſo worthily, and very hardly he recouered
himſelfe from falling, Pompides being nothing at all mooued.
Roſſelin tooke a new ſtaffe, wherewith he tryed his Fortune
the ſecond time, when, Pompides méeting him directly, brake
his ſtaffe nobly on him, and comming together, their Horſes
fought ſo one with another, as Pompides Horſe (which was
not of ſuch ſtrength as the other) fel down in vnder his maſter:
which Roſſelin perceiuing, aduanced himſelfe to him, but he
had recouered himſelfe, and ſtood ready to receiue him at the
point of the ſword. Then they buckled together, and the combat
was ſo cruell betwéen them, as in ſhort time the fleſh was
ſéene through Roſſelins armour: but he made ſemblance as
though he were nothing moued, becauſe he would not haue
his Ladies make any doubt of his proweſſe, and ſo earneſtly
he followed his intent, that Pompides had as ſmall aduantage
as himſelfe. Neuertheleſſe, his heart was more liuely, and
himſelfe more nimble and quicke then Roſſolin, who had ſuffered
ſo many ſharpe ſtrokes, and was ſo weake and wearie,
as he was enforced to intreate Pompides to let him take a
little reſt, I am content (anſwered Pompides) to let you pauſe
a while, to the end you may the better trauaile your ſelfe, in
beholding the beautie of Telanſia: conſidered alſo, the ſmall fauour
that Torſia beſtowes on me, cannot hinder me from vanquiſhing
of you. It is moreouer ſéene (ſaid Roſſelin) that it
is great danger to fight againſt men depriued of hope, but whē
one remaineth conqueror ouer ſuch perſons, the honour of the
victory giueth them the larger contentment. When he had
ſpoken what pleaſed him, Pompides and he beganne to combate
againe, hacking and hewing one another ſo cruelly, as
within a while Roſſelin was ſo ſore laboured, as he was altogether
vnable to harme his enemy. Pompides ſeeing himſelfe
in but little better eſtate then Roſſelin, and doubting leaſt the

Combate would endure too long, he caught him in his armes,
and threw him violently againſt the ground, being hardly able
to ſuſtaine himſelfe from falling on him: but the remembrance
of the victory made him take the more courage, wherevpon
he made proffer to cut off the head of Roſſelin, which the
Ladies would not agrée vnto. Then was Roſſelin caried foorth
of the fielde very dangerouſly wounded, and Pompides (for the
greater honour) was conducted to the Chamber where Blandidon
lay, where Chirugions looked dillingently to their
wounds, they being now as great friendes as euer they were,
hauing the one of them as good aſſurance of Torſiaes fauour, as
the other.
                     The King himſelfe came very louingly to viſite them, and
after he had knowledge of them, he was greatly offended that
they had not béene knowne before him in his Court: but the
Knights excuſed themſelues by their Ladies, whoſe beauties
cauſed them to trauaile thither, alwayes deſiring to be vnknowne:
The Queene was very carefull to haue them well regarded,
during the time they remained there in the Court: but
after they were in good ſtate of health, they humbly tooke their
leaue of the King, the Queene, and Madame Torſia, Blandidon
taking his way to Conſtantinople, and Pompides into
Scotland, where he eſpouſed the Princeſſe Armiſia, according
as I haue declared already to you. For you ſhall vnderſtand
that this French aduenture continued, from the time that Albayzar
ſhewed his proweſſe in Conſtantinople, hauing in his
cuſtody the Princeſſe Miragardaes Shield, vntill the inſtant
that the Knight of the Sauage man (accompanied with Arlencea
and the damoſels) returned from the king of Spaines court,
and paſſing through the Realme of France, was the firſt that
by his noble proweſſe attained this aduenture, as you ſhall
hereafter heare: wherevpon many ſecretly enuied him, whereof
he made no account at all, becauſe he had ſo well made his
Knightly behauiour knowne to the Ladies of the French
Court.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXXVIII.
                     Of that which happened to the Knight of the Sauage man,
in proouing the aduenture theſe foure Ladies had ordained.
                     
                        AS the Knight of the Sauage man was conducting
Arlencea towards Conſtantinople,
to ſhewe her his lady Leonarda, the
faire Princeſſe of Thrace, he was aduertiſed
by the Quéene of Nauarre and Dragonalt,
of the aduenture which the foure
French Ladies had ordained. And for that
the report went of them, to be maruellouſly endued with beauty,
he tooke his way into the French Court, which as then lay
in Burgandie, and drawing néere to the Citie of Sonier (now
called Digeon (ſomewhat towards the euening he entred a forreſt,
wherein was a Monaſterie of Nunnes, which had a goodly
riuer paſſing a long by it, vpon the banke whereof hee perceiued
certaine tents erected, and by them ſate diuerſe Ladies
and Damoſels, making Garlands of flowres vnder the
gréene trées, whereon were hanged many ſhieldes, which were
defended by certaine Knightes that were néere at hand, repoſing
themſelues within the tents. It ſéemeth (ſaid the Knight
of the Sauage man to Arlencea) that wee ſhall not paſſe here
ſo eaſily as we did make account.
                     When he had ſo ſaid, he eſpied néere him an ancient Knight,
of whom he requeſted to know, what honourable perſonages
they were that recreated themſelues in that place: Sir (anſwered
the ancient Knight) it is the Quéene, who came abroad
to ſollace her ſelfe with the King, hée being ſomewhat
higher in the Forreſt with his Courtly attendants, hunting
the wilde Hart. I pray you then tell me (quoth the Knight

of the Sauage man) for what occaſion are the Knights armed
that kéepe her company. You ſhall vnderſtand Sir (ſaide the
ancient Knight, that they are ſeruants vnto foure Ladies,
who kéepe themſelues in this manner, to aduenture the Combate
with him▪ that dare aduance himſelfe to prooue the aduenture:
but I pray you Sir be not offended that I part ſo
ſoone from you, for I ſee I muſt away, and ſo the ancient knight
left him.
                     I ſée well (quoth the knight of the Sauage man) that I muſt
prepare my ſelfe for the Iouſt. Wherevpon, becauſe he would
not be knowne, he commanded the Eſquire to couer his ſhield
with ſomewhat, and in the meane while he ranne his horſe vp
and downe, finding him nimble and quicke enough. After his
Shield was couered, he rode on toward the Tetes: but when
the Ladies ſaw him come, and a Damoſell of ſuch a ſtreat ſtature
with him, they began all to laugh heartely. The Knight of
the Sauage man had no ſooner beheld them, but not willing to
ſerue them all, then ſtaying his horſe, that hee might the better
contemplate their diuine faces, a French Damoſell (by the
commandement of the other Ladies) approched to the Prince
with theſe words.
                     You giue ſufficient example Sir Knight) of the ſmall affection
you beare to Ladies, in maintaining of whoſe ſweete
and delicate complexions, theſe Knights haue placed their
Shields on this Trée, to defend the paſſage, if you dare be ſo
bold as to trie the aduenture. I pray you faire Damoſell (anſwered
the Knight of the Sauage man) to let mee knowe
the conditions which theſe Knightes obſerue in garding this
Valley: for if ſo bée I iudge them any thing dangerous, it
were better for me to depart, then trouble them, for I aſſure
you the Lady you ſée in my company, would be very loth to ſee
me in any pe
                           •
                        ill. I perceiue then (ſaid the Damoſell) you are
one of thoſe Knights, who caries their Armor rather to make
a ſhowe, then to hazard your perſon in any doubtfull aduenture,
neuertheleſſe, I will let you vnderſtand the cuſtome vſed
in this place. It is ſo Syr, that the Queene of Fraunce,
(who is within theſe Tentes) hath foure Ladies in her company,

who are reputed to excell all others in Beauty, and they
are deſtrous to know, which of them may beſt make claime of
this Title aboue the other thrée. For the tryall heereof they
haue ordained, that the Knight, who will ieopard himſelfe in the
Aduenture, ſhall take a viewe of them one after another, and
hauing made his choyſe of one of theſe foure, he muſt enter the
Combate with the thrée Knights, who are ſeruants to the other
Ladyes: if ſo be his Fortune be ſo good to conquere them, hee
ſhall be called her Knight, on whoſe behalfe he entred the Combate:
which honor (I tell you) is highly eſtéemed in this Countrey,
becauſe each of the ladies deſerue moſt eſpeciall prefermēt.
Now Syr, if your ſtomacke be ſo good, you may haue libertie to
ſee them, and they will not diſdain to behold the proweſſe wherwith
you are accompanyed. I promiſe you Damoſell (ſaid the
knight of the Sauadge-man) I would not hazard my perſon for
theſe 4. onely, but as well for all the reſt that are in y• Quéenes
companie: Marry firſt I will goe doo my dutie to her Maieſty,
and after I haue ſéene the Ladyes, I will ſo behaue my ſelfe, as
I doubt not but to be well eſtéemed of all before I depart. Then
hée alighted from his Horſe, and ſhewed himſelfe ſo reuerent to
the Quéene, and her Ladyes, as they remained greatly contented.
Then the Damoſell ſhewed him the foure Ladies, and after
he had well viewed them all, ſhee deſired him to tell her his
minde. The Knight of the Sauadge man caſting his eyes firſt
on Māſia, her Beautie ſo well contented him, as he thought to
reſt there, but the Decrée of the Aduenture commaunded him to
paſſe further, and looke on Telanſia, whoſe preſence did ſo abaſh
him, that he knew not to which of thoſe twaine be ſhuld ſubmit
himſelfe. When Latrania came before him, his affection did
ſo iuggle with his iudgement, as he could not tell well what to
ſay, yet were th
                           •
                        y all forgotten. Vpon the ſight of Torſia, for
her beautie ſo enflamed him in euery vaine, that he gaue her the
title of Beauty aboue them all. But hee had ſuch ſlender ſtabilitie
in his Loue, as looke how forgetfull he was of them, one
after another, euen ſo he failed not to be the like in iudgement:
ſo, hauing bene a long while ere hee made his anſwere, at laſt
he ſpake to the Damoſell in this manner.
                     
                        
Faire Damoſell, you haue brought mee into ſo great perplexitie,
as I am almoſt willing to forſake an aduenture ſo
dangerous: neuertheleſſe, I am content to enter the Combate
for the honour of Manſia, and if Fortune fauour me with
the victory, I will attend other thrée on the behalfe of Telanſia,
with whoſe fauour I will enterpriſe with three more, for Latrania:
then turning to Torſia, he ſaid.
                     And if I eſcape the danger for all theſe on your iuſt quarrell
I will approoue my ſelfe, not onely againſt thrée, but againſt all
that dare come againſt me, to let you vnderſtand, what little
account I make of my life, being thus honoured, to imploy my
ſelfe in your ſeruice.
                     Thoſe Ladies were greatly abaſhed, hearing the braue offer
the knight of the Sauage man had made, and ſuch bruite
was preſently ſpread here of abroade, as the king left the Chaſe,
and returned to the Tents, where the Ladies rehearſed to him
the intent of the knight. Arnodes, who was a very wiſe and
diſcrete Prince, knowing the enterpriſe to be very dangerous,
laboured to haue him performe the promiſe he had made to the
Ladies.
                     The Knight of the Sauage man made his humble reuerence
to the king, afterward he mounted on horſebacke, ſpeaking
thus againe to the Damoſell that brought him thither.
If theſe foure Ladies be contented that I ſhall ſerue them, I
will let them ſée, how willingly I will venture my life for
their ſakes, but ſince you haue tolde the recompence for him,
that ſhall be ſo happy to ende the aduenture, I will not paſſe
any further before I declare to you, with what condition I
will enter the Combate againſt their ſeruants, which is, that
they ſhall grant me but one gift, if ſo be the victory happen on
my ſide.
                     And to the end you ſhall not bee ignorant of my intent,
I will take the paines to diſcourſe it to you. You ſhall vnderſtand,
that I am determined to guard the paſſage in this
Valley, againſt all knights that dare preſume to paſſe by,
during the ſpace of eight dayes, and if Fortune allowe me fauourable
countenance in the victorie againſt their Knighes,

that none of the Ladies ſhall depart hence, but if my miſhappe
chance otherwiſe, they may depart at their owne pleaſure:
Latrania vpon this, ſpake thns to the other Ladyes.
                     This Knight (me thinkes) is deſirous to deale as the knight
of the Sauage man did, who not long ſince conducted nine Ladies
in his company through the Realme of Spalne. By my
faith (ſaid Telanſia) we ought to grant what he demaundeth,
becauſe we ſhall haue the better knowledge of his valour. I
am content (anſwered Manſia) vpon this condition, that he
bring vs to the Caſtle of Almaroll, and enter the Combate
with him that kéepes the princeſſe Miragardaes Shield, on the
behalfe of one of vs foure: this I force not to doe, if ſo be he preuaile
in the Combate againſt o
                           •
                        r knights. I pray you (ſaide
Torſia) change this fond humour, for he is more liberall to promiſe▪
then all you are or can beſt grant.
                     Truely it contenteth me very much (anſwered the Knight
of the Sauage man) that you know my minde ſo well, but me
thinks Madame Torſia, it is more then reaſon that you ſhould
refuſe any thing, yet would I be loath to turne againe to the
Caſtle of Almaroll. I pray you Syr (quoth the Damoſell to
whom he ſpake firſt) haue you ſéene the Princeſſe Miragarda,
and conquered the Knight that k
                           •
                        pt her Shielde? Surely Lady
(anſwered the Knight of the Sauage man) I haue ſeene
Miragarda, and Combated againſt the Knight that kept her
Shield, but I was not ſo fortunate in power, as to ouercome
him. How then (ſaide the Damoſell) dare you take the hardineſſe
vpon you, to make ſuch a large promiſe to theſe Ladies,
that you would not faile to vanquiſh their Knights, and could
not preuaile againſt that one knight? Marcy (quoth he) for that
the preſence of theſe Ladies, and the affection I beare them,
ſhall be ſufficient for me to enter the Combate, and conquer
all the Knights that dare meddle with me. I ſee well (ſaide the
Damoſell) your loue is too full of incertaintie: then turning to
the Ladies, ſhe ſaid, they might well agrée to his requeſt, and for
the great deſire ſhe had to ſee the knight of the Sauage mans behauiour,
ſhe deſired the king to giue his conſent.
                     
                        Manſia was ſo highly fauoured of the King Arnedes, and

he, beſide, ſo willing to ſée the paſtime, gaue them all franke
and frée licence: whereupon the foure Ladyes graunted him
to kéepe the paſſage, and they would accompany him during the
eight dayes: then came the Damoſell to the knight of the Sauage
man, with theſe words. I haue ſo much preuailed, Sir
knight, as theſe foure Ladies haue giuen conſent fo your requeſt:
wherefore, I greatly deſire to ſee, if your déeds will proue
conformable to your braue words.
                     The knight of the Sauage man hearing what the Damoſell
ſaid, came Arlencea, deſiring her not to reueale who he was,
and comming backe againe, he ſet downe his order thus. The
firſt Iouſt, quoth he, ſhall be for Manſia: the ſecond for Telanſia:
the third for Latrania: and the fourth ſhall be for the honour
of Torſia. I perceiue then, ſaid the king Arnedes, the
knight is willing to accompliſh his promiſe. Then the Countie
Girarde, deſirous to make knowne the good will he bare
Telanſia, would néeds take the field firſt, and encountring the
knight of the Sauage man, he met him with ſuch force, as he
was ſent to the earth with his héeles vpward, ſo farre out of
remembrance with himſelfe, as he was faine to be caried forth
of the field: at which ſight the king was maruellouſly abaſhed,
in that the Countie Gerard was reputed on of the beſt
Knights of his Court. Manſia beganne to thinke, that in her
name all the thrée knights ſhould be vanquiſhed, and the honor
of the day ſhould be adiudged to her, becauſe the Prince would
be ſo ouerlaboured, as he could not haue the power to vanquiſh
the other thrée knights that came after.
                     The Countie Gerard was no ſooner carried out of the field,
but Brialte the ſeruant of Latrania, gaue his horſe the ſpurres,
and burſt his Launce brauely one the Prince, but he gaue him
ſuch a friendly welcome, as he was conſtrained to fall to the
ground, with one of his armes broken, whereupon, he was caried
forth of the field to the Countie of Gerard. Manſia was ſo
glad of this, as ſhe could not hide it, but they that ſate againſt
her did eaſily perceiue her ſecret reioycing: but the King Arnedes
ſeeing the dangerous hurt Brialte had receiued, beganne
to doubt, that the ſtraunge knight would iniurie all the other.
                     
                        
Then Aliart of Normandie (being ſeruant to Torſia) ran and
brake his Lance gallantly on the ſtrange knights Shield, but
he was ſent to keepe his fellow company: whereas he was ſo
offended, as he ſtarted vp againe preſently, and drawing his
ſword, came marching to his enemy, who fearing leaſt the
knight would haue ſlaine his horſe, lept beſide him, caſting his
eyes vpon Torſia, making ſhow that he was very ſorie for the
foile the knight had receiued vnder her name. But yet to acquite
himſelfe of his promiſe, he charged Aliart ſo roughly, as in
ſhort time he tumbled at his feet, yet would not he offer to take
his life from him: when the Damoſell came to him, granting
him the victory for the thrée dayes.
                     I am ſorie (ſaide the ſtrange Knight) that you ſhould take
ſuch paines Lady. I ſée well (anſwered the Damoſell) that you
witneſſe in your déedes, what you promiſed in words at the beginning.
The knight of the Sauage man (who counted himſelfe
to be called the ſtrange knight) mounted on his horſe againe,
and taking a Launce, he came to the place where the Ladies
ſate, entring into theſe ſpéeches.
                     You ſée me now ready Ladies, to enter the Field vnder the
name of Madame Telanſia, whoſe beautie is ſufficient to make
me remaine victor ouer all the Knightes that dare ſpeake againſt
her: and you Lady Manſia, doe not you forget what you
haue promiſed mee, ſince you ſée me willing to diſcharge the
bond wherein I haue tyed my ſelfe.
                     The king Arnedes, well noting the valour of the ſtrange
knight, deuiſed how he might haue knowledge of him: for he
did not thinke him to bee one of the Prince Don Edwardes
Sonnes, becauſe then he iudged, he would not haue concealed
himſelfe from the Quéene: beſide, he was aduertiſed, that Palmerin
of England had giuen ouer following ſuch aduentures,
and that the knight of the Sauage man, was in the realme of
Spaine.
                     
                     While he was thus imagining who this ſtraunge knight
ſhould be, Brian of Burgundie, ſeruant to Manſia, came into
the field, very gallantly armed, and bearing for his deuiſe
in his ſhield, Hope crowned with a garland of flowers, in a

Field of Azure: he pauſing a little, and looking ſtedfaſtly on
his Lady Manſia, parled to himſelfe in this manner. I pray
you Madame, not to make any doubt of the great proweſſe
of this ſtrange knight, in that he could not faile of the victory,
maintaining your ſingular and heauenly beautie, but now that
he preſumeth to change you for another, I doubt not to make
him looſe, what he ſéekes ſo gladly to purchaſe, ſo that the victory
ſhall be adiudged onely to you, and he that hath the power to
winne it, will remaine yours in dutie while he liueth: the
ſtrange knight came to him with theſe ſpéeches.
                     Haue you done ſir knight your ſecret fancies? I perceiue you
are one of them, that ſéekes to content your ſelfe with ſilent diſcourſes,
but I truſt to ſend you after your companions, by the
meane of Telanſia.
                     
                     I kn
                           •
                        w not (ſaide Brian of Burgandie) what the ende will
be: ſo couching his Lance, add giuing a ſigne to the ſtrange
Knight, they ranne together couragiouſly, and brake their
Lances with ſuch force, as Brian of Burgundie was vnhorſed,
and very ſors hurt, yet would he haue diſſembled it, and entred
the combat with the ſword, but the foure Ladies were ſo afraid
that the ſtrange knight would haue ſlaine him, as they cauſed
him to procéede no further.
                     The king was very much diſpleaſed, ſéeing the knights of
his court ſo handled, yet were they themſelues willing to continue
the Iouſt: whereupon Monſier of Artois ſeruant to Latrania,
(who would not waſt the time in néedleſſe words) cald
to the ſtrange knight to defend himſelfe. I would iudge, ſayd
the ſtrange knight, that the beautie of your Lady ſhould cauſe
you to regard her ſomewhat: but ſince I ſée you repoſe more
aſſurance in your owne ſtrength, then her beautie, whereby
you might enioy moſt hope, come on and welcome. Then ſetting
their lances in their reſts, they encountred together brauely,
and albeit they failed for to breake their ſtaues, Monſieuer of
Artois; receiued ſuch a forcible arrant, as he was throwne in
the duſt, ſo ſore ſhaken that he could ſcantly mooue himſelfe.
The ſtrange knight caught hold on his Helmet, and pauſing a
while, he ſpake to Manſia in this manner.
                     
                        
Behold Lady, I giue you this Knight, deſiring you to let him
be carrryed foorth of the Field: Manſia cauſed two Knights to
conduct him to his Lodging, but Brian of Burgundie, being very
much offended, he would not depart before he had fought the
Combat: whereto the Ladyes would not conſent: Beſide, the
King began to be angrie with him, by whoſe commaundement
he was reputed among the vanquiſhed. After that Brian was
departed the place, Briſar of Gennes the ſeruant of Torſia, preſented
himſelfe very richly Armed, not making ſhewe of any
ſpéech towards his Lady, for that the déeds of the ſtrange knight
(whome he thought long to deale withall) made him ſo moued
as he would not ſpeake: which the ſtrange knight perceyuing,
he ſpake to him as followeth.
                     I pray you Sir to contemplate her beautie a little, for whoſe
ſake you are ſo bold to enter the Combate: to the end her countenance
may cauſe you to imagine the griefe leſſe, if fortune direct
herſelf againſt you. I know well (anſwered Briſar of Gennes)
that you would gladly ſee in mée ſome ſhew of feare or fainting,
becauſe you would thereby magnifie your déeds the more:
but prouide your ſelfe for mee, and aſſure your ſelfe, that ſuch is
the hope I repoſe in my Ladies fauour, as I doubt not ere I go,
but to vnhorſe you.
                     Vpon this, theſe two Knights met together with ſuch force,
as Briſar of Gennes brake his ſtaffe, though not able to remoue
his aduerſary, who encountred him ſo brauely, as he was ſent to
the ground with his Saddle betweene his legges: and as he offered
to ſtrike him with his Sworde, the Damoſell came and
ſtepped betwéene them, ſo that the ſtrange knight could not execute
his intent.
                     The King Arnedes was extreamely grieued, ſéeing the
victorie come ſo faſt to the diſaduantage of his Knights, and the
ſtraunge Knight beeing very glad, to ſee Fortune fauour him
ſo well, praunced till he came before Latiania, to whome he
vſed this Language. Hee that hath the power to performe
what hee promiſeth to your Companions, hath no leſſe force to
quite himſelfe to you, whome I iudge as beautyfull as any of
them.
                     
                        
Then caſt he his eyes on Madame Manſia, whoſe griefe hee
might eaſily perceyue, becauſe ſhee ſaw her victory equall with
Lady Telanſia: and Latrania could not aſſure her ſelfe on their
ſ
                           •
                        rength that followed, becauſe ſhee feared that ouermuch trauell,
would weaken the ſtrength of the ſtrange Knight.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXXIX.
                     ¶How the ſtrange Knight entred the Fielde, to Iouſt
vnder the name of Latrania.
                     
                        WHen the ſtraunge Knight was entred the
field againe, he came to Arlencea, and talked
with her: but Gomer of Benoit ſtayed
him, letting him vnderſtand that the Day
paſſed apace, wherfore on the behalfe of his
Miſtreſſe Telanſia, he bade the Iouſt to the
ſtrange Knight, who entertained him in the
middeſt of the way ſo gallantly, as he was

                           •
                        aine to kéepe the other Knightes companie. But becauſe hee
was a Knight of good courage, hee recouered himſelfe quickly,
and drew his Sword, which when the ſtraunge Knight beheld,
hee forſooke his Horſe, and ſaluted him with ſuch cruell ſtrokes,
as that the Ladyes were glad to ſend the Damoſell to ſeparate
them aſunder, fearing leaſt the ſtraunge Knight would haue
ſlaine them.
                     The Damoſell hauing ſent Gomer away, ſéeing the ſtrange
Knight ſo pleaſant and iocond, as though he had not laboured
himſelfe at all, demaunded of him, when he would thinke himſelfe
to haue trauelled enough. Marrie quoth he) when theſe
Ladies (for whome I commit my ſelfe to the daunger) thinke
themſelues to haue neuer a Knight left to doe them ſeruice. I
pray you then (ſaide the Damoſell) that you would tell mee

who you are, that I may make report of you to the King, who
cannot be quiet, for the deſire he hath to know you.
                     My name Ladie (quoth he) is of ſo ſmall eſtimation, that I
am much aſhamed a Knight ſo vnexpert at Armes as my ſelfe,
ſhould be diſcouered to his Highneſſe. Not ſo (anſwered the
Damoſell) for your valour is ſuch, as may well abaſh the beſt
Knight that we haue ſéene.
                     After the Damoſell was gone forth of the Lyſts, the ſtrange
Knight mounted on his 
                           •
                        ſquyres horſe, becauſe his owne was
very much trauelled: but the King reioycing to ſée him ſo victorious,
and pittying he ſhould be deſtitute of a Horſe, commaunded
one of his Eſquiers to bring him the beſt and moſt aſſured
Horſe in his ſight.
                     The ſtrange knight humbly thanking the King for his gift,
mounting on his backe, attending the knight that ſhould next
enter, which was Benteier of Berlande, the ſeruant of Manſia:
but ſuch was his miſfortune, as he was vnhorſed likewiſe, very
ſore hurt in the fall. And becauſe he was vnable to helpe himſelfe,
the king commanded he ſhould be carried out of the field,
ſtill practiſing how he might know the ſtrange knight: who rid
on to the end of the race, and ſéeing neuer a knight ready to
Iouſt, he ſate ſtill in a great ſtudy.
                     Then came Arlencea to him, and willed him to remember
his buſineſſe, for there was a Knight ready to trie him. You
haue done me a great pleaſure madame (anſwered the ſtrange
knight) for I was in ſuch a mauellous conceite, as I little regarde
what affairrs I had in hand. Then gaue he his Horſe
the ſpurres againſt Bertrand of Beaumont, the amorous ſeruant
of Torſia, who ſped according as his fellowes did, and
was likewiſe carryed forth of the field, afterward he came before
the Ladies, ſpeaking to them in this manner.
                     You may ſée (ſaire Ladyes) the great afftction I haue in you
in that I ſuſtaine the quarrell of you all together, and I remaine
conquerour ouer your ſeruants, for that their good will
is not of ſuch good eſtimation to you, as the loyall and vnfained
loue I beare to you, which makes me ſo forward in you ſeruice:
neuertheleſſe, I ſée you ſo diſpleaſant for the miſfortune

of your friend, as I iudge I ſhall haue but ſlender recompence
for my labour. Then came he to madame Torſia, ſaluting her
with theſe ſpéeches. If I had acquited my ſelfe (Madame) towards
theſe Ladies, what thinke you ſwéete miſtreſſe I would
doe for you? I promiſe you, I will behaue my ſelfe in ſuch ſort,
as you ſhall ſay your ſelfe, I excéede my promiſe.
                     So concluding, he returned to the Iouſt, wherein he had ſo
good fortune, as hee vnhorſed fiue Knights together: their
names were Alteo of Frieze, Dirdell of Burdeaux, Gualter of
Dordonne, Danes of Picardie, Richard of Toloſe. The King
Arnedes knew now what to ſay, ſéeing the beſt knights of his
Court ſo diſcomfited, therefore he would haue had the ſtrange
knight procéede no further: whereat he was ſomewhat offended,
and fearing the King would not ſuffer the Ladies to accompliſh
what they had promiſed, hee entred into theſe ſpéechées.
Your Highneſſe is already acquainted with the conditions,
whereon I preſume to enter the Iouſt, therfore me thinks
it is more then reaſon to deny me iuſtice, eſpecially I being a
ſtranger: conſidering I haue fulfilled what I promiſed the Ladies,
whom I deſire you to cōmand to ſatiſfie my paines. I perceiue
(ſaid the King) you will not forget what is your right to
haue: but I would know with what intent you ſéeke to accompany
thoſe ladies, whō I can hardly affoord to be ſent from
my Court. If it pleaſe your Maieſtie (anſwered the ſtrange
Knight) there was no ſuch doubts made to me before I tryed
the Iouſt, therfore I take it very vnkindly, that your highneſſe
ſhould depriue me of my right, ſéeing it is your office to let euery
one haue his deſert. I pray you, ſaid the king, tell me who
you are? for your noble behauiour maketh me the more earneſt
in deſire to know you: and content your ſelfe, for I will not
hinder you of any thing the Ladies haue promiſed you.
                     I beſéech your grace humbly (anſwered the ſtrange Knight)
that you would not bee offended, conſidering I am loth to
bee knowne as yet, vntill I haue reuenged an iniurie
which one hath dome mee: but I promiſe you faithfully,
your highneſſe ſhall know who I am, ere I depart your
Realme, for I will not faile to declare my name to theſe Ladies,

becauſe they haue him in remembrance, that ſuffered ſo
great trauaile for their ſakes. I ſée well then (quoth the King)
you will not now eaſe my troubled thoughts: well, I will therfore
build vpon your promiſe: Then the day declining apace,
the king ſet forward on his way to Digeon, thinking the ſtrang
knight would come to take his lodging there, but his will was
farre contrary, wherefore theſe few Ladies tooke their leaue of
the company, tarying there with the ſtrange knight: who ſéeing
them ſomwhat ſad, becauſe they had loſt the Quéens company,
tooke off his Helmet, which made the Ladies greatly abaſhed,
ſo that one could hardly iudge, which of the foure was
moſt affectionate to him. The ſtrange Knight durſt not be
too familiar with them in ſpéeches, becauſe he feared to diſturbe
their patience: ſo after he had brought them to the Monaſterie
(which was néere at hand in the valley) the Abbateſſe brought
them into a faire Chamber, the windowes whereof ouer a
goodly Oratorie, where the ſtrange Knight himſelfe was
lodged, and there he laboured his thoughts ſo extremely all the
night, as he had done his body all the day before.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XL.
                     Of that which happened to the ſtrange knight, the firſt day
he enterpriſed to guard the paſſage of the Valley.
                     
                        FAire Aurora ſaluting the Ladies at their
Chamber Windows, they put themſelues
in a readineſſe, becauſe they deſired to ſée
more of their Knights proweſſe: ſo, they
went with him to the field, not vſing any
great fauour towards him, becauſe they
thought hee would leaue them the ſooner;
and Manſia requeſted of him, into what places he intended to
conduct them.
                     
                        
Madame, aunſwered the ſtrange Knight) I am ſo extreamely
paſſioned, as I cannot at this time report whither
I ſhall trauaile. Dare you not be ſo bold ſaide Manſia, to
bring vs to the Caſtle of the Giant Almaroll, and enter the
Combate for our ſakes, with the knight that kéepeth the Princeſſe
Miragardaes Shield, as the Knight of the Sauage man
did for certaine Damoſels that kept him company? I knowe
no daunger ſo great anſwered the ſtrange Knight, which I
would refuſe to hazard, if I might be vſed with gracious behauiour,
for that inciteth a noble minde moſt to the fight. If
any of vs, ſaide Latrania, were deſirous you ſhould approoue
the Combate againſt the Princeſſe Miragardaes Knight, for
which of vs foure would you aduenture moſt willingly? It
is greater trouble for me, quoth he, to anſwere your preſent demaund,
then to hazard the Combate againſt any knight whatſoeuer.
Yet quoth ſhe, admit the neceſſitie were ſuch, as wée
would faine knowe, which of vs ſhould make beſt account of
her
                           •
                        ſelfe in this caſe? Truſt me Madame, anſwered the ſtrange
Knight, it is vnpoſſible for me to make you any direct reſolution
in this matter: for mine eyes are ſo equall in iudgement
on you all foure, as I cannot either loue or affectione more then
another.
                     Haue you ſir, ſaid Torſia, at any time ſéene the princeſſe Miragarda?
Yea Madame that I haue, anſwered the ſtrange
Knight: I pray you then good Sir, quoth ſhée, that you would
vouchſafe to tell me, is ſhe ſo excéeding faire, as the common
bruite is blazed abroad of her? Madame ſaid the ſtrange knight,
you may well aſſure your ſelfe, that your ſingular beauty hath
ſo dazeled my iudgement, as I neuer ſawe any that liked me
better then you doe.
                     Ah ha, quoth Manſia, haue we taken you at laſt? Wée may
now very well perſwade our ſelues, that Torſia is ſhe whom
you make moſt account of, for you neuer gaue ſo good wordes
to any of vs: wherefore ſeeing ſhée hath the moſt power ouer
you, and that you preferre her beautie aboue all ours, I am determined
to depart hence with theſe two Knights, which I ſée
comming hitherward, for I knowe them to bee ſuch, as will

carrie me away in the deſpight of you. And I pray you Latrania
and Telanſia to beare me company, ſéeing the knight hath
reuealed himſelfe, how ſimply we are eſtéemed in his fauour.
                     The ſtrange knight thought to excuſe himſelfe, but before
he had the commoditie ſo to doe, the knights of whom Manſia
ſpake) were there arriued: the one of them being called Sir
Menelao of Clermont, the other Monſieur Arnar: who being abaſhed
to ſée theſe Ladies in the power of a ſtranger, came to
vnderſtand the occaſion. Sir Clermont (ſaide Manſia) ſince
Fortune hath ſo luckily brought you hither, I pray you to deliuer
me from this ſtrange knight, who ſaith, that in deſpite of
all the knights in France he will cary vs into Spaine with him
and there make vs giue attendance on his Lady.
                     
                        Clermont, who was the ſeruant to Latrania, giuing credite
preſently to Manſiaes words, tooke his lance from his Eſquier,
and comming to the ſtrange knight, he entred into theſe ſpéeches.
Since you haue (Sir) receiued the order of knighthood,
to offer iniurie and diſpleaſure to Ladies: I wiſh he may be
ac
                           •
                        urſed that beſtowed it on you, and my ſelfe too, if I ſhould
not attempt to chaſtiſe your follie. You are wrong informed
Sir (anſwered the ſtrange knight) and I perceiue Manſia
would gladly ſée you brought into danger, as ſhe would affoord
me the like fauour, if it lay in her power: and I thinke you ſhall
gaine more in going about your buſines, then by tarrying long
in this company.
                     
                        Clermont ſéeing himſelfe ſo lightly eſtéemed, grew into ſuch
melancholy, as he ranne againſt the ſtrange knight, before hée
would ſuffer him to take his Launce: but hée ſlipping by the
pu
                           •
                        h of the Launce, caught him in the carrire by one of his
armes, & pulling him beſide his horſe, threw him to the ground
with great violence. His Eſquire then deliuering him a
Launce, he rode againſt Arnar, who prepared himſelfe to reuenge
the ſhame his fellow Clermont had receiued, as alſo to
deſire the fauour of Torſia, becauſe he had good hope to eſpouſe
her: but the ſtrange knight being ignorant of his affection, met
ſo iuſtly with him, as he ſent him to kéepe Clermont company.
                     And to the end the Ladies might perceiue, how he deſerued

be
                           •
                        ter account them they made of him, he alighted frō his Horſe,
and hauing drawne his Sword, he dealt with them ſo brauely
both together, as he made them know they went againſt thoſe
orders, which a good Knight ought carefully to kéep and eſtéeme.
The ſtrange Knight deſiring to delight them, whoſe kindneſſe
was very mean and ſlender to him, brought the knights into ſo
bad eſtates, as they would very willingly haue had a little reſt,
if ſo be their enemy would haue ſuffered them. Manſia ſéeing
the Knights in ſo great danger, ſhe deſired the ſtrange Knight,
that it might pleaſe him to heare her one word: thē in the mean
while he ſtayed to heare what ſhe would with him, Clermont
and Arnar had the leiſure to breathe a while, whereof they were
not a little glad, and Manſia began thus to the ſtrange Knight,
I am highly contented ſir, in that you haue witneſſed your noble
valour vpon theſe two Knights, whome I deſire you to remit,
ſéeing th
                           •
                        y are not able to purchaſe any aduantage ouer
you: For I perſwade my ſelfe, that both Syr Arnar and Clermont
wil not refuſe your gentlenes in ſo dooing, and I my ſelfe
ſhal haue cauſe to thanke you for it. Theſe two French knights
were as glad as might be, that their Combat ended in ſo good order:
neuertheleſſe, becauſe their Ladies ſhould not iudge them to
be ſo fainte heart to, they made as though they gaue ouer very
vnwillingly. Which the ſtrange Knight beholding, he deſired
Manſia to ſuffer him to begin again, for he doubted not to make
them better contented, when hee brought thē into a little more
danger. Such is the pride (anſwered Torſia) as you will not be
contented till ſome knight may haue the power to qualifie your
luſtineſſe. Your beauty faira Madam (ſaid the ſtrange knight)
doth ſo torment mee, as you cannot wiſh me any greater puniſhment:
yet will I take it thankfully, comming from no bodies
hand but yours. Arnar was ſo ſore wounded, as the Ladyes
were conſt
                           •
                        ained to vnarme him to dreſſe his woundes,
which were very dangerous, & Torſia tooke paine to binde them
vp with his ſhyrt ſléeues. The ſtrāge knight ſéeing the gracious
courteſie theſe Ladies vſed to Arnar, bega
                           •
                        ne to pittie him very
much, eſpecially, beholding Torſia to ſhew teares: but they were
not very many, for French Ladyes doo not vſe to wéepe much.
                     
                        
while theſe Ladies were thus buſie about Arnar, a Knight
arriued in the place where the Combate was fought, bearing
in his ſhield in a field of ſiluer, a Speare broken in pieces, whereby
was to be vnderſtood, that his hope was altogether loſt: after
the knight a pretie ſpace beheld the beautie of theſe Ladies,
he made his reſt vpon Latrania, and being very deſirous to doe
her ſeruice, he came to her with theſe ſpéeches.
                     You ſhall vnderſtand Madame, that I haue ſometime ſtaied
my hope in the place, where I could purchaſe but ſlender aduantage,
as you may behold by the deuiſe I beare in my ſhield:
and I aſſure you, I will once againe venture my fortune on
your behalfe, for I perſwade my ſelfe, I ſhall not endure any
great torment for your ſake, hauing the fauour of your diuine
beautie before mine eyes.
                     
                        Menelao of Clermont, being ſo amorous of Latrania, as he
iudged none ought to loue her but himſelfe, could not ſuffer the
words of the Knight of the Speare, but returned him this anſwere.
If you doe attempt (ſir knight) to fight on foote againſt
me, albeit you ſée me ſore wounded: yet will I giue you to vnderſtand,
that the fauour of this Lady is reſerued for him, that
hath ſuffered thus much in her ſeruice, and thinketh himſelfe
worthy of her gracious recompence. I perceiue Sir (ſaid the K.
of the Speare) that you are ignorant of me, who could wiſh (for
the loue I beare this Lady) and you were in good eſtate, end armed
double againſt me: for as you be now, I iudge you farre
vnable to make reſiaſtance againſt me. The ſtrange knight
hearing the proud words of the knight of the Speare, mounted
on horſebacke, and taking a Lance from his Eſquire, came vnto
him with theſes words.
                     Sir Knight, I haue promiſed theſe foure Ladies, to guarde
the paſſage of this Valley for eight dayes ſpace: the two firſt
dayes in the ſeruice of Manſia, the Lady that ſitteth on your
left hand: the third and fourth for Telanſia: the fift and ſixt
for the Lady whom you like, called Latrania: and the two laſt
dayes ſhall be altogether imployed, in the honourable ſeruice
of Madame Torſia. And I aſſure you, I am as greatly affectionate
to the one as the other, except the eſpeciall opinion

I haue of Torſia, for that I ſaw her wéepe for the harme of
her knight, yet will ſhe not pitty the ceaſleſſe gréefe I endure
for her ſake. Notwithſtanding all this (ſir knight) if you can
thinke ſo well of your ſelfe as to trie the Aduenture, you ſhall
finde me verie willing to entertaine you.
                     It is ten dayes ſince (aunſwered the knight of the Sphere)
that I did arriue in any place, where I could be more deſirous
to trye my valour then I am this preſent: but ſéeing theſe daies
are limitted by courſe, I will awaite till they come, which are
appointed for the honor of Latrania, for on her behalfe I meane
to aduenture my ſelfe. In troth (ſayde Clermont,) I ſée the
Knight beginneth to diſmay himſelfe, and can finde no better
meanes to excuſe himſelfe, then to put off the triall of his manhood.
If you thinke ſo (anſwered the Knight of the Sphere,)
make your returne hither at the appointed time, and I will
not fayle to let you know what ſmall account I make of your
Choller.
                     So leauing Clermont, he approched to the Ladyes, who demanded
of him, if he had bene at the Caſtle of the Gyant Almaroll.
He being willing to ſhewe himſelfe obedient to them,
courteouſly ſhaped them this aunſwere. I haue bene not long
ſince (fayre Ladyes) at the aforenamed Caſtle, and I haue ſéene
the Princeſſe Miragarda, yet not entring the Combate with
him that kéepes the Shielde, for that Albayzar ſet himſelfe againſt
me, and vanquiſhed me. Thinke you (ſaide Manſia) any
more beautie to conſiſt in Miragarda, then in Madam Latrania?
You driue me to a harde point Lady (quoth the Knight
of the Sphere) for I iudge him of ſimple vnderſtanding, that wil
reproue them abſent, to content the humours of them preſent:
and I thinke it expedient, that eache of you ſhould be content
with your ſeuerall Giftes, not grudging nor repining at that
which is in another.
                     Sir (ſaide the ſtraunge knight) you witneſſe very well
your badde entertainement at the Caſtle of Almorall, which
hindreth your iudgement of the beautie of Miragarda & theſe
foure Ladies: in whoſe defence I will ſtand, that no Ladies
beautie may compare with theirs. The knight of the Sphere
                        
ſuſpected, that it ſhould be the Knight of the Sauage man, whervpon
he behold his ſhield, which he could not perceiue becauſe
it was couered: but he knew his Eſquire, ſo that he was aſſured
with whom he would deale. Neuertheleſſe, the affection
hee bare to Latrania, made him forget the friendſhip of the
knight of the Sauage man: ſo he tooke his leaue of the Ladies,
intending to lodge not farre from the Forreſt, vntill the dayes
came for him to aduenture with the ſtrange knight, on the behalfe
of his beloued Latrania. Clermont and Arnar departed
heauily, and the ſtrange knight went with the Ladies to the
Monaſterie againe, where he cauſed Arlen
                              •
                           ea to remaine, till
he and the knight of the Sphere had Iouſted together, fearing
leaſt in her company he ſhould be knowne, and becauſe he reſerued
her to be married to his friend Dramuſiande.
                     
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XLI.
                     The complaints which the ſtrange knight made in the night
time, vnder the window of the Chamber where the foure
Ladies were lodged.
                     
                        THeſe ladies were brought againe into their
Chamber, where out at the windowes (becauſe
the knightes were quiet, calme, and
faire) they might diſcerne the moſt part of
the Valley. The ſtrange knight was ſo vehemently
ſurpriſed with their loue, as the
great trauaile hee had ſuſtained that day,
was not of force ſufficient to cauſe him giue his mind to reſt: for
it is euermore ſéene, when the ſpirit is troubled with newe
imaginations, the heart muſt néedes be tormented with infinite
paſſions. Euen ſo was hee moleſted with ſo many newe

cares, as he was conſtrained to come forth vnder the Ladyes
Chamber window, hoping that ſeme of them would take pitie
on him: then laying him downe among the gréene leaues,
and folding his armes croſſe ouerthwart his ſtomacke, he
entred into theſe diſcourſes.
                     I know well that loue is enuious at my libertie, for that I
haue ſéene the Dames of England, of Greece, of Spaine, and of
Nauarre, without remaining affectionate to any of them: but
now being in Fraunce, I am ſuddenly inneigled by foure
Ladyes, who onely delight to depriue me of life. And that
which tormenteth me moſt, is this, I loue them all, and am as
much affected to one of them, as I am to all the other thrée: for
when I regard the one, my heart biddeth me forſake all to yéeld
to her: and beholding the ſecond, I finde my ſelfe in the ſame
alteration. So that when I would forgette ſuch vncertaine
aſſaultes, I ſée them the more readier to be extant before me,
which maketh me thinke it cannot be true loue, that doth toſſe
and turmoyle in ſo many ſorrowes: and yet doe I imagine
my griefe the leſſe, remembring that I endure it for their
ſakes.
                     But me thinkes the caſe is very hard, when no one of them
will ſéeme to make account of me: wherefore, I ſée well, I
ſhall be charged with more extreame cares, then as yet I am.
O vnfortunate knights, that vnder their names prepare your
ſelues to giue me the Combate.
                     The Ladies who were at the window, heard very well
the complaints of the ſtrange knight, whereupon, Manſia,
ſpake the reſt in this manner. I thinke it good (my friendes)
that we goe vnto him, and ſpend a little conference with himfor
ſéeing the night is long and troubleſome, I iudge we cannot
better driue it away. How dare you (ſayde Torſia) be ſo
hardie to goe viſite the man, who maketh no account to kill
them that come in his preſence? It is not for you (aunſwered
Telanſia) to make any ſhew of fearefulneſſe now: for if any
miſchance happen to vs, you are the firſt that ſhall be voyde of
it.
                     
                        
This diſcourſing to one another, at laſt they departed all
togither, being in their Petticoates, and their Mantells wrapt
about them, to ſhielde the Deawe from falling on them. After
theſe foure Ladies were come to the place where the ſtrange
Knight lay lamenting, they hauing ſaluted him, Manſia beganne
thus.
                     It is ſo Syr Knight, that we are deſirous to knowe who you
are, and vpon what occaſion you vtter theſe complaints? and
if you ſéeme to hide theſe demaunds from vs, wee ſhall be enforced
to cauſe you looſe that without Armes, which you haue obtained
of other by Armes. Indéed Ladie (anſwered the ſtrange
Knight,) one of you hath power ſufficient to vanquiſh me: then
ſhall you offer me great iniurie, to addreſſe your ſelues all foure
againſt me. Truſt me Syr (ſaide Telanſia) wee repute you ſo
good a Knight, hauing ſéene ſufficient occaſion to cauſe vs think
ſo, as that ſome of vs remaine yet in doubt, by reaſon of the
knowledge we haue of your Noble déedes. If my déedes faire
Lady (the ſtrange Knight replyed) were accompanied with any
ſhew of eſtimation, it procéeded only by being imployed in your
ſeruice, which ſéeing they are ſo agréeable to you, I ſhall attempt
to Conquere all the Knightes in the French Courte vnder your
names: but I ſée you denie your fauour, and I am out of hope
euer to purchaſe it. I pray you Syr (ſaide Torſia) let me aſke
you one queſtion: Haue you bene in Loue heeretofore, or no?
Certainly Madam (anſwered the ſtrange Knight) I haue bene
many times practiſing to follow the will of the little god of loue,
who compelleth (by his envenomed ſhafts) both Gods and men
to loue. And haue you bene (quoth Torſia) ſo greatly tormented
then, as you ſéeme to be at this preſent? No Madam (qd. hee)
for that I gaue my ſelfe to the ſeruice of one, whoſe loue I hope
to enioy (in time) by my Trauels: but now that I haue aduentured
to loue foure, one of them ſéemeth to forſake mee, to the
ende the other may deale with me in the ſame ſort. And I aſſure
you Madame, I neuer loued in any place, where I ſéemed
to be depriued of my life: but now I deſire to be conſumated,
being fallen into ſo extreame occaſions.
                     
                        
I pray you Sir (ſaid Torſia) doe not moleſt your ſelfe ſo, for
he that is accuſtomed to trauaile countries can ſhake off theſe
paſſions well enough I warrant ye. I thinke it good that you
grant to ſatiſfie Madame Latraniaes deſire, which is, that you
would conduct her to the Caſtle of Almaroll, where you muſt
enter the Combate vnder her fauour, againſt the knight that
kéepeth the portraiture of Miragarda: or elſe that your tra
                           •
                        a
                           ••
                        e
to ſéeke the Knight of the Sauage man, from whom you muſt
take by force of Armes, the Damoſelles that are in his company.
                     You will me Lady, a charge againſt all dutie, for I aduertiſe
you, he that gardeth the Princeſſe Miragardaes Shield is not
now at the Caſtle of Almaroll: but I am well content to
ſearch the Knight of the Sauage man, and to enter the Combate
with him, vnder the fauour of Madame Latrania, who
ſhall beare me company, and you all likewiſe, for I cannot liue,
being depriued of your preſence.
                     I perce
                           •
                        ue, ſaide Latrania, you can excuſe your ſelfe well
enough: but I hope the Knight of the Sphere will reuenge the
ſquemiſhneſſe you vſe towards me. Latrania thus breaking off
her purpoſe, they al foure tooke their leaue of the ſtrange knight,
becauſe the deſire of ſléepe compelled them ſo to doe, and being
entred their Chamber, they diſcourſed among themſelues
ſometimes commending the knights noble valour, and then againe
his gracious and Princely behauiour, whereupon they
determined to ſhew him better countenance then as yet they
had done.
                     The ſtrange Knight remained in extreame paſſions, becauſe
they departed from him ſo ſuddainely, and 
                           •
                        earing he had
vttered ſomewhat that they could not like off, hée paſſed the
night in many melancholly conceites, vntill in the morning,
his Eſquire brought him ſome refection. And during the time
he was at breakefaſt, the Knight of the Sphere came ſecretly
to the Monaſterie where theſe Ladies were, who by reaſon of
their late watching, kept their beddes as yet: but becauſe the
ſtrange knight ſhould not e
                           •
                        py him, he went & ſate downe at
the foote of a 
                           〈◊〉
                        . And hauing taken off his Helmette, he beganne

to recount his manifold miſfortunes he had endured,
which when he had aduiſedly conſidered, he found them not
to be compared to the violent afflictions that he ſuffred for the
loue of Latrania, whoſe beautie was of no ſmall eſtimation
with him, in that he had promiſed for her ſake to enter the
Combate againſt the Knight of the Sauage man, the Sonne to
Prince Edward his Lord and eſpeciall good friend.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XLII.
                     What happened to the ſtrange Knight, the ſecond day he
guarded the paſſage of the Valley.
                     
                        VNtill it was two houres after mid-day, the
ſtrange Knight kept within his Tent, not
hauing any occaſion to arme himſelf: which
the Ladies perceiuing, they were deſirous
to be gone, Manſia aduanſing her ſelfe as
chiefeſt of them, ſetting foorth her countenance
to the vttermoſt: and becauſe that
day was ordained for her honour, ſhee behaued her ſelfe moſt
brauely in the preſence of the other Ladies.
                     The ſtrange Knight knew well the intent of Manſia, how
glad ſhe was to ſee the triall of her beautie that day, wherevpon
he framed his language to her in this manner. I would
willingly (Madame) diſcerne ſome kinde of imperfection in
your Courtly brauery, that thereby you might receiue occaſion
to reſpect ſomewhat with pittie, the man that is extreamely
afflicted in thinking how he may compaſſe the meanes to win
you
                           •
                         good opinion: for you being adorned with ſuch rare and
exquiſite beautie, doe euen lengthen their liues, who take pleaſure

to behold you. But I good Madame cannot be ſo happy
as to be one of thoſe, in that I am he, to whom you take delight
to conceale your ſelfe: but this day I deſire you to prepare
your ſelfe, as gallant as may be, for your beauty may happen
to winne the eſtimation aboue all theſe other Ladyes, becauſe
it is vnknowne what knights will come.
                     Theſe words of the ſtrange Knight did not ſo well pleaſe
Manſia as he iudged they would haue done, for ſhe tooke them
very diſdainfully, and gaue the knight to vnderſtand, that ſhe
was not reſerued for him.
                     
                        Latrania ſéeing him ſo earneſt in contemplating the beautie
of Manſia, ſpake vnto him in this manner. I ſee well Sir,
that the regard you haue of Manſia, cauſeth you to be forgetfull
of all the reſt. Not ſo Lady (aunſwered the ſtraunge
knight) and if you will doe me the honour to heare me ſpeake,
you ſhall ſoone perceiue you are in a wrong opinion. You will
not gaineſay (ſayd Latrania) but her beautie is honoured as
your owne this day. If the day (quoth he) whereon I loſt
my libertie, both for her and you, were as yet to come, you
ſhould haue ſome reaſon for to conceiue this opinion. But if
you be deſirous to know the ſtate, wherein Loue hath bound
his Subiects to his Law, the Knight of the Sphere (whom
I perceiue is comming hitherward) will ſatiſfie you therein:
and you may demaund, if as yet he containeth the
ſame minde, wherewith he preſented himſelfe to doe you ſeruice.
                     While the ſtrange knight vſed theſe and ſuch other like
ſpéeches to Latrania, the Knight of the Sphere lifting vppe
his Helmet, came to the Tents, and ſaluted the Ladies very
gratiouſly: and as he ſtood earneſtly beholding Latrania, the
Ladyes perceiuing thrée Knights comming towards them,
being all armed after one manner, as if they were all thrée
the Seruants of Manſia, the firſt of them was an Engliſh
man, called Brauor: the ſecond, Alter of Amiens: and the third
Gualter of Amboiſe: they being all thrée of the King Arnedes
Court.
                     
                        
And becauſe they had not the meane, to make triall of their
valour in the Forreſt againſt the ſtrange knight, when he behaued
himſelfe ſo brauely in the Kings preſence, they concluded
this day to hazard their renowne, which was the laſt
day the ſtrange knight enterpriſed to ſhewe his puiſſance for
the honour of their Miſtreſſe. Theſe three knights being come
before their ſweéte Saint and Lady, were in a manner depriued
of their wits, her beautie was of ſuch ſtately preferment
in their eyes: which the Knight of the Sphere beholding, and
noting well their amorous paſſiens, he ſpake to Manſia in this
manner.
                     You cannot deny faire madame, but you are more beholding
to this ſtrange Knight, which hath kept you company for certaine
dayes, then to theſe knights which are come to ſeeke you:
for that in my iudgement they rather ſeeme to yeeld themſelues
conquered by your preſent ſight, then any deſire I can perceiue
in them to the Combat, but it may be, your braue apparel hath
more dazeled their eyes, then your ſingular beautie, which is
of ſufficiency to ſet the whole world to worke.
                     Sir (anſwered Brauor) if you are ſo buſie to deſcant on our
meanings, and that you will ſeeme to iudge of our inward
thoughts, prepare your ſelfe to the Iouſt, and I will not fayle
to giue due chaſtiſement to your lauiſh ſpéeches. Truſt me
Sir (anſwered the the Knight of the Sphere) I am content to
ſatiſfie your deſire, on condition this knight ſhall thinke it ſo
conuenient.
                     I pray you (Sir ſaid the ſtrange Knight) that you would
not ſeeme to hinder me in my enterpriſe, which being once atchieued,
you may afterwards make triall of this knights courage,
which to lay, I iudge you ſhall not neede to trauaile your
ſelfe much. I perceiue (anſwered Brauor) what the intent of
your ſpeeches is, neuertheleſſe, I hope the gallant brauerie,
wherein I haue this day beheld my Miſtreſſe Manſia, will not
onely graunt me the conqueſt ouer you, but alſo be ſufficient
for me, to correct the pride of this other Knight. I perceiue
now verie well (ſaide the ſtraunge knight) that your affection
was onely vpon her gay cloathing, but mine is on her ſwéete

ſelf, that weareth them: then caſting his eyes vpon Manſia, he
entred in to theſe ſpeeches. Faire Madame, ſince the honour of
this Day is dedicated to your praiſe, I deſire you to allow mee
ſo much fauour, as to beholde the entertainement of this newcome
Ghoſt: for I feare me, my blowes will yéeld him greater
Diſaduantage, then hee receyued content in beholding your
Beautie.
                     Vppon this they ranne together couragiouſly, and Brauor
brake his Launce worthly, but the ſtrange Knight encountred
him with ſuch force, as hee pierced him quite through the bodie,
ſo that he fell beſide his Horſe to the ground dead: his companinions
being as greatly abaſhed, as the Ladies did take it heauily
ſeeing the miſfortune of Brauor, whoſe bodie was carryed to
the Monaſtery to be buryed.
                     
                        Alter of Amiens, and Gualter of Amboyſe, notwithſtanding
the death of their Friend and companion, determined to hazard
their honour in this Aduenture: but Gualter of Amboyſe was
the firſt that preſented himſelfe to Iouſt, vſing this Language
towards his Ladie. I deſire you heartily (good Madame) that
you would not ſuffer him to dye at a ſtrangers hand▪ who onely
liueth to doe you ſeruice: but ſo well I deſire you to thinke of
mée, as in the extreameſt occaſion you will not forſake mee.
Theſe words vttered by Gualter of Amboyſe, were ſpoken after
ſuch manner, as the Knight of the Sphere eaſily vnderſtood
them, wherevpon he ſpake to Madame Latrania, in this manner.
This Knight in my iudgement (faire Miſtris) is vnwoorthy
the Loue of any gracious Lady, that diſdaineth of his enterpriſe
before he begin it.
                     While hee ſtoode thus communing with his Ladie, the two
Knights encountred together, but Gualter of Amboyſe was
caſt foorth of his Saddle, béeing vnable to mooue the Straunge
Knight: hée hauing broken his Launce, addreſſed himſelfe to
Alter of Amiens, who being very timerous and fearefull, yet to
ſhewe ſome good countenance to his Ladie, gaue his Horſe the
ſpurres againſt the ſtraunge Knight, who could not méete with
him according as he would. Neuertheleſſe, Alter of Amiens
brake his Launce in ſuch ſorte, as the péeces flewe about the

ſtrange Knights horſe head, whereat the horſe ſo fumed as he
gallopped with his maiſter violently through the field, wherevpon
the ſtrange Knight caſt himſelfe beſide him, commaunding
his Eſquire to ride after, to take him againe. Alter of Armiens,
ſéeing that Fortune more faudured him then his other
companions, was very deſirous to enter the combat with the
ſword, for which cauſe he alighted from his horſe, then Gualter
put himſelfe before him, becauſe he had Iouſted firſt: but the
ſtrange knight handled him in ſuch order, as in ſhort time his
companion was glad to come helpe him, whereupon, the
ſtrange knight entred into theſe words.
                     You come (ſir) euen as well as heart can wiſh, for I am determined
to lay claime to your horſe, becauſe mine is runne away
from me. Then he charged him ſo furiouſly, as the knight
of the Sphere was conſtraided (pittying the eſtate wherin they
were brought) to deſire Manſia to giue them ſome ſuccour: but
before ſhe could well perſwade her ſelfe to doe ſo, theſe two
knights came and rendred themſelues at her féet, deſiring her
to pitty their preſent caſe, not doubting but they would apply
their liues many other wayes in her ſeruice. The ſtraunge
knight deſirous to ſée what eſtimation Manſia would make
of them, came vnto them with theſe words. You ſhall vnderſtand
(ſir knights) that I am not determined to giue you ouer,
without the Lady intreate on your behalfe her ſelfe: or elſe
ſhe ſhall promiſe to graunt me one requeſt, which I entend to
vtter to her.
                     I aſſure you ſir knight (aunſwered Manſia) I doe not intende
to make you any ſuch promiſe, giuing you to vnderſtand,
that you ought to beware how you paſſe any further
your ſelfe, for the hope which you haue in me, who by this
meanes ſhall haue perfect knowledge, of the loue and good will
you ſéeme to beare me. I ſée well (quoth the ſtrange knight)
that you are deſirous to let me know, how your nature is bent
towardes them, that aduenture themſelues in your ſeruice:
which is: that they ſhall receiue better entertainment, then
that which you vſe towards me: whereat, I haue ſome occaſion
to gréeue, for I would be he, that ſhould onely receyue

your fauour: in that I practiſe all meanes poſſible to pleaſe
you. But I ſée your intent is to vſe me with rigour, which I
would wiſh you ſhould vſe to theſe knights, whoſe liues are
of ſo little profite to you, ſo that I count my ſelfe happy, becauſe
my life is farre from your power.
                     When he had thus ſayd, he offered to mount on Gualters
horſe, but the Ladies gaue him to vnderſtand, that he did much
abuſe the knight to offer him ſuch iniurie, by which meanes,
theſe two knights rid preſently away to the King of France
his Court, where they made knowne the miſfortune that had
happened vnto them.
                     The knight of the Sphere, tooke his way vnto his lodging,
and the Ladies to their Monaſtery: Manſia being greatly contented,
that the ſtrange knight had ſo well acquitted himſelfe
towards her, as the other thrée did very much maruell, at the
noble behauiour of this braue Champion.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XLIII.
                     Of that which happened to the ſtrange Knight the third and
fourth day.
                     
                        AFter the ſight of theſe Iouſts, the Ladies
hauing withdrawne themſelues into the
Monaſtery, the ſtrange knight entred into
his Tent, where he refreſhed himſelfe with
ſuch viands as the Nuns had ſent him. And
for that he was ſomewhat ſore trauailed,
hee was the more deſirous to reſt: in the
meane time his Eſquire returned from the ſearch of his horſe,
which he could hardly take all that day, but his maſter was

                           ••
                        ad when he ſaw him.
                     
                        
Then the ſtrange Knight, thinking the Ladies would walk
abroade, as they had done the Night before, he tooke his way to
the gréene Trées againe: but they came not abroad vntill the
Morning: when, being mounted on theyr Palfrayes, Manſia
ridde foremoſt, hauing a Garland of Flowers on her heade, in
ſigne of Victorie: Telanſia followed next her, beeing in good
hope to attaine the ſelfe ſame honour. Latrania and Torſia
came ſomewhat behinde, vſing ſuch a maieſtie in theyr countenance,
as the Knight was more and more enflamed towardes
them. When Manſia was come ſomewhat neere the ſtrange
knight, ſhe ſpake vnto him in this manner. Truſt me Syr, we
are ſo weary of your company, as we haue concluded to return
                           •
                        
to the kings Court, not doubting but we ſhall be aduertiſed,
what things happen to you in our abſence: whereto the ſtrange
knight thus replied.
                     Theſe words (good Madame) which you vſe to me, cannot
be thought welcome to me, and I am perſwaded that the lawe
which theſe Ladies of France hath ſet downe, being firſt begun
by their owne good willes, cannot be thus broken, without
their great impeachment. Good Syr (anſwered Torſia) doe
not thus grieue and offend your ſelfe, for Manſia did ſpeake but
onely to trie you, and ſhe will not be gone ſo ſoone from you, I
warrant you: as for vs we will not breake our promiſe to you,
till the eight dayes be fully compleate, except ſome other knight
come, whoſe power ſhall be ſufficient to cut off your determination.
                     Me thinke Lady, ſaide the ſtrange knight, you ſhould not
wiſh him more miſfortune, who endureth too much alreadie
for your ſweete ſakes: but me thinkes you ſhould rather wiſh
the victorie to fall on my ſide, then on any others, for the laudable
commendation you ſhall get thereby. While the ſtrange
Knight behaued himſelfe amiably, in the entertaining theſe
gallant Ladies, the Knight of the Spere arriued there on a ſuddaine,
who ſhewing his obeyſance to Madame Latrania, ſpake
to her as followeth.
                     Faire Miſtreſſe, neuer were any dayes ſo troubleſome vnto
mee, as theſe which I endure at this preſent, earneſtly thirſting

and deſiring for the time, when your ſwéete ſelfe may allow
me ſome fauour: Neuertheleſſe, I am very well perſwaded,
that the Knight who honoureth you with his ſeruice, cannot
be eaſily vanquiſhed, for that he beares as great good will to
you as I doo, adioyning hereto, that he imagineth himſelfe worthy
your loue. But you may aſſure your ſelfe, that I am ſo highly
affected to you, as this Knight may no way equall: Neuertheleſſe,
I cannot chuſe but take it heauily, fearing you will allow
the like ingratitude, which I perceiue you vſe to him: To theſe
words Latrania replyed thus:
                     Your ſpéech (Syr Knight) is farre different from the offer you
made me, when you firſt arriued in this place, when you were
ſo liberall in promiſe, that you would not ſticke (for my ſake) to
conquer the whole World. The ſtrange Knight being deſirous
to make one with them, offered to aduaunce himſelfe to them:
but he was hindred by a Damoſell, who arriued there at that
very inſtant, who deſired him to ſhow her the knight that guarded
the Paſſage of the Valley: Then diſcloſing himſelfe to the
Damoſell, ſhe ſaluted him with theſe ſpéeches;
                     Hauing vnderſtood (Sir Knight) how you are of the opinion,
that theſe foure Ladyes are the faireſt in all the World, I was
ſomewhat deſirous to trauell hither, accompanyed with theſe
foure Knights, which you ſée vnder this Trée: and they (to honour
me with theyr ſeruice) haue concluded to Iouſt with you,
not doubting but theyr paines will returne greater profite vnto
them on my behalfe, then that which you beſtow for theſe Ladyes.
And this you muſt vnderſtand beſide, that theſe knights
come not to enter the Combat with the ſword, in that I reſerue
them for eſpeciall affaires, which are to mee of greater importance
then this.
                     When the ſtrange Knight had well aduiſed himſelfe on the
Damoſels words (who bare her face couered) hee anſwered her
in this manner. I would I were▪ in as great eſtimation with
theſe Ladyes, who kéepe mee here captiue, as theſe Knights (in
your company) are to you. And for that you vſe them with ſuch
fauour, I deſire that Madam Telanſia may ſpéed no worſe then
Manſia hath done, for whoſe ſake I haue already Conquered

thrée Knights. I pray you Sir (ſaid the Damoſell) to ſhew me
which of theſe foure Ladies you ca
                           ••
                         
                        Telanſia? After the
ſtrange knight had ſatiſfied her requeſt, ſhe entred into theſe
words.
                     In ſooth (Sir) her beautie is ſufficient for you to enterpriſe
great matters, yet I imagine, my knights ſhall not be any
thing more diſcouraged thereby, to doe me ſeruice. This
Damoſell was the very ſame, that came to ſuccour the vanquiſhed
Knights, which were conquered by the ſtrange Knight
in the King and Quéenes preſence: and becauſe the ſtraunge
Knight ſped alwayes ſo fortunately, many knights ſought ſeuerely
to iniurie him: which the Quéene would preuent as
much as ſhe could, cauſing this Damoſell to entice them
to trie their valour againſt the ſtraunge Knight, for her
ſak
                           •
                        .
                     Thereto they willingly conſented, neuertheleſſe, the King
had forbidden them to enter the Combate with the Sword:
for which cauſe the Damoſell entreated the ſtraunge Knight,
that he would hazard the breaking of one Launce, againſt one
of her champions. After that the damoſell had thus concluded,
theſe foure Knights (who bare for their ſeuerall deuiſes in
their ſhéelds, the Globe of the world, figured in a ſiluer field)
beganne to aduance themſelues forward, which the ſtrange
knight perceiuing, he coaſted Telanſia with theſe ſpéeches. If
the world (faire Madam) were of no bigger quantity then this
which the Knight beareth in his ſhéeld, I iudge I might with
eaſie trauaile ouercome it, & make you the onely Quéene of the
world. Without any more words, he ga
                           •
                        e the ſpurres to his
horſe, and encountred the knight in the midſt of the carréer, ſo
brauely, as both horſe and man went to the ground: then turning
to the Damoſell that conducted them thither, he ſpake to
her as followeth. You cannot denie now faire Damoſel, but
you haue ſeene me throw the world to the ground, onely by the
fauour of Madame Telanſia. Oh Syr (anſwered the Damoſell)
you doe but as yet beginne, theſe other thrée knights knew
very well the proweſſe of this knight, to be farre greater then
they thought for: but ſince ſuch great miſfortune hath befallen

him, you ſée the ſecond Knight deſireth to reuenge his companions
wrong, and if he faile likewiſe, theſe other two Knightes
will beare them company. But I perceiue well (ſaide the Damoſell)
they muſt be tried knights, which ſhall liue in hope to
conquer you: yet may I ſay thus much without offence, that
your courage is the more emboldened by the preſence of theſe
foure Ladies. Then taking off her maſke, the ſtrange 
                           •
                        night
preſently knew her, which made him beginne in this manner.
I am very glad (faire Damoſell) that you can now witnes my
iuſtneſſe and ſtabilitie: but I doe greatly abaſh my ſelfe, of the
hope you repoſed in theſe foure knights, who (for any thing I
can ſée) beare no greater affection to you, then to me. Theſe
knights deſired the Damoſell to ſuffer them to depart, for they
were afraide, leaſt they ſhould be ſo handled as their companion
was. The king Arnedes commaunded that night, that a
great dancing ſhould be kept in the Quéenes Chamber, whereat
he was aduertiſed of the ſundry and high good hope of the
ſtrange knights: which moued many Ladies to intreate their
amorous ſeruants, that they would bring them to the place
where this knight kept the paſſage.
                     Theſe foure ladies entred the field, accompanied with their
champion, and the knight of the Sphere, whom the Ladies
deſired that the king ſhould not be offended, by his entring the
Combate with the ſtrange knight: As for the reſidue of their
ſeruants that were in the Tentes, to encourage them to be
earneſt in deſiring to enter the Iouſt, each of them promiſed
vnto her knight a garland of flowers, if the victory chanced
on his ſide. Baldwin of Nainnis, who was the affectionate ſeruant
to the faire Albania, was the firſt that preſented himſelfe
to Iuſt againſt the ſtrange knight, who would not ſuffer him
to run before he had firſt craued leaue of the ladies, that it might
be their wils to 
                           •
                        rowne him with the garlands of flowers that
remained victor: the ladies contented themſelues greatly with
this requeſt, wherevpon the ſtrange knight ſpake thus to Telanſia.
Madame, for that it is pitty your golden lockes, ſo gallantly
garniſhed with theſe fragarant flowers ſhould be iniured
by any, or theſe garlands worne by any other tho
                           •
                         your ſwéete

ſelfe: I deſire you to lay theſe garlands by the trée before you,
and doubt not but I will haue more companions to them preſently.
So ſaying, he ran againſt Baldwin with ſuch force, as
he ſent both horſe and man to the ground on a heape. The Lady
Albanis garland was preſently ſent to the ſtrange knight,
which he immediatly preſented to Telanſia, vſing this language.
If (ſwéete Miſtreſſe) you will doe me ſo much honour,
as to receiue in worth this preſent I offer vnto you: I will not
faile to enterpriſe in your gratious ſeruice, to decke this trée
with flowers of ſurpaſſing beautie.
                     Next to Baldwin, was diſmounted Bameran, the amorous
ſeruant of Lady Briſa: whoſe garland of flowers was ſet next
to Lady Albaniaes. Rion of Belze, ſeruant to Madame Vertuoſa,
being diſcomfited, her garland was a companion to Lady
Briſaes. The fourth was called Luſaman, ſeruant to Lady
Zapella, he was likewiſe ſent to kéepe his fellowes company:
next to him was Riant, the ſeruant vnto faire Blas. And Altar
of Bayonne, ſeruant to Mananſina, who ſéeking to reuenge his
friends iniurie, was caſt foorth of his Saddle, with his arme
broken. Garland of Beziers, ſeruant to Montpenſier: Forſian of
Granoble, ſeruant to the Lady of Iurie, Briſar, ſeruant to the
Lady of Bur, ſiſter to Telanſia: beſide many other knights, who
were all vanquiſhed by the ſtrange Knight.
                     Theſe garlands were hanged on the bowes of the trée, the
ſight whereof, yeelded no ſmall contentment to Telanſia: but
the other Ladies found themſelues greatly diſcontented, thinking
on this honour, and what had paſſed before, eſpecially
Manſia, who indued this day farre more triumphant, then
thoſe which the ſtrange knight maintained vnder her fauour.
Latrania and Torſia, were out of hope to attaine ſuch honour
as Telanſia had done: ſo theſe vanquiſhed knights departed
preſently thence to the Court at Digeon. The knight of the
Speare was greatly abaſhed, noting the noble deeds of the
ſtrange knight, whereupon he tooke his leaue, and went to his
accuſtomed lodging, to paſſe that night away: reioycing greatly
that the day was come at laſt, when he ſhould witneſſe to Latrania his proweſſe and affection: the ſtrange knight was

ſo tranſformed in the Loue of theſe Ladies, as hee thought neuer
to leaue theyr company, and contemplating them very earneſtly,
his Eſquyre came, and told him his Supper was ready:
remembring him alſo, that on the next day hee muſt enter the
Combat with the Knight of the Sphere, whom he iudged to be
one of good and hardy courage. I pray thée anſwered the ſtrange
Knight, let me alone, for the hope I repoſe in theſe Laies, is ſufficient
to make mee breake both the Sphere, and the hope likewiſe
of the knight thou nameſt to me.
                     The Ladies vnderſtanding the wordes of theyr Champyon,
gaue no ſmall commendations to theyr knightly déedes, in the
meane while, the Knight layde him to reſt: but ſo vnquiet was
his ſléepe, as he did not containe the ſame minde he was woont,
to goe walke vnder the Ladyes Chamber windowe, to vnderſtand
if they would come into the Field againe. And I aſſure
you, theſe Ladyes being parted but a little thence, they imagined
amongſt themſelues, by caſting of Lottes, which of them
that Night ſhould goe to him: the lotte fell vnto Latrania, who
departed as brauely garniſhed, as ſhe did the firſt night.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XLIIII.
                     ¶Of that which happened this night to the ſtraunge
Knight: and how the knight of the Sphere entred
the Combat the day following.
                     
                        IN the meane while the ſtrange Knight
ſlept at the foote of a Tree, Latrania came to
him, being in a waſtcoate of white Taffatey,
all the breaſt whereof was embrodered
with ſiluer twiſts, and hanged very
thicke with Aglets of Gold, the brauery
whereof did not a litle grace her, being likewiſe
couered with a gréene ſilke mantle, becauſe the dew ſhould

not hurt her. In this order as I haue told you, Latrania came
downe and ſate b
                           •
                         him, not ſpeaking one word to him, becauſe
the thought he ſhould ſpeake firſt. The ſtrange Knight, who
was not woont to be abaſhed at any thing, preſently caught hold
on her Mantle▪ and for that ſhe had her face couered, he ſpake to
her in this manner.
                     I deſire you (ſwéete ſoule) not to be offended, if I requeſt to
ſée your 
                           •
                        ace, whereby you may in ſome ſort aſſure the doubt
which as yet I remaine in. Latrania put by her Maſke, and
being accompanyed with a milde and affable countenance, ſhe
ſpake vnto him as followeth. You ſhall not now refuſe (Syr
Knight) to graunt me the requeſt I haue continually deſired at
your hande. Alas (fayre Miſtreſſe) you lay ſuch hotte aſſaults
but▪ my daunted Spirit (aunſwered the ſtraunge Knight) I
muſt be ſame to yeelde, becauſe the victorie ſhall be the more famous.
And it doth not a little reioyce me, that you haue thus
take
                           •
                         the paines to come alone to comforte mee, for that you
may perſwade your ſelfe, my power is farre too weake to make
reſiſtaunce againſt all you foure: To which wordes Latrania
thus replyed.
                     You haue oftentimes ſaid to me (Sir knight) that there is no
one vpon the Earth, hath greater deſire to doe me ſeruice then
your ſeke: but I cannot conceiue the ſame opinion, if you will
not at this inſtant let me know who you are. Madame (ſaid
the ſtraunge Knight) if I were in the ſeruice of any other, then
might I eaſily graunt your requeſt: but I will leaue you to
thinke, what I will doe tomorrow when I muſt be imployed

                           〈…〉
                        . But 
                           ••
                        ward it doth not a little
diſpleaſe, that you are ſo vnwilling to regard me in your fauour▪
which I eſteeme 
                           •
                        he moſt eſpeciall Fortune that can happen
to me if I could attaine the houre to reioyce in her preſence
whom (loue as the onely pillar and ſtay of my life: as I haue
already witneſſed to your companiōs, who may not preſume to
equall themſelues with you, albeit their Beauties deſerue good

                           〈…〉
                        , yet you being ſo worthie to be ſerued, I intend to
reueale my name to you, to the ende you may haue knowledge

                           〈◊〉
                        , whom you haue enforced to end
                           •
                        re ſo great trauell.
                     
                        
Theſe worde gaue occaſion of Latrania, to take him at the
aduantage, becauſe ſhe might the better attaine her deſire, and
he likewiſe triumph in this great fauour, ſo that he declared
his name to her: which when ſhe vnderſtood, her minde was
indifferently 
                           •
                        aſed, for Latrania had (in times paſt) heard of
his inconſtant and vnfaithfull dealings, and ſeating leaſt her
honour likewiſe might happen to be impeached, ſhe failed not
preſently to depart thence, promiſing not to diſcouer him to
the other Ladies.
                     After that Latrania was thus departed from him, he deuiſed
which way hee might exclude her out of his remembrance:
but ſo great was the affection hee had vowed to her, and the
conceyte of her delicate affections ſo pleaſing to him, as they
would not ſuffer him to forget her, but did ſo vehemently vexe
and torment him, as it was vnpoſſible for him to 
                           〈◊〉
                         any
quietneſſe.
                     But Latrania ſuſtained no ſuch vnruly paſſions, for ſhée
ſlept ſoundly till the morning, not making the other Ladies
acquainted with that the ſtrange Knight had told her: wherevpon
Manſia ſpake to her in this manner. I knowe well Latrania,
that you will make vs beléeue, how the Knight hath
not diſcouered his name vnto you: wherefore I intend to goe
prooue to morrowe morning when it ſhall be ſeene which of vs
hath the moſt power ouer him. And if it ſo fall out, that hee
will not reueale himſelfe to none of vs foure, I ſhall repute
his paſſions not ſo troubleſome, as his complaints to seeme to
witneſſe.
                     Vpon this determination the Ladies reſted, and ſo ſoone as
the Sunne had ſhowne his golden countenance on the earth,
certaine of the Kings Court arriued in the fielde, who cauſed
tents and pauilions to be preſently 
                           •
                        et vp, becauſe the king and
the Queene would come to ſee the Iouſts that day. The Ladies
wold not as yet come 
                           •
                        oorth o
                           •
                         their chamber, becauſe it was too
carely, and for that the Iouſts ſhould not be begun before the
King came: but it was not long before the King and Queene
came to their Tents, accompanied with many honourable perſonages,
as alſo Ladies and Damoſels of great calling.
                     
                        
The Iudges of the Fielde cauſed Tables to be ſet vp in the
Valley, which were couered with cloathes of maruellous eſtimation,
and there the King and Quéene refreſhed themſelues,
inuyting into their companie the foure Ladyes, who were ſo
ſtately Apparelled this day, as their beautie ſeemed to excell all
the Ladyes that were come with the Queene. The straunge
Knight went foorth of his Tent, that he might the better behold
this ſudden aſſemblie, and ſitting downe at the roote of a
Trée, his Eſquyre brought him victuals to breake his faſt withall.
After that the King was riſen from the Table, theſe foure
Ladyes (according to their woont) mounted on theyr Stéedes,
and tooke theyr way to the place where the ſtraunge knight remained,
who euen then was readie to fall to his daylie exerciſe:
they courteouſly ſaluting him, went with the Quéene to
her Tent, and by the kings Tents the ſtrange Knight ſtoode,
expecting who ſhould firſt beginne the Iouſte. And the King
himſelfe, was greatly delighted in beholding the Garlandes,
which for that they were the fauours of the Ladyes, and loſt
by the Knights that were foyled, he began highly to commend
the Proweſſe of the ſtrange knight: who being ieaſting with
the foure Ladyes, he eſpyed at laſt to come along the Valley, the
knight of the Sphere, Armed as he was the day before, and bearing
his Ladies Garland on his Creaſt, which he had good hope
to keepe well enough.
                     When the King Arnedes had eſpyed him, hee entered into
theſe ſpéeches. I deſire greatly to ſee that Garland of Flowers
brought vanquiſhed vnto theſe other: whereby I may bee
the better aſſured, whether hee that preuaileth in theſe Conqueſts
ſo happily, may find his Péere elſe
                           •
                        where, or n
                           •
                        . The
Knight of the Sphere, comming into the Kings preſence, ſaluted
him with humble obeyſaunce, afterwards taking his Garland
from his Helmet, he deſired him to weare it: and if hee defended
it not according to the merit of her Beautie, he deſired
it might bee placed among the other vanquiſhed. But if the
victorie happen on his ſide, he would not ſeeke any other recompence
at her hands, but that thoſe other Garlands might bee
giuen to beſtow on his Friends.
                     
                        
Of this requeſt Latrania was very glad, and deſirous to
reach ſo high felicitie, where of throughly perſwading her ſelfe,
and likewiſe to ſatiſfie the knight of the Spheres will, ſhe put
the garland on her head: then earneſtly beholding the ſtrange
knight, ſhe entred into theſe ſpéeches. You ſée (Sir) the day,
when I haue the meane to make known your knightly déedes,
as alſo the deſire you haue to doe me ſeruice. I will Madame
ſo behaue my ſelfe (aunſwered the ſtraunge Knight) as you
ſhall be perſwaded no other knight can iniurie me, ſo great is
my deſire to accompliſh ſuch ſeruice, as may be agreeable to
your gratious nature. And if afterward you make ſuch regard
of me, as you doe of thoſe whom you are woont to thruſt
into forgetfulnes, I muſt then comfort my ſelfe with this, that
I am not alone in miſfortune, but beare my croſſe with others
for company.
                     The knight of the Sphere hauing vnderſtood, how Latrania
made no more regard of them that did her ſeruice, and ſéeing
the Dice Fortunes hand, either to his continuall honour, or
preſent diſgrace, yet ignorant which of them ſhould be his
chance, ranne couragiouſly againſt ſhe ſtraunge Knight,
they encountering together ſo worthily, as they were both
compelled to forſake their ſtirrops. Vpon this gallant beginning,
they tooke new ſtaues, wherewith they met againe together
ſo ſtrongly, as the pieces flew whiſtling in the ayre: and
paſſing forward, theſe Knightes met ſo furiouſly with their
bodies, as they were conſtrained to tumble to the ground. At
this ſight the King was greatly abaſhed: but Latrania contented
her ſelfe very well, ſéeing the noble and valiant behauiour
of her Knight, who ſhée thought as good in all points
as the ſtranger. Theſe two Knights had no ſooner recouered
themſelues, but they drew their ſwords, wherewith they hacked
and hewed one another very pittifully. The ſtraunge
knight being deſirous vs to paſſe this day, with as great renowne
as he had all the other before, followed his intent with ſingular
agillitie: and the knight of the Sphere, to witneſſe his earneſt
affection to Madame Latrania, did behaue himſelfe likewiſe
ſo worthily, as each allowed him the name of a good and

hardie Knight. And ſuch was the difficultie of this Combate,
promiſing hope to neither ſide, but very doubtfull on both: as
the King eſteemed it of no leſſe danger, then that betwéene
Don Edward of England his ſonne, end Dramuſiande and his
Giants, when he was priſoner in the cuſtody of the Enchauntreſſe
Eutropa. And the King was extreamely paſſioned, fearing
leaſt two ſuch noble champions ſhould die in his preſence:
ſo fiercely they continued the fight, as they were both conſtrained
to withdrawe themſelues to breath a while. The Knight
of the Sphere, ſeeing his arme ſo mangled, began to thinke his
eſtate in ſome hazard: but afterwards remembring the beautie
of her, for whoſe ſake he thruſt himſelfe into danger, hée
cōmuned thus priuately with himſelfe. What greater good can
happen to me in all the world, then to be allowed in her ſeruice▪
whoſe beautie none in all the French Court may match?
In the meane while theſe two knights thus pauſed, the Damoſell
that was woont to come ſo often into the field, addreſſed
her ſelfe now againe to the ſtrange knight, vſing vnto him this
language.
                     I deſire now to ſée (Syr Knight) how you will iuſtifie the
large promiſes you haue made to me, for that I perſwade my
ſelfe, the Knight of the Sphere will reſtore theſe Ladies with
the loſſe of your life: and he being earneſt the victorie ſhould fall
on his ſide in reuenge of the offence you haue offered vnto them,
will yeeld your Tree decked with theſe Garlands of flowers into
their handes that beſt deſerue them, to which wordes the
ſtrange knight thus anſwered.
                     It is t
                           ••
                        e long enough (faire Damoſell) ſince I perceiued
the ſmall good will you bare me, but ſince I now perceiue
that my miſfortune is ſo agreeable vnto you, I deſire you to
make knowne vnto the Ladies, that I make no account of
their fauouring me, being well aſſured, that they are woont to
vſe ſuch recompence towards them who aduenture their liues
in their ſeruice.
                     Wherefore, that they ſhall well vnderſtand that my force
tooke his nature in times paſt, by the gratious regard of one
moſt ſingular Lady: I deſire them to keepe their woonted couetouſneſſe

of their beauty. And I ſhall decen
                           ••••
                         that Latrania
vſe her fauour towards him, whom it pleaſeth her to make
moſt account off.
                     When he had thus ſaid, he returned to the Combate▪ which
helde betweene them a long while: but when they perceiued
their Armor defaced, their fleſh martyred, and themſelues very
greatly feebled, they once againe withdrewe themſelues to reſt
a little.
                     The King Arnedes was loth two ſuch hardy knights ſhould
end their liues in ſo deſperate maner, the quarrell being of ſo
ſmall eſtimation, there he would haue had them them parted aſunder.
And the ſtrange Knight, thinking on the diſcourteous
entertainement Latrania affoorded him, diſdainedence to
looke on her: but the Knight of the Sphere made ſuch account
of her beauty, as in his ſilent thoughts he vttered theſe words.
I would I were as fortunate, and my déedes as worthy, as I
ſée you coye in accepting of thoſe, who render their very ſoules
ſubiect vnto you.
                     So breaking off, he cloſed againe with the ſtrange Knight,
who in troth was not ſlowe in receiuing him: and I aſſure you
their liues had béene in very great danger at this third triall, if
it had not beene for the arriuall of a damoſell, who being mounted
on a white Palfray, and her haire hanging ouer both her
ſhoulders, came to the ſtrange Knight crying ſo loude, as her
voice brought an Eccho of the whole Forreſt. At this ſight euery
one was ſuddainely abaſhed, and chiefely theſe two knights,
who ſeparated themſelues, to know
                           •
                        th cauſe of the Damoſels
lamentations, which ſhe came to vtter before the ſeure Ladies
deſiring them to let vs vnderſtand, for what reaſon theſe two
knights entred the Combate.
                     
                        Manſia tolde her, how they fought for Madame Latrania:
wherevpon the Damoſell approched to her, ent
                           •
                        ing into theſe
ſpéeches. Madam, if life and honor ought to be preferred before
vncertaine appetites & afflictions, I deſire you humbly to allow
aid and 
                           •
                        uccor to two diſtreſſed Damoſels, who not farre from
this place are in great danger to looſe their honour, which they
eſteeme of greater price then their liues: out of which trouble

they ſhall be ſoone deliuered, if it may pleaſe you to let mee haue
one of theſe Knights, who endure a hotte Combatte for your
Loue. When ſhe had thus ſpoken, ſhe ſhed ſuch aboundaunce
of teares, and deliuered forth ſo many ſcalding ſighes, as Latrania
was enforced to miſſe of her deſire, thinking to ſee the ende
of the Combate betweene theſe Knights: on which behalfe, the
King (ſéeing Latrania make no anſwer,) ſpake vnto the Damoſell
in this manner.
                     Which of theſe two Knights (faire Damoſell) doe you deſire
to haue with you? becauſe you ſhall perceiue my willingnes to
intreate for you. If it pleaſe your Maieſtie (anſwered the Damoſel)
they are both ſo good Knights, as I know not well which
of them I ſhould requeſt: neuertheleſſe, I will make choyſe of
the Knight that bereth his ſhéeld couered.
                     
                        Latrania had no ſooner heard the Damſells words, but ſhee
preſently came betwéene the two Knightes, giuing in ſhewe,
that the Straunge Knight ſhould not ſuffer any refuſall, and
wherevpon ſhe ſpake to him thus, Syr Knight, if for the ſuccour
of the afflicted, Armes were firſt inuented, I pray you, that
the teares of Damoſell, and the loue you ſay you beare me, may
cauſe you to forſake this Combate, and moue you to goe helpe
the oppreſſed Ladies.
                     Madame (ſaide the ſtraunge Knight) for me to obey you in
this cauſe, were very fond and vnaduiſed, yet would I doe it, if
I were not buſied about eſpeciall matters, for you may perſwade
your ſelfe, that the Bond wherein I haue tyed my ſelfe,
doth defend me from ſatiſfying your commaundement: conſidered
alſo. Madame Torſia may finde her ſelfe offended, that
I ſhould now in this manner ſlip from her, and not giue her
her due, her Beautie worthily deſeruing it.
                     I pray you ſir (quoth Torſia) that you would witneſſe your
Seruice for my Loue, in the place where this Damoſell will
conduct you. I am co
                           •
                        tent to obey your commaundement,
(anſwered the ſtrange Knight,) if you likewife will goe in our
companie: for I haue taken this condition of you, not to be
depriued of your companie, during my limitted time of guarding
this Valley.
                     
                        
Madame (ſaid the damoſel to Latrania) the knight doth perfectly
let you vnderſtand, that he is an obedient ſeruant to
loue, as your ſelfe may well perceiue, ſéeing he preferreth his
pleaſure before your will. Wherefore I deſire you to intreate
the other Knights to goe with me, for I am of the opinion, you
ſhall finde him more affectionate to you, then he whom yo
                           •
                        
haue repoſed ſo much hope in. Latrania being willing to pleaſure
the Damoſell, beganne to intreate the Knight of the
Sphere, that it might ſtand with his pleaſure to giue ouer the
Combate, and aſſiſt them with his ayde, who were in great
hazard.
                     Madame (anſwered the knight of the Sphere) I know it is
no great harme for me to let alone the Combate, mine enemy
being ſuch a noble and redoubted Knight: yet would I
not haue any one to thinke, that in reſpect of feare or diſmaying
in my ſelfe I let this paſſe thus, for that I know my ſelfe,
ſufficient enough for a greater matter. Marry, as concerning
your requeſt, the earneſt loue I beare you is ſuch and ſo great,
as I am content to ſuffer whatſoeuer you will lay vppon me,
onely to ſatiſfie and content your will.
                     Then turning to the ſtrange Knight, he beganne againe in
this manner, I pray you (Sir) thus to imagine and think, that
my earneſt deſire to purchaſe the loue of Madame Latrania,
hath bene ſome hinderance to you of the victory, albeit you
made ſome aſſurance thereof in your owne conceit. Indéede
(anſwered the ſtrange Knight) I ſée it is very hard for a man
to get any aduantage of you, without putting his owne life in
great danger: for I aſſure, your ſtroakes haue béene ſo
well laid on me, as they haue made me to conceiue ſo good opinion
of your valour, whereof ſince I am ſo well aſſured, it
doth not a little pleaſe me, that ſo good a knight ſhall goe in this
Damoſels cauſe. But ere you depart, I would very gladly
vnderſtand your name, to the end Latrania may ha
                           •
                        e knowledge
of him, to whom (of neceſſitie) ſhe muſt account her ſelfe
greatly indebted. The king himſelfe (who was no leſſe deſirous
to know him, then the ſtrange knight) deſired him earneſtly
to reueale himſelfe to him.
                     
                        
The knight of the Sphere, ſéeing the kings great importunitie,
tooke off his Helmet, and kneeled downe to kiſſe his Maieſties
hand, but he perceiuing him to be his friend Dramuſiande
would not ſo permit him, but caſting his armes about his
necke, embraced him with maruellous gratious courteſie, being
very ſory that his ſuddaine departure, would not ſuffer him
to regard him as he willingly would. And hee would not let
him part, before he had made him knowne to the Quéene and
and the other Ladies, who declare to the king, what a benefite
the knowledge of the ſtrange knight would be to them. Alaſſe
(quoth the King) I would as willingly knowe him as any of
you all, and I am much out of quiet with my ſelfe, that I haue
not knowne him all this while.
                     Oh Syr (ſaide Dramuſiande) I beſéech you to expectt yet a
little longer, vntill his enterpriſe ſhall be ended: for I am of the
opinion that he will not then ſeeke to depart hence, before hée
make himſelfe firſt knowne to your Grace.
                     The Damoſell preſented her ſelfe before him, declaring it
was high t
                           ••
                        e they ſhould be gone, wherevpon he tooke his
leaue of Latrania, who eſteemed her ſelfe aboue all the other
Ladies, in that ſhe had the power to bring into her obeyſance
ſo good a knight as was Dramuſiande. After his departure, the
King and Quéene rode to the Citie, where they daily commended
the ſingular proweſſe of the ſtrange Knight, in that he kept
his charge ſo well.
                     The Ladies of the Court would not depart thence, before
they firſt might haue the Garlands their ſeruants had loſt,
wherevpon, they came all togither to the trée, and caught them
all away violently, the ſtrange Knight not daring to reſiſt
them.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XLV.
                     Of that which the ſtrange Knight did the day following, garding
the Valley.
                     
                        WHen the King and all his Courtly attendants
were thus departed, the foure Ladies
tooke their way to the Monaſtery, and the
ſtrange Knight went into his tent, where
he ſate downe to reſt himſelfe: afterward,
as he kept it for his cuſtome, he went and
walked vnder the gréene Trées, and the
Ladies determined, who ſhould this night goe viſite this amorous
Louer.
                     
                        Manſia, who this night muſt go parley with the knight, had
put on a waſtcoate of blew Taffata, wrought all ouer the body
with net
                           •
                        worke of Gold, wherein were compoſed diuerſe
ranckes o
                           •
                         very rich Orient Pearles, and by them were placed
Stones of ineſtimable value. Her haire was wound in fine
plats about her head, being couered with an imbrodered Garland
of blewe Veluet, wherein was ſet a faire Plume of
white Feathers, very beautifully adorned with ſpangles of
Gold.
                     In this order as I haue declared to you, Manſia came and
ſate downe by the ſtrange Knight, and to auoide ſuſpition,
ſhee tooke off her Garland, not fearing to be hurt or impeached
by the Serena, or elſe for the deſire ſhe had to be the perfecter
ſéene. Then laying her hand vpon his head, ſhe beganne as
followeth. I will (Syr) at this time forbid any manner of complaint,
in that your ſelfe ſhall not deny, how all the paines paſt
are to be forgotten, and all ſeruices are to be recompenced by
gratious viſitation, eſpecially, ſeeing I take pleaſure to fauour
you ſo much at this time.
                     
                        
The ſtrange knight was ſuppriſed with ſuch excéeding ioy,
as he could not poſſibly make her any anſwer, for the beautie
of Manſia had ſo rauiſhed his vnderſtanding, as he was not
mindfull in vſing any gracious language, wherewith he ought
to haue entertained her: but after this ſodaine ioy was ſomewhat
calmed, he then failed not to account of her maruellous
honourably, wherewith ſhe remained verie well contented,
and to giue her further occaſſon of ſpéech, he began to court her
in this manner.
                     Madame, I know wel that your good nature is: to ſée the deſerts
of doubtfull trauailes requited, and he that ſhould iudge
otherwiſe, were vnworthie the gracious viſitation you haue
afforded me: aſſuring you, that this is the moſt eſpeciall recompence
can happen to me, hauing the meanes to contemplate
your excellent beauty, which no other may preſume to paragon.
And if you your ſelfe haue not the ſame opinion, truſt me, you
ſhew your ſelfe very ingratefull to Nature, who hath framed
you ſuch an one, as may iuſtly be called the Phoenix of beautie:
whom I haue ſo déepely imprinted in my heart, as I ſhall
be extreamely tormented, when I ſhall be depriued of your
ſwéete company. Yet I am greatly abaſhed, how you digeſt it
ſo wel, to ſée him ſuffer ſuch paine and greefe, who deſerueth to
be better eſtéemed of you, you hauing the power to cauſe him
liue contentedly, or die preſently. I pray you Sir (ſaide
Manſia) before you paſſe any further, tell me if you vſe theſe
ſpéeches to Latrania or no? Truſt me Lady (quoth he) her curioſitie
was ſo much, as I did not make any great account of her
when ſhe was with me, and then perhaps I might be forgetful
of many things, eſpecially, to her whom ſo many Knights are
bound to: for when the mind is elſe where grounded, all amorous
repreſentations are thruſt in obliuion which is not ſo madame
towardes you, who may altogether diſpoſe of my ſeruitude,
euen as ſhe that hath the only power ouer me. Then ſéeing
it is ſo, I pray you humbly (good Lady to iudge, to which of
you foure I am moſt affectionate, & after you haue wel aduiſed
your ſelf, on the ſeueral perfectiōs of the other ladies you cānot
yet denie, but you are aduantaged aboue them all in beautie,

grace and authoritie: ſo that I eſtéeme my ſelfe moſt fortunate
being depriued of my libertie, & altogether vowed to obey you.
                     
                        Manſia being not able to withhold her ſelfe, from giuing credite
to the ſtrange knights golden words, and not thinking
how he had vſed Latrania in the ſame manner: ſhe beganne to
come more néere him, and laying her hand on his ſhoulder, ſhe
ſhaped him this anſwer. If this matter be ſo (Sir) as you
ſéeme to make it, I humbly deſire you to tell me who you are:
to the end I may with the greater aſſurance ioyne my beléefe
to your perſwaſions. I perceiue then (anſwered the ſtrange
knight) the ſmall aſſurance you repoſe in me: ſo ſaying, he
tooke her by the hand, which ſhe ſuffered very quietly. And ſo
amorous he was in words, as at laſt he bewrayed himſelfe
vnto her: and perſwaded her, that the griping one another by
the hand, was a certaine beginning of loue. So that this little
fauour made him ſomewhat more bold, and furder he would
haue procéeded, but the Lady left him and departed: being as
glad that ſhe knew who he was, as ſhe had left him without
hope to purchaſe his intent.
                     The ſtrange knight was extreamely paſſioned, ſéeing that
her quicknes, and the light regard of loue wherewith ſhe was
accompanyed, made him ſo ſcornefully entertained: yet could
he not blame her alone, for that he was ſo vſed of them all. In
many ſad conceits he paſſed away the night, ripping vp the intricate
ſorrowes he 
                           •
                        as bound to ſuffer: but when the day
appeared, he mounted on horſebacke, vowing to reuenge the
iniurie he had receiued that night, on any Knight he ſhould
happen to deale withall. But he found himſelfe farre deceiued
in his intent, for the knights of the French Court had giuen
ouer, for comming any more to trouble him, whereat he
was ſomewhat offended: neuertheleſſe he diſſembled his gréefe
that the Ladies might behold his wonted paſſions.
                     
                        Latrania was very much diſpleaſed, becauſe the Iouſts
were not continued as they were woont: againe, ſhe doubted
leaſt the Knight of the Sphere had ſuſtained the foyle in the
Damoſelles cauſe, by reaſon he was ſo ouercharged with trauaile
before he went. The which ſhe would be very ſorry

ſhould ſo fall out, for that by his proweſſe he had giuen the
aduantage ouer her companieos, for which cauſe ſhe remained
continually affectionate towards Dramuſiande. As concerning
the aduenture he followed, the hiſtory maketh no
other mantion of it, but this: that the Damoſell was ſent by
the Sage Aliarts meanes, onely to ſuccour the liues of theſe
two knights, to be imployed in ayding the Emperour of Conſtantinople,
to which place the Damoſell had cauſed Dramuſiande
to take his way, albeit he was very loath to forſake Latrania.
                     
                     After that theſe ſixe dayes were thus paſt, which were dedicated
to the honor of Manſia, Telanſia and Latrania, the two
dayes reſerued for Torſia were come at laſt: whereof the
ſtrange knight was glad, in that he intended to doe more for
her, then he had done for all the reſt. All the firſt day it was
not his chance to haue any aduenture, becauſe no one knight
preſented himſelfe in the Valley, wherefore he paſſed away
the time till night, when hee went to his accuſtomed place,
where he had not ſtaied long, but Telanſia came to him, being
in a Taffata waſtcoate of Indian collour, very richly ſpangled
ouer the bodie, and on her head were Iewells of great eſtimation.
Thus ſhe came to the ſtrange Knight, deſiring him to
certifie her who he was: whereto hée made her this aunſwer.
                     I perceiue Madame, how Loue altogether entendeth to depriue
them of life, who are deſirous to doe him ſeruice, and the
more extreamely to plague and puniſh me, that the paines of
the other oppreſſed ſoules may not compare with mine: for he
hath made me thus to vnderſtand, that your ſeuerall viſitations
are to no other end, but onely to gaine the knowledge of
me, without any will or deſire in you, to pittie my continuall
dying ſpirit, or to regard my dangerous trauailes, wherein
you ſeeke to prolong my loathed life, though I dayly deſire to
breathe my laſt.
                     If you iudge my words to ſauour of any forgerie, you may
compare my continuall iuſtneſſe with my preſent behauiour,
and you ſhall finde your owne, iudgement a witneſſe againſt

your ſelfe: how you ought not ſo to diſdaine his kindneſſe, who
hath guarded this paſſage vnder ſhe honour of your name,
whereby you may triumph with perpetuall renowne. All theſe
cauſes conſidered, me thinkes you ſhould not vſe ſuch ingratitude
to the knight, who hath béene the occaſion you are ſo much
eſtéemed, and is alſo affectionate towards you.
                     Sir knight (anſwered Telanſia) I know not whether your
wordes are forged or no, albeit the cuſtome of ſuch as you is,
to mingle many deceits among your complaints: but if you
would perſwade me to belieue what you ſay, grant me that you
haue refuſed to my companions, that is, to tell me what and
who you are?
                     Faire Lady (anſwered the ſtrange Knight) to tell you who
I am, I ſhall not greatly make daintie: aſſuring you, that I
durſt not reueale it to any of the other, for that my ſpeciall ſeruice
is to honour you. And you ſhall vnderſtand that I am
called the Knight of the Sauage man, from which name truly
you may change me, doing me the honour to be called your
ſeruant.
                     Sir Florian (anſwered Telanſia) one of the ſignes whereby
I know the ſmall loue you beare be, is in reuealing your name
to me, the other, for that I know you more account of the other
Ladies then of me: and no doubt you haue fained to them all,
as you haue done to me, therefore I pray you be not offended,
for you and I muſt néeds part company.
                     So riſing by ſhe departed thence, promiſing not to diſcouer
him to the end his enterpriſe might not be hindered. The day
following, which was the laſt he had to trie his valour on Torſiaes
behalfe, he entred the 
                           •
                        ielde, hoping this day to purchaſe
immortall renowne.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XVI.
                     Of that which happened to the ſtrange knight, the laſt day
he guarded the paſſage, vnder the name of madame Torſia
                     
                        THe ſtrange Knight ſtayed till it was after
noone forth of his Tent, yet not one knight
entred the Valley, which made him report
to the Ladies, that the feare their ſeruants
had of him, in guarding thē, had now cauſed
them to forget the affection they were
woont in words to beare them: wherof they
foure agréeued: ſo that they mounted on thier Palfrays, were al
and came to commune with their knights, who vſed them
with leſſe pleaſant behauiourr then they had done before.
                     Whilſt theſe Ladies were thus conferring with the ſtrange
knight, they eſpyed comming thrée knights, their armor being
in colours, white, blacke and ſcarlet, and each one had figured
in his ſhéeld, a Swan in a field of Sable. One of theſe knights
was named Alemant, the other two were Italians, and Alemant
called himſelfe Lambort of Saxonie: he trauailing to
Conſtantinople, met with theſe two Italians, who perſwaded
him to trauaile with them to the Caſtle of Almaroll willing
likewiſe to approue the aduenture, was ſoone intreated to
beare them company, and their complections being very different,
they fell out of their way: then hearing of the aduenture
of theſe foure French L
                           •
                        dies, they addicted their iourney
preſently to the French Court, perſwading themſelues to end
the aduenture, wherein ſo many good and hardy knights had
fayled. And being thus armed all after▪ one manner, they

arriued in the valley now on the laſt day of the Ladies aduenture.
I know well (ſaid the ſtrange knight ſo ſoone as he had
eſpied them) that fortune did not intend to ſuffer me this day,
without ſhewing you (faire Ladie) the great deſire I hauè, to
be accepted among the number of your beſt fauoured ſeruants:
for you may perſwade your ſelfe, that no Knight whatſoeuer
hath power to reſiſt againſt me, when I haue you ſwéete Lady
in my preſence.
                     While the ſtraunge Knight this repoſed with Torſia, the
thrée Knights were arriued in the field, and after they had aduiſedly
beheld the beautie of theſe foure Ladies, they could not
iudge which of them did moſt excell in beautie. But ſo it was
that their affections were contrarie, for the two Italians enterpriſed
the Combate for Latrania, and Alemant was altogether
inueigled with the beautie of Manſia.
                     
                     Theſe Ladies were ſo well pleaſed as poſſible could be, that
they ſhould be ſerued by Kinghts of ſtrange Nations, which
made them vſe ſuch great courteſie and fauour towards them,
as they had not done the like to any of the King Arnedes court:
whereat the ſtrange knight was ſo mooued, as he preſently prepared
himſelfe to the Iouſt. Brucie of Verona one of the Italians,
was the firſt that beganne the paſtime: but the ſtrange
knight met with him in ſuch ſort, as he was ſent to the ground
with his héeles vpward.
                     Which the other Italian perceiuing, who was named Trucie
of Beroze▪
                         he gaue his horſe the ſpurres: but in the encounter
he was ſent to kéepe his fellowe company. This much diſpleaſed
Lambrot of Saxonie, who was eſtéemed a good knight,
when ſetting his Launce in a reſt, the two knights met together
ſo brauely, as Lambrot was vnhorſed with his Saddle
betwéene his legges, and the ſtrange knight was forced to forſake
both his ſtirrops.
                     Then Alemant calling to the Combate with the ſword, the
ſtrange Knight alighted from his horſe, but the two Italians
would not ſuffer Alemant to enter the Combate, for they ſaide
the aduantage belonged to them, becauſe they were firſt diſmounted,
Vpon this they fell at much variance among themſelues,

which was incontinently appeaſed by the foure Ladies,
who ordained, that Brucian of Verona ſhould begin the Combate
firſt: but he was ſo entertained by the ſtrange Knight, as
Trucie of Beroze was conſtrained to come helpe him. Whereat
the ſtrange Knight was ſo mooued, as in ſhort time he layde
Brucie of Verona at his feete: and Trucie of Beroze was ſore
hurt, as he was glad to flie to the Ladies for refuge, who deſired
the ſtrange knight to ſaue his life.
                     
                        Alemont deſirous to reuenge the iniury his two friends had
receiued, drew his ſword, and buckling on his Sheeld, came very
fiercely to aſſayle the ſtrange knight: but he dealt ſo roughly
with him, and followed his intent with ſuch nimble and braue
behauiour, as Alemant found he dealt with one ſtronger then
himſelfe. Yet was he of this mind, that he rather deſired to die
at his hands, then to demand any ſuccour of the Ladies: who
were ſo greatly mooued with pittie, fearing to ſee him die before
them, as they came and deſired the ſtrange knight to giue ouer
the Combate.
                     At their requeſt he was contented being very glad he had ſo
well accompliſhed his promiſe, giuing them to vnderſtand, that
to do them ſeruice he could be perſwaded eaſily to enterpriſe any
other aduenture: but for that it was night, they courteouſly
tooke their leaue of him, and went againe to the Monaſterie,
leauing him now in as great extremitie of greefe, as they had
done any of the dayes paſſed before. And I muſt not forget to
tel you how the Ladies likewiſe gaue the three knights a friendly
farewell, who withdrewe themſelues alſo to their Lodging,
and the day following tooke their way whither▪ Fortune guided
them: being vnwilling to go viſite the Court againe, much
leſſe to returne to their Ladies, for whoſe ſakes they had receiued
ſo great ſhame.
                     The ſtraunge Knight remembring himſelfe how Torſiaes
turne came to viſite him, made no account of his paſſed trauaile,
but went to his accuſtomed place, where hee long looked
for the preſence of Torſia. And albeit he thought to conceale
himſelfe from her, yet was it not poſſible for him ſo to
doe: for hee not onely bewrayed his name vnto her, but hee

would haue diſcourſed his whole life to her likewiſe, if ſhe had
bin diſpoſed to haue giuen the hearing. Not long it was before
Totſia tooke her way to the place, where the other Ladies had
bene before, being in her night apparell, a wastcoate of blacke
Taffata, the bodies all richly wrought euer with paſement
lace of gold, 
                           •
                        oure fingers bread, and betwéene curry lace were
coſtly pearles and ſtones, which did ſet her forth in ſuch a brauery,
as would haue amazed the 
                           •
                        réeſt knight in the world.
                     Her mantle was of blew Veluet, wrought round about
with 
                           ••
                        cures of gold verie ſumptvouſly, and in this manner ſhe
came and ſate downe by the knight: but he being fearefull to
mooue effence any way, durſt not take the hardineſſe to ſpeake
to her, whereupon ſhe ſpake thus. I did not thinke (Sir) 
                           •
                        hat
my comming would be of ſo 
                           ••
                        ender eſtimation to you, as I
perceiue you make it: but I did alwayes miſdoubt you, and
therefore I am now deceiued.
                     Madame (anſwered the ſtrange knight) the pleaſure I receiue
by your arriuall, is ſo great, as it deprined me of the vſe
of my ſpéech, whereat I ſée you are offended, and reputed me
otherwiſe then a loyall ſeruant, for that I did not aduaunce
my ſelfe to entertaine you with ſuch graciers behauiour, as
your excellencie well deſerueth. But you doe not remember
(ſwéet miſtreſſe) that if I had ſpoken to you, my talke 
                           〈…〉
                        
nothing elſe but the woonted gréeuous complaints, 
                           〈◊〉
                         which
I am afraide to commit to light (albeit I haue iuſt occaſion)
ſuch was and is my doubt (faire Madam) of diſpleaſing you. I
am not ignorant (anſwered Torſia) that he neuer wants excuſes,
who knowes how to ſhift for himſelfe. You haue giuen
forth your ſelfe daily vnder the name of an obedient ſeruant to
me, which I cannot beléeue, much leſſe abide to accept any
Knight in my ſeruice, who will not or dare not reueale his
name, the onely thing truely wherefore I am come hither at
this time. Madame (ſaid the ſtrange knight) I know not whether
I ſhould declare my name vnto you
                           •
                        , and remaine paſſionate
to vnderſtand of you, who is the Knight to whome you
beare moſt fauour: or conceale my ſelfe to your excellency, continuing
my ſ
                           •
                        lfe ſtill afflicted, and leauing you vncontented.
                     
                        
I aſſure you, I can make ſlender choyſe of either of theſe two
extreames, not knowing which of them may hurt me moſt,
yet muſt I put it in aduenture, ſince my good hap is tyed to the
heeles of Mercurie.
                     
                     Therefore you ſhall vnderſtand Madame, that I am called
the Knight of the Sauage man in all Princes Courts, where
I haue receiued greater fauour at the Ladyes hands, then I
haue done here in the French Court: albeit I haue done my
dutie in ſeruice towards them that beare the prize in beautie,
eſpecially to you, whom I honour in affection aboue all other.
                     And ſeeing I haue thus diſcourſed my name vnto you, I deſire
you to thinke, that my complaints are on iuſt occaſion: but
if it be true, that Loue is woont to enforce them ſuffer, who
trauaile and ſerue him with fidelitie, I ſhall reſt content to
be ſo well recompenced. For ſuch is the eſpeciall good will I
beare you, that I deſire my life may be prolonged onely to
pleaſure you: not regarding my often baniſhent from hope
to deſpaire, nor the ſundry vnſauorie ſweetes wherewith I
muſt feed my ſelfe, onely by the froward and rigorous ſtormes,
which dayly and hourely come from you.
                     Therefore I deſire you good Madame, ſomewhat to regard
him in pittie, who hath no other will, but onely to ſuffer what
euer you lay on him, and would refuſe no torment, ſo he knew
you did fancie it, or thinke well on it.
                     Sir Knight (anſwered Torſia) if I ſhould be deceiued by
ſuch faire and plauſible ſpeeches, it were vnpoſſible for me to

                           •
                        hunne any miſfortune, for I ſhould accompany the two princeſſes
Targiana and Arnalte: but becauſe I know you ſo well,
and would be loath to beare a part in their complaints, I am
content at this time to leaue you.
                     When ſhe had thus ſaid, ſhe preſently roſe and departed, accounting▪
her aſſurance ſmall in his company, becauſe euerie
one knew of the ſundry prankes of the Knight of the Sauage
man: but he was maruellouſly offended at the ſodaine departure
of Torſia, and brake forth in complaints ſtill, as though
ſhe were in his company. Albeit Lady (quoth he) the remembrance
of your vngentleneſſe maketh me deſpaire, yet your

preſence hath power to helpe my dolour, in reioycing my troubled
ſight, giuing comfort to my afflicted ſoule, and knitting
vp all complaints with your ſweete companie: but being depriued
of you, theſe fainting armes fold vp the dying coarſe, and
ſo with many a deadly ſigh accompany their Maiſter to their
latter home,
                     After he had moned a pretty ſpace in this manner, he concluded
with himſelfe to forget theſe Ladies, and entring into conceit
of their crueltie, he ſlept ſoundly till the next morning. Then
ſo ſoone as he was armed, he cauſed Arlencea and the Damoſels
to be ſent for, who had all this while remained in the monaſterie
with the Nuns: they giuing them moſt harty thankes
for their friendes vſage, ſet forward on their way with the
Knight of the Sauage man, who now would haue his Shield
no longer couered.
                     The foure Ladies bare them company a little way on their
Palfreys, being glad they could let the King knowe what hee
was, and very faine they would haue had him with them to the
Court: but when they perceiued their labour was all in vaine,
Torſia ſmiling, ſpake to him thus. Truſt me ſir, by the te
                           •
                        tes
which fall from mine eyes, me thinkes you take your parting
heau
                           •
                        ly, or euery teare is as bigge as a Milſtone. Lady (quoth
he) the fire that is kindled in my ſtomach by your loue, is of
ſuch nature as the water cannot quench.
                     But ſeeing you make ſo light account of him, who hath humbled
himſelfe 
                           〈◊〉
                         much to you, I will deſpiſe Loue, who is the
occaſion of ſuch a miſfortune. And this you may aſſure your
ſelfe, I will gage the heart (which once did preſent it ſelfe to
you in another place, to trie if I ſhalbe better entertained, then
I haue beene at your hands. So parting from them, he ſet forward
on his iourney, deſiring to attaine the Citie of Conſtantinople.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XLVII.
                     How the Knight of the Sauge man, arriued at the Court of
Conſtantinople: And how Dragonalt and Arnalte the
Queene of Nauarre, came likewiſe to the Emperours
Court.
                     
                        LOng trauailed the Knight of the Sauage
man, till at laſt hee came into a Forreſt
ſomewhat néere the Citie of Conſtantinople,
where he eſpied a number of Knights,
Ladies and Damoſels, which made him
preſently ſuſpect the Emperor to be in their
company, as he was indéede: for he had béen
abroad with them to ſée his falcons flie, and for that age would
not ſuffer him to ride on horſebacke, he was in a Coach, accompanied
with the Empreſſe and other Princeſſe of the Court,
who peroeiuing the knight of the Sauage man comming, and
fiue Damoſels in his company, they knew him ſo ſoone as they
beheld the deuiſe his Shield.
                     Then came they togither to méete him in ſuch a troupe, as
the Knight of the Sauage man was very ioyfull to ſee himſelfe
ſo welcome to his friends: amongſt them was his Brother
Palmerin of England, who came and embraced him with excéeding
humanitie.
                     
                        Arlencea being alighted from her horſe, he tooke her by the
hand, and brought her before the Emperour, and when he had
kiſſed his hand, he deſired his excellencie that it might be his
pleaſure to remember, how much he was beholding to that lady,
who ſaued him from falling into the handes of cruell Collambra,
her mother. Arlencea humbled her ſelfe to the Emperour,
her huge ſtature being much wondred at of all the Ladies:
but the Emperour ſhewed himſelfe very gracious vnto
her: in like manner did the Empreſſe and Gridonia. But Leonarda,
                        
the Princeſſe of Thrace, ſuſpecting the Knight of the
Sauage mans minde was not on her, entertained Arlencea,
but euen ſo.
                     In the meane while theſe Ladies were thus ioyfully entertaining
Arlencea, the knight of the Sauage man was aduertiſed
of the death of King Fredericke of England his Grandfather:
at which tidings he was ſo heauy, as he was enforced
to forſake their company, and rode into the Citie before them.
And after he was come to the Pallace, he conſumed certaine
dayes in mournings, vntill the time compelled him to goe viſit
the Princeſſe Leonarda his Lady.
                     The Emperour cauſed Arlencea to be mounted on horſebacke
againe, making very eſpeciall eſtimation of her, for as
ſhe was endued with exquiſite beautie, ſo was ſhe adorned
with very gratious maners, which liked euery one well that
beheld her: eſpecially Dramuſiande, who was now ſo farre in
loue with her, as he had quite forgotten Latrania.
                     
                     As the Emperour was about to returne into the Cittie, he
eſpyed come riding along the Forreſt diuers Ladyes and Damoſels,
accompanyed with diuers knights, who were offered
the Iouſt by them attendant on the Emperour. Which the
principal knight in the company perceiuing, and deſirous beſide
to try his valour before ſuch an aſſembly, tooke a ſtrong Lance,
and clapping downe the Beuer of his Helmet, came and preſented
himſelfe to the Lady in the company, who had the authoritie
to command all the other. And hauing taken his leaue
of her, he gaue his horſe the ſpurs, and was ſo fortunate in the
encounter, as he ſent Bellizant out of his ſaddle.
                     Afterward with another Lance, which one of the Knights
gaue him in his hand, he ſent foure more good and eſpeciall
Knights of the Emperours Court to the ground, whereat the
Emperour maruelled, and noting the braue behauiour of this
Knight, he cauſed to be ſent him certaine Lances, but before
they could be receiued, a Damoſell came and ſaluted the Emperor
from the knight in this maner. Renowmed Emperour,
Dragonalt the King of Nauarre, being deſirous to content the
Princeſſe Arnalte his Quéen and wife, hath thus preſumed to

Iouſt with your Knights: but when he vnderſtood your Highneſſe
was in place, he commanded me to infourme your Maieſtie,
how he hath left his owne realme, to offer his humble dutie
to your excellencie.
                     The Emperour and the Empreſſe hearing the Damoſelles
words, were ſuppriſed with vnſpeakeable pleaſure, entending
to entertaine Dragonalt with as much honour as could
be deuiſed: as well for knowing him to be the Sonne of a valiant
Prince, and Nephew to King Friſoll, as alſo to mooue
the affection of his Queene Arnalte, in more ample maner to
him, and ſo without any further ſtay they went to meete them.
Which when Dragonalt and the Queene Arnalte beheld, they
alighted from their horſes, and holding one another by the
hand, went to meete the Empreſſe: who likewiſe to do them
the greater honour, came on feete accompanied with Gridonia
Polinarda, Leonarda, & diuers other Ladies, each of them imbracing
them with their humanitie, letting them vnderſtand,
how the emperors court was highly honored by their preſence.
                     After they had on all ſides ſufficiently welcomed theſe princes,
Dragonalt and Arnalte mounted on horſebacke: but Palmerin
alighted, and taking the bridle of Arnaltes horſe in his
hand, ſo walked on til he came to the pallace, wherat the princeſſe
Polinarda beganne to waxe ſomewhat iealous. Arnalte
well noting the beautie of the two Princeſſes, Polinarda, and
the faire Leonarda of Thrace, began to thinke, that they which
enterpriſed the Combate in Spaine for the faireſt in the world,
did witneſſe their manhood in a iuſt occaſion: albeit, next to
theſe two, her ſelfe was eſteemed the third for beautie in the
Emperours Court, but when the Princeſſe Miragarda came
thither, ſhe was conſtrained to be the fourth in number. Dragonalt,
and the Quéene Arnalte were lodged verie neere the
Empreſſe Chamber, and Arlencea and her Damoſels, were
gueſts to the Ducheſſe of Lubicall, the chiefe Lady about the
Empreſſe.
                     The Emperour cauſed dayly Iouſts and Tournements, to
witneſſe the Quéene Arnalte, that her preſence was very agreeable
to him. Dramuſiande was ſo conquered with the

loue Arlencea, as he could reſt in no place, neither enioy any
quietneſſe. Palmerin (who liued now in more content then
he had of long time before) did not yet thinke all things ſound
and ſure, for that Lone preſenteth daily ſome occaſions of feare
to amorous perſons, vntill ſuch time as their deſires are perfectly
contented. In the meane while this great ioy continued,
Pompides King of Scottes with his Queene, arriued at the
Emperors Cour, who were receiued with maruellous great
pompe and honour.
                     The Prince Primaleon deſirous to ſhewe himſelfe thankefull
for diuerſe occaſions had paſſed betweene the Prince Don
Edward and himſelfe, ledde the Queene of Scottes Palfray by
the bridle, till ſhe came to the Pallace Gate, notwithſtanding,
the intreatie of Pompides and her ſelfe very often to the contrarie.
                     The Quéene of Scottes was lodged with the princeſſe Polinarda,
who held her ſelfe greatly contented, becauſe ſhee was
ſo neere in alliance to her moſt fauoured friend. Palmerin and
Pomp des went to comfort the Knight of the Sauage man in
his chamber, where he kept, and would not as yet goe abroad,
ſo heauily he tooke the death of King Fredericke, his Grandfather.
The Court of Conſtantinople, was in ſhort time ſo well
furniſhed with Princes and noble Knights, as they were iudged
more then needed, to entertaine the whole puiſſance of the
Pagan Kings.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XLVIII.
                     How Arnedes King of Fraunce and his Queene, Recinde
King of Spaine and his Queene, accompanied with the
Princeſſe Miragarda, and the Giant Almaroll, arriued at
the Emperours Court of Conſtantinople.
                     
                        
                        THe Emperour ſéeing himſelfe brought into
the extremity of age, thought good to enioyn
his Nephewe in marriage, and alſo the other
Princes and Knights that had béene
nouriſhed in his court: and that he might
mooue a generall good liking by ſo doing, he
imparted his intent to the Empreſſe and
his ſonne, Primaleon. When hee vnderſtood how well they
thought of the matter, hée writ preſently to Arnedes King of
France, his ſonne in lawe, that he would doe him ſo much honour
as to come with the Quéene to his Court. In like manner
his Maieſtie diſpatched letters to Don Edward, King of
England, and Flerida his daughter: to Recinde king of Spaine,
deſiring him and his Quéene to come to his Court, and bring
the Princeſſe Miragarda in their company. The Emperour
Vernar was ſent for likewiſe, and Tarnaes King of Lacedemonia,
with his Daughter Sidelia, whoſe beautie caried ſome
credit at that time, and the Soldane Bellagris, with Maiortes,
and many others, the Emperour by his Letters inuited to his
Court. But the firſt that came to Conſtantinople were the
Emperour Vernar, and King Edward of England: ſoone after
came the Soldane Bellagris and Maiortes, their entertainement
being according as their noble eſtates deſerued. Then
came the King Tarnaes with his Quéene, Sidelia his Daughter,
and the ſorrowfull Lady Pandricia, whom the Empreſſe
lodged in her owne Chamber. The two Kings, Arnedes and
Recinde, arriued with their Shippes at the Port of Conſtantinople,
and ſounded their Trumpets and Drummes ſo gallantly
as the people were afraide in the Cittie, fearing left their
enemies were come: but the Princeſſe came to receiue them
with great ioy, where they might behold the King of France
in a ſumptuous Galley, couered with cloath of Golde of
great value, wherein was himſelfe, his Quéene, Florenda
and Graciana his two Daughters, with many Ladies and
Knightes beſide. In another Galion was the King Recinde
                        
and the Quéene, with a number of Knights for his Guarde.
Before them in another Galion, was the faireſt Princeſſe
Miragarda, the Giant Almaroll, the Prince Florendos, and
many other knights. The King Recinde being aduertiſed,
that the Emperour intended to marry the Princeſſe to his
Nephewe Florendos, with the King Arnedes conſent (to doe
them the more honour) cauſed their Galion to march formoſt,
as the Captaine ouer all the other Veſſelles. The Emperour
was ſo glad of theſe tydings, as hée forſooke his Coatch,
and was brought in a chayre to the place where theſe Princes
ſhould land, and the Empreſſe with the Quéenes, Princeſſes,
and Ladies, mounted on their horſes, which were clad
in moſt rich and coſtly harneſſe, and ſo they ridde to the Port
of the Citie very ſtately. There was the Emperour, accompanied
with his Sonne Primaleon, king Edward of England,
the Emperour Vernar of Allemaigne, Soldane Bellagris,
Maiortes, Ternaes the king of Lacedemonia, Polendos,
Eſtrelant, Pompides and Dragonalt, and no little ioy it was
to him in his aged yéeres, to ſee himſelfe ſo beloued of the moſt
puiſſant Princes that were in the whole world: but albeit the
preſence of theſe great perſonages was ve
                           •
                        y pleaſant to him,
yet could hee not chooſe but take it heauily, ſéeing the preaſſe
ſo fore vppon him, as long hée could not bée a companion
for them.
                     The kings Arnedes, and Recinde, and the Prince Florendos,
being all come on land, they knéeled downe to kiſſe
the Emperours hand, but he imbracing them in his armes,
would not ſuffer him to honour him ſo much, then came the
Quéene of Spaine, and the Quéene of France, with her two
daughters, whom his Maieſtie welcomed very familiarly. And
when the Princeſſe Miragarda came into his preſence, he accepted
of her maruellous graciouſly, entring into theſe ſpéeches
to her.
                     I am very glad (Madame) that you would vouchſafe to
come hither, where I may requite the great gentleneſſe I haue
found at your hands, in prouiding to detaine the Prince Albayzar
in ſo good ſecuritie.
                     
                        
The Princeſſe Miragarda made no other anſwere, but with
a milde and Princely courteſie, made ſhowe how well ſhee
tooke the Emperours words: and I aſſure you, her preſence abaſhed
the iudgements of a number, in whoſe eyes ſhe ſeemed
the faiceſt creature on the earth.
                     The Giant Almaroll was likewiſe very welcome to the
Emperour, and when the Princeſſe Polinarda had courteouſly
ſaluted Miragarda, ſhe ſhrunke aſide to her Brother Florendos
entertaining him with this language. I perceiue new wel
(my Lord and Brother) that you haue good cauſe to thinke your
labour well beſtowed in that you haue trauelled for a Lady of
ſo ſingular beautie. I would with all my heart, good Siſter (anſwered
Florendo) that I had the due recompence my labour
hath deſerued, ſo might I be in the better aſſurance. Oh Brother
(ſaid Polinarda) the Giant Almaroll hath no authoritie
to ſhut the doore againſt you here, therefore I promiſe you, the
Princeſſe of Thrace and I will not 
                           •
                        orget to enterpriſe the
meanes, whereby you ſhall (no doubt) finde fauour.
                     The Emperour would delay the time no longer, but to the
Pallace they rode altogether, the Prince Primalcon leading
the Queene of Spaines horſe by the bridle, albeit the King Recinde
was very loth to ſuffer him. The King Polendos did as
much honour to the Queene of Fraunce, and King Edward of
England afforded the like to the faire Princeſſe Miragarda, as
well to content the aged Emperor, as to honour his kinſeman
the Prince Florendos: Palmerin of England, did the like to
the faire Florenda and Florian of the Forreſt, to the Princeſſe
Gracia
                              •
                           a, in briefe, the Princeſſe and Knights, led all the Lades
Palfra
                           •
                        es till they came to the Pallace. The Emperour
was caried in his Chayre by foure Knights, communing with
the Princeſſe Miragarda all the way, deſiring her to fauour his
Nephew Florendos, and to thinke of him, as one that had
well deſerued at her hands.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XLIX.
                     Of the Conference which the Emperour had with the Princes.
And how the Marriages that he appointed, were now
accompliſhed in effect.
                     
                        WHen the Princes, that were thus arriued
Conſtantinople, had reſted themſelues for
certaine dayes, the Emperour deſirous to
content euery one before he died, who had
beſtowed their ſeruice in honouring him,
reuealed his intent to the Emperor Vernar
king Edward, Arnedes. Recinde and Primaleon,
how he would gladly ſée his Nephewes married, and
the other Princes that had béene nouriſhed in his court, whom
he would ſee all matched according as their affections ſerued
them. The Princes liked maruaellouſly the Emperours intent
whereupon, he cauſed the Sunday following a great feaſt to be
ordained in the Quéene Fleridaes Chamber, which place was
the moſt conuenient in all the Pallace for their courtly diſports
and there the Ladies were euery one regarded in their degrées,
being more pleaſant in the Ladyes of their ſauoured ſeruants,
then all the coſtly iunckets prouided for the banquet.
                     
                        Palmerin was ſo earneſt in affection towards his Lady, as
he iudged her to ſurpaſſe all the other in beautie. Florendos
held the ſame opinion to the faire Miragarda, and Florian
made ſuch eſtimation of the Princeſſe of Thrace, as he feared
not to Combate againſt any whatſoeuer, that her beautie
might carrie the credite aboue all the reſt: and the Prince Platir
was not behinde him in conceite, towards his ſwéete Ladie
Sidelia, daughter to the King Tarnaes. The Empreſſe Bazilia,

Gridonia, Fl
                              •
                           rida, & Francellina, becauſe of their high eſtates,
were chéefe next the Empreſſe 
                           〈…〉
                         the Quéene
Flerida bare the price of beautie amongſt them all, becauſe ſhe
was in the moſt ſwéete and delicate time of her yeares. After
the Tables were wiſhdra
                           •
                        e, and all the 
                           〈◊〉
                         departed
the place, the Emperour (being weake and ſickely) 
                           〈◊〉
                        
King Edward to expreſſe before all the company, what he had
giuen him in charge. King Edward willing to obey the Emperors
commandement, aroſe from the Table, the
                           ••
                         taking off
his Hat, and kiſſing the Emperours hand, he ſaluted all there
preſent, and began thus.
                     Moſt gratious Empres, as each of vs for his benefit & honor
hath receiued ſuch Ladies in marriage, as the Emperour from
his owne Court hath pleaſed to beſtow on vs, ſome that are
allied to his Excellency, and others to the Princes and lords of
his Empire, wherby the renowme of Chriſtendom is worthyly
maintained, and all cauſes expreſſing good nature continued
in their floriſhing eſtate. It may therefore ſéeme good to you at
this preſent, that I publickely open his gracious and Princely
determination, whereby may be knowne, if your Highneſſe
with theſe Quéenes and Princeſſes in your company, ſhall
thinke well of that, which by the aduice of his honourable councell
he ſeeketh to put in practiſe. It is ſo, that his Maieſty hath
ſet it downe for a decree, that theſe young Princes and knights
ſhal ioyne in mariage (in 
                           •
                        ecompence of all their noble trauels)
with thoſe to whom they are moſt affectionate. And as for thē
that are as yet vnprouided of Ladies, his Maieſty will allow
them continuance in his Court: whereby no 
                           〈◊〉
                         ſhall grew
on any ſide, but euery one ſhall be contented to their owne deſires.
Here pauſing a while, he attended what the Empreſſe
with the other Quéenes and Ladyes would ſay, as alſo 
                           •
                        o bethinke
himſelfe on the names of the perſons, whom the Emperour
had appointed to many: but the young Princes and
knights were ſomewhat abaſhed, doubting whether they
might giue credite to the kings words, for their was not any
of them, but iudged his labors ſufficiently rewarded, if he might
enioy his ſweet Saint and Miſtreſſe.
                     
                        
The Ladies that were in preſence, began to bluſh & change
their amiable countenance, whereby they bewrayed the ſecret
ſudden ioy of their hearts, which they receiued by the ſpéeches
King Edward had vttered. Polinarda very often caſt her eyes
on the Prince Palmerin, being in as great feare as the offender
that awaiteth the ſentēce of the Iudge, for ſhe doubted leaſt
her Grandfather would beſtow on her ſome other, and not let
her enioy him whom her heart deſired. And Palmerin was afflicted
in the ſame manner, ſuch and ſo great was the vehemency
of his ſundry paſſions, which betwéene hope & feare he was
conſtrained to ſuffer: but while his thoughts were in this infinite
deale of trouble; his Father King Edward following his
former intent, began againe in this manner.
                     You ſhall vnderſtand. Sir Florendos, that my gratious
Lord the Emperour (with the conſent of the King Recinde)
enioyneth you to eſpowſe the Princeſſe Miragarda,
who (in my iudgement) will not bée any thing offended to
bee ſo matched: and ſo ſhall you Syr Florendos thinke your
ſelfe fully ſatiſfied, for all the trauailes you haue endured for
her ſake.
                     All the prince there preſent looked on Florendos, when they
might well perceiue, that the words of king Edward had giuen
him more ioy, then if the richeſt Realme in the world were in
his own poſſeſſion: but the princeſſe Miragarda kept her countenance
ſo demurely, as one could hardly iudge, whether the
loue of Florendos were acceptable to him or no.
                     And for thée my ſonne Palmerin, (ſaid king Edward the emperour
& the prince Primaleon, being very willing thou ſhouldeſt
knowe the loue they beare thee, doe giue thée to wife the
Princeſſe Polinarda, not doubting but thou ſhalt imagine all
thy paſſed trauailes, to be fully recompenced in ſo ſweet a reward.
The Princeſſe Polinarda no ſooner heard theſe wordes,
but the delicate Roſiall colour that dyed her daintie countenance,
witneſſed the loue and good will ſhe bare to the Prince
Palmerin of England, who likewiſe now abandoned all his
former feare, ſeeing he ſhould enioy the felicitie hee had ſo long
wiſhed for.
                     
                        
Which when his Father King Edward perceiued, he made
as though he did not eſpie, and procéeded on with his former
determination, giuing the Prince Gracian (Sonne to the king
of France) to vnderſtand, that the Emperour did beſtowe on
him his Niece Claricias, the Daughter to the King Polendos.
And you Syr Berolde, for your vertuous behauiour, muſt enioy
the Iewel of your heart, the faire Oniſtalda, Daughter to
the Duke Drapos of Normandie, and Niece to the renowned
King Friſoll, whereof your Father (I am ſure) will be very
well contented. And you ſir Francian, ſhall match with Bernada,
Daughter to the valiant. Prince Belcar. And you noble
Prince Platir, in that your déedes are worthy of perpetuall
memorie, you ſhall poſſeſſe the faire Sidelia, Daughter to the
King Tarnaes of Lacedemoni
                              •
                           , who will willingly beſtowe
her vpon you for that your noble behauiour hath well deſerued
her. And you Don Roſuel, the true inheriter of the Prince
Belcar your Father, ſhall be honoured with Dramaciana,
Daughter to the Duke Tirendos, and for that you haue ſerued
her faithfully ſo long, you ſhall enioy her at laſt as the deſert
of your labours. And for Bellizant your Brother, his Prize is
the Lady Deniſa, Daughter to the Duke of Sparta: who is
now content to requite him with her loue, becauſe he hath endured
ſo many ſharpe ſhowers vnder her name. Dramian ſhall
haue for his guardon, the Princeſſe Clariana, Daughter to
Di
                              •
                           ea the Princeſſe of Hungaria: and you Friſoll, becauſe it is
your right to ſuccéede the Duke your Father, ſhall be ioyned in
marriage with Leonarda, Daughter to the Duke of Pera. And
for this cauſe (noble Gentlemen) did the Emperour and his
Councell call you into this place, to the end you might perceiue
the good zeale and loue he beareth to you all. But let me not
forget what his Maieſtie hath ordained, as concerning you
noble Sir Dramuſiande, it is his will that you ſhall eſpouſe
Madame Arlencea, as well to content the deſire of her loue, as
alſo to ſhewe himſelfe thankefull, for her bewraying the treaſon
of Alfernao: and his excellency hath concluded to beſtowe
the Profound Iſle on you, which ſometime belonged to her 
                           •
                        ather
Brauorant, and is now in the cuſtody of my ſonne Florian
                        
your friend. Darmuſiande was ſuppriſed with ſuch excéeding
ioy at theſe words, as he had not the power to attend till king
Edward had finiſhed his diſcourſe, but came and humbled him
ſelfe before the Emperor, yéelding him a thouſand thankes for
his gracious courteſie king Edward tooke him vp in his armes,
deſiring him to haue patience a little while, till he had ended
his charge, and comming to the Princeſſe of Thrace he entred
into theſe ſpéeches. To you moſt excellent Princeſſe, whom
nature hath plentifully endued with beautie and courteſie, the
Emperour, wich theſe Kings and noble Lords in his company,
doe earneſtly deſire to giue in marriage my ſon Florian, if ſo be
his déedes might deſerue ſo well your good liking: it is likewiſe
wiſhed by my ſonne Palmerin, to whom you are tied in ſome
point of obedience, according as king Sardamant your Grandfather
appointed it in his will. Palmerin who all this while had
kept himſelfe ſilent) humbly deſired the king his father to
vouchſafe him a word or twaine: which being granted him, he
came before the princeſſe of Thrace and ſetting on of his knees
to the ground, he began to her as followeth.
                     I durſt not (Madam) take the hardnes on me, to preſent you
my Brother Florian the firſt time you ſaw him, fearing leaſt
you would thinke, that I was inclined more to regard his pr
                           •
                        
                        fit,
then your honour: but I was the more willing to driue it
off till this preſent, that you might haue ſome knowledge of his
knightly déedes, wherein if I perceiued you to take any delight,
I might be the bolder in preſenting him for your huſband, and
you the eaſier to entertaine him. Let it then I pray you ſeeme
acceptable in your iudgement, what the Emperor & his counſell
hath determined on, in that I am perſwaded the heauenly
powers doe thinke well it ſhould be ſo. Syr Palmerin (aunſwered
the Princeſſe) I am ſhée, who alwayes couet the
meanes, whereby I might ſhew my ſelfe dutifull vnto you,
and if I ſhould ſéeme to vſe my ſelfe otherwiſe, I were vnworthy
to receiue the royall preferment, which the King my
Grandfather hath appointed me: beſide, my ſubiects might
well examine on me, if I ſhould goe contrary to his will who
hath the houre ouer me: therefore reſolue your ſel
                           •
                        e, that I

ſhall be content to graunt to any thing, which you imagine for
the fulfilling of your promiſe, and mine honour. Palmerin kiſſing
her hand, aroſe immediately, being not a little glad of the
courteous anſwere the princeſſe of Thrace had made him then
King Edward turned to the Knights, and beganne againe in
this manner. You ſhall vnderſtand noble Gentlemen, that it
is the Emperors will you ſhould reueale to him, how you accept
of his opinion, and the Princeſſes and Ladies ſhal bewray
their intents to the Empreſſe, becauſe his excellency would not
enterpriſe any thing, but he will haue all parties well contented
therewith. Theſe marriages were ſo well thought on by euery
one preſent, as the Knights and Ladies told the Emperor
they were all contented, eſpecially the Knights, who aduanced
themſelues one after another to kiſſe the Emperours hand: the
like they did to the Emperor Vernar, Bazilia, Gridonia, and
the Kings and Quéenes there preſent, and the Emperour embraced
them euery one, but when Palmerin came to him, he h
                           •
                        ld
him in his armes, and ſpake thus.
                     My ſonne, I haue continually imagined with my ſelfe, how
I might worthily recompence your déedes of ſo high eſtimation:
but now I perſwade my ſelfe, that both my deſire and yours
ſhall be ſufficiently contented, in giuing you the Iewell of my
bliſſe, and the honour of my trauailes, my Niece the Princeſſe
Polinarda, whoſe name I pray the heauens to imprint ſo deepe
in your heart, as the Empreſſe both hath beene, and is 
                           〈◊〉
                        ,
to the end that you and I bearing one name, may be alike in
happineſſe and good fortune. I neuer thought my gracious
Lord (anſwered Palmerin) that my deedes ſhould purchaſe ſuch
a high and happy felicitie, as this which your Maieſtie
hath 
                           〈◊〉
                         on me: but I ſee it is your goodneſſe, and not my
defects, for which I am bound in duty during life. Primaleon
and Gridonia imbraced him very louingly, being glad their
Daughter was beſtowed ſo honourably.
                     After theſe ioyfull motions, both on the one ſide & the other,
were ſomewhat pacified, the Emperor returned to counſell againe,
with the Emperor Vernar, King Edward, Primaleon,
and the other Kings, letting them vnderſtand, that he did not

intend to forget the Ladie Pandritia: whereupon the Soldane
Bellagris was called, to whome King Edward bewrayed all
matters paſſed, how Bellagris vnder his name entred Pandriciaes.
Chamber, and begot of her Syr Blandidon, whom euery
one thought, and ſhée her ſelfe, to be King Edwards Sonne,
as you may reade in the firſt Volume of this Hiſtory.
                     The Soldane Bellagris knowing thy great error of his faith,
and being aſſured withall, that Blandidon was his ſonne, remoued
his Turkiſh opiuion, wherein he had liued ſo long time:
and to remaine in the friendſhip of theſe worthy Princes, hée
concluded to eſpouſe Pandritia, to the great contentment of
many Princes his friends, who likewiſe (by his conuerſion)
came to know the lawe of the liuing God. Of this good hap,
the Emperor and all the other Chriſtian Princes were very
glad, and to continue Bellagris in this good mind, the Emperor
preſently aroſe from counſell, & went into the princeſſe chamber
accompanied with King Edward, where his Maieſtie declared
to Pandritia, what had paſſed betwéene them and the
Solean Bellagris, cauſing her to forget her former opiniō, that
Blandidon was the ſonne of King Edward, and certifying her
likewiſe, how the Soldan had receiued his Heatheniſh faith,
to make her amends by marriage, which ſhe ought not to refuſe,
as well conſidering the valour and riches of the Soldane,
who was a mighty and renowmed Prince, as alſo that her
ſon might know his noble father. Pandritia heauily looking about
her, was ſo ſore troubled, as it was a great while ere ſhe
ſpake a word: but after ſhe had better remembred her ſelfe, ſhee
earneſtly beheld king Edward, ſpeaking to him in this maner.
My hard deſtiny (worthy Prince) hath concealed this ſo long,
which you at laſt haue vouchſafed to bewray, that my life may
be heereafter more pleaſant then it hath beene: and this you
may aſſure your ſelfe, that if I had knowne of this before, I
had giuen due chaſtiſement to my ignorant miſfortune. But
ſince it is come to light at this time, both the loue of my ſonne,
the ſaluation of the Soldane and his Subiects, compelleth me
to forget all matters paſt, conſidered alſo, that the force of loue
made him deceiue in this manner.
                     
                        
The Emperour liked well of that ſhe had ſaid, and the Empreſſe
embraced hee many times, being ſo glad as could be poſſible,
that all things came to ſuch a happy end. Blandidon was
then called into preſence, who was very ſorry when he knew
king Edward was not his father: but the hope to be preferred
by the Soldanes dignitie, made him to forget all former occaſions,
and take content in that preſent before him.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                         L.
                     How the Soldan Bellagris was baptized: and how afterward
the Emperor cauſed him to be married to Pandritia,
and how the other Princes of his court were married alſo.
                     
                        AFter that theſe marriages were thus agréed
vpon, the Emperour commaunded the
day following, that all things for the ſolemnizing
theſe honourable rites, ſho
                           •
                        ld be
prepared in the moſt decent maner, becauſe
he would haue them all married in the great
Hall of his Pallace, & there the Archbiſhop
of Conſtantinople ſayd diuine ſeruice, afterward
he made a learned Sermon, to giue the Soldane Bellagris
earneſt affection to the law of Ieſus Chriſt, publiſhing
likewiſe openly, what had paſſed betwéene him and the Ladie
Pandritia, becauſe no ſuſpition ſhould ariſe by them, who were
apt enough to conceine an euill opinion. When the Archbiſhop
had concluded his ſermon, be baptized the Soldane. The
Emperor and king Edward of England were his Godfathers,
and the two Empreſſes his Godmothers. And to honour him
the more, the Emperour would haue him firſt married: ſo the
Soldane Bellagris, and Pandritia being thus knit together in

Matrimonie, Blandidon humbled himſelfe before them in
ſigne of obedience, but the Soldane embracing him, tooke him
vp, reioycing greatly that he had ſo good a knight to his ſonne,
and that hée ſhould leaue to his ſubiects ſuch a worthy Gouernour.
After that Pandritia was thus eſpouſed to the Soldane,
the Empreſſe and her Ladies walked with her, becauſe
the Emperour would haue Florendos and Miragarda matched
next: which being done, his heart abandoned all woonted
care, and taking her by the hand, gaue place to other, the
Quéenes of England and Spaine, walking with them along
the Hall, to comfort theſe new married folkes with their good
counſell. Next entred the Prince Polinarda, led betwéene
the Empreſſe of Allemaigne and the Quéene of Fraunce, Palmerin
going before her accompanied with the Emperour
Vernar, and the King Tarnes of Lacedemonia: and next them came the faire Princeſſe of Thrace, betwéene the Queene
Francelina of Theſſalie, and the Quéene Flerida of England,
they being glad to ſée her matched with the Prince Florian of
the Forreſt. After theſe two noble Engliſh Princes had wedded
their ſwéete friends, the Princes Gracian, Berold, Platir,
and all the other Prince and Knights, were eſpouſed vnto their
Ladies.
                     Then the new Quéen of Thrace and the Princeſſe Polinarda
entred, leading Arlencea betweene them, whoſe beautie
ſhewed very ſtately, being ſet foorth by the preſence of theſe
two Princeſſes: the Prince Primaleon and King Edward accompanied
the Giant Dramuſiande, who was married to
Arlencea with great royaltie. When they were departed the
place, the Princeſſe Miragarda humbly intreated the Emperour,
that he would giue Cordigea, daughter to the Giant Gatarin
(ſhe remaining in her ſeruice) in marriage to the Giant
Almaroll: whereto his maiſter preſently agreed, after he had
vnderſtood the good will of Cordigea, ſo he gaue her himſelfe
(to honour the Princeſſe Miragarda the more,) to the Giant
Almaroll. Of this Cordigea, you may reade more at large, in
the ſecond Booke of the notable Hiſtory of Don Edward of
Brittaine.
                     
                     
                        
The Giant Almaroll was Lord of another Fortreſſe, not
farre from thence where he had kept the Princeſſe Miragarda,
this Fortreſſe being called Beauties Bulwarke: whereof hee
made a preſent to his eſpouſed Lady Cordigea, on condition
ſhe ſhould call the Caſtle after her owne name, but returne we
againe to our Hiſtorie.
                     As ſoone as the Archbiſhop had ended all theſe Ceremonies
of theſe marriages, the Emperor went into the Queene Flerides
Chamber, where the dinner was prouided to honor theſe
princes withall, and with the Ladies came in Florenda and
Graciana, the daughters of the king Arnede
                              •
                           : but Germaine of
Orleaunce, being the affectionate ſeruant of Florenda, thought
himſelfe vnworthy to come in preſence, becauſe hee was counted
but a ſubiect to the king of France, yet did the Emperour
make ſuch commendation of the knightly déedes of Germaine
of Orleaunce, as the King graunted him to marry with his
Daughter Florenda, albeit his Daughter Graciana found her
ſelfe diſcontented, that ſhe could not get a huſband, to ioy with
them for company. The feaſt was ſerued with moſt magnificall
honor, and the new married Prince made ſuch high account
off, as it was thought a heauenly life to be a married
man: for Florendos, Palmerin, Florian, Platir, and the other
princes, were reſpected in the fauour of the Emperors and the
Kings exceedingly, in like manner was Miragarda, Leonarda,
Polinarda, Sidelia, and all other Princeſſes, honoured by the
Empreſſes and the Quéenes, moſt ſtately to beholde. Oftentimes
they would recreate themſelues thorough the City, to
the no ſmall delight and content of the Emperour: who marking
all his frien
                           •
                        s, and ſeeing the Prince Floraman abſent
from their company, hée demanded what was become of him?
Some made anſwere, that hee was a little from the Palace,
ſitting mourning vnder a Tree.
                     Which when Florendos vnderſtood, hee left the company
and went to him, and perſwaded him to come and reioyce
with them, Floraman returned him this anſwere. Why doe
you trauell your ſelfe ſo, Sir Florendos, to haue him be partners
of the pleaſures you enioy, who hath for euer loſt his comfort?

The great good will I vnfainedly beare you, doth not deſerue
you ſhould ſo deale with me, in that my ſorrowes would
be ten times more, if I ſhould doe as you would haue mee:
therefore I deſire you let me beare my griefe quietly, ſéeing I
am hee whom Fortune delighteth to torment continually.
Florendos deuiſed all meanes poſſible, to change him from
this conceite, but ſéeing his labour was beſtowed in vaine, he
returned to the Emperor, certifying him of the griefe wherein
he had left the prince Floraman, at which newes both the Emperour
and his friendes were heauily paſſioned, and they continued
in commending the Prince Floraman, till the Gentlman
Vſher called to ſupper. When the ſupper was ended, and
the Tables withdrawne, theſe new merried Princes began
to dance after the Greekiſh manner: and when all the maſkes
and paſtimes were done for that night, each one went to his
Chamber, to receiue content with them, who had cauſed them
to endure ſo long trouble.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LI.
                     How the Queene of Thrace was conueied away by a ſtrange
aduenture, while the Knights continued the pleaſure at
Conſtantinople.
                     
                        EAch of theſe Princes delighting himſelfe
with his ſweete Lady, for whoſe ſake hee
had endured many ſharpe trauailes, at
length determined (and ſo did diners others,
though they had not attained the

                           •
                        ame felicitie, yet to witneſſe their good will
and affection to their friends) to ordaine a
generall Tournament, whereto came many ſtrange Knights,

who laboured as much as in them lay, to ſhew their hardy valour
to thoſe Princes that appointed the Triumph. In the
meane while this ſport continued, there arriued a Knight armed
all in blacke, bearing Deadly Hope, figured in his ſheeld,
his coate Armour blacke, and his horſe and Lance of the ſame
colour: by which ſad habite euery one coniectured, the ſmall
ioy this knight had of himſelfe, neuertheleſſe, ſuch was his
great fortune, as for three dayes together, he remained victor againſt
all that dealt with him. At length, becauſe he would not
diſcouer his name to the Iudges of the field. Florian and Florendos
went to arme themſelues, being very deſirous to try the
Combate with this Knight. But Dramuſiande perſwaded
them to the contrary, giuing them to vnderſtand that it was
the Prince Floraman, whom king Edward & his ſon Palmerin
brought at laſt to the Emperor, when his excellencie began to
comfort him, ſaying, that it was againſt reaſon he ſhould afflict
himſelfe in ſuch ſort, eſpecially, for the thing he could not remedy.
Moreouer, by leading his life ſo penſiuely, he ſhould in
the end not onely ſhorten his owne time, but alſo offend the
iudgements of his eſpeciall friendes, who would euerie one
be glad and faine to diſſwade him from the greeſe that did torment:
him to which words the Prince Floraman thus replied.
                     I know well my gracious Lord, that the honour it pleaſeth
you to vſe me with all, can neuer be recompenced by my deeds,
much leſſe can any ſatiſfaction be made in words: but this I
beſeech your Maieſty conſider, that the faithfull loue I haue
alwayes borne to my Lady Altea hath ſuch ſoueraigne power
ouer me, as it will not ſuffer me to change this humor. And
albeit I know ſhe is dead, to my no ſmall greefe and continuall
vexation: yet either ſhall my teares reuiue her againe, or
bring my ghoſt to keepe her company. Thus am I reſolued to
remember my loſſe: in that my true loue ought to remaine to
the end and in the end, otherwiſe it is to be iudged, but light
and vnconſtant: therefore I beſeech your Maieſtie to ſuffer me
in my complaints, for I am ſo well inured with them now, as
it is impoſſible for me to liue any otherwiſe.
                     
                        
The Emperour and the Princes ſaw they trauailed in
vaine, in perſwading Floraman to forſake his ſorrowfull
kinde of life, who taking his leaue of the Emperour, accompanyed
with king Edward, and the Prince Primaleon went to
his Chamber, but they bring not able to endure the ſight of
ſuch heauineſſe, returned preſently to the Chamber of preſence.
                     And after theſe Iouſts and triumphs were ended, theſe
Princes would ride abroade with their Ladyes into a Forreſt
néere the Cittie, where they might chaſe the wilde Bore
the Hart, and other beaſtes for their recreation: whereof the
Emperour was very glad, and taking his Coatch, he tooke his
way to the Forreſt in their company, where againſt their comming
were ſet vp very faire Tents, and the Tables being couered,
and all things ready for dinner, they ſate downe to take
their repaſt before they went to their ſport.
                     Dinner being done, the Hunters came and certified the
Emperour, how they had found the mightieſt wilde Bore that
euer was ſéene, vppon which newes the Princes immediately
aroſe from the Table, and mounting on their horſes, they rode
with the Hunters to finde the gaine: and beginning to follow
the Chaſe of the Bore, euery one liked of the pleaſantneſſe
of the paſtime, but this ſuddaine delight was mingled with a
ſuddaine miſchance, as you may reade in the diſcourſe following.
                     The Prince and Knights earneſtly purſuing the 
                           〈◊〉
                        
the Heauens began on a ſuddaine to be troubled▪ and is of
darkneſſe came vpon them, as they could not diſcerne o
                           •
                        
other, ſo that their horſes fumed and fretted excéedingly, veing
afraide by the thundring and lightning in the Ayre, as
their Maiſters were glad to forſake them and walke on foote.
                     Beſide, in the Emperours Tent was ſuch a maruellous
bruite and noyſe, as Heauen and earth would haue gone together:
but that which did moſt of all abaſh them in the
Tent, was the wailing and pittifull voyce of a woman, who
was heard to crie very gréeuouſly, calling for ayde to the

Knight of the Sauage man. At length it was knowne to be the
Queene of Thracc, who could not be ſuccoured by any of the
knights preſent with the Emperour, becauſe the darkenes was
ſuch as none could ſée her.
                     It was not long before this darke cloude amounted to the
Skies againe, making ſuch a noyſe at the departure, as Florian
riding vp and downe maruailing hereat, was at length aduertiſed
of the loſſe of the Quéene: wherevpon he tooke his way
to the Emperours Tent, finding his Maieſtie there in great
feare and heauineſſe, yet would he not giue it ouer ſo, but rode
preſently into the Citie, and hauing armed himſelfe, he concluded
to ſearch thorow all Countries, and not to reſt in any place
whatſoeuer, vntil he might heare ſome tydings of her, for whoſe
loſſe his heart was extreamely paſſioned.
                     Many of his friends preſented themſelues to beare him company
in trauaile, but the Emperour would not agrée thereto,
fearing leaſt the Turkes would viſite Conſtantinople, before
they returned againe.
                     The Knight of the Sauage man in as great griefe as could
be imagined, ſet forward in his iourney, and ſtayed not till
hée was hindered by the darke night, which hée was glad
to paſſe at the roote of a Trée in a Forreſt: but in the morning
hée mounted on Horſebacke, and many dayes hee wandered
vp and downe in ſtrange Countreys, yet not hearing newes
of her whom he would gladly méete withall, at which froward
chaunce hée was maruellouſly abaſhed, ſo that he intended to

                           〈◊〉
                         ſhipping, to try if Fortune would that wayes ſpéede him

                           〈◊〉
                         better.
                     After hee had embarbued himſelfe, putting himſelfe euen
vnto the mercy of the Seas, and ſo trauailing to any place
where the Marriners could wiſh him for his beſt auayle,
one day aboue all other, hée was aſſayled with an exceeding
tempeſt, the waues toſſing the veſſell in ſuch ſort, as
ſometime one would haue iudged it had touched the firmament,
and afterwards would fall downe as it were to Hell:
in which trouble, both the Pilot and Marriners were ſo diſſtraughted
of memory, as they could not deuiſe in what

partes, they ſhould be, but euen run which way Fortune pleaſed,
for the ſpace of three dayes, at the end whereof, they came
to a mighty huge mountaine, the top thereof ſeeming to touch
the clouds.
                     The Knight of the Sauage man deſirous to know what
Countrey this was, cauſed the Marriners to ſet him on ſhore,
and for that the Mountaine was not to be trauelled on Horſe
back, he went vp on foot, comming at laſt to the other ſide of the
Mountaine, where he entred a goodly fayre Field, which was
incloſed round about with huge Rocks, like to that he paſſed at
the entrance.
                     In the middeſt of this field was a ſtrong and admirable Caſtle,
both for the beauty as alſo the height, beeing founded of
the ſame Rockes as were about it, at the gate of this Caſtle
was hanged a Garland of Tryumphe, wherein letters of
Golde was written thus. This is the Pallace of the Queene
Melia.
                     
                     The Knight of the Sauage man ſeeing the gate open, tooke
the boldnes on him to enter in: but when he beheld the meruailous
height of the Halls and Chambers, in this Caſtle belonging
to the Queene Melia, he iudged it to be the moſt ſtately
Manſion that euer he came in.
                     For I aſſure you, the Towers, Galleries, and other buildings
were ſo ingenuouſly carued out of the ſame Rocke, as
one would haue thought the whole Caſtle to haue conſiſted of
one péece, whereupon the knight of the Sauage man was much
abaſhed, that this Fortreſſe was vnknowne to the Knights of
the Emperours Court of Greece.
                     
                     At length he thought good to viſit this Caſtle further, becauſe
hée ſaw at the foure corners thereof foure gates, and
the entrance into them was not forbidden him by any: but
he eſpied an other Gate, which was made faſt with two great
ſtroug Chaines of Iron, vppon the Gate béeing engraued
many auncient Hiſtories, which were vnknowen to the
knight of the Sauage man, and long hée ſtayed not to beholde
this Gate, for that he perceiued he trauelled iu vain, if he ſhould
offer to enter in therat. Theu paſſed he through one of the other

Gates, and came into a goodly great Hall, in the middeſt wherof
was chaſed in Gold the picture of an ancient woman, who
had deuiſed and cauſed that Caſtle to be builded: this Monument
was garniſhed on either ſide with goodly marble pillars,
and when he had behold this ſufficiently, he paſſed to viewe the
reſt of the Caſtle.
                     But turning him about to goe forward, hée eſpied hard by
him a mightie Serpent of Braſſe, faſhioned and made ſo artificially,
as it was a thing moſt ſtrange to behold, in that it was
of ſuch a monſtrous highneſſe, as it reached to the very rafters
that held vp the couerture of the Hall.
                     This Serpent held his necke stretched out along, with his
countenaunce ſo vigorous and fearefull, as (being made by
very ſingular workemanſhip and cunning) it was able to affright
them that did behold it. But the Knight of the Sauage
man (whoſe heart no terrour or fearefull motion could
diſmay) approached to this Serpent, and hauing viewed very
circumſpectly, eſpied a key tied about his necke with a Chaine
of Gold, the Chaine being wound about his necke in a great
many foldes, wherevpon he preſently imagined, that in this
key conſiſted the principall aduenture of this Caſtle, which
when he had viſited in many places, he returned againe to the
brazen Serpent, to marke if this key would ſerue to further
him in his intent.
                     And as he came to take off the Chaine with the key, he perceiued
in the Serpents necke a little chinke or creuiſe, at which
ſight he began ſomewhat to comfort himſelfe, ſo that he tooke
the key, and hauing the meanes to vſe it at his owne pleaſure,
he opened therewith a little window, which was made in the
Serpents necke, and looking in, he might diſcerne the hollowneſſe
of the Serpent round about.
                     Then did he behold foure Tapers of waxe, which ſtood on
foure Candleſtickes of Siluer, two of them placed towards
the Eaſt, and the other two to the Weſt, and burning with a
maruellous ſpendant brightneſſe, yet the waxe ſéemed not to
diminiſh any thing at all. Betwéene theſe foure lights was
couched on a pallad, the faire Leonarda Quéene of Thrace, and

his wife, and ouer her head hung a fayre Cannapy of gréene
Veluet: at this ſight the Knight of the Sauage man was ſo abaſhed,
as he doubted whether he might giue credit to this motion
before his eyes or no.
                     But when he had taken good view of her apparell, knowing
it to be the very ſame ſhe had on when ſhe was carried forth of
the Forreſt, he perſwaded himſelfe that it was ſhe, wherevpon
he called aloud to her, deſiring her to vſe more regard vnto him:
but he was neuer a iote the néerer his purpoſe, for ſhe was enchaunted
into ſuch a ſound ſléepe, as ſhe had not the power to
vnderſtand him, which when the knight of the Sauage man perceiued,
and being earneſt in the good will he bare her, he ſpake
to her after this manner.
                     Madame, what glory or contentment can my victories yéeld
me, or the manifold perillous aduentures which I haue happily
finiſhed, if you ſéeme now to forſake me in this preſent aduerſitie,
whereon both my honour and life dependeth.
                     Let this (good Madame) enter your courteous minde, how
ſince your ſtraunge departure from the Emperour of Greece.
I haue not failed to viſite many Prouinces to finde you out,
and euen at the very time when I was out of all hope to finde
you, I chanced to the place where I may behold you, but yet
to my no ſmall griefe, in that I cannot come to you, neither wil
you vouchſafe to heare me, in this extreame affliction of my
poore heart.
                     Here pauſing a while, he began to waxe maruellous angry,
when, ſetting his ha
                           •
                        d to his Swoord, and ſnatching it furiouſly
foorth of the ſheath, he layde many violent ſtrokes on the
Serpent, thinking to deſtroy it in pieces that he might come
to his Lady: but hee was fa
                           •
                        re deceiued in his intent, for the
Serpent was conuerted into a flame of fire, and paſſed ſo suddenly
away, as the Knight of the Sauage man loſt the ſight of
it cleane.
                     Then fearing leaſt his Lady ſhould abide any cruell torment,
becauſe the Serpent was ſo changed away into fier, he ſate
downe on the ground in great heauineſſe, curſſing his ill fortune
very bitterly, and intending neuer to depart from this

Caſtle, without he might haue the company of his lady again.
But while he was in this perplexitie, his Brother and friend
the Sage Aliart, (who would not forſake him in ſo great neceſſitie)
entred the Hall, attired after the Engliſh manner, not
hauing any Armour on him, for that he had not the leyſure to
arme himſelfe, ſo greatly he pittied the miſfortune of his brother
Florian of the Forreſt: the Sage Aliart was no ſooner come
vnto him, but he ſaluted him with theſe ſpeeches.
                     I perceiue (Sir Knight) you haue altogether forgotten me,
and eſpecially in the place where you haue moſt néede of my
helpe.
                     At theſe words the Knight of the Sauage man preſently aroſe,
and embracing the Sage Aliart in his armes, he returned
him this anſwer. My Lord and Brother, I am ſure it is not
vnknown vnto you, that one occaſion of gréefe thorowly ſetled
in the minde, cauſeth the party ſo vexed to commit all things
elſe to forgetfulneſſe: therefore me thinks you ſhould not be
offended, though you were not in my remembrance, I being
in ſuch a ſharpe extremity, from which I deſire to be deliuered
by your ayde.
                     Woorthy ſir (anſwered Aliart) he whoſe knowledge ſerued
him to bring the Quéene Leonarda in this place, hath done it
by ſuch a maruellous means, as it is impoſſible to recouer her
hence ſo ſpéedily: but Fortune reſeruing you to employ your
valour, in aduentures worthy moſt high renowne, will not
ſuffer his intent that brought her hither, to be fully executed,
but hath ordained it in ſuch ſort, as by my Arte I ſhall end this
cruell Enchantment: neuertheleſſe, it ſhall be neceſſary, that
you kéep me company, becauſe your courage and ſtrength may
much helpe in this caſe.
                     When hée had thus ſaid, hée commaunded the knight of
the Sauage man, to ſhut the window, and hang the key in
the place whence hee tooke it, but firſt hée looked in to ſee
the eſtate of the Quéene Leonarda: a
                           •
                        d Florian, hee laboured
very buſtly to extinguiſh the light of the Tapers, becauſe
hée coulde not ſuffer that their extreame ſhyninge

brightnes, ſhould dazell his eyes when he looked on his ſwéete
Quéene and wife, ſo that the light was ſome hinderance to him
when he thought to guard her excellent beautie: wherevpon Aliart
ſpake thus vnto him.
                     I perceiue well (my Lord) that you are ignorant of the verture
of theſe Tapers, whoſe light onely maintaineth the life of
your Quéene Leonarda: for looke how ſoone they ſhall be extinguiſhed
or conſumed, euen ſo ſoone ſhall her life be fully compleate
and ended.
                     After this communication, theſe two Knights went foorth
of the Caſtle, and ſo ſoone as they were come into the open
Field, the Ayre began to be excéeding troubled, ſo that for a time
a maruellous darkeneſſe ouer-ſhadowed them: yet at laſt it
cleared againe, when the Knight of the Sauage-man was
greatly abaſhed, ſéeing himſelfe depriued of the Sage Aliart,
and no company with him but a huge and monſterous Bull,
who ſéemed as hee had come to the top of the Rockes, vppon
this Bulles necke the Knight of the Sauage man caſt himſelfe,
and he brought him immediately into a darke and obſcure
Caue, where the Bull left him and vaniſhed away. All theſe
fearefull motions could not diſmay this hardy knight, for he did
imagine them to be but only illuſions, ſent of purpoſe to hinder
him in his determination, therefore he would make no further
account of them: but looking about this Caue (the light ſomewhat
increaſing) he beheld the figures and pictures of the moſt
renowned knights that carried arms in the time of the famous
King Amadis.
                     
                     There hee might diſcerne Eſplandian among the Moores, a
ſpectacle that delighted him very much, and in the moſt hononrable
place of all, ſtood Armato the noble King of the Perſians,
hauing letters of Golde on his left ſhoulder, which declared
his name and famous progenie. While the Knight of the Sauage
man, earneſtly beheld theſe gallant Images, he perc,yued
to enter the caue a very aged woman, ſo weake and feeble with
extremity of age, as ſhe ſeemed ready to fal to the earth, but whē
ſhée looked on the Knight of the Sauage man, ſhe ſtarted backe
in a great amazement, and crying out aloude, very pittifully demaunded

aide and ſuccour of the grauen pictures, that they
would helpe her to conquer the Knight, that was come to violate
and deface her Pallace.
                     At the cry of the olde Encauntreſſe, the Images began to
ſtirre themſelues, and lay holde on theyr Swoordes and
Speares: but when the Knight of the Sauage man made offer
to defend himſelfe, they ſtood ſilent in their former eſtate,
and the old woman vaniſhed out of ſight. Wherevppon the
Knight of the Sauage man departed thence, comming to the
Hall where the Serpent was, and there he beheld the ſame old
woman ſtanding by the windowe, where he looked in and beheld
the Quéene of Thrace his wife, which made him preſently
to coniecture, how in that place was incloſed the remedy of his
trauailes, whereto he would very gladly attaine, but it grieued
him to ſhewe his force againſt a woman, who thruſt with her
ſhoulderſ ſo ſtrongly againſt the window, as at length it opened
and ſhe went in: then turning to cloſe the window againe,
it was made faſt againe ſo ingeniouſly, as one could not iudge
by which way ſhe made her entrance.
                     The Knight of the Sauage man could not chuſe but laugh,
to ſee with what a grace this olde woman maintained her enchauntment,
and comming to the windowe where hée iudged
the entered, he knockt and kept ſuch a bounſing thereat, as the
olde woman came and opened the windowe preſenting her
ſelfe before him, accompanied with foure Knights, who were
clad in Armour very coſtly and ſumptuous and to them ſhe declared,
how the knight of the Deſart ſought to deſtroy her ancient
Pallace.
                     Theſe foure Knights lifted vp their Maces: but when the
Knight of the Sauage man ſeemed to defend himſelfe, both
they and the olde woman vaniſhed away incontinent. At theſe
ſtraunge motions hée could not chuſe but wonder, and ſitting
downe to viewe the brauery of the houſe, hee perceiued in the
middeſt of the Hall a Candleſticke of Golde ſet on a Braſen
pillar of very coſtly workemanſhip, and in the Candleſticke
burned a goodly white waxe Taper, whoſe light ſhewed after
ſuch a ſtraunge manner, as many wonderfull occaſions was

preſented before his eyes, wherevpon he imagined, how that
Caſtle had not béene founded, but onely to ſome maruellous
and eſpeciall cauſe. When he had more narrowly and circumſpectly
looked about the place, he beheld a number of Cofers
round about him, euery Cofer hauing a key of Gold hanging
at it, which made him to open them one after another: where
he found the Library of the Queene Melia, and very gorgeous
apparell belonging to a woman, which Melia had cauſed to be
made to giue to her Couzin, the daughter of King Armato her
brother, as the knight of the Sauage man found it ſet downe in
writing in the Library, which when he gad read, he beganne againe
his woonted griefe, ſeeing himſelfe out of hope to recouer
the Queene of Thrace his wife, in which affliction the Sage Aliart
preſented himſelfe before him againe, entring into theſe
ſpéeches. My Lord and brother, ſince you haue done that which
was ordained for you, referre the reſt behind to me, for in deſpight
of the perſon that delighteth to torment you thus, I will
recouer her whom you loue ſo dearely. I know very well (anſwered
the knight of the Sauage man) that you alone can reſtore
me my felicity: and if I ſhould thinke otherwiſe, I were
vnworthy to haue your furtheraunce in this my extreame
trouble.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LII.
                     How by the aide of the Sage Aliart of the obſcure Valley, the
noble knight of the Sauage man, deliuered out of the Enchauntment
his wife the Queene of Thrace.
                     
                        BEfore the Sage Aliart would deliuer the
Queene of Thrace out of the Enchauntment,
he deſired to ſee all the places in the
Caſtle, which when he had viewed, hee
made no account of any thing, but onely
the Library, and becauſe he was well worthy
of eſtimation, hée made conueyance

of all the Bookes (by his Arte) in the Perillous Iſle, where he
placed them among the Bookes of the Sage Vrganda, of whom
ſomewhat hath beene diſcourſed to you already, and all this
while the Knight of the Sauage man reſted himſelfe, becauſe his
great trauaile him ſo to doe.
                     When the Sage Aliart had thus ſent the books away, he tooke
the Taper which ſtood in the Candleſticke of Gold, and ſpake
to the Knight of the Sauage man, in this manner. You ſhall vnderſtand
(my Lord) that the life of the Queene Leonarda, conſiſteth
onely in the vertue of this light, with which it is impoſſible
for vs to ſaue or redéeme it: but in the deſpight of Targiana
(who is the onely cauſe of this miſfortune) I will ſo order the
matter, as your heart ſhall ere long receiue his contentment, yet
ſhall not the Sage Enchauntreſſe (who brought her into this
vnhappy eſtate) haue any power to reſiſt me in my determination.
Thus concluding, he went vnto the Serpent, holding in
one hand the fatal Candle, and in the other a little booke, which
he found lying at the foote of a Marble Columbe: and while
the Knight of the Sauage man opened the little doore with the
Key, the Sage Aliart reade ſo earneſtly on his Booke, as by
the vertue of the wordes written in the Booke, the Tapers of
waxe which were in the Belley of the Serpen, begand to letſe,
their light. But 
                           •
                        et they did not extinſhuiſh altogether, for if
they had béene put all at one inſtant, the life of the Quéene
of Thrace had béene brought in great daunger for they were
framed by ſuch an artificiall pollicie, as ſhe ſwéetely flumbred in
life by the vertue of their light, yet was ſhee depriued of her
nat
                           •
                        rall ſences, but not a iote impeached of her ſingular beautie.
So ſoone as one of theſe Tapers had loſt his light, the Sage
Aliart lighted it againe with the Candle in his owne hand, in
which conſiſted a cōtrary meane to helpe their purpoſe, for whē
it had burned to the very place where the ſafegard of her life
was contained, the Quéene of Thrace ſtretched out her armes,
as one awaking out of a ſound ſléepe, and the Tapers being extinct
and lighted againe, ſhe ſtarted vp on a ſuddaine, Meruailing
to ſée her ſelfe in ſuch a narrow place, and eſpecially in the
company of her Huſband, the noble Knight of the Sauage man,
                        
who beheld her with the teares trickling downe her chéekes,
knowing well, how it was ſtrange to her to be in ſuch a caſe.
                     The Sage Aliart ſéeing the Quéene in ſuch extreame heauineſſe,
he rehearſed to her how all things had happened, aſſuring
her that the Emperors Court was in a generall ſadnes by her
abſence: he alſo certified her, how the knight of the Sauage man
departed the ſame day from Cōſtantinople in her ſearch, wherat
ſhe grieued very much, for ſhe was of the opinion, that what
perſon ſoeuer happened into that place, ſhould be brought into
ſuch danger, as he might not eaſiſy get out of it againe. The
knight of the Sauage man, who could not endure to ſée his Lady
ſhut vp ſo long in the ſerpents belly, deſired the Sage Aliart to
deliuer her out of that extremitie: vpon which words the Sage
Aliart the candle into one of the ſerpents noſtrels, which made
him to lespe, and caſt fire foorth of his mouth ſo abundantly, as
one would haue thought the Hall would haue ſhaken in pieces,
ſo great was the noyſe the ſerpent made. The Queene Leonarda
was ſo amazed with this fearefull motion, as ſhe was
brought againe into her former perpletitie, at which ſight the
Knight of the Sauage man was mooued excéedingly, ſo that hee
came & embraced the Sage Aliart, humbly deſiring him to helpe
now or neuer. Then Aliart approched to the ſerpent, and thruſting
his arme in at the litle doore, he quenched the light of the
Tapers, which being done, the ſerpent ſtood indifferently quiet,
but the knight of the Sauage man was not pleaſed with all this
wherefore he began afreſh to intreat his brother, that he would
pittie the diſtreſſed caſe of his Quéene and wife: It is not to be
ſaid how well pleaſed the Sage Aliart was, ſeeing his Brother
Florian ſo earneſtly affected to the Queene of Thrace, remembring
the ſmall eſtimation he was woont to make of women,
and now that he was become ſuch a faithfull and reuerent ſubiect
to the God of loue. After that he had thorowly recounted all
theſe matters to himſelfe, he fell to reading on his looke ahaine
ſo deuoutly, as at length the Quéene of Thrace came foorth of
the Serpent, ſo rauiſhed inwardly in delight when ſhee beheld
her louing lord & huſband before her, as ſhe ran and caught
him in her armes maruellous ioyfully, thinking thus with

her ſelfe, that his valour was ſufficient to end any aduenture
whatſoeuer: and ſo pleaſant was the Knight of the Sauage
man, hauing his ſweete wife and Quéene in his armes, as he
thought himſelfe the onely happy man of the World. After
they had delighted themſelues thus ſo long as they pleaſed, the
Prince and the Sage Aliart went to ſhew the ſingularities of
this Caſtle to the Quéene Leonarda, bringing her where the
ſtately Pillars of Marble were, and likewiſe the gallant Library
of the Queene Melia, where the rich robes and ſtately
apparell were preſented to her view, which ſhe deſired as her
owne immediately, thinking that ſo ſhe ſhould be fully recompenced
for her paſſed miſfortunes, if ſo be theſe ſumptuous garments
might be beſtowed on her, that ſhe might carry them
with her to Conſtantinople.
                     
                     This earneſt motion of hers, prouoked the two Knights to
depart this place, the Sage Aliart giuing her to vnderſtand; that
it was not ueceſſary her minde ſhould be fulfilled in that requeſt,
neyther could ſhe carry any thing thence, albeit we liked
it neuer ſo well, by reaſon that theſe rich veſtures were reſerued
for one of the Queene Meliaes Daughters, who in beautie
ſhould excell all of her time. The knight of the Sauage Man,
was ſomewhat moued with theſe wordes, fearing hee ſhould
not long enioy his Queene and Wife: but the Sage Aliart ſéeing
theſe two Louers reſtored to their liberty, tooke his leaue
of them to trauell to Conſtantinople, where his preſence was
long deſired and looked for, and he gaue charge to the knight
of the Sauage man, that he would come thither with all ſpeede
poſſible, becauſe his friends might be greatly furthered by his
company.
                     But to let you vnderſtand by what occaſion the Quéene of
Thrace was thus enchanted, the Hiſtory diſcourſeth, how the
Princeſſe Targiana could not forget her anger and heauy diſpleaſure
towards the knight of the Sauage man, but dayly
thyrſting and deſiring for reuengement, entertained as partner
in her purpoſe an Enchantreſſe, whoſe dwelling was in
the Realme of Perſia, named Druſia Velonna. Targiana expecting
the time when ſhe might open her intent to this Enchauntreſſe,

                        Druſia at length conſented to fulfill her mind, and
one day when the Princeſſe was bathing her ſelfe at a Fountaine,
Druſia came ſuddainly to her thorow the window of an
high Tower, and preſenting her ſelfe ſo ſtraungely before her,
the Princeſſe Targiana was ſo amazed and frighted thereat, as
ſhe called to her ſeruants to come and helpe her. But Druſia
reuealing her ſelfe, the Princeſſe was quickly remooued from
this feare: whereupon, ſhe rehearſed her earneſt deſire to be
reuenged on the knight of the Sauage man, requeſting her fauour
and furderaunce in the cauſe. The Enchauntreſſe being
one that loued the Princeſſe well, and was glad to compaſſe
any thing that might yeeld her content, ſpake vnto her in
this manner.
                     Madame, I haue well pondered the matter wherewith you
haue made me acquainted, and haue deuiſed the meanes to releaue
your ouercharged and troubled thoughtes, and very eaſ
                           •
                        y
might we be reuenged on the knight of the Sauage man, if it
were not for his brother the Sage Aliart of the Obſcure Vally,
whoſe great experience and knowledge may be ſome hinderance
to vs: neuertheleſſe, I haue found out one practiſe, wherby
you may bring him into great trouble and daunger. Oh
Velon
                              •
                           a (quoth Targiana) it is the onely thing I deſire, to hinder
or offend him by any way whatſoeuer. You know well
Madame (aunſwered Druſia Velonna) that he is but ſlenderlie
affected to them, who notwithſtanding loue him with moſt
eſpecial good will, yet is he ſo amorous of the Queene of Thrace
his Wife, as it is not poſſible for any man to be more, wherefore
I intend to conuey her into ſuch a ſecret place, where the
Sage Aliart ſhall haue no power to helpe her, vntill the Empire
of Greece be all poyled and brought to confuſion, neyther ſhall
the knight of the Sauage man bee able to finde her, but ſhall
ſpend his time in ſeeking after her, yet ſhall his labour be beſtowed
to no ſuch ende▪ ſhe would. Targ
                              •
                           ana was very well
contented with that the Enchauntreſſe had tolde her, wherevpon
ſhe enchaunted the Queene of Thrace, in the manner as
I haue declared to you already.
                     Afterwards ſhe returned to the Princeſſe Targiana, whom

ſhe likewiſe conducted by her Arte to the Caſtle of the Quéene
Melia, at what time Albayzar was gone vnto Babylon: and
when Targiana had ſufficiently pleaſed her ſelfe, beholding the
rare and ſtrange alteration of the Quéene of Thrace, ſhe deſired
Druſia, to ſhut the doore, and to hang the Key at the chaine about
the Serpents necke, wherevpon Targiana departed thence to
the place of the Great Turke her Father, & afterward tooke her
Iourney into Perſia, being of the opinion, that the Sage Aliart
could not helpe the pittiful eſtate of the Queene of Thrace. In
the Caſtle of Melia, ſhe remained thus Enchaunted, vntill the
Knight of the Sauadge man, and the Sage Aliart met together
and deliuered her: But now wee will returne to the Prince
Albayzar, who is comming to laye Siege to the Cittie of Conſtantinople,
whither the Knight of the Sauadge man trauelled
ſpeedily, for that it were againſt reaſon, that ſuch a Noble and
redoubted Knight, ſhould be abſent from the place, where his
déereſt Friends were aſſembled together.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LIII.
                     ¶Of that which the Chriſtians did in the Citie of Conſtantinople,
at what time the Princeſſe Targiana
ſent tydings to the Courte of the Emperour Palmerin,
of the comming of his Enemyes.
                     
                        IT is rehearſed in the Chronicle of the Emperour
Palmerin, how the Kings of England,
Spayne, France, Lacedemonia, and
Theſſalia, were deſirous to depart to theyr
ſeuerall Kingdomes, after the Triumphes
& ſports for the Mariages of their Friends
were ſomewhat ouerblowne and paſt.
                     And euen as they were preparing themſelues to their iourney,
Fortune (who would make them partners of y• Emperors

daungers towardes) preſented them with ſuch occaſions, as
they were conſtrained to breake off theyr former determination,
in that the Princeſſe Targiana ſent news at the very ſame
inſtant to the Emperour, of the huge Nauie which Albayzar
had prepared to beſiege Conſtantinople withall.
                     Moreouer, ſhee gaue to vnderſtand, how the Armie of the
Great Turke her Father, was (as then) arriued in the Porte
of Armenia, and ſtayed but onely for the Winde: likewiſe,
that the Turke her Father, had appointed Albayzar chiefe captaine
Generall of his Armie, becauſe hee ſurpaſſed all the other
in valour and courage.
                     The report of this Armie, cauſed great aſtoniſhment in manie,
and chiefly to them, who were not able to endure the trauell
of Armes, and the Emperour Palmerin himſelfe was ſo ouercharged
with yéeres, as that hée could not walke out of his
Chamber, yet was hee able to comfort and encourage his deereſt
Friends with good Counſell, wherby their troubled mindes
were greatly caſed.
                     
                        Primaleon, who was naturally giuen to be couragious and
brauely minded, did not make account of any miſfortunes that
might happen to him, and the rather becauſe the valiant Princes
and Knights in his companie, could not be ſummoned at a
better time, to witneſſe theyr Nobilitie. The Kings Court,
ſent to 
                           •
                        he Gouernours of their Realmes and Signories, that
they ſhould leuey what power they could poſſible, and come thither
to them, with all ſpeede to aſſiſt them.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. LIIII.
                     ¶How the Enemies ſent an Embaſſadour to the Emperours
Court, and of the anſwer which was made
him.
                     
                        AFter the manner as I haue declared to you
already, the Emperour prouided for the entertaining
of his Enemies, and as his Maieſtie
was aduiſing himſelfe about theſe Affayres,
he was aduertiſed, that an Embaſſadour
was arriued at the Porte of the Cittie,
who demaunded ſafe conduct, before hée
would come on ſhoare. His Maieſty (with
the counſel of the Kings and Princes) was content to graunt
his requeſt: Wherevpon the Embaſſadour tooke Landing, and
being accompanyed with foure Knights, hee tooke his way to
the Emperours Pallace.
                     The Kings and Princes determined, that the Embaſſadour
ſhould rehearſe the cauſe of his arriuall to the Prince Primaleon,
before they would ſuffer him to come into the Emperours
preſence: but diuerſe of them were of a contrary opinion, affirming
that the preſence and noble Anſwere of the Emperour
himſelfe would more daunte and terrifie the Enemie, then all
they were able to doe.
                     Vpon this determination they were agréede, and the Emperour
was brought in his Chayre into the great Hall, where the
Embaſſador ſtayed, who hauing viewed the ſtrength of the Citie,
knew well they ſhould beſtow good labour before they could
conquer it. The Emperour according to his milde and Noble
nature, receyued the Embaſſador from his enemie very gratiouſly,
and after the Kings and Princes were in theyr due and
appointed places, and a generall ſilence amongſt them all, the
Embaſſadour began in theſe ſpeeches.
                     
                        
Illuſtrious and moſt puiſſant Emperour, I could wiſh to
ſée thée in the Flouriſhing eſtate of thy yeares, as well to be a
participate of many troubles, imminent to them that dare take
vppon them to defende thy Empyre, as alſo to enlarge the contentment
of them, who ſhall be ſo happie as to gaine the victorie
in the fielde of Battell, which is now preſented to thy Maieſtie.
                     I am to let thée vnderſtand, that Albayzar the great Soldan
of Babylon, and Prince of Turkie, accompanyed with other
Soldans, Kings, & puiſſant Princes, hath ſent me to thée,
to let thée know, that they are determined with theyr ſtrength
and power to beſiege this Citie, to reuenge the death of manie
theyr eſpeciall Friendes, who receyued their diſhonour before
this Cittie.
                     Neuertheleſſe, the Soldane Albayzar, hauing not forgotten
the gracious courteſie thou didſt ſometimes vſe towards Oloricque,
Alchidiana, and the Princeſſe Targiana, hath thus concluded
(fearing to be noted of ingratitude) to make thée this offer:
eyther to ſurrender the Cittie of Conſtantinople, and the
knight of the Sauage man, King of Thrace thy Nephew, into
his hands, or depart & leaue thine Empyre, ſubiect to his power,
without offering any reſiſtance to his determination.
                     On this condition hee will not bring his Armie into thine
Empyre, and hée thinketh it more neceſſary for thée, rather to
looſe one Cittie then the whole Empyre, and better it were for
thée to deliuer one man into his hands, then to ſée the death of
a number thy eſpeciall Friends. To which words the Emperour
thus anſwered. My Friend, I can hardly endure to let
thée paſſe any further in ſpéeches, but I muſt néedes anſwer you
thus: that I account it well for my profite to follow his counſell
in this matter, if by the ſending him one man, I may make
ſure account of the ſafetie of the reſt.
                     But if that one man be found ſo good a Knight, as his Valour
is ſufficient to redeeme the Captiuitie of all the other, I
muſt not be ſo forgetfull of my honour, as to render a State of
aſſurance to your Lordes mercie: Beſides, it were a thing
much againſt reaſon and duety, to yeelde that Cittie into the

hands of Heathen Infidells, where the true God is to be worſhipped
in ſpirit and truth.
                     And truely I cannot but maruell much, that hée ſhould offer
to come thus into my Empire, conſidering what promiſes
hath paſt betweene him and mée: for I was of the opinion, that
I ſhould rather be furthered by his aide and aſſiſtance, then hindered
or impeached thus maliciouſly. But for all this, my truſt
is in GOD, that I ſhall prepare his graue before the Walles
of this Cittie, as I haue done alreadie to many of his Predeceſſours,
who without regarde of theyr owne Honour, or my
courteſie, haue come to aſſaile me in this manner.
                     I perceyue then my Lord (anſwered the Embaſſa
                           •
                        our) that
becauſe Fortune hath daily fauoured you to this preſent, you
will not dreade the miſfortunes whereinto you may ſuddenly
fall: therefore I intend to returne with this anſwere to my
Lord who ſent me.
                     So taking his leaue, he returned to his Galley where it lay
at Anckor, being accompanyed with many Princes and Lords
of the Emperours Court: and after they had giuen him a very
friendly Farewell, his Galley ſet forward with ſuch expedition,
as in ſhort time it came to the reſt of the Armie.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LV.
                     ¶How the Armie of the Great Turke arriued in the
Port of Conſtantinople, and of the noble and valiant
proweſſe of the Chriſtians, before they would
ſuffer the Pagans to take Landing.
                     
                        
                        THe Embaſſadour from Albayzar, to the
Soldane of Babylon, being thus departed,
the Emperour Palmerin called together all
the Princes and Nobles in his Courte to
giue preſent order to euery one, that they
ſhould with all the beſt ſpéede poſſible, prouide
themſelues in Armes, to forbidde the
entraunce of the Enemie, and to haue good
regard to the affaires of the Citie, and ſafety of the ſame, which
was committed to the Guard of the Emperour Vernar, and the
King Polendos, accompanyed with a thouſand fiue hundreth
Knights on Horſebacke, and foure hundreth Footemen. King
Edward of England was choſen by Generall conſent, chiefe
Captaine and Gouernour of the Fielde, hauing vnder his conduct
two thouſand Knightes, beſide the Giant Dramuſiande,
who by his Noble behauiour in that expedition, wonne very
great eſtimation.
                     
                        Maiortes, Pridos, the Duke of Galles, Don Roſiande de la
Bronde his Sonne, Argolant the Duke of Horten, Pompides,
and fifty Knightes, that were come in theyr company: So
diuiding theyr Knights into foure parts, they were in number
eight thouſand, & to euery thouſand was a Generall Captain.
                     
                        Arnedes King of France, had the ordering of fiue hundred,
being attended on likewiſe by his Sonnes, Gracian, Guerin,
and Germaine of Orleance, beſide fifty good and hardy French
Knights. A thouſand fiue hundred more were conducted by
Recinde King of Spayne, the Princes Berolde and Onſtalde
his Sonnes awayting on him, with the Giant Almaroll, and
one hundreth Spaniſh Knights. The Soldane Bellagris was
Captaine ouer foure hundred Knights, being his owne Subiects,
and for the guard of his owne perſon, he had prouided one
hundred of the chiefeſt knights of his Court, among whom was
his Sonne Blandidon, whoſe noble behauiour deſerued commendations.
To Belcar Duke of Pontus and Durace, was
committed the like charge, as to the Kings Recinde and Arnedes,
hauing for the Guarde of his owne perſon, Don Roſuell,
and Bellizart his Sonnes.
                     
                        
To the King Tarnaes of Lacedemonia, (who was an Ancient
and noble Prince) was giuen the Guard of the Pallace,
and for the more ſecurity of the Empreſſe, & the other Queenes
and Ladyes, hée had attending on him two hundred Knightes.
Primaleon was choſen Lord Generall for the Cittie, hauing in
his charge ſeauen hundred Knightes, wherewith he had regarde
as well to the Field as to the Cittie.
                     
                        Palmerin, Florendos, Platir, and diuers other Knights, had
the charge of the vtter wings of the Armie, as loſt children▪ to
giue ſuccour where they perceyued moſt neceſſitie. Thus was
the Emperours Court well ſtored with noble and renowmed
Knights, yet his Maieſtie and King Edward greatly deſired
the preſence of the Prince Florian of the Forreſt, in whoſe abſence
both the Horſemen and Footemen, were ordained as I
haue alreadie declared.
                     On the next morning▪ King Edward commaunded to ſtrike
vp Allarum, for hee was giuen to vnderſtand, that the Enemie
was within halfe a league of the Cittie, and that they prepared
themſelues to take landing, and the Emperour cauſed himſelfe
to be carryed vp into a high Tower of his Pallace, becauſe hée
would ſée how Fortune diſpoſed of his happineſſe.
                     King Edward was no ſooner arriued where the Enemie was,
but he placed his Armie on the Sea-ſhoare, to hinder the Enemie
from comming on Land: but therein he was deceyued, for
the multitude of the Galleys and Ships were ſuch, as it was
impoſſible for him to doe as he would.
                     
                        Albayzar, who was accompanied with the moſt renowmed
knights of his Armie, and two the moſt ougly and fearefull Giants
that euer were ſeene, made offer to take Landing firſt of
all: but they of the Emperors Court ſtepped before them▪ and
entertayned them in ſuch ſorte, as diuers both of Turkes and
Chriſtians were very dangerouſly wounded.
                     
                        Albayzar was ſo offended, becauſe he could not haue libertie
to get foorth of his Galley, as hee commaunded the Gyants to
ſtep into the Water, to whoſe commaundement they pre
                           •
                        ently
obeyed, and with theyr Ma
                           •
                        es of Iron they began ſo to breake
thorowe the pre
                           •
                        ſſe, and they which before hindred Albayzar
                        
from comming on ſhoare, began to giue place, as it were for
his landing. Which when Dramuſiande perceiued, hee ſtept
into the water vp to the nauill, and couering himſelfe with
his ſhield, hee encountered the Giant that aduanced himſelfe
foremoſt, and king Edward leaped into the Sea, to hinder the
other Giant from dealing with Dramuſiande: but while theſe
foure were thus encountring together, the other knights of
the Emperours Court ſeeing their Captaine on foote, began to
follow after, ſo that Albayzar was conſtrained to come neere
the Giants, becauſe they thought he would want his ayde.
                     
                        Palmerin of England being buſie on the other ſide, ſeeing
the Horſes round about the field without their maſters, doubted
leaſt ſome miſfortune had fallen to his friends, whereupon
he gaue his horſe the ſpurs, and galloped to the place where
he ſaw the greateſt bickering: and ſéeing King Edward his father
ſtanding in the ſea, dealing with ſuch an ougly and monſterous
Giant, he preſently came to him, and ſtepping before
him, entred into theſe ſpeeches.
                     I deſire you my gracious Lord and father, to giue ouer this
enemy, and giue ſuccour to your friend Dramuſiande, for if any
miſfortune ſhould happen to you, your loſſe would be gréeued
through all Chriſtendome.
                     King Edward eſteeming light the words of his Sonne,
would not leaue the Giant, ſo greatly hee deſired to remaine
victor: but the neceſſity wherein hee perceiued diuers of his
friends, cauſed him to ſtep backe, and giue place to the Noble
Palmerin of England. Albayzar behaued himſelf in ſuch braue
manner, as diuers were glad to ſhunne his preſence: which
when Florendos beheld, hee aduanced himſelfe to him, and
ſuch knightly proweſſe was ſhewen on eyther ſide, as between
them began a cruell and dangerous combate. Dramuſiande
preuailed ſo well againſt his enemy the Giant, as hee tumbled
downe dead before him: but himſelfe was ſore wounded,
as King Edward commaunded him to be carried into
the Citie.
                     And Palmerin of England ſlew the other Giant likewiſe,
which his father left him fighting withall: but himſelfe was

ſo dealt withall, as in fiue dayes after he could weare no Armour.
                     
                        Albayzar no ſooner perceiuing the Giants ſlaine, but he preſently
retired into his galley, and ſo did diuers of the Turkes
beſide, but when Edward ſaw the Turkes betake themſelues
to their Galleys againe, hee mounted on horſebacke, giuing a
ſigne to his company, to withdraw themſelues, deſiring the
Soldane Be
                              •
                           lagris, the King Arnedes, the King Recinde, and
the Prince Belcar (who were dealing with another Veſſell
that ſought to take landing) to follow him: but they gaue him
to vnderſtand how Florendos, Platir, Blandidon, and the Giant
Almaroll, were carried into the Citie ſo ſore hurt, as they
were not able to ſuſtaine themſelues.
                     The King Recinde, Palmerin, and Belcar, were likewiſe
grieuouſly wounded, which made king Edward deſire them to
goe into the Citie, and in the meane while Primaleon entred
the field, accompanied with ſeauen hundred knights, deſiring
earneſtly, that King Edward and his traine, would withdraw
themſelues, that they might come with a freſh aſſault on the
enemy. But King Edward would not ſuffer it ſhould be ſo,
therefore they altogether went into the Cittie, being very
much grieued, that the principall knights of their Armie ſo ſore
wounded.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LVI.
                     Of the griefe and ſorrowe made in Conſtantinople, for the
dangerous eſtate wherein the Giant Dramuſſande was
brought: And how the Turks placed their Campe before
Citie of Conſtantinople.
                     
                        
                        WHen the Emperors Captaines were thus
come into the citie with their traines, they
paſſed the night in vſiting them that were
ſo ſore wounded: at whoſe ill lucke, Primaleon
greatly grieued, for he iudged the
want of their helpe to be ſuch, as he was
out of hope to defend the enemy from entring
on land the next day. And moſt of all, for that Palmerin
of England, Florendos, the King Recinde, Belcar, Berold,
Don Roſuel, and Bellizart were in ſuch caſe, as they could not
endure to beare Armes againe ſo ſoone. Vpon this he concluded
to let the enemies take landing, and to ſuffer them to b
                           •
                        ild
their Tents, and prouide for the field, in the mea
                           •
                        e while the
wounded perſons would be in better diſpoſition, and the ſuccour
they looked for would be likewiſe arriued, wherewith they
had good hope to bid the enemy a braue battaile, in the meane
time, they daily gaue Albayzar and his company ſundry aſſaults.
King Edward going to viſite the wounded perſons,
found the Prince Palmerin talking with the faire Polinarda,
whoſe company made him forget the griefe of his hurts, for in
her alone conſiſted the onely medicine to reſtore his health: in
like manner he found Florandos and Miragarda, Platir, and
Sidelia, Polendos and Francelian, Berolde and Oniſtalda of
Normandie, Gracian and Claritia, Don Roſuell and Dramatiana,
Bellizant and Den
                              •
                           ſa, Francian and Bernarda, Guerin
and Clariana, and diuers others of the Knights, with them to
whom they bare moſt affection.
                     But Dramuſiande was not in like caſe as theſe fortunate
Louers were, for his wounds were ſo yangerous, as he could
not enioy the ſwéete company of his beſt beloued Arlencea, towards
whom he remained maruellous affectionate: ſo that I
aſſure you, the Emperour and all of his Court were ſo ſorie for
his miſfortune, as if the Citie it ſelfe had béene brought into extreame
danger.
                     
                        
King Edward whoſe minde was not on ſuch pleaſure, as
he made any account of reſt or quietneſſe, kept his friend Dramuſiande
company, hauing his wife and Quéene Flerida with
him, onely to comfort the heauie and penſiue eſtate of Arlencea,
whoſe ſad caſe may be eaſily iudged by young married louers.
Florendos and Miragarda, viſited the Giant Almaroll,
whoſe danger almoſt was in the ſame eſtate with Dramuſiande:
yet he was able to walke, & behaue himſelfe more pleaſant in
company then the other, whoſe caſe was pittied and lamented
of all in generall.
                     Soone after arriued there the Sage Aliart, by whoſe preſence
the former feareful and vncertaine doubts were ſomewhat calmed,
in that he certified the Emperour, how Florian would not
be long abſence from thence: which newes did much ioy his
Maieſtie, as he caught the Sage Aliart in his armes, and embraced
him with a gracious countenance.
                     Then came the Empreſſe to entertaine him with the ſame
fauour, the like did Bazilia the Empreſſe of Allemaigne, Gridonia,
Polinarda, and the other princeſſes and Ladies: among
whom the Quéene Flerida was moſt glad of his preſence, as
well to perceiue the loue King Edward her huſband bare him,
as alſo, becauſe he had ſundry times preſerued the liue of his
Children by his knowledge.
                     The ſame day came to the Emperours Court the Prince
Floraman, who trauailed to finde the Prince Florian of the
Forreſt, and being aduertiſed how the enemies had laid ſiege at
Conſtantinople, he left his Realme of Sardignia giuing charge
to the Gouernours he had left there, that they ſhould leuey a
great Armie with all expedition, and ſend them after him to
Conſtantinople, as you may read more at large hereafter. The
ſame day likewiſe there arriued King Eſtrellant of Hungaria,
accompanied with two thouſand horſemen, and tenne thouſand
footmen, being vnder the conduct of the Prince Friſoll his
Sonne.
                     
                        Albayzar was greatly grieued at the loſſe of his men, wherfore
he gaue charge to his Chirurgions in his campe, that they
ſhould bee carefull and reſpectiue to them which were wounded,

and commanded the 
                           •
                        laine to bée buried. And when all
things were accompliſhed that he thought expedient, he called
the principall eſtates of his armie to councell, with whome hee
concluded, that all perſons ſhould be vigilant and carefull of
themſelues that night, becauſe the next morning he ſhould
take landing, at a certaine watch-word he would giue them.
                     The day had no ſooner chaſed away the vncomfortable and
obſcure night, but the Ships, Gallies, Brigandines, Ga
                           ••
                        
                        ots,
and other prouiſion for war, tooke landing about a league
diſtance frō 
                        Conſtantinople, being not hindred or forbidden by
any: whereupon they ſounded the drums, trumpets, cornets,
clarions, and other inſtruments, wherewith they made ſuch a
triumphant noyſe, as the people in the Citie were much amazed
thereat.
                     The Sage Aliart and Floraman, deſiring to ſée the Campe of
the enemie, requeſted the Emperour, that he would lycence
them to goe thither, which his Maieſtie would not graunt to
any: yet had hée ſuch aſſurance in the knowledge of the Sage
Aliart, as in what place ſoeuer he was, he néeded not to feare
him. Theſe two knights thus departed the Citie, being armed
with no other defence but onely their ſwordes, and becauſe
the day was faire and cleare, they betooke themſelues to
a little hill, where they might at pleaſure diſcerne the enemies
Armie. Diuers thought it good to ſcout out and take them,
becauſe by them they might vnderſtand the ſtrength of the
Citie, but Albayzar would not grant it ſhould be ſo: wherefore
he ſent an Eſquire vnto them (who attended on him when
he was in the Emperours court) to let them vnderſtand, that
if they would come néere and ſee his Campe, he, who was then
in authoritie to commaund them, was ſuch an indifferent
friend vnto them, as they might come and depart without
any danger.
                     Theſe two knights gaue ſuch credit to the meſſage Albayzar
ſent them, as they went in the Eſquiers company, which
Albayzar perceiuing, he came forth (with two Pages in very
rich apparrell, attending on him) to receiue them. Afterward
hee went with them thorow the Campe, becauſe they ſhould

ſée the mightie ſtrength thereof, and he declared to them the
names of the Princes in his companay, among whome were
verie many Giantes, as terrible and ouglie as they which
were ſlaine by Dramuſiande and Palmerin of England.
                     
                     All this while Albayzar had diligent regard to theſe two
Chriſtian Knights, to ſée if all this ſight he had ſhowne them
could diſcourage them with feare or doubt of theyr Wellfare:
but they contained ſuch a ſtoute and vndaunted countenaunce
as they ſeemed to diſdayne thoſe occaſions, which Albayzar
thought ſhould moſt diſmay them, whereat he did not a little
maruaile.
                     After they had ſéene the whole Army, Albayzar accompanied
hem very neere the Citie, deſiring them to ſalute the Emperour
and Empreſſe from him: then taking his leaue courteouſly
of them, he returned 
                           •
                        o his Campe, and they walked on
very ſadly, eſpecially, the Sage Aliart, who hauing foreſéene
what would happen, could not hide the ſorrow hee conceiued
in his minde. Neuertheleſſe, they behaued themſelues pleaſantly
at their entraunce into the Cittie, becauſe they would
not diſcourage the mindes of the people: but when they were
come to the Pallace, & into the Emperors preſence, the Prince
Floraman▪
                         by the commaundement of his Maieſtie) entred into
theſe ſpeeches.
                     My gratious Lord, the riches which your enemies hath
brought before your Cittie, were incredible in rehearſall, for
if I ſhould take vppon me to make rehearſall thereof, I ſhould
waſt a great deale of time, which I may apply to better purpoſe,
in certifying your excellencie of your enimies ſtrength:
wherefore this is to let your Maieſtie vnderſtand, that your
enimies can be no leſſe in number then two hundred thouſand,
the very ſimpleſt whereof, carryeth ſuch a brauerie of minde,
as he will abide the Féeld to the lateſt houre of death.
                     The King of Aetolia, being thirtie yéeres of age, hath
the conduct this day of them which are vnder his charge, being
tenne thouſande Horſemen, and fortie thouſand Footemen,
ſo brauely armed, as ſurely I muſt of neceſſity commend
them.
                     
                        
But aboue all the reſt, the pride of the Prince Albayzar
doth much amaze me, for no ſmall eſtimation he made of your
puiſſance, as himſelfe gaue vs the ſight of his whole Armye,
graunting the like aſſuraunce to any of your Court, as hee did
to vs, if ſo be they will deſire to ſée his Garriſon, a thing which
I haue diligently noted, and which cannot greatly profite himſelfe:
as for the reſt whereof perhappes I may be forgetfull,
my good Lorde the Sage Aliart can at large diſcourſe vnto your
Highneſſe.
                     You haue beh
                           •
                        ued your ſelues ſo well my Friends (ſayd the
Emperor) as it is not poſſible for any other to bring vs a more
certaine aſſurance in this cauſe: wherefore, it is neceſſarie that
we enter into councell, how we may auoyd the enterpriſe of Alb
                              •
                           yzar
and his Souldiours.
                     And I am content that he ſhall likewiſe ſée our Cittie, ſo
that charge be giuen to our Captaines, to behaue themſelues
with ſuch circumſpection, as our Enemies may not get any ſudden
aduantage againſt vs.
                     When the Emperour had ſet downe this for a determination,
the Princes betooke themſelues to their ſeuerall charges, that
they might better reſpect the practi
                           •
                        es of the Enimie.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LVII.
                     ¶Of that which Albayzar did, after he had well prouided
for his Armie; and of the ſuccour which came
to the Emperour Palmerin.
                     
                        
                        
                           ALbayzar, prouiding for the ſtrength of his
Armye, cauſed ſuch Trenches and Rampiers
of Defence and Fortification to bee
made round about his Camp, as they were
imagined ſufficient to withſtand and reſiſt
any furious Batterie whatſoeuer. And for
that he would haue ſome knowledge of the
valour of his Enemyes, hee appoynted his
principall Captain in places of importance, for moſt aſſurance
of his Campe, and afterwards by the conſent of his Councell,
he ſet his Galleys and Shippes on fire, reſeruing but a certain
number of his ſwifteſt Brigandines: So that the ſight of the
F
                           •
                        re made ſuch aſtoniſhment in Conſtantinople, as they fully
reſolued and determined to hazarde theyr liues, or to ſubdue the
pompe and glory of their enemies, ſéeing they preſumed ſo much
on themſelues.
                     The Emperour ſitting in his Chaire in one of the Turrets
of his Pallace, perceyued very well, that hee ſhould not driue
his Enemyes out of his Empyre, without the great effuſion of
Blood, and loſſe of his Friends. For the ſpace of ſeuen dayes
they continued burning theyr Shippes, leauing themſelues deſtitute
of prouiſion to depart from thence, if Fortune ſhould oppoſe
her ſelfe againſt them, and at the ende of ſeuen dayes, they
of Conſtantinople began to ſkyrmiſh.
                     The wounded Princes had recouered their former eſtates,
except Dramuſiande, and the Giant Almaroll: yet the Chirurgions
aſſured the Emperor, how the greateſt danger was paſt,
and they likely to doo well enough. In the meane while as King
Edward and Primaleon endeuored themſelues to fortifie the
Cittie, the Gouernours of thoſe Realmes belonging to the
Kings preſent in Conſtantinople, ſent ſuch good prouiſion of
ſtrength & forces as they could poſſibly make ready on the ſudden,
but I will rehearſe them vnto you who had (in this neceſſitie)
chiefeſt ſuccour ſent them, from theyr Kingdomes and
Signories.
                     Firſt of all, the Emperour Ve
                              •
                           nar of Allemaigne, had ſent
him two thouſand Horſemen, and twelue thouſand Footmen,

King Arnedes of Fraunce, had the like number. Recinde
King of Spayne, had two thouſand light Horſemen, and eyght
thouſand Footemen. The Prince Floraman had foure hundred
Horſemen, and foure thouſand Footemen. Tarnaes King
of Lacedemonia, had foure hundred Horſmen, and foure thouſand
Footemen.
                     From Thrace, to honour their King Florian of the Forreſt,
came foure hundred knightes on Horſebacke, and foure thouſand
Footemen. From England came foure hundred knights
and tenne thouſand Footmen. From Nauarre came two hundred
light horſemen. From Denmarke came two hundred
light Horſemen.
                     
                        Drapo the Duke of Normandie, came thither with two
thouſand Knights on Horſebacke, and foure thouſ
                           •
                        nd braue
Footemen. To the Prince Belcar, came foure hundred Horſemen,
and one thouſand Footemen. Roramant King of Bohemia,
ſent foure thouſand Footemen.
                     
                        Eſtrellant arriued there, accompanyed with eyght thouſand
and foure hundred gallant Knightes on Horſebacke, and tenne
thouſand hardy fighting men on foote: who ioyning with them
of the Cittie, were in number twenty thouſand Horſemen, and
threeſcore thouſand Footemen.
                     The Emperour and his Counſell appointed, that they which
were thus come to aſſiſt him, ſhould reſt themſelues for certain
dayes, becauſe they had ſuſtained a weary Iourney, ſo that during
the time, the wounded perſons were able to beare Armor,
with the ayde of theſe, they gaue Battell to their enemies.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. LVIII.
                     ¶Of an aduenture which happened, by the arriuall of a
ſtraunge Knight accompanied with a Ladie, in the
Prince Albayzars Campe.
                     
                        WHile they that were come to the ſuccour of
the Emperour repoſed themſelues, the
young Princes and Knights of the Court
of Conſtantinople, gaue the Enemie ſundry
Aſſaults and ſkirmiſhes, preuailing alwayes
ſo happily, as the aduauntage ſtill
came on theyr ſide. During the time they
ſkirmiſhed in this manner, the Emperour
with the Empreſſe and her Ladyes, being on a high Tower to
ſee theſe braue Attempts, they perceyued to enter the Cittie towardes
the Enemyes Campe, a Knight that ſéemed to haue ſo
good opinion of himſelfe, being mounted on a braue and gallant
Courſer, and himſelfe attired in guylte Armour, whereon was
wrought diuerſe Ingenious knottes and Deuiſes in ſiluer, beſide,
his Armour was bloody in many places, which gaue ſufficient
teſtimony, that the Knight daylie enioyed but little reſt,
and in his Shielde was Loue artificially figured, being roughly
helde by the hayre of the head, by a bloody minded Tyrant.
                     This Knight ſeemed to carry his Launce as it were on the
neck of his Horſe, and hauing on the point thereof a little white
Enſigne, which hee wore in ſigne of Peace and quietneſſe. His
Eſquire bare another Shielde after him, couered ouer with the
ſkinne of a wilde Beaſt, and another Launce in his hand, by
him rid a Lady on a blacke Palfray, ſhée being attyred after the
Turkiſh manner, in a Robe of white Sattine, which was cutte
and pinked in many places, ſo that the Blacke ſilkes lying vnder
the white, gaue a very braue grace vnto her Apparell, becauſe

the body and ſléeues was very thicke beſet with Pearles
and ſtones of great eſtimation. This Ladies haire was ſpread
abroad ouer her ſhoulders, and her face was couered becauſe ſhe
would not be knowne.
                     So ſoone as the Knight was come néere the Prince Albayzars
Tent, he ſtayed for a pretie ſpace, whereat the Turks were
ſomewhat abaſhed, becauſe they knewe not on which part this
Knight ſhould be, in that they iudged him by his Armour to be
a Chriſtian, and the Apparell of the Ladie being Turkiſh, they
could not imagine any certaintie in this caſe. In the meane
while the Princes in the Campe were thus regarding and beholding
the Knight, they perceyued him to ſende his Eſquyre to
the Prince Albayzars Tent, hauing his Face couered, leaſt hee
ſhould be knowne, when hee beganne his minde in this manner.
                     My Lorde, the Knight which you ſée preſumes ſo néere your
Campe, by mee giueth you to vnderſtand, that hee hath many
yeeres ſerued the Lady in his company, yet not able to winne or
once enioye her Loue: and for that ſhee could not well dryue
him off with any more delayes or excuſes, ſhee deſired him to
bring her vnto this place, where he muſt Enterpriſe to Io
                           •
                        ſt againſt
foure Knights on her behalfe. And if it ſo fall out, that
Fortune fauoureth him with the victorie, ſhee will not faile to
requite his labour with her Loue: but if the Knightes in your
Camp ſhall refuſe to trie their valours againſt him, ſhe hath giuen
him leaue to offer the ſame conditions to the Emperours
Knights in Conſtantinople, where, if refuſall be made likewiſe,
the Lady muſt conſent to recompence him, as if hee had vanquiſhed,
where ſhe made the challenge. Therefore my Lords, you
may determine with your ſelues, which of you dare make tryall
of the valour of this Knight.
                     I would gladly know, ſaid the Soldane of Perſia (who was
a gallaunt young Prince, and very braue in Armour) what recompence
the Knight will make him, to whom the victory may
happen? You ſhall then my Lord (anſwered the Eſquyre) ſend
him your owne Eſquier, for I haue reported to you what was
giuen me in charge.
                     
                        
So, without any more words hee returned to his Maiſter,
accompanyed with an Eſquyre from the Soldane of Perſia, to
whome the Knight that came with the Ladie, made this aunſwere.
I ſee well my Friend, that the requeſt of thy Lord ſtandeth
with good reaſon, wherefore thou may 
                           〈◊〉
                         ſay vnto him, that
if thy miſfortune bee ſuch▪ as that any of theſe foure Knightes
chaunce to vnhorſe me, I will not faile to deliuer him my Horſe
and Armour: Beſides, I will ſhew obeyſance to any he ſhall
commaund me, on condition that this Lady may remaine at her
libertie, to doo what ſhee ſhall imagine conuenient for herſelfe.

                           〈◊〉
                         
                        Pagan Princes were as well contented as could be with
this good offer of the Knight, wherefore they ordained to Iouſt
againſt the foure young Kinge, who were very brauely and gallantly
attyred in rich and coſtly Armour. The firſt of them was
the king of 
                           〈◊〉
                        : the ſecond, the king of Trebiſond: the
th
                           •
                        rd, the king of Caſpia: and the fourth, was the hardie Soldane
of Perſia.
                     
                     King Edward, Recinde, Arnedes, Palmerin of England,
and Dramuſiande departed from the Cittie of Conſtantinople,
(with a ſafe Conduct from the Prince Albayzar) to ſee theſe
Iouſts: to them came Albayzar mounted on horſebacke being
vnarmed, except only a Lance which he carryed in his hand, being
accompanied with 
                           •
                        iue other Princes and a Giant. When
they were 
                           〈◊〉
                         neere the Princes that came from the Cittie,
Al
                              ••
                           yzars ſaluted them very graciouſly: but the Knight that
came with the Lady, ſpake to them in the Greeke tongue, that
they ſhuld apply their mindes to other affaires, 
                           〈◊〉
                         to waſt
the 
                           〈◊〉
                         in ſaluting them, whom they could not affect 
                           〈◊〉
                         fauour
or friendſhyp: when he had thus ſaid, he returned to the Lady,
and prouided himſelfe to enter the Iouſt.
                     It ſeemes to me (ſaid Albayzar) that the Knight no doubt, is
both hardy and valiant, becauſe he makes ſhew of ſuch a braue

                           〈◊〉
                        : Wherefore I thinke it beſt that wee accord to his will,
rather then abide the daunger of our owne liues. So concluding
he granted the firſt Iouſt to the king of Tr
                              •
                           b
                              •
                           zonde, who
was mounted on a goodly 
                           •
                        aye Courſer, his Armour of greene
colour, and in his Shielde was figured in a fielde of Sinople, a

Giant ſlayne, in witneſſe that hee conquered him nobly in a
Combate.
                     After the King of Trebiſund had taken his leaue of Albayzar,
he preſently ran againſt the ſtrange Knight, but he encountred
him with ſuch force, as his Launce ſlewe in pieces vp into
the Ayre: neuertheleſſe, the king of Trebiſond ſped ſo vnfortunately
as hee was ſent to meaſure his length on the ground, ſo
fore ſhaken and amazed, as he was ſame to be 
                           •
                        arried foorth of
the Field. In the meane while the Knight rid to the Lady, who
was very glad that hee had ſped ſo well, the king of Caſpia preſented
him
                           •
                        elfe in the Field, being in Carnation Armour, and a
Hart
                           ••
                         Siluer portrayed on his Shield, in a fielde of Sable: he
gaue his horſe the ſpur
                           •
                        es againſt the Knight, but he was ſent to
keepe the king of Trebiſond companie. Which the king of Bithinia
perceyuing (he being armed like the king of Caſpia) ran
againſt the ſtrange Knight valiantly, and meeting with him in
the middeſt of the Carrie
                           ••
                        , broke his Launce brauely on his
Shield, but the ſtrange Knight failed of the breaking his Lance:
yet hee mette the king ſo roughly, in Iouſting againſt his bodie,
as he was throwne out of his Saddle, and the ſtraunge Knight
forced to forſake his Styrrops. But when hee had recouered
himſelfe, he went to the Ladie, deſiring her not to thinke amiſſe
of him for that little 
                           •
                        ayle, and he would make her amends on
the fourth King.
                     Then the Soldan of Perſia, being brauely mounted in guilt
Armour, and bearing in his Shielde, Fortune ſtately placed in
her Charryot of Tryumph, in a Golden fielde, aduanced himſelfe
into the Courſe, and Albayzar did him the honour to clap
downe the 
                           〈…〉
                        , Helmet, deliuering him likewiſe the
Launce hee carryed in his owne hand, whereat the Straunge
Knight was 
                           〈…〉
                         his Enemy made ſuch
account of: ſo taking his leaue of the 
                           〈◊〉
                        , he pricked foorth to
receyue the Soldane, 
                        
                           〈…〉
                        ,
they meeting both together with ſuch 
                           •
                        orce, as theyr Launces
were broken, 
                           〈…〉
                         through the middeſt, yet
themſelues nothing 
                           〈…〉
                         where
                           •
                        pon the S
                              •
                           ldane
of Perſia (ſeeing the 
                           〈◊〉
                         prowreſſe of his Enemy)

came vnto him with theſe wordes. I thinke it good (Syr
Knight) that wee yet once more hazard the tryall of the Iouſt:
but becauſe I ſee you deſtitute of a Launce, I will intreate the
Prince Albayzar to beſtowe one vpon you. Syr (anſwered
the ſtrange Knight) I am content to allow any thing you ſhall
ordaine, yet am I ſomewhat offended with my ſelfe, that I did
not make you partaker of your fellowes miſfortune. Marrye I
perſwade my ſelfe, that the faulte conſiſted in my Horſe, who
is ſo ſore laboured with trauell, as hee can hardly performe
his dutie.
                     Syr Knight (anſwered the Soldane) you ſhall not complaine
for ſo ſmall a matter, therefore I will beſtowe one of my owne
Horſes vpon you. In troth Sir (anſwered the ſtrange Knight)
I am ſo vnacquainted with this Countrey, as I knowe not at
whoſe handes I might requeſt ſuch a fauour: yet for all my
want is great, and your offer very courteous, I cannot with
good will make choyſe of your horſe. My Friend (ſaide Dramuſiande)
for that I thinke well of your behauiour and gentleneſſe,
I pray you to accept this Horſe, whereon I am mounted.
Good Sir (anſwered the ſtrange Knight, in that you graunt him
ſuch courteſie, who is a ſtraunger, and vnknowne to you, your
good will in the offer would highly impeach mee, if I ſhould
refuſe it.
                     So hée alighted from his Horſe, and mounted on that which
Dramuſiande had ſent him, giuing a ſigne to the Soldane, that
without delay, he ſhould defende himſelfe.
                     Then each of them taking a Launce, they encountred in the
middeſt of the Carriere ſo brauely, as the ſtraunge Knight loſte
both his Styrrops, but the Soldane of Perſia, was throwne to
the Earth ſo ſore hurt, as there came foure knights to carry him
foorth of the fielde.
                     The ſtraunge Knight returning againe, hée came vnto the
Prince Albayzar, with theſe wordes. You ſee Syr, that I
haue accompliſhed the Challenge which I preſented vnto you
on this Ladyes behalfe: therefore (Syr Albayzar) if you will
graunt licence to any more of your Knightes, to deale in the

ſame triall with me, I will attend the
                           •
                         the Iouſt héere till
night, or ſo long as my horſe is able to hold out.
                     I perceiue well Sir (aunſwered the Prince Albayzar) that
the pride wherewith you are accompanied, maketh you ſo gallant
in ſpeeches: but aſſure youre ſelfe, it doth not a little gréeue
me, that I am generall of this armie, which is a hinderance to
me for dealing with you. Neuertheleſſe, for the deſire I
haue to pull downe your glorious ſtomacke, I am content
that all my knightes ſhall hazard their fortune againſt you.
King Edward and the other Princes with him, did highly
commend the courage of the ſtrange knight: and but for that
he ſpake the Greeke language ſo perfectly, they would haue
iudged him to be the Prince Florian of the Forreſt.
                     
                     It was not long before foure knights (from the Prince Albayzar)
preſented themſelues in the field, very brauely Armed,
whome the ſtrange knight vnhorſed one after another
preſently: whereat Albayzar was much offended, ſo that hee
deſired the knight to reſt himſelfe a while, to which wordes the
knight thus anſwered.
                     You ſee Sir, I haue two Launces yet left, and I am very
willing to beſtow the breaking of them: therefore ſend the
Giant that ſtandeth next you, and he and I will trie our fortunes
together. Alas Sir (anſwered Albayzar) you are too
forward in wiſhing Fortune to turne her face from you, therfore
I pray thee Framuſtant (quoth the Giant) that thou wilt
graunt the knight his honeſt requeſt.
                     The Giant was ſo glad to doe any thing that might content
Albayzar, as he armed himſelfe immediately, and giuing his
horſe the ſpurres againſt the knight, they met together ſo forcibly,
as the knight was conſtrained to catch hold about the
necke of his horſe, being ſorie to receiue ſuch a foyle in the preſence
of ſo many good knights.
                     Wherefore, to reuenge himſelfe on his enemie, he tooke the
ſecond Launce, wherwith he encountred the Giant ſo worthily,
as himſelfe was almoſt caſt out of his ſaddle: but ſuch was
his fortune againſt the Giant, as the point of his Launce entred
the Beuere of his Helmet, whereby he caſt him on the

croup 
                           •
                        r of his horſe, and the Giant thinking to recouer himſelfe,
pulde the bridle of his horſe ſo ſtrongly to him, as the horſe
fell downe kackward vpon him, which fall 
                           •
                        id ſo aſtoniſh him,
as he was carried out of the field depriued of his ſenſes. This
miſhap diſliked the Prince Albayzar, to whom the ſtraunge
knight came with theſe ſpéeches.
                     If thou thinke it good (Syr Albayzar) I will now depart
into the Citie, for that the Ladie deſireth me ſo to do: it draweth
towards Night, and the entertainement you will allowe
me heere, I iudge ſhall be very ſlender. I ſee well then (aunſwered
Albayzar) that it is not your will to vſe me in any
thing, neuertheleſſe, for the pr
                           •
                        weſſe I haue ſeene in you, I am
content to accompanie the Lady to the Gate of the Citie, not
doubting of my aſſurance, beeing lycenced by the King Rec
                              •
                           nde
and theſe other Princes. King Edward and his friends
tooke in 
                           •
                        ood part the words of Albayzar, and when he had
brought them to the gates of the City, he tooke his leaue of the
king Recinde and all the reſt, deſiring the ſtrange knight to
tell him who he was.
                     You demaund the thing (anſwered this knight) which I
force not greatly to make knowne vnto you, wherefore you
ſhall vnderſtand, that I am the knight of the Sauage man,
your principal enemie, and this Lady is the Queen of Thrace
my Wife: then he tooke off his Helmet, ſaying he was glad to
meete him in the place, where he would haue occaſion to deale
further with him. At th
                           •
                        ſe wordes Albayzar was ſo offended,
as he would not ſpeake to any all that night. King Edward
and his friendes rode into the Citty ioyfully, certifying
the Emperour of the arriuall of Florian. The Queene of
Thrac
                              •
                           
                         was very graciouſly entertayned by the Empreſſe and
the other Ladyes, who maruailed much at her ſtrange apparrell,
w
                           •
                        ich was the workmanſhip of the Queene Milia, wherof
the 
                           〈◊〉
                         to make a preſent, t
                           •
                         one of the daughters
of the king Armato her brother, as I haue already declared
to you. The Emperour was ſo glad at the arriuall of his Nephew,
as hee would hardly ſuffer him out of his preſence, hee
kiſſed the hande of the Empreſſe his grandmother, and of the

Quéene Flerida his Mother: and after hee had ſaluted all his
friends, hee was conducted to his chamber, to haue his wounds
viſited, which he receiued in the Iouſt, againſt the Prince Albayzars
Knights.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LIX.
                     ¶Here ſhall be declared, after what manner the Prince
Florian of the Forreſt arriued at Conſtantinople,
and of manie things that happened after his comming.
                     
                        SO ſoone as the Prince Florian had recouered
his Quéene and Wife, by ayde and aſſiſtance
of the Sage Aliart, he followed Aduentures
a certaine time, becauſe ſhe ſhould
perceiue his valiant and Noble diſpoſition:
but when he vnderſtood the hard caſe wherinto
his déere Friendes at Conſtantinople
were brought, he changed his former determination,
and cauſed his Quéene to decke her ſelfe in the Turkiſh
Attyre, and tooke his way to the place where his troubled
Friends remained. And becauſe he could not enter the Cittie,
but he muſt firſt paſſe the Campe of his Enemyes, he diſguiſed
himſelfe very ſtrangely, couering his Shielde with the Sauadge
deuiſe, and carryed the Shielde whereof I haue ſpoken alreadie,
which he found in one of the chambers of the Caſtle, where the
Quéene Leonarda was Enchaunted.
                     In this manner hee preſented himſelfe before Albayzars
Tents, where he ſped in Iouſting as you haue hearde before,
and after he had reſted himſelfe two dayes, he deſired the Emperour
to giue his Enemyes Battell, becauſe he thought euery
day a yeare, till he might encounter with the Prince Albayzar,
but his Maieſty deferred the matter ſo long as he could, becauſe

he would be aſſured of the good diſpoſition of all his Armie. The
Turkes tooke it very ſtrangely that they had trauelled ſo farre,
to lay ſiege to the principall Citie in all the Empire, and yet to

                           〈◊〉
                         ſo long before they ioyned in Battell: but Albayzar knew
very wel the aduantage that they of the City might get of them,
in that they were compaſſed wi
                           •
                        hin ſuch ſtrong Walles of defence,
beſides, that Cittie was plentifully ſtored with good and
hardie Knightes, who would murther many of his, ere they
would yéeld themſelues. Therefore he changed his mind from
giuing the aſſault, and made hauocke and ſpoyle of them about
the Citie thereby to prouoke the Emperour to ſeeke reuenge:
but in the meane while they continued their ſpoyling, the Soldane
of Perſia, ſent a Meſſenger to the Emperour, who beeing
brought into his Maieſties preſence, ſetting his knée to the
ground, he began in this manner.
                     Moſt puiſſant Emperour, the Soldane of Perſia, my Soueraigne
Lord, with the licence of the Prince Albayzar his captaine,
and the conſent of the whole Turkiſh Armie, ſaith, that
he is greatly offended at that which hath happened, in the ſeuerall
Iouſts againſt his Nephew Florian, with whom he would
once more gladly hazard himſelfe: on condition, that you willl
ſuffer twelue Knights of your Court to come into the Fielde
to morrowe morning, to Iouſt and Combate againſt twelue
Turkes, of which companie my Lord will be the captaine. And
thus much we will graunt, that the Combat ſhall be fought before
the Empreſſe Chamber windowe, to the ende, that theſe
Princeſſes and Ladies may ſee the valour and proweſſe, which
ſhall be ſhewen on both ſides, and they will agree to giue ouer,
and ende the Combate, when theſe Ladyes ſhall thinke good ſo
to command them. Moreouer, he humbly deſired the Empreſſe,
that it may ſtand with her pleaſure (after the Iouſts be ended)
to giue them leaue to daunce with theſe Ladies: the Emperour
returned him this anſwere.
                     Thou maiſt (my friend) ſay vnto thy Lord that I am content
to graunt his requeſt, and the twelue knights o
                           •
                         my Court, ſhal
not faile to meete them in the Fielde at two houres warning:
beſide, the Empreſſe ſhall giue them leaue to daunce with theſe

Ladyes, who I truſt will agrée to what I determine, albeit
they know them for theyr ſworne Enemies. But if any other
Knights come in companie with the twelue, thou mayſt ſay to
the Soldane thy Lord, that they are forbidden to come in Arms,
the like doe I promiſe with the knights of my Court, that none
but themſelues ſhall come Armed into the Field. The Eſquire
returning with his anſwere to the Soldane of Perſia, both hée
and his Companions beganne preſently to prepare theyr Deuiſes
and Armour.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LX.
                     ¶Howe the Combate betweene twelue Turkes and
twelue Chriſtians begunne, and howe the Ladyes
cauſed it to be giuen ouer preſently.
                     
                        BEtwéene the Knights of the Emperours
Courte aroſe great controuerſie, becauſe euery
one ſtroue to be of the number of the
twelue, and very hardly could they be quieted,
ſuch was theyr earneſt deſire to deale
with the Turkes: yet in the ende they were
glad to obey the determination of Florian,
who choſe the twelue according as he named
them to you. The firſt was Palmerin of England his Brother,
the Prince Florendos, Gracian, Berolde, Floraman, of
Sardignia, Blandidon, Platir, Pompides, the King Eſtrellant
of Hungaria, Don Roſuell, Francian, Sonne to the King Polendos,
and Don Roſian de la Bronde: theſe twelue Knights
were Armed very richly, hauing theyr Coates of Armes made
by theyr Ladyes, King Edward, Arnedes, Recinde, the Soldan
Bellagris, and the Giant Dramuſiande, they being all vnarmed,
accompanyed theſe Knights into the Field, which was in
the ſame place, where the Soldan of Perſia had appointed it, becauſe
the Empreſſe and her Ladyes might ſee theyr behauiour.
                     
                        
Then came the Soldane of Perſia, and the eleuen knights of
his company, they being honoured with the preſence of the
kings of Gamba, of Sparta, of Armenia, & the Giant Framuſtant,
they being all vnarmed. The Soldane of Perſia deſired
greatly to vnhorſe the prince Florian of the Forreſt, hee comming
foremoſt with the King of Aetolia, who of the two was
thought the moſt valiaunt: againſt him Palmerin of England
determined to Iouſt, for hee knew him by the deuiſe in his
ſhéelde, which was a golden tower in a field of Sable. The
Soldane of Perſia clapt downe the Beuere of his Helmet, and
the King of Armenia gaue him his Launce, ſo, when they were
all readie to the Iouſt, at the ſound of the Trumpets they ran
altogether couragiouſly, and met one another with ſuch force,
as the moſt part of them was caſt to the ground. Palmerin of
England enconntred the king of Aetolia ſo brauely, as he was
ſent to meaſure his length on the ground, and himſelfe was
ſo ſhaken, as he forſooke both his Stirrops. Florian and the
Soldane of Perſia encountred with ſuch force, as they were
both caſt foorth of their Saddles. Florendos vnhorſed the
Prince of Arfaſia, named Argelao: in bréefe, they were all vnhorſed,
except Palmerin, Platir, and the King Polendos, who
deſiring to accompany their friends, alighted from their horſes
to charge their enemies. The Soldane of Perſia, and the
king of Aetolia, who were more offended at their miſfortune
then all the other, preſented themſelues before their enemies,
and ſo with the aide of their companions, they beganne the
Combate with the Sword: but they ſped no better thereby
then they did at the Iouſt, which the Ladies pittying, and
ſéeing the Soldane of Perſia in great daunger, by reaſon that
Florian had woonne the aduantage ouer him, likewiſe, that
Palmerin and Florendos had brought their enemies into ſubiection,
concluded that the Princeſſe Miragarda, accompanied
with foure other Ladies, and the king Tarnaes of Lacedemonia,
ſhould goe into the field to ſeparate them: but ſo ſoone as
the Combattants had eſpied her, they would not ſuffer her
to come ſo farre as they were, but gaue ouer their Combat and
come to meete her.
                     
                        
The Princeſſe Miragarda, thought her ſelfe greatly honoured
by theyr forbearance of the Combate, and hauing very gratiouſly
thanked them all, ſhee returned backe againe, holding
the Prince Florendos by the hand, and they all by degrées following
in decent manner. When they were come to the Pallace,
the Soldane and his companie were very honorably entertained
by the Emperour, the Empreſſe, Miragarda, Gridonia,
Flerida, and the other Princes, who gaue the Princeſſe Polinarda
to vnderſtand, that the Soldane of Perſia thought maruellous
well on her.
                     The Emperour cauſed them to be brought into the Chamber
of Preſence, which was richly behanged with cloathes of ineſtimable
value: but when the Turks entred the Chamber, their
mindes were rauiſhed with beholding the ſtately maner therof.
King Edward, Recinde, Arnedes, and the other Kings, entertained
the Turkes with ſingular humanitie, which made them
iudge, that the courteſie and bountie of the Emperours Court,
could not be matched in all the world beſide: but when they beheld
the rare and excellent beauty of the Ladies, they imagined,
that their Knightes preuailed more by theyr Heauenly feature,
then by the ſtrength that conſiſted in themſelues. The Soldane
of Perſia ſtill viewing the Princeſſe Miragarda, tooke her to be
the faire Polinarda: but at length he found how he was deceyued,
for he ſaw Florendos ſtill in her company, and that Palmerin
kept his Wife Polinarda in talke with him, which made
him preſently recall his error.
                     As for the other Turkiſh Princes, whoſe mindes were onely
to ſeeke the ſpoyle of the Cittie, they tooke their leaue and departed,
and when they were come to theyr Campe, they practiſed
which way to worke theyr trayterous intents. The Soldane
of Perſia tooke the Princeſſe Polinarda to daunce, the king of
Aetolia tooke the beautifull Princeſſe Miragarda, & the Soldane
Albayzar took the Queen Leonarda▪
                         knowing that the Prince
Florian would ſcantlie bee pleaſed therewith: but the King of
Coſpia, albeit hée was young himſelfe, yet he refuſed all the other
Ladyes, and tooke the Quéene Flerida: ſo, falling to their
Courtlie Paſtimes, after they had Daunced ſo much as pleaſed

themſelues, in courteous manner they departed thence. But
as they were going foorth of the Chamber, the Giant Framuſtant
(who had all this while well viewed Arlencea) was ſo rauiſhed
in affection towards her, as hee challenged the Combate
againſt Dramuſiande on the morrow: and becauſe they would
not dally on either ſide, they threw downe theyr Gages, which
the Emperour cauſed to be taken vp, aſſuring them the Fielde
on his behalfe, and the Soldane Albayzar made them the ſame
promiſe. In this maner they tooke their leaue one of another,
euery one wiſhing that the Night were paſt, becauſe they had
good hope to ſee a notable Combat, and this you ſhall vnderſtand
by the waye, that Framuſtant was the onely Giant on whoſe
force Albayzar wholly repoſed himſelfe.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LXI.
                     ¶Of a Noble and valiant Combate, betweene Dramuſiande,
and the Giant Framuſtant.
                     
                        ON the next morrow Dramuſiande addreſſed
himſelfe to the place where the Combat
ſhould bee fought, accompanyed with the
Emperor Vernar, and king Edward and
his Sonnes, of whome he was more loued
and honoured, then of all the other.
                     It was not long after, before the Giant
Framuſtant came, being attended on by diuers
of his companions and friendes, hée being in an Armour
very rich and ſtrong, as it was neceſſary for him, dealing with
one of ſuch valour as was the Giant Dramuſiande, whome
he exceeded farre in hugeneſſe of ſtature, beeing mounted on a

luſty Courſer, which made Albayzar and his Friends imagine
that the victory would happen on his ſide: but they that were
acquainted with the noble proweſſe of Dramuſiande, iudged
the contrarie.
                     Certaine words were vttered on eyther ſide, but they continued
not long, for Dramuſiande beeing very earneſt in deſire,
to chaſtiſe the proude behauiour of Framuſtant, gaue his horſe
the Spurres againſt him, who likewiſe prepared himſelfe to
entertain him: and they encountred with ſuch excéeding force,
as they were glad to catche holde about the necks of their horſes
to ſhunne the fall.
                     But they immediately recouered their Saddles againe, and
drawing theyr Swordes out of their ſcabbards, they began to
charge one an other with ſuch Furious ſtroakes, as ſurely the
Combat ſéemed to be moſt dangerous: but becauſe they could
not méete ſo cloſely together on Horſebacke as they would, they
both alighted, and Dramuſiande behaued himſelfe with ſuch expert
and nimble dexteritie in fight, as Framuſtant could faſten
very few ſtroakes on him, but hee layd on loade on his Enemy,
and ſuch was the eagerneſſe of theyr Quarrell on eyther ſide,
as it could hardly bee iudged to whome the aduantage would
happen.
                     So long endured the Combate, as their ſhields were ſo broken
and defaced, that they could find but little defence in them,
and theyr Armour was ſo cruelly cut and mangled, as theyr bodyes
were wounded in many places: which made all the Regardants
of this minde, that this Combate deſerued as great
commendation as euer did any: yea, the Combat betwéen Dramuſiande
and the Giant Barocant, might not compare with
this, for that Framuſtant ſhewed himſelfe more ſufficient in
power then the other was.
                     In briefe, the doubtfulnes of this Combat was ſuch, as Victorie
was not to be hoped for on eyther ſide, for Fortune (who
reſerued theſe Champyons for Actions of greater moment)
would not ſuffer that Combate to endure any longer: for, at
that very inſtant time, there arriued in the Fielde the Princeſſe
Targiana, accompanyed with the Princeſſe of Armenia, and

diuers worthy Knights, who being aduertiſed that the famous
Cittie of Conſtantinople was beſieged, deſired to trauell thither,
to ſée the Prince Albayzar: but before they came foorth of
theyr Kingdomes, they left ſufficient Gouernours to take the
charge of them, and afterward (being accompanyed with two
thouſand Knightes) they iourneyed vntill they came before the
Walles of Conſtantinople.
                     
                     The Princeſſe Targiana bearing great good will to the Emperour,
for the honour hee beſtowed on her in his Court, beganne
to wéepe and take it heauily, ſéeing her Friends ſo troubled and
brought into danger: but when ſhe had knowledge of the Combate
betwéene Framuſtant and Dramuſiande, ſhe would not alight
from her horſe, but entred the Field; the Prince Albayzar
beeing with her, (who was not a little glad of her arriuall) the
Princeſſe of Armenia, the Soldane of Perſia, and ſundry other
Kings in her companie.
                     In this manner ſhee came where theſe two Giants fought
the Combate, and approaching to Dramuſiande, ſhee layde her
hand on his right ſhoulder: then taking her maſke frō her face,
ſhe ſpake vnto him in this manner. Me thinks it were reaſon
(Syr Dramuſiande) that all former quarrels ſhould be ſet apart
and ended, at the preſence of her who is your loyall and vnfained
Friend. Dramuſiande calling her to his remembrance, at
length returned her this anſwer.
                     Certainely Madame, he might be accounted of an vngentle
minde, that would refuſe to be vanquiſhed, on condition that you
thought it agréeable to your nature: and I iudge you doe aduantage
me very much, in wiſhing mee to giue ouer the Combate,
eſpecially, ſeeing I am matched with ſuch a ſtrong and puiſſant
Enemie. I knowe well (ſaid Framuſtant) that theſe glozing
wordes are not ſpoken from the heart, but onely (as it were) to
flowte and ſ
                           •
                        orne me: neuertheleſſe, I hope to make you finde
them true in the ende. I pray thée Framuſtant (anſwered Dramuſiande)
ſhew thy ſelfe at this inſtant ſomewhat obedient to
Madame Targiana, conſidering wée are in the place, where we
may at all times trie our ſelues together.
                     
                        Albayzar commaunded Framuſtant to withdraw himſelfe,

and in the meane while the Emperor Vernar, King Edward,
and diuers other Princes came to the Princeſſe Targiana (but
Florian of the Forreſt ſhruncke away into the Cittie, becauſe
he would not haue her knowe him) and after they had ſaluted
her as her dignitie deſerued, ſhe willed them to doo her humble
dutie to the Emperor, the Empreſſe, and all the other Princeſſes,
her friends.
                     So, ſhe tooke her leaue of them, they returning into the Cittie
with Dramuſiande, and ſhe departing with Albayzar and
the Princes to their Campe, where ſhe was receyued meruailous
ſtatelie on all ſides, they being very glad to haue the
company of Ladies, as well as the Princes had in the Cittie.
                     The Emperor of Allemaigne and King Edward, ſpent their
time in diſcourſing on the beauty of the Princeſſe of Armenia,
who exceeded farre the Princeſſe Targiana, and continuing
the commendation of this fayre Lady, they came to the Pallace,
the Emperor reioycing greatly at the arriuall of the
Princeſſe Targiana, and the Empreſſe bare ſo great good will
vnto her, as the Princeſſe and Ladies ſought to deſire lycence,
that they might goe welcome the Princeſſe Targiana, but ſhe
her ſelf ſo flattered the prince Albayzar, as ſhe obtained lycence
of him, to goe ſhew her reuerence to the Empreſſe and her Ladies.
                     On the next morning ſhe rode brauely to the Cittie, accompanied
with the Princeſſe of Armenia and the Soldane of Perſia,
with diuers other Princes who brought them to the Citie,
at the entraunce wherof, the Emperour ſate in his Chayre (being
brought thither for the honour of Targiana) and there he
tooke her in his armes, as if ſhe had bene his owne Daughter:
the like he did to the Princeſſe of Armenia, the Soldane of
Perſia, and the other Kinges that came in the company with
the Princeſſe Targiana, and ſo he was caried with them to the
Pallace, where entring the Empreſſe Chamber, ſhe was entertained
with gratious courteſie, both ſhe and all her company
beſide. After they had imbraced one another, the Princeſſe
Polinarda preſented the Queene Flerida to Targiana,
whome ſhe held by the hand, vſing many gentle ſalutations

to her: but after ſhe had knowledge of Miragarda and Leonarda,
ſhe perceiued verie well that her beautie might not
compare with theirs, and gréeuing that Leonarda had eſcaped
ſo well from the place where ſhe cauſed her to be enchaunted,
ſhe came to the Princeſſe Miragarda with theſe ſpéeches.
                     I cannot chuſe (Madame) but eſtéeme meruailous well of
their paines, that aduenture their honour in the field in the
defence of your beautie: which is the cauſe that I muſt take in
very good part, the labour that the Prince Albayzar beſtowed
on your behalfe. To the Quéen Leonarda ſhe would not ſpeak
one word, becauſe ſhe was married to the Prince Florian,
whome ſhe condemned as her mortall enemie. The Princeſſe
of Armenia, ſitting betwéene Miragarda and Leonarda, was
very much abaſhed, in that ſhe was not acquainted with any
of the Ladies of the Emperors Court, who (notwithſtanding)
entertained her very honourablie: thus they continued their
Princelie courteſies one to another, till the night drawing
on, Targiana tooke her leaue of the Emperor, deſiring his Maieſtie
to excuſe her for the warre, which was commenced contrary
to her will.
                     The Empreſſe and the Ladies brought them to the Pallace
gate, where (on eche ſide) they parted with ſuch heauineſſe, as
they could not ſpeake to one another: but the Emperor himſelfe
accompanied them without the Cittie, and becauſe Targiana
excuſed her ſelfe of the warre, which Albayzar had enterpriſed
againſt his Maieſtie, he tooke her by the hand, ſpeaking
to her in this manner.
                     I promiſe you (Madame) it is not a little griefe to me, that
I cannot at this time witneſſe, how le
                           •
                        th I am to be iudged
vngratefull vnto you, who deſerues to be honoured with moſt
gratious ſeruice. And as for the malicious dealing of Albayzar,
truſt me, it cannot diminiſh one iote of the good will I beare
you: but this I aſſure you, you may diſpoſe both of me and my
Court at your pleaſure, and may make your ſelfe as bolde and
welcome héere, as if you were in the great Turke your Fathers
Court.
                     So breaking off, and ſaluting eche other with great courteſie,

the Emperour was carryed backe to his Pallace, and Targiana
was conducted to the Camp, accompanied with the Emperour
Vernar, the Kings of England, Fraunce, and Spayne,
and many other Princes of the Emperors Court, who hauing
brought her to the Campe, tooke their leaue, and returned to the
Citty, deuiſing ſeuerally among themſelues, to whoſe lotte Targiana,
and the other Ladyes ſhould fall, if ſo be the victory chanced
on theyr ſide: for it is oftentimes the nature of Souldiers,
to ſhare & diuide the ſpoyle among themſelues, before Fortune
hath deliuered it into theyr hands.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LXII.
                     ¶Of the Battell betweene the Chriſtians and the Turks,
and of that which happened.
                     
                        NOt many Dayes after the arriuall of the
Princeſſe Targiana, the Princes (as well
on the one ſide as on the other) concluded to
ioyne in Battell, Marrie the Chriſtians
were more deſirous thereto then the Turks,
becauſe the Victuals beganne to waxe ſcant
within the Cittie: Beſides, Albayzar came
oftentimes, and prouoked them alſo with
his Standard and Enſigns diſplayed, which vrged the Knights
to cry & call to theyr Cōmanders and Captains, to ſuffer them
to ſaillie foorth of the Cittie: for it was a griefe to them to be ſo
encloſed within, and theyr Enemyes come daring ſo boldely to
them without. Vppon this, Primaleon would gladly haue iſſued
foorth, if the other Princes would haue bin ruled after him,
but they would not Aduenture ſo raſhly, becauſe many of them
were weake and ſickly with trauelling on the Seas, therefore

they determined to recouer themſelues in perfect aſſurance of
their health, before they would thuſte themſelues into the face
of daunger.
                     After they had well reſted and recouered themſelues, and
found that they were ſtrong and able to deale with the Enemie,
the Commaunders ſummoned their traines into the Field, and
King Edward being Generall of the whole Forces, commaunded
both Horſe-men and Foote-men to prepare themſelues to
Battell. The firſt Squadron was conducted by the Soldane
Bellagris: to whome was committed fiue thouſand good Soldiers,
being all his owne Subiects. The ſecond was giuen in
charge to Recinde King of Spaine: who had the conduct of thrée
thouſand, but then ſent him from the Kingdome of Spayne.
The third was led by Arnedes King of Fraunce, who had the
charge of the like number as the King of Spaine had, with the
two thouſand Souldiers that were ſent him from France.
The fourth was vnder the conduct of Polendos King of Theſſalie,
who had attending on him the like number. The fift was
in the charge of the Emperour Vernar of Allemaigne: and the
ſixt and laſt (being foure thouſand) was conducted by King Edward
of England. Primaleon would not this day take vpon him
any charge, that he might the better giue ſuccour to thoſe places
where he perceiued moſt daunger, becauſe he iudged it a pollicie
to be vſed in Warre.
                     All theſe that followe were brauely ſéene in the Fielde this
Day, Belcar, Drapos of Normandie, Maiortes, otherwiſe called
the Great Dog, Palmerin of England, Florian of the Forreſt,
Florendos, Platir, Blandidon, Berolde Prince of Spayne, Floraman
of Sardignia, Gracian of France, Don Roſuell, Bellizart,
Oniſtalde, Tenebrant, Francian, Pompides, the Sage Aliart,
the King Eſtreliant, Friſoll, Albanis of Frieze, Rodamont,
Dragonalt King of Nauarre, Luyman of Burgundie, Germaine
of Orleance, Tremoran, Don Reſiran de la Bronde, Dramuſiande,
Almaroll, and all the moſt renowmed Knightes of the
Emperors Court, who were in the Squadron vnder the conduct
of the Soldane Bellagris, they all concluding with themſelues,
that ſo ſoone as the Battell ſhould be begunne, they would each

of them take part on that ſide, where theyr dutie and affection
did beſt ſerue them.
                     The King Tarnaes (accompanyed with many valiaunt
Knights, had committed to his charge the defence of the Cittie,
and of the Footemen were choſen fiftie thouſand, ſuch as were
accounted the moſt wiſeſt and expert Souldiers, that were vnder
the conducting of the King Tarnaes, to helpe to preuent any
danger imminent to the Cittie. King Edward himſelfe, being
very braue and gallantly Armed, ceaſed not to viſite his charge
of Horſemen, and likewiſe hee came among the young Princes
and Knightes, encouraging them in noble ſpéeches, and with a
countenance bewraying the inuincible minde of a Conquerour,
deſiring them to remember theyr Knightly déedes paſſed, which
might be an occaſion to ſtirre them vp more nobly, in defence of
the flower of all Chriſtendome.
                     With theſe and other ſuch like ſpéeches, he did ſo animate and
embolden all his Traine, as they that were the moſt fearefull,
and had leaſt minde to deale with their enemies, ſéemed as willing
and forwards to the Battell, as hée that was the braueſt
Souldier in the Field: which when the King perceiued, he withdrew
himſelfe and his company, commanding the Soldane Bellagris
to giue the firſt aſſault.
                     
                        Albayzar diuided his Horſemen in ten companyes, giuing
to euery Squadron fiue thouſand men. The firſt Squadron
was conducted by the Soldan of Perſia, who was accompanied
with the Giant Framuſtant, and about fiue hundred wel approued
Souldiers. The ſecond was giuen in charge to the king of
Trebizonde: the third, to the king of Caſpia: the fourth, to the
king of Armenia: the fift, to the king of Gamba: the ſixt, to the
king of Sparta: the ſeuenth, to the king of Bithinia: the eight, to
the prince Argelo of Arfaſia: the tenth and laſt, was conducted
by the Soldane Albayzar himſelfe, with whome were ſeauen
Giants for the Guard of his perſon.
                     But ſo ſoon as Framuſtāt eſpied Dramuſiande in the forefront
of the Chriſtians Armie, being deſirous to approoue himſelfe againſt
him onely, hée went (by the licence of Albayzar) to the
foremoſt Squadron of the Turkes, becauſe hee thought by this

meanes to encounter with Dramuſiande. The young princes
in Albayzars Campe, were diuided into foure parts, each part
contained fiue and twenty thouſand: and they that were left
beſide, were ſent to the Pauillons, for ſafegarde of the princeſſe
Targiana, and the princeſſe of Armenia.
                     
                     As for the richneſſe of their Armour, and ingenious Deuiſes,
which theſe knights (as well on the one ſide as the other) bare in
this conflict, would trouble the eloquent tongue of Marcus Tullius
Cicero, to make true ſufficient diſcourſe thereof. But to
yéelde the greater contentment to thoſe friendely Gentlemen,
who take delight in reading of this famous Hyſtorie, I will rehearſe
the Names of them that were braueſt in the Fielde: and
firſt I will begin with the Chriſtians, wherof there were ſometimes
two or thrée together, whoſe Armour and Deuiſes were
like in colour or proportion.
                     King Edward, the Emperour Vernar, and the Soldane Bellagris,
had theyr Armour in Scarlet, white and blacke colours,
with mightie Chaynes of Golde croſſing theyr Bodyes, and in
theyr ſhieldes they bare a flying Griffon, in a fielde of Siluer,
and vnderneath was written in Letters of Golde, the Names
of ſuch as they eſtéemed to bee their beſt beloued, and moſt famous
Friends.
                     
                        Primaleon and the King Polendos, were in white Armour,
and in theyr ſhieldes was portrayed in a ſiluer fielde, a clouen
Rocke, which Deuiſe Primaleon was woont to beare, when he
was amorous of the princeſſe Gridonia his Wife. Recinde,
Arnedes, and Francian, were in gylt Armour, and two Lyons
Rampant in their ſhieldes, in a field of Azure. The King of Vngaria,
Eſtrellant, and Belcar his Vnkle, were in black armour,
ſhadowed with little ſtreams of Gold, becauſe it was not long
ſince the deceaſſe of the King Friſoll and Ditree, and for theyr
Deuiſes they had figured in theyr ſhieldes a golden Trée, in a
fielde of Sable.
                     
                        Palmerin of England, and the prince Florendos, were in gréen
Armour, very thicke beſet with little fillets of gold, and in theyr
ſhieldes was figured Fortune in a Siluer fielde, whereby was
vnderſtood, that they did yet repoſe ſome truſt in her.
                     
                        
The Prince Floraman of Sardignia, and the Kinght of the
Sauadge-man, had theyr Armours of an Indian coulour, all
wrought ouer with little ſhrubbes of Golde: but the Deuiſes
of theyr ſhieldes were contrarie: for Floraman had portrayed in
his ſhielde, Death holding a Lady by the hand, in a fielde of Sable,
and Florian kept his Sauadge Deuiſe, wherewith he had atchieued
ſo many honorable victories. Dragonalt King of Nauatre,
and Albanis of Frieze, king of Denmarke, were in redde
Armour, with circles of ſiluer, croſſe thwarting euery way: and
in their ſhields was pictured in a field of Sinople, Loue, holding
a Knight vnderneath his féet: for this Deuiſe the Princeſſe Miragarda
commanded Dragonalt to carry all his life time, when
he was vanquiſhed by the prince Florendos, before the Caſtle
of Almaroll.
                     
                     The Prince Berolde, and Oniſtalde his Brother, were both
in gylt Corſelets, but their Baſes were blacke, and in their
ſhields was figured little flames of fire, in a field of Sable. Polinard
and Muncalion, had their Armour of gréene and Carnation
colours, and in their ſhields was diſplaied a ſiluer Sea, in a
field of Sinople. Blandidon and Friſoll, were in black Armor,
carrying for theyr Deuiſes in their ſhields, two golden Griffons,
in a Fielde of Geules. Pompides and Platir were in
gréene Armour, and eache of them carried in his ſhielde a ſiluer
Bull in a fielde of Sinople: for Pompides tooke very great delight
in this Deuiſe.
                     The Armours of the prince Gracian, and that of Guerin his
Brother, was of Gréene, Scarlet, and white colours, with fillets
of Golde, croſſe ſtrickt to ſeparate the colours, and in theyr
ſhieldes was figured a Garden of flowers, in a ſiluer Fielde.
Rodamont and Bellizart, had theyr Armour of Verimillion colour,
and in theyr ſhieldes they carryed Hope, in the habite of a
Woman, but depriued of life: this Deuiſe was in a fielde of
Geules.
                     
                        Don Roſuell and Dramian were both in white Armour, very
thicke beſet with Roſes of Golde, and in their ſhields was pictured
a diſplayed Enſigne of ſiluer in a Golden fielde.
                     
                        
                        Baſilliart and Didon his Brother, were in Azure Armour,
all wrought ouer with little Siluer ſhrubbes, and in the ſame
manner were their ſhields. Luyman of Burgundie, and Tremoran,
had their Armour of Tawny colour, as colour conformable
to their amorous thoughts: but becauſe Tremoran was
out of hope to eſpouſe his Ladie, he carried his Deuiſe according
to his ill happe: and Layman of Burguudie, being in the ſame
caſe, was the more willing to kéepe his companie, and therefore
they carryed for theyr Deuiſes in theyr Shielees, Sifiphus tumbling
his reſtleſſe ſtone in a field of Sable. The Sage Aliart
of the Obſcure Valley, and Don Roſian de la Bronde, were in
white Armour, and this was the maner of the Deuiſes in their
ſhieldes. The Sage Aliart had the figure of God Apollo in his
ſhield, in a field of Sinople, and Don Roſian had in his ſhielde,
the tower of Nemrod, from whence hee was lineally deſcended.
Maiortes and the Giant Almaroll, were in blacke Armour, and
theyr ſhieldes of the ſame colour, without any maner of Deuiſe.
                     The Giant Dramuſiande was in a ſtrong Armour of A
                           •
                        ier,
and his ſhielde of the ſame manner: of whome the Chriſtians
made eſpeciall account, becauſe they knew the noble valour hee
was indued withall. Diuers others were very braue, both in
theyr Armour, and Deuiſes of their ſhieldes, which made a gallant
ſhewe among the Chriſtians: but I let them paſſe at this
time, to auoyde prolixitie.
                     And now wee will ſpeake ſomewhat of the Prince Albayzar,
who was very gallantly mounted in a Gréene Armour,
which was thicke beſet with Spheares of gold, in ſigne of victory,
and in his ſhield was pictured in a fielde of Sinople, the
liuely and naturall forme of the Princeſſe Targiana. The Soldane
of Perſia, was in a Carnation coloured Armour, beeing
very thicke beſet with precious ſtones of incredible eſtimation,
and about the ſkyrts of his Baſes were framed diuerſitie of fine
and curious artificiall knottes of Gold, in the middeſt whereof
ſtood two Letters of P. P. which he had cauſed to be placed there,
onely for that they were the firſt Letters of the Name of the
Princeſſe Polinarda, towards whome he was maruellous affectionate,
and he was in good hope to be rewarded with her, if

they woonne the victorie: in his Shield was figured Hope, in a
gréen veſture like a young beautifull Ladie, and vnderneath her
was written in letters of golde, the name of the Princeſſe Polinarda.
The king of Gaſpia was in Tawny Armour, ſtreaked
ouer in diuers places with blacke, in ſigne that he had bene
vanquiſhed in the Combate paſt: and in his ſhielde he bare for
his deuiſe, a Beare, hauing his clawes al bloody, in a field of Sable,
whereby hee gaue them to vnderſtand, that he had good hope
to bathe his hands in the blood of his Enemies. The king of
Trebiſonde, was in red Armour, all ouer figured with little ſiluer
Birds, hauing their wings ſpread abroad, in manner as they
were flying, and carryed the picture of god Mars in his Shielde,
with the Minotaurs-head, that he conquered in Creete: this deuiſe
was in a golden Field. The king of Sparta was in white
Armour, and in his ſhield was portrated a Lyon torne in pieces,
becauſe he had torne a Lion himſelf, when he was in his youthfull
time. The king of Aetolia was in blacke Armour, bearing
for his Deuiſe in his ſhielde, a blacke Bull, in a field of Geules.
The king of Armenia was in Azured Armour, wrought all ouer
with roſes of golde, and in his ſhield was figured a Phoenix,
in a fielde of Azure: whereby his meaning was, that his Ladie
was the onely Phoenix of beauty in the world, to whome no other
might equall her ſelfe. The king of Gamba was in guylt
Armour, with his Baſes of ſiluer, and in his Shield was pictured
a golden Lion in a ſiluer fielde. The king of Bythinia was
in gréen Armour, croſſe-ſtreaked with bonds of ſiluer, coupling
in manner of knots: and in his ſhield he caried a golden Tiger
rampant, againſt a Rock of Chriſtal, in a field of Sinople. The
Prince Argelao of Arfaſia, had his Armour like to the king of
Bythinia. Many other of the Prince Albayzars knights came
into the fielde, being very brauely Armed, but I will let them
paſſe vnnamed at this time: aſſuring you that Framuſtant and
the other Giants were armed very gallantly, & behaued themſelues
with ſuch report in the field, as they thought verily to diſmay
the Chriſtians with their countenance.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. LXIII.
                     ¶Of the firſt Battell betweene the Chriſtians and the
Turkes, and the ſucceſſe thereof.
                     
                        THe Armye on eyther ſide, being appointed
in good and decent maner, the Potentates,
Kings, Princes, and perſons of moſt Authoritie
(would néeds goe place themſelues
in the formoſt rancke) holding this opinion,
that in ſuch a renowmed Battell wherein
the perill of all Chriſtendom conſiſted, they
which preſented themſelues the foremoſt in
Fight, ſhould deſerue the greateſt honor and glory in the Field:
which conſideration made the Captaines leaue theyr charges
to their Lieutenants, and come and place themſelues in the face
of the Battell.
                     Then the Drummes and Trumpets ſounding gallantly on
either ſide, the Soldane of Perſia marched on with his traine, to
receiue the firſt Squadron of the Chriſtians, and meeting togither,
Primaleon encountred the King of Caſp
                              •
                           a, and brake his
Launce ſo brauely on him, as himſelfe forſooke both his ſtirrops:
but the king of Caſpia had ſuch a forcible ſtroake, as hee
was ſent headlong to the Earth, very ſore wounded. Palmerin
of England ſerued the king of Aetolia in the ſame manner,
albeit he was reputed amongſt the Turkes for an eſpeciall good
Knight at Armes. Florendos and the king of Armenia fayled
in the Iouſt, but they met ſo forceably togither with theyr
bodyes, as both they and their Horſes tumbled to the ground:
the Prince Florendos recouered himſelfe againe quickly, but
the Turke was ſo amazed with his fall, as hee could hardly tell

where he was, whereupon his two Couzins came vnto him,
and conducted him betweene them to his Tent. Berolde of
Spaine, and Floraman of Sardignia, addreſſed themſelues to the
Prince Argelao and the king of Bithinia, and encountred with
them ſo furiouſly, as they were all caſt forth of their ſaddles,
being not able to mount themſelues againe, becauſe the number
was ſo great, & the fight ſo h
                           •
                        te where they were. Recinde
and Arnedes ranne againſt the Kings of Gamba and Sparta,
they being all vnhorſed, except the king Recinde, who kept
his horſe valiantly. The Soldane Bellagris and the King
of Trebiſonde mette together, and brake their Launces
verie brauely, not béeing any thing ſhaken in the encounter.
                     The Soldane of Perſia, who deſired to haue himſelfe ſéene in
the field, had no ſooner eſpied the knight of the Sauadgeman,
but he gaue his horſe the ſpurres, and encountred with him ſo
nobly, as the knight of the Sauadgeman loſt both his ſtirrops,
which he recouered againe preſently: but the Soldane was ſo
ſore ſhaken, as he lay along on the necke of his horſe, and had
tumbled to the ground, if one of his traine had not immediatly
ſuccoured him.
                     Among them that dealt in the firſt encounter, Dramuſiande
and Framuſtant was moſt to be regarded, for they fayling
at the breaking of their Launces, met in ſuch couragious
manner together with their bodies, as both horſes and men
were ſent to the ground: and recouering themſelues nimbly
againe, they beganne a furious and cruell combate, and to the
example of all other knights, charged one another with moſt
puiſſant ſtroakes.
                     All the Princes of the Emperours Court were at this firſt
encounter, except King Edward, the Emperour Vernar, and
the king Polendos, who would not depart from their Squadrons,
fearing leaſt they would diſparſe themſelues out of
order: and the Giant Almaroll kept them company likewiſe,
becauſe he ſaw no more Giants in the foremoſt rancke
but Framuſtant, with whome Dramuſiande fought very
gallantly.
                     
                        
After thyy had thus encountred with their launces, and many
knights throwne to the earth, ſome ſlaine outright, and other
ſome in little better caſe: they drew their ſwords on all
ſides, and began the moſt cruell Battaile that euer was ſéene,
and the Captaines returned againe to their ſeuerall charges,
becauſe they would not haue them fall out of order. Argelao,
and the King of Bithinia, fighting on foote againſt Floraman
of Sardignia, and Berolde of Spaine, were ſuccoured by the Soldane
of Perſia, who like a noble captaine praunced among the
ranckes, to animate and encourage the mindes of his friends,
and aſſembling them in ſundrie companies, hee came where
theſe foure continued the fight ſtill fiercely: but the Soldane,
Bellagris with his traine, ſhewed ſuch proweſſe on the freſh
commers, as with in a while, both the Soldane of Perſia himſelfe,
and the companie he brought with him were enforced to
giue them place againſt their willes, leauing Argelao and the
king of Bithinia in ſuch danger, as had not the king of Trebiſonde
come vpon them with the ſecond Turkiſh Squadrō, they
had béene ſlaine by the hands of Floraman, and the Prince Berolde.
The Soldane of Perſia was ſo greatly gréeued, ſéeing
his men ſo vanquiſhed, and they that were left ſo out of heart,
as he cried for ſuccour to the king of Trebiſonde: with whoſe
aide he returned to recouer what he had loſt, and at length made
the meanes to get Argelao and the king of Bithinia thorow the
preaſſe.
                     But he that had thē ſéene the prince Primaleon, might plainly
haue diſcerned his willing
                           •
                        es to preuails againſt his enemies:
for he laide on loade ſo on euerie ſide, and following vpon
thē with his traine ſo nobly, as not one durſt ſtand before him
to endure his fury: by this meanes he recouered horſes againe
to Floraman and Berolde, but they were ſo wounded, as they
were glad to get forth of the battell. Primaleon, Palmerin of
England, and Florian of the Forreſt with their traynes, helde
the king of Trebiſondes ſecond Squadron ſo h
                           •
                        te play, as they
wiſhed themſelues a little furder off. But on the left hand of
this Squadron was the moſt daungerous battaile, betwéene
Framuſtant and Dramuſiande, who had gotten great aduantage

of his enemies, by reaſon that Framuſtantes ſword was
broken to his hand, but Albayzar ſent two hundred Knights
on foote to helpe the Giant, which when Primaleon perceiued,
he ſpake to Palmerin of England in this manner: I pray you
Sir, goe with me to ſuccour our friend Dramaſiande, for I
will neuer returne into the Cittie, except I haue him with mée.
Without any more words they layd about them luſtily, and
knockt downe euery one that ſtood before them, vntill they
came where Dramuſiande was: thither likewiſe came to defend
him againſt his enemies, the Knight of the Sauageman,
Florendos, Platir, Polinard, Pompides, the Sage Aliart, Maiortes,
Friſoll, Blandidon, Don Roſiran de la Bronde, Belcar,
and his ſonnes, being likewiſe accompanied with twentie of
the moſt renowmed Knights in all the Armie: and to aide Framuſtant
came the Soldan of Perſia, and the king of Trebiſond,
accompanied with a hundred knights of great authoritie and
valour, they being all on foote.
                     When Primaleon ſaw his friends without their horſes he
alighted likewiſe, and ſo did the Prince Palmerin: but when the
other Chriſtian knights heard that Primaleon fought on foote,
they forſooke their horſes, and came haſtily running to defend
him, and now beganne ſuch a cruell and fierce battell, as on all
ſides it remained very doubtfull and dangerous, Dramuſiande
and Framuſtant ſo layde vpon each other with their pommils
of their ſwords, as they were at length ſo ſore trauailed, as
their ſtroakes could but little hurt them. Primaleon and the
king of Trebiſonde buckled together, but ſuch was the fierceneſſe
of their fight, as in the end they were conſtrained to pauſe
a while: the like happened to Palmerin of England and the
Soldane of Perſia: but the Knight of the Sauage man ſlew
two Knights, who came traiterouſly and ſtrooke him behinde
his back, and Florendos with the reſt of his companions ſtuck
ſo cloſely to their tackling, as many of the enemies ranne like
dogges away.
                     But Maiortes was ſo compaſſed in with his enemies, as
none of his friends might come to helpe him, ſo that he had
ſuch gréeuous wounds giuen him, as (hauing ſlaine ſo many

of his enimies as durſt abide him) hée fell downe dead to the
ground himſelfe.
                     
                        Florian of the Forreſt, was ſo grieued when he ſaw him
fall, as the teares trickled downe his cheeks, and albeit he was
in extreame heauineſſe, yet he followed on them that had kilde
Maiortes, and reuenged his death nobly, becauſe the death of
ſo braue a noble man, was much lamented of them that knew
his valiaunt minde, but moſt eſpeciallie of his Sonne Dridan,
who with anguiſh of mind caſt himſelfe amongſt his enemies,
and within a while he behaued himſelfe ſo well, as the Turkes
knew to their coſt his extreame griefe for the death of his Father:
yet ſuch was his vnhappie fortune in the end, as (being
beſet among the thickeſt of his enimies, & many cruell wounds
giuen in diuerſe places of his body) he fell to the ground, his vitall
ſpirite forſaking him, and made him follow his Fathers
dead ghoſt, which was no ſmall griefe to the noble king Edward
of England, in reſpect of the great friend ſhippe and loue,
that had remayned of long time, betwéene him and Maiortes.
                     
                     And becauſe he iudged, that fighting thus on foote would be
the death of many his deere friendes, he commaunded his hard
horſes to breake through the ranckes, whereto they preſentlie
obeyed, and ſcattered the troupes of the enemies in ſuch ſort,
as all his friendes were mounte
                           •
                         on horſebacke againe, and
Dramuſiande and Framuſtant were ſeparated a ſunder, but
at this ſecond encounter, the king of Trebiſonde was ſlaine by
the hand of the noble Palmerin of England. Dramuſiand and
Framuſtant were ſo daungerouſly wounded, as they were not
able to hold out the fight any longer: wherefore, they were
conueied thence, the one to the Turkes Tentes, and the other
to the Cittie to be tendered with preſent regard, according as
their dangerous eſtates required. When the conflict was thus
broken, diuers that had entred with the firſt ſquadron, retired
to take breathing: but Primaleon, Palmerin, nor many of the
Emperors Court beſide, were any of them, for it was a pleaſure
to them to endure the trauaile of Armes, ſuch ſmall account
they made of their hurts and their enemies.
                     
                        
The Empreſſe and the Ladies ſéeing ſo great cruelty, and the
loſſe of ſo many noble Gentlemen, withdrew themſelues into
their chambers, where they lamented in ſuch gréeuous maner,
as if they had ſeene the enimie entred into the Citie, whervpon,
many Ladies of great authorite (hearing their pittifull
lamentatiōs) came vnto the Pallace, repoſing altogither their
hope in the aged Emperor, if the knightes in the Field ſhould
fayle of the victorie.
                     The king Tarnaes would haue denied the Ladies entraunce
into the Pallace, but it was more then he could well doo: for
hardlie can any man gouerne the common people, eſpeciallie,
when a generall feare of their liues is threatned before their
eyes.
                     The Emperour himſelf, whoſe debilitie in yéeres and griefe
of minde (conceyued by this vnlooked for ſtratageme) depriued
him of his woonted good iudgement, and pollitique meanes to
preuent ſo great miſchéefe, as he could not imagine with himſelfe
how to remedie this ſuddaine miſfortune: but euen with
a Womans ſtomacke, rather then the inuincible minde he had
alwayes borne héeretofore, fel into puſillanimitie and doubtful
feare with himſelfe, vtterlie forgetting the auncient Adage:
Audaces Fortuna iuuat; and Targiana, the Princeſſe of Armenia
and all the Ladies in the Turkes Campe, were ſo fearefull
and doubtfull of the victorie, as the Ladies in the Emperours
Court.
                     King Edward being Generall of the Chriſtian Armie, deſiring
to witneſſe his noble valour in the fielde (hauing reſted
himſelfe a pretie ſpace) diſmounted thrée knights one after another
with one Launce: afterward drawing his ſworde, he
charged the enimes on all ſides about him ſo valiauntlie, as
they were glad to auoide and giue him place. And the Prince
Albayzar likewiſe, ſéeking to honour himſelfe this day with
the renowme of the field, came vppon the Chriſtians with incredible
proweſſe: and ſuch reſiſtaunce he made with his freſh
company, as the Battaile endured a long time very blody and
cruell, ſo that a man could not iudge which ſide had the moſt
aduantage.
                     
                        
But then came a newe aſſault vpon the Chriſtians, by a
great number of Turkes on the left wing, among whome were
ſixe monſtrous and terrible Giants, which Aſſault was ſo hote
for the time, as the Chriſtians were enforced to retyre. The
Giant Almaroll (who had all this while kept companie with
the King Recinde his Lorde (ſéeing the Chriſtians withdrawe
themſelues, addreſſed himſelfe to one of the Giants called Dramorant,
and with a mighty Mace that hee had gotten in the
Battell, hee kept him ſuch rough playe, as he could not paſſe on
forwards, as he willinglie would haue done. And the King Recinde,
ſéeing another Giant named Trafamor, cōming to ſtrike
at Almaroll behinde his backe, ſtepped before him to hinder his
determination: but hée being Aged and feeble, and not able to
reſiſt the mercileſſe ſtroaks of this bloody-minded Giant Trafamor,
was ſo pittifully wounded, as he fell downe at the Giants
féete, who tooke his ſword, and thruſt it to the heart of the King
Recinde.
                     
                     Which when the Prince Palmerin perceyued, hée was very
ry ſorrie, and comming in a rage to the Giant Trafamor, neuer
left him, vntill ſuch time as hee had layde him downe dead on the
ground: but he was ſo ſore but himſelfe▪ as he was glad to get
foorth of the Battell, and by the commandement of the Prince
Primaleon, 
                        
                           •
                        hee was carryed into the Cittie, where they made
great doubt of his life, by reaſon he had loſt ſuch aboundance of
his Blood.
                     
                        Almaroll and Dramorant were ſundred, whervpon the death
of Recinde K: of Spayne, was blazed through the Army, which
was ſuch heauy newes to Arnedes King of France, his Couzin
and ſingular good Friend, as making no account of his life) hee
threw himſelf amongſt his enemies: where (ſéeking to reuenge
the death of the King of Spayne) hee loſt his owne life, and by
him was ſlaine Oniſtalde, Sonne to the king Recinde, who followed
Arnedes, to reuenge his Fathers death.
                     King Edward and the other Princes, were ſo offended,
when they ſawe theyr déereſt Friendes thus caſt to the ground,
as they ranne amongſt the thickeſt of their Enemyes, and layd
on loade like deſperate men: the Knight of the Sauadge-man
                        
likewiſe, on whoſe ſhield no manner of Deuiſe could be diſcerned,
it was ſo hackt and broken in pieces: came vnto the Giant
Dramorant, and handled him in ſuch Knightly order, as he
made him tumble downe dead before him.
                     
                        Belcar and the King Polendos, entring on the king of Aetoliaes
Troupe, were in the ende enforced to paye the ſharpe tribute,
which Death demaundeth of Nature by dutie: this vnfortunate
ſucceſſe cauſed no little heauines among the Chriſtians,
but in eſpecilly to the Prince Berolde of Spayne, who vnderſtanding
that the King Recinde his Father, and Oniſtalde his
Brother, were ſlaine by the enimies, he ruſhed in fiercely vppon
them, determining eyther to reuenge theyr loſſe, or leaue his life
among them for company.
                     And the Prince Floraman of Sardignia followed cloſe after
him, butchering the Turkes on euery ſide, whereby hee manifeſted
to the Prince Berolde, the entyre good will and affection
he bare him: but the valiaunt Florendos did moſt of all iniury
the Enemie this day, for the Knightly ſtroakes that were to bee
ſéene on his Shield, deliuered a true teſtimony of the great dangers
he had eſcaped: all which he made of no account, ſuch was
his earneſt deſire to reuenge the death of his déere Friends. So
that this Battell may be reputed for the moſte cruell and perillous
that euer was ſéene, in that ſo many grieuous and tragicall
Spectacles were to be ſéene that diſmall Day, with the loſſe of
a number of famous Princes and moſt renowmed Knightes:
for there you might haue ſéene Don Roſuell and Bellizart to
breake hardily through the preaſſe of theyr Enemyes, without
eyther feare or regarde of theyr owne liues, to looke for theyr noble
Father the Prince Belcar: and Francian on the other ſide,
came to ſearche for his Father, the King Polendos: which the
Enemies perceyuing, and knowing them to be néere allyed to
the Emperor, followed fiercely after them, to ſée who could firſt
murther them.
                     The Prince Berolde was no ſooner come to the place, where
his Father lay ſlayne, but hee ſawe how the Giant Almaroll
had loſt his Helmet, and his face ſo pittifully beſmiered with his
blood, as it was a great griefe to all that behelde him, for hee had

in that place laid ſeuen hardy Knights ſlaine at his foot, and determined
not to forſake the dead body of the Prince, before he
had loſt his owne life likewiſe in that place.
                     The enemies reſiſted the Prince Berolde ſo ſtrongly, as
had it not béene for the ſuccour of the Emperor Vernar Primaleon,
Florendos and Blandidon, he had béene ſent to kéepe his
father company: and Primaleon laboured very earneſtly to get
the Giant Almaroll foorth of the battaile, becauſe he was deſtritute
of a Helmet, his Armour broken very much, and his body
wounded in many places, but ſuch was the loue and fidelitie
he bare to his Prince, as it was impoſſible for Primaleon to
cauſe him withdraw himſelfe.
                     Vpon this reſkew of the Princes to Berolde, the enemies
came running amaine to this place where they were, with
the Soldane of Perſia conducting them, who hearing how Almaroll
continued manfully killing all that came before him,
galloped thorow the rancke till he came at Almaroll: but who
ſo had ſeene the gallant behauiour of Primaleon and Florendos
his Sonne, in defending Almaroll from the enemies fury,
would haue imagined the very type of Knightly valour to
conſiſt in theſe two famous champions, who were not a little
grieued to ſée Almaroll ſo willing to ſéeke his owne death,
and could not bee perſwaded from that minde by any of his
friends.
                     The Giant Gramato (who came in company with the Soldane
of Perſia) aduanced himſelfe to deale with Almaroll, but
the hardy Florendos ſtepped before him, and had ſlaine him
outright, if Almaroll had not caught him about the body: but he
being ſo grieuouſly wounded, as no ſuccour whatſoeuer would
ſaue his life, fell down dead before the Giant Gramato, whom
Berolde afterward charged ſo roughly, as Gramato ended his
life to accompany the Giant Almaroll.
                     
                     Now began the courage of the Chriſtians to encreaſe worthily,
in that they were ſtronger in that place then the Turkes,
for the Soldane of Perſia was conueyed foorth of the Battaile,
by reaſon of a wound that he had receiued in his throate by the

puſh of a Sword: ſo that the Soldane Bellagris found good opportunitie,
to carry the bodies of the King Recinde and Oniſtalde
his ſonne forth of the field, the Prince Berolde helping
to conduct the bodies, becauſe himſelfe had loſt ſo much blood, as
he could ſcantly hold out any longer.
                     
                        Primaleon hauing a regard to the troupes of men diſperſed
in the Field, beheld King Edward and his traine driuen to the
retire, for that Albayzar accompanied with thrée Giants and a
number of knights (ſéeing the Chriſtians fore trauailed) came
vpon them with a freſh charge: but king Edward met his proud
enemie with ſuch puiſſance, as he was glad to draw backe to
reſt himſelfe a while, aſſuring you, that the King of England
behaued himſelfe ſo nobly in the field, as the whole Chriſtian
campe repoſed themſelues on him.
                     
                        Pompides, Baſiliart, the Sage Aliart, Platir, Friſol, Germain
of Orlnance, Luyman of Burgundie, Rodamont, Albanis of
Frize, Dragonalt, Don Roſiran de la Bronde, Tremoran, Tenebrant,
Don Roſuell, Bellizart, and diuers other of the Chriſtian
Knights reſiſted the enemy verie valiantly, and followed
ſo faſt vpon Albayzar and his company, as (had not freſh ſupplies
ſtill come) they had made a notable conqueſt of their aduerſaries.
                     
                        Primaleon left to gouerne theſe the Soldane Bellagris, and
Blandidon went with Florendos and Floraman to the noble
King Edward of England, and as they would haue approched
to him, they eſpyed the Emperour Vernar, and Polinard his
Brother on foote, encloſed with ſuch a number of Turkes,
as their liues were greatly to be feared: for the King of
Bythinia had ſlaine the Emperour Vernars Horſe, and falling
to the ground, brake one of his Maiſters legges in the
fall, ſo that the Emperour was faine to ſtand vppon one
legge to defend himſelfe, in which hard caſe hee was verie
neare his death, but that his Brother Polinard ſtept preſently
before him, and defended him with ſuch manly proweſſe,
as the enemy could not any way come to hurt the Emperour.

                        Primaleon ſéeing the miſfortune of the Emperour of Allemaigne,
and how the Turkes ſought euery way to take his life
from him, was ſo ouercome with inward griefe, as the teares
trickled downe his chéekes: and fearing now the vtter ruine
of Conſtantinople, he ran with ſuch courage vpon the enemies,
as downe they tumbled dead to the groūd on euery ſide of him.
And Florendos, thought his Armour was ſhiuered, and he had
no ſhéeld to defend himſelfe, yet (accompanied with the Prince
Floraman) he folowed his father, ſhewing incredible proweſſe.
Floraman ſetled himſelfe againſt the king of Bithinia, and preuailed
ſo well againſt him, as he ſent him headlong to the groūd
depriued of his life: but Primaleon ſéeing Floraman to bee
ſomewhat ſore hurt, deſired him to withdrawe himſelfe out of
the Battell.
                     When the Turkes that were conducted by the king of Bythinia,
ſawe theyr Captain ſlaine, they beganne to retire very ſpeedily,
by which meanes Primaleon recouered and mounted Polinard
on Horſebacke againe: but hee could not imagine howe
to got the Emperour Vernar out of the field: which made him
aduenture with his men in ſuch daunger, as it was doubtfull he
ſhould haue fallen into his enemies hands. For the king of Armenia
came vppon them againe with foure thouſand men, hoping
to recouer that which the other Kings had loſt, ſo that Primaleon
was faine to alight from his Horſe, for the defence of
the Emperour Vernar: in like manner did moſt of the Princes
and Knights, fearing leaſt any harme ſhould come vnto the
Prince and the Emperour, but many of them were ſlaiue in
this newe aſſault, and ſo was the king of Armenia, with fiue
hundred of his beſt tryed Soldyers.
                     The Emperour Vernar, ſéeing Death ready to entertaine
him, and that there was no meanes for him to ſhun it, embraced
it mildely and patiently: but when the young Princes ſaw
the Emperour ſlaine, they carryed him foorth of the Fielde, and
brought him with great heauineſſe into the Cittie, which was
now become in a manner deſolate.
                     The moſt vertuous and valiant King Edward, ſéeing himſelfe
left alone with the Soldane Albayzar, whome hee dealt ſo

ſtoutly withall, as Pompides, Platir, and the other Princes
might reſt themſelues, and cauſe their Friends that were there
ſlaine, to be tranſported thence, in the ende hee brought Albayzar
into ſuch eſtate, as he had kilde him in the Fielde, if hee had
not bene the ſooner reſkued by the Giants that came with him:
Neuertheleſſe, hee taught him his dutie ſo well, as hée tooke the
Engliſh Prince for a very ſharpe Schoolemaiſter.
                     While King Edward and Albayzar continued theyr Fight,
the night drawing on apace, the Trumpets ſounded the retrait,
ſo that euery one haſted vnto his Enſigne: the King Edward
ſummoned his men together, they all thinking ſo well on theyr
Generall, as they iudged themſelues happy to be vnder his leading
and gouernment. Bellagris and Primaleon brought their
traines likewiſe to him, and after they were all places in array,
the Chriſtians betooke themſelues to the Cittie, and the Turkes
returend to theyr Campe.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LXIII.
                     ¶Of that which they did at Conſtantinople, before they
gaue the Enemies the ſecond Battell, and of the great miſfortunes
which hapned in the Citty, amongſt which, chanced
the vntimely death of the aged Emperour Palmerin.
                     
                        AFter that the Chriſtian and Pagan Princes,
with theyr forces on eyther ſide, were
thus retyred to theyr ſeuerall holds, by the
conſent of Albayzar & Palmerin, the Princes
and Knights that were ſlaine in the battell,
were carryed thence to be interred, and
theyr funeralls to be performed: but for the
grieuous complaints made in the Cittie, for the loſſe of ſo many

noble and renowned Princes, I leaue them to the iudgement
of the courteous Reader, who muſt néedes thinke the
griefe to be great, in that Chriſtendome receiued ſuch a loſſe,
as in many yéeres could not be recoured againe. The conſideration
here of entred ſo déepe into the aged Emperours heart,
as he forſooke this earthly vale of miſery, yéelding his ſoule to
God, and his body to the bowelles of his mother, from whence
it came at firſt: at which time, the enchaunted bird that he kept
in his pallace, ſung thrée times together with a very pittifull
note, ſo that both olde and young in the Court, did not alittle
maruaile thereat.
                     Of this birde, you may reade more at large in the notable
and famous Hiſtory of the Emperour Palmerins life, which
Booke is called Palmerin d'Oliue, a Hiſtory plentifully ſtored
with diſcourſes of ſingular delight, being for the worthineſſe
thereof, eſtéemed of many Nations, as this Hiſtory is likewiſe:
and therefore, for the excellency of this aforeſaide Hiſtory,
and in reſpect it dependeth on matters briefely touched
in this booke, ſo that it is accounted as a parcell of this Hiſtory,
I entend (God ayding me, to publiſh it ſhortly, when (I doubt
not) but the Gentle reader ſhall finde it worthy of the commendations
that I haue vſed of it in this place. The Obſequies
and Funeralles of the Emperour were ſolemnized with great
pompe and dignitie: in like manner did they honour the Emperour
of Allemainge, and the other Kings that were ſlaine in
the battaile.
                     Not many dayes after, the wounded Princes found themſelues
in good diſpoſition againe, weerevpon they determined
to enter the field, becauſe the enemies demaunded the battaile:
but firſt of all they prouided for the ſafegard of the City, which
was committed to the charge of the King Tarnaes of Lacedemonia:
and the Sage Aliart of the Obſcure Valley, they hauing
their conduct fiue hundred Knights on horſebacke, and foure
thouſand able footemen, and for the reſt of the Chriſtians
they were deuided into ſixe ſeuerall Bands. The firſt was
conducted by the Pr
                           •
                        nce Primaleon, who had atiending on him
two thouſand and fiue hundred Knights. The ſecond Band,

being of the ſame number, was committed to the Prince Floraman
of Sardignia. The third, to the king Eſtrellant. The
fourth, to Albanis of Frieze. The fifth, to Drapos Duke of
Normandie: all theſe fiue hands being like in number. The
ſixt was vnder the charge of the noble king Edward, to whom
came all the reſt of the Chriſtian ſouldiers. The Soldane Bellagris
with his traine, had the charge of the vtter wings, to
giue ayde where he ſaw néede required.
                     When theſe Knights departed from the citie toward the
field, they were all in blacke Armour, and their ſhields of the
ſame colour without any deuices, their horſes were likewiſe
trapped in blacke, and the more to expreſſe their inward heauineſſe,
they would haue neither Drumme, Trumpet, nor any
kind of inſtrument vſed in warre with them. Neuertheleſſe,
albeit this ſad procéeding to the battaile, declared their owne
heanineſſe, yet was it likewiſe a feare and terror to the enemy,
ſéeing them comming farre from them: and euery man had cloſed
the Beuer of his helmet, becauſe the enemy ſhould not perceiue
their mournfull countenances.
                     When they were come to the place where the Battaile
ſhould be fought, they ſpread themſelues abread in the field, after
the deuice of their Captaines, without making any maner
of noyſe at all. The footemen came after, being all attired in
black likewiſe, and without either Drums, Phifes, or Trumpets,
wherby they gaue the enemies to vnderſtand, what vnfained
loue and affection they bare to their Emperour, and how
they could not forget what gracious and friendly entertainement,
he was woont to make to his very enemies.
                     A thing which all Princes ought to haue in regard, and in
remembring the great vertue of this famous Emperour, to
gouerne their Kingdomes in ſuch ſort, as the people may rather
know what a gréeuous loſſe they haue by the death of
ſuch a Prince, then to behaue themſelues in ſuch manner, as
their Subiects ſhall reioyce to be rid of their Gouernour. The
Turks were greatly abaſhed, ſéeing their enemies come marching
in this order, they knew well by their mourning habits,
that they would in this battell make no account of their liues.
                     
                        
But Albayzar ſéeing the aſtoniſhment of his Souldiers,
came to encourage them like a noble captaine, laying before
them the renowme of the victorie, which ſhould be the recompence
of all their trauailes, and a ſufficient reuenge for the
death of many of their parents and friendes, who loſt their
liues before the walles of Conſtantinople, for which cauſe this
warre was firſt enterpriſed.
                     When he had a good ſpace vſed theſe and ſuch like ſpéeches
to them, they began to waxe deſirous of the battaile, and chaſing
all their formerfeare out of remembrance, they marched
on after the ſame manner as they did in the firſt battaile, ſauing
that they were vnder the charge of other captaines, for
that they which conducted them before were ſlaine. Their Armour
was very much broken and bruiſed, and ſo died with
the blood that iſſued from their bodies, that it was almoſt as
ſtrange a ſight in the field, as the Chriſtians ſad and mournefull
habites of blacke.
                     King Edward ſéeing his men placed in decent order, and the
backwings in ſuch regard as hée thought méeteſt, hée gaue
charge to Primaleon to giue the conſent with his company, for
he had with him the noble Palmerin of England, Florian of the
Forreſt, Florendos, Platir, Pompides, Blandidon, Don Roſuel,
Bellizart, Dragonalt, King of Nauarre, the Giant Dramuſiand,
and the moſt renowmed princes of the Court.
                     On the enemies ſide, the King of Aetolia was firſt in the
field, becauſe he conducted the formoſt troupe, wherein was
the moſt puiſſant knights in all the Turkiſh Armie, beſide the
Giant Framuſtant, who deſired aboue all other things to preuaile
againſt Dramuſiande. The Chriſtians finding themſelues
in a readineſſe, the Turkes ſounded their Drummes and
Trumpets to beginne the Battaile: but ſodainely came on
them ſo great a tempeſt, as they returned backe againe,
being not able to ioyne in fight for the ſpace of two houres after.
                     In the meane time as this tempeſt continueth, let vs returne
to the Citie of Conſtantinople, which (as you haue heard
before (was committed to the chargs of Tarnaes king of Lacedemonia,
                        
and the Sage Aliart of the Obſcure Valley, who finding
by his Art that the Cittie of Conſtantinople would bee
brought to deſtruction, and that king Edward of England, and
the Prince Primaleon, with the reſt of the Princes & Knights
that maintained the warre, would ſtand in great hazard of looſing
their liues, being not able to auoyd the cruelty of the Turks
who would get the Cittie into their poſſeſſion: vpon theſe aforeſaid
conſiderations he determined to prouide for the ſafety
of the Princeſſes and Ladies of high authority, who were
(moſt of them) great with childe, and neare the 
                           •
                        ime of their
deliuerance. Wherefore, that the fruit of their bodyes might
not periſh in this extremity, he raiſed a very darke and obſcure
cloude, which ſhadowed the light of the firmament in ſuch ſort,
as not onely they in the field were couered therewith, but alſo
the Cittie was ſo wrapt in the cloud, as it was not poſſible for
them to diſcerne it.
                     In the meane while, both the Armies remained in great amazement
by this darkeneſſe, as they had not the power to
méete together, Aliart conueyed through this da
                           •
                        ke Cloud, the
Empreſſe, the Princeſſe Polinarda, and all other Princeſſes
and Ladyes beſide, to the Perillous Iſle, which the Prince Palmerin
of England had beſtowed on him: and he ſhaddowed the
Iſle likewiſe (by his Enchantment) in ſuch manner, that it remained
(as it were) inuiſible, vntill Aliart conceiued ſo well of
the time and reaſon, as he thought good to diſcouer it. Theſe
Ladies were ſurpriſed with maruellous admiration, wh
                           •
                        n
they found themſelues not in Conſtantinople, but in a ſtrange
land, where they could not haue their company, who had endured
ſo many hard and dangerous conflicts for their ſakes, this
(aboue all other cauſes) did moſt offend and trouble their conſciences:
yet at length, when they ſaw no other remedy, they
were glad to practiſe and content themſelues with often viſiting
each other in their Chambers, to expell all other cogitations
that ſéeme irkſome vnto them.
                     Thus wil we leaue the Empreſſe and her ladies in the Perillous
Iſle, and returne to the King Tarnaes at Conſtantinople,
who (after the cloude was vaniſhed away, and the day cleare

againe) ſéeing that the Empreſſe with her Ladies, and the Sage
Aliart had forſaken his Companie, conceyued ſuch extreame
griefe within himſelfe (doubting leaſt ſome miſchaunce had befallen
them (as amidde his pittifull Lamentations hée yéelded
vp the Ghoſt: leauing the Cittie ſo comfortleſſe and diſpayring
within themſelues, as they deſired to finiſh their liues, forſaking
quite all hope in them that were in the Fielde, to whome
happened what Fortune had ordained, as you may read in the
Chapter following.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. LXV.
                     ¶Of the ſecond Battell betweene the Chriſtians and
the Turkes, and what happened therein.
                     
                        THe darke cloud being gone out of fight, and
the Sage Aliart hauing brought the Empreſſe
and her Ladies to the Perillous Iſle,
the day began to waxe cléere againe, and the
Armie marched forward to méete together.
But as they were about to enter the ſkyrmiſh,
they heard a moſt lamentable and pittifull
outcrye, which made them ſtaye their
hands, and looking about to ſée the cauſe of this noyſe, they ſaw
a great many of Ladyes and Damoſells come foorth of the Cittie,
with their haire diſperſed abroade ouer theyr ſhoulders, and
wringing their handes in very grieuous manner. And for that
they had loſt the King Tarnaes, and the Sage Aliart, whom they
knew were left for their ſuccour and Defence: they came into
the Chriſtian Campe, to their Huſbands, Brethren, Sonnes,
and Kinſmen: For ſéeing they could promiſe themſelues no aſſurance
in the Cittie, they would liue and die with them in the
Fielde.
                     
                        
King Edward and Primaleon were ſo amazed at the clamor
of theſe Women, as they cauſed theyr Enſignes to ſtay, and
commanded the Horſemen not to breake theyr Array, till they
had vnderſtood the cauſe of this diſorder: but when it was told
them, how that the King Tarnaes and the Sage Aliart had forſaken
the Cittie, they were both driuen into a great admyration
with themſelues, whereupon they ſent Pompides, and Platir
into the Cittie, to bring them certaine tydings of this vnlooked
for miſchaunce.
                     When theſe two Knightes were come into the Cittie, and
heard after what manner the King Tarnaes dyed, as alſo howe
the Sage Aliart was gone no man could tell whether: they beganne
to thinke within themſelues, that both they and all theyr
Traine were brought to ſuch extremitie, as Fortune had concluded
to finiſh the memorie of theyr Knightly déedes, by deliuering
theyr liued to the ſwords of theyr enemies. They did likewiſe
perſwade themſelues, that the Sage Aliart abſented himſelfe
for no other occaſion, but onely becauſe he perceyued theyr
generall deſtruction was at hand: & in this reſpect, they iudged
hée had prouided ſome refuge for the Empreſſe and the Ladies,
that their Enemies might not triumph in theyr miſfortunes, to
the great diſcontentment of theyr Lordes and Huſbandes.
With theſe heauy Newes they returned to their Camp againe,
certifying King Edward, and Primaleon, how the Sage Aliart
was departed: Whervpon they concluded by generall determination,
to withdraw themſelues into the Cittie, to make prouiſion
for the Defence thereof, before they would enter the Battell
with their Enemies.
                     But I aſſure you, it was a pittifull ſight to behold, how the
Men, Women, and Children, came and fell down at the Princes
féete: yea, the Ancient Citizens, with their gray heads, and
white beards, being ſo weake and féeble with Age, as they were
glad to ſupport themſelues with their ſtaues: they all made their
humble requeſts, that they might rather enter the Battell, and
thereto end their liues, then to be deſtroyed at home with their
Wiues and Children by the enemie.
                     
                        
King Edward, Primaleon, and all other Princes were not
a little abaſhed, finding the Pallace in ſuch a deſolate manner,
neyther the Empreſſe, the Princeſſes, nor any of the other Ladyes
to be founde, this vexed their mindes with vnexpreſſable
griefe. They went into theyr accuſtomed Chambers, and not
finding them there to whome they were moſt affectionate, their
very ſoules were ready to forſake theyr bodyes: for the young
Princes, enioying theyr ſwéet Ladyes ſo ſhort a time, for whoſe
ſakes they had ſuffered ſo many bitter brunts, they thought
themſelues not able to liue any long time, being depriued of
their company, whom they honored with moſt pure and vnfained
affection. For now their paines were greater then euer
they had béene before, and this miſhap was more irkeſome to
them then all the dangers paſt, becauſe their Ladies were the
rewardes of their knightly victories: but hauing thus loſt them
on ſuch a ſodaine, they were out of hope to enioy the ſight of
them any more, wherefore they ſéemed as men depriued of their
ſences, looking gaſtly and fearefully one vpon an other, knowing
not which way to comfort or redr
                           •
                        ſſe their preſent heauineſſe.
                     In this caſe the Chriſtian Princes remained for the ſpace of
thrée daies, hauing no minde at all to giue their enemies battaile,
during which time, Primaleon maide conueiance of the
aged men, with their wiues and children in the night time, to
diuers of his Caſtles and Fortreſſes néere adioyning, knowing
them farre vnable to helpe in this extremitie, and then
he cauſed the wals of the Cittie to be beaten flat to the ground,
which was thought good by the aduice of euery one to bee ſo
done, and that for two eſpeciall cauſes. The firſt, that it would
more animate and imbolden the Chriſtians in the time of battaile,
ſéeing themſelues diſpoyled of the place, wherein they
repoſed their aſſurance of ſafety. The other, that the enemies
ſhould not vaunt how they had deſtroyed the City, but that it
was defaced by the Chriſtians themſelues, if ſo be Fortune
ſuffered them to enioy the victorie.
                     They of the citie ſéeing the walles ſo ſpoyled, euen to the

very firſt foundation there
                           •
                        f, conceiued ſuch hatred againſt the
Turkes (whome they reputed to cauſe the ſubuerſion of their
ſtrongeſt defence) as they prepared themſelues altogether to
enter the Field, to reuenge themſelues on their proud and vſurping
enemies: and ſo they marched all with the Princes
into the Field, who went in the ſame manner as they did before,
when Aliart conueied the Empreſſe and her Ladies from
Conſtantinople to the Perillous Iſle.
                     
                     
                        Albayzar knowing well the intent of his enemies, cōmanded
his Captaines to place their men in aray, afterward, the
Trumpets ſummoning them brauely to the Battaile, he commanded
the king of Aetolia to giue the onſet with his Band to
the enemy: whereto the king preſently obeyed, and comming on
gallantly with his troupe of men, the Prince Primaleon prepared
himſelfe to receiue him, and giuing his horſe the ſpurres,
he preuailed ſo fortunately in the encounter, as he made the
King of Aetolia meaſure his length on the ground, but hee
was quickly ſuccoured by his men, otherwiſe Primaleon had
giuen him his deaths wounde. Palmerin of England ran againſt
the Prince Argelao, and met him with ſuch puiſſance, as his
Launce pierced cleane thorowe his body, ſo that he fell to the
ground ſtarke dead: the like did the Knight of the Sauage
man to a valiant Knight named Richard, who was eſtéemed a
ſingular Captaine amongſt the Turkes: the Prince Florendos,
Platir, Gracian, Berolde, and the other knights, ſlew them outright
likewiſe that encountred them in the Iouſt. Dramuſiande
and Framuſtant brake their Launces, but yet they kept
their horſes valiantly: whereupon, they drew their ſwordes,
and began to charge each other very furiouſly. The Chriſtians
behaued themſelues ſo worthily at this firſt encounter, as the
King of Aetolia (whoſe traine were twiſe ſo many in number,
as they with the Prince Primaleon) was glad to retyre, being
not able to endure the hardy ſtroakes of the Princes, Palmerin,
Florian & Florendos: but they were faine to betake themſelues
for refuge to the ſecond ſquadron, which was conducted
by the King of Caſpia, who came brauely vpon Primaleon and
his company, yet not able to enforce thē to retyre one foote back

from them, for Palmerin and the other princes maintained the
ſight ſo ſharply againſt them, as they were once more cōpelled
to recoyle backeward: Which the Soldane of Perſia perceiuing
he came to aſſiſt them with his company, when in ſooth he had
made a great ſlaughter of the wearied Chriſtians, if it had not
béene for the Prince Floraman: who ſéeing the Soldane of Perſia
come ſo faſt forward with his Squadron, he ruſhed in vpon
them with his Band of men, and reſiſted them in very gallant
manner. Palmerin bare great malice to the Soldane of Perſia,
becauſe he was ſo amorous of y• Princeſſe Polinarda his wife,
wherefore he ran fiercely againſt him, and brake his Launce
ſo brauely on him, as the Soldane tumbled headlong backward
out of his Saddle: but the Turkes laboured earneſtly to mount
the king againe, and Primaleon went to ayde the Prince Floraman,
who was likewiſe caſt beſide his horſe.
                     Thus were they helping one another of them néereſt at hand,
ſo that they had forgotten Dramuſiande and Framuſtant, who
hauing forſaken their horſes, fought ſo long together & in ſuch
cruell manner, as their bodies were wounded in many places,
but Dramuſiande was like to ſuſtaine the worſt, in that Framuſtant
was aſſiſted againſt him by another Knight, named
Grantor: and Dramuſiande had beene ſlaine betwéene them, if
it had not beene for the Prince Florian his déere friend, who
came and buckled with Grantor in ſuch ſort, as he laide him
dead at his foote immediatly.
                     When the Turkes beheld that Grantor was ſlaine, they enuironed
the Prince Florian and Dramuſiande ſo terrible on
euerie ſide, as their lines were brought, into ſome daunger:
but the king Eſtrellant of Hungaria (who had the charge of the
third Chriſtian Squa
                           •
                        ron) entred vpon the Tu
                              ••
                           es, and droue
them backe perforce, till they ſaw their friendes brought into
ſafetie againe, and Framuſtant was very néere diſcharged
of his life, but the Soldane Albayzar ſeeing his daunger, commaunded
them altogether to runne on the Chriſtians, the like
did King Edward to his men, becauſe they ſhould helpe their
fellowes in their neceſſitie. Florian ſeeing Albayzar comming
with his Launce charged in his reſt, gaue his horſe the

ſpurres to méete him, & theſe two worthy knights encountred
together ſo nobly, as Albayzar was glad to catch holde about
the necke of his horſe to ſhun the fall: but the Prince Florians
horſe was ſo ſtarke with trauaile, as he fell to the ground vnder
his Maiſter, who leapt out of the Saddle quickly, ſo that he
ſuſtained no harme by the fall. Albayzar laboured very earneſtly,
to get Dramuſiande and the Prince Florian within the
rankes of his men, becauſe hee ſawe how cruelly they hacked
and hewed the Turkes, that he thought himſelfe happieſt who
could auoid their preſence, but yet ſuch a company of men had
Albayzar hemd them in withall, as the loſſe of their liues were
now determined, if the Soldan Bellagris & Polinarda had not
arriued there with expedition, for they walking vp and downe
with their Bandes of men, to giue aide where they perceiued
neceſſitie required, ſaw the dangerous eſtates of Dramuſiande
and Florian, and thruſting in vpon the Turkes with great puiſſance,
they reſkewed Dramuſiande, and brought him foorth of
the Armie to reſt himſelfe a while, and they mounted Florian
on horſebacke againe, notwithſtanding all the practiſes of the
enemy to the contrary, but they were glad to conuey Framuſtant
foorth of the Battaile likewiſe, for they ſawe him ſo ſore
trauailed, as he was ſcant able to ſtand on his feete.
                     After that theſe two Giants were out of the Field, the greateſt
hurley burly was by the prince Psimaleon, becauſe Palmerin
of England and the Soldane of Perſia, (they being on foote)
fought maruellous fiercely togither, the like did Polinard with
a ſtout Turke named Ferrebrocque, which cauſed the men on
all ſides to haſten to this conflict. The King of Aetolia accompanied
with fiue hundred knights on foote, came to reſkew the
Soldan of Perſia, but Berolde of Spaine, remembring the death
of the King Recinde his Father, ioyned in fight with the King
of Aetolia, King Edward came thither with his troupe of men
to aſſiſt his friends, and ſo did Albayzar on the behalfe of the
Soldane of Perſia, he bringing with him many Knights, beſide
foure ſtoute and cruel Giants, whoſe preſence did much terrifie
the Chriſtians, ſo that many of them durſt not enter the fight
with ſuch Monſters.
                     
                        
Yet could not all theſe knights and Giants diſmay the noble
Palmerin of Englād, but he continued in fight ſo brauely with
the Soldane of Perſia, as he would not leaue him, till he ſaw
him ſlaine at hia foote: for whoſe death tha Turkes lamented
very much, in that he was the principall captaine vnder the
Prince Albayzar, who likewiſe tooke the Soldanes death ſo
heauily, as he came with his men vpon the Chriſtians like a
mad man. The victorie of the Prince Palmerin againſt the
Soldane, was but little comfort to him, in that he ſaw ye prince
Polinard (who fought ſtill againſt Ferrebrocque) fall downe
dead to the ground, & Ferrebrocque with diuers other Turkes
fall downe ſlaine on each ſide of him likewiſe: but the death of
Polinard was very gréeuous to his friends and companions, in
that the Emperor Vernar his brother was kilde in the firſt battail,
and the Empreſſe Bazilia (ſeeing her lord and huſband gon)
repoſed al her hope and comfort on the prince Polinard. Florendos,
whoſe griefe could not be expreſſed for the death of his
friend Polinard, becauſe they had bene nouriſhed al their youth
together, in the Emperors court) to reuenge the death of her
déere friend and companion, he ran fiercely amongſt the thickeſt
of his enemies, and the firſt he met withal was the giant Pandolfo,
who holding a mightie mace in his hand, aduanced himſelfe
to receiue the prince Florendos. Then began a fierce
and terrible combat betwéene them, ſo that within a whyle,
the giant Pandolfo railed and exclaimed againſt his gods horribly,
finding himſelfe not able to reſiſt the force of one knight,
he being woont to vanquiſh euery one that entred fight with
him: but Florendos not regarding his railling words, brought
him into ſuch féeble eſtate, as at length he fell downe on his
knées, when Florendos taking off his Helmet, ſtrooke
                           •
                         of his
head from his ſhoulders. Berolde of Spaine lekewiſe ſlew the
king of Aetolia, which when Albayzar perceiued, hee came
running on Berolde, and twentie knights with him, ſo that
they had murdred the Spaniſh prince amongſt them, but the
Soldane Bellagris hindered their determination: for he came
with his band of men and reſkewed him, commanding foure
knights to carrie him forth of the battaile, for that he ſeemed

rather a dead man, then one that had any life left in him, and
in this order he was brought to Pacentio the Emperors cheefe
Chamberlaine, who had the charge giuen him for the wounded
perſons, becauſe he was verie ſkilfull therein, and being a
man of very auncient time, he was not iudged fit to enter the
fight. The Prince Beroldes miſfortune was ſuch griefe to his
friendes, as they rather deſired to beare him company, then to
liue in hope of an vncertain victorie, which was ye more doubtfull
to them when they remembred the loſſe of the Emperor
Vernar, the King Recinde and the other Princes.
                     But the knight of the Sauageman, ſeeing the great ſlaughter
that Albayzar made of his friendes, pricked thorow to the
place where he was, and came vnto him with theſe wordes.
Now is the time Albayzar, which alloweth vs opportuuitie to
ſatiſfie our long deſired reuenge of eche other, and becauſe we
two are the occaſions of all this trouble, I pray thée let this
quarrell be ended betwéene thée and mee, and let not thoſe
(who are innocent in this matter) looſe their liues for our offences.
I am ſo glad (aunſwered Albayzar) that it is my good
happe to méete with thée at this time, as I would not chaunge
my preſēt fortune for the moſt renowmed eſtate in the world.
So breaking off, theſe two valiant Princes began a fierce Cō
                        bat,
wherein Albayzar was brought into great daunger, but
that a Giant named Altrope came and defended him, which
Giant the knight of the Sauadgeman ſoone depriued of his
life, and would haue gone afterward forth of the Battaile to
reſt himſelfe a while, but the king of Sparta came with a great
many knightes, and compaſſed the knight of the Sauageman
in ſuch ſort, as he was fully determined to looſe his life amongſt
them. Yet ſo it chaunced, that Primaleon and Palmerin, (who
ſaw the hard caſe of his Brother Florian) arriued there, and
at this 
                           •
                        ickering they ſlew the king of Sparta, Luymeno his
Sonne, and Antiſtes his Brother, beſide many other knights
and perſonages of great account: and on the Chriſtians ſide
were ſlaine, Tenebrant and Francian, whoſe loſſe the Chriſtians
did very much lament. Then was tidinges brought to
the Soldane Bellagris, that one had kild his ſonne Blandidon,
                        
which report was ſo gréeuous to him, as hée brake thorow the
thickeſt of his enemies, till he came where his Sonne laye:
then preſently he alighted from his horſe, and comming to his
Sonne, he made ſuch ſorrowfull lamentations ouer him, as it
would haue mooued a ſtony heart to pittie. Blandidon, who
had yet ſome life left in him, hearing the voice of the Soldane
of Niquee his Father, opened his eyes, and offered to lift vp
his head to ſpeake vnto him: but ſuch was his feebleneſſe, as he
could not mooue his head, whereupon he was caried forth of
the Field, and committed to the cuſtody of the olde Pacentio.
                     
                     
                        Bellagris tooke the matter ſo heauily for his ſonne, as he concluded
to finiſh his dayes in that place, and ſo cruelly was he
aſſaulted by his enemie, as he likewiſe reſigned vp his vitall
ſpirite, after that he had kilde the Giant Malearque. In this
conflict were ſlaine of the Turkes, the king of Gamba, and his
two Brothers, the Giant Piſiſtrato, the king of Caſpia, the Giant
Framuſtant, who was ſlaine by the noble Dramnſiande,
beſide a number of famous Turkes, and on the Chriſtians ſide
were ſlaine Germayne of Orleaunce, Luyman of Burgundie,
Pompides the king of Scots, and diuers other worthy Chriſtian
Souldiers.
                     But then to amaze them the more, a number of the Cittizens
of Cōſtantinople, brought forth ſuch richeſſe as was left in the
Citie, and ſet it on fire before the enemies face, to the end that
if the enemie remayned victor, hée ſhould not vaunt of the
ſpoyle of their goodes: but they being not ſo content, when
they had burnt their riches, went and ſet on fire the braueſt
buildinges in the Cittie, and one after another brought them
all into Cinders, which was no ſmall griefe to the Chriſtian
Armie, ſeeing ſuch a renowmed Cittie ſo ſet on fire, which had
triumphed ouer all other Nations.
                     
                        Albayzar ſéeing the chriſtiās ſtriken in a maze at the ſight of
the fire, came with a freſh Bād of men vpon thē, and the knight
of the Sauadgeman ſéeing Albayzar comming, buckled himſelf
againſt him, where on eyther ſide was ſhowne incredible proweſſe:
but in the end the Prince Florian preuailed ſo well againſt
his enemies, as he yeelded vp the ghoſt at his foote; which

the Turkes beholding, they beganne to faint very much, in that
their whole hope and refuge lay in the Prince of Babylon,
neuertheleſſe, ſuch was their affection to him, as they would
not depart from his dead body, but hemde in the Knight of the
Sauage man ſo hardly on euery ſide, as they had almoſt ſlaine
him, but that he was reſkewed by diuers of his friendes, who
in ſhort time got the better of the Turkes, and the Knight of the
Sauage man was caried to the olde Pacentio, who iudged him
almoſt paſt recouery.
                     Thus did the Chriſtians obtaine the victory of the Turkes,
albeit with little pleaſure to themſelues, for ſuch ſmall account
they made of the honour they had gotten, as no man had any
mind to goe fetch the riches which was left in the Turks tents,
ſo grieuouſly did they take the loſſe of their friends, and the abſence
of their Ladies, whom they thought neuer to ſée againe.
                     The common Hindes and Boores of the Countrey, came to
ranſacke the Turkes Tents, and becauſe they had more knowledge
of the Gold, then of the infinite riches of the precious
Stones and other Iewels, they tooke their fill of the worſt,
leauing thoſe things behinde them of greater eſtimation: not
much vnlike to Aeſopes Cocke, that for ſooke a precious Stone
for a Barley corne, but it is to be committed to the brutiſhnes
of the people, in that they had not béene brought vp in places of
knowledge and good iudgement.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. LXVI.
                     The counſell and aduiſe, that the Sage Aliart gaue to them
of the Empire of Conſtantinople. And how he cauſed the
body of the Emperour Palmerin, and the other Princes
that were wounded in the Battaile, to be conueied to the
Perillous Iſle.
                     
                        WHen the Chriſtians had thus preuailed againſt
the Turkes, the Sage Aliart came
into the Chriſtian Campe, and ſet downe
order, that all they which had béene flaine
in the Battaile, ſhould be buried in ſuch
maner, as their poſterity after them ſhould
remember their ſingular proweſſe in this
Battaile againſt the great Turke. And as for them that were
liuing, yet very ſore wounded, he annointed them with a certaine
kinde of oyntment, the vertue wherof was ſuch, as it caſt
them into a ſound ſléepe.
                     In the meane while Argentao, the Gouernour of the Profound
Iſle, (whom the Sage Aliart had commaunded to come)
arriued in the Porte of Conſtantinople, with foure Galleyes,
and being come on ſhoare, the Sage Aliart & he went into the
Cittie, and commaunded all the inhabitants to aſſemble themſelues
together, which they did immediately, when hée began
to let them vnderſtand, what ſmall hope was to be repoſed
on the liues of the Prince Primaleon their Emperour, and
Florendos his Sonne, becauſe they had béene ſo cruelly wounded
in the Battaile, deſiring them to take their loſſe ſo patiently
as they could, and not to diſmay themſelues: but that they
ſhould prouide for the reedifying their Citie, not onely to aſſure

themſelues from the danger of their enemies, but to witneſſe
to the world, that fortune had not the power to roote out quite
the name of the noble Citie of Conſtantinople, as ſhe had ſubuerted
the memorie of many other famous and renowmed
Citties.
                     Beſide, they ſhould call home againe thoſe Citizens, who
(for feare of daunger) had taken themſelues to the neare adioyning
Fortreſſes, and by a generall voyce to chooſe them a
gouernour, for otherwiſe they ſhould not containe themſelues
within bonds of aſſurance. And therefore (quoth he) I am the
more willing you ſhould chooſe you a Gouernour (if ſo bee the
Emperour Primaleon, and the Prince Florendos his Sonne,
ſhould finiſh their liues, by the hurts they haue receiued in the
Battaile, becauſe I would not haue you left comfortleſſe: but
this you muſt vnderſtand, that the yong Princeſſe Primaleon,
Sonne of the noble Florendos and the Princeſſe Miragarda,
muſt be the next inheritour of the Empire. Now, for that the
Childe is very young, and beſide, hée is a long way hence, I
would you would get you ſuch a gouernor, as might be thought
worthy of ſo great a charge, and whom you may be well contented
withall, vntill the young Primaleon come to ſufficient
yeares, that hee may be able to receiue his royall Scepter of
gouernment.
                     And this I muſt deſire you, that you will not be offended becauſe
I kéepe the childe ſo farre from you, for I aſſure you, he
ſhall be daily in the company of other noble Princes, with
whome hee ſhall exerciſe Knightly Armes, and learne the
rules of diſcretion and Vertue, wherewith it is neceſſary a
Prince ſhould be adorned. For your ſelues, I would wiſh you
to order your dealings ſo well, as he that ſhall ſucceede this
Empire, may receiue no occaſion to diſlike you: and that you
may continue your courſe the better, I will come diuers times
to viſite you, to let you vnderſtand of the welfare of the Emperour
Primaleon.
                     
                     The Citizens of Conſtantinople tooke in very good part theſe
friendly ſpéeches, but they were not a little agrieued, that there

was no greater aſſurance of the Emperour Primaleons life:
wherefore ſeeing the Sage Aliarts excuſed the matter ſo well,
they requeſted of him, that he would tell them in what place
the yong Prince was nouriſhed, that they might come ſometimes
to viſite him as their Lord and Soueraigne.
                     Your requeſt (anſwered Aliart) is very great, yet will I
ſomewhat content your earneſt deſire: the place where your
prince is nouriſhed, is called the Perillious Iſle, which ſometime
belonged to the Sage Vrganda, but at this time it is in my
cuſtody, for that my brother, and the noble Palmerin of England,
who conquered it with his ſword and great loſſe of his
blood, beſtowed it vpon me.
                     After he had thus directed them for the order of their gouernment,
he tooke his way to the monaſterie of Saint Clare,
where the body of the Emperour Palmerin lay embalmed, and
the bodies of the other Kings and Princeſſe, which he cauſed to
bée conueyed into one of Argentaos Gallies: but Primaleon,
King Edward and his ſonnes, Berolde, Gracian, Floraman of
Sardignia, and Blandidon, who were all eſtéemed as dead perſons,
for that Aliart had laid them in ſuch a traunce, they were
laid in another Galley, where their wounds were viſited very
diligently.
                     Then the Galleyes departing from the Citie, the people began
to lament excéedingly, becauſe ſo many noble princes were
brought into ſuch dangerous eſtates: yet durſt they not ſhewe
any kind of feare or diſmaying, leaſt they ſhould chance to diſpleaſe
their friend the Sage Aliart. Within fewe dayes the
Gallies arriued at the Perillous Iſle, where their Ladies
receiued them very worthily, and the Sage Aliart
ſhewed himſelfe ſo diligent towards the
recouery of thier health, as they remained
on all ſides greatly
contented.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  To the courteous Reader.
                  
                     THus Gentlemen, I haue finiſhed the ſecond part
of this most famous Hiſtory, deſiring you to
beare with the rudeneſſe in the tranſlation, and
to esteeme of my good will, which farre more
then my cunning will ſtretch vnto. As for the
the Hiſtory of Palmerin d'Oliue, which contaiueth
three ſeueral parts, and ſhould haue bin
tranſlated before this, or Prmaleon of Greece, becauſe they are the
originall of all the other ſtories: after I haue ended the third part of
this worthie Hiſtorie (God aiding me) you ſhall haue them very ſpeedily,
with any thing elſe that I deſire you to accept of this, and to conſider
how highly it hath bene, and yet is eſteemed in diuers countries,
being firſt written in the Spaniſh towgue, next in Italian, and afterward
in French, and how it hath bene countenanced with the titles of
Princes and Perſonages of great dignitie, which may moue you to allow
it the better acceptation, in that it is to the honour of our countrey
of England, and deuiſed by ſtrangers, to honour it the more. Thus
not doubting of your fauourable iudgement, I humbly take
my leaue, wiſhing you all good happes, that is meet
for all ſuch gentle and friendly
mindes to haue.
                  
                     Yours A. M.
                  
               
               
                  
                  A Table for the more ready finding
of euery Chapter, contained
in this Booke.
                  
                     OF that which happened to the Prince Florendos, after that
he had left the Caſtle of Dramorant the Cruell, where he
vanquiſhed Aſtribor. chap. 1.
                     Of that which happened to the Prince Florendos, after
that hee departed from the caſtle of the Prince Arnalto,
chap. 2.
                     How the Damoſell of the Princeſſe of Terace, arriued at the
Court of the Emperour Palmerin. And of that which happened
to the Knight of the Tiger. chap. 3.
                     Of that which happened to the Knight of the Tiger, againſt
thoſe that were in ambuſh to take the Damoſel. chap. 4.
                     Of that which happened to the Knight of the Sauage man, after
he departed from the Court of the Emperour Vernar.
chap. 5.
                     Of that which happened to the knight of the Sauage man, before
he had taken his farewel of the Damoſell. chap. 6.
                     How the knights which belonged to the giants Brocalon and
Baleato, ſurrendred vp the Caſtles vnto the noble knight of
the Sauage man: and of that which happned to the prince
Florendos, &c. chap. 7.
                     Of the combates that the Prince Florendos fought, the ſecond
day after hee enterpriſed to guard the Shield of the Princeſſe
Miragarda. chap. 8.
                     Of a ſtrange aduenture which chaunced before the Caſtle of
the Giant Almarol, and what happened to the Prince Florendos.
chap. 9.
                     Here ſhall be declared, what and who the Knight was, that
came in the company of the Princeſſe Arnalte, & for what
cauſe he and ſhe trauailed to the caſtle of the Giant Almaroll:
and of the great entertainement that was made in the
Court, &c. chap. 10.
                     How the Emperour with his noble company, entred the city
of Conſtantinople, & of the gracious entertainment which
was made to Leonarda, &c. chap. 11.
                     
                        
Of an aduenture which happened in the Court of the Emperour
Palmerin, and of, &c. cha. 12.
                     Here ſhall be diſcourſed what and who the Damoſell was,
that had thus gotten the Prince Florian, &c. chap. 13.
                     Of that which happened to the knight of the Tiger, following
the ſearch of the prince Florian, &c. cha. 14.
                     Of that which happened to the Knight of the Sauage man,
&c. cha. 15.
                     Of the aduentures which chaunced to the Knight of the Sauage
man, conducting theſe Ladies to the king of Spaines
Court: and of that which happened to the knight of the
Tiger, &c. cha. 16.
                     Of the combat betweene the Giant Eſpouuantable, and the
noble knight of the Tiger: and of the battaile betweene
Berolde, Plaetih and the Sage Aliart, &c. cha. 17.
                     Of that which happened to the noble Prince Palmerin of
England, &c. cha. 18.
                     Here is yet conteined what happened to Palmerin of England,
&c. chap. 19.
                     How Alfernao arriued at the Emperours court of Conſtantinople,
&c. cha. 20.
                     How the princes and knights which were priſoners to the
great Turke, arriued at the court of Conſtantinople, whervpon
the king Recinde deliuered out of priſon, &c. ch. 21.
                     How the knight of the Sauage man (accompanied with the
damoſels) arriued in the king of Spaines court, and of that
which hapned to him there againſt the P. Albayzar. ch. 22.
                     How the Damoſels knight and Albayzar iouſted together.
chap. 23.
                     Of that which happened to the Damoſels knight, in going to
the Caſtle of Almaroll. cha. 24.
                     How Trafolant and theſe other three knights yeelded themſelues
in the Spaniſh court. And how the damoſels knight
arriued at the Caſtle, &c. cha. 25.
                     Of the Iouſts which were enterpriſed betweene the Damoſels
knight, and him that kept the ſhield of the Princeſſe
Miragarda: and of the combat at which the knight, &c. c. 26.
                     
                        
Of that which happened to the damoſels knight, as he returned
to the Court of Recinde, &c. chap. 27.
                     What the Prince Florēdos did to the vāquiſhed knight. And
how thoſe knights whom the prince Florian had conquered,
&c. chap. 28.
                     Of that which happened to the Knight of the Sauage man,
when he came to the Caſtle where Arnalte the Princeſſe of
Nauarre, &c. chap. 19.
                     How the Prince Albayzar embarqued himſelfe to ſayle into
Turkie, after he had preſented himſelfe to Leonarda, the
Princeſſe of Thrace, &c., chap. 30.
                     Of that which happened to the knight of the Tiger, after he
was departed from the Perillous Iſle, &c. chap. 31.
                     How the Knight of the Tiger tooke his leaue of Meliadus the
King of the Scots, and of the Princeſſe Armiſia his daughter,
&c. chap. 32.
                     How the knight of the Tiger arriued at Conſtantinople, and
of an aduenture which was, &c. chap. 33.
                     Of the talke which the Prince Palmerin had with the princeſſe
Polinarda his Lady. chap. 34.
                     How certaine Knights arriued at the Court of the Emperour
Palmerin, who were aduertiſed how the Turks had prouided
a great Armie, &c. chap. 35.
                     Of an aduenture which happened (during the trouble at Cō
                        ſtantinople)
in the Realme of France, and after what manner,
&c. chap. 36.
                     Of that which hapned to certaine other knights, who would
prooue the aduenture of theſe, &c. chap. 37.
                     Of that which happened to the knight of the Sauage man, in
prouing the aduenture with theſe foure, &c. chap. 38.
                     How the ſtrange knight entered the field to Iouſt vnder the
name of madame Latrania. chap. 39.
                     Of that which happened to the ſtrange knight, the firſt day he
guarded the paſſage of the Valley. chap. 40.
                     The complaints which the ſtrange Knight made in the night
time, vnder the window of the chamber, where the foure
Ladies, &c. chap. 41.
                     
                        
What hapned to the ſtrange knight the ſecond day he guarded
the paſſage of the valley. chap. 42.
                     Of that which happened to the ſtrange knight the third and
&c. chap. 43.
                     Of that which happened to the ſtrange knight this night: &
how the Knight of the Sphere entred the combate the day
following. chap. 44.
                     Of that which the ſtrange knight did the day following, garding
the Valley, chap. 45.
                     Of that which happened to the ſtrange knight the laſt day he
guarded the paſſage, vnder the name of Madame Torſia.
chap. 46.
                     How the knight of the Sauage man arriued at the Court of
Conſtantinople: & how Dragonalt & Arnalte the Queen
of Nauarre; &c. chap. 47.
                     How Arnedes king of France and his Queene, Recinde king
of Spaine and his Queene, accompanied with the princeſſe
Miragarda and the Giant Almaroll, arriued at, &c. chap.
48.
                     Of the conference which the Emperor had with the Princes:
and how the mariages which he had appointed were now
&c. chap. 49.
                     How the Soldan Bellagris was baptized, and how afterward
the Emperor cauſed him to be marryed to Pandritia, and
how, &c. chap. 50.
                     How the Queene of Thrace was conueied away by a ſtrange
aduenture, while the knights, &c. chap. 51.
                     How by the ayde of the Sage Aliart of the Obſcure Valley,
the noble knight of the Sauage man deliuered out of the
Enchantment his, &c. chap. 52.
                     Of that which the Chriſtians did in Conſtantinople, at what
time the Princeſſe Targiana ſent tidings to the Court of
the Emperour Palmerin, of the comming of his enemies.
chap▪ 53.
                     How the enemies ſent an Ambaſſadour vnto the Emperours
Court, and of the anſwer was, &c. chap▪ 54.
                     How the Armie of the great Turke arriued at the Port of

Conſtantinople, and of the noble and valiant proweſſe of the
Chriſtians, &c. cha. 55.
                     Of the griefe and ſorrowe made in Conſtantinople, for the
dangerous eſtate wherein the Giant Dramuſiande was
brought: And how the Turkes placed their campe before
the citie of Conſtantinople. cha. 56.
                     Of that which Albayzar did after hee had well prouided for
his army, and of the ſuccour which came to the Emperour
Palmerin. cha. 57.
                     Of an aduenture which happened by the arriuall of a ſtrange
knight, accompanied with a Lady, in the Prince Albayzars
campe. cha. 58.
                     Heare ſhall be declared, after what maner the Prince Florian
of the Forreſt, arriued at Conſtantinople, & of many things
&c. cha. 59.
                     How the combate betweene twelue Turks and twelue Chriſtians
was begun, and how the Ladies cauſed it to be giuen,
&c. cha. 60.
                     Of a noble and valiant combate betweene Dramuſiande and
the Giant Framuſtant. cha. 61.
                     Of the battaile betweene the Turkes and the Chriſtians, and
of that which happened. cha. 62.
                     Of the firſt battaile betweene the Chriſtians and the Turkes,
and the ſucceſſe thereof. cha. 63.
                     Of that which they did in Conſtantinople, before they gaue
the enemy the ſecond battaile. cha. 64.
                     Of the ſecond battaile betweene the Chriſtians, & the Turks,
and what happened. cha. 65.
                     The counſell and aduiſe that the Sage Aliart gaue to them of
the Empire of Conſtantinople. And how he cauſed the bodies
of the Emperour Palmerin and the other Princes, &c.
chap. 66.
                  
                  The end of the Table.
               
            
         
      
   