
      
         
            
            
            THE
benefit that Christians
receiue by
Iesus Christ
crucified.
            Translated out of
French into English,
by A. G.
            Imprinted at London
at the three Cranes
in the Vintree, for George
Bishop and Thomas
Woodcocke.
1580.
         
         
            
            
            To the English Reader.
            THou hast here deliuered to thee, good Reader, a litle
treatise, first written in the Italian tongue, and
printed at Venice: after that, translated intoo th
                  •
               
French language, and printed at Lions, and now
                  •
               
translated & printed for thee to reade in the Englishe
tongue. Enquire not of the Author, he is vnknowen,
and to know him, would doe thee but little good. Reade
the booke deuoutly, regard the matter of it attentiuely,
it may doe thee much good in these euil dayes. This
may be counted among the greatest euils with which
this age is infected, that they, which are called christians,
are miserably diuided about Christ. And yet in
trueth (as the Apostle saith vnto vs,)2. Cor.
                     •
                  
                there is but one
God, which is the father, of whom are all things, and
we in him: & our Lord Iesus Christ, by whom are all
things, and we by him. To discourse on this diuision
and the cause thereof, woulde be to some pleasing, to
some it would be displeasing. For what one truth can
please mindes so diuersly diuided? would God it could
please al to become one in that one Christ, whose name
we all doe carrie. In this little booke is that benefit
                  •
               
which commeth by Christ crucified to the Christians,
truely and comfortably handled: which benefit if all
Christians did truely vnderstand and faithfully embrace,
this diuision would vanishe away, and in Christ
the Christians should become one. To this ende reade
this booke, and much good in Christ may it doe to all
them which doe reade it.
            Amen.
         
         
            
            The Translator sendeth greeting to all
Christians vnder heauen.
            I Cannot maruell ynough whereof it commeth
that all of vs are more mooued by iniuries then
by benefites: and that we take the one so much
too hearte imprinting them in our remembraunce,
and forget the other so suddaynely. Truely wee cannot
denie, but that among so many other imperfections
wherewith wee are vnhappily defiled, wee
haue also taken this, of the greate corruption and
maymednesse of our earthly and transitorie humane
nature, wherein there cannot be imagined any thing
more vnconuenient nor more hurtefull, than reprochefull
vnthankfulnesse, whiche a man might
rightly terme the welspring of all Vices. For by it our
myndes are so drawne away and peruerted, that the
more wee bee besette rounde aboute, and loden with
the benefites of GOD our Soueraigne Father, so
muche the more become wee blockishe, and as it were
distraught and out of our wits, running after our own
lusts and vanities, wherthrough (as though wee had
drunke of the Riuer Lethe,) we forget our selues, and
misspende our whole time, busying our heades like litle
Children that goe seeking of pinnes in the Sande,
whereaboute they are so wholly occupied, that although
a man call them, they heare him not, or at
leastwise make as though they hearde him not: from

whence if wee did nowe and then lifte vp our eyes vntoo
Heauen, and inforce our selues too remember the
greate benefite that wee daily receiue of his right fatherly
goodnesse and mercy: it were not to be doubted,
but we shoulde be more inclined to loue him, and
too obey his holy will, than wee be: whereas (which
worse is) we be not onely carelesse to yeeld due thanks
vnto him, but also at al times cease not to offend him:
so deepely is the vice of vnthankfulnesse rooted in vs.
Rightly may he be blamed for vnthankefulnesse, which
acknowledgeth not the good that hath been doone to
him, at leastwise by saying Gramereie: Vnthankfull is
he that forgetteth it: but tootoo vnthankful is he that
rendereth euill for good. Wherefore wee can finde no
lawful excuse, because that which way soeuer we turn
our selues, the bountifulnesse of this greate God shineth
throughout vppon vs. Let vs a little stirre vp ou
                  •
               
wittes, and let vs looke aboute vs as farre and wyde
as the huge frame of th
                  •
                world may extēd, so diuinely
set together & garnished with so greate diuersitie of
goodly creatures, so wel cōpassed, & in such an order so
wisely cōpacted, that ther is nothing superfluous, nothing
vnprofitable, nothing whereof there may not be
rēdred a reasō. This huge Sun the foūtain of al light &
heat, & the cause of al earthly generation: the Moone
which marketh vs out the yeeres, the monthes and the
seasōs: the sky so trimly azured & richly set with the

                  ••
               istering starres: this huge Sea which beateth vpon all

sides of the earth, the weight wherof is borne vppon
his owne rounde counterpeise, the great number of
liuing creatures that are vppon it, whereof some flye
in the Ayre, euery where dispersed, and othersome
dwell in the hollow Caues of it, which nature hath fashioned
of set purpose for them: what shal I say more?
So many high mountaynes, within whose veynes are
founde innumerable treasures: And others, from
whence issue many a faire spring sprouting out their
thin and cleere water: And othersome, whereout doe
gushe violent streames and pleasaunt Riuers, nourishing
infinite numbers and kindes of fishes: So many
trees and plantes yeelding most delicate fruites and
sweete sauours: Such store of medicinable hearbes and
rootes: So many Playnes and Valleys, moste fruiteful:
Such store of medowes beautified with their louely
flowers: And to be short, the full hugenesse of the
whole, the power of the Elementes, and th
                  •
                naturall
beautie of the creatures: what are they else, but the vtterance
and open shewing of Gods loue and great liberaltie
towardes vs: of which ech one in his kinde giueth
glory to the Lord▪ yea, aske euen the 
                  •
               eastes, &
they will informe thee: demaund of the foules of the
ayre, and they wil tell thee: or else speake to the earth,
and shee will reporte vnto thee: and to the fishes of
the Sea,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . 12. and they will answeare thee, The Lorde
spake the woorde, and wee were made: hee commaunded,
and we were created. For in his hande is the

life of euery liuing thing: And by him haue all of vs
our being, moouing, and continuance. Suche is the
speache of allcreatures. Onely man, who is made after
the image and likenesse of God, indued with vnderstā
               ding,
memorie, and reason, (shewing himselfe in that
behalfe more vnhappy then the brute beastes) passeth
ouer the aboundance of so greate benefites with
his eyes shut, betrampling and beraying them with
his feete, as a swine doth precious stones: Insomuch
that after he hath once wholly buried remembrance,
there insueth ignoraunce and vtter blindnesse. O lamentable
state of reasonable man! who can hope for any
change in thee, except it be from euil to woorse, seeyng
thou hast no knowledg
                  •
                at all of God, and that all
his benefites are despised through thine extreeme vnthankefulnesse
in this behalfe? if so many creatures
wherewith this whole huge world is garnished to thy
vse, and (to touche thee yet more neerely) if the cunning
compacting together of thine owne body, which
may well bee called a little worlde, as wherein a man
may beholde the soueraigne wisedome of the woorkemaister:
if thy soule wherein shineth the inuisible
image of the euerlasting God: if thine owne life: if
the consideratiō of so great abundance of good things,
wherof he geueth thee the vse euery day, are not sufficient
ynough to moue the affections of thy heart: at
leastwise yet oughtest thou of reason too bee inflamed
and prouoked by the benefite of all benefites, and by

that moste precious gifte which he hath made vntoo
thee of his owne proper and onely Sonne, who is
the very image of his substance, and in whom dwelleth
the whole fulnesse of the Godheade, together
with al the treasures of Wisedome, and al knowledge:
Yea and so muche ought it too mooue thee the more
because that without hauing regarde that thou werte
his great enimie, hee hath layde all thine infirmities
pon his backe, and made him to die vppon the crosse
for thy sake, punishing thy sinnes in him, for the
which thou thy selfe haddest deserued eternall damnation.
Goe nowe thou vnthankefull person, and deuize
all the excuses that thou wilte: and they shall
serue to no purpose, but too accuse thee and too geue
sentence against thy selfe. The woonderfull creation,
order, and gouernment of this huge worlde,
can giue thee knowledge of his fatherly loue, wisdom,
and infinite power, although not in al pointes to the
ful. But in Iesus Christ crucified, all the bowelles of
Gods mercy are opened vntoo thee at large and perfectly.
Ther is no more any veyle that can hinder thee
from the knowing of so great loue. Seest thou not how
that at his death the veyle was rente asunder in the
middes? And when he cryed that all was finished,
and bowed downe his holy head, he gaue a token that
peace was made between God & man? Let vs therefore
henceforth learne (O my brethrē) to acknowledge
the soueraine benefite which we haue receiued by Iesus

Christe crucified. Let vs beholde the perfectnesse
of his life, and his most holy doctrine. Let vs open
our eyes at the vnmeasurable brightnesse of his euen
lasting trueth, and let vs with all our force, followe
the way wherein hee hath gone afore vs. Let vs
with a cheerefull and glad hearte imbrace the Crosse
which hee hath set afore vs: and discharging our
shoulders from all burdens, and all sinne wherein wee

                  〈◊〉
                wrapped, let vs runne with pacience too the combate
that is appointed for vs
                  •
                hauing an eye to the beginner
and accomplisher of faith, Iesus Christe, who
in steede of worldly glory susteyned the Crosse, and
despised all the shame thereof. Let vs put of the old
man with all his wretched and combersome doinges
and greeuous burdens, and clothe our selues with the
new man, whose yooke is sweete, and burden light.
Let vs by true faith runne betweene the armes of his
mercy, and pray him to vouchsafe to lighten vs▪ and to
make vs capable of all his graces, and specially of the
great benefite that wee haue receiued of him by his
crosse. Concerning the which, forasmuche as there is
lighted into my hands a little treatise compiled in the
Italian tongue, where in he is merueilously wel & liuely
drawne with another maner of pensil than painters
vse: I thought it good to put it into Frenche, too the
end that my Countreymen also might take profite by
it, and receiue like comforte as I haue receiued by it

and specially the simple people, and suche as haue no
great depth of knowledge. For it semeth, that the Author
(whosoeuer he was) was wholly mynded to apply
all thinges vnto them, without seeking or affecting
any finenesse of speech, or great darknesse of sentences.
But euen as in Sommer time we see the Riuer Saon
goe gently to ioyne himself with the Riuer of Rhone,
without doing any domage to any body: euen so goeth
this man, slyding so smoothely into the bosome
of his deare spouse Iesus Christ, without staying at any
other thing, that ouermalicious shoulde hee bee,
which woulde looke awry on him, or by any meanes
let him of his course.
            And thus my brethren, fare yee well in God, who
enrich you with his gracious gifts, from
day to day.
            Amen.
         
      
      
         
            
            Of the benefite that Christians
receiue by Iesus Christ
crucified.
            The first Chapter.
            Of Originall sinne, and of mans
wretchednesse.
            
               THe holie scripture sayeth,The state of man before and after that he had sinned.
that God created
man after his owne Image
& likenes, making
him, as in respect of his
body, impassible: and as
touching his soule, righteous, true, good,
merciful and holy. But after that he being
ouer com with desire of knowledge, had eaten
of the Apple that God had forbidd
                  ••
               
him, he lost the saide image and likenes of
God, & became like the brute beasts, & like
the diuel who had abused him. For as touching
his soule, hee became vnrighteous,
vntrue, cruell, p
                  ••••
               lesse, and the enimy of
God and as touching his body, he became
passible and subiect to a thousand inconueniences
and diseases: and not onely like,
but also inferiour to brute beasts. And euē
               
as if our forefathers had obeyed God, they
shoulde haue left vs theyr righteousnesse
and holynesse as an heritage: euen so by
being disobedient vnto God, they haue left
vs the inheritance of vnrighteousnes, wickednesse,
and Gods displeasure, in such sort
as it is vnpossible for vs (through our own
strength) to loue GOD, or to frame ourselues
vnto his holy will. May wee bee
enimies vnto him, as to o
                  •
               e that must punish
our sinnes, because hee is a iust iudge,
and therefore can wee not any more trust
wholy to his holy mercy. To be short, our
whole nature was corrupted by Adams
sinne. And like as erst it had superiorite aboue
all creatures: so became it an vnderling
to all, the bondslaue of Satan, sinne, &
death, & condemned to the miseries of hell.

                  〈◊〉
                he lost his iudgement altogeather, and
began to say that good was euill, and euill
g
                  •
               d; estéeming false things to be true, and
true things to be false. Which thing the
Prophet considering,Psalm. 114 Psalm. 14. saith
                  •
                that all men
are lyers 
                  〈◊〉
                that there is not one that doeth
good▪ because the Deuill like a stout man of
armes ruleth his owne pallace▪ that is too

                  〈◊〉
               
               ▪ the world, wherof he became a prince
and Lord. Ther
                  •
                is no tongue that can expresse

the thousandth part of our mise rie,
in that wee beeing created by Gods owne
hand, haue lost the saide image of God, and
are become like the Deuill, and too like to
him in nature and cōdition, willing whatsoeuer
he willeth, and likewise refusing
what soeuer he misliketh. By reason wher
of being giuen vp for a pray to that wicked
spirite, there is no sinne so greevous, which
euery one of vs would not be ready to doe,
if the grace of God stay vs not.Originall sinne. And this
our depriuation of righteousnesse, and this
forward inclination to all vnrighteousnes
and naughtinesse, is called original sinne:
the which wée bring with vs from out of
our mothers wombe, so as we be borne the
children of wrath: and it hath had his first
spring from our first fathers, and is the
cause and fountaine of al the vices and iniquities
that we commit: wherfrom if we
wilbe deliuered, & return again to our first
innocency to recouer the image of god: first
of all it standeth vs on hand so knowe our
own wretchednes.A very good comparison
For like as no mā will
euer séeke to the phisition, except he know
himselfe to be diseased, or acknowledge the
excellency of the Phisition, and how much
hée is bound
                  •
                vnto him, except hée knowe

his own disease to be pestilent and deadly:
euē so no mā acknowledgeth Iesus Christ
the onely Phisition of our soules, except he
first know his owne soule to bee diseased:
neither can he perceiue the excellēcy of him
nor how much he is boūd vnto him, except
hee first enter intoo the knowledge of his
owne outrageous sinnes, and of the incurable
infirmity, which wee haue receyued
through the infection of our first fathers.
         
         
            The second Chapter.
            Howe the Law was geuen by God, to
the end that we knowing our sinne, and
not hauing any hope of ability to make
our selues righteous by our own works,
should haue recourse to Gods mercy,
and vnto the righteousnes of faith.
            OUR God therfore minding of his infinite
goodnesse and mercy to send his
onely Sonne to set free the wretched children
of Adam: & knowing that first of all it
behoued him to make them vnderstād their
owne misery, chose Abraham, (in whose
seede he promised to blesse al nations,) and
accepted his ofspring for his peculiar people,
vnto whom, (after their departure out
of Aegypt, & deliuerance from the bondage
of Pharao,) hee by the meanes of Moyses,
               
gaue the Lawe, which forbiddeth all lusting,
and commandeth vs to loue GOD
with al our heart, with al our soule, and
with all our strength, in suche wise as our
whole trust be reposed in him, and we ready
to leaue our life for his sake, to suffer al
tormentes in our members, and to be berefte
of all our goodes, dignities, and honours
for the loue of our God, choosing too
die, rather then to doe any thing that may
mislike him, bee it neuer so little: and doyng
all thinges in that behalfe with a mery
heart, and with all forwardnesse and
cheerefulnesse. Moreouer the Lawe commandeth
vs to loue our neighbour as our
selfe, meaning by the Neighbor,
               Who is our neighbour. all maner
of men, as well friends as foes and it willeth
us to doe to euery man as we woulde
be done vnto, & to loue other mens cases
as our owne. And so by looking in this holy
Law, as in a cléere lookingglasse, man
doeth out of hand espy his owne great imperfection
and vnablenesse too obey Gods
commandementes, and to render him the
honour and loue which he ought to yeelde
to his maker. The first office of the Law
then,The first office or duety of the Law. is to make sinne knowen, as Saint
Paule affirmeth. And in another place hée

sayth,Rom. 3. & 7. The second office of the law. I had not known what sinne is, but
by the lawe. The second office of the law,
is to make sinne increase, for asmuche as
we being quite gone from the obeying of
God, and become bondslaues to the Deuil,
being full of wicked works and inordinate
affections, cannot abide that God shoulde
forbid vs to lust, which increaseth so much
the more, as it is the more prohibited: by
reason whereof S. Paule saith, that sinne
was dead, but the law came and raysed it
vp againe, and so it became out of measure
great.The thirde office of the law.
The thirde office of the Lawe, is to
shewe the wrath and iudgemente of God,
who threatneth death and euerlasting punishment,
to suche as kéepe not the Lawe
throughout in al points. For the holy scripture
saith,Deut. 27. Curfed is hée that perfourmeth
not throughly al the things that are written
in the booke of the law. And therefore
S. Paul saith,2. Cor. 3. that the Law is a ministerie,
and that it bringeth foorth wrath. The
lawe then hauing discouered sinne and
increased it, and shewed foorth the wrath
and in
                  •
               ig
                  •
               ation of GOD who threatneth
death,The fourth office of the lawe. executeth his fourthe office,
which is too put a man in feare,
who there vppon falleth 
                  ••
               too sorrowefulnesse,

and would faine satisfie the law:
but forasmuch as he séeth clearely, that he
is not able: he wareth angry against God,
and would with all his heart y• there were
no God, because he feareth too bée sore chastized
& punished by him, according as S.
Paul saith,Rom. 4. That the wisdome of the flesh
is the enimie of God, because it neither is
nor can be subiect to the law of God.The fifth office of the law. The
fifth office of the law (which is the principall
end and the most excellent and necessary
office of it) is to constraine a man too
goe vnto Iesus Christ, in like wise as the
Hebrewes, being dismaied, were constrayned
to appeale vnto Moses, saying:Exod. 2
                     ••
                  
                Let not
the Lord speake vnto vs, least we dye, but
speake thou vnto vs, and we wil obey thée
in all thinges. And the Lorde answered:
v
                  •
               rily they haue spoke excéeding well. Yea
they were not praysed for any other thing,
than for theyr desiring of a Mediator betwixt
God and them, which was Moyses,
who represented Iesus Christ, that should
be the Aduocate and Mediator betwéene
God and man: in respect whereof God said
vnto Moyses, I will rayse vp a Prophet among
their brethren like vnto thée, and I
will put my worde in his mouth, and hée

shall speake vnto them all the things that
I shall commande him, and I will punish
all those that wil not obey my word, which
he shall speake in my name.
         
         
            The third Chapter.
            How the forgiuenesse of our sinnes,
our iustification and our saluation
depend vpon Iesus Christe.
            WHen as our God thē had sent the
said great Prophet which he had
promised vs, (who is his only sonne) to the
end that he should set vs frée from the curse
of the law,Collo. 3. and reconcile vs vnto our God:
that he should make our will fitte for good
workes, healing our fréewil, and repayring
in vs the foresaid Image of God which we
had lost through the fault of our first parentes:Actes. 4.
for asmuch as we know that vnder
heauen there is none other name giuen vnto
men whereby we may be saued, but the
name of Iesus Christ: Let vs run vnto him
with y• feete of liuely faith, & east our selues
betwéene his armes:Matth. 11. sith hée allureth vs so
graciously▪ crying: Come vnto me all you
that labour and are heauy load, and I wil
refresh you: What comfort or what ioy in
this life can bee comparable to this his saying
there, when as a man f
                  •
               eling himselfe

oppressed with the intollerable waight of
his sinnes, vnderstandeth so swéete and amiable
wordes of the sonne of God, who
promiseth so graciously to refreshe and ryd
him of his great paynes? But all the matter
lieth in acknowledging our owne
weakenesse & miserie in good earnest. For
he shall neuer know what is swéete, who
hath not tasted of the sowre. And therefore
Iesus Christe sayth: If any man thirst,Iohn. 
                     •
                  
                let
him come to me and drinke: as if hee had
ment to say, if a man know not himself to
be a sinner, nor thirst after righteousnesse,
hée cannot tast of the swéetnesse of Iesus
Christe, how swéete it is to talke of him, to
thinke of him, and to follow his most holy
life. But when we once throughly knowe
our owne infirmity by meanes of the law,
let vs hearken too S. Iohn Baptist, who
poynteth vs too the soueraigne Phisition
with his Finger,Iohn. 
                     •
                  . saying: Beholde the
Lambe of GOD which taketh away the
sinnes of the worlde. For hée it is that
deliuereth vs from the heauie yoke of the
Lawe,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                abrogating and disanulling the
curses and sharpe threatninges of the
same: healing all our infirmities: reformyng
our free will, returning vs too our

ancient innocency,Iohn. 8. and repairing in vs the
image of our God: insomuch that (according
to S. Paules saying) like as by Adam
we bée all dead:1. Cor. 15. so by Iesus Christ we are
al quickened. And it is not to beléeued that
the sinne of Adam, which we haue by inheritance
from him, shoulde be of more force
than the righteousnesse of Christe, that
which we also inherite by faith. It séemeth
that man hath great cause to complayne,
that (without any reason why) hée is conceaued
and borne in sinne,Psalm. 50. and in the wickednes
of his parents, by meanes of whō,
death reigneth ouer all men. But nowe is
all our sorow taken away, in as muche as
by a like meane (without any occasion geuen
on our behalfe) righteousnes and euerlasting
life are come by Iesus Christe,
and by him death is s
                  •
               aine, whereof Saint
Paul maketh a very godly discourse, which
I purpose too set downe héere following.
Wherfore (faith he) like as by one man,Rom 3
                     •
                  
                sin
entred into the world, & death by sinne: euen
so death went ouer al men, forasmuch
as al men haue sinned. For vntil the law,
sinne was in the worlde: but sinne was
not regarded as long as there was no law.
Neuer the latter death reigned from Adam

vnto Moyses, euen ouer them also that sinned
not after the like manner of the transgression
of Adam, who was a figure of him
that was to come. But yet the gift is not so
as is the offence: for if through the offence
of one, many be dead: much more the grace
of God, and the gift by grace which is by
one man Iesus Christe, hath abounded vnto
many. Neither is y• gift so as that which
entred in by one that sinned. For the fault
came of one offence vnto condemnation,
but y• gift is of many offences to iustification.
For if by the offēce of one, death reigned
through one: much more shall they which
receiue the abundance of grace and of the
gift of righteousnesse, reigne in life through
one, that is, Iesus Christ. Likewise then,
as by the offence of one, that fault came on
al men to condēnation, so by the righteousnesse
of one, the benefite abounded toward
all men to the iustification of life. For as
by one mans disobediēce many were made
sinners: so by the obedience of one shal many
also bée made righteous. Moreouer the
lawe entred thereupon, that the offence
should abound: neuerthelesse where sinne
abounded, there grace abounded muche
more, that as sin hath reigned vnto death,

so might grace also reigne by righteousnesse
vntoo eternall life through Iesus
Christe our Lord. By these wordes of S.
Paul, wée manifestly perceiue the thing
to be true, which we haue said héereto fore:
that is to wit, that the law was geuen too
make sinne knowne: which sinne wée doe
also knowe, not to be of greater force than
Christes righteousnesse, wherethrough we
be iustified before God. For euen as Iesus
Christ is stronger than Adam was: so is
his righteonsnesse more mightie than the
sinne of Adam. And if the sinne of Adam
was sufficient enough to make al men sinners
and children of wrath without any
misdéedes of our owne: muche more shall
Christes righteousnesse be of greater force
to make vs all righteous and the children
of grace, without any of our owne good
workes: which cannot be good, vnlesse that
before we doe them, we our selues be made
good,The greatnes of sinne ought not 
                     •
                  o cause despayre.
as Augustine also affirmeth. Hereby
a man may know in what errour they bée
who by reason of some great offence, despaire
of Gods good wil, imagining that he
is not willing to forgeue, couer, and pardon
al sinne, hauing already punished and
chastized all our 
                  •••
               es and iniquities in

his owne onely begotten and dearly beloued
sonne, and consequently graunted a
generall pardon to all mankinde, which euery
body enioyeth that beléeueth the gospel,
that is to say, which beléeueth the happy
tidings of the Apostles haue published
through the whole world, saying:
                  
                     •
                  or. 5. We beséeche
you for Iesus Christes sake, bée yée
reconciled vnto GOD: for he that neuer
knew sinne, was made a sacrifice for our
sinne, that we might become righteous in
him. The prophet Esay for seeing this great
goodnesse of God, writeth these heauenly
wordes, which doe so well paint out the
passion of our Lorde Iesus Christ, and the
cause thereof, as it is not to be founde better
described, evē in the writings of the Apostles.
Who (saith he) wil beléeue our report,
and to whom is the arme of the Lord
reuealed? But hée shall growe vpp before
him as a branch, and as a roote out of a dry
grounde, hée hath neither forme nor beautie:
when wée shall sée him, there shalbe
no fourme that wée should desire hym:
Hée is despised a
                  •
               d reiected of men, he is a
man full of sorrowes, and hath experience
of infirmitie, wee hidde as it were our faces
from him: hée was despised and wee

estéemed him not. Surely hée hath borne
our infirmities and carried our sorrowes,
yet we did iudge him as plagued and smitten
of God, & humbled: but he was wounded
for our transgressions: he was broken
for our iniquities. The chastisement of our
peace was vpon him, and with his stripes
we are healed. All we like shéepe haue gone
astray: wee haue turned euery one to his
owne way, and the Lorde hath laide vpon
him the iniquitie of vs all: he was oppressed
and he was afflicted, yet did he not open
his mouth. He is brought as a shéepe to the
slaughter, & as a shéepe before the shearer
is dumme, so he openeth not his mouth. O
great vnkindnesse! O thing abhominable!
that we, which professe our selues Christians,
and heare that the sonne of God hath
taken all our sinnes vpon him, and washed
them out with his precious blood, suffering
himselfe to bee fastened too the Crosse for
our sakes; shoulde neuerthelesse make as
though we woulde iustifie our selues, and
purchase forgeuenesse of our sinnes by our
owne woorkes: as who woulde say, that
the desertes, righteousnesse and bloodshed
of Iesus Christe were not enough too doe
it, vnlesse we came to put too our workes

and righteousnesse which are altogether
de
                  •
               iled and spotted with selfe loue, selfcliking,
selfprofite, and a thousande other vanities,
for which wee haue neede to craue
pardon at Gods hand, rather then reward.
Neither doe we thinke of the threatnings,
which S. Paule vseth to the Galathians,Galat. 5.
who hauing béene deceiued by false Preachers,
beleeued not that the Iustification
by fayth was sufficient of it selfe, but went
about stil to be made righteous by thelaw.
Unto whom S. Paule saith: Iesus Christ
shall nothing profite you that iustifie your
selues by the law: for you bee falne from
grace, because that we through the spirit of
sayth wayt for the hope of righteousnesse.
Now if the seeking of righteousnesse & forgiuenesse
ofAn excellent comparison of the vnability of our own works.
sinnes by the keeping of the
law which GOD gaue vpon mount Sinai
with so greate glorie and maiestie, bée
the denying of Christe and of his Grace:
what shall wée say to those that will néeds
iustifie themselues afore God, by theyr
owne lawes and obseruances? I woulde
wishe that suche folkes shoulde a little
compare the one with the other, and afterwarde
geue Iudgement themselues.
God myndeth not too doe that honour, nor

to geue that glory to his owne lawe, & yet
they will haue him too geue it too mens
lawes and ordinances. But that honour
is geuen onely to his onely begotten sonne,
who alone by the sacrifice of his death and
passion, hath made full amendes for al our
sinnes past, present, and to come, as Saint
Paule and Saint Iohn declare. Wherfore
as often as we apply this satisfaction of Iesus

                  
                     •
                  eb. 7. Iohn, 12.
Christs, vnto our soules by fayth: out
of all doubt we obteine forgeuenesse of our
sinnes, and become good and righteous before
God, through his righteousnesse. And
therfore after that Saint Paule hath said,Phil. 3.
that as touching the righteousnesse of the
law, he had liued vnblameable: he addeth,
and yet whatsoeuer I haue gained by it, I
haue accompted in all respectes too bée but
losse, for the loue of Christe. And specially
I esteeme all thinges to bée losse, for the
excellent knowledge of Iesus Christe my
Lord, for whom I haue compted all things
too bée losse, and déeme them but as doung,
so may I winne Christ, and be founde in
him, not hauing mine owne righteousnes
which is of the lawe, but the righteousnes
which is by the fayth of Iesus Christe,
 wt righteousnes is giuen by God, I meane

the righteousnes of faith that I may come
to the knowledge of Iesus Christ. O most
notable words, which al Christians ought
to haue engrauen in their hearts, praying
God to make them to fast it perfectly! L
                  •
               e
howe Saint Paule sheweth plainely, that
whosoeuer knoweth Christe aright, estéemeth
al the woorks of the lawe to be hurtfull,
for somuch as they make vs too swarue
from our trust in Iesus Christ, too whom
euery man ought to impute his saluation,
and too trust onely vnto him alone. And to
inforce this sentence the more, he addeth
further, that he estéemeth all things but as
doung, so he may gayne Christ & he found
incorporated in him: declaring therby, that
whosoeuer trusteth in his owne workes, &
pretendeth not iustifie himselfe by them,
getteth not Iesus Christ, nother is engraffed
into him. And forasmuch as the whole
mystery of our faith consisteth in the truth
hereof: to the end we might the better vnderstand
what he meant to say: he addeth
and repeteth oftentunes, that he had nothing
to do with all the outward iustification
& all y• righteousnes that is grounded
vpon the keping of the law, but y• he would
cloth himself with the righteousnes which

God geueth by sayth to all them that beléeue
that all our sinnes are fully chastised
and punished in Iesu Christ: and that Iesus
Christ (as Saint Paule saith) is made
our wisedom,1. Cor. 1. righteousnesse, holinesse, and
redemption to the end (as it is writtē) that
he which wil glory, should glory in y• Lord,
and not in his owne woorks. Uery true it
is, that in the holy Scriptures there are
some textes to be found, which beyng misvnderstood,
séeme to gainesay this holy doctrine
of Saint Paules, & to attribute iustification
& remission of sinnes vnto works,
and to charity. But those authorities haue
already byn well expounded by some who
haue shewed plainly that such as haue vnderstood
them in the sense aforesaid, vnderstood
them not aright. Wherefore my déere
beloued brethren, let vs not folow the fond
opinions of the bewitched Galathians, but
rather let vs followe the trueth which
S. Paule teacheth vs, and let vs geue the
whole glory of our iustification vnto Gods
mercie, and to the merites of his Sonne,
who by his owne bloodshed hath set vs frée
from the soueraintie of the law, and from

                  〈…〉
               
               
geue vs life and endlesse felicitie. I say yet
further, that he hath deliuered vs from the
dominion of the lawe insomuch as he hath
geuen vs his holy spirit, who teacheth vs al
truth, & that he hath satisfied the law to the
ful, & giuen the same satisfactiō vnto al his
members, (that is to wit, to al true Christians)
so as they may safely appeare at
Gods throne, because they be clothed wt the
righteousnes of his Christ, & by him deliuered
from the curse of the lawe.How man is deliuered & set free from the curse of the law. Galat. 3. Rom. 8. Colos. 2. Then can
not the law any more accuse vs or cōndenm
vs, nor moue our affections or appetites,
nor increase sinne in vs. And therefore S.
Paule saith, that the obligation which was
against vs is cancelled by Iesus Christ, &
discharged vpon the trée of the crosse, insomuch
as he hath set vs frée frō the subiectiō
of the law, & consequently from the tyranny
of sinne and death, which can no more
holde vs oppressed, because it is ouercome
by Iesus Christ in his resurrection, & so cō
               sequently
by vs which are his members, in
such maner, that we may say with Saynte
Paule,1. Cor. 15. and with the Prophet Osée▪ Death
is quite vanquished and destroied: O death
where is thy sting? O Hel, where is thy 
                  〈…〉
               
               
strength of sinne is the law. But God bée
praised, who hath granted vs victory by our
Lorde Iesus Christ. He is the blessed séede
that hath crushed the head of the venomous
Serpent, that is to wit, of the Diuel, insomuche
that al those which beleue in Iesus
Christe, reposing their whole trust in his
grace, doe ouercome sinne, death, the diuel,
& hel, as Christ hath done. He is that blessed
séed of Abraham, in the which God hath
promised blessednesse to al nations, It behooueth
euery particular person too fighte
with the sayd horrible serpent, & to deliuer
himselfe frō that curse. But that enterprise
was so great, that all the force of the whole
world knit together, was not able too goe
through with it. Wherfore our God the father
of mercy, being moued with compassion
of our miseries, hath geuen vs his onely
begotten sonne, who hath deliuered vs frō
the venim of the serpent, and is himself become
our blessednesse and righteousnesse,
condicionally that we accept the same, renouncing
all our owne outwarde iustifications.
Then my déere brethren let vs imbrace
the righteousnesse of our Lord Iesus
Christ, and let vs make it ours by meanes
of fayth: let vs assure our selues, that

we be righteous, not for our own work
                  •
               ,
but through the merites of Iesus Christe,
and let vs liue merily and assured, that the
righteousnes of Iesus Christ hath vtterly
done away all our vnrighteousnes, & made
vs good, righteous, & holy before God, who
beholding vs ingrafted into his sonne by
fayth, estéemeth vs not nowe any more as
the children of Adam, but as his own children,
and hath made vs heyres of all his riches,
with his owne begotten sonne.
         
         
            The fourth Chapter.
            Of the effectes of liuely faith, and of
the vnion of mans soule with
Iesus Christ.
            THis holy faith woorketh after suche a
sorte in vs,How we receiue the likenesse of God. that hée which beléeueth
that Iesus Christ hath taken all his sinnes
vppon him, becommeth like vnto Christ,
and ouercommeth sinne, the diuel, death &
hell. And the reason thereof is this: namely
that the Churche (that is to witte euery
faithfull soule) is Christes wyfe,A very good similitude expressing the manner how our sinnes are taken away by Christ. & Christ
is her husbād. For we know how the law
of marriage is, that of two, they become
one selfsame thing, being two in one flesh,
& that the goods and substance of eyther of
them become common too them both: by

meanes wherof the husband saith, that th
                  •
               
dowry of the wife is his, and likewise the
wife sayeth that her husbands house and al
his riches are hers:& of a truth so they are:
for other wise they should not be one flesh,
as the Scripture saith. After the same maner
hath God married his onely begotten
& déere beloued sonne to the faithfull soule,
which hath not any other thing peculiar of
her owne, saue onely sinne, & yet the sonne
of God hath not disdayned to take her for
his wel beloued spouse together with her
peculiar dowry, which is sinne. And nowe
by reason of the vnion which is in this holy
mariage, look what the one hath, is also the
others, Iesus Christ therfore saith thus: y•
dowry of mans soule my déere wife, (that
is to wit, her sinnes & trāsgressings of the
law, Gods wrath agaynst her, the boldnes
of the diuel ouer her, the prison of hell, and
al other her euils) are become mine, & are
in my power to do what I list with them.
Wherfore it is at my choyce to deale with
them at my pleasure, & therfore I will put
out the hand writing which is agaynst the
soule my wife, I wil take it out of y• way,
I will fasten it to my crosse in mine owne
body, & in the same will I spoyle principalities

and powers, & make a shew of them
openly & triumph ouer them, and consum
                  •
               
them vtterly vnto nothing.
            Now when God sawe his sonne, who
knew no sinne, neither had any sinne in
him, thus willingly taking on him,
the foulenesse of our iniquity, he made him
to be sinne for vs, euē the very sacrifice for
our sinne: & did sharply punish our sinne in
him, putting him to death, euen the death
of the Crosse.Math. 28
                     •
                   Philip. 2.
Howebeit for asmuche as hee
was his welbeloued & obedient Sonne, he
woulde not leaue him in death, nor suffer
his holy one to sée corruptiō: but raised him
vp from death to life, geuing him all power
in heauen and earth, and set him at his
right hande in glory. Nowe then the wise
likewise with excéeding great ioy doth say:
the Realmes and Kingdomes of my most
déere husband & sauiour are mine, by him
I am an heyre of heauē, my husbāds riches
(that is to wit, his holines, his innocencie,
his righteousnes and his godhead, together
with al his vertue & might) are mine and
for me: & therfore in him I am holy, innocent,
righteous, & godly, and there is not any
spotte in me, I am wel
                  •
               auoured & faire,
inasmuch as my lawful husband hath not

any blemish in him, but is altogether goodly
& fayre. And sith that he is wholy mine,
& so consequently al that he hath is mine, &
all that he hath is pure and holy: it follow
               
                  •
               th that
I also am pure and holy. Therfore
to begin at his most innocēt birth, he hath
thereby sanctified the birth of his spouse cō
               
               
                  •••
               ued
in sin. The godly childhood & youth
of the bridegrom, hath iustified the childish
and youthfull life of his déerely beloued
bride. For the loue & vniō that is betwixt
the soule of a true Christiā and the Bridesgrome
Iesus Christ, maketh all the works
of either of them, to be cōmō to them both.
By reason wherof, when a man saith, Iesus
Christ hath fasted, Iesus Christ hath
prayed, Iesus Christ was heard of the father,
raised y• dead, draue diuels out of men,
healed the sicke, dyed, rose again, and ascended
into heauen: Like wise a man may say,
that a christen mā hath done all y• selfsame
works, forsomuch as y• works of Christ are
the works of the Christiā, bicause he hath
done them for him. Uerily a man may say
that the Christian hath béene nailed to the
crosse, buried, raised again, is gone vp into
heauen, become the childe of God, & mad
                  •
               
partaker of the godhead. On the other side▪
               
all the works that a Christian man doeth,
are Christes works, because it is his will
to take thē for his. And forasmuch as they
be vnperfect, & he throughly perfect, and canot
away with any vnperfect thing: he hath
made them perfect with his vertues, to the
end that his wife should be alwayes ioyfull
& well contented and not be afraide of any
thing, assuring herself, that although there
be yet still some defalte in her works, yet
notwithstāding they be acceptable to God
in respect of his sonne, vpō whō he hath his
eyes alwayes fastened. O that vnmeasurable
goodnes of God
                  •
                how greately is the
christiā bound vnto God? there is no loue
of mā, be it neuer so great, that may be cō
               pared wt
the loue that God beareth too the
soule of euery faithfull Christian, whereof
Christ is the bridegrome.Ephe. 
                     •
                  
               
Where vpon S. Paul saith, that Iesus Christ hath so loued
his wife the church, which is builded of liuing
stones (that is of the soules of the beléeuing
Christians) that for to sanctifie her,
he hath offered himselfe to the death of the
crosse, cleansing her with the washing of
water, by his word, to ioyne her to himself
a glorious church without spot or wrincle
or other like thing: but that the shoulde be

holy and vnblameable (that is to wit, like
vnto him in holinesse and innocency) and
also be the true & lawful daughter of God,
who hath loued the world so well, that as
Iesus Christ himselfe saith) he hath geuen
his onely begotten sonne,Iohn. 3.
to the ende that euery
one which beléeued in him should not
perish, but haue life euerlasting. For God
sent not his sonne into the worlde too condemne
the world: but too the ende that the
world might be saued by him, insomuche
that he which beléeueth in him shal not be
damned. Some man might demand after
what maner the vniō of this holy mariage
is made,Howe the 
                     •
                  aithfull mans soule is assured of 
                     〈◊〉
                   being ma
                  
                     ••
                  ed vn
                     •
                  o Christe. & how the soule, which is y• bride,
and her bridegrome Iesus Christ, are knit
together. What assurance can I haue,
that my Soule is vnited vntoo Iesus
Christ, and become his spouse? Howe can
I assuredly glory that I am Quéene and
Mistres of his great riches, as a wife may?
I can easily beléeue that other folkes shall
receiue this honour and glory: but I cannot
perswade my selfe that I am one of
those same too whome God hath geuen so
greate grace: For I knowe mine owne
wretchednesse & imperfection. My déerebe
loued brother, I answeare thée, that thyne

assurāce consisteth in true and liuely faith,
wherewith (as S. Peter saith) God cleanseth
mens hearts:Acts. 5. and this faith is grounded
in the beléeuing of the gospel, that is to
say, in the beléeuing of the gladde tidinges
which haue béene published on Gods béehalfe
through the whole world: which conteineth
in effect, y• God hath vsed the rigorousnes
of his iustice agaynst Iesus Christ
chastizing and punishing all our sinnes in
him.Mat. 3. And whosoeuer receiueth this good tidings,
and beléeues it stedfastly, hath the
true faith and doth enioy the forgiuenes of
his sinnes, and is also recōciled vnto God:
and of the child of wrath, is becom the child
of grace: and recouering the image of God,
entreth into the kingdome of God,2. Cor. 3. and is
made the tēple of God, who marieth mans
soule to his onely Sonne, by the meane of
this sayth, which faith is a worke of God,
and the gift of God, as S. Paule saieth oftentimes.
And God geueth it vntoo those
whom he calleth to him, of purpose to iustifie
thē and to glorify thē, and to geue thē
euerlasting life, according as our Lord Iesus
Christ witnesseth saying:Iohn. 6. This is the
will of him that sent mée, euen that euery
one which séeth the sonne and beléeueth in

him should haue euerlasting life, and I will
rayse him vp agayne at the latter day.Iohn. 3. And
like as Moyses lifted vp the serpent in the
wildernesse: so must the sonne of man bée
lifted vp, to the ende that euery one which
beleueth in him might not perish, but haue
life euerlasting. Also he saith too Martha:
He that beleueth in me shal liue,Iohn. 11. although
he were dead, & euery one that liueth & bele
ueth in me, shall not die for euer. And to a
company of the Iewes he saith:I. Iohn. 12. I am come
a light into the world, to the end that euery
man which beléeueth in me, shoulde not
abide in darknesse. And S. Iohn in his Epistle
saith: Heere in appeared the loue of
God towards vs,1. Iohn. 4. for that God is loue, and
sent his onely begotten Sonne intoo this
worlde, that we might liue through him.
And herein is loue known, not in that wée
loued God, but in that he loued vs, and sent
his Sonne too make attonement for our
sins. And moreouer he sent him to destroy
our enimies. For the bringing whereof too
passe, he made him partaker of our fleshe, &
of our bloode, as sayeth Sainte Paule: too
the end that by his death,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 2. he might destroy
him that had the dominion of death, that
is to wit, the diuel, and set all such at liberty,

as were subiect to bōdage all their-lyfe
long, for feare of death, Seeing then that
we haue recordes of the holy scripture, concerning
the promises, wherof we haue spoken
héertofore, and concerning many other
promises that are dispersed in diuers places
of the same, we cannot doubt of it. And
forsomuch as the holy scripture speaketh to
al ingeneral, none of vs ought to distrust in
himselfe, that the selfsame thing which the
scripture saith, should not belong particularly
to himselfe. And too the end that this
poynt wherin lieth and cōsisteth the whole
mystery of our holy fayth,A very goodly similitude and fitte for the expressing of the free forgiuenes
of 
                     〈◊〉
                   for Iesus Christes 
                     •
                  ake. may bee vnderstood
the better: let vs put the cace that som
good and holy King, cause the proclamation
to be made through his whole Realm
                  •
               
by the sounde of a Trumpet, that al rebels
and banished men shal safely return home
to their houses, because that at the suite &
deserte of some déere friende of theirs, it
hath pleased him to pardon them: certeinly
none of those rebels ought too doubt of the
obtayning of true pardon of his rebellion,
but rather ought assuredly too returne
home too his house, to liue vnder the shadowe
of that holie King. And if he wyll
not returne, by shal beare the pen
                  •
               lty of it

because that through his owne vnbelief he
dieth in exile and in the displeasure of his
Prince. But this good king is the Lorde of
heauen and earth, who for the obedience
& desert of our good brother Iesus Christe,
hath pardoned as all our sinnes, and (as
wee haue sayd a
                  •
               ore) hath made open proclamation
through the whole world, that al
of vs may safely returne into his kingdom.
Wherefore hee that beléeueth this proclamation,
doth straight wayes returne into
Gods kingdome, (whereout we were driuen
by the offence of our first Parentes,)
and blessedly gouerned by gods holy spirit.
And he that geueth no credite to the sayde
proclamation, shal neuer enioy the said generall
pardon: but for his vnbeleefes sake
shal abide in banishment vnder the tyranny
of the diuel, and liue and die in extréeme
misery, liuing and dying in the displeasure
of the King of heauen and earth, and that
iustly. For me cannot commit a greater
offence against this good God, then to accompte
him as a lyer and deceiuer: which
verily we doe, in not giuing credite too his
promises. O howe passing heauy is this
deadly sinne of vnbeleefe! which so farre
foorth as is possible (
                  •
               ereueth God of his

glory & perfection: besides the great harme
that it doeth to a mans selfe, which is his
owne damnation & the endlesse torment of
his soule, which the miserable 
                  〈◊〉
                féeleth
euen in this life. But on the contrary,
he that commeth vnto God with assurednesse
of this faith, beléeuing him without
any mistrust or doubt of his promises, and
warranting himselfe for a certaintie, that
God will performe all that euer hee hath
promised him; geueth all the glory vnto
God, and liueth continually in rest & endlesse
ioy, euermore praysing and thanking
the Lord God, for choozing him to the glory
of the eternall life.
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                And héere of they haue
an assured earnest penny and gage, that is
to wit, the sonne of God, whom they take
for their most louing Bridegrome, y• blood
of whom, hath made their heartes so drunken,
that through this passing holy beliefe,
there is in the christian heart engendred so
liuely a hope & so certaine a trust of Gods
mercy towardes vs, and such an operatiō
is wrought in vs, as wée reste our selues
wholy vpon God, leauing the whole care
of vs vnto him in suche wise, that béeing
throughly assured of Gods good will, wée
are not afraid, neither of the Deuil, nor of

his ministers, nor of death. Which holy &
stedfast trust of Gods mercy, inlargeth our
hearte, chéereth it vp, & with certaine merueilous
swéete affections directeth it vntoo
GOD, filling it, and setting it on Fyre
with an excéeding feruent loue.
                  
                     •
                  eb. 4. And therefore
Paul incourageth vs too goe with all
boldnesse to the throne of Grace: and hée
counselleth vs that we should not shake it
off, nor make light of our trust, which hath
great recompence and rewarde. But this
so holy and diuine affiance is gendred in
our heartes by the working of the holy
Ghost, who is communicated vnto vs by
faith,
                  
                     •
                  eb. I0. which neuer goeth without the loue
of God. And héere of it commeth, that w
                  •
               e
are prouoked too doe good workes with a
certaine liuelinesse and effectual chéerefulnesse:
whereby wée gather such a strength
& inclination to do them, as we be throughly
ready and forwarde, to doe and to suffer
all intollerable thinges for the loue and
glory of our most gracious and mercifull
father, who hath inriched vs with so abundant
grace through Iesus Christe, & of his
enimies made vs his most déere children.
This true faith is no sooner giuen a man,
but he is by and by indued and imprinted

with a certain violent loue of good works,
to yeelde right sweete and amiable fruites
both vnto God, & likewise vnto his neighbour,
as a very good and fruitfull trée. And
it is no more possible that he should bée otherwise,
than it is possible that a Faggot
should be set on fire, and not cast light immediately.
This is the holy Faith,Heb. 8. without
the which it is vnpossible yt any man shuld
please God, and whereby all the holy men
(as well of the olde Testament as of the
new) haue byn saued, according as S. Paul
witnesseth of Abraham:Rom. 4. concerning whō,
the Scripture saieth,Gen. 15. that Abraham beléeued
God, and it was reckoned to hym for
righteousnes. And therefore he saith a litle
before: We beléeue that a man is iustified
by faith without the déedes of the law. And
in an other place he saith:Rom. 2. So then in that
time shall the remnant be saued, according
to the election of grace: and if they be saued
by grace,Galat. 3. then is it not by workes, for then
were grace no grace.Abac. 2. And to the Galathiās
hée sayth, it is a manyfest matter, that no
man becommeth righteous before GOD
by the Lawe, because the righteous lyueth
by Faith. And the Lawe consisteth
not in beliefe, but hée that perfourmeth the

things that the law commandeth, shal liue
by that performance. And further be saith,
that a man cānot become righteous by the
déedes of the law, but only by beléeuing in
Iesus Christe.Galat 3. Againe, a litle after he saith
that if a man can become righteous by the
law, Iesus Christe dyed in vaine: Moreouer
to the Romans,Rom. 10. making comparisō betwéene
the righteousnesse of the law, & the
righteousnes of the Gospel, hee saith, that
the one consisteth in the doing of workes,
and the other in beléeuing. For if thou confesse,
our Lord Iesus Christ wn
                  •
                thy mouth,
and beléue in thy hart that God hath raysed
him vp from death, thou shalt be saued.
For the beliefe of the heart maketh a man
righteous, & the confession of y• mouth maketh
him safe. Loe how this good Teacher
S. Paul sheweth euidently that faith maketh
a man righteous without any works.
And not only S. Paul, but also 
                  •
                holy doctors
that came after him, haue confirmed
and allowed this most holy truth of Iustification
by faith:S. Augustin among whom S. Augustin
is the chiefe, who in his booke of faith and
workes, and in his booke of the Spirit and
the Letter, and in his booke of fourescore &
thrée questions, and in his booke which hée

did write to Bouiface, and in his treatise
vpon the xxxi. Psalme, and in many other
places, defendeth this article, shewing that
we become righteous by faith without any
helpe of good workes: Howebeit that good
workes are the effectes of righteousnesse, &
not the cause of it. And he sheweth that the
wordes of S. Iames being soundly vnderstoode,
are nothing contrary to this article.
Which thing Origen doth also affirme in
his 4.Origen. booke vpon the Epistle to the Romās
saying that S. Paules meaning is, that
faith only is sufficient to make men righteous
in somuche that a man becommeth
righteous, only by beléeuing, although hée
haue not doone any good worke at all. For
so it is, that y• Théef became righteous wt
out the works of the law, forasmuch as the
Lord sought not what good workes he had
doone in times past, nor waited vntil he had
done any after he had beléeued, but hauing
accepted him for righteous vpon his onely
confession, tooke him for his companion, euen
he shoulde enter into Paradise. Likewise,
that so renowmedMary Magdal
                     •
                  . Luke. 6. woman in the
Gospell of S. Luke, while shée was at the
féete of Iesus Christ, heard it said vnto her,
thy sinnes are forgi
                  •
               en thée. And a litle after

he saith vnto her, thy faith hath saued
thée, goe thy way in peace. Afterward Origen
saith, In many places of the Gospell a
man may sée how our Lorde Iesus Christe
hath spoken in suche wise, as hee sheweth
that faith is the cause of the saluation of
the beteeuers. Then is a man ma
                  •
               e righteous
by faith, & the works of the law further
him nothing at al. On the contrary, where
Faith is not, (which Faith maketh the
beléeuer righteous) although a man do the
workes which the Law commandeth: yet
notwithstanding forasmuch as they be not
builded vpon the foundation of faith, albe▪
it that to outward appearance they séeme
good, yet can they not iustifie him that doth
them, because he wanteth faith, which is
the marke of them that are become righteous
before God.Faith is the marke of those that are iustified And who is he that can
boast himself to be righteous, when he heareth
God say by his Prophet Esay,Esay 64. that all
our righteousnesse is as a defiled cloath of
a menstruous woman? Then can wée not
iustly glory in our selues, but in the onely
faith of the crosse of Iesus Christ.S. Basil. 
               S. Bas
                     •
                  l
in his Homilie of humilitie, sayth that the
Christian ought to holde him selfe for righteous
through beléefe in Iesus Christ: and

his wordes are these. The Apostle sayth,
that he which gloryeth, should glory in the
Lord, in that God hath made Iesus Christ
to be our wisdome, righteousnesse, holynes
and redemption, to the end, that hée which
would glory, should glory in the Lord, because
that 
                  •
               he per
                  •
               ite aud sounde gloriyng,
is to glory in the Lorde. For in so doing, a
man presumeth not vpon his owne righteousnesse,
but acknowledgeth his want or

                  •
               he true righteousnesse, & that he is made
righteous, only by beléeuing in Iesus
Christe. And S. Paul glorieth of the despiting
of his owne righteousnesse, and of his
séeking of Christes righteousnesse, by faith,
which commeth of God. S. Hyllary in his
nienth Canon vppon the exposition of S.
Matthewe sayth these woordes:S. 
                     •
                  i
                     •••
                  lary. The
Scribes considering Iesus Christe but only
as man, were troubled that a man
shoulde forgeue sinnes, and pardon that
thing which the Lawe coulde not doe, becauss
that only faith iustifieth. Saint Ambrose,
               S. Ambrose Rom. 4. in expounding these word
                  •
               s of S.
Paul [Vnto hym that beleeueth in him
which iustifieth the vngodly. his faith is
accounted for righteousnesse, according
to the purpose of Gods grace.] (Like

as Dauid also saith, that the man is ble
                     ••
                  ed
whom Gōd accompteth righteous without
good workes) writeth thus. S. Paul
sayth, that vnto him which beléeueth in Iesus
Christ (that is to wit, to the Gentile)
his faith is imputed for righteousnesse, as
it was vnto Abraham. In what wise thē
thinke the Iewes to become righteous by
the workes of the law: and yet to be righteous
as Abraham was, séeing that Abraham
became not righteous by the déedes of
the Lawe, but onely by faith? Then is not
the Law needful, forasmuche as the sinner
becommeth righteous before God through
only faith, according to gods gracious purpose,
as Dauid sayth. The Apostle confirmeth
that which he hath said, by the Prophets
example, saying:Psalm. 31. Blessed is y• man
whom God accepteth for righteous without
workes: Whereby Dauid meaneth
that those men are very happy, whō God
hath determined to accept for righteous before
him, by only faith, without any paines
taking or obseruation of the Law on theyr
behalfe. Thus sheweth hée the blessednesse
of the time wherein Christ was borne, insomuch
as the Lord himselfe saith: Many
righteous men & Prophetes haue coueted

to sée the things that you sée, and too heare
the things that you heare, & haue not heard
them. The selfsame thing saith S. Ambrose
in expounding the first cap. of the I. Epistle
to ȳ Corinthians, affirming openly y• whosoeuer
beléeueth in Iesus Christ, is become
righteous Wtout workes & without any desert,
& receiueth forgiuenesse of his sinnes
by faith alone. Also he affirmeth the same
thing in an Epistle which he writeth to Irenaeus,
saying: let no man boast of his own
workes, for no man becommeth righteous
by his owne workes: but he that hath righteousnesse,
hath it of frée gift, forsomuch as
he is made righteous by Iesus Christ. Thē
is 
                  〈◊〉
                faith that deliuereth by Christs blood:
for happy is hée whose sinne is forgeuen &
pardoned.S. Bernard And S. Bernard in his thréescore
and seuentéene Sermon vppon the Ballet
of Ballets, cōfirmeth the same, saying that
our owne merites beare no sway at all, in
making vs righteous, which thing must be
attributed wholy vnto grace, wt maketh vs
righteous fréely, & likewise dischargeth vs
frō the bondage of sinne. And he addeth,
that Iesus Christ marrieth the soule and

                  •
               oupleth it vnto himselfe by faith, without
that any desert of our works ought or can

come betwéen. But bicause I wil not be too
long, I wyll make an end of mine allegations,
when I haue vttered one very notable
and good saiyng of Saint Ambrose in
his booke intituled of Iacob concerning the
blessed life.G
                     •
                  n. 17. The saide holy mansaith, that
like as Iacob hauing not on his owne behalfe
deserued the birthright,A very good comparison how we bee clothedwith the righteousnes of Iesus Christe. shrowded
himselfe vnder the apparrell of his brother
and cloathed him selfe with his garment,
which yéelded a very swéete sente, and in
that wise presented him selfe to his father,
to receiue the blessing vnder another mās
person too his owne behoofe: euen so is it
requisite for vs to cloath our selues with
the righteousnes of Iesus Christ by faith,
and to shrowd our selues vnder the diuine
purenesse of our eldest brother, if wée wyll
be receiued for righteous afore God. And
certainely this is true. For if wée appeare
before God vnclothed of the righteousnesse
of Iesus Christe, out of all doubt we shal
bée iudged worthie of euerlasting damnation.
But contrariwise, yf GOD sée vs
apparelled with the righteousnesse of his
sonne Christ: thē wil he surely take vs for
righteous, and holy, and worthy of eternal
life. And verily it is a great rashnesse in

such as pretende to attaine vnto righteousnes
by y• kéeping of Gods cōmandements,
which are alcomprehēded in * louing God,
with all our heart, with all our soule, and
with all our strength, and our neighbour
as our selfe.No man can boast of the perfourmance of Gods lawe. But who is so arrogant or so
madde as to presume that he is able to perfourme
those commandements to the full?
Or who séeth not that Gods law requireth
perfect loue, and condemneth all vnperfectnesse.
Let euery man consider well his
owne workes, which partly shall séeme
good vnto him, and hée shall finde that they
ought rather to be called transgressions of
that most holy law, according also as they
be altogeather vncleane and vnperfect, so
that he must bee faine to vtter this saying
of Dauids, Enter not into iudgemente
with thy seruant O Lorde,Psalm. 102 for no man liuing
shall bée found righteous in thy sight
And Solomon saith,Prou. 20. Iob. 15. who is hée that may
say, my hearte is cleane: And Iob cryeth
out, What man is he that can be vndefiled,
and what man borne of woman can
shewe him selfe righteous? Beholde hee
found no stedfastnesse among his Saints,
yea the heauens are not cleane in his
sight. Nowe muche more abhominable

and filthie is man, who drinketh iniquitie
as it were water? And S. Iohn saith, If
we say wée bée without sinne,
                  
                     •
                  . Ihon. 2. wée deceiue
our selues. And specially our Sauiour Iesus
Christe teacheth vs to say, as often as
wee pray, Forgeue vs all our trespasses, as
we forgiue them that trespasse against vs.
               Matth 6.
And herby may wel be gathered the folly of
those y• make merchādise of their workes,
presuming to saue by them, not onely them
selues, but also their neighbors: as though
our Lord Iesus Christe had not sayd vnto
them, When yée haue doone all that euer is
commanded you,Luke. 17. say yée, we be vnprofitable
seruantes, wee have doone but as wee
ought to doe. Ye sée that although wee had
perfourmed Gods lawe too the full, yet neuerthelesse
we shoulde esteeme and cal our
selues vnprofitable seruants. Nowe then
séeing that men are so farre of from this ful
perfourmance: who is he that dareth be so
bolde as to glorifie him selfe that hee hath
added so great an ouerplus of deseruinges
aboue the full measure, as he may haue to
deale abroade vnto others? But to returne
to our purpose, I woulde that the proude
sinner which beareth him selfe in hande
that hée maketh himselfe righteous before

God by doeing some workes which are allowable
to the world, would consider that
all the works which procéed out of an vncleane
and foule hearte, are also vncleane
and filthie, and consequently cannot be acceptable
vnto God, nor haue any power to
make the partie righteous. Therefore wée
must first of all cleanse the hearte, if wee
minde that our workes should please God.
The cleansing of the hearte proceedeth
of faith, as the holy Ghost affirmeth by the
mouth of S. Peter.Acts. 15. Then must wee not
say that the vnrighteous person and the
sinner becommeth righteous, good, and acceptable
vnto God by his owne workes:
But wée must of necessitie conclude, that
faith cleanseth our har
                  •
               es, and maketh vs
good, righteous and acceptable before God,
and furthermore causeth our woorkes too
please him, notwithstanding that they bée
altogether vnprofitable and vnperfect. For
in as much as wée be become the children
of God through faith: hee considereth our
workes not as a seuere & rigorous iudge,
but as a most mercifull father, hauing pitty
of our frailenesse, and regarding vs as
the members of his eldest sonne, whose per
               
                  •
               ection
and righteousnesse doeth supply all

our vncleannesse and imperfection, which
arenot layde to our charge, forsomuche as
they be couered vnder the purenes and innocencie
of Iesus Christe, and come not to
iudgement before God. And héereupon it
co
                  •
               neth too passe,How the woorkes of the faithful, though they be vnperfit, please God. that all our woorkes
which proceede of a true faith, (notwithstanding
that they be wholy sinful and corrupt
of themselues) shall neuerthelesse bée
praysed and allowed by Iesus Christe in
the generall iudgement, because they bee
the fruites and Testimonies of our faith
whereby wee bée saued. For insomuche as
we haue loued y• brethren of Iesus Christ,
wée shall shew euidently, that wée haue also
béene faithfull, and brethren of Christe,
and therefore by faith, wée shall bee put in
full possession of the euerlasting kingdome
which our soueraigne Lord God hath prepared
for vs before y• creating of the world:Matth. 25.
not for our merites sakes, but through his
mercy whereby he hath chosen vs, and called
vs to the grace of his Gospel, and made
vs righteous, to the intent to glorifie vs euerlastingly
with his only begotten sonne
Iesus Christe, who is the holinesse and
righteousnesse of vs, but not of them which
wyll not confesse that faith is sufficient of

it selfe too make a man righteous and acceptable
to the Lord GOD, who through
his fatherly goodnes and louing kindnes,
offereth and giueth vs Iesus Christe with
his righteousnesse, without any desert of
our owne works. What thing can work
or cause a man too deserue so great a gyfte
and Ireasure as Iesus Christe is? This
treasure is geuen only through the grace,
fauour, and mercyfulnesse of GOD:In what maner faith iustifiet. and
only faith is the thing that receiueth suche
a gift, as too make vs inioy the forgiuenesse
of our sinnes.
            And therfore when S. Paul & other Doctors
say, that only faith maketh men righteous
without workes: they meane, y• it
maketh vs so inioy y• general forgeuenesse
of our sinnes, and to receiue Iesus Christ,
who (as saith S. Paul) dwelleth in our
heartes by faith,
                  
                     •
                  phe. 3. and ouercomming and pacifiyng
the troubles of our consci
                  •
               nces, satisfieth
Gods iustice for our sinnes. Furthermore
it appeaseth Gods wrath iustly
mooued against vs, quenetheth the fyre
of Hell, whereinto our naturall corruption
did throw vs headlong, and chéerefully
destroyeth and ouerthroweth the Deuil
togeather with al his power and tyranny:

Which things, all y• works that al y• men
in the worlde can lay together, are not able
to deserue nor to bring to passe. That glory
and that prerogatiue is reserued alonly
to the sonne of God, that is to wit, too the
blessed Iesus Christe, who hath power aboue
all the the powers that are in heauen, in
earth, and in Hell, and giueth himselfe and
his merites, to al such as distrusting in thē
               selues
doe set their whole hope of being saued,
in him and in his merites. And therefore
let no man beguile him selfe when hée
heareth it saide, that onely fayth iustifieth
without workes: and think, as false christians
doe (who drawe all thinges to liue
fleshly) that the true faith consisteth in beléeuing
the bare s
                  •
               rory of Iesus Christ, after
the same manner as men beléeue the story
of Caesar, or Alexander. Suche manner
of beliefe is but an historicall belief, grounded
méerely vpon the report of men, & vpon
their writinges, & lightly imprinted in
our conceite by a certaine custome, and is
like to the faith of the Turkes, who for the
like reasons beléeue the fables of their Alcaron.
And such a faith is but an imagination
of man, which neuer renueth the har
                  •
               
of man, nor warmeth it with the loue of

God, neyther doe any good woorkes insue,
or any change of life which faith shoulde
bring foorth. And therfore they falsty hold opiniō,
against y• holy scripture and agaynst
the holy Doctors of the church, y• only faith
maketh not māe righteous, but y• they must
also haue works, vnto whō I answere that
this historical and fond beléefe, and all the
workes that insue therof, are not only vnable
to make a man righteous: but also doo
cast the parties headlong to the bottome of
hel,Mat. 12. like vnto those y• haue no oyle in their
larpes, that is to say, no liecly 
                  •
               aith in their
harts. The fayth that maketh men righteous,
is a work of God in vs, wherby out
old man is crucified, & wee being transformed
in Iesus Christe, become newe creatures,
& the déere beloued children of God.Rom. 6.
This heauenly faith is it that graffeth vs
into the death and resurrection of Iesus
Christ, & consequently mortifieth our flesh
with the affects & lustes therof. For when
we by the operation of fayth do knowe our
selues to be dead with Iesus Christe: wee
are at a full point with our selues & with
the world, & are throughly resolued, how it
is méete that they which are dead with Iesus
Christe, shoulde mortifie their earthly

members, that is to wit, the sinfull affections
of they mind, and the lusts of the flesh
& forasmuch as we know we bee raysed againe
in Christ, we bend our selues to the
leading of a spirituall & holy life, like vnto
that which we shal liue in heauē, after the
last resurrection. This holy fayth making
vs to inioy the general pard
                  •
               n that is published
by the Gospel, bringeth vs into the
kingdome of our good God, and pacifieth
our cōsciences, mainteining vs in cōtinual
ioy, & holy & spiritual sweetnes. This selfsame
faith knitteth vs vnto God, & maketh
him to dwell in our heartes, & clotheth our
soule with himself, so as thēceforth the holy
Ghost moueth vs to doe the same things
wherunto he moued Iesus Christ while he
was in the world, & was cōuersant among
men, that is to wit, vnto lo wlines, meekenes,
obedientnes vnto God, louingnes, &
other perfections, wherthrough we recouer
y• image of God. For these selfsame causes,
Iesus Christ did rightly attribute blessednes
vnto this inspired faith: which blessednes
cannot be v•out good works & holines
of life. And how can it bée that a Christian
should not beocme holy, seeing that Iesus
Christ is become his holines through

               
                  •
               aith: Therfore by faith we be iustified & saued:S. Paule calleth thē saints whō we call Christians.
and therfore S. Paul doth in a maner
alwaies call those Saints, whom we call
nowe Christians: who, if they haue not
Christs spirit are none of Christes, & consequētly
no Christiās at al. But if they have
the spirit of Iesus Christe to rule and gouerne
them, we must not doubte, but that
although they knowe well that they bee
made righteous through faith onely:He that beleeueth cannot be with out good workes. yet for
al that, they will become neuer the more
slouthfull to do good workes. For Christes
spirite is the spirit of loue, and loue cannot
bee idle, nor cease from the doing of good
works. But if we will say the truth, a mā can
do no good works, except he first know
himselfe to be become righteous by faith:
for before he knoweth that, his dooing of
good woorkes is rather too make himselfe
righteous, than for the loue and glory of
God: and so he defileth all his works with
selfeloue, for the loue of himselfe and for
his own profit. But he that knoweth himselfe
to be become righteous by the merits
and righteousnesse of Christe, (which hee
maketh his owne by fayth) laboureth happily,
& doeth good woorkes, alonely for the
loue and glory of Christ, and not for love of

himselfe, nor to make himselfe righteous,
And thervpō it cōmeth, that the true Christiā,
(that is to wit, he that accounteth him
self righteous by reason of Christes righteousnes)
asketh not whether good works be
cōmanded or not: but being wholly moued
& prouoked with a certaine violence of godly
loue, he offereth himselfe willingly to doal
the works that are holy & Christianlike,
and neuer ceaseth to doe well. He therefore
which féeleth not the meruailous effects by
his faith, which we haue heretofore declared,
y• the inspired faith worketh in y• heart
of the christiā: Let him assure himselfe, that
he hath not the christiā faith, & let him pray
earnestly vnto God to giue it him, saying:
Lorde, helpe mine vnbeleefe. And when he
heareth it said,Mark. 2. that only faith maketh men
righteous, let him not deceiue himself, & say
What néede I to weary my selfe in doing
good workes? faith is inough to send me to
Paradise. To such an one I answeare, that
onely fayth sendeth vs to Paradise: but yet
let him take good héed: for the diuels doe also
beléeue and tremble,Iames 2. as saith S. Iames: O
miserable man, wilte thou goe wt them too
Paradise? By this false cōclusiō thou maist
know (my brother) in what an error thou

art: for thou wéenest to haue the faith that
maketh men righteous, and thou hast it
not.Apoc. 3. Thou sayest thou art rich, and hast no
néede of any thing, and thou seest not howe
thou art poore, wretched, blind, and naked.
I councel thée to buy golde of God, that is
throughly fixed wt fire, (that is to say, true
faith set on fire with good works) to the intent
thou maist become riche: and to cloth
thy self with white raiment (that is to wit
with Christes innocencie) to the ende that
the shame of thy nakednesse (which is the
great filthinesse of thy sinnes) be not séene
to the whole world. Then is the iustifying
faith as it were a flame of fire, which cānot
but cast foorth brightnesse. And like as the
flame burneth the wood without the helpe
of the light,A liuely cō
                  parison. and yet the flame cannot bee
without the light: so is it assuredly true,
that fayth alone consumeth and burneth
away sinne without the helpe of woorkes,
and yet that the same fayth cannot be with
out good woorkes. Wherefore, like as if
we see a flame of fire that giueth no light,
we knowe by and by that it is but vayne
and painted: euen so when wee see not
some light of good woorkes in a man, it is
a token that he hath not the true inspired

faith,Ihat S. Iames meant concerning works. Iames. 2. which God giueth to his chosen, too
iustifie and glorify them withall. And hold
it for certayne, that S. Iames meant so,
when he sayde, shewe mee thy faith by thy
works, & I wil shewe thée my faith by my
works. For his meaning was, that he s• is
plūged in ambitiousnes, and worldly pleasurs,
beleueth not (though he say he beleue)
forasmuch as he sheweth not in himself the
effects of faith. Also we may liken this holy
faith too the Godhead which is in Iesus
Christ:A heanenly comparison who being very mā (but wtout sin)
did wonderful thinges, healing the sicke,
giuing sight to the blind, walking vpon the
water, and raysing vp the dead vnto life again:
& yet these merueilous works were
not the cause that he was God. For before
he did any of those things, he was God and
the lawful and only begottē sonne of God,
and he néed not to worke those miracles to
make himself God by them, but forasmuch
as he was God, therfore he did them. And
so, the miracles that Christ wrought, made
him not to be God, but shewed openly that
he was God. In likewise, true fayth is as
it were a Godhead in the Soule of a Christian,
which doeth wonderous works, & is
neuer weary of well doyng, and yet those

works are not the cause that a Christian is
a christian, that is to wit, that he is righteous,
good, holy, and acceptable vntoo God,
neither néedeth he to woorke all those good
workes to become such a one. But forasmuch
as he is a christian by fayth, lyke as
Iesus Christ being a man was also God
by his Godhead; hee dooth all those good
woorkes, which make not the christian too
be righteous and good, but shewe him to be
good, righteous and holy. So then, like as
Christes Godhead was the cause that hée
wrought miracles: euen so faith working
through loue, is the cause of the good works
that a christen man doeth. And like as a
mā may say of Iesus Christ, that hee hath
done this miracle or that, & that those miracles,
besids that they glorified God, were
also a great honor vnto Iesus Christ as he
was mā, who for his obedience euen vnto
death, was recōpenced at Gods hād in his
resurrectiō, & had geuen vnto him al power
both in heauen & earth, which he had not afore
as in respect of his manhood, but deserued
it by the vnion wt is betwixt the worde
of God and the māhood of Christ: So doeth
faith in a Christian, which faith by reasō of
the vnion that it hath with the soule, attributeth
that thing too the one in is proper

to the other: whervpon it cōmeth, that the
holy scripture promiseth the christian euerlasting
life for his good woorks, because good
works are the fruites and testimonies of
liuely faith, and procéed of it as light procéedeth
frō a flame of fire, accōrding as I haue
said hertofore. And by this holy faith which
imbraceth Iesu Christ, it commeth to passe
that our soule is ioyned with Christ, and is
so vnited and knit to him, that whatsoeuer
Christ hath merited & deserued, the same is
imputed vnto the soule, as though it had
merited and deserued it. And therefore S.
Augustine saith, that God crowneth his
owne giftes in vs. Of this vnion of the
soule with Iesus Christ, Christ himselfe
beareth good recorde, where hee prayeth so
his father for his Apostles and for such as
should beléeue in him by their preaching:Iohn. 17. I
pray not (saith he) for them onely, but also
for al those that shal beléeue in me through
theyr word, to the end they may be all one
thing, that like as thou my father art in
me, and I in thee, so they also may b
                  •
               e one
in vs, and that the world may beléeue that
thou hast sent me, and that I haue geuen
them the glory which thou hast geuen me,
so as they should be one selfsame thing like

as thou and I are one. Whereby it appeareth
euidently, that if we beléeue the word
of the Apostles (who preached that Iesus
Christ died for our sinnes,Rom. 4. and rose againe
for our iustificatiō) we become al one thing
with him: and forasmuch as he is all one
with God, we also become al one with god,
by the meane of Iesus Christ.2. Cor. 6. D wōderful
glory of the Christiā, to whom it is graunted
through faith, to possesse the vnspeakeable
benefits which the Angels long to behold!
By this present discourse a man may
plainly perceiue the difference y• is betwixt
vs & them that defend the iustification by
faith & woorkes together. Herein we agrée
with them, that we stablish workes, affirming
that the 
                  •
               aith which iustifieth cannot
be without good works, & that those which
are become righteous are they that doe the
good woorks that may rightly be called good
works. But we differ from them in this,
that we say,1. Pet-2. that faith maketh men righteous
without the help of woorkēs. And the
reason is ready: namely, because that by
faith we put on Christe, and make his holinesse
and righteousnesse to be ours. And
séeing the case so standeth, that Christes
righteousnesse is geuen vs by fayeth:
                  
                     •
                   Galat. 3. We

cannot be so thanklesse, blind, and vnhappy,
as not to beléeue that he is of sufficient
ability, to make vs acceptable and right before
God. Let vs say wt the Apostle,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 9. If the
blood of Oxen and Goates and the Ashes of
a Cow sprinckled, cleanseth the vncleane,
as touching the cleansing of the flesh: how
much more shal that blood of Iesus Christ,
who by the euerlasting spirite offered himselfe
vndefiled vnto God, to cleanse our consciences
from dead workes to serue the liuing
God? I pray thée now, thou good and
deuout christiā, consider wel which of these
two opinions is the truest, holiest, and worthiest
to be preached: Ours, which aduanceth
the benefit of Iesus Christ, & pulleth
downe the pride of man which would exalt
his owne woorkes against Christes glory,
or the other, which by affirming that faith
of it selfe iustifieth not, defaceth the glory
and benefite of Iesus Christe, and puffeth
vp the pride of man, who cannot abide to
bée iustified fréely by our Lord Iesus Christ
without some merit of his owne. But (say
they) it is a greate quickening vp to good
woorkes to say that a man maketh himself
righteous before God by meanes of them.
I answeare, that we also confesse that good

workes are acceptable to God, & that he of
his méere grace and frée liberalitie recompenceth
them in paradise. But we say more
ouer, that no woorkes are good, sauing
those that (S. Augustine saith) are done by
those that are become righteous through
faith, because, that if the tree be not good, it
cannot yeelde good fruit. And 
                  •
               urthermore
we say, that such as are become righteous
through fayth, forasmuch as they knowe
themselues to be righteous through Gods
righteousnesse purchased by Christ, make
no bargayning with God for their works,
as though they woulde buy their maner of
iustification such as it is with them: but
béeing inflamed with the loue of God, and
desirous to glorifie Iesus Christ who hath
made them righteous by geuing them his
merites and riches, they bestow all theyr
whole studie and labour to doe Gods will,
fighting manfully agaynst the loue of thē
               selues,
and agaynst the world and the Diuel.
And when they fal through frailty of y•
flesh, they recouer themselues by and by, &
are so much the more desirous to do good, &
so much the more in loue with their God,
cōsidering that he layeth not their sins to
their charge, bicause they be ingrafted into

Iesus Christ, who hath made ful amendes
for all his members, vppon the trée of his
trosse, and maketh continuall intercession
for them to the eternall father, who for the
loue of his onely begotten sonne beholdeth
them alwaies with a gentle countenance,
gouerning and defending them as his most
deare children, and in the end geuing them
the heritage of the world, making thé like
fashioned to the glorious image of Christ.
These louing motions are y• spurres that
pricke forward the true Christians to doe
good woorks: who considering that they are
become the children of God through faith, &
made partakers of his diuine nature, are
stirred vp by the holy Ghoste dwelling in
them, to liue as it becommeth the children
of so great a Lord, & are greately ashamed
that they mainteine not the beauty of their
heauenly noblenes: and therfore they imploy
their whole indeuour to the following
of their firstborue brother Iesus Christ lyuing
in great lowlines and m
                  •
               eekenes, in al
thinges séeking the glory of God, geuing
their liues for their brethren, doing good to
their enimies, gloriyng in y• sufferance of
reproches, & in the crosse of our Lord Iesus
Christ,Galat. 6. 
                     ••
                  ke. 2. & saying with Zachary, We be deliuered

out of hande of our enimies, to serue
God wtout feare, in holines and righteousnes
all the daies of our life. They say with
S. Paul, The grace of the Lord is appeared,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   2.
to abolish al wickednes and al worldly
desires in vs, to the end we should liue a
sober, holy, and honest life in this worlde,
wayting for the blessed hope, and for the
glorious appearing of the great God and sauiour.
These and such other like thoughts,
desires, and affections, are wrought by inspired
faith in the soules of them that are
become righteous. And as for him that eyther
wholly or partly feleth not these godly
affections and operations in his heart, but
is geuen ouer to the flesh and the world; let
him assur
                  •
                himselfe, that hee hath not yet
the iustifying faith, nor is the member of
Christ, because he hath not Christes spirit,
and cōsequently is none of his, and he that
is none of Christes, is no Christian. Then
let mans wisedom cease henceforth to fightRom. 8.
agaynst the righteousnesse of the most holy
faith, and let vs geue al the glory of our
iustification,Gala. 3. to the merits of Iesus Christ
with whom we be clothed through faith.
         
         
            
            The fifth Chapter.
            In what wise the Christian is clothed
with Iesus Christ.
            ALthough that by the things aforesaid,
a man may easily and plainly inough
perc
                  •
               iue, how a Christian may clothe himselfe
with Iesus Christ: yet neuerthelesse,
I mind to speake a little of it, assuring my
selfe, that vnto the good and faithfull Christian,
it can séeme neither grieuous nor
troublesome to speake therof, although the
thing were repeated a thousande tunes.
Therfore I say, that the Christian knoweth
that Iesus Christ, together with al his
righteousnesse, holinesse, and innocen
                  •
               ie, is
his owne through faith. And like as when
a man purposeth to present himselfe before
some great Lorde or Prince, h
                  •
                laboureth
to aray himselfe in some faire and rostely
apparreli: euen so, when the Christian is
decked and arayed with the innocencie of
Christ, and with all his perfection, he presēteth
himselfe boldly before God the Lord
of all, assuring himself, y• through Christs
merites he is in as good case, as if he had
purchased al that which Iesus Christ hath
purchased and deserued. And truely, fayth
maketh euery of 
                  〈◊〉
                to possesse Christ and

all that is his, as we possesse our own garmēt.
And therfore to be clothed with Iesus
Christ, is nothing else but to beleeue for a
certaintie, that Christ is wholy ours: and
so is he in very déede, if we beléeue so, and
hold our selues assured, that by the same
heauenly garment we be recetued into fauour
before God. For it is moste certaine
that he as a most déere father hath geuen
vs his sonne: meaning that all his righteousnesse,
and al that euer he is, can, or hath
done, should be in our power and iurisdiction,
in such wise as it shoulde be lawfull for
vs to make our boast of them, as if we had
done, purchasen, and deserued them, by our
owne strength. And whosoeuer beléeueth
this, shal find that his belief is good & true,
as we haue shewed heretofore. Then must
the Christiā haue a stedfast faith & beliefe, y•
al the goods, al the graces, & al the riches of
Iesus Christ, are his: for sith y• God hath
geuen vs Iesus Christ himself, how should
it be possible that he hath not geuen vs all
things wt him? Wow if this be true, as true
it is in déed:Rom. S. y• Christian may rightly say,
I am y• child of God, & Iesu Christ is my
brother, I am Lord of heauē and earth, & of
hel & of death, & of the law, insomuch as the

law cannot accuse me nor lay any curse vppon
me, bicause the righteousnes of God is
become mine. And this fayth is it alone y•
maketh a mā to be called a christī & which
clotheth him with Iesus Christ as we haue
saide afore. And boldly may this be called
a great mystery, wherunder are contamed
marueilous things, & things not hearde of,
cōcerning y• great God, which cānot enter
into mās heart, except God do first soften it
 wt his holy grace as he hath promised to do
by his holy prophet, saying, I wil giue you
a new heart, and I wil put a new mind into
you, and I wil take away the stony hart
out of your bodie, & I wil giue you a heart
of flesh. Now then, he that beléeueth not after
the said maner, that Iesus Christ with
all the goods that he possesseth, is his; cannot
call himselfe a true Christian, nor euer
haue a quiet and ioyfull conscience, nor a
good and feruent courage too doe good: but
shal easily faint in doyng of good woorkes,
yea and moreouer hee shall neuer bee able
to doe woorkes that are truely good. This
only beléefe and trust y• we haue in the merites
of Iesus Christ, maketh men true
christians, stout, cheereful, mery, louers of
God, ready to doe good works, Possessors,

of Gods kingdome and of God himselfe, &
his right dearely beloued children, in whō
the holy Ghost doeth truely dwell. What
heart is so cowardly, cold, & vile, which cō
               sidering
the inestimable greatnesse of the
gift that God hath bestowed vpon him, in
geuing him his owne so welbeloued sonne
with all his perfectnesse;Iesus thrist the 
                     〈◊〉
                   example of Christians. is not inflamed
with an exéeding earnest desire, to become
like vnto him in good works? specially séeing
that the father hath giuen him vnto vs
for an example wheron we must continually
loke, framing our life after such a sort,
as it may be a true counterpaine of the life
of Iesus Christ, forasmuch as Christe (as
saith S. Peter) hath suffered for vs,2. 
                     •
                  et. 2. leaning
vs an ensample, to the ende that wée
should follow his footesteppes. Out of this
consideration issueth another kinde of clothing
of a mans selfe with Christe, which
we may terme an example clothing, for so
much as the christiā must frame his whole
life after y• example of Christe, fashioning
himselfe like vntoo him in all his déedes,
words, & thoughts, leuing his former wicked
life, & decking himselfe with the new
life, that is to wit, with the life of Christe.
By reason whereof S. Paul saith,Ephe 4. Rom. 15. Let vs

cast away the workes of darkenesse, and
put on the armour of light, not in feasting,
nor in drunkennesse, nor in chambering &
wantonnesse, nor in striefe: but put vpon
you the Lorde Iesus Christe, and make no
preparation for the flesh, nor for the lustes
thereof. Héereupon the true Christian being
in loue with Iesus Christ, saith in him
selfe, Sith that Iesus Christe, not hauing
any néede of mée, hath redéemed mee with
his owne blood, and is become poore to inriche
mée: I will likewise geue my goodes,
yea and my very life, for the loue and welfare
of my neighbor. And like as I am clothed
with Iesus Christ for y• loue he hath
borne to me: so wil I haue my neighbor in
Christ, to cloath himself with me and with
my goodes likewise, for 
                  •
                loue that I beare
him for Christes sake. He that doth not so,
is no true Christian, for he cannot say, that
he loueth Iesus Christe, if he loue not the
members & brothers of him: & if we loue
not our neighbour, for whose sake Christ
hath shed his blood, wée cannot truely say
that wée loue Iesus Christe: who being equal
with God, was obedient to his father
euen to the death of the crosse,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   2. & hath loued
and redéemed vs, geuing himselfe vnto vs,

with al that euer he hath. After the same
maner, we being rich & hauing abundance
of good things at Christes hande, must also
be obedient vnto God, to offer & giue our
workes & al that me haue, yea & euen our
selues, to our neighbours and brethren in
Iesus Christe, seraing them and helping
them at theyr néede, and being to them as
another Christe. And like as Iesus Christ
was lowly and gentle,Marke. 12. and far from all debate
and strife: so must wee set our whole
mind vpon lowlinesse and méekenesse, eschewing
al strife and impacience, as well
which consist in wordes and reasoning, as
in déedes: And as Iesus Christ hath indured
all the persecutiōs & spites of the world
for y• glory of God: so must we with al patientnes
chéerefully beare the persecutiōs
and reproches that are done by false Christians
to all suche as will liue faithfully in
Iesus Christ: who gaue his life for his enemies,
and praied for them vpon the crosse:
and so must wée also pray alwayes for our
enemies,2. 
                     •
                  im. 2. & willingly spēd our life for their
welfare. And this is to folow Christs steps
according as S. Peter saith. For whē wée
know Iesus Christ with al his riches to be
our own good, (which thing is to be clothed

with Christ, & too become pure & cleane wt
               out
spot) ther remaineth nothing more for
vs to doe, but to glorifie God by following
the life of Iesus Christe, and to doe to our
brethren as Christe hath doone to vs: and
specially forasmuch as wee bee warranted
by his word, that whatsoeuer we do to his
brethren & ours, he accepteth it as a benefit
doone to himselfe. And doubtles séeing that
the true Christiās are members of Christ,
we cannot do either good or euil to the true
Christians, but wee doe it likewise vntoo
Christ, insomche that he reioyceth or suffereth
in his members. Therfore like as Iesus
Christe is our clothing by faith, so also
must we through loue become the clothing
of our brethren, & haue as good care of them
as of our owne bodies: for they be mēbers
of our body, wherof Christ is the head. And
this is the holy godly loue & charity which
springeth and procéedeth of the true vnfeined
faith,Rom. 12. which GOD hath breathed into
his elect: which faith (as saieth S. Paul)
worketh by loue. Howbeit forasmuche as
the life of our Lorde Iesus Christe, wherewithal
we must be clothed,1. Tim. 1.
Galat 5. was a continuall
crosse, ful of troubles, reproches, & persecutions:
if we wil fashion our selues like

vnto his life, we must cōtinually beare the
crosse, as he himself saith: If any man wil
come after me, let him forsake himselfe, &
take vp his crosse and follow me.Luke. 9. But the
chief cause of this crosse is, for that our god
purposeth to mortifie the affections of our
mind and the lustes of our flesh by that exercise:
to the end we may conceaue in our
selues the great perfection wherein we bee
comprised by our Lorde Iesus Christe, by
being grafted into him. Also his wil is, that
our faith being 
                  •
               ined like gold in a furnace
of troubles,Iohn. 15 Phillip. 3. should shine bright too his glory.
Moreouer his intent is, that we by our
infirmities, should set out his great power,
which the world in despite of it, beholdeth
in vs, inasmuch as our frailtie becommeth
strong by troubles and persecutions, & the
more that it was beaten downe and oppressed,
so much the more it is strong & stedfast.
Whereof the Apostle S. Paul saieth,2. Cor. 12. 2. Cor. 4. wee
carry this treasure in earthen vessels, that
the excellencie of the power might be gods
and not ours. On all sides we suffer tribulation,
but wée are not ouercome: wée bée
poore, but not ouercome of pouertie: we suffer
persecution, but yet are we not forsakē:
we be despised, but yet we perish not: and

so we daily beare about vs the dying of our
Lord Iesus Christin our body, that the life
of Iesus Christ may also be openly shewed
in vs. And séeing the case is so, y• our Lorde
Iesus Christ and all his deare disciples glorified
God by tribulations: let vs also imbrace
them ioyfully, and say with the Apostle
S. Paul,Galat. 6. God forbid that I should glory,
saue in the Crosse of our Lorde Iesus
Christe: and let vs so deale, as the worlde
may (whether it wil or no) perceiue and sée
with his eyes, the wonderfull effectes that
God worketh in such as sincerely imbrace
the grace of his Gospell. Let vs so deale I
say, as the worldlinges may sée with how
great quietnesse of minde the true Christians
indure the losse of theyr goodes, wt death
of their children, slaunders, the diseases of
the body, and the persecutions of false christians:
and also that they may sée how the
only true Christians doe worship God inspirite
and truthe, taking in good woorth
at his hand whatsoeuer hapneth, and ho
                  •
               
               ding
all that he doeth to be good, righteous,
and holy, praysing him alwayes for the
same, whether it be inprosperite or aduersitie,
thanking him as a most gracious
and louing father, and acknowledging it

for a right great gift of Gods goodnesse,Rom. 5. too
suffer any aduersitie, and chiefly for the go
spell, and for following the steps of Christ,
specially forasmuch as we know,After what sort paciēce
ingendreth tryall. that tribulariō
ingendreth pacience, and pacience
tryall, and trial hope, and hope maketh vs
not ashamed. I say y• patience engendereth
triall, because that whereas God hath promised
helpe in trouble to suche as trust in
him, we finde it by experience, in that wee
continue strong and stedfast all the whyle,
and are vpholden by the hād of God: which
thing we could not doe withal the powers
that wée haue of our owne. So then by patience
wée finde that our Lorde geueth vs
the helpe that he hath promised vs at our
néede, whereby our hope is confirmed. And
it were an ouer great vnthankfulnes not to
trust to such an aide & fauour for the time
to come, as wee haue founde by experience
to be so certaine & stedfast h
                  •
               réfore.
But what néede wee so many wordes? It
ought to suffise vs to knowe, that the true
christians are through tribulation clothed
with the image of our Lord Iesus Christe
crucified:Rom. 8. which if wée beare willingly and
with a good hearte, we shall in the ende bée
clothed with the image of Iesus Christe

glorified.
                  
                     •
                  . Cor. 2. For as the passions of Iesus
Christe doe abounde: so through him, shall
the consolations ouerabounde: and if wée
suffer with him héere below for a tyme, we
shall also regine with him there aboue for
euer.
         
         
            The sixth Chapter.
            Certaine remedies against distrust.
            BUt forasmuch as the Deuil and man
                  •
               
wisdome labour continually to dispossesse
us of this most holy faith, wherethrough
we beléeue that all our sinnes are
chastized & punished in Iesus Christe, and
that through his most precious bloodshed,
we be reconciled to the maiestie of God: it
is very néedefull for a Christiā to haue his
weapons alwaies in a readinesse, to defend
himselfe from the saide most mischieuous
temptation, which séeketh to bereaue the
soule of her life.Marke. 9. Among the saide weapons
(in my iudgement) the mightiest and best
are,Fourereme dies against the temptations of Distrust. Prayer. Prayer, the often vse of the holy communion,
the remembring of holie Baptisme,
and the minding of Predestination.
In our prayer, we may well say with the
father of the poore Lunatike person, of whō
mentiō is made in the Gospel of S. Mark,
Lorde Iesus, helpe mine vnbeliefe. Or else

we may say with the Apostles, Lorde encrease
our faith.Math. 9. And if there reigne in vs a
continuall desire to growe in faith, hope, &
loue: we wil continually pray,1. Ches. 5. True prai
                     •
                  
                as S. Paul
instructeth vs. For prayer is nothing else
but a feruent minde setled vpon God. By
the remembring of Baptisme,Baptisme we shall assure
our selues that we are at peace with
God.1. Pet. 3. And forasmuch as S. Peter saith that
the Ark of Noe was a figure of Baptisme:
therefore, like as Noe was saued from the
flood of the Arke, because he beléeued y• promises
of God: so also are we by faith saued
in Baptisme from Gods wrath.Marke. 10. Which
faith is grounded vppon the worde of our
Lord Iesus Christe, who saith y• hee which
beléeueth & is baptized, shalbe saued. And
good right it is: for in baptisme we put on
Iesus Christ as the Apostle S. Paul affirmeth,
Galat. 3. & consequētly we be made partakers
of his righteousnes, and of all his goodes: &
vnder this precious robe, the sinnes y• our

                  •
               railtie committeth, lie hidden and couered
and are not imputed vnto vs. And so, according
as S. Paul saith,Rom. 4. the blessednes which
the Psalmist speaketh of, apperteineth vnto
vs: namely,Ps
                     •
                  l
                     ••
                  . 3. Blessed are they whose misdoings are forgeuen, and whose sinnes

are couered. Blessed is the man to whom
                  •
               ,
the Lorde imputeth not sinne. But it standeth
a Christian in hand, to take good héed,
that vpon these wordes he take no liberty
to sinne: for this doctrine belongeth to none
suche as honor themselues with the name
of Christians, confessing Christ with their
mouth, and yet deny him in theyr déedes.
But it cōcerneth the true Christians, who
though they fight manfully against the
fleshe, the worlde, and the Deuil: doe notwithstanding
fall dayly, and are constreyned
to say, Lorde forgeue vs our offences.
These are they to whom we speak to comfort
them and to holde them vp, that they
fall not into despayre: as though the blood
of Christe washed vs not from all sinne,
and that hée were not our aduocate, and
the Attonementmaker for his members.
And therefore when wée bée prouoked too
doubt of the forgeuenesse of our sinnes, and
that our owne cōscience beginneth to trouble
vs: then must wée furnishe our selues
with true faith, & out of hād haue recourse
to the precious blood of Iesus Christe,The supper of the Lord.
shed for vs vpō the altar of the crosse, & distributed
to his Apostles at his last Supper, vnder
the veile of a most Holy Sacrament,

which was ordeined by Christ, to the end y•
wée shoulde celebrate the remembrance of
his death, and that by the same visible Sacrament,
our troubled consciences might be
assured of our attonement with God. The
blessed Iesus Christe made his last Will,
when he said, this is my body which is geuen
for you,Luke. 22. and this is my blood of the new
Testament,Marke. 16. which is shed for many for the
forgeuenesse of their sinnes. Wée knowe
that a Testament (saith S. Paul) although
it be but a mans Testament,Ga
                     •
                  at. 3. yet neuer thelesse
if it be allowed, no man dispiseth it,
or addeth any thing to it: and that no Testament
is of force til the testator be dead,
but hath ful power after y• parties decease.
Then did Iesus Christe make his Testament,
wherin he promiseth forgiuenesse of
sinnes, and the grace and good fauor of him
selfe and of his father togeather with mercy
and euerlasting life. And to the intent
that the saide Testament shoulde be of ful
force, he hath confirmed it with his owne
precious blood and with his owne death.
By reason whereof, Saint Paul sayeth,Heb. 
                     •
                  
               
that Iesus Christe is the Mediator of the
newe Testament, that by his dying for the
the redemption of those transgressions
which were in the former testament, they

that are called might receiue the promise of
the eternal inheritance. For whersoeuer is
a Testament, there must also be y• death of
the Testator: for the Testament is confirmed
by the death of the partie, insomuch as
it is of no value so long as the maker of it
is aliue. Wherefore we be very certaine &
assured by the death of Iesus Christe, that
his Testament is auaileable, whereby all
our misdéedes are pardoned, and we made
heyres of eternal life. And for a token and
faithfull pledge héereof,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   lib. 1 in stéed of a Seale,
he hath left vs this Diuine Sacramente,
which not onely giueth our soules assured
hope of their euerlasting Saluation, but
also warranteth vnto vs that immortality
of our flesh, forasmuch as it is euen nowe
quickened by that immortall flesh of his, &
in a certaine maner becōmeth partaker of
the immortalitie therof, & he that is partaker
of that diuine flesh by faith, shal not perish
for euer. But vnto him that receiueth
it without the saide faith, it turneth too a
dangerous poyson,Iohn. 6. bicause that like as whē
bodily sustenance findeth the stomacke incumbred
with euill humors, it corrupteth
likewise and worketh great anoyance: euē
so if this spirituall foode light into a sinfull
soule that is full of malice and misbeliefe,

it casteth it headlong intoo some greater
ruine, not through it owne default, but because
that too the vncleane and vnbeléeuer
all thinges are vncleane: notwithstanding
that the thinges bee sanctified by the
Lords blessing.1. Cor. 11. For (saith S. Paul) be that
eateth of that bread & drinketh of that cup
unworthily, isWhat is ment by not making a di
                     •
                  
                  ferēce of th
                     •
                   Lords body. is giltie of the body and blood
of the Lord, and hée eateth & drinketh his
own damnation, bicause he maketh no differēce
of the Lordes body. For he maketh
no difference of the Lords body, which presumeth
to the Lords supper without faith,
and charity.Hee that receiueth this Sacramen
                     •
                   protesteth himselfe too trust in none other thing than the blood of Christe. And forasmuch as he beleueth
not that body to be his life and the cleanser
of all his sinnes: he maketh Iesus Christe
a lyar, and treadeth the sonne of god vnder
foote, and estéemeth the blood of the Testamente
whereby he was sanctified but as a
cōmon worldly thing, and doth great wrōg
to the spirite of grace, & he shalbe punished
very sore at Gods hād, for this his vnbelief
and wicked hypocriste. For whereas he reposeth
not that trust of his iustificatiō in the
passiō of our Lord & Sauior Iesus Christ:
yet neuerthelesse he receiueth this most holy
Sacrament, and maketh protestation
that he putteth not his trust in any other
thing. Wherby he accuseth himselfe, and is

witnesse of his owne iniquitie, and condē
               neth
himselfe to euerlasting death, by refusing
the life which GOD promiseth him
in that holy Sacrament. And in this point,
when the Christiā féeleth that his enimies
are like to ouercome him: that is too wit,
when he beginneth too doubt whether hee
haue receiued forgiuenesse of his sinnes by
Iesu Christe: and that he shall not be able
to withstand the Deuill and his temptations:
and that the accusation of his owne
doubtfull conscience comes too presse him,
so as he beginneth too feare least Hell fire
should swallow him vp, & death hold him
in his euerlasting bands by reason of gods
wrath, I say, when the good Christian féeleth
himselfe in suche an agony: Let him
get him to his holy Sacrament with a good
hearte and stout courage, and receiue it deuoutly;
saying in his heart, and answering
his enemies thus: I confesse I haue deserued
a thousand hels, and euerlasting death
by reason of the great sinnes which I haue
committed. But this heauenly Sacramēt
which I receiue at that preset, assureth me
of the forgiuenesse of all my misdoinges, &
of mine attonement with God. For if I
haue an eye to my works, there is no doubt
but I acknowledge my selfe a sinner, & condemne

mine owne self in such wise, as my
cōscience should neuer be quiet, if I should
thinke that my sinnes are pardoned mée
for my workes sake. But when I looke to
the promises and couenants of God, who
promiseth me forgeuenes of my sinnes by
the blood of Iesus Christe, I am as sure I
haue obteined it, & that I haue his fauour,
as I am sure y• he which hath made y• promises
& couenants, cannot lye nor deceiue:
and through this stedfast faith I become
righteous by Christes righteousnes, wherthrough
I am saued, and my conscience quieted.
Hath he not geuen his most innocent
body into the hands of sinners for our sins?Rom. 4.
Hath hee not shed his blood to wash away
my iniquities? Why then doest thou vexe
thy selfe O my soule? put thy trust in the
Lorde, who beareth thée so great loue, that
to deliuer thée from eternall death, it hath
pleased him that his only sonne should suffer
death and passion, who hath taken vpon
himselfe our pouertie, to geue vs his riches:
laid our weakenesse vpon himselfe,
to stablish vs in his strength: become mortall,
to make vs immortall: come down
untoo the earth, to aduance vs vpp too
heauen: and become the sonne of man
with vs, too make vs the children of God

with himselfe. Who is hee then that shall
accuse vs?Rom. 8. God is he that iustifieth vs, and
who shall condemne vs? Iesus Christe is
dead for vs, yea and rysen agayne 
                  〈◊〉
                vs,
and sitteth at the right hande of God▪ making
intercessiō for vs. Let vs then D my
soule leaue of these teares and sighes.
            
               
                  
                     
                        THE CIII: Psalme.
                        1 MY Soule prayse thou the Lorde,
and all that is within me, praise
his holy name.
                        2 My soule, prayse thou the Lord, & forget
not all his benefites.
                        3 Which forgiueth al thine iniquitie, &
healeth all thine infirmities.
                        4 Which redéemeth thy life from the
graue, and crowneth thée with mercy and
compassion.
                        5 Which satisfieth thy mouth with good
thinges: and thy youth is renued like the
Eagles.
                        6 The Lorde executeth righteousness
                              •
                           
and iudgement to all that are oppressed.
                        7 No made his waies knowne vnto Moses,
and his workes vntoo the children of
Israell.
                        8 The Lord is ful of cōpassion and mercy,
s
                              •
                           ow to anger, and of great kindnesse.
                        9 We will not alway chide, neither kéep
                              •
                           
                           
his anger for euer.
                        10 He hath not delt with vs after our sins,
nor rewarded vs according to our iniquities.
                        11 For as high as the heauen is aboue the
earth: so great is his mercie towarde them
that feare him.
                        12 As farre as the East is from the West:
so far hath he remoued our sinnes from vs.
                        13 As a father hath compassion on his children,
so hath the Lord compassion on them
that feare him.
                        14 For he knoweth whereof we be made:
he remembreth that we are but dust.
                        15 The dayes of man are as grasse: as a
floure of the field, so florisheth he.
                        16 For y• winde goeth ouer it, & it is gone,
and the place therof shall know it no more.
                        17 But y• louing kindnes of y• Lord endureth
for euer & euer vpō thē that feare him,
amp; his righteousnes vpon childrens childrē.
                        18 Unto them y• keep his couenāt, & think
vpon his commaundements to doe them.
                        19 The Lord hath prepared his throne in
heauen, and his kingdome ruleth ouer all.
                        20 Praise the Lord, ye his Angels, that excel
in strength, that doe his commandemēt
in obeying the voyce of his woord
                              •
                           .
                        21 Praise the Lord, al ye his hostes, ye his

seruants that do his pleasure.
                        22 Praise the Lord, all ye his works, in al
places of his dominion: my soule prayse
thou the Lorde.
                     
                  
               
            
            So hath he had mercy on vs, in giuing vs
his onely sonne. With this faith, wt those
thāksgeuings, with these or such other like
thoughts must wee receiue the sacrament
of the body and bloode of our Lorde Iesus
Christ. After this maner is all fearfulnesse
driuen out of the soule of the Christian: and
charity is increased, fayth strengthened, the
conscience quieted, & the toung neuer ceasseth
to prayse. God, and to yéeld him infinit
thanks for so great a benefite. This is the
vertue, efficacie, & only trust of our soule.
This is the rocke, wherevpon if the conscience
be buylded, it feareth nother tempest,
nor the gates of hel, nor Gods wrath, nor
the law, nor sinne, nor death, nor the diuels,
nor any other thing. And forasmuch as
the substance of the Lords supper and table
consisteth is this diuine sacrament: When
the Christian is at it, he must hold his eyes
fastened continually vppon the passion of
our gratious Sauiour, beholding him on
the one side vppon the crosse loden with all
our sinnes: and God on the other side punishing,
chastising, and whipping his
owne onely begotten and Déerebeloued

sonne in steade of vs. O happie is that man
that shutteth his eyes from al other sights,
and will neither heare nor sée any other
thing than Iesus Christ crucified, in whō
are layde vp and bestowed al the treasures
of Gods wisdome and diuine knowledge
                  •
               
Blessed (say I) is he that féedeth his minde
with so heauenly a foode, and maketh himselfe
drunken in the loue of God with so
sweete and singular a liquor. But before
I make an ende of this matter, I will
first aduertise the Christian, that Sainte
Augustine hath ordinarily béene woont too
terme this holy Sacrament, the bonde of
charity, and the mystery of vnity. And he
saith, that whosoeuer receiueth the mystery
of vnitie, & regardeth not the bond of peace,
receiueth not the Sacrament to his owne
behoo
                  •
               e, but as a witnesse agaynst himselfe.
Therfore we must vnderstād,Why the holy sacrament of thankesgiuing was ordain
                     •
                  d. y• the Lorde
hath ordeyned this holy sacramēt not only
to make vs sure of y• forgiueues of our sins:
but also to inflame vs to peace, vnity, & brotherly
charitie. For in this Sacrament the
Lord doth after such a maner make vs parlakers
of his body, as he becommeth al one
thing wt vs, & we with him. By reasō wherof,Christen peace and vnion are betokened by the bread and wine.
forasmuch as he hath but one body wherof,
he maketh vs Partakers: it is méet
                  •
               
               
that we also shoulde by such partaking becom
al one body together amōg our selues.
And this vntō is represēted by the bread of
the sacrament: which as it is made of many
grains mingled & kneaded together, in such
wise as one of them cā not be discerned frō
another: So also must we be toyned together
after such a sort, & so vnited together
into one agréement of mind, as no diuision
may créep in. And this doth S. Paule shew
vs, when he saith: Is not the cup of blessing
which we blesse, the cōmuniō of the blood of
Iesus Christ, is not the bread y• we break,
the cōmunion of the body of Iesus Christe
whereas we be many, yet are we but one
bread and one body, forsomuch as we be all
Partakers of one bread. By these thinges
we vnderstand,
                  
                     •
                  e that offē
                  eth one of his Christē brethren. offendeth Christ 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                that when we receiue his
most holy cōmunion, we must cōsider that
we are al of vs ingraffed into Christ, & are
all become members of one selfsame body,
that is to wit, of Iesus Christ, in such wise
as we cānot offend, defame, or despise any
of our brethren, but we must therewithall
offend, defame, and despise, our saide head
Iesus Christ: neyther cā we be at variance
 wt any of our brethren, but in likewise we
must be at oddes with him. Also we cannot
loue him, excepte wee loue him in our brethren.

Look how much care we haue of our
owne bodie, so much must we haue of our
Christian brethren, who are the mēbers of
our body. And like as no parte of our body
féeleth any griefe, which spreadeth not it
selfe into al the other parts: so ought we to
determine wt our selues, that our brother
feleth not any inconuenience, which should
not moue vs to cōpassiō. With such maner
of thoughtes must wee prepare our selues
to this holy sacrament, quickening vp our
spirites with a feruent loue to our neighbourward.
For what greater spurre cā we
haue to prick vs to loue one another,A preparation to the receiuing of the holy Sacramen
                     •
                  
                thā to
sée that Iesus Christ, by giuing himself vn
too vs, not onely allureth vs too geue our
selues one to another, but also by making
himselfe common to vs all, maketh vs also
to be al one selfesame thing in him? In respect
wherof, we ought to couet & procure,
that in al of vs there may be but one mind,
one heart, & one toūg, accorded & vnited together
in thought, words, & déeds. And wée
must mark wel,He that receiueth the Sacrament bindeth him
                     •
                  selfe to all the dueties of charity. that as oft as we receiue
this holy and woorthy sacrament, we binde
our selues to all the dueties of charity: as
not to offende any of our brethren, nor too
leaue any thing vndone, that may be profitable
and helpfull in their necessity. But if

ther come any to this heauenly table of the
Lord, y• are diuided at variāce wt their brethrē,
the same must assure themselues that
they eat vnworthily, & are guilty of the body
& blood of the Lorde, & that they eate and
drinke their own damnation: for that there
wanted nothing on their behalfe, but y• the
body of Iesus Christ was rent & plucked in
péeces again, whilest they by hatred are diuided
frō their brethren, y• vs to wit, frō the
members of Iesus Christ, & haue not any
part wt him, and yet neuertheles in receyuing
this holy communion, pretended to be
Iéeu
                  •
                that their whole saluation consisteth
in the participation and vnion with Iesus
Christ. Then let vs goe my brethrē
               The true end for which the holy sacrament is ordained. to
the receiuing of this heauenly bread, to celebrate
the remembrance of our Lords passion,
and to strengthen and fortify the belief
and assurance of the forgiuenesse of our
sinnes, with the remembrāce therof, and to
quicken vp our minds & toungs to praise &
exalt the infinit goodnes of our God, and finally
to cherish brotherly loue, and to witnes
y• same one to another by 
                  •
                streight vniō
 wt al of vs haue in the body of our Lord
Iesus Christ.The fo
                     •
                  rth remedy against 
                     〈◊〉
                  . Besides prayer, and the remembring
of Baptisme, and the often resorting
to the most holy communion, there

is one other very good remedy, against di|
strust & fearfulnes▪ which is no lesse friend
to Christian charity: namely the remembrance
of our predestination and election to
eternal life, grounded vpō the word of God
which is the sword of the holy Ghost, wherwith
we may beate back our enimies. Reioyce
ye in this (saith the Lorde) that your
names are written in heauen.Ephe. 5. Luke. 10. There is no
greater ioy in this life, nor any thing that
more comforteth the Christiā that is afflicted,
tempted, or falne into any sinne, than
the remembrāce of predestinatiō, & the assuring
of our selues that we be of the number
of them whose names are written in the
book of life, & wt are chosen to be fashioned
like vnto the image of Iesus Christ, O how
unspeakeable is the comfort of him y• hath
this fayth, & museth cōtinually in his heare
vppon this excéeding swéet predestination,
wherby he knoweth y• although he fall often,
yet notwtstanding, God his father who
hath foreordeined him too euerlasting life,Psal. 36.
holdeth him vp, & reacheth out his hand vnto
him cōtinually. And he saith continually
in himselfe, if God haue chosen me and predestinated
me to the glory of his children,
who can hinder me: If God bee with vsRom. 
                     •
                  
               
(sayth S. Paule) who can be against vs?

Nay rather,Be that receiueth the Gospel is sure that he is predesinate
                     •
                  . The effect proceeding of the knowledge of predestination. to the end that the predestination
may be accōplished in vs, he hath sent
his déere beloued sonne, who is a most sure
earnest penny & pledge vnto vs, that wee
which haue receiued: the grace of the Gospel,
are Gods children, chosen to eternall
life. This holy Predestinatiō mainteineth
the true christiā in a continual spiritual ioy
increaseth in him the indeuour of good
works, and inflameth him with the loue of
God, and maketh him enimy tothe worlde
and to sinne. Who is so fierce and hardharted,
which knowing that God of his mercy
hath made him his child from euerlasting,
will not by & by be inflamed to loue God?
Who is of so vile & base courage, y• he will
not estéeme al the pleasures, al the honors,
& al the riches of the world as filthy myre,
when he knowes that he hath made him a

                  •
               itizen of heauen? yea these are they that
worship God rightly in spirit & truthe, receiuing
al thinges (as well in prosperity as
in aduersity) at the hād of God their father,

                  •
               nd euermore praising and thanking him
or all as their good father, who is righte
               
                  •
               us
and holy in al his woorks. These being
inflamed with the loue of God, and armed
with the knowledge of their Predestinati
               
                  •
               n,
feare neither death, nor sinne, nor the

diuel, nor hel: neither know they what the
wrath of God is: for they sée none other
thing in God, but loue and fatherly kindenesse
towardes them. And if they fall into
any troubles, they accept them as tokens
of Gods fauour, crying out with S. Paule,Rom. 8.
Who is it that shal separate vs from Gods
loue? shal tribulations, shall anguish, shall
persecution, or hunger, or nakednes, or perill,
or sword? as it is written for thy sake
are we killed all the day long, and counted
as shèep appoynted to the slaughter. But in
al these things we get y• vpper hād through
him that hath loued vs. Wherfore, it is not
for nought that Saint Iohn saith, how the
true Christians know right wel, that they
must be saued and glorified, & that by reasō
of the same affiance, they make themselues
holy as Iesus Christ is holy. And when S.
Paul exhorteth his disciples too a good and
holy life: he is wont to put them in remembrance
of their election and predestination,
as of a thing of very great force to stirre vp
the mindes of the true Christians to the louing
of God, and too the perfourmance of
good woorkes. And for the same cause our
good Lord Iesus Christ speaketh openly of
this holy predestination, as one that knew
of how great importaunce the knowledge

therof is to the edifiyng of his electe. But
perchāce thou wilt say to me, I know well
that they whose names are written in heauen,
haue cause to liue in continuall ioy, &
glorifie God both in woord and déede: but I
know not whether I am of that nūber or
no, & therfore I liue in continual feare: specially
because I know my selfe to be an excéeding
weake and frayle sinner, from the
violence whereof I am not able to defende
my selfe, but that I am ouercome of it daily.
And furthermore, forasmuche as I sée
my selfe continually afflicted and troubled
with diuerse temptations, mée thinks I do
as it were behold with mine eyes, y• wrath
of God scourging me. To answere to these
doubts of thine, I say my right déere brother,
that thou must assure thy selfe, that al
these are but temptations of the diuel, who
by al meanes seeketh to rob vs of that faith
and confidence that springeth of faith, & assureth
vs of Gods good will towardes vs.
He laboureth to strip our soule out of this
precious garmēt: for he knoweth y• none is
a true Christian, except he beléeue Gods
woorde, which promiseth forgeuenesse of
all sinnes, and peace too all them, which
accept the grace of the Gospel. Uerily I say
that he which vpon these promises of God,

perswadeth not himselfe assuredly, that
God is a mercifull and louing father vnto
him, nor with stedfast confidence looketh to
receiue the inheritance of the heauēly kingdome
at his hand: is not faithful in déed, &
maketh himselfe vtterly vnwoorthy of
Gods grace. In respect whereof,Heb. 3. S. Paule
saith, that we be the temple of God, so farfoorth
as we firmely mainteine the confidence
and glory of our hope, vnto the ende.
And in another place he exhorteth vs that
we shoulde not geue ouer our trust,Heb. 10. which
hath great reward of recompence. And therfore
my brethren, let vs geue our whole indeuour
to doe the will of God, as it becommeth
good children, and beware that wee
sinne not, as neere as wee can. And although
wee fall oftentimes intoo sinne
through our owne frailtie, yet let vs not by
& by surmise, that we be vessels of wrath,
or that we be vtterly forsaken of the holy
Ghost: for we haue our Aduocate Iesus
Christ before God the father, and he is the
attonement maker for our sinnes. Let vs
bethinke vs of the opinion of S. Augustine,
who saith that none of the Saints is righteous
and without sinne: and yet notwithstanding
that, he ceaseth not to be righteous
and holy, so farfoorth as he retaine his

holinesse with affection. And therfore if we
haue afflictions and tribulations,Afflictions are no signes of reprobation let vs not
think that God sends thē because he is our
enimy,Pro. 5. but bicause he is our most louing father.
The Lord (saith Salomon) chastiseth
him whome hee loueth, and scourgeth euery
childe of his whō he receiueth. Wherfore
if we haue receiued the grace of the gospel,
wherby man is receiued of God for his
childe,A true mark to knowe God children by. me must not doubte of Gods grace
and good will towardes vs. And when wée
perceiue our selues too delight in Gods
word, and to haue a desire to folow the life
of Iesus Christ: we must stedfastly beleue,
that we be the children of God, & the temple
of the holy Ghost: For those thinges cā
               not
bee done by the power of mans wisedome,
but are the giftes of the holie Ghost,
who dwelleth in vs by fayth, and is as it
were a seale of authoritie which sealeth vp
Gods promises in our heartes,Ephe. 2. Wherefore the Apostle calleth the holy Ghost she spirit of promise. the certainly
wherof is printed aforehād in our minds
and is geuen vs as a pleadge to stablishe &
confirme the same. Assoone as you beléeue
(saith the Apostle S. Paule) ye be sealed by
the holy spirit of promise, who is the earnest
peny of our inheritance. Beholde how
he sheweth vs hereby, that the heartes of
the faythfull are marked with the holie

Ghost, as it were with a seale: in respect
                  •
               
whereof he calleth the holy Ghost the spirit
of promise, forasmuch as he cōfirmeth the
promise of the Gospel, the which (as I haue
oftentimes tolde you) is a happy tidinges
that promiseth forgeuenesse of sinnes and
euerlasting life, to all such as beléeue that
all their misdoings are blotted out in Iesus
Christ. All we that beléeue in Iesus Christ
(saith Saint Paule) are become the children
of God:Gala
                     •
                  . 
                     •
                  
                and because we bee his children,
he hath sent the spirit of his sonne into
our heart, which crieth, Father, Father.
And to the Romaines, those (saith he) that
are guided by the spirit of God, are the children
of God: for ye haue not receiued again
the spirite of bondage in feare:Rom. 
                     •
                  
                but the
spirit of adoption, whereby me cry, father,
father. For certeinly the same spirite beareth
our spirite recorde, that we be the children
of God. Now then, if we be children,
we be also heires. And we must mark wel,
that in these two places, the Apostle Saint
Paule speaketh plainly, not of any speciall
reuelation, but of a certayne record which
the holy Ghost doeth commonly yéelde too
all such as receiue the grace of the Gospel.
Then if the holy Ghost assure vs that wee
bée Gods children and heires: why shoulde

we doubt of our Predestinatiō:Rom 8. The same
man saith in the same Epistle, Whome hée
hath predestinated, them hath hee also called:
and whom he hath called, them hath
he also made righteous: and whom he hath
made righteous, them also hath he glorified.
What shall wee then say too all these
things? if God be on our side, who can bee
against vs? And therefore if & plainly perceiue,
that God hath called mee by geuing
me faith and the fruites of fayth,A true mark of Predesti
                  
                     •
                  n. that is
to wit, Peace of conscience, mortification
of the flesh, and quickening of the spirit,
whether it be in whole or in parte: why
shoulde I doubt that I am not predestinated?
And moreouer we say with Sainte
Paule, that all true Christians (that is to
wit, all such as beleeue the Gospel) receiue
not the spirite of this worlde,1. Eor. 2. but the spirit
that commeth from God: by the inspiration
whereof they discerne the thinges that
God hath geuen them. What maruel then
is it, if we know that God hath certeinly
geuen vs euerlasting life? But there are
some which say, that no man ought to presume
so farre, as to boast humselfe to haue
the spirit of God. They speake in such wise.
as if the Christian should glory of y• hauing
of it for his owne desertes, and not by the

onely and méere mercy of God: and as
though it were a presumptuousnes to professe
himselfe a Christian: or as though a
man coulde be a Christian without the hauing
of Christes spirite: or as though wee
coulde without flat hipocrisie say, that Iesus
Christ is our Lord, or call God our father,
if the holy Ghost moued not our harts
and toungs to vtter to sweete wordes.Rom. 8. 1. Cor. 1
                     •
                  . And
yet notwithstanding, euen they that count
us presūptuous for saying that God hath
geuen vs his holy spirite. with faith, forbid
vs not to say euery day Our Father, but
rather commaunde vs. But I would haue
them to tell me, how it is possible to separate
fayth and the holy Ghost asunder, séeing
that faith is the peculiar worke of the
holy Ghost? If it be presumption to beléeue
that the holy Ghost is in vs,He that glorieth not that he hath the holy Ghost is no true Christian. why doeth S.
Paul bid y• Corinthiās try thēselues whether
they haue faith or no, affirming them
to be reprobates, if they know not y• Iesus
Christ is in thē? But in very déed, it is
a great blindnes to accuse the Christiās of
presumptuousnes for taking vpon them to
glory of the presence of the holy Ghoste.
without wt glorying, there cannot be any
Christianity at al. But Iesus Cherist (who
cānot ly) saith, y• his spirit is vnknowē to y•
               
world,Iohn. 14. and that they onely doe know him,
within whom he dwelleth. Then let them
begin to become god Christians, and put away
their Iewish mindes, and imbrace the
grace of the holy Gospel in good earnest: &
then shal they know that the good and true
Christians both haue the holy Ghost, & also
acknowledg ethēselues to haue him. But
some one may say to me, that the Christiā
cannot by any meanes know that he is in
Gods fauour, without some speciall reuelation:
and so consequently, that he cannot
know whether he be predestinated or no.
And he may specially alledge these wordes
of Solomon,Eccle. 6. A man knoweth not whether
he be worthy of hatred or of loue: and also
these wordes of the Apostle1. Cor. 4. S. Paul to the
Corinthians:A man may know that he is in Gods fauoure. I féel not my selfe guilty of
any thing, and yet féele I not my selfe iustified
for all that. It séemeth to be sufficiently
declared by the textes of holy scripture,
that the sayde opinion is false: and now remayneth
onely to bee shewed briefly, that
these two textes wherevpon the same opinion
is chiefly grounded, ought not too bee
taken in that sense. As touching Solomons
sentence, although it be scarce wel &
faithfully translated in the commontranslation:
yet is there not any man so dull,

who in reading Solomōs whole discourse,
may not plainely perceiue, that by saying
so, he ment, that if any man will take vpon
him to iudge by the casualties,By the cha
                     •
                  
                  ces of this life, no ma
                     •
                   can iudge whether a man bee in Gods fauor or displeasure. that happen
in this life, who is loued or hated of God:
Hée laboureth in vain
                  •
               , considering that
the selfesame chaunces which light vppon
the righteous: light also vpon the vnrighteous:
vpon him that sacrifizeth, aswell as
vpon him that sacrifizeth not: and as soone
vppon the good man as vppon the sinner.
Whereof it may be gathered, that GOD
doeth not alwayes shew his loue towards those
whome hée indueth with outwarde
prosperities: and contrariwise, that hée
sheweth not his displeasure towards those
whome hée punisheth. Then my ryght
deare brethren in Christe Iesus our Lorde
doe you thinke it reason to conclude, that a
man cannot bee sure of Gods fauour, because
the same surenesse cannot bée perceiued
by the sundry chaunces, that happen euery
day in these transitory and temporall
thinges? A little afore, Solomon saith
that a man cannot discerne any difference
betwéene the soule of man, and the life of
a Beast: for it is séene that both man and
Beast dye after one manner. Shall wée
then conclude by this outwarde accident,

that the perswasiō which we haue conceaued
of the immortality of y• soule, is grounded
but only vpon coniecture: so surely:
and it were a great folly to stande vppon a
thing so notably knowne. And as for S.
Paules wordes, I say, that forasmuche as
he was speaking of the administration of
the Gospell, hee ment that his hearte misgiues
him not of any misdealing therein,
and yet for all that, that hée is not sure hee
hath doone his whole dutie to the full, and
therein obteined the prayse of righteousnes
to Godward, as if he had done all that perteyned
and was conuenient to be done by
a faithful Steward: and therefore in speaking
of his office, like a iust and discrete
person, he durst not iustifie himselfe, nor auow
that he had discharged his dutie to the
uttermost, and satisfied his Lords wil, but
referred all thinges to the only iudgement
of his Lord. And verily, whosoeuer readeth
these wordes of the Apostle S. Paul, and
considereth the wordes going afore them
with some iudgement, and likewise the
wordes that folow: wil not doubt, but this
is the true sense of them. I know well that
some men in expounding these woordes of
the Apostle S. Paul, say, that although hée
knew himselfe to be without sinne, yet hée

knew not whether hee were righteous to
Godward or no, according as Dauid affirmeth,
that no man can perfectly know his
owne sinnes.Rom. 3. 5. But these men perceiued not
that S. Paul groundeth not righteousnes
vppon woorkes but vppon faith, and that
he vtterly refuseth his owne righteousnes
to imbrace onely the righteousnesse which
God hath geuen vs, through our Lord Iesus
Christ.Phillip. 3. Also they cōsider not, y• he was
most certaine to be accepted for righteous,
in mainteining the soundnesse & purenes
of the Christian faith, and that hee knewe
well how the crowne of that righteousnes
was laide vp for him in heauen: and also,
that he was fully assured,2. Tim. 4. that no creature
in heauen, earth, nor hel, was able to separate
him from the loue of God, and that he
longed to die because he knew for a trueth,
that after his death,Rom. 8. he should bée with Iesus
Christ. All which things should be false
if he had not béen well assured that he was
righteous,Ph
                     •
                  . 1. (I meane) by faith, and not by
works. therefore my dearely beloued brethren,
let vs ceasse to speake y• thing of the
Apostle S. Paul, wt he neuer once thought
of himself, but fircely fought against it continually,
in answering suche as measured
righteousnesse by workes, and not by faith

in our Lorde Iesus Christe. But beside
                  •
               
these two authorities of Solomon and S.
Paul, a man myght alledge some other places
of Holy Scripture, which wheras they
warne and encourage men to feare GOD
séeme too bée contrary too the assurance of
this our Predestination.The two sortes of feare, childly & 
                     ••
                  uish. And if I would
declare them all particularly, I shoulde be
ouerlong. But I say generally, that the
feare of punishment was proper to the old
Testament, and childly loue too the newe
Testamente: according as Saint Paul
witnesseth, when hée saith to the Romans,
yée haue not receiued the spirite of bondage
too feare: but yée haue receiued the spirite
of adoption, whereby wée crie, father, father.

                  
                     •
                  . Tim. 1 And likewise vnto Timothie he saith,
that GOD hath not geuen vs the spirite
of fearefullnes, but rather of power and
loue: which spirite Iesus Christe hath geuen
vs according too the promise made by
the mouth of the Holy Prophetes, and
brought to passe, that wèe being deliuered
out of our enimies handes, may serue him
without feare before his holy presence, in
all holynesse & righteousnesse all the dayes
of our life. By these and many other places
of the holy Scripture, a man may playnly
gather, that the paineful and slauish fearefulnesse

agréeth not with a Christian: and
this is already confirmed by this, that such
manner of fearefulnesse is vtterly contrary
to the spirituall chéerefulnesse and ioy,
which is peculiar to the Christian, as the
Apostle Saint Paul sheweth openly to the
Romanes,Rom. 14▪
                saying that the kingdome of
God is righteousnesse, and peace, and ioy
in the holy Ghost: that is to say, that euery
man which entereth into the kingdome of
the grace of the Gospell, is become righteous
through faith: and afterwarde addeth
peace of conscience, which consequently
bréedeth such a spirituall and holy rest and
gladnes,Ephe. 6. Phillip. 4. in respect wherof, the same Saint
Paul doth oftentimes incourage the Christians
to liue meryly. And Saint Peter
sayth,1. Pet. 1. that all they which beléeue in Iesus
Christe, doe continually reioyce with an
unspeakeable and glorious ioy, notwithstanding
that they be afflicted with diuerse
temptations.The slauish feare threateneth the wicked, and th
                     •
                   childly feare encourageth the chosen. And therefore when the holy
Scripture threatneth and frayeth the christians,
they must vnderstande, that it speaketh
to such as are so licencious, that for somuche
as they kéepe not the thankfulnesse
& honesty that belōng to Gods children, they
must be handled as seruantes, and hilde in
awe, vntill they come to taste and féele

how swéete and pleasant the Lord is, and
untill such time as faith worke his affectes
in them, and that they haue so much childly
loue, as may suffice to kéepe and mainteine
them in honestie of Christian conuersation,
and in folowing the example of our
Lorde Iesus Christe. And when the selfe
same scripture exhorteth Christians to the
true feare: it meaneth not that they should
feare the iudgement and wrath of God, as
though it were presently ready to condēne
thē: for as I haue saide already) by the record
which the holy Ghost geueth to theyr
spirite, they knowe that God hath chosen
them and called them, of his owne méere
mercy, and not for their deserts. By reason
whereof, they doubt not at all, but y• by the
selfesame goodnesse & mercy, he will mainteine
them in the happy state wherein hee
hath placed them. And after suche manner
scripture exhorteth them,The effects of childly feare. not to slauish
feare but to childishe, that is to wit, that
like good children they shoulde bee loath too
offend against the Christian religion,Ephe. 4. or to
commit any thing against the duty and honestie
of Gods true children, and likewise
too gréeue the holy Ghost that dwelleth in
them: to the ende that knowing the corruptednesse
of our nature, wée shoulde alwayes

be héedefull and diligent, and neuer
haue any trust in our selues: for in our flesh
and in our mindes do the appetites and affections
continually dwell: which, as deadly
enimies of the soule, lay a thousande
snares and baytes for vs, incessantly labouring
too make vs prowde, ambicious,
lecherous, and couetous. This is the feare
wherevnto the whole Scripture exhorteth
the Christiaes that haue once tasted howe
swèete the Lorde is, and which bestowe all
their indeuour in following Christes footesteppes,
who cast not from them this holy
feare, because they labour to put of the old
man. And the good Christians must neuer
bereaue themselues quite & cleane of this
childly feare, which is the singular friende
of Christian charitie, like as the slauishe
feare is such an enemie vnto it, as they can
by no meanes dwell togeather. And by the
the foresaide thinges,The Christian may warrant himself the forgeuenesse of his sinnes. a man may plainely
perceiue, that the good Christian ought
neuer too doubt of the forgiuenesse of his
sinnes, nor of Gods fauour. Neuerthelesse,
for the better satisfiyng of the Reader, I
purpose too set downe héere vnder, certayne
authorities of the holy. Doctours,
which comfirme this foresaid trueth. Saint
Hyllary in his fifth Canon vpon Matthew

sayth, it is Gods wyll, that we should hope
without any doubting of his vnknowne
wil. For if the beliefe bée doubtfull, there
can bée no righteousnesse obteined by beléeuing.
And thus wée sée, that according to
S. Hyllary,
               S. Hillary. a man obteineth not forgeuenesse
of his sinnes at Gods hande, except
hèe belèeue vndoubtedly to obteine it. And
good right it is that it shoulde bée so.Iames. 1. For
he that doubteth, is like a waue of the sea,
which is tossed and turmoyled with the
winde. And therefore let not such a one
thinke to obteine any thing at Gods hand.
But let vs heare Saint Augustine, who
in his Manuell counselleth vs too driue away
the saide foolish imagination,S. Augu
                     •
                  t. which
intendeth to dispossesse vs of the foresaide
good and sage assurednesse. Let such foolish
imagination (sayth hee) murmure as much
as it lifteth, saying, who art thou? Hows
great is that glory? By what desertes hopest
thou too obteine it? I answere assuredly:
I knowe in whome I haue beléeued
and I know that hée (of his great loue)
hath made mée his sonne: I knowe hée is
true of his promise, and able too perfourme
his worde: For hée can doe what hée will.
And when I thinke vpon the Lords death,
the multitude of my sinnes cannot dismay

mée, for in his death doe I put all my
trust. His death is my whole desert, it is
my refuge, it is my saluation, my life and
resurrection, and the mer
                  •
               y of the Lorde is
my desert, I am not poore of desert, so long
as the Lord of mercy sayleth me not. And
sith the mercies of y• Lord are many: many
also are my deseruinges. The more y• hée is
of power to saue, the more am I sure to bée
saued. The same S. Augustin talking with
GOD in another place, sayth that hée
had despayred by reason of his great sinnes
and infinite negligences, if the woorde of
GOD had not become flesh. And a
                  •
               one
after, hée sayth these wordes: All my hops
all the assurance of my trust is setled in his
precious blood, which was shed for vs and
for our saluation. In him my poore heart
taketh breath: and putting my whole
trust in him, I long to come vnto thée O
Father, not hauing mine owne righteousnesse,
but that righteousnesse of thy sonne
Iusus Christe. In these two places Saint
Augustine sheweth plainely, that the Christian
must not be afraide, but assure him
selfe of righteousnesse, by grounding himselfe,
not vpon his owne workes, but vpon
the precious blood of Iesus Christe, which

cleanseth vs from all our sinnes, and
maketh our peace with GOD. Saint
Bernarde
               S. Bernard in his first Sermon vppon the
Annunciation saueth moste euidently,
that it is enough to beléeue that a man can
haue forgiuenesse of our sinnes, but by
Gods mercy: nor any one good desire or abilitie
too doe so muche as one good worke,
except GOD geue it him: no nor that
a man cannot deserue eternall life by his
workes, but if GOD geue him the gifte
so to beléeue: But besides all these things
(sayth Saint Bernard) which ought rather
too bée counted a certaine entraunce and
foundation of our faith,) it is néedeful that
thou beléeue also, that thy sinnes are forgeuen
thée for the loue of Iesus Christe.Eche one must beleue particularly his sinnes are released & forgeuen him freely.
Sée howe this holy man confesseth that it
is not enough too beléeue generally the forgeuenesse
of sinnes: but hée must also beléeue
particularly that his owne sinnes are
forgeuen him by Iesus Christe, and the
reason is ready at hande: namely, that forasmuche
as GOD hath promised thée to
accept thée for righteous through the merites
of Iesus Christe, if thou beléeue not
that thou art become righteous through
him, thou makest GOD a lyer, and consequently

thou makest thy selfe vnworthie
of thy grace and liberality. But thou wilt
say to me, and I beléeue wel the forgeuenesse of
sinnes, and I knowe that GOD is true:
but I am afraide that I am not worthie to
haue so great a gift. I answere, that the
forgiuenes of thy sinnes shall not be a gift
of free grace, but a wages, if God woulde
geue it thée for the worthinesse of thy
workes. But I reply vpon thée, that God
accepteth thée for righteous, and laieth not
thy sinne to thy charge, because of Christs
merits, which are geuen vnto thée, and become
thine by faith. Therefore, following
the Counsell of Saint Bernard, beléeue
thou not onely the forgeuenesse of sinnes
in generall, but also apply the same beliefe
to thine owne particular person, by beléeuing
without any doubt, that all thy misdoinges
are pardoned thée through Iesus
Christ. And in so doing thou shalt geue the
glory vnto GOD, by confessing hym too
bée mercifull and true, and shalt become
righteous and holy before GOD, forsomuche
as by the same confession, the holynesse
& righteousnesse of Iesus Christ, shalbée
communicated vntoo thée. But to returne
to our purpose of Predestination: I

say, that by the thinges aboue mencioned,
a man may euidently perceiue, that the assurance
of Predestination doeth the hurt,
but rather greatly profite the true Christians.
And I thinke not that it can hurt the
false Christians and reprobates. For albeit
that such manner of folke woulde beare
themselues in hande, and pretende too the
worldewarde too bée of the number of the
predestmate: yet can they neuer perswade
theyr owne consciences, which will euer
bée gnawing and crying out to the contrary.
But yet it séemeth greatly, that the doctrine
of Predestination may hurt them.
For they bée woonts to say: If I bée of the
number of the reprobates, what shall it auayle
mée too doe good workes? And if I bée
of the number of the predestinate, I shal be
saued without any labouring of mine too
doe good workes. I answere thée at few
                  •
               
wordes, that by suche diuelishe arguments
they increase Gods wrath against themselues,
who hath disclosed the knowledge
of Predestination too the Christians, too
make them whot, and not colde in the loue
of God: and to set them forwarde and not
backeward vnto good workes. And therefore
the true Christian, on the one side holdeth

himselfe assuredly predestinated vnto
euerlasting lyfe, and to be saued, not at all
by his owne merits, but by Gods election,
who hath predestinated vs not for our
owne works sakes, but to shew the greatnesse
of his mercie: And on the other side
endeuoureth himselfe to doe good woorkes
after the example of Iesus Christ asmuch
as if his saluation depended vpon his own
pollicy and paines taking. As for him that
ceasseth to do good because of the doctrine of
Predestination, saying: If I be predestinated,
I shall be saued without strayning of
my selfe to doe good woorkes: he sheweth euidently,
that his trauelling is not for the
loue of God, but for the loue of himselfe.
By reason whereof, the woorkes that he
doeth, may perhaps be good and holy too
the sight of men, but they bee wicked and
abhominable before the Lorde God, who
hath an eye to the intent. And herevppon it
may be gathered, that the doctrine of Predestinatiō
worketh rather good than harm
to the false Christians. For it discouereth
their hypocris
                  •
               e, which cannot cure it selfe
so long as it lieth hidden vnder the mantle
of outward workes. But I woulde hau
                  •
               
them that say, I will not streine my selfe

to doe wel, for if I be predestinated: I shal
be saued without tiring of my self so much:
I say, I woulde haue them tell me, howe
it happeneth, that when they be diseased,
they say not also I will haue neither Phisition
nor phisicke: for looke what God had
determined vpon me, cannot but come too
passe? why eate they? why drinke they?
why till they the ground? why plant they
Uines? & why be they so diligent in doing
all thinges conuenient for to sustaine y• bodie?
why say they not also, that all these
turmoylings, pollicies, & trauailes of ours
are superfluous, forasmuch as it is not possible,
but that whatsoeuer God hath foreséene
and determined concerning our life &
death, must néeds come to passe? And therfore
if Gods prouidēce make thē not negligent
and idle in thinges pertayning to the
bodie: why should it make thē more slouthfull
and negligent in that which concerneth
the Christian perfection, which without
all comparison is farre nobler then the
body? But forasmuche as we sée that neyther
Iesus Christ, nor Saynte Paule, for
any doubt of offending the reprobats haue
forborne to preache the trueth, which is necessary
to the edifying of the chosen, for the

loue of whom the euerlasting sonne of God
became man, and was put to death vpō the
Crosse: we also in likewise ought not to
forbeare the preaching of Predestination
to the true Christians, forasmuche as wee
haue séene▪ that it importeth greate edification.
            Now are we come to the end of our purpose,
wherein our thiefe intent hath béene
(according to our small power) to magnify
the wonderful benefit which the Christen
man hath receiued by Iesus Christ crusified,
& to shewe that faith of her selfe alone
iustifieth, that is to wit, that God receiueth
& holdeth them for righteous, which beleue
stedfastly, y• Christ hath made full amends
for their sinnes: howbeit, that as light can
not be separated from fire, which of it selfe
burneth and deuoureth al thinges: euen so
good woorkes cannot bee separated from
saith, which alone by it selfe iustifieth.
            And this holy doctrine (which exalteth
Iesus Christ, and represseth & abateth the
pride of man) hath and alwayes shalbe reiected,
and fought agaynst, by such Christians
as haue Iewish myndes. But happie
is hée, who following the example of Saint
Paule, spoyleth himselfe of his owne righteousness,

and would haue none other righteousnesse,
than that which is of Iesus
Christ, wherewith if he be clothed and appareled,
he may most assuredly appeare before
God, and shal receiue his blessing and
the heritage of heauen and earth, with his
onely sonne Iesus Christ our Lorde: too
whom be al honor, praise and glorie,
from this time foorth for euermore.
            Amen.
            
               Christ is the end of the Law.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               ¶Imprinted at London at
the three Cranes in the Vintree by
Thomas Dawson, for George
Bishop and Thomas Wodcocke.
1580.
            
         
      
   