
      
         
            
            THE BENEFITE
that Christians receiue
by Iesus Christ
Crucifyed.
            Translated out of French into
English, by A. G.
            1573. IMPRINTED AT
London for Lucas Harison
and George Bishop.
            
         
         
            
            ¶To the English Reader.
            THou hast here deliuered to thee good Reader, a
litle tretise first writtē in the Italian tonge &
printed at Venise, after that translated into the
French langage and printed at Lyons, and now
translated & printed for thee to reade in the English
tounge. Enquire not of the Author, he is vnknowen,
and to know him would do thee but litle
good. Reade the booke deuowtly, regard the mater
of it attentyuely, it may do the much good in theis
euill dayes. This may be counted among the greatest
euils with which this age is infected, that thei
which are called christians are miserably diuided
about Christ. And yet in truth as the apostle saith
vnto vs,
                  
                     •
                   Cor. 8. ther is but one God, which is the father of
whom are all things, and we in him, and our lord
Iesus Christ by whō are al things, & we by him.
To discourse on this diuision and the cause thereof
would be to some pleasing, to some it would be displeasing.
For what one truth can please myndes so
diuersly diuided? wold God it could please all to
become one in that one Christ whose name we al do
carie. In this litle booke is that benefite which cō
               mith
by Christ crucified to the Christians, truly &
comfortably handeled: which benefite if all christians
did truly vnderstand and faithfully embrace,
this diuision would vanish away, and in
Christ the christiās shold become one. To this end
reade this booke and much good in Christ may it
do to all them which do reade it. Amen.
         
         
            
            ¶The Translater sendeth greeting to
all Christians that are vnder
Heauen.
            I Cannot maruell ynough wherof it
commeth that all of vs are more moued
by iniuries than by benefyts: and
that we take the one so much to hart,
imprinting them in our rememberance, and
forget the other so suddenly. Truly vve cannot
deny, but that among so manie other imperfections
vvherwith we are vnhappely defyled,
we haue also takē this, of the great corruption
and maymednesse of our earthly &
transitorie humane nature, vvherin ther cannot
be imagined any thing more vnconuenient
nor more hurtfull, than reprochefull vnthankfulnesse,
vvhich a man myght ryghtly
terme the welspring of al vyces. For by it our
minds are so drawen away & peruerted, that
the more we be beset rownd about and loden
with the benefits of GOD our souerein Father,
so much the more become we blookish
and as it were distraught and out of our wits,
ronning after our owne lustes and vanities,
where through (as though wee had drunke
of the riuer Lethe,) we fouget our selues and
mispend our whole time, bwisying our heads
like litle children that go seeking of pinnes in

the sand, wherabout they are so wholly occupyed,
that although a man cal them, they here
him not, or at leastwise make as though they
herd him not: frō whence if we did now and
thē lift vp our eyes vnto heauē, & inforce our
selues to remember the great benefits that we
dayly receiue of his right fatherly goodnesse
and mercie: it were not to be dowted but we
shold be more inclined to loue him & to obei
his holy will, than we be: wheras (which worse
is) we be not only careles to yeald dew thākes
vnto him, but also at all times cease not to offende
him: so deepely is the vyce of vnthākfulnes
rooted in vs. Ryghtly may he be blamed
for vnthankfulnesse, which acknowledgeth
not the good that hath bin done to him,
at leastwyse by saying gramercie: Vnthankfull
is he that forgetteth it: but toto vnthākfull
is he that rēdereth euil for good: VVherfore
we cā find no lawfull excuse, bicause that
which waye soeuer we turne our selues, the
bountifulnesse of this great GOD shyneth
throughot vppō vs. Let vs a little sturre vp
our wits, and let vs looke about vs as farre and
wyde as this howge frame of the worlde may
extende, so deuynely set togither, and garnished
with so great diuersitie of goodly creatures,
so well compassed, and in such an order

so vvysely compacted, that there is nothing
superfluouse, nothing vnprofitable, nothing
wherof ther may not be rēdred a rason. This
howge Sonne the fountayne of all lyght and
heate, and the cause of all earthly generacion:
the Moone which marketh vs out the yeeres
the monethes and the seasons: the Sky so
trimly azured and richely sette with glistering
starres: this howge Sea which beateth vpon
al sydes of the earth, the weyght wherof is
born vppon his own round counterpeis: the
great nomber of liuing creatures that are vppon
it, whereof some flye in the ayre, euerywhere
dispersed and othersome dwell in the
holow caues of it, which nature hath fashioned
of set purpose for them: vvhat shal I say
more? So many high moūtaines within whose
veynes are found innumerable tresures: And
others, from whēce issew many a fayre spring
spowting out their thinne and cleere water.
And othersome wheroutof doo gush violent
streams and plesāt riuers, nourishing infinite
nombers and kindes of fishes: So many trees
and plants yelding most delicate fruites and
sweete sauours: Such store of medicinable
herbes and rootes: So many plaines and vallyes,
most fruitfull: Such store of medowes
beawtifyed with their louely flowers: And to

be short, the ful howgenesse of the whole, the
power of the Elemēts, and the natural beawtie
of the creatures: what are they else but the
vtteraunce and open shewing of gods loue &
great liberality towards vs: of which eche one
in his kinde giueth glory to the Lorde? yea,
aske euen the beasts, and they will informe
thee: demaund of the fowles of the aire, and
they wil tell thee: or else speake to the earth,
and she will report vnto thee: and to the fisshes
of the Sea, and they wil answer thee: The
Lord spake the word,Iob. 12. and we were made: he
commaunded, and we were created. For in his
hand is the life of euery liuing thing. Aud by
him haue al of vs our being, mouing, & continewance.
Such is the speech of all creaturs.
Onely man, who is made after the image and
likenesse of god, indewed with vnderstāding,
memorie, and reason, (shewing himselfe in
that beehalfe more vnhappie than the brute
beasts,) passeth ouer the abundāce of so great
benefyes with his eyes shet, betrampling and
beraying them with his feete, as a swyne doth
precious stones: In somuch that after he hath
once wholly buryed remembrance, ther insueth
ignorance & vtter blyndnesse. O lamentable
state of reasonable man, who can hope
for any change in thee, except it be from euil

to worse, seing thou hast no knowledge at all
of God, and that, all his benefits are despysed
through thyne extreme vnthankfulnesse in
this behalfe? If so many creatures wherwith
this whole howge worlde is garnished to thy
vse: and (to touch thee yit more neerely) if
the cunning compacting togither of thyne
owne bodie, which may well be called a little
world, as wherin a man may behold the souerein
wisedom of the workmaister: if thy soule
wherin shineth the inuisible image of of the
euerlasting God: if thyne owne lyfe: if the
consideration of so great abundance of good
things whereof he giueth thee the vse euery
day, are not sufficiēt ynough to moue the affections
of thy hart: at leastwise yit oughtest
thou of reason to be inflamed and prouoked
by the benefyte of all benefyts, and by that
most precious gift which he hath made vnto
thee of his owne propre and only Sonne, who
is the very image of his substāce, & in whom
dwelleth the whole fulnesse of the Godhead,
togither with all the treasures of wisedom, & al
knowledge: Yea & so much ought it to moue
thee the more, bicause that without hauing regard
that thou wart his great enemie, he hath
layd all thyne infirmities vpon his backe and
made him to dye vpō the crosse for thy sake,

punishing thy sinnes in him, for the which
thou thy selfe haddest deserued eternall damnatiō.
Go now thou vnthankful persone, and
deuise all the excuses that thou wilt: and they
shall serue thee to no purpose, but to accuse
thee and to giue sentence againste thy selfe.
The wonderfull creation, order, and gouernmēt
of this howge world, can giue thee knowledge
of his fatherly loue, wisedome, and infinite
power, although not in all poynts to the
full. But in Iesus Christ crucifyed, all the bowells
of gods mercie are opened vnto thee at
large and perfectly. There is no more any
veyle that can hinder thee from the knowing
of so great loue. Seest thou not how that at
his deathe the veyle vvas rent asunder in the
myddes? And when he cryed that all was finished,
& bowed down his holy head, he gaue
a tokē that peace was made betwene God and
man. Let vs therfore henceforth learne O my
brethren to acknowledge the souerein benefyte
which we haue receiued by Iesus Christe
crucifyed Let vs behold the perfectnesse of
his lyfe, and his most holy Doctrine. Let vs
open our eyes at the vnmeasurable bryghtnesse
of his euerlasting truth, and let vs withall
our force folow the way wherein he hath
gone afore vs. Let vs with a cheerful and glad

hart imbrace the crosse which he hath set afore
vs: and discharging our shoulders from
all burthens and al sinne wherin we are wrapped,
let vs ronne with pacience to the combat
that is appointed for vs, hauing an eye to the
beginner & accōplisher of faith Iesus Christ,
vvho in stede of worldly glory susteyned the
crosse, and despyzed all the shame therof. Let
vs put of the old man with all his vvretched
and combersom dooinges and greuous burthens:
and cloth our selues with the new man
vvhose yoke is sweete and burthen lyght. Let
vs by trewe fayth runne betweene the armes
of his mercy, and pray him too voutsafe too
lyghten vs, and too make vs capable of al his
graces, and specially of the great benefite that
vve haue receiued of him by his crosse. Concerning
the which, forasmuch as ther is lighted
into my handes a little treatyze compiled
in the Italian toung, wherin he is maruelously
vvell and liuely drawen vvith another maner
of pensil than peinters vse: I thought it good
to put it into French, to the end that my coū
               trymen
also might take profite by it, and receyue
lyke comfort as I haue receyued by it:
And specially the simple people and such as
haue no great depth of knowledge. For it feemeth,
that the Author (vvhosoeuer he vvas)

vvas vvholy mynded to apply all things vntoo
them, without seeking or affecting anye
finenesse of speech, or great darknesse of sentences.
But euen as in Sōmertyme we see the
Riuer Saon go gently to ioyne himself vvith
the Riuer of Rhone, without doing anye domage
to any bodye: euen so goeth this man,
slyding so smothely into the bosome of hys
deere spouse Iesus Chryst, without staying at
any other thing: that ouermaliciouse should
he bee, which would looke awrye on him, or
by any meanes let him of his course.
And thus my brethren fareye well in
God, who inriche you with his
graciouse giftes from day
to day. Amen.
         
      
      
         
            
            Of the benefyt that christians
receyue by Iesus Christ crucifyed.
            The fyrst Chapter.
            ¶Of Originall sinne, and of mans
vvretchednesse.
            
               THe holy Scripture saith,The stat
                     •
                   of man before and after that he had 
                     〈◊〉
                  . that
GOD created man after
his owne Image & likenesse,
making him, as in respect of
his bodie, impossible: and as
touching his Soule, rightuouse,
true, good, mercifull, and holie. But after
that he being ouercome with desyre of
knowledge, had eaten of the Apple that God
had forbidden him: he lost the sayd image &
likenesse of God, and became like the brute
beasts, & like the diuel who had abused him.
For as touching his Soule, he became vnrightuous,
vntrew, cruell, pitilesse, and the
enemie of God: and as touching his bodie,
he became passible and subiect to a thousand
inconueniences and diseases: and not onely
like, but also inferiour to brute beasts. And
euen as if our forefathers had obeyed God,
they should haue left vs their rightuousenes
and holines as an heritage: euen so by being

disobedient vnto God, they haue left vs the
inheritance of vnrightuousenesse, wickednes,
and gods displeasure in such sort as it is
vnpossible for vs (through our own strength)
to loue God, or to frame our selues vnto his
holy will. Nay we be enemies vnto him,
as to one yt must punish our sinnes bycause
he is a iust iudge, and therfore can we not any
more trust wholly to his holy mercie. To
be short, our whole nature was corrupted bi
Adams sin. And like as erst it had superioritie
aboue all creatures, so became it an vnderling
to all, y• bōdslaue of satā, sin, & death,
& condemned to the miseries of hell. Also he
lost his iudgment altogither, & began to saye
that good was euil, and euil good: estéeming
falfe things to be trew, & trew things to bée
false.Psal. 114. Psal. 14. Which thing the prophet considering,
saith: that all men are lyers, and that ther is
not one that doth good, bicause the diuel like
a stout man of armes ruleth his own palace,
that is to wit the world wherof he became
the prince and Lord. There is no tunge that
can expresse the thousandth part of our miserie,
in that we being created by gods owne
hand, haue lost the said image of god, and are
become like the deuil, and too like to him in
nature and condicion, willing whatsoeuer

he willeth, & likewise refuzing whatsoeuer
he mislyketh. By reason wherof being giuē
vp for a prey to that wicked spirit, ther is no
sinne so gréeuouse, which euery one of vs
would not be redie to doe, if the grace of god
stay vs not.Originall s
                     •
                  n. And this our depriuaciō of rightuousenes,
and this foreward inclination to
all vnrightuousnes and naughtines, is called
origiall sinne: the which we bring with
vs from out of our mother
                  •
                womb, so as we
be borne the children of wrath, and it hath
had his first spring from our first fathers, &
is the cause and fountaine of all the vyces &
iniq
                  •
               ities that we commit: wherfrom if we
wilbe deliuered & returne again to our first
innocencie, to recouer the image of god: first
of all it stādeth vs on hand to know our own
wretchednes.A verye good compa
                     •
                  ison. For like as no man will euer
séeke to the Phisicion, except he know himselfe
to be diseased: or acknowledge the excellencie
of the Phisicion and how much he
is bownd vnto him, except he know his own
disease to be pestilent and deadly: euen so no
man acknowledgeth Iesus Christ the onely
Phisicion of our soules, except he first know
his own soule to be diseased: neyther can he
perceiue y• excellencie of him nor how much
he is bound vnto him, except he first enter in

to the knowledge of his owne outrageouse
sinnes, & of the incurable infirmitie, which
we haue receiued through y• infection of our
first fathers.
         
         
            The second Chapter.
            ¶Hovv the Lawe was giuen by God, to
the end that we knowing our sinne and
hauing not any hope of ability to make
our selues righteouse by our own works,
should haue recourse to gods mercie, &
vnto the ryghtuousenesse of fayth.
            OUR God therfore mynding of his infinite
goodnesse & merc
                  •
               e to send his only
Sonne to sette frée y• wretched children
of Adam: & knowing that first of all it
behoued him to make thē vnderstand their
own miserie: chose Abraham, (in whose séed
he promised to blisse al nacions,) & accepted
his ofspring for his peculiar people, vnto
whō, (after their departure out of Aegypt &
deliuerance from the bondage of Pharao,) he
by the meanes of Moyses, gaue the Lawe,
which forbiddeth all iusting, and commaundeth
vs to loue GOD with all our hart,
with all our soule, and with al our strength,

in such wise as our whole trust be reposed in
him, & we redy to leaue our life for his sake,
to suffer all torments in our members, and
to be bere
                  •
               t of all our goods, dignities, & honours
for the loue of our god: choosing to dye,
rather than to do any thing that may mislike
him, be it neuer so little: and doing al things
in that behalfe with a merie hart, and with
all forewardnes and cherefulnes. Moreouer
the Lawe cōmaundeth vs to loue our neighbour
as our selfe,Who is our neybour mening, hy the Neyghbour,
all maner of men as well frends as foes: &
it willeth vs to do to euery man as we wold
be done vnto, and to loue other menns caces
as our owne. And so by looking in this holye
Lawe as in a cléere lookingglasse, man doth
out of hand espye his own great imperfectiō
& vnablenes to obey gods commaūdements,
and to rēder him the honour and loue which
he ought to yéeld to his maker.The 
                     〈◊〉
                   office or dewtie of the lawe. The first office
of the Lawe then, is to make sinne knowen,
as sainct Paule affirmeth. And in another
place he saith, I had not knowen what
sinne is, but by the Lawe.Rom. 3. and 7. The second office
of the Lawe, is to make sinne increace, forasmuch
as we being quyte g
                  •
               ne from the obeying
of God,The second office of the lawe. and become bōdslaues to the
diuell, being full of wicked works and inordinate

affectiōs, cannot abyde that god shold
forbid vs to lust, which increaseth so much ye
more, as it is the more prohibited: by reason
wherof S. Paule sayth, that sinne was dead,
but the Lawe came and raysed it vp againe,
and so it became out of measure great. The
third office of the Lawe,The third office of the lawe. is to shew ye wrath
and iudgment of God, who threatneth death
and euerlasting punishme
                  •
               t to such as kéepe
not the Lawe throughout in all points. For
the holy Scripture saith,Deu. 27. Cursed is he y• performeth
not throughly al the things that are
written in the booke of the Lawe. And therfore
sainct Paule saith,2. Cor. 3. y• the Law is a ministerie
and that it bringeth foorth wrath. The
Lawe then hauing discouered sinne and increaced
it, and shewed foorth the wrath & indignation
of God who threatneth death,The forth office of the Lowe. executeth
his fourth office, which is to put a
man in feare, who there vppō falleth into sorowfulnes,
& would fayre satisfie the Law:
but forasmuch as he séeth clerely, that he is
not able: he wexeth angry against God, and
wold with all his hart, that ther wer no god,
bicause he feareth to be sore chastized & punished
by him,Rom. 4 according as sainct Paule saith,
that the wisedome of the flesh is the enemie
of God, bicause it neyther is nor can be subiect

to the Lawe of God.The fifth office of the lawe. The fifth office of
the Lawe, (which is the principal ende and
the most excellent and necessarie office of
it) is to constraine a man to goo vnto Iesus
Christ, in lyke wyse as the Hebrues being
dismayed, were constrained to appeale vnto
Moyses, saying:Exod. 20 Let not the Lord speake vnto
vs, least we dye, but speake thou vnto vs &
we will obey thée in al things. And the Lord
answered: verely they haue spokē exceding
well. Yea they were not praysed for any other
thing, than for thēyr desyring of a Mediator
betwixt GOD and them, which was
Moyses, who represented Iesus Christ, that
should be the aduocate & Mediator betwene
God and man. In respect whereof God sayd
vnto Moyses, I will rayse vp a Prophet among
theyr brethren like vnto thée, & I will
put my word in his mouth, & he shall speake
vnto them all the thinges that I shall commaund
him, and I will punish all those that
wyll not obey my word which he shal speake
in my name.
         
         
            The third Chapter.
            ¶How the forgiuenesse of our sinnes, our
iustification, & our saluation depend vppon
Iesus Christ.
            
               WHen as our God then had sent the said
great Prophet which he had promised
vs, (who is his onely sonne,) to the end that
he shold set vs frée frō the curse of the Law,Coloss. 3
and recon
                  •
               yle vs vnto our God: that he shold
make our will fit for good woorkes, healing
our frée will, and repayring in vs the foresaid
image of god which we had lost through
the fault of our first parentes:Act. 4. forasmuch as
we knowe that vnder heauen there is non
                  •
               
other name giuē vnto men wherby we may
be saued, but the name of Iesus Christ: Let
vs ronne vnto him with the feete of lyuely
fayth,Mat. 11. & cast our selues betwē his armes,
sith he allureth vs so gracious
                  •
               i, crying: come
vnto mée all you that labour and are heauy
loden, and I wyll refresh you: What comfort
or what ioy in this lyfe can be comparable
to this his saying there, when as a man
feling himselfe oppressed with the intollerable
wayght of his sinnes, vnders
                  •
               andeth so
swéete and amyable words of the Sonne of
God, who promiseth so graciously to refresh
& rid him of his great peyns? But al the matter
lyeth in acknowledging our owne weaknesse
& miserie in good earnest. For he shall
neuer knowe what is swéete, who hathe not
tasted of ye sowre. And therfore Iesus Christ

sayth: If any man thirst,Iohn. 7. let him come to me
and drink: as if he had ment to say, if a man
know not himselfe to be a sinner, nor thirst
after rightuousenesse, he cannot taste of the
swéetnesse of Iesus Christ, how swéete it is
to talke of him, to thinke of him, and to follow
his most holy lyfe. But when we once
throughlye knowe our owne infirmitie by
meane of the Lawe: let vs herken to sainct
Iohn Baptist,
               Iohn. 
                     •
                  . who poynteth vs to ye souerein
Phisicion with his fingar, saying: Beholde
y• Lamb of God which taketh away y• sinnes
of the world. For he it is that deliuereth vs
from the heauie yoke of the law,Gal. 3. abrogating
and disanulling the curses and sharp threatnings
of the same: healing all our infirmities:
reforming our frée will, returning vs
to our auncient innocencie, and repayringe
in vs the image of our God:Iohn. 8. insomuch that
(according to sainct Paules saying) lyke as
by Adam we be all dead:1. Cor. 15. so by Iesus Christ
we are all quickened. And it is not to be beléeued
y• the sinne of Adam, which we haue
by inheritance from him, should be of more
force then the ryghtuousnes of Christe, the
which also we inherit by fayth. It séemeth
that m
                  •
               n hath great cause to complayn, that
(without any reason why,) he is conceiued &

borne in sinne,Psal. 50 and in the wickednesse of his
parents, by meanes of whom death reigneth
ouer all men. But now is all our sorow taken
awaye, inasmuch as by a lyke meane
(without anye occasiō giuen on our behalf,)
rightuousenesse & euerlasting lyfe are come
by Iesus Christ, and by him death is s
                  •
               ayne,
whereof sainct Paule maketh a verie goodly
discourse, which I purpose to set downe here
folowing.Rom. 5 Wherefore (sayth he) lyke as by
one man sinne entred into the world, and
death by sin: euen so death went ouer al mē,

                  •
               orasmuch as all men haue sinned. For vntill
the Lawe, sinne was in the worlde: but
sin was not regarded as long as ther was no
law. Neuerthelater, death reigned frō 
               Adā
               
vnto Moses, euen ouer thē also y• sinned not
after y• like maner of y• trāsgressiō of Adam,
who was a figur of him y• was to come. But
yit the gift is not so as is the offence: For if
through the offence of one, manie be dead:
much more the grace of God and the gift by
grace which is by one man Iesus Christe,
hath abounded vnto many. Neyther is the
gift so as that which entred in by one ye sinned.
For the fault came of one offence vnto
condemnation, but the gifte is of many offē
               ces
to iustification. For if by the offence of

one, death reigned through one: much more
shall they which receiue ye abōdance of grace
and of the gift of rightuousnes, reigne in life
through one, that is Iesus Christ. Likewise
then, as by the offence of one, the fault came
on all men to condemnation, so by y• ryghtuousenes
of one, ye benefyte abounded toward
all men to the iustification of life. For as by
one mans disobedience many wer made sinners,
so by the obediēce of one shall many also
be made righteous. Moreouer the law entred
ther vppon, that the offence shold aboūd:
neuertheles where sinne aboūded ther grace
abounded much more, that as sinne had reigned
vnto death, so might grace also reigne by
rightuousenes vnto eternal lyfe through Iesus
Christ our lord. By theis words of saint
Paule we manife
                  •
               tlye perceiue the thing to
be trew which we haue said heretofore: that
is to wit, that the lawe was giuen to make
sinne knowē: which sinne we do also know,
no to be of greater force thā Chris
                  •
               es rightuousenes,
wherthrough we be iustifyed before
God. For euen as Iesus Christ is strōger
than Adam was: so is his ryghtuousenes
more mightie than the sinne of Adam. And
if the sinne of Adam was sufficient ynough
to make al men sinners & children of wrath

without ani misdéed of our own: much more
shall Christes ryghtuousnes be of greater
force to make vs all rightuouse and the children
of grace, without any of our owne good
workes: which cannot be good, vnlesse that
before we do them, we our selues be made
good,The greatne
                     ••
                  e of sin 
                     〈◊〉
                   not to cause despayre. as Awstin also affirmeth. Hereby a mā
may know in what an errour they bée, who
by reason of some great offence, despayre of
gods good wil, imagining that he is not willing
to forgiue, couer, and pardon all sinne,
hauing alredie punished and chastized al our
sinnes and iniquities in his owne onely begotten
and déerebeloued sonne, and consequently
graunted a generall pardon to all
mankinde, which euery bodye inioyeth that
beleueth the Gospell, that is to say, which beléeueth
the happie tydings that the Apostles
haue published through the whole worlde,
                  
                     •
                  . Cor. 5.
saying: We beséeche you for Iesus Christes
sake, be yée recon
                  •
               yled vnto God: for he that
neuer knew sinne, was made a sacrifyze for
our sinne, that we might become rightuouse
in him. The Prophet Esay foreséeing this
great goodnes of God, writeth these heauēly
words, which do so well peynt out the passiō
of our Lord Iesus Christ, and the cause ther
of: as it is not to be found better descrybed,

euen in the writings of the Apostles. Who
(sayth he) will beleue our report, & to whom
is the arme of the Lord reueled. But hée
shall grow vp before him as a braunche and
as a roote out of a drye gdound, he hath neyther
forme nor beautie: when we shall sée
him, ther shalbe no forme that we should desire
him: He is despized and reiected of men,
he is a man full of sorowes, and hath experience
of infirmities, wée hidd as it were our
faces from him: he was despized & we estemed
him not. Surely he hathe borne our infirmities
and caried our sorowes, yit we did
iudge him as plaged and smitten of god, and
humbled: but he was wounded for our trāsgressions:
he was broken for our iniquities.
The chasismēt of our peace was vppō him,
and with his stripes we are healed. All we
like shéepe haue gone astraie: we haue turned
euery one to his owne waye, and ye Lord
hath layde vppon him the iniquitie of vs all:
he was oppressed & he was afflicted, yit dyd
he not open his mouth. He is brought as a
shéepe to the slaughter and as a shéepe before
the shearer is dumme so he openeth not his
mouth. O great vnkindnes. O thing abhominable?
that we which professe our selues
Christians, and here that the sonne of God

hath taken al our sinnes vppō him, & washed
them out with his preciouse blud, suffering
himselfe to bée fastened to the crosse for our
sakes: should neuertheles make as though
we would iustifie our selues & purchace forgiuenes
of our sinnes by our our owne workes:
as who would say, that the deserts, ryghtuousenes
and bludshed of Iesus Christ were
not ynough to do it, vnlesse we came to put
to our workes & ryghtuousnes which are altogither
defiled and spotted with selfeloue,
seflyking, selfeprofit, and a thousande other
vanities, for which we haue néede to craue
pardon at GODS hande, rather than reward.
Neyther do we thinke of the threatnings
which saint Paule vseth to the Galathians:
who hauing bin deceiued by falseprechers,
beleued not that the iustification by
fayth was sufficient of it selfe, but went about
stil to be made rightuous by the Law.
Unto whom S. Paule saieth:Gala 
                     •
                  
                Iesus Christe
shall nothing profyt you that iustifie your
selues by the Lawe: for you be falne from
grace, bicause that we thorough the spirit of
fayth wayte for the hope of rightuousnesse.An  excellent comparison of the 
                     •••
                  
                  bilitie of our owne woorks.
Now if the séeking of rightuousnesse & forgiuenes
of sinnes by the kéeping of the lawe
which God gaue vppon mount Sinai with so

great glorie and maiestie, be the denying of
Christ and of his grace: what shal we say to
those that will néedes iustifie themselues afore
God by their owne lawes and obseruā
               ces?
I would wish that such folkes should a
little compare the one with the other, and afterward
giue iudgment themselues. God
myndeth not to doe that honour, nor to giue
that glorie to his owne lawe, and yit they
will haue him to giue it to mennes lawes &
ordinances. But that honour is giuen onely
to his onely begotten sonne, who alone by y•
sacrifice of his death and passion, hath made
full amends for all our sinnes, past, present,Hebr. 7.
and to come, as sainct Paule and sainct Iohn
declare.Iohn. 12. Wherfore as oftē as we apply this
satisfactiō of Iesus Christs, vnto our soules
by fayth: out of all dout we obteyne forgiuenes
of our sinnes, and become good & rightuouse
before God, through his ryghtuousnes.Phil. 3
And therefore after that sainct Paule hathe
said, that as touching the ryghtuousenes of y•
lawe, he had liued vnblameable: he addeth,
& yit whatsoeuer I haue gayned by it I haue
accounted it in al respects to be but losse, for
the loue of Christ. And specially I esteme al
things to be losse, for the excellēt knowledge
of Iesus Christ my Lord, for whome I haue

counted all thinges to be losse, & déeme them
but as dung, so I may win Christ, & bée foūd
in him, not hauing myne owne rightuousenesse
which is of the lawe, but the righteousnesse
which is by the fayth of Iesus Christ,
which rightuousnes is giuen of god, I mene
the rightuousnes of faith, that I may come to
the knowledge of Iesus Christ. O most notable
wordes, which all Christians ought to
haue ingrauen in their hartes, praying God
to make them to tast it perfectly. Lo, how S.
Paule sheweth plainly, that whosoeuer knoweth
Christ aright estéemeth all the works
of the law to bée hurtful, for so much as they
make vs to swarue from our trust in Iesus
Christ, to whom euery man ought to impute
his saluation, & to trust only vnto him alone.
And to inforce this sentence the more, he addeth
further, that he estéemeth all things but
as dung, so he may gayne Christ and be foūd
incorporated in him: declaring thereby that
whosoeuer trusteth in his own workes, and
pretendeth to iustifie him selfe by them, getteth
not Iesus Christ nother is ingreffed into
him▪ And forasmuch as the whole mistery
of our faith consisteth in the truth hereof: 
                  •
               o
the end we might ye better vnderstand what
he ment to say: he addeth and repeteth oftentimes,

y• he had nothing to doo with al ye outward
iustification & al the rightuousnes that
is groūded vppon ye keping of ye law, but that
he wold cloth him selfe with y• rightuousnes
which God giueth by faith, to al thē y• beleue
that all our sinnes are fully chastized & punished
in Iesus Christ:
                  
                     •
                  . Cor. 1. & that Iesus Christ (as
S. Paule saieth) is made our wisdome, rightuousnes,
holines, & redemption to ye end, (as
it is written) y• he which will glorie should
glorie in the lord & not in his own workes.
Uery true it is, that in ye holy scriptures ther
are some texts to be found, which being misvnderstode,
séeme to gaynsay this holy doctrine
of S. Paules, & to attribute iustification
& remission of sinnes vnto works, & to charitie.
But those authorities haue alredy bin
wel expounded by somme who haue shewed
playnly, y• such as haue vnderstode thē in ye
sence aforesaid, vnderstode them not aright.
Wherfore my déerebeloued brethren, let vs
not folow ye fond opinion of y• bewitched Galathiās,
but rather let vs folow y• truth which
s. Paul teacheth vs, & let vs giue ye whol glorie
of our iustification vnto Gods mercy & to
y• merits of his sonne, who by his own bludshed
hath set vs frée frō y• souereintie of the
law, & from y• tyrannie of sin & death: & hath

brought vs into y• kingdom of god, to giue vs
life and endlesse felicitie. I say yet further, y•
he hath deliuered vs from y• dominion of the
lawe, insomuch as he hath giuen vs his holy
spirit, who teacheth vs all truth, and that he
hath satisfied the lawe to the full, & giuen the
same satisfaction vnto al his members, (that
is to wit to all true Christians,) so as they
may safely appéere at Gods throne, bicause
they be clothed with ye rightuousnesse of hys
Christ,How man is deliuered and set free from the curse of the lawe. and by him deliuered from the curse
of the lawe. Then cannot y• lawe any more
accuse vs or condemne vs, nor moue our affections
or appetites, nor increase sin in vs.
And therefore Sainct Paule saieth, that the
Obligacion which was against vs is cancelledGal. 3.
by Iesus Christ & discharged vppon the
trée of the crosse,Rom. 8. insomuch as he hath set vs
fr
                  •
               e from the subiection of the lawe,Colost. 2 and cō
               sequently
from the tyrannie of sin & death,
which can no more hereafter hold vs oppressed
bicause it is ouercome by Iesus christ in
his resurrectiō, & so cōsequently by vs which
are his members, in such maner y• wée may
say with Saincte Paule, and with the Prophet
Osee,
               1. Cor. 15 Death is quyt
                  •
                vanquished & destroyed.
O Death, wher is thy 
                  〈◊〉
               ? O Hel,
wher is thy victorie? The sting of Death is

               
                  •
               in, and the strength of sin is the lawe. But
God bée praysed who hath graunted vs vic
               
                  •
               orie
by our Lord Iesus Christ.Gen. 3 He is ye bles
               
                  •
               ed
séede that hathe crusshed the head of y• ve
               
                  •
               emous
Serpent, that is to wit of ye Diuell,
insomuch that all those which beléeue in Ie
               
                  •
               us
Christ, reposing their whole trust in his
grace, doo ouercome sin, death, the Diuel and
Hell, as Christ hath done. Hée is that blessed
séede of Abraham, in the which god hath promised
blissednesse to all Naciōs. It behoued
euery particuler person to fight with ye sayd
horrible Serpent, and too deliuer hym selfe
from that curse. But that enterprise was so
great, that all the force of the whole world
knitte together was not able too go through
with it. Wherfore our God y• father of mercie,
being moued with compassion of our miseries,
hath giuē vs his only begottē sonne,
who hath deliuered vs from y• veni
                  •
                of the
Serpent, & is him selfe become our blissednesse
& rightuousnes, condicionally y• we accept
the same, renoūcing al our own otward
iustifications. Then my déere bréethren let
vs imbrace the rightuousnesse of our Lorde
Iesus Christ, and lette vs make it ours by
means of fayth: let vs assure our selues that
we bée rightuouse, not for our owne works,

but through the merites of Iesus Christ, &
let vs liue merily & assured that the rightuousnes
of Iesus Christe hath vtterly done away
all our vnrightuosnes, & made vs good,
rightuouse, and holie before God, who beholding
vs ingreffed into his sonne by fayth, estéemeth
vs not now any more as the childrē
of Adam, but as his owne children, and hath
made vs heirs of al his riches, with his own
begotten sonne.
         
         
            The fourth Chapter.
            ¶Of the effectes of liuely faith, and of the
vnion of mans Soule with Iesus Christ.
            THis holie faith worketh after such a sort
in vs,How we 
                     〈◊〉
                   the likenesse of God. y• he which beleueth y• Iesus Christ
hath taken all his sins vppon him, becōmeth
like vnto Christ, & ouercōmeth sin, the diuel,
death, & Hell. And the reason thereof is this:
namely that the church (that is to wit euery
faithfull Sowle) is Christes wyfe,A very good s
                     •
                  militude expressing the maner how our 
                     〈◊〉
                   are taken away by Christ. & Christ
is hir husband. For we know how the lawe
of mariage is, that of two, they become one
selfesame thing, being two in one flesh, and
that the goods & substance of either of them
become comon to thē both: by means wherof
the husband saieth, that the dowrie of his
wyfe is his, & likewise the wyfe sayeth that

hir husbands house & all his riches are hirs:
and of a truth so they are: for otherwise they
should not be one flesh, as the scripture saith.
After the same maner hath God maryed his
onlibegottē & déerbeloued sonne to the faythful
soule, which hath not any other thing peculiar
of hir own, saue only sin, & yit the sōne
of God hath not disdeyned to take hir for his
welbeloued spowse, togither wt hir peculiar
dowrie, which is sin. And now by reason of y•
vnion which is in this holie mariage, looke
what y• on hath, is also y• others. Iesus christ
therefore saieth thus: The dowrie of mans
soule my déere wife, (that is to wit hir sins
and transgressings of the lawe, Gods wrath
ageinst hir, the boldnes of the diuill ouer hir,
the prison of Hell, and all other hir euils) are
become myne & are in my power to do what
I list with thē. Wherfore it is at my choyse
to deale with them at my pleasure, and therfore
I will put out the hand writing which
is agaynst the soule 
                  •
               y wyfe, I will take it
oute of the waye, I wyll fasten it too my
crosse in myne owne bodie, and in the same
wyll I spoile principalities and powers and
make a shew of thē openlye & triumphe ouer
them and consume thē vtterly vnto nothing.
            Now when GOD sawe his sonne who

knewe no 
                  •
               nne, neither had any sin in him,
thus wyllingly taking on him the fowlenes
of our iniquitie, he made him to be sinne for
vs euen the very sacrifice for our sinne: & did
sharply punish our sinne in him, putting him
to death, euen the death of the crosse. Howbeit
forasmuch as hée was his welbeloued &
obedient sonne,Math. 28 hée would not leaue him in
death nor suffer his holy one to sée corruption:Phil. 2
but raysed him vp from death to lyfe, giuing
him al power in heauen and earth, and
set him at his ryght hād in glory. Now then
the wyfe likewise with exceding great ioye
doth saye: the Realmes and Kingedomes
of my most déere husband and sauiour are
mine, by him I am an heire of heauen, my
husbands riches, (that is to wit his holines
his innocencie, his rightuousenes & his godhead,
togither wt al his vertue & myght,) are
mine and for me: and therfore in him I am
holie, innocent, ryghtuouse, and godly, & ther
is not any spot in mée. I am well fauored &
fayre, inasmuch as my lawful husband hath
not any blemishe in him, but is altogither
goodly and fayre. And sith that he is wholly
myne, and so consequently all that he hath is
myne, and all that he hath is pure and holie:
it foloweth that I also am pure and holie.

Therfore to begin at his most innocēt birth
                  •
               
he hath thereby sanctifyed the birthe of his
spouse conceiued in sinne. The godly chyldhod
and youth of the brydegroome, hath iustified
the childish and youthful lyfe of his déerbeloued
bryde. For the loue and vnion that
is betwixt the sowle of a trew christian and
the bridegroome Iesus Christ, maketh al the
woorks of eyther of them, to be comon to thē
bothe. By reason wherof when a man saith,
Iesus Christ hath fasted, Iesus Christ hath
prayed, Iesus Christ was herd of the father,
raysed the dead, draue diuells out of men,
healed the sicke, dyed, rose again, and ascended
into heauen: Likewise a man may say,
that a Christen man hath done all the selfesame
woorkes, forasmuch as the workes of
Christ are the workes of the Christian, bycause
he hath doone them for hym. Uerely a
man may say y• the Christian hath bin nayled
too ye crosse, buried, raysed again, is gone
vp into heauen, become the child of God, and
made partaker of the Godhead. On the other
side, all the workes y• a Christian man doeth
are Christes workes, bycause it is his will
to take them for his. And forasmuch as they
be vnperfect, and he throughly perfect, & cannot
away with any vnperfect thing: he hath

made them perfect with his vertues, to the
end that his wife should be alwaies ioyful &
well cōtentid and not be afraid of any thing
assuring hirself, that although ther be yit stil
some default in hir workes, yitnotwithstanding
they be acceptable to God in respect of
his sonne, vppō whō he hath his eyes alwais
fastened. O y• vnmeasurable goodnes of god?
how greatly is the christiā bound vnto god?
Ther is no loue of man, be it neuer so great,
that may be compared with y• loue that god
beareth to the sowle of euery faythfull christian,
wherof Christ is y• bridgrome. Whervppon
s. Paule sayeth, that Iesus Christ hath
so loued his wif ye church which is builded of
liuing stones (that is of the soules of y• beleuing
christians) that for to sanctifie hir,Ephe. 5. 
               
                  •
                he
hath offered himself to the death of ye crosse,
clenzing hir with the washing of water, by
his word, to ioyne hir to himself a gloriouse
church without spot or wrincle or other like
thing: but that she should be holie and vnblamable
(that is to wit like vnto him in holinesse
& innocencie) and also be the trew and
lawfull daughter of god, who hath loued the
world so well, that (as Iesus Christ himself
saieth) he hath giuē his onlibegotten sonne,Iohn. 3.
to the end that euerie one which beleueh in

him should not perish, but haue lyfe euerlasting.
For God sent not his sonne into the
world to condemne the worlde: but to the
ende that the Worlde myght bée saued by
him, insomuch that he which beléeueth in
him shall not bée damned.How the faithfull mans sowle is assu
                     •
                  ed of his being maried vnto Christ. Some man
might demaund after what maner the vnion
of this holie Mariage is made, and how
the Sowle which is the Bryde, and hir
Bridegrome Iesus Chryste are knitte togither.
What assurance can I haue, that my
Sowle ys vnited vntoo Iesus Christe, and
become his Spowse? How can I assuredly
glorie that I am Quéene and Mistresse of
his greate riches, as a wyfe maye? I can
easly beléeue that otherfolkes shall receyue
this honour and glorie: but I cannot perswade
my selfe that I am one of th
                  •
               se same
to whome GOD hathe gyuen so greate
grace: For I knowe myne owne wretchednesse
and imperfection. My der
                  •
               beloued
brother, I answer thee that thyne assurance
cōsisteth in trew and liuely fayth, wherwith
(as Sainct Peter sayeth) God clenzeth mens
harts:Act. 5 And this fayeth is grownded in the be
leuing of the Gospell that is to saye, in the
beleuing of the gladde tydings which hathe
bin published on GODS behalf throwgh

the whole world: which tydings conteyneth
in effect, that god hath vsed the rigorousenes
of his iustis against Iesus Christ, chastizing
& punishing all our sinnes in him.Mat. 2 And whosoeuer
receiueth this good tydings & beléeues
it stedfastly, hath the true fayth and doth inioye
the forgiuenes of his sinnes, and is also
reconciled vnto GOD: and of the chylde of
wrath, is become the chyld of grace: and recouering
the image of God, entereth into the
kingdome of God, and is made the temple of
God,2. Cor. 3. who maryeth mans soule to his onely
Sonne, by the meane of this fayth, which
fayth is a worke of God and the gift of god,
as sainct Paule saieth oftentymes. And God
giueth it vnto those whom he calleth to him,
of purpose to iustifie them & to glorifie thē, &
to giue them euerlasting lyfe, according as
our Lorde Iesus Christ witnesseth saying:
This is the will of him that sent mée,Iohn. 6 euen
that euery one which séeth the sonne and beleueth
in him, should haue euerlasting lyfe,
and I wyll rayse him vp agein at the latter
day.Iohn. 3 And lyke as Moses lifted vp the Serpent
in the Wildernesse: so must the sonne
of man be lifted vp, to the ende that euery
one which beleueth in him might not perish
but haue lyfe euerlasting. Also he sayeth to

               Martha:
               Iohn. 11. He that beleueth in me shall liue,
although he wer dead, and euery one that liueth
& beleueth in me shall not dye for euer.
And to a companie of the Iewes he sayeth:Iohn. 12. I
am come a lyght into the world, to the ende
that euery man which beleueth in me, shold
not abide in darknes. And sainct Iohn in his
Epistle saieth:1. Iohn. 4 Herein appéered the loue of
god towards vs, for that god is loue and sent
his only begotten sonne into this world, that
we might liue through him. And héere in is
loue knowen, not in that we loued God, but
in that he loued vs & sent his sonne to make
attonement for our sinnes. And moreouer,
he sent him to destroy our enemies. For the
bringing wherof to passe, he made him parttaker
of our fleshe, and of our blud, as sayeth
sainct Paule, to the ende that by his death he
myght destroy him that had the dominion of
death,Hebr. 
                     •
                  . that is to wit the diuel, and set al such
at libertie, as were subiect to bōdage al their
lyfe long, for feare of death. Seing then that
we haue records of the holy Scripture, concerning
the promises, whereof we haue spoken
heretofore, and concerning many other
promyses that are dispersed in diuers places
of the same: we cannot dout of it. And
forsomuch as the Scripture speaketh to all

ingenerall, none of vs oughte to distrust in
himselfe, that the selfsame thing which the
Scripture sayeth, should not belong perticularly
to him selfe. And to the ende that this
point, wherin lyeth and consisteth the whole
misterie of our holie faith, may be vnderstod
the better:A very goodly s
                     ••
                  ilitude & 
                     •
                  it for the expressing of the free for giuensse of si
                     ••
                  es for Iesus Christes sake. Let vs put the cace that some good
& holie King, cause proclamation to be made
through his whole Realme by the sound of
a Trumpet, that all Rebels and banished
men shall safely returne home to their howses,
bicause that at the sewt & desert of some
dere fréend of theirs, it hath pleased hym to
pardon them: certeinly none of those Rebels
ought to dout, of the obteyning of trew pardon
of his rebellion, but rather ought assuredly
to returne home to his howse, to lyue
vnder the shadowe of that holie king. And
if he will not returne, he shall beare the penaltie
of it, bicause that through his own vnbelefe
he dyeth in exyll and in the displeasure
of his prince. But this good king is
the Lorde of Heauen and Earth, who for
the obedience and desert of our good brother
Iesus Christe, hath pardoned vs all our
siunes, and (as we haue sayd afore) hathe
made open proclamaction through the whole
world, that all of vs may safely returne into

his kingdome. Wherfore he that beléeueth
this proclamaciō, dooth streytwayes return
into Gods kingdome (whereoutof we were
driuen by the offence of our first parentes,)
and is blissedly gouerned by gods holy Spirit.
And he that giueth no credit to the sayde
proclamacion, shall neuer inioy the sayd geuerall
pardon: but for his vnbelefes sake
shall abyde in banishment vnder the tyrannie
of the diuel, and liue and dye in extreme
miserie, liuing and dying in the di
                  •
               pleasure
of the king of heauen and earthe: and that
iustly. For we cannot commit a greater offence
against this good God, that to account
him as a lyer and deceiuer: which verely
we doo, in not giuing credit to his promises.
O how passing heauie is this deadly sinne
of vnbelefe? which (so farre foorth as is possible
(beréeueth God of his glorie and perfection:
besydes the greate harme that it doeth
to a mans selfe, which is his owne damnation
and the endlesse tormēt of his soule,
which the miserable conscience féeleth euen
in this lyfe. But on the contrarie, he that
commeth vnto GOD with assurednesse
of this fayth, beléeuing him without anye
mistruste or dowt of his promises, and
warranting himselfe for a certeyntie, that

God will performe al that euer he hath promised
him: giueth all the glorie vnto God,
and liueth cōtinually in rest and endles ioy,
euermore praysing and thanking the Lorde
God for choozing him to the glorie of the eternall
lyfe.
                  
                     •
                  . Cor. 1. And hereof they haue an assured
earnestpeny and gage, that is to wit the
sonne of god, whom they take for their most
louing Brydegrome, the blud of whom hath
made theyr hartes so drunken: that through
this passing holie belefe there is in the christen
hart ingendred so lyuely a hope and so
certeine a trust of gods 
                  •
               ercie towards vs,
and such an operation is wrought in vs, as
we rest our selues wholly vppon God, leauing
the whole care of vs vnto him in suche
wyse that being throughly assured of Gods
good wil, we are not afraid, nother of ye diuel,
uor of his ministers, nor of death. Which
holie and stedfast trust of Gods mercie,
inlargeth our hart, chéereth it vp, and with
certeine marualouse swéete affections dyrecteth
it vnto GOD, filling it and setting
it on Fyre with an exceding feruent loue.Heb. 4
And therefore Paule incourageth vs to goe
with all boldnesse to the throne of grace: &
he counselleth vs that wée should not shake
it of, nor make lyght of our trust, which

hath great recompence & reward. But thys
so holy and diuine affiance is gendred in our
harts by the working of the holie ghost, who
is cōmunicated vnto vs by fayth,Heb. 10. which neuer
goeth without ye loue of God. And hereof
it commeth, that wée bée prouoked to dooe
good works with a certeine liuelines and effectuall
cherefulnes: wherby we gather such
a strength and inclinacion to doo thē, as wée
be throughly redie and foreward to doo and
suffer all intollerable things for the loue and
glorie of our moste graciouse and mercyfull
father, who hath inryched vs wyth so abundaunt
grace through Iesus Christ, and of his
enemies made vs hys moste déere children.
This treue fayth is no sooner gyuen a man,
but he is by and by indewed and imprinted
with a certeine violent loue of good works,
to yéeld right swéet and amiable frutes both
vnto God and likewise to his Neybour, as a
verie good & frutefull trée. And it is no more
possible that he should bée otherwise, than it
is possible that a fagot should be set on fyre &
not cast light immediatly.Heb. 8 This is the holye
fayth without the which it is vnpossible that
anie man should please God, and wherby all
the holie men (as well of the old Testamēt
as of the new) haue bin saued, according as

Sainct Paule witnesseth of Abraham:
               Rom. 4. concerning
whome the Scripture sayeth,Gen. 1
                     •
                  . that
Abraham bel
                  ••
               ued GOD, and it was reckened
too him for rightuousenesse. And therfore
hée sayth a little before: We beléeue
that a man is iustified by fayth without the
déedes of the Lawe.Rom 2. And in another place
he saith: Sothen in that time shall the remnant
be saued, according to the election of
grace: and if they be saued by grace, then is
it not by workes, for then were grace no
grace. And to the Galathians he sayeth,Gala. 3. it
is a manifest matter that no man becommeth
rightuouse before God by the Lawe,Abac. 2.
bicause the rightuouse liueth by faith. And
the lawe consisteth not in beleefe, but he that
performeth the thinges that the Lawe commaundeth,Gal. 3.
shall liue by that performance.
And further hée sayeth that a man cannot
become rightuouse by the déedes of the law,
but onely by beléeuing in Iesus Christ. Agein,
a little after he sayeth, that if a man
can become rightuouse by the Lawe, Iesus
Christ dyed in vayne. Moreouer,Rom. 10. to the Romaines,
making comparison betwene the
rightuousnesse of the Lawe, and the rightuousnesse
of the Gospell, he sayeth that the
one consis
                  •
               eth in the dooing of workes, and

the other in beleuing. For if thou confesse
our Lord Iesus Christ with thy mouth, and
beleue in thy hart that God hath raysed him
vp from death: thou shalt be saued. For the
beléef of the hart maketh a man rightuouse,
and the confession of the mouth maketh him
safe. Lo how this good teacher Sainct Paule
sheweth euidently, that faith maketh a man
rightuouse without any workes. And not
only Sainct Paule, but also the holy Doctors
that came after him haue confirmed and allowed
this most holy trueth of Iustification
by fayth: among whome Sainct Augustin
is the chiefe,S. Augustin who in his booke of fayth and
workes, and in his booke of the Spirit and
the Letter, and in his booke of fourescore
and thrée questions, and in his booke which
he did write to Boniface, and in his treatise
vpon the xxxj. Psalme, and in many other
places, defendeth this article, shewing that
we become rightuous by faith without any
help of good works: howbeit that good works
are the effects of rightuousnesse, and not the
cause of it. And he sheweth that y• wordes of
S. 
                     •
                  ames being soundly vnderstood, are nothing
contrary to this article.Origen Whith thing
Origen doth also affirme in his fourth booke
vpon the Epistle to the Romanes, saying y• 
               S.

Paules meaning is, that fayth only is sufficiente
to make men rightuouse, insomuch that
a man becommeth rightuouse, only by beléeuing,
although he haue not doone anye good
work at all. For so it is, yt the théefe became
rightuouse without the workes of the lawe,
forasmuch as the Lord sought not what good
workes he had done in time past, nor wayted
vntill he had done any after he had beléeued,
but hauing accepted him for rightuouse
vpon his only confession, tooke him for hys
companion euen when he should enter into
Paradyse. Likewise, that so renowmedMarie magdalen. woman
in the gospel of Sainct Luke,
               Luke. 6. while she
was yit at the féete of Iesus Christ, herd it
sayd vnto hir, thy sins are forgiuen thée. And
a little after he saieth vnto hir, thy faith hath
saued thée, goo thy way in peace. Afterward
Origen sayth. In many places of the Gospel
a man may sée how our Lord Iesus Christ
hath spoken in such wise, as he sheweth that
fayth is the cause of the saluation of the beleuers.
Thē is a mā made rightuouse by faith,Fayth is the mark of those that are iustified
and the workes of the lawe further him nothing
at all. On the contrarie, where faith is
not, (which faith maketh ye beléeuer rightuouse,)
although a man doo the workes which
the law cōmaundeth: yit notwithstanding,

forasmuch as they be not builded vppon the
foūdation of faith, albeit y• to outward appearance
they séeme good, yit can they not iustifie
him that doeth them, bicause he wanteth
fayth, which is the marke of thē that are become
rightuouse before God. And who is he
that cā boast himselfe to be rightuouse, whē
he hereth God say by his Prophet 
                  
                     •
                  say,
               Esai. 64. that
all our rightuousnesse is as a defiled cloth of
a menstruouse woman? Then can wée not
iustly glorie in our selues but in y• only faith
of the crosse of Iesus Christ. S. Basill in hys
Homilie of humilitie,S. Basil. sayeth y• the Christian
ought to hold himself for rightuouse through
beléefe in Iesus Christ, and his wordes are
theis. The Apostle sayeth that he which glorieth
should glorie in the Lord, in that God
hath made Iesus Christ to be our wisedome,
rightuousenes, holinesse, and redemption, to
the end y• he which would glorie should glorye
in the Lord, bicause that the perfect and
sound glorying is to glorye in the Lord. For
in so doing, a man presumeth not vppon his
owne rightuousenes, but acknowledgeth his
want of the true rightuousenes, and that he
is made rightuouse, only by beléeuyng in
Iesus Christ. And Sainct Paule gloryeth of
the despyzyng of hys owne rightuousenesse,

and of his séeking of Christes rightuousnes,
by fayth which commeth of GOD. Sainct
Hilary in his ninth Canon vppon the exposition
of Sainct Matthew sayeth these words:S. Hilary
The Scribes considering Iesus Christe but
only as mā, were troubled, that a mā should
forgiue sinnes, and pardon that thing which
the Lawe could not doe, bicause that onely
fayth iustifieth.S. Ambrose. Sainct Ambrose in expounding
these wordes of Sainct Paule (vnto
him that beleeueth in him vvhich iustifieth
the vngodly,
               Rom. 4 
               his fay the is accounted for rightuousnesse,
according to the purpose of Gods
grace: like as Dauid also sayeth, that the
man is blissed whom God accompteth rightuouse
without workes) writeth thus. Saint
Paule sayeth, that vnto him which beleueth
in Iesus Christ (that is to wit to the Gentile)
his fayth is imputed for rightuonsnes,
as it was vnto Abraham. In what wise
then thinke the Iewes to become rightuous
by the woorkes of the Lawe: and yit to be
rightuous as Abraham was, séeing that Abraham
became not rightuouse by the déedes
of the Lawe, but onely by fayth? Then is
not the Lawe néedefull, forasmuch as the
sinner becommeth rightuouse before God
through onely fayth, according to gods graciouse

purpose, as Dauid sayeth. The Apostle
coufirmeth that which he hath sayde, by
the Prophetes example,Psal. 31 saying: Blissed is
the man whome God accepteth for rightuouse
without workes: wherby Dauid méeneth,
that those men are very happy, whom
GOD hath determined to accept for rightuouse
before him, by onely fayth without
any paynes taking or obseruatiō of the Law
on their behalfe. Thus sheweth he the blissednesse
of the time wherein Christe was
borne, in so much as the Lord himself saith:
Many rightuouse men and Prophetes haue
coueted to sée the thinges that you sée, and to
heare the thinges that you heare, and haue
not heard them. The selfesame thing sayeth
Sainct Ambrose in expounding the first
chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians,
affirming openly that whosoeuer beléeueth
in Iesus Christe, is become rightuous
without workes and without any desert, &
receiueth forgiuenes of his sinnes by faith alone.
Also he affirmeth the same thing in an
epistle which he writeth to Ireneus saying:
let no man boast of his owne workes, for no
mā becōmeth rightuous by his own works:
but he y• hath righteousnes, hath it of frée gift
                  •
               
               
forsomuch as he is made rightuouse by Iesus
Christ. Then is it fayth that deliuereth
by Christes blud: for happie is he whose sin
is forgiuen and pardoned.S. Bernard. And S. Bernard in
his thréescore and seuentéenth Sermon vppon
the Ballet of Ballets, cōfirmeth y• same,
saying that our own merites beare no sway
at all in making vs rightuouse, which thyng
m
                  •
               st be attributed wholly vnto grace which
maketh vs rightuouse fréely, and lykewyse
dischargeth vs from the bondage of sin. And
he addeth, that Iesus Christ marieth y• soule
and cupleth it vnto himselfe by fayth, without
that anie desert of our workes oughte or
can come betwene. But bicause I will not
be to long, I wil make an ende of mine allegations,
when I haue vttered one verie notable
and good saying of Sainct Ambrosis in
his booke intituled of Iacob concerning the
blessid life.Gen. 17. The saide holie man saith, y• like
as Iacob hauing not on his owne behalfe deserued
the birth right,A very good comparisō how we be clothed with the rightuousenesse of Iesus Christ. shrowded himself vnder
the apparel of his brother, & clothed himself
with his garment which yelded a verie
swéete sent, and in that wise presented himself
to his father to receiue y• blissing vnder
another mans person to his own behoof: euen
so is it requisite for vs to clothe our selues

with the rightuousenesse of Iesus Christ by
faith and to shrowd our selues vnder the diuine
purenes of our eldest brother, if we wil
be receyued for rightuouse afore God. And
certeinly this is true. For if we appéere before
God vnclothed of the rightuousenes of
Iesus Christ: but of all dout we shalbe iudged
worthy of euerlasting damnation. But
contrariwise, if God sée vs appareled with
the rightuousenes of his sonne Christ: then
wil he surely take vs for rightuouse, & holie,
and worthy of eternall lyfe. And verely it is
a great rashnesse in such as pretend to attein
to rightuousenes by the keping of gods commaundemēts,
which are al comprehended in
louing God with all our harte, with all our
soule, and wyth al our strength, & our Neybour
as our self. But who is so arrogāt or so
mad,No man 
                     〈◊〉
                   boast of the performāce of gods lawe. as to presume y• he is able to performe
those commaundements to the ful? Or who
séeth not that gods lawe requyreth perfect
loue, and condemneth all vnperfectnes? Let
euery man consider well his owne workes,
which partly shall séeme good vnto him: and
he shall fynd that they ought rather to be called
transgressions of that most holie Lawe,
according also as they be altogither vnclean
and vnperfect, so that he must be fayne to vtter

this saying of Dauids,
               Psal. 102. Enter not into
iudgment with thy seruant O Lord, for no
man liuing shalbe found ryghtuouse in thy
sight. And Salomō
                sayth who is he that may
say,Pro. 20. my hart is cleane? And Iob cryeth out,Iob. 1
                     •
                  .
               
                  •
               hat man is he that can be vndefyled, and
what man borne of woman can shew himselfe
rightuouse? Behold he found no stedfastnes
among his saincts, yea the heauens
are not cleane in his syght. How much more
abhominable and filthy is man, who drinketh
iniquitie as it were water? And sainct,
Iohn sayeth,
                  
                     ••
                  ohn. 2. if we say we be without sinne,
we deceiue our selues.Math. 6. And specially our sauiour
Iesus Christ teacheth vs to say, as often
as we pray, Forgiue vs all our trespasses
as vve forgiue them that trespasse against vs▪
               
And hereby may well be gathered the folie
of those y• make merchādyse of their works,
presuming to saue by them, not onely themselues,
but also their neibours, as though our
Lord Iesus Christ had not sayd vnto them.
When ye haue done all y• euer is cōmaunded
you,Luke. 17 say ye, we be vnprofitable seruāts:
we haue done but as we ought to doe. Ye sée
y• although wée had performed gods law to
y• full, yit neuertheles we shold esteme & call
our selues vnprofitable seruāts, Now then,

seing that men are so farre of from this full
performāce: who is he that dareth be so bold
as to glorifie himselfe that he hath added so
great an ouerplus of deseruings aboue y• ful
measure, as he may haue to deale abrode vnto
others? But to returne to our purpose, I
would that the proude sinner which beareth
himself in hand that he maketh himself rightuouse
before God by doing some works
which are allowable to y• world, wold consider
that al y• works which procede out of an
vncleane and soule hart, are also vncleane &
filthie, and cōsequently cannot be acceptable
vnto God, nor haue any power to make the
partie rightuouse. Therfore we must first of
all clenze y• 
               
                  •
               art, if we mind that our works
should please God. The clenzing of the harte
procedeth of faith, as the holy gost affirmeth
by the mouth of S. Peter? Then must we not
say that the vnrightuouse person and the sinner
becommeth rightuouse,Acts. 1
                     •
                  . good, and acceptable
vnto god by his owne workes: but we
muste of necessitie conclude, that fayth clenzeth
our hartes, and maketh vs good, ryghtuouse
and acceptable before GOD, and
furthermore cawseth our workes to please
hym, notwithstāding that they be altogither

vnprofitable and vnperfit. For inasmuch as
we be become y• childrē of god through faith:
he considereth our workes, not as a seuere
and rigorouse iudge, but as a most merciful
Father, hauing pitie of our fraylenes, & regarding
vs as y• mēbers of his eldest sonne,
whose perfection & rightuousenes doth supply
all our vnclennes & imperfection, which
are not laied to our charge forsomuch as thei
be couered vnder the pur
                  •
               nes and innocēcie
of Iesus Christ, and come not to iudgement
before God. And hereuppon it commeth to
passe,How the workes of y• faithfull, though thei be vnperfect, please GOD. that all our workes which procede of
trew faith, (notwithstanding that they be
wholly sinfull and corrupt of themselues,)
shall neuertheles be praysed & allowed by
Iesus Christ in the generall iudgement, bicause
they be the fruites and testimonies of
our fayth wherby we be saued. For insomuch as
we haue loued y• brethren of Iesus
Christ, we shal shewe euidently, y• we haue
also bin faithful, and brethrē of Christ, and
therefore by fayth we shalbe put in full possession
of the euerlasting kingdome, which
our souerein Lord god hath prepared for vs
before the creating of the world:Math. 2
                     •
                  
                not for our
merits sakes, but through his mercie, wherby
he hath chozen vs, & called vs to the grace

of his gospel, and made vs ryghtuouse, to the
intent to glorifie vs euerlastingly with his
only begottē sonne Iesus Christ, who is the
holines and rightuousenes of vs, but not of
them which wyll not confesse that faith is
sufficiēt of it selfe to make a man rightuouse
and acceptable to y• Lord God, who through
his fatherly goodnes and louingkindnes offereth
& giueth vs Iesus Christ with his rightuousenes,
without any desert of our owne
workes. What thing can worke or cause a
man to deserne so great a gift & treasure as
Iesus Christ is? This treasure is giuen only
through the grace, fauour,In wha
                     •
                   maner faith iustify
                     •
                  th. & mercifulnes
of god: and only faith is the thing that receiueth
such a gift, as to make vs inioy the forgiuenes
of our sinnes. And therfore when
S. Paule & other doctors say, that on
                  •
               ly 
                  •
               ayth
maketh men ryghtuouse, without workes:
they mene that it maketh vs to inioy the generall
forgiuenes of our sinnes, & to
                  •
                receiue
Iesus Christe,Ephe. 3. who (as saieth sainct Paule)
dwelleth in our hartes by fayth, & ouercomming
and pacifying the trubbles of our consci
                  •
               
               ̄ces,
satisfieth gods iustice for our sinnes.
Furthermor it appeaseth gods wrath iustlimoued
ageinst vs, quencheth the fyre of hell
wherin? our natural corruption did throw

vs headlong, & chéerfully destroieth & ouerthroweth
y• Diuel, togither wt al his power
and tiranny: Which thinges, all the works
that all the men in y• world can lay togither,
are not able to deserue nor to bring to passe.
That glory and that prerogatiue is reserued
alonly to the sonne of God, that is to wit to
the blissed Iesus Christ, who hath power aboue
all the powers that are in Heauen, in
Earth, and in Hell, and giueth himself & his
merits, to al such as distrusting in thēselues
do set their whole hope of being saued, in him
and in his merits. And therefore let no mā
begwyle himselfe when hée hereth it sayd,
that only faith iustifieth without works: and
think as fal
                  •
               e christians doe, (who drawe al
thinges to liue fleshly) that the trew faith cō
               sisteth
in beleuing the bare storie of Iesus
Christ, after the same maner as men beleue
y• storie of Caesar or of Alexander. Such maner
of beléef is but an historicall beléef, groū
               ded
merely vppon the report of men, and vppon
their writinges, & lighly imprinted in
our conceyt by a certeint custome, & is like
to the faith of the Turkes, who for the lyke
reasons beleue y• fables of their Alcorane.
And suche a fayth is but an imagination of
man, which neuer reneweth the hart of mā
               nor

warmeth it with the loue of God, neyther
do any good works insew or any chaūge
of life which faith should bring forth. And
therfore they fal
                  ••
               y hold opinion, ageinst the
holy scripture and ageinst the holy Doctors
of the church, that only faith maketh not mē
rightuouse, but y• they must also haue works
Unto whom I answer, that this historicall
and fond beleef, and all the works that insew
thereof, are not only vnable to make a man
rightuouse:Mat. 12. but also do cast the parties headlong
to the bottom of hel, like vnto those that
haue none oile in their Lampes, y• is to say,
no liuely faith in their harts. The fayth that
maketh men rightuouse,Rom. 6. is a work of God in
vs wherby our old man is crucified, and wée
being transformed in Iesus Christ, become
new creatures, and the derebeloued childrē
of God. This heauenly fayth is it that graffeth
vs into the death and resurrection of Iesus
Christ, and consequently mortifieth our
flesh with the effectes and lustes therof. For
when we by the operation of fayth do know
our selues to be dead with Iesus Christ: we
are at a full point with our selues and with
the world, and are throughly resolued how
it is méet that they which are dead with Iesus
Christe, should mortifie their earthly
                  •
               
               
members, that is to wit the sinfull affectiōs
of their mynd, and the lustes of the flesh: and
forasmuch as we know we be raysed again
which Christ, we bend our selues to the leading
of a spirituall and holie lyfe, like vnto
that which we shall liue in heauen, after the
last resurrection. This holie faith making
vs to inoy the generall pardon that is published
by the gospel, bringeth vs into the kingdome
of our good god, and pacifyeth our consciences,
mainteyning vs in continewal ioy
and holie and spiritual swéetnes. This selfe
same faith knitteth vs vnto god, and maketh
him to dwell in our harts, and clotheth our
sowle with himself, so as thenseforth the holie
Ghost moueth vs to doo the same thinges
wherunto he moued Iesus Christ whyle he
was in this world & was conuersant among
men: that is to wit, vnto lowlines, mekenes,
obedientnes vnto God, louingnes, and
other perfections, wherthrough we recouer
the image of god. For this selfesame causes
Iesus Christ did rightly attribute blissednes
vnto this inspyred fayth: which blissednes
cannot be without good works & holines
of lyfe. And how can it be that a christian
shold not become holie, seing y• Iesus Christ
is become his holines through fayth? Therfore

by fayth we be iustified and saued,Sainct Paule calleth them Sainctes whom we call Christians. and
therfore S. Paule doth in a maner alwaies
call those Saincts, whom we call now christians:
who, if they haue not Christes spirit,
are none of Christes, and consequently no
christians at all. But if they haue the spirit
of Iesus Christ to rule and gouerne them:
we must not dowt,He that beleueth cannot be with out good workes. but that although they
know well y• they be made rightuouse thorough
fayth onely: yit for all that they will
become neuer the more slouthfull to do good
workes. For Christes spirit is the spirit of
loue: and loue cannot be ydle, nor cease from
the dooing of good workes. But if we will
say the truth, a man can do no good workes,
except he first know himselfe to be become
ryghtuouse by fayth: for before he knoweth
that, his doing of good workes is rather to
make himselfe ryghtuouse than for the loue
and glorie of God: and so he defyleth al his
works with selfeloue for the loue of himself
& for his own profite. But he that knoweth
himselfe to bée become ryghtuouse by the
merites & rightuousenesse of Christ, (which
he maketh his owne by fayth) laboreth happily,
and doeth good works alonly for ye loue
and glorie of Christ, and not for loue of himselfe,
nor to make himselfe rightuouse. And

theruppon it commeth, that y• true christian,
(that is to wit, he that accounteth himself
rightuouse by reason of Christes rightuousenesse)
asketh not whither good works be cō
               maunded
or not: but being wholly moued &
prouoked with a certeine violence of Godly
loue, he offereth himselfe willingly to do all
the workes that are holy and christianlyke,
and neuer ceaseth to do well. He therefore
which féeleth not the meruelous 
                  〈◊〉
                by
his fayth which we haue heretofore 
                  •
               eclared
that the inspired faith worketh in the hart of
the christian. Let him assure himself, that he
hath not the christian faith, and let him pray
earnestly vnto God to giue it hym, saying:
Lord,Mark
                     •
                   9. help myne vnbeléef. And whē he herereth
it said y• only faith maketh men rightuonse:
let him not deceiue himself & say, what
nede I to wery my self in doing good works,
faith is inough to send me to Paradyse? to such
a one I answere, y• only fayth sendeth vs to
Paradise: but yit let him take good hede for y•
diuels do also beleue & tr
                  •
               ble, as saieth sainct
Iames.
               Iames. 2. O miserable man wilte thou go with
them to Paradise? By this false conclusion
t
                  •
               ou maiest know, (my brother,) in what
an errour thou art, for thou wéenest to haue
the fayth that maketh men rightuouse, and

thou haste it not.Apoc. 3. Thou sayest thou art ryche
and hast no nede of any thing:: and thou séest
not how thou art pore, wretched, blynd, and
naked. I counsell thée to bwy gold of GOD,
that is throughly fired with fyre, (that is to
say, trew faith set on fyre with good works,)
to the intent thou mayest become riche: and
to clothe thy self with white ramēt, (that is
to wit with Christes innocencie,) to the end
that the shame of thy nakednesse, (which is
the greate filthinesse of thy sinnes) be not
séene to the whole world. Then is the iustifying
fayth as it were a flame of fyre, which
cannot but cast forth brightnes.A liuely cōparison And lyke as
the flame burneth the wood without the help
of the light, and yit the flame cannot be with
out the light: so is it assuredly trew, y• fayth
alone consumeth & burneth away sinne with
out the helpe of works, and yit that the same
fayth cannot be without good works. Wherfore,
like as if we sée a flame of fyre that giueth
no light, we knowe biandby y• it is but
vayne and painted: euen so when we sée not
some light of good works in a man,Wh
                     •
                  t S. Iames ment concerning workes. it is a tokē
y• he hath not y• true inspired fayth, which
god giueth to his chozen, to iustifie and glorifie
them withall. And hold it for certeyne,
that Saincte Iames ment so when hée sayd,Iames. 2.
               
shewe me thy fayth by thy works, and I wil
shewe thée my fayth by my workes. For his
mening was, y• he which is plundged in ambitionsenes,
and worldly pleasures, beleueth
not, though he say he beleue) forasmuch as
he sheweth not in himself the effects of faith.
                  
                     •
                   heauenly 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
Also we may likē this holy faith to the godhead
which is in Iesus Christ: who being very
man (but withoute sin) dyd wonderfull
thinges, healing the sicke, giuing sight to the
blind, walking vppon the water, and raising
vp the dead, vnto lifte agein: & yit theis maruelouse
workes were not the cause that hée
was GOD. For before he did anie of those
things, he was God and the lawfull and onlibegotten
sonne of God, and he neded not to
work those miracles to make himself god bi
them, but forasmuch as he was god, therfore
he did thē. And so, the miracles that Christ
wrought made him not to be god, but shewed
openly that he was God. In likewise, trewe
faith is as it were a godhead in the sowle of
a christian, which doeth wonderouse works
and is neuer weary of well doing: and yit
those works are not y• cause y• a christiā is a
christian, (y• is to wit, that he is rightuouse
good, holy, and acceptable vnto God, neither
néedeth he to worke all those good workes to

become such a one. But forasmuch as he is a
Christian by fayth, like as Iesus Christ being
a man was also God by his Godhead: he
doeth all those good workes, which make not
the christian to be rightuouse and good, but
shewe him to be good rightuouse & holie. So
then, like as Christes Godhead was y• cause
that he wrought miracls: euen so faith working
through loue, is y• cause of y• good works
that a chzisten mā doeth. And like as a man
may say of Iesus Christ, y• he hath done this
miracle or that, and that those miracles, besides
y• they glorified God, were also a great
honor vnto Iesus Christ as he was mā, who
for his obedience euen vnto death, was recompenced
at gods hand in his resurrection,
and had gyuen vnto him all power but in
heauen and earth, which he had not afore as
in respect of his manhod, but deserued it by
the vnion which is betwixt the word of God
and the manhod of Christ: So doth faith in a
christian, which faith by reason of the vnion
that it hath with y• soule, attributeth y• thing
to the one which is proper to y• other: whervppon
it commeth, that y• holy scripture promiseth
the christian euerlasting life for hys
good works bicause good works are y• frutes
and testimonies of liuely fayth, & procede of

it as light procedeth from a flame of fyre, according
as I haue sayd heretofore. And by
this holy faith which imbraseth Iesus christ
it commeth to passe that our sowle is ioyned
with Christ and is so vnited and knit to
him, that whatsoeuer Christ hath merited &
deserued, the same is imputed vnto the soule
as though it had merited & deserued it. And
therfore S. Austin sayth that God crowneth
his owne giftes in vs.Iohn. 17. Of thys vnion of the
soule with Iesus Christ, Christ himself beareth
good record wher he prayeth to his Father
for his Apostles, and for suche as should
beleue in him by their preaching. I pray not
(sayeth he) for thē only: but also for all those
that shall beleue in me through their word,
to the end they may be al one thing, that like
as thou my Father arte in me & I in thée, so
they also may be one in vs, & that the world
may beleue that thou hast sent mée, and that
I haue giuen thē the glorie which thou haste
giuen mée, so as they should be one selfsame
thing like as thou and I are one. Wherby it
appereth euidently, that if we beleue y• word
of the Apostles,Rom. 4. (who preached that Iesus
Christ died for our sinnes and rose agein for
our iustification) we become all one thyng
with him: and forasmuch as he is all one

with Go
                  •
               . we also become all one with God
by the meane of Iesus Christ.2. Cor. 6. O wonderfull
glorie of the christian, to whom it is graunted
through fayth, to possesse the vnspeakable
benefites which the Angels long to beholde.
By this present discourse a man may playnly
perceiue the difference, that is betwixt vs
and them that defend y• iustification by fayth
and work
                  •
               s togither Herein we agrée with
them, that we stablish works, affirming that
the fayth which iustifieth cannot be without
good works, and that those which are become
rightuouse are they that doo the good workes
that may rightly be called good workes.1. Peter. 2 But
we differ from thē in this, that we say, that
faith maketh men rightuouse withoute the
helpe of workes. And the reason is redy:
namely bycawse that by fayth wée putte on
Christ,Gala. 3. and make hys holyness and rightuousenesse
to bée ours. And seyng the cace so
standeth, that Christes rightuousenesse is
gyuen vs by faith: Wée cannot be so thanklesse,
blynde, and vnhappye as not to beleue
that he is of suffycient abilitie, to make vs
(acceptable and ryghtuouse before GOD.
Lette vs saye with the Apostle,Hebr. 9. if the blud of
Oxen and Gotes and the asshes of a Cow
sprincled, clenzeth the vncleane, as touching

y• clenzing of y• flesh: how much more shal the
blud of Iesus Christ who by the euerlasting
spirit offered himselfe vndefiled vnto God,
clenze our consciences from dead workes to
serue the liuing God? I prey thée now, thou
good & deuout christian, consider well which
of theis two opinions is the trewest, holyest,
and worthiest to be preached: Ours, which
aduaunceth the benefyte of Iesus Christ, &
pulleth down the pride of man which would
exalt his owne works ageinst Christes glorie:
or the other which by affirming that
fayth of it self iusti
                  •
               ieth not, defaceth the glorie
and benefyte of Iesus Christ and puffeth
vp the pryde of man, who cannot abyde to be
iustified fréely by our Lorde Iesus Christ,
without some merit of his owne. But (saye
they) it is a gret quickning vp to good works,
to say that a mā maketh himself rightuouse
before good by means of them. I answer, that
we also confesse that good workes are acceptable
to god, & that he of his mere grace and
frée liberalitie recompenseth them in Paradise.
But we say moreouer, that no workes
are good, sauing those y• as (S. Austin saieth)
are done by thē that are become rightuouse
through fayth, bicause that if the trée be not
good, it cannot yeld good frute. And furthermore

we saye that such as are become ryghtuouse
through faythe, forasmuch as they
knowe themselues to be ryghtuouse through
Gods rightuousnesse purchased by Christe:
make no bargayning with GOD for their
workes, as though they would bwy their
maner of iustification suche as it is, with
them: but being inflamed with the loue 
                  〈◊〉
               
GOD, and desirouse to glorifie Iesus christ
who hath made them rightuouse by giuing
them his merites and riches, they bestow 
                  〈◊〉
               
their whole study and labor to doe gods wil,
fighting manfully against the loue of thēselues,
and against the world and the Diuell.
And when they fall throughe frayltie of the
flesh, thei recouer themselues by and by, and
are so much the more desirous to doe good, &
so much the more in loue with their God,
considering that he layeth not their sinn
                  ••
                to
their charge, bicause they be ingraffed 
                  〈◊〉
               
Iesus Christe, who hath made full 
                  〈◊〉
               
for all his members vppon the tree of his
crosse, and maketh continuall interce
                  •••
                for
them to the eternal Father, who for the loue
of his onely begotten sonne, beholdeth them
alwayes with a gentle countenance, gouerning
and defending them as his most deare
children, and in the end giuing them the h
                  •
               
               ritage

of the world, making them like fashioned
to the glorious Image of Christ. These
louing motions are the spurs that prick forward
y• true christiās to do good works: who
considering y• they are become the childrē of
god through faith, & made partakers of his diuine
nature, are sturred vp by the holy ghost
dwelling in thē, to liue as it becōmeth y• children
of so great a lord, and are greatly ashamed
y• they maintein not the beauty of their
heauēli noblesse: & therfore they imploy their
whole indeuer to the folowing of their firstborn
brother Iesus christ, liuing in gret low
lines & méeknesse, in al things séeking y• glory
of God, giuing their liues for their brethren,
dooing good to their enemies, glorying
in y• sufferance of reproches,Gala. 6. & in the crosse of
our Lord Iesus christ,Luke. 2. & saying wt 
               Zacharie:
We be deliuered out of the hand of our enimies,
to serue god without feare, in holines
and rightuousenesse all the dayes of our life.
They say with Sainct Paule: The grace of
the Lord is appeared to abolishe all wickednesse
and all worldly desires in vs,Tit. 2. to the
end we should liue a sobre, holy and honest
lyfe in this world, wayting for the blissed
hope, and for the gloriouse appearing of the
great God and Sauiour. There & such other

like thoughtes, desires and affections are
wrought by inspired fayth in the soules of
them that are become right
                  ••
               use. And as for
him that either wholly or partly féeleth not
these godly affections and operations in his
hart, but is gyuen ouer to the fleshe and the
world: let him assure himselfe that hée hath
not yit the iustifying faith, nor is the member
of Christ, bicause hée hath not Christes
spirit,Rom. 8. and consequently is none of his, and
he that is none of Christs, is no christian.
Then let mans wisdome cease henceforth to
fight agaynst the rightuousenesse of the most
holy faith, and let vs giue all the glorie of
our iustification, to the merits of IESUS
Christ,Gala. 3. with whom we bée clothed thorough
faith.
         
         
            The fyfth Chapter.
            In what wyse the Christian is clothed
with Iesus Christ.
            ALthough that by the things aforesayd, a
man may easely and plainly inough perceiue,
howe a Christian maye cloth himselfe
with Iesus Christe: yit neuerthelesse,
I mynde to speake a little of it, assuring myselfe,
that vntoo the good and faythefull

Christian, it can séeme nether grenouse nor
troublesome to speake thereof, although the
thing were repeted a thousand times. Therfore
I say that the Christian knoweth that
Iesus Christ togither with al his righteousnesse,
holinesse and innocencie, is his owne
through faith. And like as when a man purposeth
to present himselfe before some great
Lord or Prince, he laboreth to aray himself
in some fayre and costly apparell: euen so,
when the christian is decked and arayed wt
the innocencie of Christ, & with all his perfection,
he presenteth himself boldely before
God the Lord of all, assuring him selfe, that
through christes merits, he is in as good cace
as if he had purchaced all that which Iesus
Christ hath purchaced and deserued. And
truely, faith maketh euery of vs to possesse
Christ and all that is his, as we possesse our
own garment. And therefore to be clothed
with Iesus christ, is nothing else but to beleue
for a certaintie, that Christe is wholly
ours: and so is he in very déed, if we beleue
so, and hold our selues assured, that by the
same heauenly garmēt we be receiued into
fauor before god. For it is most certain that
he as a most déere father hath giuen vs his
sonne: meaning that al his rightuousnes, &

all that euer he is, can, or hath done, shold be
in our power & inrisdictiō, in such wise as it
should be lawful for vs to make our boast of
thē, as if we had done, purchaced & des
                  •
               rued
them by our own strength. And whosoeuer
beleueth this, shal find that his beléef is good
and tru, as we haue shewed heretofore. Thē
must the christian haue a stedfast faith & beleef
that all the goods, all the graces, & all the
riches of Iesus christ, are his: for sith y• God
hath giuen vs Iesus christ himself, how shold
it be possible that he hath not giuen vs all
things wt him?Rom. 8. Now if this be true, as tru it
is in déed: the christiā may rightly say, I am
y• child of god, & Iesus christ is my brother.
I am Lord of heauē & earth, & of hell and of
death, & of the law, in so much as the law cā
               not
accuse me nor lay any curse vpō me, bicause
the righteousnes of god is becom myn.
And this faith is it alone y• maketh a man to
be called a christian, & which clotheth him wt
Iesus christ as we haue said afore. And boldly
may this be called a great mistery, whervnder
are cōteined maruelous things, and
things not herd of cōcerning the great God,
which cannot enter into mans hart, except
god do first softē it with his holy grace, as he
hath promised to do by his holy prophet saying,

I will giue you a new hart, and I will
put a new mynde into you, and I wyll take
away the stony hart out of your bodie, and
I will giue you a hart of fleshe. Now then,
he that beleueth not after the sayde maner,
that Iesus Christe with all the goods that he
possesseth, is his: cannot call himself a trew
christian, nor euer haue a quiet and ioyfull
conscience, nor a good and feruent corage to
doo good: but shall easly faint in doing of good
works, yea and moreouer he shall neuer be
able to do works that are truly good. This
only beléef and trust that we haue in the merits
of Iesus Christ, maketh men trew christians,
stowt, cherful, merrie, louers of God,
readie to doo good workes, possessers of gods
kingdome and of god himselfe, and his right
derebeloued children, in whome the holie
Ghoste dooth truly dwell. What hart is so
cowardly, cold, and vyle, which considering
the inestimable greatnes of the gift that god
hath bestowed vppon him in giuing him hisIesus Christ y• trew exā
                  ple of chri
                  
                     •••
                  ans.
owne so welbeloued sonne with all his perfectnes:
is not inflamed with an exceding
carnest desyre, to become like vnto him in
good workes? specially seing that the Father
hath giuen him vnto vs for an example
whereon we must continewally looke, framing

our lyfe after such a sort, as it maye
be a trew counterpaine of the lyfe of Iesus
Christe,1. Peter. 2 forasmuch as Christe (as sayeth
Sainct Peter) hathe fuffered for vs, leauing
vs an insample, to the ende that we
shoulde folowe his footesteppes. Out of this
consideracion iss
                  •
               weth another kind of clothing
of a manes selfe with Christ, which
we may terme An example clothinge, for so
much as the christian must frame his whole
lyfe after the example of Christ, fashyoning
himself like vnto him in all his dedes words
and thowghtes, leauing his former wicked
lyfe, and decking himself with the new lyfe,
that is to wit with the lyfe of Christe.Ephe. 4. By
reason wherof sainct Paule sayeth:Rom. 15. Let vs
cast away the works of darknesse, and put
on the a
                  •
               mour of lyght, not in feasting, nor
in drunkennesse, nor in chambering and
wantonnesse, nor in stryfe: but put vpon
you the Lorde Iesus Christ, and make no
preparation for the flesh, nor for the lustes
therof. Héeruppon the trew Christian being
in loue with Iesus Christ, sayeth in himself.
Sith that Iesus Christe, not hauing anye
néede of me, hathe redemed me with his
own blud, and is become poore to inrich me:
I wil likewise giue my g
                  ••
               ds y
                  ••
                & my very

lyfe for the loue & welfare of my neighbour.
And like as I am clothed with Iesus christ
for the loue he hath borne to me: so will I
haue my neighbor in Christ to cloth himself
with me & with my goods likewise, for the
loue that I beare him for christes sake. He y•
doth not so, is no true christian, for he cānot
say that he loueth Iesus christ, if he loue not
the mēbers & brothers of him: and if we loue
not our neighbour for whose sake christ hath
shed his blud, we cannot truely say that we
loue Iesus christ: who being equall wt God,
was obedient to his father, euen to y• death
of the crosse,Phil. 2. & hath loued & redéemed vs, giuing
himselfe vnto vs, with all that euer he
hath. After the same maner, we being rich &
hauing abundance of good things at Christes
hand, must also be obedient vnto god, to offer
& giue our works & al that we haue, yea and
euen our selues to our neighbours and brethren
in Iesus Christ, seruing them & helping
them at their néed, and being to thē as
another Christ. And like as Iesus Christ
was lowly and gentle, and far from all debate
and stryfe:Math. 1
                     •
                  . so must wée set our whole
mynde vpon lowelinesse & méeknesse, eschewing
all stryfe and impatiēce, as wel which
consist in words and reasoning, as in déeds.

And as in Iesus Christe hath indured al the
persecutions and spytes of the world for the
glorie of God: so must wée with all patientnesse
chéerfully beare the persecutions and
reproches that are doone by false christians2. Tim. 2
too all suche as will liue faythfully in Iesus
Christe: who gaue his life for his enemyes,
and prayed for them vppon the crosse: and so
must we also pray always for our enemies,
and willingly spend our lyfe for their welfare.
And this is too folowe Christs steppes,
according as sainct Peter sayeth. For when
we knowe Iesus Christ with all his riches
to be our owne good, (which thing, is to bée
clothed with Christ, and to become pure and
cleane without spot): there remayneth nothing
more for vs to do, but to glorifye God
by folowing the lyfe of Iesus Christe, and to
do to our brethren as Christe hathe doone to
vs: and specially for somuch as we bée warranted
by his word, that whatsoeuer we do
to his brethren and ours, he accepteth it as
a benefyte done to himself. And dowtlesse seing
that the trewe christians are the members
of Christ: we cannot do eyther good or
euill too the trew Christians, but wée d
                  ••
                it
likewyse vnto Christ, in so much that he reioyceth
or suffereth in his members. Th
                  •
               reTherefore

like as Iesus Christ is our clothing
by faith: so also must we through loue
become the clothing of our brethren, & haue
as good care of them as of our owne bodies:
for they be members of our bodie, whereof
Christe is the heade. And this is the godly
loue and charitie which springeth and procéedeth
of the true vnfeyned faith, which god
hath breathed into his electe: which faith (as
sayeth Saint Paule) worketh by loue. Howbeit,Rom. 12.
for asmuch as the lyfe of our Lorde Iesus
Christ, wherewithall wée must bée clothed,1. Tim 1
was a continuall crosse, full of troubles,Gala. 5
reproches, and persecutions: if wee
will fashion our selues like vnto his life, we
must continually beare the crosse, as hée him
selfe sayeth:Luke. 9. If any man will come after
mée, let him forsake him selfe and take vp
his crosse and followe mée. But the chief
cause of this crosse is, for that our GOD
purposeth to mortifie the affections of our
minde and the luftes of our fleshe by that exercise:
to the end wée may conceyue in our
selues the great perfection wherein wée bée
comprised by our Lord IESUS Christ,
by being graffed into him. Also his will is,Iohn. 15.
that our fayth béeing fyned like golde in the
fornace of troubles,Phil. 3. should shine bright to

his glorie. Moreouer, his intent is, that we
by our infirmities should set out his great
power, which the worlde in dispite of it, beholdeth
in vs, in asmuch as our frayeltie becommeth
strong by troubles and persecutions,
and the more that it is beaten downe
and oppressed, so much the more is it strong
and stedfast. Whereof the Apostle Sainct
Paule sayeth,2. Cor. 12 we carrie this treasure in earthen
vesselles,2. Cor. 4. that the excellencie of the power
might bée Gods and not ours. On all
sides wée suffer tribulation, but we are not
ouercomme: wée be poore, but not ouercomme
of pouertie: wée suffer persecution,
but yit are we not forsaken: we be dispised,
but yit we perish not: and so we dayly beare
about vs the dying of our Lord Iesus Christ
in our bodie, that the life of Iesus Christe
may also be openly shewed in vs. And séeing
the case is so, that our Lord Iesus christ
and all his deare Disciples glorified God by
tribulations: let vs also imbrace them ioyefully,
and saye with the Apostle Saincte
Paule,
               Gala. 6. GOD forbid that I should glory saue
in the crosse of our Lord Iesus Christ: and
let vs so deale, as the world may (whither it
will or no) perceiue & see wt his eies, ye wōderful
effects yt god worketh in such as sincerely

imbrace the grace of his gospell. Let vs so
deale I say, as the worldlings may sée with
how great quietnes of mynd the trew christians
indure the losse of their goods, y• death
of their children, flaunders, the diseases of y•
bodie, & the persecutions of false christians:
and also that they may sée how the only true
christians do worship God in spirit & truth,
taking in good worth at his hand whatsoeuer
happeneth, & holding al that he doth to be
good rightfull & holie, praising him alwaies
for the same, whither it be in prosperitie or
aduersitie, thāking him as a most graciouse
and louing father, and acknowledging it for
a right great gift of gods goodnes, to suffer any
aduersitie,Rom. 5. and che
                  ••
               y for the gospell & for
folowing the steps of Christ: specially forasmuch
as we know,After what sort patience ingendereth triall that tribulation ingendreth
patience, and patience triall, and trial
hope, and hope maketh vs not ashamed. I say
that patience ingendreth triall, bicause that
wheras God hath promised help in truble to
such as trust in him, we find it by experiēce,
in that we continew strong and stedfast all
the while, and are vpholden by the hand of
God, which thing we could not doo with all
the powers that we haue of our owne. So
then by patience we fynd that our Lord gyueth

vs the help that he hath promised vs at
our néede, whereby our hope is confirmed.
And it were an ouergreat vnthankfulnesse
not to trust to such an ayd and fauour for the
tyme to come, as we haue found by experience
to be so certein and stedfast heretofore.
But what néede we so manie wordes? It
ought to suffyze vs to knowe,Rom. 
                     •
                  . that the trew
christians are through tribulation clothed
with the image of our lord Iesus christ crucifyed:
which if we beare willingly & with
a good hart, we shall in the ende be clothed
with the image of Iesus Christ glorifyed.2. Cor. 2.
For as the passions of Iesus Christe doe abound:
so through him shal the consolations
ouerabound: & if we suffer with him here
bylowe for a tyme, we shal also reigne with
him there aboue for euer.
         
         
            The sixt Chapter.
            ¶Certein remedies against distrust.
            BUt forasmuch as the diuell & mans wisedome
labour continually to dispossesse vs
of this most holy fayth, wherthrough we beleue
that all our sinnes are chastized & punished
in Iesus christ, & that 
                  〈…〉
               
               
preciouse bludshed we be reconcyled to the
maiestie of god: it is verie néedful for a christiā
to haue his weapons alwaies in a redines,
to defend himself from y• sayd most mischeuouse
temptation,Mark. 9. which séeketh to beréeue
the sowle of hir lyfe. Among the sayd
weapons (in my iudgment) y• mightiest and
best are,Foure remedies against the tēptaciōs of distrust Prayer the often vse of the holie
Communion, the rememberinge of holie
Baptim, and the minding of predestination.
In our Prayer,Prayer. wée may well say with the
father of the poore Lunatik person of whom
mencion is made in the Gospell of Saynct
Mark: Lord Iesus,Math. 9. help myne vnbeléef. Or
else we may say with the Apostles, Lorde
increace our fayth. And if there reigne in vs
a continewall desyre to grow in fayth,1. Thes. 5 hope,
and Loue: we will continewally pray, as
sainct Paule instructeth vs.Tru prayer. For Prayer is
nothing else but a feruent mynd settled vpō
God. By the remembering of Baptim, we
shall assure our selues that we are at peace
with God.Baptisme. And forsomuch as 
                  •
               . Peter sayeth
that y• Ark of Noe was a figure of Baptim:
therefore,1. Pet. 3. like as Noe was saued from the
flud by the Arke, bycause hée beléeued the
promises of GOD: so also are we by fayth
saued in baptym from Gods wrath. Which

faith is greunded vppon the woord of our
Lord Iesus Christ, who saieth that he which
beléeueth and is baptized,Mark. 16 shalbe saued. And
good right it is: for in baptisme wée put on
Iesus Christ as the Apostle Sainct Paule affirmeth,Gala. 3.
and consequently we bée made partakers
of his rightuousenesse, and of all hys
goods: and vnder this preciouse robe, the
sinnes that our frayelty committeth, lye hieden
and couered, and are not imputed vnto
vs. And so, according as Saint Paule sayeth,Rom. 4.
the blissednesse which the Psalmist speaketh
of, apperteineth to vs: namely,Psal. 36. Blissed are
they whose misdooinges are forgiuen, and
whose sinnes are couered. Blissed is the mā
to whom the Lord imputeth not sinne. But
it standeth a christian in hande, to take good
héede, that vpon these wordes he take not libertie
to sinne: for this doctrine belongeth
to none such as honor them selues with the
name of Christians confessing Christe with
their mouth, and yit denie him in their
déedes. But it concerneth the true Christians,
who though they fight manfully agaynst
the fleshe, the worlde, and the diuill:
doe notwithstanding fall darly, and are constreyned
to say, Lord forgiue vs our offēces.

Theis are they to whom we speake to comfort
them and to hold them vp, that they fall
not into despayre as though the blud of christ
washed vs not from all sin, and that he were
not our aduocate, and the attonementmaker
for his members. And therfore when we be
prouoked to dowt of the forgiuenesse of our
sinnes, & that our own conscience beginneth
to trubble vs:The supper of the Lord. Then must we furnish our
selues with trew fayth, and out of hand haue
recourse to y• preciowse blud of Iesus Christ
shed for vs vppon the alter of the Crosse, and
distributed to his Apostles at his last supper,
vnder the veyle of a most holie Sacrament,
which was ordeyned by Christ to the end y•
we should celebrate the remembrance of his
death, & that by the same visible Sacrament
our trubbled consciences myght be assured
of our attonement with God. The blissed
Iesus christ made his last wil when he said,
This is my bodie which is giuen for yow,Luke. 22
and this is my blud of the new Testament
which is shed for manie to the forgiuenes of
their sinnes.Mark. 16 We knowe that a Testament
(sayeth Sainct Paule) although it be but a
mans Testament,Gala. 3. yet neuertheles if it be
allowed, no man despyzeth it or addeth anie
thing to it: and that no testament is of force

till the testator be dead, but hathe full poure
after the parties decease. Then did Iesus
Christ make his Testament, wherin he promisethe
forgiuenesse of sinnes, and the grace
and good fauour of himselfe and his father,
togither with mercie and euerlasting lyfe.
And to the intent that the sayd Testamente
should be of full force, he hathe confirmed it
with his owne preciowse blud and with his
owne death.Hebr. 9. By reason wherof, sainct Paule
sayeth, that Iesus Christe is the mediator of
the new Testamēt that by his dying for the
redemption of those transgressions which
were in the former testament, they that are
called might receyue the promis of the eternall
inheritance. For whersoeuer is a Testament,
there must also be the death of the
Testator, for the Testament is confirmed
by the deathe of the partie, insomuch as it is
of no valu so long as the maker of it is aliue.
Wherfore we be verye certein and assured
by the death of Iesus Christ, that his Testament
is auaylable, wherby all our misdéeds
are pardoned,Ireneus Lib. 1. and we made heyres of eternall
life. And for a token and faythful pledge
hereof, in sted of a Seale, he hathe left vs
this diuine Sacrament, which not onely giueth
our sowles assured hope of their euerlasting

Saluation, but also warrant
                  •
               th vnto
vs ye immortalitie of our flesh, forasmuch as
it is euen now quickned by that immortall
flesh of his, and in a certein maner becōmeth
parttaker of the immortalitie therof, and he
that is parttaker of that diuine flesh by faith,
shall not perish for euer.Iohn. 6. But vnto him that
receyueth it withowt the sayd fayth, it turneth
to a daungerouse poyson, becawse that
like as when bodily sustenance fyndeth the
stomacke incumbred with euill humors, it
corrupteth likewyse and woorketh greate anoyance:
euen so if this spirituall féede lyght
into a sinfull sowle that is full of malice and
misbelef, it casteth it headlong into some
greater ruine, not through it owne default,
but bycause that to the vncleane and vnbeleuer
al things are vncleane: notwithstanding
that the things be sanctified by the Lordes
blissing. For (as sayeth Sainct Paule (he that
eateth of that bread and drinketh of that cup
vnworthely,1 Cor. 11. is giltie of the bodie and blud
of the Lord,What is ment by not making a difference of the lords bodie. and he eateth and drinketh his
owne damnation, bycause he maketh no difference
of the Lordes bodie. For he maketh
no difference of the Lords bodie, which presumeth
to the Lords supper without fayth
& charitie. And forasmuch as he beleueth not

that bodie to be his lyfe and the clenzer of al
his sinnes:He y• receiueth this Sacrament protesteth himself to trust in none other thing than the blud of Christ. he maketh Iesus Christe a lyer,
and treadeth the sonne of God vnder foote,
& estemeth the blud of the Testament wherby
he was fāctified but as a comon or worldly
thing, & doeth greate wrong to the spirit
of grace, and he shalbe punished verye sore
at Gods hand for this his vnbéelef and wicked
hipocrisie. For wheras he reposeth not
y• trust of his iustificatiō in the passiō of our
lord & sauiour Iesus christ: yit neuerthelesse
he receyueth this moste holie Sacrament, &
maketh protestation that he putteth not his
trust in anie other thing. Wherby he accuseth
himself, and is a witnesse of his owne
iniquitie, and condemneth himself to euerlasting
death, by refuzing the lyfe which god
promiseth him in that holie Sacramēt.Uery cō
                  fortable counsel. And
in this poynt, when the Christian féeleth
that his enemies are lyke to ouercome him:
ye is to wit, when he beginneth to dout whether
he haue receiued forgiuenes of his sinns
by Iesus Christ: & that he shal not be able to
withstand the diuel and his tēptatiōs: & that
the accusation of his owne dowtfull conscience
comes to presse him, so as he beginneth
to feare least helfyre shold swallow him vp,

and death hold him in his euerlasting bands
by reason of Gods wrath: I saye, when the
good christian féeleth himself in such agonie:
Let him get him to this holie Sacrament wt
a good hart and stowt courage, and receiue it
deuoutly, saying in his hart and answering
his enemies thus: I cōfesse I haue deserued
a thousand hells, & euerlasting death by reason
of the great sinnes which I haue committed.
But this heauenly sacrament which
I receyue at this present, assureth me of the
forguiuenes of all my misdoings, & of myne
attonement with God. For if I haue an eye
to my works: ther is no dowt but I acknowledge
my self a sinner, and condemne myne
owne selfe in suche wise, as my conscience
should neuer be quiet, if I should think that
my sinnes are pardoned me for my workes
sake. But when I looke to the promises and
couenantes of God, who promiseth me forgiuenes
of my sinnes by the blud of Iesus
Christ, I am as sure that I haue obteyned it,
and that I haue his fauour, as I am sure that
he which hath made the promises and couenants,
cannot lye nor deceiue: and through
this stedfast fayth I become ryghtuouse by
Christes rightuousenes,Rom. 4. wher through I am
saued and my conscience quieted. Hath he

not giuen his most innocent bodie into the
handes of sinners for our sinnes? Hath he
not shed his blud to wash away my iniquities?
Why thē doost thou vex thy self O my
soule? put thy trust in the Lord, who beareth
thée so great loue, that to deliuer thée from eternal
death, it hath pleased him that his only
sonne should suffer death and passion, who
hath taken vppon himselfe our pouertie, to
giue vs his riches: layd our weakenesse
vppon himself, to stablish vs in his strength:
become mortal, to make vs immortall: come
downe vnto the earth to aduaunce vs vp to
heauen: and become the sonne of man with
vs, to make vs the children of God with himself.
Who is he then that shal accuse vs? God
is he that iustifieth vs,Rom. 8. & who shall condemne
vs? Iesus Christ is dead for vs, yea & rizen
agein for vs, and he sitteth at the right hand
of God, making intercession for vs. Let vs
then O my Sowle leaue of these teares and
sighes.
            
               
                  
                     
                        ¶THE. C. III. PSALME.
                        1 MY soule, praise thou the LORD, and
all that is within me, praise his holie
Name.
                        
                           2 My soule, praise thou the Lord, and forget
not all his benefites.
                        3 Which forgiueth al thine iniquitie, and
healeth all thine infirmities.
                        4 Which redemeth thy life from ye graue,
& crowneth thée with mercie & compassion.
                        5 Which satisfieth thy mouth with good
things: & thy youth is renued like y• Egles.
                        6 The Lord executeth righteousenes and
iudgement to al that are oppressed.
                        7 He made his waies knowen vnto Moses,
& his workes vnto the children of Israel.
                        
                        8 The Lord is ful of compassion and mercie,
slow to angre and of great kindnes.
                        9 He will not alwaye chide, nether kepe
his angre for euer.
                        10 He hath not dealt with vs after our sinz,
nor rewarded vs accordīg to our iniquities.
                        11 For as high as the heauen is aboue the
earth, so great is his mercie towarde them
that feare him.
                        12 As farre as the East is from the West:
so far hath he remoued our sinnes from vs.
                        13 As a father hath cōpassiō on his childrē,
so hath y• Lord compassiō on thē y• fear him.
                        14 For he knoweth whereof we be made:
he remembreth that we are but dust.
                        15 The dayes of man are as grasse: as a

floure of the field, so florisheth he.
                        16 For the winde goeth ouer it, & it is gone,
and the place therof shal know it no more.
                        17 But y• louing kindenes of y• Lord endureth
for euer & euer vpon thē that fear him, &
his righteousenes vpon childrens children.
                        18 Unto thē that kepe his ceuenāt, & think
vpon his commandements to do them.
                        19 The Lorde hath prepared his throne in
heauen, and his kingdome ruleth ouer all.
                        20 Praise the Lord, ye his Angels, that exrel
in strength, that do his commandement
in obeying the voice of his word.
                        21 Praise the Lord, all ye his hostes, ye his
seruants that do his pleasure.
                        22 Praise the Lord, all ye his workes, in al
places of his dominion: my soule praise thou
the Lord.
                     
                  
               
            
            So hath he had mercie on vs, in giuing vs
his only sonne. With this faith, with theis
thanksgiuings, with theis or such other like
thoughts must we receiue ye sacramēt of the
bodie & blud of our Lord Iesus Christ. After
this maner is al fearfulnes driuen out of the
soule of y• christiā: & charitie is incresed, faith
strēgthened, y• conscience quieted, & the tung
neuer ceasseth to prayse God and to yéelde
him infinite thanks for so great a benefyte.

This is the vertue efficacie, and onely trust
of our sowle. This is the Rocke wher vppō
if the conscience be bwilded, it feareth nother
tempest, nor the gates of hell, nor gods
wrath, nor the Lawe, nor sinne, nor death,
nor the diuels, nor any other thing. And forasmuch
as the substance of the Lords Supper
and table consisteth in this diuine Sacrament:
When ye christian is at it, he must
hold his eyes fastened continewally vppon
the passion of our graciouse Sauiour, beholding
him on the one syde vppon the crosse loden
with all our sinnes: and GOD on the
othersyde punishing, chastizing, and whipping
his owne only begottē and derbeloued
sonne in stede of vs. O happie is that man
that shetteth his eyes from all other syghts,
and will nother héere nor sée any other thing
than Iesus Christ crucifyed, in whome are
layd vp & bestowed all the treasures of Gods
wisdome & deuine knowledge. Blessed (say
I) is he that fedeth his mind with so heauenly
a foode, & maketh himselfe drunken in the
loue of God with so swéete and singular a liquor.
But before I make an end of this matter,
I will first aduertise the christian, that
Sainct Austin hath ordinarily bin woont to
terme this holy sacrament the bond of charitie,

and the misterie of vnitie. And he saieth,
that whosoeuer receiueth ye misterie of vnitie
and regardeth not the bond of peace, receiueth
not the Sacrament to his owne behoof,
but as a witnesse ageinst himself. Therfore
we must vnderstand,Why the holy Sacramēt of thankesgiu
                     •
                  ng was ordey
                     •
                  ed. that the Lord hath
ordeyned this holy Sacrament, not only to
make vs sure of the forgiuenes of our sins:
but also to inflame vs to peace, vnitie, & brotherly
charitie. For in this Sacrament the
lord doth after such a maner make vs partakers
of his body, as he becōmeth al one thing
with vs, and we with him. By reason wher
of forasmuch as he hath but one bodie wherof
he maketh vs partakers:Christen peace and vnyo
                     •
                   are betokened by the bread and Wyne. it is méete that
we also should by such partaking become all
one body togither amōg our selues. And this
vnion is represented by the bread of the Sacramēt:
which as it is made of many grayns
mingled and kneaded togither in such wyse
as one of them cannot be discerned from another:
So also must we be ioyned togither
after such a sorte, and so vnited togither into
one agrement of mynd, as no diuision may
créepe in. And this dooth sainct Paule shewe
vs when he saieth: Is not the cup of blissing
which we blisse, the communion of the blud
of Iesus Christ? is not ye bread y• we break,

the communion of the bodie of Iesus christe?
whereas we be manie, yit are we but one
bread and one bodie, forsomuch as we be all
parttakers of one bread.
                  
                     •
                  e that offendeth one of his Christen brethren, offendeth Christ himself. By theis things we
vnderstand, that when we receiue this most
holy communion, we must consider that we
are all of vs ingreffed into Christe, and are
all becomme members of one selfesame bodie,
y• is to wit of I
                  •
               sus Christ, in such wyse
as we cannot offend, defame or d
                  •
               spyse any
of our brethren, but we must therwithall
offend, defame and despyse our sayde head
Iesus Christ: neyther can we be at variance
with any of our brethren, but in lykewise
we must be at odds with him. Also we cannot
loue him, except we loue him in our brethren.
Looke how much care we haue of our
owne bodie, so much must we haue of our
christen brethren, who are the members of
our bodie. And like as no part of our bodie
féeleth anye gréefe, which spreddeth not it
selfe into all the other parts: so ought we to
determine with our selues, that our brother
féeleth not any inconuenience, which should
not moue vs to compassion. With such maner
of thoughts must we prepare our selues
to this holie Sacrament, quickening vp our
sprites wt a feruēt loue to our neibour ward.

For what greater spurre can we haue to
prick vs to loue one another,A preparatiō to y• receyuing of y• holy Sacrament. thā to sée y• Iesus
christ, by giuing himself vnto vs, not only
allureth vs to giue our selues one to another,
but also by making himself common to
vs all, maketh vs also to be all one selfsame
thing in him? In respect wherof, wée ought
to couet and procure, that in all of vs there
may be but one mind, one harte, & one tung,
accorded and vnited togither in thoughtes,
words and déeds. And we must mark well,
that as oft as we receyue this holy and worthy
Sacrament,He that receyueth y• Sacramēt byndeth himself to al y• dewlies of charitie we bind our selues to al the
deuties of charitie: as not to offende any of
our brethren, nor to leaue anything vndon,
that may be profitable and helpfull in their
necessitie. But if there come any to this heauenly
table of the Lord, that are diuided at
variance with their brethrē, the same must
assure themselues that they eate vnworthely,
and are gilty of the bodie and bloud of the
Lorde, and that they eate and drinke their
own damnation: for that there wanted nothing
on their behalf, but that the body of Iesus
christ was rent and plucked in péeces again,
whilest they by hatred are deuided frō
their brethren, that is to wit, from the members
of Iesus Christ, and haue not any parte

with him: and yit neuertheles in receiuing
this holy communion, pretended to beléeue
that their whole saluation consisteth in the
participation and vnion with Iesus Christ.
Then let vs go my brethrē,The trew and for which the holy Sacrament is ordeined. to the receiuing
of this heauenly bread, to celebrate the remembrance
of our Lordes passion, and to
strengthen and fortifie the beléefe and assurance
of the forgiuenes of our sinnes, with
the remembrance thereof, and to quicken vp
our myndes and tungs to prayse and exalt
the infinite goodnes of our God, and finally
to cherish brotherly loue, and to witnes the
same one to another by the streyght vnion
which all of vs haue in the bodie of our lord
Iesus christ.The fourth remedie against distrust. Besydes prayer, & thé remembring
of Baptim, and the often resorting to
the most holy communion: ther is one other
verie good remedy against distrust and fearfulnes,
which is no lesse fréende to christian
charitie: namely the remembrance of our
predestination and election to eternall lyfe,
grounded vppon the word of God, which is
the sword of the holie Ghoste wherwith we
may beate backe our enemies.Ephe. 5. Reioyce yée
in this (sayeth the Lorde) that your names
are written in heauen.Luke. 10 There is no greater
ioy in this life, nor any thing that more comforteth

the christian that is afficted, tempted,
or falne into anie sinne, than the rememberance
of predestination, and the assuring
of our selues that we be of y• nomber whose
names are written in the booke of lyfe, and
which are chosen to be fashioned like vnto ye
image of Iesus Christ. O how vnspeakable
is the comfort of him that hath this fayth, &
museth cōtinually in his hart vppon this exceding
swéete predestination whereby he
knoweth that although he fall often: yit notwithstanding,
god his father who hath foreordeined
him to euerlasting life, holdeth him
vp and reacheth out his hand vnto him continually.Psal. 36.
And he sayeth continually in himselfe,
if god haue chozen me and predestinated
me to the glorie of his children, who can
hinder me? If God be with vs (sayeth sainct
Paule) who can be ageinst vs? Nay rather,Rom. 8.
to the ende that the predestination may be
accomplished in vs,He y• re
                  
                     •
                  eyueth y• Gospel is sure y• he is predestinated. 
                     •
                   he effect y• precede of y• knowleg for predestination. he hath sent his déere beloued
sonne, who is a most sure earnest penny
and pledge vnto vs, that we which haue
receyued the grace of the Gospell, are gods
Children, chozen to eternall lyfe. This
holie predestination maynteyneth the trew
Christian in a continuall spirituall ioye,
increaceth in him ye indeuer of good works,

& inflameth him wt the loue of god, & maketh
him enemie to ye world & to sinne. Who is so
fearce & hardharted, which knowing y• god of
his mercy hath made him his child frō euerlasting,
will not by and by bée inflamed to
loue GOD? Who is of so vyle and ba
                  •
               e
courage, that hée will not estéeme all the
pleasures, all the honours, and all the riches
of the world as filthy myre, whē he knowes
y• god hath made him a citizen of heauē? yea
theis are thei y• worship god rightly in spirit
& truth, receyuing all things (as wel in prosperitie
as in aduersitie) at the hand of God
their Father, and euermore praysing and
thāking him for all, as their good father, who
is rightuouse and holy in all his workes.
These being inflamed with the loue of God,
and armed with the knowledge of their predestination,
feare neither death, nor sin, nor
the Diuill, nor hell: neyther knowe they
what the wrath of god is: for they sée none
other thing in god, but loue & fatherly kindnesse
towards them. And if they fall into any
troubles, they accept them as tokens of
gods fauour,Rom. 8. trying out with S. Paule, who
is it that shall separate vs from Gods loue?
shall tribulations, shall anguish, shall persecution,
or hunger, or nakednesse, or perill, or

sword? as it is written, for thy sake are we
killed all the day long, and counted as shéepe
appointed to the slaughter. But in all these
things we get the vpper hand thorough him
that hath loued vs. Wherefore, it is not for
nought that sainct Iohn sayeth, how the true
christians know right well,1. Iohn. 3. that they must
be saued and glorified, and that by reason of
the same affiance, they make themselues holy
as Iesus Christ is holy. And when Saint
Paule exhorteth his Disciples to a good and
holy life:
                  
                     •
                  phe. 1. he is wont to put them in remembrance
of their election and predestination,
as of a thing of very great force to stirre vp
the mynds of the true Christians to the louing
of God, and to the performance of good
works. And for the same cause our good lord
Iesus christ speaketh openly of this holy predestination,
as one that knew of howe great
importance the knowledge thereof is to the
edifying of his elect. But perchaunce thou
wilt say to me, I know wel that they whose
names are written in heauen, haue cause to
liue in continuall ioy, and to glorifie GOD
but in word and deed: but I know not whither
I am of that number or no, and therefore
I liue in continuall feare: specially bycause
I knowe my selfe to bée an excéedinge

weake and frayle sinner, from the violence
wherof I am not able to defend my self, but
that I am ouercome of it daily. And furthermore
for asmuch as I se my self cōtineually
afflicted and troubled with dyuerse temptations,
methinks I do as it were behold with
myne eyes, the wrath of God squorging me.
Too answere to theis dowtes of thyne, I say
my ryght dere brother, that thou must assure
thy selfe, that al theis are but temptations of
the deuill, who by all meanes séeketh to rob
vs of that faith and confidence that springeth
of faythe and assurethe vs of Gods good will
towardes vs. He laboreth to strip our sowle
out of this preciouse garmēt: for he knoweth
that none is a trew Christian, except he beleue
Gods word which promiseth forgiuenesse
of all sinnes, & peace to all them which
accept the grace of the Gospel. Uerely I say,
that he which vppon theis promises of God,
perswadeth not himselfe assuredly, that god
is a mercifull and louing father vnto him,
nor with stedfast cōfidence loketh to receyue
the inheritance of the heauenly kyngdome
at his hand: is not faythful in dede, & maketh
himself vtterly vnworthie of gods grace. In
respect whereof sainct Paule sayeth that we
be the temple of God,Hebr. 3. so farforthe as we

firmely mainteine the confidence and glory
of our hope, vnto the ende. And in another
place he exhorteth vs that we shuld not giue
ouer our trust,Hebr. 10 which hath great rewarde of
recompence. And therfore my brethren, let
vs giue our whole indeuer to do the will of
God, as it becommeth good children, and beware
that we sinne not, as néere as we can.
And although we fall oftentimes into sinne
through our own frayeltie: yet let vs not by
and by surmise, that we be vessels of wrath,
or that wée bee vtterly forsaken of the holy
Ghoste: for wee haue our Aduocate Iesus
Christ before God the father, and he is the
attonement maker for our sinnes. Let vs
bethinke vs of the opinion of Saint Austin,
who fayeth, that none of the Saincts is rightuouse
and without sinne: and yit notwithstanding
that, he ceasseth not to be rightuous
and holy, so farforth as he retaine his holynesse
with affection.Afflictiōs at no signes of reprobation And therefore if wee
haue afflictions and tribulations: let vs not
think that God sends them bicause he is our
enemie, but bicause he is our most louing father.
The Lord (sayeth Salomon) chastiseth
him whom hee loueth, and scourgeth euery
child of his whom he receyueth. Wherfore,Pro 5.
if we haue receiued the grace of the Gospel,

whereby man is receiued of GOD for his
childe, wee muste not doubt of Gods grace
and good will towards vs.
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   trew 
                     〈◊〉
                   to know 
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  ods children by. And when wee
perceyue our selues to delight in GODS
woord, and to haue a desire to followe the
life of Iesus Christe: wee must stedfastly
beleeue, that wee bee the children of
GOD and the temple of the holy Ghost.
For those things cannot be done by the power
of mans wisedome, but are the gifts of the
holy Ghost who dwelleth in vs by faith, and
is as it were a seale of authoritie which sealeth
vp Gods promises in our hartes, the certeinty
wherof is printed aforehand in our
mindes, and is giuen vs as a pledge to stablish
and confirme the same.
                  
                     •
                  phe. 2. As soone as you
beleeue (sayth the Apostle Sainct Paule) yee
be sealed by the holy Spirit of promise,Wherefore y• Apostle calleth y• holy Gost y• s
                     •
                  irit of 
                     〈◊〉
                  . who
is the earnestpenny of our inheritance. Behold
howe he sheweth vs heereby, that the
hartes of the faithfull are marked with the
holy Ghost as it were with a seal
                  •
               : in respect
wherof he calleth the holy ghost the spirit of
promis, for so much as he confirmeth the promis
of the Gospell, the which (as I haue oftentimes
told you) is a happy tydings that
promiseth forgiuenesse of sinnes and euerlasting

life, to all suche as beleeue that all
their misdooinges are blotted out in Iesus
Christ. All we that beléeue in IESUS
Christ (sayeth Sainct Paule) are becommeGala. 3.
the children of GOD: and bicause we bée
his children, hée hathe sent the Spirit of his
Sonne into our hart, which cryeth, Father,
father. And to the Romanes, those (sayeth
he) that are guided by the spirit of GOD,Rom. 8.
are the children of God: for ye haue not receyued
again the spirit of bondage in feare:
but the Spirite of adoption, whereby wee
crie father, father. For certeinly the sam
                  •
               
spirit beareth our spirit record, that wée bée
the children of GOD. Now then, if we be
children, wée bée also heires. And we must
marke well, that in these twoo places the Apostle
Saint Paule speaketh plainly, not of
any speciall reuelation, but of a certeine recorde
which the holy Ghost doth commonly
yéelde to all such as receyue the grace of the
Gospell. Then if the holy Ghoste assure vs
that we be Gods children and heires: why
should we doubt of our predestination? The
same man sayeth in the same Epistle,Rom. 8. whom
hée hath predestinated, them hathe hee also
called: and whō he hath called, them hath he

also made rightuouse: & whom he hath made
rightuouse thē also hath he glorified. What
shal we thē say to al these things? if god be on
our side,A true mark of predestis nation. who can be against vs? And therefore
if I plainly perceiue, that God hath called
me by giuing me fayth and the fruiets of
faith, that is to wit, Peace of conscience, mortification
of the flesh, and quickening of the
spirit, whether it be in whole or in parte:
why should I doubt that I am not predestinated?
And moreouer we saye with Sainct
Paule, that all true christians (that is to wit,
all such as beléeue the Gospell) receyue not
the spirit of this world,1. Cor. 2. but the spirit that
commeth from god: by the inspiration wher
of they discerne the things that God hath giuen
them. What maruell then is it, if wée
know that god hath certeinly giuen vs euerlasting
life? But there are some which saye,
that no man ought to presume so farre, as to
boast himselfe to haue the spirit of GOD.
They speake in such wyse, as if the christiā
should glory of the hauing of it for his owne
desertes, & not by the onely & mere mercie
of God: and as though it were a presumptuousnesse
to professe him selfe a christian: or
as though a man could be a Christian without
ye hauing of Christes spirit: or as though

we could without flat hipocrisie say that Iesus
Christ is our Lord,Rom. 8. or call God our Father,
if the holy ghost moued not our hartes
& tungs to vtter so swéete wordes.1. Cor. 12 And yit
notwithstanding, euen they that count vs
presumptuouse for saying that God hath giuen
vs his holy spirit, with faith, forbid vs
not to say euery day Our Father, but rather
commaund vs. But I would haue them too
tell me, how it is possible to separate faith &
the holy gost asunder, séeing that faith is the
peculiar work of the holy ghost? If it be presumption
to beléeue that the holy ghost is in
vs,He that glorieth not y• he hath y• holy ghost, is no true Christiā. why doth sainct Paule bid the Corinthians
try them selues whither they haue faith
or no, affirming them to be reprobats if they
know not that Iesus Christ is in them? But
in very déede, it is a great blindnesse to accuse
the christians of presumptuousnesse for
taking vppon them to glorie of the presence
of the holy ghost, without which glorying,
there cannot be any Christianitie at all.
But Iesus Christe (who cannot lye) sayeth,
that his spirit is vnknowen to the worlde, &
that they only do know him,Iohn. 14. within whome
he dwelleth. Then let them begin to become
good christians, and put away their Iewish
minds, & imbrace the grace of the holy gospell

in good earnest: and then shall they
know that the good and true christians both
haue the holy Ghost, and also acknowledge
themselues to haue him. But some one may
say to mée, that the christian can not by any
means know that he is in gods fauour, without
some speciall reuelation: and so consequently
that he cannot knowe whither he be
predestinated or no.Eccle. 6. And hée may specially
alledge these woordes of Salomon, A man
knoweth not whither he be worthy of hatred
or of loue: and also these wordes of the Apostle
Sainct Paule to the Corinthians: I féele
not my selfe gilty of any thing,1. Cor. 4. and yit féele
I not my selfe iustifyed for all that.A Man may knowe y• he is in Gods fa
                  
                     •
                  or. It séemeth
to be sufficiently declared by the textes
of holy Scripture, that the saide opinion is
false: and now remaineth onely to be shewed
briefely, that these two textes whereuppon
the same opinion is chiefly grounded,
ought not to be taken in that sence. As touchinge
Salomons sentence, although it bée
scarse well and faythefully translated in the
common translation: yit is there not any
man so dul, who in reading Salomons whole
discourse, may not playnely perceyue,
by saying so he ment that if any man willBy the chaunces
take vppon him to iudge by the casualties▪
               
that happen in this lyfe,Of this life no mā cā iudge whther a mā be in Gods fauor or displeasure. who is loued or hated
of GOD: he laboreth in vayne, considering
that the selfesame chaunces which light
vppon the rightuouse, light also vppon the
vnrightuouse: vppon him that Sacri
                  ••
               zeth,
as wel as vpon him that sacrifizeth not: & as
soone vpō the good mā as vpō y• sinner. Wher
of it may be gathered, y• god doth not always
shew his loue towards those whō he indueth
 wt outward prosperities: & contrariewyse,
that he sheweth not his displeasure towards
those whom hee punisheth. Then my right
deere brethren in Christ Iesus our Lorde,
doe you thinke it reason to conclude, that a
man cannot be sure of Gods fauour, bycause
the same surenesse cannot bee perceyued by
the sundrie chaunces that happen euery day
in theis transitory & temporal things? A litle
afore, Salomō
                saith y• a man can not discerne
any difference betwene y• soule of a mā, & the
life of a beast: for it is seene that both mā &
beast die after one maner. Shal we then conclude
by this outward accident, y• the persua
               
                  •
               iō
which we haue conceiued of the immortality
of the soule is groūded but only vppon
coniecture? No surely, and it were a great
follye to stande vppon a thing so notablye
knowen. And as for Saincte Paules
               
words, I say, that for asmuch as he was sp
                  •
               aking
of the administration of the gospell, hée
ment that his hart misgiues him not of any
misdealing therin, and yit for all that, that
he is not sure he hath done his whole duetie
to the full, and therein obteyned the prayse
of rightuousenes to Godward, as if hée had
done all that pertained and was conuenient
to be done by a faithfull Steward: and therfore
in speaking of his office, like a iust and
discrete persone, he durst not iustifie himself,
nor auow that he had discharged his deutie
to the vttermost, and satisfyed his lords wil,
but 
                  •
               eferred all things to the only iudgemēt
of his Lord. And verely, who soeuer readeth
these words of the Apostle Sainct Paule, and
considereth the wordes going afore them wt
some iudgement, and likewise the woordes
that folowe: will not doubt, but this is the
true sence of them. I know well, that some
men in expounding these words of the Apostle
sainct Paule, say, that although he knewe
himself to be without sin, yit he knewe not
whether he were rightuouse to Godward or
no, accordinge as Dauid affirmeth, that no
man can perfectly knowe his owne sinnes.
But these mē perceiue not that Saint Paule
               Rom. 3. 5
groundeth not rightuousenes vppon woorks

but vpon faith, and that hée vtterly refuseth
his own rightuousenesse to imbrace only the
rightuousnes which God hath giuen vs thorough
our Lord Iesus Christ.Phil. 3. Also they consider
not, that he was most certein to bée accepted
for rightuous, in maynteining the
soundnesse and purenesse of the christē faith,
and that he knewe well howe the crowne of2. Tim. 4
that righteousnes was layd vp for him in
heauen: and also, that hee was fully assured,
that no creature in heauen,Rom. 8. earth, nor hell
was able to separate him from the loue of
God,Phil. 1. and that he longed to dye bicause hée
knew for a truth, y• after his death, he should
be with Iesus Christe. All which thinges
should be false, if he had not bin well assured
that he was rightuouse, (I meane) by faith &
not by works. Therfore, my déerbeloued brethren,
let vs cease to speake that thing of the
Apostle Sainct Paule, which he neuer once
thought of himself, but féersly fought agaynst
it continually, in answering such as measured
rightuousenes by woorks, & not by faith
in our Lord Iesus Christ. But besides these
two auctorities of Salomon and sainct Paul,
a man might alledge some other places of holy
scripture, which wheras they warne and
incorage men to feare God, séeme to be contrarie

to the assurance of this our predestination.
And if I would declare them all particularly:
I should be ouer long.The two 
                     •
                  ort
                     •
                  s of feare, child y• & 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                But I say generally,Rom. 8.
that y• feare of punishment was proper
to the old Testamēt, and childly loue to
the new Testament: according as S. Paule
witnesseth when he sayeth to the Romanes,
ye haue not receyued the spirit of bondage to
feare: but ye haue receiued y• spirit of adoptiō
wherby we 
                  •
               rye father, father. And likewise
vnto Timothie he sayeth,2. Tim. 
                     •
                  . y• god hath not giuē
vs y• spirit of fearfulnes, but rather of power
and loue: which spirit Iesus Christ hath giuen
vs according to the promis made by the
mouth of the holy Prophets, and brought to
passe that we being deliuered out of our enemyes
handes, may serue him without feare
before his holy presence, in all holinesse and
rightuousenesse all the dayes of our life. By
theis & many other places of the holy Scripture,
a man may plainly gather, that y• peynfull
and slauish fearfulnesse agreeth not with
a Christian: and this is alredie confirmed by
this, that such maner of fearfulnesse is vtterly
contrarie to the spirituall cherefulnes and
ioy which is peculiar to the christian, as the
Apostle Sainct Paule sheweth openly to the
Romanes,Rom. 14 saying that the kingdome of God

is rightuousenesse & peace & ioy in the holy
ghost: that is to say, y• euery man which entereth
into the kingdome of the grace of the
gospel, is become rightuouse through fayth:
and afterward addeth peace of conscience,Ephe. 6.
which consequently bréedeth such a spiritual
and holy rest & gladnesse,Phil. 4. in respect wherof
the same Sainct Paule doth oftentimes incorage
the christians to liue merily.1. Peter. 1 And sainct
Peter sayeth, that all they which beleeue in
Iesus Christ, do continually reioyce with an
vnspeakable and gloriouse ioy, notwithstanding
that they be afflicted with diuerse temptations.The sla
                  
                     •
                  ish feare threateneth the wicked, and the childly feare 
                     〈◊〉
                   y• chozen.
And therfore whē the holy scripture
threateneth and frayeth the christians: they
must vnderstand, that it speaketh to such as
are so licenciouse, that forsomuche as they
kepe not the thankfulnesse and honestie that
belong to GODS children, they must b
                  •
               e
handled as serua
                  •••••
               , and hild in awe vntill
they come to taste and feele how sweete and
pleasant the Lord is, and vntill such time as
fayth worke his effectes in them, & that they
haue so much childly loue, as may suffize to
keepe & maintaine thē in honestie of christē
conuersation, and in folowing the example
of our lord Iesus Christ. And whē ye selfsame
scripture exhorteth y• christiās to y• true fear:

it meaneth not that they should feare the iudgement
and wrath of god, as though it were
presently ready to condemne them: for (as
I haue said already) by the record which the
holy ghost giueth to thier spirit, they knowe
that God hath chosen them and called them,
of his owne mere mercy, and not for their
desertes. By reason whereof they doubt not
at al, but that by the selfsame goodnes & mercie,
he will mainteine thē in the happy state
wherin he hath placed them. And after suche
maner the scripture exhorteth them,The effects of childly fear. Eph 4. not too
flauish feare but to childly feare: that is too
wit, that like good children they should bée
loth to offend against the christen Religion,
or to commit any thing against the deutie &
honestie of Gods true children, and likewise
to gréeue the holy ghost that dwelleth in thē:
to the ende that knowing the corruptednesse
of our nature, we shou
                  ••
                always be héedfull
and diligent, and neuer haue any t
                  •
               ust in
our selues: for in our flesh and in our mynds
do the appetites and affections continually
dwell: which, as deadly enemies of y• soule,
lay a thousand snares and baytes for vs incessantly,
labouring to make vs proud, ambitiouse,
lecherous, and couetouse. This is
the feare whereunto the whole scripture exhorteth

the Christians that haue once fasted
howe swéet the Lord is, and which bestowe
all their indeuer in followinge Christes
footesteps, who cast not frō thē this holy fear,
bycause they labour to put off the old man.
And the good christians must neuer berée
                  ••
               
themselues quyte and cleane of this childlie
feare, which is the singular friend of christē
charitie, like as the slauish feare is suche an
enemie vnto it, as they can by no meanes
dwell togither.The christian may warrant him self y• forgiuenes of his slunes. And by the foresayd things,
a man may plainely perceiue, that the good
Christian ought neuer to doubt of the forgiuenesse
of his sinnes, nor of Gods fauour.
Neuerthelesse, for the better satisfying of
the Reader, I purpose to set downe here vnder,
certaine authorities of y• holy Doctors,
which confirme this foresayd truth. Sainct
Hilary in his fifth Canon vppon Matthewe
sayth, it is Gods will, that wée should hope
without any douting of his vnknowen will.
For if the beléefe be doubtfull, there can bée
no rightuousenesse obteyned by beléeuinge.
And thus wée sée,S Hilary that according to Sainct
Hilarie, a man obteyneth not forgiuenesse of
his sinnes at Gods hand, except he beléeue
vndoubtedly to obteyne it. And good right it
is,Iames. 1. that it should be so. For he that douteth,

is like a waue of the Sea, which is tossed &
turmoyled with the wynd. And therfore let
not such a one think to obteyne any thing at
gods hande. But let vs here sainct Austin,
               S. Augustin.
who in his Manuel counsele
                  •
               h vs to driue away
the sayd foolish imagination, which intendeth
to dispossesse vs of the foresayd good
and sage assurednes. Let such foolish imagination
(sayeth he) murmur as much as it
listeth, saying: who art thou? how great is
that glorie? by what desertes hopest thou to
obteyne it? I answer assuredly: I know in
whome I haue beléeued, and I know that he
(of his great loue) hath made me his sonne:
I know he is trew of his promis, and able
to performe his word: for he can do what he
will. And when I thinke vppon the Lords
death, the multitude of my sinnes cannot dismay
mee: for in his death doe I put all my
trust. His death is my whole desert, it is my
refuge, it is my saluation, my life and resurrection,
& the mercie of ye Lord is my desert.
I am not poore of desert, so long as the lord
of mercie fayleth me not. And sith the mercies
of the Lord are manie: manie also are
my deseruings. The more y• he is of power
to saue, the more am I sure to be saued. The
same sainct Austin talking with GOD in

another place, sayeth that he had despayred
by reason of his greate sinnes and infinite
negligences, if the woord of god had not becommne
flesh. And anon after he sayth theis
words: All my hope, all the assurance of my
trust is settled in his preciouse blud, which
was shed for vs and for our saluatiō. In him
my poore hart taketh breth: and putting my
whole trust in him, I longe to come vnto
thée O father, not hauing myne owne ryghtuousenes,
but y• ryghtuousenes of thy sonne
Iesus Christ. In theis two places sainct Austin
sheweth playnly, that the christiā must
not be afrayd, but assure himselfe of ryghtuousenes,
by grownding himselfe, not vppon
his own works, but vppō the preciouse blud
of Iesus Christ, which clenzeth vs from all
our sinnes, and maketh our peace with god.
Sainct Barnard in his first sermō vppon the
Annunciation sayeth most euidently,S. Bernard. that it
is not ynough to beleue that a man can haue
forgiuenes of his sinnes,Eche one must beleue particularly that hie sinnes are released & forgiuē him freely. but by gods mercie:
nor any one good desyre or abilitie to doe so
much as one good worke, except God giue it
him: no nor that a man cannot deserue eternall
lyfe by his workes, but if GOD giue
him the gift so to beleeue: But besydes
all theis thinges (sayeth Sainct Bernard)

which ought rather to be counted a certayne
entrance and foundation of our faith), it is
néedfull that thou beléeue also,Eche one must beleue particularly that his sinnes are released & forgiuē him freely. that thy sins
are forgiuen thée for the loue of Iesus christ.
Sée how this holy man confesseth that it is
not ynough to beléeue generally the forgiuenesse
of sinnes: but he must also beléeue particularly
that his owne sinnes are forgiuen
him by Iesus Christ, and the reason is ready
at hand, namely, that forasmuch as God
hath promised thée to accept thée for rightuouse
through the merites of Iesus Christ, if
thou beléeue not that thou art become rightuouse
through him, thou makest GOD a
lyer, and consequently thou makest thy selfe
vnworthie of his grace and liberalitie. But
thou wilt say to me, I beléeue well the forgiuenesse
of sinnes, and I know that GOD.
is true: but I am afrayd that I am not worshie
to haue so great a gift. I aunswer, that
the forgiuenesse of thy sinnes shall not bée a
gift or frée grace, but a wages, if God should
giue it thée for the worthines of thy works.
But I replie vppon thée, that God accepteth
thée for rightuouse, and layeth not thy sin too
thy charge, bicause of Christs merits, which
are giuen vnto thée and become thyne by
fayth. Therefore, following the councell of

Sainct Bernard, beleue thou, not only the forgiuenesse
of sinnes in generall, but also apply
the same beléefe to thine own particular person,
by beleuing without any dout, y• all thy
misdoinges are pardoned thée through Iesus
Christ. And in so doing thou shalt giue y• glorie
vnto God, by confessing him to be mercifull
and trew & shalt become rightuouse and
holy before God, forsomuch as by the same
confessiō y• holines & righteousnesse of Iesus
Christ, shal be communicated vnto thée. But
to returne to our purpose of predestinatiō: I
say, that by the thinges aboue mencioned, a
man may euidently perceyue, that the assuraunce
of predestination doth not hurt, but
rather greately profit the trew Christians.
And I thinke not that it can hurte the false
Christians and reprobates. For albeit that
such maner of folk would beare them selues
in hand and pretend to the worldward to be
of the nomber of ye predestinate: yit can they
neuer perswade their owne consciences,
which wil euer bée gnawing and crying out
to the contrarie. But yit it séemeth greatly,
that the doctrine of predestination may hurt
them. For they be wont to say: If I bée of the
nomber of y• reprobates, what shall it auaile
mée to do good works? And if I be of y• nomber

of the predestinate, I shalbe saued without
any laboring of myne to do good works.
I answer thée at fewe wordes, that by suche
diuelish argumēts they increace gods wrath
ageinst themselues, who hath disclozed the
knowledge of predestination to the Christians,
to make them whot, and not c
                  •
               ld in the
loue of God: and to set them foreward and
not backward vnto good workes. And therfore
the trew Christian, on the one side holdeth
himself assuredly predestinated vnto euerlasting
lyfe and to be saued, not at all by
his owne merites, but by Gods electiō, who
hath predestinated vs, not for our own workes
lakes but to shewe the greatnesse of hys
mercie: And on y• other side indeuereth himselfe
to do good workes after the example of
Iesus Christ, as much as if his saluation depended
vppon his own policie and paynestaking.
As for hym that ceasseth to do good bycause
of the Doctrine of predestination, saying,
if I be predestinated, I shalbée saued
without streyning of my self to do good workes:
he sheweth euidently, that his traueling
is not for the loue of God, but for ye loue
of himself. By reason whereof, the workes
that he doth may perhaps be good and holy to
the sight of men but they be wicked and abhominable

before the Lorde God, who hath
an eye to the intent. And hereuppon it may
be gathered, that the doctrine of predestination
worketh rather good than harme to the
false christians. For it discouereth their hipocrisie
which can not cure it selfe so long as
it lyeth hidden vnder the mantel of outward
works. But I would haue them that saye, I
will not streyne my self to do well, for if I
be predestinated, I shalbe saued without tyring
of my self so much: I say I would haue
them tell mée, how it happeneth, that when
they be diseased, they say not also, I wil haue
neyther Phisicion nor phisick: for looke what
God had determined vppon mée, cannot but
come to passe? why eate they? why drincke
they? why till they the ground? why plant
they Uines? and why bée they so diligent in
dooing all thinges conuenient for too susteyne
the body? why saye they not also,
that all theis turmoylynges, pollices, and
trauels of ours are superfluouse, forasmuch
as it is not possible, but that what soeuer
God hath foreséene and determined concerning
our lyfe and death, muste néedes come
to passe? And therefore if Gods prouidence
make them not negligent and idle in things
perteining to the body. Why should it make

them more slothfull and negligent in that
which concerneth the Christen perfection,
which without all comparison is farre nobler
than the bodie? But for asmuch as wée
sée that neither Iesus Christe nor Sainct
Paule, for any doubt of offending the reprobates,
haue forborne to preache the trueth,
which is necessarie to the edifying of the
chosen, for the loue of whom the euerlasting
Sonne of GOD became man, and was put
to death vppon the crosse: wee also in like
wise ought not to forbeare the preaching of
predestination to the true Christians, for asmuch
as wee haue seene, that it importeth
great edification. Now are we come to the
end of our purpose, wherein our chief intent
hath bin (according to our small power) to
magnifie the wonderfull benefite which the
Christen man hath receyued by IESUS
Christ crucified, and to shewe that faith, of
hir self alone iustifieth, that is to witt, that
God receyueth and holdeth them for rightuouse,
which beleeue stedfastly that Chryste
hath made full amends for their sinnes: how
beit that as light cannot be separated from
Fyre which of it selfe burneth and deuoureth
all things: euen so good woorks can not
bee separated from fayth, which alone by i
                  •
               
               selfe

iustifieth. And this holy doctrine (which
exalteth Iesus Christ and represseth and abateth
the pryde of man) hath and alwayes
shalbe reiected and fought against by such
Christians as haue Iewish mindes. But
happy is hee, who folowing the example of
Sainct Paule, spoileth himselfe of his owne
rightuousenesse, and would haue none other
rightuousenesse, than that which is of Iesus
Christ, wherwith if he be clothed and apparelled,
he may most assuredly appeere before
God, and shall receiue his blissing and the
heritage of heauen & earth: with his
only Sonne Iesus Christ our lord,
to whom be all honor, praise &
glory from this time forth
for euermore.
Amen.
            
               Christ is the ende of Law.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶Imprinted at London by
Thomas East, for Lucas Harison,
and George Bisshop.
            
         
      
   