
      
         
            
            A SERMON,
Preached at the Funerall of that
moſt Honorable and worthie
Knight S. Richard Leueſon, Vice-Admirall
of England:
            Who dyed at London the 2. of Auguſt,
and was interred at VVooluer Hampton in
the Countie of Stafford, the 2. day
of September following
Anno Domi. 1605.
            By SAMVEL PAGE, Batchelour in Diuinitie,
and Vicar of Deptforde
in Kent.
            LONDON,
Printed by William White, dwelling
in Cow-lane neere
Holborne Conduit.
1605.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
HONORABLE HIS
eſpeciall good Lord, the
Earle of Nottingham, the
Lord high Admirall of
England. &c. SAMVEL
PAGE wiſheth
all encreaſe of
Honour.
            
               MY eſpeciall good Lord,
the Loue which that
Honorable Knight Sir
Richard Leueſon did
deſerue from mee; hath
made my eare ſo impatient of any imputation
by which he may be traduced to
the world, that paſsing amongſt the
throng of variable ſenſures, and obſeruing
how Emulation and Enuie of his
Worth, ſtriueth to burie his Honour in
the ſame duſt with his life-leſſe body:

I could not but wonder, that ſo many
faire parts of vertue and goodnes in him,
could be ſo ſlightly skipt ouer, and that
ſo curſory eyes as beheld them, could ſo
dwell vpon the errours and mis-heedings
of his youth. It concerneth mee (whom
he choſe out of all his acquaintance, to
breath his laſt words in my eares, and to
make me the eye, and the tongue witneſse
of his ende,) to doe him this right, to
ſatisfie with my teſtimonie ſuch, who being
better acquainted with his courſe of
life then my ſelfe was, might finde in it
more to diſlike, and might therefore ſuſpect
his death: to thoſe, and for diſcharge
of my duetie to my honourable friende,
though departed, I haue cauſed theſe
Papers to ſpeake more publiquely that,
which in a full hearing I deliuered to
thoſe which were preſent at his Funerals▪
and I proteſt herein my ſinceritie;
for as al my ſeruice done to him, had beginning

in my loue of his vertue; So neither
my labour was mercenary with him▪
nor my penne hired: for it is ſufficiently
knowen, that I neuer receiued from him
more then the rich reward of his thanks▪
& acknowledgment of that cōfort which
he receiued from mee; which I hold ſo
deare a recompence, that I could ſow dayly,
to reape but ſuch an Harueſt.
            What I haue herein deliuered, I preſent
vnto your Honour, beſeeching you,
who haue vouchſafed to be the Patrone
of my Studies, to receiue this; and herewithall
my most humble duetie.
            
               Debtford this 8. December. 1605.
               
               Your Honours Chaplaine in
all duetie and ſeruice,
Samuell Page▪
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               2. Sam 3. verſ. 38.
               And the King ſaid to his Seruants,
Know ye not that a Prince and a great
Man is fallen this day in Iſrael?
            
            
               ABNER is dead, DAVID
the King is become a
mourner; hee followed
the Beare of Abner to
the Graue: When hee
came to the Sepulchre,
hee lift vp his voyce and
wept: He bemoned his death to the people▪
hee refuſed his meate till the Sunne was
downe. And in this Verſe he pleadeth the
cauſe of his griefe to his Seruantes, and
makes them ſenſible of his loſſe: Knovv ye
not that there is &c.
            
            See how artificiall ſorrow is, in telling of
her owne tale: heere is not a word in this
ſpeach of the Kinges, but it hath the taſte
and the reliſh of the greiued heart where it
grew.
            
               
1 It is not a feare, or danger, or ſome infirmitie
of his friend, that mooueth him, but
a fall; a fall as low as the Earth, and as deepe
as the Graue.
            2 It is not the fall of any artificiall ſtructare
or compoſition, but of a man; a Man is
fallen. Heere is the diſſolution of a little
World, a pile of the curiouſeſt Architecture,
and the maiſter peece of the moſt skilfull
builder.
            Conſult not herein the practiſe of humane
inhumanitie, which holdeth the life
of man cheape, and vnderualueth ſo rare a
creature with low-priz'd eſtimation, but
conſult Nature: Hoc natura preſcribit, vt
homo homini quicun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   fit ob eam ipſam Cauſam
tantum quod homo ſit conſultam velit: This
(ſayth Cicero) is the document of Nature,
that a man ſhould ſeeke the good of a man,
euen for this alone, becauſe he is a man.
            3 This man for whom Dauid makes this
moane, is none of them that are wearie of
the light becauſe God doth humble them;
and being vile, and ſitting with the Dogges
of the flocke, hunt after death: But, a great
man is fallen: great in the proofe of his vertue

in the aduenture of his perſon, in his aduancement
to be the fauorite of a King; in
his imployment to be one of the ſupporters
of a mightie Kingdome, a Prince and a
great man, that is, a principall great man in
Iſrael.
            
            4 Hee is fallen in Iſrael, and it is ſo much
blood let out of Iſraels veynes, ſome of that
locke cut off wherein Sampſons ſtrength
lay: and Iſrael being the enuie of all the
Kingdomes of the world, the Archers ſhooting
at it, and greeuing it, as old Iaacob ſaid
of Ioſeph: If it had been ſowen with the
ſeede of valiant men, it could haue ſet them
all on worke to keepe violent intruders
from inuaſion and aſſault. Therefore Iſrael
had a great loſſe in the death of Abner.
            
            5 All this not a griefe of auncient times,
as Hecuba ſayd of Troy, Troia i am vetus eſt
malum: Troy is an old greife, but it is a freſh
woe inſtantly preſsing, and oppreſsing the
ſence: for he is fallen To day.
            
            6 Doe you not kn
                     〈…〉
                   this? ſaith Dauid: had
you an hope of his perſon, and haue you
no greife for his death? Could your glad
eares receiue the tydinges of his ioyning

with our forces, and do you with dry eyes
ſee him, by death, disioyned from vs
againe?
            Thus doth Dauid keepe a ſcoare of his
owne loſſes. Beholde, heere is Abner a
Prince; yet he is fallen: a Great man, yet a
man, fallen in Iſrael: for Death hath left
no place priuiledged, no perſon free.
            I will confine my preſent Diſcourſe to
theſe three perticular poyntes.
            
               1 I obſerue a difference betweene
man and man, in this title ginen to
Abner: a great man.
               
               2 I finde the greateſt, ſubiect to
mortalitie: is fallen.
               
               3 I note in Dauid a deſire, that notiſe
be taken of this loſſe: Doe you
not knovv?
               
            
            1. Of the difference betweene man
and man.
            This is not in reſpect of the maker: for
God hath not made ſome men himfelfe,
and deuolued the reſt to inferiour iournimen
vnder him: but we are all alike beholding

to him for our creation: not in reſpect of
the matter; for we were all, digged out of
the ſame Pitte.
            But the difference is in the vſe, & ſeruice
of men, and that is directed in all well menaged
States, by their manners and merites.
Tullies rule of a mans Fortune; that is, of his
condition of life, is this: Suis ea cui
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   fingitur
moribus: It is ſuch as his behauiour and
carriage makes it. The beſt men ſeeke
Honour; and they ſeeke it beſt, euen in the
merrite of their owne worth; not in the
groundleſſe opinion of an vndiſcerning
multitude, and therefore they make their
liues preſidents of liuing to others, and their
whole comportſment exemplary, deſeruing
well: Some for aduice, others for execution:
Some for Artes, ſome for the
Tongues, ſome for the Sword, ſome for the
Compaſſe, ſome in the Chambers of Princes,
ſome in the Field making merite ſtill,
the true luſtre of their greatnes.
            
               Paulum ſepaltae diſtat inertiae celata virtus:
Vertue that commeth not abroade, is little
better then vnſeen
                  •
                vnskilfulneſſe: which
the Poet ſp
                  •
               ke not to encourage men to

put all their Vertue vpon the Stage, and to
ſet it alwayes in the common eye, with baſe
proſtitution; for this is an ambitious begging
of popular ayer: But he admoniſheth
to keepe Vertue in breath with exerciſe,
to giue it life in action, and not ſuffer it to
keepe houſe too much, or to ruſt with reſt
and idleneſſe.
            Thus ſhall not a man truſt to hereditary
Dignitie, and ſpend vpon that ſtocke of Honour
which his noble anceſtors haue left
him: neither ſhall hee baſely purchaſe
precedence and priority with the Penny, nor
diue by cunning inſinuation into the fauour
of Princes by flattering their amiſſes:
All theſe are the Balles of Fortune, racketed
vpon high; but not abyding there, but
falling downe againe: Theſe ſpring tides
haue their neapes▪ theſe are very Meteors,
making a portentoſe ſhew of light awhile,
but ſoone put out: For when this Curtayne
of Greatnes drawne betweene them and the
deceiued eyes of men, ſhall be withdrawen;
when this ouer-guilding with falſe Honour
ſhall begin to weare off, and their vnworthineſſe
looke like it ſelfe, ſtript and naked:

When they ſhall vnlearne the art of Seeming,
ſhall it not then be ſayd vnto them.
What fruite haue you now of theſe thinges
where of you are aſhamed?
            Ler Honour then follow Vertue: and let
Vertue be content with it ſelfe. S. Auguſtines
rule is, Gloria noſtra eſt teſtimonium Conſcientiae
noſirae: Our glorie is in the teſtimonie
of our owne Conſcience.
            The firſt Adam ſought Honour, and it
fledde from him: The ſecond Adam fledde
from Honour, and it ouertoke him.
            The vſe of this inſtruction is this, to prouoke
euery of you (according to the meaſure
of Gods endowment of Grace) to ſtirre
vp in your ſelues thoſe faire partes of Vertue
and goodnes, by which your God may
be moſt glorified in his creature, your
Countrie may haue the benefite of your
ſeruice, your King the vſe of your Vertue,
and all men the example of it.
            
               Seneca ſayth, Recie facii feciſſe merces eſt:
To haue done well, is the reward of well
doing: therefore if Riches buy away, or
Fauoure giue away from you your wel-deſerued
Honoures; yet God hath promiſed to

be your portion, and exceeding great reward.
            It will be a great euidence againſt you,
that you neuer loued Vertue and goodnes
truely, if you do neglect them when you
ſee your ſelues neglected: for Honourable
actions are not to be vndertaken in regarde
of the honour which we gayne by them,
but that God may be honoured by vs in
them.
            Our Sauiour hath enformed vs, that they
which ſeeke the prayſe of men, haue their
rewarde heere. I will conclude this firſt
poynt with the ſaying of S. Chriſoſtome, Hon
                     ••
                  
verus eſt in virtute animi: True honour is in
the vertue of the minde: and for all other
that goe for honours heere, let vs ſay with
the ſame learned father Honores non ſunt im
                     •
                  
miniſteria: They are not Honours, but meere
ſeruices.
            2 Though I haue found as much difference
betweene man and man, as betweene
high and low, rich and poore, great and
ſmall; yet I haue ſet mine eye in the ſecond
place, vpon the mortaliue of Great Men,

becauſe my Text ſaith, A great man is fallen.
It hath coſt the liues of the greateſt to exemplifie
this to vs from Adam, the Father
of vs all; by whoſe diſobedience Sinne came
into the world, and by Sinne, Death, euen
to this moment of time wherein thouſands
are breathing their laſt in ſundry places, and
by ſundry ſorts of death.
            Where be thoſe great ones, euen the greateſt
of the Sonnes of men, which haue ouerrunne
Kingdomes & people▪ with an inundation
of power, and taught the Earth to
groane, and tremble vnder the burthen of
their Armes?
            Did not God blow vpon them, and they
withered? And did not the whire wind take
them away as ſtuble. Eſa. 40. 24.
            When Iob was out of taſte with his life,
he wiſht that he had gone immediatly from
the wombe to the Graue: for ſayth hee,
I ſhould haue ſlept then, and been at reſt, with
the Kinges and Counſay lours of the Earth,
which haue builded them ſelues deſolate
places: or with the Princes that had gold,
and haue filled their houſes with ſiluer. Iob
3. 13.
            
               
Dignitie, friends, followers, wealth, plentie,
the beſt ſupporters that euer the world
could find (of temporall happines) giue way
when Death commeth. The Centution ſayth
to his ſeruant Goe, and he goeth: Death
ſayth to the Centurion Come, and he commeth.
Deaths Nettes are not Cobwebbes
to take none but ſmall Flyes, nor Snares
for none but ſmall Birdes: If great Men
ſhould not die, ſmall men ſhould not liue.
Vnreſtrayned geatnes growes ſaluage: but
the thought of Death, makes it come to
hand, and become tame.
            All the life of ſome, is a rize from one
aduancement to another, till they haue loſt
themſelues in their owne greatnes: but they
ſhall fall euen from the greateſt. It was ſo
decreed in Paradice, when wee were all yet
in the loynes of our firſt Parents, before
there was any ſuch difference betweene vs
in dignitie: For out of it wert thou taken,
becauſe thou art Duſt, and to Duſt ſhalt thou
returne. Gen. 3. 19. Duſt is our firſt and laſt.
The moſt neat, & the moſt cutious amongſt
vs, ſhall not bruſh off this duſt, till we riſe
againe, euen till our mortall do put on immortalitie.
            
               
               Reu. 6. 8. S. Iohn looked, and behold, a pale
Horſe, & his name that ſate vpon him is Death.
Death is an Horſeman (you ſee) to ſhew his
ſpeede: and his Horſe is pale, which is the
complexion of departing and dying men.
This ryder hath ouertaken Abner, a Great
man in Iſrael. This filles the eyes of Dauid
full of teares, till they runne ouer.
            1 The vſe of this obſeruation is to vnderſtand,
that Princes haue their ſorrowes.
Luctus (ſayth Tully) eſt agritudo ex eius qui
charus eſt acerbo interitu: Mourning is a
ſorrow conceiued at the death of a deare
Friend. In this, griefe is impartiall, the
friendes of Kinges are as mortall, as the
friendes of Subiectes. It is not in the Cotages
of the poore, or vnder the roofe of the
Widow only, in the Hoſpitals of the diſeaſed
onely▪ or in the darke Dungeons of the impriſoned:
but in the Palaces of Princes, in
the Bed-chambers of Kinges; nay in their
boſomes, and the inmoſt conclaues of their
breaſtes: Luctus et vltrices poſuere cubilia
curae: Sorrow and ſad vnreſt haue taken vp
their lodging.
            
               
               Abner dyeth in the nonage of King Dauides
ſoueraigntie; a limbe of ſtrength vntimely
lopt from the body of his greatnes.
And I am this day vveake (ſayth hee) and
nevvly annoynted King.
            
            
               Dauid is exerciſed in theſe ſorrowes: for
in the next Chapter, he mourneth for Ishbosheth
the Sonne of Saul, whom ſome, preſuming
to pleaſe the King, did murther in
his bedd: but he calleth the executioners
wicked men: he chargeth them with murther,
murther of a righte ous Perſon, and that
done vpon him in his owne Houſe, which
ſhould haue been to him a Sanctuarie of
peace: and vpon his owne Bedd, where he
promiſeth himſelfe reſt.
            The B
                  •••
                ſhould indeed repreſent the
Graue, and ſleepe Death: but to make a
Slaughter houſe of his Chamber, and a Beare
of his Bedd, was the worke of men of blood:
and Dauid could doe no leſſe out of his
griefe for Ishbosbeth, and his iuſtice vpon
them, but require his blood at their handes,
and take them from the earth.
            
               Dauids Child be gotten of Bathsheba, and
Abſolon hi
                  •
                Sonne dying, were to much

cut out of his owne fleſh: and (if Mors take
name a Morsu, Death from byting) they
were two morſels bitten cut of Dauids owne
loynes.
            This Dauid a King may doe: hee may
loue his Friendes whileſt they liue, and aduance
them to honour: he may hugg them
in the boſome of his beſt fauoures, and engirde
them in the cincture of his royall embracements:
He may beweepe them when
they are dead, & ſhed his ſorrowes in teares
vpon the earth for them: But to adiourne
Death, or prolong Life▪ to fill the emptie
Veines of his friendes with liuely blood, or
their dryed Boanes with marrow: to open
the eares which Death hath ſhut, or to light
againe the Candles which Death hath put
out, or to redeeme their life from the power
of the Graue; In all theſe thinges, Diuid is
no King. 2. Reg. 5. 7.
            When the King of Iſrael receiued Letters
conteining a requeſt that he would heale
the Leproſie of Naaman, hee anſwered them
with the rending of his cloathes, ſaying:
Am I God, to kill and to giue I fo, that he doth
ſend to mee, that I ſhould heale a man from 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
Leproſie?
            
            In a leſſe matter in the next Chapter,
when a Woman in the Famine of Samaria,
cryed, Helpe my Lord, O king. The King of
Iſrael ſayd: Seeing the Lord doth not ſuccoure
thee, hovv should I helpe thee vvith the Barne
or the VVinepreſſe?
            
            Kings then haue their winges clipt: God
wil haue them knowne to be but men: the
Winde blowes on them, the Sunne heates
them, the raine doth wet them: griefe and
care is as ordinary a gueſt with them, as
with their meaneſt Subiectes: their great
Friendes fall alſo like other men: Mors aequo
pulsat pede, it goes with an euen foote, and
carryeth an indifferent hand, and leaues
Kinges that onely remedy, to ſitte to wne
and weepe ouer their dead, as Dauid heere
doth ouer Abner.
            
            It is not long ſince our eyes ſaw the fall of
Maieſtie, the death of the great Lady of
theſe Realmes, the Soueraigne of all the
honeſt hearts vnder theſe her dotninions,
the wonder of her ſexe, deſeruing better of
her people, then we haue words to expreſſe;
as much aboue my prayſe, as I was beneath

her greatnes, the holy Annoynted ſeru
                  〈…〉
               
of God, hath not ſhe read vs a lecture of
Mortality, and ſhewed vs our of what Pitt
Princes are digged?
            I would my words could go ſo neare the
hearts of the greateſt in this aſſemblie, as to
perſwade them to lay thus much to heart,
and to make it their Philoſophy and beſt
learning, to learne to die.
            This meditation were enough to kill the
Moath in their Garments, and to ſcoure off
the Ruſt from their Gold, and to ſet their
impriſoned Money at liberty: it were
enough to cloath the naked, to feede the
hungry, to comfort the oppreſſed, to make
Rich men liue to God, & not to themſelues,
or to regard themſelues chiefly for a common
good.
            It were enough to diſtaſte to men that
auxious and ſolicitous impropriation of all
their reſpectes vnto themſelues, and to enlarge
their hoartes to the purſuite of the
good of their brethren.
            This meditation were enough to reare
vp Temples to God, Colledges for Artes and
Learning. Hoſpitals for the poore and diſeaſed:

for there is nothing that killes Charitie
and Good▪workes ſooner, then hope of
long life.
            I beſeech you, if your eare be open, to entertaine
this needful inſtruction, let it be tenible
in your remembrance alſo, that whilſt
you liue, you may do good to all: and that
when you die, your workes may follow
you: not the merite of your workes; for,
your well doing extendeth not to God.
            This were condignitie on your part: but
the reward of your workes: for God rewardeth
abundantly thoſe that do well: this is
gratuitie on Gods part. It is ſayd of them
that die, thus, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Their owne
workes follow them, that they might not
depende hopefully on the workes of other
men, much leſſe vpon their multiplyed reiterations
of prayers for them. It is alſo ſayd,

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                which ſignifieth immediatly following,
and therefore no ſtay by the way,

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                euen with themſelues.
            It is the reproch of Proteſtants, and the
ſhame of our Profeſſours at this day: It is
ſpoken of in Gath, and it is proclaimed in the

ſtreetes of Ask
                     •
                  lon; the Church of Roome
doth iuſtly charge vs with it: Good workes
liue in exile from vs: encroachments vpon
our Church-reuenewes, and bequeathments
of Dying men to holy vſes, euen for the
maintenance of good Artes and learning:
            The reentries of the Laye vpon the rentes
of God, are frequent: the Church hath not
the ouerflowings now of the fulleſt Cuppe:
it is honour enough to them, that inuade not
theſe conſecrate and hallowed Beneuolences,
that make a conſcience of this gripple
ſeaſure, and vnrighteous intruſion, though
they giue nothing themſelues.
            But let me ſpeake it to the eare of Greatneſſe;
and let the heart that keepeth houſe
there, tremble at it. Hinc colligendum eſt qua
paena mulctandus ſit qui aliena diripit ſi inferni
damnatione percu
                     •
                  itur qui propria non largitur▪
               
Hence we may conceiue, how they ſhall
ſmart for their direptions, who inuade the
goodes of other men, when hee ſhal be puniſhed
with infernall damnation, who gaue
not that which was his owne: It is the ſpeach
of S Gregorie writing vpon the Parable of
the Rich man.
            
               
I beſeech you, as you tender the happines
of your beloued ſoules, let the remembrance
of the ende, kindle in you an holy ambition,
which may mount your eyes & hoapes
to a more loftie apprehention of that wealth
which waſteth not, of that honour which
commeth not into duſt, of that happineſſe
which neuer can be vnhappied againe: and
for theſe thinges, facite de damno lucrum of
that which idly oftentimes leawdly is miſſpent,
make friendes: Ventres pauperum
horrea diuitum, Lay vp, if not your Harueſt,
yet at leaſt the Gleanings, in theſe Barnes:
And if you giue charge for them, as Boaz
did for Ruth, that they may gleane among
the Sheaues, the bowels of the poore will
bleſſe you, and they that are ready to periſh,
will pray for your increaſe.
            2 Dauid teacheth vs a ſecond vſe of this
Doctrine of Princes mortalitie. Pſal. 146.
Truſt no in Princes &c.
            
            A King is called 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               quaſe 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
Let Let them goe to him for Iudgement,
and in his reſt & peace let them ſeeke
reſt▪ but to faſten dependance vpon Great

men, is to forget the Lord of Hoaſtes: they
that ſow their hope vpon this ground, reape
no better Harueſt then that vpon the houſe
toppe.
            I will conclude this poynt, with that
Iſay. 31. 1. VVoe be to them that goe dovvne
into Egypt for helpe. &c. The Egyptians are
men, not God: their Horſes flesh, and not ſpirit;
and vvhen the Lord shall ſtretch out his hand,
their helpers shall fayle, &c.
            3 I note in this fall of ſo Great a man
the loſſe which the State where he liueth,
hath of him: the King he loofeth Abners
ſeruice. I am nevvly annoynted King, and
the ſonnes of Zeruiah. &c.
            
            The people generally ſhall want his direction
and ouerſight. It is one of the
Roddes; rather it is one of the Scorpions
wherewith God did vſe to ſcourge the diſobedient;
He calleth it The breaking of the pride
of their povver. Leuit. 26. 19.
            Ier
                  •
               mie in his Lament. bringes in Ieruſalem
thus, complayning. 1. Lament. 15. The
Lord hath troden vnder foote all my valiant
men in the middeſt of me
                  •
               : For thoſe thinges

I vveepe: mine eye, euen mine eye, eaſteth out
vvater. Lamen 4. 2. The noble men of Zion
comparable to fine gold, hovv are they eſteemed
as earthen Pi
                  •
               chers, euen the vvorke of the
hands of the Potter?
            What are the Walles about our ſtrongeſt
Townes, but heapes of Stone and congeſtions
of Earth? Theopompus in Plutarch to one
that ſhewed him the Walles of his Cittie,
asking him if they were not goodly and
ſtrong? aunſwered well, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                no, if
your Cittie hold none but Women. Our
Shippes are but walles of Wood; our Ordinance
but the meſſengers of Death: and
there muſt be ſome to ſende theſe meſſengers
abroade.
            Indeed all our defence, our ſtrongeſt Bulwarkes
and Propugnacles of our land, what
are they without the miniſterie and ſeruice
of Men, but as Shaftes and Arrowes hunge
vp againſt the wall? And what are Men,
without order and Diſcipline, but as droues
of wilde Beaſtes? So did diſordered Confuſion
faſhion the vnſchoold minoritie of the
world, euen then when the Romane Empire
like a young budd of greatneſſe, was firſt

Inoculate in the ranckſtocke of vndiſciplin'd
tymes: So ſayth a learned Romane.
            
            Diſciplina militaris acriter retenta, &c.
            Millitarie Diſcipline ſeueerely retained,
made Rome ſpread ouer Towne and Countrey,
Land and Sea, and bredd the Empire
of all the Earth, in the poore Cottage of
Romulus.
            
            And was not all this performed by the
vertue of men of action, and vndertaking,
ſuch as are called Great men?
            
            
               Philip of Macedon had wont to call the
Athenians an happie people, becauſe they
had ſuch ſtore of Great Men of worth, as
yeerely to chooſe tenne fitt to be Leaders;
whereas he had in all his time, found none
but Parmenio, worthy to take charge vnder
him. But now I begin to ſee how I do idle
thetime, to ſhew you how great a miſſe a
State may haue of Worthy men, and to endeare
to you men of action.
            For we haue put off our Armour, and our
Swordes and Sheildes hang vp rather as
Monuments of old, then Inſtrumentes of
new Warre
                  •
               tour Ships are double moor'd,
our Men of Warre haue waſted ouer welcome

peace into our borders; Abner hath
leaue to die, and men of action could neuer
haue been better ſpared: Smooth and euen
is the face and outſide of all things amongſt
vs. Let not our eyes, ô Lord, nor the eyes
of our vnborne Children and Nephewes,
euer ſee it wrinckled any more: Let vs all
ioyne in prayer alwayes for the peace of our
Ieruſalem, and let them proſper that loue it.
            Yet by the faire leaue of a gentle Peace,
let vs conſider that the Sonnes of Zeruiah
may be too hard for vs, and therefore let not
Abner die without ſence of a publique
loſſe, euen without an vniuerſall condolement
of the State wherein he liues, and of
which he hath deſerued well.
            But this is my third, and laſt Obſeruation:
For Dauid deſireth that notice be taken of
Abners death: Kovv ye not.
            
            Surely the righteous perisheth, and no man
conſidereth it in his heart. Iſay. 57. 1. It is not
poſsible but the common eye doth ſee it,
and the vnderſtanding doth apprehende
ſuch ſadd accidents: but men keepe ſuch
things as much as they may, from the heart,

loath to entertaine ſo vnwelcome a gueſt
as Griefe is.
            
               Dauid doth not put them in minde of it
as of ſome ſadd betiding to Abner: for the
aduantage of the death of the Righteous is
manifold.
            1 Reſt from labours: For it is moſt true
which S. Bern. ſayth: Qui in labore hominum
non ſunt, in labore profecto Doemonum erunt:
They that labour not heere amongſt men,
ſhall labour hereafter amongſt Diuels.
            2 They are taken avvay from the euill to
come, as choyce ſtuffe remooued when Fire
is feared; So doth God defend his choſen,
from the conflagration of the vnrighteous.
            3 They are tranſlated from death to life. S.
Gregory ſaith, Curramus et ſequamur Chriſtum,
non ſunt hic vera ſolatia, ſed ibi ponuntur vbi
vera vita: Let vs runne and follow Chriſt:
heere are no true comfortes, they are layde
vp there where it true life.
            But Dauids end in this bemoaning of Abner
is, to teach them to depende vpon God, not
on man; and to encourage euery bold hart,
and able hand amongſt them, to auenge the
workers of that death to Abner, that griefe

to the King, that weakenes to the Church,
and that common loſte to all Iſrael.
            
            It is our great fault that when God giueth
any ſuch blow to our State, the ſmart of it
in too ſoone paſt, and their memorie buried
in the ſame Graue with them. This is a
great disheartning of Worthy men, from
great vnderrakinges: For this Land hath
buried, in our memorie, of Worthres that
are all dead, their actes, their name and all;
ſuch an honourable breed, as huing eyes
cannot find paragons too, and our preſent
hopes (which yet are our franckeſt promiſes)
cannot apprehend: Let them all goe with
this honour done them in heauen, In memoria
aeteina erit iustus.
            
            And let Learning, which bath the beſt
eye to ſec Virtue, & the Honourableſt aff
                  •
               ction
to loue it and the longeſt liued meanes
to immortalize it, keepe her owne cours
vpon the earth: Vignum laude virum Muſa
vstat mori: And let their owne good deedes
prayſe them in the gates.
            They that truſt a curious pile of Stone
Piramids, Coloſſes high-reard Monumentes
ouer, their low layd bodyes in the loſome

of the Earth, with their memories, doe bue
deceiue themſelues. A good Name is a
pretious Oyntment powred foorth, the perfume
of it filleth all the houſe.
            
               Thus much of the vvords of my Text.
               COncerning this occaſion of meeting,
let me alſo borrow your parience and
attention.
               Though I know you haue ſaued me a
labour in the application: and your vnderſtandings
in their cleare light, haue ſeene
that this honorable Knight, of whom there
is now but thus much left, euen a morſell
fitte for the Wormes, and atenant for the
houſe, aud a gueſt for the bedd in the darke,
of which Iob ſpeaketh, Hee hath beene my
Teate, the Abner, the Great and Worthie
man whom I haue perſonated all this while:
and our Sceane lieth in our Iſrael, and that
this fight is the Cataſtiophe of our Tragedy.
               Yet I beſeech you, let mee pay the debt
which I owe to his loue of mee, and the
duetie which I acknowledge tributarie to
his memory, at leaſt to ſay to you of him as

                  David did of his Abner: Knovv ye not that
a great. &c.
               
               A man great in his birth and deſcent, as
you all know, linked by mariage in a moſt
Honorable Familie, of a goodly & a louely
perſonage, of an caſie and affable nature
where his diſcretion found it fitt to be ſo:
of a daring and hardie ſpirit. of a ſterne and
ſower aſpect againſt the enemies of his
Soueraigne, magnanimouſly valiant in his
vndertakinges, wiſe in his counſailes, ſpeedy
and reſolute in his executions; valuing his
worthy life leſſe, then the common good of
his Countrey: Witneſſe that aduentueous
expedition of his, Irish ſeruice; where
he wrote his volour in the blood of the oppoſites,
and filled the care of this Kingdome
with the welcome tydinges of his victories.
               Hee was iudicious in the finding out of
Virtue, magnificent and bounteous in the
reward of it 
                     〈…〉
                   ſpare in ſpeach; but when occaſion
prompted him, rather performing,
then promiſing his fauoure and loue, where
he ſaw deſert.
               
                  
Great in the fauoure of the late Maieſtie
of this Land, and ſucceeding in his loue,
who ſucceeded in her greatnes: great in his
employment and office of truſt and charge:
and (for which he forgate not his duetie to
God in all humble thankes giuing amongſt
his dying meditations) very fortunate and
ſuccesfull: great in the loue of the common
man that went vnder his charge; for
the eye that ſaw him, bleſſed him; and euery
tongue of theirs, beare witneſſe of his righteous
dealing.
               Great in his eſtate and means of maintenance;
for like a Tree planted by the Riuers
of vvaters, ſo hee grew, and ſo did God giue
him a plentifull encreaſe: But that which
maketh all this greatneſſe a great deale
greater, hee had an vnderſtanding to know
God, and an affection to loue him.
               I muſt not flatter the remembrance of
fleſh and blood ſo farre, as to exempt him
from offending (with other men) I know
that humanitie and infirmitie are indiuiduall:
But I am his witneſſe, that he looked
vpon his life paſt, with a cenſorious eye: hee
charged himſelfe with his defaultinges

without excuſe or mittigation of his ſinnes,
euen with deteſtation of his vnthriftines of
good howers, and ſorrow for the loſſe of ſo
pretious minutes, that ſhould hane been
better ſpent, and with moſt ſerious deprecation
of Gods wrath.
               It pleaſed him in my attendaunce vpon
his honourable Father in Law into Spayne,
wherein this worthy Knight had a great
place of Commaund and Charge: it pleaſed
him in this expedition, to take knowledge
of mee, and often to vouchſafe me his
conference: and being deſirous to ſing the
ſonge of the Lord in a ſtrange Land, he receiued
at my hands the Sacrament of the
body and blood of Chriſt, accompanied
with many worthy Knights, & Gentlemen
of qualitie, in one of the Harboroughs of
that Land; where there was peace for our
perſons, but not for our religion: Yea, many
wayes he teſtified to mee, his loue of God,
and of our Religion: Hee looked iudicially
into the difference betweene vs and the
Church of Rome, touched with commiſeration
of the darknes wherein they lyued,
and wiſhing encreaſe of zeale amongſt vs,

and knowledge with them.
               After his returne, it pleaſed Almighty God
by his laſt Sicknes, to put him in minde that
hee muſt ſet his Houſe in order: For he muſt
die. This he maturely regarded; and after
the ſetling of his Eſtate, he reſerued the remaine
of his time, as a vacation from all
temporall thoughts, and conſecrated it to
his preparation for his remooue of the
body, that he might dwell with the Lord.
               It pleaſed him then, to remember his
acquaintaunce, with mee; and when hee
had diſpatched a Meſſenger with his Letters
to mee, to entreat my reſort to him, I
preuented expectation: for the vnwelcome
newes of his dangerous Sickneſſe, was to
mee meſſenger enough to call vpon mee
to doe ſo Honourable a Friende my laſt
ſeruice.
               Hee receiued my free and voluntarie viſitation,
with more then thankes: and deſirous
to be priuate with mee, to this purpoſe
he beſpake mee.
               Firſt, he tolde me of his preſent weaknes,
and appeared to mee ſenſible of his danger
of death, and therefore proteſted an earneſt

deſire to ſpend that ſhort time of life limitted
then to him, in a religious preparation
for that end.
               Hee began at the acouſing of his former
leawd life (ſo he was pleaſed to call it, with
a ſorrowfull deteſtation of it) and complayning
to mee of his preſent infirmitie,
which had ſo weakened his memorie & vnderſtanding,
that he could not lay him ſelfe
ſo open before God as he deſired, nor comprehend
in fitte wordes his ſuite to God for
pardon of his ſinnes, and the aſſiſtance of his
holy Grace to the laſt gaſpe, as he wiſhed:
Hee earneſtly deſired mee to conceiue a
forme of confeſsion of his ſinnes to God,
and a Prayer for thoſe mercies which I
might leaue with him when I ſhould depare
from him.
               This I ſoone ſatisfied him in, for I had
more vſe herein of my memorie of that
which he had deliuered to mee, then of my
inuention for that which I was to delyuer
to him: His ſorrowes had the true face of
woe; and his feeling of his owne griefe for
finne, was ſo ſenſible, his zeale ſo feruent,
his humiliation made him ſo deiected, that

I ſaw in him a true mirrour and preſident
of repenting in good earneſt.
               O let mee heare the tongue ſpeake which
is prompted by a ſoule truely humbled before
God. Hee vſed this forme of Prayer,
with an affection ſanctified, and a Spirit
wayned from this world: And this done,
he deſired mee now to ſupply the weakenes
of his memorie, by calling into his remembraunce
thoſe thinges which are moſt fitte
to be the laſt thoughts of a dying man.
               I ſpared not my beſt endeuour herein,
and entertained him with all the comfortes
which I could.
               Hee heard mee attentiuely, vnderſtandingly,
conſentfully, and beleeuingly: And
confeſſed this doctrine of Peace, which
paſſeth all vnderſtanding, to be the beſt Phiſicke;
and that onely which now he deſired.
               Thus commending him to my earneſt
Prayers to God, hee diſmiſſed mee, pro teſting
that he had much cheared and refreſhed
his ouercharged ſpirit with theſe holy exerciſes;
hee deſired mee to repaire to him
the morning following betimes: this I did
gladly, and full of hope that the Lord would

haue mercy on vs, that he might liue.
               When I came, hee gaue mee a louing and
chearefull welcome, and then deſired mee
not to depart from him, till I had ſeene the
laſt of him. Hee told mee of the ſorrowes
which he had ſuſtained the night paſt, and
that he ſaw no poſsibilitie of life beyonde
the morning following, he found ſuch decay
in himſelfe: then I vnderſtood how in
the night paſt, he had called vpon God, and
what good watch he kept, that if at midnight,
or at the dawning, God had ſent for him
hence, hee might not be vnprouided.
               Hee then in the hearing of vs all preſent,
made his confeſsion of ſinnes, and prayers
to God ſo earneſtly and effectually, that
when he requeſted vs all to pray to God for
him, hee taught vs to be importunate, and
that it paſt not good manners to take no
nay of our God. I neuer ſowed my comfort
in a better ground; for I began to reape, ere
I had done ſowing. Hee heard our prayers
for him, with grea
                     •
                   content & comfort.
               This whole day was ſpent in prayers, and
reading of thoſe things to him which might
beſt endeare to him the ioyes of Heauen:

and when he felt his decay more ſenſible, he
deſired our prayers to God for him againe,
as loth to looſe the aduantage of any minute
of that ſhort time of his life: and after
vs, hee ſayd the Lords Prayer, to our great
reioycing in his zeale, who grieued ſo much
for his weakeneſſe; and hee teſtified to vs
witneſſes, the Religion and Fayth wherein
hee died.
               I deſired him to be plaine and true to me
in one demaunde: I ſhewed him how thoſe
that are in miſerie (as Iob ſpeaketh) ſeeke
after death, and reioyce when they can finde
the Graue; but their miſerie and wearines
of ſuffering, bringeth foorth in them theſe
defires: But for him who had plentie of all
that his heart could wiſh for his meanes of
maintenance, greatneſſe in his place, honour

                     〈…〉
                  s employments 
                     〈…〉
                  ce with his Soueraigne,
loue with the 
                     〈…〉
                  tude, and the
common language of all men to applaude
his noble deſertes of the ſtate in which hee
liued: I enquired therefore if hee who bad
ſo many prouocations to deſire to liue, could
be content to forſake this life, and all theſe

thinges? Hee ſmiled cheerefully, and proteſted
that hee dyed as willingly, as that
poore man mentioned in Iob, that had nothing
but miſerie to forſake; for Heauen
was his hope, and GOD his exceeding great
reward.
               Shortly after, hee began to decay more
and more, and ſlumbring out a little time,
after ſome pange and ſtrong Conuulſions,
hee fell into this laſt ſleepe, leauing teares
in euery beholders eye, and deuiding amongſt
vs his friendes and followers, a well
witneſt ſorrow: and leauing this body of
clay to theſe our laſt obſequies.
               Thus leauing him with God; and to
God commending our ſelues, I conclude.
I haue but planted and watered, the Lord
giue the encreaſe.
               FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   