
      
         
            
            
               
               The Zodiake of Life written by the Godly and zealous Poet Marcellus Pallingenius ſtellatus, wherein are conteyned twelue Bookes diſcloſing the haynous Crymes & wicked vices of our corrupt nature: And plainlye declaring the pleaſaunt and perfit pathway vnto eternall lyfe, beſides a numbre of digreſſions both pleaſaunt & profitable, Newly tranſlated into Engliſhe verſe by Barnabae Googe.
            
            
               Probitas laudatur & alget.
            
            
               IMPRINTED AT LONDON by Henry Denham, for Rafe Newberye dwelling in Fleete ſtreate. Anno. 1565. Aprilis. 18.
         
         
            
            
               
               
                  B G TOVTE LOVENGE AV DIEV
               
            
         
         
            
            GILBERTVS DVKE CANtabrigienſis, in Marcelli Palingenij conuerſionem.
            
            
               Bellorum, vt ſaeuam rabiem depellimus armis
               Armato
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   minus gladij, vel taela nocebunt:
               Ramis, vt volueres deuitant grandinis imbrē,
               Nec non ventoſos nimbos, gelidaſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   procellas
               Ardens vt
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   calor frigus depulſat acutum.
               Blandimenta, velut ſedant, cohibent
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   furores,
               Aureus vt Phebus tenebras detrudit inanes:
               Sic decus eloquij liuorem pellit acerbum
               Grandi preſidio Gogeum cingente Mineru
                     •
                  
               
               Omnigenis herbis, vt enim ver pingit agellos
               Gratum ver opus hoc Muſis fic ſacrat, & ornat,
               En ſilet infrendens tua (Zoile) lingua, nec ist
                     •
                  
               
               Veris dente potest florem vitiare canino.
               Sit ſtygijs flammis acris tua lingua ſepulta.
            
         
         
            Idem in Laudem operis, ad beneuolum lectorem.
            
            
               Hoc docens vitae ſpeculum beatae
               Quoſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   virtutis, vitij
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   fructus
               Ducit ad ſacras pietatis arces
               Quaſit eundum.
            
            
               
               Anglus exultet Iuuenis, Senex
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
               
               Commodis fretus Latio dicatis:
               Qua dat hoc, inquam patri
                     •
                   libell
                     •
                  
               
               Gogeus almae.
            
            
               Sit nefas ergo violare linguis
               Gog
                     •
                  i, lector, vigilem laborem:
               Gratias gratus meritas habere &
               Hui
                     •
                  memor esto.
            
         
         
            CHRISTOFERVS CARLILVS ſacroſanctae Thaeologiae profeſsor, in Marc. Pallingenij co
                  〈…〉
               ſionem.
            
               Orbem ſigni
                     •
                  erum collustrat numine Phebi
               Pax: radios mittens, ſpargat in orbe faces.
               Lumine virtutis Gogêus pect
                     •
                  ra complet
               Nostra, ligans noſtris verba Latina modis.
               Anglige
                     ••
                  s laetor binas reperiſse Poetas▪
               
               A vit
                     •
                   agresti, qui reuocare ſtudent.
               Alter Chaucerus fama ſuper 
                     •
                  there notus,
               Alter Gogeus, posteritatis 
                     •
                  onos
               Ambo virtutes, virtut is praemia pandunt
               Ambo: artes omnes ambo docere parant.
               Quid deus eſt monſtrat quae
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   eſt diuina potesta
                     •
                  
               
               Quid
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Dei numen, mira
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   facta docent.
            
         
         
            
            
               In Marcellum Pallingenium à Barnaba Gogeo ex Latino Carmine in Anglicum traductum, Iacobi Itzuerti carmen.
            
               Dic mihi quae riguis Parnaſi in collibus erras,
               Que
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   praees ſancto Calliopeia choro,
               Dic queſo (ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   enim quid
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   mihi Diua negaſti)
               Dic mihi quid mereant, qui tua tēpla colunt.
               An non & virides Laurus Hederas
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ſequaces,
               Nexa
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   per dias florea ſerta comas?
               An non aeternas laudes, vitam
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   perennem,
               An non perpetua poſteritate colt?
               An non ſunt digni quorum poſt funera nomen
               Viuat, & aeterna laude feratur opus?
               Sunt equidem: ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   enim ſcribunt ſine numine vates
               Sunt reor illorum pectora plena Deo.
               Quis neget imbutos diuina mente Poetas?
               Crede mihi aethereo ſpiritus igne calet.
               Dic mihi Diua precor ſi ſint haec praemia vatum,
               Quaenam Gogeo munera digna dabis?
               Ille tuos coluit largis ſudoribus hortos,
               Et nouus acceſsit ad tua templa cliens
               Hic reſides iuuenum mentes accendit, & altis
               Eduxit tenebris, luce dedit
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   frui.
               Nempe refert magni, quis nos moderetur euntes
               Et quonam pueri diſcimus ire duce.
               
                  
Hic Anglis Anglus glaciem preſcîdit, & illis
               Difficile ad laudem iam patefecit iter.
               Addidit & ſtimulos, calcar
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   impreſsit eunti
               Primus, & hoc magna laude ſubiuit opus.
               Huius enim didicit bene Palingenius arte
               Stricta quidē numeris Anglica verba loqui
               Iam
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   nouo inſignem ſeſe miratur amictu,
               Se
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ſtupet duplici veste Poeta tegi.
               Et defixa tenens in pulchrum lumina teg
                     ••
                  en
               Iure noua vates veſte ſuperbus ouat.
               Nunc nitidum laudat cultum, varios
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   colores,
               Nunc ſua ſcripta ſtupet diuite verſa ſtylo.
               Nunc vim, nunc faciles motus, caste
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   fluentis
               Carminis immenſas ſ
                     •
                  pe rubeſcit opes.
               Non peregrinorum foetus, nec adultera verba,
               Sed nudam & caſtam cernit vbi
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   fidem.
               Non videt excurſus, ſua ſed veſtigia noſcit,
               Et latio paſsim conſona verba ſtylo.
               Iam
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   etiam cūctis gaudet ſua ſcripta Britannis
               Et ſancta a cupida carmina pube legi,
               Et te Calliope (cuius nunc munere viuit)
               Per Charitum ſupplex numina ſancta rogat,
               Vt quo
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Gogci ſuper aurea ſydera nomen
               (Sunt etenim haec Vatū praemia larga) vehas
               Neue quis illius curſus decus obruat 
                     •
                  ui,
               Sed foelix omni tempore viuat. Amen.
            
         
         
            
            IN GOGEI AEDITIONEM, G. Chatertoni carmen Eligiacum, Christi Collegij Cantabrigi
                  •
                Socij, ad Lectorem.
            
               Marmoreae turres, praecinctae maenibus vrbes
               Tempore labenti, praecipitata ruunt.
               Intereunt ſtatuae, monumenta antiqua virorum
               Quicquid & orbis habet, tempore caſſa iacēt
               Vrbs Romana licet, ſublimibus alta columnis:
               Occidet horrendi conſcia dedecoris.
               Magnificam paenis videas, Carthaginis vrbem:
               Nulla loci, aut vrbis priſtina ſigna manent.
               Sempiterna manent, quae ſcripſit carmina Gogus
               Aetnaeis nunq praeda voranda rogis.
               Non opus egregium hoc, himnis celebrare decorū eſt
               Hoc erit in toto notius orbe nihil.
               Te tamen inprimis noſtra haec mirabitur 
                     •
                  tas
               Si moriere, tuum non morietur opus.
               Anglia laetatur ſe tali prole parentem,
               Est
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ſibi ſolum, ſe genuiſſe ſatis.
               Haec antiqua domus (tibi quōdā ſe dula nutrix)
               Extulit ad verbum, nominis ecce caput
               Quos et hebraea min vel quos nec greca iuuabūt
               Cui
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   minus forſan turba latina placet.
               Huc omnes populi, vos huc generoſa iuuen
                     ••
                  s
               Confluite huc pueri, decrepiti
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ſenes.
            
         
         
            
            DAVID BELLVS, IN BARnabae Gogei Pallingenium.
            
               Carmina Gogaei crebro recitare Rotundae
               Ingenium, mores, eloquium
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   iuuat.
               Quiſquis auet veram complecti mente ſalutem,
               Comparet hunc librum qui ſine ſorde fluit
               Diuitie pereunt, validū
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   quo
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   corpus honores
               Florent doctrinae perpetuo
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   manent
               Qui ſapiat, librum claras qui continet istum
               Virtutes querat, nam mala cuncta vetat.
               Vade libelle igitur Gogei clara ſuppellex
               Et monſtres nomen traxeris vnde tuum.
            
         
         
            
            
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
            
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  :
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
            
         
         
            Eadem Latine.
            
               Non oculis ego te, clariſsime Gogie, vidi,
               Gogie natalis gloria magna ſoli:
               Sed tua bella tamen luſtraui epigrammata, quae
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
               
               Aequent Chauceri ſcripta deſerta ſenis.
               Vidi & Signidici veneranda poaemata Vatis,
               Sunt in maternos quae tibi verſa ſonos.
               Omnia quae pulchrè, Muſis
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   fauentibus ipſe
               Scripſiſti, Vatum munere digna ſacro.
            
         
         
            
            
               To the right Honorable Sir William Cecill Knighte, principall Secretary to the Queenes highneſſe, & Maiſter of her Maieſties Courte of Wardes and Liuereyes.
            
               THe fauorable accepting of my ſimple trauayles lately dedicated vnto your honor, hath ſo much boldened and thorowelye encouraged me, that mawgre the deſpite of moſt reprochfull tongs, I haue not feared to finiſh the courſe of my long pretended race: with no leſſe profite as I truſt, vnto a number, than paynefull trauayle vnto myſelfe. Wherin if I had knowen at the firſte, as much as ſince I haue perfectly vnderſtode, neyther had I as then taken vpon me ſo great an enterpriſe, nor ſince ſo rudely finiſhed, the tranſlation

of ſo eloquent a Poet. For when I fyrſte began to employ ſome part of my leyſure aboute it, making dilligente inquirie, I coulde learne of no man that euer had attempted to engliſh the ſame. So that perceyuing my labour to be no hindraunce to any other mans prayſe, and lamenting to ſee ſo Chriſtian a writer to lie hyd and vnknowen to the ignoraunt ſorte, I thought I ſhould not do amiſſe, if al that in me lay I beſtowed, in the albeit ſimple and ſlender, yet faythfull and true tranſlation, of ſo vertuous a worke. But ſince I haue certaynely vnderſtoode, that when I firſte began to fall in hand wythall, three bookes thereof were both eloquentely and excellently engliſhed, by Maſter Smith, clark vnto the moſte honorable of the Queenes Maieſties counſell. Whoſe doings, as in other matters I haue wyth admiration behelde, ſo in thys I am well aſſured I ſhould with an amaſed minde haue ſene: I woulde that eyther I had latelier begonne it, or elſe that he had fallen in hand ſooner with it, wherby my groſſe & homely

ſtyle might haue bene no hindrance to the fruites of ſo pure a penne. But ſince it was my fortune, ſo blindely to venture vpon it, I truſte my trauayle ſhall neuer the more be enuied. I could not (when I had long debated ye matter with my ſelfe) finde out a Poet more meete for the teaching of a Chriſtian life (an eſtate in theſe oure dayes moſt miſerably decayed) than this no leſſe learned than famous Italiō: Marcellus Pallingenius, a man of ſuch excellent learning and Godly life, that neither ye vnquietneſſe of his time (Italie in thoſe dayes raging wyth moſt cruell & bloudy warres) ne yet the furious tyranny of the Antichriſtian Prelate (vnder whoſe ambicious and Tirannicall gouernaunce he continually liued) coulde once amaſe the Muſe, or hinder the zealous and vertuous ſpirit of ſo Chriſtian a Souldiour. I haue many times much muſed wyth my ſelfe, howe (liuing in ſo daungerous a place) he durſt take vpon him ſo boldely to controll the corrupte and vnchriſtian liues of the whole Colledge of contemptuous Cardinalles,

the vngracious ouerſeeings of bloudthyrſty Biſhops, the Panchplying practiſes of pelting Priours, the manifold madneſſe of miſcheuous Monkes, wyth the filthy fraternitie of flattering Friers. Which ſurely he durſt neuer haue done, but onely that he was heartened wyth a happy and heauenly ſpirite. Which notable audacitie of his was wonderfully reuenged by the malicious hands of ſuch as felt themſelues fretted with his ſpiritual corſey. For when they had not power to execute their tyrannie vpon his innocent body in time of his life, their miſchieuous malice was no whit aſhamed to conſume with fyre the blameleſſe bones of ſo vertuous a man: yea and that a great while after his death. Beſides the reprouing of the leud liues of the Clergie, he boldly inueyed agaynſt the graceleſſe gouernance of proud pompous Princes, ye licencious liuing of the riottous nobilitie, the couetous catchings of greedy Lawyers, the vngodly gaynes of fooliſh Phyſitians, and the corrupted conſciences of deceytf
                  ••
                Artificers:

affirming playnly, that if they did not better beautify their chriſtian names with a more chriſtiā life, of ſo many thouſands as haue in vaine receued that moſt holy ſacrament of ſacred Baptiſme, there ſhould ſcarce three aſpire vnto the enheritaunce of Heauenly ioyes. What doth your honor ſuppoſe this man would haue written? Unto how great a volume doe you thinke his works would haue amoū
               ted, if ſo that GOD had appoynted him to floriſh at this preſēt time in England, wheras pitifully raigneth ſuch mōſtrous & horrible pride, ſuch cancred and ſpiteful malice, ſuch falſe & fayned frēdſhips, ſuch lack of loue and charity, ſuch profeſſing of God in words, & denying him in works, as doubtleſſe is not to be foūd among the faythleſſe Turks, miſcreant Sarazēs, or ſuperſticious Jewes: Better were it in my fanſy not at al to profes his name, thā thus with diueliſh life to make it be euill ſpoken of amongſt the heathen. The Prophet Eſay. 52. ſaith, Vae vobis propter quos nomē meum malè audit apud gentes. Vae qui conſurgitis &c. 
               Eſay. 5.
               
It is not our chriſtendome aſſuredly that liuing ſo vnlike Chriſtians ſhall bring vs to Heauen, as S. Chriſoſtome in theſe wordes doth wytneſſe. Sin vero ne tibi quidem ipſe luce as, & ne propriam putredinem foetorem
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   detergas, quibus te indicijs ego fidelem 
               In Cap. 1. Mat. Ho: 4 
               potero agnoſcere: an quia ſacrati aquas fontis ingreſſus es? at hoc ipſū fit tibi grauioris viatticū ſupplicij. I would therfore wiſh that we ſhould not to much preſume of the ſecuritie obtayned by a Chriſtian name, but that we ſhould wyth al our endeuour apply our ſelues to ſhew ſuch fruits as duetie requireth in the followers of Chriſte. Whereby we ſhoulde not onely preuayle agaynſt our enimies, and ſtoppe the mouthes of our ſlaunderous aduerſaries, but alſo enioy a bleſſed and happy tranquility in this worlde, and be aſſured to obtayne the promiſed pleaſures in the worlde to come. For the teachinge whereof, I know no man that hath ſo much trauayled and perfectly profyted, as hath this Poet, which I here preſent vnto your honor, about whom although I haue lately

ken ſome paynes, not enioying all the while ſo quiet a minde as had bene nedefull for ſuch a labour, nor hauing the familiar conference of any ſtudious frends whereby in ſome doubtes I might better haue bene reſolued. I am well aſſured I ſhall receyue for reward, the reprechfull reports of a number of infamous tongs, as by the publiſhing of my firſt attempts I haue bene ſufficiently taught. What remedie? If this my trauayle ſhall finde fauoure at the handes of youre honoure and others of perfectneſſe in iudgement, I doe little eſteeme the fonde ſurmiſings of the ſcornefull company, nor the raſhe reporte of ſo fonde a fellowſhip, aduiſing them rather to proue the lyke laboure, than hawetyly to reproue any well meaning minde. I haue longer here continued my Barbarous ſtyle than reaſon doth allowe: wherefore ceaſſing (for auoyding of tediouſneſſe) wyth ſo vnperfecte an ende, I moſte humbly beſeechs your honoure to take in good parte this ſo ſimple and ſlender a gyfte, whiche althoughe

it hath eſcaped at the firſte impreſſion with a number of faultes, I truſte hereafter ſhall perfectelye be purged. God long preſerue your honour in proſperous eſtate.
            
               Your Honours humble and faythfull ſeruaunt
Barnabae Googe.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ To the vertuous and frendely Reader.
            
               WHat pleaſure and profite the dilligent reading of vertuous Poets doth miniſter to the Godly and Chriſtian minde, ſo euidently and playnely hath alwayes appeared, that I neede not to beſtowe any time about the declaring hereof. Neither was the ſtatety ſtyle of Heroicall verſe, only had in price and eſtimation with the learned Greekes and 
                  •
               l
                  •
               quent Romains (wyth whome Poets were alwayes eſtemed and carefully prouided for,) but alſo it ſeemeth there was no little accoumpte made, of the pleaſant agreement of 
                  •
               u
                  ••
               ly meaſured wordes, among thoſe ſacred Prophetes that dire
                  •
               ted the whole courſe and trade of their life, to the pray
                  •
               ng and pleaſing of the almighty Lorde. For as S. Hierome teſti
                  •
               eth, the deuine and notable Prophecies of Eſay, the Lamentation of Jeremie, the Songs & Ballades of Salomen, the Pſalter of Dauid, and

the boke of Hiob, were written by ye firſt auctours in perfect and pleaſaunt Hexameter verſes. So that the deuine and canonicall volumes were garniſhed and ſet forth with the ſweete according tunes, & heauenly ſoundes of pleaſaunt metre. Yet wyll not the graceleſſe company of our pernicious Hipocrites allow that the Pſalmes of Dauid (a moſte comfortable booke) ſhould be tranſlated into Engliſhe metre. And why? Marry (ſaye they) bycauſe they were only receiued to be chaū
               ted in the Church, and not to be ſong in euery Coblers ſhop. O monſtrous & malicious infidels, doe you ſo much diſcloſe your cancred ſtomacks towardes the deuine Maieſtie, that you ab horre to heare his glory and prayſe ſounding in ye mouth of a poore Chriſtian artificer? May none of your ſacred ſecretes paſſe any farther than your ſolemne ſinagogs? What ſay you to Chriſoſtome who exhorted his audience in this ſorte?
            
               Dicat vir aliqua eorum quae nunc hic ſunt 
               Homy. 2. in 1. Cap. Gen. 
               dicta, audiat autē Mulier, diſcant Pueri, diſcant & Familiares, fiat
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Domus Eccleſia, vt

                  
                     •
                  ffugetur Diabolus, in fugam vertatur malus ille Daemon inimicus ſalutis noſtrae.
            
            Let the goodman (ſaith he) tell to his familie ſome of theſe matters, whereof I haue here entreated. Let the wife giue care, let the children learne, let the reſidewe be inſtructed, and let the houſe be made a Church, that the Diuell may be put to flight, that the wicked ſpirite and enimie of our ſaluation may be chaſed away. If you had lyued in theſe dayes Mayſter Doctor, for your ſo ſaying you ſhould haue bene counted an Heritike, as a good Scholler alledging of late dayes to Sir John lacklattin of the countrey, the auctority of ſain
                  •
               t Paule: wilt thou haue it (ſayth the Parſon) S. Paule was an Heretike and ſo art thou. I aſſure you yt Diuell hath a fayth and ſo haue you. To retourne to thee, louing and frendly reader: Seing that wyth theſe auncient fathers and holy Prophetes, this kinde of wryting in verſe was ſo highly eſteemed, that the Godly inſtructions of the Scripture, and the comfortable prophecies of our mercifull redeemer, were in this ſorte

of wryting vttered, yea & ſince there was ſuche a grace giuen vnto it that the Holy Ghoſte did therein prophecy of Chriſte by the mouthes of ſinfull Pagans, as it appeareth by the prophecy of Uirgill.
            
               Vltima Cumaei iam venit carminis aetas
               Magnus ab integro ſeclorum naſcitur ordo.
               Iam redit & Virgo, redeunt Saturnia regnae Eglog. 4.
               
               Iam noua progenies caelo demittitur alto.
            
            Since this (I ſaye) appeareth, be not ſo ſtraight of iudgement as I know a number to be that can not abyde to reade anyething written in Engliſhe verſe, which nowe is ſo plenteouſly enriched wyth a numbre of eloquent writers, that in my fanſy it is lyttle inferiour to the pleaſaunt verſes of the auncient Romaines. For ſince the time of our excellente countreyman ſir Geffray Chaucer who liueth in like eſtimation with vs as did olde Ennius wyth the Latines. There hath flouriſhed in England ſo fine and filed phraſes, and ſo good & pleaſant Poets as may counter
               
                  •
               ayle the doings of Virgill, Ouid, Horace, Iuuenall, Martiall, Lucan, Perſeus, Tibullus, Catullus, Seneca, and Propertius. Amongſt

whome (as moſt inferiour to them all) I haue for thy cōmoditie brought into Engliſh verſe this vertuous Poet Palingen
                     •
                  . And though I haue not ſo eloquētly Engliſhed it as a nūber that may better thā I would haue done, & as the worthyneſſe of the autour ſeemes to require, yet haue I faythfully & truly tranſlated it: giuing in ſome places verſe for verſe, & word for worde: in other places (where I haue not preciſely obſerued ſo ſtrick
                  •
               e an order) yet haue I no whit ſwarued from the perfect minde of the au
                  •
               oure, to the entente that with theſe ſundry kinds of tranſlations I might pleaſe euery head. And if it ſo happen to fall out that I ſatiſfy not thine expectation, yet accept good Reader my good wyll therein, which onely meaneth to pleaſe and profite thee. For which I accoumpt my trauayles recōpenced, if ſo be they ſhall be thankfully receyued of thee. And for the other ſorte, I ſaye vnto them wyth Martiall.
            
            Qui ducis vultus, & non legis iſta libenter
            Omnibus inuidias, liuide, ne
                  •
               o ti
                  •
               i.
            Fare thou vvell moſt heartyly in Chriſt.
         
         
            
               
               
                  Faultes eſcaped in the Auctors abſence.
                  
                     
                        Letter.
                     
                     
                        Leafe.
                     
                     
                        Syde.
                     
                     
                        Lyne.
                     
                     
                        Faultes.
                     
                     
                        Corrected.
                     
                  
                  
                     U
                     7
                     2
                     5
                     when God,
                     When that
                  
                  
                     U
                     7
                     2
                     16
                     and left
                     at laſt
                  
                  
                     U
                     7
                     2
                     20
                     nygher
                     Myſer
                  
                  
                     CC
                     3
                     2
                     24
                     their
                     they
                  
                  
                     CC
                     4
                     2
                     17
                     not
                     no
                  
                  
                     CC
                     6
                     2
                     24
                      
                     leue out but with ſtroke of Tortoys loſt his life.
                  
                  
                     CC
                     8
                     2
                     15
                     with mighty fall. &c.
                      
                  
                  
                     CC
                     8
                     2
                     25
                     Poets
                     Prophets
                  
                  
                     FF
                     7
                     2
                     14
                     doubtfull
                     doleful
                  
                  
                     GG
                     2
                     2
                     11
                     beaſtes
                     hoaſtes
                  
                  
                     HH
                     5
                     1
                     12
                     Belbowes
                     bellowes his right
                  
                  
                     KK
                     5
                     1
                     18
                     hys horne
                     horne.
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ❧ The fyrſt Booke of Pallingen, entituled Aries.
            
            
               MY minde with fury fierce in flamd
               of late I know not how,
               Doth burne Parnaſus hylles to ſee,
               adournd wyth Laurell bow,
               The Camps ſo cleare of Caſtaly,
               
               where Muſes ſweete do ſing:
               The towne Cyrrha doth me delight,
               and trees that euer ſpring.
               What darkneſſe oh ſhall I now flie?
               to me appeareth playne
               The bliſſefull beames of Eous bright,
               the day returnes agayne.
               O darkneſſe fade thy way from hence,
               hyde thou thy ſelfe in hell.
               The loue of Muſe and hie Iehoue,
               
               doth both within me dwell.
               And vertue doth not labour feare,
               the way though hard it be,
               O Phebus father Poets helpe,
               diſcloſe the doubtes to me,
               With Aganippes holſome fode,
               repleniſh thou my dayes:
               Thy temple eke to come vnto,
               do thou direct my wayes.
               Defend me from the common ſorte,
               that ſeeke me to diſprayſe.
               
                  
Not worſe vnlikde now ſhall I be,
               if that thou wylt me bleſſe,
               That I thy prieſt vnknowne and new,
               my ſelfe to labour dreſſe.
               Thou lifteſt men from baſe eſtate,
               to honours them to call,
               Without thy grace, the wit of man,
               would periſh ſone and fall:
               His voyce and al would ware full horce
               nothing would ſwetely ſound,
               All ſwete and pleaſaunt melody,
               would fal vnto the ground.
               And if thou wilte me fauour nowe,
               I wyll aſcend the Skies,
               And there thy hie and Godly workes
               contemplate with mine eyes.
               Oh fauour me, thou Phebus hie,
               take thou from ground away:
               Thy Poet proſtrate here on earth,
               if that by fates I may.
               And you (O Nimphes) of Caſtaly,
               
               if wyth vnfayned harte
               I haue approcht your learned dores,
               if riottes fylthy arte
               Could not wtdraw my youthful yeares,
               from honoring of your name,
               Ne fylthy luſt of beaſtlineſſe
               coulde euer me defame:
               
                  
Then let my fame go flye abrode,
               leaſt that vnworthyly,
               I ſhal be after thought to liue,
               and ſo my name ſhal dye.
               For hope of glory and renowne,
               a man for to obtayne,
               Hath cauſed men in vertuouſneſſe
               to take both care and payne.
               And thou O famous worthy Prince
               that Hercule haſt to name,
               Amongs the doughty Italian Dukes,
               of moſt renowned fame.
               And of the hie Eſtenſian bloud,
               the chiefe illuſter floure:
               Whom Pallas in Parnafus caues,
               hath nouriſht euery houre,
               Whome Muſes nine wyth ſacred milke
               from tender yeres haue fed,
               Whereby a fame they hope to haue
               that neuer ſhall be deade:
               Of Cyrrha eke the Laurell tree,
               ſhall ſpring they truſt agayne,
               Though Mars doth let in ſpite of them,
               and ſeeketh to retayne
               Your noble heart into his tentes
               by al the meanes he may:
               In tents where honour you ſhal haue
               
                  
that neuer ſhall decay,
               Wheras your armes as right requires
               ſhall richly decked be
               With triumphes due to ſuch a Prince
               of luſty Laurell tree.
               Drawe nere and wyth a ioyful face
               thy Poete loke vpon,
               Willing to treade vnproued pathes
               that haue not yet bene gone.
               And ſhewe-thy fauour to a wight
               that nowe abaſhed is:
               So may Ferrarra ſee thee long
               in perfect ioy and blis,
               Till after this thy ioyfull life,
               a long and happy time,
               Departing from the earth thou ſhalt
               the ſtarry heauen clime.
               And if my Fatal yeares be long,
               in time ſhal come the day,
               When as your grace and worthy dedes
               I ſhal at large diſplay,
               When Indie aye with Tarteſſe brinkes
               thy name ſhall cauſe to ſound:
               Thy fame ſhall flye in euery place
               of Hiperbores ground.
               In vtter partes of Africke to,
               you ſhall be knowen by me:
               
                  
Then I wyth greater rage of Muſe,
               
               encouraged ſhall be,
               And ſhal declare vnto al men,
               how that you do embrace
               Juſtice, and eke what Godlineſſe
               and fayth is in your grace,
               What counſayle doth in you abound,
               what valeant worthy powre,
               How liberall with gentleneſſe,
               you are at euery howre:
               By me ſhall alſo wonder much,
               the world in euery place,
               To ſee what wyt and manners mylde,
               conſiſteth in your grace.
               But now the things that I you giue,
               receiue wyth gentle harte,
               And take my preſent doing here,
               a while as in good parte.
               My minde deſyreth ſore to wryte
               of much and diuers things,
               And not alwayes to ſtay at one,
               but as the ſprite me brings
               I go now here, now there I ſwimme
               amid the waters deepe,
               Sometime I toſſe the boiſtrous waues
               ſometyme to ſhore I creepe.
               And though ſometimes by reaſons rule
               
                  
I ſhall aſſay to finde,
               The ſecret wayes by nature hyd,
               and bring them vnto minde:
               Thoſe things yet will I follow moſt,
               whereby a profyt ſhall
               Aryſe, and adde a holy life,
               to men that be mortal.
               A life alas now baniſht cleane,
               if I the truth may ſay
               In this our age, than which a worſe
               was neuer ſeene the day.
               Such things I ſay, that ſhall expel
               the vices of the minde:
               A thing that more the Muſes fyttes,
               than this I can not finde.
               This makes a man for to be ſound,
               of witte both prompt and fine,
               Although by nature he be dull,
               and do no whitte decline
               Ungodly, and neglecting right,
               that horedome doth not ſpare,
               Or on whome earthly auarice,
               hath cauſed for to care,
               Or he whome enuy in his hearte,
               doth euermore poſſeſſe,
               Unconſtant, or a lying man,
               or takes in drinke exceſſe,
               
                  
In fine what euer vice he hath,
               by this he may forſake,
               The hurtful harmes of peruerſe mind,
               a Godly life to take.
               This worthy men doth cauſe to be,
               and fyt for honours hie:
               Which to themſelues, their houſe, and realme
               can councel prudently,
               And vnto doubtful things they can
               bring preſent remedy.
               So much the face of beauty fayre,
               ought not eſtemed to be,
               The pleaſaunt eyes with ſhining locks,
               eche parte of royall blee,
               As maners wel compoſed, and
               a pure and honeſt minde,
               Where vertue beares ſo great a ſtroke
               that vice is harde to finde.
               Doth not the righteous man or he,
               that vertues much doth loue,
               Liue al in myrth, and hopes for helpe
               of only God aboue?
               He nothing cares whē whiſpring worde
                     •
                  
               
               be cloſely ſpoke in eare,
               When iudge, or King, doth for him cal
               his heart doth nothing feare.
               Contrarywiſe the wicked man,
               
                  
defamed feares to be,
               And when the lightnings thūder rores,
               then gilty trembleth he.
               If men doe chaunce in eares to rounde,
               or whiſper when they walke,
               Alas then cries he to himſelfe,
               of me theſe men do talke,
               What ſhal I do? the Judge or King
               doth cal, and ſhall I goe,
               Or rather flie the perils great
               of wretched life? now loe,
               By fyxed law of GOD doth feare
               the wicked men torment,
               And though ſometime the euil man
               to myrth doth ſeeme as bent,
               As Strongilos amyd the ſeas,
               yet doth he boyle within,
               Or Etna when his flaming dartes,
               
                  Pyrackmon doth begin.
               But were it better to declare,
               with thouſand ſhippes aſſaylde
               The curſed chaunce of Pergamus
               
               that foliſhly bewaylde
               The periurde chaunce of Sinons deede?
               or elſe Ogiges towne,
               Which by the cruel chaunce of warre,
               was raced cleane adowne?
               
                  
Or ſhal I prayſe, as Poetes wont,
               ſome man wyth forging lyes?
               And iudge a colour fayre to be,
               contrary to mine eyes?
               Or were it better here to fayne,
               how Dedalus did flie,
               The woful hap of Icarus
               
               that fell out of the Skie?
               The bodies oft tranſfourmed aye,
               of Gods and eke of men:
               And ſo delude the ydle eares,
               with trifles of my pen?
               Or had I better to declare
               the wanton toyes of youth,
               And ſlaunder Gods wyth prophane acts
               which is a greater ruth?
               For what do theſe our frantick heads
               now feare at any houre?
               The Gods (we ſay) with lecherous luſte,
               both boyes and maydes defloure.
               A hore in heauens hie to be,
               a lechoure to they ſay:
               O ſhame, is this a Godlineſſe,
               or right to vſe ſuch way?
               Are theſe the thankes we owe to God?
               be theſe our odoures ſwete?
               Be theſe the duties that we owe,
               
                  
or prayſes for him meete?
               What thing will now the witte of man
               forbeare to fayne or lye:
               By meanes whereof they may obtayne
               in ſinne a liberty?
               Of writers vayne both leud and yll,
               O rude vnruly route,
               You nede to take Elleborus
               
               to pourge your humours out.
               To you I ſpeake that others harme
               whoſe tongs do ſpare no man:
               If lightning ſhould you all conſume,
               what maruell were it than?
               Shew me the cauſe both night and day,
               why do you take ſuch payne?
               Is it but only for your ſelues?
               why then no prayſe you gayne.
               For he that only priuate wealth
               regardeth alwayes ſtill,
               And laughes to ſcorne an others harme
               whilſte he enioyes his will.
               A ſauage beaſt by right deſert,
               deſerueth calde to be:
               And not a man for to be namde,
               for ſo to write ought we,
               That men may get ſome good thereby,
               and not complaine to ſpend:
               
                  
Their times in trifling trickes & toyes
               that haue no certaine end.
               And fyrſt ought to be knowen that we,
               do good in three deuide:
               In pleaſure and vtilitie,
               and honeſty chiefe beſide.
               Some one of theſe or greater parte,
               may Poets alway vſe:
               So that the bondes of honeſty,
               to breake they ſhall refuſe.
               But O what titles and what crowne,
               did he deſerue to haue,
               Which things not only vaine & nought
               good fruite that neuer gaue,
               But wrot ſuch things as might corrupt
               the life of any man,
               And make him worſer ten to one,
               than when he firſt began?
               He left behinde him monuments,
               of wanton wicked wayes:
               And left ſuch fooliſh doting things,
               to men of latter dayes.
               O Lord how much doth wanton words
               to wicked life entice
               And with a feruent poyſon great,
               doth draw men vnto vice.
               From eares a wanton wicked voice,
               
                  
dare pearce the ſecrete thought.
               And vnto miſchiefe moue thereby,
               the members bent to nought.
               A noble man ſuch things delight,
               (ſome man perhaps wyll ſay:)
               Who in his houſe a luſty route
               doth kepe in rich aray,
               Whome for to feare, exceſſiue goods
               compels a man thereto,
               With any parte of worthy wyt
               who neuer had to do.
               What then may theſe be ſuffred thoe,
               or prayſd, bycauſe they pleaſe
               The rich, or elſe the noble men
               that alwayes liue in eaſe?
               Not ſo, for what a ſorte there be
               of twolegd Aſſes clothed
               In Golde and Silke, and Purple fayre
               to al men is not ſhewed.
               There be, there be ful many now,
               whome Pearls haue puft with pride,
               And whome the Aſians haue beſet
               with Silke on euery ſyde,
               Whoſe fingers fayre with rings of gold
               be daſht and deckt about,
               With precious ſtones & pearles of price
               that India ſendeth out.
               
                  
Thoſe men a man would almoſt ſwear,
               that Plato they excell,
               Or Socrates who (Phaebus iudge)
               of wiſdome bare the bell.
               And yet theſe Princely paynted walles
               do nought wythin contayne,
               A blather ful implete with winde ſprings
               they may be termed playne.
               Where Fortune fawnes, there pleaſure
               and pleaſure bringeth folly:
               And ſo the light of reaſons rule
               is darkned vtterly,
               Whereby it happes that ſeldome wyſe,
               theſe children chaunce to be.
               To ſuffer payne for vertues ſake,
               who wil, if ſo be he
               Haue no rewarde? rewarde who ſekes,
               but he whome nede conſtraynes?
               The rich man followes ioyful things,
               and liueth void of paynes,
               He hates the prycking thorny wayes,
               the clyffes both ſharp and ſowre,
               By which we do aſſay to clime,
               to Lady learnings towre.
               I can not ſtay my ſelfe as now,
               when anger cōmes vpon,
               But needes I muſt defye both verſe,
               
                  
and Poets al as one,
               When boyes we ſee decline to nought,
               whome maiſters do embewe,
               With verſes filthy to be namde,
               which moſt they ſhould eſchew.
               Their firſt poſſeſſed ſhame faſtneſſe,
               to ſee them cleane forſake:
               And eke how apt and prone they be
               a noughty way to take,
               And foſter miſchiefe ſo in youth,
               that he may alwayes dwell
               In them, whereby they may prepare
               in age a way to hell.
               But yet it doth me good to ſee,
               how hoping al for praiſe,
               They get themſelues immortall ſhame,
               that neuer more decayes.
               For who wil iudge them voyd of vice,
               or that they liude not ſo,
               As they themſelues did giue precepts
               to others for to go?
               The talke it ſelfe doth wel declare,
               the nature of the minde,
               And euery man doth moſte frequent
               things propre to his kinde.
               Of Oxen, rake, and culter ſharpe
               the plowmans 
                     •
                  ong doth walke,
               
                  
Of Sayle and Cable, Maſt and Ore,
               is all the Seamans talke.
               Of Horſes, harneſſe, Speare & Shielde,
               the Captayne ſtyl wil boſte:
               So bawdy mates of bawdy things,
               their tongs do clatter moſte.
               I warne you ſyrs aboue the reſt,
               of youth that takes the cure,
               Whoſe parte it is the tender mindes
               of boyes for to allure,
               To bertue and to Godlineſſe,
               like waxe do them prepare,
               Hate you the wicked workes of thoſe,
               for greater matters care.
               Reade not ſuch things as are but vayne
               vnworthy to be tolde:
               But teach the worthy hiſtories
               of auncient fathers olde.
               Herein let children nouſeled be,
               let theſe be borne away:
               Here of may ſpring a Godly fruite,
               direct their life that may.
               They ſhew what things we folow ſhuld
               and what we ſhould reiect:
               And fables al among the reſt
               we may not wel neglect.
               For oftentimes a Comody,
               
                  
may holeſome doctrine bring:
               And moniſh men by pleaſant wordes,
               to leaue ſome noughty thing.
               There be I graunt ſome Poets workes
               not altogither vayne,
               Which with a pleſaunt ſugred ſtyle,
               procede from ſobre brayne.
               Theſe things do helpe, and voyd of vic
               theſe workes do profit much:
               In youth bring vp your ſcholers wyth
               none other foode but ſuch.
               And when their yong and tender age
               they once haue paſſed out:
               Then may they ſafely voyd of harm,
               go range the fieldes about,
               And gather floures where they liſt,
               for daunger is away.
               But now a while for to diſcuſſe,
               I thinke it beſt aſſay,
               Of which of theſe is nedefull moſt,
               or moſte to be eſtemed:
               The man that good and honeſt is,
               or he that well is learned.
               The good or elſe the learned man,
               of two which is the beſt:
               Learning is hie, becōmes the meke,
               and doth the proude infeſt.
               
                  
It doth refuſe the belly gods,
               and ſuch as ſleepe hath trainde:
               Without long time and labour great,
               it wyll not be obtainde.
               This Citie rules and moueth Mars,
               and this can warres refell:
               It ſheweth the earth and goodly ſtarres
               and ſickneſſe doth expell.
               Thys teacheth figures faire to frame,
               of ſundry ſorce and kinde:
               This teacheth vs to number well,
               and muſicke calles to minde.
               This doth aſcende the heauens and
               bring hidden things to light:
               No perfit man without this ſame,
               may called be of right.
               Unlike to beaſtes and like to gods,
               this cauſeth vs to be:
               Sometime and yet of little price,
               his vertue loſt we ſee.
               As oft as with the dregges of vice,
               defylde he doth put on:
               Deformed hewe amid the durte,
               as doth the Jaſper ſtone.
               Or as the Sunne behinde the cloude,
               or ſhadowe of the Moone:
               Ne is it onely vile in ſight,
               
                  
but hurtfull very ſoone.
               For if a wicked man it haue,
               then may it be comparde:
               Unto a frentyke foole that hath
               a ſworde wythout regarde.
               Whereby hee many doth deſtroy,
               and runneth more aſtray:
               But he that voide of harme and hurte,
               to liue doth well aſſay.
               Obſeruing well the law of God,
               and of the hygher powre:
               And ſynne doth flye as open throte,
               of dragon to deuoure.
               The ſhepe, the moyle or horſes kept,
               whoſe office is to ſee:
               Though he be one, if learning lacke,
               eſtemde he ought to bee.
               Such one I ſay no man nor God,
               can euer well deſpiſe:
               But he that vertue doth enuie,
               at leaſt that is not wiſe.
               For who but ſuch wyll not hym loue,
               and worthily commende:
               That feareth God and righteouſnes,
               obſerueth to hys ende.
               Whom golde can neuer ouercome,
               who willeth no mans wrong:
               
                  
Who helpes the poores afflicted caſe,
               who flyeth the naughty throng.
               He feedes the humble and the meke
               yll tongues hee doth reiect:
               No man to hurt he doth reioice,
               but rather to protect.
               And that which is the worthyeſt praiſe
               at euery time he can:
               In euery thing a modeſtye,
               vſe, happy is that man.
               More happy yet I doe him iudge,
               that doth in both excell:
               Who that is good and learned to,
               a crowne deſerueth well.
               For other men he farre exceedes,
               as golde doth copper paſſe:
               And as the flaming Piropus,
               excelles the duſkey glaſſe.
               And ſeldome ſynne thou ſhalt diſcerne,
               a man of learned fame:
               At leaſt not much, vnto the rude,
               there is no heede of ſhame.
               But headlong ruſhe they into vice,
               which they forbidden bee:
               And holy lawes be laught to ſcorne,
               by fooliſhe fonde decree.
               Lyke as the blinde cannot beware,
               
                  
but fal in ditches deepe:
               As men amid the darke be hurt,
               when Proſerpine doth ſleepe.
               So minde of man, which is but blinde
               take learning once away:
               In euery vice it doth not doubt
               to fall and runne aſtray.
               Except it be compreſt by feare,
               of paine that may enſue:
               No things but thoſe that pleaſaunt bee,
               it iudgeth right or true.
               Yet many times it may be ſene,
               that nature doth ſupply:
               The maiſters roume and giueth grace,
               in youth abundantly.
               Whereby that ſchoole did neuer teache,
               by grace they may obtaine:
               What letteth ſuch to leade a life,
               as vertue teacheth plaine.
               The greater thankes be due to him,
               for euermore to giue:
               Whoſe booke doth ſhew a Methode true
               declaring how to liue.
               O famous Gods of hie renoume,
               which rule the forked hyll:
               To whom my yeares I alwayes gaue,
               and dedicate them ſtyll.
               
                  
If that ſuch waighty things a wretche,
               may ſafely you deſire:
               In this my worke I take in hande,
               your aide I now require.
               Let not diſhonour me deface,
               nor in his blaſing rage:
               Let limping Uulcan me deſtroye,
               at any time or age.
               And thus an ende the ramme that kepes
               the entraunce of our doore:
               Doth leaue his place vnto the bull,
               that haſteth here afore.
               The booke approching next at hande,
               doth will mee to haue done:
               In haſt and biddes me finiſhe now,
               that I of late begonne.
            
         
         
            ¶The Seconde booke entituled Taurus.
            
               LOng time yt haſt thee reſted well,
               my boate in pleaſant baye:
               Now time vs biddes to hoyſe vp ſailes
               and ancour vp to way.
               The waſhing wynter now is fledde,
               the hoary ſnowes be gon:
               From downe the hylles they faſt diſtill,
               
                  
that once they fell vpon.
               The earth againe doth floriſhe greene,
               the trees repaire their ſpring:
               With pleaſaunt notes the Nitingale,
               beginneth new to ſing.
               With flowers freſh their heads be deckt
               the Fairies daunce in fielde:
               And wanton ſonges in moſſye dennes,
               the Drids and Satirs yelde.
               The wynged Cupide faſt doth caſt,
               his dartes of golde yframed:
               And luſty youth with pleaſaunt heate,
               hath feruently inflamed.
               Now may we ſafely wander out,
               amid the waters plaine:
               The floudes be calme ye weſterne wynde
               is preſent here againe.
               O foole why art thou now afraide,
               the ayre is fayre and bright:
               And Atlas daughters riſyng vp,
               perſwade thy courſe of right.
               For ydleneſſe what kynde of praiſe
               can happen vnto thee:
               To ſtouthfulneſſe no good rewarde,
               may well aſcribed bee.
               Lyft vp thy heart and corage eke,
               be bolde and of good chere:
               
                  
For fortune moſt doth fauour thoſe,
               that all things leaſt doe feare.
               To fearefull folkes at any time,
               ſhee 
                     〈…〉
                  umphe hath denaide:
               But as I geſſe the monſters teeth,
               doth make thee ſore afraide.
               Great ſhame it is that vertue ſhoulde,
               for monſters hyde their face:
               Go to therefore leaue of thy lettes,
               and walke the depth apace.
               The kyng and Lord and mighty power,
               that rules the worlde ſo faſt:
               Who wyth a beck the golden ſtarres,
               ſhall gouerne whilſte they laſt.
               Who made the earth inhabited
               wyth beaſtes of ſundry ſight:
               And diuers fiſhe within the ſea,
               to draw their vitall ſprite.
               Leaſt deſtitute of dwellers be,
               thoſe elements they ſhoulde:
               And onely man among the reſt,
               diſcerne he reaſon woulde.
               And vnto him he graunted ſpeache,
               where beaſtes be dumme of ſounde:
               Declining downe their bodies great,
               doe lycke the maſſey grounde.
               With reaſon he hath vnder brought,
               
                  
the ſtrongeſt beaſtes of might:
               The Lion fierce, the Tygre ſwift,
               alone hath put to flight.
               The ſerpents though their bodies foule
               wyth poyſon doe abounde:
               Doe ſtande in awe and feare him to,
               when that they heare hys ſounde.
               The mōſtruous mole ye thurlpole great,
               of mighty forme and ſtrength:
               In Occean ſea doth giue him place,
               when he doth walke at length.
               Take him away what were the earth?
               a place wyth bryers growne:
               And would bring forth no kinde of corne
               vntilde or els vnſowne.
               Hee cities built and ordned lawes.
               wherby they ruled bee:
               Wyth temples trymmed for their ſtate,
               the Gods adourned hee.
               Full many artes he ſearched forth,
               and inſtruments he founde:
               Which like the lightning flaſhe & flame,
               and lyke the thunders ſounde.
               Wherein the fier faſt incloſde,
               inforceth all hee may:
               Out of hys mouth to rumble oute,
               the pellet farre away.
               
                  
Whereby the Towers hye be bette,
               and walles of euery towne:
               Hys ſtrength not able to abide
               come topſy turuey downe.
               And he that heareth farre away,
               the bouncing of theſe blowes:
               With dreadfull noyſe ye thūder thumpes
               as preſent there he trowes.
               Unhappy had you bene O Gods,
               if in Phlegreus grounde:
               Wheras with giantes huge you fought
               ſuch weapons had bene founde.
               He founde out ſhippes whereby a man,
               to paſſe the ſeas may knowe:
               And wander farre whereas he liſt,
               if wynde at wyll doe blowe.
               In places farre abrode and nie,
               to Tytan in the Eaſt:
               And where the Sūne doth ſlip ſometime
               and fall vnder the weſt.
               And in the North whereas the Beare,
               her colour cleare doth giue:
               And in the other part againe,
               where men there be that liue.
               Whoſe feete contrary quite to ours,
               doe alwayes vſe to treade:
               And lyke to fall their heeles aloft,
               
                  
doe downewarde hang theire head,
               And though he doe excell in witte,
               and vigour of the minde:
               So much that well he may be thought
               to come of God hys kinde.
               Yet knowethhe not nor ſeekes to know,
               a thyng to badde to tell:
               How for to liue, what wayes to flye,
               or what to follow well.
               O mortall breſtes where darknes blinde
               doth euermore abounde:
               And eke O mindes where fooliſhneſſe,
               may alwayes well be founde,
               By wicked wayes they runne aſtray,
               and fewe alas doe knowe:
               Which way their iourney well to take
               or where in ſafe to rowe.
               Whereby the chiefe and happieſt lyfe,
               in time they may obtaine:
               The knotty ſcience of tho lawes,
               will neuer ſhewe it plaine.
               Nor he that can in medicine ſkyll,
               in eloquence or grammer:
               But onely wyſedome muſt the waye
               detect, the chiefe defender.
               Of man and ruler of hys life,
               which if the Lorde m
                     ••
                   giue:
               
                  
And if the ſyſters three me let,
               vntill my time to liue.
               What kinde of thing is bleſſed lyfe,
               I wyll my ſelfe entreate:
               And how it may be got although,
               it be a labour great.
               The greateſt part of men doe thinke,
               felicitie to ſtande:
               In purſes puffed vp with pens,
               and ſo much golde in hande.
               To haue as in the Lidius ſtreames,
               among the ſande doth growe:
               Or elſe as much as Tagus vp,
               continually doth throwe.
               To haue ſo many acres of
               good grounde and paſtors 
                     ••
                  aine:
               As he hath haires vnto hys head,
               of men a buſhing traine.
               Of beaſtes ſo huge a droue to haue,
               as Polyphemus not:
               At any time did foſter vp,
               amid the pleaſaunt plot.
               Of Sycyly as neuer had
               the ſhepeheard Ariſteus:
               As neuer toke away by force,
               the man that hyght Tyrinthus.
               Wyth orchardes fayre as euer had,
               
                  
Alcinous the King:
               And as the ſyſters fayre did holde,
               by force of cruell ſting.
               Of dragon vgly to beholde,
               for to poſſeſſe alone:
               Wyth houſes hye adourned faire,
               wyth cruſt of Marble ſtone.
               Theſe are the things that euery man,
               doth now a dayes deſire:
               Which nature carefull for her ſonne,
               doth inſtantly require.
               With earneſt prayer to the Gods,
               theſe things who doth poſſeſſe:
               The common ſort beleues he liues,
               in perfect bleſſedneſſe.
               What Hiders great in flowers lurke,
               the blockheads doe not knowe:
               Ne yet how many pricking thornes
               among the Roſes growe.
               For needes he muſt no remedy,
               that riches wyll obtaine:
               Both night and day be vered ſore,
               wyth cares and cruell paine.
               His lucke vncertaine euery houre,
               now thys, now that he wayeth,
               No ſooner ſittes he downe to meate,
               but auarice hym frayeth.
               
                  
No meates almoſt doe pleaſe his mouth
               he haſteth to forſake:
               The table yet vnſatiſfyde,
               for filthy lucre ſake.
               And little reſt the wretched ſoule,
               doth take at any night:
               Sometimes on ſide, ſometimes on face,
               ſometimes he turnes vpright.
               He toſſeth rounde about the bed,
               like as the waighty ſtone:
               That Syſyphus continually,
               doth toſſe and turne alone.
               What he hath done the day before,
               he muttereth in hys minde:
               And what the next day he may doe,
               he muſeth for to finde.
               Beholde (ſayth he) my catraile dyes,
               to morowe if I may:
               Some fother I ſhall ſeeke to get,
               O curſed wynters day.
               How much this cold hath hurt mi beaſts
               full ſore am I deluded:
               My bayly and my ſhepeherd eke,
               haue both me foule miſuſed.
               My folde the wolues, O wofull chaunce,
               alas haue broken in:
               And now my cattell to deſtroy,
               
                  
the ſouldyer doth begin.
               He hath deſtroide my tenements,
               by flame conſumed quite:
               My corne and now my vineyarde to,
               he ſcorcheth downe a right.
               My detter fledde from hence away,
               my money with him gone:
               No fayth there is that feareth God,
               I thinke there be not one.
               The worlde is naught but great diſceit
                     •
                  
               
               O Lorde he was eſtemde:
               An honeſt faithfull man and true
               but all is not as it ſemde.
               That rule is not to be obſerude:
               to truſt a man by face:
               But wherefore ſhoulde I nowe lament,
               my ſhippe returnes a pace.
               And home ſhe bringes I leape for ioy,
               ſuch wares as wyll awaye:
               Both pepper ſpice and franckincenſe,
               wyth ſylke and amber aye.
               With clothes that Sydon ſendeth for the
               and wares of diuers kinde:
               Which thorow ye waues of ſurging ſeas
               ſhe bringeth forth of Inde.
               Whom if the great Symplegades,
               had chaunſte to burſt a ſunder:
               
                  
Or Scilla with the Caphare rocke,
               the ſeas had ſuncke her vnder.
               Then ſhould I fyll my houſe alas
               wyth great complaynt and cryes:
               The teares would ouerflow my breaſt,
               that iſſued from my eyes.
               I wyll no money lack I trowe,
               tyll lyfe beginne to ſtarte,
               Corne beares to lowe a price what then
               of oyles I make my marte.
               I muſt go delue I muſt go ſowe,
               and harrow well my corne:
               I muſt go builde and ſee my vines,
               well trimmed cut and ſhorne.
               This wyll I bye this will I ſell,
               I wyll receiue and paye:
               My dettes no otherwiſe thys wretche,
               is toſt then ball in playe.
               The multitude beholding hye,
               is vſed to be caſt:
               Now here now there among the croude
               is driuen very faſt.
               Some one doth ſtrike it wyth his hādes,
               ſome other wyth hys feete:
               In ioye in griefe in feare and hope
               ſo doth he alwayes fleete.
               As ſeas be wont when windes do blowe
               
                  
an Irion is he iuſt:
               Who wyth a cloud as hath bene tolde,
               perfourming filthy luſt.
               Begat a ſonne of double fourme
               wherfore he then was iudged,
               Of gods vpon a ſnaky wheele,
               for euer to be tourned.
               For what is riches but a thing,
               which apteſt we may like:
               Unto a cloude which Bore as if
               deſcending happe to ſtrike.
               Thou ſhalt beholde wherof it came,
               to ſmoke reſolued than:
               Of riches monſters he begot,
               that haue the face of man.
               Then outward face of welthy man:
               what thing doth more excell?
               But when the courſe of all his life,
               we once haue marked well.
               We ſhall beholde the hinder partes,
               to differ farre away:
               From thoſe that we did firſt diſcerne,
               whome fortune wythout ſtay,
               Doth tourne about vpon hir wheele,
               the carkes and cares be ſnakes,
               Which alwayes gripe & gnaw his hea
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               wyth ſorrowes that he takes.
               
                  
The riche man either knowes or not,
               what goodes he doth poſſeſſe:
               If not what helpe they then thereby
               no good ne yet diſtreſſe.
               He doth receiue but as a man,
               that riches is without:
               If he doe knowe he either loues,
               or loues them not no doubt.
               If he them hate, why keepes he them,
               what ioy takes he thereby:
               Such as who drinks the iuice of grapes
               and wyne doth cleane defye.
               If he them loue he them regardes,
               and ſeketh to defende:
               Them, and to kepe the ſorrowes much,
               and labours till his ende.
               It doth him much vnquiet when,
               He thinketh for to ſee:
               Some harme approching to hys welth,
               and vexed moſt is he.
               When any part therof by loſſe
               doth ſcape out of hys hande:
               As many times for to be fall,
               by needefull rule doth ſtande.
               When nothing long in ſtate abides,
               thou ſhalt beholde and ſee:
               So many harmes as euer ſeene,
               
                  
in haſt at hand to be.
               When all is done how much the more
               of goodes he doth poſſeſſe:
               So much the more of carke and care,
               ſhall euer him oppreſſe.
               What ſhall I here declare or ſhewe,
               the daungers incident:
               That he doth paſſe by ſeas and land,
               his liuing to augment.
               From theues by land frō theues by ſeas
               full oft he flyeth faſt:
               And yet for all the wyles he hath,
               he taken is at laſt.
               And oft his bowels doe become,
               a pray vnto the wolfe:
               Or Fiſhes fowle do him deuoure,
               vp ſwallowed in the golfe.
               And often he whom worldly wealth,
               had moued to be bolde:
               Is forced vnder his mayſters yoke,
               his captiues neck to holde.
               At home at boorde ne yet in bed,
               he cannot ſafely be:
               But poyſon ſtrong they wil him giue,
               whome leaſt miſtruſteth he.
               Or elſe the wicked handes of ſome,
               vnthrifty ſeruaunt wyll:
               
                  
In bed a ſtepe and ſnorting faſt,
               hym quickly ſ
                     •
                  ey and kyll.
               As fatteſt beaſtes in ſacrifice,
               be ſooneſt euer ſlayne:
               And as the worthieſt tree is firſt,
               depriued of his grayne.
               And as the grape is firſt deſtroyde,
               that ſweeteſt is of waſt:
               With flyes and bees and other wormes
               that always them do waſt.
               So he whome nature moſt hath lent,
               is alwayes moſt intrapt:
               And euermore in daungers great,
               is readieſt to be clapt.
               Note well the crafty wit and head,
               of Dioniſe the King:
               Behold good man and art thou bleſſed,
               what elſe thou lackit nothing.
               Thou lackſt no meat yu lackſt no drinke,
               thou lackſt no pleaſaunt boyes:
               Thou lackſt no ſcepter nor no crowne,
               thou wanteſt no wiſhed boyes.
               With gliſtering gold & precious ſtones,
               beholde thou doeſt abounde:
               A ſword but loe hangs ouer thy head,
               that will the wretch confound.
               With enuy richeſſe eft be vext,
               
                  
all things of good eſtate:
               Doth malice harme and happye things
               it euermore doth hate.
               So deare (O miſers) do you ſeeke,
               of golde the wicked mine:
               Wherby your harts may alwaies prick
               the ſiſters Paleſ
                     •
                  ine.
               And ſoner downe deſcend the pit,
               of ghaſtly Plutoes raigne:
               Was not the giftes that Bacchus gaue,
               of golde to Mydas gaine.
               Of all men laught to ſcorne by right,
               to whom thou Phebus much,
               An angred gaueſt an Aſſes 
                     •
                  ares,
               all things quoth Myde I tutch.
               Be golde I wyſhe and by and by,
               he aſked his fatall ende:
               For downe his gredy g
                     ••
                  ping guttes,
               no meate coulde then diſcende.
               Such fortune ha
                     ••
                   thou ſparing wre
                     •
                  ch
               the more thou ha
                     •
                  t of goodes:
               The more thou lackſte as Tantalus,
               doth thirſt among the 
                     ••
                  oudes,
               If thou migh
                     •
                  t all things free o
                     〈…〉
                  e,
               thou wouldſt thy ſelfe require:
               Wouldſt thou but take yt ſhould ſuffyce
               exceſſe or elſe deſire.
               
                  
This one doth hurte the other meane,
               all men may ſoone obtaine:
               For nature with a little thing,
               contented doth remaine:
               Except that headlong 
                     •
                  aine to vice,
               i
                     •
                   doth repugne againe.
               The chiefeſt fruites of ſeas and woode,
               to riche mens boardes be brought:
               There lacks no Hare no goat nor Hart
               no 
                     •
                  id no Bore nor ought.
               Amongſt the flocke of flittering foules,
               the Throſtell fatte and rounde:
               The Partrige, Colmouſe, nor ye birdes,
               that bredes in Colchis grounde.
               With Capons great & mighty Doues,
               and Turbots in be brought:
               The Lopſter, Lamprey & the Shrimpe,
               and Mugil fat is caught.
               The fiſhe that toke his name of golde,
               the chopping Dy
                     ••
                  er newe:
               Which Cizicus doth foſter vp,
               amid his ſeas ſo blewe.
               Wyth many moe that ſemeth harde,
               in verſe for to declare:
               And wines yt may wyth falerne fi
                     •
                  loes,
               and N
                     •••
                  are ſweete compare.
               But now I aſke and will this wretche,
               
                  
all this himſelfe deuoure:
               I thinke not ſo for if he woulde,
               it ſemes not in his power.
               And if he might his belly ſure
               would burſt a ſonder thoe:
               And ſwolne to tombe with roring route
               him following ſhould he goe.
               For he that doth his ſtomacke charge,
               with more than will ſuffiſe:
               Is hurt and then phiſicions helpe,
               with groning voice he cryes.
               Then vp he throwes and all his houſe,
               doth filthy ſtincke poſſeſſe:
               Whereby him feruent feuers vexe,
               and humours ſharpe oppreſſe.
               What ſicknes great exceſſe doth brede,
               no man there is but knowes:
               What hurts by to much drink let down
               within the body growes.
               Wherfore he muſt be modeſt nedes,
               of much and little take:
               Who that before thapointed tyme,
               ſweete lyfe will not forſake:
               Nor more than doth yt pore he muſt,
               his hungred body ſ
                     •
                  ake.
               With purple faire and clothe of golde,
               the riche man is arayed:
               
                  
His gorgeous ſhirt doth caſt a ſhew,
               with ſylke and 
                     •
                  uerlayde.
               About his head he weareth aye,
               the fleece of S
                     •
                  ithian 
                     •
                  ow:
               And Jewels fayre about his neck,
               of price he weares but now.
               Are theſe of greater force for 
                     •
                  o
               expell the bitter colde:
               Than if in garments made of wolle,
               thy body were infolde.
               Or doth the wouen webbe of 
                     ••
                  axe,
               not ſo repulſe the heate:
               Whē as ye Sunne doth feruēt flame
               amid the Lion great?
               Or when the raging dog the fieldes,
               of greene doth quite defeate.
               As if the fine and tender ſylke,
               encloſde thee rounde about:
               But thou wilt ſay he is eſtemde,
               whom gorgeous geare ſettes out.
               Unto hym paſſing by the way,
               the people ducke and ryſe:
               And onely he is counted then,
               both noble good and wyſe.
               And worthy worſhip to receiue,
               and frendſhip for to haue:
               No 
                     •
                  eede at all they take of hym,
               
                  
whoſe garments be not braue.
               The common people laugh to ſee,
               his cote then worne to nought:
               Though thou ſhouldſt Tully repreſent,
               whoſe eloquence was thought.
               For to excell all Italye,
               or elſe Demoſthenes:
               Whoſe famous voice the Athens men,
               dyd wonder at in plees.
               Or if thou hadſt as great a gift,
               as Maro had in verſe:
               Or couldſt the auncient Homers tunes
               celeſtiall well rehearſe.
               For all this ſame yet ſhouldſt not thou
               the price of praiſe obtaine:
               But as re
                     ••
                  ct of euery man,
               thou ſhalt receiue diſdaine.
               In vaine thou ſhalt beholde the hewe,
               of Ganymedes face:
               In vaine and oft thou ſhalt deſyre,
               thy damoſell to embrace:
               If that with vile apparell thou
               doeſt runne the poore mans race.
               I not denie that clothing faire,
               eſtemed ought to be:
               But if the minde doth vertues lacke,
               with vices eke agree.
               
                  
Thy beauty all biddes then adewe
               and glory leaues thee quite:
               And euery man that knowes thee well,
               will haue thee in dyſpite.
               They will thee floute behinde thy back,
               and greuous mocks thee giue:
               Thy ſeruant to that of thy foode,
               hath alwayes vſed to liue,
               If that he know thee for to be,
               a gredy Churle or ſuch:
               As cruell is of hauty minde,
               or vſeth wine to much.
               Or one that lacketh wit he will,
               regarde thee then but lyght:
               And grudging efte theſe wordes will he
               vnto himſelfe reſight.
               O ſuch a maiſter fortune falſe,
               why diddeſt thou me giue?
               Me vnder ſuch a maiſter long,
               ſhall fates enforce to liue?
               Can other men commende him then,
               whoſe ſeruants ſo deſpiſe:
               But if thou valiant be and iuſt,
               both ſober ſadde and wiſe.
               If ſo be that, that learning great,
               doth cauſe thee to excell:
               Then to thy worſhip doth agree,
               
                  
all kynde of garments well.
               And no man will thee then deſpiſe,
               except that he be mad:
               And firſt whatſoeuer that thou art,
               deſirous to be had.
               In honour to be praiſed much,
               and much to be beloued:
               Imbracing thou vertue flye thou vice,
               and that of right reproued.
               May bring the aucthour to a ſhame,
               beware thou not commit:
               For oft the common people 
                     •
                  ude,
               doe vſe as voide of wyt.
               The noble vertue to deſpiſe,
               if ſo be that they ſee:
               With little ſpot of any vice,
               defyled hir to bee.
               But what is hee vpon the earth,
               that liueth voide of crime:
               And from the true and beaten way
               departeth not ſometime?
               Or doth not ſwarue or runne aſtraye,
               from out the ruled lyne?
               But he that leaſt and ſeldome ſynnes,
               hym beſt we may defyne.
               But greateſt grace hath ſuch a one,
               that learnedly and wyſe:
               
                  
All things he ſpeakes with order iuſte,
               can well himſelfe deuiſe.
               To wyſe and filed ſpeache may be,
               great force and ſtrength aſſynde,
               Tt diuers paſſions doth prouoke,
               and gouernes well thy minde.
               Much more will this than coſtly clothe,
               ſet forth thy worthy name:
               Uſe not the loue of boyes take heede,
               ſuch loue is ſynfull ſhame.
               For children haue no loue ne wit,
               no reaſon faith nor truſt:
               A vengeance light on hym I wiſhe,
               that ioyes in ſuch a lu
                     ••
                  .
               If that the pleaſaunt portrature
               of maydes doe thee delyght:
               Go take a wife thou nedeſt not lack,
               a 
                     •
                  ormouſe for the night.
               What hadſt thou rather foole to wyſhe,
               and hope for things denayde:
               When as with eaſier medicine thou
               mayſt haue thy griefe alayde?
               Perchaunce for thys yet riches are,
               to be deſyred plaine:
               Whereby a man may ſooner ſo,
               to vertue hye attaine.
               If voide of money cleane thou arte,
               
                  
no man will take the paines:
               Thee to enſtruct for teachers ſure,
               require no little gaines.
               Nor little price will thee ſuffice,
               thy ſelfe with bookes to ſtore:
               Whereby thou maiſt apply thy ſelfe,
               to Lady learnings lore.
               Leſt pouertie with other cares,
               doth occupy thy head:
               And ſo from learning draw thy minde,
               with other buſines lead,
               O lorde howe harde a thing it is,
               how fewe doth God permit:
               To flye from baſe and poore eſtate,
               in honours hye to ſit.
               How ſeldome doth the ſely ſoule,
               aſcende to honours hye:
               And more beſydes what is his lyfe,
               to death and eke how nye.
               How much to be deſpyſed tho,
               when pleaſure none his minde,
               Doth eaſe, amongſt his trauailes great
               when he no ioyes can finde.
               When neuer cares abſentes themſelfes
               with griefes when all habounde:
               Yet better paſſe the Stigian lake,
               and feede the gredy hounde.
               
                  
And mixed be wyth ſhrikyng ſoules,
               then neuer ioy to finde:
               
                  
                     •
                  n happye things when neuer mir
                     •
                  he,
               ſhall glad thy wretched minde.
               For to this wretche what ioy at all,
               or pleaſure can remaine:
               That lackes both meate & drink full of
                     •
                  ,
               ſometime his bedde againe.
               Sometime he lacketh co
                     •
                  ee and cloke,
               and oft his to
                     •
                  s be ſpyde:
               From out his clouted ſh
                     •
                  es to pepe,
               where ſeames ſitte ga
                     •
                  ing wyde.
               With paine drawes on hys drudging lyfe,
               much leſſe he able is:
               Thoſe things to haunt ye here d
                     ••
                   bring
               a mortall man to bliſſe.
               But he that ha
                     ••
                   the golden mines,
               in hym theſe things doe 
                     ••
                  owe:
               And euery thing he ſtraight obtaines,
               wherat he bendes hys howe.
               Such rule and ſwaye hath money now
                     •
                  
               
               ſuch force in euery place:
               That nothing long ſhe wyll permit,
               for to reſiſt her grace.
               From hie ſhe raceth hilles adowne,
               and valleys vp doth hoyſe:
               If that therefore with ſwifty courſe,
               
                  
of dogges he doth reioyſe
               To take the Harte the Goate or Wolfe
               the flighty flying Hares:
               If birdes to take or fiſh deceaue,
               wyth hookes and nettes or ſnares.
               If for to ſerue in Uenus court,
               if meate or drinke delight,
               If quiet reſt, if Lu
                     •
                  e or Harpe,
               him pleaſe or ſonges to ſhright:
               All theſe the rich man doth poſſeſſe,
               through mighty moneyes might.
               New hark agayne what I ſhal ſay,
               
                  
                     •
                  o thys in contrary:
               If any man deſire 
                     •
                  o learne,
               he ſhall i
                     •
                   ſoone come by.
               So that his minde 
                     •
                  e conſtant thoe,
               and feareth not to tread:
               The ſharp and crabbed thorny wayes,
               to vertue that do lead.
               If money lacke what then perforce,
               let houſhold ſtuffe be ſolde:
               With houſe and all and meddowe to,
               how may my life then holde?
               Then ſhall I be conſtraynd to begge,
               and walle
                     •
                   vp to take:
               Farre better wretch it is to begge,
               when learning ſhall thee make.
               
                  
Like to the heauen ſainctes aboue,
               than if thou ſhouldſt poſſeſſe:
               The Perſians herds & droues of beaſts
               with all their welthineſſe.
               Beleue not thou the iudgement blinde,
               of rude and common ſorte:
               No more who can than beaſts diſcerne,
               the truth or it reporte.
               If thou be wiſe, mark what I ſaye,
               in mind and print it ſure:
               Excepting vet tue nothing is,
               that here may long endure.
               For riches fade and forme and ſtrength
               and honour eke doth fall:
               And vertue onely doth remayne,
               in ſtrength and euer ſhall.
               Which neuer fortune may ſuppreſſe,
               nor age can take away:
               I neuer ſaw it yet nor thoe,
               beleue it well I may.
               The vertuous man for hunger 
                     ••
                  eru
                     ••
                  ,
               or left to begge his bread:
               Though fortune ſometyme doth aſſay,
               him for to ouertread.
               Yet veertue haſteth faſt anone,
               and learning doth defende:
               His clients nor doth ſuffer them,
               
                  
their yeares in care to ſpende.
               But offers them a boorde to help,
               when ſayle and ſhippe is loſte:
               Whereby they may the ſhore attayne,
               from waues of Seas ytoſt.
               Who followeth vertue may go ſee,
               tharabian deſertes fell:
               The Ethiops black the rugged getes,
               the Indes in health and well.
               For only vertue of her force,
               wyll fortune falſe wythſtand:
               And oft with hir in doubtfull matche,
               doth ſtriue with fighting hand.
               For coſtes thou oughteſt not to ſpare,
               nor doubt the landes to ſell:
               Wherby thou vertue mayſt obtayne,
               yf fortune be ſo fell.
               That nought to ſell at all thou haſte,
               let goodneſſe then remayne:
               In thee, If learnde thou canſt not be,
               wyth learnde thy ſelfe retayne.
               With eares attētiue mark their words,
               ſometyme and queſtion finde:
               The reſt to God do thou commit,
               and wyth a lowly minde.
               Receaue thappointed fates from hie,
               if ioyes thou doeſt frequente:
               
                  
And hurtfull pleaſure thee entrap,
               and in hir ginnes thee hent.
               And couet ſo thy youthfull dayes,
               to paſſe in pleaſaunt ſport:
               And therfore doeſt deſire to beare,
               a rich and wealthy port.
               Theſe things that reaſon doth thee tell,
               peruſe thou well in minde:
               A greater yll and hurtfull more,
               than pleaſure none can finde.
               It taketh counſell quite from vs,
               and doth the minde oppreſſe:
               Reſiſting vertues euermore,
               encreaſeth wickedneſſe.
               It is the chiefeſt nource to vice,
               enfebleth aye the ſtrength:
               With bitter ende and many hurtes,
               procureth man at length.
               But playnlier of this ſame anone,
               we wil entreate and tell:
               The poore man hath his ioyes alſo,
               yf that thou markeſt well.
               Not much perchaunce inferiour to,
               for pleaſaunteſt be ſuch:
               Obtayned ioyes that ſeldome happes,
               and ioyfuller he much.
               The pleaſure is beleue me now,
               
                  
that long hath bene abſented:
               And more deſirde ſo meate is ſwete,
               to him that is an hungred.
               So reſt to him that laboureth ſore,
               ſo drink is to the drye:
               So flame vnto the frieſing wight,
               ſo colde when ſunne is hye.
               So long forborne is welcomer,
               to Lady Uenus fayre:
               For contraries by oppoſites,
               their ſtrength do eft repayre.
               The rich man now will ſuffer nought,
               but alwayes doth abound:
               With deynties ſo that lothſomneſſe,
               in him may eft be founde.
               Sometime he doth deſire and much,
               on earthy rootes to graſh:
               Sometyme on peſcods faſt he feedes,
               ſometime on other traſh.
               And royall fare wyth deynty diſh,
               abhorring nought eſteemes:
               Nothing ſo ſwete he then receiues,
               but better loe it ſeemes.
               And lykes him not if any tyme,
               it chanceth to endure:
               But chaunges new doth him delight,
               and for to haue in vre.
               
                  
Forbidden things are ſweeter much,
               ſuch things be nought and yll:
               That alwayes are at hande to haue,
               ſo not the thing but wyll.
               And iudgement of the minde doth cauſe,
               a man to be content:
               And worthy is to be imbraſde,
               that pleaſeth his intent.
               What profits it vnto the ſicke,
               to offer deynty meate:
               Whoſe taſt away doth quite bereft,
               the feruent feuers heate.
               Or what auayles it vnto him,
               the pleaſaunt wines to bring:
               Who euermore refrayning wine,
               doth ioy in cleared ſpring?
               Some one with Kid ſome other thoe,
               wyth porke refreſht to be:
               Deſireth more ſome ſongs delight,
               ſome other playes to ſe
                     •
                  .
               So loue to all men is not like,
               ſome man a boy deſires:
               And ſome a mayd and ſome a gyll,
               and ſome a wyfe requires.
               The minde and not the thing therefore,
               doth cauſe a quietneſſe:
               Wherby the poore no leſſe their ioyes,
               
                  
then riche men doth poſſeſſe.
               Exceſſe the riche man doth deſyre,
               fewe things the poore ſuffiſe:
               To him doth greater charge of houſe,
               but leſſer ioyes ariſe.
               The ſhipman or the labouring wight
               much pleaſure more doe take:
               With egges & leekes and homely foode,
               his hungred mawe to ſlake.
               Than kyngs & Queenes wt deinty diſhe
               of ſeas and lande to dine:
               The worthier pleaſure then I thinke,
               of right we may define.
               That vſed neither cauſeth harme,
               nor honeſty reſyſtes:
               For beſt it is to couet leaſt,
               and liue within the lyſtes.
               Of counſaile good nor vexed be
               with vaine and fonde deſyre:
               For who the things he cannot haue,
               doth earneſtly require.
               With fruſtrate hope is tormented,
               and loſeth time in vaine:
               Wherfore deſyre thou nothing els,
               but that thou mayſt obtaine.
               And rule thy minde wt bridlyng bitt,
               but he that doth habounde:
               
                  
With riches, alwayes couets more.
               then lawfull may be founde.
               With little and content to liue,
               he knowes not yet there fore:
               Whom leaſt of all doe full ſuffiſe,
               hym happier iudge I more.
               For lofty landes doe cauſe a man,
               for to excell in pride:
               Thimmortall gods for to deſpiſe,
               and men for to deride.
               Without all rule, a carpet knight
               and vertues mortall foe:
               For who doth vertue ought regarde,
               when riches ſwelleth ſo?
               O famous worthy pouertie,
               O giftes of God vnkende:
               Of vertues aye the ſafe defence,
               to ſhamefaſtnes a frende.
               The brydle tryde of wantones,
               and patron of the lyfe:
               Thou onely canſt and well deſpiſe,
               the ſhameleſſe fortunde ryfe.
               The raging of the Seas and wyndes,
               whilſte in thy little bote:
               Thou kepeſt the ſafe aſſured foordes,
               and rydſte by ſhore a flote.
               The loftye hylles on hye full oft
               
                  
the flaſhing lightnings ſmite:
               And ſpiring aſhes long be bette,
               by northern Boreas might.
               Low things do lie vnknowē to harmes
               the tempeſtes neuer greues:
               The lowly ſhrouded Junipers,
               nor ſhakes the Mirice leues.
               The famous Anaxagoras,
               and Democryte the wyſe:
               With many mo whoſe worthy fame
               throughout the world nowe flies:
               Did ſyluer golde and riches eke,
               as heads of yll deſpyſe.
               And why? but yt they thought they were
               not vertues good nor trew:
               Which let the minde wt diuers cares,
               and hedlong downe eke threw,
               Full many men in diuers vice,
               but alwayes marke thou well:
               What Fabrice Calo and Curius to,
               theſe holy men thee tell.
               Regarde not what the common ſort,
               and fooliſhe route doe ſay:
               Therample of the good alwayes,
               before thy eyes but lay.
               Dyd not Ouirinus conquerour,
               his banners oft diſplay:
               
                  
Commaunded weapons vp to take,
               and plough a downe to laye.
               And reſt his deluing ſpade a whyle,
               then would the cottage ſmall:
               Content the men and deinty fare,
               not vſed then at all.
               But Princely meates & roufed roomes,
               bring forth as now a dayes:
               A weake a fayn
                     •
                   and tender fruite,
               and apt to ſport and playes.
               O learne you mortall men at length,
               put darkenes from your minde:
               Lyft vp a loft your dimmye eies,
               wherto doth will ſo blinde.
               You leade? take heede in any wyſe,
               you thither doe not goe:
               By reaſon lyke the gods aboue,
               you are created loe.
               By reaſons are the ſeas and lande,
               vnto your power ſubiect:
               Let errours not therfore as now,
               but reaſon you direct.
               The certaine ende of euery thing.
               peruſe you well alwaye:
               And let the meate your ſelues ſuffiſe,
               that hunger driues away.
               And garments eke your ſkinnes to hide
               
                  
and cald for to expell:
               Let aye the ſlepe that doth refreſh,
               your wery limmes be well.
               Of theſe three things aboue the reſte,
               moſt nede we haue alway:
               Sith theſe our bodies are compact,
               of vile and brittle claye.
               But yet thou oughtſt thoſe things to vſe
               as Phiſick for to heale:
               The diuers ſickneſſe that to man,
               dame nature wontes to deale.
               Some one we ſee in daynty fare,
               doth riot moſt embrace:
               Some other in erceſſe of clothes,
               and ſome whilſt they apace.
               From learning flye do vneth knowe,
               nor once this life perceaue:
               When euermore wyth ſluggiſh ſlepe,
               their eyes togyther cleaue.
               But happy is he that is content,
               with little to remayne:
               Nor puts his truſt in things ſo frayle,
               that death will him conſtrayne.
               To leaue behinde as none of his,
               and wayeth well in minde:
               How ſhort the ſpace is of our life,
               how all things vayne we finde.
               
                  
That here on earth created be,
               who alwayes one remaynes:
               In proſperouſe eke and aduerſe chance,
               the iudge nor Sttgian paynes.
               Regardeth not and nought eſteemes,
               what euer fortune flyng:
               Unhappy is he whom will doth leade,
               vnmindfull of the thing
               That is to come, but like to beaſtes,
               regardes the thing in ſyght:
               Who knoweth not that by how much,
               the minde is more of might.
               Than is the corps, ſo much the more,
               in gifts it doth excell:
               Riches be not the chiefeſt goodes,
               therefore appeareth well.
               For theſe bicauſe for bodies wealth,
               they onely out be ſought:
               The manners of the owners eke,
               we ſee they better nought.
               Who wil accompt them chiefeſt goods?
               for often times we ſee:
               Such men with riches as abounde,
               like brutiſh beaſtes to bee.
               As much therfore as will ſuffiſe,
               thy life no more require:
               For in exceſſe do fooles reioyce,
               
                  
in vaine thou doeſt deſyre.
               Thy barnes vnheaped & hugye mowes,
               of corne when thou as well:
               With leſſer meaſure though by much,
               thy hunger mayſt expell.
               When little cuppes ſhall thee ſuffiſe,
               why doeſt thou tunnes deſyre?
               But yet if Putus doe thee loue,
               and plentie on thee flyre.
               And eke the will vnknowne of faſes,
               hath riches del
                     •
                  e to thee:
               What wouldſt thou doe? that thou hadſt learnde
               it ſemeth beſt to mee.
               Leaſt by poſſeſſion thou be worfe,
               a dolte and counted plaine:
               And tell mee now I thee require,
               what wiſdome doth remaine.
               Or counſell elſe to him in whom,
               great riches euer 
                     ••
                  owe?
               And by what meanes them for to vſe,
               the foole doth nothing know.
               Hereby doth ſtrength and often hurte,
               and beautie eke anoye:
               By reaſon lyke the aucthour oft,
               doth eloquence deſtroy.
               And by theſe meanes are diuers artes,
               full hurtfull oft to many:
               
                  
Let not the ſnare of auarice,
               thee catche but from her flie.
               Than thys there is no fury fierce,
               aſſuredly more fell:
               Begotten once in Acheron,
               amyd the raigne of hell.
               She was where flaming fyerbrandes,
               ſhe dreadfully doth caſt:
               A hundred thretning heades ſhee beares
               wyth vgly adders braſt.
               Her gredy iawes with bloud of men,
               coulde neuer haue their fill:
               With churliſh chaps deuouring mea
                     •
                  ,
               yet foode requir the ſhee ſtill.
               She ſpareth none nor god hys churche,
               once feareth to defyle:
               This curſed neuer fylled beaſt,
               and wicked monſter vile.
               Of hir come plagues & ſlaugh
                     •
                  ers ſharp
               wyth diſcorde and diſtreſſe:
               Wyth treaſons brawlings and diſceits
               and loſſe of ſhamefaſtneſſe.
               Contempt of God with periuries,
               and chydings fell with fight:
               With many more which in my verſe,
               I cannot well reſyght.
               From this therfore 
                     ••
                  ye thou thy way
               
                  
nothing doth more infeſt:
               Nor nothing more than this declares,
               a vile vnworthy breſt.
               So women, aged men and boyes,
               doe couet moſt alwayes:
               Becauſe they lack both ſtrength & force,
               in minde and haue no ſtayes.
               An other vice contrary now,
               to this doth yet remaine:
               This ſame from the to baniſhe quite,
               thy ſenſes looke thou ſtraine.
               If thou doſt ſpende without reſpect,
               in vame thou ſhalt beholde:
               An hungred eft anothers ſpitte,
               with deinties manifolde.
               When all thy liuing quite is ſpent,
               by ryote cleane deſtroyde:
               Betwene them both the vertue lyes,
               the vite therefore auoide.
               As reaſon doth require ſo giue,
               and euermore take heede:
               Be not to bolde to vſe exceſſe,
               within thy tether feede.
               This ende hath riches we are bounde,
               all men to profite thoe:
               But firſt our owne dame nature ſure,
               hath vs 
                     •
                  reated ſo.
               
                  
That not alone to vs and ours,
               we ſhould commodious be:
               But alſo if that powre wyll ſerne,
               to all of eche degree.
               What thing more famous is than thys,
               what more deſerues the place:
               Of gods aboue then for to helpe,
               the poores afflicted caſe?
               So ſhall the people honor vs,
               ſo get we fame thereby:
               And by ſuch actes to gods full oft,
               we ſee doe many flye.
               Nothing doth more a man become,
               nothing for him more meete:
               As ſayth the olde and auncient ſchoole,
               of Philoſophers ſweete.
               Than man to aide and ſuccour ſoone,
               hys fellowe falne to grounde:
               But now alas O dolefull times.
               and faſhions nothing ſounde.
               All godlineſſe is clean extinct,
               to no man geues doubtleſſe:
               The welthy wretche although he hath
               wherwith to giue exceſſe.
               Of no man thoe he p
                     ••
                  ie hath,
               all heartes doe yron ſeeme:
               Who geueth the begger nowe a myte,
               
                  
their teares they nought eſteeme.
               If ought they giue to ſeoffers now,
               or elſe to rake hell knaues:
               They do it deale to Colmon birds,
               and eke to baudy ſlaues.
               No man doth giue the learned ought,
               the muſes be deſpiſed:
               In euery place ſome one we ſee,
               ſo much hath exerciſed.
               The dyſe and tables tyll his purſe,
               at length the gorge doth caſt:
               So oft an other vies at Cardes,
               tyll all his goods be paſt.
               And is not this a greater ſhame,
               thus money for to ſpend:
               Wherby no honour is obtaynde,
               nor thank is got at thende.
               O minde forgetting God and eke,
               wyth vices vile defilde:
               And is it lawfull this to doe,
               didſt thou not once a childe.
               Come naked from thy mothers womb,
               and ſhalt retourne agayne:
               Reſolued vnto durty earth,
               from whence thou camſte certayne?
               O foole theſe goods be none of thine,
               but vnderneath the hande:
               
                  
Of God aboue and thou but here,
               a ſtraunger in the lande.
               And burſſer for a while of them,
               ne be the goods at all:
               But onely now the vſe of them,
               to our ſubiection thrall.
               For when the Greſilde Charon olde,
               ſhall be are thee paſt the lake:
               By which the gods aboue to ſweare,
               do tremble eft and quake.
               Then here yu wretch to other heyres,
               the goods thou ſhalt forſake:
               Wherefore we ought to vſe them wel,
               while line of lyfe doth laſt:
               In occupying about our ſelues,
               and helping others faſt.
               Now haue I well declarde I thinke,
               if riches ought to bee:
               Accompted for the chiefeſt goodes,
               all men may playnly ſee.
               My bote draw backe we haue aſſayde,
               the ſeas ſufficiently:
               Lo cauſing cloudes the ſoutherne winde
               beginneth faſt to flye.
               Upſuckt the floudes from out the ſeas,
               the whirle windes vp do beare:
               Which doth declare a ſſorme to come,
               
                  
not beſt we tary heere.
               Beleue me now for ſore I feare,
               to ſhippes vntruſty Orion:
               Whilſt time we haue let vs diſpatche,
               to port and get vs gon.
               When as the baniſht cloudes aboue,
               ſhall make the day be fayre:
               Then Triton ſhall vs call from hye,
               and we to ſeas repayre.
            
         
         
            ¶ The third Booke entituled Gemini.
            
               
                  VPriſing was the dauning day
               and fading ſtarres did ſhūne
               The heauens hie of Ti
                     •
                  ā thoe
               and half to apeare begunne.
               To them that vnder vs do dwell,
               and halfe diſcernde our eyes:
               I meruayld much to ſee as then,
               the ſier vppe to ryſe.
               Amyd the floudes vnquenched thus,
               theſe contraries no doubt:
               Ech other now do quite deſtroy,
               but is the ſunne put out.
               With flouds? it is not fiery then,
               
                  
or elſe to touch the brinke:
               Of Occean ſea, the common ſort do lye,
               thus did I thinke.
               While as by ſhore I walked alone,
               beholde there gan me meete:
               An aged man with ſtaffe in hand,
               in clothur neare and ſweete.
               His hoary beard with ſyluer heares,
               his middle fully rought:
               His ſkin was white and ioyfull face.
               of diuers colours wrought.
               A flowry garland gay he ware,
               about his ſeemely heare:
               When as we met and made vnto,
               ech other frendly cheare.
               Frō whence I came, what place I ſeke,
               my name he doth deſyre:
               I aunſwered him and did the like,
               wyth ſhame faſt voyce requyre.
               But after that he had declared,
               his proper name certayne:
               For Epicure this man he height,
               I was aſtoniſhed playne.
               Like as the poore and labouring ſoule,
               in deluing of the grounde:
               A hydden cheſt amyd the earth,
               by lucky chaunce hath found.
               
                  
And thus I ſayd good father olde,
               ſuch fauour mayſt thou finde:
               Amongſt the gods that al things wel,
               may ſatiſfy thy minde.
               Syth wiſdom great and wondrous eke,
               within thy breſte doth dwel:
               If falſly men do not affirme,
               as eft they doe. Now tell
               Unto me here I thee beſeche,
               of grace the good preceptes:
               With witty ſawes and eke inſtruce,
               my youth if nothing lets,
               More wayghty affayres: quod he againe
               no wayghty affayres me let,
               But for that cares and worke I ſhanne
               oft tymes my ſelfe to get.
               Unto this place I wonted am,
               and floures vp to take:
               Of diuers hewes amid the meades,
               head garlandes for to make.
               Willing therfore wyth all my heart,
               to aunſwere thy requeſt:
               I am for olde men all to chat,
               it doth delight vs beſſ.
               But leaſt by ſome that paſſe the way,
               we here diſturbed be:
               Let vs go hence, and vnderneath,
               
                  
the ſhaded holmey tree:
               That by the waters ſyde thou ſeeſt:
               our ſelues we wyll repoſe.
               We went and thus with pleaſant voyce
               his minde he gan diſcloſe.
               Some god young man thee hither now
               aſſuredly hath ſent:
               Wherby this day thou might perceaue,
               by wiſdome what is ment.
               For O the gods in what a miſt,
               and darkneſſe of the minde:
               Is drent as now the whole eſtate,
               of mortall humaine kinde.
               Of them that beare the face of men,
               two thouſand thou mayſt ſee:
               But one that ſhewes himſelfe a man,
               is ſcarcely found to bee.
               A den of doltes that now the world,
               may termed be ful well:
               And place wyth errors stuft therfore
               giue eare what I thee tell:
               If wretched darkneſſe frō thy minde
               thou ſeekeſt to erpell.
               And firſt of all thou ought to knowe,
               the true felicity:
               Which wych a reaſon firme and good,
               ought ſearched forth to be.
               
                  
Hereof doth wiſdome flow wt ſtreamee,
               hereof ſhe doth appeare:
               But fewe there be that can attaine,
               the truth away to beare.
               For riches to be chiefeſt good,
               the greateſt ſort do ſay:
               An other part doth honour take,
               to be the chiefeſt away.
               And diuers men in diuers things,
               the chiefeſt good doe fynde:
               But I the price abeue the reſt,
               to pleaſure haue aſſignde.
               And this my part I truſt I can,
               by reaſon good defende:
               It is the marke that all ſhoote at,
               and eke the finall ende.
               To which, the actes and dedes of men,
               be altogither bent:
               Euen as vnto thappointed marke,
               the ſhooters ſhaft is ſent.
               Who euer would the earth with rakes,
               or Seas with Ores haue tryed?
               Or martyall power by force of armes,
               who durſt haue occupyed?
               In fyne, who euer would haue ſought,
               vertue to come vnto:
               If pleaſure then or hope thereof,
               
                  
dyd not enforce hym ſo?
               For this the chiese beginning is,
               the midſt and eke the ende:
               Of laboures all, for proofe therof,
               thy minde a whyle attende.
               All workes if chagent reaſon haue,
               vnto ſome ende are donne:
               The workmās handes it moues therto,
               and firſt in minde begonne.
               It is: But laſt of all the deade,
               it ſelfe comes forth to lyght:
               The ende therof is good therfore,
               the worke doth more delight.
               The will thereof, with great delight,
               the ende for to obtaine:
               Doth force the labour light to be,
               the cauſe is pleaſure plaine.
               For truely nothing elſe it is,
               but pleaſure of the minde:
               And ſynce by reaſon harde it is,
               to teache the rude and blinde.
               I will attempt by ſimlitudes,
               the truth for to declare:
               Why delues the plowmās clubbiſhe hād,
               & teares the earth wt ſhare?
               For all the heate of flaming dogge,
               hys worke he doth not ſpace.
               
                  
Nor hoary winter froſte. Why fears,
               the ſhipman not in minde:
               The raging rage of ſurging Seas,
               with threarning Rocks ſo blind?
               Deſpiſyng death at hande in hope,
               of maſte with ſayly pyne:
               Why doth the Captaine to the fielde,
               hys manfull minde encline?
               And ūerſly doth reioicewhen as
               he heares the Trompettes blow:
               With hynteng noyſe of foming horſe,
               hys heart begynnes to glow.
               Why doth it ſome delyght alwayes,
               with papers pale to bee:
               And bookes of diuers authors made,
               with daily paine to ſee?
               Certes for that that after time,
               when labours long depart:
               Sōe gaine or ſame may giue him cauſe
               for to reioice in heart.
               For if ſo be that fame and gaine,
               ſhould not the minde aſcende:
               With ioye both vertue & artes withall,
               would ſoone be at an ende.
               For of it ſelfe the ende is ſweete
               and for the ende is thought:
               Both middeſt & former facces ſo ſweete,
               
                  
it forceth alſo nought.
               Of vyle or elſe of honeſt ſtate,
               the dcades do ſeeme to be:
               For as the lewde lycentious man,
               reioyſeth vice to ſee.
               In vertue lykewyſe euermore,
               the good mans Joyes doe ſtande:
               All things therfore for pleaſures ſake,
               we ſurely take in hande.
               For pleaſure men decline frō harmes,
               for this they gaines require:
               Things worthy praiſe or elſe reproche
               through this they doe deſyre.
               With onely this the Goddes aboue,
               contented ſurely bee:
               For profyte is for them vnmeete,
               ſynce nought they lacke we ſee.
               But thou perchaunce wilt ſay the gods,
               with honeſt ioyes abounde:
               What then? If with ſuch ioyfull goods,
               in them no ioye is founde?
               As if thou ſhouldeſt wt gliſtering golde
               and pearles a ſtocke aray:
               An other thing here adde, as oft,
               as cauſe be perfect may.
               It nedefull is the like effect,
               from thence ſhould then proceede:
               
                  
When as therefore that force of ly
                     •
                  e,
               is well diſpoſde in deede.
               And ch
                     •
                  efeſt good obiect to it,
               it alwayes doth retayne:
               That this is happieſt happineſſe,
               denieth no man playne.
               But now from out ſuch fountayne, loe,
               is pleaſure forſt to runne:
               With muſick ſo the eares reioyce,
               of numbers apte begunne.
               So is the ſyght wyth beauty pleaſde,
               the noſe with goodly ſmell:
               This iudgement eke I do pronounce,
               of other partes as well.
               What ſayſt thou now to Uenus worke,
               that creatures all doth make?
               And this the pleaſauntſt pleaſure is,
               except thou truth forſake.
               Moreouer yet both payne and griefe,
               ſince greateſt yls they bee:
               Contrary eke to pleaſure now,
               by right we pleaſure ſee.
               To be the chiefeſt good deſerues,
               of contraries alſo:
               The reaſon lyke contrary is,
               that ſad things to forgo.
               By natures force all things do ſeke,
               
                  
and pleaſures do embrace:
               Who may beleue that once wyl vs,
               deceaue that natures grace?
               The chiefeſt good therfore it is,
               that creatures all do loue:
               But what loue they, or ſeeke they for,
               but pleaſaunt ioyes to proue?
               That we muſt vertue ſeke agayne,
               ſome ſort there be that ſay:
               By ſwet and colde while here we liue,
               and pleaſure caſt away.
               And after death they ſay we ſhall,
               in perfit pleaſure liue:
               Which good to thoſe that do him loue,
               prepared hath to giue.
               This voyce wyth reaſon cannot ſtande,
               but ſhewes it ſelfe as vayne:
               For that the ſoule doth after liue,
               when death the corps hath ſayne.
               Or that it lurkes in lothſome lake,
               of Tartares grieſly den:
               And payes the paynes of his deſerts,
               and takes rewardes as then.
               Of former factes ought none beleue,
               except his ſenſes fade:
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   fooles it is your Poets mad,
               that haue theſe fables made.
               
                  
Who euer wonted were to write
               ſuch fooliſhe fayned toyes:
               Whereby they might delight the eares
               of fooles with fruſtrate 
                     •
                  yes.
               The yrkſome place they fayned haue,
               of Stig
                     •
                  an 
                     •
                  iraun
                     •
                   fell:
               Wher flames ye 
                  
                     •
                  ouds of Phiegethō
               
               that burnes with roaring yell:
               Whereas the triple headed dog,
               and Tiſiphone doth dwell
               With adders arinde of pay
                     •
                  ted hewe,
               and greſſly Gyaunts great:
               wyth dreadfull darkenes doide of lyght
               and fyres whoſe flaming heat.
               Conſumes no wood, where frieſeth cold
               without the wynters ſpace:
               The bote without the force of oke,
               here creketh in this place.
               wh
                     •
                  lſte her wyth ſoules doth 
                     •
                  uerlode
               the aged Ferriman:
               Here Siſiphus the ſtone torments,
               and Tantale waters wanne.
               The ſ
                     •
                  iſty riſtye veſſelles heare,
               matemurdring ſyſters beare:
               From whence the waters out do guſh,
               that kept in vaine are there.
               Much more than I haue heare declarde
               
                  
theſe Poets p
                     •
                  lde haue taught,
               In hell to be, which are not true,
               of children to be thought.
               O gods how great a lacke of wit,
               there is in euery place:
               How prone the way to trif
                     •
                  es is,
               and credite you this caſe,
               O voide of wyt? which neuer coulde,
               by reaſon ought be proued:
               Nor by no ſenſe may be deſernde,
               with feare why are you moued?
               Of things ſo vaine, who credites moſ
                     •
                  ,
               is moſt himſelfe deceaued:
               Theſe are I ſay deceitfull things,
               whereby be prieſtes releaued.
               For when that once our vitall breath,
               is faded cleane away:
               No more we be than firſt we were,
               before our natall daye.
               O to much weake to fraile and proude,
               O nature bolde of man:
               whereby doeſt thou perſwade thy ſelfe
               to liue for euer than?
               Leaue of therefore thou lumpe of claye,
               the yeares of gods to wyll:
               
                  
                     •
                  ll things begonne ſhall haue an ende,
               nothing remaineth ſtyll.
               
                  
Both cities great, and mighty men,
               and vaſtye realmes withall:
               The hautieſt hylles and greateſt flouds
               doth time at length let fall.
               And thinkeſt thou (O fading duſt)
               for euer to remaine?
               Is hope of minde with thee ſo great?
               we trauaile but in vaine.
               In truſting dreames for vertues ſake,
               and fayning fanſies ſtrange:
               That be but fooles that things aſſured,
               for vnaſſurde will chaunge.
               Forſakyng thus aſſertainde here,
               with doubtfull things to meete:
               But yet of olde, and auncient fame,
               rewardes remaineth ſweete.
               Of little force this nothing is,
               when death hath had his right:
               Thou nothing art, for what is fame,
               if it doe nought delight?
               The corps in graue, what doth ye ſ
                     •
                  one
               or ſtocke reioice in prayes?
               If here thou haſt not them, thou ſhal
                     •
                  
               
               haue neuer happy dayes.
               Therefore while this our brittle lyfe,
               vncertaine eke doth laſt:
               The wyſe man, to his power will ioy:
               
                  
nor ſtraite wyll downe be caſt.
               As oft as fortune on him frownes,
               wyll ſeeke the pleaſaunt life:
               If any thing to him ſhall hap,
               of bitter eygre ſtrife.
               Wherefore bicauſe I will not now,
               thee fruſtrate here retaine:
               (O yong man) ioy while time permits,
               and baniſhe dolefull paine.
               When theſe his wordes my berded ſire
               had moued me to beleue:
               Good father then (quod I) for theſe
               thy paines I cannot geue.
               Thee worthy thanks, but whilſt I line,
               I ſhall to thee be bounde:
               Within my heart, and eke I ſhall,
               reſerue thy ſayings ſounde.
               One doubt within my breſt doth yet.
               aſſuredly remaine:
               For not the deedes we onely muſt,
               but learne them to obtaine.
               Therefore I doe require you now,
               to teache me here the way:
               That wyll me leade to pleaſures place▪
               
               whereby it haue I may.
               The way is ſhort and plaine withall,
               then grayherde to me tels:
               
                  
Nor farre from hence voluptnouſneſſe,
               that luſty Lady dwels.
               Whom if thou doeſt deſire to ſee,
               come after me a pace:
               Wherby thou mayſt by me reioice,
               in finding out hir grace.
               One parte of three the ſtarry orbes,
               had ſcarce paſt ouer than:
               When ſtackring vp himſelf did rayſe,
               thunweldy aged man.
               Who leading foorth I followed on,
               and hand in hand we went:
               By ſtraunge vnhaunted wayes we goe,
               and ſpace a little ſpent
               Beholde appeares a ſumptuous houſe,
               and ſtrayght I aſke my guide:
               What honour kepes that precious gem
               and princely palace wide?
               Plutus quod he poſſeſſeth this,
               and eke an armed knight:
               The way to kepe and men to paſſe,
               forbiddeth by his might.
               Except they come him firſt vnto,
               and pleaſe him wyth ſome gift:
               But he himſelf doth holde his hall,
               amid you towry clift.
               Three daughters eke he only hath,
               
                  
within his bowre to dwell:
               Whoſe names if thou deſire to knowe,
               I ſhall thee briefly tell.
               The firſt of them is filthy exceſſe,
               the ſecond puffed pride:
               The third is fooliſh ignoraunce,
               with countnaunce bolde beſyde.
               Who then quod I ſhal leade vs now,
               vnto this famous kyng?
               Three maydes he hath quod greſil thoe,
               that there to wyll thee bring.
               Chance, fraud and vſury, by theſe,
               haue all men eaſy way:
               I haue no gifts then aunſwered I,
               that giue theſe maydes I may.
               Nor ſafe it is ſuch girles to truſt,
               ſome other way declare:
               There is quod he another way,
               there is a way to ſpare.
               which if thou ſayſt the word we go,
               leade me there to quod I:
               Togither both we went therwyth,
               where depe a vale did lie.
               with ſtones the way was all beſet,
               by which our iourney lay:
               And ſo be growne wyth cra
                     ••
                  ed ſhorns:
               that ſearce we ſee the way.
               
                  
Hereby we found the ragged houſe,
               of ſeely pouerty:
               With top vntylde we paſt it thoe,
               and ſtreight a wood we ſpye.
               Beholde, then ſayth my guide to me,
               beholde you trees ſo hie:
               Which wt their tops do ſeme to touch,
               the ſteamed ſtarry ſkie.
               There dwels ye worthy quene (quod he,)
               by whom we ſhall be bleſt:
               But firſt thou muſt waſh hand and face
               and get thee neatly dreſt.
               The Goddeſſe loues no naſtineſſe,
               nor ſ
                     •
                  ouens can abide:
               A riuer ſmall I then perceiude,
               by grauayle ground to glide.
               Which wyth a pleaſannt huſhing ſoūd,
               prouoked the ioyes of bed:
               Here waſht I fayre my face and hands,
               and combde my rugged hed.
               I trimde my clothes in order fine,
               and lightneſſe hath expelde:
               All graue and earneſt things: ſo that
               wyth mirth my way I helde.
               No further of than once a man,
               a ſtone may from him ſting:
               The wood was then whereas we heare
               
                  
the birdes full ſwetely ſyng.
               And floures ſwete and fayre we ſmell.
               of which inowe ther growes:
               Such woods tharabian neuer ſaw,
               though franconcenſe there flowes.
               Nor yet the Eaſterne Indian thoe,
               nor Scith the like doth ſee:
               Though round about he is beſet,
               wyth bowes of lawrell tree.
               Nor Atlas that the rowling ſkies,
               with ſhoulders doth 
                     •
                  nſtayne:
               Though Satirs in the place doth daūce
               whom Fayries loue doth payne.
               A riuer milde about it runnes,
               wyth comely water cleare:
               The bankes ſo farre aſonder ſtode,
               as leapes the chaſed Deare.
               And in the depth a doughty droue,
               of ſcaley beaſtes they play:
               And for a wall it compaſde is,
               with lofty pines ſo gay.
               With pines that in their crabbed barks
               doth Cibels loue contayne:
               And Phebus Cipreſſe ſtandes them by,
               of equall heigth agayne.
               There lackes no maſtes Eſculus,
               no Mapple, Holme nor Oke:
               
                  
Nor plaintree, Corke, nor yet the nutte
               that colour doth prouoke.
               The Arbute, and the Alder tree,
               the Cheſtnut, and the Aſhe:
               The Filbert, Pechtree and the Palme,
               the Byrch with ſpriggy laſhe.
               The Firretre, and the mirtle eke,
               and brode leaude Beechy wood:
               When Saturn ruled the golden world,
               which was our fathers foode.
               The Uine, the Figge and Apple eke,
               and Lotos Pryaps frend:
               The Juey and the Laurell tree,
               that Poets heads doth ſhend.
               The Mulberry and the Poplartree,
               that Hercule once eſtemde:
               The Peartree, willow, and the Prime,
               with Bore that whitley ſemde.
               The Medlar and the Oliue tree,
               the Elme and Cherrey red:
               The Codtree and the Almon eke,
               whoſe floures firſt do ſpred.
               What ſhould I here the Cedre tree,
               or Hebron call to minde:
               Or Cytre fitte for Tables fine,
               whom golde his place reſynde.
               Or other more whoſe names if thou,
               
                  
doſt take in hand to tell:
               Thou ſoner mayſt in number bring,
               the Egiptian lands as well.
               Thus in we go whereas the bridge,
               doth ioyne the bankes in one:
               Of ample ſpace and ſemely ſyght,
               their alleyes long they gone.
               Wyth Purple Roles red and white,
               and Paunſeys paynted hewe:
               White Daffodils and violets ſwete,
               wyth flagrant Lillies blewe.
               Swete Amaranthe that long doth liue,
               wyth leaues of crimſon die:
               The Cloue wyth Balme and Caſſia to,
               Mynt Time and Sauerie.
               With Saffrō Myrhe and Maioram,
               the Gardens onely gem:
               Of ſauoure ſweete in I dale woodes,
               ynow there growes of them.
               Both here and there in euery place,
               ſwete ſauours vp they ſume:
               A thouſand kindes of Birdes do fill,
               the woodes with euery tune.
               With diuers notes the cleared ayre,
               they cauſed to reſounde:
               There Progne wayles the gret vn
                     •
                  rot
                     •
                  
               
               that in her loue was found.
               
                  
And Philomela doth bewayle,
               her owne and Itis caſe:
               In humaine voice and painfull throte,
               the 
                     •
                  ara
                     •
                   pr
                     •
                  tes apaſe.
               Their varying ſoftly notes ſo fine,
               the Goldfi
                     •
                  ch faſt doth ſing:
               And waters flowes the flowers vpon,
               from cleare continuall ſpring.
               And here and there their courſes runne
               and moyſtes the hear
                     •
                  es ſo grene:
               No Dragon there nor greedy wolfe,
               might euer yet be ſeene.
               No Bore, no Beare nor Tigre fierce,
               nor Serpent foule there dwels:
               To harme with triple hiſſing toung,
               with poyſon fierce that ſwels.
               In fine no kinde of beaſt there is,
               but ſuch as peace hath 
                     •
                  worne:
               The longeard wat, the Hart, the Buck,
               the Goate with harmeleſſe horne.
               The middle heauens then almoſt,
               the flaming Phebus helde:
               When firſt we ſaw the gorgeous place,
               whereas thys Lady dwelde.
               Amid the woods an aumple ſpace,
               full of grene herbes we ſee:
               No tree there grewe but tables rounde,
               
                  
in order placed be.
               With de
                     ••
                  ties ſuch as Capna did,
               the oneyde duke prepare:
               Such deinties as they once did eate,
               the ſacred ſhieldes that bare.
               The time is come quod Greſill nowe
               let vs go drinke and fill:
               Our bellies: Strength for to repayre,
               it is the goddeſſe wyll.
               That none ſhall paſſe wyth ſober head,
               nor yet with hungred mawe:
               For ſcotfree here may all men feede,
               thys is the Ladies lawe.
               Whē meate doth faile, her maides do fil
               the table full againe:
               A pace wee feede and ſcarce can riſe,
               ſo wetes the wine our braine.
               With doubtfull ſteps our feete do trede,
               with ſtackryng ſtumpes we go:
               More earneſtly we then deſyre,
               the Queene to come vnto.
               Whom in the fielde we walking finde,
               with mighty mirthfull traine:
               Young luſty guts wyth boyes & maides
               and doting age againe.
               On her right hande a woman goes,
               with pleaſant ſhining face:
               
                  
And in her hande a boye ſhe leades,
               from downe whoſe ſhoulders place.
               A dreadful quyuer hanges with ſhaf
                     •
                  es,
               both cruell ſharpe and kene:
               And in his handes a bowe he bare,
               and drewe the ſtring ſo tene.
               Though blinde he was yet ſtraight hee threw
                     •
                  
               
               at euery man his darte:
               And fier
                     ••
                  ye to without regarde,
               he perced to the heart.
               The ſhaft returneth ſtraight againe,
               when wyde the wounde is left:
               The people all incontinent,
               he had of lyfe berefte.
               But that a certaine woman there,
               that pityed much the ſore:
               Of Godly zeale vnto theſe men,
               gan helpe and helth reſtore.
               For when the wounded breſtes ſhe ſaw
               whereas the darte went in:
               Of any man, and bloud ſo warme,
               that guſhing out did ſpin.
               Then ſtrayte ſhe runnes her cure vnto,
               and healthfull drinkes him giues:
               Wherby though cruell wound remain,
               the pacient yet he lyues.
               An other woman yet beſydes,
               
                  
in left hande leades the Queene:
               Whoſe chaps do alwaies chaw ye cudde,
               her golles they greſy beene.
               Wyth muſty duſty lothſome clothes,
               whoſe ſtynke doth all anoye:
               And onely to ſhee doth delight,
               in beaſtly belly ioye.
               Great tanckards depe ſhe turneth quite
               the bottoms vpſey downe:
               And in her hande a boy ſhe leades,
               wyth drouſy droupyng crowne.
               And winking eies, he ſcarce could wake
               nor woulde his dame permit:
               With meate & drink thus ouercharg
                     •
                  e
               to haue a waking fyt.
               A moyſter ſtraunge on her he flyngs,
               heer
                     •
                   ſoundes with wheaſing noyſe:
               The boxen ſhalme, with ſtroke ye harpe.
               is forcde to ſhewe his voice.
               Here Orphens doth bewayle hys wife.
               with tooth of ſerpent torne:
               The dire decrees of darkſome den,
               and labours paſt and worne.
               And after him both beaſt and ſtone,
               by muſyck ſw
                     ••
                  e he drawes:
               To Delphins eke Arion here,
               
                  
                     •
                  oth ſwetely ſyng his ſawes.
               
                  
With harpe the noble Amphion here,
               doth Thebes walles renewe:
               Declaring here his cruel caſe,
               by ſhipmen eke vnt
                     •
                  ewe.
               And after theſe with fr
                     •
                  ſkyng l
                     •
                  gges,
               comes Dauncing all the reſt:
               Whoſe eyes a certaine dymnes darcke,
               had fully then oppreſt.
               About the heades of euery one,
               their flyes a ſtincking miſt:
               And one amongſt them all I knewe,
               that helde this writte in fyſt.
               Sa
                     •
                  danapalus here am I,
               that rulde with princely powre:
               T
                     •
                  aſſyrians Realme loe thys haue I,
               for that I did deuoure.
               O fooliſhe wretches, whyleſt you lyue,
               let neuer Joyes ſo go:
               For after death alas there are,
               no Joyes to come vnto.
               Learne you by mee O mortall men,
               the treweſt way to knowe:
               Now laſt of all two Monſters came,
               amyd the vtterſt rowe.
               Wherof the one with diuers tonges,
               theſe fellowes fowle arayde:
               The other vexed them ſore with pricks,
               
                  
that griefe their Joye alayde.
               So much the heauens vs do hate,
               reioyſing at our yll:
               So farre the Gods aboue doe ſeme,
               contrary to our wyll.
               And though wyth theſe aduerſities,
               we paſſe our dayes in payne:
               Yet haue we not one houre to ioy,
               in quiet to remaine.
               If ought we haue it is but ſhort,
               and ioy vnperfect framed:
               O lyfe that doſte of ryght deſerue,
               erilement to be named.
               Why doth the harmes of mortall men,
               the Goddes aboue delight:
               Why had they rather ſad we were,
               than liue in ioyfull plight.
               Whereof did fyrſt ſpring out to vs,
               ſuch mortall hatred fell:
               Wynne thou the gods wt pacient mind,
               in bearing euils well.
               No ſpace we were of any length,
               from this vnrulye game:
               When from the right ſide of the woode,
               came forth a comely Dame.
               With body fyne and virgins face,
               and ſober ſemely gate:
               
                  
Such one as Joue his wife is thought,
               amyd her great eſtate.
               with haire, and boſom torne, ſhe runnes
               to vs in dolefull plight,
               And not to be deſpyſde ſhe was
               though clothes were baſe to ſyght.
               And from her ruddy roſye lyppes,
               theſe witty wordes did ſpryng:
               O caytifes whereto pace you thus,
               whereto ſhall phrenſy bring.
               You now? ſtay here, ſet down your fete
               and leape nor to the ſnare:
               And hearken to my wordes a whyle,
               that I ſhall heere declare:
               Fyrſt this (quod ſhe) no goddeſſe is,
               nor her no goddeſſe bare.
               As you (perchaunce) beloue ſhe is,
               to whom as now you goe,
               To tentes of whom you couet now
               to Joyne your ſelues vnto.
               But is a dredefull drery ſprite,
               deceiuing all that liues:
               Unwares of her deceitfully,
               and gall for honey giues.
               Let not the face deceiue you now
               that ſemeth ſayre without:
               That gliſters aye with ſhining golde
               
                  
beſet with gemmes aboute.
               You know not yet how foule ſhe is,
               within thoſe garments gaye:
               A thouſande ſpots within ſhe hath
               and caſtes her men away.
               Deceiude with falſe defrauding toye:
               as 
                     •
                  iſhe their bane come by:
               Whom crafty fyſher doth hegyle,
               with reede deceitfully.
               When from the rockes, into the floudes
               he caſteth downe his lyne:
               With harmefull baite the hooke ſo hyd,
               with haſtye courſe they hine.
               And ſnatche with gredye iawes ye bayte
               and faſt they hang thereby:
               And following faſt the twyrling threde
               theyr daunce full dolefully:
               The quiuering ſandes of Libiaes lande
               we nede not for to flye:
               Ne fearefull Atiphates houſe,
               ne Scillaes rocke ſo hye.
               Nor dreadefull drenching Charibdis,
               nor other monſter fell:
               So much as ought we pleaſure ſhunne
               what harmes hereby do dwell.
               In mortall men? what townes? what realmes?
               what men of worthy fame
               Hath it deſtroide? I wilbe ſhort,
               
                  
and one example name.
               Who euer yet Alcides paſt,
               who durſt ſuch deedes aſſay?
               That ſlew two ſerpēts foule ſometimes
               in cradle as he lay.
               He tore the tuſhes from them both,
               and thruſt his handes ſo ſmall:
               In midſt their throtes. He cauſed hath,
               Molorchus beaſt to fall.
               He cut the foule Echydnaes head:
               deſtroyde the dreadfull drake:
               The fearefull bull adowne he threw,
               and ſwifty Hart did take.
               He hath expelde the Stimphalides
               by force of valeant bowe:
               The Thracian tyrauntes ſtable eke,
               his hande did ouerthrowe.
               He turnde thy courſe Achelous,
               and brake thy winding creke:
               He toke the Apples from the maydes,
               and ſpoilde the Spaniſhe freke.
               Of hugie kyne. He did deſcende
               adowne the pyt of hell:
               The dreadfull dog from thence he drew,
               that fometh poyſon fell.
               The Bore of Erymantus to,
               was ſlaine of that ſame hand:
               
                  
And Anthenes eke the ūrength of him,
               lift vp did vnderſtand.
               He felt it eke that Oxen ſtale,
               Dan Uulcanes wyly whelpe:
               And after all the wery ſire,
               he could olde Atlas helpe.
               The ſtarres aboue and ſwaying poules,
               whoſe ſhoulders do ſuſtayne:
               But O thou hurtfull pleaſure loe,
               deceatful eke and vayne.
               The Lordly heſts of Gigian mayde,
               with will he did obay:
               And he whom dire Megeraes force,
               nor fende might once affray.
               Nor quiuering Lartares froſty colde,
               nor flames of Phlegethon:
               Nor vggly Charons dreadfull loke,
               with briſtled haires vpon.
               Did often fondly feare the threats,
               of milde vnmighty mayde:
               For ſhield in hand a diſtaffe beares,
               for helme wyth coyfe arayde.
               The hande alſo that once was wont,
               vnweldy clubbe to ſhake:
               In maydely guiſe then towe to ſpinne,
               and eke accountes to make.
               Of taſke perfourmed. And vnto her
               
                  
the bondled flax he beares:
               whilſt clothed in womēs wed the ſtroke,
               of miſtres whip he feares.
               Amphitrions ſonne, what beaſtly toye,
               hath made the thus ſo blinde?
               For as that hag dame Circes did,
               tranſforme to ſwiniſh kinde.
               Uliſſes mates bewrapt their bones,
               in ſtubborne briſtles harde:
               So doth your Quene (nay rather ſlaue,)
               chaunge them that hir regarde.
               For diſh in hand to them ſhe geues,
               of pleaſaunt poyſon full:
               Of which who drinks is ſtraight tranſformd
               in Lion, Bore or Bull.
               Or made a dogge or elſe a wolfe,
               the common plague to ſheepe:
               And other into diuers ſhapes,
               are thus compelde to creepe.
               But few of that ſame ſort there be,
               this deathly cup that flye:
               And you your ſelues theſe fearful fates,
               ſhall ſhortly ſure come by.
               If thou perchaunce wil after runne,
               the banners of this hore:
               Wherfore be wiſe and flye the ſnares,
               I warne you ſirs before.
               
                  
Whylſt time will ſerue wyth brideling bits,
               and rule your wilful minde:
               And in the priuy hidden ſnares,
               let not your eyes be blinde.
               Leaſt ſhe like as the ſpyder doth,
               begyle the ſiely flye:
               whilte as in tender webbe ſhe lurkes,
               and in her bowre doth lye.
               But when that ſhe doth perreyne,
               the gyltleſſe ſoule in trapt:
               Then out wyth cruell courſe ſhe comes,
               the corps in cordes ſo clapt.
               The duſty twyſt with nimble legges, through,
               about it faſt ſhe windes:
               wyth deadelye ſtyngs ſhe thruſtes hym
               and ſuckes the bloud ſhe findes.
               O mad to mad, which when he may,
               to gods compared be:
               By reaſon rulde, yet brut
                     ••
                  h trayne,
               to haunt delighteth he.
               In vſing eft of lecherous actes,
               and pampering Uenus frende:
               His gredy paunch and beaſtlineſſe,
               he followeth to his ende.
               Theſe words wyth pacience coulde not beare.
               my luſty greſild gyde:
               But mourning this his wil ſo broke,
               
                  
and angred eke beſide.
               With mumbling wordes: I know not what
               he turnes frō vs his face,
               And, vnto his acquainted mates,
               ran three legde ſire a pace.
               Arete then (for this hir name,
               ſhe termde her ſelfe to be)
               Let Greſil flye from hence away,
               regarde not thou quod ſhe.
               The Owle to darkneſſe vſde, cannot,
               the gliſtring ſunne abide:
               And as the ſick whome feuer long,
               wyth raging heate hath tride.
               Refuſeth ſuch as may to him,
               his health agayne reſtore:
               Things worſe and hurtfull to his life,
               deſiring rather more.
               So fooles do follow falſe things moſt,
               and from the truth they flye:
               But flie not thou my warning heare,
               if elth thou doeſt ſet by.
               Which that yu mayſt more aptly heare,
               walke now this way wyth me:
               For with theſe ſights the minde is let,
               and eares diſturbed 
                     •
                  ee.
               Then towards the right hand forth ſhee leades,
               and vnderneath a bay:
               
                  
That ſtode thereby, we both ſit downe,
               and thus ſhe gan to ſay.
               That workman firſt that made the ſkies
               the earth and ſeas alſo:
               As all the ſpheares he hath compelde,
               gaynward the firſt to go.
               So would he that theffectes of minde,
               ſhould reaſon eke gaynſay:
               Leaſt minde alone within the corps,
               with dulneſſe ſhould decay.
               For as the Horſe by force of ſpurre,
               and Oxe, with gode a right:
               Are forcde to go, and by the ſmart,
               receiue the greater might.
               So ſharp with force, theffects the minde
               encreaſed by reſtraynt:
               The which effectes if they were not,
               the minde ſtraight ways would faint.
               And would no worthy thing perfourme
               like as the ſhip doth ſlugge:
               Except the windes her ſayles do puffe,
               and Ores by force hir drugge.
               Some greatly erre therfore that ſay,
               ſuch tumultes of the minde:
               A wiſeman neuer ought to feele,
               like forme in marble ſinde.
               Theſe men do think a man to be:
               
                  
and doting preach in vayne:
               For then in vayne had nature dealt,
               to man ſuch motions playne.
               Which is to baſe for to confeſſe,
               we may them therfore vſe:
               Moſt lawfully if reaſons rule,
               and arte thereto we chuſe.
               Theſe greate affections of the minde,
               with bridle ſtrong he guides:
               And as the horſeman rules his horſe,
               ſo rules he them beſides.
               Nor once is ouer runne of them,
               he, that deſerues to bee:
               A wiſe man namde, and not in vayne,
               but fewe there be we ſee.
               That vertue knowes for to obtayne,
               in meaſure for to ſtay:
               Some ſort therefore this ſame do loue,
               ſome take it cleane away.
               Both ſortes therby in error hault,
               for, onely gods alone:
               By reaſon liues, and beaſtes agayne,
               with onely ſenſe do grone.
               But man with both is full adornde,
               commaunded to reioyſe:
               In both alſo: in reaſon moſt,
               this part is worthier choyſe.
               
                  
And more celeſtiall eke it is,
               and lifteth men alofte:
               Wher luſt doth throw mē hedlōg down
               and makes them dote full ofte.
               Wherfore we ought it leaſt to bey,
               although (O nature blinde:
               Of men) that euery man it hauntes,
               and few can reaſon finde.
               A ſort therfore amyd the wood,
               ſaunce number ſawe we play:
               To which euen thou with doltiſh guide,
               hadſt helde thy fooliſh way.
               But that our voyce did thee withdrawe,
               and didſt thou nothing feare:
               Thoſe mōſters two, with ſtealthy ſteps
               that followed after there?
               Knoweſt thou their names? the one is grefs
               the other ſlaunder hight:
               I not forbid nor graunt ſuch ioyes,
               of ſenſe proceding right.
               But rare I would that they ſhould be,
               and eke no vertues foe:
               For which it neuer lawfull is,
               things honeſt to let goe.
               But bridells ſtrong thou nedeſt ſure,
               and cloſely them to take:
               For elſe they hurt: and ioyfull things,
               
                  
wil malice not forſake.
               Diſordring all and loke how much,
               a man doth from them flye:
               So much the more he doth approch,
               the ſeare of Joue on hye.
               And he that hauntes them moſt of all,
               is worthy leaſt of prayſe:
               Abaſing eke himſelf therwyth,
               with beaſtes he leades his dayes.
               They hurt beſydes when as they be,
               to dayly vſe retainde:
               And daungers dire be got therby,
               and minde with lets is painde.
               Nor can the minde be alwayes yet,
               to ſeuere things addict:
               For frayle it is and ioy it muſt,
               when endes the ſad afflict.
               And downe the higheſt hilles deſcende,
               to valleyes depe and lowe:
               No otherwiſe than when on earth,
               doth Joue his lightning throwe.
               Hating the crimes that here be done,
               the Egle bearing faſt:
               Wyth byll or feete, the three edgde tole,
               in Cicil fornace caſt.
               Aſcends the toppes of heauens hie,
               and maruayles much to ſee:
               
                  
The Princely walles wyth precious ſtones
               that there adourned bee.
               Aſtoniſhed is to ſee the place,
               of gliſtering gold confect:
               That ſhines wyth ſtarres ſhe doth beholde
               with Diamond pillers deckt.
               The coſtly roufes ſhe loked vpon,
               of Indian teeth compacte:
               She meruayles at the ample fielde,
               and light that neuer lackt.
               The great delightes that gods are in,
               that rong cannot expreſſe:
               Nor neuer heart of man could thinke,
               the worthy pleaſauntneſſe.
               She flying faſt both here and there,
               deſireth much to play:
               By ſkies ſo cleare and pleaſaunt ayres,
               begins hir wings to ſpray.
               The earth, and quite ſhe doth forget,
               her neſt is out of minde:
               In princely rayne of thundring God,
               ſuch pleaſure doth ſhe finde.
               But after that by hungers prick,
               with faſting ſtrength decayes:
               And he ate lackes foode to worke vppon,
               that now ſhe gan to prayſe.
               The heauens hie ſhe doth deſpiſe,
               
                  
and downe her ſelfe ſhe ſpeedes▪
               
               To ground, that late ſhe did contemne,
               and there apace ſhe feedes.
               Then I which held my peace ſo long,
               (ſuch ſilence for to breake:)
               Addreſt my ſelfe and not affrayd,
               her tale to ſtoppe, gan ſpeake.
               Bycauſe (quod I) the ſunne as now,
               gan weſtward firſt deſcend:
               And night doth haſt his courſe to vſe.
               before this light do wende.
               Away from vs and darkneſſe cōmes,
               a few things ſhew to me:
               O goddeſſe milde (no matrone thou,
               but ſeemes a ghoſt to be.)
               What name the woman had, of late,
               that I ſaw yonder ſtand:
               Beſydes the Quene, & what the boyes
               be, that ſhe led in hand.
               Then in this ſorte ſhee aunſwered me,
               doubt not, thou ſhalt diſcerne:
               By me (if time do nothing let)
               all that thou ſeekes to learne.
               Unworthy things thou haſt not aſkt,
               I will therfore reſight:
               Her now, that on the left hand goes,
               and greedy but ſhee hight.
               
                  
Her great delight is for to eate,
               and night and day to drinke:
               The greateſt ſorte do worſhip her,
               and for a god her thinke.
               With ioyfull hearts the flaming wines,
               in gilded holes they maſh.
               And coſtly cates on bourdened bourdes,
               the gredy guts they graſh.
               The chiefeſt good they think to be,
               this belly god to ſerue:
               But out of doubt I thee aſſure,
               they from the truth do ſwerue.
               For nothing is more vile than this,
               nor harmeth more the ſtate,
               Of man: The beaſtes for onely lyfe,
               did Joue aboue create.
               But man for life and reaſon to,
               and that he ſhould excell:
               And ſo be like vnto the ſainctes,
               which in the heauens dwell.
               He ordaynde hath to rule the earth,
               but they that loue the yoke:
               Of gredineſſe and belly ioyes,
               are dull, and with the ſmoke.
               Of fuming meates their wit is darckt,
               (like as the cloudes the ſunne:)
               Ne may they yet the truth diſcerne,
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  
but chiefly when begunne.
               Hath boyling wines within the breſt,
               to blinde and dull the witte:
               And when the paunch is ſtuffed ful,
               for bookes they be vnfitte.
               Wherby it often cōmes to paſſe,
               their witte but ſmall to bee:
               The end that nature plaſte them for,
               they cleane for ſake we ſee.
               Nor more they knowe, than doth ye herd
               of Shepe or Oxen dull:
               Yea leſſe ſometyme when as with wine
               their beaſtly braynes be full.
               When as for one, two lightes they ſee,
               with borde and wall to daunce:
               O dronkenneſſe, the death of minde,
               the broode of all miſchaunce.
               What thing doſt thou not force ye mind,
               of man to take in hande?
               What dare not he attempt thorow thee
               both ſtrife wyth brawling, and
               Moſt cruell frayes thou moueſt him to,
               thou ioyeſt when bloud is ſhead:
               By thee are ſecretes eft reuealde,
               wyth minde and tong made dead.
               Both feare and ſhame faſtneſſe alſo,
               full farre they flye from thee:
               
                  
Shunne you this plague (O wretches) now
               that makes you mad to be.
               And euen as as mad as once Dreſtes
               was with mothers might:
               What filthier thing? what beaſte more vile
               than is the dronken wight?
               The meate that he not long before,
               hath faſt deuoured vp:
               He perbrakes out, he trembles eke,
               and ſtinketh of the cup.
               Ful oft he falles and breaks his browes
               his eyes and legs withall:
               His ſtutting wordes he ſtamereth out,
               no man perceiue him ſhall.
               Much things he ſayth, & much he doth,
               that when the night is gone:
               And ſunne is preſent here agayne,
               he ſorrowes ſore vppon.
               The Mace donian King, the ſonne,
               of Phillip graund le Roy:
               In dronken mode, at table once,
               his frends did all deſtroy.
               But when the cups their fumes had left
               and wit returnde agayne:
               He found the fault, wt tears he mournd,
               and wiſht himſelf as ſlayne.
               Why boaſt you with your Orgies vain
               
                  
in woodes of Citheron?
               Your Thias daūce, why brag you now
               your foolyſhe drūms vpon?
               No God your Bacchus is Iwis,
               that comes of Cadmus line:
               Nor Joue him got of Semels wombe,
               as Poetes doe define.
               But hell hath him engendred, lo
               Begera is his dame:
               No God he is, but doth deſpiſe,
               the gods, and hates their name.
               For godlineſſe they nought eſtreme,
               that haunt the pots of wyne:
               Nor well can vſe the dronken prieſt,
               the Sacraments deuine.
               What neede I here for to reſite,
               what ſickneſſe, and what paines:
               Exceſſe of meate and to much drinke,
               doth brede within the vaines?
               From hence doe flow: euen as it were,
               from euerlaſting ſpring:
               The axeſſe, and the botche, the byle,
               wyth ſcaule and ſcurfe itching.
               The goute oppreſſing hands and fete,
               wyth bleared dropping eyes:
               Wyth wine the quiuering ioyntes they quake.
               frō iawes the teeth out flies
               
                  
With ſodayne death, & ſtomacks paine,
               and fulſome ſtinking breath:
               A greater ſory than ſworde hath ſlayne,
               exceſſe hath done to death.
               Beſydes the goods be ſtraight cōſumde,
               and downe the guttes do ſ
                     •
                  ing:
               The fielde, the houſe, the houſhold ſtuffe
               and euery other thing.
               And now both poore and baſe he is,
               whoſe riches late were greate:
               Eate thou, wher by thy lyfe may laſt,
               but liue not thou to eate.
               I haue thee here declared now,
               the woman what ſhe hight:
               And now the boy with nodding noule,
               I wyll thee here reſight.
               The boy is hers, and of her borne,
               and labour him begat:
               His name is ſlepe, his nourſe is leth.
               his fode is poppey fat.
               He brother germaine is to death,
               but not as ſhe doth laſt:
               He doth refreſh the weried limmes,
               wyth dayly labour paſt.
               He doth expell the cares of men,
               and calleth ſtrength agayne:
               Without the ayde of him, no man,
               
                  
his life may well ſuſtayne.
               Yet hurtes he much and doth the minde
               in certayne wiſe oppreſſe:
               Diſeaſes breedes, and ouls the corps,
               oft vſed with exceſſe.
               If foode be ſmall, he ſmall will be,
               for when the meate is ſpent:
               The corps doth wake or elſe doth reſt,
               wyth little ſlepe content.
               More lightly then his reſt he takes,
               and better ſleepes doth breede:
               But vnto troubled mindes it is,
               a comfort greate in deede.
               And much it is to be deſired,
               when loue the hart doth payne:
               When ſickneſſe greues or when yt man,
               doth heauy chaunce ſuſtayne.
               Then is it more to be eſtemed:
               than golde or precious ſtone:
               As death, ſo ſleepe doth make the wretch
               and happy man as one.
               But he whome nature hath endewed,
               wyth long and happy dayes:
               That doth deſire expert to be,
               in euery kinde of wayes.
               By vertue eke a famous name,
               in earth for to obtayne:
               
                  
Muſt watche: for famous things, by ſleepe
               none are perfourmed plaine.
               And for to ſleepe in feathers ſoft,
               renowne doth eft refuſe:
               Shun thou this ſame, with al thy might
               thy ſelfe to watching vſe.
               For, O what times of quiet length
               ſhall fares permit to thee:
               When laſt of all the night ſhall come
               and day ſhall baniſht bee.
               And breath hath left ye quiuering ioints
               lyke ayre that fleting flyes:
               With long and euerlaſting ſleepe,
               then ſhalt thou ſhut thine eyes.
               While as the goddeſſe thus did ſpeake,
               diſcended downe from hye:
               Thaumantis, lo when ſūne doth ſhine
               that gliſters in the ſkye.
               With diuers hew that ſhewes her face,
               amydde the miſty cloude:
               wyth ruddy roſye purple lippes,
               thus gan ſhe ſpeake aloude.
               God ſpede thee goddeſſe here on earth,
               Panomphes gem moſt deare:
               Arete chiefe of goddeſſes
               (as doth to me appeare.)
               Come on thy wayes for all the gods,
               
                  
deſyreth now to ſee.
               Leaue thou the earth, & earthly raignes
               where dwellers yll they bee.
               Here is no place for ghoſtly men,
               all wycked crimes here raigne:
               Religion none, no fayth, nor grace
               but vertue in diſdaine.
               Here fooliſhe fondeneſſe holdes ye balle,
               imperiall Scepter aye:
               Fraude and diſceyt all men amongſte,
               is vſed here alwaye.
               Go to therefore in haſt, as now,
               breake of thy tale begunne:
               Let lettes be loſed, & with lyke courſe,
               let vs to heauen runne.
               Arete than, beholding mee,
               theſe wordes began to ſay:
               I cannot now (as faine I woulde)
               all things to thee diſplay.
               But when the day againe repayres,
               and night away ſhall ſlyde:
               To thee, ſhall I ſende one, be gladde,
               to tell thee all beſyde.
               Farewel therefore: & wyth theſe words
               gaine warde the ſkyes they ſpring:
               The weſterne wynde did them receiue
               and vpwarde faſt them bring:
               
                  
Lyke as when wicked Scilla flyes,
               her father following faſt:
               Aloft by little vp ſhe hyes,
               and he gan after haſt.
               Wyth gredy minde, & through the ayre
               he ſores both here and there:
               Deſiring much to wreke the fault
               of cutting of hys haire.
               She ſtriues her ſelfe in cloudes to hyde,
               and mounteth out of ſight:
               And Niſus thether perceth faſt,
               that both be out of lyght.
               Adowne the floudes, doth ſunne diſcend
               and forth the ſtarres they ſhinde:
               And I the way that grey berd led,
               full ſadly then declinde:
               And home I come, my promiſt ioyes
               in heauy hope to finde.
            
         
         
            
            
            Cancer the fourth Booke.
            
               
                  
                     
                        •
                     
                  Sūne that with perpetual courſe
               about the worlde doeſt flye:
               The parent chief of euery thing,
               and dyamonde of the ſkye.
               The Prince of all the Starres, & ſpring
               of euerlaſting light:
               Beholding euery thing abroade,
               whyle as with colour bright.
               Of crimſyn hew, thou leaueſt aloofe
               the brinkes of Perſean lande:
               With riſing face, and paſſing forth,
               doeſt hyde thy fyerie brand.
               Amydde the weſterne fluddes, and laſte
               of all, doſte burne the hyll:
               Of Calpe great, and eke that courſe,
               frequenteſt alwayes ſtyll.
               By thee, doe all things plaine appeare,
               whoſe colour late the night
               Bereft, hir darkeneſſe by no meanes
               abyding ones thy lyght.
               The ſyght and eye of all the worlde,
               who partes in foure the yeare,
               And changeſt times, & with the time,
               all things engendred heare:
               while as by croked line thou runſte
               in lyuely pictured ſpheare.
               
                  
O ſtarre deuine, and of the gods,
               o faireſt God all hail:
               We worſhip thee, and from the hart,
               wher neuer trothe doth quail.
               Our prayers here we make to thee,
               behold vs now therfore:
               With ioyfull face, and ioyful day,
               with ioy thy ſelf reſtore.
               Diſperſe the cloudes from hence, and let
               the day be bright and cleare:
               Let ſeas lay downe their roring lokes,
               ſtraight, when thou doſte apeare.
               Let ſhipmen ſafe frequent their courſe,
               vpon the waters plaine:
               Defend the corne, the trees, and vines
               from pouring ſhoures of raine.
               And frō the boyſtrous whirlwind mad,
               and ſtormy ſtones of hail:
               Let pleaſaunt aires on vs be blown,
               from fiery Pyros vail.
               And make all thinges by thy returne,
               in quiet reſt remayn:
               O chief defence, and Poets ayde,
               all hail to thee agayn.
               Thou filleſt the mindes of Poets all,
               with ſacred holy ſprite:
               And moueſt the heades of euery one,
               
                  
with ſugred verſe to wryte.
               By thee they gain the laurel leafe,
               and euerlaſting fame:
               Al hayle therfore, and help me now,
               my ſinging verſe to frame.
               And ſuccoure theſe my fyrſt attemptes,
               direct my courſe withall:
               Til vnto long deſired port,
               my bote, and I may crall.
               Thus, whylſte at caſtale ſprynges on knees
               my humble ſute declarde:
               The muſes all about me plaſte,
               the God my prayers hard.
               From towers of Delphos hie he heard,
               and ſtraight as ſemde to me:
               The ſteple be
                     ••
                  , and therewythal
               a ſhining light I ſee.
               From out the Chauncell came, and eke,
               a wonderous voyce I heare:
               Which wyth theſe words, as then me thought,
               reſounded in mine eare.
               O yong man voyd of blyſſe, and whom,
               ſuch deſtnies dire do payne:
               That ſpendſt thy lyfe with bitter yeares
               pull vp thy hart agayne.
               For pacient payne doth ouercome,
               and in thafflicted caſe:
               
                  
The valeant ought for to deſpiſe,
               the fawning fortunes face.
               For fortune then doth moſt preuayle,
               when that ſhe is reſtraynde:
               Doeſt thou not ſee, whome fortune oft,
               had fully once diſdaynde.
               The ſame wyth changed hand ſhe ayds,
               and lyfteth vp on hye:
               Now this, now that: nothing endures,
               beneath the heauens ſkye.
               when glouming weather foule is gone,
               then pleaſaunt dayes enſewe:
               At length the ſwelling ſeas be caulme,
               that erſte the windes ſo blewe.
               when winters ſeaſon ſharp departes,
               apears the floured ſpring:
               Fix ſure thy minde therefore as nowe,
               and faynt not in the thing.
               That bytter ſeemes: prepare thy ſelfe,
               for better deſtenies:
               The tyme ſhall come (the ſtarres aboue,
               altring their courſe in ſkies.)
               (If death before, thee not deſtroy)
               when this thy preſent name:
               That now doth lye both drownde & hyd,
               ſhall gayne immortall fame.
               For I my ſelfe wyll preſent be,
               
                  
and eke my learned route
               The Siſters nine, in euery place,
               ſhall ſtand thee round about.
               And take thee from the common ſort,
               and cauſe thy name to lyue:
               For euermore. This aunſweare here,
               to me did Phebus gyue
               So praying. But ſcarce can I the Gods
               beleue ſuch things of me:
               Under ſo crabde aſpect of ſtarres,
               I know my byrth to be.
               So ſore the heauens do me vexe,
               but yet from thence I go:
               wyth ioyfull heart I wander forth,
               alone, and alwayes ſo.
               Theſe wordes in minde I muſe,
               O Lord that hap might be:
               That God or man I might now meete,
               as promiſd late to me.
               Arete for to ſend to teach,
               that I the reſt might know:
               O that from heauens hye ſhee would,
               deſcend the earth belowe.
               And me with pleaſaunt words inſtruct,
               as erſt I did her heare:
               A valley long there lay betwene,
               two hils that bounded neare.
               
                  
A narrow path there was, that ſhewes
               the trauayling wight his way:
               This path I toke, and ſtraight I ſaw,
               two ſhepheardes there that lay.
               In graſſe full grene agaynſt the banke,
               who (bagges and bottels downe:
               with crab tre ſtaues wher wt they walkd)
               deſirous of renowne.
               Began to ſtriue who beſt could ſing,
               but iudge they lacked than:
               Whoſe ſentence ſhuld the ſtrife appeaſe,
               and prayſe the ſiner man.
               As ſone as they me preſent ſpyde,
               they both me calde vnto:
               And wild me for to ſyt them by,
               and iudge who beſt could do.
               Then one of them, (when that he had
               wyth oten muſicke played)
               His ſtaring eyes on heauen caſt,
               and on thys ſort he ſayd.
               O floure fayre of Dardany,
               of Joue beloued (o childe:)
               That ſerueſt the gods wyth frothing cup
               of pleaſaunt Nectar milde.
               Come downe from hie now frō ye Skies,
               a fayrer far than thee:
               In earth remayns that vnto Joue,
               
                  
cupbearer now ſhall be.
               Him, Jupiter deſpiſing thee,
               ſhall take from hence, and place
               Among the ſtarres from enuy burſt,
               (O thou in wretched caſe.)
               Yeld vp for griefe thy wofull goſte,
               but rather not departe:
               Thou ſhalt wyth wines the Gods ſalnte,
               and I enioy my harte.
               Philetus deare (wythout whoſe ſight,
               no kinde of thing is ſwete:
               To me,) no not my life to haue,
               wythout his preſence mete.
               As oft as him on horſbacke ſwift,
               (the Gote, or Hart to chace:)
               The Fayries ſpie, wyth loue they burnt
               and wyſh that louely face.
               Wyth thouſand kiſſes for to mete,
               as many giftes wythall:
               And floured garlands trim him giue
               contending, beſt who ſhall.
               And apples fayre in baſkets bring,
               and grapes of pleaſannt taſt:
               O that neglecting to be pleaſd,
               in him were not ſo plaſt.
               O that this liuelie Impe would ſhewe,
               himſelf alwayes at hand:
               
                  
To eaſe the wretched louers griefe,
               then hapieſt ſhould I ſtand.
               No man in all the world my mate,
               but he doth cleane deſpiſe,
               My plaints and faithful louers ſutes
               and hates my dolefull cries:
               And as the ſhaft from bowe departes
               ſo from me faſt he flies.
               But flye not from me thus, nor hate,
               me ſo (Philetus deare:)
               I am no cruell Canniball,
               wherby thou ſhouldeſt me feare.
               But worthy to be loued I am,
               perchaunce if thou me knowe:
               For though vpon my body rough,
               the hoary haires they growe.
               And though from chin with locks vnkēpt
               my grieſly beard doth fall:
               I am not yet yll fauoured ſure,
               for beard and briſtels all.
               Be decent eke and mete they be,
               for fyghting folkes and ſtrong:
               Let maydly men haue tender ſkinnes,
               the ſheapheardes all among.
               In richeſſe none doth me excell,
               of beaſt I lacke no ſtore:
               
                  
A thouſand kine my paſture feedes,
               of ſwine full fyfty ſcore.
               Amongſt my groue of Okes they runne
               my kine wyth calues do ſway,
               My luſty gotes wyth kid they ſwell:
               ne want I whigge, nor whay:
               Freſh cheeſe, and olde inough I haue
               take what thou likeſt, away.
               All mine is thine and I thine owne,
               though cruel thou denny:
               If thou me louedſt and wouldſt thy ſelfe
               ſomtyme come ſit me by.
               I would thee pleaſaunt apples get,
               that hangs on braunches hie:
               wyth golden ſydes like yellow waxe,
               and red, as ſtrawberies die.
               I would thy lap wyth fylberts fyll,
               and nuts of diuers kinde:
               How oft, how oft mine armes ſhould I,
               about thy myddle winde?
               Two thouſand kiſſes would I giue,
               thoſe roſey lippes of thine:
               Dout not (ſwete boy) but walk with me
               by cleared ſpring ſo fine.
               we both wyll reſt, and gratefull ſleepe,
               wyth hauſing armes wyll take:
               
                  
Alurde wyth ſhade of huſhing trees,
               and noyſe that riuers make.
               while Greſhops in the heat do chirp,
               alas, and doſt thou now
               Deſpiſe both me and all my giftes,
               that here to thee I vow?
               Do not my wofull teares thee moue,
               nor all that I can ſay?
               More fiercer far, than Tiger ſtout,
               (whoſe whelp is tane away.)
               More deafe than pictures made,
               of Parus Marble ſtone:
               And harder eke than are agayne,
               the mountaynes euery chone
               Of Alpes hie, and Diamond ſtrong,
               what doth thy beauty good:
               If all men ſo thou doſt deſpiſe,
               wyth fierce and cruell moode?
               And ſlayeſt the ſoules of woful wightes,
               whoſe heartes thine owne be tride:
               Thus wiſe her ſelfe in floures fayre,
               the dreadfull Snake doth hide.
               And thus wyth poyſon hony myxt,
               lay downe diſ
                     〈…〉
                   aſyde:
               A monſter vile, and vnto God,
               is auncient e
                     〈…〉
                  y, pryde.
               Nor be not thou wyth grace begilde,
               
                  
or forme of fading hewe:
               For beauty laſts but little time,
               like flower freſh and newe.
               Full fayre at fyrſt, is gone in tyme,
               while flouring age doth laſt:
               while tender ſkinne in face doth ſhine,
               let not in vayne be paſt
               Such happy tymes, but vſe the giftes,
               now graunted vnto thee:
               While tyme doth ſerue, for euery thing,
               by vſe commended be.
               The tyme ſhall come when this thy chin
               wyth briſtled beard beſet:
               Shall vggly ſeeme, and eke thy face,
               ſhall riueled wrinkles fret.
               And when thy golden lockes ſhal tourne
               to ghaſtly greſild heares:
               To late then ſhalt thou fodle bewayle,
               the loſſe of youthfull yeares.
               And oft thy ſelfe ſhalt ſay, where is
               my beauty olde now gone?
               Where is my colour freſh become,
               both red and white in one?
               Uayne hope, alas, of this thy face,
               then ſhalt thou ſore lament:
               Thy chaunged cheekes, and face ſo foule
               thy ſelfe, when repreſent,
               
                  
Thou ſhalt thy glaſſe perceyue, but why
               thus waſte I winde in vayne?
               What meane I thus in barren ſoyle,
               to let my ſeedes remayne?
               Unhappy wretch in vayne I toyle,
               my deſtnies will me ſo:
               O cruell deſtenies, that now,
               ſo ſore agaynſt me go.
               And chiefly now, when wretched loue,
               hath pearſt my wofull hart:
               Of greater force is lucke in loue,
               than all the ſwelling part.
               Of richeſſe great, or noble bloud,
               to deſtnies vertue 
                     •
                  hrall:
               By luck in loue the prince deſpiſde,
               and John obtaines the ball.
               But though more fiercer thou remainſt,
               than fearfull raging drake:
               Or doſte my loue no more eſteme,
               than weedes in fenny lake.
               Yet thee ſweete hart I ſerue, and thee,
               for euer ſhall I loue:
               And nothing ſhall thee from my minde,
               (Philetus deare) remoue.
               This ſayd, he held his peace, and thus,
               this other gan to ſay:
               Mellina, paſſing floure of wheat,
               
                  
and whiter farre away.
               Than frothing fome of raging ſeas,
               or Allablaſtar ſtone:
               And boyled milke, more red than are,
               the Cherries euery one.
               When ripe they hang, or Mulbry frute,
               while yet no blacke they weare:
               More fayre than trees in time of ſpring,
               when braunches bloſſomes beare.
               More ſweete than are the withred figges
               or wines that new be made:
               Such lippes, ſuch breſt, or eyes I thinke,
               dame Uenus neuer had.
               What ſhould I here commend her thies,
               or places there that lie?
               Such partes in practiſe put, than ſpeake,
               with better will would I.
               Not onely here of mortall men,
               her prayſe Mellina gaynes:
               But Gods her loue I ſaw my ſelfe,
               a Satire take the paynes.
               To hunt her once, and when he had,
               the game poſſeſt in pawes:
               Anenſt a Corke he taught hir tricks,
               of wanton louers lawes.
               She cald and ſhrikt, and I, as wood,
               would ſtrayght her ayde haue borne:
               
                  
But ſore afrayd I was to meete,
               the ſhagheard horſons horne.
               Nor once I durſt my enimy try,
               his pactence for to proue:
               How oft ſhe beckes and byds me come,
               wyth eyes that rowling moue.
               And of her ſelf ſhe calles me thus,
               and faſt begins to twine:
               Her armes ſo white about my necke,
               like Juy, or the Uine.
               That wonted are their neighbor trees,
               wyth winding courſe to brace:
               And faſt the wanton bytes my necke,
               and ſoftly on the face
               Wyth hand in ſport ſhe ſmites me oft,
               and by her trouth ſhe ſweares:
               That none on earth but me ſhee loues,
               nor none good wyll ſhe beares.
               But yet am I not ſuch a foole,
               that I holde this for trewe:
               For women all in lies excell,
               and when wyth fawnings newe
               The naughty queanes begin to fliere,
               the more thou oughteſt afrayd
               To be, theſe words in ſong he ſpake,
               and more ve would haue ſayd.
               But ſeuen wolues by chaunce therwith,
               
                  
came creping cloſe the way:
               From rockes adowne amyd the trees,
               deſirous of their pray.
               And on the flocke they runne, now theſe,
               now thoſe they ſlea and byte:
               And mouthes in bloud they ſtain, againe
               the maſty curres they fyte.
               Wyth barking boughing noyſe, to beat,
               their enimies from the ground:
               A noyſe full greate made in the dale,
               wyth roaring cry doth ſound.
               Then both the ſhepheardes riſe in haſte,
               the wager quite vndone:
               Wyth ſling, and ſtaues of Oke in hand,
               togither both they runne.
               And I, behinde alone remaynd,
               and forth another way:
               With doutfull minde and diuers thought
               I went, as farre as may
               The braſen canon caſt his ſtone
               at thrice, and there a ſpring
               That ſpouted vp wyth bubling ſandes,
               where thicke the Plantrees cling
               I found, and round about the graſſe,
               full grene, it doth embrace,
               Wyth ſeates of ſandy Tophus ſtone,
               I geſſe it was the place
               
                  
Where Fayries ſet in Sommers rage,
               when Dogdayes heat doth glowe:
               Not farre from hence I ſaw me thought
               a Seruice tree to growe.
               Whoſe fruite did make ye brāches bend,
               and therto faſt I went:
               (For ripe I them perceaude,) and ſome,
               with haſt in hand I hent.
               And eate them vp, deſyring then,
               with water for to ſlake:
               My burning thirſt, and to the well,
               my iourney forth I take.
               And downe I bowe my ſelf, and there,
               my lippes in water fyne:
               I dipt, and whilſt I drinke, the ſtones,
               in Criſtall waters ſhine.
               Whilſt theſe are done, a yong mā down
               from heauens to me ſent:
               That Goddeſſe good, Arete fayre,
               of me not negligent.
               Wyth falling flight he cuttes the ayre,
               more ſwifter much he flies:
               Than haukes that ſtriue by force to take
               the pray before their eyes.
               And ſtraight to me he cōmes that then,
               wyth weary limmes did reſt:
               Amid the graſſe he bids god den,
               
                  
then vp my ſelfe I dreſt
               And worſhip there to him I make.
               He (paſſing man in fame)
               I am did ſay Aretes ſonne
               
                  Timalphes is my name,
               My mother hath me hither ſent,
               that al that doth remayne
               Behinde vnfolde, I may diſcloſe
               to thee in order playne.
               Then both togither downe we ſyt,
               and thus he gan to ſay.
               The woman, and hir boy, that ſtode
               on left ſyde yonder way,
               Thou knowſt, my mother told ye plaine:
               now reſtes there for to tell
               What hight the woman, and the boy
               that on the right hand dwell.
               Hir Venus men do cal, and ſay
               that of the ſalt ſea ſud
               She then created was, when that
               olde Saturne in the flud
               Unkinde his fathers ſtones did caſt,
               ſo ſayd the Greekiſh ſorte:
               A people fanſies fyt to fayne
               and lies for to reporte.
               
                  Vranius hir (of troth) begat
               of Lopades by rape.
               
                  
                  Vranius ſyre of euery thing,
               than whome of larger ſhape
               Was Atlas not, nor yet the fierce
               
                  Enceladus ſo ſtrong,
               Nor gorbellied Typheus huge,
               nor all the Giants long,
               That euer earth did yet bring vp.
               Nine heads him nature toke,
               Whereof the higheſt is voyd of eyes,
               and Weſtward ſtyll doth loke.
               Gaynward the Eaſt the other ſtand,
               aboue a thouſand eyes
               The ſecond hath, and on a peece
               doth al the reſt ſuffiſe.
               His right hand Northward out he caſts
               the left to South he ſendes,
               With both his hands ye world he metes,
               his feete the flock of fendes
               Doth touch, his head the ſkies doth rech,
               a ſhepheard rich in deede
               Aboue al men, of euery flocke
               through al the earth to feede,
               He puttes them out, the number would
               of them excede, if not
               That monſter Pamphagus his ſonne
               with greedy rauening throte
               Should them deuoure continually
               
                  
wyth Attropos his wife.
               This Venus now Vranius got,
               and ioynde in wedlock life
               To one Pedogenes a God,
               and bad they ſhould encreaſe.
               This is that Venus, wythout whome
               the vſe of earth would ceaſe:
               And al the world wyth bryers thick
               vnſeemely ſhould be thought.
               Hir God hath ordeynd, that ſhe myght
               the loſſe which nature brought
               Ful recompence, which God appoynts,
               that hurtful can not be.
               What then of them ſhall I reporte
               content with chaſtitie
               That fayre encreaſe do not eſteme.
               but voyd of iſſue die,
               And leaue no ſignes of them behinde 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               they ſinne aſſuredly.
               And if the truth may here be ſayd,
               vnworthy byrth him giues
               Nature, of whome not one is borne
               vnworthy eke he liues
               By whome another hath no life.
               Yet they whome ſickneſſe let.
               Or other meanes do them conſtrayne
               no children for to get,
               
                  
Oppreſt with curſed pouerty,
               do feare that they ſhall ſee:
               Their children begge, intend ſaincts life
               of whome but fewe there be.
               Let them refraine, good leaue they haue
               but many wyl no wyfe,
               That they may others efte defile,
               and lead a lechours life.
               And for bycauſe that more they might
               the common ſort beguile,
               Under pretence they giue them ſelues
               to ſacred things a while,
               And churches haunt, and prieſts of God
               they counted are to be.
               They diuers lawes & garments ſtrange
               do vſe, and thinke to ſee
               The heauens hie with ſcraped crowne,
               cleane things the beaſtes do flye,
               And after things vncleane they runne,
               while as the panche they plye,
               And giue themſelues to drowſy reaſt,
               which both do foſter vice.
               Stale Uirgins are they thought to be
               while cloſe they caſt the diſe,
               The darke night al in vice to ſpend,
               their mindes they whole apply.
               None truely vſe a Uirgins life,
               
                  
but ſuch as come thereby:
               When croked olde vnluſty age,
               or ſickneſſe lore them fret.
               Or reſtleſſe payne of carking minde:
               or gift of God then let.
               Al ouerplus from out the corps
               doth nature cleane expel.
               Hereof it cōmes that in night dreames
               ſometimes doth Venus dwel,
               In dreames that ſhew the ioyful arte
               and pleaſaunt ſporte in deede.
               Let them more chaſte than Sibels be,
               or Nunnes of Ueſtal weede.
               Of two which worthier is I aſke
               eſtemed for to be,
               The barraine bowes that fruteleſſe fade
               or elſe the fertile tree?
               The ground that giueth good encreaſe,
               or ſand where nothing growes?
               O thoughts of men of none effect,
               O fond and fooliſh vowes,
               Apply your ſelues not to deſpiſe
               the ſacred natures heſt
               Which wold the bred ſhuld brede agayn
               which made ſuch ioyful reſt,
               In wedlock bed thee not to feare,
               but rather to allure,
               
                  
Why wilt thou nature thus withſtande
               no hurt in Venus lure
               There is, if hir thou lawful vſe
               with meane, and not exceſſe.
               But to much vſde ſhe ſtrength abates,
               and drownes the valiantneſſe:
               Deſtroyes the wit, and ſhortneth life.
               Now muſt we here diſplay
               dame Venus ſōne whoſe force doth cauſe
               both man and God obay.
               Who brond withal, and quiuered ſhafts
               makes all the world afrayd.
               To whome (though yet a boy, and blind)
               hath euery thing obayd,
               That earth, or ſea did euer breede,
               or heauens hie contayne.
               O Lord what rage of flames, and fyre
               in euery place to rayne
               This boy hath cauſd? what force haſte ye
               
               O quiuered Cupide now?
               No ſtrength thy power may once reſiſt,
               thy conqueſt makes to bow
               Both beaſt and Man, and Gods aboue,
               with dartes of thine alone.
               (His heart through pearcd) full oft hath made
               the thūdring God to grone:
               And diuers ſhapes on him to take
               
                  
hys lightning laide a ſyde.
               (And region left of ſtarry ſkyes)
               on wretched ſoile to ſlide
               Hath not diſdainde, ſometime the forme
               of Egle ſwift to beare,
               Sometime, a bull with frowuing face,
               ſometimes a ſhepheards cheare
               On him to put, ſometime to ſeme
               a ſnake, and now, and than
               With flames to come, in Satirs ſhape:
               now golde, now like a ſwan.
               
                  Neptunus alſo once ychanged
               to fluddes of Enepey,
               
               While he poore wretch thy dart did feele
               with Salmonide he lay.
               And oft a Dolphin would he ſeeme,
               a Ram, or Horſe to be.
               With all the ſeas he coulde not quenche
               the flames that burnte by thee,
               In breaſt ſo blinde, and heart of him,
               a tale to long it were,
               Like actes of all the Gods, to ſhewe
               to thee in order here.
               How Phebus did a hauke become
               and eke a Lion kende:
               Or call to minde the woode attemptes
               of raging Tartares fende,
               
                  
But vaine it is ſo time to ſpende:
               for if I ſhould expounde
               The Lordes, and Ladies euerychone,
               whom cruell loue did wounde,
               My tale woulde runne to much at large,
               and downe (before) woulde hide
               His gliſtring beames ſyr Titan bright,
               the ſmoking wheeles ſhould ſlide,
               Amid the waſhing weſterne waues.
               But here I thinke it beſt
               Such things to haue, ſith many men
               haue plainely them expreſt.
               And now the truth we will declare,
               this boy did neuer flow
               From Bacchus raines, as Grece did faine
               no ſure: if it were ſo,
               Eche man that hateth wine, ſhould loue
               but deſtny him begot:
               Bicauſe in euery kinde of loue
               this deſtny knittes the knot.
               All morttall things, this deſteny rules:
               ſhe doth to all beſtow
               Conditions eke with fortune to,
               and ende of lyfe doth know.
               Of greater force than beauty is
               this deſteny aſſurde.
               Though beauty cauſe of burning flame
               
                  
hath louers linckes procurde:
               Of greater might than golde it is
               though once with golde did bye
               Olde Saturnes ſonne, incloſde in towers
               with Danae faire to lie.
               Familier ſyght, and licence had
               full oft to talke, and liue
               Togither both, when none ſhall ſee
               which ſliding way doth giue,
               By which to loue we in doe come,
               by which is Venus got.
               All this can nothing ſure preuaile:
               if deſtnies fauour not.
               By deſtny ioinde, by deſtny broke,
               the louers knot, and ring.
               By this the vile deformed ſlaue
               ſometimes obtaines the thing,
               Which rich, nor faire can haue: by this
               the faire and gentle wyfe
               Is of hir huſbande eft deſpiſde:
               and more contentes his lyfe
               A ragged iade, in houſe to kepe.
               By this the wife diſdaines
               Hir huſbande faire, of gentle bloud
               and greater ioy ſuſtaines
               A lither louſy lout to haue,
               or vnaquainted wight.
               
                  
And if ſo be that loue were not
               by Gods aduiſement right
               To euery man appointed here,
               by limittes parted iuſt:
               No doubt of all might one be loued,
               and on them all ſhould luſt,
               And euery man might ſafe enioy
               the Damſel that he likes,
               But as the fiſher doth not take
               the fiſhes all in dikes:
               Nor foulers all the birdes do catch,
               nor hunters all doe kill,
               But euery one his chance doth take,
               obtaines and hath his will,
               So, loue to euery one is delt
               by Gods arbitrement.
               So doth the ſeruant baſe full oft
               his Lady well content.
               So ſhall the burſten bleared lout,
               and crooked father olde
               A bliſſefull girle to wyfe obtaine.
               For as the Marchant bolde,
               That vnderneth vnhappy ſtarre
               with wares his ſhip doth freight,
               And cuts the fearefull fouring ſeas,
               is often ſpoilde of weight
               By loſte of ſhip, or Pirates fierce:
               
                  
ſo he that flames wyth loue,
               The ſtarres, & luck agaynſt him both:
               doth ſeke the rockes to moue.
               An euil name, and cruel wound,
               receyueth he agayne.
               And ef
                     •
                  e his loue to get, doth he
               the loſſe of lyfe ſuſtayne.
               But he, whome deſtnies fauour wel,
               and fortune ſmiles vpon,
               His heart, and ioy may ſone obtayne
               wyth quiet reſt anon.
               But ſure of fewe this grace is had,
               ſo good are Gods to fewe:
               Except ſuch one as cloſe doth kepe
               his ioyes that none them knowe.
               No truſt there is at al in man
               diſceytes are vſed vile,
               Now euery man doth practiſe howe
               his fellow to beguile.
               If any man vnto his frende
               his ſecretes doth diſcloſe.
               Then muſt he ſtande in feare of him
               leaſt he his frendſhip loſe:
               Leaſt he in angry moode reueale
               that erſt in harte he hydes
               If free, therefore thou ſekeſt to be,
               and ſafe to liue beſydes.
               
                  
Let no man knowe thy ſecrete deedes:
               thy frend haue alwayes ſo
               While frendſhip laſts, that thou foreſee
               he once may be thy foe.
               Which thing in profe hath eft ben knowen,
               for fewe ſuch frendes we ſee
               That alwayes loue: and much herein
               ought enuy fearde to be.
               Which euer ſtriues the happy chaunce
               wyth poyſon fell to ſtayne.
               Take heede therfore of enuy ſyrs,
               I warne you louers playne.
               Let no man know thy minde in loue,
               but hide this loue of thine,
               (If witte thou haſt) and let not thou
               thy fyer forth to ſhine.
               A monſter vile is enuy ſure,
               a plague that rageth fel,
               A deadly hurt, than which a worſe
               is hard to finde in Hel.
               It hunteth vertue in euery place,
               good dedes aſunder teares.
               Good men ſhe hates, and doth diſdayne
               the happes of others yeares.
               Although no man can well kepe cloſe
               his owne vnfayned loue,
               If Fates agaynſt him let, and nyll
               
                  
the enuious lightes aboue,
               Smal force in wit of man there is,
               where Goddes do not agree.
               In vayne he toyles that ſeeketh ought,
               when Gods againſt him be.
               Yet ought we not for this to leaue
               our willes and wittes to ſtrayne:
               For he that hath the race forth runne,
               and palme cannot obtayne,
               Is worthy prayſe: and enuy all
               vpon the Goddes he layes:
               Who often good men downe haue put,
               and fooles exaiting rayſe.
               A happy man is he to whome,
               from tower of heauens, grace
               Is graunted, whō God guides himſelf,
               whoſe byrth with lucky face
               The happy ſtarres haue ſhinde vpon,
               to him cōmes ioyful loue:
               And voyd of woe, long ſweteneſſe he
               wyth pleaſant life may proue
               For loue is daynty, ſwete, and milde,
               if deſtnye cauſe not payne:
               Whoſe dartes, the man that neuer felt,
               doth ſenſleſſe ſtyll remayne.
               What beaſt might euer yet be found,
               that felt not Cupides flame?
               
                  
All creatures vile, and baſe we ſee
               haue taſted of the ſame:
               God willing ſo. Wherfore who ſeekes
               this loue, a thing deuine
               He ſeekes: for if the king, and Lorde
               of all the world, ſhould not
               All things created here retaine
               in loues aſſured knot,
               The world ſhould ſtraight be at an end,
               and the elements decay.
               That eche man loues he keepes, and it
               defendeth eke alway.
               But no man ſeekes the thing to kepe
               that he ſets nothing by.
               Wherfore the order of all things
               ſhall laſt continually.
               For, euerlaſting is the loue
               of God, that all doth guide.
               Though all things made do fal and fade,
               the kindes yet neuer ſtide.
               For thoſe the bleſſed God doth loue,
               but not the bodies ſo.
               Wherof the cruell death hath power,
               for no man ſuffreth tho
               The thing he loues to periſhe quite,
               if he can it defende.
               But who denies? God all thing can.
               
                  
and he can them defende.
               But be the bodies doth not loue,
               wherefore he lettes them die:
               But not the kindes he ſo permits
               from their eſtate to 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               What doth the potter care if thys,
               or that hys pot be burſt,
               Turning the wheele, and chalke in hand
               deſpiſeth now the firſt?
               A newer ſort of them he makes
               now ouer all this ſame.
               The ſkye, the grounde, the ſeas and aire,
               and raging fiers flame,
               And eke in fine, the worlde it ſelfe
               (by loues enduring knot)
               So many yeares doth ſtande and laſt,
               for if thys loue were not:
               The elaments altogither would
               with burſten bondes go fyght:
               Nor downe to earth, the Heauens would
               ſhewe forth theyr bliſſefull light,
               And beames ſo warme, no ſeede ſhoulde growe
               and eke the fiery flame
               This aire his neighbor, would cōſume,
               he would, but out of frame,
               His ſhoures on earth yt aire put downe,
               full bare would ſeeme eche ſoile,
               
                  
The ſeas ſhould quench the 
                     〈…〉
                  er quite,
               or rather fyre boyle,
               And waſte away the fyſhy ſeas,
               As once, when Phaeton rulde not wel
               the fyry foming beaſts,
               (I dreading ſore the monſters hie,)
               his owne good fathers heaſtes
               Beleeuing not, vnhappy wretch
               was drownd in his deſyre.
               Then al the world therewith began
               to burne with blaſing fyre.
               Tyll he by force of lightning ſmytte
               came tumbling headlong downe,
               And in the flouds his flames did quench.
               Loue breedes in euery towne
               Aſſured peace, peace worthieſt is
               of al things here we ſee.
               In time of peace do al things growe,
               and al things liuely be.
               Then liue men ſafe, in ſafety 
                     •
                  ke
               the trauayling wight he ſtands,
               And takes his iourney voyd of harme
               and ſcapes the robbers handes.
               Then buzzing Bees in hiues be kept
               by good aduiſe and care,
               And beaſtes in paſtures fat are fed,
               the ground is torne wyth ſhare,
               
                  
And yeldeth farre encreaſe in tyme,
               then plenty beares the ſway:
               In bread, and mylke and noppy drinke,
               then euery where they play.
               The ſounding ſhaume doth thē prouoke
               to daunce, the Thiaſe round:
               But idiotes, none do enuy peace,
               and couet Martiall ground.
               Such times did flow when Saturn ruld
               his Empire here alone:
               O worthy age more worth than Gold,
               but now O griefe to mone.
               All things doth diſcorde vile diſturbe,
               wyth raged mocion mad:
               And filles and feareth euery place,
               wyth broyling tumult ſad.
               Nowe fierce we forced are to be,
               all lawes wyth ſworde to ſlake:
               The furies al of hel they ſwarme,
               a thouſand brondes they ſhake
               A thouſand ſnakes wythal, and moue
               the proud hie minded Kings:
               And common people mad to be,
               what good to you it brings?
               (O wretches mad) your death to haſte,
               wyth battes, and bylbowe blade:
               To late when as ſhe neuer commes,
               
                  
but miſchefe this hath made
               That plaguy pride and hunger mad,
               dominion for to haue:
               O duſt, what makes thee proud to be,
               whoſe ſtinking guttes in graue
               The filthy wormes anone ſhall teare,
               why ſekeſt thou for golde?
               Thinkſte thou for euer here to lyue?
               O wretch, O wretch, bi hold,
               How vaine, how ſhort, how fleeteth ſone
               dur life before thine eyes?
               A graue anone ſhall cloſe contayne,
               thy bones, and ſhall ſuffic
                     •
                  .
               And if ſo be that loue ſhould knitte,
               the heartes of men in one:
               This would not be, for euery man,
               his frend would tend vpon.
               And all men for their partes would ayde
               the frend that they holde deare:
               Aſſuredly, nothing more good,
               nor ſweater doth appeare.
               Than truly while we here do liue,
               of many loued to be:
               A ſafe defence are alwayes frends,
               agaynſt aduerſity.
               The mind in deubtful things they eaſe,
               and helpers ſeke to be:
               
                  
Thy cares and loſſe they lighten much,
               they wepe and wayle wyth thee.
               But ſeldome periſheth the man,
               that thus is rich in friendes.
               When fortune laughes vpon thy lucke,
               and happy chaunce thee ſendes:
               Wyth thee thy profyts they embrace,
               wyth thee they ioyful bee:
               Wyth frendſhip they thy haps increaſe,
               and feaſt in mirth wyth thee.
               Who liſt therefore to leade his life,
               in ſafety, and in ioy:
               Great ſtore of frends for to retayne,
               let him his care employ.
               By many meanes this thing is got,
               which (as I can) I ſhall
               Declare: but now to know,
               is nedefull fyrſt of all,
               Which loue the people call of minde,
               a motion for to be:
               For wel to wyl it is the ſame:
               that men call loue we ſee.
               The mind alwayes it ſelfe deſyres,
               the good thing for to proue:
               And ſeekes the euill for to ſhunne,
               theſe 
                     〈◊〉
                   alone her moue.
               Theſe two therfore the cauſes be,
               
                  
and loues aſſured ground:
               But good in three deuided is,
               wherof one parte is found
               Delighting for to be,
               the other honeſt eke appeares:
               The third vtilitie.
               So likewiſe, yll in three we parte,
               fyrſt hurtfull we eſteme:
               The ſecond vile deformed is,
               the third doth greuous ſeme.
               Who ſo that loues, refuſing theſe,
               or elſe deſiring thoſe:
               He loues, loue diuers is, like as
               the ſpring from whence it flowes.
               Not worthy prayſed like to be,
               nor worthy like diſprayſe:
               Nor only differ three foreſayd,
               in generall kinde alwayes.
               But diuers ſpeciall kindes himſelf,
               doth eche of theſe contayne:
               Which kindes when as they diuers be,
               make diuers loues agayne.
               What ſo euer aydes, that profit is,
               but is not yet as one:
               Much goods vpon the body wayght,
               and much the ſoule vpon.
               Strength, beauty, health, actiuity,
               
                  
theſe foure the body oweth:
               Theſe things whatſoeuer creature giues
               from them the profit floweth.
               Two goods agayne the ſoule contaynes
               as maners milde, and Arte:
               Like as the ſoule hath vertues two,
               the will, to whome the parte
               Of maners all, belong, and minde,
               to whome the truth to know
               It proper is, and from the mind,
               like diuers goods do flow.
               The learnings nine this minde adourn,
               which Poets Muſes call:
               Equivalent to circles nine,
               that roule aboue vs all.
               The wyll doth diuers goods poſſeſſe,
               of which theſe foure excell:
               Wit, iuſtice eke, and vertue ſtrong,
               that conquers troubles fell.
               With her that bridleth eke our mindes,
               and modeſty doth bring:
               From theſe, as from the fountayne firſt
               do al the other ſpring.
               Which whoſoeuer ſeekes to know,
               let him go toſſe the boke:
               Of Stagerite, or (if he liſte)
               in Platoes workes go loke.
               
                  
Which two are lightes to all the world,
               whatſoeuer then it be:
               Such like to vs that giues, that terme
               may profitable we.
               As to the body medcine is,
               and eke the phiſick leach:
               And to the minde the boke likewyſe,
               is mayſter that doth teach.
               But thoſe that profiteth the ſoule,
               more profitable be:
               And better eke bycauſe it is,
               of greater dignity.
               As is the mayſter than the man,
               the ſhipman than the ſhip:
               Than is the cart is he that holdes,
               the claſhing carters whip.
               But by delay, or out of hand,
               doth profit vs eche thing:
               As to the hungred man the golde,
               and he that golde doth bring.
               The coke, and eke the fode it ſelfe,
               the like I do declare
               Of pleaſing goods in diuers partes,
               deuided is their ſhare.
               Of which the body ſome do pleaſe,
               and ſome the ſoule delight:
               But yet the pleaſures of the ſoule,
               
                  
he alwayes more of might
               And common eke to Gods, and vs,
               whereas the bodies ioy:
               As graunted vnto brutiſh beaſtes,
               to them a proper roy.
               Not lawfull vnto them it is,
               wyth ioyes of ſoule to mell:
               Nor haue they all the ſenſes fiue,
               and only knowe they well.
               What taſt and ſenſe of featling meanes
               they muſick nought eſteme:
               No ſwete perfumes wyth princely ſmel,
               to them doth pleaſant ſeme.
               Regard they ought the paynted lines,
               of fine Appelles hand:
               Or muſe they on the braſen plate,
               of comly Corinthes land?
               Or wonder they the ſight to ſee,
               of ſhooting Circus game?
               If ought they ſmel, if tune or ſyght,
               them pleaſe, it is the ſame
               That 
                     •
                  aſte, or feeling makes, as when
               the Lion fierce doth ſpye,
               In fieldes by chaunce a cowe, he leapes,
               and liftes his maine on hye.
               And twines and twirls his twiſting taſt
               deſrous of his pray:
               
                  
Or when the fomey horſe beholdes,
               the gadding mare aſtray.
               Wyth hauty head vpheld he runnes,
               and here and there he kickes:
               And leapeth hedge and ditch abrode,
               while luſty guts him prickes.
               And cauſeth all the ſkies aboue,
               wyth hineying noyſe to ſhrike:
               When meat therfore, and gendring act,
               the beaſtes do chiefeſt like.
               And ſyth to them it proper is,
               it is therfore moſt vile:
               And fit for villaynes to poſſeſſe,
               fyne wyt it doth erile.
               To often vſde, it body hurtes,
               who therfore this obayes:
               Is made a foole and for to ſerue,
               is apter eke alwayes.
               Than ouer others for to rule,
               but vſe them moderately:
               And if thou minded art to know,
               the goods of honeſty.
               Remember what before I ſayd,
               for of the minde they bee:
               The maners milde, and learning eke,
               as I declard to thee.
               
                  
But giue good eare what I ſhal ſay,
               thoſe goods that do delight
               While as they laſt, do pleaſant ſeme,
               and after of no might.
               Example for, beholde the ioyes,
               of ſong and Uenus play:
               But that that brings the body good,
               that profits men do ſay.
               The goods therof be pleaſant eke,
               as health obtaynde doth pleaſe:
               So profits it agayne we ſee,
               that healeth eche diſeaſe.
               And that that cauſeth goods of minde,
               we well may profit name:
               But theſe, as ſone as they be got,
               then pleaſant are the ſame.
               And honeſt out of hand they be,
               for all that vertue brings:
               Doth profit much, and delt her ſelfe,
               aboue all other things.
               She pleaſeth moſt, and honeſt is,
               her iuſt rewarde and hire:
               Is honour only due to her,
               therfore who doth deſire.
               Much loue, while he here liues to haue,
               let eyther him deuiſe:
               
                  
To pleaſe or profyt them he loues,
               or elſe in any wyſe,
               Let him haue vertues good in ſtore,
               the which the dogged ſort
               Shal force and eke conſtrayne to gyue,
               a prayſe and good report.
               Whome though they hate yet ſhall they feare
               and fyrſt of all he muſt:
               Of thoſe whome he doth ſeke to pleaſe,
               marke all the manners iuſt.
               For all mens wylles do not agree,
               nor all their ſtudies one:
               Such ſeedes vnlike dame nature ſowes,
               engendring vs vpon.
               The one doth hate that thother loues,
               that one doth moſt diſprayſe:
               The other lifts aboue the Skies,
               wherof appeares alwayes,
               That eche loue al things not a like,
               nor al men do deſyre:
               One good that profits, like to haue,
               nor honeſt like requyre.
               Wherfore we fyrſt of all muſt learne,
               what pleaſeth beſt his brayne:
               To whome we ſeke, leſt elſe perchaunce
               we laboure all in vayne.
               In doing things of them vnliked,
               
                  
this is not hard to knowe:
               The talke aſſuredly declares,
               the deedes from them that flowe
               And hidden heart, al men talke moſt,
               of that they moſt do loue:
               And moſt attentiue are therto,
               ful many things that proue.
               His loue at home may eft be ſpied,
               the plowman holdes at home
               The plow, the goade, the yoke, the rake,
               the ſpade to temper lome.
               The Knight his fearful armour hath,
               that hangs at home full bie:
               So he whoſe houſe wyth bokes abounds
               a ſtudent rightfully,
               May demed be: and this I ſay
               of euery other man:
               The hand and tong declares the heart,
               ſuch things as pleaſeth than.
               Who ſeketh frendes let him perfourme,
               for fawning loue doth get:
               But moſt men yet do gape for gayne,
               and all mens hearts are ſet
               On gold, and giftes and many frendes,
               by gyftes obtayned be.
               But ſure ſuch loue endureth not,
               for when that gayne doth flee:
               
                  
Then fayleth frendſhip, chiefly then
               when hope to haue, is gone:
               But ſome there be (though few of them)
               that ſtyll remayne as one.
               And mindfull eke of frendſhip ſhewed,
               do neuer ceaſſe to loue:
               But graunt the vnthankfuls frendſhyp fayle,
               it doth not yet behoue.
               The good and frendly man to leaue,
               (who may as rare be found:
               As Phenix bird in all the world,
               that breedes in Arabs ground)
               To profyt many men, and ayde,
               wyth all his power the ſame:
               This way to heauen only leades,
               by this obtaynd the game
               Great Hercules, and many more,
               whoſe worthy fames remayne:
               As yet wyth vs, whome neuer age,
               can cauſe to die agayne.
               The gentle and the liberall man,
               is lyke to God aboue:
               Great ſortes of men agayne there be,
               delighting things that loue.
               Wherby ſuch men they moſt eſteme,
               that pleaſant things do bring:
               And chiefly children, youth, and ſuch
               
                  
as are of greate liuing
               Do couet ioyes, and pleaſures ſeke,
               but ſuch loue is not true:
               For when that pleaſure once is gone,
               then frendſhips eke adewe.
               Yet ſometymes ſure it profyts much,
               and many get therby:
               Riches, and many fauour get,
               therfore let him apply
               His mind, to pleaſe who frendſhip ſekes
               (ſo he go not aſtray:
               From bondes of right and honeſty,
               but eche man profyt may)
               And pleaſure eke two ſundry wayes,
               by wordes and dede beſyde:
               But ſafer eke and eaſier it is,
               ſuch frendſhip to prouide
               By wordes, than dedes, but now tis beſt
               for to declare the way:
               By which it may be brought to paſſe,
               which thing perfourme you may.
               If holſome counſell thou doſt giue,
               and warning hurt declare,
               And teach how profyt may be got,
               of euill to beware:
               In praying Gods to ſend them helth,
               and ſend them well to fare.
               
                  
In aſkyng gratefull thynges, for them
               in whome conſiſtes thy care.
               If thou deſyreſt any man,
               with woordes for to delight,
               Of him, and eke of all his thinges,
               doe prayſes thou reſight.
               And if he euer any acte
               performed woorthy prayes,
               Commende it much, for wiſemen now,
               and fooles at all aſſayes
               Would prayſed be, ſomtime agayne,
               with ſweet, and pleaſant ſtile
               Delight that tentiue eares of theirs,
               prouokyng them to ſmile.
               Or tellyng of ſome pleaſant tale,
               though new, or olde it be
               (If it be woorth declaryng) tell
               ſome woorthy hiſtory.
               If thou perceiueſt any thyng
               that doth his minde delight
               In any caſe, diſprayſe it not,
               but ſay the crow is white.
               And if thy conſcience be ſo ſtraight
               thou darſt not ſay ſo much,
               Then hold thy tong, ſaye neuer a woord,
               for now the time is ſuch,
               That wyſdome great it is to fayne,
               
                  
(as true the people ſay)
               He cannot liue that knowes not how
               with both his handes ſo play.
               Sometime, beleeue me, now it hurtes
               the truthe for to defend,
               The place, the people, and the time
               in minde doo thou perpend,
               That nought thee hurte. But ſome there be
               that rather loue to prayſe
               A man behinde his backe, and take
               the ſame for better wayes.
               They doo but wel ſuche kynde of prayſe
               more thanke deſerueth ſure:
               Unfayned eke and vnſuſpect▪
               
               it ſeemes to be more pure.
               For ſome doo vſe to coſin men
               when as they preſent be:
               True friendes whereby they might be thought▪
               
               whom when they abſent ſe
               With bifyng words they laugh to ſcorn,
               beſt is it to reiect
               Such clawyng geſtes, it is the vſe
               of Gnatoes fawning ſect.
               Not few again at leaſt, ſome one
               such marchant ſhalt thou finde:
               That all thynges will abroade declare
               that iſſued from thy mynde.
               Such praiyng mates tnow there be
               
                  
he ſpeakes much good (ſayth he:)
               And doth commend your mayſterſhip,
               of him diſprayſde you be.
               In fewe wordes now the truth to ſay,
               nothing doth more delight:
               All kinde of men, than manners good,
               and life lead all vpright.
               Of greater force than riches, this,
               or learning eke it ſemes:
               Though euyll men be learnde, or riche,
               yet no man them eſtemes.
               Nothing more odious is, than vice,
               but if thou honeſt be:
               And good, al men ſhal thee embrace,
               at leaſt (I think) none thee
               Wyll hate. A ſentence olde it is,
               that maners lyke in all:
               And ſtudy like is it (they ſay)
               that loue is fedde wythall.
               So merry it is when knaues be mette,
               ſo learnd wyth learnd remayne:
               So haunt al kinde of beaſtes their herd,
               I ſpeake not this agayne.
               For how can they be ioynd in loue,
               whoſe mindes contrary bee:
               When one thing for to wyll and hate,
               frendes vſe it is we ſee?
               
                  
Loue laſtes not longe in wicked men,
               fooles frendſhip laſtes not long.
               For priuate wealth that yll men ſeke
               by right and 
                     •
                  ke by wrong.
               And cruell luſte to harme and hurt
               that yll men all poſſeſſe:
               With pryde, and wrath togither both
               the frendes of folyſhneſſe
               Makes fuming humors rage abrode,
               and ioynes them by the ea
                     •
                  es.
               That onely loue endureth long,
               whoſe roote dame vertue beates,
               Which honeſty engendred hath,
               this onely knittes the hartes:
               Of godly 
                     •
                  ke and faithfull men,
               with loue that neuer partes.
               And more it is to be eſtemde,
               Than is the loue of kinde:
               By which the father loues the ſonne,
               and eke with louing minde.
               
                  
                     ••
                  he other k
                     ••
                  ſmen doe imbrace,
               for children e
                     ••
                  yn hate:
               Their parentes deare, and fathers e
                     ••
                  
               
               haue grudgd the childes eſtate.
               The brother hath bene ſene (er this)
               to worke the brothers wyl
                     •
                  :
               But neuer true Dreſſes yet,
               
                  
did Pylades beguile.
               Nor Pylades Dre
                     ••
                   to ayde,
               did death eſteme there while.
               But here it comes in queſtion, if
               by any meanes we can:
               Procure the loue of euerychone,
               the good, and euill man.
               For lone in many partes diſperſt
                     •
                  
               
               is weaker euery howre:
               In fewe of greater force it is,
               in two of greateſt powre.
               Denided thus in many parte
                     •
                  
               
               it vaniſheth away:
               Who byddes ſecke not to many mates,
               doe therefore truely ſaye.
               For harde it is to line among
               ſo great a companye:
               With them as it doth frendes become,
               eke conuerſant to be.
               For fyxed fayth denyes her ſelfe,
               with many for to dwell:
               With fewe her ſelfe the doth content,
               wherfore beleue thou well.
               Thou ſhalt not many faithfull finde,
               loue not in any wyſe:
               The common ſort: nor ſeeke their loue,
               
                  
for diſcorde thence doth ryſe.
               And pleaſant peace with fewe remains,
               the common preaſe forſake:
               Of preſſing men with troubles, they
               their troublous name doe take.
               A fewe, and good chooſe thou thy ſelfe,
               with whom to leade thy lyfe:
               By many yeares in ſafe thou maiſte,
               and alſo voide of ſtrife.
               Lyke as therefore, thou canſt not loue,
               ſo many feruently:
               So, canſt thou not of ſuch a ſort,
               be loued faithfully.
               For who ſo loueth not for troth,
               is worthy of no loue:
               A ciuill common loue there is,
               wherewith it doth behoue.
               The common ſorte to loue, with which
               eche good, and euill man:
               We ought aſſuredly to loue,
               which is perfourmed than.
               When as we no mans hurt procure
               by wordes, or elſe by actes:
               When as we leade our lyfe that none
               may well controll our factes.
               
                  
When we to all men curteyſe be,
               and eke with frendly fare:
               Doe them ſalute with honours dewe,
               and prayſing them 
                     ••
                  brace.
               But yet, at fyrſt it doth 
                     •
                  ehoue
               with fewe to leade thy life:
               If thou doſt
                     •
                   ſeeke 
                     〈◊〉
                   peace to liue,
               and 
                     〈◊〉
                   from fooliſhe 
                     〈…〉
                  :
               Them 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſhun whom 
                     •••
                  ght thou knowes:
               it can not be perdye.
               That we in thornes, and thiſtles treade.
               and ſcape 
                     〈◊〉
                   thereby:
               Nor care thou not a whyt, if that
               the wicked loue not thee:
               Thinke it ynough if he not hate,
               ne ſhalt thou hated bee.
               If thou from them doe ſtande aloofe,
               ſuch hur
                     •
                  eth not the ſnake.
               But if, ſometime it doth thee pleaſe.
               the company to take.
               Of tag, and rag, and neighbor John,
               let tongue in ſilence dwell:
               And take good herde what thing yu ſaiſt,
               and alwa
                     •
                  es ha
                     •
                  ken well.
               And ſeldome ſpeake, i
                     •
                   is the ſigne
               of one, whoſe head is lyght:
               So much to pra
                     •
                  e, be ef
                     •
                   o
                     •••
                  ndes
               
                  
that ſo 
                     •
                  oth wordes reſight.
               But ſuch as rare, and wyſely ſpeake,
               deſ
                     ••
                  ue the chiefeſt praiſe:
               And in the pru
                     •••
                  t mouth it is
               a goodly gift alwayes.
               Speake yll of none behinde their ba
                     •
                  ke,
               ne yet before their face:
               Let thys the chiefeſt warning bee,
               and 
                     •
                  ule of chief
                     •
                  ſt place.
               Nor pr
                     ••
                  e not thou to no intent,
               nor ydle wordes let 
                     •
                  all:
               For then ſhall eche man laugh at thee,
               and eke a foole thee call
               If thou ſhalt aunſwere any man,
               or if thou queſtion finde:
               Before thou ſpeakeſt in any caſe,
               recorde it in thy minde
               For when it once is 
                     ••
                  edde from thee,
               thou canſt it not retaine:
               The worde that once is flowne abrode,
               can not come home againe
               A goodly thing, alſo it is
               in talke to tell ſometime:
               The pithy ſenſe of aged lawes,
               and auncient poets 
                     ••
                  me▪
               
               And now and then examples sounde▪
               
               in worthy ſtories olde:
               
                  
Do giue the talke a greater grace
               if they 
                     •
                  lude, ſo tolde.
               Alwayes therfore, it nedefull is
               on diuers bookes to reede:
               And, as the Bees now there now here,
               on ſondry floures to feede.
               Expell thou anger farre from thee
               away with pride that elfe:
               Such kinde of men cannot be loued,
               and alwayes ſhewe thy ſelfe.
               Of gentyll minde, and lowly eke,
               ſo ſhalt thou all men pleaſe:
               If any man thy hurt procure,
               proue thou, hym to appeaſe.
               Rather with wyt, than furious mode,
               to wit doth ſtrength giue place:
               She conquereſſe doth all things tame
               the Tigres ſtout in pace.
               And Lyons fierce by art are wonne:
               and ſhips in ſeas doe ſwim:
               And towers ſtronge by art doth beare
               the Oliphant on him.
               By this the Bull doth beare the yoke
               and horſe with ſpouting might:
               By this conſtrained is to beare,
               the bridle, and the knight.
               Wit all things rules with aide of force,
               
                  
to threaten much wyth crackes,
               Is cowardes guiſe, & womens ſtrength
               to men belongeth factes.
               The wyſe man doth diſſemble hurt,
               the valeant prates no whitte,
               But when he ſees the time then dare
               he doe that ſhall ſeeme fytte.
               Firſt take good heede that none yu hurt,
               and if by iniury.
               Thou harmed art, when thou ſeeſt time
               reuenge it rightfully.
               If thou canſt not let griefe a while
               within thy heart remaine,
               Leaſt that by fooliſhe boſting wordes,
               thou maiſt more harme ſuſtaine:
               It is naughty playing with edged toles
               the wyſe man will refraine:
               And ſpie hys time, and eke giue place
               his foe with wordes to traine.
               That pleaſant ſeme, and fawnings eke
               till he him bring to ſnare:
               So winnes the wilde vnrulye colte
               the witty horſeman ware.
               So on the Oxens necke the yokes,
               the plowman putteth on:
               So Lyons fierce the Charret drawes
               that Cibell ſyttes vpon.
               
                  
So (tigres wood) you doe obey
               to Bachus bridell raines.
               Great wit it is to conquer thus,
               and hide the inwarde paines.
               Tyll time conuenient come, therefore
               this muſt be markt beſide.
               Wherſoeuer thou remaineſt, let not
               thy mouth be ſtretched to wide,
               With laughings loude, but whē nede is
               then laugh thou moderately:
               It doth declare a ſimple wit,
               to laugh exceſſiuely.
               And on the other ſide, it is
               not fyt for any man:
               Alwayes in dumpes to be, therfore
               flie thou them both, and than.
               The middle kepe, there vertue ſits,
               no geſter would I thee:
               And yet, if that thou canſt, I would
               that pleaſant thou ſhouldſt bee.
               Enough (me thinkes) I haue now ſaid,
               my meſſage here doth ende:
               For which, to thee, my mother mee
               from heauen hie did ſende.
               Now time cōmaundes to leaue ye earth,
               and ſkies aboue to clime:
               From whence I wonted am the earth,
               
                  
to ſe full many a time.
               Muſing that it ſo little ſemes,
               and rounde as any ball:
               Amid the aire to ſee it hang,
               hauing no ſtay at all.
               Suſtainde only with his poiſe.
               the ſea doth eke appere
               About the earth full ſerpent lyke
               to crangle heere and there.
               And like a little brooke to runne,
               here eke I doe beholde.
               The Padus Tanais, Ganges and
               that Hiſtre waters colde.
               As oft as ſhowers do cauſe the dikes
               with wet to ouerflowe:
               And when thy mouthes alofe I ſee
               (O Nilus then I trowe.)
               They be (though great in dede they are)
               but ſeauen gutters ſmall.
               And hence I vewe the bloudy broyles
               with ſhining ſwordes that fall.
               And fieldes be ſprent with purple bloud,
               And fooliſhe kings therby:
               Who (while they couet more to haue
               and neuer thinke to die.)
               With dire debate do battailes bring
               the giltleſſe ſoules to kill:
               
                  
And ſhew the Gods a gaſing griefe
               repugnant to their will.
               And there I ſe their places change
               both riuers, ſprings, and flouds
               Hils fall to dales, and dales to hils,
               and place (where once grewe woods)
               With coulter 
                     ••
                  lde, and wheras plowes
               before haue runne their race,
               Theyr woodes to growe, tranſformed cowns
               and al things changing place.
               He bleſſed is that may the like
               proſpect to this obtaine:
               Where Aſia, and Affricke he may ſee,
               and Europ eke againe.
               That ſwels with wealth, & wepons eke,
               and diuers nations ſtrong:
               That there do dwell, whō Cancer burns
               the Ethiops them among.
               Cilicians fierce, and Tartars turkes
               and men of Scithians grounde.
               The ſhoting Parthes, Arabians eke
               where franckinſence is founde.
               The Thracians wylde, and Arimaſpes
               thoſe valiant men in fight:
               The french, the Italian, men of Spain
               the dreadfull Engliſhe wight.
               As many people more beſide,
               
                  
on whom the ſunne doth ſhine,
               While he aboue, or vnder goes,
               the horiſontall line.
               Wouldes thou not hither wyll to come,
               if it might lawfull bee,
               For any mortall man to doe:
               if body let not thee.
               But this can hap to none, but vs
               whoſe bodies framed were:
               Of fineſt aire, and not of earth,
               a while therefore forbeare.
               Till death thy ſoule ſhall loſe frō bonds,
               and tyll that time a dewe,
               I go, this ſaid, and aunſwering I
               away from me he flewe.
               In haſte he flies wyth ſwifter courſe
               than windes themſelues my thought
               And ſpreading winges abrode the ſkies
               wyth courſe againe he cought.
            
         
         
            ¶ The fithe Booke entituled Leo.
            
               I Seeke not here Arabians wealth,
               nor ſtones of value hie:
               That redde ſeas breede, ne golden ſandes
               in Tagus ſtreames that lie.
               
                  
Nor people proude to gouerne here
               with ſceptred hande and mace:
               Such things my lucke hath me denyed,
               nor once I waile the caſe.
               That deſteny hath not giuen me ſuch,
               ſo euen the nought as good:
               May like obtaine to reape the golde
               of wealthy richeſſe floud.
               Full oft we ſee rhunworthy heds
               of witleſſe people crownde:
               Whoſe bodies eke are trun bedeckt
               with robes of purple rownde.
               Thoſe things I woulde the Lorde of all,
               on mee would here beſtow:
               Which neither fooles nor wicked men
               may euer hap to know.
               That makes a perfect man in deede
               and nere to ſainctes aboue:
               O mighty Joue what is the cauſe,
               or what ſhould thee thus moue,
               Wiſedome to none or fewe to geue?
               in euery place we ſee:
               Both pleaſant, faire, and luſtye brutes,
               and wealthy men to bee.
               But vneth may the place be founde,
               in all the worlde ſo wyde:
               That bringeth forth ſuch any one
               
                  
in whom doth wyt abide.
               Doſt thou perchāte more worthy think,
               a guide of fooles to bee:
               More noble is that power, vnder
               the which more noble be.
               For worthyer it is aſſertainly
               to rule by force of powers:
               Both caſtels ſtronge, and fortreſſes
               wyth large and ample towers.
               Than Lorde of folde and flocke to be,
               and droues of beaſtes to guide:
               Perhaps thou doſt it to that ende
               our doings to deride.
               And makeſt man thy laughing ſtocke,
               for nothing elſe to be:
               The life of men on earth doth ſeme
               the ſtaged comedie.
               And as the Ape that counter feits,
               to vs doth laughter moue:
               So we like wyſe doe cauſe and moue
               the ſainctes to laugh aboue.
               As oft as ſtately ſteps we treade
               with looke of proude diſdaine:
               As oft as richeſſe we to much
               doe crane or honors graine.
               As oft as we like Saunder ſnuffe,
               our ſelues doe bragge and boſte.
               
                  
What leſſe is it, what part is played,
               when holding honors moſt.
               With ſceptred hande, a crowned owle
               an Aſſe of ſtature faire:
               Of them beholden is to ſyt
               a loft in ſtately chaire.
               Deſpiſing euery other man
               though he be like in caſe:
               Deſiring yet to heare the ſounde,
               of God preſerue your grace.
               And to be duckd and knelde vnto
               and haue them kiſſe his feete.
               Nor ſeeth the mad man what he is
               how vaine and apt to fleete:
               Like water bleb and thiſtle doune,
               that flieth in euery place:
               I am no ſuch, nor ſeeke I doe
               to liue in ſuch a caſe.
               But you O Gods aboue that dwell,
               and bleſſed are alone:
               That liue in euerlaſting ioy,
               if caſe you thinke vppon.
               The cries of mortall ſinners here
               and if you not deſpiſe.
               The humane prayers that we poure,
               and teares of wretched eyes:
               I you beſeche to graunt me here,
               
                  
a pure and perfet minde,
               By which the truthe I alwayes may
               from falſhode aptly finde.
               And vertue eke from vice diſcerne
               leaſt I as voide of wit,
               Should flie the things yt I ſhould haunt
               and follow things vnfit.
               For if ſo be it may pertaine
               to any mortall man:
               To line as thus in bleſſed caſe,
               by this meanes thinke I than.
               That I may bleſſed be. But ſure
               I am therin deceaued:
               And with me alſo are all theſe
               that haue the ſame beleued.
               For no man euer happy was
               nor euer yet ſhalbe:
               Not though the goodes of all the worlde
               in hand poſſeſſed he.
               Nor though he did in wit excell.
               but ſome perchance will doubt:
               Except my leaues by reaſon ſtrong
               do boult the matter out.
               Parke thou therfore this preſent book
                     •
                  
               
               that ſekeſt this to know:
               According as they beſt can doe
               my verſes thee ſhall ſhow.
               
                  
Your ſacred dores (my muſes ſweete)
               ſet wide and open heere:
               To mee your Prophet and refreſhe
               my minde with waters cleere.
               Of Parnas hilles, which ſore I thyrſt:
               diſcloſe your ſecrete wayes.
               Shewe me the truth, for well you know
               what hath bene done in dayes.
               Of alder time, and preſently,
               and what ſhall eke enſue:
               Now fyrſt of all I will declare,
               with name and not vntrue.
               Whom we ought happy for to call,
               then will I touche the thing:
               Whereto the God Appollo hie,
               by wiſedome ſhall me bring.
               I ſay therfore that only hee
               can haue the name of bleſt
               Who hath the chiefeſt good in hande
               now preſently poſſeſt.
               But all men this not truely knowe
               when eche one beff doth deeme:
               The thing ye moſt his minde doth pleaſe,
               the aſſe doth more eſteeme.
               And mule, the barley graine, than birt
               that deinty diſhe of meate:
               Than fleſhe of fender thruſhes ſod,
               
                  
than loynes of Hares to eate.
               So golde the gredy ſnudge doth wiſh,
               and alwayes prayſe for beſt:
               Which honors thinks thambitions man
               and milkſop, Uenus neſt.
               Howe fewe alas the truth may know,
               what myſt of errours blinde:
               Our iudgements hide, bycauſe that few
               haue now a perfect minde?
               Eche man doth iudge, & ech man ſpeakes
               according to his wyll:
               Of their own ſelues ſom things ar good
               which neuer can be yll
               And neuer varme, ſo good there are,
               not of themſelues that bee:
               Which ſomtyme help and eke beſyde,
               do ſomtyme harme we ſee.
               Theſe are the bodies outward giftes,
               vſe makes them good or nought:
               As if a man his countrey ſaue,
               by ſtrength, this ſtrength is thought
               Then good to be, but if he harme,
               the giltleſſe innocent:
               And wyth this ſtrength his coūtrey warr
               then now incontinent,
               This ſtrength ſhall coūted be for ill,
               like ſentence I declare:
               
                  
Of riches, honors, eke of rule
               and all thinges els that are.
               The owner eft ſuche goodes deſtroy,
               although he vſe them well:
               So hurtes the Bees their hony ſweete,
               ſo makes the Beuer yell.
               His hoyſtring waxe, like riuers ſtreame,
               they fade and fleete beſide:
               And doubtfully in errour paſſe,
               and neuer certayne byde.
               Not therfore they be chiefeſt goods,
               nor who ſe doth abound:
               Wyth ſuch may counted be to haue,
               a happy life then found.
               But rather if the truth be ſayd,
               thoſe goods vnperfect be:
               which vnto vs do profyt bring,
               and hurt in like degree.
               For elſe might poyſon good be iudgd,
               that ſometime health vs bringes:
               And nothing ſhould be counted yll,
               among all worldly things.
               When as nothing ſo hurtfull is,
               but ſometyme helpes agayne:
               But thoſe that of themſelues be good,
               and alwayes good remayne.
               Doth make the happy man in dede,
               
                  
but what theſe goods now be:
               All men knowes not, wyth reaſon ſharp,
               therfore them ſeke muſt we.
               Minerua graunting grace, and ſome,
               theſe things perchaunce wyll ſay:
               Is nothing hard to know, ſyth them,
               both chaunce and corpes denay.
               Then muſt they nedes be good of minde
               that makes vs bleſt alone:
               This bolt of theirs is well beſtowed,
               but mark they haue touchd none.
               Firſt muſt we common thinges declare,
               our purpoſe ſhew that may:
               Like as the torch amid the darke,
               doth ſhew the gadlings way.
               worke, working, or the man that workes
               in euery kinde of thing:
               The work it ſelfe an end we graunt,
               and him as beginning
               That works we take the middle eke
               the working for 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  ee:
               Now which of theſe more worthy is,
               becommeth vs to ſee.
               Ech thing that moues doth farre excell,
               the moued thing therby:
               This playne apears, the end doth moue
               the workman certaynly.
               
                  
For what is he takes ought in hand,
               but he before perpend:
               And in his minde do ful conceaue,
               therof the finall end?
               The end therfore more noble is,
               that working eke beſyde:
               Is much more baſe than is the end,
               by reaſon like is tryde.
               Hereof we muſt coniecture needes,
               the chiefeſt good to bee:
               A certayne end, but euery end,
               is not of beſt degree.
               But only that which is the ende,
               of euery other ende:
               To which the other ends haue all
               recourse as flouds deſcend.
               Togyther all in roaring ſeas,
               for reaſon would that ſo:
               Unto the ſure and perfect thing,
               thunperfect things ſhuld go.
               And for to come to better ſtate,
               bycauſe it is more baſe:
               No otherwyſe could wel be kept,
               good order in this caſe.
               That thing therfore that is the laſt,
               and end of all the reſt:
               That nedes muſt be the perfectſt good,
               
                  
the chiefeſt and the beſt.
               Agayne of euery kinde of thing,
               contaynde in compaſſe round:
               Of all the world ſome hauing lyfe,
               ſome voyd of lyfe be found.
               But thoſe that life retayne, excell
               the bodies lyfe wythout:
               Then whatſoeuer is chiefeſt good,
               muſt liue enſewes no dout.
               Of things that liue, ſome reaſon want,
               and haue no ſpeach to vſe:
               The reſt haue ſpeach and reaſon both,
               and them we beſt do chuſe.
               The chiefeſt good therfore hath ſpeach,
               and reaſon perfect tride:
               Of thoſe that reaſon haue, great part,
               their liues in pleaſure ſlide.
               And parte agayne their liues conſume,
               in labours great and payne:
               But of them both their ſtate is beſt,
               that pleaſant life retayne.
               We muſt nedes (Ergo) thinke the life,
               of chiefeſt good, moſt ſwete:
               Of thoſe that liue moſt pleaſauntly,
               ſome parte away do flete
               Ju little tyme, and ſome agayne,
               remayne for longer dayes:
               
                  
They that continue longeſt age,
               their ſtate for beſt we prayſe.
               The longeſt time therfore doth liue,
               the chiefeſt good of all:
               Whom thundring Jone & great Jehoue
               wont mortal men to cal.
               He ſhakes wyth fearfull noyſe ye flames,
               and flaſhing lightnings fell:
               Black ſtorms he ſends wt thūders roare
               he makes the ſkies to yell.
               Unbindes the blaſts and ſets them forth
               that makes the ſeas to roare:
               That driues the foming flouds wt force,
               vnto the ratling ſhore.
               And ſhakes encldsde in caues the earth,
               wherby commes tumbling downe:
               The buildings byg of euery bowre,
               and ſtrength of euery towne.
               But ſome perchaunce do doubt if God,
               whome we chief good do call:
               An end may be, ſyth we haue told
               before that end of all
               A framed thing muſt be, and here,
               this end to haue we ſay:
               Beginning and a midſt thereto,
               which all men wyl denay.
               He alwayes was and ſtyll ſhall lyue,
               
                  
no end to him can be:
               All things he made, and of no man,
               was euer framed he.
               Before him nothing could be ſeene,
               nothing can after bide:
               This doubt wyth anſwer for to looſe,
               loe thus I do prouide.
               The workman fyrſt and maker hero
               of all the world and all
               Things in the ſame contayned clere
               this ſame we God do call.
               The end of all the world likewyſe,
               and all thing in the ſame:
               Him God that guides the ſtars aboue,
               him god we alſo name.
               Yet lawfull therfore is it not,
               a worke to thinke this ſame.
               For euery end is not a work,
               his minde that worke doth frame.
               Sekes not the work alone to make,
               but farther doth intend:
               As he that frames a cheſt doth not
               his paynes and labour ſpend
               The cheſt alone to make, but for
               ſome other cauſe it frame,
               As ſomthing for to kepe therein,
               or elſe to ſell the ſame.
               
                  
More worthie euer is the ende
               the later it doth fall:
               And worſer things to better driue,
               ſo God is ende of all.
               To whome eche eyther thing contendes,
               for whom the world doth ſtand:
               And all things eke therein that be,
               and for himſelfe his hand
               Created al, and not for vs,
               as ſome ſyr Johns do ſay,
               That call and bawle in euery church,
               and lead pore ſoules aſtray.
               Wyth words they doltes of Dawcockes make
               what cauſe, what wit of ours?
               What nobleneſſe, what goodneſſe is
               contaynd wythin our powrs.
               For which the world ſo vaſt ſhuld frame
               ſo great a prince as he:
               We all are full of fylthy vice,
               and fooles we alſo be.
               Scarce one in all the world there is,
               whom poyſon doth not try:
               Of greedy ſcraping auarice,
               or fylthy lechery.
               Whom ſwelling pryde doth neuer vexe,
               whome yre or pleaſure blinde:
               Doth not throw hedlōg down, why then
               
                  
what goodneſſe can we finde
               In vs, or what deſertes, that might
               ſo great a workman moue:
               The ſkies, the ſeas, the fruteful earth,
               to frame for our behoue?
               Loues not he gentle vndeſerude?
               ſo thou perchaunce wylt ſay:
               This is but fond, for who wyll loue,
               the vnthankful wretch alway?
               But he that wit doth lacke belyde,
               whoſe natures diſagree
               So much, what meanes, or how
               may loue betwene them be?
               For God himſelf all tymes ſurmounts,
               in whome no end is ſpyde
               Nor neuer he beginning had,
               yet end of all beſyde.
               And fyrſt begynning eke he is,
               moſt chiefe omnipotent,
               Aboue all things, than whome more good
               can no mans head inuent:
               Or yet a Lord of greater power,
               or one more excellent
               Who hath no nede of any thing,
               yet all things nede his might:
               Who eche doth beholde, and yet
               not ſubiect to our ſight.
               
                  
Contayning all good things in him,
               and voyd of eche ill deede:
               We contrary as miſers borne,
               of vile and fylthy ſeede,
               To wayling woes and dolefull teares,
               and thouſand daungers dyre:
               Continually wyth theſe or thoſe,
               diſeaſes ſet on fyre.
               But little tymē remayning here,
               and that in griefe and payne:
               Alas in what an errors myſt,
               our liues we here do trayne?
               Howe eche one weake of minde we be,
               wyth diuers chaunces dolde:
               Lamenting this, and wayling that,
               in fraud and vices bolde.
               Who after that we waded ha
                     •
                  e,
               through cares and 
                     •
                  arking thought:
               Are here compeld this life to yeld,
               reſolued ſone to nought.
               The diſtance vs betwene and God,
               this (ergo) doth declare:
               More great to be, 
                     〈◊〉
                   if we ſhould
               the ſeely flea compare
               Unto the mighty Elephant,
               what knot of amity:
               Can knit theſe two good geffes in one.
               
                  
that ſo vnequall be?
               Thinkſt thou thys flea may haue ye loue,
               of this ſame monſter ſtrong:
               Wyth like doth loue and concord dwell,
               and eke th'vnlike among
               Alwayes doth hate and diſcord raine,
               ſmal fayth at leaſt, with them ther is,
               Hereby ſome ſorte appeare,
               (whom men prophane, our law do iudge
               and they that cowles do weare
               Call hereticks) account vs mad,
               and doltheads vs do call:
               Bicauſe we hope the Skies to ſee,
               and liue the Gods wythall.
               For euermore in happy life,
               wyth diuers other toyes:
               Which foliſh minde and prating tong,
               do promiſe vs as ioyes.
               For ſpeach doth make vs beaſtes excell,
               wher if we lackd the ſame:
               Which God vs giues, & eke our handes,
               by which we all things frame.
               No beaſt more vile than we were then,
               no beaſt in worſer caſe:
               For theſe two aboue the reſt,
               giues nature all her grace.
               Here of doth all our pride ariſe,
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  
there of eche Arte begonne,
               For voyce doth warne the preſent, what
               to doe or what to ſhonne.
               And letters to the abſent ſpeake,
               for if a beaſt might ſhow:
               By wordes the ſecret motions hid,
               in heart that he doth know.
               If talke among them might be had,
               if that their syngers fyne:
               were apt to write, no doubt we might
               bcholde an Aue ſometime
               Of greater wit than we: and beaſtes
               of euery other kinde:
               would greater reaſon haue in them
               than man in vs may finde.
               And boldely durſt themſelues preferre,
               eche other wight before:
               And eke the Aſſo would proue himſelfe,
               of eſtimation more
               Than vs, the tongue and hande therfore,
               not reaſon cauſeth thus:
               Eche other kinde of beast to be,
               a Subiect vnto vs
               This they affirme and more beſyde,
               if men be borne they ſay:
               Of parents dumme, whoſe handes are maunde
               or cut from them away.
               
                  
And line in woodes not nere to townes,
               and tongue and hand doe faile,
               Like other beaſtes: (I pray thee) what
               can humaine wit preuaile?
               what reaſon ſhall in them ayeare,
               thinkeſt thou they will not leade:
               Their liues as vils as other beaſtes?
               what wiſedome may they pleade.
               More than the reaſt of brutiſhe ſort,
               one ſprite they al poſſeſſe
               Though it vnlike doe ſeme to be,
               bicauſe they doe expreſſe.
               In body diuers forme and haue
               of great diuerſitie:
               Their membres all wher to is toynde
               a diuers facultie.
               If diuers Carpenters you bring
               like learned in their feat:
               If ſome of them lack inſtruments,
               no doubt the diffrence great
               Muſt needes amongſt them be,
               for they can nothing do:
               That want eche kinde of tole that doth
               belong their worke vnto.
               Nor after him ſhall Orpheus draw,
               the beaſtes and rockes ſo hie:
               If he ſhoulde lacke his muſicke ſweete,
               
                  
ne once would Paris flie
               (Being armed wel at euery poynt)
               vnarmed fierce Achill:
               Wyth ſuch a ſorte of reaſons vile,
               theſe fooles our cares do fyll.
               But more of them perchaunce I wyl,
               hereafter bring to light:
               When I ſhall of the ſoule of man,
               ſome ſentences reſight.
               For there I wyl it proue deuine,
               immortal eke to be:
               which two of beaſts no man wil graunt,
               now where we ſtayd wil we
               The chiefe and perfect good is God,
               and who ſo him poſſeſt:
               May called be of euery man,
               the happieſt man and bleſt.
               But who can him obtayne to haue,
               for ethe thing had as yet:
               Is farre more vile than he that hath
               obtayned it to get.
               And euery kind of thing poſſeſr,
               is eke of value leſſe:
               Than is the owner of the ſame,
               that then doth it poſſeſſe.
               For euen as ſone thou mayſt contayne,
               the Occean ſea as wet:
               
                  
Wythin the compaſſe of a did,
               or of an Oyſter shel.
               (O candle ſet before the windes.
               O ſubiect duſt to graue)
               Than Lord of ſuch a mighty power,
               by any meanes to haue.
               Alone God al things doth poſſeſſe,
               and hath himſelfe alone:
               He only hath the happy life,
               beſyde him bleſt is none.
               A rertayne chiefeſt good there is,
               beſyde this ſame foreſayd:
               Which euery creature may obtayns,
               yet like to them denayd.
               For diuers natures all they haue,
               ſome one thing this doth pleaſe.
               Some other thing doth ſeeme agayne,
               to be the others eaſe.
               Al thing therfore may well obtayne,
               a certayne happineſſe:
               If not ſo perfectly a God,
               himſelf doth it poſſeſſe.
               But by ſome meanes, and for a 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               while things that doth agree,
               Wyth nature beſt, he can obtayne,
               ne feeles aduerſitie.
               But (al things paſt) now time requires,
               
                  
that we ſhould ſpeake of man:
               Who hath the chiefeſt good in hand,
               and counted happy than,
               When ſeeming vnto nature good,
               he all things doth poſſeſſe:
               And feeles in all his life no harme
               nor kinde of bytterneſſe.
               This may be counted chiefeſt good,
               that all good things contaynes:
               That giues all kinde of pleaſant things,
               that puts away al paynes.
               For only pſeaſure doth not make,
               nor vertue yet doth giue:
               The happy life, as ſome do write,
               in ground of Grece that liue.
               Sith many goods of greater worth,
               than fewe, are counted playne:
               As is the buſhel counted more,
               than one pore ſeely grayne.
               One good thing giues not happineſſe,
               though it be chiefe and beſt:
               But one in all that makes the lyfe,
               compact in all the reſt.
               So can not only one that rules,
               a towne procure to ſtand:
               So can not of a thombe be framde,
               a full and perfect hand.
               
                  
And ſyth that of two partes we are,
               the body and the minde:
               Then happineſſe the happy man,
               in both theſe partes muſt finde.
               He muſt be whole, and ſound in Corps,
               and of a luſty might,
               He muſt be fayre, he muſt be freſh,
               and of a liuely ſpright,
               He muſt be good, wiſe, learnd, diſcrete,
               and gifts of both retayne,
               Pore life not know, nor hurtful chaūce,
               and if he not remayne
               In long eſtate of happy yeares,
               yet bleſt can he not be
               Though al the ſame commodities
               foreſayd to him agree.
               For happy life that doth not laſt
               almoſt is worth nothing,
               As well haue certayne ſayd before,
               not one day makes the ſpring,
               Ne bringeth it on Swallowes ſwaps.
               But at his lateſt day
               With eaſy death and ſmalleſt payne
               muſt he depart away,
               And paſſe with ioy the Stygian lakes
               reſoulde from mortal dayes,
               Nor in his life time glory wantes
               
                  
nor at his death his prayſe.
               But may there any one be found
               with vs that mortal are,
               Which hath al theſe things in his time?
               I think him very rare,
               To whome nothing diſyrde is lackt,
               nor doleful chaunce doth light,
               In al his time and yeares, who liues
               and dyes in happy plight,
               This is the very Phaenix byrd
               whome duſt the Grecian fayne,
               The Grecian of a fooliſh head,
               and of a frantick brayne:
               Who thought of one might yſſue come,
               and bones conſumde that be
               To aſhes colde, a byrd to breede
               which neuer men could ſee.
               But ſo that ſhe may wonders ſing
               this nation not eſteames
               The truth to ſay, a nation whole
               addict to toyes and dreames.
               At whoſe example Latines dote,
               the happy man therfore
               Is rare as Phaenix byrd. But we
               are al both leſſe and more
               In wretched caſe, although yet ſome
               than ſome more miſers be,
               
                  
Bicauſe that like eſtate to al
               is not, nor like degree.
               He that therfore doth moſt good things
               and euil leaſt ſuſtayne,
               May counted be a happy man:
               but he whome cares do payne,
               And fewe good things at al poſſeſſe,
               may called be ful wel
               A wretched man, ſyth none therfore
               is happy, we muſt tel
               How leaſt vnhappy we may be
               and how in better caſe
               Our liues to leade in greater ioy,
               and with more pleaſaunt grace.
               And to begin I not beleue
               it true that al men praſe
               How Biſhops great and mighty Kings
               do liue in beſt eſtate.
               For as in euery other thing
               extremity is thought
               But il to be, the meane as good,
               ſo here exceſſe is nought
               In riches, for to much of eche
               doth hurt, who hath therfore
               Moſt riches, hath no better life,
               than he that moſt is pore.
               With euils like they vered be.
               
                  
                  
                     •
                  o he that is to fatte,
               And hath his paūch wyth guts bumbaſt
               not lighter is for that,
               Nor ſoner moues than doth the wretch
               whoſe ſkinne doth leanneſſe fret:
               The one doth febleneſſe forbid
               the other fatneſſe let.
               And as the Seas with greater floudes,
               and foming force doth yell,
               And caſts himſelfe in mountaynes hie
               while he diſcouers Hell,
               Amid the deapth the tempeſt roares
               and yet doth leaſt appere.
               Is moued moſt with raging windes,
               but now the ſhoare ful nere
               The ſhallow Seas with louder noyſe
               doth bounce vpon the ſand:
               So Kings that haue the power
               and rule of realmes in hand,
               With greater cares tormented are,
               and greater griefes of minde,
               Although the common people yet,
               theſe woūds doe neuer finde.
               For ſecretly within their heartes
               their torments they do hide,
               Adde this thereto, they alwayes haue
               a miſcheus mate beſide
               
                  
That vexeth them, and feare it is
               ſuſpecting euery twigge,
               Here of ſometime do treaſons breede
               ſometyme a Spaniſh figge.
               They dare not walke alone, nor eate
               except it taſted be.
               More deare than any kinde of price
               O worthy libertie,
               The chiefeſt Gem, and Jewel fayre
               which taken once away,
               Be ſwete, and pleaſant vnto men,
               nothing inuented may:
               And death it is alyue to be.
               The pore and ſeely ſoule,
               Where as he liſt both night and day
               in ſafety may go proule,
               Eyther wythin the Cities wall,
               their places fayre to ſee,
               And playes beholde, or view the ſignes
               of olde antiquity,
               Or if his pleaſure rather be
               without the wall to walke,
               In Orchards fayre, and gardens gay,
               amyd the floures to ſtalke,
               Or if deſire of countrey ſight
               remayne within his hart,
               Nothing him lets but may alone
               
                  
when he ſeeth tyme depart.
               He needes no ſhuffling ſorte of men,
               nor croude of clientes thicke.
               As oft beſyde as he doth thirſt
               or hunger doth him pricke
               Apace he falles there to, nor feare
               of poyſon doth him let.
               For baſer foode the byrdes abrode
               in woods had rather get:
               And greater pleaſure farre they take
               in pecking ſeedes wyth payne,
               Than if a cage of pearle and gold
               their bodies ſhould contayne:
               And there be fed with daynty meates.
               Full oft a king therefore
               May liue in wretched caſe no doubt,
               nor makes him happy more
               (Beleue me now) his regal crowne.
               But on the outward ſhow
               The fooles do gaſe, and what within
               remaynes they little know.
               For I him count in beſt eſtate
               whome Fortune giues a meane
               Whoſe liuing doth not much exceede
               nor ſubſtance is to leane,
               Who hath himſelfe a prety houſe
               to which doth ground belong
               
                  
That giues his maſter malt and wheat
               and other grayne among
               O what a great and goodly gayne
               the ground wel tillde doth breede
               The huſbandman that labours wel
               of few things ſtands in neede.
               For eyther trees of diuers kindes
               a long in order ſet,
               With little coſt on them beſtowde
               do greateſt profyt get,
               Or ſundry ſortes of fruteful grayne
               and Corne in furrowes caſt
               With great encreaſe cōmes vp agayne,
               Or if to labour faſt
               It pleaſeth him in Orchards fayre,
               of whoſe increaſe doth ſpring
               Such pleaſant frutes that may cōpare
               wyth diſh of any king:
               Except one liſt rather excede
               than reaſonably to lyue.
               The meane eſtate therefore is beſt
               which eyther chaunce doth giue,
               Or dead mens wil, or dowry of wife,
               or trauayle of the hand,
               Or caſt of minde by marchandiſe
               to fetch from land to land,
               In breding heaſtes, with cattels heird,
               
                  
thy ſtables ful to drtue,
               In keping doues on houſes hie,
               or homed Bees in hiue.
               Or winter milles black oyles to grinde,
               or milles that meale do make,
               With theſe and diuers other meanes
               ſufficient gayne to take
               Doth wiſdome teach ſuch as giue not
               their mindes to ſlouthfulneſſe,
               Nor ſuffer ill and poyſon ſwete
               of drouſy lazineſſe.
               But chiefly yet this is the gift
               of lady Fortunes grace,
               She ſetteth whome ſhe wil aloft
               in rich and welthy caſe.
               She lady is of euery thing
               and riches all doth gyue.
               It is not to be ſought beſyde
               in ſeruice for to lyue,
               For nothing more an honeſt man
               becommes than liberty
               But he of nature is a ſlaue
               and of no dignity,
               Unhappy rather, and a wretch,
               who can the yoke ſuſtayne
               Of maſters heſtes, and them obey
               for hope of fooliſh gayne.
               
                  
The meddowes fat, nor all the Golde
               nor price of Indian ſandes,
               Is ſo much worth that thou ſhuldſt haue
               thy meate in others hands,
               And reſt at others wil, and when
               thy maſter byds thee go,
               Then like a ball from him thou muſt
               be toſſed to and fro:
               And ſerue a man perhaps more worſe
               than thou thy ſelfe ſometime,
               An Aſſe, vnlearnde, a ſurfetter
               that vowes his yeares to wine.
               A fond and filthy thing it is,
               when thou mayſt leade thy life
               With little liuing ſafe and free
               and voyd of al ſuch ſtrife
               To beare the yoke of bondage vile
               for hope of greater gayne
               And freedome ſel, the chiefe of all
               and ſtately checke ſuſtayne.
               O mindes of men degenerate
               why ſeeke ye great mens halls
               To be an honour vnto them
               and make your ſelues as thralls?
               Wo worth you all that ſhepherdes nede
               like beaſtes of brutiſh ſorte,
               That of your ſelues not able be
               
                  
to kepe an honeſt porte.
               For who ſo ſerues by any meanes
               can no wayes happy be,
               It is an Aſſes parte to beare
               the ſaddle ſtyl we ſee.
               Therefore who cōmes of parents free,
               or of a noble kinde,
               And doth poſſeſſe as much as may
               ſuffiſe himſelf to finde
               He nedeleſſe then his chaunce be wayles
               But ſome perchaunce wyl doubt
               The maried or the ſingle life
               which beſt of them, for ſtout
               And proud the wiues are often ſeene,
               and oft to chide and brall,
               And catch their huſbands by the pates,
               and often naught wythall:
               
                  
                     •
                  eſides the cares of children vexe
               whome grieues the ſickneſſe rage
               Or elſe vntimely death doth take,
               the daughter come to age
               With monied bagges a mate requires,
               or elſe Dame Lais ſchole
               Doth practiſe there, and ſtayns ye houſe,
               the ſonne proues oft a foole
               L
                     •
                  mfingred oft, and harlots kepes,
               a brawling merchant ſtout,
               
                  
A ſwearing Goſe, a Ruſfian wilde,
               a vile vnſhamefaſt lout.
               He ſeemes not to be free beſyde
               who ſo euer hath a wife,
               Muſt alter needes condicions al,
               and leaue his youthful life,
               Forſaking frayes muſt byde at home,
               not ryde from towne to towne,
               Nor in the night time walke the ſtretes
               in beating dores adowne,
               And keping Jone. Its nedeful then
               to liue aduiſedly,
               And ſee thy goods they not decreaſe
               but may augmented be,
               Leaſt in thy age the wallet come.
               Although theſe things be ſo,
               Yet think I ſure with marted bed
               and nature for to go
               More better farre, as ſhe to vs
               of birdes and beaſtes vntame
               Example ſhewes, how both the kindes
               themſelues togither frame,
               And ioyne in one of duty muſt,
               and alwayes ſo remayne
               Encreaſe to get and nouriſh vp
               their yong wyth equal payne.
               Whereby the kinde may ſtyll endure
               
                  
and neuer more decay,
               For we as euery kinde of beaſt
               are moued to Venus play
               By natures wyll, a worſer thing
               ſhall hap to thee be ſure
               If thou thy ſelfe wilt neuer ſeeke
               this thing for to procure.
               And voyd of iſſue ſhalt thou dye
               and yeld thy corps agayne,
               A ſtraunger then ſhall haue thy goodes
               for which thou tokeſt payne.
               And when that aged hayres ſhall hap
               and ſickneſſe ſhall thee hent,
               Who ſhall thy wearied age relieue?
               who ſhal thy hurtes lament?
               Thy brother or thy kinſman nere,
               or wil do this thy frende?
               No ſure, for to be heire to thee
               they rather wiſh thine ende.
               On thee aliue they wayt and fawne
               thy goods at graue to take,
               And eche man loues and fears thy good
               of thee no force they make.
               O miſchief great, O beaſtlineſſe,
               and vile deſire to get,
               O piteous plague eche where diſperſt
               on profit all be ſet
               
                  
The vertue left. Who ſeketh now
               the righteous thing to vſe?
               What man is he that wil not now
               al goodneſſe cleane refuſe
               If any hope of gayne he haue?
               Golde guydes the lawes we ſee,
               And might of Gold than ſtrēgth of blud
               of greater force to be.
               For Gold both ſhame faſtneſſe and faith
               are ſet abrode to ſell,
               For Gold the Gods aboue be ſcrude
               and we ſet free from Hell.
               But now the wife hir father leaues
               and mother deare beſyde,
               With al hir houſe and houſhold frends,
               with thee alone to byde
               For euermore both night and day,
               and of thy ſeede ſhe beares
               A ſweete and goodly golpowlde Boy
               of ſmall and tender yeares:
               And kindred now to thee ſhe brings
               and doth thy houſe enlarge
               And helpes thee eke in euery thing
               and takes wyth the thy charge.
               Betwene you al things common are
               both good and euil things,
               Whatſoeuer harmeth one hurts both.
               
                  
and that which profit brings
               Unto the one, that profits both.
               If ſyckneſſe make thee weake
               Or greater age, then doth ſhe ſtrayght
               exhorte thee wel and ſpeake.
               She comfortes thee, ſhe helps thee then,
               ſhe neuer leaues thee there,
               She watches thee and watching ſerues.
               Likewyſe thy children dere
               With al the meanes they can they kepe
               for both your blouds are one,
               And Image like: And when the day
               wherein thou muſt be gone
               Is come, thou art not cleane extince
               but ſhalt aliue remayne
               In them who then ſhal repreſent
               their fathers face agayne.
               But ſome there be that rather had
               in common harlots bed
               Uncertayne children get, therfore
               they liſt not wiues to wed.
               Such kinde of men I can not prayſe
               nor wiſe I haue them thought,
               For wife wyth dowry helpes thee well
               where harlots bring thee nought.
               A wife doth bring thee ſtore of frendes,
               where harlots bring thee foes,
               
                  
A wife thou ſhalt in ſafety haue.
               a hore wyth griefe and woes.
               The one wil truſty ſtyll remayne.
               the other falſe alway,
               And fearing to be caſt at large
               ſhe ſtealeth al ſhe may.
               And for hir ſelfe ſhe heapes vp all
               hir ſtate for to repaire
               When thou haſt pluckt hir belles away
               and caſt hir vp to aire.
               More, if thou kepeſt a hore, thy goods
               are but in queaſy caſe,
               Of wiues are children lawful got,
               of harlots baſtards baſe.
               To wed therfore it needeful is
               but fytteſt fyrſt to ſee
               The maydes eſtate, the parents 
                     •
                  ke
               their manners what they be.
               For oftentimes the children do
               their parents after take,
               For trees according as they are
               like frutes are wont to make.
               Aſke counſel of hir neighbours, cloſe
               (ſo that ſhe faythfull be)
               And if thou haū a woman ſend
               hir whole eſtate to ſee:
               If ſhe be fayre, if ſhe be fowle,
               
                  
if ſhe be ſore to knowe
               If ſhe lacke wyt, if ſhe can ſpinne,
               if ſhe can knit or ſowe.
               Theſe are the workes for them to vſe
               and vertuous womens deedes,
               For to eſchewe all ydleneſſe,
               which chiefly vices breedes.
               For ydleneſſe the minde corrupts
               and leades it vnto euil,
               To wanton luſt and filthy vice,
               and fanſies of the Deuil.
               This ydleneſſe doth ouerthrowe
               and Cities downe doth pul.
               For if that Lucreſſe had not giuen
               hir ſelf to workes of wul,
               And if the chaſte Penelopey
               
               which webs had neuer wrought,
               But both amyd their halles had ſyt
               with ydle wanton thought:
               This might haue pleaſd perchāce amōg
               a thouſand woers one,
               And of the others Uirgin death
               ſhould neuer fame haue gone:
               But beſt it is for thee to viewe
               theſe things thy ſelfe alone.
               For other men among (for troth)
               firme fayth remayneth none.
               
                  
For al men now wyl faine and lye,
               and truth is quite exilde:
               Few faythful ſhalt thou find, but if
               thou wilt not be beguilde.
               If thou wouldſt al things better proue,
               then make thy ſelfe a ſpye:
               And ſeeke al things thou goeſt about,
               to ſee wyth preſent eye.
               Wherfore I warne thee earneſtly,
               take hede that thou her ſee:
               (If that thou canſt) what one ſhe is,
               to whom thou thinkſt to be
               In mariage ioynde, leaſt afterward,
               in vayne thou doſt lament:
               And leaſt it doe when tyme is paſt,
               thee of thy dede repent.
               But if perchaunce (as eft it happes)
               thou liueſt in wretched caſe:
               Wyth wicked wyfe deceyude by fate,
               and frowning Junoes grace.
               Fyrſt mildly doe ſuch one exhort,
               ſwete words wyth her frequent:
               And giue her gyfts, and all that may,
               her wayward minde content:
               Wyth ſwete deceyts her ouercome,
               now faſt thy armes embrace
               About her neck, and though ſhee ſhun,
               
                  
caſt kyſſes on hir face.
               With all ſweete meanes apeaſe hir yre▪
               
               if this doe not preuayle,
               Uſe bytter wordes, be angry then
               and chyde hir faſt, and rayle,
               Put on thy braſen face, and fume
               and feare hir then with threttes.
               If this doe nought procure, and by
               thy wordes ſhe nothing ſettes,
               Trye thou the matter then with ſtripes
               and ſoftly on the backe
               With bouncing blowes bebaſt hir well
               that all hir bones may cracke.
               If thou ſuſpect thy wife of play,
               then kepe no luſty men,
               Nor fellowes fayre, with whom ſhe may
               be prating now and then.
               Thou art deceaued, if thou doſt thinke
               that any kinde of man
               Wyll faythfull be, in Uenus caſe
               no men are faithfull than.
               For the reioyſeth to beguile.
               by fraude is loue poſſeſt
               And vnto Uenus alwayes fraude
               a thing is counted beſt.
               But as a chiefeſt thing take heede
               there entre not thy dore
               
                  
No fryer fatte, ne luſty Monke,
               nor prieſt of any lore.
               Eſchewe the knaues, a greater plague
               than theſe can none expreſſe,
               Theſe are the dregges of euery ſort
               and ſpringes of foliſheneſſe,
               The common ſynke of miſchiefes all,
               and Wolues in felles of ſheepe,
               For pence and no deuocion ſure
               to God theſe wretches creepe.
               And with a colour falſe of truth
               they ſymple ſoules be guile.
               And vnderneath religious cloke
               a thouſande miſchiefes vile.
               A thouſande haynous deedes they doe
               deflouring mayde and wyfe,
               Whore hunters vile, and Sodomites
               the ſeruaunts all their lyfe.
               Of beaſtlineſſe, and belly ioye,
               the things diuine they ſell,
               What wonders great inuent they not?
               what dreames doe they not tell?
               The common people to deceiue
               and to procure againe.
               Hereof doth ſuperſtition ryſe
               and thouſande fanſyes vain
                     •
                  
               
               Which if the gods be wyſe they ſcorne,
               
                  
and do refuſe to vewe:
               The Godly man doth worſhip God,
               wyth earneſt loue and trewe.
               And not for gold, away wyth gayne,
               thou ſhalt ſee them denie:
               All ſacred ſeruice here on earth,
               and God himſelf on hie.
               Thēſelues therfore this flock doth ſerue,
               and not the ſaincts aboue:
               And profit cauſeth Gods to be,
               which if thou once remoue,
               Both temples and their alt are ſtones,
               ſhall flat lie on the ground:
               Nor any more amongſt them al,
               ſhall any God be found.
               Theſe iuggling mates and foxes falſe,
               expell from thee therfore:
               And take good hede that none of them,
               do enter at thy dore.
               Leaſt thou do cry the Cuckees note,
               through fayned vertue ſuch:
               Nor if thou any goſſyps haſt,
               beleue them not to much.
               For vnder colour of this name,
               the Knaues do many play:
               Take heede beſyde that from thy houſe,
               ſhe often do not ſtray.
               
                  
Nor let her haunt thy neyghbors houſe,
               it hath bene ſene ful oft:
               That whoremaſters haue hid thē ſelues,
               amyd thy neighbours loft.
               Appoynt her mates for company,
               of chaſt and honeſt fame:
               Let mother Bee, be put from thence,
               and euery bawdy dame.
               And ſeeke thou not wyth other whores,
               thy ſelfe for to relieue:
               Nothing doth cauſe her more to frowne
               nor nothing more her grieue.
               For nothing more reuengement ſeekes,
               than when ſhe is begilde:
               And ſees that wyth vnſtedfaſt loue,
               her bed is thus defilde.
               Then all wyth ire ſhe flames and hates,
               then doth ſhe eke begin:
               To work her houſband like deſpite,
               then choller boyles wythin.
               Then rageth ſhee like Bacchus prieſt,
               whom to much wine doth prick:
               Beleue me well ſhe is but rare,
               that doth not vſe the trick,
               That harlots vſe, when that ſhe is,
               deceyude of lawfull part:
               At leaſt if ſhe can not in dede,
               
                  
yet ſynnes ſhe in hir heart.
               For will with vice prouoked thus
               in vice will farther ſlide.
               But if thou takſt hir with the deede
               let lawes on hir be tride.
               Be not aſhamed but let the lawes
               be reuerencde of thee,
               For they are as a certaine rule
               by which we guided bee.
               Leaſt thou ſhouldſt giue a greater paine
               amid thy raging yre
               (Offending God, in felowing men)
               than doth the fault require.
               For common people neuer vſe
               the rule of reaſon ſage,
               But are ſeducde with furies fell
               like beaſtes of brainles rage.
               Ne haſt thou loſt thy liberty
               by marrying of a wyfe
               Bicauſe thou maiſt not walke ye ſtretes
               and leade a ruffians lyfe.
               This can be calde no liberty
               but rather licence nought
               Who ſo is free doth ſeeme to ſerue
               ſuch is not to be ſought.
               It bringes the owner to much harme,
               and not to can doe ill,
               
                  
Is better ſarre than haue ſuch vice
               adherent to thy will.
               How many men haue bene deſtroide
               by to much liberty?
               How many men in ſafety liue
               with bridles doſt thou ſe?
               And if thy children ſickneſſe vexe
               why ſhouldſt thou weepe or waile
               Go ſeeke in haſt to make them whole
               if that will not preuaile
               And if that death will haue them needes
               then vſe a pacient minde
               Thou art not in this caſe alone
               but fellowes ſhalt thou finde.
               The griefe that we with many beare
               we better may ſuſtaine.
               We all are borne to this intent
               to render lyfe againe.
               For of our fyrſt beginning doth
               the fatall ende depende
               And certaine is the time decreed
               for all away to wende.
               And either ſone or latter doth
               eche man his graue deſcende
               To death which is of euils alt
               the laſt and finall ende.
               Not of the valiaunt to be fearde.
               
                  
what doth it ought auaile:
               The deathes of them with teares, yt here
               haue loſt their lyfe to wayle.
               Is it a thing ſo wretched here,
               to leaue this fooliſhe life:
               To ryd thereby our mortall corps
               from all vnquiet ſtrife.
               And for the hurly burly here,
               eternall lyfe to win:
               Perpetuall reaſt by death we gaine,
               or eke the comming in.
               To lyfe againe, but weepe thy fill,
               in time thy teares ſhall ſtaye:
               And all thy cares and griefe beſyde,
               from thee ſhall time conuaye.
               But if thou wanton children keepe,
               or of a greater ſhame:
               O father fonde deſeruing ſtripes,
               then thou art moſt to blame.
               And cauſer chiefe of all their hurt,
               who taughtſt not them to know:
               Both maners good and vertuouſneſe
                     •
                  ,
               while tender yeares did grow.
               Not yet with vices foule defaced,
               neglecting thou the minde:
               Dioſt only bring their bodies vp,
               like beaſtes of brutiſhe kinde.
               
                  
Hereof ſo many fooliſh geeſe,
               and noughty men remaine:
               With whom eche citie peſtred is,
               for all in age retaine.
               The maners that they did receiue
               when yonger yeares were rife:
               And eche man as he liued in youth,
               ſo leadeth he his life.
               The tender twigge at firſt may bowe
               according to thy minde:
               But when the bowes get elder ſtrength
               no more thou ſhalt them winde.
               Nor from the place that yong it helde,
               thou ſhalt it cauſe to flye:
               So doth a childe in tender yeares,
               eche way himſelfe applye.
               But when that elder age is come,
               looke which way firſt he went:
               That kepes he ſtill, and will not change
               his firſt conceiude intent.
               Of cuſtome long is nature bred
               and yeldes hir force alway:
               To vſe that long time hath bene kept.
               yet ought we for to pray.
               To God, within the mothers wombe
               that he may giue good ſeede:
               For ſo we ſhew our ſelues in lyfe,
               
                  
as wee therin doe breede
               Whoſoeuer doth come nought frō thēce
               will ſeldome vertuous proue
               Though manners good, the ſchole hym teach
               and thouſande maſters moue.
               Well maiſt thou nature rule ſometime,
               but neuer hir expell
               For ſhe is ſtill of greater force
               thau all thy guiding well.
               Yet ſomthing will ſhe altred be
               with vſe and daily toyle:
               So with continuall huſbanding
               doth beare the barren ſoyle.
               So Lions fierce of mighty force
               obey to man as king.
               So by continuall exerciſe
               eche Arte in time doth ſpring.
               Wherefore inſtruct thy children well
               while tender yeares doe grow
               And teach them honeſt wayes to walke
               and vertuous lyfe to know.
               Permit them not to rampe abrode
               according to their will,
               Than liberty no kinde of thing
               for children is more ill.
               If thou be wyſe holde faſt thy raynes
               and warely well them guide
               
                  
For mortall things by naturra force
               are moude in vice to ſlide.
               And willingly thereto they run
               if helpe no labour bring
               For without Arte is nature wone
               to giue no perfect thing.
               For God himſelfe will not permit
               that we with ſlouthfulneſſe
               Should heauy ware, but ſtirres vs vp
               with cares and buſyneſſe:
               And as with ſpurres the ſlothfull pricks
               a pleaſaunt place ther lies
               That ryſeth vp with craggey rocke
               amid the ſteamy ſkies,
               Full of delight than which more bleft
               a place can not be founde
               To whom the ſweete Elyſius fields
               and Temp, of Theſſale grounde
               Doth place reſigne, here nigh the pole
               and night the ſtarres that ſhine,
               Dame vertue dwels, and there enioyes
               a thouſande pleaſures fyne.
               But vengeance crabbed is the pathes
               
                  
                     •
                  oth narrow and vnplaine
               And ſo be grown wyth thickes of thorne
               that neuer can attaine,
               The vile and ſlouthfull minde to paſſe
               
                  
of earthly cares poſſeſt:
               And few pure minde a loft doth bring
               whom God hath choſe as bleſt.
               Aboue to dwell amid the ſkyes,
               full crabbed is the way:
               To vertue ſure, but plaine to vice,
               by which we ſone doe ſtray.
               To which we all runne eaſely,
               who therefore doth intende:
               To trade a childe in vertuouſneſſe,
               muſt labour him to mende,
               For without labour nothing good,
               can well perfourmed bee:
               The force of daily labour doth,
               all things diſpatch we ſee.
               Firſt ought you fathers to take heede,
               aboue all other things:
               Your children haunt no ill reſort,
               for cuſtome alwayes brings.
               Eche kinde of manners vnto men,
               yea though they ſainctes ſhould be:
               Ill company will them corrupt,
               but chiefely let them flie.
               From haunt of luſtye youthfull brutes,
               for youth is alwayes bent:
               Lo vices all, and filthy be,
               all filthy talke innent.
               
                  
For wholly is this age advicſe,
               to naughty ryots deede:
               That they vſe not the haunt therefore,
               of yong men take good heede.
               Thou that intendeſt for to kepe.
               a childe in vertuouſneſſe:
               Now vſe to chide, and now the rod,
               and plaine the way expreſſe.
               By which they may their feete direct,
               in no wyſe fauour ſhowe:
               And euer angry, let them not,
               the loue of Fathers know.
               For nothing can more hurtful be,
               than ſpeake them faire vnto:
               Then greater heart in vice they take
               then all things dare they doe.
               When thou for truthe ſhalte take theyr wordes
               and makſt of them to much:
               Bewitched ſore with doting loue,
               to children fauour ſuch
               Is hurtefull ſure, for feare alone,
               doth make them vice to fly:
               Not reaſon then, and ſone they ſynne,
               if they be not put by.
               With brydels harde, and as they doe
               full oft in vices fall:
               Done cauſyng them, ſo ſeldome they
               
                  
returne if none doe call.
               According as they bring them vp
               ſo all men children haue.
               Beſyde all this we muſt inuent
               our bodyes health to ſaue.
               For health is far more worth than golde
               the healthy deluing loute
               In better ſtate accounted is
               than craſed kyng no doute
               Firſt ought the cauſe be knowē wherof
               ſuch ſickneſſe vile are ſowne,
               In corps of men, tormenting them
               for once the cauſes knowne.
               More eaſely mayſt thou ſhun theffects
               and cauſes pulde away,
               The effectes of them that did enſue
               incontinent decay.
               The cauſer firſt of each diſeaſe
               is chiefeſt nature ſure,
               As oft as vnder naughty ſtarres
               the byrth ſhe doth procure:
               While as the childe doth inwarde take
               the motions of the ſaye
               Or elſe begot of naughty ſeede.
               the cauſe doth eften lye.
               Amyd the parentes of the childe,
               when they perfour me the acte
               
                  
Diſpoſed ill, with naughty bloud,
               or ſore diſeaſes racte
               More cauſes are there yet beſide
               as labour toyle and reſt,
               Both colde, & heat, with ſlepe, and meat,
               and ioyes of Uenus neſt.
               Eache one of theſe, doth ſtrength abate
               and hurt the liuely ſprite,
               As oft as we vſe them to much
               or vſe them elſe to lyght.
               Exceſſe of both doth ſickneſſe bring
               of meaſure health proceedes
               The perturbations of the minde
               diſeaſes often breedes.
               And to much ſadneſſe, feare and griefe
               and to much myr
                     •
                  h as well
               Doth kyll if we will credit ſuch
               as hyſtories doe tell.
               The ayre doth hurt, the water harmes
               when they be both infected.
               Hereof doth come the plaguie ſore
               whereby the guttes are vered.
               The common rot doth many kyll,
               and diuers ſickneſſe ſore
               Doth brawling, fight, and fawle procure
               with thouſande perryls more.
               Theſe ſprings & groūds of miſchiefes all
               
                  
(if thou thy health ſet by:)
               By all the meanes thou canſt inuent.
               ſeeke thou from them to flye.
               If thou be ſyck as nedes thou muſt
               ſometyme, what wilt thou doe?
               Deſyre not then the medcine long,
               but loke thou ſone thereto.
               While as thy ſore is yet but grene,
               nor yet thy mortall fo:
               Poſſeſſed hath his fired place,
               amyd thy corps to goe.
               A little water doth ſuffice,
               to quench the breeding fyre:
               But when that it is fully growne,
               and flames begin to ſpyre.
               Wyth vaunting courſe agayn ye ſtarres
               ſcarce riuer, ſpring, or lake
               Will then ſuffice to quench it out,
               ſhift therefore timely make.
               To know the cauſe of thy diſeaſe,
               and ſone to put them out
               Uſe contraryes, contrary things,
               eche one expell no doubt.
               If cold haue thus procurde thy harme,
               vſe things to heate agayne:
               If trauayle, toyle, or meate thee hurt,
               from them likewyſe refrayne.
               
                  
If nede require then ſeeke the aide
               of ſome Phiſitians hand:
               Or Surgians helpe in Surgians Arte,
               more knowledge ſure doth ſtand.
               For playne and ſure appeares the work,
               that in his hand he takes:
               But Leache, whom we Phiſitian name
               while he the water ſhakes.
               Wherby he doth his iudgement giue,
               and feeles the beating vayne:
               And rakes the dung, he is deceaude,
               and doth deceaue agayne.
               But wyth vnlike eſtate of harme,
               the ſimple ſoule doth die:
               And giues the balde religious men,
               a cauſe to ſing and crie.
               The other hauing gotten golde,
               accuſeth God on hie:
               And ſayth that be was onely cauſe,
               wherby the man did die.
               And faſt wyth ſiluer ſtuffes his purſe,
               wyth ſweete reioicing hart:
               All men (alas) are healed now,
               by chaunce and not by Arte.
               For he that any Arte knowes well,
               in practiſing of it:
               But ſeldome he doth chaunce to er
                     •
                  e,
               
                  
or doth offend no whitte.
               But theſe among whereof we talke,
               amongſt a hundred yll:
               There ſcarce is one whom they can ſaue
               or whome they do not kyll.
               How chaunceth this? But for bycauſe,
               that fewe of them doth knowe:
               What thing they do, what Phiſicke is,
               but while they ſeeke to flowe.
               Wyth wytty words, and Logiks Arte,
               the vulearned ſort to binde:
               Of Phiſiks cure the principles,
               they ſcarcely ſeke to finde.
               Inſtructed thus wyth nedeleſſe Artes,
               themſelues they home wards hie:
               And faſt wyth Ergo there they prate,
               and bygge they looke therby.
               Hereby they ſtipendes do require,
               and thinke inough the ſame:
               (Nor are they here deceyude) for this,
               that wyth an honeſt name
               They may be murderers of men,
               O lawes of wretched kinde:
               That can permit ſuch miſchtefs great,
               O Kings and rulers b
                     •
                  inde.
               That ſpye not thys deformed thing,
               O you that guide and rayne:
               
                  
Permit not ſuch a wickedneſſe,
               chaſe hence this plague agayne.
               And ſuccour bring to mortall kinde,
               by theſe ſame murdring knaues:
               How many men both night and day,
               haue found their fatall graues?
               Let them haue perfectly their Arte,
               or let them not profeſſe:
               For other artes if they do erre,
               the harme of them is leſſe.
               But this except it perfect be,
               is full of perilles greate:
               And priuily doth rage as doth
               at home the plaguy heate.
               It is not good therfore to truſte,
               ſuch men, whoſe learning ſtands:
               In precious habite to be ſeene,
               and to adourne their hands
               Wyth rings and hoopes, and precious ſtones,
               but this that I ſhall tell:
               Wherby thou mayſt thy ſelfe retayne,
               in minde reſerue thou well.
               See that thy diet holſome be,
               and eate not thou to much:
               For miſchiefe great hath come to men,
               by ouer feeding ſuch.
               Here of do moſt diſeaſes breede,
               
                  
beware eſpecially:
               As of a poyſon ſtrong that doth,
               enforce the corps to dye.
               That thou no meate agayne do take.
               till that receiued laſt:
               Be well conſumed and perfectly,
               his full digeſtion paſt.
               And euery day vſe exerciſe,
               by pace or other feate:
               Wherby thy ioynts thus moued may,
               procure a warming heate.
               For mouing is the cauſe of warmth,
               and aydes the ſtomack well:
               Encreaſeth ſtrength, & humors nought,
               from out the fleſh expell.
               Breake not beſide thy quiet reſt,
               for ſleepe the body feedes:
               And helps the mind wher harme to both,
               exceſſiue watching breedes.
               Expell thou ſorrow farre from thee,
               and heauineſſe exile:
               For it dries vp the ſinowes all,
               and makes the body vile.
               And greſted haires vntimely plants,
               the ioyfull heart agayne:
               Doth make thy limmes & mēbers ſtrōg,
               and youthfull yeares retayne.
               
                  
The other things beholde thy ſelfe,
               that erſt I tolde to thee:
               A thing more precious farre there is,
               by which we happy bee.
               And like to Gods, and heauens haunt,
               in earth remayning here:
               Although his grace to fewe is giuen,
               fewe worthy do appere.
               Such honour hie for to poſſeſſe,
               and if to know the ſame:
               Thy minde deſyres, I wyll thee tell,
               dame wiſdome is her name.
               This is the greateſt good of all.
               than this of greater grace:
               The Gods can giue nothing to man,
               to this reſigneth place
               All that that breedes in red ſea ſandes,
               or all the golden goodes:
               That Lagus keepes, that Hermus hath
               or in Pactolus flouds.
               Whatſoeuer growes if truth be ſayd,
               to her no Princely raygne:
               May be comparde, ſhe is the Mother
               of all Godly trayne,
               And greateſt vertue is. O bleſf,
               yea bleſt, and bleſt agayne,
               As much as mortall man can be,
               
                  
is he that doth obtayne
               Of God, this goodly gyft to get,
               but some perchaunce wyll ſeeke:
               What wyſdome is to knowe, and ſure
               the troth hereof to ſpeake.
               Nought elſe but knowledge chefe ſhee is
               by which the pured minde:
               Whom neither mortal waight doth pres
               nor earthly thought can blinde.
               Doth ſcale and clime the ſkies aboue,
               and there in ayry place:
               Wyth God doth dwel, deſpiſing here,
               all things in mortall caſe
               As vayne, aſcending alwayes vp,
               much like the flames of fyre:
               Regarding light theſe earthly things
               doth things aboue deſire.
               And doth diſcerne the good from yll,
               and truth from falſehode nought:
               And things of blind and mortall men,
               that chiefeſt here are thought.
               As pleaſures, realmes, and riches great
               wyth hie triumphing geare:
               For which both night and day they toyle
               eſteming not a heare.
               Bewayls the vayn and fading thoughts
               declaring here the way:
               
                  
Of liuing well in order iuſt,
               and eke the dying day.
               The reſt among the wiſeman ſhines,
               as doth the ſunne full bright:
               Amid the ſtarres, and doth deſpiſe,
               the force of fortunes might.
               And vnderneath his fete doth treade,
               eche harme wyth conſtant minde:
               Nor moued is beſyde wyth feare,
               or dread of death vnkinde.
               Nor feareth once the paynes of Hell,
               but takes wyth myrth his graue:
               And laughes to ſcorne the fanſies fond,
               that common people haue.
               Not douting here this lyfe to leaue,
               repleate wyth wretchedneſſe:
               And ful of toyles hereby to get,
               eternall quietneſſe.
               In fine he equall is to Joue,
               to him adherent be
               Four things: For wel he counſel giues,
               and clearly iudgeth he.
               All error quite from him remoude,
               he guideth alſo right:
               Both humaine things and eke deuine,
               are ſubiect to his ſight.
               This laſt that I haue here rehearſt,
               
                  
is chiefeſt of all the reſt:
               Than which there is no greater thing,
               that here may be paſſeſt.
               But no man can this wiſedome haue,
               tyll cleane he purged bee:
               From euery haynous vice and crime,
               and all iniquitie.
               For wiſedome doth deny to dwell,
               amyd the ſinfull hart:
               And hateth eke the mindes vnpure,
               ſith ſhe is pureſt parte.
               And no man can this wiſedome haue,
               except he be diſcreate:
               And learned be in many Artes,
               know theſe to be the feate,
               Wyth which is wiſedome free obtaynd,
               wherof I would ſay more:
               But time commaundes me here to ſhut,
               and end this booke before.
               My Lions tale hath long enough,
               continued here hir ſtile:
               Wherfore my muſe now hold thy peace,
               and reſt thy ſelf a while.
            
         
         
            
            Virgo the ſixt Booke.
            
               SOme I beleue of cancred minde,
               and of malicious face:
               Who thinke they only know the troth
               and only haue the grace
               Al doutful things wyth iudgemēt right,
               and knowledge full to trie:
               Wil ſay I neuer taſted yet,
               the bleſſed ſprings that lie
               In Aone fieldes, nor ſacred flouds,
               that Phocidos doth frame:
               Nor that the Laurell leafe I doe
               deſerue, nor Poets name.
               Bycauſe I write not fanſies fond,
               and monſters maruellous:
               And fayning not deceyue the eares,
               of ſuch as credit vs.
               For they ſuppoſe the Poets parte,
               is only lies to tell:
               As if it were a thing to vile,
               for them wyth troth to mell
               And lawfull not. their iudgements I,
               accompt both naught and vayne:
               And ſweeter ſemeth farre to me,
               the truth for to retayne.
               To aged wiues and witleſſe boyes,
               
                  
ſuch trifles I be take:
               Some barke abrode the battels big,
               that Giauntes great did make.
               With Gorgons grun, and Harpies vile,
               and mighty Ciclops wilde:
               And ſhipmen ſore enflamde with ſong,
               of pleſaunt mermaides milde.
               with Circes old that monſtrous hag,
               and beaſtes that thre heds weares:
               Chymera vile, and Atlas ſtrong,
               whoſe mighty ſhoulders beares.
               The ſtarry ſkies, ichangd to rocke,
               that cloudes hath forrowed eft:
               with Perſea hie, and Tantalus,
               Promotheus wretched theft.
               And Titius ſtout, and Belides,
               and what ſo euer more:
               The doting grece hath Latins taught,
               in long time here cofore.
               I wiſh not I, ſo much to drincke,
               of Aganippes ſtreames:
               Nor ſeke I ſo the Laurel leafe,
               of gliſtring Phebus beames.
               with Juey leaues the hears to decke,
               wherby I ſo might fain:
               A poet thus to be I bluſh,
               and am aſhamed plam.
               
                  
If nedes we muſt ſuche trifles wright,
               and vſe ſuche pleaſaunt lies
               Troth thus deſpiſoe: of many toung
               is had, but few are wiſe.
               Beleue me well: and many wright,
               with hauty verſes hie:
               And many haue the Grecians toung,
               and latin perfectly.
               And while ſo many thinges they know
               their wiſdome is but thin:
               With regal wordes theyr ſtile is dekt,
               but ſmall effect within.
               The outward Image only ſhewes,
               and picture light we ſpy:
               But what good thing remains therin?
               what frute is had therby?
               What learneth he that readeth them?
               what knowledge hath he got?
               But dreames and foliſh fanſies fond,
               that liſe here profit not.
               which for to know, and not to know,
               is all of one effect:
               Though they me Poet call or not.
               I wil not yet neglect.
               The troth to ſay, and lies to ſhunne,
               truthe makes the perfect minde:
               which who ſo euer moſt doth know,
               
                  
approcheth niſte the kinde
               Of ſaintes aboue, and happieſt is,
               although the foliſhneſſe:
               Of people rude him not commend,
               nor prayſe his worthineſſe.
               Nor fauour him as he deſerues,
               nor titles of him tel:
               Wherfore my muſes now approch,
               and Sicophants farewel.
               Behold, I enter now the way,
               which with a lothſome ſhade:
               The Cipreſſe and the Yeutree hides,
               with leaues that neuer fade.
               The doleful fieldes and darkſome raign
               of Proſerpu
                     •
                  e I ſee:
               Wherin the Letheus riuer runs,
               with ſtreames that darkned be.
               Amid the poyſon fieldes abrode,
               doth ſlepy Popey ſpring:
               On ſilent ſhores, Calliopey
               wherto doſt thou me bring?
               What monſters for to ſe doſt thou,
               commaund? what noyſe to harke?
               With doleful noyſe of irkſome Owles,
               ſoundes al the wodes ſo darke.
               The Howlats cry with woful tunes
               and loud lamenting noyſe,
               
                  
O muſe, wherto doſt thou me bring:
               behold, with wailing voyce.
               The hilles and valleis all do roar,
               and 
                     •
                  ccho back doth beat:
               The mourning times, an anſwer giues,
               what grief is this ſo great?
               What is the cauſe of miſchief ſuch,
               what kinde of people thoſe:
               That all be cladde in mourning blacks
               and wailing veſture goes?
               What men are they that thus in blacke,
               with weping fil the ſkies?
               Alas, what ſight of bodies ſlain,
               lie here before mine cies?
               What hath here cauſde this bloudy broyle
               who made this ſlaughter fel?
               How many kinges and biſhops bones
               lye here? I know them wel.
               Is yen ſame death aloofe that comes
               with bloudy ſithe in hand?
               With dredful face, and ghaſlley looke
               before whoſe face doth ſtand.
               A thouſand heapes of ſickneſſes,
               a thouſand daungers cake:
               O armed with to fierce a gard,
               my thinckes I hear him ſpeake.
               With clamoure great as he doth come,
               
                  
to him I wil geue eare:
               And what I hard wyth all my hart,
               I wil declare them heare.
               That death I am that with my ſythe,
               right downe do cut like hay:
               All thinges that liue vpon the earth,
               the rule and eke the ſway.
               Of all the world, hath I oue me delt,
               and biddes me none to ſpare:
               But hie and low, to ſlea and kil,
               them downe with equal ſhare.
               Wherby may none eſcape my handes,
               not one can flie from me:
               The hauty heds of mighty kings,
               by me ſuppreſſed be.
               The pride and pompe of prelates flour,
               I cauſe a downe to fall:
               No kinde of creature here doth liue,
               but vnto vs is thrall.
               Although he (flying) pearſe the partes,
               of northern Boreas ground:
               And paſſe the ragged 
                     •
                  iphean rockes,
               yet ſhall mine ire be found.
               And he my power and ſtroke ſhal fele,
               or though he do deſcend:
               The ſouthern parts, wher ſhineth bright
               the ſtarres to vs vnkend.
               
                  
Yet there he ſhall me ſurely finde,
               and finding me ſhall die:
               
                  
                     •
                  y ſithe, both Eaſt, and weſt doth kill,
               I ſet not richeſſe by.
               How many men hath this my hand,
               downe caſt from ſtate on hie:
               And hedlong ſhoued with mortal might,
               in darkſome graue to lie?
               I wel remember Priam once,
               when ſtaine at altare ſtone:
               He ſacrificed was to me,
               the guid of Macedone.
               The proud, with fighting hand that put,
               ſo many realmes to flight:
               To whom no like could then be found,
               by force and deadly might.
               Of this my dart, in Babilon,
               ſore wounded downe did fall:
               What ſhould I here the Latine Lordes,
               and Mars his neuewe
                     •
                   call
               To minde, the Lordes of all the earth,
               whoſe valeant vertue plaine:
               Did ioyne theyr rule to Ocean ſeas,
               and fame with ſtarres to raine?
               Could I not when me liſt all theſe,
               
                  
                     •
                  ſlaine to hel throw downe?
               Depriude theyr hands of ſcep
                     •
                  ors 
                     ••
                  ou
                     •
                  
               
               
                  
theyr heades of regall crowne.
               Of wordes their mouthes, of ſight theyr eyes,
               of mouing members all:
               And eke their bodies thus deſtroyde,
               in filthy graue let fall.
               Me feares the Ind, the Arabian,
               the more, the Scithian fel:
               All they whom Aſy and Europe kepes,
               in Affricke all that dwel.
               Both kinde and place are one to me,
               nor times obſerue I than,
               Nor maners way, nor yeares eſteame,
               the good and euil man.
               The wiſe the fooliſh dolt ſhall die,
               the little ſucking Will:
               The yong and old, the fayre and foule,
               with reaſon like I kil.
               And he that yonder I do ſe,
               approching to my land:
               When as his deſtenies permit,
               ſhall feale my deadly hand
               Theſe fearful words with helliſh mouth,
               this churliſh thief out brayed:
               Wherwith my ſenſes all did fayl,
               and I remaind affrayd.
               My bloud therwith forſoke the vaines,
               and left the outward part:
               
                  
And ſhrouded cloſe within my breſt
               to ſuccour there my heart:
               But chiefely when this fearefull fiende
               had ſent the plagues of Hell
               To them that ranged on the earth
               amid the croude to dwell,
               Which knew not of that miſchief great,
               then forth abrode they fly
               And here and there they catche and take
               eche one they can come by.
               Then bodies ſicke on grounde are laide
               and deepe for paine they grone,
               And many there with Sythe in hande
               doth death diſpatch alone:
               And paſſing forth ſhe did reſerue
               till ſlaughter next begunne,
               The liues of all whom Lacheſis
               
               not yet had fully ſpunne.
               Thus trembling all my ioints therwith
               and all amaſed then
               My ſelfe vnto gan ſaye theſe wordes:
               O cares, O vowes of men
               O labours vaine, deceiuing hope,
               O ſeeting ioyes of minde,
               O time that euermore doſt chaunge,
               O fading humaine kinde,
               
                  
How vayne and how vncertayne is
               thys tranſitory life?
               How ſubiect vnto euery harme
               of thouſand euils rife?
               Which outward ſhewes a pleaſant face
               both ſwete and framed wel,
               But inward, O what gall, what griefe,
               what poyſon there doth dwel?
               What are we wretches here but duſt,
               with winde and rayne vpcaſt?
               And like the brittle breaking glaſſe
               and ſhaddowes fading faſt?
               Much like to Roſes that doe ſhewe
               a gorgeous gaudy face
               When funne doth riſe, & when the night
               apears do loſe their grace.
               To day wyth myrth aliue, and foote
               to wormes wythin a while,
               This day in fayre and luſty plight,
               and ſtraight a Carrian vile.
               Alas what doth it vs auayle
               to hourd vp heapes of Gold
               And plate to haue, and clothing riche
               and Gems of price to holde,
               Great realmes & cities ſtrong to guide,
               in houſes fayre to lye
               
                  
Aloft to loke, and think himſelfe
               ful like to Gods on hye?
               If death do al things take from hence
               if we like ſmoke or duſt
               As wretches fade, if that ſo ſone
               our pride, our pompe and luſt
               Do paſſe, and end for euermore?
               as I theſe wordes had ſayd
               With whiſpring voyce my ſelfe vnto
               beholding al afrayd
               With quaking pace this Ghaſtly fiend:
               ſyr Orpheus mother deare,
               Why art thou thus ſhe ſayth aſeard?
               be bolde and of good cheare,
               For feare is ſigne of beaſtly minde,
               vnfyt for men is ſuch,
               What is the cauſe that ſhuld thee moue
               to feare this death ſo much?
               Then aunſwered I: Good Lady mine
               nature doth force me ſo,
               What liuing beaſt hir not abhors
               and ſeekes from hir to go?
               Shee takes from vs both life and goods
               delightes and al at ones
               The corps to nought reſolues, for what
               remaines but duſt and bones,
               
                  
Which bones in tyme returne to duſt?
               in fine all goodly things
               Shee here from vs doth take away
               and chiefeſt miſchiefe brings.
               Whom would not therfore ſuch a beaſt
               and vgley Monſter feare
               Except his heart were made of ſteele?
               Then Ioue hys daughter deare
               With ſmiling lippes began to ſay
               thou runſt beyonde the white,
               And art deceiude with forme of truth
               and ſhadow of that light.
               It is not eaſy for eche one
               the truth it ſelfe to know,
               Thys is the ſelfe ſame bowe that doth
               amid the great woode grow
               With trees of order thick embracde,
               that miſty errors hide,
               Nor euer might thys golden twig
               of many men be ſpide,
               But onely vnto them to whom
               the milke white Doues it ſhow,
               But I of ſeede celeſtiall borne
               the truth doe fully knowe:
               And can it well to thee declare
               if thou to here require.
               
                  
I aunſwerde then: Good lady ſure
               I nothing more deſyre:
               We muſt depart from hence quoth ſhee
               come after me a while.
               And forth ſhe leades, not far from thence
               where Phebus hye did ſmyle,
               With beating beames vpon the hill,
               whoſe pleaſant ſhining light
               Did put the miſty cloudes abrode
               and darkneſſe all to flight.
               Beſyde a ſpring we both ſate downe
               and vnder Laurell ſhade
               Begins my guide with pleaſaunt voice,
               and thus hir wordes ſhe made:
               An Ape (quoth ſhe) and ieſting ſtock
               is man to God in ſkye,
               As oft as he doth truſt his wit
               to much, preſuming hie,
               Dare ſearche the things of nature hid
               his ſecretes for to ſpeake,
               when as in very deede his minde
               is dull and all to weake.
               If he be ignorant of things
               that lye before his feete
               How thinkſt thou thoſe things ſhal he ſe
               which God and nature ſweete
               
                  
Within their boſomes cloſe haue hyd?
               yet al at fingers endes
               This haſty blinde vnhappy foole
               perſuade himſelfe he kendes,
               So much himſelf he beares in hand
               of al your foliſhneſſe
               The ſpring and chiefe this ſelfeloue is,
               A darkneſſe great that cauſeth you,
               to knowe the truth the leſſe.
               Away with this, and better things
               thine eyes ſhal quickly ſpy,
               And thoſe that erſt for good ye thoughtſt
               thou ſhalt for good deny,
               And thoſe that euil now thou thinkeſt
               thou wilt not euill trowe,
               This darkneſſe from thy minde expeld.
               I wil therefore thou know,
               That mortall ſtate is nothing elſe
               but blathers full of winde,
               which here and there on rolling bal
               enforceth fortune blinde,
               To whome if any wytte they had
               ſhould death more welcome be
               Than life, ſyth liuing here all men
               wyth harmes oppreſſed be:
               
                  
And fewe good things they here do vſe
               not full of bytterneſſe
               which true I thinke thou wilt beleue
               when I ſhall here expreſſe
               The goods and ylles of mortall life
               as briefly as I may.
               Theſe two conferd the humaine life
               we playnly ſhall diſplay.
               What thing it is, and whither death
               ought ſo much fearde to be.
               But fyrſt of riches wyll we ſpeake
               which euery land we ſee
               Doth prayſe, doth ſeeke, doth wonder at
               and couet inſtantly:
               I wil endeuour them to blaſe.
               Good Lady then quoth I
               If it you pleaſe, this labour ſpare
               for once and long agoe
               This leſſon learnde I perfectly,
               
                  Minerua taught me thoe,
               Now forward ſhew ſome other caſe,
               not things fore knowen retel.
               The whole eſtate of pleaſure to
               
                  Arete tolde me well,
               So dyd hir ſonne Timalphes eke
               let this thoe paſſed be
               
                  
Therfore, and then declare at large
               what elſe it pleaſeth thee.
               Then aunſwered ſhe, of nobleneſſe
               I ſomthing here wyll ſay,
               For that is one of chiefeſt goodes,
               and at this preſent day
               Al men do ſeke this ſame to haue
               and think they it obtayne
               Although as farre from it they be
               as is the Spaniard playne
               Remoued from the man of Inde.
               
               But what is nobleneſſe?
               Of value what? the truth I do
               intend for to expreſſe.
               But what auayleth it as nowe
               the truth of ought to ſay
               Syth no man wil it nowe beleue
               ſyth al men it denay?
               Some kinde of beaſtes doe flye and hate
               continually the light,
               And rouing ſtyll amyd the darke
               do wander eke by night.
               So, many neyther can, nor loue
               the light of truth to finde.
               For God with nature ſo deuides
               the ſtate of mortall kinde,
               
                  
That vnto him that ſees aright,
               the ſtate of man alone
               Doth ſeme to blaſe the nature full
               of other beaſts eche one.
               So diuers are the thoughtes of man,
               and ſo vnlike they be,
               For many ſtill purſue the darke
               and truth can neuer ſee,
               And on the Sunne do alwayes loke
               wyth watriſh winking eyes,
               A few with open ſight it vewe
               whoſe minde is of the Skies.
               Nobillity therefore as doth
               the common people ſay,
               In heapes of riches doth conſiſt.
               or in the Golden ſway,
               Or elſe in bloud, as oft as he
               bred vp of gentle like,
               Of Belſiers, and of Grandfathers
               can brag and armes define,
               And can his valeant parents prayſe:
               this iudgement I refuſe,
               For ſtyll the common people lye
               as they were wont to vſe.
               A like opinion many haue,
               but fewe haue reaſon playne.
               
                  
If he ſhould be a Gentleman
               that riches doth obtayne,
               Why then good Gentlemen may be
               the Dowrers and their feares,
               The Butchar, Barber, Fiſhmongers,
               and he that horſes reares,
               The ſhepheard, and Jack Baker, and
               the Tanner with his hide,
               The Baud, the Chefe, the Graftex
               and other all beſide
               Of fylthy ſorte, for them among
               ful many riches haue
               And many may, for fortane ofte
               extolles the wretched ſlaue,
               And often ſhe doth throwe a downe
               with hir vnequal hand
               Such as of late ſhe did permitte
               aloft on whele to ſtand.
               At that tyme only Marius was
               therfore, in noble ſtate
               When as a victorer he came
               within the Romaines gate
               (The Counſel and the Commons al
               reioycing much thereat,)
               With crowne of Bayes, & horſes whyte
               ydrawne on Chariot ſat,
               
                  
But after that from thence expelde,
               by wicked Syllaes might,
               A baniſht man to Minturne fled
               lay hid, and wanted light
               In dunge on vile, or when he was
               conſtraynd to beg his bread
               In Africke land, (O lawes of Gods
               O powers to little dread,)
               And bread moſt apt for ditchers tough:
               was not this noble man
               A wretch as now? from him aloofe
               fled nobleneſſe as than
               And ſtrayghtwayes ſhe did eke returne
               when Marius came agayne
               By lot of chaunged ſtarre to Rome:
               their ſentence ſure is vayne,
               If noble ſtate conſiſt in golde,
               of earth doth Golde procede
               Of fraud, of ſtealth, of Uſery,
               we ergo then do ſpede
               Of nobleneſſe by fraude and ſtealth,
               and eke by Uſery,
               O iudgement blinde of common ſort
               of reaſon cleane wythout,
               No Golde can make your noble men
               no riches thus can cloute,
               
                  
For worthier is nobillity
               than any precious good,
               With golde it is not bought nor ſolde.
               But ſome now bragge of bloud,
               And prayſes of their kindred prate
               while they moſt wicked be,
               And of their parents actes they tell
               and olde antiquity,
               Of Grandſirs dedes, and bloudy ſpoyle
               of Unckles winning ground,
               And though ye ſlouthful beaſts thēſelues
               wyth thouſand crimes abound,
               And vertue lacke, yet are they thought
               good Gentlemen to be,
               Bycauſe they come of auncient bloud,
               and noble aunceſtrie.
               Why bragſt thou thus with others acts
               and talkſt thy Parents prayſe,
               When as thou art a ſhame to them
               that liude in alder dayes?
               The Crowe a Swan would ſeeme to be
               and eke the prating Rooke,
               Wyth Pecockes feathers falſe yſtolne
               would like a Pecocke loke,
               But nature doth forbyd, which is
               the ſpring of nobleneſſe.
               
                  
Hereeof comes beaſtly mindes & mindes
               addict to Godlineſſe,
               Of hir procedeth euery kinde.
               The body cauſeth not
               Thee for to be a Gentleman
               but minde procureth that.
               For many Clownes haue bodies bigge
               of fayre and luſty ſtate,
               An ornament is nobleneſſe
               to minde appropriate,
               And certaine force of nature bredde
               which mighty things and hie,
               Deſyreth ſtill, and things of baſe
               eſtate ſettes nothing by,
               By which the minde doth ſtriue aloft
               lyke fiery flame to ryſe,
               And lyke the Herne, to pearce the clouds
               and baſer things deſpiſe
               whoſoeuer can this ſtrength obtaine
               by gift and force deuine
               He ſhall be good and paine full eke,
               of powre in counſell fine,
               And royle ſuſtaine ſomething to doe
               that ſhall ſeeme worthy prayſe,
               That he himſelfe may praiſe deſerue
               
                  
                     •
                  n long and after dayes.
               
                  
But not to al doth nature giue
               a thing of value ſuch,
               Yea vnto fewe ſhe doth it deale,
               whoſe worthy fame ſo much
               For euer liues in peoples mouthes
               long after deathes diſtreſſe.
               But O condicions yll to 
                     •
                  el,
               O wondrous franſineſſe:
               Who would not now be calde & thought
               a Gentleman by name:
               O Knauiſhe ſorte, O creatures vile
               beyond all kinde of ſhame:
               Triumphing names do thee delight,
               and fame abrode to yel,
               Thee glory likes, then why not payne,
               and vertuouſneſſe as wel,
               Contents thy minde that worthyly
               thou mayſt be named than
               A Gentleman, lykes it thee more
               a wiſe and ſobre man,
               Deſeruing not, than of deſert
               accompted for to be?
               Why is not chalke for cheeſe as wel
               delighting vnto thee
               As lying name of Nobleneſſe?
               O vile diſguiſed ſpright,
               
                  
O Monkey, learne to brydle wyl,
               to guide thy minde aright,
               Reaſon to vſe, to flye the things
               that ſhameful are and vayne,
               Haunt righteouſie & know thy ſelfe,
               and labour hard ſuſtayne.
               Fly flouthfulneſſe, wherby thou mayſte
               attayne to vertue hie
               Then mayſt thou wel a Gentleman
               be calde, and worthy lie,
               This, this, is true Nobillity,
               theſe gifts the Gods beſtowne,
               And theſe rewardes to men, vnto
               the vnlearned ſorte vnknowne.
               This way the auncient Romaines went,
               by this their Empire flew
               Aboue the Starres, and when it ceaſte
               then bad their ſtate adew.
               For when as their vnthrifty ſeede
               (their Empire thus encreaſt)
               Did ſpring amid more proſprous yeres,
               they following inward preaſt
               Great riot, playes, and wantonneſſe
               did cleane for ſake the ſtate
               Their fathers helde before, whereby
               did nobleneſſe them hate:
               
                  
And went againe the Heauens to
               till ryot forewarde wrought
               And vice, whereby was Rome at length
               cleane ſackt, and ſpoilde to nought.
               It is not kinred thoe nor bloud
               nor ſpecheleſſe Imagrie,
               Nor heapes of Golde that can thee make
               a Gentleman to be.
               Uertue, vertue, by hir was made
               both Hector and Alcide
               
               Of noble ſtate, by this againe
               right Gentleman was tryde
               That wight to whom the Iliades got
               an euerlaſting name.
               With diuers other worthy ſtates
               of ſtill abiding fame.
               Why bragſt thou that thou doſte deſcende
               of noble ſtocke and bloud?
               Great ſpres thee got, what then, if thou
               thy ſelfe be nothing good?
               If thou a villaine doe defyle
               and ſtaine thy familye
               Then is thy bloud no honour ſure
               but meere reproche to thee.
               Thou art a Monſter, ſhame to them
               from whom thy bloud doth paſſe
               
                  
As when the ſtately Lion ſtoute
               begettes a ſely Aſſe
               Or Ape of Eliphant is borne:
               for nobleneſſe not ſo
               Is left you here by Teſtament
               nor vertue giuen ſo,
               As houſe and land and houſholde ſtuffe.
               this nature cleare hath delt
               Unto thine Auncetours before,
               which yet they all not felt.
               For if thou ſhalt the lyne well ſearche
               from whence thou fyrſt wert twinde,
               Thou ſhalt perchāce of thine own bloud
               full many a cobler finde,
               And many a Carter cleane, and one
               of them thou ſhalt well ſee
               was firſt that cauſde in time thy ſtocke
               ſuch Gentlemen to bee.
               which as it did in time encreaſe
               ſo time ſhall it decay
               For time doth here bring euery thing
               and time takes all away.
               Amongſt vs all what man to come
               of Pompeis bloud is founde?
               Of Ceſars line, or of that man
               to whom did Affricke grounde
               
                  
A ſurname giue by vertue great?
               what man would once haue thought
               That ſuch a ſtately ſtocke as theſe
               ſhould euer come to nought?
               The higheſt houſes often fall
               and come to meere decay:
               Oft comes the little houſe aloft,
               of man the ſrate alway
               Can not endure. The ſkyes aboue
               doe alter mortall things.
               But thou wile ſaye, what kinde of ſeede
               is ſowne, ſuch fruite it brings,
               If I of noble ſtocke doe come
               then ſhall I noble bee.
               Not ſo, for oft a ſquall is borne
               of goodly men we ſee
               And fayre and eke welfauourde men
               yll fauourde knaues haue got,
               Of witty men haue Aſſes come.
               The mind engendreth not
               As doth the corps of fathers ſeede,
               nor in the fathers ſure
               It lyes, to giue the children minde.
               This, nature doth procure.
               What fruite can noble ſeede vp bring
               if ſkyes doe not agree?
               
                  
Moſt true it is that people ſay
               the yeare, not huſbandrie
               Doth giue the corne a good encreaſe,
               if ſee de amyd the grounde
               Though beſt be caſt, and thereto ſtarres
               agreing not be founde,
               There of will eyther Darnell ſpring
               or loſt it els will be,
               Thus noble children for to get
               the father not (we ſee,)
               Sufficient is except the grace
               of Heauens him permit.
               That many baſe, proue noble men
               of this here chaunceth it:
               Who by their vertue and deſertes
               obtayning fame thereby
               Did after noble make themſelues.
               What was the Vergill hie?
               What was the famous Cicere
               
               what Cato wyſe, deuine?
               Or what elſe was Horatius?
               
               all borne of franklynes lyne.
               Of whom did learned Homer come
               whoſe ſyre nor countrey we
               As yet doe knowe? Demoſthenes
               
               hys father tell thou me,
               
                  
And mother of Euripides?
               
               declare the worthy line
               Of Socrates, of him I ſay,
               from whom the ſawes deuine
               Did Plato learne, who counted was
               as then Apollo thought
               The wyſeſt man, hym Maſon got
               that in the Marble wrought,
               And eke a Midwyfe was hys dame.
               We alſo well doe knowe
               That many haue bene crowned Kings
               whoſe parents were but lowe.
               Not ſeldome Emperours haue come
               from base and ſmall eſtate
               To honours hye, what ſayst thou then
               ſyth all degenerate,
               Both horſe & dogges and other beaſtes
               from their long wonted kinde?
               For nothing can long time endure
               but all things worſe we fynde
               In time to be by natures rule
               and law that ſtill endures
               Of deſtenies, till that againe
               an other byrth procures
               Reſtored ſtate, this altering
               the worldes chiefe grace I take
               
                  
This is the hteſt workmans prayse
               of little things to make
               Great matters, and the ample things
               reduce to ſmal eſtate,
               To chaunge the face of euery thing
               and ſtyl to renouate
               Moſt prudently al things in tyme.
               I do not here deny
               But that it is a goodly thing
               to come of parents hye,
               And to be borne of auncient bloud:
               for it is worthy ſure.
               With ayde and good examples eke
               ſuch fathers do procure
               Their children like themſelues to be
               if Fates do not ſay nay,
               Or nature ſtrong of force to much:
               which who ſo ſeekes to ſtay,
               As wel may clime wyth heaped hylis
               in heauens hie to dwel
               Depriuing Ioue of regal ſeate
               as fame to vs doth tel
               When Phlegurs fieldes the tumult felt
               of ghaſtly Giants ſtout,
               How then the great Enceladus,
               
               by force did bring about
               
                  
The great and huge Olimpus hill
               with Oſſa for to lie
               While Oſſa then was ouer preſſde
               with mighty Pelion hie.
               But yet we count not this ynough
               though all therefore thee call
               A Gentleman, and thou art fayre
               and framed well withall
               Of pleaſaunt face, and fareſt well
               and goeſt in proude aray,
               And thereby ſhe weſt thy noble ſtocke,
               for this no man can ſay
               Thou art a Gentleman, but that
               dame Fortunes grace is thine,
               And thou full like a golden puffe
               and like a marble ſigne.
               But who regardes, for now ynough
               it is, to haue the name
               Of vertuous, and of gentlemen,
               eche man to ſeeme the ſame
               Deſyreth more than it to be.
               O Gods, aboue that guide,
               Now names of great magnificence
               and titles hie beſyde
               All men deſyre and arrogate,
               they hunt and it poſſeſſe,
               
                  
The Aſſe a Libarde calles himſelfe
               the Ant a Lioneſſe.
               Who will not gentle, iust, and wyſe,
               well learnde and honeſt now
               Be counttd here? contented well
               with barke alone of bowe
               And outwarde ſhadowes of the thing
               that vnder ſuch a cloke
               His wicked maners he may hide.
               Now name beares all the ſtroke
               And not the thing: well take therfore
               this noble name to thee
               As Paſquill is at Rome and as
               both Thecues and Harlots bee,
               Be noble thou like marble ſigne.
               I put the caſe a Gentleman
               by name and eke in deede
               Thou art, what good ſhall it thee doe,
               hereof what ſhall proceede?
               Thou aunſwere wilt, I ſhal haue praiſe
               and honours ſhall obtaine.
               Are theſe rewardes not to be ſought?
               or ſeme they to be vaine.
               Of nobleneſſe doth vertue breede,
               of vertue prayſe doth ſpring
               
                  
And honor eke. I wil not (for
               it ſeemes no lawful thing)
               With vertue finde a fault: but if
               with cleare and perfect eye
               Thou ſhalt beholde the truth in deede,
               then ſhalt thou playne eſpye
               What grefe & payns this vertue brings
               and bytcer lyfe doth make,
               Though they that are of Stoik ſect
               this for to graunt forſake.
               And fyrſt we wil the mortal parte
               beholde ſo difficil
               That who ſo ſeekes it for to kepe
               muſt needes employ his wil
               Great cares and labours for to take,
               wyth nature warres proclayme,
               And fight he muſt: for nature ſo
               doth minde of man conſtrayne
               Both weake and prone in vice to be
               and vertues enimy.
               O God, ful ſoone in vice eche one
               doth fal ful readily,
               What is the cauſe that nature is
               of man ſo naught and vile?
               Was this thy fault Promotheus?
               
               or doth the fiende beguile,
               
                  
And plant ſuch illes in mortall breſt
               as fame doth playnly tell,
               And cauſeth loue of wickedneſſe?
               The way that leades to well
               Ful hard and ſharp and paynful is.
               who can we good now fynde?
               Of his owne ſelfe not one, who not
               of yll and wicked minde?
               Such one as feare of King or lawes
               prohibites to offend,
               Or ſuch as cannot wel perfourme
               the crime he doth entend.
               It is not eaſy ſure to winne
               and nature put to flight,
               Nor for to ſtay the furies fell
               within the heart that fight,
               Wherfore it needeful is to ſtriue
               from yeres of youthful trayne,
               With dayly flight and labours great,
               the vices to reſtrayne.
               For cuſtome wonted is to break
               the force of nature ſure
               If that by many yeares it hath
               bene vſed to endure.
               Mannes life a warrefare (ergo) is
               eche fielde the enimy
               
                  
Poſſeſſeth ful, al ful of theeues,
               ſuch gynnes who then can fly?
               So many nets who can eſcape?
               for when that fortune ſmyles
               Then creepes in fond laciuiouſneſſe,
               and ſtings with thouſand wiles,
               Faſt by encampeth ſwelling pride
               with ſlouth and gluttony,
               And foliſh boldneſſe ſtrayght doth ryſe
               wyth griefe and feare thereby,
               And 
                     •
                  ayſon fel of enuy and yre
               doth then poſſeſſe his minde.
               When as he liues in great vnhap
               then ſeekes he for to finde
               Al meanes he can away to driue
               his wretched pouerty,
               Then falſe he playes, he robs & ſteales,
               his lack for to ſupply.
               Oh Lord thus wiſe are mortal men
               betwene the cruel rockes
               Of Charibdis and Scilla toſt,
               of both receyue they knockes.
               And while they ſeke theſe yls to ſhunne
               to other ſtraight they fall.
               If valeant they do ſeeke to be
               then daungers dire they ſhall
               
                  
And yrkeſome labours alſo fele
               if vertue they do heede
               That guides the actes of mortal men,
               then them commaundeth neede
               Al ioyes away to driue and put,
               and eke wyth ſaged ſawe
               A life vnpleaſant for to leade.
               If iuſt and righteous lawe
               Seeke any man for to obſerue,
               then profyt muſt away
               This iuſtice is of many prayſde
               and fewe retayne it aye.
               If prudence any man do pleaſe
               he muſt in any caſe
               Beware he put his truſt in none,
               for now in euery place
               Are great deceytes, and perils riſe,
               and wyth ſimplicity
               In fine who that is good receaues
               moſt often harme we ſee,
               He leaſt in ſafety liues and feeles
               more hurt than al the reſt
               For this ſame world a ſtorehouſe is
               where miſchiefes al be preſt,
               All goodneſſe here exiled is
               the ſimple Hares thereby
               
                  
The fearfull Hart, the harmeleſſe gotes
               their bane come ſoneſt by,
               But rare the hunter hunts the Beare,
               amyd the woods ſo hie
               The Lion reaſts, go now thy wayes,
               and leade thou ſimply
               A gentle life wyth innocents,
               that ſoner ſo thou may
               Unto the greedy gaping wolues
               become a grateful pray.
               The world (alas) doth now abound
               with tirants ouer al,
               The ſtrong tread vnder fote the weake,
               the mighty hurt the ſmal.
               The Egles chaſe the fearful Swannes,
               the Haukes doe Throſtles kil,
               And ſary ſimple ſeely doues
               deſtroyes with croked byl.
               The ſpeckled Serpent kylls the Frogs
               and Lizartes vp doth eate
               And in the woods the greateſt beaſtes
               of leſſer make their meate.
               Thou monſters alſo doeſt poſſeſſe
               O ſeas of mighty powre
               That wyth a gaping greedy throte
               the little fyſh deuoure.
               
                  
Not ſea, not earth, not aire is ſafe,
               the enmy euery where
               Is now at hand, it profits ſmal
               to liue vnhurtful here.
               Beholde how good is vertues parte
               that goodneſſe here doth trayne,
               For when ye haue it gotten once
               with labour and great payne
               Amid your enmies al ſhe doth
               you thus vnarmed ſend.
               But thou wilt ſay, ſuch vertuouſneſſe
               do lawes and Kings defend.
               O would to God that this were ſo,
               but now in euery place
               With money lawes corrupted ar
                     •
                  
               
               and eke the Princes grace
               Is pleaſde with precious gifts and ſute,
               the lawes ſet them on rack
               That eyther haue no pens to pay
               or frendſhip elſe do lack.
               The other ſcape as innocents
               howſoeuer iudgement trye:
               Lyke as the fly that ſmalleſt is
               in weaued Cobweb hye
               That Spyder makes remayneth wrapt
               where if a greater ſtray
               
                  
She breakes the nettes, & flyes abrode
               The lawes (as wel doth ſay
               That Barbarous ſage of Scythia)
               
               the ſeely ſoule doth tye
               Where as the rich and mighty men
               burſt through ful eaſily.
               The other parte of vertue, that
               doth ſearch wyth ſtudious payne
               And for to knowe the cauſes hyd
               of nature, doth obtayne,
               And froth to learne, that ſcarce you can
               at any time come by:
               How hard and ful of payne it is
               they knowe that it do try.
               Fyrſt vnder maiſters rule wyth ſtrypes
               they are conſtraynde to liue,
               And there accoumpt of leſſons hard
               with feare and teares to giue:
               Shut vp as it in priſon were
               whereby they may not goe
               Abrode, wythout the tyrants leaue
               although them forceth thoe
               The office of the Campo Clubbe,
               reſtraynt of Blathers might,
               Though hunger pricke, and luſt to play
               wherein they moſt delight.
               
                  
But when the yeares of youthful ſtate
               approching preſent ſtand,
               Then nede requires more diligence
               ſome one then ſekes the land
               Wherein Anthenor laſt arriued
               with raging flouds to ſtriue
               Of Venice gul
                     •
                  e, to Naples elſe
               through Tuſcan ſeas doth driue:
               An other faſt to Perouſe ſayles
               or gayneward Rome do f
                     •
                  eete,
               There from his countrey farre exilde
               wyth many woes to meete,
               With lack of meate and quiet ſleepes
               and want of Venus play.
               On bookes wyth ſtudy for to loke,
               applying day by day.
               For otherwyſe can none be learnd
               except wyth vntrue fame,
               For fewe are learned now in deede
               but many are in name.
               Joyes hurt them much & pleaſures 
                     •
                  ke
               that ſeke for to attayne
               To top of learnings palace hie:
               for this beates back agayne
               Their mindes from treading crabbed pathes
               by which the iourney bends
               
                  
To fayre Mineruaes holy houſe.
               For he that thus intendes
               A name throughout the world to get,
               muſt ſuffer dayly payne.
               Great griefs hereby ſome men wyth yll
               digeſtion eft ſuſtayne,
               Of many whilſte to much they reade
               both ſyght and eyes decay,
               By ſtudy great their ſtomack rawe
               their colour falles away.
               Then leanneſſe cōmes wt wayward age
               nor maruel is it thoe,
               Sith for to knowe the truth doth ſtyll
               beyond mannes nature goe,
               And proper is to God alone.
               Like as the Owle of night
               Can not beholde the ſhining Sunne,
               with clere and perfect ſight:
               So fares the minde of man as oft
               as it intends to flye
               Aloft, to ſearch the ſecret things
               falles headlong ſtrayght from hye.
               Now mortal men dare reache at things
               to Gods appropriate,
               And fooliſher they proue themſelues
               the more they ſeke the ſtate
               
                  
Of things whereof the knowledge doth
               pertaine to them no whit?
               Except that God graūt them from hye
               both reaſon grace and wit.
               But happy are the Aungels all
               for they the worlde doe know
               What thing it is, how much, how great
               whereof it fyrſt did grow,
               The Lorde and maker of the ſame,
               all things that may be thought,
               The Cauſes hid, the priuie ſtrengthes
               whereby all things are wrought.
               This is the lyfe that they doe leade
               and this their pleaſure all:
               On meate or ſleepe they neuer thinke
               to griefes they are not thrall,
               No hope of gaine, no feare of loſſe
               doth cauſe them for to fret,
               But alwayes are of perfect power
               this knowledge true to get.
               Sapience to Aungels doth belong
               and Gods aboue you ſee
               Where onely prudence doth pertaine
               to men that mortall bee
               Whereby they may take good aduiſe
               from harmes and hurts to flie
               
                  
And gather things that may giue ayde
               and liue here quietly.
               What thing to doe and what to leaue
               to man doth prudence ſhowe
               Therefore who wyſheth well to liue
               and eke where thornes doe growe
               With feete vnpricked for to go,
               let him ſeeke hir to knowe.
               Who wyll not hym acount a foole
               that things of greateſt gaine
               Forſaking quite, doth ſeeke to get
               things ſtrange and alſo vaine,
               Who ſekes aboue his reache to roue
               and while he climes to hie
               Comes tumbling downe lyke Icarui
               
               in waters deepe to lye?
               The Tode that late did ſeeke to matche
               the Oxe in drinking vaine
               His panche aſunder burſten thoe
               doth neuer drinke againe:
               while as ſyr Phaeton ſought to rule
               the brideled iades on hye
               with earthly hande, was he not forcde
               in Padus ſtreams to lye
               His life and chariot both reſygnde
               with this vnhappy fall?
               
                  
The prudent man containes himſelfe
               within dame natures wall
               Nor more he dare than hym becomes
               except that God him moues:
               Let mortall men ſuch things regarde
               as mortall men behoues.
               Let them not ſearch beyond their powre
               leaſt if they clyme to hye
               They hedlong fal and proue themſelues
               a laughing ſtocke thereby.
               As if an Oxe woulde vpwarde clime
               abrode his flight to take,
               Or if an Aſſe a Lute would ſounde
               melodious noiſe to make.
               But let it bee that one obtaine
               all artes in memory,
               By which he many bookes can make,
               what good gettes he thereby?
               what iuſt rewarde ſhall conteruaile
               the paines that he endures?
               Fame, prayſe, and glory, thou wilt ſay
               rewarde to him procures,
               Hys name thereby ſhall euer lyue,
               and alwayes eke remayne.
               But 
                     〈◊〉
                   would haue the wel perpende
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   viewe more playne
               
                  
What prayſe, what fame, and glory is.
               For many things we ſee,
               In other ſhapes than in their owne
               tranſformed for to bee
               Which wt a cloke and ſhadowing miſt
               deceiue the minde and eyes.
               Hereof good things are counted nought
               and euill good likewiſe:
               All fooliſhneſſe hereof doth ſpring.
               Ful oft is Copper tride
               In Siluer rounde encloſde to lye,
               oft Golde doth Iron hyde,
               And pureſt ſhelles within containe
               the nuts that rotten bee,
               In ſkinnes of ſheepe full oft to lurke
               the wylie Wolfe you ſee.
               Doe not the gorgeous hangings hyde
               the duſty mouldred wall,
               Where gaping riftes vnſemely ſyt
               and wormes conſuming crall?
               There is a ſharper ſyght that ſees
               what hyd in ſecrete lyes,
               Who vſeth thys ſhall iudge aright
               and wonders ſee with eyes.
               I here demaunde what fame doth help,
               what prayſe? or what renowne?
               
                  
To them that ſleepe? or vnto them
               whom death hath ſtricken downe?
               No more for trouth than doth the harp,
               the deafe vnhearing wyght,
               No more thā gorgeous plays doth pleſe
               the man that lackes hys ſyght.
               Thou anſwerſt here, that they that liue
               and they that here awake
               Reioyce therin, and for the ſame
               no perils they forſake,
               But breath and bloud doe both reſigne
               thys thing for to obtaine.
               Ambition many doth enforce
               and driue to glories gaine
               Much like a ſpurre, and many brings
               to toppes of vertue hye
               With prickes, prouoking ſluggiſhe folk
               by force of ſworde to try
               Some worthy thing, and if they nil
                     •
                  
               
               by force perfourme the ſame,
               That then by wyt they take in hande
               ſome thing of worthy fame.
               Yet is ambition ſure a vice
               and no man will we ſee
               Be called ſo, and they that are
               ambitious, counted bee
               
                  
Both vain and proude of naughty mind
               as once the Romains warre,
               Requeſted of the common ſort
               (reiecting ſhame afarre)
               As oft as they their voices ſought
               with humble ſute did pray
               Good will of Raſcalles for to get
               that they might beare the ſway
               In cōmon welth, their owne things left
               whereby they might go 
                     •
                  et
               Amid the ſtretes with traine of men
               and ſtately countenaunce ſet.
               For hir owne ſelfe is vertue ſought,
               and not for honors ſake,
               Though ſhe of right deſerueth ſure
               chiefe honors for to take.
               No vertue moues the common ſort
               they rather hir deſpiſe
               Wherfore muſt Fortune fauour needes
               and richeſſe eke ſuffiſe.
               Then prayſe renowne and worthineſſe
               will alſo preſent be.
               In euery place if liuing lacke
               doth vertue begge we ſee.
               But yet it forceth not if that
               the donghill cocke doe geſſe
               
                  
A precious ſtone as nothing worth,
               this makes not it the leſſe
               Of value: ſo the vertuous man
               content with eche degre
               Deſpiſing praiſe of common ſort
               regardes not vanitie.
               The face that well preporcioned is
               requires no paynted hewe,
               And of it ſelfe may bare be ſhewde
               the golde that tryed is true.
               But he that vertue is without
               doth counterfait the ſame
               And vnderneth diſguiſed cloke
               procures a vertuous name.
               wherfore if thou doſt well diſcerne
               thou ſhalt beholde and ſee
               This mortall lyfe that here you leade
               a Pageant for to bee.
               The diuers partes therein declared
               the chaunging world doth ſhowe
               The maſkers are eche one of them
               with liuely breath that blow.
               For almoſt euery man now is
               deſguiſed from his kinde
               And vnderneth a falſe pretence
               they ſely ſoules doe blinde.
               
                  
So moue they Goddes aboue to laugh
               wyth toyes and trifles vayne,
               Which here in Pageāts fond they paſſe
               while they do life retayne.
               Fame, glory, prayſe, and eke renowne
               are dreames and profitleſſe
               Bicauſe with chaunce they are obtaynd
               and not by vertuouſneſſe.
               But let it be they graunted are
               to ſuch as worthy be
               Tel me do they the body good?
               no whit I promiſe thee.
               Help they the mind? as much for truth,
               they blowe them vp before
               Depriuing them of ſobreneſſe
               they make them careful more.
               For he that after honour ſeekes
               muſt cap and crouch ful low
               Wyth bribing gifts beſeching men
               his ſimple ſtate to know.
               This is therefore a wretched life
               and ful of buſineſſe,
               With enuy oft it compaſſde is
               and oft in great diſtreſſe.
               But he that vertue true can get
               he liues moſt quietly
               
                  
And happy enough, let him commit
               the reſt to Gods on hye.
               Sufficient honour vnto man
               is to deſerue the ſame,
               For to the vnworthy honour dealt
               you can not honour name,
               To ſuch it is a burden great
               and more a ſcorneful thing
               As when vpon the ſtage a foole
               comes dreſſde vp like a King.
               Now wil I here declare and tel
               of man the miſchieues al
               Aſſone as he from mothers wombe
               with bloud embrued doth cral,
               He ſtrayghtway cries, and weping luck
               him brings to wretched life,
               For ſeing wel by nature ſhewde
               the cares and bytter ſtrife
               Wherwith this mortall life abounds.
               So depe with groning winde
               The marchant ſighes, and feares as oft
               as he doth cal to minde
               The perils great that ſhips are in,
               the force of Pirats hand,
               The boyſtrous windes, & raging Seas,
               with rockes and drenching ſand.
               
                  
Then by and by but ſcarce yet borne
               him binding bonds do holde,
               And ſtraight his tender ioynts and lims
               the ſwadling clothes do folde:
               As tokens yll of bondage great
               that he in time muſt weare,
               For who is free? lawes, kings & crimes
               haue al thing ſubiect here,
               And eche man ſerues for hope of gayne
               or elſe wyth force conſtraynd.
               Al beaſtes as ſone as they are bred
               with lymmes are ſtraight ſuſtaynd.
               And walke abrode immediatly,
               where man is nothing ſo,
               But long his mouth and minde he lacks
               and ſtrength of limmes to go.
               Much like a ſounding picture made
               with crying neuer ſtyll
               Diſturbing al men night and day
               with voyce and waylings ſhrill.
               And when on limmes he ſtiffer ſtands,
               and words can wel pronounce
               Then bound he is, and ſuffers threates,
               then maiſters on him bounce,
               With laſhing ſtrypes, and ofte his ſyre,
               oft mother on him layes,
               
                  
Sometime his brothers buffets flye,
               ſometime his ſtepdames frayes,
               with blowes not few that ſtepſyre giues
               and when this age is paſt
               Then luſty youth approching cōmes,
               and ſtrength increaſeth fair.
               Now from his mouth he ſhakes the bit,
               now councel none he heares,
               He rageth now with furious mode,
               and burnes in youthful yeares,
               With rage and riot runnes he mad,
               and raſh without aduiſe,
               No counſell will he take therein,
               but wytty ſawes deſpiſe.
               No daungers now he doth eſteme
               ſo he the thing obtayne
               Whereto laſciuious luſt him moues
               and force of wilful brayne.
               Neglecting lawes he brawles & fyghtes
               and braynſicke runnes aſtray,
               The greateſt parte of youth are now
               with ſurfets led away.
               A fewe whome feare, or ſhamefaſtneſſe
               or wyſdome doth reſtrayne,
               Their youthfull dayes vprightly leade
               and voyd of vicious ſtayne.
               
                  
Now grauer age and wiſer cōmes,
               and cares with hir ſhe brings,
               And labours hard, then toyles the man
               about a hundred things,
               And al the meanes he can he ſekes
               his liuing to prouide,
               At home he neuer ydle ſtands,
               but here or there muſt ride,
               In towne, or elſe at fielde he works
               with labour great and payne,
               His wife, his children and his men
               wherby he may ſuſtayne.
               Alone for al he careth then,
               he taſtes no daynty meate,
               Nor quier ſleepes, but forward nows
               him driues ambition great
               And giues him rule in common wealth,
               where while for honours hie
               The foole doth gape, he malice doth
               and miſchienes great come by.
               Then wrinkled age wyth hoary hayres
               encrocheth in apace
               The body fades, the ſtrength abates,
               the beauty of his face
               And colour goes, his ſenſes fayle,
               his eares and eyes decay,
               
                  
His taſte is gone, ſome ſickneſſe ſore
               frequenteth him alway,
               Scarce chawes his meate his tothleſſe chaps
               scarce walks wt ſtaffe in hand
               His croked olde vnweldy limmes,
               whereon he ſcarce may ſtand.
               The minde like wiſe doth 
                     •
                  eele decay,
               now dotes he like a childe,
               And through his weake and aged yeres
               is wiſdome quite exilde.
               Eche age therefore his miſchiefe hath,
               but miſchiefes more there be,
               That doth belong to euery age
               to al of eche degree.
               Sometime doth colde to much them vex
               and Snowes that flakey flye,
               And Northern Boreas winde ſo brym
               when Iſe doth hang full hie
               On houſe, and when the waters depe
               congealed ſtyll do ſtay
               Now raging heate of Sommer burnes
               while Sunne doth kepe his way
               Through blaſing breath of Lion fierce,
               the fields depriude of greene,
               The groūd by drythe doth gape for rain
               and moyſture none is ſeene,
               
                  
The hearbs & graſſe their lines reſigne,
               the Pooles and Fennes be dry
               Nowe hunger pricks, nowe thirſte doth greue
               and dearth doth make thē cry:
               Who can in verſe declare to men
               the ſickneſſes that raynes
               In mortal life? the Agues hote,
               the griefe and raging paynes
               That ouer al the body runnes?
               eche member poyſon feeles,
               The hand, the ſyde, the ſyght, is vexe
               and al from head to heeles
               Doth griefe and ſickneſſe ſore ſuſtayne,
               Why do I them reſight?
               Why ſeke I here the Cranes to tell
               in Strimon flouds that light?
               Or number great of Swans that ſwim
               in ſtreames of Troian land?
               Oft times the minde doth loſe his ſtate
               by hearbs or Witches hand:
               Or when at ſacred Ceres feaſt
               ſome fiende in breſt doth lye,
               Or when poſſeſt wyth Bacchus force
               abrode with rage they fiye,
               Though griefe wt yre and couetouſneſſe
               ambition and delight
               
                  
As much the ſenſes do confound
               as doth of wine the might
               Procuring darkneſſe to the minde.
               If truth we therfore ſay,
               Al dronke with beaſtly affects of minde
               are moſt men at this day,
               But fewe (alas) there can be found
               that reele not here and there,
               That can diſcerne what they ſhould do
               wyth beames of eyeſight clere:
               And guide them ſelues by reaſons rule.
               Here of aduiſedly
               One ſayd the number endleſſe was
               of fooles abrode that flye.
               For who nedes not Helleborus
               
               that giues the purging ſtooles?
               But ſeuen wiſe the Grekes could finde,
               among ten thouſand fooles.
               The nurſe and dam of mortal kinde
               dame Folly ſure is thought
               Wythout whoſe grace all thing woulde fade
               and men wold here do nought,
               She Captayne chief are wars begunnè
               and al that thereto long.
               As armour bright, and Targets fayre
               with Ancents eke among,
               
                  
Where colours faire abrode doe blaſe
               wyth ſundry ſort of beaſtes,
               Of hir comes playes and daunces fyne
               and dronken Bacchus feaſtes,
               All nice delightes and wanton geſtes
               wyth ſutes of fonde aray
               From hir doth come, wt heapes of bokes
               compyled day by daye.
               The floudes of trifles fonde doe flowe
               by hir, and euery thing
               Moſt part at leaſt that man here doth,
               proceede from ſuch a ſpring.
               But now the wofull hurts and harmes
               and dolefull deſtenye
               That man ſuſtaines, can none declare
               though eloquent he be,
               Now drownde in fluds here ſinks theron
               and vnto fyſhes great
               The ſymple wretche of ſoule depriude
               becomes a dainty meate.
               An other downe from houſe doth fall
               and ſhewes a tumbling point,
               And through hys haſt receiues a clap
               that crackes hys chiefeſt ioint:
               Or batters ſore his tender limmes
               and ſome the lightnings ſmite
               
                  
Or tempeſt kils, on ſome againe
               the falling houſe doth light,
               And doth vnlode him of his braines,
               ſome fier fries to death,
               Wyth hurtfull herbs or Muſhroms vile
               ſome yelde their vitall breath.
               And ſome when as to faſt he eates,
               while gredy guts doe gripe,
               Doth ouercharge his peece with lumps
               that ſtops hys drinking pipe.
               How many teares the raging beaſt
               with teeth ſomething to keene,
               With Iron ſhoes of Horſes flame
               how many hath bene ſeene
               And many goarde wt wilde Bulls horne
               that roring mad doth bring?
               What ſhuld I ſhew the daungers great
               that man to man doth bring?
               No beaſt he needeth more to feare
               than fellowes of his owne:
               So many knaues and theeues hereby
               and perſons vile are knowne,
               So many witneſſe falſe that beare,
               ſo many vicious ſlaues,
               So many liuing on the ſpoyle,
               and cut throte ſwearing knaues,
               
                  
Diſturbing reaſt of mortall men
               and in none other plight,
               Than doth the merry beaſtes diſturbe
               the Lioneſſe in ſyght.
               He with hys tongue procureth harme,
               he with hys ſworde doth fray,
               The greateſt ſort with craft doth hurt,
               one robbes in open way,
               An other filcheth priuily:
               ſome ſort there alſo be,
               That vnder cloke of frendſhip ſtrong
               or of Hypocriſye,
               Such men deceiue as they doe knowe
               to be of credite light.
               All men almoſt (O wicked kinde)
               in others harme delight,
               The brother ſcarce may brother truſt,
               eche man his friende muſt feare
               The father of hys ſonne in doubt
               doth liue, ſure Hell is here,
               The furies and the ſtinking flouds
               that lye in Lumbo lake
               The gaping grenning Helhound wood
               and all that Hell doth take.
               Sleepe only peace to man doth bring
               amid his fleering life,
               
                  
Nothing than this (if dreames fray not)
               more ſweete or voide of ſtrife:
               For cares and labour it extles,
               and with his pleaſant wings,
               The wretched body reſting brodes,
               and ſweere eſtate him brings.
               Yet nature ſeemes thys reſt to hate
               and ordainde hath hereby
               The ſtinging Gnat and byting Flea,
               to vexe continually
               With twinging prick this pleaſant ioy,
               whereby both night and day
               Might miſchiefes euer preſent be.
               More better farre away
               Therefore is death, than picture hys,
               For who ſo once the ſeas of lyfe
               in ioyfull bote hath paſt,
               And in the quiet hauen fayre
               his Anker ſafe hath caſt,
               With mery heart doth laugh to ſcorne
               the blaſtes of raging wyndes
               With tempeſts black, and Leucoths hed
               which floury Garlandes byndes,
               Doth honor much, and Melic
                        •
                     rt
               
               with giftes he doth ſalute,
               
                  
And ſafe amid the ſhore he ioyes
               with playes of ſundry ſute.
               Death endes al pain, al bonds doth loſe,
               death cauſes feare to flie,
               And daungers all by death are forede
               to reſt eternally.
               And as no griefe nor paine thee vext
               before thy Syre thee got,
               So ſhalt thou feele no griefe nor paine
               when death hir dart hath ſhot.
               Who can conceiue the times as yll
               he felt hys byrth before?
               Or iudge of dayes he neuer ſaw
               or ſhall ſee neuer more?
               Or who will once diſpraiſe the night
               as wretched, nought or yll
               Wherein poſſeſt of deadly ſleepe
               he ſenſeleſſe lay ful ſtill?
               For what is death continuall ſleepe.
               what ſleepe? for ſmall time death.
               But many thinke ſoules neuer die
               but after loſſe of breath
               The dead they ſay doe liue againe,
               and fleſhe forſaking quite
               As cockels from the ſhell outdrawne
               to Pluto take their flight:
               
                  
And downwarde hedlong faſt they run
               in kingdome blacke to ſayle.
               There faine they woods of Mirtel trees
               where wofull louers wayle.
               There riuers run wyth flaming flouds
               and dreadfull Monſters bee
               That poyſō fome, with gaping throtes,
               theyr places may you ſee
               Of diuers forme, where Infants crye,
               and where the gilty Ghoſtes
               The furies fierce of Hell doe burne,
               and whip faſt lynckd to poſtes,
               And where the pleaſant fieldes doe lye
               with goodly greene arayed,
               As due to bleſſed men that here
               their pagents wel haue playde.
               But other now ſay otherwiſe
               and ſoules they graunt remayne
               But thoſe that wel in earth haue liude
               with ſtarres aboue ſhall rayne,
               And they againe that lyke to beaſtes
               haue ſerude licencious minde,
               And God neglect, in forme of beaſtes
               to liue are all aſſinde:
               In brutiſhe ſhape to wander long
               by iudgement iuſt are made,
               
                  
Til time that purged front their crime
               they come to hygheſt grade.
               Which things in deede if they wer true
               death fearefull might be thought,
               Or at the leaſt a better lyfe
               and voide of ſinne be ſought:
               For to the iuſt hereby is got
               the ioyes and pleaſures true,
               Wheras the wicked ſhall receiue
               their paines and merits due.
               But whether that the deade doe liue
               or that they nothing bee
               And ſoule with body hath hys ende,
               pertaineth not to mee.
               For I mee thinks haue ſayd ynough:
               enquire of Siſter mine,
               Whom Grecians, wyſedome euer call,
               theſe thoughtes ſhe doth defyne,
               And alwayes ſearcheth ſecrete things
               and verity doth ſhowe,
               Hir teaching, well thou maiſt attaine
               the ſtate of ſoules to knowe.
               Except it ſerue to tell thee that
               death is not to be dred,
               At leaſt vnto the iuſt that here
               a righteous life haue led:
               
                  
For eyther quiet reſt they haue
               in ſleepe that ſtill doth laſt,
               Or happy elſe they ſhall receiue
               rewardes for vertue paſt.
               wherfore go to liue Godly now,
               put vice from minde away,
               So death ſhall ſeme but light to thee
               and graue thee not ſhall fray.
               But now in minde theſe words reuolue
               both ſpeake and think this thing:
               What hurt ſhall death to mee procure
               what loſſe ſhall graue mee bring?
               No whit for trouth. what will it haue?
               of richeſſe mee depriue.
               But richeſſe then I ſhall not neede,
               for nothing then I ſtriue.
               But richeſt then I may be calde,
               for welthyeſt is the wight
               Not that doth moſt poſſeſſe, but he
               that lacketh leaſt in ſyght.
               Gold, ſiluer, precious ſtones, and lands,
               with ſumptuous fyne aray
               With other lyke, I will deſpiſe,
               as things that I not way:
               Nor pleaſure paſt ſhall greue me then
               no more than greueth beaſtes
               
                  
Swete pleſant ſparkling wines to lack
               or Cuſtards fyne in feaſtes
               The thinges that no man doth deſyre
               what if they not be had?
               But friends & children ſweete to leaue
               wil make (thou ſayeſt) men ſad.
               why ſhuld this thing me greue ſo much,
               were it not hurtful more
               If in my life my frends ſhould dye
               and I lament therfore
               Continually? as ſome do write
               how for Antilochus
               
               Syr Neſtor wept, as for his ſonne
               (whome ſlewe the King Turnus
               
               While he the Troians armies helpt)
               
                  Euandre liude in woe.
               I go before, and what for this
               they all ſhall after goe,
               When God appoynted hath their time,
               and me agayne ſhall ſee:
               If ſoules be ought as we beleue,
               as Chriſt declares they be.
               Well whatſoeuer that it is
               death yll I may not call
               Bycauſe it riches takes away
               and pleaſaunt ioyes wythall.
               
                  
For vnto vs theſe are but lent,
               the vſe doth nature giue,
               And not the thing it ſelfe ſhe deales
               to mortal men that liue.
               Sith nothing then to me belongs
               to death I wyl reſigne
               Al other things that here I haue
               as nothing ſure of mine.
               What if I others goods do leaue?
               wherfore ſhould I lament
               If nature nowe do aſke agayne
               the things that ſhe me lent?
               I naked came into this world
               and naked wil I out.
               For this world is an Inne where hoſtes
               of men a wondrous roure:
               Who for a time do vſe the foode
               that layes before their face,
               Their hoſte and therewithal doth ſay,
               ſyrs take and eate apace,
               Not for deſertes of you we giue
               theſe things, but of good wyll
               Theſe pleaſant diſhes here we ſet
               therewith your ſelues to fyll
               Untill ſuch time as I thinke good
               to byd you hence departe
               
                  
And ſay from vp my table riſe,
               now eaſe with ioyfull harte,
               But when the houre laſt ſhal come
               wherein I byd you go,
               With willing minde obey me then,
               and place reſigne you thoe
               To other geſts that here ſhal ſyt,
               let them reioyce a while
               wyth diſhes theſe: who wyll repine
               (except he be to vile,
               Lack wyt, or elſe vnthanckfull be)
               hearing theſe wordes to go
               From others dores, or elſe wyll ſyt
               while he commaundeth ſo?
               But he ſhal cry come forth you Knaue
               and thruſt him out by the eares
               And yll apayd he forwardes goes,
               wyth woful weping teares.
               Wherfore ſhould I if he do call
               that all things here doth guide
               
                  
                     •
                  epine to go from hence, or ſeeke
               in wretched life to byde
               As many do? nor fyt it is,
               nay willing hence I go
               And leaue this fylthy world I wyll,
               where thouſand miſchieues flowe,
               
                  
Where fayth is none, where godlineſſe,
               where iuſtice none doth dwell,
               Where peace and quietneſſe is fled,
               where vices beare the bell,
               Where brother ſekes the brothers blud,
               where ſonne the father hates,
               Where diſcorde euermore doth raigne,
               and guile in maried mates.
               No man there is, at leaſt but rare,
               who (if he can) not ſteales,
               Who robbeth not, who doth not fayne,
               and who not falſiy deales.
               That well this world may now be calde
               of theeues a gaping den.
               Loe, Kings and Biſhops proude beſyde,
               by name of Godly men
               The commons poore do powle and pyl,
               and Citizens do ſhere
               And ſimple innocents deſtroy.
               what ſhould I recken here
               The horedomes great committed now?
               all flowes with vice we ſee,
               The naughty act do yong men vſe,
               and cloſe miſuſed be,
               Who plants not hornes in neighbours heads?
               the balde religious frye
               
                  
Who ſhould be chaſt, abrode with hores
               or cloſe wyth boyes do lye:
               To widdowes graue or tender maydes,
               the holy prieſtes do crepe.
               And ſome within their kinſfolkes bed
               haue great delight to ſlepe.
               Some ſlaues wt beſts themſelues defile:
               the fieldes and groue of tree
               And euery towne is now a ſtewes.
               And harmes that inſtant be
               And daungers great that haps to men,
               and labours great and ſore,
               And al the ſuperſticious ſorte
               of falſe religious lore.
               What nede we ſubiectes now to be?
               ſyth (O the ſhameful ſtate)
               Unwytty and groſſeheaded fooles
               and they that learning hate
               (To whome the dice, and Dogs to kepe
               with byrdes of rauening kinde
               And horſes ryde, with other toyes
               is all their chilediſh minde)
               Do Scepters holde, and peoples guide,
               and gouerne Cities ſtrong?
               Here of ſuch errors vp do ſpring
               with foliſhneſſe among,
               
                  
Hereof ſo many vices breede
               if this thou calleſt to minde
               Thou ſhalt not feare this fooliſh worlde
               and nought, to leaue behinde:
               Yea thou wilt count it wel that once
               
                  Calanus and his feares
               Did bring to paſſe, who ſlewe thēſelues
               to ſcape theſe wretched yeares
               And ſtaying death with hand did haſte,
               nor longer would preſerue
               The dying Corps, nor wretched fleſh
               with labour long to ſerue.
               And if religion ſayd not nay
               and lawes of Plato hie
               And GOD himſelfe, I would perſuade
               thee forthwith for to die,
               And wicked chaunce and wretched earth
               to leaue as vayne and nought,
               Not wine as wine deſyred is
               but wine and good is ſought.
               So life as life is nothing worth
               if goodneſſe lack we ſee,
               If it be naught, as wine corrupt
               let it deſpiſed be.
               For life it ſelfe we nede not wyſh,
               nor fled it ought to be.
               
                  
The worme, the flye, and euery ſtone
               and barke of euery tree,
               And euery vile and little thing
               doth life in it poſſeſſe,
               No kinde of thing deſyred is
               where wanteth pleaſauntneſſe.
               If it be not both life and good
               I ſee no cauſe whereby,
               It ſhould be wiſht or may be loued.
               Therefore who feares to dye
               Is but a foole ſince he deſires
               ſuch hurt and harme to byde
               Both of the body and the minde
               with labours long beſyde
               Before he would al kinde of grieues
               with fleſh from him expel,
               And euer in tranquillity
               and perfect reſt to dwell,
               Or leauing members here behinde
               to liue for euermore,
               Where he ſhal want no kinde of thing
               nor ſorrow feele nor ſore,
               And with the ſaincts togither there
               about the world to flye,
               More ſwift than al the windes that be
               beholding things on hye.
               
                  
Except the dregs of vice him ſtay
               and force him ſtyll to dwell
               Beneath in Corners deepe of earth
               amyd the raygne of Hell.
               When thus this Lady fayre had ſayd
               ſhe roſe and ſtode by me
               And on my head (refuſing I)
               ſhe put the Laurell tree,
               And thence departing forth ſhe flewe
               where ſhining ſtarres we ſee.
            
            ¶ Explicit media Pars.
         
         
            
            
            
               Libra, The ſeauenth Booke.
            
               
                  MY muſe a lof
                     •
                  , raiſe vp thy ſelf
               and vſe a better flite:
               Moūt vp a hie, & think it ſcorn
               of baſe affayres to write.
               More great renoune, and glory more,
               in hautye matters lyes.
               Uiew thou ye Gods, and take thy courſe
               thorowout the ſtarrye Skyes.
               Where ſpring time laſtes for euermore,
               where peace doth neuer quayle,
               Where Sunne doth ſhine continuallye,
               where Light doth neuer fayle.
               Clowde cauſer Southwinde none there is
               nor boyſtrous Boreas blowes,
               But mylder breaths ye Weſtern windes
               where ſweete Ambrozia growes.
               Take thou thys way, and yet ſomtimes
               downe falling faſt from hye,
               Now vp, now downe, wyth ſundry ſort
               of Gates aloft go flye.
               And as ſome hawty place he ſeekes
               that couets farre to ſee,
               
                  〈1 page missing〉
               
               
                  
The cauſe is fyrſt before the effect
               the workman worke aboue.
               The perfect thing, bicauſe it doth
               eche parte in it containe,
               And nothing lacks, is ſtronger farre
               of greater force againe.
               Therfore it makes, cōmaunds, & moues,
               and ſo by chalenge due
               The cauſe and Auctor eke of all
               it may be tearmed true.
               But otherwyſe thunperfect thing
               that maymde can not conſiſt,
               Is ouercome, and moue it muſt
               euen as the perfyte liſt.
               It doth obey and not commaunde,
               and therfore muſt be named
               The effect, and eke the framed worke,
               and not the thing that framed.
               So farre behinde it euer ought
               the perfect thing to goe.
               For if vnperfite were the ſpring
               from whence all thing doe 
                     ••
                  oe,
               It were but vile and nothing wrought
               therof ſhould perfect be,
               As alwayes of thunperfect Arte
               vnperfect worke we ſe.
               
                  
Wherfore beginnings more than one
               no reaſon forth can finde,
               Bicauſe there is not to be knowne
               but one of perfect kinde.
               From which, the neuer fayling courſe
               and order of all things
               Doth come, as from the Union fyrſt
               eche other number ſprings.
               Beſydes it pure and ſyngle is,
               that mixtures all hath made:
               For nothing can compounded be
               but ſymples fyrſt is had.
               For fyrſt it nedefull is alone
               the ſymples to be tryde,
               And then in mixture all in one
               compounded to abyde.
               Therfore no principall there is
               but one, as I haue taught:
               Which ſymple in degree we iudge,
               and pureſt muſt be thought.
               Whom if we think not for to liue,
               in 
                     •
                  rror great wee fall:
               If he liue not, how liues the reaſ
                     •
                  ,
               ſynce by him lyue we all?
               Doubtleſſe he li
                     •
                  es, and wiſedome hath,
               or elſe in order dewe,
               
                  
How could he frame ſuch goodly ſightes
               except he all things knew?
               Nor doubt we muſt, but needes cōfeſſe;
               with mouth and eke with heart,
               Him to be good: Can he be ill
               of whom eche good is part?
               Can bitter 
                     •
                  reames at any time
               from ſweeteſt fountaine runne?
               Or can the riuers pleaſant be
               of bytter ſpring begunne?
               For eyther nothing muſt be good,
               or good muſt he be thought,
               That is the ſpring of all the reſt,
               by whom the worlde was wrought.
               Hym men doe call by diuers names,
               but we that Latine wright
               Doe call him God, and more we ſaye
               that Jupiter he hight.
               Who, fynce he is the firſt that was,
               and maker of eche one,
               Liues of himſelf both good and wyſe,
               receiuing ſtate of none.
               But all by him their ſtates enioy,
               who may loſe that they haue,
               Whenſoeuer he lyſt for to reſtraine
               the thing that fyrſt he gaue.
               
                  
As Kyuers muſt leaue of theyr courſe
               when ſprings their ſtremes deny,
               And yet it followes not therfore
               the ſpring it ſelfe be drye:
               (For of it ſelfe it yeldes the ſtreame
               and hanges at no mans tayle:)
               So God doth of himſelfe conſyſt,
               and therfore cannot fayle.
               If altogither periſhe ſhould,
               yet fayles not he therfore,
               For what conſyſteth of it ſelfe
               muſt laſt for euermore.
               When onely of himſelfe he ſ
                     •
                  ayes,
               and nedes no helper by,
               When as by force he cannot quayle
               and wyll not willingly.
               He is all and whole, the reſt but part,
               yet in no ſuch degree,
               That of thoſe partes he pureſt ſhoulde
               himſelfe compounded bee.
               But by his vertue he is all,
               bicauſe he fyrſt did frame
               The worlde ſo wide, and all things elſe
               conteyned in the ſame.
               All things that liue and voide of lyfe,
               all things that doe appere,
               
                  
And hidden ſyghts he only made,
               and doth preſerue them here.
               In this wyſe therfore is he all
               as ſeede is all the tree,
               Wherof ſprings vp the mighty boole
               whoſe braunches ſhadowers bee.
               Some doubt if God a body haue,
               and thus doe they beleue,
               That nothing voide of body is
               that ſenſe cannot perceue.
               And therefore now we will attempt
               the trouth therof to ſee,
               Of quantitie and qualitie
               all bodies needes muſt bee.
               For by theſe two ſtate ſenſible
               the body doth receiue:
               Take theſe away what doth remaine
               that ſenſes may perceiue?
               All quantities and qualities
               compounded euer bee,
               And God of nature ſyngle is
               as late I tolde to thee.
               Adde more to thys that bodyes all
               of forme and matter bee.
               Nor God can be of ſuch a power
               as boundes may comprehends,
               
                  
When he abides for euermore,
               leaſt ſo the worlde ſhould ende.
               Nor body none is voide of boundes,
               but all are meaſurable.
               The compaſt forme hath his precinets,
               whoſe faſhyon is moſt laudable.
               So hath the Square and Triangle,
               and all the ſhapes that bee.
               This reaſon proues no body is
               but it may meaſurde bee.
               And thus I proue, this body here
               in equall partes deuide
               Whereof the halfe let A poſſeſſe
               and B the other ſyde.
               I here demaunde if A as much as B
               
               can doe? or if theſe twaine
               Be infinite? ſo one ſhall ſerue,
               and thother ſhalbe vaine.
               If both haue power determinate
               the whole muſt haue the ſame.
               But who ſo ſeekes the vnbounded thing
               of bounded partes to frame,
               Shall proue vnwyſe and thus enſewes
               the maker chiefe of all
               No body hath. But ſome there be
               perchaunce that aunſwere ſhall
               
                  
God is a body infinite.
               hut this doe I deny:
               For ſo ſhould he eche place fill vp,
               and leaue none voide: wherby
               The reſt ſhould neuer be containde.
               ſo worlde there ſhould be none,
               Nor we remaine, nor any thing
               ſaue he himſelfe alone.
               Beſydes, ſynce body here in life
               is of more noble ſtate
               Than ſenſſes Corſe, we muſt not doubte
               but lyfe of hygher rate,
               Than Careaſſe is. But here I aſke
               if life a ſubſtance be?
               If not, then ſubſtance were more vile
               and of more baſe degree,
               Than that which ſubſtance is without.
               and if you bring in this,
               In ſuffring ſuch abſurditie
               the ſcholemen all will hiſſe.
               But if that lyfe a ſubſtance be,
               then body is but vaine,
               Since of it ſelfe is can conſyſt
               and ſeuered 
                     〈◊〉
                   remaine.
               And why ſhould 
                     •
                  od a 
                     •
                  ody take
               ſynce he at libertie
               
                  
Doth beſt enioy his ſtate and hath
               no ſuch neceſſitie?
               It is a thing ſuper fluous eke,
               by which the lyfe encloſed
               As priſoners like is barde the place
               wherto it is beſt diſpoſed.
               Therefore that chiefe Almighty Prince
               eternall good and wyſe
               No body hath. Now will I ſhewe
               why many doe deſpyſe
               Thys reaſon, and doe thinke it vaine.
               the cauſe hereof doth ſpring,
               That drounde in bodies groſſe, & blinded ſenſe,
               they know no other thing
               But bodyes here. as through a glaſſe
               wyth any colour ſtainde
               Whoſoeuer lookes, ech thing ſhal iudge
               of colour that is fained.
               Yet muſt we know, and doutleſſe think,
               that diuers things there be,
               That eyther voyde of bodyes lyue,
               or of ſuch pure degre
               Their bodyes are, that neyther eyes
               of ours can them beholde,
               Nor ſenſe diſcerne, and ſo more worth
               than ours a thouſand folde.
               
                  
Which thus perchaunce may proued be.
               all groſſe and wayghty things,
               How much the more of earthly drofse
               annexde to them forth brings,
               So much more baſe and vyler be
               than that which ſeemes to flowe
               Of fyne and purer matter wrought,
               all mettals this doth ſhowe.
               For looke when as by feruent heate
               of Fyrie flames they frye,
               They ſtraightwaies melt, & baſeſt parts
               wherein moſt earth doth lye,
               As nothing worth, falles out to droſſe.
               the pureſt and moſt fine,
               With better ſounde and better ſhape
               before the eye doth ſhine.
               So Bread is beſt of pureſt meale
               wherof the Maſters eate,
               Of groſſer is the ſeruants foode,
               the worſt is Maſtyues meate.
               So Water, Wyne, and Oyle wyth like
               the worthyeſt of them bee,
               Such as moſt cleare and ſubtill ſeeme
               and lyghteſt in degree.
               So meate the baſer and groſeſt part
               by ſyege away doth fade
               
                  
The fineſt part remaines, wherof
               Fleſhe, Bloud, and ſtrength is made.
               What is the cauſe that common ſtones
               ſo rude and ruſty lye?
               Where marble, & the precious gemmes
               doe glyſter in the eye.
               Nought elſe, but that in one of them
               leſſe droſſe of earth is founde,
               In thother, groſſe and heauy moulde
               hath ſyght and value drounde.
               Therfore more foule, and baſer farre
               ſuch things are indgde to be,
               Wherein moſt earth remaines, wherby
               they are calde of leſſe degree.
               As droſſe we take leſſe golde to be,
               or golde of baſer myne
               We can not call ſo iuſtly Golde
               as that already fyne.
               For of all Elaments the earth
               the vyleſt hath bene thought.
               And as the rubbiſh of the re
                     ••
                  e,
               caſt by, when they were wrought
               Therfore the wyſeſt workman fyrſt
               dyd cauſe it lowe to lye,
               That diſtant farre it ſhould remaine
               remoued from the ſkye.
               
                  
And thick in ball he caſt it rounde,
               more leſſe and ſmall to bee,
               That ſaints might haue more plain proſpect
               that liſte the world to ſee.
               For when God had dect the world
               wyth Starres in trym araye,
               What droſſe remaynde he bade ye winds
               to clenſe and ſwepe awaye.
               Then in with haſty courſe they ruſhe
               their Lordes awarde to do,
               The Northwinde blowes ye Southwind huffes,
               the Weſt, and Eaſt ſet to.
               With ſtriuing blaſts they ſwepe ye fieldes
               and rounde in heape they caſt
               Whatſoeuer they finde, conſtraining it:
               the earth is framed and lefte.
               Which, baniſhed from the heauens hye,
               ſtraight downe to center fell,
               No place more farre nor baſe appeares
               where nygher ſhee might dwell.
               Beſyde, of weaker force it is,
               and eke of ſmaller power,
               Than all the reaſt of Elaments are,
               and febleſt of the fower.
               For if by feruent heate of Sunne
               it be conſtrained to gape,
               
                  
Or pearced with Plow, it cannot ioyne,
               nor take his former ſhape.
               The waters if they parted be
               doe ſtraight returne in one,
               And voide of all diuiſyon ſemes
               as if there had bene none.
               So doth the ayre, and fier eke,
               if theſe deuided be,
               At fyrſt they ioyne againe, ſo that
               no ſigne of hurt you ſe.
               And why? bicauſe they are more pure,
               and perfect in degree,
               And of their proper force alone
               they alwayes moued bee.
               But now the earth vnweldy thing
               of nature euer ſtayes,
               And more, is cauſe that ſundry things
               can moue no kinde of wayes.
               For where moſt earth habounds, moſte waight
               is found, ſuch things apere
               Leſſe apt to moue, the light more quick,
               and vnto life more nere.
               For lyfe in euery thing is cauſe
               whereby they moue alone.
               It nedes no profe the ſenſeleſſe Corſe
               doth ſtirre as doth a ſtone
               
                  
Since things in lyfe haue chief eſtate
               (for life excelleth all)
               Doubtleſſe the light and mouing things
               the chiefeſt we may call.
               They erre therfore, that doe beleue
               no other things to be.
               But ſuch as ſenſes groſſe perceiue,
               and eyes apparant ſee.
               For what more ſubtyle is than ayre,
               what leſſe is felt or ſeene?
               By which haue many thought it voide
               as no thing to haue beene.
               It is but ſ
                     •
                  ight: what tho? yet hath
               it here a ſubſtance ſure
               And body is, of foure chiefe, one,
               than earth or ſtreame more pure,
               And therfore placed in hyer ſeate.
               for things approching nere
               To ſkyes, and bleſſed ſtarres aboue,
               of chiefeſt ſtate appere.
               Beſydes, are not the wyndes ſo pure
               that no man can them ſee?
               Yet nothwithſtanding none there is
               but knowes that windes there bee.
               Which when they haue a ſunder burſt
               the barres of Eolus ſtrong,
               
                  
The monſtrous Hills by force do ſhake,
               downe torne the trees along
               Doe lye, the Seas from chanell deepe
               are toſſed aboue the ſhoares,
               The cloudes are cauſed, the lightninge flaſhe,
               the dreadfull thunder reares.
               Synce thus their force doth rage thinkſt thou
               that ſubſtance they doe lacke?
               Bicauſe thou canſt not them beholde,
               or in thy handes them take.
               To iudge as ſenſes leade is fonde:
               for oftentimes the eyes
               In taking one thing for an other▪
               
               thys error plainely tryes.
               As if into the clereſt ſpring
               a ſtaffe moſt ſtraight be thruſt,
               The eye ſhall iudge it to be Croked
               though it be neuer ſo iuſt.
               As if a boate rowe nere the ſhore
               the ſhore ſhall ſeeme to flye
               And ſtyll the boateis thought to ſtay,
               the ſenſes therfore lye:
               Which many times deceiued be,
               and changed ſundry wayes
               By age ſometime or ſyckneſſe▪ great
               the force of them decayes:
               
                  
Nor euery man hath them alike,
               ſome thinkes it fayre and meete,
               The thing another ſayth is fowle,
               and ſome do count it ſweete,
               That others iudge of bitter taſte:
               the ayre is colde ſayth he,
               Another ſayth the wether is hote,
               thus ſenſes diuers be
               In diuers bodies, diuers ſeemes,
               deceaued ſometyme by chaunce,
               As when the drunckardſees two lights
               for one, and ſtooles to daunce,
               The wine in troubling of his eyes
               doth much diſeaſe his ſight,
               The ayre beſydes deludes the ſenſe,
               ſometymes it ſemeth bright,
               Now darke, now thick, now moyſt, now dry,
               wherby we often geſſe
               The Sunne as, red as bloud to be,
               the Mo
                     •
                  e now bygge, now leſſe.
               Hereoſ doth alſo come to paſſe
               when one aloud doth cry
               Deceauing foliſh cares a doyce
               doth ſeeme to aunſwere nye.
               By this and other meanes they erre,
               but reaſon is more ſure.
               
                  
Who findes amongſt a thouſand toyes,
               the certayne truth and pure.
               This reaſon is moſt deare to him
               that wiſdome doth retayne,
               Whoſe minde is of a liuely force,
               and ſprite of heauenly vayne.
               The blunt and doltiſh common ſorte,
               wyth blinde and bleared eyes,
               Doth not hir ſee, hereof doth fault,
               vayne hope, and fanſy riſe.
               This reaſon guides the wyſeſt men,
               Opinion leades the lowte,
               Let vs the ſteppes of reaſon 
                     •
                  read,
               and ioyle hir wayes about,
               This reaſon may be calde the Sunne
               that moues in order iuſt,
               By which alone from brutſh kinde
               of beaſtes we differ muſt.
               The dark and dim vncertayne Moone,
               Opinion may be named,
               But what doth reaſon byd me write▪
               
               that many creatures framed,
               Aliue there are that we can not
               by ſenſes vnderſtand:
               For if that God ſhould not haue made,
               wych hye and glorious hand,
               
                  
More noble creatures than the ſtate
               of fading mortall kinde
               He had not then deſerued ſuch prayſe
               as is to hym aſſinde,
               Unperfect eke had bene hys raine
               for vnderneth the kinde
               Of man the wilde and ſaluage beaſtes
               conſyſt of brutiſhe minde,
               To ſleepe and feede, addicted all:
               and if he had not framed
               No better things than here we ſee
               the worlde might well be named
               A folde of filthy feeding flocks
               with thornes and donge ſet out
               What ſhould we then this God account
               a mighty heardman ſtoute
               But he created man beſydes:
               now ſure a goodly thing:
               Was this hys beſt? is thys the power
               of that Almighty king?
               But let vs trye if thys be true
               if we may credite giue:
               It is not good nor reaſon wyll
               that we ſhall thys beleue.
               For what is man? a fooliſhe beaſt
               a creature full of ſpight
               
                  
And wretched farre aboue the reaſt
               if we ſhall iudge vpright.
               Who is not of hys nature nought?
               the way to vice is wyde,
               Wherin the feete of mortall men
               continually doth ſiyde:
               No warning, lawe, no payne, nor feare
               can cauſe them for to ſtaye.
               Againe the path of vertue is
               a ſtraight and painefull way,
               Wherin but fewe doe vſe to walke
               and them you muſt conſtraine.
               Who is wyſe? the woman? or the childe?
               or all the Coblers trayne?
               The moſt (alas) are fooliſh doltes
               in darkenes blinde we tread,
               And fonde affection beares the ſway
               by which we all are lead.
               For none at all or fewe there be
               (whom he that guides the ſkye
               Hath choſen to himſelfe alone)
               thys reaſon ruled by.
               For who can now beholde or how
               may leyſure we obtaine,
               Wherby we might ſearche out ye trouth
               that ſecrete doth remaine?
               
                  
Cares pulles vs back: the greateſt part
               of lyfe in ſlepe doth waſt.
               The reſt doth payne or ſyckneſſe let,
               or pouertie doth taſte,
               And ſtouthfulneſſe ſometime doth hurt
               and pleaſure oft annoy,
               Hereof ſprings fooles & wyſedome eke
               by this we not enioy
               For ſhe with great continuall toyle
               and ſtudy long is got,
               And doth require a quiet minde
               that troubles hinder not
               The troubles of the ſtate of man
               (if I remember well)
               Among my bookes the ſyrt I think
               before doth plainely tell:
               Of miſchiefe, griefe, and fooliſheneſſe
               alas this is the place,
               And darkſome denne of Hell wherein
               all liue in wretched caſe
               But yet the groſſe and common ſorte
               doe neuer waye this thing,
               But in the middeſt of all their toyle
               the foolyſhe knaues doe ſing
               And gaping laffe doe not perceiue
               their owne calamitie,
               
                  
But are when paine doth plague them ſore
               as ioconde as a Pye,
               And ſodainely doth all forget
               ſo that ſome ſweeteneſſe fall
               Hereby doth come forgetfulneſſe
               that ryds them cleane from all.
               For nature wyſe and prouident
               our ſtate did well fore ſee
               In giuing vs ſo ſlender wy
                     •
                  
               
               for our commoditie.
               For if that wyſedome were in vs
               what man coulde beare the ſtryfe,
               The cares, and tedious troubling to
                     ••
                  es
               of thys our wretched lyfe.
               For ſadneſſe ioyned with carke & car
                     •
                  
               
               thys wyſedome in doth bring,
               And nature ſeemes to Foſter man
               with hope of hopeleſſe thing:
               Without the which eche man himſelfe
               would couet to deſtroy.
               So hope and folly medicines be
               that nature doth employ
               For our behoue by ſage aduiſe,
               leaſt we by chaunce ſhould faint,
               When many miſchiefs ſwarming thick
               our wytleſſe ſenſe doth taint.
               
                  
And if no creature elſe excell
               thys man in hye degre,
               The chiefe Creator of the worlde
               what ſhall we thinke to be?
               Of Miſers, Fooles, and eke of them
               by whom doth miſchiefe ſpring:
               He ſhalbe calde a Lorde, a Prince
               a Father, guide, and King.
               O noble powre, O princely raigne,
               companions fine and braue,
               What wants ther now O God to thee?
               what ſekeſt thou more to haue?
               Alone thou doſte not now remaine,
               it well became thy Grace
               To frame ſo fayre a worlde as thys
               to make ſuch creatures place.
               Let Heauen ſerue theyr only vſe,
               the Starres, the Moone, the Sunne,
               The Ayre, the Earth, the ſurging Seas
               what elſe? it ſhalbe done.
               But ſtraight they ſhall conſumed be,
               and vaniſhe cleane away:
               As Snowe doth fade in ſommers heate,
               or flowre in froſty day.
               What ſtate haue they that doe conſyſt
               of bodye weake and frayle:
               
                  
What ſtate baue they that in the ſpace
               of ſo ſmall tyme doe fayle?
               May we beleue the ſeas and earth
               alone repleniſhed bee
               Which are compared to the ſkyes
               as nothing in degree,
               And if the mighty compaſt ſpeare
               in minde thou well doſt way
               thou ſhalt perceiue the ſmalleſt Starre
               more great as wyſemen ſay
               Shall then ſo ſmall and vile a place
               ſo many fiſhe contayne
               Such ſtore of men, of beaſts and foules
               and thother voide remaine?
               Shal ſkies and ayre their dwellers lack?
               he dotes that thinke th ſo
               And ſeemes to haue a ſlender wit
               for there are thouſandes mo.
               That better ſtate and better lyfe enioye
               and farre more bleſſed be.
               Moreouer if we will confeſſe
               the vnfayned veritie,
               This earth is place for man and beaſt:
               beyonde the clowdes, the ayre,
               And ſacred ſkye, where peace doth raine
               and daye is alwayes fayre.
               
                  
The Angels haue their dwellings there
               whom though we cannot ſee
               (For pure and fyne theyr ſubſtance is)
               yet numberleſſe they be.
               As thick as are the ſandes in place
               where waters ebbe and flowe,
               As thick as ſtand the flowers and graſ
                     ••
                  
               
               that in the meddowes growe.
               For who ſo thinks the Heauens hye
               of dwellers voide to be,
               And may vpon thys earth ſo vyle
               ſo many creatures ſe:
               He dotes deceiued by ignorance,
               and fooliſhneſſe of minde,
               And ſemes all drounde in earthly droſſe,
               as beaſtes of baſeſt kinde.
               Nor wonder I at thys a whit
               that happye Ilandes founde
               In Occean ſeas they ſay there be
               where all things good abounde,
               Whereas no griefe the lyfe doth vexe,
               where no miſfortunes raygne.
               The ſhyes perchaunce th
                     •
                   Occean ſea
               to name doth here retaine,
               Bicauſe in colour lyke it ſeemes
               and eke in mouing rounde,
               
                  
Eche Starre an Ilande ſhall be thought
               why not? haue we not founde
               That diuers houſes are ſo calde
               bicauſe that farre away
               They ſeuered from their fellowes 
                     •
                  y
                     •
                  
               
               who otherwyſe doth ſay
               He ſayth not true, for if there were
               ſuch Ilandes in our ſeas
               The Princes would not ſuffer them make
               to paſſe their lyfe in eaſe:
               But weapon ſtrayght ſhould conqueſt
               to enlarge theyr kingdomes hye
               If any paſſage were to them
               themſelues therin to lye.
               What doubteth Grece to fayne or lye
               the mother olde of toyes?
               For doubtleſſe Heauen, Starres, & ayr
                     •
                  
               
               inhabitaunts enioyes.
               Who thys denyes doth malice much
               the bleſſed ſaintes on hye,
               And eke the eternall ſtate of God
               doe blaſpheme fooliſhlyé
               Is it not wicked blaſphemie
               preſumpteouſly to ſaye?
               That Heauen lackes inhabitants
               and God doth beare no ſway,
               
                  
But here with vs and ſauage beaſtes
               ſo fonde ſo full of ſhame,
               Nay certainely God coulde and woulde
               more noble creatures frame,
               That leade theyr lyfe in better place
               whereby hys prayſe eſteemde
               Should be the more and larger power
               and world more perfect deemde.
               For making ſūdry ſorts & nobler things
               the beautie more doth ſhine
               Of this ſame worlde and more appeares
               his Maieſty diuine.
               But if theſe ſhapes be pure and voide
               of body coms the dout,
               Or whether they conſiſt of partes
               as we doe rounde about.
               Yes truely reaſon doth declare
               all creatures that doe dwell
               In fyre, and ayre, they bodyes haue.
               if they had not, aſwell
               The ayre and fyre ſhould deſert be,
               and places voyde ſhould growe
               For none but bodyes place poſſeſſe
               as wyſe mens wordes doe ſhows.
               But whyther ſhall theſe bodyes dye?
               we muſt confeſſe it ſo
               
                  
A long and ioyfull lyfe they leade
               at length with death they go,
               For if that ayre and fyre in tyme
               corruption ſhall deface,
               Why ſhould not all ſuch creatures dye
               as liue in ſuch a place?
               For placed things doe followe ſtill
               the places nature playne.
               But ſome perchaunce deſyres to knowe
               what faſhion they retayne,
               We may be ſure theyr beauty is ſuch
               that they doe farre excell
               All creatures fleeting in the ſeas
               or all on earth that dwell:
               Which neyther God permittes nor we
               coulde view with carnall eye,
               But they that paſſe theyr life in ſtarres,
               and in the pureſt ſkye,
               Doeneuer dye for age nor yeares
               cannot the ſtrength abate,
               Of thoſe ſo gorgeous gliſtring ſtarres
               or harme the heauens ſtate.
               And eke we muſt beleue that thoſe
               which liue in ſkyes ſo bryght
               Theyr bodies are more fayre, more fine,
               of greater force, and might,
               
                  
Then all the reaſt that liue betweene
               the earth, and Starres aboue:
               Or in the elements dwell where time
               and age can them remoue:
               But what doe they? they doe reioyce
               with ſenſe and reaſon right,
               Now vſing one, and now the other
               and liue in ſuch delight,
               As wit of man cannot deuiſe,
               nor mortall tongue can tell.
               True worlde, and true eſt ate is there,
               true ioyes, and treaſures dwell:
               We only haue the ſhadowes here
               and counter faytes retayne,
               Which laſting but a little ſpace
               lyke waxe doe melt againe.
               Our worlde is but a figure plaine
               of thoſe ſo princely powres,
               And as our worlde the painted Mappe,
               ſo it ſurmounteth ou
                     •
                  es.
               Aboue these Heauens that we name
               and creatures all beyonde,
               A better worlde vncorporate
               that ſenſes doth tranſcende
               And wyth the minde alone is ſeene
               there are that think to be,
               
                  
And with thaſſured trouth it ſeemes
               not much to diſagre.
               If minde excelleth farre the ſenſe
               why ſhould the ſenſe beholde
               A worlde alone wyth perfect things
               and creatures many folde.
               And minde without his proper worlde
               a Cyphar ſhould remayne
               And none but dreames and fanſyes fine
               with ſhapes and ſhadowes vayne.
               Thus eyther nothing is the minde,
               or elſe hath nature wrought
               A worlde agreing to the ſame
               wherein containde are thought
               Unfained, chiefe; and pureſt things
               which better farre away
               May of themſelues conſyſt thā things
               that ſenſes compaſſe may.
               This ſame firſt framed world doth paſſe
               the world that ſenſes ſee.
               As much as minde excels the ſenſe
               in perfecter degree:
               In which the chiefeſt lyght is God
               where ſaints as Starres appere,
               And therfore more & ſtrāger things are there
               then are perceiued here,
               
                  
Syth it is perfecter by much
               for nothing there doth dye,
               No tyme, nor motion, there hath rule
               all fixed continually,
               As voide of place and ſafe from harme
               they all doe ſeeme to be,
               There are the cauſes of eache thing,
               and ſpringes of all we ſee.
               The worlde that ſenſes may perceiue
               from thys ſame worlde doth ſpring,
               And ſemeth here a figure ſure,
               and ſhaddowe of that thing:
               All things more perfect there
               and all things whole appere,
               We haue but portions of the ſame
               which are encreaſed here
               By natures fault and great deffect.
               ſo heartes a number be,
               For vertue one aboue creates
               the hearts that here we ſee
               By hir the ſubtill Foxe is framde
               by hir the Lyons liue,
               And ſo of all the other beaſtes,
               that thys our worlde doth giue,
               Which ſeeme in number diuers ſortes
               but all are one in kinde
               
                  
That from theſe powers at firſt to come
               are euery one aſſinde.
               None otherwyſe than Carpenters
               in Cities great of name,
               Eche one applying well hys worke
               doe diuers matters frame.
               Wherfore this world doth ſtād of parts
               the other doth conſyſt
               Of al, and liuing by themſelues
               of diſtance as they liſt
               But ſome haue thought yt euery Starre
               a worlde we well may cal,
               The earth they count a darkned ſtarre
               wheras the leaſt of all
               The God doth raine that vnderneath
               the clowdes hath placed his chaire
               That foſters all the creatures here
               in ſeas, in earth and ayre
               A Lorde of ſhadowes and the guide
               of ſhapes that liuely bee
               To whom is delt the charge of things
               and rule of all to ſee.
               Which for bicauſe they doe not laſt
               but paſſe with tyme away
               Doe ſcarſe deſerue the name of ought
               but ſhadowes that decay.
               
                  
The ſame is Pluto as I iudge,
               of whome the Poets olde,
               Do often ſyng, and ſay that he,
               the King dome black doth holde.
               For vnderneath the cloudes is night,
               aboue are al things cleare,
               Where light doth laſt for euermore,
               and brightneſſe ſtyll appeare.
               To him as to the worſt of all,
               thalmighty Lord dyd giue
               The vtleft raigne, the reſt more good,
               in better ſtarres to liue.
               But yet is no man ſure of this,
               for who doth know ſo wel,
               Gods myſteries? who hath bene there,
               and turnde agayne to tell.
               No ſtate of man is ſuch, our minde
               doth faynt in things ſo hie:
               The Owle cannot beholde the Sunne,
               wyth pure and perfect eye.
               Eche one preſuming of his wyt,
               inuenteth matters newe,
               But Poets ſpecially, to whome
               moſt confidence is dewe:
               For they may by autority
               of any matters write:
               
                  
Wyth Bacchus rage they moued be,
               and wyth Apolloes ſprite.
               Though nothing is that doth forbyd
               the mad man truth to ſay,
               
                  Sibylla vſed to tell the trouth,
               in madneſſe as ſhe lay.
               Let this ſuffiſe (my promiſſe kept)
               to proue that numbers be
               Of creatures farre excelling vs,
               which no mans eyes can ſee:
               Yet do they liue and reaſon vſe,
               and as ſome wyſe men ſay,
               Such are our ſoules departed once,
               that neuer ſhal decay.
               So Plato, ſo Pythagoras,
               
               and ſo Plotinus thought,
               And ſo haue many Poets erſt,
               in pleaſaunt verſes wrought.
               Therefore it ſemeth labour worth
               (a thing moſt mete to tel)
               Of this for to entreat at large,
               for what doth more excel?
               Than throughly man to know himſelfe:
               for children vnderſtand
               Where of the Body doth conſyſt,
               euen earth, of flyme, and ſand.
               
                  
But harde it is ſo plaine to knowe
               the nature of the minde,
               Wherfore preſuming on my Muſe
               with all the force I finde
               Beſtowing all my wits thereon
               I will attempt to knowe
               The perfect nature of the ſame,
               and plaine in verſes ſhewe.
               That done forſaking Libra ſoone
               
                  Scorpius, thy crooked ſygne
               I entre wyll, and deſtenie
               thy fatall force define
               If deſtiny doe not depriue
               our Port of hys wyll.
               And for bycauſe in doubtfull things
               to bring the greater ſtyll
               The methode and the order beſt
               is plainely to begin,
               With ſuch as are aſſured moſt
               ſo wyll I doe herein,
               For if the fyrſt beginnings here
               ſhall ſeeme obſcure in ſyght,
               The ſequele ſhall vncertaine ſeeme
               and in the worſer plight
               If ſlender the foundation be
               in ſmall tyme and ſpace,
               
                  
We ſhall beholde the buildings fayle
               that we thereon doe place.
               The effects more plaine and manifeſt
               than cauſes ſeeme to be
               At them therfore we wyll begin
               and all things open ſee.
               With mouing nowe (for euery thing
               that lyfe remayneth in
               Doth moue alone, firſt ſygne of lyfe)
               therfore we will begin.
               For of it ſelfe the bodyes reſtes
               and members rottes away
               The cauſe (perhaps) that moues is heate
               or bloud that beares the ſway.
               But things aliue are often ſtyll
               when as they liſt to reſt
               Though heate & bloud in them abound,
               therfore appereth beſt
               That wyll is cauſe of mouing here
               yet ſometimes they deſyre
               To moue and cannot ſtirre therefore
               doth mouing both require
               The one commaunds, the other works,
               for wyll can nothing doe
               If power doe lack. But how commes it
               that men moue to and froe?
               
                  
Bicauſe (minde teaching) wil ſeeth good
               and mouing ſtraight doth turne
               To that it ſees, as Fyrre is drawn
               by that which makes it burne.
               Lyke as the yron from his place
               the Lodeſtone vpwarde drawes,
               And as the Aumber lyfteth vp
               the lyttle ſlender ſtrawes:
               The worlde in ſuch a wondrous ſorte
               the Almighty Lorde did frame,
               That many things doe well agree
               as ioyned in the ſame,
               And many things doe diſagree
               and kepe continuall fight,
               Wherby ſome men haue ſurely thought
               that ſtrife, and frendeſhip might
               Be iuſtly calde beginnings chiefe,
               by which are all things wrought,
               Thus good firſt moued by which ye mind
               to motion quickly brought,
               Doth moue the partes & pricketh forth
               the body here and there:
               But yet ws think ſuffiſeth not
               one good to all things here
               Nor one deſyre to all alyke:
               ſo thys ſome that eſtemes
               
                  
And euery one retaines hys ioy
               as beſt to nature ſeemes.
               The Childe we ſee deſyres the thyngs
               that aged men forſake,
               For as the bodyes ſeeme to be
               ſo minde and wyll doe take:
               Wherfore we ſometime couet thys,
               and ſometime long for that,
               And that which late we did eſteme
               we now doe ſeeme to hate.
               Bicauſe our chaunging body is
               diſpoſed diuerſlye,
               And drawes the nature of the minde
               the way that it doth wrye.
               Hereof comes thyrſt, and hunger ſharp,
               and luſt to Ladyes lappes.
               The body many things doe change
               as age, or tyme, or happes,
               As alſo meate, and drinke, ſometymes
               and ayre doth chaunge it quite,
               And Starres doth alteration make
               as learned men doe write.
               Wherfore nothing in ſyght alone
               but ſtate of body here
               Doth cauſe vs diuers thyngs to wyll
               and moues, it doth appere.
               
                  
But ſome by reaſon rather ledde,
               doe walke as ſhe doth ſhew,
               And onely are by vertue drawne:
               but ſuch are very fewe.
               For fleſhly fonde affections here
               the minde doe ouer runne,
               None otherwyſe than miſtes doe darke
               the cleare and ſhining Sunne.
               Lo this the cauſe why body moues.
               the mouing force of minde,
               Whom moued wil doth ſtil commaund
               obayes as is aſſinde.
               And in the partes that quyet are
               if nothing them doe let
               Is poured out and cauſeth them
               now here now there to iet.
               But why ſhould labour weary them
               whereof ſhould this aryſe?
               As faynting feete in trauaile, and
               the akyng arme oft tryes.
               The cauſe hereof, is bloud reſolued
               by force of feruent heate,
               (For to much mouing it inflames)
               decayes in fuming ſweate.
               None otherwyſe than Feuers fierce
               the creature pale conſumes.
               
                  
When bloud or other humor hote
               thorowout all the members fumes
               Doth lyfe ſupport and body feedes,
               which whyleſt it quickning makes,
               The mouing force poſſeſſing all
               the body quiuering ſhakes
               The heate and heated bloud beſyde
               doth brede a liuely ſpright:
               As waters warmde wt beames of Sūne
               doe yelde a vapour light.
               Thys ſpirite encloſed within the bowels
               Thorowe all the vaines doth ronne,
               And nere to hir doth ſerue the lyfe
               in what ſhe will haue donne.
               But thoſe in heauy ſleepes that lye
               how ſhould they mouing make?
               As ſome doe in theyr ſteepes aryſe
               and weapon vp doe take,
               Some in the ſtable takes hys horſe,
               ſome wrytes as many ſay,
               And ſome hath earſt bene ſeene a ſle
                     •
                  pe
               vpon the Lute to play.
               It muſt be knowne that of the thing
               the Image doth remaine
               In vs, of all that we doe ſee,
               or ſenſes can retaine.
               
                  
Thys makes vs think we ſee the face
               that late we gaſed on,
               And that we ſeeme to heare the wordes
               were vtred long agone.
               Theſe formes within the ſecrete celles
               incloſed in the brayne,
               A vapour moues, which to aſcende
               the ſtomack doth conſtraine
               And minde deluded ſo doth moue,
               the body ſtyres thereby,
               If the reſemblance be of force
               that in the head doth lye.
               But tayle of L yſart, or of Snake
               that cut in two doth ſprawle,
               Doth will it moue? Or force of minde?
               that Greekes doe fanſye call,
               As they whom rage of madneſſe moues,
               or to much drinke arayes,
               Or dreadfull dreames do cauſe to ſhake:
               or happens other wayes.
               Perchaunce amongſt the knotty partes
               of thys deuided tayle,
               The liuely ſpirite encloſde doth ſearche
               all meanes for to preuayle,
               In breaking out and wynding partes
               doth wrye as beſt it may,
               
                  
And ſtriuing long through paſſage ſmal
               doth get at length away.
               Or that ſame part of minde that feeles
               deuided doth remaine
               In tayle cut of, and cauſeth it
               to turne and turne againe.
               Yet I ſuppoſe that euery thing
               wherin no iudgement lyes
               Can feele no griefe, nor nothing elſe
               that we can here deuiſe.
               For chiefeſt force by which we feele
               from knowledge euer flowes.
               who knowes & iudgeth moſt feeles moſt
               and moſt reioyſing knowes.
               But fooles and doltes care leſſe for all,
               leſſe harmde, leſſe fearing ſtyll,
               They feele not colde, nor heate ſo much
               ſcarce know they good from ill.
               Not for bicauſe it ſmartes, therfore
               the tayle deuided ſhakes,
               For nought it feeles, bicauſe the ſtrēgth
               from which it knowledge takes
               Is not in it, but in the head
               in better place did lye.
               Wherfore the former cauſe I iudge
               the trouth to go more nye.
               
                  
Lo, thus therfore is mouing made
               by which all creatures go.
               Yet in the reaſons paſt before
               we put thys one thing to,
               That ſundry times the preſent good
               when it might be atchieued
               Doth nothing moue, nor is deſyred
               bicauſe tis not perceiued
               Thus knowledge ſemes of mouing cauſe
               or chiefeſt as we ſee:
               For who deſyres, or ſekes the thing
               he knowes not what to ber?
               For will h
                     •
                  r ſelfe of proper force,
               is altogither blinde,
               And cannot any thing deſyre
               without the light of minde:
               By whom if ſhe be not enformde
               ſhe takes ſhe vntowarde way,
               And with the ſhe we of good beguilde
               hir vertue doth decay.
               Of mouing this ſhall here ſuffiſe,
               nowe let vs ſeeke to knowe
               How liuing things doe waxe ſo great,
               what cauſeth them to growe,
               And why at certayne tyme they ceaſe.
               a fiery ſpirite doth raine
               
                  
Thou giueſt lyfe to euery thing,
               that carcaſſe doth contayne.
               This heate doth liuely moiſture feede,
               as flame of Candell bright
               (When ſoone withdraw himſelf frō vs)
               the Oyle preſerues in light.
               Thys in the ſtomack boyles the meate
               wherof the fineſt ſpread
               Abrode, the ſynowes, bones, and fleſhe,
               wyth pyth, and bloud are bread.
               And all the body doth encreaſe
               as plantes wyth ſhowers of rayne,
               And warmth of Sūne them comforting
               doth ryſe and ſpring amaine.
               If that this fyre be much of force
               and moyſture equall here
               As much as heate ſhall ſeeme to nede
               the encreaſe ſhall great appere.
               At length it makes an ende and ſtayes
               when ſpent is all the heate.
               Which fading body fades, as ſhewes
               in them whoſe yeares are great,
               For waſted they lyke pyned Ehoſtes
               their aged lymmes doe crooke
               And ſtouping low wyth hollowed eye
               vpon the earth doe looke.
               
                  
For fyre is gone, and liuely heate,
               and moyſture doth decay,
               Without the which no lyfe remaines:
               as Lampes no longer may
               Giue out their light than oyle doth ſerue
               but leaues, and darkeneſſe brings.
               Then let vs now the mouing ſhewe
               of minde and whence it ſprings,
               A thing both darke, and harde to fynde,
               but yet we will aſſay
               With all our force to touch the trouth
               as nere as well we may.
               And fyrſt of rage, that boldneth men,
               and daungers doth deſpyſe,
               Encreaſeth ſtrength and giueth force,
               as much as ſhall ſuffiſe,
               Which mouing all as deſperate
               vpon our foes we flye,
               And bloudy battaile to beginne
               with ſworde in haſt we hye.
               The cauſe therof is bloud enflamde,
               and heart that ſendes out fyre,
               And bitter galle abrode diſperſd
               for Galle is houſe to yre,
               And choller matter miniſters
               to rage and fury blinde,
               
                  
Hence comes that creatures lacking gal
               are not of wrathfull minde,
               Embracing peace, refuſe to fight,
               but they whoſe bloud doth burne,
               And greater rage of heate retaine,
               to anger ſoneſt turne.
               So youth, and ſo ſuch dronken mates
               whoſe heads hath brink diſeaſed,
               Upon a ſmalleſt cauſe doe ſnuffe,
               the minde therfore diſpleaſed
               Doth bloud and choller myngle ſtraight
               then hande for weapon calles,
               And ſkirmiſhe comes, thus cuts are carued,
               and wounde wyde open falles.
               For fyrſt the minde offended is,
               and vexed by miury,
               Which troubled, moues ye body ſtraight
               by theſe it ſemes they lye
               That ſay the minde can neuer ſtyre,
               for if it neuer moue,
               The body ſtyll to ſtande and ſtaye
               it alwayes doth behoue:
               For diuers mouings doe declare
               a diuers mouer playne
               The Sunne doth oftē change in courſe
               and ſhaddowes change againe.
               
                  
What is the cauſe that Organs giue
               now one now other voice?
               But hande yt, ſhyftes from diuers kayes
               doth cauſe a diuers noyſe.
               The minde affection inwarde fyrſt
               doth take and cloſe concele,
               And makes ſome part or other ſerue
               when ſhe wyll it reucle:
               Diſcloſing ſtraight to it whatſoeuer
               within in ſecrete lyes,
               To thende that plame it may appere
               and open to the eyes.
               None otherwyſe than when the king
               vnto his faithfull frende
               Declares the ſecretes of hys minde
               and after doth it ſende
               To be proclaimed in euery place
               that it may plaine appere.
               Hence ſpringeth loue for whē the minde
               doth fanſye pleaſant gere.
               She makes the heart a miniſter
               and ſo doth loue declare,
               In heart, loue, wrath, feare, luſt, & hope,
               wyth ioye, and alſo care
               As in a tower with minde doe dwell
               and theſe as there begonne
               
                  
By meanes of other partes through al
               the body forth do runne.
               But of this ſame in other place,
               more playnly ſhal we write,
               If God therein do fauour vs,
               and Muſes graunt vs ſprite.
               Suffi
                     •
                  eth now affections fyrſt
               of al things elſe to be
               Wythin the minde, the cauſes ſprong,
               of things wythout we ſee,
               And after they by member, bloud,
               or other humours might,
               Are ſpread abrode in euery parte,
               and ſo thruſt out to light.
               For ſeing minde and body are ioynde,
               the mouing nedes muſt be
               Common to both, the harmes al one,
               and chaunge in like degree:
               Whatſoeuer thing the one perceyues,
               the other feeleth it,
               They both in nature doe agree,
               ſo ſtrongly are they knitte.
               But now bycauſe we ſeeme to touch,
               the typ of Scorpions toe,
               Let vs, my Muſe, of ſenſes ſpeake,
               here briefly as we goe:
               
                  
Fyue ſenſes nature gaue to ſuc
                     •
                  
               
               as perfect creatures be,
               But vnto ſome he delt not all,
               which may be worthely
               Unperfect namde, as Moles, & wormes
               and Scallops of the baye,
               And Wilks, & Irchin ek
                     •
                   whom pricks
               incompaſt rounde araye.
               Aniong theſe ſenſes al, the ſyght
               is thought the beſt to bee,
               Bicauſe it is the chiefeſt meanes
               wherwith the minde doth ſee,
               Declaring plaine the wondrous workes beaſts,
               that nature here doth frame
               ſuch floures, ſuch fruits, ſuch her vs, ſuch
               ſuch plantes, ſuch ſtones of name,
               Such ſundry ſortes of mettalles fayre,
               and ſhewing alſo plaine,
               What Fyſhes Proteus feedes in ſeas,
               what Monſters there remaine,
               And more than thys the ſtately roomes
               wherein the Gods doe lye
               The gliſtering globes of ſtarres aboue
               and Phaebus ſhining hye:
               Beſydes the things that men doe heare
               that tongue can not diſplaye,
               
                  
Thys ſenſe therfore doth all excell
               and fayreſt farre away:
               In which the ſeate and chiefeſt place
               wherin the minde doth dwell
               Is thought to be, for when we meet
                     •
                  
               
               or talke in preſence tell,
               Upon the others eyes we gaſe
               as man, and minde, and all
               Did there conſyſt, who ſo the eyes
               the glaſſe of minde doth call
               Shall ſay the truth, for pleaſaunt loue
               in them doth fyrſt gyue lyght:
               There hate and 
                     •
                  ierceneſſe doth appere
               with mylde and gentle ſprite:
               There ſadneſſe, ioy and miſchief ſhewes
               with zeale and wyſedome great,
               And follye, pride, and feare and rage,
               with fault and wrathfull heat.
               But wherof doth the ſyght proceede?
               the mindes let other ſee
               Of learned men, I briefely ſhewe
               as I think beſt to be.
               One lyfe there muſt be knowne to be
               of ſubſtance eke ſo fine,
               As ſyght can neuer comprehende
               of force and power d
                     •
                  uine.
               
                  
Which nature deales & God doth giue:
               thys feedes and makes to growe,
               Doth breed, doth moue, doth heare, & taſt
               doth ſmell, ſee, feele, and knowe:
               Which is the chiefe and greateſt power
               moſt nere to ſaints on hye.
               Theſe powres ſhe through ye body ſpreds
               in certaine partes to lye,
               And by the eyes doth lyght let in,
               and ſundry coulers ſee,
               And iudgeth playne of euery ſhape,
               and all things elſe that be:
               Receaueth alſo by the noſe
               the ſmelles of ſundry ſort,
               And by the eares doth vnderſtande
               ſounde noyſe and great report.
               By tongue deſcernes eche kinde of taſt,
               by feling knowledge brings
               Of hote from colde, of harde from ſoft,
               of rough from ſmotheſt things.
               Companions fyue theſe are to lyfe,
               and faithfull ſeruants ſure,
               That ſhewes hir all, without the which
               ſhe nothing coulde procure.
               The eyes therfore as glaſſye made
               and as the Chriſtall cl
                     •
                  re,
               
                  
Lyke as a glaſſe receyue the ſhapes
               that we doe looke on here,
               By power wherof are things deſernde
               if that the eye be ſounde.
               Theſe ſorts of things vnto the minde
               (for as in hygheſt grounde
               Hir ſtately ſeate in head the holdes)
               the eye doth plainely ſhowe,
               Whoſe ymage truely ſhadowed there
               ſhe wyſe doth ſtraight wayes knowe,
               So wondrouſly ſhe doth perceiue
               a ſundry ſort of ſoundes,
               When in the helthy vnharmed eares
               the ayre therof reboundes.
               For ayre of ſlendreſt ſubſtance is
               and moueth by and by,
               Which beaten with the noiſe doth ſhūne
               and from the ſtroke doth flye,
               And pearcyng breakes into the eares,
               though cloſe be kept the glaſſe,
               And cloſe the dore, ſo fine it is
               that inwarde it will paſſe.
               For euen the fyſhe when fy
                     •
                  hers harde
               with poales the floudes 
                     ••
                  e plaſhe,
               For feare of noyſe flye faſt from thence
               and thick in nettes doe maſhe.
               
                  
For ayre to depth of ſeas doth pearce
               vp mountes the waues thereby,
               And tempeſts roares wt dreadfull noyſe,
               the ſhipman out doth crye,
               And vowes to offer ſacred giftes:
               As oft therfore as wee
               Doe finde two things togither knockte,
               as oft as ayre we ſee
               Moued vehemently, but chiefly then,
               when through theſe hollowed things
               By narrowe ſtraightes it paſſeth out,
               thence diuers voices ſprings:
               As diuers are the ſortes of them,
               as place doth faſhion take:
               In which the ayre doth ſundry ſoundes
               and ſundry voices make.
               So ſoundes the Trumpet otherwyſe
               by farre than ſhalme doth blowe,
               And well we may the Tymbrels tune
               from ſounde of ſawtrey knowe.
               For as by ſtroke of ſtone in ſtreame
               doe many cyrcles ryſe
               So moued, the ayre, wt whirling wheele
               doth ſpread in largeſt guiſe.
               And therfore into many eares
               one voice doth eaſely paſſe
               
                  
As where a number be, one ſyght
               is ſeene in euery glaue.
               But how the noſe receiueth ſmell
               let vs ſay ſomething here.
               A ſlender fume from euery thing
               ariſyng doth appere,
               Which broade in ayre doth ſpred it ſelfe
               as Frankconcenſe we ſee,
               Or Myrrhe, if that vpon the coales
               the powder poured bee.
               By meanes of tongue is taſte perceiude
               and roufe of mouthe beſyde,
               For by theſe twaine the taſte & ſmatche,
               of euery thing is tryde,
               Which pearcing ſtraight doth touch the ſenſe
               therof is taſte begonne.
               But feeling, bloud and ſprite procures
               which through the bodye runne.
               Thys ſenſe doe creatures all poſſeſſe
               and taſte they all receiue:
               But man doth better them enioye
               and them more right perceiue.
               Hereof to man more wyſedome doth
               than to the reſt aryſe:
               Some thys denye and ſaye the things
               foreſayde are otherwyſe,
               
                  
Alowing not that formes receyued
               in eyes, cauſe ſyght to be,
               Or that the ayre we neede, as meane
               to heare, or for to ſee.
               For the almighty King doth giue
               ſo many powers to minde
               As in the world he framed things,
               that varie in their kinde.
               That ſhe might al things comprehend,
               ſhe knowes wel what to be,
               Hir proper kinde, and more perceyues.
               Minde al things plaine doth ſee,
               And al things ponders prudently
               that ſenſes to hir brings,
               And wyth celeſtial trial wayes
               the true and vertuous things.
               To Lyfe therefore is minde the Sunne,
               the ſenſes Starres doe ſeeme:
               So ſome affirme, but we make haſte
               and leaue theſe things to deeme,
               To other men, for nye we come
               to ende of Libra here,
               Bycauſe the feete of Scorpion ſigne
               do playnly now appere.
               My ſayings yet do plainly teach,
               the ſoule Celeſtiall
               
                  
To be, which voyd of body liues,
               and giueth lyfe to all,
               Diſcerning alſo euery thing
               as farre as God giues leaue,
               For al things here, of him their force
               determinde do receyue.
               To him eternal power belongs,
               al things doth he create,
               And makes al things that here ar made
               through his almighty ſtate.
               For if the ſoule perceaues and knowes,
               and vnderſtandeth al,
               We may not thinke it ſubſtance ſuch,
               as we may body cal,
               Sych bodies moue, not earth nor ayre,
               not floud nor fyry flame,
               Nor any thing that theſe haue made,
               hath power as hath this ſame.
               we neede not doubt but ſoule proceedes,
               and doth from Joue diſcend,
               And neuer dyes whome he permits,
               the world to comprehend.
               What if ſo be the Ato
                        ••
                     yes
               
               that ſundry wiſe men fayne,
               The ſoule is rather thought to be,
               than body to maintayne,
               
                  
Al Bodies be of quantity,
               and may deuided be,
               But ſoule is vndiuidable
               and of no groſſe degree,
               And as a Center doth ſhe ſeeme,
               where many lynes do mete,
               Which ſenſes do conuey to hir,
               as floudes to ſeas do flete.
               Wherefore I maruel much at ſuch,
               as thinke a like decay,
               And iudge the ſoule no more to be
               when body fades away.
               For if ſo be it might be proued,
               yet ſhould it not be ſayd,
               Nor publiſhed to the common ſort,
               nor euery where diſplayed.
               For many wicked men and yll
               there are, which if they thought
               Their ſoules as nothing ſhall remayne,
               when corſe to graue is brought,
               Nor that it feeles, or ſuffers ought,
               when it goeth hence away,
               And that no puniſhment remaynes
               for prancks that here they play,
               A thouſand miſchiefs would they doe,
               take feare from them among,
               
                  
And fall to euery villany
               confounding right wyth wrong.
               Beſydes a number now that thinke
               in bleſſed ſtate to be,
               When death hath them deſtroied, & hope
               the face of God to ſee,
               And euermore wyth him to ioy,
               and therfore vertuouſly
               Do ſeke to paſſe their preſent lyfe,
               wych Godly modeſty:
               If they ſhall ſee that after death,
               do no rewardes remaine,
               Amaſed al, their vertuous workes,
               ſhall ceaſſe and periſhe playne.
               So many ſtately temples trimmed,
               ſo many altares hie,
               Wyth golde and marble garniſhed
               and decked ſumptuouſly,
               Beſyde Religion, Godly zeale,
               honour, and worſhipping
               Of God, ſhal come to nought, if after
               death remayne nothing
               That men hope for, if that the ſoule
               as winde doth paſſe away.
               Of wilde, and franticke common ſorte
               Religion muſt be ſtay,
               
                  
And feare of ſmart. For miſchieuous,
               and full of fraude theyr brayne
               Is alwayes ſeene, nor of themſelues
               they well doe meane or plaine.
               The common people vertue loath,
               and euer more doe hate.
               Religion is the comelineſſe,
               and glory of our ſtate,
               Which makes the Gods to fauour vs,
               which we winne Heauen by.
               No wyſe nor good man therfore dare
               attempt here openly,
               To teache yt ſoule ſhall come to naught,
               and ſo corrupt the mindes
               Of rude vnſkilfull common ſort,
               that wauer lyke the wyndes.
               Now muſt we proue by reaſon good
               that ſoule doth neuer dye,
               And free from ſting or darte of death
               doth liue eternally:
               As he that preacheth Chriſt declares,
               and Greſhop eater Jewe,
               That for ſynnes vtterly deſpyſed:
               which God that all things knewe
               Would not haue made if he had thought
               it had bene nedeleſſe here:
               
                  
And nations all with one conſent
               account it to be clere.
               And firſt the thing reſembling moſt
               the mightyeſt Lorde of al,
               Of longer laſting tyme we graunt
               and perfecter muſt call.
               For that which doth not long endure
               but ſhortly doth decay,
               That it ſhould be vnperfecter
               who is that will ſay nay?
               And therefore doe celeſ
                     •
                  iall things
               a greater whyle endure,
               Bicauſe they are more perfecter,
               and more diuine and pure:
               But things that nerer are to earth
               and fartheſt of from ſkyes,
               Unperfect ſince they are, do fade
               and ſoneſt euer dyes:
               Shall then our ſoule ſynce it in lyfe
               and knowledge doth appere,
               Moſt lyke vnto the ſtate diuine,
               be cloſed and ſhut vp here
               With body for to ende? nor ſhall
               it here haue longer place
               Than fading fleſhe? or ſhall it liue
               more great nor larger ſpace?
               
                  
Beſydes the ſoule can not decay,
               thys reaſon wytneſſe ſhal,
               Bycauſe it is of ſyngle ſtate,
               and voyd of matter al.
               Adde this, that when the body fades,
               the force of minde doth growe,
               As weake and aged fathers olde,
               do more of councell kn
                     •
                  w
               Than youthful blouds of yonger yeres,
               and often lacks he wit
               That doth excel in ſtrength and force:
               For rare doth God permit
               To any one both ſtrength and wyt.
               Wherefore if force brought low,
               By ſpace, and courſe of many yeares,
               the minde doth ſtronger grow,
               Of Body doth it not depend,
               but of it ſelfe conſiſt
               Another thing, and after graue
               doth lyue and death reſiſt.
               Doth not beſyde when fote doth ake
               the minde iudge thereof playne?
               It is no doubt. But how can griefe
               to towre of minde a
                     ••
                  ayne,
               Doth it aſcend from loweſt partes
               as ſmoke doth vpward flye?
               
                  
No: for many partes not foote alone,
               (if ſo) ſhould ake thereby,
               Nor of the foote, but of the parte
               that nereſt is to minde
               The ache ſhuld grieue: this ſhewes that ſoule
               is not of bodies kinde:
               And ſo is free from death ſince it
               in diſtance needes no meane.
               Adde this when wee would cal to minde
               the thing forgotten cleane,
               Or elſe deuiſe ſome worthy fetche,
               from minde, the ſenſes al
               It then behoues to gather vp,
               whereby doth often fal
               That many better for to muſe,
               do ſhut and cloſe their eyes,
               Or elſe forſaking company,
               ſome ſecret place deuiſe.
               Or when the night with darkſome cloud
               the earth doth ouerſpred,
               And creatures all wyth heauy ſleepes,
               do take their reſt in bed,
               They ſtyll do watch, and ſilent al,
               vpon their beds do reſt,
               And light put out, in darkneſſe w
                     •
                  et
               their minde wyth body oppreſ
                     •
                  .
               
                  
For ſenſes do the minde diſturbe,
               affections it deſtroyes,
               Amaſing it wyth dulneſſe great,
               and blindneſſe it anoyes:
               None otherwyſe than cloudes do hyde
               the Sunne that clearly ſhynes.
               If therfore, when it doth remayne
               wythin his owne confines,
               And flying farre from ſenſes al,
               and cares that body brings,
               It wyſer be, then ſhal it knowe
               and vnderſtand al things
               In better ſort, when it is free,
               and from the fleſh doth flye,
               More perfect of it ſelf it is,
               and lyues continuallye.
               Beſyde when man as meane conſyſtes,
               the Saints and beaſtes betwixt,
               Some parte wyth eche he cōmon holdes
               wyth beaſtes his body mixt,
               And wyth the ſaintes his minde agrees:
               one of theſe partes doth dye,
               Of the other Death can haue no power,
               but liues continuallye.
               Death therfore takes not al away,
               for why? his deadly dartes,
               
                  
Doth neuer harme the ſoule a wh
                     ••
                  
               
               when it from body partes.
               And more than thys I haue to ſay,
               if nothing doe remaine
               Of vs, when carcaſſe lyes in tombe,
               God ſhall be called plaine
               Uniuſt, and one that fauour ſhewes
               to ſuch as naughtly lyue:
               For ſuch for terme of all their lyfe,
               no ſorrowes them doe grieue,
               No riches lacke nor pleaſures great,
               but happily reioyce,
               Exalted with promotions hye,
               and wyth the Commons voice.
               On the other ſyde the vertuous men
               a thouſande griefes moleſt,
               Now ſore diſeaſed, now plagued wc nede
               in fine alwayes oppreſ
                     •
                  .
               Therfore the ſoule liues after graue,
               and feeles deſerued paynes,
               And if it haue done iuſtly here
               a Crowne of glory gaines.
               By theſe and many other wayes
               I coulde declare no doubt,
               That ſoule of man doth neuer dye,
               and body liues without.
               
                  
But thys ynough: time biddes me ende
               nor ignoraunt am I,
               That ſoule of many (although vnapt)
               is termde a melodye.
               And as of ſundry voices moued
               an harmony proceedes,
               Of ſundry compoundes medeyne made
               which force of healyng brcedes:
               So of the ioyned elaments
               by certayne meane and way
               Created, of the heauens eke
               the ſoule to be ſome ſay:
               A part wherof in body dwels
               and part abrode doth lye:
               As ſyght doth ſpring of outwarde lyght
               and vertue of the eye.
               For Heauen is the chiefeſt cauſe
               from which all things doe ſpring,
               wythout whoſe ayde ye earth coulde not,
               nor ſeas breede any thing.
               But thys opinion is not true,
               for if it ſhould be ſo,
               The ſoule with fleſh ſhould neuer ſtriue,
               nor once againſt it go,
               But euermore in one agree.
               As euery powre doth ſhowe,
               
                  
That wonted are of my
                     •
                  ed things
               by ſprite diuine to growe.
               As in the kinde of hearbs apperes,
               and in the precious ſtone.
               Some think the ſoule doth not remaine
               when fleſhe is from it gone,
               Bicauſe that heauy, ſluggiſhe ſleepe
               the nereſt thing that may
               Reſemble death, doth ſeeme to take
               both ſenſe and minde away:
               Or for bycauſe they ſee the minde
               wyth ſyckneſſe diuerſly
               So vext, and harmde, that it can not
               the place it hath ſupply,
               And with the body to encreaſe
               wyth which it eke decayes.
               As well apperes in children yong
               and men of elder dayes:
               Fonde is the childe, the man diſcrete.
               the olde man doteth ſtyll
               For weake vnweldy wythered age
               doth minde and body ſpyll.
               And more ſay they if that the ſoule
               of ſubſtance be diuine,
               And ſeured from theſe fleſhly lyms
               may leade a lyfe more fine,
               
                  
Then why ſhould it in wretched fleſhe
               ſo ſeeke it ſelfe to place?
               By whoſe defect ſo many yls
               and miſchiefe it deface.
               But fonde ſhe is therfore if that
               ſhe doe this willingly,
               And if perforce ſhe be compelde
               in carcaſſe caued to lye
               who doth cōſtraine? Doth God himſelf?
               then hir he naught eſteemes:
               Nay which in priſon vile he puts
               to hate he rather ſeemes.
               More of it ſelfe (except it learne,)
               ſynce it doth nothing knowe,
               And oftentimes forgetfulneſſe
               the minde doth ouerthrowe.
               Therefore they iudge it nothing is
               when body here doth dye,
               For learne it cannot, ſenſes deade,
               which it knowes all things by.
               Some other ſay that ſoule there is
               in all the worlde but one,
               Which giueth lyfe to euery thing,
               as Sunne but one alone
               There is, that makes all eyes to ſee
               eternall, think they this
               
                  
Though bodyes dye as eyes put out
               the Sunne eternall is.
               Theſe trifles fonde it is not harde
               wyth reaſon to diſproue:
               But here I longer am I feare
               than it doth me behoue.
               There ſhal not want that ſuch demaūde
               ſhall aunſwere once at full,
               And all the doubtes therin aſſoyle
               and knots aſunder pull.
               O man of ſharpe and pregnant wyt,
               thy prayſe ſhall liue with mine,
               Our labours (doubt not) ſhall cōmende
               the men of later time:
               They famous worke attempt, & ſeedes
               of Heauen on earth go ſowe.
               This one thing will I more put to,
               that euery man may knowe
               The ſoule immortall for to be,
               and ſprong of heauenly grace,
               If ſenſes and affections all
               he will reſtraine a ſpace.
               If that diſpiſyng worldly ioyes,
               and earthly thoughtes reſynde
               wyth dayly labour he attempt
               to God to lyfte hys minde:
               
                  
Then perfect wiſedome ſhall he haue,
               and things to come foretell
               Awake, or elſe in heuye ſleepes
               perceiue the ſame as well.
               In thys ſort did the Prophetes olde
               the things to come declare.
               The ſober minde therefore doth come
               more nere to heauenly fare,
               The farther from the fleſhe it flyes,
               and from the earthly care.
               But lyke to beaſtes the greateſt ſort
               doe liue as ſenſe doth wyll,
               And thinke none other good to be
               but fleſhe to haue hys fill.
               Hereof 
                     〈◊〉
                   comes that many think
               the ſoule with body dyes,
               Bicauſe they ſee not things diuine
               with weake and fleſhly eyes.
               But of the ſoule thys ſhall ſuffiſe:
               let vs returne againe
               To him that made the world, whom we
               conclude for to remaine
               Of body voide: and thouſandes more
               that body line without,
               As thick as in the woodes the leaues
               doe cluſter trees about:
               
                  
And if they bodyes haue at all
               ſo purely are they finde,
               That ſenſe of ours cannot perceiue
               but onely ſeene of mynde.
               But thou my Muſe be ſilent here,
               and when hys wyll ſhall be
               And pleaſure eke, who moues my lips,
               then ſhalt thou ſearche with me
               The cauſe of things, that vnderueath
               the cyrcle of the Moone
               We ſee to paſſe, if they by chaunce,
               or fatall force be done.
               And whylſt while as the Sunne ye backe
               of Lyon flaming fryes,
               And doubling oft hir creaking voyce
               the Greſhop chyrping cryes,
               Encompaſt with the ſhadowing graſſe
               let vs finde out in ſhade
               Of Lawrell, or ſweete Mirtle tree,
               where huſhing noyſe is made
               Of ſtreames, that flowes from Parnas ſprings
               a quiet reſting place,
               For reſt doth well refreſhe the minde,
               and calles againe the grace.
               And ſtraight when as wyth quietneſſe
               our ſtrength is come againe,
               
                  
I wyll (if thou wilt fauour me
               and me wyth grace mayntayne)
               Attempt to touch the ſtately tunes:
               and if the almighty King
               with countenance ſweete do graunt me ayde,
               my labour long pitying,
               And pouerty driue farre from me,
               and bytter cares expel:
               Al wholly wyl I liue wyth thee,
               and alwayes wyth thee dwel.
               This onely ſhal be my delight,
               my ſelfe then ſhal I fyll
               Wyth pleaſant Aganippaes ſtreames,
               and ſyng on Cirph
                        •
                     s hyll.
            
         
         
            Scorpius, the eyght Boke.
            
               THe cauſe why mortal ſtate doth pas
               ſuch croked cōtrary wayes,
               Some ſort in honour, happily
               do ſpend their ioyfull dayes:
               And other ſome in myſerie,
               oppreſſed continually,
               Wyth dayly moyling vexed ſore,
               in fame obſcure do lye.
               
                  
Fayre Muſe declare: for vnto thee
               it lawful is to knowe,
               The councels of the Goddes aboue,
               and ſecrets for to ſhowe.
               Some men by blinde diſordred chaunce.
               thinke all things done to be,
               Nor world by reaſon to be ruled,
               bycauſe they moſt things ſee
               Wyth vndeſerued goods adourned,
               and moſt things plagued agayne
               Uniuſtly vext wyth noyſome ils,
               and difference none to rayne:
               The iuſt and vertuous men oppreſt,
               and Rake helles hiely placed,
               And vice than vertue more eſteemed,
               and Churches al defaced,
               Wyth fyry flame of thunder cracks,
               and moſt men for to gayne,
               By ſynfull vſage of themſelues,
               and craft of ſubtyle brayne:
               Such when they ſee to come to paſſe,
               the greateſt parte ſurmyſe,
               Eyther no Gods at al to be,
               or elſe that they diſpiſe,
               The baſe affayres of mortal men,
               And only heauens minde: therfore
               they raſh and blindely ſay,
               
                  
Uncertayne chaunce in euery thing
               doth beare the chiefeſt ſway.
               But Fortune ſome to thee do giue
               the gouernance ouer al,
               And thee Lady chiefe of euery
               thing on earth do cal,
               And that thou holdſt the ſcepters here
               wyth browes that ſowrely frowne,
               And wyth thy falſe vnſtable wheele
               turnſt al things vpſyde downe:
               To thee the olde deceyued age
               dyd buyld their altares hye,
               And often tymes before thy face,
               their ſacrifice dyd lye.
               Some are beſides that do impute
               eche thing to deſtenye,
               And iudge that force of fatall lawes,
               the world is ordred by,
               And that wyth one continual courſe
               (as pageants ſhewes to minde)
               Al things do moue, and euery man
               hath here his parte aſſinde,
               That he muſt play, tyl al be done:
               a queſtion to be ſought
               Right profitable fayre and hard,
               not to be left vntaught.
               
                  
Now fyrſt therefore let vs declare,
               that nothing here can be
               Wythout a cauſe, and that the cauſe
               muſt of neceſſity,
               Much differ from the effect, ſynce that
               nothing it ſelf doth breede,
               No thing can of it ſelfe be cauſe,
               nor of it ſelfe proceede.
               Then infinite ſhall cauſes growe?
               not ſo: but yet there ought
               Some fyrſt to be, from which the reſt
               of cauſes muſt be brought,
               Which from the hieſt muſt deſcend,
               vnto the baſeſt ſtate.
               This order then of cauſes we
               cal Deſtenie or Fate:
               Which God as once predeſtining
               that all things ſhould be ſo,
               Determinde hath by his decree
               for euermore to go.
               But as eche cauſe doth nereſt come
               vnto the cauſer fyrſt,
               So all the reſt it doth excel,
               and moues, and rules the worſt.
               The fyrſt beginning is a cauſe
               and no effect the ſame,
               
                  
The loweſt ſtate is but effect,
               no cauſe we can it name:
               The meanes that are betwene theſe two
               may names of both retayne.
               For if of cauſes were no knot,
               nor order ſtyll to rayne,
               If thone of thother ſhoulde not hang,
               (as if from heauens hye
               A Chayne to deepeſt part of Hell
               ſhould hang and lincked lye:
               Which is to vyle to be rehearſed)
               beginnings more than one
               Shall ſeeme to be: and cauſes fyrſt
               muſt many ſpring thereon.
               Then ſhal they ſtryue amōgſt thēſelues
               and often fiercely fyght,
               So many heads, for one alone
               doth rule require of right:
               So neyther world ſhould here be one,
               nor beautifull ſhould ſeeme:
               For ordre is the beauty chiefe,
               that we in things eſteeme.
               But ſome perchaunce wyl ſay from one
               beginning fyrſt of all,
               Togyther many cauſes ſeue▪
               
               red downward often fall.
               
                  
As ſundry ſort of gliſtering beames
               the Sunne doth from him ſende,
               With certaine difference ſeuered,
               of which doth not depende
               The one of the others force, but eache
               from ſelfe ſame head doe fall:
               So needes no ſtrife, nor let, bycauſe
               one way they walke not all.
               Thys order is not very yll,
               nor much miſlyketh me,
               This ſentence may be fortune true:
               but let vs thorowly ſee,
               All blindeneſſe from our minde expelde,
               for minde of man cannot
               Attaine to lyght of trouth ſo ſone,
               nor in ſuch eaſy ſort,
               But oftentimes doth vſe to erre,
               and hereof doth aryſe
               Such ſectes, & ſuch contrary ſawes,
               he proues, and he denies:
               As reaſon proper is to Gods,
               opinion is to vs,
               No certaintie hath mortall man
               the trouth for to diſcuſſe.
               Therfore if many cauſes be
               that from the fyrſt doe flowe:
               
                  
If eche of them in perfectneſſe
               be like, I ſeke to know:
               No order there ſhal then appeare,
               for where no chiefe doth guide
               No difference, nor diuerſity ſeene,
               no order can be ſpyde.
               In euery thing thou mayſt perceyue
               a firſt, a mydſt, and laſt,
               No kind of thing is here that is
               wythout an order caſt.
               But if they al do not alike
               this perfectneſſe auowe,
               God hath ſome thing vnperfect made:
               this can not I allowe.
               Wherefore one perfect good effect
               allowe the cauſer fyrſt,
               The reſt haue more vnperfecter,
               as they themſelues are worſt.
               For commonly moſt ſtore of fruite,
               the naughtieſt tree doth bring
               But worſt, as yll than good, and ſowre
               than ſweete doth ryfer ſpring.
               For as eche cauſe is more of power
               and of eſtate more hye,
               So more of lyfe and reaſon hath
               this pureſt ſubſtance nye.
               
                  
The cauſe agayne of weaker force,
               and of a baſer kinde,
               Leſſe lyfe, and reaſon doth poſſeſſe,
               and ſubſtance leſſe doth fynde.
               As well vpon the earth appears,
               wher al things do endure
               But little ſpace, where reaſon is ſcarce,
               where no eſtate is pure:
               But all of many things conſiſtes,
               al things on earth that bene,
               Compounded are, and myxt, ſo that
               no ſubſtaunce can be ſene:
               Nor here ſhe is eſteemde a whit,
               the honour doth remayne,
               To ſuch as hir do here enioy,
               and ſuch as hir retayne.
               In darke ſome caues ſhe hidden lyes,
               and hereby do we fynde,
               That fortunes goods are more eſtemde
               than vertues of the minde.
               For ſubſtance vertue may be calde,
               but in this worlde exilde
               This ſubſtaunce liues, hir coūtrey fayre
               hir ſeate and manſion milde,
               The heauens are, where as ſhe hath
               hir faythfull frendes of truſt,
               
                  
Goodneſſe, & truth. By this meanes tho
               the world is framed iuſt,
               Of cauſes as before is ſayde
               preieruing euery thing
               with during bond, this chaine (but God)
               may none in peeces bring,
               Nor force, nor ſpace of tyme it breake.
               Of cauſes ſuch is ſponne,
               What is to come, what preſent is,
               and what hath earſt bene donne,
               To al the which theyr force, and ſtrēgth,
               thalmighty king aboue
               with certain boundes, & time appointes
               by certayne meanes to moue.
               And needefull is it to be knowen
               how, many cauſes runne
               To gather oft when any thing
               by force of them is donne.
               Nor raſhely is thys meeting made,
               and cauſes mixed ſo,
               But by appointed deſtenyes,
               all things doe paſſe, and go
               Thalmighty worke man of the worlde
               hath all things vndercaſt
               Aſſured lawes, and meaſure delt
               to all the things he paſt.
               
                  
Therefore it is not true that ſome
               affyrme, and dare defende,
               That nothing certayne can be founde,
               that chance doth all things ſende:
               And God regards not mortall ſtate.
               But they themſelues deceaue,
               And are beguiled much, to whom
               thys ſentence here doth cleaue.
               For truely chance is nothing elſe
               but vaine opinion blinde,
               Not diffring much frō ſhapes, & ſyghtes
               that in our ſleepes we fynde.
               Whatſoeuer Ariſtotel ſayth,
               or any of them all,
               I paſſe not for, ſynce from the truth
               they many times doe fall.
               Oft prudent, graue, and famous men,
               in errors chance to ſlyde,
               And many wittes wyth them deceiue
               when they themſelues go wyde:
               Examples only ſerue, ſo much
               muſt errors folowed bee.
               Let no man iudge me arrogant,
               for reaſon ruleth mee,
               She faithfull guide of wyſemen is:
               let him that ſeekes to fynde
               
                  
The trouth, loue hir, and followe hir
               with all hys might, and minde.
               And that there is no chaunce at all
               thys reaſon ſtrong and ſtayde,
               Makes me beleue: for if that all
               (as earſt before is ſayde)
               By cauſes fixed in certaine guiſe,
               and certayne time doe moue
               As God commaundes, for perfectneſſe,
               and for the worldes behoue,
               Leaſt hurtfull error ſhould deſtroy
               ſo fayre a worke as it,
               what kind of place ſhall chaūce poſſeſſe,
               or ſeate finde out to ſyt?
               In doubtfulneſſe, and altering ſtate
               ſurmounting farre away
               Both Protheus, and Vertumnus to,
               in changing theyr aray,
               As voide, ſo nature chance denies.
               Uncertaine nought doth lye
               Within thys worlde, but certaine all:
               as nature, God, and ſkye,
               And elaments, and what of them
               ſo euer framde we ſee,
               Or hath in tyme before bene wrought,
               or euermore ſhall be.
               
                  
But if that ought vncertaine were,
               then ſhould the minde diuine,
               Not all things here knowe certainely,
               but from the trouth decline?
               Which were to great abſurditie,
               for he doth all things ſpye
               That eche thing makes, nor ought from him
               can hyd in ſecret lye.
               Though ſome doe ſay that if ſo be
               that heauenly minde ſhoulde knowe
               The baſe eſtate of mortall kinde,
               it ſhould leſſe worthy growe.
               But they are much deceiued, for none
               is ill bycauſe that hee
               Doth ill things know, nor vile yt knowes
               the things that vileſt bee.
               Nor any man is changed white
               that white can well define,
               Nor worſer is the Sunne as oft
               as it on knaues doth ſhine,
               Nor if with beames it hap to blaſe
               in place be durtyed much
               It foule doth ſeeme, nor light defylde
               that filthy things doth touche.
               So if the minde perceiue the thing
               that vyleſt may be thought,
               
                  
It is not worſe, to knowe ill, than good,
               but ill to doe is naught.
               Thus God of nothing ignorant,
               all things that are doth knowe,
               What hath bene done in alder tymes,
               and what ſhall after growe.
               Which if they be not ſurely 
                     •
                  ixt
               confeſſe we muſt them needes
               Not to be knowne, for knowledge ſtyll
               of things aſſurde proceedes.
               The Prophetes alſo when they ſpeake
               of things that happen ſhall,
               The certaine dayes do playnly appoint,
               and proper names of all:
               Which would not be, but that al thyngs
               are fyxed certaine ſo
               That are to come, or preſent be,
               or paſſed long ago.
               Yet many things doe ſeeme by chaunce
               amongſt vs for to lyght:
               As when a tyle by tempeſt torne
               from houſe a man doth ſmyte:
               Or when a man in deluing deepe
               doth ſtore of treaſure finde:
               Such things by chaūce to hap, doth ſynk
               in common peoples minde.
               
                  
But thys my minde doth not alowe:
               for though vnlooked for
               Such things doe hap, ſhall we therein
               admit a chaunce therfore?
               Our knowledge, nor our ignorance,
               to alter things hath might:
               For fyre hath not his flaming heate,
               nor Snow therfore is whyte,
               Nor Sūne doth yeld hys gliſtering beames
               bicauſe we knowe the thing:
               For of the matters that conſyſt
               our knowledge here doth ſpring.
               Therfore we knowe it thus to be
               bicauſe the thing is ſo,
               And minde may often ſeeme to erre
               the thing can not ſo do.
               Now of the thing I ſpeake and aſke
               if chaunce therein doe lye,
               For whether we doe knowe thereof
               or no, regarde not I.
               The chaunce therefore in vs doth lye,
               not in the things that be,
               Such things we thinke to fall by chaūc
                     •
                  
               
               wherof no cauſe we ſee,
               As knowne alone vnto the Gods:
               all things are certaine tho.
               
                  
For with one ſort of mouing rounde
               the heauens alwayes go,
               Lyke ſeede, like fruite, and elaments
               in auncient order rayne,
               And keepe their kinde, & wonted courſe
               the yeare doth ſtyll retaine.
               For after ſpring, the ſomer hoat
               himſelfe hath ſtrayghtwayes placde,
               And after him with Apples thyck
               and Grapes doth harueſt haſt,
               Next after that his nipping froſres
               the wynter bringeth in,
               And wyth his Iſye northern blaſtes
               all things to droupe begin.
               No herbe doth euer change hys force,
               all creatures doe retaine
               Their olde accuſtomed ſhape, and in
               theyr wonted guiſe remaine.
               Ne muſt we thinke that monſters here
               of chaunce or errors growe,
               When cauſe of them aſſertaynde is
               ill tydings to foreſhowe:
               And therof fyrſt did take theyr name
               wherfore their wonders hyght,
               Which nature willingly doth make,
               who often doth delight
               
                  
To brede ſome 
                     •
                  ond ylfauo
                     •
                  red things.
               As paynter oft doth ioy
               (Though he haue cunning great beſyde)
               to paint ſome teſting toy:
               As pycture crooked, or ſaddelbackd,
               wyth noſe of largeſt ſyſe,
               And blabber lypt, a worthy ſyght
               and fit for clowniſhe eyes.
               Synce all things thus in order good,
               and meaſure lyke doe fall,
               Unſtable chaunce within the world
               ſhall beare no ſwynge at all:
               whom chiefeſt prouidence of God,
               and wyſedome great doth draw,
               That he may eaſely vnderſtande
               with what a wondrous lawe
               The worlde with euerlaſting courſe
               is framed here and gracde:
               How euery creature hath his lymmes,
               and members aptly placde,
               well ſeruing to their vſes all
               agreing fayre the ſame,
               How God or nature neuer thyng
               in vaine did make or frame.
               who ponders this ſhal think not chance,
               but reaſon beares the ſway,
               
                  
And al things done as God commaūds,
               wyll deeme, and playnely ſay.
               But whether fortune guideth all
               as many doe perſuade,
               A thing both meete, and worthy is
               in knowledge to be had.
               Let vs bende all our wyts to thys,
               but fyrſt we muſt well knowe
               What kinde of thing thys fortune is,
               and whence hir grace doth growe.
               In auncient tyme they worſhipt hir,
               and Goddeſſe hir did call,
               And thought ſhe bare no little ſway
               in Heauen and earth, and all:
               And alters vnto hir they built,
               and offred ſacrifyce:
               But I thinke hir not God to be,
               nor any ſainct in ſkyes,
               Is eyther male, or female ſure,
               in kinde they not delight,
               No byrth they haue, nor dying day
               as ſome of olde doe wryte,
               Who thinke the Gods lyke vs to be.
               O fonde, and fooliſhe mindes,
               O heads for to be healed with iuice
               of greateſt purging kindes.
               
                  
Judge you the Gods, of our eſtate,
               that wyth theyr Ladies fayre
               Embracing many times they lye,
               theyr kinde for to repayre?
               Let rather vs therfore account
               a certaine God to be,
               Whoſe nature differs farre from Gods
               a Ghoſt of lowe degre,
               And therfore guides the kingdomes vile
               of earth and waters rounde,
               Wheras ſo many haynous factes,
               ſuch griefes and plagues are founde,
               Where as no kinde of thing is ſafe,
               where no eſtate is free,
               where craftes and wyles doe ſwarme ſo thick,
               where ſuch deceiuings be.
               The Prince of all the worlde, thys God
               is named of Chriſt, and Paule:
               Whom Pluto, and ſyr Dites black,
               the Poets vſe to call:
               who fauours fooles, and wicked men,
               and vertuous men moleſt.
               This houſe, thys ſeate, this courte doth ſeme,
               for ſuch a tyrant beſt,
               whom commonly we fortune call:
               for eche ill thing doth raine
               
                  
Beneath the Mone: as darkſome night
               and ſtormes, and tempeſt mayne,
               Wyth colde and heate, and teaſty age,
               dame neede of beggars hall,
               And labour, griefe, and wretchedneſſe,
               and death that endeth all.
               Aboue the Mone continual light,
               wyth peace and ioy remayne,
               No tyme, nor error, death nor age,
               nor any thing is vayne.
               O bleſt, and double bleſt agayne,
               that in ſo pleaſaunt place,
               So fayre, ſo beautifull, to liue
               of God obtayneth grace.
               Some thinke the world to be fulfylde
               wyth other Gods beſyde,
               Whereof the moſt do leade their lyfe
               in ayry places wyde,
               whom Greekes cal ſprytes, & more to thē
               
               the chiefeſt rule they giue
               Of creatures al, that on the earth,
               or on the ſea do liue.
               Affirming that both good and euyl
               as moſt their mindes doth pleaſe
               They ſend, as honours, ioyes, & wealth,
               and contraries to theſe.
               
                  
wherefore it very needeful is
               to pleaſe them often tymes,
               which may be done by ſeruing them,
               by charmes, or by diuines
               As many thinke, and like wyſe ſay
               that they will ſtraight appere
               To vs, (if they be ryghtly calde)
               and helpe vs praying here:
               And that no better thing can be
               here in this life to man,
               Than for to haue their company,
               and ſee them now and than:
               which I beleue but fewe obtayne
               but iuſt men that deſpiſe
               The fond and fading wanton ioies,
               and foode of fleſhly eyes:
               That quietly do liue, and cares
               do baniſh farre away,
               And heauenly things alone do minde,
               and neuer ſeeke to ſtray
               From that, which right and vertuous is.
               Although that ſome do ſay,
               Ill ſprites amongſt theſe good there be,
               conſtrayned to obay
               To naughty men, by Coniuring,
               whereby much ill is done:
               
                  
I can not ſtay, nor now is place.
               the ſigne where as the ſunne
               Doth yelde his yearly compaſt courſe,
               where ſcaled brethren ſhine
               Shall tell the reſt, where as I wyll
               the ſtate of Gods define,
               If God himſelfe doe me permit
               who doth my verſes gene.
               Let vs therefore paſſe ouer this.
               I ſcarely can beleue,
               That any God can euyl be.
               Wyſdome byds neuer ſynne:
               But contrary, by folly doth
               fault, ſtray, and crime come in.
               No man is euil wyllingly
               as farre as I beleaue:
               For euery wyl doth couet good,
               if iudgement not deceaue.
               But Diuel wyſdome hath, (if that
               this name to him agree.)
               But whether Fortune gouerne al,
               or howſoeuer it be,
               Or Diuels guide the ſtate of men:
               but yet wythout deſtenie
               Doth nothing paſſe, But al things rulde
               by minde of God on hie,
               
                  
Without whoſe power nothing is done:
               but of this ſaying here
               A doubt doth ryſe, and knot ſo hard
               and ſure doth eke appere,
               Such one as Hercules, or elſe
               the Macedonian King
               Would ſcarce vndoe, which douht & ſtay
               to many mindes doth bring.
               If deſtenie commaundeth al,
               if al things ſo muſt moue,
               Not wyl to vs remaineth free,
               nor to the Goddes aboue,
               Free wyll is taken cleane away,
               and vertue no rewarde,
               Nor vice doth punniſhment deſerne,
               which is not to be heard.
               No place is now of Gods to ſpeake,
               but of ſuch things as be
               In our eſtate, is ſubiect here,
               which eyes of men may ſee.
               I ſay therefore that in the things
               that vnder fortune be,
               No kinde of thing can here be founde,
               exempt from deſtenie:
               As riches, pleaſures, ioyful minde,
               wyth rule and honours hy
                     •
                  ,
               
                  
Come from aboue: not wyl of ours
               is that we get them by.
               For who would 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſuch things enioy?
               but wyll auayles not thoe,
               It rather hurts if deſtenies
               agaynſt a man do go.
               How many ſtriue to ryſe aloft
               agaynſt their deſtenie,
               But faſter more and more they fal
               and downe they deeper lye.
               On thother ſyde they vnto whome
               the ſtars more gracious be,
               Unlooked for doe often liue
               in chiefe proſperity:
               Whoſe nettes while they themſelues do ſleepe,
               
                  Rhamnuſia ful doth fyll,
               Wyth fiſh, and bringeth vnto them
               al things that they can wyll.
               Loe, ſome of great and noble houſe,
               we ſee to come to light,
               And to 
                     〈◊〉
                   from childehode fyrſt
               all things wyth ioyful ſpright,
               And to attayne to honour hye,
               though they vnworthy be,
               And bli
                     •
                  ded oft their eyes to rule
               that ſcarcely wel can ſee,
               
                  
And lyue in al licenciouſneſſe.
               And ſome of kinred baſe
               For to be borne, wyth griefe and teares
               themſelues for to deface,
               wyth labour long and vayne, to toyle,
               and yet cannot expel
               The pricke of hunger that they feele
               but ſtyl in beggrye dwel.
               who wyl denye theſe ylies to come,
               through cruell deſtnies might?
               A number fayre and actiue are
               and of couragious ſprite:
               And many fowle, and ſyckly ſtyl,
               of courage faynt we ſee:
               whereof cōmes thys? of our deſertes?
               or our infirmity?
               Or ſhal we ſay, our wyl doth al?
               By Fates aſſuredly
               Eche thing doth chaunce to mortal men
               the rule hath Deſrenie:
               Of our affaires and our eſtate,
               the houre and kinde of death
               It only guides: a halter him,
               him ſword depriues of breath,
               He drownde in floudes he kilde wt colde
               him ſtrangleth fyry ſmoke,
               
                  
Some other hunger doth deſtroy,
               and ſome doth ſurfets choke,
               By griefe or ſyckneſſe many dye,
               ſome, chaunce away doth ſend,
               And many age bereues of life:
               a certayne day of ende,
               To al men is, and euery age,
               nor longer can we go
               Than threede of life permits, that rūnes
               the ſpiteful ſpyndle fro.
               So kylde a ryſh the prayſer of
               
                  A chilles luſty lore:
               So Aeſchilus, while as he walkde
               abrode on Sicill ſhore,
               Wyth mighty fall of houſe deceaſſed:
               
                  Anacreon ſo did kill
               A reaſons ſeede. Alas what wayes,
               what meanes hath death to ſpyl?
               When fardeſt of thou thinkeſt him,
               then nereſt ſtandeth he:
               Nothing than death more certayne can
               nor more vncertayne be.
               Yet ſome that know the force of ſtarr
                     •
                  s,
               and ſecrets of the ſkye,
               Soothſaying Po
                     •
                  ts that can tel,
               how things to come do lye:
               
                  
I knowe not with what ſprite inſpired,
               are often wont to tell,
               The kinde, and day, of death to come:
               for of the things aſwell
               To come is nature ſure, as of
               the preſent things and paſt,
               Sure in the fyrſt and ſeconde cauſe
               that from the fyrſt to th' laſt
               With largeſt lynke extended are.
               But goodes or illes of minde,
               Doe they proceede from deſteny
               or from the fatall kinde?
               Learning and wit ſeeme thence to flow,
               may any learning get
               Except he wyſedome doe obtaine
               and nature force permit
               If fortune let or ſyckneſſe ſtaye?
               An Dratour ſome one,
               An other a Philoſopher,
               ſome alwayes looke vpon
               The ſacred ſecretes of the Gods,
               and ſecke the ſtarry ſkye,
               And ſome there are yt drink the ſtreames
               in wretched pouertye
               That from Caſtalian well doe flowe,
               whom pleaſeth pleaſant fame
               
                  
As nereſt kinne to hunger ſharpe
               from whence comes all theſe ſame?
               From deſteny the chiefe of all,
               eche Arte from hence doth flowe,
               Thence offices deriued all
               that mortall men doe knowe.
               In ſundry ſeruants nature ioyes,
               that diuers things thence may
               Procede, to deck the world, and letts
               not all to paſſe one way,
               But them commaūdeth ſeuerall courſe
               and ſeuerall paines to take,
               With ſundry ſort of workes the world
               more beautyfull to make.
               But whether our conditions here
               are delt by deſteny,
               Or whether of our wyll they ſpring
               it ſemeth good to trye:
               Nor labour ſmall it doth appere
               the trouth herem to finde.
               Of our free wyll what portion doth
               remaine within our minde?
               In wretched caſe we lyue if vs
               byreft is libertye,
               If that the chiefe and greateſt force
               of fatall deſteny,
               
                  
Conſtraine vs ill to be, and that
               by force we in be brought
               To wickedneſſe, and if to ſtriue
               therwith auaileth nought.
               Wherfore it ſemeth labour worth
               our wittes to thys to bende,
               And for to ſyft the trouth as much
               as God ſhall knowledge ſende.
               Fyrſt it behoueth vs to tell
               what thys free wyll ſhould be,
               An ample power receiued of God,
               and largeſt liberty
               Deliuered man, that as he lyſt,
               the right, or wayes vniuſt
               He folowe ſhould: not (vertue left)
               that therby ſinne he muſt:
               But contrary the vices thunde
               to applye the vertuous wayes:
               For euill deedes doe harme the ſoule
               and good deſerueth prayſe.
               Beſydes it further muſt be ſought
               if thys free will doth raine
               In all a lyke or if it doth
               in euery time remaine?
               No ſure it ſemeth not to be
               in Children, nor in ſuch
               
                  
As vehement anguiſhe of the minde
               or body greueth much,
               Or they whoſe eyes the heauy ſleepes
               haue ſhut and cloſed ſure:
               For ſlepe is counted plaine of death,
               the liuely portrature.
               Wherfore if thou ſhalt ſearch the truthe
               with well aduiſed minde,
               Thou ſhalt a ſmalleſt ſort among
               ſo many thouſande finde,
               That with free wil do guide themſelues
               and libertie doe vſe.
               The fault of age I ouerpaſſe,
               and childrens yeares excuſe,
               And vnto thoſe that ſleeping lye
               I licence alſo giue,
               Or them whom feuers rage doth roſt
               or ſyckneſſe ſharpe doth grieue.
               Of which a number great there be,
               but greater farre away,
               And worſer eke, whoſe fylthy minde
               doth vices foule aray,
               And fonde affections makes to faint,
               wythdrawing it with ſtrife
               From reaſon farre, and from the path
               of ryght, and vertuous lyfe.
               
                  
May theſe be counted for to haue
               free wyll and libertye?
               A doubtfull thing it ſurely is,
               and many it denye.
               Wherfore thou well muſt vnderſtande
               that he alone is free
               Whom reaſon rules, & that with payne
               will neuer conquerd bee,
               Nor when the ſtormy tempeſts rage
               to rocks is euer thrall,
               But ſtoutly ſticking to the ſterne
               doth with the hauen fall.
               So truely earſt haue certaine ſayde
               but wiſemen none we finde,
               Whom reaſon ruling can correct
               the affections of the minde.
               The other ſort can not doe ſo:
               why? hath not God them delt
               Free wyll? whych euer may be founde
               where reaſon may be felt,
               For theſe are alwayes coupled ſtyll.
               So beaſtes of nature wylde
               Syth reaſon they are thought to lack
               are iudgde from wyll exylde.
               But all men reaſon doe receiue,
               and therfore haue free wyll:
               
                  
For reaſon is the guide of minde
               that choſeth good from ill,
               Deſcerning eke the naughty facts,
               from ſuch as honeſt be,
               And called is the ſyght, and eye,
               wherwith the minde doth ſe.
               Such eye perhaps as Poliphaem
               
               the Poets gaue to thee,
               Wherwyth the lymmes of thy beloued
               in ſeas thou oft didſt ſee,
               But naught (alas) and all to naught
               (who, ſuch, to ſhunne hath might)
               
                  Vliſſes wyth a fiery poſt
               hath it bereft of ſyght,
               And face, the face that fyrſt was fayre,
               of beauty ſpoyled quite:
               Or ſuch an eye as Lynceus had,
               that ſawe in darkeſt night.
               Thys eye therefore to euery man
               
                  Prometheus wyſedome delt,
               But fewe it vſe, a very fewe
               that grace of loue haue felt.
               Hereof the ſpring of errours doth,
               and wickedneſſe aryſe.
               For if the ſteps of reaſon, all
               ſhould treade in nereſt wyſe,
               
                  
Then peace on earthe ſhoulde alwayes (dwell,
               and Mars hys bloudy hande
               Such ſlaughters nor ſuch cryes ſhoulde cauſe,
               & townes & walles ſhuld ſtand,
               And weapons framed fyrſt in hell
               by fiendyſhe furyes wrought,
               Should tille ye field, with good exchange
               to ſhare and cultre brought.
               Then Bees, and Cattel ſwarming thick
               and riches of the fielde,
               Unto the happy huſbandman
               a great increaſe ſhould yelde.
               The golden world ſhould then returne,
               and eke one place containe
               Both man, & God, who would vouchſafe
               before our eyes to raine.
               The cauſe why fewe doe reaſon vſe,
               and wayes forbydden knowe,
               And voide of freewill liue like beaſtes
               I wyll aſſay to ſhowe.
               A certaine part diuine, in vs
               that minde and reaſon hyght,
               There is, which nature in the head
               hath placed a loft in ſyght,
               And ſeruants vnto it appoints
               the ſenſes, that there be,
               
                  
By meanes whereof the Skies & Earth
               and al things it may ſee.
               An other fading force there is
               wythin the breaſt encloſde,
               By meanes wherof we moue, and grow
               wyth helpe of heate diſpoſde:
               (Thus hath it pleaſed God) this ſtraynes
               moleſts and grieues the minde,
               And to this part a number great
               of ſeruaunts, is aſſinde,
               As fond delight. wrath, griefe, and feare,
               wyth great deſire to gayne,
               Ambition hauty harmfull thing,
               wyth fumes that vex the brayne.
               Wyth theſe his luſty ſouldiours he
               giues battayle to the minde.
               Theſe mates attempted Joue to vexe
               of fierceſt giants kinde,
               As Giges ſtrong, Iapetus, and
               
                  Tiphoeus monſtrous ſprite
               
                  Enceladus yll worker, and
               
                  Briareus dredful wight.
               Wyth worldly thoughtes hie heapt they vexe,
               the part diuine aboue,
               Except that grace from heauen hye
               like lightning them remoue:
               
                  
As when the raynes are once let loſe,
               the Chariot headlong dryues,
               And ſwiftly runnes, to ſtay the courſe
               in vaine the Carter ſtryues.
               The fyrſt beginnings muſt be ſtopped,
               whyle ſparke but kindling lies,
               When fyre hath rought the lofty partes
               and flames approch the ſkies,
               Eſpecially when Boreas blaſtes
               from Northerne Pole doth fall,
               And rageth fierce, in vayne alas
               for water then they call.
               As when from top of hawty rocke,
               ſome wayghty ſtone downe trowles,
               What force can it of courſe reſtrayne?
               al things wyth it, it rowles,
               Aſunder crackes the mighty trees
               that on the mountayne ſprings
               Which at the fyrſt might well be ſtayed
               wyth force of ſmalleſt things.
               Euen ſo the affections of the minde
               if that wyth all their ſway
               The minde oppreſt they do inuade,
               them ſcarce, can reaſon ſtay,
               And helme and al forſaken quite,
               wyth ſtreame dame Reaſon driues,
               
                  
In raging windes, and yeldes to foe
               a captiue kept in gyues.
               Therefore while vices yet be yong,
               let them oppreſſed be,
               And voyd the cauſe ere they waxe ſtrong
               then minde and wyl is free:
               Then conquerour thou ſhalt be crownd
               wyth Palme of Idumay.
               
               But if the aſſault be now begonne,
               and ſiege the foe doth lay,
               And ſhakes wyth battrey great ye walles
               except (beleue me well,)
               Some God wyth better grace defend,
               Reaſon doth byd farewell,
               And cannot byde ſo ſore a brunt.
               May we not playnly ſee
               What harmes the minde doth there ſuſtayne
               where Bacchus bleſſings be,
               What madneſſe ofte doth ſpring when wine
               to much in ſtomack raynes?
               Tell where freewyl kepes reſidence
               when drinke doth vex the braynes?
               The ſober and the faſting man
               of freewil is poſſeſt,
               And doth what ſo euer Reaſon byds:
               Againe the dronken geſt,
               
                  
The thing that he ne would, ne knowes
               he alwayes doth the ſame,
               Which deedes he ſobre doth repent,
               and ſorroweth eke wyth ſhame.
               So wyth affections minde is dronke,
               and in none otherwyſe,
               Than wine that topſey turnes the brayn
               when it doth vpward ryſe
               It troubled is and darkd in myſtes.
               Thus he (and none beſides)
               Hath freedome, and his minde at wyl,
               whome reaſon only guides:
               Who all affections ouercommes,
               and wholly doth reſtrayne,
               He that from youth doth vertue vſe,
               may well to this attaine:
               Such force hath vſe, nothing more ſtrōg.
               The other ſorte are wayde
               In manner like to brutiſh beaſts,
               as true the Poet ſayd,
               Eche man his owne delight doth drawe,
               Freewyll in many oppreſt
               And hindred is, wherefore who list
               Freewyl for to poſſeſſe,
               Let hym reſyſt while yong they be,
               thaffections of the minde,
               
                  
And them to reaſon ſubiect make,
               and brydie vſe in kinde:
               For fleſh agaynſt the ſprite rebels,
               and wyth continuall warres,
               Doth it moleſt: The ſoule moſt pure,
               doth couet ſtyll theſtarres:
               But lumpiſh fleſh doth ſhunne the ſkies,
               and earthly things deſyres,
               For earth it onely is, and into
               earth at length expyres.
               Thus two ſo farre contrary things
               hath God compact in one.
               Admit thou art wyſe, and onely rulde
               by reaſons force alone,
               And freewyll perfectly enioyeſt,
               ſhall deſtnie then beare ſway?
               Yea more to Fates thou ſubiect arte,
               and more ſhalt it obey,
               For deſtny is the wyl of God
               where wyth the prudent wight
               Agrees, and doth as it commaundes.
               The fond and naughty ſprite
               On the other part abhorres his lawes,
               and ſhunnes the Lordes decrees.
               But thou wylt ſay: then is he free,
               not rulde by deſtenies.
               
                  
No: but two worſer lordes he ſerues,
               and ſuch as vileſt be,
               As wickedneſſe, and foliſhneſſe
               his ſyſter in degree.
               Though this the wyll of God doth cauſe
               but that which doth permit,
               And not the wil that doth commaunde,
               for of two ſortes is it.
               whereby appeares that al thyngs are
               ſubiect to deſteny,
               whether they be of good eſtate,
               or of a vile degree:
               For miſchiefe deſteny permits
               and good by force doth ſend,
               And God him ſelf cōmaūds, frō whome,
               doth deſteny deſcend.
               wyth reaſous like perſuaded ſome
               to this effect do ſay:
               O mortal men liue ioyfully
               while that you haue a day,
               And doleful cares from heart expel,
               ne trouble once your thought
               wyth things that preſent here you ſee,
               or after ſhall be wrought:
               By fyxed law ſhall all things fall,
               and paſſe by order ſure,
               
                  
Wherefore ſhould griefe or fooliſh feare
               to ſadneſſe you procure?
               Eche man hath here his lot aſſinde
               which written ſecretely,
               Wythin his breaſt he alwayes beares,
               yet nothing knowes thereby,
               But profe thereof doth come to light
               vpon the fatall day:
               When as experience doth reueale
               that erſt in ſecret lay.
               what nedeth ſobs or wayling teares?
               for back can neuer runne
               Celeſtial ſawes, nor nothing chaunge
               that God hath wrought or done.
               For order beſt, and perfect courſe:
               if it ſhould altred be
               It ſhuld be worſe (which may not chāce)
               or better in degree.
               But nothing of more perfect ſtate
               than perfect can be found.
               A doubt both great and maruellous
               doth ſpring vpon this ground,
               For if al things (as late I ſayd)
               are vnder Deſtenie,
               Why frowneth God on ſome, and lookes
               on others graciouſly?
               
                  
why is not fortune like to al?
               why ſeeth ſome happier dayes
               Than other do? and nature why
               ſeemes ſhe to ſome alwayes
               A ſtepdame ſharpe, and vnto ſome
               agayne a mother dere?
               This knot it ſemeth good that we
               ſhould breake aſunder here.
               By fault and by deſert of vs,
               a number thinke that this
               Doth chaunce, and by decree of God
               ſuch as haue done amyſſe
               For to be plagued, and vertuous men
               good Fortune to receue.
               But this by no meanes can be true,
               nor I do it belene,
               For what haue brutiſh beaſtes deſerued,
               what fault in trees can be?
               Yet fortune vnto euery beaſt
               doth ſhew diuerſity:
               The theefe doth ſome conuey, ſome dye
               vpon the Butchars knyfe,
               Some wolues, or ſyckneſſe, froſt or flud,
               ſome age depriues of lyfe,
               Some leade their life more pleaſantly,
               and ſome wyth greater payne.
               
                  
And vnto euery kynde of tree
               hys fortune doth remaine,
               The eaſt wynde cracks a ſonder thys
               and rootes doth vpwarde turne,
               Some ſort are cut for diuers things,
               and ſome in fiers burne,
               And lyghtning ſpoyles an other ſort.
               To euery fiſhe, and beaſt,
               A certaine fortune is aſſynde
               by deſtenies beheaſt:
               Yet neyther tree, nor beaſt can ſynne.
               And oftentymes beſyde
               Miſfortunes great the good man, doth
               and vertuous man abyde:
               On the other part to naughty men
               doth fortune fauour ſhowe,
               And graunts them eke in worldly welth
               and honors hye to flowe.
               Thus deſtnye lookes not on deſertes:
               therfore ſome other way,
               Or cauſe, we muſt attempt to finde.
               Perhaps ſome man wyll ſay
               The wyll of God is cauſe of all
               and ſeekes none other where:
               Thys doth not yet ſuffiſe, we muſt
               go ſyft the truth more nere:
               
                  
For God ſynce he is wyſe, and beſt,
               will not the thing permit
               That reaſon lackes, but chiefeſt things
               commaunds as ſeemes moſt fyt.
               Wherfore we muſt ſay otherwyſe:
               eche cauſe of cauſes all
               As from the fyrſt it farther is,
               ſo more vnlyke doth fall.
               Syth God therfore is alwayes pure,
               and euer one ſhal be,
               The laſt of cauſes that from him
               is fartheſt in degre
               Shall double be, and diuers ſeeme,
               and worke ſhall alwayes frame
               In ſundry ſortes, and altring ſtate
               and this is euen the ſame
               That rules the earth, and euery thing
               that earth doth here containe
               Therfore nothing on earth is ſeene
               that certaine is or plaine.
               Syth fortune hir vnſted faſt wheele
               doth turne in ſundry ſort:
               And mortall men wyth diuers chaunce
               to guide hath chiefeſt ſport.
               But yet why ſmyles ſhe ſo on ſome,
               and frownes on other ſort?
               
                  
Why giues ſhe ſome a lyfe wyth cares,
               and ſome a princely port?
               The cauſe of this is harde to knowe
               as if we ſhould require,
               To know the cauſe of raging heate
               we feele in flaming fyre:
               Or wherfore worwood bitter is,
               why ſnowe doth ſhewe ſo white,
               wherfore ſome herbs haue force to hurt,
               and others healing might,
               And why ſome trees beare ſūdry branch
               why in ſuch ſhape they growe,
               Or why ſome beaſts haue ſubtile ſenſe,
               and ſome are dull and ſlowe,
               Wherfore ye ſtrawes doth Amber draw,
               why Loadſtone lyfteth hye
               The yron peece, why it can not
               doe ſo the Diamonde nye.
               Such things hath God in ſecrete ſhut,
               and vnto mortall braine.
               Appointed boundes, the which to paſſe
               mans wyt doth ſtriue in vaine.
               As if the potter doe deuide
               in ſundry partes his clay,
               And it departed thus abrode,
               to ſundry purpoſe lay,
               
                  
Why rather he of thys than that
               a pot or diſhe doth bake:
               Or baſon broade? Of thys a Crock,
               of that a pytcher make?
               Doth reaſon moue hint thus to doe?
               or reaſon none at all
               But only wyll? as he thinks beſt
               ſo frames he great and ſmall.
               Tys harde to know ye workmans mind:
               Euen ſo, who ſeekes to knowe
               Why fortune ſome exalteth hye,
               and bringeth others lowe:
               A thing to hye he reacheth at,
               for God hath giuen powre
               Of earth to hir, and of the world
               hath made hir gouernour,
               That what ſhe lyſt ſhee may perfourme
               the force of deſteny
               Excepted ſtill, for euery thing
               is gouerned therby.
               why ſhould not ſhe doe what ſhe lyſt?
               what law ſhould hir reſtraine?
               Ought ſeruants lawes for to appoint
               their Lordes for to conſtraine?
               we all hir ſeruants truely are
               whyle we enioy this lyght,
               
                  
And muſt in euery thing obey
               the pleaſure of the ſpright,
               Yet of our ſoules ſhe hath no powre
               whoſe roote in heauen ſtandes,
               Thys onely God exempted hath
               from out thys tyrants handes.
               All other things in earth or ſeas,
               as ſhe ſhall beſt deuiſe
               God ſuffers frely to be done,
               both good and ill likewyſe.
               But ſome wyll ſay: God then is cauſe
               of euery euill act,
               And ſo vniuſt may well be calde,
               for he that doth the fact,
               And he that ſuffers it to paſſe,
               doe both one fault commit,
               And both lyke punniſhement to haue
               the law adiudgeth fit.
               Wherefore if God ſuch illes on earth
               doth ſuffer for to raine,
               And when he well may them forbydde,
               yet doth not them reſtraine:
               He ſhall be thought the cauſe of ill,
               and miſchiefe to embrace:
               Thys part I alſo aunſwere ſhall
               if God doe graunt me grace.
               
                  
Firſt therfore with attentiue minde
               it muſt be noted well,
               That cauſes ſome be baſe, and ſmall,
               and ſome againe excell
               In worthineſſe before the reſt:
               as in a battayle mayne
               Lieuetenants are, and Captaines ſtout,
               the reſt of common traine.
               Theſe cauſes chiefe aboue the reſt
               in wondrous ſort aſſignes
               Thalmighty Lord, that guides aboue
               the Starres, the ſtarry ſygnes,
               Who lyues in euerlaſting lyght
               aboue the Heauens hye,
               That at hys beck doth cauſe to turne
               the motions of the ſkye:
               To euery cauſe aſſigning force,
               and whereto they ſhall tende,
               With certaine boundes encloſeth them
               the which may none tranſcende.
               And ſynce he wyſely all things made,
               of force it followe muſt,
               That euery thyng continuallye
               keepe courſe and order iuſt.
               For things that once are rightly framed
               and fault doe none receaue,
               
                  
Ought not in tract of any times
               their wonted courſe to leaue.
               The order thus of euery thing
               can neuer altred be,
               Bicauſe thalmighty Lorde hath made
               all things in iuſte degre.
               If then the ſprite that guides the earth
               be naught, or worke amiſſe,
               It is bicauſe the baſeſt cauſe
               and fartheſt of is this
               From cauſer fyrſt, and lyght remoued
               a large and ample ſpace,
               And therefore vnto darkneſſe blynde,
               the nerer hath hys place,
               And onely ſhadowe ſhewes of truth:
               which God doth ſo permit
               Bicauſe the ſtate of all the world
               and order aſketh it.
               For as the daye determinde is
               by darkneſſe of the night,
               And things contrary ended are
               by force of others might:
               So ſort and courſe of cauſes good
               as reaſon doth require
               In vyle and wicked cauſe muſt ende
               and fynally expyre:
               
                  
which wycked kingdomes gouerne ſhal,
               and miſchiefes vile ſhall guide,
               Hence diſcorde euermore proceedes
               wyth brawles, and minde to chide,
               Strong battailes, frayes, & falſe diſeyt
               with fyres, and ſlaughters great,
               Theftes, wyles, with nede & robberies,
               and plagues, with raging heate,
               Great earthquakes, ſtormes, & tempeſts great,
               of ſyckneſſes ſuch ſtore,
               So great a ſort of perilles vile,
               and daungers euermore,
               And finally what harmes to hap
               in any place we knowe
               From thys ſo wretched cauſe & Prince
               of all the earth doth flowe.
               Full truely earſt (alas) did ſay
               the famous Hermes wyſe
               This world a heape of harms doth ſeme
               where euery miſchiefe lyes.
               Bicauſe the diuell that on earth
               the chiefeſt ſtroke doth ſmite
               Is miſchieuous, and euermore
               in cruelty doth delight.
               For as the firſt of cauſes is
               the ſpring of all good things,
               
                  
So is the laſt the fountayne chiefe
               from whence all miſchiefe ſprings.
               Wherefore if lecherours on earth
               beare al the rule and ſway,
               If Aſſes ſxt in ſeate as Kings,
               in pompe of proud aray,
               If charge of ſheepe commytted is
               to wolues of rauening kinde,
               If Har
                     •
                  ots in the Churches dwel
               and men of monſtrous minde,
               If that the holy rytes of Chriſt
               the hands vnpure doth fyle,
               If Heauen and purging place Sir John
               doth ſell wyth greedy guile,
               More, if vnpunniſhed ſuch crimes
               are ſtyll before our eyes,
               The fault not in thalmighty Lord
               but in this Diuell lies:
               Whome fortune commonly we name,
               and Pluto oft we call,
               But vnto him an apter name
               
                  Sarcotheus fyt doth fall:
               For vnto him the power of fleſh
               and guiding is aſſinde,
               Him ſerues all ſuch as loue them ſelues,
               
                  
                     •
                  o much wyth fleſhly minde:
               
                  
Of him the bodies are, therefore
               in ſynne they alwayes driue,
               And to the ſoules as enimies
               contrary ſtyl do ſtryue.
               For of the heauens commes the ſoule,
               and from the ſtarry Skyes,
               But earthly are the bodies here
               and heauens do deſpyſe.
               This ſame Sarcotheus thoe that guydes
               the loweſt partes of all,
               Such holy men as do deſpiſe
               the 
                     •
                  oyes 
                     •
                  erreſtr
                     •
                  all,
               To vertue bent, and Godly life,
               he hates and ſtyl purſues:
               And vexeth, grieueth, & them moleſts:
               as commonly doth vſe
               The naughty Prince, and cruel King,
               alwayes for to oppreſſe
               The wyſeſt men, and ſuch as do
               ercell in vertuouſneſſe.
               For vertue of the wicked men
               is euermore enuied.
               Al things their enimies hate and feare
               and ſhunne from them aſyde.
               Therefore the Diuel many harmes
               prou
                     •
                  deth for the meeke,
               
                  
And them whoſe mindes do moūt aloft,
               and hearts do heauen ſeke.
               Ne would he haue his malice ſeene,
               for if he ſhould be knowne,
               Al men would him deteſt, as head
               from whom al ylles haue flowne,
               And bloudy butcher of our kinde,
               him al ſhould iuſtly hate,
               And curſing cal him cruel beaſt
               deceyuer of our ſtate.
               Therefore he craftely lies hydde,
               and from the wyſe man flies,
               Leaſt he be knowne, ne feares he Moles
               but leapes from Linceus eyes.
               So theues do vſe, and wicked men
               alwayes the light to flye,
               And in the darkeſt tyme reioyce
               that none their miſchiefe ſpye.
               Hereof it commes as often as
               men feele aduerſity,
               Al ignorant wyth blindneſſe, and
               of minde oppreſſed be,
               (For ignorance is cauſer chiefe
               of errors al that fal)
               Thinking with anger and complaynt,
               the guyde of goodneſſe al
               
                  
Doth vex thē, ſo they ſtraightway curſe
               his h
                     •
                  e and holy name.
               The wicked Diuel daunceth then,
               and grinneth at the ſame,
               And ioyes to ſee himſelf vnknowne,
               and miſchiefe cloſe to lye,
               And that he thus hath power to hurt
               and no man could it ſpye.
               A foe vnto 
                     •
                  halmighty God
               he is, and ennimy,
               By whome from heauen tumbled down
               in chaynes he here doth lye,
               Encloſde betwene the earth and Mone
               and there he holdes his rayne.
               Wherfore O wretched mortal men
               at length apply your brayne,
               To know the cauſe of al your griefes,
               from whence ſuch ylles do flowe,
               And heauy harmful things do hay,
               your butcher learne to know:
               For this Sarcotheus this is he
               that plagues you in ſuch ſorte,
               That of your harmes & greuous grefes
               doth make his chiefeſt ſport:
               None otherwiſe than Mars his child
               (great realmes in thraldome brought)
               
                  
Wyth death of wret
                     •
                  hed men or beaſtes
               a plea
                     •
                  ant paſtyme ſought.
               The Noble men the Gentlemen,
               the commons all ſyt ſtyll,
               In diuers roomes aſſigned them,
               as Otha
                        •
                     s lawes doth wyll:
               Then enters in before them all
               the cutters for to fyght,
               Or elſe ſome other yeldes hys lymmes
               to beaſtes thereon to byte:
               The Lion, or the Tiger ſtout,
               or elſe ſome fier
                     ••
                  r kinde,
               Should at this play preſent himſelfe
               to pleaſe the peoples minde:
               Wyth death & mangled much wt wound
               from whence the bloud doth flow,
               Oft vnto ſome of others ſmart
               a great delight doth grow.
               Wherefore they do moſt wickedly,
               that rayling thus do brawle,
               And dare blaſpheme thalmighty Lorde,
               the cauſe of goodneſſe all:
               From whome as from himſelf, no yll
               can any tyme proceede,
               Except contingently as Sunne
               doth darckneſſe euer breede
               
                  
As oft as vnder earth it ſlydes,
               and abſent fyre we ſee
               Encreaſeth colde: yet cloud in Sunne,
               nor colde in Fyre can be.
               Wherfore I maruel much that ſome
               whoſe Learning is not ſmal,
               Do ſay that he offended is,
               or wrathful him do cal,
               And that he plagueth vs as oft
               as we do him offend,
               That milde, and Lord of mercies is,
               that goodneſſe al doth ſend:
               And that from him doth warres begin,
               wyth plague and famine ſore.
               If that our deedes could him offend.
               what thing vnhappier more
               Than he, in al the world were found▪
               
               for euery day and houre
               We crimes commit, and blaſphemies
               out of our mouthes we poure:
               Then ſurely ſhould he neuer ioy,
               nor reſt in quietneſſe,
               Nor God ſhould happy be, if that
               as oft as we tra
                     ••
                  greſſe
               He ſhould be wroth▪ & moued with dedes
               of ſuch as ſynfu
                     ••
                  be.
               
                  
But God can not be vexe or harmd
               if we the truth wyl ſe:
               For of ſuch might and perfectneſſe,
               of God the nature is,
               And diſtant euen ſo farre is it
               from our iniquities,
               That we from him do differ more
               and farder are by much,
               Than is from vs the Aſſe, the Flye,
               the Flea, or worſe than ſuch.
               How then can we ſuch wretches vile
               offend a Lord ſo great?
               Or by what meanes may we him harm
               and force him thus ſo freat?
               Is not this God of paſſïons voyd,
               and free from griefe or payne:
               And thereby liues in bleſſed ſtate
               and alwayes doth remayne?
               Doth it becom a Prince to fume
               when foles do fondly prate:
               Or rather them for to contemne,
               ſeemes it a giants ſtate,
               Wyth little children for to fight?
               ſince he knowes al things wel
               And doth the things to come foreſee,
               I thee beſech to tel,
               
                  
Ought he ſuch things for to create,
               as ſhould his pleaſure ſpot,
               Wherby he ſhould be after grieued?
               or rather ought he not
               That helpes the world, to help himſelf?
               or tel if thus diſeaſed
               He willes it ſo, if he wyll ſo
               he is no whit dyſpleaſed,
               But rather ioyes. If he would not
               why doth he it permit?
               Or is he not omnipotent?
               he is, we al graunt it.
               Then ought he not to ſuffer it
               but yet he doth we ſee,
               Whereby no kinde of griefe he feeles,
               as reaſon teacheth me:
               But leades his life in quietneſſe.
               Here thou perchaunce wylt ſay
               If that our ſynnes him not diſpleaſe,
               wyth al the force we may
               Let vs runne headlong into vice
               and neuer ſinne forbeare,
               Not ſo: but to theſe words of mine
               giue thou attentiue eare,
               And vnto thee of truth ſtrayghtwayes
               the gates I ſhall diſcloſe.
               
                  
When any man doth ſynne, then forth
               away he ſtinging goes
               From this ſame ſpring of good, & leaues
               both right, and light, and peace:
               Wherby the ſynner euermore
               hys harmes doth ſtill encreaſe.
               Such is the ſtate of contraryes
               that how much thou doeſt flye,
               From one, vnto the other ſtraight
               thou doeſt approche more nye.
               So he that ſynning flyes from God,
               runnes to Sarcotheus next:
               Whoſe yoke when he hath once put on
               with griefes he ſore is vext:
               And as the tyraunt doth commaunde
               is plagued in ſundry wyſe.
               Thus no man ſynnes but punniſhment
               for hym prepared lyes,
               Yet God is neuer cauſe of ill
               as I haue ſayde before
               As of hymſelfe and properly:
               But he that ſynnes therfore,
               doth with his owne conſent,
               Unto the hangman giue himſelfe:
               to haue his punniſhment
               
                  
But hereof ſprings two crabbed doubts,
               for if that ſynne be cauſe
               Of al our miſchiefe and our ylles,
               and our vnhappy ſawes,
               Why often doth the wicked man
               his lyfe in pleaſure trayne
               And dyeth wel, the vertuous man
               doth many griefes ſuſtayne,
               And endes at length in miſery?
               Beſydes before is taught,
               That by no fault nor our deſerts,
               things good do chaunce, or naught:
               But rather ſeemes it from the power
               of certayne ſprite to flowe,
               Who guides the Seas, and al the earth,
               and ayre poſſeſſeth lowe.
               How ſpeake I thus in contraries?
               my wordes do diſagree,
               But (reader) wel thou ſhalt diſcerne
               the trouth and verity,
               And darkneſſe from thy mynd thou ſhalt
               behold farre of to flye:
               If theſe my words thou wilt vouchſafe
               to heare attentiuely.
               Know therefore double good to be,
               one as the Commons wil,
               
                  
The other as the wiſemen iudge.
               So of two ſortes is ill,
               The opinion of the common ſort
               is worſer euermore:
               For groſſe, and do
                     ••
                  ſhe is their braine
               of iudgement lacking ſtore:
               wherfore the goods of body here
               and ſuch as fortune gaue
               Theſe onely they doe wonder at
               and theſe they ſeeke to haue:
               But now the goods that in the minde
               are founde for to remaine
               They either know not what they meane
               or elſe they count them vaine.
               The wyſe man on the other ſyde
               the onely goods of minde
               Doth ſeeke to haue, and doth deſpyſe
               the reſt and other kinde.
               Thus followed we before the minde
               of rude and common men,
               And as ſuch people vſe to ſpeake
               ſo was my talke as then.
               But from the rude and common ſort,
               my minde doth differ now:
               As wyſe men iudge of good and ill
               at thys tune I allowe.
               
                  
And in ſuch ſort I ſay no good
               vnto the wicked man
               May chaunce, and to the vertuous ſort
               no euill happen can:
               Which plainely will I now declare
               and clerely ſhall appere.
               Fyrſt thys it nedefull is to knowe,
               what vice or cryme is here,
               Is of the minde a ſickneſſe ſore:
               nor men are onely ſyck
               In body here, but minde aye feeles
               hir wounde and greuous prick
               No leſſe in force, than body doth.
               Thus euery euill wight
               Is ſyck, bicauſe hys will is ſyck,
               and iudgement is not right.
               Whereby the wretch ye harmeful things
               more worth than good eſteemes,
               And ſweter aye the filthyeſt factes
               to hym than honeſt ſemes,
               Which if hys minde & wyll were ſounde
               coulde neuer wicked be:
               But iuſt and vertuous ſhould be found:
               in thys they diſagree.
               And as the body all is ill
               when any of theſe twayne
               
                  
Diſeaſed is with maladie,
               the heart, or elſe the braine:
               So, ſo, alas the whole eſtate
               of ſoule is euer ill,
               Whē as theſe two with vice are harmde
               the minde and eke the wyll.
               As pleaſaunt meate to ſtomack ſyck
               doth ſeme vnpleaſaunt aye
               And protytes nothing vnto hym
               that ſyckneſſe doth aſſay:
               So (ſycke the ſoule) no good thing can
               the wicked man come by,
               Nor nothing profytes him at all,
               which true I thus wyll trye.
               Some men in lawes expert we ſee,
               but full of ſubtiltie,
               And couetous, vniuſt, and one
               that wayes not honeſty
               What profites hym hys learning here,
               what good gaines he therfore?
               Alas he wretches doth beguile,
               and ſpoyles hys Clyents poore
               And many other doth he hurt.
               Learning vnto the naught
               Is lyke a ſworde vnto the man
               that mad hath it vp caught.
               
                  
For all things doth the wycked man
               abuſe, and make vnpure,
               To others harme, ſhame to himſelfe,
               and hatred doth procure,
               And in his feete the thornes he ſet
               with anguiſhe often goes
               Or elſe he feareth them, wyth hurt
               whom he hath made hys foes.
               Shall then hys learning good be calde
               which doth ſo many blame,
               And hurt like ſtinging ſnake, ne ſpares
               the owner of the ſame?
               And ſo of other faculties
               that yll men occupie.
               Eſtemed them to be as good
               lyke reaſon doth dente.
               But now the wycked man is riche
               wyth Golde and Jewels ſtore,
               Are not theſe riches good? not ſo,
               tell me the cauſe wherefore.
               Lo here I tell, bicauſe he doth
               abuſe them filthily,
               He kepeth hores, and ſurfetteth,
               and baudes therewith doth by,
               With money gredy boyes corrupts,
               and wyth great gyftes aſſayes
               
                  
The chaſtitie of maidens poore
               that happen in hys wayes,
               And ſo that he may bring to paſſe
               what luſt doth hym perſuade
               Regardes no whit what lawes of men
               or Gods precepts doe trade:
               Who if he once be couetous
               what crime dare he not doe?
               Thys wolfe wc bloudy mouth doth rag
                     •
                  
               
               eche folde to come vnto,
               And runneth headlong into vice
               hys miſch efe to contriue,
               And euery where he followeth harde
               as vyle deſyre doth driue.
               Nothing may worſe be ſuffered
               than fooles in welthy ſtate,
               Than riche men to be couetous
               than ill men fortunate.
               Thus ryther lyke to beastes he doth
               with fleſhely pleaſures go,
               Unto himſelfe an ennimye
               and to hys purſe a foe:
               Or elſe an other Tantalus
               
               hys goods to much doth ſpare,
               And heapes vp all, ne knowes for whom
               theſe heapes he doth prepare.
               
                  
And as the ſwine to his owne bſ
                     •
                  ,
               himſelfe he doth not feede
               But many mo, who fruites of toyle
               doe ſnatche away with ſpeede.
               Wherby appeares no goods to be
               the riches of the yl,
               But if he ſtoute and ſturdy be
               and ſtomacke haue at wyll
               What doth he thē? he ſtratght wil braul,
               and with hys mighty yowre
               Now one, now others ſhall he harme,
               and miſchiefe euery howre:
               Moſt commonly a wartare goes,
               or elſe becomes a chiefe,
               That Tygarlyke by others bloud
               he may receiue reliefe:
               Both warres & weapons fierce he loues
               for miſchiefe not for prayſe,
               whereby he to his countrey gettes
               both loſſe and ſhame alwayes.
               Stout perſonage void of vertuous mind
               puts many men to paine,
               Laſtes lyttle time, and seldome doth
               to aged yeares attaine.
               But what nedes many wordes herei
                     •
                  
               
               ſyth theſe exampies may
               
                  
Suffiſe the trouth therof to ſhewe,
               and clerely to diſplay.
               Now meete it is wyth good aduiſe
               to ſearche if ought can be
               That harmes the iuſt and holy men,
               as many iudge we ſe:
               Sure harde it is, yet boldely will
               I thereto trudge apace
               Presuming of Apolloes helpe,
               and of my Muſes grace.
               Fyrſt euery good man nedes muſt be
               of ſoule and minde both ſounde,
               Though ſyckneſſe in hys body rage
               or ache in limmes be founde:
               Leaſt will, and iudgement tyght in him
               doe lacke or not agre,
               For voide of iudgement, right, & wyll,
               no vertuous man may be:
               Theſe two are the foundations
               wheron doth vertue ſyt.
               Such men whatſoeuer they poſſeſſe
               doe iuſtly order it:
               And therfore is their learning good,
               their ſubſtance and their ſtrength,
               And finally whatſoeuer they
               poſſeſſe, and haue at length.
               
                  
For in the greaceſt ſort of things
               the vſe of them we ſe
               Is it that chi
                     •
                  fly cauſeth them
               both good, and ill to be.
               And if ſo be thimmortall Gods
               of men haue any care,
               They chiefely ought ſuch to defende
               as suſt and vertuous are:
               Which if they ſhould not doe they ſemde
               all voide of reaſon cleare,
               Unworthy cke of odour ſweete,
               of Church or ſeruice here.
               Wherfore I doe not ſe what thing
               can harme the vertuous man,
               Ne yet what ill in body, or
               in minde, he ſuffer can:
               Syth God him kepes and noriſheth,
               and with his mighty arme
               Doth for him fight, and ſets him ſafe
               from euery kinde of harme.
               For who helpes not, or who doth not
               defende his frende at neede,
               whenſoeuer he can, if that he doe
               beare him good wyl in deede?
               But yet ſometimes the good man ſemes
               to liue in miſery,
               
                  
To ſuffer nede, and ſickneſſes,
               and great aduerſity:
               When as in deede he is not good,
               but playes the Hipocrite:
               Wherof a number ſhalt thou finde
               that vnder ſimple plight,
               Do ſecret hide their poyſoned heartes
               and woluiſh natures playne,
               And fooliſh men do oft beguile,
               while they do vertue fayne:
               And therfore god who knowes ye hearts
               and ſecrets of the minde,
               Preſerues him not, nor loueth him.
               But we wyth iudgement blinde,
               And doltiſh head, deceyued wyth ſygne
               and ſhaddow of the right,
               Think then the iuſt man ſuffers hurte,
               and liues in woful plight.
               Alas how often falſe and fond,
               are founde the iudgements blynde
               Of men, and eke how ignorant
               of truth is mortal minde:
               Al pleaſe themſelues, and euery man
               in his conceyt ſeemes wiſe:
               By this we cauſe the Goddes to laugh,
               hence errors moſt do riſe.
               
                  
But here admit the iuſt man feeles
               both griefe and ſickneſſes,
               And leades his life in pouerty,
               and aye in great diſtreſſe,
               Exiled from his countrey farre,
               or pent in pryſon vile,
               Or vext wyth other caſualties,
               doth he take harme this while?
               No: for in ſuffring of ſuch things
               more clerely ſhine he ſhall:
               Al to the beſt to Godly men
               as God commaundes doth fall.
               And as Phyſitians vſe to giue
               the byttreſt medcines oft
               Unto the ſicke to bring them health,
               and rayſe them vp aloft:
               So oftentymes God tries the iuſt,
               to ſtirre them vp thereby,
               That ſo he may them more compel
               their vertue to apply.
               As pleaſure makes men foles, & naught
               ſo payne doth cal to minde,
               And chaſeth vice, a bytte to ſynne,
               a ſpurre to vertnes kinde.
               Seeſt thou not golde in fyry flame
               more precious to be made?
               
                  
And ground more ferule for to be
               by edge of churliſh ſpade?
               And ſtanding waters to corrupt?
               On yron caſt thine eye
               Is fayrer made by occupyings,
               and ruſts if it do lye.
               Thus diuers things there are that vext,
               receyue a clearer ſtate,
               As chiefly vertue, that when as
               hir blackeſt miſchiefes mate
               Appeares moſt bright, as in the darke
               the fyre more fayrer ſhewes.
               wherfore no kinde of griefe at al,
               the good man euer knowes:
               Or if he ſuffers ought his pa▪
               
               cience gets him greater gayne,
               And medcine though it bitter be,
               doth cauſe relcaſe of payne:
               And leaſt ſome man ſhould think that I
               do tryfies fayne in minde:
               The thing that holeſome others feele
               is poyſon to ſome kinde.
               So vnto ſome wines hurtful are,
               and fleſh a harmfull meate,
               So wormwood vnto many health
               doth gyue, and pleaſure greate.
               
                  
So heate doth Snow, and wax, and Iſe
               conſume and melt away:
               which heat doth harder make agayne
               the earth or potters clay.
               So many ſuch in ſundry ſtates,
               do worke in diuers kinde.
               How eft the ſame wordes ſome delight
               that vex anothers minde?
               Al things to al ſortes are not lyke:
               the wines that beſt we deeme,
               If they in muſty calke be kept
               both tart and naught do ſeeme.
               Unto the ſound are al things ſound,
               but ſuch as ſyckneſſe haue,
               Them holeſome meates doe ſometyme harme,
               and almoſt bring to graue.
               So (to my matter to returne)
               the ylles of body than,
               Or ſtings of fortune hurtful be
               vnto the euyl man:
               But good and alſo neceſſary
               for ſuch as vertuous be,
               By which although they hurtful ſeeme,
               they gayne more hye degree.
               Theſe words for this tyme ſhal ſuffiſe,
               for now this booke to ende
               
                  
My Muſe commaundes, & Chiron doth
               vpon my Pen attende,
               Who coueteth of ſtate of man
               to write, and faſhtons rife,
               And open to diſcloſe abrode
               the veſtry here of lyfe.
               Now therfore nedeful is for me
               my Muſes tunes to ceaſſe,
               And ſilent in the ſacred woods
               to reſt my ſelfe in peace,
               And on the roofe of learnings lodge
               on hye to hange my harpe:
               Tyll that theſe tymes be ouerpaſt
               and doubtful ſeaſons ſharpe,
               Tymes much to be bewaylde: wherein
               the diſcorde that doth broyle
               Among the ſtates, all Italy
               
               wyth warres doth ſeke to ſpoyle,
               Whereby doth Rome lament hir cafe,
               hir houſholdes layd on ground,
               
                  Ticinum, Narnia, Melphis eke
               this fall haue felt and found.
               And Naples that wyth Mermaydes tomb
               ſo famous lately ioyed
               Beholding now hir orchards fayre
               wyth French mens hands deſtroied.
               
                  
Alas doth heauy mourne by ſtreames,
               of Sebethes ſo cleare.
               What ſhould I tel the wōdrous flames
               that in the ſkyes appeare,
               More bright than dayes & locuſts grim,
               like cloudes the Sunne to hide,
               And tender corue with gredy iawes,
               to ſpoyle on euery ſyde?
               How many cities woful plague,
               and piteous famine ſore,
               Hath quite depriued of Citizens?
               how many places more,
               Wyth flouds are almoſt periſhed?
               Alas now inſtly now doth God
               plague vs in ſundry caſe?
               What miſchief do we not commyt,
               what iuſtice is in place,
               What loue or ſeruice here of God?
               Religion now is made
               An occupation for the purſe,
               a Marchandiſe and trade.
               The ſacred rytes are aye defyled,
               wyth hands of bandy mates.
               Yet loke theron and let it paſſe,
               the Kings and Princely ſtates,
               
                  
And honour due to Chriſt aboue
               they not eſteeme nor way.
               Thus ouer vs pore miſers here,
               ſuch blockes do beare the ſway,
               Therefore I wyl go hence a while,
               and in Parnaſus hyll
               Until my Muſe doth cal me forth,
               lye cloſe and ſecrete ſtyll.
            
         
         
            Sagittarius, the ninth Booke.
            
               IT waxeth light now Muſe enough
               wythin Caſtalian lake,
               We reſted haue, the wreſt therfore
               and Harp in hand go take:
               Set ſtrings in tune, and with thy grace
               accuſtomed to thy kinde,
               Sing Goddeſſe auncient melody:
               good verſes fyl thy minde
               That erſt Apollo wonted was
               in Bay tree woods to tel:
               While he by riuer ſtoode that runnes
               from out Permeſſus Wel.
               Us calles behold another ioyle
               wherein ſome prayſe ooth lye,
               
                  
Let vs from hautye place and top,
               of Parnas hylles ſo bye
               Beholde the ſundry mindes of men,
               and eke their liuing marke.
               Nowe paſt the middeſt of ſurging ſeas
               had runne my ſayling barke,
               And now the toppes of lofty trees
               wyth froſty ryndes were white:
               When as a certaine God vnknowne
               by me ſtoode vp in ſyght,
               And ſhining wyth his beames deuine
               expellde the blackiſhe night.
               A certaine rock I then behelde
               whoſe top did reache ſo hye,
               That paſſing cloudes aboue it might
               diſcouer plaine the ſkye:
               Harde ſemed it firſt to enter vp,
               for ragged ſtones there was
               Placed round about, which made ye way
               both ſtraight, and ill to paſſe,
               The bottom all beſet wyth bryers:
               the mydſt more mylde againe,
               And nerer as it comes to ſkyes
               the path appeares more playne,
               And eaſyer to be trauailed,
               
                  Theorea eke it hyght
               
                  
Hereto me ſtraightwayes did conduct
               my Ghoſt and guiding ſpright.
               To top wherof when as we came
               I myght beholde and ſee,
               Eche place with wōdrous ſyghts fulfild
               and furniſhed to bee,
               Which if my tong would here declare
               the Sunne ſhould ſoner ſlyde
               To loweſt partes, and night the earth
               with miſty cloke ſhould hyde.
               Whyle as I ſtay, and gaſe vpon
               the large and ioyfull ſyghtes:
               Lo fallyng from the ſkyes aloft
               a voice theſe wordes recytes:
               
                  Stellatus bowe thy knees, and here
               thy humble prayers make
               Unto the Almighty king, without
               whoſe grace thou canſt not take
               The pleaſant pleaſures of this meunt.
               Therefore in humble wyſe
               Kneele thou to God, for fauour all
               doth fall to earth from ſkyes:
               For nothing is wherof to man
               can greater profyte flowe,
               Than heauenly helpe with holy prayers
               to get, and God to knowe.
               
                  
When thys I hearde, vpon the earth
               my face, and hande vpright,
               I bowed my knees, and poured out
               theſe words in harty plight.
               O Father great of ſaints, chiefe powre
               that in the worlde may be,
               Than whom may neuer thing be found,
               nor thought of more degree,
               Remoued farre from body here,
               yet framing faſhyons all,
               Both ſuch as neuer fade, and ſuch
               as times at length lettes fall:
               The firſt, and of beginning voide,
               the fountaine whence doth ſpring
               All kinde of good, of nature eke
               the auctor▪ guide, and king:
               That all things here doſt comprehende,
               comprended thou of none,
               The hye Almighty Maieſty,
               and chiefeſt good alone,
               Lyfe, wyſedome, order, praiſe, and ende,
               minde, truth, way, lyght, and grace,
               No where thy ſelfe inhabiting,
               and dwelling in eche place,
               Unmoueable, and mouing giueſt
               to all and euery thing,
               
                  
From whom, in whom, & eke by whome
               all kynde of things do ſpring:
               In one eſtate remaining ſtyll,
               and changing in no time,
               The chiefeſt cauſe that rowling aye
               the Globe where ſtarres doe ſhine,
               Doeſt guide by fixed law thappointed
               force of deſtenye:
               Of Lordes the greateſt Lorde of all,
               and King of Kings moſt hye,
               Before whoſe face a thouſande beaſtes
               of Angels glyſtering bright,
               Doe miniſter with ioyfull hymnes,
               in preſence of thy ſyght,
               Amidſt the ample fieldes of lyght
               aboue the worlde ſo hye
               Where apteſt place and ſeate there is
               for things of certaintye.
               I worſhip thee, I honor thee,
               and proſtrate here on face
               I lyft mine eyes deſyring thee
               wyth mylde and cherefull grace,
               Upon me ſynfull man to looke,
               and heare my earneſt crye,
               Poure downe into my earthly breſt
               thy beames of lyght from hye,
               
                  
Driue darkeneſſe frō my minde oppreſt
               alas in dolefull wyſe,
               Whyle in conſuming carcaſſe here
               and fading fleſhe it lyes.
               Graunt me the perfect path to finde
               leaſt harmefull errors ſting
               wyth fanſy fonde, and iudgement blind,
               in ſynne me headlong fling.
               For without thee, the wit of man,
               and force of mortall kinde,
               while it intendes to mount a loft
               receiues a greater fall:
               As Icarus whoſe wyngs him faylde
               when he flewe hyeſt of all.
               Graunt therfore O moſt mighty king
               to mee thy creature lowe,
               Thy will to learne, and thee to pleaſe,
               and then that I may knowe
               Mine own eſtate, from whence I came,
               and wherto I was made,
               And whether I at length ſhall paſſe
               when that from hence I fade:
               what here in lyfe I ſhould perfourme,
               and what I ſhould not doe:
               That when dame Lacheſis my threde
               of lyfe hath ſnapt in two,
               
                  
And that the fartheſt day is come
               that long with priuie ſtelth
               Procurde my graue death bring my reſt
               and part of ſauing helth.
               Theſe words thus ſayde, an other voice
               againe did pearce my eares,
               Thalmighty Lorde thou pleaſed haſt
               thy prayer full well he heares:
               Pluck vp Stellatus now thy heart
               to thee for to remaine
               Here on this mount it graunted is
               and ſacred fruites to gaine.
               Thys ſaid forthwith the voice did ceaſſe,
               nor worde it vttered more:
               Then in my minde a greater force
               I felt, than earſt afore,
               And ſharper ſyght: then looked I forth
               all things deſcerning well
               And for my eyes, they myght preſume
               olde Linceus to excell.
               With that I felt a ſubtill wynde
               to lyft me vp on hye,
               which ſoftly cauſde me to aſcende
               to toppe of ſtarry ſkye:
               Much lyke the byrde that beares ye darts
               that 
                     
                        •
                     ulcans forge dyd frame,
               
                  
That when we ſynne, ye thunder thomps
               doe fling and flaſhe oft 
                     ••
                  ame.
               And nowe approcht I nere the Moone
               whoſe ga
                     •
                  es I had in iyght,
               Wherof, part gliſtred all with golde,
               and part with ſyluer white.
               I entre in beholding al,
               when ſtraight with me doth meete
               
                  Timalphes yong, of vertues great,
               and eke of fauoure ſweete:
               (Whom of Arete Ioue bega
                     •
                  
               
               in auncient tymes of olde.)
               He knewe me ſtraight, for oft he had
               hys mothers heſtes me tolde,
               And when eche other greted was
               he much things aſked of me:
               And after brought me to a towne
               of hugeſt quantitie,
               The loftye walles of Diamonde ſtrong
               were rayſed hye and framde,
               The bulwarks built of Carbuncle,
               that all as fiery flamde.
               O Lorde what gorgeous houſes there,
               and goodly ſyghtes I ſaw,
               As Temples fayre, and Theaters,
               
               and ſtreetes, and ſeares of lawe:
               
                  
Al framed of ſyluer, gold and ſtone,
               and more of goodly kinde
               I there beheld, but cannot now
               beare al away in minde:
               And though I could remembre al
               yet God doth not allowe,
               That cōmon peoples heads ſhuld know
               the ſtate of all, and how.
               I wondred at the number great
               that through the city ſo
               Al clad in white by thouſands thick
               amyd the ſtreates to go,
               Their heads beſet wyth garlands fayre
               in hand the Lillies white,
               They ioyful beare Menarchus guyde
               of Cynthyus kingdome bright:
               Remembring oft wt Himnes they ſyng,
               and ſwete agreing layes,
               
                  Menarchus name they oft rehearſe,
               
                  Menarch wyth Pſalme they prayſe:
               
                  Menarchus name did Eccho lowde
               reſounding oft ſend out,
               He vanquiſhed in happy fielde
               th' Arcadian giants ſtout:
               As then Timalphes tolde to me
               wyth wordes that were not vayne.
               
                  
Once was (quoth he) Arcadia voyd
               of hylles, and al lay playne,
               There dreadful giants kingdome held,
               as Maenalos the hye,
               And Pholoe, and Lyceus great
               that ioyed in woods to lye:
               And Erymanth whoſe ſhoulders bare
               the backes of ſauage ſwine,
               
                  Cyllenes eke that boylde wyth ſpyte,
               agaynſt the powers diuine:
               Who fyrſt before the reſt preſuming
               al of force and might,
               Durſt giue ill language to the Moone
               wyth wordes of canckred ſpite,
               That they before hir long were borne,
               and of more noble race,
               And ſo that they deſerue the names
               of Gods, and higher place.
               Beſydes in rage a towre they built
               amyd the ſkies to looke:
               O Nemroth larger farre than thine,
               and wyth an yron hooke,
               Attempted thrice from place to pluck
               this Goddeſſe where ſhe ſtandes,
               Bloud red for feare to ſee hir ſelfe
               ſo nere to wretches hands:
               
                  
                  Menarchus gaue them thrice repulſe
               wyth valeant force and might,
               And thrice the iuice out preſt from gras
               of olde Saturnus ſpright:
               Among them 
                     •
                  aſt the poyſon runnes
               ſtraight wayes through al their bones
               Wyth chy
                     •
                  ling colde, conſumed wt payn
               they leaue their liues at once:
               And vggly ſoules they cleane forſake,
               which hel below receaues,
               Wher as with paynes they plagued are
               that neuer after leaues.
               But now their bodies quite deſtroyde
               by force of venome late,
               Their carcaſſe turnde to lofty hilles
               kepes name wyth chaunged ſtate.
               Whereby this deede and triumph great
               in minde the Moone men heare,
               And celebrate wyth ſolemne pompe
               this feaſt from yeare to yeare,
               And to their king they worſhip make
               with great and ioyful cheare.
               Thus paſſing forth, we found a tower
               that all of Gold did ſhine,
               Al wrought, & ſet wyth precious ſtones
               of ſundry colours fine:
               
                  
Here quoth my guyde, no mortal man
               may euer ſet his feete:
               We ſtayde therfore, and by the ſpace
               of large and ample ſtreete,
               On euery ſyde we might beholde
               approching ſoules at hand,
               And there before the ſeate and place
               of iudgement for to ſtand:
               Which placed was agaynſt the towre,
               and wrought right cunningly,
               Three ſonnes of Ioue and fayth begot
               ſyt there in ſea
                     •
                  es ful hye,
               To iudge the ſoules, regarding wel
               of al their ſinnes the ſtore,
               And vertuous deedes that euery man
               hath done in earth before.
               
                  Teleſcopus and Dorophon
               
               
                  Philorthus frend alway
               To iuſtice, theſe, deſertes and faultes
               in perfect balance way:
               And by their iudgements very fewe
               to heauen did aſcend:
               But thouſands of the ſame agayne
               to earth did downe deſcend,
               And many alſo in the Moone
               they did commaund to ſtay.
               
                  
Aſtoniſhed long wyth gaſyng ſyght
               at length I gan to ſay:
               Declare to me good guyde quoth I,
               if Hell beneath doth lye
               In deepeſt dongeon of the earth,
               and to the Center nye,
               And ſoules thereto conueyde they ſay
               the corſe clapt vnder hearce,
               Olde Aeacus and Minos there
               and Radamanthus fearce
               Do euer iudge, and giue rewardes
               or elſe deſerued payne,
               How chaunceth it I here beholde
               the like thing done agayne?
               Mannes mind (quoth he) in pryſon dark
               of carcaſſe ſhut doth lye:
               And forced by fault and ignorance,
               is led by wayes awry.
               By this is man to dreames and toyes
               of nature prone and bent,
               And from the truth he wanders farre,
               if grace do not preuent.
               No maruel thoe, if many things
               your Poets falſe haue ſong:
               Bycauſe to treade the ſteppes of truth
               lies not in euery tong.
               
                  
But thou, haue alwayes well in minde
               theſe myſteries I tell:
               All things are good and neuer fade
               aboue the Moone that dwell,
               Nor griefe can vexe thoſe ſacred ſtates:
               But all that nature framed beneath
               the Moone, is nought, and ill,
               And lawe ſeuere of death doth feele,
               and force of time to ſpyll.
               Theſe places doth the middle ſpheare
               of Moone in twaine deuide,
               Placde equally betwixt the worlde
               doth boundes to heauen bide.
               Thus when that lyfe is fledde, all ſoules
               are brought vnto thys place,
               And here pleade gilty or vngilty
               before the iudges face:
               By whoſe awarde, to certaine roomes,
               according to their deedes
               They ſtraight are ſent, receiuing there
               for their deſertes their meedes.
               And euery one the henyer they
               with heapes of vice are made,
               The deeper they deſcende the pyt
               of darke infernall ſhade.
               
                  
Agayne the better that they be
               and farther of from crime,
               So much they higher mounting vp,
               more nye the heauens clime.
               But they whoſe ylles do counterpeaſe
               the vertues of their minde,
               For to remaine about the Moon
                     •
                  ,
               are many yeares aſſinde:
               Tyl eyther falling freſh to vice,
               when many yeares are ſpent,
               They turne to earth, or purged wel,
               are into heauen ſent.
               Loe thus he ſayd. But then agayne
               what is the cauſe quoth I,
               That ſoules ſo fewe the ſtarres approch
               and gayne the heauens hie?
               Why runne they hedlong ſo to vice,
               and (Miſers) vertue flye,
               Why more eſteme they dark than light
               and rather ſynne to apply
               Than vertue pure? where of to them
               doth ſo great madneſſe riſe?
               What will ſo fond doth them beguile,
               what fanſy bleares their eyes?
               Then aunſwered thus Aretes ſonne:
               both I do it deſire,
               
                  
And mete it is, that I diſcloſe
               the things thou doſt require,
               And many other things beſyde,
               which thou thy ſelfe ſhalt ſay,
               Are worthy to be learned here
               and to be borne away,
               Since here wythout the power of God
               I know thou canſt not come,
               Who liſt ſuch things to thee to ſhewe:
               before the gates of whome
               No man aliue may once approch,
               except by him aſſinde,
               Then now giue eare, and what I ſay,
               beare wel away in minde.
               But nedeful fyrſt it is for vs
               a little hence to walke.
               We went, and in a lofty tower
               we both ſyt downe to talke,
               From whence both ſeas & land ful plain
               we might beholde and ſee.
               Then thus from ſacred breſt, this voice
               he vttred out to me:
               As of them ſelues the ſoules can not
               be yll, nor bent to ſynne,
               Since yt their kinde doth come frō ſkyes
               and ſpring from God begynne:
               
                  
Nor of theyr owne and proper wyll,
               their natures can be nought,
               Since God them made who neuer thing
               of euill ſtate hath wrought.
               But many other cauſes be
               that into dongeon vile
               Of hel do downwards thruſt theſe ſouls
               and them with vice defile.
               And chiefe of them the body is,
               wherein the ſoule lyes bounde
               As in a pryſon ſtrong, whoſe bondes
               doth iudgement quite confounde:
               No otherwyſe than fyre is hydde
               wythin an earthen pot,
               And miſty cloudes doe darke the ſyght
               of flaming Phebus hot.
               Then all things doth the ſoule forget,
               And Lethes ſtreames doth taſte,
               And lyke apperes to papers blankt,
               wherin no worde is placde.
               Thus captiue cloſed in fading fleſhe,
               a thouſande miſchiefes ill,
               A thouſande Monſters hir aſſault,
               and alwayes ſeeke to ſpill,
               Lyke as the Goldefinch whyle in cage,
               hir dolefull deſteny
               
                  
wyth ſundry fortes of pleaſaunt tune
               doth ſeeke to pacify:
               To whom all cloſe and couertly
               the crafty Cat comes neare,
               And driues moleſting ſore the wretche
               on euery ſyde to feare.
               The Cat a bane to ſymple byrdes,
               of Myce the finder out,
               She fearing ſore the ſpoylers pawe,
               doth ſlutter rounde about
               The Cage, and ſaues hir ſelfe by flight:
               when preſent doth appeare
               An other foe with furye lyke
               the ſelly wretche to feare,
               Who thruſting in hir Tallons ſharpe,
               doth take hir cleane away,
               And feedes thereon with wonted noyſe
               as on accuſtomed pray.
               So 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪ and thore with diuers foes
               th'vnhappy ſoule is toſt,
               And flying farre the ginnes of ſome
               is in the others loſt:
               White inclo
                     •
                  de in carcaſſe here it li
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               It knowes not what to do,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   daunger here for to beware,
               or what to cleaue vnto.
               
                  
And with the ſhowe of good deceiued,
               much like the dronken wyght
               It ſtackring ſtandes. Whereby, if that
               by ſome that teache aryght,
               Or by their ayde that warning giue,
               it be not ledde or brought
               From darkenes blinde vnto the lyght,
               it runneth ſtyll to nought,
               And better things doth aye refuſe.
               of ſoule the chiefeſt ſtaye:
               Contagion fyrſt, and chiefeſt ill,
               that through the fleſhe doth rayne,
               Is ignoraunce of truth and good,
               from whence out ſpringeth than,
               Falſe iudgement as the greateſt plague
               that happens vnto man.
               Wherof two monſters are begot,
               folly, and wickedneſſe,
               From theſe two euery 
                     〈◊〉
                   proceedes
               that man can here expreſſe.
               For all men ſinne, eyther bicauſe
               the goodes here counterfeat
               
                  
                     •
                  hey moſt eſteeme as folly leades,
               or elſe that miſchiefe great
               
                  
                     •
                  oth prick them forth to wicked de
                     〈…〉
                  .
               Wherfore, we iuſtly may
               
                  
Count him a foole, or wicked man,
               that doth from reaſon ſtray.
               But in that part of ſoule that luſtes,
               there ſyttes dame follyes grace,
               And there ſhe pytched hath hir tents,
               and choſe hir dwelling place:
               In the other part all bent to wrathe,
               there miſchiefe hath his holde,
               With force, and Craft, & poyſon ſtrong
               moſt dreadfull to be tolde.
               Theſe two (for truth) are mighty kings,
               and armyes great behinde
               They leade, and both deſtroy
               the ſtate of mortall kinde.
               They both are ygnorant of truth,
               and framed falſe iudgement by,
               (As earſt was tolde) the ſoules that in
               the careaſſe buryed lye
               Unmindefull of their owne eſtate,
               and voide of light withall,
               Into three lakes of Hell, and death,
               they leade, and downe let fall.
               Of which the firſt Limoſum hight,
               therein doth pleaſure rayne,
               
                  Spinoſum is the other calde,
               where vile deſyre to gaine,
               
                  
And couetouſnes, doth rule: the thyrde
               
                  Fulmoſum hath to name,
               Where pride beares ſway, yt thriſteth ſtill
               for honours hye and fame.
               In theſe three lakes the greateſt part
               doe periſhe euery daye:
               Of all the ſoules within the worlde
               this is the chiefe decay.
               For ſuch as ſlyde into theſe pooles.
               them euermore diſtroyes
               The luſt of fleſhe, and gredy minde,
               of fonde and fading ioyes.
               Ne of themſelues they knowledge haue
               nor of the heauens bright,
               Nor other lyfe they thinke to be
               than this in preſent ſyght.
               O fylthy, fonde, and doltiſhe mindes
               from heauen turned quite,
               Not minding hye or worthy things
               but ſtill in brutiſhe plite,
               Reſpecting only here the earth.
               Beſydes are cauſes mo,
               wherby the ſoules infected are,
               and often plaged ſo.
               For where the clouds are thronged thick
               and ſhowres of raine proceede,
               
                  
And windes wt dreadful meeting ſounde
               doe flaſhe of lightnings breede,
               There is the place of vglye ſprites,
               by whom doe plagues aryſe,
               With battailes fierce & raging ſtormes,
               through ſeas, and lande that flyes.
               By craft and by the tempting force
               of them, and their deceit,
               The ſymple ſort of men doe fall
               to euery miſchiefe great:
               Hereby both right and honeſty,
               they quite caſt from their minde.
               But now, bicauſe theſe temptours here,
               and fiendes of deuiliſhe kinde,
               Fewe can obtaine wyth eyes to ſe,
               therfore but fewe beleue
               That any ſuch things doe remaine,
               nor credit wyll they gene:
               Nay rather many doe account
               it but an ydle fame,
               And as at dreames of folkes diſeaſed,
               ſo laugh they at the ſame.
               But thou driue from thy minde away
               thys fooliſhe hereſy,
               And giue good credite to my wordes
               of greateſt certainty.
               
                  
And for bicauſe thou ſhalt perceiue
               I teache not trifles vaine,
               I wyll procure that thou ſhalt ſee
               all thyngs before thee plaine.
               But fyrſt it needefull is wyth prayers
               Dame Rainebowe for to trye,
               Who wonted was to beare the heſtes
               of Iuno through the ſkye:
               That ſhe with winde diſperſe ye cloudes,
               and make the ſkyes looke fayre,
               Leaſt that thy ſyght be hyndered,
               by dymneſſe of the ayre.
               Then humbly in thys wyſe I praide:
               O thou Thaumatis hye,
               Of ſundry colour to beholde
               a beauty to the ſkye,
               That ſtretcheſt forth in miſty cloudes,
               thy great and myghty bowe,
               And Phebus ſhining bright his beames
               in thee doeſt beare and ſhowe,
               And flouds vp ſuckt vnto the cloudes
               doſt bring and carry farre,
               O Rainebowe wondrous ſyght to men
               and Iunoes Meſſanger:
               And truely got of Thaumas olde,
               the daughter paſſyng fayre,
               
                  
Graunt I thee pray all darkneſſe fledde
               a cleare and Cryſtall ayre.
               Shut vp in caues of Eolus,
               
               the ſouth windes cauſe of rayne,
               And ſende abrode the northerne blaſtes,
               to make fayre dayes againe.
               Immediately vpon theſe wordes,
               from out the northerne ſyde
               Did Boreas blowe, and with hys blaſt
               clearde all both rounde and wyde,
               Then ſprinkling in mine eyes a iuyce,
               my guide, beholde quoth he,
               Now ſhall the ſecrets of the worlde,
               reueled be to thee.
               Now open wyde your ſprings, & playne
               your caues abrode diſplaye,
               You Syſters of Parnaſus hyll,
               beſet about wyth baye,
               And vnto me (for neede it is)
               a hundred tongues in verſe
               Sende out, that I theſe ayrie kings
               and people may rehearſe,
               Deceiuers great of men and guides
               of vice, which all that liue
               Doe ſtyll moleſt: and by their craft
               mans ſoule to hell doe giue.
               
                  
Here fyrſt whereas in chariot red
               
                  Aurora fayre doth ryſe,
               And bright from out the Occean ſeas,
               appeares to mortal eyes,
               And chaſeth hence the Helliſh night,
               wyth bluſhing beauty fayre,
               A mighty King I might diſcerne,
               placde hie in lofty chayre,
               Hys haire wyth fyry garland dockt,
               puft vp in fiendiſh wiſe,
               Wyth browes full broade, & threatning loke,
               and fyry flaming eyes.
               Two monſtrous hornes & large he had,
               and noſtrils wide in ſight,
               Al black himſelf, for bodies black
               to euery euyll ſpright
               And vggly ſhape, hath nature dealt,
               yet white his teeth did ſhowe,
               And white his grenning tuſkes ſtode,
               large wings on him did growe,
               Framde like the wings of Flindermics
               his feete of largeſt ſiſe,
               In faſhion as the wilde Duck beares,
               or Gooſe that creaking cries:
               His tayle ſuch one as Lions haue
               Al naked ſate he there
               
                  
But bodies couered round about
               wyth lothſome ſhagged haire,
               A number great about him ſtoode,
               a wondrous forte of men,
               A greater company I think
               than Xerxes trayned, when
               By force of armes (vnhappy man)
               the Greckes he did inuade:
               And ſcarce in ſafety could returne
               wyth al the flight they made,
               Eche one of them in hand a hooke
               did holde, and Belbowes beare,
               Wyth bellowes for to fyll their heades,
               with winde, whom Fortune here,
               Had eyther lent great ſtore of golde:
               or whome they ſaw ful well,
               In learning, beauty, ſtate or ſtrength,
               their fellowes to excell.
               Wyth hooke ſuch as wyth wantō wind
               were puft ſufficiently,
               Amyd the ſmoky lakes to caſt,
               wyth Snakes and Toades to lye.
               And other monſters there that dwelt.
               This luſty foreſayd King,
               
                  Tiphurgus had to name: as ſayd
               my guide that tolde eche thing.
               
                  
Then where the Sūne doth downward fall,
               amyd the weſterne ſtreames:
               From whence among the Spaniards,
               he throwes his lateſt beames,
               I caſt mine eyes, and like the fyrſt low
               another King in ſyght
               I had, that ſate in ſeat aloft,
               his name Aplesto hight:
               A number great of ſprites he rulde,
               ſuch as amyd the weſt
               Are bred, and ſuch as in thoſe partes
               do dwel and haue their reſt.
               Eche one of them a Serpent holdes,
               a fleſh hooke alſo hath.
               Then ſpake Timalphes in this ſorte:
               ſeeſt thou quoth he, to wrath
               How euery man their Serpents moue?
               and pinching oft do touch,
               That ſharper may they ſet their teeth,
               and poyſon more by much
               Deſtil in hearts of earthly men,
               for they on whome doth hitte,
               The force of thoſe ſuch poiſoned teeth,
               do forth wyth loſe their witte,
               And he auenly things do cleane deſpiſe:
               and wyth ſuch thirſt they broyle,
               
                  
That licoure none can them ſuffiſe
               wyth drink in vayne they toyle.
               And while thus euermore in vayne
               they drink and ſtyll are drye,
               Unmindful of their death, theyr lot,
               themſelues, and heauens hye:
               Then ſtrayght at hād theſe diuels come
               wyth hookes as here you ſee,
               And catcheth them, & ſtrykes the throtes
               that yet ful thirſty be
               To fling in flouds of thorney lake:
               where as wyth wondrous paynes
               They punniſht are wyth Monſters vile
               that ſecret there remaynes:
               Blond ſpecially wyth bloudſuckers
               that thick about them lies:
               And hyting ſtyll, both day and night,
               them plages in piteous wyſe.
               At length they yeld agayne the bloud,
               that whilſt they here did liue
               They ſuckt from men, nor eaſe of ſmart
               no ſpace of yeares can giue.
               This King both makes and plages ſuch men
               as couetous he made.
               Thys ſayd, I turnde my eyes to ſtarres
               that glide in coldeſt glade,
               
                  
Wheras our Pole doth plaine beholde,
               and viewe the double beare,
               And where Bootes driues hys waine,
               in euer rowling ſpheare.
               And there an other king I ſee,
               and thouſande ſpirites ill
               That dwel about thoſe northerne partes
               whoſe handes great hookes doe fill.
               Then ſayd my guide: this king yt raigns
               in partes of Boreas colde
               Of Lechery, and Gloconye,
               doth Crowne and Scepter holde.
               
                  Philocreus eke to name he hath,
               in fraude full lyke the reſt:
               O Lord with how great harmes doth he
               poore mortall men moleſt?
               For on theſe hookes that here thou ſeeſt
               the baytes that taſt full well,
               He tyeth faſt where poyſon lurkes
               of filthy flouds of hell.
               And wyth theſe baytes he doth cōmaūde
               the doltiſhe fooles to take,
               And catcht in puddles to be caſt
               of muddy miery lake.
               Who ſtraight tranſformed into ſhape
               of vgglye beaſtes, appeares
               
                  
Both Swine and Aſſes, Bulles & Foxe,
               and wolues, and lothſome Beares:
               And others Monſters voide of minde.
               Nor this doth yet ſuffyſe,
               with Harnets, waſpes, & Betels blinde
               that rounde about there flyes,
               Continually they vexed are.
               Lo thus Philocreus men are plagued
               in piteous painefull wyſe,
               That couet onely carnall ioyes,
               and vertue here deſpyſe.
               Thus ſayth my guide, but I my eyes
               about the ſoutherne pole
               Do caſt, frō whence ye clouds are cauſde
               in euery place to rolle.
               with ſtedfaſt ſyght I note, what ſort
               of ſprites I there can ſee,
               And flocks of fendes wt wings full black
               that ſwiftly flying bee.
               Amongſt them all a mighty king
               there ſtoode with Crowne of pride
               wyth lowring browes, and dogged loo
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               and in hys mouth full wyde
               A monſtrous tongue he hiſſyng ſhocke,
               and lyke the lothſome Snake
               
                  
He caſtes abroade from out hys throte
               a fylthy poyſon black,
               Such as the adder (while he burnes
               wyth loue of Lamprey long,
               Much fearing for to harme his ioy
               wyth deadly venome ſtrong)
               Caſts vp among the ragged rocks,
               and hydes it ſecretly,
               And ſpringing ſtraight with luſty leape
               into the ſeas doth flye,
               And calling oft wyth hyſſing ſound
               doth ſeeke his louers deare,
               Who runnes to meete hir mate in haſt,
               whoſe voyce ſhe weldoth heare,
               And both wyth much embracing ioyne.
               But when their pleaſaunt play
               Is fully paſt, and finiſhed,
               the Snake wyth ioy away
               Doth ſwimme to land, and on the rocke
               whereas his poyſon lay,
               He ſearcheth for his owne defence.
               which if he finde away,
               Or ſpylt, or troden vnder foote,
               ſuch griefe he then ſuſtaynes,
               That mourning, weary of his life
               he daſheth oft his braynes,
               
                  
Agaynſt the ſharp and ragged ſtones
               tyl that his breath at laſt
               Wyth al his wretched paynes & griefe,
               by death be ouerpaſt.
               Such was this King, and ſuch did ſeme
               his ſubiectes for to be:
               Oft tymes the Prince a paterne is
               vnto the commontie.
               with Fawchon great in right hand held
               eche one of them he goeth,
               Al black, both face, and teeth, and lippes
               al ful of fylthy froth.
               This King was Lord of enuy great
               
                  Timalphes colde me there,
               And that Miastor was his name,
               by whoſe awarde ſeucre,
               His ſeruants fyll the heartes of men
               wyth froth of canckred ſpyte.
               Then runnes the plague through euery veine,
               and euery where doth light,
               But moſt of al doth vexe the eyes,
               that they 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſuffer may
               To ſee their fellowes lyue in wealth,
               but thereat pyne away.
               At laſt they thruſt thē through wt dartes
               and ſoules ful ſicke expell,
               
                  
Whereon wyth triple throte doth chaw
               the fiendiſh hound of Hel:
               And chawed, to poiſō ſtrong doth turn,
               and of their bodies ſpring
               Fowl Scorpions, which although they fawne
               wyth tayle do deadly ſting.
               But now behold the middle partes,
               that in the ayre doth lye,
               And there Sarcotheus ſee, aboue
               the reſt a King moſt hie.
               And of them al moſt miſchieuous.
               The other Kings that be,
               Do feare and alſo worſhip hym,
               the power and rule hath he
               Of al the diuels in the world
               from whome the miſchiefs al
               Do flowe as from a poynt: and as
               the beames from Phaebus fal.
               I then beheld this vggly fiend,
               placde vnder cloth of ſtate,
               That in his hand the ſcepter held,
               of miſchiefe pride and ha
                     •
                  e.
               From him doth ſpring f
                     •
                  l bloudy cōbs▪
               
               and ſeauen hornes in bight,
               The number like of lofty towers
               in ſhewe reſembling right.
               
                  
His eares hys noſtrilles and hys eyes
               all fyerie filthy glowe,
               And from his dampiſhe throte he doth
               the ſmoky flames out throwe,
               Alas, how farre the number great
               of hys companions ſpreade,
               What armyes armed all wyth dartes
               and gunnes, thys fiende doth leade:
               As if he would the heauens burſt,
               and ſaincts from thence expell.
               Then quoth my guide: thys diuell once
               in beautie did excell,
               And moſt with God in fauour ſtoode:
               but minde diſpoſed ill,
               And pryde to proſprous ſtate alied,
               thys Miſer quite did ſpyll.
               For lyke to God he nedes would be,
               and honours equall haue,
               And thus from thence was baniſhed
               the proude preſumptuous ſlaue.
               Whom Michaell as he was aſſynde,
               in griſley cloude hath tyde,
               And there apointed him hys place
               where he ſhould ſtyll abyde.
               But often, of hys olde eſtate,
               and ioyes of paſſed 
                     •
                  yme
               
                  
Remembring well, in vaine he ſtriues
               and thinkes the ſkyes to clime.
               Hereof doth come the thunder crackes,
               and fearefull flames of lyght,
               And gaſtly ſyghtes of fyre doe flaſhe,
               from cloudes as darke as night:
               The beaſtes for feare amaſed ſtande,
               and heartes of men doe quake.
               But vext in vaine, and to no ende
               hys trauayles doth he take,
               Nor nerer can he come to ſkyes.
               And he that guide of lyght
               was once, and called Lucifer,
               
               loues now to walke by night,
               And darkeneſſe beſt of all eſtemes,
               and leades with him hys ſprightes,
               And bugges, and goblins grimme or hel
               and ſuch deformed ſyghtes:
               Sometimes by day when as he ioyned
               a troupe of armed knaues,
               And ſtrawes wt bloudy Corſes ye fieldes,
               or drowneth ſhippes in wanes,
               Or when ſuch miſchief great he works:
               Then comes he forth by lyght
               But cloſe, and ſendes abrode hys men
               in ſecret priuie plight,
               
                  
Which moues the hearts of wicked m
                     •
                  
               
               and them with fury 
                     •
                  illes,
               And ſecretely with ſylent voice
               perſuades theyr minde yo ylles.
               But then quoth I: I thee beſeeche my guide
               let vs now leaue
               Theſe monſtrous Diuels to beholde,
               and ſtate of man perceaue:
               For from thys mount we eaſely may
               both lande and ſeas diſcrye,
               Nor profite ſmall I thee aſſure
               in thys proſpect doth lye.
               Then gaſed we both vpon the earth:
               and fyrſt I wondred moſt,
               To ſee ſuch diuers colours ſtrange
               in men of ſundry coſt.
               For thoſe that nereſt leade theyr lyfe
               vnto the middle lyne,
               Are black, with blaberlips, and haire
               both curlde and criſped fyne,
               And naked cleane, or couerde elſe
               with ſkynne of Kiddes full yll.
               But ſuch as dwell about the North,
               where Golde is quaking ſtyll,
               In whyteneſſe ſeeme to paſſe the ſnow,
               and ſcarce they can expell
               
                  
Wyth garments long & many clothes
               the clode that there doth dwell.
               Betweene theſe people all that be,
               wyth black and whyte are died,
               But more and leſſe as farre and nere
               they from the Sunne abyde.
               Whyle thus I fondly wondred at
               the things that there I ſee,
               Why doeſt ye (quoth my guide) regarde
               the things that vayneſt be?
               why vieweſt thou thus the colours vaine
               in fleſhe of mortall man:
               Farre better ſhall it be for thee
               theyr manners well to ſcan,
               And diuers faſhyons of theyr mindes,
               and works of them to ſee,
               wherby thou ſhalt beholde the lyfe
               of man, I ſhewing thee,
               And what confuſyon is therein.
               Fyrſt, fayne thou here a hande, ☞
               whoſe thombe directly vpwarde ryſe
               and fingers open ſtande:
               And on the thombe place thou the men
               of beſt diſpoſed minde,
               That worldly things doe here deſpyſe,
               and things of heauenly hinde
               
                  
Doe onely ſeeke, and moſt eſteeme
               dame wyſedomes ſacred grace,
               Delyghting nature to beholde,
               and hye Celeſtyall place,
               Unharmefull, gentle, louing beſt
               the vertuous things and right,
               Whom neither riches can corrupt,
               nor fleſhely fonde delight,
               Nor glaſſe of pompous ſtate alure:
               men of a heauenly kinde,
               And Gods incarnate here on earth,
               but rare and ſcant to finde.
               For all ſuch things that perfect are
               are ſcarſe and ſelde to ſee,
               O that the mighty Lorde would cauſe
               thee ſuch a one to bee.
               Next ſtandes to thys the forefinger,
               whereto thou ſhalt aſſyne
               Diſcreteſt men, the ſeconde ſort,
               and good we them defyne,
               Yet leane they ſome thing to the world,
               as fyt to beare the ſway
               In cities and in common wealthes,
               and banners to diſplay,
               And fayth and iuſtice eke they loue,
               and vertuous ſeeke to be:
               
                  
Yet from the pleaſures of the worlde
               they are not fully free.
               To whom if God at any time
               the rule and empire giue,
               Then comes the golden tymes againe,
               and vertue here to liue,
               And iuſtice to the earth returnes,
               and peace doth beare the ſway,
               And vice with punniſhement ſeuere
               is forced for to ſtay.
               The middle finger followes then,
               of eſtimation ſmall,
               Whereon thou muſt apoint a place
               vnto thoſe Minions all,
               Whoſe mindes are ready to conceiue,
               and wittes for to inuent,
               Whoſe tongs doe flowe with eloquēce,
               to vtter theyr intent:
               But wycked, and vniuſt they are
               and full of vyllanyes,
               And bending alwayes to the earth
               doe not beholde the ſkyes,
               A ſuttle ſort, that foxes heartes
               within theyr guilfull breſt,
               Doe alwayes beare, and ſymple ſoules
               with fraude doe ſtyll moleſt.
               
                  
And when as moſt they vertue hate,
               yet lyſt they for to ſeeme,
               Both good, and Godly men, and ſuch,
               as vertue moſt eſteeme,
               And other wiſe than they do meane
               theyr tong doth talke alwayes:
               And all they doe is done for gaine,
               or elſe for hope of prayſe,
               Nor lyfe but thys they none eſteeme
               nor looke for to enioy.
               And theſe are they that euermore
               doe wiſe men moſt anoy,
               And armde wt fraude, on fauour ſtaide
               (which eyther they obtaine,
               Wyth ſlauiſhe ſeruice done to them,
               or elſe with giftes doe gaine)
               The Godly purpoſes they let,
               and truth with craft they hyde:
               And if their cunning there doe fayle
               then force in tyme is tryde,
               Then vſe they ſwords, or flames of fyre,
               or ſtrength of poyſon trye:
               And if they cannot cloſely hurt
               then worke they openly.
               With theſe ſuch iolye ſeruitours
               in euery time, and place,
               
                  
The Dieul doth hys Kingdome kepe,
               and eke hys owne good grace.
               This ſtaffe he chiefly leaneth on,
               wyth this great helpe and ſtay,
               He conqueſt makes vpon the earth,
               and brings them to obay.
               More crafty Knaues than wiſemē liue,
               and ſtronger aye they be,
               That wyn the Palme, and triumph ſtil,
               wyth ſpoyle of honeſty.
               Which when they ſcepter hold in hand,
               or rule in cyties beare,
               Then cōmes the yron world agayne,
               and Mars approcheth neare,
               Then fury conquers lawes and right,
               then lawful is it found
               For vice to lyue vnpunniſhed,
               then vertue lies a groūd.
               No men more miſchieuous than theſe
               among the mortal ſtate
               Do liue, nor none there are that more
               the Gods aboue do hate.
               Now next in place the Fooles do ſyt,
               who preſently muſt ſtand
               Upon the fynger fourth in place,
               of this thy fayned hand.
               
                  
Of Fooles the greateſt number is:
               who doth not playnly know?
               Dame nature ioyes in making Fooles,
               as ſhe doth oft to ſowe
               Both Nettles, Docks, & filthy Weedes
               dul wyt, and doltyſh brayne
               Theſe Idiotes haue, they ſeeke not for
               the ioyes of ſoule to gayne:
               And only of their lyfe, and panch,
               lyke beaſtes their God they make.
               Theſe doltyſh Fooles by thouſād wyles
               the crafty ſort do take,
               And many falſe and wicked things
               to do, they them perſuade,
               And wyth their language as they lyſt
               do trayne them to their trade.
               For Fooles do quickly credit giue,
               as children alſo wyll,
               But ſoneſt to vice: opinions worſt
               in them appeareth ſtyll,
               To whome is alſo worſer minde:
               here of it doth aryſe
               That Foles beleue theſe crafty Knaues
               before the Godly wyſe:
               For councel naught theſe Foxes gyue,
               and teach from truth to ſlyde,
               
                  
And vnderneath a paynted cote,
               the fylthy vice they hyde.
               But though by many meanes they do▪
               
               theſe foreſayd doltes beguyle,
               Of ſuperſtition yet there is
               a playne and eaſy wyle,
               Wel knowen to al the worlds of olde:
               the which this ſubtile kinde
               Doth chiefly vſe, for to the church
               of God themſelues they binde,
               And holy rytes they miniſter.
               Then cauſe they ſore to feare
               The blockiſh heartes of Idiotes,
               and them they threaten there,
               Except wyth giftes they pleaſe ye ſaincts
               except they do appeaſe
               Wyth Golde the wrath of God for ſyn,
               and purchaſe their releaſe,
               Which ſtrayght theſe Prelats chaſt receiue,
               wherwith they fat and feede
               The Harlots and their Curtiſans,
               and Mules to ſerue at neede.
               For who doth not the lyfe of Prieſtes
               both note and well beholde?
               And how they do poore Fooles deceiue?
               yet ſcape they vncontrolde:
               
                  
Such is the ſuffrance now of Kings,
               that onely do apply
               Their mindes to paſtyme, belly cheare,
               and filthy lechery.
               Theſe things the Gods do aye permitte
               that little ſeeme to wey
               What hands do deale their ſacraments
               what hearts do them obey,
               What honours here on earth they haue
               or elſe what blaſphemy.
               But now to Fooles I come agayne,
               whome when in ſeate on hie
               Hath Fortune placde for hir delight,
               O Lord what number great
               Of Follies ſhalt thou then beholde?
               to long it were to treate.
               Then vertue made a ieſting ſtock,
               and placde aloft is vice,
               Then daunces fonde, and bankettings,
               and playes are had in price:
               Then flock of Paraſites and whores,
               in euery place are ſeene:
               Then filthy fond delight alone
               doth guide the ſoyle as Queene.
               For as the Prince is commonly
               ſo do the ſubiects lyue,
               
                  
And to the lyke behauiours aye
               themſelues they alwayes gyue.
               Not onely pleaſure vnto Fooles
               of kindred we do fynde,
               But anger oftentymes doth match
               hir ſelf wyth Foliſh mynde:
               For Fooles are eaſely moued to wrath,
               and deſprate enterpriſe,
               As oft as fury ſlames wythin
               and choller vp doth riſe:
               Then wicked loue of weapon ſprings,
               and bloudy broyles thereby,
               That many corſes gyue to death
               ful colde in graue to lye:
               A naughty kinde of men are theſe
               and much to be auoyded.
               The laſt the lyttle fynger is
               wherwyth the eares are ſcratched,
               And therfore calde the earefynger
               where mad men placed ſyt,
               That lack the vſe of reaſon right,
               and that haue loſt their wyt:
               Whoſe fury if it neuer ceaſſe,
               more fyt for them to dye
               It were, and from ſo great diſeaſe
               by meanes of death to flye.
               
                  
Of good men thus two only kyndes
               there are, and neuer more:
               The reſt are alwayes naught and yll,
               auoyd them wel therefore,
               Or if thou canſt not them auoyd,
               beware yet at the leaſt
               Thou moueſt them not, ye cōmon ſorte,
               a fierce and cruel beaſt
               Do alwayes rage, and hurtful be.
               When thus Timalph had taught,
               May not (quoth I) theſe Foles & wolues
               to good eſtate be brought?
               May vice by no meanes be expeld?
               or if there be a way
               Diſcloſe to me. Then on thys ſorte
               
                  Timalphes gan to ſay:
               As nature in mannes body doth
               diſeaſes diuers breede,
               So many Sickneſſes to the mynde
               from hir do like proceede:
               And trauayle lyke to both hath dealt.
               Loe, how ſhe man doth loue:
               Yet many ſuccours hath ſhe ſet
               for mortall mannes behoue,
               Which if ſhe had not done, to ſore
               and cruell had ſhe bene.
               
                  
Therfore ye ſame that helpt hath har
                     〈…〉
                  ,
               and as to harme ſhe is ſeene,
               So had ſhe ſkyl to heale agayne:
               that iuſtly you may doubt
               A naturall Mother hir to cal,
               or elſe a ſtepdame ſtout.
               But now let vs the bodies griefes,
               and medcins for the ſame
               Paſſe ouer quite, in many bookes
               declarde of auncient fame:
               And of the minde as much as neede
               ſhal preſently require,
               Let vs here ſpeake to teach more plaine
               the thing thou didſt deſire.
               And firſt, as nature ſo diſpoſing it
               the rude and countrey fielde,
               
                  
                     ••
                  le Nettels, weedes & brembels ſharp
               continually doth yelde,
               Except it oftentimes be tilde,
               and eke wyth labour ſore,
               The hurtful wedes with plough & rakes
               be cauſde to grow no more,
               Nor this enough, it needeful is
               good ſeedes therein to caſt,
               And dayly for to huſbande it
               till daunger all be paſt.
               
                  
Euen ſo the minde whilſt it is bounde
               wythin the body here,
               Is ouergrowen wyth Bryars ſharp,
               and wylde it doth appere:
               Except it ayded be wyth helpe
               of one that tilleth well,
               And aptly vertues therein plantes,
               and vices doth expell.
               But what is huſbandry of minde
               perhaps thou ſekeſt to know:
               Its wyſedome, wiſdome that I meane,
               that manners good doth ſhowe,
               That makes men vertuous for to be,
               and playne doth teach the way
               To mortal men, of liuing right,
               and leauing for to ſtray,
               Perſuading them to leade their liues
               in perfect Godly ſtate,
               And righte ouſneſſe to exerciſe,
               and ſinnes to ſhunne and hate.
               This only is the wiſdome true,
               and not that other kinde,
               Wherto Phyſitians and vayne clerkes
               do ſtill apply their minde:
               Attempting cauſes hydde of things
               to bring abrode to light,
               
                  
And for to ſearche the ſecrete celles
               of nature, day and night:
               
                  Materiam primam, and Vacuum,
               
               and thouſande monſters more
               with bluſtring countnāce belching out,
               that they might ſeeme therfore
               Well learnde, and ſtuffed full
               theyr purſe with coyne may ſtrayne.
               O goodly wiſedōe, whoſe learned youth
               doe eyther gape for gaine,
               Or ſwell with vaine ambition:
               but none amongſt them thoe
               Doth vertuouſer, from thence
               or better manerde goe,
               No teacher of the minde is thys,
               nor wyſedome hir we call:
               But rather knowledge hath to name,
               if that ſhe doe not fall,
               From doubtful pathes of men deceiude.
               who thys hath learned than
               No witt but knowledge gaines by it,
               and of a cunning man
               Perchance he beares the name, but not
               of wyſs and prudent wyght.
               Theſe two doe differ farre in ſtate,
               and workes in diuers plight,
               
                  
From wiſedome ſpringes ye fruit of life,
               from knowledge the floure doth ryſe,
               The one doth profite, ayde, and helpe,
               the other beautifies:
               The one reſpectes the inwarde things,
               the other outwarde ſhine,
               The one makes vertuous men, & good,
               the other learned, and fyne.
               Thus wyſedome onely decks the minde
               which manners God doth ſhowe
               As I haue ſayde, deſtroyeth vice,
               and vertue there doth ſowe,
               And waters it with heauenly ſhowers.
               O light of mankinde here,
               O per
                     •
                  ite way of ſauing helth,
               defence, and comfort clere,
               Both entry dore, and guide of lyfe
               O peace, and ſalue of minde,
               O bleſſed worthy ſan
                     •
                  tuary,
               O wyſedome ſweteſt kynde,
               That Nectar doeſt excell in taſt,
               to whom art thou now dere?
               who followes thee? what place haſt thou
               on earth, what honours there?
               In Temples waſt thou wont to raine,
               in ſchooles, and proches lowe,
               
                  
In Councelles, and in courts of kings,
               now no man doth thee knowe:
               But Poets dreames and tryfles fonde
               for thee in place doe raine.
               what 
                     •
                  earnes 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſcholler now in ſcholes,
               what knowledge doth he gaine?
               But 
                     •
                  anſyes vaine, or baudy tales:
               be holde in ſeate full hye
               The Maſter ſy
                     •
                  tes, wich booke before
               that open wyde doth lye,
               And ſpitting oft he well doth viewe
               hys great aſſembled crowde,
               And when hee ſees them bent to heare,
               wyth lofty voice and lowde,
               He then expoundes ſome dreadful ghoſt
               of dolefull tragedie.
               Or elſe ſome harlots trickes declares
               in wanton Comedie,
               Or doting lones of auncient time,
               or elſe to light doth bring
               Some monſtrous, or ſome cruell fact,
               or lamentable thing.
               O brayne deſeruing to be p
                     •
                  rged,
               doeſt thou theſe wayes inſtruct?
               The tender mindes and ignorant
               bring vp with ſuch a frui
                     •
                  t?
               
                  
Is this the ſalt wher of the age
               ſo yong is made to ſay?
               Is it not ſhame wyth 
                     •
                  ryfles ſuch
               to paſſe the time away?
               By thys ſo many naughty knaues,
               and villaines doe appere:
               By thys the groue of vices thick
               vp ſpringeth euery where:
               When as no vertuous bringing vp
               of Children can be founde.
               O you that youth do not correct,
               but rather them confounde,
               Learne fyrſt your ſelues to liue vpright,
               and then to others ſhowe
               A vertuous trade, leaſt lyke to beaſtes
               you liue, and nothing knowe.
               But thou Stellatus harken well,
               to thee I will expreſſe
               which way thou ſhalt apply thy minde
               to perfecte vertuouſneſſe.
               Fyrſt, oft in minde remember well
               one God alone to be,
               E
                     •
                  ernall beſt, omnipotent,
               and of moſt hye degre,
               Who heauen, and the golden Starres
               that ſhine throughout al the ſkye,
               
                  
The reſt of things that may be ſeene,
               or not be ſeene wyth eye,
               Of nothing, with hys beck alone
               before all tymes hath made,
               And framde thē kepes, & gouernes here
               with euerlaſting trade.
               Hym worſhip, honor, feare and prayſe,
               and often to hym praye,
               Both nights, & dayes, when Sūne doth ryſe
               and Sunne doth fall away,
               And when from both in equall ſpace
               his Globe doth diſtant glowe:
               For vertue chiefe and wyſedome chiefe,
               it is, the king to knowe.
               Of ſainctes aboue, and father of men
               to loue with heart entire
               To prayſe him alwayes and to dread,
               and humbly him deſire.
               Without thys ſame all vertues elſe,
               think nothing worth to be,
               For almoſt thys, and nothing elſe
               ſufficient is for thee.
               Therfore haue alwayes God in heart,
               and often in thy minde
               And call to him, nothing than thys
               more vertnous canſt thou finde:
               
                  
Thys is to all the vertues elſe
               the open doore, and plaine,
               For without grace, and ayde of God,
               no man can them obtaine,
               Nor able be to flye from vice.
               Beſydes the ſayn
                     •
                  ts aboue that dwell,
               and hoſtes of meſſangers,
               And ſeruants of the chiefeſt Lorde,
               and holy Miniſters,
               Fulfilling the commaundement of
               hys Maieſtie deuine,
               That alwayes ſtand before hys face
               in ſkyes full cleare that ſhine:
               With holy minde remember oft
               in humble ſort to praye,
               That they may helpe thee in thy neede,
               and daungers dryue awaye,
               And thee vnto the Lorde commende:
               for truely Aungels can,
               And often vſe to profite much
               the earneſt praying man.
               Nor, be not thou (beware therof)
               amongſt ſuch ſort a mate,
               That think that nature neuer made
               a thing of hygher ſtate
               
                  
Than man: mad men, yt when they ſee
               ſo plaine before their eye,
               Both ſeas and lande of Creatures full,
               doe thinke that in the ſkye,
               And in the Starres no dwellers be,
               and indge the ample ſpace
               Of bleſſed heauen for to be
               a voide, and deſert place.
               O crabde, and crookde vntoward ſoules,
               O mindes in darkeneſſe drounde.
               Mans ſenſe can not all things perceiue,
               for many things are founde
               That often tymes deceiue the eyes,
               which yet the minde doth ſee:
               Therfore what reaſon moues in minde
               muſt rather followed bee:
               Which teacheth that there is a God,
               and dwellers in the ſkye:
               Wherfore ye Starres are eyther Gods,
               Or Temples where they lye.
               Theſe grounde workes layde, wt all thy heart,
               embrace thou righteouſneſſe,
               And let no iniury of thine
               be any mans diſtreſſe,
               By wordes or deedes no man can hurt,
               nor deale thou ſo wyth men
               
                  
As thou wouldſt not be delt withall,
               but alwayes doe to them
               As thou wouldſt they ſhould do ro thee:
               thus nature doth decree.
               Which if thou ſtraightly doſt not keeps
               giue credit vnto mee:
               Thou neuer canſt be fauoured of
               that maieſtie deuine,
               Nor after death vnhappy man
               thou ſhalt the heauens clime.
               An others honor, fame, or ſtate,
               harme not in any caſe,
               When vile deſyre doth moue, or wrathe
               or enuye comes in place:
               But rather helpe ſuch as thou knoweſt
               to be of vertuous minde,
               With all thy force, and pleaſure doe
               to men of wycked kinde
               Sometimes, that ſo they hurt thee not,
               or ſeldomer thee harme:
               And let not brybes, nor loue, nor hate,
               thy minde from iuſtice charme,
               For theſe are three eſpeciall things
               that daſell ſore the ſyght
               Of minde, and driue men euer more
               from doing well and right:
               
                  
But ſtyll haue God in memory,
               and death to come in minde,
               Then f
                     •
                  ye the enticements of the fleſh
               and byts of ſharpeſt kinde
               On pleaſure put: For nothing doth
               to man more miſchiefe bring
               Than yll delight, to vertue ſure
               a moſt contrary thing:
               For vertue laboures euermore
               the heauens hye to clyme,
               But pleaſure ennimy to the ſkies
               doth downeward ſtyll decline,
               And groueling gaſeth on the earth,
               as beaſtes do commonly,
               Deſtroying ſtrength of body here
               and force of minde: wherby
               It breedes a dull and ſlouthful ſenſe,
               and ſharp dyſeaſes makes.
               This is that Circes, that Syren
               
               and hooke of Stygian lakes,
               With this ſame ſnare a nūber great
               of ſoules, the Diuell takes,
               And ſuffers not them after death
               their countrey Skyes to ſee,
               But wyly wrappeth them in myſtes
               of Hel his mates to be.
               
                  
Theſe bayts therfore, thys poiſon ſwete
               of fylthy fiendiſh foe,
               Wyth al thy might auoyd them well,
               and warely from them go:
               Leſt that when greater yeres do come,
               in vayne thou doſt repent
               Thy ſelfe, thy ſubſtance, fame, and wit,
               ſo loſt and fondly ſpent.
               Then ſhalt thou ſay as many do,
               O goodly tymes in minde,
               How vilely haue I you abuſed?
               where now ſhould I you finde?
               Unhappy man: If God would graunt
               agayne my former tyme,
               And once againe the Samian branch
               I might aſſay to clyme,
               Thereto I would where as the earth
               his horne forth doth ſtretch,
               Though that the way be ſtrayt, & ſteepe
               the top there of to retch.
               No kinde of thing doth vertue paſſe,
               which alwayes doth remayne,
               Which honor giues, and hie eſtate,
               and glory great doth gayne,
               Preſerues the life, and doth augment
               the goods that here you haue,
               
                  
And doth remaine, when death hath caſt
               the fading corſe in graue.
               But me vnhappy wretch alas
               did pleaſure ſwete de
                     •
                  eaue,
               And fled away doth me in briars
               and many miſchienes leaue:
               For whilſt that I in youthful yeares
               the 
                     ••
                  ewes do oft frequent,
               And while to feeding, ſlepe, and play,
               my dol
                     ••
                  ſh minde was bent,
               Nought would I lerne, & hating bokes,
               did ſtudy much deſpiſe,
               And learning ſcorne, but now alas
               I ſee before my eyes,
               My ſelfe vnlearnde, of yll report,
               in beggarly aray,
               My ſtrength decayde, my minde appald,
               my ſenſes worne away:
               Al this tyme haue I liued as he
               that lyes a ſleepe in dreames,
               Doth think him ſelf awake to be
               deceyued by ſuch meanes.
               Like wordes to theſe doth vtter of
                     •
                  
               
               the ſ
                     •
                  outhfull ſ
                     •
                  uggiſh man,
               When age the neighbor nexte to death,
               doth count to late as than
               
                  
His life led yll in youthfull yeares.
               The greateſt ſort do ſhut the dore
               when Steede is ſtollen away:
               And wyſe they are when as to late
               their wittes they do aſſay,
               And for Phyſitians fa
                     ••
                   they ſeeke,
               when hope of health is gone.
               O wretches whilſt you here haue tyme,
               looke wel thys tyme vpon:
               For faſt away the houre 
                     ••
                  yes,
               and fled can not re
                     •
                  ou
                     •
                  ne,
               No teares can help the corſe in graue,
               nor ſobbes for him to mourne:
               That medcine only is of force
               which is in time applyed,
               Therfore muſt vertue be embracde,
               when youth is fyrſt in pryde:
               And then it nedeful is to to treade
               the perfect path of lyfe,
               And vertuous workes to take in hand,
               then reaſon muſt be ryfe,
               And minde wyth councel muſt be rulde
               while yet but yong it is:
               Leaſt that with fonde delight deceyude,
               it he adlong runne amyſſe.
               
                  
Who ſo is wyſe let hym in tyme
               wyth wiſedome wel prouide,
               For after wyttes are euermore
               to folly next alied:
               And out of tyme it bringeth griefe
               be wayling al in vayne,
               A hurt or loſſe that neuer can
               be brought or got agayne.
               Beſyde, the wicked thirſt of wealth,
               and vile deſyre of golde
               Muſt thou eſchew, for where a place
               this couetouſneſſe doth holde
               There rayne almoſt eche other vice:
               as ſhameful periuries,
               Ungoolineſſe, theft, and diſceyt,
               wyth open robberies,
               Guyles, treaſons, and conſpyracies,
               wyth frayes and murders vile,
               What needes it for to ſhew them all?
               nothing beſyde more vile,
               Nor worſe than is the couetous man,
               that drownde in earth belowe,
               Doth like the Mole no kinde of thing
               deſyre, loue, or know
               Saue only riches of the earth
               for which he doth not feare
               
                  
Eche yll to work, nor other God
               he doth acknowledge here,
               But purſe and pens his chiefe delight:
               nor ſees the vnhappy beſt
               How ſhort the lyfe of man is here,
               how frayle, how ſone deceaſt,
               And how that from his bending bow
               death euermore doth caſt
               His deadly ſhaftes, that pearceth hearts
               of mortall men ſo faſt,
               And neyther ſpares the yong nor lernd,
               nor yet the wealthy wyght:
               But euery man wythout reſpect
               wyth bloudy blow doth ſmyte:
               And oftentimes is neereſt then,
               when furtheſt of he ſhowes,
               And ſodaine tumults then doth cauſe
               when no man of hym knowes,
               But thou regarde not ryches here,
               nor goods that ſubiect be
               To blinded chaunce nor let no care
               of ſuch things tro
                     〈…〉
                   thee:
               For proper vnto no man are
               the things, which as ſhe lykes
               Doth fortune giue, and takes away
               when ſhe vnconſtant ſtrykes:
               
                  
Or paſſing doth wyth lyfe away
               to diuers men deſcend.
               Nay, other riches ſhalt thou ſeke
               that neuer ſhal haue ende,
               On which no chaūce nor kinde of death,
               ſhall euer powre obtayne:
               Theſe riches labour thou to get
               both dayes and nightes with payne,
               For that thou ſhalt be truely rich,
               and truely bleſt by that.
               The others that the common ſorte
               like fooles do wonder at,
               And wiſh to haue, if thou enioyeſt,
               as money, houſe and land,
               Them vſe and occupy at wyll,
               who doth agaynſt it ſtand?
               But iuſtly yet, and modeſtly,
               and when thou maiſt or can,
               Haue pity on the pouerty,
               deſpiſe no needy man.
               By this meanes ſhalt ye wyn thee praiſe
               and health for euer more,
               And for this earthly baggage here
               the Skies aboue ſhalt gayne.
               No man is he, but ſure a wolfe
               that doth not mercy ſhowe,
               
                  
That is not moued to ſee the ſtate
               of others ouerthrowe.
               But if of poore eſtate thou arte,
               then beare it paciently,
               And in good part ſuſtayne the lotte
               of this thy pouerty:
               For greater ouerthrowes hath he,
               and greater griefe and care,
               Whome Fortune moſt enriched hath,
               and giuen the greater ſhare:
               And ſo much ouerlayd he is,
               wyth wayght of ſubſtance great,
               That by no meanes he can beholde
               the hie celeſtial ſeate.
               For light, and voyde of earthly dregges
               it him behoues to be,
               That wil with minde aſcend the place
               where as the heauens be.
               For more a man ſeekes earthly ſtate,
               more falles he from the Skye,
               And from the euer laſting light
               he farther of doth flye:
               And eke in place where as a man
               his treaſure vp doth hyde,
               There lies his heart, and there his mind
               doth euermore abyde.
               
                  
Thus prouertie helpes many men
               vnburdning them therby
               That ſo wyth ſwifter wyngs they may
               vnto the heauens flye.
               In lyke ſort pride thou muſt auoyde
               the ſpring of ſtryfe, and hate,
               That with diſcention many times
               deſtroyes a common ſtate.
               wyth thys diſeaſe in auncient time
               was Rome nere ouerthrowne,
               Oppreſt wyth rage of fury fierce,
               that ciuill warres had blowne.
               Flye thou thys fiende of hell, if thou
               deſyreſt for to bee
               A friende of Gods, and after death
               the Heauens elere to ſee:
               No proude man loues the Gods aboue,
               nor is beloued of them:
               For God eſtemes the humble ſort
               and lowly minded men,
               And well he lykes the gentle mindes
               where no ambition lyes,
               Thruſtes downe ye proude, & ſuffers not
               to dwell with him in ſkyes.
               wherfore you proude diſdainful ſwarme
               what doth your pryde you gaine?
               
                  
What helpes your great renoumed names
               and princely titles vaine?
               which death in ſhorteſt time doth ſpoile,
               and in the ſtreame hath dronde
               Of Lethes flouds, where ſynking lowe
               they neuer can be founde.
               You ſeeke to pleaſe the common ſort,
               and of them prayſde to hee,
               Tell, what diſtretion hath that ſtate
               the truth of things to ſee.
               They count you here as Gods to be,
               and what doth follow then?
               When Aſſes here in deede you are
               with outwarde ſigne of men,
               Th vnſkilfull ſort you doe deceiue,
               but not the Gods aboue:
               But rather them to laughter oft,
               and oft to wrath you moue:
               For all your prety prankes they marke,
               and priuie deedes they ſee,
               But you O blinded Aſſes thinke
               no Gods at all to bee,
               Nor yet beleue the Corſe in graue,
               the ſoule ſhall ryſe to dome,
               And therfore ſeke theſe preſent ioyes,
               and ſcorne the lyfe to come.
               
                  
A number great of beaſtes aliue
               in ſhape of men doe ſtraye,
               Hence ſpringeth vp your errour great
               and cauſe of your decaye,
               That with your groſſe capacitie,
               no other thing you ſee
               but bodyes groſſe, nor true things know
               but ſuch as ſhaddowes bee.
               The greateſt ſort delight in ſmoke,
               and full with ſmoke they flowe,
               O fooles what lighter thing thā ſmoke,
               what thing doth vayner ſhowe?
               Or what may more be laughed at?
               than honor to purſue
               All vndeſerued, and to deſpyſe
               the cauſe of honor true,
               We ſee yll men, vnlearned and fonde,
               in place aloft to ſtay,
               And guide ſuch as doe them excell,
               whom they ſhould rather obay.
               For ſpitefull fortune ſt
                     •
                  ll doth ſport
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   mortall mans eſtate,
               And out of order all confoundes,
               as ſhe doth lyke, or hate:
               Oft tymes exaiting to the ſtarres
               the ſtouthfull ſeruile kinde,
               
                  
Deſeruing fetters for to weare,
               or in the mille to grinde.
               But if ſhe were of good eſtate,
               ſhe would the world commit
               Of wyſe men to be guided here,
               as meete it is and fyt:
               Then all things ſhould in order paſſe,
               and lawes in ſtrength ſhould ſtande,
               And holy Sacraments be delt
               by Godly Prelates hande:
               And God would then contented be
               to ſhe we himſelfe in ſyght.
               But harebrainde Fortune alwaies doth
               in counter faites delight:
               Yet thys thalmighty Lorde permittes.
               Who could it well correct,
               And why ſhould not we ſuffer it?
               For vnto what effect
               Is it, the truth with reaſon ſtrong
               to maintaine, and defende
               Preuayling not but get thereby
               diſpleaſure in the ende?
               For wyſedome is cōtemnde, & harmde,
               with which no force doth raine,
               Whom no authoritie ſupportes,
               nor honour doth maintaine,
               
                  
Therfore it is better not to ſpeake:
               deſpyſe thou in thy minde
               The fooliſhe common peoples prayſe,
               and gyftes of Fortune blinde,
               Applye thy ſelfe to pleaſe the Lorde,
               wyth deedes of vertuous kynde,
               And after death true honor thou,
               and true renoume ſhalt finde:
               That for the iuſt and Godly men,
               prepared is in ſkyes,
               Wheras the milde and lowly hearts,
               doe ioy in ioyfull wyſe.
               But proude men wofully doe wayle
               in ſmothring fiery ſmokes.
               Now laſt of all reſtraine thy wrath,
               for anger rage prouokes,
               And rage doth cauſe vnſemely wordes,
               of naughty wordes doth ſpring
               Both brawles & frayes, of frayes comes woūds,
               & woūds do ſlaughter bring.
               Anger doth ſo confounde the minde,
               that dronke when bloud doth frye
               It knowes not what to doe, and voide
               of iudgement runnes awrye:
               Sraight griefe & ſhame enſues ye deedes
               done vnaduiſedly,
               
                  
Shunne thys, guide minde, & winne thy ſelfe
               with bearing manfully.
               A goodly vertue pacience is,
               which who ſo is without
               Muſt needes of force lacke honeſtie,
               with cruell minde and ſtout,
               Still vſyng for to braule and 
                     ••
                  ght.
               Frayes fitteſt are for beaſtes,
               And quiet peace is farre more meete
               to dwell in mortall breaſtes,
               The wyſe, & vertuous man, ſekes peace
               all other things before,
               And ſuffers things of ſmaller waight,
               for feare of miſchiefe more,
               And well takes heede, leaſt that the cole
               that yet but kindling lyes,
               Wyth fiery force of flaſhing flame
               aloft at length aryſe.
               Who naught can beare, let him abſent
               himſelfe from company,
               And leade hys lyfe alone in woods,
               or elſe on mountaines hye.
               And he that dwelles in company,
               let him learne much to beare,
               And to reſtrayne with brydle ſharpe
               the wrath that him doe ſteare,
               
                  
Diſſembling cloſely wyth himſelfe
               his anger that doth ſpring,
               And neuer breake the bondes of peace
               for euery triſting thing,
               Forgiuing ſtull the faultes of thoſe
               that hym offended haue,
               That he may ſo forgiueneſſe get,
               as he to others gaue.
               Thus much of trayning of the minde
               I thought it good to touche,
               Which doth ſuffyſe: to theſe I coulde
               haue added more by much,
               But he that doth obſerue theſe fewe
               ſhall neuer want the reſt,
               But eaſely all them obtaine
               that are not here expreſt:
               They all contayned priuily,
               and cloſde in theſe doelye.
               But yet it nedefull is the whyle
               the wyſemens bookes to applye,
               And cauſes for to ſearche of things,
               and to adorne the minde
               With diuers ar
                     •
                  es: for voyde therof
               it is both dull, and blinde.
               And thus, as hath bene ſayde before,
               thoſe 
                     •
                  ooles, and foxes, well
               
                  
May vertuous be, and frame thēſelues
               in ſeate of blyſſe to dwell.
               Theſe thigs while as my guide declarde
               in preſens Mercury,
               
               The poſte of Gods, and Atlas Sonne,
               ſent downe from Ioue ſtoode by:
               And willde T
                        •
                     malphes in haſt
               the heauens to aſcende,
               For all the ſaints (quoth he) are willds
               on Ioue for to attende,
               And Momus there appointed hath
               of wayghty affayres to treate.
               If certaine Monks (that placed are
               vpon the hauty ſeate,
               That harde beſyde the citie ſtandes,
               where paſſing by the walles
               To Venize goolfe the fyſhie ſtreames
               of Ariminum fall)
               Oflyuing ſhall depriued be,
               or elſe thoſe partes forſake
               That contrey women vſe to cut
               when they theyr Capons make:
               Since that they are to coltiſhe waxt,
               and beare their heddes to hye.
               Deſpiſyng men, and filthy factes
               commit licenciouſly.
               
                  
Example taking of their Prior,
               fye, fye, to great a ſhame.
               And can the Church abyde to ſee
               ſuch Porkettes as theſe ſame?
               That only liue to ſerue their paunch,
               their luſt, and ſleepy ſenſe,
               Which heard, in haſt Aretes ſonne
               departing ſtraight from thence,
               Did me commyt to Mercury,
               
               who going downe to Hell,
               The ſpeciall meſſage of hys Lord
               vnto the fiende to tell:
               Me faſt embracing in his armes
               did through the cloudes conuay
               To ground, what time as Clement Pope
               in campe with Caeſar lay
               Within the walles of Bononye,
               
               and Florenze City fayre
               With mighty force did long beſiege.
               Thus cutting ſwift the ayre
               With wyngs, at length came Mercury
               
               to rockes that ragged lye,
               Of S. Marinus hauty hylles,
               that ſeeme to touch the Skye:
               From thence in ſmall deſcent he ſet
               me in thy fieldes ſo gay
               
                  
                  Verruculus, and then to Hell
               in haſte he takes his way.
            
         
         
            Capricornus, the tenth Booke.
            
               
                  AL haile to thee good Mercury,
               
               from Stygian lake ſo ſoone things
               Art thou returnde? declare what
               in Plutoes court are doone:
               Great brawles, & raging mad vprodes,
               what is the cauſe or why?
               I wyll thee tell, although in haffe
               I muſt to heauen flye.
               So great a ſort of Turkes and Jewes,
               and Chriſtians there remaine,
               That place therein ſuffiſeth not,
               the number to contayne:
               No empty rome there is, but all
               ful thwact as they may he,
               The Porches full, and ful the Hall,
               and full the courtes I ſee,
               The Temples, houſes and the Streates
               the Walles, and Market rowe,
               And al the City fieldes, and hylles
               and wooddy valleyes lowe,
               
                  
So full that crowding thick they thruſt,
               and ſhoue wyth diueliſh might:
               With fyſt and heele, and tuſke, & tooth,
               in cruel ſort they fight,
               For of no weapon haue they ſkill,
               nor ſprites can euer dye:
               Scarce could I paſſe the place vnto
               whereas the fiend doth lye,
               But through ye mydſt of ſwarming ſoules,
               wyth force I make my way,
               And wyth this rod to get me roome
               amongſt them faſt I lay:
               At length the priuy chaumber of
               the black and vggly ſprite
               I come vnto, whom there I fynde
               in ſad and doleful plight.
               And when to him I had declarde
               my fathers full decree,
               Commanding him that Antechrist
               
               ſhould ſtrayght vnloſed be
               From out the pyt, and ſent abrode
               to euery place and land:
               That working wonders ſtrange & falſe
               and teaching that at hand
               The dreadful day of iudgement is,
               and cude of all the reſt,
               
                  
May al thing out of order bring,
               both Gods, and man, and beaſt,
               As fixed ſtate of deſtiny
               commaundeth to be had:
               God Pluto then tell me quoth I
               why ſy
                     •
                  ſte thou here ſo ſad?
               So ſad quoth he: doeſt thou not thinke,
               to great a wrong I byde,
               When you poſſeſſe ſo great a ſpace
               of heauen large and wyde?
               When as but fewe you are, and when
               ſcarce three (when all is done,)
               Or little more, in greateſt ſpace
               and tract of tyme do come:
               And I to be encloſde within
               a kingdome here ſo ſmall,
               Where out of number mortal men
               continually do fall:
               The Jewes and al the Turkiſh broode,
               not all the Chriſtian bend
               (I graunt) but ſure the greateſt parte,
               do here, do here deſcend,
               And hither to my parkes they runne:
               why come they more to me?
               Or why doth not my brother there
               that Skies doth ouerſee
               
                  
Theſe Friers, Prieſts, & Monks at leſt
               take vp to heauen hye,
               And them in bleſſed place wyth him
               preſerue continually?
               Is is not ſhame, theſe men that in
               the Church ſo ſwetely ſing,
               And day by day, in ſacred towers
               the reſtleſſe bells do ring,
               That ſpend ſuch ſtore of Franconcenſe,
               and many Hores relieue,
               That pardon others, and can not
               their owne myſdeedes forgiue,
               That play the parts of paryſhe Clerke,
               the Corſe to bring to graue,
               And beautify the Church of God,
               with Tombs and Pictures braue,
               Is it not ſhame theſe men to ſende
               to Hell, with paynes therfore,
               As thirſty Appulia neuer bred
               of Flyes a greater ſtore?
               Nor once the chiefeſt Biſhops he
               doth dread, or more forbeare,
               But rather wylls that they do feele
               extreameſt torments heere:
               Thus in the deepeſt pyt of Hel
               encloſde they lye in chaynes
               
                  
And plaged are aboue the reſt
               with grieuous kinde of paynes.
               Wherfore Cyllenius when thou comſte
               the Starres aboue vnto,
               I pray thee ſhew my brother there
               that al things I wyl do
               With willing minde as he cōmaundes:
               But yet in any wiſe
               Let him reſpect my poore eſtate,
               and kingdome not deſpiſe,
               And either take ſome ſoules from hence
               or elſe make Hel more wyde:
               This ſayd, I wyll (quoth I) and then
               from thence in haſte I hied.
               And now to Heauen I retourne
               nor longer can I ſtay:
               Forget not me thy client poore
               go bleſſed ſainct away.
               Thou Muſe remembre well to thewe
               to me thy verſes fine,
               For paper lowe at hand, and pen,
               and leyſure good and tyme:
               Beginne and teache me in what ſorte
               a wyſe man ſhould be wrought.
               Fyrſt vnderneath a happy ſtarre
               he muſt to light be brought,
               
                  
That after ſhall be wyſe or bleſt:
               for greatly matter makes
               Under what ſigne or what aſpect,
               a man his byrthday takes:
               As they affirme that know the names,
               and force, and motions hye
               Of Starres, and caſt natiuities,
               and tell the deſtiny.
               O Lord how great and wonderous
               doth heauens force appeare,
               Wythout whoſe help the earth nor ſeas,
               could euer creature beare.
               The Skye the Occean repreſentes
               the father here of all,
               And ſtars the ſyſter Nimphs by name
               full aptly may we call,
               Frō whence procedes al good on earth.
               therfore can no man liue
               As wiſe and bleſt, whō ſtarres in byrth,
               an yll aſpect do giue.
               Beſide of great effect doth ſeeme
               their parents ſtate, and kinde,
               Of whome the infant nourced is,
               and who doth guide the minde.
               For as the childe in tender yeares
               himſelf at fyrſt doth trayne,
               
                  
Such cuſtome ſhal in gra
                     •
                  er age
               within his heart remayne:
               Long time that nature doth endure,
               and long in minde doth lye,
               That in our childiſh age at fyrſt,
               our ſenſes did apply.
               Therefore the maſter needes muſt be
               both wyſe and learned well,
               That guides the childe, and alſo muſt
               to vertue him compell.
               And like the horſman good, now here,
               now there muſt winde and wreſte
               The vntamed head, and now with by
                     ••
                  e
               and now wyth ſpurre moleſt:
               Nor only him with words perſuade,
               but with examples teache:
               For what if life be contrary
               auayleth it to preach?
               And fyrſt be dilligent to kepe
               him from the vicious kinde,
               Ill company doth oft corrupt
               a good and vertuous minde:
               This poyſon many hath deſtroyed,
               wouldſt th
                     •
                  n be glad to tell
               The nature iuſt of any man,
               then marke his fellowes well,
               
                  
For lyke to lyke doe euer goe,
               and alwayes ſhalt thou finde
               That conu
                     •
                  rſant are ſuch as be
               of one diſpoſed minde.
               Wherfore let both the ſchoolemaſter,
               and parents well beware,
               Leaſt him whom they doe thus inſtruct
               the naughty youth doe ſ
                     •
                  are,
               And them with filthy crimes infect:
               alas full ſone we all
               Enclyned are vnto the worſe,
               and ſone to vice we fall.
               Beſydes thys childe that here we 
                     •
                  ayne
               a wyſe man for to make,
               Let him in Greeke, and latine bookes,
               his daily trauaile take,
               And giue good wyll and diligence
               in learning to procede,
               Refuſyng al vnhoneſt bookes
               let hym good au
                     •
                  thors reade:
               For ſ
                     •
                  ldome is the vnlearned good,
               for ignorance doth blinde,
               And darkes with errours commonly
               the rude vnſkilful minde.
               But yet from to much ſtudy and toyle
               let him hys minde refraine,
               
                  
Leaſt he proue mad, in ſearching thus
               thys wyſedome to attaine:
               Or fall into ſome great diſeaſe
               and ſo himſelfe deſtroy:
               To much of euery thing doth harme
               and long doth not enioye.
               His ſprites ſometime to recreate,
               and to refreſhe his minde,
               Let him abſent him ſelfe and playe:
               for reſt in euery kinde
               Doth quickneſſe bring, and play in time
               doth former force repatre.
               But though eche kindes of learning is
               both nedefull good and faire.
               Yet chiefe among the reſt are thoſe,
               and hygheſt place obtaine,
               That teacheth well ye Starres to know,
               and nature opens plaine,
               Let theſe our wyſe men well apply
               with all hys force and might,
               In grauer age, and in theſe artes
               let him ſpende hys delight:
               And therwithall (as hath bene ſayde)
               the nurture of the minde
               Well put in vre, both iuſt and good
               ſhalbe and ſo ſhall winde
               
                  
About hys head two Lawrell twiſtes.
               How goodly a thing is it
               A man both learned and good to bee,
               to knowe, and to haue wit?
               A learned foole is to be fearde,
               lyke as the 
                     •
                  urious braine.
               With ſworde in hande, ſo is the learnde
               in whom doth vice remaine.
               But yet ſuffyſeth not alone:
               the minde for to regarde,
               And wyth good manners, & good artes
               to haue it thus preparde:
               When as the ſtate of body here
               we muſt not lightly way,
               For if the body be diſeaſed
               it neuer can obay
               The heſ
                     •
                  es of minde, yu doth commaund
               both worthy things and great.
               Wherfore we muſt our ſelues apply
               to feede on holeſome meate,
               That may engender pureſt bloud:
               for hurtfull humour ſprings
               Of ou
                     •
                  ll meates moſt commonly,
               and ſuch vnholſome things.
               All dronkenneſſe muſt be eſchewed,
               and ſurfets muſt be fled,
               
                  
For theſe the ſtomacke ouercharge,
               and much anoye the head,
               And rounde wyth fumes beſet the brain,
               by thys doth alwayes come
               The dull appalled ſenſe and ſpryt
                     •
                  ,
               and ſleepes of afternoone.
               To exerciſe the body well
               in due conuenient time,
               Is great commodity to health,
               and makes the force more fyne:
               By to much ſ
                     •
                  outh doth ſtrength de
                     •
                  ay,
               and by to long a reſt.
               The ſynowes faynt, and all the lymmes
               by thys are quite oppreſt.
               Beſyde muſt colde extreme be ſhunde,
               and heate that raging broyles,
               And all corrupt and filthy ayres,
               and fenniſhe moory ſoyles:
               Eſpecially in ſommer tyme,
               when dogge with fyerie 
                     •
                  eene
               Doth cleaue the fieldes, & Graſhopper
                     •
                  
                  ▪
               
               ſyng vnder braunches greene.
               In fine our ſelues we muſt apply
               with all our force and might,
               To bodyes health, that ſo it may
               obey the minde aright,
               
                  
Which ſcarſe can wel be brought about
               if pouertye denye:
               Needes muſt we money haue by chaūce
               or gift of ſome that dye,
               Or elſe by trade of occupying
               in any facultye,
               For euermore the nedy man
               doth ſuffer miſerye:
               Nor without riches, poſſible
               a happy lyfe to leade,
               Alas how often vertue poore
               doth mourne with heauy heade?
               How much deſpyſed ſhe ſtyll doth lye
               if money be away?
               Him truely and in proper kinde
               a ryche man call we may
               That flowes with wit, and eloquence,
               with wyſedome and with art,
               And whereſoeuer he becomes
               can gaine an honeſt part,
               And portion for himſelfe to liue,
               and though he iorney makes
               To diuers places farre from home,
               hys ſubſtance with him takes,
               And neuer wanteth needefull things
               a ioyfull lyfe to leade,
               
                  
Nor feare the theeues, nor doth ye ſword▪
               
               or cruell robbers dreade,
               And quickly doth hymſelfe repaire
               though he be ſpoyled quite:
               For vertue true giues neuer place
               to Fortunes frowning ſpite.
               For euery dwelling in the worlde
               doth natiue ſoyle appere
               Unto the vertuous man, and well
               he liueth euery where.
               But he that vertue lackes, although
               he great poſſeſſions holde,
               And purſes ſtuffed full wyth coyne,
               and Coffers full of golde,
               Yet can he not go where he lyſt,
               nor trauaile euery place,
               To ſee the countreys ſtraunge abrode,
               and men of ſundry grace,
               And euery were to liue: for houſe,
               and grounde, and Caſtels ſtrong,
               He can not beare about wyth hym
               in all hys iorneys long,
               Leaſt yt perchaunce wt theeues he meete,
               or periſhe on the ſhore,
               And then for Gods ſake aſke hys meate
               at euery other dore.
               
                  
At home therefore he alwayes dwels,
               and in hys countrey lyues
               Where as hys ground a great increaſe
               of Corne and wyne hym giues,
               And as a baniſht man he feares
               beyonde the boundes to go,
               That ſlouthfulneſſe of minde, & chaunce
               to him aſſigned ſo:
               Wherby the goodly ſyghtes abrode
               he can not viewe nor marke,
               Whyle ſtill at home he hidden lyes
               as pent in dongeon darke.
               Therfore the olde Philoſophers
               by fine inuention founde,
               A certaine ſtone, that where they went
               or trauailed any grounde,
               Prouided them of needeful things,
               and neuer would decay,
               By ayde wherof, full many landes
               and countreys farre away
               They might hehold, and alwaies learne
               of many ſundry artes.
               And thus of olde the Gods aboue
               beſought with humble heartes,
               The ſacrifyce on altare ſlaine
               before as was the trade
               
                  
To Mercury, the Sunne, and Moone,
               Lo thus their prayers made.
               O Titan, beauty of the worlde,
               O fayreſt God in ſyght,
               O thou Latonia dryuing hence
               the ſhadowes of the nyght,
               O ſwyftly fleecing reſtleſſe Impe
               of Ioue and Maia borne,
               That able arte to chaunge thy ſelfe
               to ſhapes of ſundry forme:
               Be preſent here, and bowe your eares
               to our complaints and crye,
               Beholde a fewe, whoſe mindes & wittes
               are in degree full hye,
               That wiſedome moſt of all eſteme,
               whyle cauſe of euery thing,
               And ſecrete ſtate of nature hyd
               to lyght we ſeeke to bring,
               And meat with minde the mighty ſkye:
               vs neede doth ouertread,
               And many great miſſehappes we feele,
               of hunger almoſt dead:
               Whyle as the doltiſhe common ſort
               doe all things rake and ſnatche,
               And all the money heaping vp
               into their coffers catche,
               
                  
Nor any of them doth pity vs,
               and if we aſke a myte,
               Then poynting at vs ſtraight they ieſt,
               and make of vs but light:
               Wherby we are conſtraynde to delue,
               or elſe attendance gyue
               On toyling beaſtes, or cary doung,
               ſcarce know we how to lyue:
               And Idiotes are we made to ſerue.
               Wherfore you Goddes aboue
               Haue pyty yet at length of vs,
               if good mennes ſtate you moue,
               And ſhew an eaſy way by which
               we may liue honeſtly,
               And for to ſearch the ſecrete dennes
               where truth doth hydden lye.
               Theſe prayers hearde, the Gods anone
               thus calde came forth in place,
               And fyrſt did Phebus aunſwere make:
               O noble worthy race
               Of halfe Goddes, Skies deſeruing wel
               and fauour eke from hye,
               Now hearken wel, and in your mindes
               let theſe my ſayings lye
               Take here this yong Archadian bloud,
               and ſwyft vntruſty ſwayne
               
                  
And plunged deepe in Stygian ſtreates,
               let him forthwyth be ſlayne:
               In boſome thruſt of Hyales
               
               him let the Gods receaue,
               Whome Lemnian countrey worſhippeth
               and hye aloft him heaue:
               Then bury him in warmed wombe,
               and corrupted him vndoe,
               Whoſe dropping ioyntes a ſprite ſhall pearce
               that falles our bodies fro,
               And wondrouſly ſhal call agayne,
               deceaſde and quenched quite
               Him from the darke new clad in cloke,
               of golde, and ſhining bright
               Wyth ſyluer ſhew, then him agayne
               amyd the fyer caſt:
               An other ſtrayght ſhall ſpring thereof,
               as Phaenix chaunging faſt,
               And perfect leaue the bodies all
               that it ſhall feale or touch,
               The bondes and lawes of nature here,
               ſurmounting aye by much,
               Shal chaunge the kindes & driue away,
               this needy pouerty.
               Here Phebus ceaſde, and Mercury,
               
               and Dian did agree
               
                  
To all that he declared had,
               forthwith away they flye,
               Aſcending to the lofty place
               and compaſde beauens hye.
               Then men of hauty ſenſe they blinde,
               and aunſwere all to darke,
               Long pondring in their doubtful minde
               do muſe theron and marke,
               And ſcarce in longeſt race of tyme
               wyth proues of ſundry kinde,
               And not wyth little charges did
               this arte at fyrſt out finde,
               Than which no arte more worthy is,
               the heauenly ſtone to frame,
               Which wicked people neuer knowe,
               nor can obtayne the ſame.
               And this whoſoeuer doth enioy
               may dwell in any land,
               Both free frō feare of fortunes wheele,
               and force of robbers hand:
               But vnto felwe the Gods vouchſaue
               ſo great a gift to giue.
               Some wil demaund if it be meete
               for wyſe men here that liue,
               To linck themſelues in wedlocks bond,
               and ſo the time to ſpend.
               
                  
In procreation here of youth.
               Though ſome do this commend,
               Yet this in mine opinion is
               for holly men not meete,
               For care of wife doth often let,
               and loue of children ſweete,
               The wyttes deuine of wyſeſt men,
               that do their mindes apply
               About ſuch hye and hauty things,
               as ſecretes of the Skye.
               Let him that only ſeekes the worlde
               reioyce in wyfe and childe,
               And often to himſelfe procure
               the Gods of Mariage milde:
               But let the wiſeman alwayes ioye
               in chaſte and ſingle plight,
               And euerwore liue vndefilde
               in body and in ſpright.
               For he that doth wyth ſlender fare
               and ſmall himſelfe content,
               And doth abſtayne from carnal vſe,
               and prayer ſtyll frequent,
               And lifting minde aboue the ſtarres
               beholdes the chiefe degree,
               Shal oft enioy the ſpeach of God,
               and oftentimes him ſee,
               
                  
In happy ſtate, ſhall tell before
               the things that after ſpring.
               A ſacred Gemme is chaſtitie,
               to God moſt thankfull thing.
               Unto the chaſte he oft appeares,
               and ſecretes oft doth tell:
               Againe the filthy lecherye
               and paſtimes meete for hell,
               He hates & ſhunnes and alwayes doth
               ſuch wanton mates deteſt.
               But no man can a Uirgin be
               but he whom God hath bleſt,
               And doth aſſyſt: Thys gratious gyft
               doth from the ſkye deſcende,
               Of higher ſtate than man can get,
               or man can comprehende:
               No perfite wyſeman can be had
               except in thys degree.
               It ſemeth alſo good to knowe
               if it conuenient be
               For wyſemen dreadfull weapons fieret
               of raging Mars to trye,
               And for to bathe their hands in bloud,
               of mortall enimie,
               And to themſelues by fight to get
               an euerlaſting name:
               
                  
For many iudge no greater vertue,
               glory, prayſe, or fame
               Can be, than gotten is by warres.
               O wretched beaſtes, O blinde,
               Why think you wars more worth than peace,
               or of a better kinde?
               For nothing is more vile than thys,
               nor nothing can be found,
               That farther from mans reaſō ſeemes,
               to differ or to ſound:
               For if that lawes and reaſon ſhoulde
               in euery place beare ſway,
               Then peace ſhuld rayne in proper force
               and warres ſhuld quite away:
               In tyme of battayle lawes do ceaſſe,
               and ouerthrowen do lye,
               Then fury raynes, and vice doth rage,
               abrode at liberty,
               Then wicked men holde vp the head,
               and ſhake their weapons than,
               And ſcotfree thence they kyl and ſtryke,
               and take from euery man,
               And fearing no decree of iudge,
               defile eche thing they finde
               More mete is peace for mortal man,
               and warres for brutiſh kinde.
               
                  
To toſſe the blades mad men loue,
               and he deſires to fyght,
               That pore and lazy labour hates,
               and hath a great delight
               To liue a luſty vicious ſtate,
               though purſe do not agree:
               And therfore ſells his lyfe for gayne,
               and runnes in ieopardie,
               Then conquerour he triumph may
               with that that others got.
               And carry thence the ſpoyle and pray
               vnto his natiue plot.
               But he that ſubſtance hath at home,
               and can ſufficiently
               Him ſelf and his defend and keepe
               wyth any faculty,
               Doth peace aboue the reſt eſteeme,
               and from the ſword abſtayne:
               Except he be of franticke minde,
               and fond diſpoſed brayne.
               But thou wylt ſay great Kings & dukes
               in deedes of armes delight,
               And trayne themſelues to follow Mars,
               
               wyth al their fo
                     ••
                  e and might:
               What then, are no
                     •
                   gret Kings & dukes
               oft times in dotage brought,
               
                  
And flow wt vice? by whoſe fond mindes
               great cities come to nought.
               And though they great reuene we haue,
               and Kingdomes many one,
               Yet more they alwayes ſeeke to haue,
               and more they heape thereon.
               The couetous man though he poſſeſſe,
               as much of golden Myne
               As Tagus hath, yet pore he is
               and liues in neede and pyne.
               And thus therfore with this mad minde
               are Dukes and Princes great
               Compelde to ioyne the bloudy campes,
               wyth rage of Martial heate,
               Enlarging their dominions much
               with heapes of Miſers ſlayne.
               But though that wars be nought, & vile
               to be abhorred playne,
               Yet bring they ſome commodity,
               for falſe and crafty men,
               Expert in fraud and vſury,
               do heape vp al thing then
               When peace doth rain, but whē ye wars
               do rage, the Souldiour ſtrong,
               The euil gotten goods doth ſpoyle
               that he hath raked long.
               
                  
Then iuſtly doth the rage of Wolues
               on Foxes vengeance take,
               And due rewardes the mighty ſort
               vnto the ſubtile make.
               And lyke for lyke they ſhew. Thus time
               doth all things alter ſo,
               Beſydes, the kings wt thouſande crafts,
               and thouſande powlings mo,
               In time of peace their ſubiectes fleeſe,
               and coyne in Coffers poure,
               Wherby both Golde and Siluer all
               the Checker would deuoure,
               If battaile ſhould not bring abrode
               that hydden lay in peace
               Diſtributing to many men
               one priuate mans encreaſe.
               Now laſt of all, in number not
               a fewe, there is a kinde
               Both voide of learning, welth, & Arte,
               of laſey ſtouthfull minde,
               To miſchiefe giuen, prone to vice,
               and ſtoute, and full of cryme:
               Such men, or rather ſhadowes vaine
               at one appointed tyme
               Doth God a warfare ſende, wyth death
               of cruell kinde to dye.
               
                  
And thus he purgeth mortall ſtate,
               whereby liue merily
               Long time the reſt that doe remaine,
               thys miſchiefe ouerthrowne,
               Tyll that againe ſuch wicked weedes
               anewe be ſprong and growne,
               That muſt be rooted out with warres,
               and cut with weapon grimme.
               Then Iupiter beginnes againe
               hys pottes vncleane to ſkimme,
               And ſending forth the furyes vile,
               doth ſweepe the filth away,
               This is the order of the worlde
               that neuer ſhall decay:
               Thys courſe the deſtinies themſelues
               decreede long tyme agone,
               When as Promotheus ſtale the fyre
               the hawtie heauens from,
               And when Deucalion with hys wife
               dame Pyrrha, made to ſpring
               So many thouſande perſons with
               the ſtones that they did fling.
               Wherfore a wyſeman it becomes
               to follow reaſons grace,
               And chiefly peace to loue, and peace
               with all hys minde to embrace.
               
                  
Except perchaūce ſometyme cōſtrainde
               he for his countrey fyght,
               And for defence of him and his,
               then is the quarrel right:
               Then fights he voyd of any blame,
               for lawes of euery ſrate
               Do ſuffer force with force to dawnt,
               and guile with guile to mate,
               As due deſeries to recompence
               conuenient is and meete.
               Now farther muſt we ſearch if that
               it be for wiſemen feete
               To exerciſe ſome faculty,
               wherwith al times he may
               Relieue himſelf if that miſſe happes
               do bring him to decay,
               If froward Fortune any time
               ſend needy pouerty,
               Depriuing him of all his goodes
               and ſubſtance violently,
               Leaſt that he begge and ſuffer oft
               both colde, and hunger to.
               There are for truth ſome kinde of thing,
               that wiſemen wel may do,
               Wherby himſelf he ſuccour may
               if pouerty conſtrayne,
               
                  
Let him a good Phiſitian be:
               this gets ſufficient gayne,
               And driues away diſeaſes quite.
               Olde Phebus vſed this ſame,
               And Phebus ſonne, by this they both
               deſerude a famous name.
               And this Sir Chirons pupil learnde
               though of the ſtock he was
               Of auncient Aeacus and Thetis ſprong,
               by this did Paeon pas,
               
                  Machaon and Hippocrates
               
               by this gat honour great.
               What ſhould I call to memory
               al ſuch as by this feate,
               Got long agoe both pens and prayſe,
               and fame when they were dead.
               A good e
                     •
                  pert Phyſitian
               ſhal neuer begge his bread,
               Adde more to this, it ful beſides
               of priuy knowledge flowes,
               And both of floure, hearb, and ſtone,
               doth ſecretes playne diſcloſe:
               And whatſoeuer earth doth here
               within hir bowels hide,
               Doth well perceiue, and natures force
               to open doth prouide:
               
                  
Eche part within the body of man
               it doth conſyder well,
               And turnes againe a number that
               were almoſt gone to hell.
               What thing than this more requiſite,
               for wyſe men can we finde?
               That not alone the wiſeman may
               with counſell heale the minde,
               But alſo get the body helth,
               and ſo both partes redreſſe:
               Thus may a wyſeman all preſerue
               in perfect quietneſſe.
               But now when as dame Lacheſis
               
               the lateſt yeare doth ſpinne,
               And hoary whiteneſſe doth defyle
               both head and bearded chinne,
               Then meete it is for him to reſt,
               and then himſelfe to ſtay,
               And longer not to roue about
               in countreys farre away:
               But finde ſome certaine dwelling place,
               and ſearche for hys auaile
               Such things as nedefull are for lyfe,
               leaſt foode in age doe fayle:
               And in the meane whyle to depart,
               and ſhunne the common ſort,
               
                  
Contenting hym with fellowes fewe,
               and wyth a ſlender port,
               And ſolitary oftentimes:
               to God both night and daye,
               The mind wel purgde of naughty thou ghtes,
               in feruent ſprite to praye:
               And wholly to addict himſelfe
               the heauenly ſtate to finde,
               And all the cares that fleſhe doth giue,
               to baniſhe from his minde.
               Then ſhall the Gods appere, though he
               in valley lowe doe lye,
               Or on the hylles, or ſhadowy woodes,
               or on the mountaines hye,
               In cottage ſmall do place himſelfe.
               it is not ſafe nor well
               With many for to liue, or in the
               townes of fooles to dwell,
               And in the company of theeues,
               of ſlaues, and couetous
               And cuthrote brawling ſwering mates,
               or men ambitious.
               But let the wyſeman flye the croude
               of rude and common ſort,
               For of the common people is
               enuied the wyſemans port,
               
                  
Bycauſe of their contrary deedes:
               contraries euermore
               Do one the other ſtriue agaynſt
               and let, and hinder ſore.
               Here of haue many wiſemen dyed,
               bycauſe they would not ſpare
               When any naughty thing they ſaw,
               the truth for to declare,
               And to rebuke the mindes of Fooles,
               which ſith it could not beare,
               Nor ſuffer ſuch abuſe of Fooles,
               they ſlayne and punniſht were.
               Wherefore, leaſt that the wiſeman ſee
               ſuch ſtore of ſynful ſyght,
               And leaſt he fall in daunger by
               defending truth and right,
               Let him wythdraw himſelfe forthwith
               from common company:
               And ſecret liue with two or three
               that good and learned be,
               Though ſeldome ſhal he be without
               the Gods that guide the ſky,
               For Gods do often pleaſure take
               in wiſemens company:
               Oft doth the wiſeman heare them ſpeak
               and ſeeth them oft with eyes,
               
                  
They fil his heart with comfort greate
               in wondrous ſorte and wiſe:
               The wiſeman bleſſed is on earth,
               and bleſt aboue in Skies:
               Go then O blinded mortal men,
               go heape vp money than,
               And fyll your caſkets full of Golde
               by al the meanes you can,
               Beſet with rings your fyngers thick,
               and let the Jewels round
               In gorgeous linekes of golde about
               your graceleſſe neckes be wound,
               Now ruffie in your ſylkes abrode,
               and brag it through the ſtreete,
               Go, go I ſay you blinded fooles,
               both Crownes and Scepter ſweete,
               And al that Fortune raſh can giue
               to you with al your power
               Go ſeke: yet all theſe goodly things
               ſhal vaniſh in an houre,
               Al theſe things are but dreames & toyes
               and haue but little ſtay,
               Which quickly chaunce doth from you take
               or death doth ſnatch away,
               Which ſone doe vaniſh hēce like ſmoke
               and neuer turne agayne.
               
                  
Go, go O wretches ſeke to get
               theſe myſtes, and ſhaddowes vayne.
               But when the dying day ſhal come,
               and lateſt houre ſhal fall,
               Then, then when all your follies paſt
               in vayne to minde you call,
               You ſhall perceyue that you did dote,
               and ſtept from truth awry,
               And mourne to late. Alas in tyme
               your errour learne to ſpy.
               O miſchieuous vntoward ſoules,
               O heartes of canckred kinde,
               Why gaze you ſtyll vpon he earth
               like beaſtes of brutiſh minde?
               Why caſt you not your eyes aloft
               vnto the ſtarry Skies?
               There, there ye trueſt world doth ſtande
               there life moſt perfect lies,
               For ſuch as feare aad worſhip God:
               there neyther chaunce hath place,
               Nor churliſh death can there the ſtate
               wyth deadly darte deface:
               There is the aſſured treaſure found,
               there lies the chiefe delight,
               That God almighty hath preparde
               for them that ſerue him right:
               
                  
Which neuer curſe of fretting time
               hath power to ouerthrowe,
               To this apply your mindes while ſtates
               permit, and life below.
               Beholde you not of fading life
               the ſlender holde and ſtay?
               Do not you ſee how all things here
               in ſhorteſt time decay?
               And lyke to ſmoke in ſubtile ayre
               doth vaniſh quite away.
               Where finde you now the ſtately kings
               in pomp of proud aray
               That heretofore haue bene? or where,
               do you eſteme to be
               The Prelates chief that thought thēselues
               Gods fellowes in degree?
               Their rotten bones entombed cloſe
               in fylthy caues do dwell,
               And for their ſoules perhaps they do
               kepe Chriſtmaſſe now in Hell:
               Farre baniſhde from the happy place
               wherto the good are brought,
               And there they ſuffer payne, for pryde,
               and miſchiefe that they wrought.
               O Lord how gladly would they nowe
               if in their power it lay,
               
                  〈1 page missing〉
               
               
                  
Encloſe themſelues in fleſh agayne,
               and take their olde aray,
               That not eſteming riches here,
               and kingdomes leauing cleane,
               They might liue Godly here on earth,
               in pore eſtate, and meane,
               And by their righteous lyfe make hym
               their frende that guides the Skie,
               And after death poſſeſſe a place
               aboue the heauens hie.
               But he that ſhewes his wit to late,
               his wiſdome ſhewes in vayne.
               Let euery man ſeeke God to pleaſe,
               and worldly wealth diſdayne,
               And trauayle, for the heauenly ſtate
               of him example take,
               Which of this worldly fading ioyes
               a ſmall accompt doth make,
               But only hopes in time to come
               the perfect ioyes to feale,
               Which wel he knowes, for God to hym
               ſuch things doth oft reueale.
               And ſuch a wiſeman late there liued
               ſince I remember may,
               That with a fewe vpon the top
               of hye Soractis lay,
               
                  
Full leane he was, and bearded wel,
               his houſe was ſmal and neate,
               All clad he was in ruſſet robes,
               a man of learning great.
               And comely countnance to be holde.
               he had his dwelling place
               In wilderneſſe, where round about
               the woods did him embrace:
               Whoſe heauenly mind, when as he lyſt
               of things to come could tel,
               And aunſwers gaue, ſuch as for truth
               did Delphis not excel.
               I moued and prouoked thus
               with fame that of him ran,
               By paynfull iourneys long vnto
               this ſacred hill I came,
               And foūd the olde man ſitting there
               in warme and Sunny caue.
               Who (after that I had receiude
               the like God Deane I gaue)
               He wyllde me there to take my reſt
               ſo downe by him I ſyt.
               And therewithall I aſkde him thus:
               what is the cauſe of it
               (Quoth I) that here you chooſe to lyue
               vpon this mountaine ſteepe,
               
                  
Where almoſt euery thing doth lack,
               that life of man ſhould kepe.
               Then aunſwering me this holy man
               on this ſorte there began:
               My great delight was heretofore
               to liue in cities, whan
               Both yong, and ignoraunt, I thought
               nought elſe to be requirde
               But riches here, and ſuch delight
               as life of man deſirde,
               Following ye example and the fault
               of rude and common ſort:
               Then ioyed I for to leade my life
               wyth great and much reſort,
               And with the reſt for company
               I fell into the floud
               Of vayne delightes, with colour falſe,
               deceyude of trouth and good.
               But when that greater age began
               wyth fading yeares to ſhow,
               And wiſedome more in tract of time
               within my head to growe,
               I then began to note and marke
               the partes that men do play,
               And ſundry ſorte of liues they leade.
               (as God gaue grace) to way.
               
                  
Then many fylthy things I ſawe
               there done, and ful of ſhame,
               And nothing elſe of iuſtice left
               but vayne and ydle name.
               Th'vngilty to be punniſhed,
               the gylty ſcaping free,
               The vertue hydde in vice, and vice
               in vertue hid to be,
               The poore in euery place oppreſt,
               and fauour more to get
               Than iuſt deſerts, ye law a brybing craft
               for golde a fyſhing nette:
               Eche kinde of handy craft corrupt
               by guile of workmens wyll,
               The theefe to fee the Inkeper
               his geſts thereby to kyll.
               Beſydes I many might beholde
               enricht by theft and guyle
               Though naughty beaſtes, more meeter far,
               to weare a rope a whyle,
               Yet prayſde to be and worſhipped,
               and feared very much:
               The vnworthy placde in regal ſeate,
               and honours dealt to ſuch
               As haue but only ſhape of men.
               Beſyde religion fled
               
                  
By conetouſneſſe, and Prieſts bent al
               to foode, and Harlots bed:
               And vnder cloke of holineſſe
               seke priuily to gayne,
               And pick the common peoples purſe
               by meanes of wyly trayne:
               While as they open heauen wyde,
               and barre the helliſh way,
               And while they boſt that they can ſoules
               where as they liſt conuay,
               And wyth their Portas force the ſaincts
               to do as they are bent.
               By this occaſion left I al,
               and from the townes I wene,
               Accoumpting it more ſafe for me
               to liue in deſert place,
               And in this hyll to runne the reſt
               of al my ranging race.
               This hil whereas the altare ſtands
               of Syluester the ſaint,
               Where as the Shrine, and monuments
               of him his prayſes paynt:
               Which place though it ſeme rough and rude,
               not meere to dwel vpon
               Yet fitte it is for ſaincts, and ſuch
               as liue in peace alone,
               
                  
And wholly do apply their mindes
               the Lord to feare and loue,
               And alwayes ſeeke to ioyne themſelues
               with ſaincts in Skies aboue:
               But hard perchaunce it ſeemes to thee,
               and ſtraunge it doth appere,
               That I can liue in deſert ſuch,
               and ſtony places here,
               Where ſeldome any man doth come,
               where wanting ſeemes to be
               Moſt things that ſhould ſuſtaine the life
               of man at libertie.
               Yet is it not ſo hard in deede,
               nor ſtraunge it ſeemeth than,
               If that the holy Ghoſt enſpire
               the heart of any man,
               Deſcending downe from heauens hye:
               of God the ſacred ſprighte
               That purifies the heart from ſinne,
               and rayſeth ſoules to light
               That ouerwhelmde in fleſh do lye:
               as Mercury ſublimde
               By force of fyer is, and takes
               a colour white ful finde.
               This holy ſprite adournes the minde,
               and heart doth vpward moue
               
                  
This cutts away the worldly cares,
               and breadeth heauenly loue:
               Wherwith the minde inflamed once
               all things doth eaſye ſeeme,
               Though neuer ſo ſore: for he that loues
               doth labour light eſteeme,
               Eſpecially if any hope
               there be rewarde to holde:
               For hope, & loue, are two ſtrōg pricks,
               that makes vs alway bolde,
               And not to care for any toyle,
               wherfore continually
               Our daily prayers muſt wee make,
               to hym that guides the ſkye,
               That ſo thys holy ſprite vouchſafe
               into our heartes to fall,
               That he may plant a Godly hope,
               and Godly loue withall:
               Wherwith ye minde inſpirde may moūt
               aboue the ſtarry ſkye,
               Deſpiſing much the world, and ioyes
               that vaine doe pleaſe the eye,
               And ſtriue to ioyne it ſelfe to God,
               with all the force and might.
               No maruell then it is all,
               if ayded of this ſprite
               
                  
I here can dwell, and leade a lyfe
               full harde ſo paciently,
               Upon this ſtiepe and deſert rocke,
               and ſtony mountaine hye.
               Yet neuer lackt I meate, nor clothes
               vpon this loftye ſpyre,
               As much as nature doth content,
               not wanton fonde deſyre.
               A little thing doth nature ſerue,
               a ſmall thing doth content,
               Such one as loues none ouerplus,
               a man to vertue bent,
               That rather ſeekes celeſtiall lyfe,
               than fleſhly fading dayes.
               For lyfe (leaſt thou be ignorant)
               is double, in hir wayes:
               One, wherwithall the bodye lyues,
               ſtill followed and purſude
               Is thys, of all the route of fooles,
               and common people rude.
               The people fonde that nothing knowe
               of any worthineſſe,
               But ſtouthful beaſts do make their God
               of filthy fonde exceſſe.
               This lyfe is proper vnto beaſtes
               of wilde and ſauage kinde,
               
                  
The other vnto God aboue,
               and men of godly minde,
               That for their great and worthy deedes
               doe well deſerue the name
               Of perfect men, and holly ſainctes
               of euerlaſting fame.
               But ſuch hye minded vertuous Impes
               the earth doth ſeldome broode,
               The earth a mother to the naught,
               and ſtepdame to the good.
               Agui ſe falta vn Renglon por ligereza.
               But now bicauſe I ſee thee bent
               to giue attent
                     •
                  u
                     •
                   eare,
               Some things of this celeſtiall lyfe
               I will declare thee here,
               Which ought well vnderſtoode, to pleaſe
               the minde of any wight.
               Fyrſt, man conſyſtes not only of fleſhe,
               but alſo of the ſpright:
               This giueth lyfe to them that line,
               by this we feele and moue,
               This giues vs mind, ye worthyeſt thing
               by which men wondrous proue.
               But many doubt if that the ſoule
               doe liue the body dead,
               
                  
Or whether it doe finiſhe 
                     •
                  o
               when as the lyfe is ſtedde:
               Aſſaredly the worſer ſort
               that to the fleſhe doe cleaue,
               And bent to vice, deſpiſing God,
               doe wiſhe and eke beleue,
               The ſoule to haue a dying day:
               
                  
                     •
                  icauſe (alas) they feare
               The cruell forments for the ſinnes
               that they committed here:
               And therefore will alowe no hell,
               nor Diuels for to be,
               And ſo they doe perſuade themſelues
               to ſcape with miſchiefe free.
               An other better ſort of men
               that ſynfull lyfe doe hate,
               Prouoked with the Godly loue
               of vertues goodly 
                     •
                  iate,
               Doe thinke the ſoule doth alwayes lyue,
               and not to dye with graue,
               Bicauſe they hope a glorious Crowne
               for their good workes to haue,
               And make accompt of perfect bliſſe
               when death hath ſhot hys dart,
               And of a better promiſde lyfe
               for to enioy their part.
               
                  
Of theſe two ſortes who iudgeth beſt▪
               
               who is but the iuſt?
               For euermore in doubtfull things
               the opinion muſt we truſt
               That pleaſeth beſt the better ſort,
               and that which follow moſt
               Such men as vertuous be, and ſuch
               as haue the holy Ghoſt.
               More ſafe it is to cleaue vnto
               the vertuous, and the iuſt,
               Than fanſyes of the wycked men
               to credite or to truſt.
               Ne muſt we note their number great
               that any thing haue ſayde,
               But in what ſort they leade theyr lyfe
               muſt well of vs 
                     •
                  e wayde.
               Wherefore it better is with fewe
               of vertuous ſort to ſay,
               That ſoules doe lyue continually
               and haue no dying day,
               Than with a number of the lewde
               againſt it to replye,
               Contending that there are no ſpri
                     ••
                  s,
               and that the ſoule doth dye.
               But more b
                     •
                  cauſe thou ſhalt beleue,
               I will declare to thee
               
                  
By reaſon good, the ſtate of ſoule
               immortall for to bee.
               For if that God in better things
               doth cunning ſtill expreſſe,
               As wyſedome telles, and as the good
               and vertuous muſt confeſſe:
               Then doubtleſſe muſt we iudge he gau
                     •
                  
               
               the ſoules no time to dye,
               Since better farre it is for them
               to liue continuallye,
               Than with the fleſhe to be extinct,
               and feele a full decaye:
               Which thus I proue, if death doe take
               from vs the ſoule away,
               If that we haue no other lyfe,
               but in thys body here,
               Then God may be accounted ill,
               and ſhall vniuſt appere,
               For thouſandes euery day we ſe
                     •
                  
               
               that floriſhe proſprouſtye,
               In richeſſe, ſubſtance and renoume,
               in raignes and Empyres hye,
               Yet ydle lubbers, vnlearnde, & naugh
                     •
                  ,
               that ſynne at liber
                     •
                  ye,
               And runne the race of all their life
               in great proſperitye.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  
On the other ſyde we may beholde
               the iuſt oppreſt to be
               With ſpitefull chaunce, a wretched lyfe
               and py
                     •
                  ious prouertye.
               Thus eyther God vnrighteous is
               that doth theſe things permit,
               Or after death hath euery man
               as he deſerueth it:
               Or elſe he doth diſoaine the deedes
               of mortall men to knowe.
               Beſides, what gratious mind apperes in God
               what goodneſſe doth he ſhowe▪
               
               If this be all that he doth giue,
               a lyfe ſo ſhort, and vaine,
               That ſwyftly runneth to an ende,
               and doth no time remaine:
               The halfe wher of is ſpent in ſleepe,
               the reſt in griefe, and 
                     •
                  oyle,
               And daungers great as faſt doth fleete,
               as riuers ſwyft in ſoyle.
               Therfore go to, O wretched men,
               builde Gorgeous Churches hye,
               And let with coſtly offrings great
               your altars peſtred lye,
               Set vp your ioyfull branche of bayes,
               your ſacred dores about,
               
                  
with pompe of proude proceſſyon paſſe,
               let Hi
                     •••
                  es be ratled out,
               Spende frankconſen
                     •
                  e, and let the noſe
               of God be ſtretched wyde
               With pleaſant ſmoke: do this, and add
                     •
                  
               
               more honour much beſyde,
               That he preſerue your goodly lyfe,
               wherin doth you torment,
               Sometime great cold, & ſometime hea
                     •
                  ,
               
                  
                     •
                  ow plague, now famiſhement
               Now bloudy warres, now ſicknes great
               or chaunce to ſorowe at,
               Sometime the buſye byting flye,
               ſometime the ſtynging 
                     •
                  nat,
               The Chyn
                     •
                  h and Flea. Keioyce I ſaye
               that here you leade your lyfe
               With thouſand painfull labours great,
               in trauaile, toyle, and ſtryfe:
               And after in a little ſpace
               in paine you drop away,
               And lompiſhe lye in lothſome vawlt,
               to wormes a grateful praye.
               O worthy lyfe, O goodly gift of God:
               man in this world is bredde
               Among the brutiſhe beaſtes, and fooles
               and 
                     ••
                  aues hys lyfe is ledde,
               
                  
Wher ſtormes, and flakey ſnowes & yſe
               and durt and duſt, and night,
               And harmful ayre, and cloudes & miſtes
               and windes, wyth helliſh ſyght,
               And grief & wailing raynes, wher death
               beſyde doth worke his feate.
               Is this our goodly countrey here,
               is this our happy ſeate,
               For which we owe ſuch ſeruice here,
               vnto the Goddes aboue?
               For which it ſeemeth mete wyth vowes
               the heauenly ſayn
                     •
                  ts to moue?
               And if none other life we haue
               than this of body vayne,
               So frayle and ful of fylthineſſe,
               when death hath carcaſſe ſtayne:
               I ſee not why ſuch prayſes ſhould
               of God reſound in ayre,
               Nor why we ſhould ſuch honour giue
               to hym in temples fayre,
               That hath vs wretches framed here
               in this ſo wretched ſoyle,
               That ſhall for euermore decay
               after ſo great a toyle.
               Wherfore leaſt God ſhall ſeeme vniuſt,
               and ful of cruelneſſe
               
                  
Shal well deſeruing counted be:
               we muſt of force confeſſe,
               That death doth not deſtroy the ſoule,
               but that it alwayes is:
               None otherwiſe than ſprite in ayre,
               and ſainct in heauen liues,
               Both voyd of body, ſleepe, and meate.
               And more we muſt confeſſe
               That after death they liue in paynes,
               or perfect bleſſedneſſe.
               But let this reaſon thee ſuffiſe,
               for if thou this do ſhewe
               Unto the wicked kinde, they laugh,
               no light the blinde doth knowe.
               But thou, beleue for euermore
               and know aſſuredly,
               (For ground of ſauing health it is,)
               that ſoule doth neuer dye,
               Exempted from the Siſters power
               and fatal deſtiny.
               Theſe things foretolde made euident
               let vs begin to tell
               The perfect life, that makes vs like
               to ſaincts aboue that dwell:
               By which the heauens we deſyre.
               But ſyth doth beſt appeare
               
                  
Contrary things, when they be ſeene,
               and ioyned ſomething neere.
               Wherfore it is conuenient firſt
               the bodies life to ſhowe,
               That drawes vs downe frō heauen hie,
               to minde the earth below,
               And makes vs like to brutiſh beaſtes,
               contrary to the ſoule.
               This life he liues (though naught) yt doth
               for ſtately honours prowle,
               And ſeekes with al his force the fruicte
               of praiſe and glory vayne,
               Deſiring only men to pleaſe
               with fonde vayne glorious brayne:
               And he that wholly doth apply
               himſelf a wealth to get
               By right or wrong, and hath his heart
               vpon his riches ſet:
               A two leggde Mole, that alwayes doth
               in earth en
                     •
                  ombed lye,
               Not caſting once his eyes aloft
               vnto the heauens hye.
               And be that drownde in lecherie,
               and ſurfe
                     •
                  s euer lyes,
               Regarding only fleſhly ioyes,
               doth ſhamefaſtneſſe deſpiſe,
               
                  
Runnes headlong into whoredome vile,
               and fattes himſelfe with meate,
               A fooliſh man, that ſo the wormes
               may haue more foode to eate.
               Al theſe ſame vile and fylthy kindes
               that I haue reckned here,
               May wel be called fleſhly men,
               for loue to fleſh they beare:
               Whoſe life doth differ ſmal frō beaſtes.
               But now on the other ſide:
               He that doth prayſe of men depiſe,
               and pomp of worldly pride,
               Doth liue with chaſt and Godly minde,
               is calde a ſpiritual man:
               Bicauſe his ſprite the body rulde,
               and luſt ſubdued than,
               Doth freely guide and hath his place
               in hieſt part of brayne.
               Therefore the Godly life, is fyrſt
               with bridle to reſtrayne
               Fond pleaſure, Gluttony, and luſt,
               to conquer fleſh with ſprite,
               For to neglect al worldly things,
               and only ſet delight
               On heauen, heauen moſt to wyſh,
               and chie
                     •
                  ly to regard:
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  
There is the ſoyle for ſoules and ſeate
               for vertuous men preparde:
               There to the body layd in graue
               the righteous ſoules do clime,
               Moſt glorious ſoules that brightly doe
               with glorious vertue ſhine,
               And feele in euer laſting light
               an euerlaſting ioy.
               But chiefly let the vertuous man
               his time and toyle employ
               In learning, vſing ſtyll to reade
               ſuch bokes as do entreate
               Of God, of ſoule, and wretched ſtate,
               of this our dwelling ſeate,
               Of death, or other honeſt things,
               and let him night and day,
               Of theſe both often reade, and talke,
               and wel in minde them way.
               But wanton workes, & wanton words,
               let him with head eſchew,
               Alas how ſore do ſuch affayres
               a vertuous minde ſubdew:
               For reading is the foode of minde,
               which if it vertuous be
               Doth profyt much, if it be yll
               doth hurt excedinglye:
               
                  
None otherwiſe than euyll meate
               doth hurt the man that chawes.
               Theſe thinges though they muſte all be kept.
               yet nothing more withdrawes
               A man from loue of filthy fleſh,
               nor leades to God more nye,
               Than oftentimes to ponder well
               of life the miſery:
               Which ſince it is ſo ſhort, and full
               of ſuch calamitie,
               Seemes rather death than life to me,
               yea, worſe than death to be.
               For who is it that doth not ſee,
               who doth not playne perceaue?
               That yrkſome gall, and bytterneſſe
               to euery parte do cleaue.
               If euery thing thou wel doeſt ſift,
               nought perfect ſhalt thou fynde:
               For nature poyſoned hath the partes
               of all and euery kind.
               Moſt things haue double face: ful black
               within, and outward white,
               And with their colour, do deceyue
               the iudgement of the ſighte.
               If ought there be here in this life
               both fayre and good beſyde,
               
                  
Like ſmoke and miſt it flyes away,
               and doth no time abide.
               Time ſuffers nothing long on earth,
               death maketh al things vayne,
               And turnes and tumbles vnder foote,
               of man the proud diſdayne.
               Alas how al this worldly pompe
               doth quickly paſſe away,
               How wauering is renoume of man,
               how ſone doth it decay:
               Much like the bubble ſwelling great
               amyd the waters cleere
               Is ſone deſtroyed, and with a puffe
               of winde doth not appere.
               For in a moment al the ioyes
               of man are fetcht away,
               Then only doth the talk remaine,
               wherein they thus do ſay,
               Loe, here he was, loe, this did he,
               he fought, and triumph wan,
               He loued, he raigned, he conquerd realmes,
               ſubdued many a man,
               A goodly ſor
                     •
                  e of bookes he wrote,
               but now where ſhall we finde
               Theſe things? no where. Himſelf where now?
               both out of ſight and minde.
               
                  
What is he now? Nothing. Or whether
               did he himſelf conuay?
               Loe, fled from hence with windes he is,
               and vaniſht quite away.
               Alas, alas, but trifles fond,
               and fanſies meere they be,
               Whatſoeuer goodly thing on earth,
               or wonderful we ſee.
               What tell you me of Was, or Did,
               
               one Is more worth coumpt I,
               Than Was a thouſand times. But faſt
               this Is away doth flye,
               And al our pompe with him he beares.
               Theſe things who wel doth way,
               And vſeth to conſider oft,
               ſhall quickly caſt away
               This worldly loue, and hating earth
               ſhal ſeeke the Skies to finde:
               Eſpecially if therewithal
               he vſe to beare in minde
               How fylthy and how miſerable,
               mans body doth appere,
               Of fading fleſh, and brittle bones,
               with ſkinne encompaſt here:
               Al flowing ful with dregges vncleane,
               and bloud corrupt, and vile,
               
                  
Still durty, ſoule, and filthy lookes,
               except it euery while
               Be waſht, and kept with daily care,
               and ſo made fayre and white.
               O dolefull hoſpitall of minde,
               and veſſell of the ſprite,
               By which ſuch ſyckneſſe great we feele,
               by which ſuch neede we haue.
               O heauie garment, pryſon ſtrong,
               O quick, and liuely graue:
               That chokeſt here both minde, & ſenſe,
               and them in darkeneſſe hyde:
               Wherby ſo great an ignorance
               in breſt of man doth byde.
               O earth to earth returning ſoone,
               that in a ſmalleſt while
               In tombe, ſhalt freſhly feede ye wormes,
               with foode, of carcaſſe vile.
               In what a wretched caſe liues he,
               that ledde away with loue
               Of thee, doth leaue the perfect lyfe,
               and gift of God aboue,
               While more than meate eſteming thee,
               thy pleaſures here preparde,
               He onely ſeekes: and good, and ryght
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   ſmally doth regarde:
               
                  
And thinkes there is no other lyfe
               than this, that here we holde.
               A fooliſhe Aſſe, forgetfull of
               himſelfe, and countrey olde,
               From whence into thys darkſome dale,
               and dolefull place he went,
               That ſo a wretche he ſhould become,
               in wretched carcaſſe pent.
               For euery ſoule that is encloſde
               with fleſhe and members here,
               Hath wretched lyfe, tyll loſed frō thence
               it flye to heauens clere:
               Except the heauy waight of ſynne
               doe barre him of hys way,
               And cauſe it in the loweſt ayre,
               or on the earth to ſtay.
               For pureſt heauen neuer can
               a thing vncleane abyde,
               Nor wicked men, nor doltiſhe fooles,
               may come where God doth guide.
               Theſe wordes while as the holy man
               in teaching mee had ſpent,
               The Sunne almoſt had ended daye
               with Waine that weary went:
               And night was nere at hande, that thoe
               began abrode to caſt
               
                  
Hir dreadfull darkſome ſhade, vpon
               the worlde approching faſt.
               I thence depart, and towards Rome
               
               my way in haſt I take.
               And whyle with ſpeede I paſſe the pathe
               that iorney new doth make:
               Lo Cynthia ſhining compaſſe full,
               did call the lightleſſe night,
               With ſyluer beames, that dewe ſhe caſt
               to appere both fayre and bright.
               Thus went I all alone, and wyth
               my ſelfe in minde I wayde,
               The Godly wordes that late to me
               the auncient Father ſayde.
               But lo, thre men in company
               therwith I might beholde,
               whom meeting thus by chaūce, I aſkde
               which way they trauaile would:
               To Rome they ſayde: and one of them
               lookde full vyon mee thoe,
               And naming mee, from whēce quoth he,
               what countrey comſte thou froe?
               I aunſwerde him, from that wyſe man,
               which in the part moſt hye
               Of fayre Apolloes ſtately hyll,
               in lofty place doth lye.
               
                  
Wherewith he ſmylde, & ſayde, O foole
               ſynkes it into thy minde,
               That poſſyble on earth it is
               a wyſe man here to finde?
               He ſemeth wyſe that is leaſt foole
               the other ſort among,
               Although a dolt for wyſedome doth
               to Gods alone belong:
               Of number which we here are three,
               for I am calde by name
               
                  Sarracilus, and Sathiell he,
               
                  Iaxa is thys ſame.
               which though we walk in humain ſhape,
               thus ſeeming men in face,
               Yet Gods we be, and nere the Moone
               we haue our dwelling place.
               Whereas a number great of Gods
               of meaneſt ſort doe lye,
               That haue the guiding of the earth,
               and Seas that ryſe ſo hye.
               This when I heard, amaſde I was,
               and ſore to dread began:
               Yet ſeming bolde and voide of feare,
               full lyke a pretye man▪
               
               I aſkde wherfore they went to Rome,
               
               then aunſwerde me the ſame:
               
                  
A fellowe there of oures we haue
               that Ammon hath to name,
               whom bounde to ſerue by Magike Arte
               a yong man there kepes ſtraight,
               Of Narni ſoyle, that doth in court
               of Vrſin prelate wayght.
               O what great power is graunted man,
               the ſprites he guides by line.
               By this you well may vnderſtande
               your ſoules to be diuine,
               And voide of death. For if no part,
               of you ſhould after raine,
               If that your ſoule ſhould dye, as bodye
               here by death is ſlaine:
               What power ſhoulde haue ſuch fooliſhe beaſtes,
               and trifling pyctures vaine,
               Upon the ſprites aboue? And if
               no ſacred thing remaine
               In you, how ſhould ſuch Ghoſtes as we
               the force of man ſo waye,
               Or vnto man of fading ſtate
               in ſuch a ſort obaye?
               Yea I my ſelfe was once Conſtrainde
               to ſerue a German wight,
               Encloſde within a compaſt ſtone
               of Chriſtall clere and height▪
               
               
                  
But at the length a bearded ſyre
               vnloſde me of theſe bandes,
               And priſon broken thence I fledde,
               in haſt from out his handes.
               To Rome therefore we go with minde,
               if that we may t'vntye
               From ſeruice ſtraight, a mate of oures
               that there doth captiue lye.
               And ſo that downe, to Hell we may
               conuaye this preſent night,
               A ſort of Romiſhe prelates proude,
               that liue in great delight.
               Theſe words whyle as he ſpake, a winde
               forthwith dyd pittling blowe:
               Quoth Sathiell then, O frendes, frō 
                  Rome
               
               
                  Remiſſes comes I knowe:
               This winde that comes before declares,
               nor herein did he lye,
               For therwithall a fayre yong man
               
                  Remiſſes ſtoode them bye.
               They at hys comming all reioiſt,
               and byd hym welcome there,
               And aſke what great affayres in Rome,
               
               what newes doe there appere.
               There all quoth he are bent to luſt,
               and Glotony doe minde,
               
                  
With theft, and guile, all ours they be,
               both man, and womankinde.
               But Clement there the Pope prepares
               an armye great in haſt,
               And ſeekes to haue the preſent ſtate
               of Luther cleane defacde,
               And Spaniſhe enſynes therfore kepes:
               nor wyll he nowe diſpute,
               And him wyth ſcriptures ouerthrowe,
               but with the ſworde confute.
               Away with counſaile now, and hence
               with Luthers workes againe,
               For Byſhops now are battailes meete,
               all other wayes are vaine,
               Ne care they what the Apoſtles taught,
               ne for the wordes of Chriſt,
               But boaſt themſelues as Lordes of all,
               that may doe what they liſt.
               They that haue power do feare no law,
               law is with force oppreſt.
               But we (my mates) doe hope thereby
               of gayne to be poſſeſt,
               And of the ſpoyle of ſuch a ſort
               ſome ſoules to beare away
               Unto the dreadfull dongeon darke.
               Theſe wordes he thus did ſay:
               
                  
Thē whiſpring ſomething wc thēſelues,
               from thence they doe depart:
               And mee they leaue remaining there
               alone, with heauy heart.
               For when Sarracilus had ſayde
               that none on earth was wyſe,
               Immediatly a dolefull thought
               wythin my heart did ryſe:
               And thus vnto my ſelfe I ſayde,
               is wyſedome euermore
               In vaine of vs deſyrde, and praiſde,
               and vainely looked for.
               And only delt to ſaintes aboue?
               Then of neceſſitie
               Here in this wretched mortall lyfe,
               all men muſt fooliſhe be,
               And laughing ſtocks, & pageants fonde,
               vnto the Gods in ſkye.
               O ſtate in moſt vnhappy kinde
               of man in miſery,
               O raſhe vnbridled wantonneſſe
               of ſuch as parents bee,
               O filthy luſt that doth beget
               the Children that we ſee,
               What do you now? you doe beget
               hoth fooles, and wretches here,
               
                  
A boy is borne, be mery ſyrs,
               reioyce, and make good chere,
               Fil in your cuppes, and daynty diſh
               vpon the table place.
               But ſone the childe ſhal proue a foole,
               or liue in wretched caſe,
               Or dying ſone, he ſhal departe
               vnto the Ghoſt belowe.
               O blinded mindes, that of the things
               to come do neuer know.
               We mortal men in wretched things
               haue oft a great delight.
               Theſe words I muttred in my minde,
               and wrapt in woful plight
               I went vnto my lodging ſtrayght,
               for ſleepe oppreſt my eyes,
               And made me reele. Of wiſemans ſtate
               theſe wordes ſhal here ſuffiſe.
               Now meete it is thy weried harpe
               my Muſe at reſt to lay,
               And for to ſpare the iarring ſtrings,
               let vs this time go pray
               The Lord and maker of the world,
               that grace he may vs ſend,
               The other ſygnes that do remayne,
               wyth pleaſant ſong to end,
               
                  
For greater things I muſt declare
               than yet from me did flowe:
               And ſore my ſimple minde doth feare,
               ſuch Myſteries great to ſhowe.
               My watry ſigne ſhal ſearch the partes
               of nature perfectly,
               And laſt of al my labour ſhal
               ſet open wyde the Skye.
            
         
         
            Aquarius, the eleuenth Booke.
            
               THe Loue of nature parent chief
               and great deſire of minde,
               The ſecret cauſes of al things
               for to reueale and finde
               Perſuades me now agayne, my ſelfe
               with Aeon ſtreames to fyl,
               And once agayne to reſt on toppes
               of hye Parnaſus hil.
               My Muſe draw neere, & bring thy Harp,
               now neede thy wit to ſhowe
               It is, and of a learned voyce,
               and verſe at ful to flowe.
               No ſmal things here we muſt declare
               I purpoſe now in minde,
               
                  
Dame natures face for to diſcloſe,
               about the world to winde.
               And fyrſt what hath bene here before,
               what is, and what ſhal be,
               Is called Eus: this name contaynes
               al things of eche degree,
               But of the ſortes that God hath framde
               by power and wiſdome hye,
               Some leade their life of body voyd,
               ſome eyther liueleſſe lye,
               Or elſe do liue in body here.
               Of former ſtate of twayne
               This B
                     •
                  ke ſpeaks not, ye next ſhal ſhew
               in time that doth remayne:
               Now (Muſe) let vs the other ſhew.
               The far
                     •
                  heſt partes moſt high
               Of al the world, wyth ample ſpace
               encompaſt is of Skie,
               That whirling round with dayly courſe
               doth al things here encloſe.
               Fiue Zones deuide it into partes,
               but euery part of thoſe
               Repleniſht with his dwellers is,
               nothing forbyds the ſame.
               For colde can neue
                     •
                   hurt the Gods,
               nor heat
                     •
                   can them inflame.
               
                  
Such things do beſt agree wyth earthe,
               the ſacred Skies are free
               From colde congeled, quiuering yſe,
               and fiers that flaming be.
               Which though it rolle continually.
               yet kepes it ſtyl one place,
               And from the parte where firſt it ſtode,
               doth neuer ſhift his pace.
               For placde betwene two fixed Poles,
               
               it ſtedfaſtly doth ſtand,
               And is ſuſtaynde betwene them two
               by Gods almighty hand.
               Whereof the one doth playne appeare
               to vs continually,
               And doth beholde the Beares aboue
               that kepe their courſe ſo hye:
               The other vnder earth is placde
               agaynſt it fixed wel,
               And in the night is ſene to them.
               that vnder vs do dwel.
               This compaſt globe of al the Skie,
               from Eaſt to Weſt deuides
               As many Spheres in compaſſe round,
               as there are Zones beſydes.
               That which is next vnto the Beare
               
               the Articke hath to name:
               
                  
And next to him the Circle ſtands
               wherein doth Cancer flame,
               Which doth conſtraine the Sūne to fal,
               and backward to retire,
               And farther of for to withdrawe
               his beames of flaming fire.
               Then next in order doth enſewe,
               the Equinoctiall line,
               Which doth declare the dayes, & nights,
               of equal length and tyme.
               Not far from thence by Capricorne,
               
               another line doth runne,
               Which cannot paſſe, but doth retourne
               from hence to vs the Sunne.
               The circle next that placed is
               vnto the South ſo nere
               Th' Autarticke circle hath to name,
               contrary to our Sphere.
               Beſide theſe lines a circle crookt
               there ſtands in Skies ſo cleare,
               By which ye Sūne in months twice ſyx,
               doth paſſe a perfect yeare.
               An other circle white there is,
               whoſe courſe by knees doth trayne
               Of Gemini, by Scorpius taile,
               and by the Tropicks twayne,
               
                  
And through the croked path of Sunne
               by midſt of Archers ſtring,
               And paſſeth by the Centaurs legges,
               and by the Egles wing,
               And both the Carter and the Swanne,
               and Perſeus doth it touch.
               And Paralels there are, this name
               giue Greekes to Circles ſuch,
               And day by day the Sunne doth paſſe
               a circle of this kinde,
               When as he falles amyd the Weſt,
               and leaues the Eaſt behinde.
               Two Colures eke beſydes there are,
               the one where Sunne doth ſtay
               By Cancer, Capricorne, and both
               the Poles doth cut his way:
               The other by the Balance runnes,
               and by the Wethers face:
               This ſhewes the times whē night & day
               are both of equal ſpace.
               Beſydes a numbre great there is
               of ſundry circles framde,
               That paſſe by both the foreſayd Poles,
               
               
                  Meridians rightly namde,
               That ouer vs directly runnes,
               a Circle more doth lye
               
                  
The Horizon calde, the world in mydſt
               deuided is thereby,
               And wher our ſight doth ceaſſe it ſtands
               thence terme the Greekes it ſo.
               Beſydes the Heauens parted are
               with many Circles moe.
               And nine there be, whereof the hyeſt
               that mouer firſt we call,
               Doth rolling from the fartheſt Indes,
               
               with Moores and Spaniards fall:
               Within a day he runnes his race,
               and fiercely doth he twine
               About with him the other Spheres,
               in whome no Starre doth ſhine:
               But cleane contrary to the ſame
               moue al the Spheres beſyde,
               And towards ye ſtreames of Ganges great
               from Cales in courſe they ſlyde.
               Wherof the greatſt doth ſhine wt ſtarrs
               that voyd of number be,
               And ſcarcely in an hundred yeares
               doth moue but one degree.
               And next to this doth Saturne ſtande
               aboue the other Spheres,
               Who finiſheth his courſe at full
               inſpace of thirty yeres.
               
                  
And next to him ſtands Iupiter,
               
               that ende of courſe doth gayne
               In yeares twice ſyx. Him Mars enſewes
               that turns in tweluemonths twayne.
               Next ſtands the Sunne that (as they ſay)
               his iourney doth contriue
               Beſyde ſir houres in ſpace of dayes
               three hundred, ſixty, fiue.
               Then next in place doth Venus rolle
               hir whyrling whele about,
               And ſoner than the Sunne hir courſe
               by ſeuentene dayes falles out.
               Then moues in Circle Mercury,
               
               which if report be right,
               Doth nine dayes ſoner end his courſe
               than Venus planet bright.
               The Circle of the Moone is loweſt,
               and paſſeth through the l
                     ••
                  e
               Of all hir courſe in houres cyght,
               and twenty dayes and nine.
               Seuen planets thus there are, yt grekes
               as wandring ſtarres do call:
               The hyeſt of which Saturnus hath,
               to him for houſe and hall.
               The Gote and ſeruitour of Ioue,
               
               and Iupiter doth holde:
               
                  
To houſes darke amidde the ſkye
               the fiſhe and Archer bolde.
               The Scorpion and the Phyrygean Ramme,
               
               to fooliſhe Mars pertayne:
               And in the flaming Lyon fierce,
               the Sunne doth Eaſt remaine.
               But in the Bull and Ballance doth
               the tender Venus reſt:
               
                  Mercurius doth in twinnes reioice,
               and in the Virgins breſt.
               A goodly Rome the Crabbe doth make,
               wherein the Moone doth dwell.
               But of the fayre Celeſtiall ſygnes,
               let vs begin to tell.
               Within the Zodiake, where the Sunne
               a yere by courſe doth trye:
               Twelue Signes there be, & ſyx of them,
               are named Northerlye.
               The other ſyxe are Southerne ſygnes,
               from beaſt that gilded ſhines:
               Unto the pleaſant Uirgins foote,
               they are calde the Northerne ſignes.
               But from the foremoſt of the waytes,
               vnto the cattayle twaine
               Of Neptunes droue, whatſoeuer are
               vnto the South pertaine.
               
                  
The names of theſe celeſtiall ſygnes
               I wyll diſcloſe in verſe.
               Theſe are the Ram, the Bull, the Twinnes
               
               the Crabbe, the Lyon fierce,
               The Maide, the Scales, the Scorpion,
               
               the Shooter, and the Gote,
               
               The Waterpourer, and in ſkyes,
               the Fiſhes two that flote.
               Ech ſeuenth ſtande contrarily,
               for when the one doth ryſe
               The other ſyttes, when as the Ram
               
               apperes before our eyes,
               Then down therwith deſcendes ye 
                  Scales
               
               ſo ſtandes contrary full:
               And riſyng eche when other falles
               the Scorpion, and the Bull.
               
               From head of Crabbe, to Shooters foote
               directly doe they lye:
               And from the Gote vnto the Twinnts
               
               they are ſayde to hang awry.
               Thriſe ten degrees in length, & twelue
               in bredth hath euery ſigne:
               And earthly named are, the Gote,
               
               the Bull, and Virgin fyne.
               But airy are theſe three, the Scales,
               
               the Waterman, the Twinnes:
               
               
                  
And wateriſhe are the Scorpion, and
               the Crabbe, and fiſhy finnes.
               The three that reſt are fiery
               the Lyon, Shooter, Ram:
               
               And Maſculin be theſe with three,
               that Ayrie ſygnes we name.
               And Fortunate they called be,
               the reſt are Faeminine:
               
               And are vnfortunate, they ſay
               that ſtate of Starres define.
               Theſe mouing are, the Ram, the Crabbe,
               
               the Scales, and Capricorn:
               
               And faſt the Lyon, Scorpion, Bull.
               
               and Boye with Egle borne.
               The Twinnes, the Shooter, Mayde, and Fiſhe,
               
               are common euery ſygne.
               More, three and thyrtie Images
               in ſacred ſkyes doe ſhine,
               Whereof are twenty placed faſt,
               amidde the Northerne Raine:
               And ſtorming South doth challenge all
               the reſt that doe remaine.
               Theſe are the ſtarres that in the North
               doe giue their blaſing light:
               Two Beares, of which doth H
                        •
                     lice
               
               ſhine forth with Starres more bright.
               
                  
The leſſer Cynoſura is,
               
                  Ph
                        •
                     niceans faithfull guide:
               Betweene them both the Serpent fierce,
               doth creepe with crawling pride,
               There Cepheus ſhines, and Caſsiopey,
               
               and Candian gliſtring Crowne:
               
               And next vnto the milke white Swanne
               
               is placde the Kneeler downe,
               And harkneth to the pleaſant Harpe.
               
               The Berwarde there doth ſhowe
               His gliſtring ſtarres, and Perſeus ſtands
               in thys celeſtiall rowe:
               That beares in hande Meduſaes face,
               and in this part is ſeene,
               The Carter, he that Serpent holdes,
               and eke hys Serpent keene,
               And by the Serpent ſtandes the Shaft,
               
               and there the Egle nye,
               And Dolphin that in ayrie ſeas
               aboue doth ſwiftly flye.
               Here ſhines the noble Pegaſus,
               
               a Horſe of auncient fame:
               And thereby ſtandes Andromeda,
               
               and Delta, laſt of name.
               Now thirtene ſygnes the South in part
               contrary doth retaine:
               
                  
The Whale, that ſcarce is yet at length
               wyth ſworde of Perſeus ſlaine.
               
                  Orion armde thou ſhalt beholde
               in thys ſame part of ſkyes.
               There Nilus runnes wc Channels ſtore:
               and Hare that ſwiftly flyes,
               Whom nere a brace of Doggs purſue,
               the greater and the ſmall.
               Among theſe Starres doth Argos ſayle
               a goodly Ship, and tall.
               Here mayſt thou both the Altar, and
               the myghty Cup beholde.
               And Phaebut Crowe, that gliſters all
               wyth Starres of flaming golde.
               The Centaure fierce, and Dragon ſlaine,
               with ſtrong Alcides ſweat,
               The ſtinking plague of Lernaes lake
               a grieſly monſter great.
               And in thys part a certaine Fiſhe,
               
               may well perceined bee.
               Lo here the ſhapes that moue aboue
               my verſe hath tolde to thee.
               Now wyll I ſhewe how many Starres
               in euery ſygne appere:
               In Elice doe ſeuen ſhine,
               by name the greater Beare,
               
               
                  
Bicauſe it giues the greater lyght
               but Cynoſura hyght:
               The leſſer beare bicauſe ſhe doth
               appere with ſmaller light,
               Though one and twenty Starres in hir
               doe euermore abide:
               Fyftene the waking Serpent hath
               that doth the Bears deuide:
               And Cepheus. xix. ſtarres containes:
               
                  Caſsiepey doth ſhine
               with thirtene lights: ye gorgeous crown
               hath neuer more than nine:
               And three the Swanne, twice fiue and nine
               the Kneeler bright doth weare:
               And fourtene Starres deſcribes the mā
               
               that driues about the Beare,
               
               Of which the ſtarre doth brighteſt ſhine
               that in hys gyrdle lyes:
               Ful ſeuentene brondes doth Perſeus holde
               that gliſters in the ſkyes:
               The Carter ſeuen: but that clere Starre
               that on hys ſhoulder ſtandes
               Is calde the Gote, the other twaine
               are Kiddes he hath in handes:
               A dreadfull ſyght to ſhypmen oft.
               The man that holdes the Snake
               
               
                  
Hath ſeuētene ſtarres: his Serpents ſhape
               doth two and twenty make.
               Nine lyghtes doe ſhine in Orpheus Harp:
               foure frames the Shaft a hye:
               Foure fyres doe flame in him that lyfte
               the Trotan to the ſkye:
               Ten ſparkes doe make the Dolphin clere:
               with eightene Starres of night
               Shines Paegaſus: and twenty giues
               
                  Andromeda hir lyght:
               But three alone doth Delta beare.
               Now will I take in hande
               To tell in verſe how many ſtarres
               in ſygne of Zodiake ſtande.
               The Ram is fyrſt, that. xviij. lightes
               doth in his body beare,
               The Bull hath one and twenty ſtarres
               but ſeuen ſhining cleare,
               Behinde hys back Vergiliae are calde
               and eke Athlantides,
               
               As many in his head he hath,
               of ſhowers calde Hyades:
               
               Eightene betwixt them haue ye 
                  Twinnes,
               
               one. x. the other eyght:
               And eightene hath the Crabbe aboue,
               two ſtandes behinde him ſtraight
               
                  
That Aſſes, and the Stall are namde,
               but next that clerely ſhine,
               The Lyon gliſters there with ſtarres
               in number ten and nine:
               The Virgin holding eares of Corne
               with eyghtene lightes is clere:
               In Balance foure, and. xv. in
               the Scorpion doth appere:
               And. xv. in the Shooter ſhines,
               before whoſe feete doth lye
               A certaine Crowne where ſeuen lightes
               doe gliſter to the eye.
               The Gote hath two and twenty ſtarres,
               the Troian Boy fourtene:
               In the one Fiſhe viij. and. ix. appeares:
               in the other. xij. are ſeene.
               Now will I ſhew what ſtarres there be
               in ſygnes of Southerne ſyde,
               Though farre from vs they be, & ſcant
               can of our ſyght be ſpyde:
               The monſtrous Fyſhe hath. xxx. lights:
               like ſort in Nilus flowes,
               Syxe hath the Hare, and. xvij.
               in great Orion ſhowes,
               With. xix. flames the Syrian Dog,
               
               the lyttle Dog hath three,
               
                  
The ſydes of Arcos brauely deckt
               with three and twenty be,
               One ſtarre doth Chiron more relay,
               the ſacrifice in hands
               He holdes eleuen hath, & deckt with. iiij.
               the goodly Altare ſtands,
               With ſix and twenty Hydra ſhynes,
               three ſignes that lies in length
               And mates the Crab, the Virgin fayre
               and Lion great of ſtrength.
               The Rauen ſhynes wyth ſeauen ſtarres,
               the Cup hath eyght in ſight,
               The Southerne Fiſh with. xij. doth caſt
               abrode his ſtarry light,
               The riſing and the ſetting of
               the Signes let vs diſplay.
               Three ſorts of wayes ye ſtarres do ryſe,
               three ſortes they fall away,
               That riſing called Coſmike is,
               the ſetting termde likewiſe,
               When early in the Eaſte the ſigne,
               wyth Sunne is knowen to ryſe:
               But when ſoeuer any ſygne
               doth ryſe, or downeward fall,
               And Sunne in ſetting, lets them ſhine,
               this terme we Cronicall.
               
               
                  
And Heliake is the riſing namde,
               when as the Sunne full nere
               The ſigne lyes hyd, and paſſing thence,
               forth with doth bright appere:
               The Heliake ſetting that we cal
               when as in any ſigne
               The Sunne doth walke, and wt his light
               permit it not to ſhine,
               But now the riſing of the Signes
               and how they downe deſcend
               I wyll declare, if Muſes ayde
               and Phaebus be my frend.
               When Ram doth riſe then mounteth vp
               left part of Andromaed
               
               Unto the halfe, and ioynde therewith
               Sir Perſeus flaming head:
               Then backward commes the Bull aloft,
               who while he vpward hyes,
               Al Perſeus ſprings, and greateſt part
               of Carter then doth riſe,
               And Thurlpoles tayle, and fading quite
               the altare downe doth fall:
               Then hydes himſelf in flaſhing floudes,
               the Berward firſt of all.
               With Twinnes doth all the Whale aryſe,
               and former partes of Po,
               
               
                  
And with this ſame Orion great
               all armed vp doth go:
               Then he that holdes the Snake with both
               his feete, the water tries:
               The Crab ariſing vp takes halfe
               the Crowne away from eyes,
               The tayle of Whale, the Southerne Fyſhe
               
               and head of Kneeler lowe,
               And half his Hanch: frō knees to backe
               of him that Snake doth ſhowe,
               And all his Snake except the neck,
               the Bearward almoſt quite.
               But now agayne from girdle vp
               
                  Orion commes to ſight,
               Wyth al the courſe of Nilus great.
               Theſe Signes beſyde do ryſe
               Wyth Lion fierce: the Egle, Hare,
               
               and Dog of leſſer ſyſe,
               The former legges of greater Dog,
               
               and head of Hydra ſprings:
               But theſe agaynſt the Bearward hote,
               and he that Serpent wrings,
               With head and necke of Snake in hand,
               and part that did remayne
               Of gliſtring Crowne, and Kneeler eke,
               (excepted yet agayne
               
                  
His left foote and his knee beſyde)
               in Weſterne waues do fall,
               With Virgin riſeth whole the Dog,
               
               and Serpent vp doth crall,
               Unto the Cups, and then appeares
               the Ship of Theſſaly,
               
               As much as Maſt and ſayle may ſhowe,
               Contrary hid do lye
               Theſe ſtarres, the Dolphin, al the Swan,
               
               his tayle except, the Darte,
               
               The Scorpions cley, and of the floude
               of Nile the former parte:
               But Pegaſus hides head and necke,
               the reſt appeareth bright,
               Al Argo with the Scales doth ryſe,
               and Bearward clere in ſight.
               Saue tippe of tayle, al Hydra ſeene,
               the right knee and the ſhinne
               Of Kneeler downe, and Centaures tayle
               to ſhine doth then beginne:
               Then mayſt yt halfe the Crowne perceyue
               the reſt of Horſe that flies,
               And partes that hindermoſt do ſtand
               of Swanne then hidden lies:
               And al ſaue head the Whale doth ſet,
               hir head in Seas doth hyde:
               
                  
                  Andromaeda then ſhalt thou ſee,
               olde Cepheus downe to ſlyde,
               The Father of Andromeda,
               
               and downe in flouds to fall
               With hands, his ſhoulders, & his head.
               Theſe ſhapes and fygures all
               With Scorpion riſe: the Dragons tayle,
               and Chirons horſe appeare,
               And reſt of Crowne and Sacrifice
               that he in hands doth beare,
               Alſo the Serpents head doth ryſe,
               and eke hir holders head,
               Then ſyts the part that doth remayne
               of corſe of Andromed,
               
               And Cepheus ſyts from head to waſte,
               and double winding way
               Of Padus ſtreames, and downward then
               doth fal dame Caſsiepey,
               
               Then firſt the Dog himſelfe doth hyde,
               and downe Orion flings.
               When as the Shooter vp doth ryſe,
               the Serpent holder ſprings,
               With Serpent whole, the left hand and
               the head of Kneeler downe,
               And al the Harp, the breaſt and head
               of him that ware the Crowne
               
                  
Of Aethyops land King Cepheus cald.
               Then hidden quite doth lye
               
                  Orion, Hare, and greater Dog
               
               and Carter of the Skye,
               Excepting only Head and Feete
               then Perſeus downe doth fall,
               His right foote and his thigh except
               the Ship (ſaue ſterne) ſyts al.
               When as the Gote aſcendeth vp,
               the Swanne, and Shaft thereby
               The Altare and the Egle fayre.
               begin to appeare in ſkye.
               But ſterne of Argo then deſcendes,
               and leſſer Dog doth hyde
               His ſtarres in Sea, and vnder grounde
               therewyth doth Perſeus ſlyde.
               When as of Ganimedes fayre
               the goodly ſtarres do ryſe,
               Then firſt the limmes of Pegaſus
               
               do clime into the Skies:
               Contrarywyſe the neck and head
               of Dragon downe doth ſlyde,
               And Chiron doth his hinder parte
               beneath the waters hyde.
               When as the Fyſhes twayne are brought
               to riſe aloft in Skye,
               
                  
The right ſyde of Andromeda
               
               appeareth to the eye.
               And he that Southerne Fiſh is calde:
               then both the bodies quite
               Of Dragon and of Centaure great,
               are taken from our ſight.
               Thus much of riſing of the Signes
               and ſetting ſhal ſuffiſe,
               Now let vs touch the reſt that doth
               remaine, in ſpeedy wiſe.
               But fyrſt we muſt Vrania call
               my verſes here vnto,
               That ſhe may ayde and ſuccour ſende
               ſuch ſecrets to vndo.
               
                  Vrania, thou that knoweſt the things
               aloft that hydden lye,
               That walkeſt oft by ſeates of Gods,
               and ſtarry temples hye:
               
                  Vrania beautiful draw nere,
               and open vnto me,
               The ſecrete ſeates of Gods aboue,
               and things that hidden be,
               And helpe thy Poet, that in ſong
               thy Scepters ſeekes to ſhewe,
               And graunt the whirling Skies aboue
               in minde that I may knowe.
               
                  
And firſt good Lady ſhewe to me
               if that the Skies aboue
               Conſiſt of matter hard and thicke,
               or ſoft and apt to moue:
               None otherwiſe than is the ayre,
               which well we may deuide:
               This tolde thou ſhalt declare to me
               ſtraunge matters more beſide.
               Two ſprings of nature chiefe there be
               
                  Materia and Forma namde:
               Of theſe ſame twaine al kinde of things,
               that here we ſee, are framde,
               Of theſe the earth, the Seas, the ayre,
               and flaming fyre ſprings.
               Wherefore they lye, that matter none
               admit in Heauenly things:
               For contraries ſhould then in them
               be found, thus they do ſay,
               And by this meanes corrupted quite
               they ſhould in time decay.
               But as me ſeemes, this reaſon here
               doth from the truth decline,
               For neyther matter is in fault,
               if that in tract of tyme
               The bodies fade: nor contraries
               themſelues wil thus vndo
               
                  
If that their forces equall be,
               and ſtronger none of two:
               For when the ſtrength & power is lyke,
               then equall is the fyght,
               And victory on neither part,
               and neither ſyde doth lyght.
               Therfore God ſeking in hys minde
               the heauens hye to make,
               The chiefe and pureſt fyned partes,
               of matters, fyrſt dyd take,
               And tempred them in ſuch a ſort
               that harme in them ſhould ceaſe,
               And that the things contrary thus,
               ſhould ſtyll remaine in peace:
               So laſtes the ſkye continually
               and neuer doth decay.
               But for bicauſe the harder things
               laſt longer farre away,
               And take leſſe hurt: therefore the ſkye
               of all the hardeſt ſeemes
               More than the Diamonde, that forme
               and fyre it light eſtemes,
               And euery force ſaue onely Gods,
               of whom it fyrſt toke grounde.
               An other reaſon proues thys ſame,
               for fyrſt that moueth rounde,
               
                  
The Spheres beneath him turns about
               and Weſt ward them doth driue,
               And rolles them dayly mouing round
               though they contrary ſtriue:
               Which could not be if that they were
               not hard aſſuredly.
               Lake there withal that parte of Moone,
               the likeſt is to ſkye,
               Which Sun doth not behold, nor tuchd
               wyth beames of brothers eyes.
               So Starres at noone are thought to be
               in colour like to Skyes,
               Which Moone & Starres thē ſelues be harde,
               and dark they alſo be:
               The experience of the Eclipſe doth this
               declare apparantly,
               For Moone betwixt doth hide ye beames
               that from the Sunne do flowe,
               And ſuffers not the ſhining light
               vpon the earth to ſhowe.
               Why ſhuld not this ſame hardnes here
               vnto the Skies agree?
               For neuer ſhould it elſe holde faſt
               the Starres that fixed be,
               But wander farre abroade they would,
               nor one place them ſhould holde.
               
                  
Yet darke is not the firmament,
               as of the Starres we tolde,
               For placed here vpon the earth
               the hyeſt Starres we ſee:
               And well our ſight deſcernes the ſignes
               that fartheſt from vs be.
               Syth hardeſt are celeſtiall ſhapes,
               and pureſt eke are ſuch,
               Perchaunce they gyue a ſound beſides,
               and ſyth they rolle and touch,
               They make ſome he auenly melody,
               as ſome that long agoe
               Both learnde and ſobre written haue,
               my Muſe this doubt vndoe.
               Though hard and many be the kindes
               of Heauenly bodies hie,
               And though they ſubiect are to ſyght
               of earthly humaine eye,
               Yet noyſe for troth they none do make,
               for nothing them doth beate:
               Nor beaten would they more reſound
               that are moſt thicke and greate.
               And ſyth no ayre is there, wythout
               the which no ſound is made,
               And therefore voyd of noyſe runne
               they round in rolling trade.
               
                  
Beſyde, the inferiour Circles eyght
               gaynward the mornings ſeate
               Are turnde about one ſelfe ſame way,
               nor on themſelues they beate
               Wyth meeting courſe, but paſſe one way,
               wyth eaſy rolling round,
               As daunce in order compaſſing
               about do ſoftely driue:
               The Mouer firſt agaynſt them all
               in courſe doth onely ſtriue,
               Yet noyſe doth it neuer make,
               ne ſoundeth it at all,
               For aire there lackes and outward partes
               of Spheares are ſmoth alway:
               Whereby they ſwiftly paſſe about,
               no roughneſſe them doth ſtay,
               And eaſly thus with gentle touch
               their neyghbours next are kyſt,
               Wherfore there motion they do make
               all ſilently and whyſt.
               Therefore the Fathers olde did erle,
               that earneſtly beleued
               Spheares mouing to make Harmony,
               but not to be perceiued,
               Bycauſe it paſſde the eares of man,
               as is not heard at all
               
                  
The ruſh of Nilus ſtreames, where from
               the mountaynes they doe fall,
               But farther of the ſound doth roare.
               They trifle thus to teach,
               And fond and vayne the reaſon is,
               that herein they do preach.
               For if ſuch things were neuer heard,
               why ſhould they then deuiſe
               A ſound amyd the Skies to be,
               tis naught to enterpriſe
               Of things to talke, that neuer can
               be ſhewde or proued playne,
               That iuſtly may denied be:
               no newe things muſt we fayne,
               Except a troth in them be proued,
               where reaſon is away,
               No fayth nor credit muſt we giue
               to wordes that men do ſay.
               But is the Heauen round my Muſe,
               
               as fame of olde hath ſpyde,
               For compaſſed forme ſee mes perfecter
               than all the reſt beſyde,
               Bycauſe it hath beginning none
               nor ende in it doth lye,
               Bycauſe it aye contayneth moſte,
               more fine and fayre to th'eye
               
                  
And apter is it to be moued.
               chiefly the myddeſt about:
               As Heauen turnd about the earth,
               that hath hir ſtanding ſtout
               In mydſt of all the worlde. This forme
               ſo worthy doth agree
               To Heauen, to the Sunne and Moone,
               and all the Starres we ſee:
               Though folly fonde of Paynters doth
               them other wyſe deſc
                     •
                   ye.
               But are the Starres as ſome do ſay
               the thicker parte of Skye?
               Not ſo: for euery one of them
               vnlike to Heauen be,
               Among themſelues they differ eke,
               as Elme from Seruiſe tree,
               As Peare from Cherry differeth
               in faſhion and in fruite:
               Their diuers vertue this declares,
               and eke their ſundry ſuite.
               A power alone hath euery Starre,
               and nature eke at hand.
               The Heauen therefore is but ſeate
               and place where Starres do ſtand,
               No ſubſtance thoe, or matter of them.
               What vertue hath the Skye?
               
                  
All force and vertues in the Starres
               and gliſtering planets lye.
               The ſtarres do guide the cōpaſſd world,
               and euery chaunge doth bring,
               The Starres create all things on earth
               and gouerne euery thing:
               Thus teach th'Aſtronomers, and thus
               the common fame doth flye.
               Ne muſt we think in thicke and thinne
               the ſubſtance of the Skye
               To differ from the Starres, but eke
               their natures diuers be.
               And ſundry is their ſhape and force, and
               faſhion that we ſee.
               The bygneſſe of the Starres, and if
               their turning neuer ſtay,
               And in what place they fixed be,
               (as Plato once did ſay)
               And if they voyd of dwellers be,
               or any there doth dwell,
               My Muſe I would be glad to knowe,
               wherefore I pray thee tell.
               All ſtarres are not of bygneſſe like,
               for many leſſe there be,
               And in ſuch ſort, as comprehend
               no man may them we ſee:
               
                  
Some are agayne of larger ſyſe,
               in number fewe and fyne,
               That in cleare nightes amyd the ſkyes
               wyth gorgeous light do ſhine:
               Of which th'Aſtronomers haue framde
               fayre ſhapes and fygures bright,
               And pictured haue the Heauens braue
               with ſygnes of ſundry ſight.
               Thus of theſe greater ſorte of Starres,
               (as learnd in Starres doe tel,
               And as the Sunnes eclipſe doth ſhewe,
               wherein appeareth well
               How great the Moone in body is
               while vnder him ſhe glydes,
               And darkning all with ſhadowes black,
               hir brothers beames ſhe hydes,)
               Some do in compaſſe farre excede
               both ſeas, and earth, and all,
               And bygger are their ſhining globes
               though they do ſeeme ſo ſmall:
               Bycauſe ſo farre from vs they be.
               For euery thing beſyde,
               The farther it is from our eyes,
               the leſſe in ſyght is ſpyed,
               And doth deceiue the lookers on.
               The ſtarres that fixed be
               
                  
As Plato greateſt clarke doth ſay)
               are eche in their degree
               About their Centers rolled round,
               and turnde continually,
               And by this reaſon are they thought
               to twinckle in the eye:
               And not as certayne fayned haue,
               bycauſe farre of they be,
               Therefore they yelde a trembling light
               to ſuch as them do ſee:
               This reaſon ſurely is but vayne,
               and childiſhe for to write,
               For nothing ſeemes to twinckle tho,
               bycauſe tis farre from ſyght:
               But dimmer then and leſſe it ſeemes,
               nor twinckling can they be
               Without a motion ſure. Wherefore
               the Starres that fixt we ſee,
               Do moue togither with the Sunne,
               as we declared late,
               But Saturne, Iupiter and Mars,
               
               do moue in no ſuch rate,
               No more doth Moone, nor Mercury.
               
               nor Venus pleaſaunt Starre:
               But moue in little Circles that
               to them annexed are.
               
                  
Why ſparckles not Saturne, and Ioue,
               
               and Mars, as doth the Sunne?
               
               Syth farther far from vs in Spheares
               aloft more hye they runne:
               Nor differ they in difference great
               from fixed Starres aboue?
               Bycauſe they do not as the Sunne
               
               about their Centers moue.
               But in theſe Epicycles rolle
               their bodyes rounde about.
               Some man perchaunte if ſo the Sunne
               
               doth ſparckle, ſtandes in doubt.
               But if he ſhall the ſame beholde
               when firſt it doth appeare,
               Or when in Winter time it falles,
               and ſettes in waters cleare,
               When as his eye may beſte endure
               his ſyght thereon to caſt,
               He ſhall perceyue it playne to turne,
               and eke to ſparkle faſt.
               Let no man thinke this thing to be
               ſo greate and ſtrange to minde,
               If all the gorgeous Starres do moue
               in ſuch a ſorte and kinde:
               Seemes it not farre more wonderfull
               that Heauens compaſſe wide
               
                  
Wyth ſuch a motion ſwift about
               the world doth alwayes glyde,
               That Byrdes and windes, & lightnings flaſh,
               in ſwiftneſſe it doth paſſe?
               Thus now th'almighty Lord, by whom
               the world created was,
               All things he made, deuided in
               theſe two, mouing and reſt.
               But in the Center reſt vpon
               the earth hir place poſſeſt:
               In all the others motion dwelles.
               The ſtreames do ſwiftly flye,
               The ayre and fyry flames on earth
               do moue continually.
               But chiefly in the firmament
               hath mouing greateſt ſpright,
               And euery Spheare the higher it is
               doth moue wyth greater might,
               And ſwiftlier runnes about the world.
               Wherefore that Heauen hie,
               That called is the mouer fyrſt,
               with motion moſt doth flie.
               But that the greateſt motion is,
               that in the time moſt ſmall,
               Doth ſooneſt runne his courſe about
               the greateſt ſpace of all.
               
                  
Thus would it runne about the worlde
               in twinckling of an eye,
               But that the other Spheares do let
               that vnder him do lye,
               Reſtrayning it of courſe ſo ſwifte,
               leaſt that in turning round,
               The Seas with it, it ſhould conuay,
               and all the earthy ground:
               For then no kinde of creature coulde
               leade here his life in them.
               O matter to be wondred at,
               who is not mazed when
               He wayeth with himſelfe in minde
               ſo great a quantitie,
               So farre to paſſe in ſo ſhort time,
               and backe agayne to flye,
               And neuer for to ceaſſe this courſe,
               and labour none to feele?
               Hereby do ſome beleue that Gods
               the worlde about do wheele.
               Of them to euery Circle is
               a mouer ſtrong aſſignde,
               Who like as they that are condemned
               in bakehouſe for to grinde,
               May neuer ceaſſe from turning round
               the Skies both day and night,
               
                  
Nor though he would can once haue (time
               to reſt his wery ſpright.
               Now ſurely happy is that God
               that ſerueth in the ſame.
               But theſe are toyes, and fanſies fond
               of ſuch as ſeeke for fame.
               What ſtore of fonde Fooloſophers,
               and ſuch as hunte for prayſe,
               The earth brings forth, it is not good
               to credit all he ſayes,
               Though great his eſtimation be
               in mouthes of many men,
               Though many Keames of Paper he
               hath ſcribled with his pen.
               For famous men do oftentimes
               make great and famous lies,
               And often men do myſſe the truth
               though they be neuer ſo wiſe.
               Therefore muſt reaſon firſt be ſought,
               for in ſuch doubtfull things,
               More credit reaſon ought to haue,
               than mennes ymaginings:
               For ſuch are often proued falſe.
               What thing doth reaſon ſay?
               That Skies or Starres are moued of Gods
               or of their proper i way?
               
                  
What honour great, what kinde of ioy,
               what pleaſure can there be,
               Unto theſe Gods that turne about
               the Skies continually?
               That they for life of fooliſh man
               may needefull things prouide,
               And that the Birdes and ſauage beaſts
               and Fyſhes they may guide.
               Becoms it Lordes in ſuch a ſorte
               their ſeruants here to ſerue?
               And Gods for euer to be thrall,
               that they may beaſtes preſerue,
               That they may foſter Foles & Knaues:
               is it not rather meete
               For Gods to enioy their liberty,
               and pleaſaunt freedome ſweete?
               That they may wher they list go walk,
               leaſt as in fetters tyed,
               They can not paſſe from place to place,
               but ſtyll at home abyde?
               Or as the potters plying ſtyll
               the wheele and lumpe of clay,
               Can haue no time of quiet reſt,
               nor ſteppe from place away.
               Seemes it ſo ſweete aſporte to them
               the compaſſe round to moue,
               
                  
Or can this laboure neuer grieue
               the Gods that ſyt aboue?
               O ſentence worthy to be markde
               of graue and witty men,
               But reaſon bars them this, and cryes
               contrary quite to them.
               For nothing is eternall here
               but only God alone,
               And after him continuall be
               the Natures euerychone.
               Of things that he of nothing made.
               But yet by ſure decree,
               That otherwiſe they cannot ſhewe
               than they appoynted be,
               By him when firſt he framd the world,
               ſo ſtyll continuall ſhall
               The waters ſoft, the ster hote,
               the earth a ſted faſt ball.
               So ſhal the ayre for euer moue,
               ſo of neceſſity
               The circles of the Heanens round
               ſhal turne continually,
               So force and faſhion euery herbe
               deliured doth retayne,
               And euery tree, and euery beaſt
               that neuer time can ſtayne.
               
                  
As long as vnremouing ſtate
               of nature doth endure,
               As long as chaungeth not the wyll
               of GOD diuine and pure.
               Wherefore if thus continuall be
               the courſe of Heauens bright,
               It muſt be naturall as ſhewes
               in wayghty things and light.
               For what of nature propre is
               doth neuer feele decay,
               But if another moue the ſame
               in time it falles away.
               For no ſuch ſtate of violence
               doth last continually.
               Haue heauy things & light more force
               than ſtate of Starres and Skie,
               That they can moue of propre ſtrength
               and theſe can not do ſo
               Except of Gods they cauſed be
               about in courſe to go?
               Then is the earth and fier farre
               more noble than the Skie
               At leaſt for this bycauſe they neede
               no helpe of mouer by.
               But of themſelues from Center they
               or can to Center flie.
               
                  
Wherefore we muſt beleue that theſe
               celeſtiall ſtates aboue
               Of proper force and of their formes,
               as fyer and earth do moue.
               For nature is of greater might
               than mouer any one.
               This nature onely God excelles
               and him except alone,
               No better thing than nature is
               nor in the worlde more hie.
               I nature call the fixed law
               of him that guides the Skie,
               Which frō the worldes foundation firſt
               to all things he aſſured,
               And wyllde that it ſhould ſtand in force
               while age of worlde endured,
               For this ſame lawe hath God vnto
               the formes of things aſſignde
               That when from thence do things procede
               formes wel fulfil Gods minde,
               He can they once this order breake,
               for of their formes do ſpring
               Such things as he commaunded hath,
               who framde eche formed thing.
               This true and proper nature is
               of higher ſtate agayne
               
                  
Then matter or forme as ſome haue (taught
               for certainly theſe twayne
               Are rather ſprings of eury thing
               or cauſes firſt aboue
               Or framers firſt, not nature ſure
               if trueſt names we loue,
               Except we haue a better wyll
               falſe names to giue ſuch things.
               But of this ſame enough we haue,
               now ſtrike we other ſtrings,
               And whither that the ſtately roonies
               of Heauen empty be,
               Or whither any dwellers there
               haue place and ſouraintie.
               The preſent time doth me perſuade
               in wonted verſe to ſyng.
               Syth Heauen is ſo vaſt and wyde
               and ſuch a gorgeous thing,
               All garniſht round with gliſtring Starres
               ſo bright and fayre to th'eys
               Shall only voyd and empty it
               and vnreplemſht lye?
               And earth and ſeas ſuch dwellers haue?
               or is the ſeas or ground
               A place more pleaſaunt, fayre and good
               or more in compaſſe found
               
                  
Than all the Skie by which they more
               than Skies deſerue to holde,
               Such ſtore of creatures fayre & ſhapes,
               and faſhions ſundry folde?
               Is it a parte of prudent Prince
               to builde a pallace wyde
               With golde and Marble beautified
               throughout on eury ſyde
               And not (ſaue ſtable) to permit
               there any man to lie
               And furniſh out ſuch goodly roomes
               and ſumpteous buildings hie?
               For Earth is ſtable to all the worlde
               wherein all filth doth bide
               Duſt, dyrt, dung, bones and carton,
               and lothſome thingꝭ beſide.
               Who can at any time rehearſe
               the heapes of things vncleane
               That on the ſeas and earth appeare
               and euer ſhall be ſeene?
               Who knoweth not the ſhowrs ye miſts,
               the cloudes and flakes of ſnowe,
               The force of windes & rage of ſtormes,
               that on the ſeas do blowe,
               That ſhakes the earth & moues ye ayre?
               Yet playnly may we ſee
               
                  
The Seas and Earth with ſundry ſortꝭ
               of creatures full to bee.
               Shall then ye heauens cleare be thought
               as voyd and empty made?
               O rather voyd and empty mindes
               that thus your ſelues perſuade.
               For creatures doth the Skies containe
               and eury Starre beſide
               Be heauenly townes & ſeates of ſainctꝭ
               where Kings and Commons bide
               But perfect Kings and people eke,
               all things are perfect there,
               Not ſhapes & ſhaddowes vain of things
               as we haue preſent here,
               Which death ſone takes & time deſtroyes,
               defiles, and driues away.
               There wiſe and happy folkes, and ſuche
               as neuer do decay
               Do liue, here miſers dwell and men
               that certayne are to dye
               And doltiſh fooles. There peace & light
               and pleaſure chiefe doth lye:
               Here dayly warres and darkneſſe blind
               and eury kinde of payne.
               Go now, and prayſe this world & take
               delight in life ſo vayne,
               
                  
Preſume thou foole than Heauens faire
               the earth to ſet more by.
               But ſome may doubt if that more ſtrōg
               than Diamond be the Skye,
               And empty place is none therein,
               how Gods there dwelling be
               And mouing there? this ſemeth ſure
               with reaſon not t'agree.
               Beſydes ſince that the Heauens bright
               can not with plowe be torne,
               Nor digd with ſpade, how there ſhal vines
               and nedefull graine be borne?
               Theſe are but toyes & laughing ſtockꝭ,
               for though the Skies be harde,
               Yet paſſage haue the dwellers there,
               nothing their courſe hath barde.
               For vnto theſe celeſtiall ſtates
               the Maieſty deuine
               Appoynted ſlendreſt bodies hath
               of ſubſtance light and fine,
               So that no neede of dores they haue,
               nor yet of windowes wide,
               For through the thickeſt walles they run
               and through the Marbels ſlide,
               So pure and fine their nature is,
               and of ſo ſtrong a might.
               
                  
Who, (if ſo be they neuer had
               bene ſubiect to his ſight)
               Would thincke that fiſh in flouds ſhuld bee
               and frogs in ſlime to breede,
               And Salamander liue by fire,
               of ayre Chamelions feede
               And Greſhops nouriſhed with deawe?
               yet true this ſame we ſee,
               And we confeſſe them wonderfull,
               for many things there be
               Which though we think can not be dōe
               yet can and oft are done,
               Why could not God then creatures make
               that through ye earth ſhuld run
               And of no meate nor drinke haue neede?
               if he ſo could he did,
               Fond were it ſuch a ſpace to builde
               and leaue vnfurniſhed.
               But Heaueners haue no neede wt plow
               and ſpade for foode to ſtriue
               Since that their bodies are not ſuch
               as foode doth keepe aliue,
               Nor Gods do euer ſuffer thyrſt
               nor Sainctꝭ an hungred be
               In fine they neuer greeued are
               with lack or pouertie.
               
                  
Bicauſe beyond the Moone there dwellꝭ
               no kinde of dolefull caſe
               For eury kind of miſchefe, God
               vpon the earth did place
               And in the mioſt did them encloſe
               forbydding them the Skie:
               O happy ſuch as leade their liues
               thus in thoſe places hie,
               That Nectar drinke, ſtyll fed with foode
               of ſweete Ambroſia greene
               Whereof in thoſe Celeſtaill meades
               abundance great is ſeene.
               More happy and better is the life
               of ſuch as dwell aboue,
               The hier they in Heauen haue
               their place to reſt and moue,
               For places ſuch as in the Skies
               are hier in degree,
               More bleſſed are, and better farre,
               than thoſe that lower bee.
               What are the blackiſh ſpotꝭ that in
               the Moone we may beholde?
               For of theſe ſame men diuerſly
               their fanſies oft haue tolde.
               Nought of it ſelfe doth ſhine in Skies
               ſaue onely Phaebus cleare,
               
                  
Of him the Moone receauꝭ hir light
               and Starres that gliſter there,
               Who for bicau
                     •
                  e ſhe is the laſt
               of all the Starres on hie,
               And loweſt parte of Heauen keepes
               vnto the earth moſt nie,
               Shee needes muſt darkeſt be of all
               whereby ſith eury ſide
               Shee hath not white, nor thick, nor pure
               nor mee e where light may bide,
               For whiteſt partꝭ and thick and light
               ſunbeames at night receaue,
               The other partꝭ that are not apt
               the ſame doth lightleſſe leaue.
               Thus in the night the Moone doth ſhine
               but when the day giues light
               Much lyke in ſhewe to ſpotted cloude,
               in Skie ſhee waxeth white.
               So Gloewormes in the night do ſhine,
               but when the day returnꝭ
               By light they loſe their light agayne
               that in the euening burnꝭ,
               And then their propre colour ſhewe
               all fraude and guile away,
               
                  
                     •
                  he night is meeteſt for deceytꝭ
               true things appeare by day.
               
                  
Now if the world eternall be
               or if in time begonne
               It doth abyde a finall ende
               when many yeares are done,
               Is worthy to be vnderſtoode.
               For of this queſtion hie
               Haue diuers wiſemen written bookes
               he ſayth he doth deny,
               And authours fanſies differing
               the thing doth doubtfull try
               And that the troth in ſecrete plighte
               all dark doth hydden lye.
               Some thinke that it beginning had
               and that the world did ſpring,
               Of matter that for euer laſtꝭ
               and force of mightieſt king,
               When as before it had no ſtate:
               and ſay that theſe ſame twayne
               Continued alwayes haue, and ſhal
               for euermore remayne,
               
                  Matter, and the almighty Lorde,
               from whence all things doe floe.
               Some think the world of nothing made
               and thoſe deny alſo
               That any matter was before,
               but by the word and wyll
               
                  
(Of God) all made. But others ſay
               ſo moude by reaſons ſkyll,
               That neuer it beginning had
               nor neuer ſhall haue ende.
               Of theſe whoſe ſentence trueſt is?
               ſure I ſhuld condiſcend
               (But that Religion me forbyds,
               and Chriſtians that defend
               The doctrine olde of Moyſes bookes)
               to credit none beſide,
               But that the world hath alwayes bene,
               and alwayes ſhal abide.
               For why might not this world haue ben
               for euer here to fore?
               Bicauſe he could not do it tyll time,
               had taught him knowledge more,
               And then at length he finiſhed it?
               Or could he alwayes it haue done
               but would not vtter more?
               What is the cauſe? why rather would
               he after than before?
               Or elſe what reaſon alterd thus
               his minde to other trade?
               If naught it were this world to make:
               why was it euer made?
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  
But if it meete and profitable
               were this world to frame,
               What is the cauſe that God ſo late
               created hath the ſame?
               Wherefore hath it ſo ſhort an age?
               For, if we boldly may
               Deuines beleeue, eyght thouſand yeres
               are not full paſt away,
               Since Adam olde created was.
               Beſide whence doth proceede
               The cauſe why God ſhuld make ye world?
               for that he this did neede?
               If ſo: he ſhould at firſt it made
               leaſt he ſhould greeued bee
               The lacke of ſuch a goodly thing
               ſo long a time to ſee.
               If not: why made he it? in vayne▪
               
               ought he for to deuiſe
               The thing that to no purpoſe is?
               of fooles this is the guiſe.
               Therof thē was ſome cauſe, but what?
               of troth aſſuredly,
               His goodneſſe great and mighty powre,
               leaſt that in vayne ſhould lye
               Theſe twoo ſhut vp in ſecrete cloſe,
               but rather open be
               
                  
To eury man, for mighty and good
               in vayne is coumpted he
               By whome no great nor godly thing
               hath neuer yet bene wrought.
               If God therefore was euer good,
               and euer mighty thought,
               Why would he not haue alwayes builte
               this goodly world we ſee?
               Why let he ſuch a thing till nowe
               of late deferred bee?
               No reaſon truly can be found
               except ſome ſubtile brayne
               Make more accōpt of 
                     •
                  oyes than truthe
               and fooliſh fanſies fayne.
               Wherefore, if we to reaſon ſticke
               then muſt we ſurely ſay
               That this ſame world hath euer bene
               and neuer ſhall decay.
               But if that GOD ſayd otherwiſe
               long ſince, and then did giue
               To Moyſes knowledge of his workes,
               we Moyſes muſt belieue:
               Let reaſon alway yelde to fayth,
               and there as priſoner leaue,
               For GOD can not deceaued be,
               nor neuer doth deceaue,
               
                  
If any time he do vouchſafe
               by words with men to deale,
               If that appearing vnto man
               his ſecrets he reueale.
               But they that firſt this Chaos and
               continuall matter taught,
               Do trifle much. For why ſhould God
               leaue it ſo long vnwrought
               If he forthwith could make the world
               and at the fyrſt create
               All kinde of things? In vayne it is
               for to deliberate
               That preſently may well be done.
               But ſome haue ſurely thought
               Eternal ſtate the world to haue
               of no man made or wrought,
               But of it ſelfe as now it is,
               before all ages paſt,
               And of it ſelfe as now it is
               for euermore ſhall laſt.
               Which ſure is falſe: for reaſon doth
               hir ſelfe this ſame deny,
               For two moſt perfect things can not
               in order euer lye:
               But would fal out betwene themſelues
               and ſtrife thereby maintayne.
               
                  
Well, graunt that in a faythful league
               they alwayes do 
                     •
                  emayne,
               In vayne two heads allowed are,
               for one ſhall wel ſuffiſe,
               Bicauſe at leaſt dame nature ought
               before the reſt to riſe.
               And if before the reſt ſhe be,
               then is ſhe cauſe of all,
               For formoſt cauſe doth alwayes frame
               the things that after fall.
               Wherfore doubtleſſe the almighty lord
               this world himſelf did make
               Of nothing, and eternall to.
               But how? the reaſon take.
               Eternal goodneſſe hath the Lorde,
               eternal powre hath he,
               May not likewiſe his wyll to make
               the world eternall be?
               Which if it were, as reaſon ſhewes:
               nought letꝭ but world may be
               Continuall built by workeman hie,
               in ſuch a fayre degree.
               As who ſoeuer grauntꝭ the Sunne
               continuall to haue bene,
               Muſt needes confeſſe, the light thereof
               continually was ſeene:
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  
Yet is 
                     •
                  he light the Sunnes effect,
               and Sunne the cauſe we call.
               But let vs ſearch the Elaments
               and from the Heauens fall,
               And not vnworthy things of them
               let vs now v
                     ••
                  er playne.
               Some men haue ſayd that vnderneath
               the Skies a fire doth rayne
               Neere to the Moone, but voyd of light:
               and kindling haſtily,
               And wondrous hote, which to be true
               doth perfect reaſon try.
               For in the night we may beholde
               the fire in Skies to flie,
               And f
                     •
                  aſhing flames throughout ye aire
               and Starres to ſhoote from hie.
               Which doth proceede of damps that in
               the ayre do riſe more hye,
               And burned is by force of fyre
               that there al
                     •
                  ft doth lye.
               For of twoo ſor
                     •
                  ꝭ is vapoure, one
               light, drye, and ſoone begoonne
               To fire, whereby the flaming ſigh
                     •
                  ꝭ
               in Skies are cauſde to runne,
               The other more colde, more waighty & groſſe,
               engendred of this ſame
               
                  
Are ſhowrs & clouds & ſnowes & myſtes
               and windes with flaſhing flame,
               And thunder, hayleſtones, deaw & rayn,
               if fier were none aboue,
               No vapour there could kindled be,
               in eueningꝭ darke to moue.
               Moreouer, ſince in lightneſſe thus
               the fire doth ayre excell,
               No remedy, but needes it muſt
               haue hier place to dwell.
               His ſeate therefore is vnder Skies,
               and next to Moone doth lye.
               Beneath this fire hath ayre his place
               which in his partes moſt hye
               A feruent heate of fire doth take.
               The myddle partes moſt colde,
               Doth thūder, clouds, & lightnings bred
                     •
                  
               
               and tempeſtꝭ ſundry folde.
               The loweſt parte is warme and moyſt
               for vapour that doth riſe
               From floudꝭ continually it moyſ
                     •
                  ꝭ
               aſcending towardꝭ the Skies,
               And warmd it is by beames of Sunne
               that back from earth rebound,
               Here 
                     ••
                  ſts & ſhowrs and pleſant deaw
                     •
                  
               
               and ſnowes and froſtꝭ are found,
               
                  
Which ſundry ſorts of winds do breede
               for no ſmall powre is dealt
               Unto theſe windes, and oftentimes
               their force in ayre is fealt,
               Theſe can in time of Sommer cauſe
               the nipping coldes to come
               And in the winter ſeaſon ſende
               abrode the warming Sunne,
               Theſe can both giue and take away
               from vs our corne and grayne,
               Theſe can both breede and beare away
               great ſickneſſes and payne.
               From out the Eaſt doth Eurus blowe.
               and from the Libian coaſt
               Doth Auſter come, and Zephyrus
               
               from weſterne parts doth poſte,
               But Boreas blaſtes in Scythian hilles
               and Northerne partes doth riſe.
               More windes there are, all rule
               the ayre that lower lies,
               And with the ayre both land and ſea.
               Of windes the cloudes do breede,
               And from the cloudes do flakes of ſnow
               and ſhowers of rayne proceede:
               Dewes, lightning, hayle & early froſts:
               but with diuerſty of times,
               
                  
And eke by ſundry wayes and meanes
               and blaſtes of ſundry windes.
               Whereof ſuch as from South do blow,
               bréedes cloudes & ſhowers, & heaty,
               But thoſe that from the Scythian partes
               do come, cauſe coldeneſſe great.
               From theſe coms yſe & ſnowes & froſtes
               when winter dwelleth héere:
               But in the Sommer time they ſerue
               to make the weather cléere.
               The weſterne winde bréedes flowers, & groſid
               with gréene doth new aray,
               And giues the birds a cauſe to ſing,
               and filles the woods wyth May.
               Oft times the Eaſterne winde is good
               yet now and then doth rayſe
               Such tempeſtes great, that ſeas & land
               by force thereof it frayes.
               Theſe windes the ayry ſprites aboue
               or Starres abrode do ſend,
               And oft when as the Coniurer
               for treaſure doth intend
               In earth to delue, or conſecrate
               his booke in Magike wiſe
               Some ſprite to binde, then haue I heard
               that windes which then did riſe
               
                  
And ſuddayne ſtorme hath layd ye corne,
               and grapes did downeward fling.
               The matter making windes is miſtes
               that from the flouds do ſpring,
               The cauſe that moueth them are ſprites
               that in the ayre do dwell,
               But this will not the common ſorte
               allow, nor credit well.
               What thē? caſt not ſuch precious pearls
               to Dogs or filthy ſwine:
               Beleue it you that learned are,
               whoſe mindes are more deuine,
               That not alone in Skies but in
               the ayre, there thouſands be
               Of ſprites that moue the raging winds
               and tempeſts that you ſee
               And thunder down wc lightning throw.
               Yet do I not deny
               But other cauſes are that blaſtes
               of windes are moued by,
               As Sunne and Moone and Starres, but chief,
               the ſeauen which they name,
               The wandring ſtars that of theſe miſts
               effects do diuers frame.
               I ſaw while as at Rome (P. Leo
               
               the tenth there raygning than)
               
                  
I was, a peece of potters worke
               and picture of a man
               That from his mouth of ſtraighteſt ſiſe,
               a mighty winde did blowe,
               For all his breſt being hollow made
               with water full did flowe
               Which being with heate of fire reſolud,
               out of his mouth it went
               In mighty winde, and farre from it
               the force thereof was ſent.
               This proues yt wind proceedes of flouds
               that thus reſolued bee
               While vapour mounting vp is forede
               by meanes of heate to flie,
               For contraries do euermore
               eche other driue away.
               In this ſame loweſt parte of ayre
               as we before did ſay,
               The blaſing ſtarres do oft appeare
               that fall of Prince doth ſhowe
               And there with diuers colours died
               appeares the ſtormy bowe.
               This ſame ye beames of Sun doth cauſe
               that on the cloudes we ſee,
               The other made by ſome one ſtarre
               of them that mouers bee,
               
                  
Which while the vapour vnderneath
               doth ſhape thereof receaue,
               Appeares a tayle, and in the clouds
               his flaming light doth leaue
               Like as the Circled myſt that doth
               encompaſſe round the Moone
               The circled miſt (as men do ſay)
               a ſigne of winde to come.
               As whē thrée ſūnes are thought to ſhine
               and yet they are not thrée
               But ſhaps of ſūne that framd in clouds
               as in a glaſſe we ſée.
               But vnderneath this ayre ſo groſſe
               and lowe, the Seas haue place:
               The Occean Seas that all the earth
               in circuite do embrace,
               Which paſſing through ye narrow ſtratghts
               where Hercles pillars ſhowes
               It ſpreds it ſelfe, and thus abrode
               both farre and wyde it flowes.
               And this is namde by ſundry names
               
                  Aegian flouds it makes
               
                  Ionian, Tuſcan, Adriatike
               
               Red Seas and Perſean lakes.
               This Sea doth ſearch the ſecrete caues
               that lowe in earth doth lye,
               
                  
And euermore doth ebbe and flowe
               and taſteth diuerſly,
               As diuers is the earth, by which
               he doth his paſſage make,
               And of the brimſtone ſulphured vaynes
               doth ſmell of brimſtone take.
               This is the cauſe that fluds their cours
               mayntayne continually,
               For to their ſprings they ofte returne,
               and oft to ſeas they flye,
               And roll and paſſe from place to place
               and round in compaſſe driue:
               And do preſerue the earth as bloud.
               preſerues the corſe aliue.
               The ſelfe ſame fluds doth make ye lakes
               and fennes of filthy ayre,
               And cleare and Criſtall rūning ſprings
               and wells for euer fayre.
               In fine from Occean ſeas proceedes
               all courſe of waters heere,
               That round about the world retaynes.
               This made the waters cleare
               That parte beneath the earth do lye,
               and parte aboue doe runne,
               And ſuch beſides as from the cloudes
               of Helliſh dye do come.
               
                  
But wherefore is the Seas ſo ſalte?
               doth it of nature ſpring?
               I thinke not ſo. For euery taſt
               that ſeas with them do bring,
               Doth fetch his cauſe from out the earth
               for in the earth are found
               Great hilles of ſalte that vnderneath
               the waters deepe are dround,
               Seas ſucks this ſalte and doth reſolue
               it into water cleare.
               Thus Salte not Sunne, is cauſe that ſaltneſſe
               doth in Seas appeare.
               For why doth not the Sunne likewiſe
               of Ponds ſalt water make?
               For all ſuch partes of earth as were
               not meete for man to take
               Bycauſe they were to full of ſalt
               hath nature vnderlayde,
               The Occean ſeas more frutefull partes
               to vs ſhe hath diſplayed,
               Wherein are mountaines, hils & cliues
               rocks, fields and valleyes lowe,
               Straights, countreys, woods and pondꝭ
               lakes, ſprings & ſtreames that flowe,
               Small townes, great cities, broughes & holdes
               with 
                     ••
                  ones and metalls pure
               
                  
Such things wherby the life of man
               the better doth endure.
               The rule of all this earth and goods
               to man the Lorde did giue,
               And made him King of eury kinde
               in ſeas or land that liue:
               And wit and reaſon to him dealt
               by which he might excell
               And guide the world, and ſeruing God
               him loue and worſhip well.
               Amyd this earth a Center lies,
               whereby it is ſuſtaynde,
               For thither falles eche waighty thing,
               as God at firſt ordaynde,
               That neuer of their propre force
               can from this Center flye,
               And therefore fixed ſtands the earth
               and in the mydſt doth lye
               Suſtayned with hir heauy waight,
               that faſt on eury ſide
               To Center runs and frames a ball
               both darke and thick, and wyde:
               About the which wyth Crimſin horſe
               the Sunne is alwayes lead
               And on the parte contrary ſtyll
               the darkeſome night is ſpread.
               
                  
For nothing elſe but ſhade it is
               of earth and waters great,
               Which ſhadow if in night it chaunce
               vpon the Moone to beate
               Doth cauſe Eclipſe, and filles wt feare
               the wofull gazers hearte,
               Suppoſing that oppreſt ſhee is
               with charme of Magike arte.
               This ſhadow makes the longeſt nightꝭ
               when fartheſt from vs burnes,
               The flaming Sunne, and ſhorteſt when
               to Northerne ſignes he turnes.
               The cauſe thereof is ſwelling earth
               and ſtately mountaynes hie,
               Which ſubtile nature hath deuiſed
               in place betweene to lie,
               That with their tops in change of time
               the nights they alter may.
               For looke when neerer vnto South
               the ſame doth keepe his way,
               Then farther forth their ſhadowes dark
               theſe hilles abrode do fling
               Such ſhades as hide the light and cauſe
               the day more late to ſpring,
               And force the day in ſhorter time
               and ſpace his courſe to ende.
               
                  
Then froſty winter vnto vs
               his quaking colde doth ſende,
               Then ſōmer makes the Indians blacke
               with raging heate to frye.
               But when the Sunne returneth backe
               to toppe of Cancer hie,
               Then ſhorter are the nightꝭ with vs
               and heate beginnes agayne,
               Then winter vexeth thoſe with colde
               that vnder vs do rayne.
               Thus doth the Sūne with diuers cours
               both alter times and tides,
               And in foure equall partes the ſpace
               of all the yeare deuides:
               And rolling round about the earth,
               both nations ſerueth well,
               Both them that vnder vs do liue,
               and them aloft that dwell.
               For men liue alſo vnder earth,
               not onely woods and ſtreames,
               Nor nature willde that Sunne and day
               in vayne ſhould caſt their beames
               And onely ſerue for brutiſh beaſtes
               and ſortes of ſwimming kinde,
               For all the earth is dwelt vpon
               no place therein we finde,
               
                  
Nor any clime there is, but that
               there mortall men may dwell
               And finde out places fitte for them
               and ſeates that ſerue them well:
               Though colde extreme, or to much hear
               rayne there continually:
               Where nature miſchiefes doth permit
               there plants ſhe pleaſure by
               And wiſe ſhe mixeth ſowre with ſweete,
               and where diſeaſes raynes
               There hath ſhe poynted remedies
               that can releaſe the paynes.
               Therefore whereſoeuer to much heate
               anoyes the inhabitant
               No mountaynes colde nor cooling blaſtꝭ
               no ſhaddowing trees do want
               Nor pleaſant ſtreams wt ſtore of ſpringꝭ
               whoſe coldeneſſe may defeate
               The harmes that happen vnto man
               by force of raging heate.
               Beſides the night hath equall length
               there all times with the day
               Which with an euen cooling force
               doth heate of Sunne alay.
               wherby we iudge the myddle Zone
               not voyd nor empty 
                     ••
                  es
               
                  
But peopled well, by nature ſafe
               and meanes that they deuiſe.
               So th'vtter Zones where as they ſay
               no kinde of people dwell,
               with ſnowes and yſe all couerde ſtyll
               men may inhabite well,
               As reaſon good doth vs perſuade.
               for there great ſtore of wood
               Doth alwayes grow, & garments there
               are made both great and good,
               wyth furres of ſundry ſortes of beaſtes,
               and ſtoues are many there
               where wt men well may warm thēſelues
               and winter nothing feare,
               And bytter colde by many meanes
               they well may driue away.
               Nor foode conuenient do they want
               but Cates at home they may
               (Or brought frō other countreyes) haue
               and daynty kinde of fare,
               wherefore it is not true that ſome
               brought vp in Greece declare,
               That nature onely hath aſſignde
               one Zone of ſmalleſt ſiſe
               For man to dwell, and all the reſt
               that voyd and deſert lies
               
                  
Alone to ſerue, for beaſt and fiſh
               this world vnworthy ſeeme,
               That nature graunting greater place
               to beaſts them beſt eſteeme.
               Wherfore if he may be beleeued
               that troth doth playnly tell
               No place there is vpon the earth
               but men may ſafely dwell.
               Dame natures ayde in nothing doth
               ſuſtayne or feele decay,
               And witte of man the hardeſt things
               doth breake and beare away.
               Now laſt bicauſe vnto the ende
               with haſte apace we hie,
               And time doth wyll vs to attempt
               the fiſhes of the Skie:
               Therefore I briefly will declare
               the cauſe why earth doth quake
               What force doth driue it for to moue
               what might doth make it ſhake.
               And thus we may be bolde to thinke
               that in the earth belowe
               Are many caues and mighty vawtes
               where boyſtrous winds do blowe.
               Which whilſt with force they rage and ſtriue,
               vpon the earth they beate
               
                  
And in this rage do ouerturne
               the walles and Cities greate,
               Tyll breaking out at ſome one place
               wyth force abrode they flye
               And blowe about in puffing ayre
               not long in reſt they lye.
               Theſe windes are bred within the earth
               of damps, which firy heate
               Doth draw from moyſture neere about
               for many fiers great
               The earth within doth nouriſh ſtyll,
               a wondrous thing I tell
               But yet no fayned thing I ſhewe,
               he can beare witneſſe well
               Who ſo hath Aetna euer ſeene
               or bathes of waters hote,
               Or who ſo knowes the wonders of
               
                  Veſeuus viney plotte.
               Theſe winds the wicked ſprits do moue
               that in the loweſt Hell
               Poſſeſſe their place, and in the depth
               of dongeons darke do dwell.
               For trifies ſurely are they not,
               nor words of vanitie
               That of the Stygian lakes, and of
               
                  Auernus ſpoken be.
               
                  
No place doth voyd or emptyly
               but dwelt in euery wheare,
               Both vnder earth and on the earth,
               in ayre and firy ſpheare,
               In Skies and eke aboue the Skies
               where Heauen ſhineth bright,
               where as the gliſtring pallayce ſtandes
               of Prince of greateſt might
               That owner is of all the world.
               My Muſe adieu farewell:
               And finally prepare thy ſelfe
               thy ending tale to tell.
            
         
         
            Piſces, the tvvelueth Booke:
            
               MOſt glorious GOD almighty King
               thou Parent chiefe of name
               Whoſe wiſdom gret this wōdrous world
               of nothing firſt did frame,
               And gouerns it and euermore
               preſerueꝭ it day by day,
               The ſpring and end of all that be
               to whome all things obay,
               Than whome more great, more good, or fayre,
               is nothing, nor more hie,
               
                  
That bleſſed liueſt for euermore
               aboue the ſtarry Skye,
               My minde deſiring now to thee
               to clime doth nothing neede
               
                  Apollo, Muſe, Parnaſus hill
               or ſprings that wont to feede
               The pratling Poets, fanſies vayne
               when as they liſt to write
               Diſguiſed tales that frantike heads
               of countrey Clownes delite.
               For, other ayde, and other grace
               it needefull is to haue,
               And ſtreames of other fountayns ſwete
               I thyrſty now do craue.
               I thee beſeech and humbly pray,
               on thee alone I call,
               That this my worke of late begoonne
               and labour laſt of all
               Thou fauour wilt, and graūt me grace,
               to touch the appoynted ende,
               O Lorde thy holy ſprite vouchſafe
               into my heart to ſende,
               wherewith inſpirde I may beholde
               the ſecrets of thy rayne
               And others teache, and with my verſe
               immortall honour gayne.
               
                  
A ſorte there are that do ſuppoſe
               the ends of euery thing
               Aboue the heauens to conſiſt,
               and farther not to ſpring,
               So that beyond them nothing is
               and that aboue the Skies
               Hath nature neuer powre to clime,
               but there amazed lies.
               Which vnto me appeareth falſe
               as reaſon doth me teach.
               For if the ende of all be there
               where Skies no farther reach
               Why hath not God created more?
               bicauſe he had not ſkill
               How more to make, his cunning ſtayed
               and broken of his will?
               Or was it bicauſe he had not powre?
               but troth both theſe denies,
               For powre of God hath neuer ende
               nor bounds his knowledge ties.
               No kinde of thing may God conclude
               nor limits him aſſigne,
               Nor propre force doth once reſtrayne
               the Maieſtie deuine.
               Great things I tell, and reaſon greate
               ſhall alſo this defende,
               
                  
If any thing the powre of God
               may ende or comprehende
               Then is yt thing more ſtrong than God.
               For what thing can be found,
               That if it haue not greater force
               another thing can bound?
               But nothing paſſeth God in powre
               nor ſtronger is than he,
               Therefore he neyther can nor wyll
               with limits compaſt be,
               For who wold haue his force reſtraynd
               when that he may be free
               And walke abrode where as he liſt
               with powre at libertie?
               No man there is that doth deſire
               himſelfe for to abaſe,
               But rather all men arrogate
               to them a higher place,
               And alwayes ſeeke for to enhaunce
               the ſtate that here they leade,
               And though their wings be large & wide
               yet farther them to ſpreade.
               will GOD then while he may be greateſt
               of powre omnipotent
               His propre force himſelfe reſtrayne
               and liue in limits pent?
               
                  
This ſurely doth not well agrée
               nor ought to be beleeued
               That God hath bounds, if that of none
               he euer them receiued
               Nor hath aſſigned to himſelfe
               as we before did proue.
               Theſe things foretold, we thus cōclude
               the works of God aboue
               Unbounded for to be, leaſt that
               his powre and maieſtie,
               And knowlege ſhould be counted vayn.
               For if aboue the Skie
               He could and might haue framed more
               and goodlier things by much
               But would not: then in vayne is all
               his power and knowledge ſuch.
               For if that any man haue ſkyll
               and cunning in an arte,
               And neuer will in practiſe put
               the knowledge of his harte:
               In vayne he ſhould vnto himſelfe
               procure a workmans name,
               In vayne with wordes hee ſhould cōmit
               his facultie to fame,
               Which ſhould be rather folly calde
               and not a facultie.
               
                  
But in the ſtate diuine of God
               and glorious maieſtie,
               We muſt beleeue is nothing vayne
               ſince Godlieſt is the ſame.
               Thus God what ſo euer he could doe
               aſſurely did frame
               Leaſt that his vertue were in vayne,
               and euer ſhould lye hyd,
               But ſince he could make endleſſe things
               it muſt be thought he dyd
               And all his power there in employed,
               ſo that there did remaine
               In him no kinde of power or force
               that ydle were or vayne.
               But learned Ariſtotle ſayth
               there can no body be
               But that it muſt of boundes conſiſt:
               to this do I agree,
               Bicauſe aboue the Skies no kinde
               of body we do place,
               But light moſt pure, of body voyd
               ſuch light as doth deface
               And farre excel our ſhining Sunne,
               ſuch light as comprehend
               Our eyes can not, and endleſſe light
               that God doth from him ſend,
               
                  
Wherein togither with their King
               the ſprites that are more hie
               Do dwell, the meaner ſorte beneath
               in Skies do alwayes lie.
               Therfore the raygne and portion of
               the world conſiſts in three
               
                  Celeſtiall, Subceleſtiall: which
               with limits compaſt be,
               The reſt no bounds may comprehend
               which bright aboue the Skie
               Doth ſhine with light moſt wonderfull.
               But here will ſome replie
               That without body is no light,
               and ſo by this denie
               That light can neuer thoe be found
               aboue the heauens hie.
               But at vs vaynly doth he barke,
               in vaine he doth contend,
               For reaſon doth my words approue
               and veritie defend.
               I pray thee ſhew what is the cauſe
               that here the Sunne doth ſhine?
               Bicauſe his matter giues him light
               or rather forme deuine
               That doth ſo great a globe contayne?
               for forme and faſhion gay
               
                  
To all things ſtate of being giues,
               as Natureſearchers ſay:
               With whome we alſo do agree.
               this ſame doth playnly ſhowe
               That Forme, not Matter makes ye ſu
                     •
                  
               
               to ſhine. From Forme doth flowe
               All kinde of force and comelineſſe.
               And if ſo greate a light
               Aſſigned be to bodyly Formes,
               why ſhould we in this plight
               Deny that incorporeall ſtates
               may any light contayne?
               Since that more pure and fine they are
               and fayrer farre agayne.
               Wherefore the ſprites and ghoſts aboue
               do ſhine with wondrous light
               Although it can not be diſcernde
               of our corrupted ſight:
               So that among theſe Saincts the more
               their ſtate and powre is hie
               With brighter beauty much they ſhew
               and greater maieſtie.
               No golde, no pearls nor precious ſtones
               nor pompe of purple gowne
               Doth them as it doth vs ſet out
               but light is their renowne.
               
                  
And as the Sunne amongſt the ſtarres
               doth ſhine with goodlieſt light,
               So ſhines among the Saincts aboue
               the LORD of greateſt might
               And neuer darkneth them a whit,
               but makes them all to ſhine,
               Such is the goodneſſe of his grace
               and maieſtie deuine.
               But here perchaunce he wyll obiect
               that in the ayre doth lye
               No ground of light, and ſince no ayre
               there is aboue the Skye
               He wyll deny that there is light.
               But now he lies agayne,
               For ayre is not the ground of light,
               nor as ſome fondly fayne
               Is light in ayre, but contrary
               the ayre in light doth dwell,
               If reaſon what, not Ariſtotle
               
               doth ſay he marketh well.
               For if without the dores faſt ſhut
               a candle burneth bright,
               Or by ſome clift the fier ſhine
               in houſe all voyde of light,
               And ſome there with the ayre about
               the beame with ſtriking ſhakes
               
                  
The ayre is forced to paſſe the light
               but light no mouing makes.
               And if the ayre were ground of light
               then with one motion ſo
               Both ayre and light ſhould moued be
               and both togither goe.
               Beſide, if that in time of night
               a man with Torch in hand
               Should paſſe, yt light doth places chaūge
               but ayre doth quiet ſtand.
               Which if to light it ſubiect were
               it ſhould continually
               Go wander place by place with light
               and ſtyll keepe company.
               But now this ſame is nothing ſo
               but doth contrary proue,
               For light doth paſſe when aire doth ſtay
               and ſtyll with torch doth moue.
               Wherby it appeares that light doth not
               the ayre as ſubiect neede,
               But well may ſtand and well wy
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               the vſe of ayre procéede.
               Eſpecially the light of God
               whereof a parte doth paſſe
               Into our ſunne and there is kep
                     •
                  
               
               contaynde as in a Glaſſe.
               
                  
For as within his propre ſpheare
               that vnder Moone doth lye
               No fier can diſcerned be
               by force of any eye,
               But if that any matter chaunce
               to kindle with the ſame,
               Then Starres do fall and firy ſtreams
               in Sommer nights do flame
               And other ſights that feare the mindes
               of men in dreadfull wiſe.
               So as it is the light of God
               can not be ſeene with eyes,
               But fixed in the Sunne it ſhines
               bycauſe the matter cleare
               Whereof the Sunne is made is fitte
               and apt for light t'appeare,
               For God hath framde it in ſuch ſorte,
               as there his light may byde
               And ſhine, creating day and life
               and goodly things beſide.
               That light doth alſo ſhine in ſhapes
               of ſundry ſacred ſprites
               Though not alike to all as Starres
               ſhine not with equall lights
               But ſome more bright than others be
               as they are ſet before.
               
                  
And as a candle can giue light
               to many candels more
               And yet doth neyther loſe nor leſſe
               his beauty burning bright,
               So light of God decreaſing not
               to other Saincts giues light.
               But ſome perchaūce will here demaūde
               and doubtfull queſtion finde
               If that beſides this light that I
               declarde of endleſſe kinde
               Doth any other thing conſiſt
               without the world ſo great
               Though this be neyther meete nor fitte
               for mortall men t'entreat
               Yet wyll I proue to paſſe the path
               wherein no Poet yet
               That hath bene hither to before
               might euer ſet his feete,
               And wyll attempt to bring to light
               the treaſures hie in place
               Of God if he be pleaſde and helpe
               with his accuſtomed grace.
               Firſt muſt we graūt that God is ſpring
               and Father 
                     •
                  ke of all
               Who made all things and beſt & chiefe
               him may we truly call.
               
                  
Therefore where ſo euer GOD abides
               his glory there is found,
               And euery good and gorgeous ſight
               doth in that place abound.
               And thus what ſo euer good the earth
               the ſeas or ayre contaynes,
               All this is ſéene in place whereas
               the LORD almighty raygnes.
               And though no matter be in ſuch,
               yet iudge not thou therfore
               They being lacke, for perfecter
               and fayrer they be more
               than things that are of matter made.
               For forme that can it ſelfe ſuſtayne
               wythout this matters hand,
               Is perfecter than that which voyd
               of matter cannot ſtand.
               Therefore all voyd of matter there
               things perfect are and pure
               And in deſpite of fretting age
               and force of fate endure.
               And ſtore of goodly things are there
               that in this worldly light
               
                  GOD hath not made, from which procéedes
               great ioyes & Saincts delight,
               
                  
Such ioyes as tong of mortall man
               can neuer full define,
               Such ioyes as neuer can decay
               with ſpace of any time.
               Theſe incorporeal formes were known
               to minde of Plato hie,
               Although the enuious ſorte do ſcorne
               his bookes full bytterly.
               But eury man doth not aſpire
               theſe myſteries to knowe,
               A fewe them finde to whome the LORD
               
               aboue doth fauour ſhowe,
               And giues to them his light that they
               theſe things may playne beholde.
               In fine, there ſprites and Angels are
               as many thouſand folde
               As all the woods contayne in leaues
               or all the ſhores in ſand,
               Or all the Fiſhes in the ſeas
               or ſ
                     •
                  arres in Skie that ſtand,
               Yea, number none can them containe,
               for ſince that GOD could frame
               Them numberleſſe, he ſure ſo dyd
               the more to ſpread his name,
               Eſpecially ſince that the world
               doth voyd of li
                     〈…〉
                  s lye,
               
                  
As is before declared playne
               and reaſon ſtrong doth trye.
               But ſince they voyd of body be
               and Matter all away
               Therfore they neuer chaunge in tyme
               nor age doth them decay,
               No greeſe they feele, nor ſleeps nor foode
               at any time they craue
               Nor labour knowe but ioyfull youth
               continually they haue
               And freedome chiefe, no bondage there
               no ſeruants in degree
               Nor none there are that there compels,
               nor none compelled bee,
               One onely Lord they do confeſſe
               the King and ſpring of all
               Him worſhip they and him they loue
               and ſerue in generall,
               They willingly do him obey
               and ſerue in euery thing
               Reioycing all his laud and prayſe
               and wondrous actes they ſing
               Eche one doth there apply himſelfe
               to pleaſe with goodly grace,
               No fighting there, no cancred ſpite
               nor enuy can haue place,
               
                  
Continuall peace there florisheth
               great loue and concorde great
               Among them is ſuſpicion none
               no craft nor falſe deceat.
               In fine the goodlieſt parte it is
               of all the world beſide,
               And farre more worthy are the ſprites
               that in this place abyde,
               Than thoſe that in the Skies do dwell
               and in the Starres do lye,
               For looke as lower euery ſpheare
               doth come to earth more nye,
               The meaner ſprites it doth con
                     •
                  ayne,
               and meaner goods doth giue,
               And ſo much baſer is the ſame.
               whereby ſuch things as liue
               Aboue the Skie, as they moſt fayre
               and good, and bleſſed ſhow,
               So thoſe that in the bowels darke
               of earth do dwell below,
               Are moſt ylfauoured, vile, and yll,
               and there not all in vayne
               The ſtinking lakes and ſoyels of Hell
               to be did Poets fayne:
               Of Hell where men do after death
               their paynes for michiefe take
               
                  
And vainely ſeeke for reſt and peace
               in euer darkned lake.
               But wherfore waſte I words in winde
               and ſtriuing all in vaine
               Doe ſeeke vnto ſuch Buzzards blinde
               the trothe to open plaine?
               So ſore the ſtate of mankinde dotes
               that it will neuer knowe
               That eyther Gods in Heauen be
               or ſprites in Hell belowe.
               But moſt men laugh if any man
               do tell them credibly
               That after death the ſoules doe liue
               and neuer more doe dye.
               Hence ſpringeth it that night and daye
               they richeſſe ſéeke to gaine
               This is their greateſt carke and care
               their greateſt toyle and paine
               That they in Golde and Jewels maye
               their neighbours farre excell,
               Golde is the thing that all men ſeeke
               in golde their hope doth dwell.
               For thys, runnes into raging warres
               the Captaine ſtout of minde
               For thys, his Children wyfe and houſe
               and countrey left behinde
               
                  
The Marchaunt cutting foming ſeas
               in ſhyp with ſayles ſet out
               Aſſayes the blewe and dreadfull gulfes
               and coaſtes the worlde about.
               Eche man doth practiſe craft and thefte
               this golde to keepe in ſight
               Golde euery man deſires and loues
               golde pleaſeth euery wyght.
               Ne feare they any kinde of paynes
               that after death is due
               O altogither earthly men elſe
               that onely in the viewe
               Frō beaſts are knowē. Cā you nought
               than golde to knowledge call?
               By which a wyſe man from a foole
               doth differ nought at all
               Wherewith fonde fortune ill men oft
               habundantly doth feede
               Learne you that many things there are
               that golde doe farre exceede
               Which vnto fooles and wicked men,
               of God not giuen be
               Theſe are the vertues: Godlineſſe
               iuſtice and prudencye
               And wyſedome paſſing farre the reſt.
               Theſe goods who doth retaine
               
                  
A mortall God is and the ſame
               immortall man agayne
               That after death ſhall happy be,
               but he that hath them not
               And ſtaines himſelfe with filthy ſinnes
               (when death his ſhaft hath ſhot)
               ſhall headlong into Hell be caſt.
               Theſe are not trifles, tales or dreames
               but true and ſure they be,
               Yea moſt aſſurde, beléeue it well,
               you blinde, beleeue you me,
               Woe be to you if that you wyll
               not me herein beleeue
               For life ſhall quickly you forſake,
               and then you ſhall perceyue
               That I ſayd true euen then when as
               your ſoules in Hell ſhall lye,
               You laugh: but this your ioy ſhall chāge
               to teares and greeuous cry.
               The time ſhall come when many men
               that now in welthy pride
               Do beare the ſway and ſcornefully
               both God and man deride
               All naked, bare, in miſerie
               and wretched caſe ſhall lye
               
                  
And ſhall of others ayde require
               with pyteous wofull crye.
               Wherfore O you that haue delight
               in good and Godly things
               Endewed with a better ſoule
               whoſe rootes from heauen ſprings.
               Theſe earthly Gods that as the cloudes
               away doe ſwifely flye
               Which fortune vnto fooles and knaues
               doth giue moſt commonlye,
               And which a fewe yeares ended once
               doth death take cleane away
               Regarde not muche, nor in ſuch things
               your heape or treaſure laye.
               Seeke you no more than that, which is
               for lyfe ſufficient
               A ſmall thing certes will ſuffiſe
               with little liue content.
               But let your chiefe delight be in
               the ſacred ſeates on hye
               Seeke heauenly things wt all your force
               to this your mindes applye:
               In Heauen are the perfect goods
               that euermore remaine
               Which neuer fooliſhe dolt ſhall haue
               nor wicked man obtaine.
               
                  
In earth whatſoeuer doth delight
               are trifles all and toyes
               Which fooles and beaſtly people ſeeke
               and count as chiefeſt ioyes
               For which a thouſande hazardes great
               they raſhely vndertake
               And offring vp their fooliſhe breſtes
               to death, they ſkirmiſhe make
               Of thys they boſt the Bytle doth
               in dong reioyce to lye
               Things filthy, filthy folkes doe loue
               and villaines villanie.
               Leaue earthly things to earthly minds
               let ſwine in durt delight
               And let your only trauaile be
               to gaine the heauens bright.
               The goodlyeſt things doe beſt become
               the men of beſt degree
               And valiant things moſt meeteſt are
               for them that valiant bee.
               The earth is but a Chery fayre
               God hath to you aſſynde
               The heauens for your countrey ſwéete
               your countrey ſéeke to finde.
               That when from bondes of body thou
               eſcaped art and gone
               
                  
And left your fleſhe for dogges to féede
               or wormes to gnawe vpon
               You there may alwayes happy liue
               from fleſhe vncleane exempt
               And lame and often weary limmes
               wherin whyleſt you were pent
               Remaining in the vale of teares
               and in the mortall rayne
               Both many harmes and ſickneſſes
               and griefes you did ſuſtaine
               For ſo the earth may called bée
               which is the ſtable ſure
               Of all the worlde, the mother and
               the nurſe of vice vnpure
               Wheras the raging Deuill dwels
               the king of ſinfull kinde
               Wherfore it needefull is that you
               haue often death in minde
               And with your ſelues conſider well
               how nere the dore he ſtandes
               Still threatning with his deadly darte,
               in pale and dreadfull handes
               How ſuddainely he ſtrikes therewith
               how oft he doth deſtroy
               The luſty youth and takes away
               our fayre and flowring ioye.
               
                  
O fading lyfe that ſubiect art
               to thouſande caſualtyes
               O to to ſhorte and doubtfull ſtate
               that ſmoke lyke from vs flyes
               Now this now that man drops away
               and thou this preſent day
               To morrowe I, thus at the laſt
               we all doe paſſe away
               None otherwiſe than ſimple ſhéepe
               that Butcher hath preparde
               In folde to kill, now theſe now thoſe
               with knife he ſtriketh harde.
               To morrowe other the next day moe
               thus all in time they dye
               Tyll that by this his ſlaughters great
               the folde doth emptye lye.
               This fading lyfe therfore deſpiſe
               which firſt beginning takes
               with teares his middeſt is toyle & griefe
               and death concluſion makes.
               Who wyll delyght in ſuch a lyfe
               except a fooliſhe braine?
               Seeke you an other lyfe to haue
               an other lyfe to gaine
               Whereas no mourning griefe or paine
               whereas no death is founde
               
                  
Thus happy ſtate you ſhall receaue
               when carcaſſe comes to grounde
               You that haue hated ſinne, and God
               haue worſhipped holylie
               And haue not put your confidence
               in things that worldly be
               But chaſt, vnhurtful, milde and true
               haue liude in pure degree.
               But ſome perchance yt think how gods
               doe dwell in Heauens clere
               wold alſo learne ſome wayes or meanes
               (if any ſuch there were)
               By which they might wt them haue talk
               and ſee them face to face
               O what a goodly thing were this
               and what a wondrous grace
               Than which no greater thing on earth
               I think can man obtaine
               But fewe deſerue ſo great a ſtate
               and honor for to gaine
               For many I graunt with diuels talke
               which eaſely they entice
               By humble prayers made to them
               or meanes of ſacrifice
               Since farre they be not from the earth
               but in the ayre doe lye
               
                  
And oftentimes beholde and kéepe
               the people companie:
               Yea vnto many they appere
               and ſerue them willingly
               And with the beautie great of youth
               enamoured oft they be.
               But Gods that in the heauen dwell
               the things that mortall be
               Diſdaine to knowe and wicked factes
               of men abhorre to ſée
               As they that well doe vnderſtande
               how fooliſhe and how vile
               Mans nature is how falſe and bolde
               and eke how full of guile
               Deſpiſer and blaſphemer of
               the chiefeſt maieſtie
               Wherefore to haue the ſpeache of them
               and ſee them preſentlie
               Is labour great and ſeldome had
               bicauſe their eares they cloſe
               To voice of men and turne away
               their eyes from giftes of thoſe
               Which after that they be enrichde
               with ſéedes that others ſowe
               A portion ſmall of others goodes
               vpon the Church beſtowe,
               
                  
Thinking that Heauen may be ſolde
               O two legged Aſſes blinde
               Thinke you that God is couetous?
               and precious ſtones doth minde?
               Or hath delight in glittering golde?
               or needes your helpe to haue?
               Doe you ſuppoſe that he is ſuch
               as doth your fauour craue:
               Think you that brybes can him corrupt
               as many men they doe?
               No ſure he is not got with golde
               nor giftes he looketh to:
               When that he liues in happyeſt ſtate
               and bleſſed on euery ſyde,
               When his are all that earth contaynes
               or ſeas or heauens wyde
               How can you giue to God the things
               that his alreadye be?
               Doth not he rather giue to you
               the things that here you ſée?
               Therfore ſince neither they with giftes
               nor vowes will moued be
               A matter very harde it is
               them preſently to ſee.
               Although the matter be ſo harde
               yet wyll we paſſe the way
               
                  
And what our force in this can doe
               by proofe we will aſſaye.
               Firſt needes we muſt the meanes finde out
               that God doth beſt content
               Who is not moude with noble bloud
               nor vnto riches bent
               No king nor Ceyſar he reſpectts
               nor triumphes doth eſteme
               Ne careth he for ſuch as are
               moſt ſtrong and fayreſt ſeeme.
               But theſe doth vtterly deſpiſe
               nor for the loue of them
               
                  
                     •
                  ouchſafes the prayers to beholde
               or preſent ſight of men
               Thus muſt we ſeeke an other way
               by which we may obtaine
               Their ſpeache and preſence for to haue
               perchaunce my verſes plaine
               This way & meanes ſhall bring to light
               if that the Gods aboue
               So fayre attempts doe ayde and helpe
               and wyth their ſprite approue.
               The firſt thing is the clenlineſſe
               of body and of minde
               By which, man well eſteemde of God
               doth loue and fauour finde
               
                  
For all vncleaneſſe doth he hate
               and doth abhorre to ſee,
               So fayre and bleſſed is his ſtate
               and of ſo hye degree.
               Wherfore we muſt at firſt take heede
               that we be perfectly
               Well purged and pure from filthinee
               and all iniquitie
               Unclothed of our garments blacke
               and clad in comely whites
               Which colour beſt with God agrees
               and black with fiendiſhe ſprites.
               A harde thing is this ſame I graunt
               for who doth here remaine
               That leades his life without a fault
               and free from blot or ſtaine?
               To euery man hath nature delt
               ſome crime or vicious kinde
               And nothing is on earth ſo faire
               but fault therin we finde.
               Yet are there certaine ſinnes ſo ſmall
               and to ſuch trifling ende
               That in a manner nought at all
               the eyes of God offende
               Wherwith he is not greued much
               no ſores are theſe nor ſtaynes
               
                  
But as the little freckels that
               in body fayre remaines
               Which eaſely the Lorde forgiues
               ſince well perce
                     •
                  ueth 
                     •
                  ée
               How weake and frayle the nature is
               of ſuch as mortall bee.
               But great & haynous crymes doe much
               offende the mighty ſtate
               And wicked men he alwayes doth
               abhorre, deſpyſe and hate
               Nor wyll he once their prayers heare
               except they clenſe before
               And waſhe away their ſinnes wt 
                  
                     •
                  eares
               and whyte for black reſtore
               Requiring pardon for their faults
               with voice of mourning minde
               Obtaining once againe the pathes
               of vertue for to finde
               And caſting of hys canckred ſkinne
               as in the pleaſant ſpring
               The Serpent vſeth all his ſkinne
               of olde away to 
                     ••
                  ing.
               who thus renewed departes & leaues
               his ſlough in ſtones behinde
               And caſting vp his head alo
                     •
                  t
               
                  
with proude and ſtately minde
               His breadfull hyſſing doubleth oft
               with tong of triple kinde.
               Thus Gods are pleaſed, & thus whē as
               we rightly on them call
               They ſhewe themſelues and thus to vs
               theyr prophecies let fall.
               Yet muſt there one thing more be had
               vnto this perfect whight
               A Crymſin colour muſt be ioynde,
               the beautie then is bright
               When as a purple redde with white
               well entermedled lyes
               What meanes this ruddy colour here:
               ſure, loue it ſignifies.
               For loue reſembled is to fire
               which fyre hath reddiſhe flame
               And both a colour and an heate
               procéedeth from the ſame.
               Therefore it néedefull is beſide
               that we the Gods aboue
               Doe hartely loue for he that loues
               deſerueth to haue loue.
               For whoſoeuer loues the Gods
               and liueth Chriſtianly
               
                  
Can not be odious vnto them
               but ſhall rewarded bee
               And ſhall in happy ſtate obtaine
               whatſoeuer he doth require
               But who is he that loues the Lorde?
               the man that doth deſire
               In filthy entiſements of the fleſhe
               and pleaſures for to ſleepe?
               Or he that hath a great delight
               the rauening hauke to keepe,
               And (madde) in feeding dogges & horſe
               hys liuing doth decaye:
               Or he that ſeekes for hye eſtate
               that quickly fades awaye:
               An Owle that in the roufe doth fit
               a mate of Fortunes playe?
               Or is it hee that vpon God
               hath heart and fanſie ſet
               And which he worſhips as a God
               by all meanes ſeekes to get?
               Beleue mee: they that earthly things
               doe couet to obtaine
               The things that in the heauens are
               regarde not for to gaine.
               No man can well two maiſters ſerue
               for who ſo ioyes in white
               
                  
It followe muſt that he deteſtes
               the black and griſley ſight.
               Who ſo delightes in light of Sunne
               him darkneſſe heauie makes
               And he that ſweeteneſſe loues in bitter
               things no pleaſure takes
               Who ſo approcheth to the earth
               muſt needes the heauens flye
               And where as loue of earth remaines
               no man can loue the ſkye
               But fewe (alas) and all to fewe
               theſe earthly things deſpiſe
               And able are with wings of minde
               to mount vnto the ſkyes.
               Wherfore? bicauſe it is ſo harde,
               to this doe I agree:
               But great rewardes makes greateſt paynes
               both eaſie and light to be.
               what greater thing can be obtaynde
               than here with Gods to walke?
               And to beholde them with our eyes
               and thus with them to talke?
               This is chiefeſt Jewell ſure
               for which we ought to beare
               Eache kinde of trauaile toile and griefe
               with good and pleaſant cheare.
               
                  
The Cat would gladly milke receiue
               but feete ſhe wyll not wet
               The way to vertue ſure is harde
               yet ſhall th'vnſlouthfull get
               Both vertue and honour vertues price
               the ſouldiour good ob
                     •
                  aynes
               A due rewarde whereas no prayſe
               the ſlouthfull cowarde gaynes.
               Therefore we muſt apply our ſelues
               with all our force and might
               That theſe ſo glorious ſtates aboue
               in vs may haue delight
               Then euery thing we ſhalbe ſure
               here proſperouſly to haue
               Both whilſt we liue vpon the earth
               and when we are layde in graue.
               why doe we thus eſtéeme the earth
               that ſone we ſhall forſake
               O blinded fooles of fading ioyes
               we more account doe make
               Than of the goods that alwayes laſtes
               what madneſſe is this ſame?
               Nowe laſt remaynes that prayers o
                     ••
                  
               
               with humble minde he frame
               That ſéekes the ſight of Gods to haue
               which once for to require
               
                  
Suffiſeth not but oftentimes
               we muſt and much deſire
               Tyll at the length in ſpace of time
               we get the victorie
               And as our minde deſireth moſt
               obtayne the Gods to ſee.
               One ſtroke doth not cut downe ye Oke
               of olde and auncient yeares,
               Nor yet the ſtone by falling of
               one drop of water weares
               Nor Rome was builded in a day
               eche creature, grayne and tree
               In time ſpring vp, and in great ſpace
               of yeares encreaſed bee.
               And thinkſt thou ſuch a wōdrons thing
               and of eſtate ſo hie
               Can with ſo little paynes be done
               and wrought immediatly?
               So eaſly can we n
                     •
                  t the ſight
               of earthly Kings obtayne
               Nor come to tell our tales to them
               and heare them talke agayne.
               Thinkſt thou that Gods 
                     〈◊〉
                   better are
               than Kings that here we ſee
               Wherfore then ſhould they come except
               they oft deſired bee,
               
                  
Except we them as we doe Lordes
               in humble ſort deſire
               Wherfore we muſt on euery daye
               them oftentimes require.
               That they vouchſafe themſelues ſometime
               to ſhewe to vs in ſight
               And with their talke the ſecrete things
               to bring abrode to lyght
               This if we doe (beleue mee well)
               at length they will appere
               And with their preſence will vs bleſſe
               in wretched carcaſſe here
               And ſhortly bring vs to the ſkyes
               an ende of all our ſtrife
               whereas the perfecteſt pleaſure is
               and eke the happyeſt lyfe
               Then ſhall we paſſe and come before
               the maker great of ſkyes
               And haue the Prince of all the worlde
               in viewe of theſe our eyes
               Than which no better ſtate can be
               nor more renouned thing
               who is of goodneſſe and bewtye all
               the fountaine hedde and ſpring.
               But many think it can not be
               that vnto any here
               
                  
On earth the ſacred ſprites aboue
               ſhould talke or thus appere
               And think that I but trifles tell.
               to theſe I pardone gyue.
               For nature hath not delt lyke wyt
               to all that here doe liue.
               Some ſtill doe ponder in their minde
               the Heauenly ioyes aboue
               And alwayes think of hauty things
               ſome, meane things only loue
               And haue no pleaſure much to rayſe
               themſelues from earthly place
               And thouſandes on the grounde doe lye
               nor thence wyll ryſe an aſe.
               But earthly ioy doe only minde.
               ſure in none other wiſe
               Than certayne byrdes that in the ayre
               alo
                     •
                  t moſt hylye flye
               Where many keepe the midſt thereof
               and mount not very hye
               The reaſt frequent the loweſt partes
               and nere the earth doe flye.
               Wherfore it is no wonder great
               if what I here declare
               The common people not beleue
               whoſe mindes moſt brutiſhe are.
               
                  
Yet true it is that I haue tolde
               for how ſhould any one
               Liue on the mountaines colde & dwell
               in wilderneſſe alone
               And willing leade ſo harde a lyfe?
               ſure periſhe ſhould he ſtaight,
               Except ſome God him comforting
               ſhould eaſe him of this waight.
               Beleue me he that liues alone
               auoiding companye
               Is eyther mad, or more than man
               doth talke with Gods on hye.
               In this ſort liued the Prophets olde
               as it apperes by fame,
               And many after Chriſt whom men
               did holy Fathers name
               And in this preſent age of ours
               full many may we finde
               That leade their life & ſpēd their yeares
               in this ſame ſort and kinde.
               Theſe men when they do wiſely ſpeake
               and reaſon fayre and well
               And wonders great doe bring to paſſe
               and things to come foretell
               Wilt thou eſteeme as mad or fonde
               or to be wayed lyght?
               
                  
Or rather wilt thou iudge they be
               inſpirde with holy ſprite?
               Beſtdes the holy Church affyrmes
               that earſt haue many béene
               That ſacred ſhapes of bleſſed ghoſtes
               full oftentimes haue ſeene
               Why ſhould not I beleue ſith that
               the Church doth tell it mee?
               Therfore it is no fable fonde
               but doth wyth truth agree,
               That men may come to ſpeake wt God
               and them in preſence ſee
               Which I ſuppoſe the chiefeſt good
               and finall ende to be
               Of all good things that vnto ma
                     •
                  
               
               may any wayes aryſe
               While as of thys hys preſent lyfe
               the troublous ſeas he tryes.
               And when eſcaped from mortall chaine
               the ſoule hath paſſage ſtraight
               Conueying with hir ſelfe theſe three
               that alwayes on hir wayte
               The minde the ſenſe and mouing force
               vnto the heauens hye
               Shall ioyfull go and there remaine
               in bliſſe perpetuallye:
               
                  
And dwelling there with Gods a God
               ſhall it created be.
               O Heauen great O houſe of Gods
               of fayreſt dignitie
               How pure arte thou how wonderfull
               with Maieſtie deuine
               How garniſhte rounde about wt ſtarres
               doſt thou moſt brightly ſhine?
               Thou palayce well repleniſhed
               with euery ſweete delight.
               For if the earth habounds with things
               ſo fayre and good to ſight
               The earth a place for man and beaſtes
               the vyleſt part of all
               what ſhold we think of thee wher dwels
               the Gods celeſtiall
               The Lordes and happy kings of all?
               O would to God that when
               My dolefull threeds the Syſters three
               had fully finiſht, then
               It thyther were my hap to come
               my Carcaſſe caſt in graue:
               And euermore ſuch wondrous ioyes
               before my eyes to haue.
               And now by grace of God I haue
               of Zodtake finiſht here
               
                  
Twelue ſtarry ſ
                     •
                  gnes which nūber doth
               in theſe my bookes appere:
               A labour great with ſtudy long
               and tedious trauaile pende
               Yet finiſht now and cloſed vp
               with laſt and finall ende.
               What thanks ſhall I thee gyue O Lord
               and Prince of euery lande
               That haſt me willde ſo fayre and great
               attemptꝭ to take in hande
               And giuen me mind and might therto?
               the prayſe is onely thine,
               If any fayre or goodly thing
               in theſe my bookes doth ſhine,
               For euery fayre and goodly thing
               from thee doth firſt deſcend
               Thou wert the fyrſt beginning of
               this worke and finall ende:
               My minde and hand were gouernde by
               thy Maieſtie deuine,
               To thee I onely giue the thanks
               the honour all is thine.
               But yet if any due deſert
               on theſe my paynes attende
               I thee beſeeche O Lorde that when
               my lyfe is at an ende
               
                  
This life that night by night I ſpend
               in dreames of vanitie
               And when the day retornes ſtill vext
               with griefe and myſerie
               Thou wylt vouchſafe in wyping out
               my ſinnes to pardone mée
               Whatſoeuer I haue done (alaſſe)
               with miſt of minde oppreſt
               And ſuffer thys my ſoule with thée
               in Heauens hye to reſt.
               And thou my booke in this meane while
               thorow▪ andry cities run,
               Aſſured vnder cankred clawes
               of enuie great to come,
               For Carpers and Correctors thou
               ſhalt finde in euery place,
               Whoſe mouthes with téeth enuenomed
               ſhall tearing thée deface.
               Nor ſome ſhall ſurelywatin ng be
               which when they nothing can
               Doe worthy prayſe wyll yet reioyce
               to rayle at euery man:
               And finding fault at others works
               will purchaſe foolyſhe fame.
               Shunne yu ſuch enui
                     •
                  us whelps as theſe
               and mouthes that thus defame
               
                  
And ſearche for good and learned men
               which though but fewe they bée
               Yet happy mayſt thou dwell with few,
               for fewe of beſt degrée
               Hath God created here on earth
               to ſuch go reuerently
               And all that we haue done laye thou
               before the vertuous eye
               which if they lyke it doth ſuffiſe
               and what the reſt doth ſaye
               Regarde not thou, but clowniſhe words
               with laughter paſſe awaye.
               The iudgement of the common ſorte
               is groſſe and eke their minde
               Is wondrous weake and fooliſhe things
               delights the fooliſhe kinde:
               All men the meate doe moſt deſire
               that them doth beſt delight
               Eache pleaſure is not acceptable
               to euery kinde of ſprite
               But good and learned men the things
               of good and godly ſenſe
               Giue eare vnto and reade and marke
               the ſame with diligence
               This is the foode that them doth féede
               and comfort of their minde
               
                  
And if foreſh
                     •
                  wing doe not lye
               vnto this vertuous kinde
               Thou ſhalt be heartyly welcomed
               and with a ſmiling looke
               Of them thou ſhalt peruſed bée.
               Go therfore bleſſed booke
               Abyde along and happy tyme,
               and when the ghaſtly graue
               Encompaſt rounde about with earth
               my carcaſſe colde ſhall haue,
               Through euery countrey (thou aliue)
               and realmes of ſundry fame
               Go paſſe, and ſéeke in euery place
               to blaſe abrode my name
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            Non nobis Domine ſed nomini tuo.
            ¶ Imprinted at London, by Henry Denham, for Rafe Newberye dwelling in Fleete ſtreate.
            
         
      
   