
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  Palmerin D'Oliua.
                  The Mirrour of nobilitie,
Mappe of honor, Anotamie of rare
fortunes, Heroycall president of Loue:
VVonder for Chiualrie, and most accomplished
Knight in all perfections.
                  Presenting to noble mindes, theyr Courtlie desires, to Gentles,
theyr choise expectations, and to the inferiour sorte, howe to imitate
theyr vertues: handled vvith modestie, to shun
offence, yet all delightfull, for recreation.
                  Written in the Spanish, Italian and French,
and from them turned into English
by A. M. one of the Messengers
of her Maiesties
Chamber.
                  Patere aut abstine.
                  At London,
Printed by I. Charlewoode, for William
VVright, and are to bee solde at his Shoppe, adioyning
to S. Mildreds Church in the Poultrie,
the middle Shoppe
in the rowe.
1588.
               
               
                  
                  
                  
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  To the right noble, learned, and
worthie minded Lord, Edward de Ve
                        •
                     e, Earle of Oxenford,
Viscount Bulbeck, Lord Sanford, and of Badelsmere,
and Lord high Chamberlaine of England: A. M.
wisheth continuall happines in this life, and
in the world to come.
                  
                     AMong the Spartanes
right noble Lord, and sometime
my honorable Maister, nothing
was accounted more odious,
then the forgetfulnes of the seruaunt
towardes his Maister:
which made Mucronius, who
had beene seruaunt to Hagarbus
a poore Arte
                        •
                     an, and for his vertues afterward called
to the office of a Senatou
                           •
                        , in all assemblies to reuerence
his poore Maister, so that he would often say: It was
honour to Mucronius, that he had beene seruaunt to
Hagarbus.
                  Though this example (my good Lord) be vnfit for me,
in what respect, beseemes me not to speake: Yet that excel
                        •
                     lent
opinion of the Spartanes, I count it religion for me
to immitate. For if this vice was so despised among such
famous persons, what reproch wold it be to so poore an abiect
as my selfe, beeing once so happy as to serue a Maister
so noble: to forget his precious vertues, which makes him
generally belooued▪ but cheerf
                        •
                     ly mine owne dutie, which
nothing but death can discharge, In remembraunce therfore
of my officious zeale, I present your Honour the willing
endeuours of your late seruaunt: howe simple soeuer
they be, right perfect shall you make them by your fauourable

acceptaunce, this being added, that were I equall in ability
with the best, all should be offered to my noble Maister.
                  If Palmerin hath sustained any wrong by my bad translation,
being so worthely set downe in other languages:
Your Honour hauing such speciall knowledge in them, I
hope will let slip any fault escaped, in respect I haue doone
my good will, the largest talent I haue to bestowe.
                  And seeing the time affordes me such oportunitie, that
with ending this first parte, the olde yeere is expired: I
present it my noble Lord as your seruauntes New yeeres
gift, and therewithall deliuer my most affectionate dutie,
euermore ready at your Honours commaundement.
                  Needelesse were it, by tediousnes to growe troublesome,
when a woord suffiseth to so sound iudgement: I submit
my selfe and my Booke to your gracious conceit, and
the second part, now on the presse, and well neere finished
I will shortly present my worthie Patrone.
                  In meane while, I wish your Honor so many New yeers
of happines, as may stand with the heauenly appointment,

                        •
                     nd my modestie to desire.
                  Sometime your Honours seruant,
yet continuing in all humble duty.
Anthonie Monday.
               
               
                  
                  To the courteous Readers.
                  
                     WHen I finished my seconde
parte of Palmerin of England,
I promised this worke of Palmerin
D'Oliua, because it depended
so especially on the
other: to discharge that debt,
for promise is no lesse accounted,
with the new yeere I send
him abroad, a freendly companion
for the long euenings, and a fit recreation for
other vacant times.
                  But because some (perhaps) will make exceptions against
me, that being but one Booke in other languages,
I now deuide it twaine: my aunswer is, that to
glut men with delight, may make them surfeit, and so
in expecting thanks for my paynes, I should remaine
condemned by generall misliking. Beside, a Booke
growing too bigge in quantitie, is profitable neither
to the minde nor the pursse: for that men are now so
wise, and the world so hard, as they looue not to buie
pleasure at vnreasonable price. And yet the first parte
will entice them to haue the second, when (it may bee
alleaged) the cost is as great, as though it had come altogether:
yet I
                        •
                     am of the minde, that a man grutcheth
not so much at a little mony, payd at seuerall times, as
he doth at once, for this aduauntage he hath, in meane
time he may imploy halfe his mony on more needful
occasions, and raise some benefit toward buying the

second parte. Againe, the other part will be new at the
comming forth, where now it wold be stale: for such
are affectiōs now a daies, that a booke a sennight olde,
is scant worth the reading. Thus no iniurie is offered
by deuiding my Booke▪ but profitte both to you and
me: yours I haue rehearsed, and mine is, that a little
pause dooth well in so long a labour, beside, this aduauntage
would I take, that if my first parte deserued
no liking▪ you should neuer be offended by me with
the second.
                  Yet heerein I am encouraged▪ that what hath past
with so great applause in diuers languages, can hardly
merite to be despised in England, being matter altogether
of delight, and no way offensiue: for noble
and Gentle mindes, are farre from iniuri
                        •
                     g the Historie,
that hath so highly pleased Emperours, Kinges &
mightie potentates, if then the inferiour sorte mislike,
it is because they are not capable of so especiall deseruinges.
                  And yet I am perswaded, that both one and other
will freendly entertaine Palmerin D'Oliua, because his
History i
                        •
                      so plentifully stored with choyse conceit,
varietie of matter and exquisit conueyaunce: as nothing
can be reprooued but my simple translation, yet
that I hope will be pardoned too, in that to translate,
allowes little occasion of fine pen worke.
                  The second parte goes forward on the Printers presse,
and I hope shalbe with you sooner then you expect:
In the meane while let this haue fauourable acceptaunce,
and that wilbe a spurre to hasten the other.
                  Yours to his vttermost.
A. Munday.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  The first parte of the auncient
and honorable Historie, of the valiant
Prince Palmerin D'Oliua, Emperor of Constantinople,
Sonne to the King Florendos of Maccdon, and the
fayre Griana, Daughter to Remicius, Emperour of
Constantinople: a History full of singuler and
Courtlie recreation &c.
                  
                     CHAP. I.
                     
                        Of the secrete loue which the Prince Tarisius bare to the
yong Princesse Griana: and the arriuall of the Prince
Florendos at Constantinople.
                     
                     
                        THe auncient Histories, of the
famous Emperours of Constantinople
doo record, that the eight
Emperor succeeding Constantine,
the founder of that auncient
and famous Cittie, was named
Remicius, who gouerned
so iustlie, and with such excéeding
honour: as not onelie his
Subiectes intirelie looued him,
but of the kingdoms about him he was so feared and reuerenced,
that his Empire increased more large then in the
time of his Predecessors. This Remicius was of such a
princely and munificent minde, that no Knight whatsoeuer

came into his Court, without verie honourable receite and
bountifull rewardes: expressing the good nature of a vertuous
Prince, whose déedes were helde of no small reckoning
amongst his verie enemies. He maried with the King of
Hungarias Daughter, a Princesse for witte and beautie, equall
with any of her time, which caused her to be so especiallie
loued of her Lord the Emperour, as hee altogeather
gaue ouer y• exercise of Armes: notwithstanding, his Court
did not diminishe one lote of the former glorie for good and
hardle Knights, but dailie increased in such sort, as he tooke
great delight to haue yong Princes, Knights and Gentlemen,
nurtured and educated from their verie infancie in his
Pallace, especiallie after the Empresse had brought him a
Sonne, which was named Caniano, at whose birth was no
little reioycing through the whole Empire. Within two
yéeres after, she was likewise deliuered of a goodlie Daughter,
named Griana, who growing to fourtéene yéeres of age,
was of such rare beautie and singuler good grace, as those
that behelde her, estéemed her for the chiefest péece of workmanshippe
that euer nature framed.
                     Héereupon it chaunced, that Tarisius Sonne to the King
of Hungaria (who had béene brought vp in company with
the yonge Prince Caniano) fell into such amorous conceite
of the yong Princesse, as hee deuoted him selfe onelie to her
seruice, béeing vnable to conceale ye obiect of his affections,
but that time made her acquainted with the cause of his alteration.
Manie meanes he founde to entise her good opinion
towards him, but she carrying a religious zeale to loue in
some other climate, made no reckoning of his imporunate
and dilligent seruice, which drewe a Hell of tormentinge
thoughts vppon Tarisius, séeing his sute and seruice so déeplie
despised. Neuerthelesse, (to compasse his intent) he desired
his Cozin Caniano, to cause a Tryumphe bee published,
whereunto all Knights might be summoned, as well
straungers as others: not doubting but hee should spéede so
well in déedes of Armes, as thereby hee might deserue the

loue of the faire Griana, and so afterwardes make meanes
by the Empresse to demaunde her in mariage, all which hée
concealed from his Cozin Caniano: who verie gladlie didde
consent to what Tarisius had requested, watching oportunitie
to finde the Emperour his Father at leysure, when
he made his highnesse acquainted with the whole enterprise,
of himselfe and his Cozin Tarisius, desiring him that
all Knights might haue warning for preparation, against a
day the next Moneth appointed for the purpose. The Emperour
was verie well pleased with his Sonnes requeste,
accounting himselfe highlie honoured by his demaunde:
whereuppon he caused Heraulds of Armes presentlie to bée
dispatched, to signifie his intended Tournament through al
Countries farre and néere. In the meane while Tarisius
coulde not rest daie nor night, but still endeuoured to doo
what he iudged might please the Princesse Griana, to whō
as yet he had not vttered the effect of his longing desire, albeit,
by exteriour actions he dailie made shewe sufficient of
his tormenting passions. But it so fell out not long after,
that one daie in her walking he had sorted her alone from al
the other Ladies & Gentlewomen, in a place commodious
for a Louers discourses, where falling from one argument
to another, the furie of his oppressions imboldened him so
far, that at length he brake with her in manner folowing.
                     Madame, you are not ignoraunt of the honourable assembly,
that is appointed at the feaste ensuing, when I hope to
receiue the order of Knighthoode, and if it shall like you to
thinke so well of mee, as to graunt mee one request, easie enough
for you to affoorde me, perswade your selfe that I shal
imagine my fortune equall with the happiest Knights that
euer liued, in that it may be the onelie meane, whereby I
shall enioy the prize and honour of the Triumphe. Griana
knowing assuredlie that Tarisius bare her great affection,
as I haue before rehearsed, returned him this aunswere.
In sooth Cozin, it would please me meruailous well, to bee
the meane of so good fortune as you promise your selfe. Neuerthelesse,

I haue not learned so little modestie, as to grant
anie thing, before I knowe what is desired. When Tarisius
vnderstoode her modest excuse, he perswaded himself that
he should nowe obtaine that of her, whereof vntill that instant
he had liued in despaire: whereuppon, the teares standing
in his eyes, he began in this manner. I humblie beséech
you good Madame, to take in worth what I am to acquaint
you with, for when I determined to smoother my
gréefe in secrete, the extremitie of my affection grew to such
a surplusage, as it brake the stringes of my thoughts almost
vowed for euer silent, to reueale that to you which my selfe
dare but reuerentlie thinke, such is my feare to displease
you: otherwise, I knowe no meane canne warrant me
from suddaine and cruell death, so setled is y• vnspotted loue
I bare you, which when I striue to ouercome; and my selfe
also, the more I would decrease it, the more it augmenteth,
and that so strangelie, as while you are in presence, my spirite
forsaketh euerie part of mée, to liue in you onelie. For
which cause I haue determined (if you thinke it good) to request
you of the Emperour your Father for my Wife, and
if he regarde me with so much honour: the Realme of Hungaria
may well challenge, and my selfe likewise, the highest
roome in earthlie felicitie, hauing a Mistresse of such vnspeakable
qualitie. In the meane time, if you please to bestowe
on me anie Iewell or fauoure, commaunding mee to
weare it as your Knight and Seruaunt: you shall wel perceiue
how aduenturous loue will be in defence of my right,
by the aduantage I shall recouer in the vertue of a gifte so
acceptable.
                     
                        Griana, who made but slender account of his passions,
and béeing not well pleased that he held her with such vaine
discourses: modestlie returned him this aunswere. If you
had such regarde of me as I well deserue, you woulde not
attempt me with spéeches so vnfitting my hearing: for if
your desire be such as you giue me to vnderstand, you ought
to make it knowne to the Emperor or Empresse, who haue

greater authoritie ouer me then I haue my selfe. Therfore
I desire you hencefoorth not to aduenture the like on perill
of your life, otherwise I shall let you knowe howe highlie
you offend me: on which cōdition I am cōtent for this time
to pardon your want of discretion, in that I perceiue my
selfe to be the onelie cause thereof, in graunting you time
and leysure thus priuatlie to assaile me, for which ouersight
I repent mee at the verie harte. With which wordes shee
floong away and left him alone, declaring by her countenaunce
to be offended with his request, in that shee desired
rather to die then accept him for her Husband, or to allowe
him the name of her fréende. If then Tarisius was driuen
into a quandarie, wee néede not meruaile: wherefore troubled
as he was, and not caring greatlie whether hee went,
he entred the Empresse Chamber, where shee and her Son
Caniano stoode conferring togeather, without saluting the
one or other, he satte downe in a Chaire, and gaue such bitter
sighes, as the Empresse hearing, was somewhat mooued
therewith, doubting he had either receiued some greate
iniurie, or els coulde not prouide himselfe so sufficientlie as
he would for the Triumphe, wherupon she left her Sonne,
and calling Tarisius aside, thus began with him. Nephewe,
I sée you verie melancholie, which makes me to iudge, that
you want some néedefull thing for the Tournament, which
my Sonne hath caused to be published. With which words
she beheld Tarisius more wishlie then she had doone before,
and perceiued the teares to trickle down his chéekes, which
made her more desirous to knowe the cause of his gréefe, but
his hart was so confounded and shut vppe in anguish, as hée
could not speake one word to her. Neuerthelesse, the Empresse,
who loued him as her owne Sonne, founde so manie
meanes to perswade him, as in the ende he disclosed ye loue
he bare to Griana, and the aunswere likewise which shee
made him: whereby I am assured (quoth he) that nothing
but death can cease my torments. The Empresse (who of
her selfe did manie times determine to make that marriage)

perceiuing nowe howe fitlie the occasion offred it selfe,
began to resolue on the consumation thereof: and to content
her Nephewe, in excusing the Princesse Griana, spake
as followeth. Doo you Nephewe mislike the aunswere of
my Daughter? beléeue me therein she didde but her dutie:
for she cannot dispose of her selfe béeing yong and vnder controule,
but the Emperour and I, whom you ought firste to
make acquainted with your request. But since I perceiue
how you are affected, I promise you I will confer with my
Lorde the Emperour, and hope to preuaile so well in the
cause, as you shall spéede of that you moste desire. As they
continued these discourses, they were giuen to vnderstande
by a Messenger, that the Prince Florendos the Kinges son
of Macedon was newlie arriued, with a braue companie
of Knights. But his comming to the Emperour was not
as his vassaile or Subiect, because the kingdome of Macedon
was at that time no way beholding to the Empire, but
onelie to sée the faire yong Princesse Griana, the renowne
of whose beautie and vertues had so peirced his thoughtes,
as before he sawe her, he loued and honoured her, so that for
this cause onlie he iournied to Constantinople, where he was
verie honourablie entertained bothe of the Emperour and
his Sonne Caniano as also of the Empresse and faire Griana,
who oftentimes hearde him reckoned and estéemed amongst
the most honourable and gracious Princes, that liued
at that daie.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. II.
                     
                        Howe the Empresse conferred with the Emperour, as concerning
the mariage of theyr Daughter Griana wyth
Tarisius, Sonne to the King of Hungaria, whereof
they both determined, and of that which happened in
the meane time.
                     
                     
                        THe Empresse was not forgetfull
of her promise made to her Nephewe
Tarisius, but endeuoured
by all meanes possible to find the
Emperour at such leysure, as she
might impart the whole to him:
and because shee had so hardilie
taken the matter vppon her, shee
would gladlie it should sorte to effecte,
as commonlie Women are
couetous of their owne desires, therefore no meruaile if shée
were earnest in following her intent. Soone after, walking
alone with the Emperour, and smoothlie couering the baite
she was desirous he shoulde swallowe, shee desired him to
graunt her one request, whereof shee woulde not willinglie
be denied. The Emperour neuer before hearing her so importunate,
consented at the first to whatsoeuer she demaunded:
nowe perswading her selfe sure to spéede, thus shee beganne.
                     My Lord, hauing often considered with my selfe, that
our Daughter Griana is of yéeres and discretion able for a
Husband, I am the more desirous to sée her honourablie bestowed.
And for that the yonge Prince Tarisius hath béene
trained vp in your Court, and (which I little thought) some
good will appeareth to be betwéene them: I should thinke
if not amisse to vnite them in mariage togeather, for hardlie

shall we finde (
                           〈…〉
                        ) a Lord of greater blood
and birth then he, béeing heire apparant to the Crowne and
kingdome of Hungaria, besides they hauing béene so longe
time conuersant togeather in their yonger yeeres, will entertaine
a more speciall regard of loue betwéene them, then
can be in anie other that may mooue y• question to her. Madame
(aunswered the Emperour) she is your Childe, and I
doo not thinke but you would her good: therefore I like the
motion well, for that indéede I esteeme so well of Tarisius,
as of mine owne Sonne, a
                           •
                        d since wee haue so happilie fallen
into these discourses, we will foorthwith certifie y• King
his Father by our Ambassadours, that we may vnderstand
his opinion héerein. The Empresse gratified her Lord with
verie hartie thankes, béeing not a little glad she had so well
preuailed, wherefore immediatlie shee aduertised 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
But for Griana, her affection was els where, for she bare a
certaine secrete good liking to Florendos so soone as shee behelde
him, hearing so great reporte of his knightlie bountie
and prowesse, so that beholding them togeather, and their
eyes deliuering the good conceite of eache other: one might
easilie iudge, that Loue hadde so mightilie maistered her
thoughts, as (if he consented) she had sette downe her reste
for her choise, and hee on the other side was drawne into
the same compasse, notwithstanding eache of them (for the
time) concealed, what they rather desired should be known
betweene them. Yet this hidden fire stroue to gaine place
of issue, for diuers times ye Princesse Griana béeing amongst
her Ladies, talking of such Knights as woulde shewe themselues
at the Tournament: the Prince Florendos was cō
                        monlie
first spoken of, and so highlie would the Ladies commende
him beyonde all the other, as Griana coulde not refraine
from changing coloure, so that ye alteration she founde
in her spirite might be euidentlie perceiued, howbeit none
of the Ladies as then noted it, and thus shee continued till
the feast of Saint Maria d' Augusta, which was the daie
appointed for the Tournament, on which daie the Emperour

knighted his Sonne Caniano, and Tarisius Nephewe
to the Empresse, in honour wherof, hee held a greater and
more magnificent Courte, then before time hee had doone,
for he suffered the Ladies to accompanie the Knights at the
Table, albeit they were not wont to doo so often at y• time,
yet full well it pleased the Prince Florendos, who satte opposite
to the Princesse Griana, during which time of Dinner,
though manie piercing lookes, and smothered sighes
were sent from eache other, as messengers of their s
                           •
                        m
                           •
                        lable
opinions, yet cunninglie they shaddowed all from being
discerned. But after the Tables were withdrawne, and
eache one preparing for the Tourney: Florendos so well
behaued himselfe, as he founde the meanes to speake priuatlie
with his newe Fréende, and thus he beganne.
                     Madame, the Heauens haue not a little fauoured mee,
in sorting vs so commodiouslie togeather, that I may shewe
you before I enter the Lystes royall, the occasion why I left
the Realme of Macedon, to visite my Lord the Emperor.
I sweare to you vpon my knightlie faith, that your gracious
selfe was the onelie cause of my iourney, and while I liue, I
shall euermore aduenture my selfe, in ought that may stand
with your fauour and liking: and the first argument of my
happinesse I should account, if you would commaunde mee
this daie to arme my selfe for your Knight: otherwise, I
must be content to absent my selfe, béeing assured that with
out your regard, it is vnpossible for me to doo any thing that
can returne me estimation or honour. And albeit I haue not
as yet doone anie seruice to you, whereby I shoulde deserue
to be so accepted: yet such is the hope I repose in your vertuous
nature, as you will not refuse my honest request, beeing
the first I euer desired of you, and not the last (I truste)
shall doo you honour. Nowe (as you haue heard before) Griana
earnestlie affected Florendos: neuerthelesse, as a modest
and well aduised Princesse, doubting leaste hee faigned
those spéeches of course, dissembling her selfe to be somwhat
displeased, returned this aunswere.
                     
                        I did not thinke (my Lord Florendos) that you woulde so
farre forget your selfe, to holde mee with spéeches not beséeming
the Daughter of so great an Emperour as I am: neuerthelesse,
knowing you are a Stranger, and ignoraunt (it
may be) of the modestie which shoulde defende Knights deuising
with Ladies, I will not vse such rigour towards you
as I ought, yet must I tell you that I finde my selfe offended.
You desire that as my Knight you may enter ye Tourney:
for that I graunt ye, to the ende I may perceiue the
effect of the prowesse, which each one so much commendeth
in you, the rest, it is my pleasure that you forbeare. Madame
(quoth he) if I haue vsed anie such spéeches as agree
not with your patience: for Gods sake (in my excuse) accuse
my small compasse of libertie, which remaineth onelie
at your disposition. What (quoth she) thinke you that I wil
loue anie but he that must and ought be my Husbande? Ah
swéete Ladie (said Florendos) that is it I so earnestlie desire,
and thinke not that I sollicite you with anie other kind
of loue, but onelie to make you the Mistresse of my self, and
altogeather to dispose of me and mine: for proofe whereof, I
will héereafter imploy my selfe in the Emperours seruice,
in such sorte as (if you like it) I hope to purchase his consent.
Truelie Sir (quoth she) that onelie appertaines to the
Emperor and not to mée, to whom you are to make known
what you intende: for hee hath authoritie to commaunde,
and I am bounde by duetie to obey. At which wordes the
Empresse called her awaie, when Florendos making her
courteous reuerence, departed to his Chamber to arme him
selfe, for manie Knights were entred the Lystes, and he in
short space came thether for companie: where hee behaued
himselfe with such valoure, as he not onelie got ye honour of
the first daie, but of the foure daies folowing while ye Tourneie
endured, and wonne the prize which Caniano had prepared
for him that best deserued it, which made him bee
greatlie estéemed of the Emperour, and of the whole Court
ingenerall, espe
                           •
                        iallie of the faire Griana, whose harte by

little and little Loue brought in subiection, to the no small
content of Florendos, which doubtlesse had the Prince Tarisius
beheld
                           •
                        , I imagine hee woulde haue hardlie liked it.
But nowe during the time of these great Feastes, and Triumphes,
Fortune the sworne enemie to all quietnes, presented
the Emperor with other occasions▪ to cut off these
pastimes and courtlie deuises: for after many of ye Knights
assembled at his Courte, had taken leaue to returne into
their Countries, Gamezio Sonne to the Soldane of Babilon,
who was on the Seas with a mightie Armie, intending
to conquer Alexandria, was by extreamitie of winde
and weather, driuen into the straights before Constantinople.
Which when the Pilots and Marriners perceiued, not
on
                           •
                         amongst thē but greatlie reioyced at this good fortune,
but chéefelie Gamezio, who perswaded himself y• his Gods
had sent him thether, that the moste noble & florishing Cittie
of the world might fall into his handes: whereupon the
windes somewhat appeased, and the Seas calmed, he assembled
the chiefe and principall Captaines of his Armie, and
thus began.
                     My good fréendes, I beléeue assuredlie, y• our great Gods
would not suffer vs to arriue in Alexandria, because wee
went against them of our owne Law and Religion, but rather
it liked them better, that we should addresse our selues
to this Countrie of Christians, either to ruinate it altogeather,
or at least to bring it vnder our obeysance. Therefore
I am determined for this time, to defer the reuenge of the
iniurie, which the King Calameno did to the Soldane, and
as much as in me lyes imploy my forces in conquest of this
Countrey: for which cause, I desire that each of you would
particularlie encourage your people, assuring them (if wee
can conquer this Cittie) the riches thereof will counteruaile
their paine and trauaile. The Captaines failed not
to accomplish their charge to the vttermost, summoning euerie
one presentlie to Armes: so prouiding their Shippes,
their Ensignes & all thinges els néedefull for their defence,

they hoysed their sailes, making towards y• Shoare, where
with such prouision as they had they tooke landing, making
such a noyse with their Drummes, Trumpets, & Clamors,
as was heard with no small feare in euerie part of the Cittie.
Neuertheles, they were receiued with better resistance
then they looked for, as following the discourse of the Historie,
you shall at large vnderstand.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. III.
                     
                        Of the battayle fought before the Cittie of Constantinople,
betweene the Emperours power, and the Armie
of Gamezio.
                     
                     
                        IMmediatlie was this huge Armie
on the Sea, discouered by
the Sent
                           •
                        rnelles of the Cittie,
whereupon the rumour arose so
greate, as the people ranne on
heapes to defende the Hauen,
where the Moores thought to
haue made their first entrie. In
the meane while, Caniano, Tarisius,
and the other principall
Knights, with their men of Armes, put themselues in equipage,
doraynning their Armie in such warlike maner, as
nowe they marche forth of the Cittie, to succour those places
where the Moores gaue most eager assault. The Prince
Florendos béeing left behinde, made no little haste to gather
his companie, and as he galloped with them by ye Emperours
Pallace, hee espied the Princesse Griana standing
at her Chamber windowe, casting manie a ruefull looke towardes
the 
                           〈◊〉
                         of the Cittie, which so déepelie peirced
the gentle Princes harte, as immediatlie hee saide within
himselfe. By Heauen (swéete Ladie) either will I die this

day, or remooue the gréefe that séemeth so néere to touche
you. And with this resolution he gaue the spurres to hys
Horse, when it was not long before hee got among ye thickest
of the Moores, where he behelde the enemie so strong,
and the Christians so weake, as the day was like to prooue
dangerous and dismall. For the Prince Gamezio, was estéemed
one of the best Knights through all Asia, and that
daie hee behaued himselfe so roughlie amongst the Christians:
as sooth to say, they were enforced to retire towardes
the Cittie. Which when the Emperour behelde, who remained
with no great strength to defend the Cittie, he was
not a little gréeued to sée his men turne their backs on their
enemies, and disperse themselues in such fearefull and dysmaying
sorte. But Florendos, and the Prince Caniano vsed
such meanes, as they got them soone in aray againe, and
returned on the enemie with a fresh and hardie charge. Tarisius
shewed himselfe verie valiaunt & aduenturous, stryuing
by all the meanes he could to equall the Prince Florendos,
who that daie gaue testimonie of most rare exploits
so these thrée noble Gentlemen past from rancke to ranck,
sending all to the earth that durst withstande them. Gamezio
séeing his menne so bloodilie slaughtered on euerie side,
méeting with Tarisius woulde take reuenge on him, deliue
                           •
                        ring
him such a cruell stroke on the heade with his sword,
as downe he fell to the grounde so astonished, as his enemie
might euen then haue slaine him: and so hee had doone
but for the Prince Florendos, who séeing the Moore auauncing
himselfe on his Styrrops, to reach a full stroke at Tarisius
on the ground, lifted him quite out of his saddle with
his Launce, and bare him so rudelie therewith to the earth,
as breaking his necke with the fal, he gaue vppe the ghost.
When the Moores behelde Gamez
                              •
                           o their General slaine,
and the Christians make such 
                           〈…〉
                         harts
fayling them to make further resist, 
                           〈…〉
                        
towards their Ships, when had not the 
                           〈…〉
                        
them, not one had escaped death or taken 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        ▪
                        
notwithstanding, the greatest part were put to the sworde,
diuers making hast to get awaie by boates, were drowned
in the Sea, and manie of account brought backe prisoners,
thus with victorie returned the Emperours power to the
Cittie. So manie of the Moores as escaped to theyr shyps,
béeing not a little glad they were so farre from their enemies:
sette sayle and returned towardes the Soldane, to
whom they declared the summe of theyr mis-fortune, as also
the death of his Sonne Gamezio, which 
                           •
                        idinges made
him well nye mad with rage and anger. But béeing old and
crazed with sicknesse, he could not goe in person to reuenge
his death, which made him vowe and sweare, that so soone
as his other Sonne came to yéeres to beare Armes, he wold
sende him with such a puissant strength, as easilie he should
destroy the Emperour & his Countrie: in the meane time,
he sent the raunsome to redéeme them that were taken prisoners,
where we will leaue the Soldane, and returne to
Caniano and the other Princes, who béeing nowe come againe
to the Cittie, the Emperour hauing hearde the worthie
seruice Florendos had doone that same day (and how he
had receiued some fewe daungerous woundes in ye battaile)
sent for him in all haste that might bee to his Pallace, because
his owne Chirurgions and Phisitions shoulde haue
care of him. So was Florendos brought very honourablie
to the Pallace, and conducted to a Chamber beséeming hys
estate, where the Empresse and Griana came presentlie to
visite him. to whom the Prince Caniano recounted, howe
Tarisius had béene slaine by Gamezio, but that Florendos
stepped betwéene his death and him, but (quoth hee) the
Moore excused Tarisius, for in my presence he gaue his laste
farewell to this world, so that nowe we may saie the victorie
is ours, albeit before it hunge in hard suspence. While
Caniano continued these and such like spéeches, Griana
cast manie a swéete looke on the Prince Florendos, and hee
aunswered his obiect with the selfe same messengers of hys
hart: thus contented they their seuerall passions with such

modest and vertuous regarde, as none present could suspect
their secrete meaning. The Empresse and her Daughter
courteouslie taking their leaue, Florendos and his Chirurgions
we leaue a while togeather, they to apply medicines
to his woundes, and he the remembraunce of his Mistresse
to his hart. On the morrowe the Emperour with his nobilitie
rode foorth of the Cittie, to sée the slaughtered bodies, among
whom they founde Gamezio, who was easily known
by the richnes of his Armour, which Caniano caused to bée
taken from the deade bodie, and brought to Florendos as
the deserte of his trauaile: when the Emperour himselfe,
(the more to honour him) made present thereof to Florendos
at his returne, with these spéeches. My noble Cozin, by
your valour and Knightlie prowesse, haue I had the vpper
hand of nune enemies, may I but liue to requite thy good
desarts, I shall account my selfe happie and fortunate: notwithstanding,
account of me as thy Kinsman and continual
fréende, and bee there ought in my power shall like thée to
demaunde, on the faith of a King I vowe to giue it thee.
                     
                        Florendos most humblie thanked the Emperor, as well
for the great honour he did him, as also for his large & bountifull
promise, wheron he builded so assuredlie, as he almost
accounted faire Griana for his owne: who with the Empresse
her Mother came dailie to visite him, by which
meanes theyr mutuall loue encreased more and more, and
Florendos recouered his health in the shorter time, when
he solicited the Emperour with this sute following.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. IIII
                     
                        Howe Florendos intreated the Emperour, to giue him in
mariage his Daughter Griana, and what answere the
Emperour made him.
                     
                     
                        AFter y• 
                        Florendos was throughlie
healed of the woundes, which
hee had receiued in fight against
the Moores: finding the Emperour
one daie at leysure, & alone
in his Chamber, hee began to salute
him as after followeth. My
dread and soueraigne Lorde, so
princely and gracious haue your
fauours béene towards me, since
first I entred your royall Courte, as the King my Father
and I shall neuer aunswere such excéeding courtesie. And to
the ende this kindnes may rather increase then any waie
diminish, I beséeche your highnesse not to denie me one request,
which among the infinite number of your princelie
graces towardes me, I shall account it to excéede all other.
In bréefe, it is the Princesse Griana your Daughter, whose
loue and honourable fame, made me forsake the Realme of
Macedon, onelie to desire her in marriage, if either anie
desert in me, or your owne princelie good conceite, might repute
me woorthie so high a fauour. And for I woulde not
your highnes should anie waie misconceiue of mee, as that
the motion proceedeth from a youthfull & vn
                           •
                        aduised heade,
or that I haue enterprised it, without the good liking of the
King my Father: I humblie desire your Maiestie to reste
satis-fied bothe in these and all other opinions, in that my
Fathers consent, brought mee with no little spéede hether,
and the hope of yours during my aboade héere, hath taughte

me to place my loue with discretion, and continue it wyth
honourable vnspotted loyaltie. With this addition (vnder
your highnesse correction) that were she mine as I am wholie
hers: the faithfull seruice of a thankfull Sonne, shoulde
aunswere the gen
                           •
                        lenes of so good a Father, and the irreuocable
vowes of holie loue, assure Griana of her Florendos.
Right déerelie did the Emperour loue the Prince Florendos,
as had he béene his owne Sonne Caniano, his knightlie
valour and manifold other vertues iustlie inducing hym
thereto: and gladlie he would haue cōsented to his request,
if his promise made vnto Tarisius did not binde him to the
contrarie, whereupon he returned him this aunswere. Beléeue
me good Cozin, I am not a little agréeued that I cannot
satis-fie your gentle request, for that Tarisius Nephewe
to the Empresse hath alreadie preuented mee: to him haue
I past my promise for my Daughter, and dailie I expect the
Ambassadours comming from Hungaria to finishe the mariage,
so that I had rather loose the best of my Citties, then it
should be said I falsified my worde. Notwithstanding, of one
thing I can assure you, that you are far higher in my grace
and fauour then he: yet necessitie is without lawe, and the
regarde of mine honour must intreate you to hold me excused.
                     Greatlie abashed was the Prince Florendos, séeing in
one instant that hope strooken dead, that had maintayned
his life since his comming to Constantinople: and so nypt
in the heade was he with the Emperours answere, as hee
stoode a good while in a studie not speaking a worde, at last
he began thus. God forbidde that so great a Prince shoulde
breake his promise by my occasion: neuerthelesse, my truth
and loyaltie to your highnesse shall not any way diminishe,
but I shall remaine the most forward in duetie, of any that
owe seruice and alleageaunce to your Maiestie. Neyther
will I (sayd the Emperour) imagine the worse of you, but
loue you rather better then I did before. Then entered diuers
Noble men and Gentlemen, which made them breake

off from further spéeches, and Florendos taking his leaue,
went to his Chamber, so full of gréefe and extreame heauines,
as easilie he could haue béene induced to commit some
violence vpon himselfe: but casting himselfe vpon his bed,
he thus beganne to breath foorth the furie of his passions, to
ease the heauie burthen of his oppressed spirite.
                     Unhappy wretch that I am beyonde all other, what
hope of life canst thou flatter thy self withal, séeing ye meane
that should maintaine the continuaunce thereof, forbiddes
thée (sonde man) to hope any longer. What angry Planet
gouerned thy natiuitie, that he to whom thou gauest life,
should this day be the cause to ende thine owne. Beléeue

                           〈◊〉
                         
                        Tarisius, had I made tryal of this inconuenience before,
hardlie shoulde I haue put my personne in such daunger amongst
the Moores, to shéelde thy life: but in defending the
sworde out of thy throate, I haue deseruedlie thrust it in
mine owne, so that by lengthning thy daies, I haue expyred
mine owne date, and that with a death so miserable and cruell,
as no enemie whatsoeuer would wish to another. But
were it not that my duetie to the good Emperour countermaundeth
me, thou couldest not with such ease either outbraue
me in my looue, or thus vsurpe the gracious fauoure
of my Mistresse Griana, were affection ballanced with desert,
or loue measured by vertue as it is by opinion. Notwithstanding,
to die for her loue I shall account my selfe
happie, in that she cannot but pittie my vnluckie death, and
my spirite should passe with greater quiet to his ende, if she
knewe with what content I take my destenie: but fayre
Griana, would God I had either not séene thée at al, or Fortune
had béene fauourable to me in choise. At which words
the extremitie of his passions tooke away the libertie of his
spéeche, so that he could not finish what hee woulde gladlie
haue spoken, but falling from his bedde to the grounde in a
swoune, amazed one of his Esquires that was in the nexte
Chamber, who hearing the fall, ran in immediatlie, where
séeing his Maister lying deade [in his iudgement] ran and
called Frenato, who was Cozin to Florendos, and one that

knewe most of his priuate affayres, notwithstanding, hee
was ignorant in the cause of this accident, who taking him
vppe in his armes, with colde water and vinagre caste in
his face, at length he got life into him againe, when Florendos
opening his eyes, and séeing his Cozin so busie about
him, breathing foorth two or thrée bitter sighes, saide. My
déere fréende and Cozin, I beséeche you hinder not the ende
and issue of my life, for béeing out of all hope to recouer my
Ladie Griana, there is no meane left to maintaine my life.
When Frenato heard these wordes, hee doubted that the
Prince had receiued some contrarie aunswere from y• Emperour,
as concerning the marriage betwéene him and his
Daughter, for whose loue onelie hee left the kingdome of
Macedon: wherfore, he perceiuing that she must bee the
onelie meane to ease his torment, hee began thus roundlie
to aunswere the Prince. And what of this? must you therefore
dispaire? Alas (said Florendos,) what would yee haue
me doo? the Emperour hath long since past his promise for
her to Tarisius, as his highnes assured me by his own wordes.
Uerie well Sir (answered Frenato) but doo you know
if she haue giuen her consent? I promise you I am perswaded
that she loues him not, but that her fauourable regarde
is much more towardes you then him: and for you saye so
much, to morrow will I sounde the bottome of this matter,
so that (if I can) I will frustrate the Emperours intent towardes
Tarisius. Doo you in the meane time but learne to
dissemble your gréefe, and shewe not your selfe mal content
for anie thing that hath béene saide: but bee of good chéere,
and referre your fortune in this case to the successe of myne
endeuours. These and such like perswasions Frenato vsed
to the Prince, whom he thus left in his Chamber, and returned
to the Pallace as was his manner. All this while
the Emperour bethought himselfe, on the spéeches that had
passed betwéene him and Florendos, which made him the
night following, to discourse theron with the Empresse, perswading
her, that hee coulde more willinglie accept of hym

for his Sonne then Tarisius. But she who highlie fauoured
her Nephewe, reprooued his opinion with manie answers,
so that by importunate intreaties, teares, and other subtill
fetches, which Women are wont to vse to accomplish theyr
desires, she so farre disswaded the Emperour, as hee promised
her againe not to giue her to anie other, then to him to
whom he first past his worde. Of which wordes the Empresse
was not a little glad, and therefore all that night shée
deuised, by what meanes she might frō that time forward
so much as in her laie, hinder Florendos from speaking
to her Daughter: whereupon, she dailie kept the Chamber
of presence, and helde a more strickt looke on Griana then
before shee had doone, which greatlie increased the passions
of Florendos, and brought him into so weake estate, as the
learned Phisitions coulde not deliuer ye cause of his sicknes,
to the no small gréefe of the Emperour, but especiallie of
Caniano, yet for all this woulde not the Empresse at anie
time visite him, because shee woulde hinder the occasion of
her Daughters séeing him, remembring what spéeches had
past betwéene him and the Emperour. And albeit Griana
made no outward shewe thereof, yet in her harte shee was
greatlie displeased at her Mothers dealings, so that one day
when her Brother Caniano came to sée her, to recount vnto
her in what extreamitie he had left his fréendlie cōpanion,
and what gréefe it would be to him if he died, as he greatlie
doubted: What my Lord (quoth she) it is not so I hope?
Yes certainlie (quoth he) and I feare he will very hardlie
escape this day. At which wordes the water stoode in her
eyes, yet so well as she coulde shee dissembled her passions:
neuerthelesse, she could not holde it in, but said. I meruayle
much that the Empresse my Mother makes so slender account
of him, as since his sicknes shee woulde not vouchsafe
once to visite him: I feare she hath forgotten what good hée

                           〈◊〉
                         for vs, that day when he valiantly slew the Turke Gamezio.
Beléeue me (my good Lord and Brother) I am har
                        
                           ••
                        lie
sorr
                           •
                        e for his sicknes, for if he die [as heauen forbidde

quoth shee secretlie] the Emperour my Father shall loose
more then hée thinketh on, the great seruice hee hath doone
for him already, may giue instaunce of my words, and more
he béeing the Sonne of so great a Prince as he is. By this
time had such extreame gréefe ouerburdened her hart, as
she was constrained (feigning to goe to the Empresse Chā
                        ber)
to leaue her Brother, that she might alone by her selfe
bemoane her fréends hard fortune.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. V.
                     
                        Howe Griana sent a Ring to the Prince Florendos by
Cardina her Mayde, desiring him (as he loued her)
to comfort himselfe, and of the aunswere he sent her.
                     
                     
                        SO soone as Griana hadde left her
Brother, she went into her chā
                        ber,
where more and more shee
lamented for the sicknes of Florendos,
and with her teares shee
coupled these discourses. May it
be that anie liuing creature, can
deserue so gréeuous punishment
as I doo, that endaunger the life
of the woorthiest Knight in the worlde? Unhappy that I
am, that loue, yea the loue he beares to mee, should bring so
braue a Gentleman to so hard an exigent: but if he die, such
iust vengeaunce will I take vpon my selfe, as I wyl not remaine
one howre aliue after him, and let our ghostes seeke
their owne quiet in death, that Fortune would not affoorde
vs in life. Yet will I thus farre first aduenture, and that before
any sléepe enter these eies of mine, try if it consist in my
power to ease his extreamitie, that buyes my loue at too
déere a price. And in this anguish of minde she called one of

her Damoselles, the Daughter of her Nurse named Cardina,
whom aboue the rest she trusted most, and to her she began
in manner following. Cardina, thou knowest the loue
I alwaies bare thy Mother, and for her sake howe well I
haue thought of thée, I haue knowne thée long time a true
and faithfull Seruaunt: but nowe Cardina is a time beyonde
all other, to make tryall of thy truth, and to witnesse
thy loyaltie to me, onelie as thou art sure, so to bee secrete,
and so secrete as I must put my life and honour into thy secrecie.
Cardina, who was wise, and of good gouernement,
hearing Griana vse such earnest spéeches: imagined that
she would commit no commō matter to her trust with such
coniuration, whereuppon she modestlie returned thys aunswere.
Madame, rather had I be torne péecemeale in sunder,
then anie thing you commaunde for secrete, shoulde by
me be reuealed without your licence: and so assure your
selfe, that while I liue, you shall finde mee as faithfull in
déede, as I promise in worde. I neuer hitherto (quoth the
Princesse) had other opinion of thée, listen nowe therefore
what I shall commaunde thée. I haue vnderstoode for certaine
Cardina, that the gréeuous sicknes of the Prince Florendos,
is caused by verie earnest loue which hee beares to
me, & for I account it great pittie to loose so good a Knight,
doo so much as take the paines to goe to him from me: and
saie I desire him to bee of good chéere, and if there bee any
thing in my power may doo him good, I will gladlie accomplish
it, as she that loues him as her own selfe, and to assure
him thereof, saie I sende him this Ring, which I wyll him
to kéepe as a pledge of my loue. Madame (answered Cardina)
Fortune spéede me so well, as my paines may giue ease
to both your passions: and might my sentence like you Madame,
I knowe no Knight so worthy your loue as Florendos.
Goe then (sayd Griana) and returne againe so soone as
thou canst. So went Cardina straite to the lodging of the
Prince Florendos, at the entraunce whereof, shee met the
Prince Caniano so heauie and pensiue as might be, because

he perceiued his Fréend to consume awaie euerie day more
and more. But Cardina, who had well learned her lesson,
stept aside, and would not be séene of Caniano: who beeing
gone, shee went vp to the Chamber, where when shee was
readie to enter, she hearde the Prince cōplaine in this sort.
Ah poore wretch, must thou néedes die without anie hope
of remedie? And as he would haue procéeded on, Cardina
stepped to him, and after she had saluted him, said to him secretelie,
that the Princesse Griana had sent her to him, to
vnderstand of his health, and beléeue me good Prince (quoth
she) I neuer sawe Ladie so sorrowfull for your sicknes, as
she is. She commendeth her selfe to your honour most hartilie,
and hath sent you this Ring, as an earnest of the looue
she beares you, desiring you to bee of good chéere and comfort
your selfe, because she desires to sée you, to confer with you
of matters that concerne you bothe néerelie. These wordes
so rauished the spirit of Florendos, as a good while he doubted,
whether he dreamed, or that hee might giue credite to
what he hearde: for albeit he knewe the messenger so well
as anie in the Courte, yet coulde he not perswade himselfe
that hee was so fortunate. At length (betwéene hope and
dispayre) he tooke the Ring, which he entertained with manie
deuoute kysses, and embracing Cardina so well as hee
coulde, thus answered. Alas my swéete fréende, may it bee
possible that my Ladie hath such regard of him, who neuer
was able to doo her anie seruice? Doubt not thereof my
Lorde (aunswered Cardina) and if you will declare your
loue answerable to hers in vertue, you must giue testimonie
thereof by comforting your person, that she may sée you
so soone as may be. Ah fayre Uirgin (quoth he) let my whole
life be imployed, in what shall like her diuine nature to cō
                        maunde
me: and I assure you, that these tydings hath breathed
such newe life into my verie soule, as alreadie I finde
my selfe wonderfullie chaunged, yea, and that in such sorte,
as before thrée daies bee past, I shall attende her gracious
will with seruiceable dilligence. In the meane while, I shal

desire you faire Fréend, to let my soueraigne Mistresse vnderstand,
that I kisse her highnesse hande in humble duetie,
and had ere this giuen farewell to this life, hadde not her
swéete regard called me againe from death. Thus parted
Cardina from the Prince, taking her way spéedily towards
Griana, who longed not a little to heare from Florendos,
whom she had made Lord of her gentle affections.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. VI.
                     
                        Howe Cardina recited to the Princesse Griana, what
speeches had past betweene her and Florendos, and of
the counsell shee gaue her Mistresse, to conferre with
him in the Garden so soone as he was recouered.
                     
                     
                        CArdina thus dispatched from
Florendos, made no little haste
towardes the Princesse, who remained
all this while silent in
her Chamber, and no sooner perceiued
she Cardina to enter, but
she demaunded if Florendos receiued
her token in good part or
no. Beléeue me Madame (answered
Cardina) I thinke you neuer
did anie thing in all your life, whereby you coulde obtaine
more honour and applause, then by that you vouchsafed to
doo at this instant, for in my iudgment you haue performed
a miracle, in giuing him life that was in the very iawes of
death. Then from point to point shee recounted the talke
passed betwéene them, first howe she founde him in y• midst
of his regrets, and lastlie what message hee had sent by her.
Thus while Cardina continued her discourse, euery worde
tooke hold on the gentle hart of the Princesse, and wounded

her with such pittifull regarde of the Prince his torments:
as what she desired inwardlie, shee shaddowed with modestie,
as lothe to receiue shame in her loue, hauing caryed her
selfe with such honour all her life, quoth shee to Cardina.
Howe might I (good Seruaunt) ease this waightie oppression?
Uerie well (said Cardina) whē Fortune alloweth opportunitie.
But thou knowest (quoth Griana) a Princesse
as I am, to be séene secrete with so braue a Gallant, dooth
greatlie hazard my life and honour. As for that Madame,
(saide Cardina) my Sister can better aduise you then I, or
any that I know, by her meanes may you speake with your
Knight, the brauest Gentleman in the world, and one whō
I knowe is so farre deuoted yours, as hee will rather loose
his life, then impeache your honour anie waie: and otherwise
then in loyaltie to make you his Ladie and wyfe, I am
well assured he loueth not, which loue (Madame) you may
well entertaine. Returne then Cardina (quoth the Princesse)
to my Lorde Florendos, and assure him that so soone
as he is recouered, I wyll come and speake with him, in
such place where we may well aduenture: and desire hym
as he loueth me, that it may bee with all conuenient spéede.
Cardina without anie further delay, wēt with this message
to the Prince Florendos: who hartened himselfe so well
vpon these spéeches, as within sixe dayes he found himselfe
thorowlie amended, whereof the Emperour and Caniano
hys Sonne, was not a little glad: but Tarisius was scant
well pleased thereat, for he had cōceiued a secrete iealousie,
because he was so earnest in affection towards Griana, who
by her Mayd Cardina had warned Florendos, that y• night
following he should come into the Garden, where
                           •
                        nto her
Chamber had a secrete entraunce, and there woulde he and
she conferre of their loue, without suspicion of any. Florendos
séeing these affayres sort to so good ende, purposed what
euer happened, not to fayle the time & place: which made
him thinke this day a yéere in length, so long hee looked and
desired for the night. But nowe the wished howre is come,

when Florendos with his Cozin 
                           
                              •
                           renato (who was priuie
to the Princes secrete loue) departed from their lodginges,
and comming to the Garden, they sawe the wall was verie
high and harde to climbe, notwithstanding, greater thinges
are possible to Louers, chéefely when a cause of such waight
is in hand, so that in short time Florendos had gotte the top
of the Wall, and afterward went to the place where Griana
                        
                           •
                        tayed his comming, who had no bodie with her but Lerina,
Sister to Cardina, to whom likewise she thorowly bewrayed
her secrets. He hauing espied them, came and fell
on his knee before the Princesse, but she tooke him vppe in
her armes, embracing him so swéetlie: as Lerina withdrew
her selfe amongst the Trées, not with anie intent of feare
to displease them, but with a certaine kinde of gréefe which
ouercame her, that shee wanted a Fréende to participate
with her in loue, as her Mistresse hadde, before wh
                           •
                        m Florendos
béeing on his knée, sayd. Mad
                           •
                        me, by vertue of your
commaundement I am thus bolde to enter your presence,
yéelding my whole abilitie to you, as to the diuine Goddesse
that hath shéelded me from death, which grace séeing your
princelie nature hath affoorded me, my life for euer héereafter
remaines at your soueraigne pleasure: the vnfeigned
promise whereof, I binde to you by irr
                           •
                        uocable vowes, but
especiallie by my faith, y• onelie ornament of a true Knight,
that I desire no longer to breathe this ayre, then to honour
your name with my continual seruice, for life without y
                           •
                        ur
grace and fauour, is more yrkesome to me then a thousande
deathes. But by your fauour my Lorde (answered Griana)
howe or from whence hath this hote loue sprunge, let mee
knowe I desire you? Madame (ꝙ he) as I haue heretofore,
so at this time I assure you, that in my nature Countrie of
Macedon, I hearde the renowne of your excelling beauty,
at which verie instant I dedicated my selfe onelie yours:
and euer since continuing in this religious seruice, I haue
so confidentlie set downe my rest, in gracious regard of your
swéete selfe, as béeing yours in seruice, I liue, if otherwise,

I die. In sooth said (said the Princesse) I sée thē you haue giuen
your selfe wholie mine, and so I am well centented to
accept you. Then Madame (quoth he) to seale y• assuraunce
of this diuine fauour you haue doone me, 
                           〈…〉
                         intreate to
kisse those swéete lippes, that deliuered the 
                           〈◊〉
                         I haue
long looked for. Which to grant, though (for modesties sake)
at first she séemed daintie, yet at length looue had so suppr
                           •
                        
                        zed
her, as he néeded not striue when no resistaunce was offered.
Thus with feares and solemne kysses, they breathed
into eache others soule, the mute arguments of their loue,
and faire Cynthia amiablie fauouring this delicate encounter,
added such courage to the minde of this lou
                           •
                        lie Champion:
as breaking his Launce in the face of Venus, hee bequeathed
the successe of his d
                           •
                        uoire to the gracious aspect of
that Planet. And among a number of soft and sweete loue
spéeches, he discoursed to her his talke with the Emperour
her Father, howe he had requested her in marriage, & howe
he excused his consent by the promise he had made before to
Tarisius, through the dailie and earnest perswasions of the
Empresse. Notwithstanding (quoth he) in respect you haue
not consented thereto, I hope they shall finde themselues
farre beyonde their reckoning. Nowe for the Princesse, she
neuer knewe that Tarisius had laboured to haue her to hys
Wife, because she made so light account of him, as she wold
rather die then consent thereto, whereuppon shee returned
Florendos this aunswere. The Emperour my Father hath
reason to thinke hardlie of my Mother, and great discredite
will it be to her, to procure my mariage against my wil, for
neuer shall I consent thereto: and therefore my Lord I desire
your aduise, how I may preuent this ensuing daunger▪
Madame (answered Florendos) my deuise is layd already,
so please you to accept thereof: I will conuey you hence secretlie,
and before the Emperour or any one know of it, into
my Countrey of Macedon, where I and mine shall entertaine
you with great and reuerend honour, and you shall
be our gracious Lady and Princesse. Beléeue me (sayd she)

it is doubtfull in such a iourney what daungers may happen,
notwithstanding, hauing vowed my selfe onlie yours:
be it to the lyking or dislyking of my Father and Mother, I
had rather breake through the straights of a greater hazarde,
then be, forced to marrie him, whome while I liue I
can not like, therefore doo you expecte the aduauntage of the
time, and I will aduenture with you whether you please.
Madame (answered Florendos) continue you this resolution,
and referre the rest to my charge, which you shall see effected
ere thrée daies be past: in the meane while I entend
to take my leaue of the Emperour your Father, with this
excuse, that the King my Father commaundeth my returne
home, for which cause I will sende my traine before, reseruing
onelie but tenne of my best Knights to accompany me.
For that (quoth Griana) doo what you thinke best, & without
anie further expecting me in this place, certifie me how
things happen by your Cozin Frenate, or my Maide Cardina.
But nowe you sée the daie beginnes to breake, wherfore
let me desire you to depart, that no s
                           •
                        andall or suspition
arise of our méeting. Florendos kissing the Princesse hand,
though longer hee woulde haue stayde) humbly tooke hys
leaue, and by the helpe of Lerina, hee got ouer the Wall againe,
where F
                              •
                           enato stayed his comming, to wh
                           •
                        m when
he was entred his lodging, hee imparted the appointment
betwéene him and the Princesse, desiring him to discharge
his trayne, except ten of his best approoued Knights, to help
him if any hinderance preuented his intent: as for the rest,
they should be going on before, and stay his c
                           •
                        mming at an
appointed place, thrée daies iourney from Constantinople. In
the morning he awaited the Emperours c
                           •
                        mming abroad,
to whom he said, that he had receiued Letters from y• King
his Father, with expresse commaundement to make spéedy
returne home: therefore my good Lord (sayd hee) I desire
to depart with your fauourable lyking, and in respect I may
not contrary where I am bounde to obey, I intend to morrow
to set forward on my iourney, assuring your highnesse,

that in what place I shall chaunce to come, I am yours in
loyall and faithfull seruice. My good Cozin (aunswered the
Emperour) I giue you thankes with all my hart, for y• honour
you haue doone me with your gentle presence: and if
you haue occasion to vse m
                           •
                        e in ought, you shall perceiue
howe highlie I loue and estéeme of you. My Lord (said Florendos)
I desire to deserue the great kindnes I haue found
alreadie: so taking his leaue, the Emperour embraced him,
and as he issued forth of the Chamber, he met the Prince
Caniano, of whom he tooke his leaue likewise, who desired
him to staie thrée or foure daies lōger. In which time there
came to the Courte certaine Ambassadours, which y• Kinge
of Hungaria had sent to the Emperour, to conclude the mariage
betwéene his Sonne Ta
                              ••
                           sius and the Princesse Griana,
the Duke of Gramay béeing chéefe in this Embassade,
who was accompanied with manie Knightes and Gentlemen
of name and account, to whom the Empresse gaue verie
gracious welcome, in that shee had priuatlie procured
this their comming. As these Ambassadours entred ye great
Chamber, Caniano and Tarisius who accompanied them,
perceiued Griana to withdrawe her selfe aside very sad and
mellanchollie: whereupon Caniano came vnto her (greatlie
abashed at her angry countenaunce) and thus hee began.
Fayre Sister, at this time when you ought to shewe the
moste cheerefull countenaunce, you are more sadde then of
long time I haue séene you: me thinkes you haue good occasion
to be merrie, séeing the Emperour my Father hath prouided
you so braue a Husbande, as is my Cozin the Prince
Tarisius, who I am sure loues you as his owne life. Ah brother
(quoth she) I knowe not what should mooue him so to
doo, séeing I neuer thought so well of him: and more gladlie
could I entertaine mine owne death, then bee constrained
to loue where I cannot. These words did Tarisius easily vnderstand,
notwithstanding he made shewe as though he did
not: but going to the Empresse he desired her to stay there
with the Emperour, séeing the Ambassadours were come

from the King his Father, that what was begun as concerning
him and Griana, might nowe be finished according to
her promise. Uppon this occasion, the Empresse called
Griana aside, and with smoothe and swéete spéeches began
to breake with her, howe for her good shee had induced the
Emperour, to giue her in marriage to her Cozin Tarisius,
and what honourable aduantage she shoulde receiue thereby:
wherefore faire Daughter (saide she) resolue your selfe
with childlike obedience, to thinke well of that your Parents
haue determined. All these perswasions coulde not
drawe one pleasing word from the Princesse, but shee excused
her selfe still, by the desire shee had to remaine as s
                           •
                        ee
was, and rather then to marrie shee would take a religious
life vpon her: with which words she brake into such teares
as the Empresse was constrained to leaue her alone, not
doubting to finde her the next time in better tune. Griana
then considering with her selfe, how she shoulde be enforced
at length to yéelde, whether she woulde or no, if Florendos
did not the sooner accomplish his enterprise: called Cardina
vnto her, and sent her with this charge to Florendos,
that that present night he shoulde not fayle to méete her in
the Garden, where she would be readie to depart with him,
otherwise he should neuer gaine the like opportunitie, with
which message Cardina departed.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. VII.
                     
                        How Florendos came that night to the Garden, to conclude
what he and Griana had intended, and what happened
to them.
                     
                     
                        FLorendos vnderstanding the
will of his Mistresse, with great
dilligence laboured to execute
what they had intended, and taking
his leaue at y• Courte, feigned
he woulde returne no more,
but take his waie straight towards
Macedon. Tarisius, whose
iealousie increased euerie daie
more and more, sette pri
                           •
                        ie spies
to watch euerie night, who went in & out at the Princesse
Chāber, and albeit of long time his labors were frustrate,
yet at length he and his spies perceiued, how he whome hée
most enuied, mounted the Garden Wall where the Princesse
lay: for Florendos hauing left his companie without
the Cittie, accompanied with Frenato, and both of thē well
armed, he priuilie returned againe to the Pallace, thinking
about midnight to carrie her away, for whose loue hee had
thrust himselfe into this daungerous hazarde. Thus hauing
left their Horses wtout the Citie with their Pages, & being
come to the Garden Wall, Frenato helping the Prince to
get vppe, Tarisius and his men, who vnhappilie lay there
in ambush, ran violentlie vpon him, crying all aloude, kyll,
kill these villaines that woulde dishonour the Emperours
Pallace. At which wordes, Florendos and Frenato seeing
themselues discouered, presentlie drewe their swordes, and
beganne to laie about them verie valiantlie, Florendos giuing

                        Tarisius so cruell a stroake on the heade, that hee fell
downe to the ground as he had béene dead, and two or thrée
of his companie with him: which when the rest behelde,
they gotte ouer the Wall, and running with great clamour
into the Cittie, cryed, helpe helpe Tarisius, whō 
                        Florendos
(séeking to rob the Emperours Pallace) hath cruelly murdered.
This noyse was heard by Griana, Lerina, and Cardina,
who were in the Gardē staying for Florendos, which
did so amaze the hardiest of the three, as they knewe not
what countenance to sette on y• matter: especiallie Griana,
whom this feare had strooken into a deade traunce, but Lerina
and her Sister taking her vp in their armes, conueyed
her into her Chamber, and soone after into her bed, when
recouering her selfe, in extreame wéeping thus spake. Alas
miserable wretch y• I am, dooth Fortune employ al meanes
she can for my destruction? Well, let her doo the vttermoste
spight shee can, for I am well assured before it be long, that
death shall tryumphe aboue all her discourtesies. Cardina
séeing her so wéepe and wring her handes, and as it were
readie to fall into despayre, began to perswade her in thys
sorte. Madame, it is no time nowe to vse these extremeties,
for Gods sake learne to couer your passions: to the ende the
Emperour may not detect vs, béeing assured that as yet we
were not perceiued, and if you can but content your selfe,
all this tumult will soone be ouercome. I pray thée (quoth
Griana) leaue me alone, and goe sée (if thou canst) what is
become of Florendos, that I may know whether hee be taken
or slaine. So went Cardina, & standing among others,
as one that knewe nothing, behelde all. During this hote
tumult, Fren
                              •
                           to séeing trouble encreasing more and more,
followed the matter with such dilligence, as he got Florendos
forth of the throng, and the darknesse of the night was
such, as they easily compassed to get out of the Cittie, where
their Pages stayed with their Horses, wheron they mounted
and set on away. But the Prince Florendos would manie
times haue returned backe againe, so lothe was hee to

leaue her whom he loued so déerely, for being out of all hope
to sée her againe, he estéemed his life of no value or account.
In which impatience, he rent his comelie locks of haire, and
haled his flesh with great violence, whereuppon Frenato
thus spake to him. Why howe nowe my Lorde? wyll you
in séeking honour wound your selfe with shame, or in arguing
your loue to your Ladie, endaunger her life? desire you
to loose your selfe, and her also for euer? Beléeue me Cozin,
this verie hardlie beséemes you, that the subtill dealing of a
cowardlie Knight, should make you thus to forget your self.
No no good Cozin, it is now no time to declare these shewes
let vs therefore make spéede to our companie, and if you
thinke good, we will sende one secretlie backe to the Cittie,
to vnderstand the ende of this troublesome broyle, and wee
in y• meane time may set forward towards Macedon. Ah
swéete Cozin (quoth Florendos) you speake as the man that
cannot comprehende my torments, thinke you it is possible
for me to liue, leauing that rare creature in such perrill, for
whose loue a Hell of gréefes hath martired my soule? By
my knightlie faith I sweare, that death is a thousand times
more welcome to me, then to be maistered by this one conceit,
that I shold liue an hower out of her gracious seruice.
Well well Sir (sayd Frenato) what you may not doo now,
referre till better conuenience, and let vs set on before the
daie light descry vs: otherwise, in séeking to defende Griana,
your selfe shalbe witnes of her reproche and condemnation.
Florendos perceiuing his Cozin did aduise him for the
best, was well contented to be ruled by him, so giuing the
spurres to their Horses, stayed not till they ouertooke y• rest
of their companie: when he dispatched an Esquire presentlie
backe to the Cittie, commaunding him straightly to direct
soone to the King his Fathers Court, the successe of euerie
thing that happened in his absence.
                     But now to returne where before we left, Cardina had
not long staide in this hurlie burley, but shee perceiued the
Emperour was rysen, who in all hast caused his Guarde to

arme themselues to helpe Tarisius: for by this time hadde
the two Knights which escaped, aduertised in the Courte,
that they tooke Florendos as he was climbing the Garden
wall, to goe to dishonour the Princesse Griana. At which
report the Emperour was so mooued, as he went in greate
furie to his Daughters Chamber, whom he founde in her
bed, more likelie to die then liue: but necessitie (whereof
manie doo often make a vertue) made her couer her weakenes
with a faire shewe of courage, so that when she see him
enter, shee wrapped her selfe in her might Mantle, & came
before him, to whom hee beganne in this furious manner.
Thou leude Gyrle, darest thou conceiue the thought to doo
mee this dishonour? by my Crowne for this thy presumption,
I shall make thée such an example to all other, as thy
heade from thy shoulders will scant quite thy fault. Griana
hearing him speake so roughlie, answered him againe
thus mildlie. My Lord and Father, I beséeche you to pardon
me, you accuse me, and I know not whereof: if I haue
doone euil, it is in you to chastise me as you shal please, and
if I be innocent, vouchsafe good Father not to condemne
mee. Ah varlet (quoth hee) this excuse shall little profite
thée. So taking her verie rudelie, he locked her in a strong
Tower, whereof he carried the Keye himselfe: then went
he to Tarisius his lodging to sée how he did, for it was told
him that he was in daunger of his life, where he found the
Empresse heauilie wéeping, but he caused her to goe to her
Chamber, and commaunded his Chirurgions to looke dilligentlie
to his Nephewe, and not to spare any cost to purchase
his health. Nowe because they which searched for
Florendos, could not finde him, the bruite and rumor was
qualified, and the Emperour went againe to his Chamber
till the morning, when the Empresse hearing y• her daughter
was in prison, tooke it verie heauilie, and knéeling bebefore
the Emperour, desired him that she might fetch her
foorth: but he was so angrie, as her wordes coulde doo nothing
with him, yet he graunted that shee shoulde goe see

her, and tooke her the Key, when she entering the Tower,
founde her sitting on the ground so blubred with teares, as
was lamentable to beholde, but when she behelde her Mother,
she arose, and dooing her reuerence, coulde not speake
her teares so ouercame her. The Empresse that loued her
déerelie, séeing her in this gréeuous estate, had much a doo
to dissemble what she thought, how beit after a fewe light
wordes passed betwéene them, she said. I am 
                           •
                        orie daughter
that you haue so lightlie throwne your affection vpon a
Straunger, and that you forget your duetie, in following
your Fathers counsell and mine, who well kn
                           •
                        we the loue
Tarisius beares you, and no otherwise Daughter, then to
take you to his wife. But you (carried awaie with y• loosenes,
which ill agrées with your credite and calling) haue
rather thought best, to grant Florendos enterance by your
Garden, at such a suspected howre, as while you liue, your
honour will be hardlie thought on: for two of Tarisius his
Knights, who thought to take the Traytour, are slaine,
and my Nephew himselfe daungerouslie escaped. Griana
hearing him called Traitour whom shee so highlie looued,
and that shee herselfe was accused, by that which ought to
excuse her, answered. Madame, and my gracious Mother,
as yet I am ignoraunt of the cause, that hath mooued the
Emperour in such choller against me, and be it for this you
speake of, in soothe I am offered verie great iniurie, for I
knowe not whether Florendos or anie other haue entred
my Garden, well I am assured hee came not where I was.
These are straunge newes to me Madame, I 
                           •
                        old rather
haue thought him on his waie towards Macedon, in respect
of the solemne leaue he tooke in the Court
                           •
                        . For my
part, I would that the Traytour which was ye cause hereof,
had long since béene buried in the bottome of the Sea,
then he should so abuse the honor of Florendo
                              •
                           , with a matter
of such villanie, wherein I cannot iudge him faultie: but
were it he Madame, I am at a point, let him die y• death,
as he hath well deserued, for my duetie to you my Parents

hath taught me better nurture, and loue canne be no priuiledge
to me to offende. Then good Mother, twit not mee
with impeache of honour in so innocent a cause, for defence
whereof, were the death present before mine eyes, I haue
sorrowed as much as I would, and am more readie to embrace
then liue in suspecte, so shall my Father and you bee
eased of prouiding me a Husband. As for the prison wherein
I am, I will not denie his fauoure when it shall please
him to deliuer me: but I coulde take it farre more contentedlie,
to spende the remainder of my following daies thus
solitarie, then to liue abroade misdéemed on by anie. Faire
Daughter (said the Empresse) doo not discomfort your selfe
in this sort, the Emperour had some reason (in regarde of
the loue he beares you, and the outragious tumult which
happened) to doo as he hath doone: but I hope in the end all
will sort to the best, and that you your selfe shall remaine
contented. Manie other spéeches passed betwéene them, till
at length ye Empresse left her and departed, for she thought
long till she was with the Emperour, to let him know the
talke betwéene her and Griana: which shee didde without
omitting anie thing, notwithstanding hee was more seuere
to his Daughter euerie daie after. Then sent hee for the
Ambassadours, and thus he began with them. My Lordes,
at this time I am aduised, that you shall returne to your
King my Brother, for in respect of the accidents which you
haue séene to happen: I will craue pardon for this tyme,
referring matters ouer till some other time, when thinges
shall fall in better disposition. The Ambassadours vnderstanding
the Emperours pleasure, the next daie tooke their
leaue towarde the King their Maister, to whom they declared
the whole in generall: whereat hee conceiued such dyspleasure,
as he presentlie sent for his Sonne Tarisius, who
had not as yet recouered his health. But he was so enamered
on y• yong Princesse, as he would not obey his Fathers
commaund, but so soone as he was indifferentlie amended,
he intreated the Emperour to pardon his Daughter, accusing

his owne men, who vndiscreetlie had raised this false
rumour of her and Florendos. By this meanes, the Empresse
and her Ladies obtained libertie dailie to accompanie
Griana: but all the night time he caused her to bee locked
vp as closelie as before, committing her to the charge
of an aged Gentlewoman named Tolomestra, whom hee
commaunded on paine of death, not to bee a minute of an
houre forth of her companie.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. VIII.
                     
                        Howe Florendos arriuing on the frontiers of Macedon,
made manie sorrowfull complaints, for not bringing
Griana away, according to his enterprise.
                     
                     
                        NO sooner had Florendos & Frenato
ouertane their companie,
but they rid on in such hast (fearing
to be followed) as at length
they got the Frontiers of Macedon.
And because Florendos
imagined himselfe without life,
not hearing anie tydinges from
his Mistresse Griana, he concluded
to rest at the first Towne he
came too, there to expect the returne of the Esquire he sent
to Constantinople: who returned towards his Maister sooner
then he looked for, by reason of the little aboad he made
in the Emperours Court, for he staied not when he hearde
that Griana was imprisoned, and that Tarisius was not
slaine as his Maister was perswaded. These newes did
wonderfullie afflict the Prince, as well for the harde vsage
of his swéete Fréende, as that he had fayled in killing him,
by whose death he well hoped to recouer his losse: all the

whole daie would he receiue no sustenance, but locked himselfe
close in his Chamber, and tombled on his bedde as a
man halfe desperate. But Frenato who would not be long
absent from him, fearing least his furie woulde cause him
worke some violence on himselfe, made such meanes y• hee
got into the Chamber, at what time the Prince was thus
lamenting. Alas swéete Madame, was I borne in such an
vnhappie houre, that without desert you must indure imprisonment
for me? What satis-faction maie your Florendos
liue to make, in requitall of this iniurie? When didde
you euer merit to be so hardlie intreated for him? Beléeue
me, coulde you bee discharged so soone as I coulde wyshe it,
bolts, locks nor walles coulde holde you a thought whyle,
yet wyshing is no action, euerie thing is contrarie to me, al
helpes refuse me, and death likewise denies me: but by my
sworde (and therewith he started vp) in spight of whatsoeuer
I will deliuer you. Frenato séeing him rise in such a furie,
came and tooke him by the arme, demaunding what he
would haue. Death (quoth he) if I could, for it gréeues mee
to liue anie longer. You speake verie wiselie (quoth hée in
mockage) is all this for the imprisonment of Griana? is it
not better she should be there, then in the custodie of Tarisius?
her captiuitie you know cannot long endure, but were
she married she could neuer be recouered. Therefore let
good hope perswade you, and now send an other Messenger
with spéede to Constantinople, to know what accidents haue
happened since, and to practise the meane to speake with
Cardina, who will certifie you from Griana, what is or
may be doone in these affayres. This counsell liked well
Florendos, whereuppon he presentlie dispatched a Gentleman
of trust, who with all dilligence did execute the commaund
of his Maister, for in good time he arriued at Constantinople,
when Griana had libertie to speake with her
Gentlewomen: which when he hearde, he was not a little
glad, whereupon he searched earnestlie till he hadde founde
Cardina, to whom he deliuered his Maisters minde, as also

in what sad and heauie plight he left him, desiring her
with all spéede to certifie the Princesse thereof, and what
seruice she would commaunde him to his Maister. Cardina
knowing how glad the Princesse would bee, to heare these
tidings from Florendos, went to séeke her Sister Lerina, to
whom she imparted what you haue heard, and she well aduised
of the time and place, discoursed the same to the Princesse,
vnséene, and not suspected of old Tolomestra. How ioyfull
she was of this message, I cannot vtter, nor you conceiue,
but shee was resolued, neuer to haue any Husbande
but Florendos, and therefore to comfort him, she deuised to
write to him that he might hope as wel as she did: but wel
she knewe not how to accomplish her intent, by reason shée
wanted pen, inke and paper, and she was forbidden to haue
anie. Notwithstanding, she so well pe
                           •
                        swaded her woman
Tolomestra, as (feigning to wryte to the Emperour her
Father) she recouered the meane to execute her desire. Thē
withdrawing her selfe apart, first she wrote a Letter to the
Emperour, and afterwards one to Florendos, wherein she
desired him not to be offended, albeit things fell out not to
his lyking: for (with the fauour of Fortune) the end would
be as pleasant to him, as the beginning had béene vnhappie
to them bothe, withal, that as he desired to prolong her life,
he shoulde doo nothing to the preiudice of his owne person.
These two Letters thus written & sealed, she called Tolomestra,
and gaue her that she had written to the Emperor,
desiring her to carrie it presentlie to his Maiestie, by whose
departing, she had opportunitie to conferre with Lerina: in
bréefe she desired her to goe séeke the Esquire, that he might
returne to his Maister with the Letter she sent him, which
she did effectuallie, and the gentle Esquire made no little
hast to his Maister. Who receiuing the Letter from hys
Mistresse Griana, was not content alone to read it, but kist
and rekist it a hūdred times, saying. Ah swéete Letter, writ
ten with ye hand of ye only Princesse this day liuing: for her
sake will I kéepe thée, as ye best token a true Knight can receiue
from his Mistresse.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. IX.
                     
                        Howe the Emperour promised Tarisius, that hee shoulde
marrie Griana, whether she woulde or no: and howe
she was deliuered of a fayre Sonne, without the knowledge
of anie, but olde Tolomestra who had her in
guarde.
                     
                     
                        WHen the Emperour had receiued
the Letter, which Tolomestra
presented him from his Daughter,
albeit he found nothing therin
might prouoke him to anger,
sauing that she earnestlie desired
him to pittie her estate, béeing
innocent of anie thing was laide
to her charge: yet he shewed him
selfe more discontented then before,
sending Tolomestra backe with this aunswere. Say
to Griana, that séeing she was so aduenturous to incur my
displeasure, shee shall well knowe that I will not spare to
punish her offence: and let her assure her selfe, that I wyll
neuer looke on her while I liue, if she match not with Tarisius
to whom I haue giuen her. All this Tolomestra told
to Griana, which rather then to obey, shee desired to die,
wherefore when anie came to visite her, she woulde shewe
her selfe more pleasant in their companie then shee hadde
doone, in respecte of vnexpected heauines that secretlye touched
her, féeling herselfe so farre conceiued with Childe, as
she knewe no meanes to saue it and her honour, if it should
happen to be perceiued. One onelie helpe shee had in this
extreamitie, that béeing so weake and sicklie, the Phisitions
could not discerne her disease: but reputed her likely to die,

which she with all her hart desired, yet doo what iniurie to
her selfe she could, she had better health then she desired to
haue. In the ende, féeling her selfe so grosse and vnweldie,
she durst not leaue her bed, but kept it dailie, till her time
drewe verie néere at hand, when the Emperour (by y• earnest
importunitie of the Empresse) happened to come and
sée her, bringing with him the Prince Tarisius: who béeing
thus entred ye Towre, they founde her in such gréeuous
and daungerous estate, as for all the anger the Emperour
had against her, it mooued the teares to stande in his eyes,
which he shaddowed so well as he coulde, framing his spéeches
to her in this sort. Well Daughter, it likes you to cō
                        trarie
me, in that which concernes your honour and profit,
and without anie feare (as is thy duetie) thou hast boldlie
refused the Husband which I haue appointed thée: but (by
mine honour) I will cause thée know that thou hast displeased
me, for wilt thou or not (before I leaue thée) I wil giue
thée to him whome I haue promised. Then taking her by
the hande, and causing Tarisius to come néere, he saide. My
Sonne, in regarde of my word, which I will kéepe inuiolalablie,
I giue thée heere Griana, from henceforth account of
her as thy Wife: and holde thée, héere is the Key of the
Tower, kéepe her in thine owne custodie, and héereafter
thinke of her as thou findest occasion. Well sawe Griana
that perforce she must obey her Fathers will: wherefore
with great wisedome couering her secrete thoughts, with
extreame teares deliuered this aunswere. Alas my good
Lord and Father, I neuer thought y• your highnesse would
vse such crueltie towards me, as to enforce me take a Husband
contrarie to my liking, not (my good Lorde) but y• 
                        Tarisius
hath much better deserued: but that which toucheth
me most in opinion is, that our néere alliaunce in kindred,
is sufficient to continue the loue betwéene the King his father
and you, without anie such néedelesse séeking of newe
vniting. And moreouer good Father, his education in your
Court with my Brother Caniano and me, since our verie

yongest yéeres to this present, hath béene of such equall and
familiar condition: as it séemes to mee impossible to reuerence
him with that intire duetie, which women must and
ought vse to their Husbands. Wherfore my good Lord and
Father, I perswade my selfe (vnder your correction) that
you should support me in this iust request: the rather in respect
of my present estate, which may induce you somwhat
to conceiue: that the obsequies of my buriall is more likelie
to be solemnized, then those holie ceremonies y• shoulde
be vsed at my marriage. And with these words she powred
foorth such aboundance of teares, as the Emperour knewe
not what to answere: but ouercome with pittie withdrew
himselfe, leauing Tarisius with her, who hoping to haue
better words of her, said. Madame, I beseeche you not to offend
your selfe, for anie thing the Emperour hath saide concerning
me, for I wil not anie thing to your discontent, and
rather would I suffer all my life, then cause the least doubt
to encurre your dislike: hoping y• in time to come you wyll
take such pittie on mee, as béeing perswaded of the loue I
heare you, and the reuerend desire I haue to doo you seruice
you will graunt that with good will, which the Emperour
striues to gaine perforce, assuring you y• nothing can
be more gréeuous to mee, then the harde dealing which hetherto
hath béene vsed towards you. And to the ende you
may resolue your selfe of that I say, your Father hauing
deliuered me the Keye of your prison, and ye guarde of your
personne, I here commit bothe to your gentle pleasure. So
kissing the Keie, he laid it by her, and without expecting anie
aunswere, with great reuerence hee departed, leauing
her with Tolomestra, so rapt into a slumber or traunce, as
her Kéeper would not for pittie trouble her. The Princesse
in this silent passion, thought that shee sawe a fierce Lyon
before her, with open throate readie to deuoure her, and
néere at hand she espied an armed Knight, to whom shee laboured
for her defence, crying, that for Gods sake he would
shéeld her from the beast, but the Knight with stearne and

angrie countenaunce thus answered. I wil not defend thée,
but with my Sword will take thy life from thée. Thou hast
so much offended the heauenlie powers in disobedience to
thy Father, as I ought rather to deuide thy head from thy
shoulders, then to hinder this beaste from deuouring thee.
Thinkest thou to contrarie their diuine pleasures? Suffiseth
not the fault thou hast committed with Florendos? cō
                        tent
thée, and shroude thy shame, in regard of the fruite in
thy wombe, whose woorthinesse thou shalt knowe more of
héereafter. If y• dooest not, thou diest an euerlasting death,
from which thou canst haue no meane to defende thée. The
Knight did so affright Griana, as she promised him to accomplish
the Emperours commaundement without fayle:
whereupon the Knight and the Lyon vanished awaie, leauing
her (as she thought) by a fayre Fountaine, enuironed
with Trées and diuersitie of flowers, the swéete sent wherof
was so pleasaunt and odori
                           ••
                        erous, as made the chéereful
bloode to reuiue againe in the Princesse, and with breathing
foorth a vehement sigh, she awaked, inuocating on
the powers to pardon her transgressions, and promising to
obey the wyll of her Father, albeit she could hardlie forget
Florendos so soone. Within two or thrée daies after, the
Prince Tarisius came to visite her, to whom she shewed better
countenaunce then she had doone, and as they were deuising
togeather in amorous talk, she said. Beléeue me Syr
Tarisius, you haue vsed such honest and gentle courtesie towardes
mee, as hencefoorth I giue my selfe wholie yours:
therefore béeing sorrie for my long disobedience to my Parents
and you, tryumphe nowe Tarisius in the honor of my
loue. If these wordes pleased Tarisius, it is not to be doubted,
for ioy whereof hee went presentlie to the Emperour,
and made him acquainted with these happie tydinges: so
that (to make short) after manie promises and solemne
oathes to y• Princesse, not onelie to accept her as his spouse
and wife, but as his soueraigne Ladie and Mistresse, hee
broughte her with him to the Emperour, who hearing

the resolution of his Daughter, embraced her, and tooke
her into as good conceite as euer he did.
                     Notwithstanding, Tolomestra was cōmanded to attend
on her still, wherefore Griana knewing her time to drawe
néere, and hardlie could she conceale her fortune: after manie
difficult doubts and feares debated in her thoughts, at
last she imparted the whole to Tolomestra. The olde Gentlewoman
after manie motherlie rebukes, for the fault cō
                        mitted
as the daunger imminent, thought better yet to couer
this misaduenture, then to publish that which woulde
displease manie, and profite none: so leauing to reprehende,
when care and comfort was more required, at that instant
the Princesse was deliuered of a goodlie man childe. Thus
in the ninth Moneth, after the returne of Florendos towards
Macedon, on Mondaie at night about eight of the
clocke, the Princesse had her howre of deliueraunce: when
Tolomestra receiuing the Childe, sawe it so beautifull and
wel fourmed, as it gréeued her meruailouslie, to think what
hard fortune it brought with the birth. For the honour of
the Mother could not bee defended, but by the price of ye infants
life: wherefore hauing wrapped it in swadling clothes
which the Princesse had prepared of some valew, shee
brought it to the sorrowfull Mother, saying. Trust mee
Madame, it much displeaseth me that wee must thus loose
this louelie childe, whom I could haue estéemed happy, and
the Mother likewise, if it might liue without displeasure:
but he swéete babe must suffer the punishment for the offence,
whereof he is not anie way culpable. Alas (saide the
Princesse) what shall we doo? would God it weare deade, or
out of daunger: then taking it in her armes, and washing
his face with flooddes of teares, after manie swéete kisses,
thus said. Ah my little deintie, and must I néedes leaue
thée? must the safetie of thy life remaine in the mercie of a
straunge Womanne, who not knowing thy Parents, may
deale with thée discourteouslie? well, if thou die, thy Mother
will not be long after thée. And as shee thus mourned

ouer her infant, shee perceiued on his right chéeke a lyttle
marke in likenesse of a Crosse: which made her call her vision
to remembraunce, and the words of the Knight, that
promised good fortune to the Childe, which made her conceiue
a comfortable hope, whereupon, about his necke shee
tyed a fayre Crucifixe of golde. Nowe was the night verie
farre spent, and Tolomestra feared they shoulde be preuented,
wherfore (quoth she) Madame it is time to determine
of some thing, leaue muzing I pray you anie longer on the
Childe, and let me goe carrie it to Cardina to be borne forth
of the Court. The wéeping Mother séeing shee councelled
for the best, for her last adiewe sealed manie swéete kisses
on the face of the infant, and so in great gréefe deliuered it
to Tolomestra, who went and found Cardina, to whom she
gaue it: and she without anie tariance mounted on Horsebacke,
& not knowing what way shee tooke, rode on which
way Fortune guided her. Uerie doubtfull was she howe to
be discharged of her carriage, for she feared to let any Woman
in the neighbour Uillages haue it, least so the Princesse
might be discouered: for that it was commonlie blazed
through the Empire, that the Princesse was imprisoned
for the loue of Florendos. At length the daie began to appeare,
when she perceiued herselfe on a high Mountaine,
which was verie thicke sette with Palme and Oliue trées:
then she alighted from her Horse, and made a little bed of
sweete Hearbes, wherein she layd the Childe, hoping some
body would passe by that would take compassion on it. So
committing the tender infant to the protection of the powers,
she returned to the Cittie in very good time.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. X.
                     
                        Howe Gerrard passing where Cardina hadde left the
Childe, heard it crye, and so brought it home with him
to his wyfe to nourish it.
                     
                     
                        THe Mountaine where Cardina
had left ye Princesse yong Son,
was about a daies iourney from
Constantinople, and was commō
                        lie
called the Mount of Oliues,
where neere at hande dwelt a
welthie Farmer, who hauing
the occupation of the grounde,
grew very rich by gathering the
fruites of ye Palme, Oliue, Date
and other Trées, and like a good Husband he daily folowed
his affayres, béeing named Gerrard. His Wyfe the same
morning likewise was deliuered of a Male child, which being
deade borne, caused this good man to walke foorth into
his groundes in great heauines, for he had but one Daughter
aged three yeeres, and his Sonne woulde haue beene a
great comfort to him. In these melanchollique passions as
he went néere the Trée where Cardina had left the seelie
infant, he heard it cry: whereat he greatlie meruailing, approached
néerer, and sawe the swéete Babie pittifully mourning,
wanting the nouriture that shoulde comfort it. Hee
tooke it very tenderly in hys armes, and séeing it so sweete
and louelie, was perswaded that God had sent it him, in recompence
of hys owne that was deade borne: and so ioyfullie
went home with it to hys Wife, who was named Marcella,
and to her he beginneth in this maner. Behold swéete
Wife, in the place of your yong dead Sonne, God hath this

day sent vs an other, which I haue brought you home. Thē
recounted he to her, howe he found it on the Mountaine vnder
an Oliue Trée: and therefore (quoth hee) I pray thee
nourish it in stedde of thine owne, for a goodlier Childe did
I neuer behold. The good womā tooke it, and vnwrapping
the swadling clothes, sawe they were rich and of good valewe,
but cheefelie ye Crucifire which hung about his neck:
whereupon she iudged it of some noble house, and mooued
with pitty, thus sayd. I beléeue sweete infant, that thy Mother
is in no small greefe for the losse of thee, but séeing thy
fortune hath brought thee to me, I wyll foster thee as thou
wert mine owne Sonne. And from thence forward shee vsed
it so louinglie, as euery one thought it to bee Gerrards
owne Child: and bringing it to baptisme, because he found
it so among the Palme trees, hee caused the Childe to bee
named Palmerin, who grewe on in yeeres, both in comelie
feature and gentle behauiour. Not long after, Marcella
brought her Husbande an other Sonne, whose name was
Colmelio, and him did Palmerin loue as his own Brother
and companion, as heereafter you shall more at large vnderstand:
but heere I wyll craue leaue to pause for a whyle,
and following the intent of this Historie, you shall vnderstand
howe Griana gouerned herselfe, after she had escaped
this hard aduenture.
                     So soone as Cardina was returned to the Court, Griana
sent for her, to knowe what shee had doone with the infant:
to whom she discoursed in what sort she hadde left it,
which gréeued her as much as the weight of her offence.
Notwithstanding, considering howe happilie shee had escaped
shame and disgrace, from thence forwarde shee dissembled
her passions better, and shewed herselfe so well reclaimed,
as the Empresse reioyced much thereat, hoping nowe
to ende the matter for her Nephewe Tarisius: whereupon
one day finding her Daughter alone, shee tooke occasion to
conferre with her thus. Daughter, wil you now accomplish
that, which your Father and I haue long béene importunate

for, I pray you holde of no longer, least you driue him
into anger againe, which can no way returne you benefite.
When Griana heard her Mother speake so gentlie, & knowing
well, that (whether she would or no) it muste sorte to
that conclusion, she answered. Madame, you haue thought
good (will I nill I) that I shoulde match with your Nephewe
Tarisius, I must then by force doo that which wyllingly
I cannot, nor while I liue shall I conceiue better opinion:
yf then (Mother) hereafter our fortunes fall out so
contrary, that any misaduenture happen by thys your wilfulnes,
you neede not complaine but of your selfe, béeing the
inuenter and procurer thereof. All these spéeches of Griana
could not alter her opinion, but without regard of any danger,
she went presently to the Emperour, desiring him (séeing
Griana was recouered) to ende the marriage betwéene
her Nephew and her: whereto he gaue such suddaine consent,
as before a seauen night was finished, Tarisius and she
were maried togeather, to her great gréefe, as her countenaunce
declared, for when euery one were at their feasting
dauncing, and other delights, the woeful Princesse thought
on the great iniurie she had doone to Florendos, accounting
herselfe the most vnhappy on the earth, and to herselfe thus
sorrowed. Ah my deere freende, what wylt thou say when
thou hearest these tydinges, that I am become so false and
disloyall to thee? what excuse may pleade for me to thée? by
good reason may I for euer bee excluded from theyr companie,
who haue kept their fayth inuiolable to their freendes,
and continue in profession of their vnchangable affections,
for neuer did Woman commit such treason as this that I
haue doone: and yet (my Lord) altogeather against my wil,
as my wofull hart may giue euident witnesse, which shalbe
thine while it remaines in thys miserable bodie, which
Tarisius must nowe haue, though in iustice it be thine. And
in thys sort continued her dolorous complaints til night approched,
when she must yeeld that honor to Tarisius, which
with better wyll she could haue affoorded Florendos.
                     
                     
                        
After the feastes and triumphes of the marriage were
finished, Griana desirous to absent herselfe from her fathers
Courte, because the remembraunce of Florendos passions
was so gréeuous to her: desired Tarisius to make short his
staie, and set forward to Hungaria, whether the Emperour
her Father caused her to be so honourablie conuaied, as beséemed
the Daughter of so great a Prince. But as shee was
taking her leaue among the Ladies, the Empresse came to
her sorrowfullie wéeping, which when Griana beheld, shee
said. Madame, I am abashed to sée what heauines you shew
for the departure of your Daughter, to whom you alone
haue béene so cruell, as by your meanes shee is banished for
euer from you and you
                           •
                         Countrie: why lament you then?
séeing it is your pleasure to make her vnfortunate while
she liues? I hartelie desire the heauens to pardon you, and
that the first newes heereafter you shall heare of me, maie
be the true report of my death. This said, shee mounted on
horsebacke, and without anie semblaunce to take her leaue
of her Father: so béeing honourablie accompanied, in short
time she arriued in Hungaria with Tarisius, whose loue to
her so vehementlie increased, as he reputed himselfe y• most
fortunate Prince in Europe, hauing gained the paragon among
all Ladies. Soone after the aged King died, by which
meanes Tarisius came to the Crowne. Griana highlie esteeming
such as shee brought with her from Constantinople,
to witt, Lerina and Cardina, but especiallie Tolomestra,
to whom she verie often imparted the whole secrets of
her minde, leading so strickt and constant a life, as all the
Court did wonder at her. But the remorse of conscience,
which dailie touched her for the losse of her Sonne, caused
her to spende day and night in denout orisons, that the heauens
would forget her hainous offence.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XI.
                     
                        Howe Florendos vnderstoode by the Esquire hee sent to
Constantinople, the marriage of Griana and Tarisius:
whereat he conceiued such inward greefe, as hée
would haue died with extreame sorrow.
                     
                     
                        ALl this while continued Florendos
on the Frontiers betwéene
Constantinople and Macedon, til
at length he hearde that Griana
was released of her imprisonment,
wherof he was so glad, as
nowe he thought to deale more
surelie then he did before: whervppon
he dispatched Lyomenus
one of his Esquires towardes
her, with a Letter of earnest and intire affection, wherein
he desired to knowe, if he might compasse ye meane to come
and sée her, and hee doubted not to bring her so secretlie on
her iournete, and with so good prouision, as before they
should be againe discouered, they would be safelie arriued in
Macedon. But this hope was soone frustrate, for Lyomenus
béeing come to Constantinople, founde the marriage betwéene
Tarisius and Griana consumated: which he tooke so
displeasantlie, as without giuing the Letter, or speaking to
the Princesse, he returned hastilie againe to his Lorde and
Maister. Who béeing aduertised of his comming, sent for
him immediatlie vp into his Chamber, at whose entrance,
the Prince discerned the newes by his conuntenance, whervpon
he demaunded if Griana were sicke, or howe shee fared?
My Lord (ꝙ he) happie had she béene, if she had dyed
tenne yeeres since: for I doubt [vnlesse you arme your self

with wonderfull patience] that what is doone will highlie
endaunger your person. Why (quoth Florendos) what is
happened? Trust me my Lord (ꝙ he) the verie worst that
can be for you, Tarisius hath espoused her, and (despight of
her) the Emperour caused it to be doone. No sooner had Lyomenus
spoken the word, but Florendos cast himselfe crueli
                           •
                        e
against the grounde, saying. O my God take pittie on
my soule, for my bodie must needes suffer mis-fortune. At
which wordes he fell in a swoune, when Lyomenus thinking
him dead, ran hastilie and called Frenato: who knowing
full well ye cause of his passion, laboured by all meanes
he might to perswade him 
                           〈◊〉
                         notwithst
                           ••
                        ding all the intreaties
he vsed, in 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           •
                        nd 
                           〈…〉
                         hee coulde not
get one word of hi
                           •
                        , whereuppon hee sent for an auncient
Hermit neere at hand, whom Florendos made verie much
account of, who beeing come, & applying diuers soueraigne
Hearbes to his temples, whereof the olde Father 
                           •
                        n
                           •
                        we
well the vertue, at length Florendos recouered his sences,
and opening his eyes, beh
                           •
                        ld the olde Hermit, to whō with
verie feeble voice he said. Ah good Father praie for me, for
I féele mine ende nigh at hand. Not so my S
                           •
                        nne saide the
Hermit, what? are you so vnprouided of diuine perswasion,
as you will loose bothe bodie and soule for matter of so
meane consequence? hast thou liued so long, and yet ign
                           •
                        
                        raunt
of the inconstancie of Women, which is no other th
                           •
                        
                        ̄
thou beholdest in Griana? Knowest thou not, that as the
saile of the Shippe is subiecte to all windes, so are their affections
to continuall mutabilitie? and knowest thou not,
that what they purpose to execute irreuocable, in one moment
they are suddainlie disswaded from? My Sonne, beléeue
my counsell, and with as much pleasure learne to forget
this folly, as with extreame paine thou diddes
                           •
                         first imprint
it in thy thoughts. Ah Father (quoth Florendos) neuer
seeke in this sort to perswade me, béeing assured if you
knew how things haue past, you wold not thus in fearmes
disgrace my Ladie: for shee is mine, and Tarisius hath no

right to her, to whom the Emperour hath married her perforce,
els would she neuer haue broken her faith to me, and
while I liue Father, none but she can bee called the Wyfe
of Florendos, Sonne to the mighty King of Macedon. The
wise olde Father séeing him in choller, & beeing lothe likewise
to offende the Prince, would no longer crosse him in
spéeches, but fearing to mooue him too much, mildlie thus
spake. May be (my Sonne) she hath beene deere to you, and
I would your consent in loue had aunswered your lyking:
but thus to dispaire, and endaunger your owne life, truste
me it is not well doone, therefore I desire you to perswade
your selfe, and by your constancie condemne her lightnes,
taking patientlie what ha
                           •
                        h happened. These and such like
good words vsed the old Hermit, but Florendos would take
no sustenance, neither be remooued frō this opinion, for fiue
daies while the old man staied with him: neither would he
looke chéerefully as he was wont, but continued euermore
sad & melanchollique, nor could the King his Father cause
him like of anie Wife, but onely Griana, for whome continuallie
he neuer left mourning.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XII.
                     
                        How yong Palmerin sleeping, had a strange vision, which
prouoked him to know whose Son he was, and of the talk
which passed between him and Dyof
                              •
                           na, the daughter
of Gerrard.
                     
                     
                        PAlmerin being now come to the
age of fifteene yeeres, nourished
in the Mountaine as the Childe
of Gerrard his supposed Father,
well beloued of him and Marcella
his wife as their own Sonne:
grewe in stature so tall, comelie
and wel nurtured, as well might

he be known of noble parentage. For albeit he companyed
with Gerrards Children, who vsed him after their rusticall
capacities: yet hee desired more to passe the Mountaines
with his long Bowe, to chase the Beares and Bores thorowe
thicke and thinne, and to keepe Hawkes and dogges,
rather then Sheepe and Cattell as the other Children did.
In these sports he had such wonderfull delight, as oftentimes
he would come home verie late and sore wearied: but
one time among the rest, he came home so ouerlaboured, as
he was glad to laie him downe to rest, and he was no sooner
fallen a sléepe, but he was solicited with a meruailous visyon,
the effect whereof thus followeth. Hee thought (as hee
was pursuing a goodlie Harte thorowe a Forrest) hee met
with the fairest Ladie that euer eye behelde, who sat on the
side of a goodlie Fountaine, and called him vnto her, saying.
Be not abashed Palmerin, though I am come from the
furthest parts to finde thee in this Countrey, for I am well
assured, that ere many daies be past, thy bountie & prowesse
shall make thee renowmed through the worlde, for one of
the hardiest Knights that euer liued. Leaue therefore thys
obscure and rusticall kinde of life, and hencefoorth lift thy
mind to high occasions which are offered thee: and heereof
beléeue me, as she that loueth thee as her owne life, beeing
deuoted onelie thine at all times, as nature may witnesse
who hath marked me with thy like Charracter. Thē shewing
her arme, she saide. Beholde in this hande, and on this
side of my hart, one like and selfe same marke, as yu broughtest
on thy face from thy Mothers wombe. To which wordes
Palmerin woulde haue aunswered, but the Ladie vanished
awaie so suddainly, as he could not perceiue what was
become of her. Whereuppon raising himselfe, and meruayling
from whence this occasion should proceede, he admired
the beautie of the Ladie he sawe in his sleepe, which was
so liuelie in his remembrance, as he iudged her present before
his eyes. But perswading himselfe that such apparitions
happened by idle thoughts, or by some vapour of no effect:

made no account thereof, whereuppon, the next night
following, the same Ladie that appeared to him in the Forrest,
presented herselfe to him againe, holding in her hands
a sumptuous Crowne of golde, and thus spake. See heere
(my Lord) the honour which I holde, beeing giuen me onelie
for the loue of you. In this sort continued this vision for
foureteene or fifteene daies following, till at length the Ladie
sh
                           •
                        wed herselfe verie angrie, saying. I am ashamed
Palmerin, that you deferre so long to séeke me out, doo you
thinke the promises I haue made you are friuolous? No,
no, the time and trauaile thou takest (if thou giuest credite
to my wordes) shall make thée knowe that thou art ye Son
of a King, and not of the Countrey swayne that hath fostered
thée. From henceforth therefore expect me no more in
this Mountaine, but if my beautie haue found place in thy
har
                           •
                        , seeke then to conquere me, that thou maist be y• Lorde
and possessour of mee. Thus departed the Ladie, leauing
a desire (more then accustomed) in the hart of Palmerin,
who till that time made little reckoning of so high matters,
for the Pastorall life hee ledde with Gerrard and hys
familie, seemed the most happiest to him in all the worlde,
not hauing séene any person of greater calling then he. But
nowe newe affections so eleuated his minde, as he intended
to goe seeke her, whom in sleepe he had beheld so often: For
(quoth he) if she assure mee to discende of a royall linage, I
may well presume she knowes me bett
                           •
                        r then my Father
Gerrard, els would she not so often induce me to folow my
fortune, and the good that is prouided for me, well might
I be accounted a foole, if I wold not aduēture on so especial
an occasion, therfore happen what wil, I meane to search
thorow the whole worlde till I haue founde her, and none
but she shall euer be my Mistresse. But how can it be that
I am discended from so high a place, séeing my Father is
such a simple Countriman? hath my Mother béene forgetfull
of her reputation, that some Prince or great Lord hath
so become my Father? Well, I wyll knowe of her if I can

before I depart, and if she will not tell mee, I will searche
for her that shall assure me. Thus was Palmerin confounded
with remembraunce of his visions, as from that time
he became maruailous pensiue & solitarie: then bethought
he, howe he might knowe of his Mother Marcella the ende
of his desire, wherof Dyofena (who loued him déerely) partlie
aduertised him.
                     You haue heard heertofore, how when Gerrard founde
Palmerin among the Oliue Trées, he had a daughter three
yeeres olde, named Dyofena, indifferent fayre, who as shee
increased in yéeres, became so amorous of her supposed brother,
that hardly she could dissemble her affection: notwithstanding,
shame and regard locked vppe her lippes, that she
durst not speake what she gladlie would, but séeing Palmerin
in like sadnes as she was, she immagined that one sicknes
had strooken them both, wherfore casting manie doubts
as she laie in her bed, in the same Chamber her Parents
did, she heard them enter into this discourse. Haue you not
séene Palmerin (quoth he) howe heauie and sadde hee hath
béene a long time? Yea truelie haue I (ꝙ shee) it may bee
that some haue tolde him hee is not your Sonne: so falling
out of one matter into an other, Dyofena hearde them
report the manner how they found him, which she desirous
to let Palmerin vnderstande, arose earlie the next morning,
and comming to Palmerin, thus conferred with him. Brother,
if you knew so much as I doo, peraduenture you wold
be not a little abashed. Why good Sister (quoth he) I pray
you let me vnderstand the matter. In sooth (quoth shée) I
euer thought till this time, that you had béene mine owne
naturall Brother, but by chaunce hearing some talke betwéene
my Father and Mother this last night, I am no other
then your fréende, and shee y• loues you dearelie: which
I haue euermore hetherto feared to let you knowe, doubting
the nerenes of our consanguinitie, which I nowe perceiue
cannot hinder our marriage, if you will request mee
of my Father, who I am sure will not denie you. And so she

rehearsed the manner of his finding, which so well lyked
Palmerin, as he gaue the more credite to the visions he
had séene, neuerthelesse, he thus dallied with Dyofena. It
may bee Sister, you misunderstoode our Parents, my selfe
will deniaund the trueth of our Mother, if she assure me as
you haue doone, then will I talke with them concerning our
marriage. So shall you doo well (said Dyofena) to bee thorowlie
assured, yet néede you not report mee to haue informed
you, least thereby you bring mee into my Parents displeasure.
Palmerin thus leauing Dyofena, chanced to find
his Mother Marcella alone, to whom he said. Mother, I beséeche
you graunt me one request that I shall demaunde of
you. That will I my Sonne (quoth she) if it be in my power
to doo. Understand then good Mother (quoth he) that I
haue oftentimes dreamed how I am not your Son, so that
I knowe not what to saie, vnlesse you please to assure mee
better. When Marcella heard these wordes, she was strooken
in a studie: but Palmerin was still so importunate, as
at last she thus answered. In good faith (faire Freende) I
neuer kn
                           •
                        w thine owne naturall Parents, yet haue I looued
thee as if thou wert mine owne Sonne: and so what
words Dyofena had before reported, Marcella confirmed,
taking him with her into her Chamber, where she shewed
him the costlie swadling clothes that he was founde in, and
the Crucifire likewise that hung about his necke, which he
intreated her to bestow on him, to the ende (quoth he) that
for your sake I may kéepe it while I liue. Marcella woulde
not denie his request, but put it about his necke herselfe.
From which time forwarde, Palmerin shewed himselfe of
more cheereful disposition, deuising how he might compasse
the meane to goe seeke his fortune, wherto his sundry apparitions
had so often incited him. And as none can shunne
what is ordeined him by diuine prouidence, not manye
daies after, as he was walking alone vppon the Mountain,
he heard a voice cry verie pittifullie for helpe and succour:
whereuppon Palmerin ranne that waie which hee hearde

the voice, where hee behelde a Lyon gréedilie deuouring a
Horse, and Palmerin hauing no weapon to defend himselfe
withall but a staffe, verie hardilie sette vpon the beast, gyuing
him such a stroake betwéene the eyes, as he fell down
dead to the grounde, then comming to him hee hearde complaine,
saide: I haue my Freende in some parte reuenged
thy wrong. Alas Sir (ꝙ he) had you not béene, my life had
perished, for as I trauailed on my iourney, this Lion furiouslie
sette vpon me to deuoure mee: which the rest of my
companie perceiuing, tooke thēselues to flight, leauing mée
as you founde mee. The best is (said Palmerin) that you
haue escaped with life: and if you please to goe with mee
not far hence, where I haue béene nourished, you shall haue
the best entertainment that I can make you. My Freende
(quoth the Straunger) you haue alreadie doone so much for
me, as if you will goe with me into the Countrey where I
dwell, I haue wherewithall to reward your trauaile richlie.
Is it farre hence Sir, said Palmerin? In the Cittie of
Hermida (ꝙ he) in the Realme of Macedon I dwel, from
whence I parted a moneth since wt my merchandise, which
I haue left at Constantinople: frō whence returning homeward,
this vnlooked for mis-fortune befeil mee, which had
made an ende of me without your assistance. As they were
thus conferring togeather, one of the Strangers seruaunts
came to looke him, and finding him so happilie escaped, was
not a little ioyfull, reporting that he had left his companiōs
not farre off. Returne then said his Maister, and wil them
come to me to the next Uillage, where I meane to haue my
wounds dressed, which the seruaunt performed immediatlie,
and all this while stoode Palmerin in debating with
himselfe if he should thus leaue his Father Gerrard or not:
at length [after manie opinions] fearing if hee returned
home againe not to finde the like opportunitie, concluded
to depart with the Stranger. So was hee sette on a verie
good Palfray, & setting forwards to Macedon, y• night they
were entertained in a verie good lodging, where the stranger

caused his woundes to be searched, reporting to eueri
                           •
                        
one, howe by the ayde of Palmerin his life was preserued,
for which cause he accounted of him as of his owne Sonne.
All this while Gerrard and his Wife little thought of this
mishappe, but expected Palmerins returne till darke night,
and séeing he came not as he was wont: both he & his wife
the next daie searched the Mountaines, but they could not
finde him, which made Gerrard to question in himself, what
euil he had offered him, that should make him thus depart.
Nowe durst not his Wife Marcella tell him, the talke betwéene
her and Palmerin, but accompanied her Husband in
sorrow for their losse: especially Dyofena and her Brother
Colmelio were most sory, Dyofena for losse, as she thought,
of her Husband, and Colmelio for the companie of his supposed
Brother, whose absence went so neere his hart, as
he intended neuer to giue ouer searche till he hadde founde
him.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XIII.
                     
                        How Palmerin went with this Merchant named Estebon
to the Cittie of Hermida, who afterwarde gaue
him Horse and Armour to be made Knight.
                     
                     
                        
                           EStebon the Merchant thus conducting
Palmerin on his way, at
length arriued at the Cittie of
Hermida, where he was louingly
welcomed home by his Wife,
both yong and beautifull as anye
in that Countrey, to whom he
reported his daungerous assault
by ye Lyon, and without Palmerins
help he had béene deuoured:

but (quoth hee) good fortune sent him at the verie instant
that slewe him, for which I shal be beholding to him while
I haue a day to liue, therefore good Wife entertaine him
in the best sort you can deuise, for he hath well deserued it.
This spéeche had the Merchant with his fayre Wife, who
embracing Palmerin, said: That nature had omitted nothing
in her workmanship, making him so amiable and ful
of hardines. Palmerin séeing himselfe so fauoured of so beautifull
a woman, hauing before spent his time among Shéep
heards, Swineheards and loutish Swaines of y• Country,
with modestie began to blushe, and was so well stored with
ciuilitie to make her this answere. I desire Mistresse that

                           〈◊〉
                         behauiour may bee such, as may continue my Maisters
good liking and yours towards me. So from that time hee
followed Merchandise, and profited so well in the course of
traffique, as Estebon committed all his affaires to Palmerins trust: who rather gaue his mind to martiall exercises,
and followed Knightlie dispositions so much, as verie
nature declared the noblenes of his minde, for he delighted
to mannage great Horses, to fight at al maner of weapons,
to sée daungerous Combats, to frequent the assemblye of
Knights, to talke of Armes and honourable exployts, and in
bréefe, to exercise all the braueries of a noble Courtier.
                     Whereat Estebon meruailed so much, as faling in talke
with him, he said. Me thinkes it is strange Palmerin, that
thou béeing the Sonne of a drudge, and nourished on the
Mountaine of Oliues (as thy selfe hath often tolde me) disdaynest
the life of a Merchant, frequenting the company of
hardie Knights, as though thou shouldest take Launce and
shéelde to enter the Combat. Sir (said Palmerin) I know
not if my Father be such as I haue told you, but I wot wel
my heart so serues me, as I can thinke of nothing but actions
of honour and knighthoode. The Merchant was contented
to heare Palmerin in these terarmes, because he perceiued
that his Wife fauoured him greatlie, wherat he became
a little iealous, and gladly would remooue the occasion,

wherfore he said. Séeing it is so Palmerin, that thou hast
no mind to follow my affaires, I am well contented y• shalt
exercise chiualrie, béeing the thing thou naturallie affectest,
and whereby thou mayst attaine to credite & account. For
mine owne part, because I will not hinder so good forwardnesse,
thou shalt haue of me money, Horse and Armour, that
thou mayst goe to Macedon to the King, where if thou request
it of the Prince Florendos his Sonne, he will not refuse
to giue thée thy order. Palmerin returned him verie
hartie thanks, and hauing prouided al things expedient for
his iourney: tooke his leaue of the Marchant Estebon and
his wyfe, hoping to speede well in his aduenturous enterprise.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XIIII.
                     
                        How Palmerin arriued at the Court of Macedon, hoping
to receiue the order of knighthood at the hande of the
Prince Florendos, Sonne to the aged King Primaleon,
by the fauoure of the Ladie Arismena.
                     
                     
                        SUch spéede made Palmerin beeing
departed frō the Marchant,
as on the fourth day following,
riding by a Riuers side, he found
a Dwarffe sitting heauilie wéeping,
of whom he demaunded the
cause of his mourning. Alas Syr
(saide the Dwarffe) as I was riding
by the commaundement of
my Maister, to a Lady whom he
déerelie loueth, a Knight euen nowe tooke my Horse from
me, and very villainously offered me outrage, which yet
dooth not so much greeue mee, as (beeing thus on foote) I

know not howe to get ouer this Riuer. Mount vp behinde
me (said Palmerin) and at the first Towne wee come to, I
will prouide thée of another Horse. Then mounted the
Dwarffe vp behinde him, and hauing past the Riuer, desired
to know of Palmerin whether he trauailed: for (quoth
he) I neuer sawe man whom I had greater desire to serue,
then you. Dwarffe (answered Palmerin) I nowe iourneie
towarde the Court of Macedon to the King, where I hope
to find the Prince Florendos, who is accounted one of the
woorthiest Knights in the world, and by his hande I desire
to be knighted if I may. And after you haue receiued your
order (said the Dwarffe) I hope you will not be so vnwise
to hazard the aduenture, wherein so manie haue failed and
lost their liues. What aduenture is that quoth Palmerin?
To goe to the Mountaine A
                              •
                           tifaeria (said the Dwarffe) in
hope to kill the Serpent, which hath béene the death of so
manie valiant Knights. And what occasion said Palmerin,
mooued them to fight with the Serpent? That will I tell
you, answered the Dwarffe. The King Primaleon, father
to the Prince Florendos whom you séeke, thrée yéeres since
fell into a verie strange disease, for which no remedie can
yet be found, notwithstanding the dilligent endeuours of
the Quéene, and Ladie Arismena her Daughter, one of the
fairest and most vertuous Princesses that euer was hearde
of: who séeing her Father in such daungerous estate, hath
often assembled the best Phisitions in the whole worlde,
who haue practised al possible means to recouer his health,
yet hither to all hath béene to no purpose. Whereupon she
sent to an auncient Knight, the most skilfullest in the arte of
Nigromancie this daie liuing, who returned this answere:
that he should neuer bee healed, except hee bee first washed
with the water of a Fountaine, which standeth on the top
of the Mountaine Artifaeria, whether fourtimes a yere resort
three Sisters, Magitians of the Isle Carderia, to gather
vertuous Hearbes which there they wash, and wherof
they frame all their enchantments. This place is so defended

by the Monster wherof I tolde you, that no man as
yet durst approche it. Which newes when the Princesse
Arismena vnderstood, hoping by strength of men to recouer
the water and vanquish the Beast, leauied a great number
of Souldiours well appointed, who were no sooner entered
the Mountaine, but the Serpent came furiouslie foorth of
his Den, throwing fire and smoake out of his mouth, and
beating his winges togeather with such terror, as the very
hardiest durst passe no further, but were all glad to take
themselues to flight, yet coulde they not depart with such
expedition, but the greater part of them paid their liues for
their bolde attempt, the Mountaine was so stored with Lions,
Beares, Wolues, Harts, Tygres, Ounces, and other
wild rauenous Beastes that deuoured them. Nowe at
length manie Knights haue tryed themselues in this aduenture,
thinking by their Prowesse to performe more thē the
other: but all the worse, for not one of them returned backe
againe aliue. And why goes not the Prince Florendos him
selfe, said Palmerin, that is estéemed y• most valiant Knight
thorow all Greece? Alas Sir, said the Dwarffe, some other
matter hath so drowned his minde in mellancholique, as
he liues like one that dispiseth himselfe. While ye Dwarffe
continued his discourse, the desire of honour and renowne
did so liuelie touche the spirit of Palmerin, as he said to him
selfe. It may be that Arismena was the Lady, which in
my sléeping thoughts visited mee so often, if the Destinies
haue vowed her mine, why should I feare the Serpent, or
all the other Beastes wherewith this Dwarffe doth so terrifie
me? Haue not I slaine a Lyon alreadie with a staffe?
Tush the more daunger is in the place, the more honor depends
vpon the victory. If I leaue my life there, I am not
the first, if I returne with conquest, I shall be beyonde anie
yet in fortune: therefore fall out as it will, no perrill shall
dismaie me from giuing the aduenture, whereupon he sayd
to the Dwarffe. But tell me my Freende, hee that bringes
the water from the Mountaine to the King, what aduauntage

shall he deserue? My Lord, (quoth hee) it hath beene
manie times published, that his rewarde shall be the best
Cittie in all this Relame. Sée then Dwarffe said Palmerin,
one man more will hazarde his life in this enterprise,
albeit I should receiue but thanks for my frauaile, wylt
thou goe with me? That will I (aunswered the Dwarffe)
if you please, and neuer will I forsake you while breath is
in my bodie. Thus set they on till they came to the great
Cittie of Macedon, at what time Florendos was gone to
the Temple in such heauines, as he séemed a man of another
world, béeing accompanied with manie Knights, and
his faire Sister the Ladie Arismena, to whom Palmerin
boldlie addressed himselfe: and as though hee had beene a
Courtier all his life time, with séemelie modestie he set his
knée to the grounde before her, and thus began. Madame, I
humbly 
                           •
                        eséeche you to vouchsafe mee one request, which
well you may not denie me, in that I am a Straunger, as
also in respect of the desire I haue to doo you seruice. And
trust me Sir (quoth shée) you shall not bee refused, what is
it you woulde haue me doo for you? That at your request
(said Palmerin) the Prince Florendos your Brother, wyll
giue me my Knighthoode. Arismena seeing Palmerin so amiable
and well disposed of bodie, meruailed of whence hee
was, and said. In good sooth Sir, such matter nothing appertaineth
vnto me, for (as I iudge) such a motion shoulde
procéede from your selfe: yet taking him by the hande, shee
presented him to her Brother, saying. I pray you my Lord
graunt to this yonge Gentleman as yet not knighted, the
thing he hath desired mee to demaunde. Florendos hauing
not as yet behelde him, looked vppon him, when an excéeding
passiō, presenting ye Princesse Griana to his thoughts,
suddainlie touched him, and béeing rapt into more conceite
of ioy then he had béene accustomed, demaunded of Palmerin
if he would be made Knight. With right good wyl my
Lorde quoth he, if it shall like you to doo me so much honor,
for aboue all thinges els it is my onelie desire. My freende,

said Florendos, it is necessarie I should first know, whether
you be noble borne or no. My Lord, quoth Palmerin, as yet
I neuer knewe my Father or Mother, nor any of my kindred:
notwithstanding, mine owne hart makes mee iudge
no lesse of my selfe, and more gladlie would I die, then doo
anie thing that were not vertuous, and well woorthie the
name of a Gentleman. And trust me, said Florendos, I am
of the same opinion: this night therefore you must obserue
the religious watch as is accustomed, and to morrowe will
I giue you your order, and put the spurre on your héele my
selfe. Palmerin on his knée humblie kissed the Princes
hand, and continuing in talke togeather, Florendos tooke a
great delight in beholding him, so that hee demaunded his
name and Countrey. My Lord, quoth he, they which found
me amongst the Palme Trées, on y• Mountaine of Oliues,
not farre from Constantinople, haue giuen me the name of
Palmerin. By mine honour said Florendos, I ought wel to
know the Cittie whereof you speake, as the place wherein
my déerest affections tooke their first life, and not long since,
are bequeathed to death, awaiting nowe but the howre to
be discharged of the burden.
                     Thus hauing in his companie his vnknowne Sonne,
begotten by him on the Princesse Griana, knew little that
his loue had sorted to such effect: neuerthelesse, nature prouoked
him to like so well of Palmerin, as none in y• Courte
contented him more then he. And longer woulde they haue
continued their talke, but that faire Arismena interrupted
them, asking Palmerin if he woulde discharge her of the request
he demaunded. That doo I Madame (quoth hee) and
in requitall thereof, dedicate the whole circuit of my life to
your gracious seruice: and to begin my deuoire on your be
halfe, so soone as I haue receiued my Knighthoode, I wyll
take my iourney towards the Serpent, in hope to bring the
water that must recouer the King your Fathers health. Alas
good Sir, said she, God forbidde that you should fall in
such daunger by my meanes. I know well aunswered Palmerin,
                        
that I can die but once, and if it be nowe, then am I
dispatched, and if I escape, I shall doo that whereof many other
haue failed, and this is my resolution faire Madame.
Beléeue me, said Florendos, me thinkes you are as yet too
yong, to finish an action wherein consists so great daunger,
I praie you therfore referre it vnto such, as haue had more
experience in Armes then as yet you haue. My Lorde, saide
Palmerin, in other matters I shall obey when you cōmand,
but this I must desire you not to disswade me from. Well
then, quoth Florendos, séeing you will néedes haue it so, I
am content, you shall in the meane while kéepe mee companie:
as for Sworde and Armour, trouble not you selfe to
prouide ame, because my selfe will furnish you sufficientlie.
Thus all daie Florendos accompanied Palmerin, demaunding
of him what things he had séene in Constantinople, and
falling from one discourse to another, he asked him what Esquire
he had to attēd on him. Thē he shewed his Dwarffe
called Vrbanillo, such a deformed and euill fauoured felow,
as euerie one that saw him laughed hartilie, whereuppon
Palmerin said to Florendos. By my faith my Lorde, as vnséemelie
as he is, I thinke so well of him, as I should be displeased
if he were anie waie iniuried. Assure your selfe, said
Florendos, that he will stand you in great stedde when you
haue no néede of him, and looke y• you leaue nothing behind
you, that you néede to fight against the Serpent, and trust
it in his discretion to bring after you. When Vrbanillo perceiued
euerie one test so with him, he was halfe angrie, and
in some choller thus said to the Prince. I can no waie, my
Lord, better my shape or proportion, but if I liue, this little
deformed bodie of mine shall giue you to vnderstande, that
I beare so good a minde, as where my Maister leaues his
life, I meane to finish mine, and though in meane while I
can doo him no other seruice, he shalbe assured of my trueth
and loyaltie. But not offended (Owarffe my good freende)
saide Florendos, for I thinke well of thée and of thy behauiour:
And so because the Tables were couered for Supper,

they brake of talke, Palmerin preparing himself to his
watchfull deuoire in the Chappell.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XV.
                     
                        Howe Florendos gaue to Palmerin the Armour and
Sword of Gamezio, whom hee slewe before Constantinople,
and afterwarde Knighted him: and howe a
Damosell came to the Court, who presented him with
a Helmet and a rich Sheelde.
                     
                     
                        THe time béeing come, that Palmerin
should performe his deuonte
watch in the Chappel, before
hee receiued his Knighthoode,
according to the auncient
custome: Florendos gaue commaundement
that the Armour
of Gamezio should bee brought
him, which the Emperour had
giuen him, after his conquest of
the Soldan of Babilons army on the Sea, as you haue heard
before, and these he shewed to Palmerin, saying. My fréend,
this Armour sometimes belonged to the best Knight of his
time, whom (neuerthelesse) I conquered, béeing then more
pleasant, ioyfull, and at better content, then I shalbe while
I haue a daie to liue. And because I haue some speciall opinion
of your prowesse, and that these ornaments of defence
you will better imploy, then anie other on whom I shal bestowe
them: I praie you henceforth to weare them for my
sake. My Lorde, saide Palmerin, my desire is, that my seruice
towardes your honour, maie be witnessed in my good
imploying of this gentle gift. Then Frenato and diuers other

Knights did helpe to arme him, and afterward accompanied
him to the Chappell, where all that night hee spent
in sollemne orisons, that God would endue him wt strength
to vanquish the Serpent, that so the King might againe receiue
his health.
                     At the breake of daie, as Florendos went to the Chappell
to giue him his order, there entred among them on the
suddaine a comelie Damosell, bearing a Helmet & a Shéeld
of Azier, the goodliest and most beautifull that euer was
séene, vpon the Shéelde béeing portraied a Ladies arme,
hauing her hande fast closed togeather: the Damosell comming
before the Prince Florendos, began thus. I pray you
my Lord to pause a while, till I haue conferred a little with
Palmerin. Florendos was greatlie amazed at this accident,
in that he had neuer séene the Damosell before: notwithstanding
he returned this answere. Faire Damosell & my
Fréende, good leaue haue you to saie what you please. Then
comming to Palmerin, and falling on her knées before him,
she saide. Sir Palmerin, a Knight that hath authoritie to
commaund me, and whom as yet you doo not knowe, hath
sent you by me this Helment and Shéelde, wherein you shall
find ye verie secretes of your hart. And if you desire to know
whence this honour procéedeth, it commeth from him who
hath prooued the effect héereof, and that knowes more of
you néerest affairest then you doo your selfe, albeit as yet
he hath neuer séene you. Damosell, saide Palmerin, where
maie I finde the learned man that hath thus honored mee,
whō I may remunerate with my chéefest endeuours heerafter?
You cannot as yet know him, saide the Damosell. I
praie you faire Uirgin, quoth Palmerin, that you will aunswere
on my behalfe, howe in anie place I shall come héereafter,
I remaine readie to doo what likes him to cōmaunde
me. It suffiseth (quoth she) looke that héereafter you remē
                        ber
your promise: then comming to the Prince Florendos,
she said. My Lorde, the same Man from whom I haue
saluted Palmerin, gaue me in charge to saie to you, that you

should not feare or doubt to dubbe him Knight: but to perswade
your selfe, that both by Father and Mother hee is so
noble as he dooth well deserue it, and him héereafter you
will loue beyond all other, for by him you shall enioy the
thing you most estéeme and desire. Thus hauing no longer
licence to staie with you, I humbly desire you to excuse my
departure. Swéete Maide, saide Florendos, may your wordes
sort to so good end, as you haue promised. So departed
the Damosell, leauing Palmerin on his knée before the
Prince, who taking the Sworde that sometimes belonged
to Gamezio, Knighted him, saying: And maist thou prooue
as famous and fortunate, as my hope perswades mee thou
will. Then was he honourablie conueyed to the Pallace,
where the faire Arismena vnarmed him, and couered him
with a rich Mantle of white Satten, imbroydered all ouer
with sumptuous flowers of Gold: beside, no one in y• troupe
but highlie reuerenced him, for the woorthie report y• Damosell
made of him. And albeit the Princesse Arismena
disswaded him so well as she could, that he should not endā
                        ger
himselfe against the Serpent, because by him her Brother
should ouercome his melancholly, and fearing his losse
without hope of recouerie: yet néedes would he be gone the
same daie, but that her importunate intreatie perswaded
him to staie eight daies longer. Palmerin béeing soone after
alone by himselfe, he remembred the wordes of the Damosell,
who promised him to finde the secrets of his hart in his
Shéelde: whereupon he well aduised himselfe, and sawe
that the hand portraied in the Shéelde, had the same marke
which the Ladie had, that appeared to him in his sléepe,
whereat not a little maruailing, he said within himselfe. It
must néedes be without all doubt, that he which sent mee
this present, knoweth full wel ye scope of my fortune, for I
am well assured, that the Ladie which spake to mee in my
sléepe, when I abode in the house of my Father Gerrarde,
shewed me her hand, with the selfe same marke I sée heere
pictured: by which I may perswade my selfe, that she will

not cease to follow and finde me out, vntill such time as I
maie speake with her. Whereuppon he founde himselfe so
suddainlie inueigled with her loue, as he thus complained.
Ah Palmerin, well maist thou sée that long thou canst not
resist this impression, but whence should this humour proséede?
to loue her thou neuer sawest, nor knowest where is
her abiding? If it fall out that tho diest in thy pursuite,
these passions shall so haue a small ende, and I gaine y• greatest
felicitie that I can desire. By this time had he spent
the eyght daies, which he promised Arismena for Florendos
companie, when as well to begin the searche of her hee
loued so well, as to ende the aduenture he intended of the
Serpent: he prepared to depart, prouiding himselfe a great
huge Mace of yron, which did him good seruice, as you shall
reade héereafter.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XVI.
                     
                        Howe Palmerin fought with the horrible Serpent on the
Mountaine Artaeferia, and slewe him, bringing the
glasse filled with the water of the Fountaine, whereby
King Primaleon of Macedon recouered his health.
                     
                     
                        
                           EIght daies had Palmerin
stayed with Florendos,
and in companye of the fayre
Princesse Arismena, who
fearing that hee woulde neuer
returne from the Mountaine
Artifaeria, was very pensiue
and sad: and oftentimes she
intreated him, not to hazard himselfe
against those cruell, rauenous and supernaturall Monsters,

but rather to witnesse his valour against Knights of
account like himselfe, but all her spéeches profited not, for
he was resolute to depart. I shall yet desire you, sayde the
Princesse, that for my sake you will take with you thrée Esquires
which I will giue you, who may lend you succour
if anie inconuenience should befall you. Then she called the
Esquires, and presented them vnto him, with ye glasse that
he should bring the water in from the Fountaine, if Fortune
stoode with him to finish the aduenture. Palmerin
moū
                        ting
on horsebacke, and Florendos accompanying him halfe
a daies iourney on ye way, left him on his iourney towardes
the Mountaine Artifaeria, where he arriued on the last daie
of April. Thē he commanded the Esquires & his Dwarffe
Vrbanillo, to expect his returne at the foote of the Mountain,
for he would suffer none of thē to goe vp with him: so
ascended he the Hyll by a little trackt footepath, with hys
yron Mace on his necke, and the Glasse for the water fastened
at his gyrdle. Hauing thus trauailed vppe till about
midday, he founde the passage so thicke set with Trées and
brakes, as he was constrained to alight frō his Horse, whō
he vnbrideled and left there féeding: and much further had
he not gone, but the night ouertooke him, yet did ye Moone
shine bright and cléere, which made him still trauaile onwarde,
till he beheld the Rocke where the water was, and
the Serpents Den, who was come somewhat lower to recreate
himselfe among the swéete Hearbes, where he hadde
closelie couched himselfe. But when he heard Palmerin cō
                        ming,
he began to swell, and writhe his taile togeather verie
strangely: all which could not dismay this aduenturous
Knight, but commending himselfe to God, sette downe his

                           〈◊〉
                        , and with his Mace marched stoutlie against his enemie,
saying. Why Palmerin? didst thou so often request
of Florendos & the Princesse his Sister, to try thy strength
against thys deuill, and now thou art come in sight of hym
wylt thou faint? Dooth it not beséeme thée better to die
with honour, then to liue with shame? let the one encourage

thée to follow thy enterprise, and the other kill thee
when thou offerest to retire. And with these wordes he aduaunced
him to the Serpent, and the Serpent fiercelye began
to assaile him, and with his taile had smote him down,
but that hee nimblie preuented the stroke, deliuering the
Serpent so sore a blowe on ye head with his Mace, as made
him reele and stagger, and cry so terribly, as the whole
Mountaine resounded with a meruailous Eccho, and to reuengo
himselfe, with his tallants he got hold on Palmerins
Armour, which hee rent violentlie in two or thrée places,
wounding his bodie verie daungerouslie. When Palmerin
perceiued in what hard plight he was, he tooke hart a fresh,
and watching his aduauntage, strooke the Serpent wyth
his Mace so stronglie on the necke, as he fell to the grounde
in a manner dead, and Palmerin plied him with so manie
strokes one after another, as he left him not while any life
was in him. After this happy victory, for which deuous
                           •
                        ie he
praised God, binding vppe his woundes so well as he could,
with extreame wearines he laid him downe and slept, whē
he séemed to sée the thrée Sisters whereof wee haue spoken
before, who were the Daughters to a Knight, Lord of the
Isle Carderia, to whom none might be cōpared for knowledge
in the Magicall sciences, and so well he had instructed
his Daughters, as after his death, they alone excelled in
this Arte, so that the men of that Countrey commonlie called
them the Goddesses of destinie, because they coulde diuine
before what should follow after. And if any one didde
happen to iniurie them, they would reuenge themselues by
their enchauntments, so that they were greatlie feared and
helde in reuerence. They vsed diuers times this Mountaine
Artifaeria as well to gather Hearbes for theyr necessarie
vse, as also for the Water of the Fountayne,
for the defence whereof they had there left this Serpent,
who was in time growne so huge and monstrous, as he rather
séemed a deuill then a natural Beast. Notwithstanding,
howe hidious soeuer he was, Palmerin as you haue

hearde ouercame and slewe him, finding the thrée Sisters
in the manner as I haue tolde you: who were not greatlie
discontented with him, but estéemed so well of him, as in
his sléepe the eldest of them thus spake to him. Beléeue me
Palmerin, thy beginning is so honourable, as great pittie it
were to let thée die héere, chéefelie for the want y
                           •
                        e all Greece
shal haue of thée in time to come, the whole Empire wherof
is predestinated thine: and therefore will I heale the
woundes thou hast at this time receiued. I will then doo
somewhat more for him, said the seconde Sister, I will enchaūt
him so wel for his auaile, as héerafter no cōiuratiō or
witchcraft shall haue anie power to hurt him. Truelie said
the third Sister, for my part, I will giue him such fortune,
as the first time he shall sée his Ladie Polinarda, (who so
manie times saluted him in his Dreames) shee shall looue
him so intirelie: as no dolor or forment shall make her forget
while shee liues, the happines shee shall receiue by his
occasions. Then the eldest Sister tooke a Golden Cup, and
filled it with the water of the Fountaine, and wringing the
iuyce of certaine Hearbes into it, washed therewith Palmerins
woundes, so that they were immediatlie healed.
                     Now felt he verie wel all they did, but his slumber tooke
awaie the libertie of his spéeche, vntill such time as they
were departed, but first the eldest of them thus spake. Since
this Knight hath had so good a beginning, and y• his strength
hath depriued our garde of our Fountaine, I praie you let
vs suffer him to haue his Glasse full of our Water, that by
his meanes the King of Macedon may be healed, which a
number of other Knights haue failed of héeretofore. Wherto
they all consented, and so it came to passe: then gathering
their Hearbes as they were wont, and washing them,
they tooke their waie to the Isle Card
                              •
                           ria.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XVII.
                     
                        Howe Palmerin discended from the Mountaine, wyth
his Glasse full of the water of the enchaūted Fountaine,
and how ioyfull Vrbanillo & the other Esquires were,
seeing their Maister returne with so good fortune.
                     
                     
                        WHen these thrée Sisters were
departed, Palmerin awaked and
arose, not a little meruailing at
that he had heard and séene: but
most of al when he felt his woū
                        des
healed, & sawe his glasse ful
of the water he came for, so reudering
thankes to heauen for his
good successe, hee went vp higher
on the Mountain, thinking to sée
the Fountaine, but he could not, wherfore without any longer
staie he discended downe againe, thus saying to himself.
How happie maie I count my selfe, to finde so good fortune
in this desolate Mountaine? for now I know her name that
is destenied to be mine, henceforth shal she not conceale her
selfe from me, may I find the place where she abideth: and
this I vowe by him that made mee, that I will not cease to
séeke her through the world, til I heare some tidings of her:
and were it not for the promise I haue made the Princesse
Arismena, to bring her this water to recouer the King her
Father, this daie woulde I begin my religious enterprise,
in hope [if the Ladies spake trueth y• appeared to me in my
sleepe] héereafter to be one of the happiest Knights in the
world. So walked he on til he came where he left his horse,
wheron hee mounted, and came to Vrbanillo and his other
Esquires, who hauing heard the cry of the Serpent, when

                        Palmerin gaue him his first stroke, perswaded themselues
that their Maister was slaine: but when they saw him cō
                        ming,
Vrbanillo aboue all the rest was most ioyfull, & ran
apace to meete him, desiring to know how he had sped. Uerie
wel I thank God, said Palme
                              •
                           in, who gaue me strength
to kill the Monster, and to bring sufficient of the Water I
hope, to winne the King Primaleon his health. Then haue
I the thing I most desire, said Vrbanillo, albeit I greatlie
feared that you had accompanied all the other Knights in
death, that aduentured before you, and coulde not spéede so
well. So mounted they all on horsebacke, and made so good
iourneies as they arriued at Macedon: whereof Florendos
and faire Arismena were not a little ioyfull, especially whē
they were assured, that Palmerin had brought with him
the Kings health, by meanes wherof it is not to be demanded,
if he were highlie honoured and receiued at the Court.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XVIII.
                     
                        How foure Knights would haue taken the Glasse of fatall
water from Vrbanillo, before Palmerin arriued 
                              〈◊〉
                           
Macedon, and of the Combat betweene them.
                     
                     
                        YOu must heere vnderstande,
that the same day, Palmerin, in
companie of his Esquires, departed
from the Mountaine, hée
sent Vrbanillo the Dwarffe before
towardes Macedon, with
the Glasse of water, when it so
fortuned y• foure Knights met
 wt him, one of thē saluting him
in these hard tearmes. Deformed
villaine, giue me that Glasse, or I shall take thy head

from thy shoulders. Palmerin, who came not farre behind,
séeing the Knights offer iniurie to his Dwarffe, gaue spurs
to his Horse, and thus answered. Howe now Gentlemen?
are you not ashamed in my presence to abuse my seruant?
trust me I neither can nor wil so put it vp: and so couching
his Launce, he encounted one of them so roughlie, as he fel
from his Horse deade to the ground. When the other three
sawe their companopm thus foyled, they altogeather set vpon
Palmerin: but their fortune fel out so ill, as two of them
were soone vanquished, and the third tooke himself to flight
verie hardlie escaping. Palmerin made no account of folowing
him, but leauing them rode on his way, his Dwarffe
thus comming to him. Beléeue me my Lord (quoth he) hee
is to be accounted ouer foolish hardie, that at the weapons
point séekes to offende you: I dare boldlie affirme my wordes,
by euidence of the fortune of these foure Knightes. In
that, said Palmerin, thou maist be deceiued, but God is alwaies
fréende to iustice and equitie, and enemie to such as
goe against them. But because you shall know the occasion
why these foure Knights would haue taken the glass from
Vrbanillo, you must note that they were all Sonnes to a
great Lorde of a Castell, which was a daies iourneie off the
Mountaine Artifaeria, who hauing intelligence by Shéepe-heards
and other pesants, what good fortune had befallen
Palmerin, to kill the Serpent, and bring away the fatall
water, repined greatlie thereat: for the Lorde did highlie
mallice the King of Macedon, because he had enforced him
to surrender a Manour, which he against all right, held frō
one of his Sisters, and for this cause, knowing that by the
vertue of that water the King shold recouer his health, hée
sent his foure Sonnes to take it from Palmerin, whose successe
in their attempt fell out as you haue heard. Now Palmerin
by this time is come to Macedon to the King, whom
with great reuerence he saluted on his knée: when y• King
embracing him so well as he could, saide. Trust me my good
Fréende, next God I must néedes estéeme you dearest, for

that as he by his Godhead hath made me breath this ayre,
though weake and sicklie: by diuine prouidence hee hath
sent you to restore me my bodilie health, from hencefoorth
therefore I shall intreate you to commaund mee and mine
at your pleasure. My gratious Lorde, saide Palmerin, the
heauens giue me successe to doo you seruice, for I knowe no
Prince liuing this daie, for whom I would more gladly aduenture
my life. I thank you good Sir, quoth the King, but
the gréefe I haue sustained for the sorrow of my Sonne Florendos,
brought me into such a long and lingering extreamitie,
as well may I blesse the time, that by your good successe
am so happilie deliuered: let me therefore entertaine
you as my seconde Sonne, and perswade your selfe of such a
Father, who wil loue you as if you were his owne naturall
Childe, in that I and the greater part of my Kingdom shalbe
at your disposition. Woorthy Sir, saide Palmerin, woorthilie
might I be reputed amongst the worst in the world,
refusing the honour you please to offer mee, especiallie in
such an extraordinarie kinde of fauour: for the rest, (beeing
thus accepted in your princely grace) I haue sufficient
béeing furnished with Horse and Armour to doo me seruice.
With these wordes the King embraced him, and méere ioy
caused the teares to trickle downe his chéekes: so that
Palmerin staied longer with him then he made
account to doo, till the Duke of Durace
sent for him, as you shall reade in
the discourse following.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHA. XIX.
                     
                        How Duke Astor of Durace sent to the King of Macedon,
desiring him to sende him the Knight, that had
slaine the Serpent on the Mountain Artifaeria, to ayde
him against the Countie Passaco of Mecaena, who
laide straight siedge to one of his Citties.
                     
                     
                        SO farre was spread the fame of
this victory, which Palmerin in had
against the Serpent on ye Mountaine
Artifaeria, as at length the
Dake Astor of Durance hearde
therof, against whom the Countle
Passaco of Mecaena warge
                           •
                        
battaile, and seeing himselfe vnable
to resiste his enemic, minded
to sende to the King of Macedon,
requiring ayde of teh Knight that slewe the Serpent at the
enchaunted Fountaine: and heereuppon he dispatched one
of his Gentlemen towards the King, who made good haste
till he came thither, when dooing his reuerence, and deliuering
his Letters of credite to the King, he saide. Dread
                           •
                        
Lorde, the Duke of Durace my Maister, most hūbly salutes
your Maiestie by me. The King hauing read the Letters,
and noting the contents: bad the Messenger discharge the
rest of his message. It is so Sir, said the Gentleman, that of
long time my Lord and maister hath béene assaulted by the
Countie Passaco, and in such cruell sorte hath warred on
him, as he hath well neere destroyed his whole Countrie,
for he hath taken the Cittie of Mizzara, and againste all
right dooth challenge it for his owne. After this, the Duke
my Maister raysing his siedge to bid him battaile, Fortune

hath béene so contrarie to my Lorde, as his noble Sonnes
are slaine, and ye greater part of his worthyest Gentlemen.
Yet not contented with all this, the Countie pursues him
s
                           •
                        il to his very Cittie of Durace, which he hath begirt with
siedge so stronglie, as hee is doubtfull of a further daunger.
But within these eyght daies he vnderstood that your highnesse
hath heere a Knight, that slewe the Serpent on ye enchaunted
Mountaine, in whose valour my Lorde reposeth
such confidence, as woulde you graunt him licence to come
thither, my Lorde will accompany him with so manie hardie
men at Armes, as he doubts not to enforce the Countie
to leaue his Country, and for that the matter requireth expedition,
he desires your assistaunce with all possible spéede.
I am sorrie, quoth the King, that the Duke my Nephew is
in such extremitie, and I promise you I did not thinke as
yet to part with Palmerin: but séeing the necessitie is so
vrgent, I will intreate him to goe with you, and so manie
approued Knights with him, as the Countie shal perceiue,
I am not well pleased with his hard dealing towardes my
Nephew. Nowe was Palmerin present when the Gentleman
deliuered his message, which pleased him not a little,
because he would gladlie leaue the King to followe his fortune,
and was thus held from his desire by importunate requestes:
but see
                           •
                        g the King had graunted to sende him to
the Duke, he fell on his knées, vsing these spéeches. In respect
my good Lord, that the Duke your Nephew hath vrgent
occasion to imploy me, and in that his sute is onely for
me, without any other of your people: I beséeche you suffer
me to goe alone to him, for my hope is so good, in a cause of
trueth and 
                           〈◊〉
                        , that wee shall bee sufficient there to ende
the controu
                           ••
                        ie. Not so my good fréende Palmerin, said the
King, you 
                           〈◊〉
                         not ha
                           •
                        arde your selfe alone, but take such
companie 
                           〈…〉
                         with you. My Lord, quoth Palmerin,
he demaundes me without any other companye,
and therefore let mee perswade you to satis
                           •
                        fie his request:
so turning to the Gentleman, he bid him prepare to set forward,

for he was readie. Worthie Sir, answered the Messenger,
with what expedition you please, for neuer was
Knight expected with more earnest longing for, then you
are. This suddaine resolution of Palmerin displeased Florendos:
wherefore taking him aside, he said. I sée then my
déere Fréende you will needes bee gone, albeit your companie
hath giuen mee greater sollace & delight, then any thing
els since I lost mine onelie content: yet is my regarde of
your honor such, y• I feare more to heare your mis-fortune,
then I pittie ye necessitie of my Cozin the Duke of Durace.
Yet let me intreate you, that finishing your intent with
fortunate successe, you make your present returne to the
King my Father, whose loue, and whose liberalitye you
neede not doubt of. My Lorde (quoth Palmerin) the King
and you haue so highlie honoured mee, as wheresoeuer I
shall come heereafter, I rest yours in my verye vttermost
endeuours.
                     These wordes did Ptolome heare the Sonne of Frenato,
whō 
                        Florendos had kept since ye time he was his Page,
and was nowe olde enough to receiue Knighthoode: which
made him desirous to purchase honour by some meanes, especiallie
if the King woulde mooue Palmerin to take him
with him, his request he perswaded himselfe would not bee
denyed, whereupon, knéeling before the King, hee beganne
thus. If it so please your highnes, that at your handes I
might receiue my order of Knighthoode, before Palmerin
departed from your Court: I am assured he would not disdaine
me for his companion, especially if your Maiestie did
mooue the question on my behalfe. Beléeue mee, quoth the
King, so good a motion shall not be hindered by me, & therefore
to morrow will I giue you your order, and such Armor
as shall well beséeme a Knight, prepare you in meane time
to performe your watch. Highly contented was Ptolome
at these spéeches, and gaue order for his prouision of néedefull
occasions, til euening came, when he entered the Chappell,
where hee spent the night in deuout orisons, y• heauen

would so further ye whole course of his time, as might stand
with the aduauncement of iustice and his own honor. Earlie
in the morning, the King accompanied with his Sonne
Florendos and manie other Knights, entered the Chappel,
where finding Ptolome on his knées, hee gaue him his
knighthoode, wishing his fortune to prooue such, as might
make him famous where euer he came: afterward he desired
Palmerin, that this new Knight might beare him cō
                        panie
in his trauailes, whereto Palmerin willingly consented,
accepting so well of Ptolomes behauiour, as hee purposed
thence forward not to forsake so good a companion. Thē
they both tooke their leaue of the King and Florendos, and
departed with the Gentleman towardes the Duke of Durace,
making such good expedition in their iourneye, as hauing
crost the Seas with a prosperous winde, they landed
in the Countrey of Durace. Nowe because the Cittie was
besiedged on all sides, they were doubtfull howe to gette in
vnséene of the enemie, which the Gentlemanne their guide
performed so well: as by priuie signes made to the Sintinell,
at length they got in without any danger. The Duke
hearing tydings of their arriuall, left his Chamber & came
to welcome Palmerin, whome hee entertained with great
honour, spending the most part of the night in familiar conference
with him, till hauing brought him to his Chamber,
hee left them bothe to their good rest, till the next morning,
when he came againe to visite them, thus saluting Palmerin.
                     
                     Your arriuall, Sir Knight, dooth arme mee with such
assured hope, as by the helpe I shall receiue at your hande,
mine enemie (I trust) shal not outbraue me as he hath doone
hitherto: and therfore you with your worthie companion,
are bothe so welcome as you can desire. My Lorde, (quoth
Palmerin) the King that sent me to you, hath bounde me to
him by so manie courtesies, as for the loue of him and Florendos
his Sonne, you may assure your selfe of my vttermost
seruice, so long as I shall be able to holde my Sworde.

The Duke returned his noble offer manie thankes, and
walking into the Hall, the Duchesse there expected the
comming of Palmerin, so after manie welcoms and courtlie
embracings, the Tables béeing couered, they sat downe to
Dinner: all which time, Palmerins eyes were fixed on the
Duchesse Daughter, who was one of the fairest Uyrgins
that euer he sawe, and so busied was his thoughts in beholding
her, as hee gaue small regarde to the Dukes wordes,
who reported what shamefull iniuries the Countie had offered
him from time to time, and howe manie skirmishes
had passed betwéene them since the beginning of the wars.
Thus spent they the Dinner time, till the Tables beeing
withdrawne, and the Duchesse with her Daughter gone
into their Chamber, the Duke questioned with Palmerin
as concerning Ptolome, who was verie néere allied to the
Duke: and so with discoursing of nouels of Macedon, as
also the doubtfull affaires of the warres, they passed the
whole daie till night came, when Palmerin and Ptolome
departing to their Chamber, Palmerin coulde take no rest,
the beautie of the Duchesse Daughter so troubled hys
thoughts, which made him desirous to knowe her name: if
this were shée the thrée Sisters spake of on the Mountain,
and was beside promised him in hi
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         visions. Palmerin
was not alone thus passionate, but on the other side the
yong Ladie became as amorous of him: but Fortune wold
not permitte their loue, as you shall heare more héereafter.
The Coūtie hauing al this while maintained very straight
siedge, intending now to loose or gaine al, gaue fierce assault
vppon the Cittie: first calling all the cheefest Lordes and
Captaines of his Armie, moouing them with earnest and
Souldiour like perswasions, to foresée all aduauntages, and
to encounter their enemies with magnanimious and resolute
courage. When he had thus unboldened his menne to
the fight, with sound of Drummes, Trompets & Clari
                           •
                        ns
they bad the Cittie battaile: then might you beholde howe
they besturred themselues with Fagots to fill the Ditches

and Trenches, set scaling Ladders to the walles, howe the
one side assaulted and the other defended, that manie loste
their liues or departed maimed, such hauocke did Palmerin
and P
                              •
                           olome with the Dukes power, make on their enemies,
notwithstanding they were in number farre beyonde
them, and meruailous well prouided of all necessaries. But
then Palmerin remembred a suddaine pollicie to preuent a
mischéefe, for as the enemie retired to prepare for the seconde
assault, he called ye most part of the best Knights that
the Duke had, willing each one betake himself to his horse
and follow him, leauing the rest well appointed for defence
of the walles. The Counties power sounding the alarme,
and comming roughlie againe vpon the Cittie: Palmerin
with his company priuilie issued foorth at ye Posterne gate
on the backs of the enemies, and gaue such a braue onsette,
as they were forced to forsake their scaling Ladders to resist
this encounter. There were manie strokes deliuered
on either side, the Countie & most part of his Knights béeing
on horsebacke, which made them holde the longer play
with Palmerin and his men: notwithstanding, the Countie
séeing such a hardie attempt giuen on a suddaine, and doubting
freshe supplie woulde come from the Cittie, with feare
began to retire, and with one of his Bretheren laboured to
resist this sharpe assault, but Palmerin and his companie
gaue them small time to rest, laying on loade with meruailous
fiercenes, whereat the Countie was so offended, as cō
                        ming
to Palmerin, he gaue him such a cruell stroke on the
Helmet, as he fell therwith to the ground, yet did he quicklie
recouer himselfe againe, and requited the Countie with
so sound a salutation, as he made him tomble from his saddle
headlong to the earth, at what time on the other side
Ptolome had so canuazed the Counties Brother, as he sealed
him a quittaunce with his sword for his life. Then began
the Counties Souldiours to dispayre of their successe,
and Palmerin with his traine to follow them so closelie, as
they were glad to take themselues to flight, leauing theyr

Maister ouerthrowne in the Armie, where hee was troden
to death with the trampling of the Horses. Thus did the
victorie remaine to the Duke, his enemies scattering in
flight gladde to saue their liues, whom Palmerin commanded
to follow no further, least gathering themselues togeather
againe, and espying aduauntage, they might so endanger
them: for oftentimes the vanquished too narrowly pursued,
recouer courage & daunte the pride of the conquerers.
For this cause he returned with his men into the Citty, the
Duke vnderstanding the foyle of his enemie, which made
him with a great number of woorthy Cittizens to goe méet
Palmerin and Ptolome, whome embracing hee thus entertained.
Ah good Knights, by you is my estate recouered, and
the death of my Sonnes reuenged on the murderer, therefore
dispose of me and myne as you shall thinke beste: to
which words Palmerin thus answered. My Lord, let heauen
haue the honour of our victory, as for me, I haue doone,
and will héereafter what I can, for the great kindnesse of
the King of Macedon your Uncle, who hath honored mee
in sending me to you, and other recompence I neuer did or
will séeke. As they thus parled togeather, the Duke perceiued
by the blood on Palmerins Armour, that he was wounded
in manie places, wherefore (quoth he) I sée you are sore
wounded, let vs make haste to our Pallace, where a Ladye
attending on the Duchesse and well séene in chirurgeri
                           •
                        ,
shall giue attendaunce on you till you are recouered. So
mounting on horsebacke, they rode to the Pallace, where
Palmerin was lodged. Béeing brought into his Chamber,
the Duchesse and her Daughter holpe to vnarme him,
when the Ladie dressed his wounds, perswading him there
was no daunger in them to be feared. Thus each one departing,
Laurana the Duchesse Daughter called Vrbanillo
the Dwarsse, saying to him. My Fréende, desire thy Mayster
to make bolde of any thing he wants, and that for my
sake he will dispayre of nothing. Madame, said y• Dwarffe,
you haue good reason to wish my Maister well, as well for

the good assistaunce he gaue the Duke your Father, as also
in respecte of his deserts, which are as honourable as any
that euer came in this Court. These words Palmerin verie
well hearde, hauing his eye continually on her: wherefore
when shee and all the other were departed, hee called
Vrbanillo, demaunding what talke he had with the Princesse,
which he reported, and his answere also. Gramercies,
said Palmerin, I pray thée find the meane to let her knowe
that I am her Seruaunt and Knight, ready to accomplishe
anie thing that she shal commaunde me. Referre this matter
to me Sir, quoth the Dwarffe, I knowe what Saint
must patronize these affaires, and what offering must bee
layde on his Altar.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XX.
                     
                        Howe Palmerin became highlie enamoured with the
beautie of the Princesse Laurana, thinking her to bee
the Lady that sollicited him in his visions.
                     
                     
                        
                           VRbanillo the Dwarffe, not forgetfull
of his Maisters commandement,
the next day when Laurana
came with her Mother to
visite Palmerin, shee tooke the
Dwarffe aside, demaūding what
reste his Maister tooke the night
past. Madame (quoth he) indifferent,
I thanke God and you, for
in you two consists the disposition
of my Maisters health. As howe quoth shee? Thus Madame,
said Vrbanillo, the first day that he behelde you, hee
gaue the whole possession of himselfe so firmely to you, as
day & night he meditates on your diuine perfections, doubting

in requital of his seruice to my Lord your Father, and
his Countrey, whose liues and yours he hath defended, him
selfe shalbe repayed with suddaine and cruel death: for had
he not come for your safetie, well had he escaped this daungerous
extreamitie. Then séeing (fayre Madame) that his
valour hath béene the meane of your deliueraunce, doo not
so degenerate from gentle nature, as to kill him that gaue
you life. Why my Freend (quoth she) what wouldest thou
haue me doo? To loue him, swéete Madame, quoth he, as hée
doth you. Alas, sayd she, thou mayst assure thy selfe, y• none
can wysh thy Maister better then I doo, béeing my duetie
and his desert: with which wordes shee chaunged colour
with such modest bashfulnes, as it might be perceiued shee
could hardly master her affectiōs. Which when y• Dwarffe
behelde, as one not to learne his lesson in this arte, perswaded
himselfe by the very lookes of Laurana, that his Maysters
loue would sort to happy ende, and thereuppon he followed
the matter thus. I thinke Madame, that you
wysh my Maister as well as anie, but that is not enough,
vnlesse your wysh agrée wyth his in this poynt: that you
graunt your selfe his onely Lady and Mistresse, as hee hath
vowed himselfe your Knight and Seruant. If it may please
you to wysh this good to my Maister, vouchsafe this fauour
as a president of your lyking: that so soone as he shall finde
himselfe better in health, you wyll but consent to speake
with him alone, in some such conuenient and vnsuspected
place, as hee may haue liberty to acquaint you with the secrets
of his thoughts. Alas (quoth she) how should I so doo,
without offering too much impeache to mine owne honour?
Madame, saide ye Dwarffe, the night giues fauour to loues
swéete enterprises. By this time the Duchesse was ready
to depart, which Laurana perceiuing, sayd to the Dwarffe.
Assure thy Maister from me, that I am more his thē myne
owne, and I will doo for his welfare what I may with modestie.
By reason of their departure, the Dwarffe coulde
not make her answere, but shaddowing the matter as hee

had doone before, went about his Maisters busines, till hee
came and found him alone, when he discoursed all that had
past betwéene the Princesse and him, which so well contented
Palmerin as nothing coulde more: because he perswaded
himselfe, as I haue saide alreadie, that this was shee
which the thrée Sisters promised him, by whom he shoulde
receiue the honour that destinie allowed him. For thys
cause thence forwarde he was verie desirous to knowe her
name, commaunding Vrbanillo very straightly to enquire
it, which hee did, informing his maister that her name was
Laurana: whereupon he well sawe that hee was deceiued,
in that the Sisters had named his Mistresse Polinarda,
and therefore he resolued to withdraw his affection, and to
depart thence so soone as he should be able to beare Armor.
But it may be easilie presumed, that when one hath so far
ventured in loue, that he perceiues himself beloued, as the
Dwarffe perswaded his Maister: hardly can hee giue ouer
so faire a beginning: yet héere it fell out contrary, as you
shall well perceiue, that the ende was more suddaine then
the beginning. Palmerin now knowing ye Princesse name,
began to vse other countenaunce to her then hee was accustomed,
but shee good Lady (in his excuse) conceiued better
opinion then she had cause: yet as it euermore falleth out
in loue, that when Ladies sée themselues but slenderly
courted by their Fréendes, they growe importunate in
their amorous desires, so came it to passe with Laurana,
who perceiuing herselfe not solicited by Palmerin as shee
was wont, one night somewhat late shee called ye Dwarffe,
and thus began. Howe comes it to passe (my good Fréend)
that thy Maister is not of so pleasaunt disposition, as heeretofore
he hath béene? it may be thou hast not let him vnderstand
my last salutation, or els feare with-holdes him from
following his determination: I pray thée doo the message
of my earnest good will to him, and tell him that I long to
impart our affections togeather, to the ful resolution of our
desired thoughts, which I haue found the way vnsuspected

to accomplish, so please him to come to my Chāber to morrow
at night, where I shall not faile to expect his presence.
When the Dwarffe heard Laurana vse these words, thinking
his Maister was still in his former cogitations, thus
aunswered. Trust me fayre Madame, within these fewe
dayes my Maister is become so mellanchollie, as I haue
manie times feared his death, and I am sure hee hath no other
cause to torment him so, but onely the fury of the extreame
loue he beares you: yet séeing you haue promised
him such gracious fauour, let me alone to change this vnpleasaunt
humour. Fayle not then quoth shee, to let him
know my minde. I goe presently, said the Dwarffe, to acquaint
him with these long desired tydings. So taking his
leaue, he went to his Maisters Chamber, whom he founde
fast a sleepe, when not daring to awake him, let stay hys
message till the next morning, and so laide him downe to
rest: at what time sleepe had thorowly possessed him, he began
to cry and complaine so loude, as his Maister hearing
him arose, and demaunded of him the cause of his lament.
Alas my Lorde (quoth he) neuer in all my life was I so affrighted,
me thought that one of the fayrest Ladies that euer
eye lookt on, helde a naked sworde against my throate,
saying. Uile and villainous creature as thou art, darest
thou presume so much to offende me, as to make thy Lorde
and Maister amorous of Lady Laurana, and to forsake me?
iustly doost thou deserue to dye on this weapon for thy paillardise:
and if héereafter thou carry any message to preiudice
my right, assure thy selfe that I wil chastise thée in such
sort, as all deformed villaines shal receiue example by thée.
I tell thée Traytour, Palmerin his fortunes climbes higher
then the name of Laurana, and where he is more looued
for the royaltie of his linage, then for his base and Pastoral
education. With which wordes shee gaue me such a stroke
on the heade with her sworde, as I (fearefull of my life)
cryed so loude as you say you hearde me. This motiō made
Palmerin easily perceiue, that Polinarda had made thys

threatning to the Dwarffe for Laurana: which concealing
to hims
                           •
                        lfe, he said in laughter. I think thou diddest forget
to drinke when thou 
                           〈◊〉
                         to bed, and so thy hart béeing
drie conceiued this fonde vision: I praie thée sléepe, & trouble
me no more with such idle passions. The Dwarffe betooke
him to rest, but Palmerins thoughts all night were
hammering on this Dreame, so that he resolued to departe
thence the next morning, and séeke els where his aduentures,
séeing hee was admonished by so manie aduertisements.
So at the daie rysing he called the Dwarffe, and
commaunded him to prepare his Armour, for hee intended
to take his leaue of the Duke. Ptolome hearing this, and
hauing noted beside all that the Dwarffe tolde his Maister
in the night. Dissembling the matter, as was his manner,
he came and bad Palmerin good morrowe, who aunswered
Ptolome in this manner. My déere Fréend, I haue concealed
none of mine affaires frō thée, since the time we receiued
our knighthoode, and parted togeather from the Courte
of Macedon: nowe therefore shall I impart to thée what I
haue determined.
                     It is so, that vrgent occasions constraines me presently
to leaue this Countreie, and henceforth to frame my course
which way Fortune will direct me, by which occasion I see
we must be enforced to leaue each other: notwithstanding,
let me intreate that our absence may no way impayre our
fréendshippe, not doubting but in good time we shall meete
togeather againe. In meane space, if you sée the King or
Prince Florendos, forgette not the humble duety of theyr
vowed Seruaunt I beséeche yée, who dedicates his life and
honour in all attempts to their gracious fauours. By God,
said Ptolome, let who will doo the message for me, for neither
death nor daunger shall seperate me from you: but I
wil beare you companie while life and soule hold together.
If you be so resolute, said Palmerin, shame were it for mee
so to refuse you. Set forward then when you please (quoth
Ptolome) for we neither must nor will depart, thats flat.

So béeing bothe armed they came to the Duke, who meruailed
much to sée them so prepared, and therefore demaunded
whether they went. My good Lord, answered Palmerin,
in that your Countrey is nowe quieted, wee must intreate
you for our departure, because waightie affaires in
other places doo so commaunde vs. How happens it fayre
Fréendes, saide the Duke, that you will so soone leaue mee?
My Lorde (quoth Palmerin) wee are so enforced, and therfore
we humblie intreate you, not to be offended. If your
affaires bee such saide the Duke, lothe am I to hinder you,
commaunde of me and mine what you please, for all remaineth
at your disposition. Most humble thanks did Palmerin
and Ptolome returne ye Duke, and ere they went to horseback,
they came to take their leaue of the Duchesse & Laurana,
who was well nie deade, séeing her hope deceiued, for
she expected the night comming, when shée and Palmerin
should conferre togeather of their loue: but séeing him now
departing, she was out of all hope to sée him againe, the extreame
gréefe whereof so ouercame her, as giuing a greate
shrike shee fell in a swoune. The Ladies and Gentlewomen
in great amazement came about her, ignoraunt of her
euill but onelie Palmerin and his Dwarffe, which hee likewise
woulde not reueale to anie, for the reason you hearde
discoursed before: and rather would she entertaine her own
death, then make knowne a secrete of such importaunce:
wherefore hauing somewhat recouered herselfe, and not able
to conceale her anguish, with an extreame sigh she thus
breathed foorth her sorrow. Ah Palmerin, easilie hast thou
kindled the fire, which with great shame thou leauest consuming
vnquenched. Who would haue thought such treason
coulde harbour, where faire conditions and honourable
valour shined so brightlie? Well may I cond
                           •
                        mne al men
of disloyaltie, séeing thou hast failed resembling so excellent.
Beléeue me Knight, thou hast doone mee great wrong, and
thy selfe much more, for which where euer thou c
                           •
                        mmest,
be thou named the most vngrateful Knight that euer drew

Sworde, séeking her death so cruelly, who loues thée deerer
then her owne life. These complaints made the sorrowful
Laurana before the Duchesse, not sparing to discharge the
whole burthen of her oppressed hart, her Mother not daring
to gainesay her, but expected when the shoulde depart
this life: wherefore perswading her from dispaire, shee
swéetelie promised to worke so with Palmerin, as he should
staie and enioy her to his wife. But all was in vaine, for he
mounted on horsebacke, and accompanied with Ptolome
and Vibanillo, left the Cittie of Durace, no one knowing
which way they were ridden: Palmerin cōuerted into such
heauines, as nothing coulde torment him more, so earnest
was his desire to sée her, whome fate and Fortune had appointed
for him.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXI.
                     
                        Howe Palmerin and Ptolome met with a Damosell, who
made great mone for a Casket which two Knights had
forcibly taken from her, and what happened to them.
                     
                     
                        BEeing thus departed from Durace,
these Knights rode along,
thinking in what heauines they
had left the Dukes Daughter:
when Palmerin accusing himself
as guiltie of this mischaunce,
within himselfe thus sadlie discoursed.
Unhappy man, that euer
thou cammest into this Coūtry,
where thou hast left so harde an
opinion of thy selfe, as while thou liuest thou shalt be the
worse estéemed: and well worthie, for iustlie maist thou be
accused of disloyaltie, in making meanes to obtaine the loue

of the faire Princesse Laurana, and hauing conquered wher
thou desiredst, to make so light account of her as thou haste
doone. Had death preuented thée before, shee had béene satis-fied,
thine honour defended, and thy vnknowne Polinarda
no way iniuried: which spéeches made the teares to trickle
down his chéekes, when Ptolome looking aside espyed
him, and gessing the cause of his sadnes, said. Uerily I neuer
thought to sée such womannishe behauiour in you, nor
that any gréefe or mis-fortune should haue teares so soone at
commaundement. Howe will you héereafter withstande so
manie casualties, hard aduentures, and daungerous stratagems,
with manie & sundrie narrowe brunts that you must
passe thorow, when I sée you vnable to ouercome your own
selfe: béeing supprized by her teares, to whome you haue
doone honour to affoorde a good countenaunce? If you had
receiued of her the swéetes of loue, reason might then plead
in your excuse: but hauing no way misprised her honour,
or offered offence to modest chastitie, what iniurie may shée
saie that you haue doone her? Forget I praie you these vnséemelie
fashions, hardly agréeing with a Knight of such report
as you are, let vs finde some thing els to talke on, and
tell me which way you intende to iourney. By my life, (ꝙ
Palmerin) I knowe not: but let vs take which way Fortune
shall please to conduct vs. I thinke it best then, sayde
Ptolome, that we shape our course towarde Rome, where
we shall finde people of all Nations, by whome we maie be
instructed as concerning aduentures, worthy our trauaile,
and guyding to honour. On then chéerelie, quoth Palmerin,
and so they trauailed eight daies togeather, not méeting
with any aduenture worthy to be spoken off: till at length
they met a Damosell heauily mourning, who saide. Alas,
what will shee saie whose trust was onelie in mee, hauing
lost the thing wherein consisted her hope, to recouer y• highest
of her noble desires? Palmerin hearing these wordes,
and mooued with compassion, rode to her, & demaunded the
cause of her mourning. Sir Knight (quoth she) I was sent

by a Ladye with a Caskette, wherein was one of the best
Swordes in the whole worlde, which is so enchaunted, as
none can drawe it out of the skabbard, but hee that is esteemed
the worthiest Knight liuing: but before any be admitted
to make proffe of this aduenture, hee must graunt a request
that I am to aske him. With this Sword haue I trauailed
many strange Countries, as Fraunce, Italie, Sclauonye
and diuer
                           •
                         other, where many haue tryed, but no one
yet could finish the aduenture: whereuppon I was thys
daie trauailing towarde the Emperours Courte of Greece,
and heereby I met with two Knights, who hauing hearde
the cause of my long trauaile, made proofe of their fortune
one after another, and bothe failed, whereat they were so
offended, as they tooke the Casket from me perforce, and
are gone there with I knowe not whither, which dooth so
gréeue me, in respect of her losse towards whom I am, as
death woulde be more welcome to mee then life. Faire
Uirgin, saide Palmerin, doo not discomfort your selfe, but
she we mee which way they rode that dealt with you so discourteouslie.
Gentle Knight (quoth shee) if your hap be to
restore my losse againe, you doo the most gracious acte, that
euer Knight did for a distressed Damosell. These Traytors
to honour (whereof the one is in Crunson Armour, bearing
in his Shéelde thrée Lyons heades) tooke this waie by the
woode, and as yet I am sure they canne not be farre hence.
Then Palmerin clasped his Helmet, and taking his Sword
and Launce, desired Ptolome to garde the Damosell and
follow him, galloping that way which she had shewed him:
and by the time he had rid two miles, he espied them he looked
for, talking with an other Knight they had mette, and
they thrée togeather were assaying to open the Casket, to
whom Palmerin cryed. Trecherous villaines, that can not
méete with Ladies on the waie, but must offer them iniurie,
deliuer the Casket, or yee die. One of the two turned
presently, and séeing him that thus threatned them to be alone,
not moouing a 
                           •
                        ote began to laughe, and scornefullie

returned this aunswere. Softlie, softlie good Sir, God pardon
their soules whome you kill so easilie: but for all hys
words, Palmerin ran against them, and they at him, so that
he receiued a small wounde on his shoulder, in recompence
whereof, he gaue one of them a pasport into another world,
and laid so lustilie on the seconde, as he set him quicklie beside
his saddle. When the third sawe his companions at so
harde a reckoning, he said to himselfe. By my faith he spake
not vnaduisedlie, that said: A safe escape is better then a
bad tarrying. And allowing this sentence for currant in
his owne opinion, gaue the spurs to his Horse, making hast
away with the Casket so fast as hee coulde: but Palmerin
béeing somewhat better mounted, got such aduauntage of
this runaway, as with his sword he parted his right arme
from his bodie, whereuppon he fell to the grounde and the
Casket with him. Then Palmerin alighted and tooke it vp,
and leauing ye Knight there, returned which way he came,
when opening the Casket, he tooke great pleasure in behelding
the Sworde, which was meruailous costlie: yet would
he not prooue to drawe it foorth, because he knewe not her
pleasure to whom it appertained. At length he espied Ptolome
comming, who came apace (if néede had béene) to assist
him: but when he knewe how he had ouercome y• Knights,
and recouered the thing was so desired, no man coulde bee
better contented, especially the Damosell, who leaping frō
her Palfray, came and kissed Palmerins féete, saying. And
may all happines repay this gentle déede, faire Knight, for
but by you, my death had béene best welcome to me. D
                           •
                        mosell
(quoth hee) sée héere the Casket according as I sounde
it, I know not whither they that tooke it from you haue abused
it or no. No, no, saide shee, they could no way wrong
it, the Sword béeing heere that belongs to the best Knight.
I praie you (quoth Ptolome) let mee make tryall of my
strength, albeit I know my selfe no such man as you speake
of: so taking the Casket, offered to begin, when the Damosell
desired him to forbeare, for (quoth shee) you must first

graunt me one request. What ere it be, saide Ptolome, I
graunt it: and so set all his might to his intent, but coulde
not accomplish it, wherefore quoth he to the Damosel. Beléeue
me Lady, he that wrought this enchauntment, dyd
more by his arte, then I can by my cunning, and in my opinion
you may trauaile long enough, before you finde him
that shall quit your expectation. The more wil be my trouble
quoth the Damosell, béeing tyed by necessitye to such a
Knights fortune. When Palmerin sawe that his companion
had failed, he doubted whether he should take it in hand
or no: yet séeing hee coulde spéede no worse then other had
doone, he said to the Damosell, will you any thing with me
before I aduenture my selfe, for my Fréende shall not bee
mal content for a fellowe. Gentle Knight, quoth she, I wyll
nothing, but that you make me the like promise your fréend
did. Of that doubt you not saide Palmerin: so laying hande
valiantlie on the Sword, without any great labor he drew
it foorth, béeing the richest and goodliest Sworde that euer
was séene. Ah good Knight, sayde the Damosell, happy bee
the day of thy natiuitie, for thou hast deliuered me from incredible
labour. The Sword is yours, but by your promise
you stand bound to goe with me where I shall conduct you,
to doo that shall please my Lady to commaund you. Leade
the way Damosell quoth Palmerin, and be sure we wil not
leaue thy company. So mounted ye Damosell on her Palfray,
and tooke the way towardes Rome, where she that deliuered
her the Casket remained in deuotion, and with such
spéede they dispatched their trauaile, as they arriued at the
Gate of a strong Castell, where the Damosell alighted, desiring
Palmerin and Ptolome to expect her returne awhile.
The Gate being opened, she went straight to her Mistresse
and her Sister, who béeing gladde of her comming, demaunded
if she had found the man shée went to séeke. Ladies (ꝙ
she) I haue, and hither he is come with me, but this I da
                           •
                        e
assure you before hande, that a more goodlie and valiant
Gentleman liues not this daie: for in my presence he vanquished

three Knights, who perforce tooke the Casket
from me, and for the Sworde, he drew it foorth so easilie, as
it had béene that he weareth by his side. Goe, said the Lady
and cause him come néere, and come Sister let vs goe to the
Gate to entertaine him. Then was the Draw bridge let
downe, when Palmerin and Ptolome riding to the Gate,
met there the Ladies, whom they saluted with great reuerence,
and each Ladye leading a Knight in by the hande,
conducted them to their Chambers to be vnarmed.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXII.
                     
                        How the Lady of the Castell declared to Palmerin, what
mooued the Gyant Darmaco to take from her her
Daughter and her goods, whereuppon Palmerin promised
to enter Combat with the Gyant: as much for
pittie, as to acquite his promise made to the Damosell,
that brought the Casket, and the enchaunted Sword.
                     
                     
                        OUr two Knightes béeing thus entered
the Castell and vnarmed,
the Lady brought each of them a
rich Mantle of Crimson Damaske,
imbroydered with Golde
and pearle, to couer them, and so
came with them into the Hall to
meate, where wanted no choyse
of dainty delicates: so after y• Tables
were withdrawne, and manye
other spéeches passed betweene them, the Ladie thus
began to Palmerin.
                     
                     Sir Knight, as nowe I am a poore and disinherited
Gentlewoman, that sometime was Wife to one of ye welthiest

Knights in this Countrey, with whome I long time
remained not hauing anie Childe, till at length it pleased
God to sende me a Daughter, so faire a creature as euer nature
framed, who at my Husbands death was left with me
but fiue yéeres aged. My Lorde and Husbande learned in
the arte Magicke, and for his skill renowmed in this Countrie,
the daie before his death hee called mee to him, vsing
these spéeches. Déere Wife, let if suffise thée that I knowe
what shall happen to thée after my death, and that one shal
take perforce from thée, not onelie such goods as I leaue
thée, but also thy faire Daughter, to helpe which extremity,
I haue somewhat prouided for thée before my departure.
                     Thou shalt finde in my Cabinett a Sworde, which I
my selfe haue enclosed in a Casket, and haue sette so manie
inchaunted spels on that Sword, as no man shal be able to
drawe it out of the scabbard, vnlesse he be the best approued
Knight in the worlde, and he it is that must giue thée succour,
and helpe to recouer againe thy losse. Too true fel out
my Husbands spéeches, for soone after Darmaco the Gyant
came hither, and as his custome was to abuse whome hee
listed, so tooke he from me the best of my Castelles, and in
despight of me tooke my Daughter from me, saying that he
would giue her to one of his Sonnes in marriage, a villain
far more vicious then the Father, & so deformed, as nature
standes ashamed at her owne workmanship. Nowe in respect
I would not consent to this vnséemely marriage, such
goods as was left me, hee violentlie tooke from mee, thys
Sworde onelie excepted which you haue worthilie conquered,
and that had gone with him too, but that my Sister hid
it verie secretlie. Now woorthie Knight, if euer pittie tooke
place in thy gentle hart, reuenge me on the villaine, ye hath
thus robde me of my goods and my Daughter, whose youth
(béeing as yet but tenne yéeres olde) is the cause that the
Giant hath not consumated the marriage. And if it shal like
you to doo thus much for me, you shall not onelie fulfil your
promise to the Damosell that brought you hither, but you

shall doo a déede acceptaple to God, profitable to me, comfortable
to my poore Childe, and honorable for euer vnto your
owne selfe. Madame (aunswered Palmerin) it is no meruaile
if Darmaco haue doone you this wrong, in y• Giants
doo take a habit in trecherous dealinges: wherefore did not
my promise binde me to your Damosel, I would not passe
so lightlie out of this Countrie, ere I compelled him somewhat
to recompence this iniurie, and this shall I (God willing)
doo to morrowe, so please you I may bee conducted to
him. Ah gentle Knight, saide the Ladie, what I am not able,
Heauen will no doubt repay thee: And because it was
nowe somwhat late, after they had spent a little more time
togeather in conference, these Ladies accompanied him and
Ptolome into their Chamber, and taking their leaue, committed
the Knights to their good rest for that night, which
they passed with quiet repose, and on the next morning after
they were armed, they demaunded their guide of y• Ladie,
that shoulde direct them the way towardes the Giant.
Then she called the Damosell that carried the Casket, and
two Knights of her owne, whom shee commaunded to goe
with Palmerin: so committing him to God and good successe,
they tooke their waie straight to the Castell of Darmaco,
where they arriued in the euening, when they espyed
a Squire on the walles, who was appointed there to
kéepe the watch, to whom Palmerin saide. My Fréende, I
praie thée if Darmaco bee within, cause him to come foorth,
for I would speake with him. And what woulde you with
him aunswered the Squire? I woulde intreate him, sayde
Palmerin, to vse himselfe more courteouslie then hee hath
doone heeretofore, and that hee woulde doo right to a good
Ladie whom he hath disinherited, namely to sende her her
goods and her Daughter againe: and if my intreatie may
not preuaile with him, bidde him if hee dare come to the
Combatt, wherein I will make him confesse vnder my
Sworde, that his actions haue béene villainous, traiterous,
and disloyall. In good sooth Sir, aunswered the Squire in

derision, you may séeme to haue reason, and they that sent
you likewise, but your iourney I feare me will not amount
to so much: therefore if you will be ruled by me get you going,
vnlesse you are willing to leaue your heade for a signe
to our Gates. My heade, said Palmerin, my Sworde holdes
too good an edge, and mine arme too sound strēgth, to leaue
a Iewell of such price so easilie: goe therefore when I byd
thée thou wert best, otherwise assure thy selfe if I vanquish
thy Maister, that thou with the rest shalt surelie dye the
death. Too soone, said the Squire, shall I doo your message,
and if anie harme happen to you, saie my good Fréende you
were councelled be
                           •
                        ore: but as for my Maister Darmaco,
he hath not beene within for this howre and more, yet is
his Sonne Mordano héere, who can bid you welcome as
well as his Father. So departed the Squire, and in shorte
time Mordano the Gyants Sonne came vpon the walles,
demaunding of Palmerin what he sought for? I tolde thy
Squire, aunswered Palmerin: but tell me, art thou y• Son
of the Giant, that delightest in offering villainie to Ladies?
and howe then, said Mordano, what if I am? I pray
thee, said Palmerin, bid thy Father that without any further
quarrell he deliuer the Ladie that he detaines violent
lie, otherwise I shall cause him to doo it whether hee will or
no. I shall make thee aunswere said Mordano, if thou darest

                           •
                        arrie but till I arme my selfe: and so presently departing,
in short time he came foorth very well appointed, with
a meruailous strong Launce in his hand, and mounted on
a verie lustie Courser, so prauncing towards Palmerin, hee
saide. Wretch, art thou come to seeke thine owne death? I
pittie thee: yet if thou wilt yeelde thy selfe to my mercie, I
will spare thy life, and suffer thée to waste thy time in one
of the ba
                           •
                        e Dungions in this Castel. From lodging there,
God sheelde me, quoth Palmerin, and béeing mooued wyth
these rough wordes of his enemie, he encountred Mordano
with such courage, as their Launces beeing broken, bothe
of them were dismounted, Palmerin not hurt, but Mordano
                        
was wounded on the right side, the trunchion of Palmerins
Launce beeing left in his bodie. Notwithstanding he receuered
himselfe quicklie, and came furiouslie towardes Palmerin,
and gaue him such a cruell stroke on the head, as the
bloode beganne to trickle downe his face: which when he
perceiued, and howe it stoode him in hande now to be venturous,
he requited Mordano with so sounde a greeting, as
he parted one of his armes quite from his bodie, and astomed
him likewise that he fell to the ground, but recouering
himselfe, he ran towardes the Castell and Palmerin after
him. The Seruaunts of the Castell, séeing their Lordes
Sonne in such danger, with Iauelinges and other weapons
came against Palmerin, whom they had murdered, if Ptolome
and the two Knights that were sent with him, had
not speedilie come from their close ambush to defende him,
and so manfullie did they behaue themselues, as they droue
them into y• base Court, where Mordano fell deade at Ptolomes
feete, who deferring no time, presently with hys
Sworde tooke his heade from his shoulders. The seruants
this séeing, dispersed themselues & ran into corners, so that
Palmerin and his companie had no bodie left to resist them,
some lying there wounded to the death, and other escaping
foorth at a backe Gate, which they made fast after thē least
they should be followed. When Palmerin sawe all thinges
fall out so effectually, hee called for the Damosell and the
Knights that came with him, who beeing not a little glad
of this great good fortune, desired first to séeke for Esmerinda
their Ladies Daughter, for they were well assured that
she was in the Castell. Searche in euery place, quoth hee,
and because the night drewe on, the Gates were made fast,
and there they determined to lodge for y• night. In meane
while, the Damosell went about the Castell, and neere the
Giants Chamber she founde Esmerinda, who immediatlie
knowing her, came running and caught her louingly about
the necke: for before, (not knowing that her companie had
conquered the Castell) she and three other W
                           •
                        menne that

kept her companie, were greatlie feared, but nowe the Damosell
gaue her perfect assuraunce, that all was doone for
her deliuerie, and by the onelie Knight for prowesse in the
worlde, whom her Ladie Mother had thus sent thither.
As they continued this talke, Palmerin came to them, before
whom the yong Gentlewoman Esmerinda humbled
herselfe on her knées: but he taking her vp, embraced her
with these speeches. Prettie soule, your Ladie mother hath
great desire to sée you, will not you goe with vs to her? Sir
Knight, ꝙ shee, I neuer in my life desired any thing more,
then to sée my Mother: but I greatlie doubt that the false
Darmaco will meete vs by the way, for he went this morning
to the funerall of one of his Sisters, and it will bee to
morrowe before his returne, when if hee hap to meete vs,
we are but deade. Let me deale for that good Ladie, saide
Palmerin: I haue learned alreadie to kill the Sonne, I
doubt not but this smal practise, wil make me doo as much
to the Father. While Palmerin and Ptolome thus deuised
with Esmerinda, the Damosell and Vtbanillo had prouided
Supper, which beeing ended they went to rest, expecting
the morning, when they prepared ye Women to horsebacke,
and hauing taken what them best liked out of the
Castell, they sette fire on the rest, and so tooke their way towards
the sorrowfull Widdowe: who expecting good tydings,
continued in earnest and deuoute orisons, that ye good
Knight might ouercome her blood-thirstie enemie, and returne
with victory and her Daughter Esmerinda.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXIII.
                     
                        Howe Palmerin returning with his company to the Ladies
Castell, happened to meete with the Giant Darmaco,
who lost his life in Combat with Palmerin.
                     
                     
                        THus rode Palmerin and his cō
                        pany
verie ioyfull of their good
fortune, especially Esmerinda, aboue
all the reste: but this pleasant
humour lasted not long, for
shee had espied Darmaco comming
foorth of a woode, hauing
with him his wife & tenne well
appointed Knights, whereat the
yong Ladie was so affrighted, as
she cryed out, saying: O God, now are we all cast away. At
which words the other women began to discourage themselues,
and séeing the Giant so neere, knewe not whether
they were best to goe forward or backe againe: whereupon
Palmerin saide to Ptolome. I praie thée good Freende,
while I fight with Darmaco, doo you & these two Knights
deale with the rest: in the meane while, I thinke it good
that my Dwarffe Vrbanillo, conuay these Ladies into the
thickest of the woode. He had no sooner thus said, but he behelde
the Giant make apace towards them, who not thinking
what had happened, yet séeing faire Esmerinda so deliuered:
in wonderfull rage, not taking either Sworde or
Shéelde with him, he praunced towardes Palmerin, who
entertained him so soundly on the head with his Fauchion,
as the Giant tombled foorth of his Saddle, hanging in hys
styrrop by the left foote, and was no way able to recouer
himselfe.
                     
                        
The Horse feeling his Maister from his backe, and his
burthen to weighe ouer heauie on his side, the Giants foote
likewise tickling him in the flancke, began to course about,
and to beate his Maister with his féete euery way he could
reach him, whē 
                        Palmerin on the other side laid him on such
strokes, as at length he sent his soule to the deuils, the patrons
of his villainous life. Now thought Palmerin he had
no more to doo, but goe helpe his companions against the other
Knights, wherein he was deceiued, for the Giantesse
to reuenge her Husbands death, gaue so cruell a stroke at
Palmerin with her Husbands Mace, as had he not shrunk
aside she had slaine him, and so continued more like a Lyon
then a Woman, redoubling stroke after stroke: which forced
Palmerin for safegarde of himselfe, séeing no meanes or
perswasions could preuaile with her, to sende her packing
after her Husbande. Ptolome and his Knights had dealt
so well with the rest, as on the comming of Palmerin they
had dispatched them all, if fresh supply had not come to thē,
as you shall heare more anon.
                     The Lady of the Castel mother to Esmerinda, so soone
as Palmerin departed thence towardes the Giant, sent to
séeke a yong Gentleman named Crispino, to whom shee
promised her Daughter in marriage, if so be she could recouer
her againe out of the Giants power: who staying not
long after this message, made hast to the Castell, the Ladie
entertaining him in this manner. Not long since, my good
Freende, there departed hence a Knight, who intendes to
reuenge my wrongs on the Giant Darmaco, and because I
knowe not to what ende this enterprise will sorte: I pray
you Arme you, and take tenne of your hardiest men with
you, to helpe the good Knight if he should be distressed. Crispino
soone consented to this motion, & in his way towards
the Castell, it was his chaunce to meete with the Dwarffe
and the Ladies that fledde into the woode. It is not to demaund
how pleasing this sight was to him, beholding Esmerinda
whom he loued as himselfe: of whom he demaunded

where their companie was, and shee reported in what
state they left them at time of their flight. Whereupon he
commaunded fiue of his men to guide ye Ladies, to a Kinsmans
house of his that was néere at hande, and hee with
the rest of his traine galloped to the place, where Palmerin
Ptolome, and the Ladies two Knights encountered, wyth
the fresh supplie that came to Darmacos men. Hee was no
sooner arriued, but he behelde Palmerin and Ptolome woū
                        ded
very sore, and one of the Ladies Knights 
                           〈◊〉
                         among
the rest, which mooued him & his men to bestir themselues:
so that (short tale to make) the Giants men were all vanquished
in the ende, and then Crispino declared to Palmerin,
howe he had sent Esmerinda and the Ladies to his Cozins
house not farre of, whether if it pleased him to walke,
he should receiue what courtesie could be performed on so
suddaine warning, in respect of the happy fortune y• whole
Country shoulde finde by him, beeing thus deliuered of
Darmaco and his Sonne, but aboue all, for the safetye of
his best beloued Esmerinda. Thus rode they togeather
with Crispino, whose Cozin made them verie gracious
welcome, reioycing greatlie at this happy victory, and afterward
they set forwarde to the good Widdowe, Crispino
by the way reporting to Palmerin his loue to Esmerinda,
and howe her Mother had promised him her in marriage,
desiring him to assist the matter that it might bee finished:
which he promised to doo, and so at length they came to the
Castell, where when the Ladie sawe her Daughter, and
hearde howe her cheefest enemies were slaine, it is hard to
expresse her excéeding ioy, which her chéerefull countenance
somewhat made manifest, welcomming Palmerin with
these wordes. Ah gen
                           •
                        le Knight, howe might I be able
while I liue to recompence this inestimable fauour? the
comfort of mine age, and my oppressed soule haue you
brought me, may neuer harmes befal so good a Knight. Ladie,
quoth he, giue the prayse to God, as for me, iudge if I
haue béene as good as my promise to your Damosell or no:

and if there be anie thing els to doo, Lady I am readie now
to performe it. You haue doone so much for me, saide she, as
nothing remaineth more to be desired, vnlesse of your bountie
you will cause me to receiue what the Giant tooke from
me by force: for séeing he is deade, they that with-helde it
from me, will nowe willinglie, restore it againe. That shal
be likewise accomplished, quoth Palmerin: but because hee
and Ptolome were sore wounded as you hearde, they staied
to be 
                           〈◊〉
                         and sent Crispino with his Cozin and a good
sufficient traine, to demaunde the Ladies Castell and her
goods. They that helde it of the Giant, vnderstanding his
death, made present deliueraunce thereof, and committed
themselues to the Ladies mercie: whether shee sent her
Daughter, so soone as Palmerin and Ptolome were healed,
to whom the Subiects vowed their faith and allegeaunce,
and with great Triumphes honoured the mariage of Crispino
and Esmerinda. On the morrowe, as the Knights sat
at meate, there entred the Hall a Squire, who said to Palmerin,
that a Damosel staied without to speake with him.
Let her come in, quoth he, & saie her pleasure. The Squire
bringing her into the Hall, she fell on her knées before Palmerin,
saying. Sir Knight, doo you not knowe mee? No in
good sooth, aunswered Palmerin. Beléeue mee (quoth the
Damosell) then hath my seruice béene euil imployed which
s
                           •
                        metime I did you, and whereof I am sure you haue heard
good account. Then Palmerin knewe her (she bringing the
Shéelde and the Helmet when Florendos knighted him)
whereuppon he rose from the Table, and embracing her,
said. Faire Damosell and my fréende, I pray you pardon
me, for the length of time since I first saw you, did quite exempt
you from my remembrance: pleaseth it you to commaunde
me anie seruice? Sir Knight, said the Damosell,
when I presented you the Helmet and Shéelde, wherwith
you tooke your order of Knighthoode, you promised mee (if
you remember) that you would vse it with right good will,
in anie affaires the Knight had that sent it you, and when

he should require such performaunce: nowe is the time to
confirme your déede with your worde, for hee hath sent mée
to you with humble intreatie, that without anie staie, you
goe where I shall conduct you, otherwise you are the onelie
cause of his death. God shéelde me frō such mis-fortune said
Palmerin, rather woulde I goe with you presently from
the Table. So doo I pray you, (quoth she) for I haue hast.
Then he called for his Armour, and the table withdrawne,
he went into his Chamber to arme himselfe, and so dyd
Ptolome also: returning, they tooke their leaue of the Ladies
and mounted on horsebacke, the whole companie béeing
so sorrie for their departure, as Esmerinda came to the
Damosell, saying. I promise you Damosell, you haue doone
vs wrong in mine opinion, to hinder vs of the presence of
so good a Knight. Ladie, aunswered the Damosell, thinke
you he was borne for you onelie? content your selfe with the
good you haue receiued by him, and suffer such as haue néed
of his prowesse, to receiue his assistaunce as you haue doone.
And good reason saide Esmerinda, if it be to so good an end,
that no resistaunce bee offered when helpe is required. So
departed the two Knights with the Damosell which waie
she guided them, and verie desirous was Palmerin to bee
with the Knight that sent to seeke him: because hee would
gladlie know, of whence hee was that wyshed him so wel,
as his message declared by the Damosell the same daie hee
was Knighted.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXIIII.
                     
                        Howe Palmerin and Ptolome arriued at the Courte of
the King of Bohemia, where they entred Combat
against the Countie of Ormeque and his two Cozins,
who accused the Knight and his Son of treason, that
sent to seeke Palmerin.
                     
                     
                        MAnie miles had these Knightes
ridde with the Damosell, when
Palmerin at length desired her
to tell him, what hee was that
sent him y• Helmet & the Shéeld:
whereto she aunswered, that séeing
he was so desirous to knowe,
listen, ꝙ she, and I shall report
the whole vnto you. The Knight
we speake of, is discēded of verie
royall bloode, béeing Uncle to the King of Bohemia that
raignes at this present, as also to ye Empresse of Allemaigne
the verie best séene in Nigromancie this daie liuing. This
noble man is named Prince Adrian, who neuer liked to
liue in the Court of the King his Brother, but contented
with what patrimonie his Father left him, at length maried
with a verie beautifull Ladie, of whom in time hee begat
a Sonne named Dyardo, which Sonne his Brother
the King of Bohemia, nourished vppe in his Court with his
owne Sonne. So mutually in loue agréed these two yong
Princes, as after the death of the aged King, the yong Dyardo
should ioyn the rule with his Cozin the King: who
tooke to Wife ye Daughter to the Duke of Lorayne, bringing
her with him into this Countrey, in companie of her
Sister, a Princesse so wise and vertuous as euer liued. It

so came to passe, that Dyardo my Lords most noble Sonne,
framing his thoughts to the inspirations of loue, affected so
highlie the other Sister, as he determined neuer to haue anie
other to his Wife, if he might compasse what he intended.
For her good Ladie, he coulde not be deceiued in his amorous
desires, he found her loue so equall with his, yet did
they shaddow their affections so discreetlie, as none coulde
perceiue them, but Domarto the traiterous Countie of Ormeque,
one of the best Knights in all this Country, were he
as familiar with vertue and honestie, as he is with mallice
and disloyaltie. This Traytour enterprised to match with
the Queenes Sister, beloued as you haue hearde by my
Lordes worthy Sonne, and thereuppon after manie sollicitings,
made knowne his intent vnto her, whereof she made
so slender account, as shee forbad him any more to trouble
her. Domarto séeing my Lorde Dyardo his onely hinderaunce
in loue, intended a mallicious villainie: and on a
suddaine accused the Prince, that he intended to poyson the
King, so to obtaine the Crowne, as discended of a neerer cō
                        sanguinitie.
And as it often falleth out in such cases, when
one séekes to crosse an others fortune, there is no time flacked
in following such drifts: euen so this Traytor, finding
the yonge King alone, began his matter in this coullorable
sort. My gracious Lord, the faith and allegeaunce I owe to
you highnesse, bindes me to make your princelie cares acquainted
with such newes, as, God is my witnes, said the
Traitour (lifting his eyes and hands to heauen) mine own
death were more welcome to me, such is the loue I beare
them whom it concernes, béeing al so neere allied to you in
birth, as sorie I am they shoulde bee detected: but in your
regarde my gracious Lorde, the action touching you in such
sort as it dooth, let me die rather then spare any liuing creature,
no not mine owne Sonne, had nature giuen mee anie.
This néedelesse exordium haue I made to so foule an
occasion, albeit truth néedes no coullers or eloquent figures
and therefore in bréefe my Lord, this is the summe. I am

crediblie enformed, that your highnesse Cozin the Prince
Dyardo, and Madame Cardonia Sister to ye Quéene, haue
laid the platforme to poyson your Maiestie, and this haue
they attempted, by the procurement of olde Adrian your
Uncle, who pretends that the Crowne of Bohemia is his.
I knowe not whether it be for want of discretion or no: but
howsoeuer it be my Lorde, you shoulde not leaue such a villainie
vnpunished. The King began greatlie to meruaile
at these newes, and knewe not well what to think: whervpon
he aunswered the Countie, that he coulde not beleeue
this accusation. But the Traytour set so smoothe a countenaunce
on the matter, and did auerre it still with such stout
protestations, as hee induced the King to beleeue him: so
that a daie or two after, the King béeing walking in hys
Garden, séeing Dyardo & Cardonya at the Quéenes chamber
windowe, secretlie conferring of their amorous affections,
commaunded them bothe to be carried to prison. The
Countie glad thereof, prouoked the King still with such anger
against them, as immediatlie he woulde haue thē bothe
doone to death: but that the Quéene and the Lordes of hys
Counsel, founde meanes to quallifie his displeasure, declaring
what discredite his highnes shold receiue, if he did not
suffer them to be openlie conuicted of their offences. All this
while good Princes, were they ignoraunt of this detection,
till at length the King discoursed the whole matter to thē,
and likewise who was their accuser: nor did the Countie
faile to maintaine his wordes openlie, offering to make it
good in fight, against any that durst say the contrary, and because
he had two Cozins, hardie and valiant Knights, conspirators
likewise in this faction, there could be none found
that would enter the Combat against them. Which when
the noble Prince Adrian vnderstoode, very gréefe had well
néere slaine him, in respect he had no Child but this Dyardo,
as also for y• hee was accused with y• hee neuer thought.
Héereupon he went presently to the King his Nephew, and
preuailed so well with him, as he obtained the space of two

Monethes, to bring with him one or two that might maintaine
the innocencie of him, his Sonne Dyardo, and the
Princesse Cardonia, against the Traytour Domarto and
his Cozins. And this is the cause he sent mee to seeke you
foorth, in hope that you are as much his Freende as hee is
yours, which you may somewhat perceiue, by the freendlie
presents he sent you by mee to Macedon. So helpe mee
God, saide Palmerin, you haue reported a most strange dyscourse,
and neuer did I think, that such treason could enter
the thoughts of any Knight, or other inferior person. All this
is true, quoth ye Damosell, and it is appointed y• the Prince-Dyardo,
with his aged and crazed Father, shal defend their
owne causes, without séeking helpe of anie other: but he neuer
as yet receiued the order of Knighthoode, and therfore
is constrained to desire your assistaunce. And that shall I
doo with all my hart, saide Palmerin, would God we were
there where he expecteth vs, for the desire I haue to sée
him, as also to vnderstande what he knowes of my following
fortunes. Those matters are hid from mee, quoth shee,
yet this haue I hearde him say diuers times, being in talk
of you, that he accounted you the most honorable Knight in
the worlde: and that if he euer chaunced to sée you, he wold
aduise you to goe to the Emperour of Allemaignes Courte,
to be the knightly Seruaunt to the Princesse Polinarda.
When Palmerin heard the name of Polinarda, he remembred
that it was her name, whome hee had so manye times
séene in his fraunces, for which cause he asked of the Damosell,
what the Lady was of whom shee spake? My Lord
quoth the, Polinarda is Daughter to the Emperour, and
Niece vnto my Lorde Adrian, the most beautiful Princesse
that euer eye behelde. By my faith, saide Palmerin, y• more
easily may I be induced to graunt her my seruice, and thether
intend I to trauaile, when I haue finished your Lords
busines. So rode they with much more haste thē before, tyl
at length they came to the Cittie of Almedya, where the
King remained, and ye Prince Adrian expecting Palmerins
                        
comming, which when he hearde, hee came to meete him,
eache embracing other with meruailous courtesie, and the
good olde man with the teares in his eyes thus saide. Ah
good Knight, what may counteruaile this your exceeding
paines, to maintaine the right of my Sonne and mee, who
are falselie accused of such villainous treason, as (on the perill
of my soule) we neuer did imagine? Thereof am I certainlie
perswaded, aunswered Palmerin, and therfore am I
come to enter the Combat with him, that dare affirme otherwise.
Mine olde age, quoth Adrian, might excuse mee
henceforth from bearing Armes, but béeing vnable to endure
so vile a slaunder, so long as life and soule will holde
togeather, shal I doo my deuoire: so please your companion
to make the second, as olde as I am I will be the thirde, for
the trayterous Coūtie hath two of his Cozins y• take part
with him. And if my fortune so fall out as I die in this tryall,
I shall receiue my lot very contentedlie, if mine eyes
might first beholde mine iniurie reuenged. I pray you said
Palmerin, goe presently to the King, to the ende that hys
highnesse may graunt vs the fielde, for my Freende and I
thinke long till we haue made your accuser knowe his trecherie.
Adrian immediatly went to the King, and on his
knées thus began. My Lorde, you knowe that the Countie
of Ormeque hath accused mee, my Sonne Dyardo, and Madame
Cardonya, of the cryme of Lesae Maiestatis, and in
that we all are innocent, I am readie to maintaine, that he
hath falsely and malliciously belied vs, which I my selfe
will approoue vpon him, or two more with me, against him
and his Cozins, if they dare enter the fielde with him in
this quarrell, where we will either make known their villainie,
or receiue the reward belongs to disloyall Traitors.
As for the wrong which you (my Lord) haue doone me, béeing
your Uncle, and my Sonne Dyardo your Cozin germaine:
that I referre to God to recompence, and to the better
knowledge you shall receiue of mee héereafter, béeing

                           •
                        owe too olde to bee a Traytour, and my Sonne too louing

to proue disloyall. The King was abashed to heare his Uncle
speake so audaciously, doubting nowe whether he should
giue credite to what had béene reported, especially against
him, so neere his highnes in bloode, who so liberally offered
to enter the Combat: notwithstanding his white heade and
aged body made him vnfit for such actions, wherefore hee
thus aunswered. Good Uncle, impute not mee any thing
faultie in your accusation, and that the proofe shall manifest
that must be made. The Countie beeing present, was
strooken in a quandarie at these wordes, and gladly he wold
haue demed this former slaunder, but he could find no waie
cleanlie to doo it: wherefore seeing of force he must néedes
enter the Combat, he boldly fell on his knées before ye King
with these wordes. My Lorde, what I haue saide is verie
certaine, and most true it is, that by the counsell of Prince
Adrian, héere present, his Sonne practised with Lady Cardonya,
to poison you, that he might be King: which to make
good, there is my gadge, on the behalfe of my selfe and my
Cozins. Thou lyest Traytor in thy throate, said olde Adrian,
I take thine offer: and as he woulde haue gone on with
further spéeches, Palmerin stept before the King, saying.
Worthy Lorde, séeing the effect of the wordes must be put
in execution, which haue béene heere spoken on bothe sides
before your Maiestie: may it please you the Prince Dyardo
and Lady Cardonya may be sent for, to take with vs
their oathes as in such cases is required, and in meane time
let eache one goe put himselfe in equipage for the Combat.
Good reason said the King, and presently hee commaunded
the Princes to be brought, who beeing come, Palmerin demaunded
where they were that tooke part with the Countie:
whereupon he presented his Cozins, the one named
Edron, proude and arrogant, and the other Edward of selfe
same qualitie. These two tooke their oathes with ye Countie,
that the Princes accused, conspired the Kinges death, in
such sort as hath béene before declared: and olde Adrian,
Dyardo, and fayre Cardonya sware the contrary. But it

is true, and I wil not denie it (said the Prince Dyardo) that
I haue and doo loue Ladie Cardonya, as much or rather
more then mine owne selfe, yet neuer did I cary any other
intent, but to request her in holie wedlocke, so pleased the
King and Quéene to like so well thereof as we coulde. But
that euer I intended treason or villainie, it is most false,
and Countie thou liest in thy throate, and thy copartners
that haue sworne with thee. It is sufficient, said Palmerin:
but my Lord, ꝙ he to the King, if wee be conquerers, the accused
shall bee deliuered, and the accusers hanged? What
saie you Countie, quoth the King? Good reason Sir, the like
doo we request if we be victors. Will you (saide Palmerin)
that eache shall helpe his fellow as he findes it conuenient?
What els? said the Countie, that is expedient. While this
talke endured, Edron regarded so well Palmerin, that hee
espied the Sworde which the Damosell carried in the Casket,
and brought to that Courte as she did to others, which
shewing the Countie, he saide out aloude. Where did the
deuils finde this Knight to giue him this Sworde? Belike
they gaue him strength to drawe it out, els he might haue
failed as manie other did: the Damosell was vnwise to bestowe
it in such bad sorte. At which wordes Palmerin beeing
angry, returned Edron this rounde au
                           •
                        swere. I see
(Knight) there is in thee more brauery and foolishe glorie
then manlie action, thou blamest mee before thou knowest
me, but ere you and I part, Ile finde better reason to bestowe
on you, and beate better gouernment into your pate
with this sword that likes you not. This caused euery one
wishlie to beholde Palmerin, the King remembring that he
had séene the Sworde, which none in his Court coulde deserue
to conquere: whereuppon he estéemed so well of Palmerin,
as he commaunded Edron to silence, and all to goe
arme themselues, because hee intended that day to see the
Combat fought.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXV.
                     
                        Howe Palmerin, Adrian & Ptolome entered the Combat,
against the Countie of Ormeque and his Cozins,
whom they honorably vanquished.
                     
                     
                        AFter the King had commaunded
the Knights to goe arme themselues,
he gaue charge to foure of
his auncientest Knights to see
the fielde prouided, and there to
place the Iudges, according to
the wonted custome in Bohemia:
the Knights béeing careful of the
Kinges commaunde, had soone
prepared all things in readines,
wherefore the King, his Lords, Ladies and Gentlewomen,
went to sée the issue of this valiant enterprise, Then was
the Prince Dyardo and faire Cardonya brought into the
fielde, before whom was made a very great fire, wherein
they should be burned, if the Countie conquered. Soone after
came the sixe Combatants, who entered at two places
appointed one against the other, the Challengers beeing
conducted by two of the Iudges to their place, and the Defendants
by the other two where they were appointed: so
the Iudges beeing placed, the Marshal summoned ye fielde,
and the Heraldes bid the Champions doo their deuo
                           •
                        re.
                     
                        Palmerin had good regard to Edron, whose words sticking
on his stomacke, called now for reuenge, wherefore
couching his Launce, he encountered him with such a full
carrire, as his Launce passed through his bodie, and Edron
tombled dead to the ground. In the meane while, ye Countie
and Prince Adrian had vnhorssed eache other, Adrian
                        
so sore wounded as he could hardlie helpe himselfe: as for
Ptolome and Edward, they had astonied each other with
falles from their Horsses, but they recouered themselues
quicklie, and with sharpe strokes beganne to charge eache
other valiantly. Greatlie ashamed was the Countie to bee
vnhorssed, and therfore to recouer his honour, he came with
great furie towardes his enemie: which Palmerin perceiuing,
stept betwéene them, saying. To me Countie, to mee,
who wil bid more for thy heade then anie in the field. With
which wordes he reached him such a sure stroke on ye head,
as made the fire flie foorth of his eyes: notwithstanding, as
a man of good courage, he stept aside, & thrusting his sword
into Palmerins Horse throate, enforced him quickly to take
him to his féete: but all the worse for him as it fell out afterwarde,
for Palmerin hauing beaten him out of breath, he
flong away his weapon, and caught him about the middle,
where they tugged so long togeather, that Palmerin getting
him downe, and his knées on his belly, with his sword
soone tooke his heade from his shoulders. All this while
Ptolome had good play with his enemie, and after manie
daungerous woundes receiued on either side, at length hee
had the better of the daie by killing his aduersarie. Then he
and Palmerin went to the Iudges, who giuing thē sentence
of honourable victory, they tooke of their Helmets, & came
to sée in what estate the Prince Adrian was. Euill enough
(quoth he) my noble good Fréends, but the lesse account doo
I make of my life, in that mine eyes haue séene due vengeaunce
on mine enemies. Then was he nobly borne forth
of the fielde, the King commaunding to lodge him in his
owne Pallace, and the Chirurgions searching his wounds,
founde them mortall, which newes did gréeue the whole
Court ingenerall: the good olde Prince yet béeing of some
courage, was ioyfull to die in so good sorte, hauing defended
his owne honour and his Sonnes, wh
                           •
                        me he sent
for, and in the presence of all the standers by, sa
                           •
                        d, My Son,
séeing it hath pleased God thus to sende for me, good reason

is it that his will bee fulfilled, but ere I depart, this I commaunde
thée, that (next God) thou truely serue and loue my
Lorde the King, bearing towards him a hart so faithfull, as
I haue doone to the hower of my death: and conceiue no essence
at what hath passed against thée and me, hauing come
to passe (as I iudge) more by euill counsel, then any setled
perswasion against vs. For the rest, to thy vttermost, remē
                        ber
the good thou hast this daie receiued by y• noble Knight,
who is called Palmerin: then calling Palmerin to him, hee
saide. Sir Palmerin, death hath seized so surelie on me, as I
cannot let you know a number of things that concerne you
very néerelie, I counsell you therefore to trauaile to y• Emperours
Court of Allemaigne, where you shal heare tidings
of that you séeke so earnestlie: with which wordes hee deliuered
vppe his ghost. And because it seemeth good 
                           •
                        re I
passe any further, to let you knowe how the Prince Adrian
came by the knowledge of Palmerin, thus it is. I haue heretofore
reported, that he was a notable Cabalist or Magitian,
by meanes whereof fewe secrets were concealed from
him: so casting the Callender of most honourable byrthes,
he ha
                           •
                        pened on Palmerin, and perceiuing the high fortune
he was borne to, chéefelie that he shoulde prooue a most noble
K
                           ••
                        ght, and the greatest Lord in Europe, hee was desirous
to contract a marriage betwéene him and his Niece
Polinarda, presenting her to him in his visions, as hath
béene declared. Hee thus deceasing, the King highly discontented
at his Uncles harde fortune, caused him to be buried
in most sumptuous maner, making him a Tombe in forme
of a Piramides, the most excellent & stately that euer was
in Bohemia, and ouer against it, were hanged the bodies of
the Countie and his two Cozins, for his Trophe. Thus euery
thing quieted, and the funeralles of the Prince Adrian
solemnized, Palmerin woulde presentlie depart towardes
Allemaigne: but Ptolomes woundes were so daungerous,
as he was constrained to staie longer then he intended. In
the meane space, the King did them all the honour could be

deuised, in hope to stay them still in his Court, but it was
impossible, for Palmerin told him, he must néedes goe to the
Emperour, about affaires of very great importaunce. I
knowe your meaning well enough, saide the King, you intende
to goe Combat with the enchaunted Knight: and in
so dooing, you shall loose both your paines and your life, as
manie other haue doone before you. What enchaunted
Knight is it saide Palmerin? on my faith my Lord, I neuer
hearde anie one talke of him but you. Then will I tell yee,
(quoth the King) since I haue begun the matter. Not long
since in the Country of the Emperour mine Uncle, in the
Cittie of Y
                              •
                           manes dwelled a welthie Knight, who had a
fayre Daughter, amorous of a Gentleman, and their loue
kept so secrete as none knew it but themselues. It so fell
out, that her Father marryed her to another Gentleman in
his house, but for any good acceptation, or chéerefull countenaunce
of the Gentlewoman, the bridegrome could haue
none, so highlie estéemed she her first loue: and continued
in opinion towards him so firme, as she graunted him enteraunce
into her Chamber at an appointed time, where hee
murdered her Husbande, and carryed the Lady with hym
whether he pleased. The bruite heereof was so soone spred
abroade, as the mother of the murdered Gentleman heard
thereof, whereuppon she made her complaint to the Emperour,
who immediatlie sent to summon ye other before him:
but they refusing to come, and hauing taken themselues to
a very strong Castell, were in ye ende so straightly besieged,
as the Lady with her louer, at length were taken, & hauing
confessed the trueth of their offence, sentence was giuen on
them y• they should be burned. The Father to this Knight
offender so gréeued heereat, as hee went to one of his Sisters,
entending neuer to sée the Emperour or his Court againe.
His Sister séeing him in this extreamitie, (as no
mallice or bad inuention is comparable to a Womans) deuised
to enchaunt one of her Sonnes, a good & hardy Knight,
in such sort as he shoulde neuer bee ouercome in fight, but

with an enchauntment of greater force. Beside, shee gaue
him a Bow, and a great companie of impoysoned arrowes,
wherewith he should kill the Emperour and his Children,
or anie other whome himselfe pleased: which hee had not
failed to haue doone, but mine Uncle Adrian vnderstanding
thereof, did take such regarde to the matter, as hee coulde
not hurt them, but many of his people, so that the Country
is wonderfully perplexed. For hee is mounted on a Horse
enchaunted as himselfe is, the swiftest in pace y• euer was
séene, wherewith he flies into manie out places of the Empire,
committing a thousand harmes and cannot be stayed,
for whosoeuer comes to him armed, Knight or pesant, all
dies the death, and none escapes him. And that which is
worst of all, it is commonly reported, that if mine Uncle
will not giue him his eldest Sonne Trineus, and faire Poli
                           
                              •
                           arda
his Daughter, to doo with them what shall like his
humour, hee will neuer departe the Countrey, til he haue
thorowly ruinated it. By my Sworde (my Lorde) sayde
Palmerin, in all my life I neuer heard so strange a tale,
were I sure to die a thousande deathes, I will fight with
this deuill, and deliuer the Countrey if my strength wyll
compasse it. Alas my good Fréende, sayde the King, it would
much displease me, that you should hazard your selfe in such
daunger, for where such deuillish enchauntments are, the
strength of man (howe great so
                           •
                        uer it be) dooth not auayle:
and therefore for my sake I pray you to forbeare. Let come
what pleaseth God said Palmerin, for if I die nowe, I shall
be excused for euer h
                           •
                        ereafter. W
                           •
                        ll sawe the King that he
coulde not chaunge him, therefore he left off any further to
intreate him: and too long he thought hee tarryed for Ptolomes
health, so desirous was he to be with the Emperour,
hoping that his Combat with ye enchaunted Knight, would
graunt him meanes to sée and talke with fayre Polinarda.
Wherefore, when his cōpanion had gotten a little strēgth,
they tooke theyr leaue of the King and the Ladies, chéefelie
of the Prince Dyardo & fayre Cardonya: who after theyr

departure had such successe in their loue, as with y• Kinges
consent the marriage was finished. Nowe are Palmerin
and Ptolome on their way to Gaunt, where the Emperour
made his continuall aboade: the enchaunted Knight so persecuting
him, as he durst at no time come foorth of his Castell.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXVI.
                     
                        Howe Palmerin and Ptolome arriued at the Cittie of
Gaunt, where the Emperour of Allemaigne kept his
Courte, and of the Combat betweene Palmerin and
the enchaunted Knight.
                     
                     
                        GOod expedition made these
Knights in their iourney, tyll at
length they arriued at the Citty
of Gaunt, where the Emperor of
Allemaigne then soiourned, not
knowing howe to depart thence,
because the enchaunted Knight
watched him at all howres: our
Knightes béeing thus come thether,
lodged in the house of a welthie
Burgesse, where they were entertained in very honorable
maner. They were no sooner dismounted from theyr
Horsses, but the whole Cittie was on a suddaine vprore,
and the people ranne on heapes from one place to another:
which made him remember what the King of Bohemia had
tolde him, and presently he imagined what after followed,
for his Hoste in great feare came running to him, saying.
                     Alas Sir, we all are vndoone, the enchaunted Knight hath
gotten the Gates of our Cittie, and in despight of ye guarde
he is entered: wonderfull is the harme that he will nowe

doo, if the Prince Trineus and fayre Polynarda be not reskewed.
God defende such harde fortune, saide Palmerin, rather
will I fight with him, and if I die, I shall accompanie
many other in vnfortunate successe. With these words hee
tooke his Launce, and galloped that way where hee hearde
the tumult, which was at the Emperours Castell, where
the enchaunted Knight was shooting his arrowes at the
windowes he espied open. Ioyfull was Palmerin to finde
him in so fit a place, where his Lady Polinarda might giue
iudgment of his valour, which opinion did so renewe hys
courage, as presently he marched towards his enemie, who
held in his hande a Persian Bowe, with an arrow in it, readie
to shoote, hauing a great sorte more at his backe in his
Quiuer: he was of vnreasonable stature, yet with a countenaunce
sterne and couragious, all which could not dismay
Palmerin, but called to him in this maner. Proud Knight,
that by the ayde of deuils and euill spirits hast committed
monstrous cruelties: it is nowe time that hee whom thou
seruest should haue his pray, which is thy soule into endlesse
perdition. And so without staying for any aunswer, hee ran
valiantly against him: but the enchaunted Knight taking
his aduauntage, shot an arrowe at him so violently, as if
pierced through his Armour to the bare flesh. Palmerin hauing
broken his Launce, with an yron Mace he had, he reached
such a stroke to the Knight, as hee brake his Bowe in
two peeces, and the blowe falling on the head of his Horse,
made him therewithall fall deade to the grounde. The
Knight hauing recouered himselfe, tooke a Mace that hung
at his saddle Bowe, and came against Palmerin, who was
nowe on foote likewise: so layd they on loade terribly with
their Maces, that the Emperour and his Lordes and Ladies
hearing the strokes, came to the windowes to see the
Cōbat, little thinking that any one durst presinne to meddle
with his enemie, yet all this while the Knights neuer
breathed, though theyr Sheeldes and Armour were very
much mangled, and their bodies wounded in many places.

And because Palmerin sawe the sight endure so long wyth
the Mace, he threw it downe and tooke him to his Sword,
wherewith he did so bumbaste him about the heade, as hee
could scant tell where to strike againe: but the Knight on
a suddaine lifting vp his Mace, gaue Palmerin such a stroke
betwéene the head and the shoulders, as made him reele to
and fro amazedly, yet comming to himselfe, and seeing the
Knight faint with his great expence of bloode, closed with
him, and casting his legge behinde him, threw him to the
grounde, when setting his foote on his brest to kéepe him
downe, with his sworde he parted hys head from his bodie.
What question were it, whether the Emperour reioysed
hereat or no
                           •
                         who for his whole Empire wold not he were
aliue againe, béeing so well deliuered from his onely enemy
in the worlde, that coulde so molest him and his Countrey
with such crueltie. And to say sooth, the enchaunted Knight
was altogeather inuincible, nor could Palmerin haue thus
preuailed against his wonderfull enchauntments, but that
the thrée Magicall Sisters of the Mountaine Artifaeria
highly fauoured him, as you hearde before what promises
they made him.
                     The Combat béeing thus ended, and the enchaunted
Knight dead, the Emperour (giuing thanks to God for this
victory) let open the Gates of the Castell, and came foorth
himselfe to welcome Palmerin, who kneeling on his knee
before the Emperour, thus spake. Mighty Prince, such renowne
haue I hearde through the worlde, of your excéeding
honour and bountie, as I haue trauailed many straunge
Countries to come offer you my seruice, desiring your highnes,
(if my sute may seeme reasonable) to accept me hence
forth amongst your Knightly Seruaunts. Ah faire Knight,
aunswered the Emperour, it is for me to know of you, how
I may re
                           •••
                        erate this vnspeakable courtesie, for but by
you, mine enemie had triumphed in my spoyle: so much thē
is my selfe, my Children and Countrey bounde to you, as
no satis-faction is sufficient to regratiate. So taking him by

the hand, and perceiuing his body woūded in many places,
he conducted him into one of the fayrest Chambers in hys
Castell, where he was vnarmed, commaunding his Chirurgions
to take dilligent care of him, because in truth they
much doubted his life. Wherfore getting him into his bed,
all néedefull things for his health were applyed to him, and
no cost was spared, to saue his life that preserued the whol
                           •
                        
Countrey.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXVII.
                     
                        Howe the Empresse came to visite Palmerin, who kept
his Chamber, because he had receiued such daungerous
woundes, in the Combat with the enchaunted Knight,
and of the speech he had with the fayre Princesse Polinarda.
                     
                     
                        THe Empresse with her fayre
Daughter Polinarda, gladde of
the death of the enchaunted
Knight, came to Palmerins chā
                        ber
to visite him, who hearing
of their comming, cast a night
Mantle about him which the
Emperor had sent him, & came
with greate reuerence to welcome
them: so desirous was he
to sée her, for whom he had trauailed so manie strange Regions.
In this place it is necessary that you remēber, what
gratious gifts the thrée fatall Sisters bestowed on him, in
the Mountaine Artifaeria, one of them graunting him this
speciall fauour, that he should be highlie estéemed of her to
whom he was destenied, so soone as she behelde him, which
came t
                           •
                         passe as héere shall be declared. Palmerin expecting

the entrance of the Empresse & her Daughter in his Chamber,
méeting them at the dore, falling on his knée, did with
great humilitie kisse their handes: but the Empresse taking
him vppe in her armes, saluted him with these spéeches.
Gentle Knight, right happy may we count our selues
by your comming hether, the Realme béeing more desolate
then it hath béene séene héeretofore, and not without cause▪
in respect of the great iniurie the Knight did vs, wh
                           •
                        m you
haue slaine, he hauing sworne the death of my children that
neuer offended him: but God bee thanked the lot hath fallen
on himselfe, which he determined to inflict on other, for
which great grace they stand so déepelie bound to you, as to
their Father that first gaue them life, which by your prowesse
you haue happilie preserued, this second gift béeing of
no lesse account then the first, worthelie may you bee called
their seconde Father. Palmerin giuing eare to ye Empresse
salutations, had his minde more busied in beholding Polinarda,
whose daintie regarde so maistred his opinions, as
heade, hart, thoughts and all were nowe sette to work: yet
couertly he shaped this answere to the Empresse. Madame,
what I haue doone for you and yours, is nothing in respecte
of my great good will: for since the time I first had knowledge
of my selfe, and before I receiued the order of knighthoode,
vnderstanding of my Lord the Emperour, and what
honourable entertainment was in his Court, I dedicated
my seruice to him onelie, and for this cause Madame came
I hither. But howe is it possible Sir, saide she, that you can
content your selfe to be one of his Knights, your deserts bein
so great? Very well Madame, quoth he, and yours too,
so please your highnes to affoorde me such fauour. With all
my hart Sir, said she, shall I entertaine you towardes the
Emperour, and on mine owne behalfe will prouide better
for you then I will speake of: and did it like you, I woulde
accept you for a Uirgins Knight héere, and none other.
Whereuppon shee called her Daughter Polinarda, saying.
Faire Daughter, this Knight as yet hath little acquaintance

in the Court, I praie you sée his entertainment maie
be good, because his desire is to make staie with vs, and for
your owne part, looke that you intreate him well, with this
request, that you accept him for your seruaunt, and he shall
be your Knight. And are you bothe agréed Ladies, said Palmerin?
Heauen forsake me if I refuse honour of so high account.
And as they woulde haue procéeded on, the Emperor
came in and brake off their talke, and comming to the Empresse,
saide. Madame, I beséeche you haue good regarde to
the health of this Knight, and let our Chirurgions not trifle
the time with him, for I perswade my selfe, that the enchaunted
Knight with his venomed arrowes, hath wounded
him with great daunger inwardlie, and hath besides
sore brused his bodie with the weight of his Mace. But
Palmerin hauing Polinarda so néere him, neither minded
his woundes or what the Emperour had spoken, his obiect
more delighted, then his woundes gréeued him, then the
Emperour taking him by the hande, saide. I pray you my
déere Freende to bee of good comfort, dispayre not for anie
thing I beseeche you, and bee aduised by them y• haue care
of your health, for you shall want nothing if my Crowne
will purchase it. So departed hee and the Empresse, with
their Daughter Polinarda, whome loue had already so inueigled,
that she (béeing yet but tender of yéeres) found her
selfe so restrained of her libertie, as scant she knewe howe
to dissemble this suddaine affection: and from that time
forward she became so sadde and pensiue, as one of her Ladies,
the most fauoured and familiar with her, named Brionella,
Daughter to the Duke of Saxon, well perceiued it,
yet durst shee not presume to demaunde, whence procéeded
this strange alteration, but so circumspectly did she regarde
the Princesse, as she well noted the grounde of her gréefes.
Whereuppon it happened, that one time amongst other,
they two béeing alone togeather, Brionella iudging that her
Ladie delighted to heare spéeche of Palmerin, nowe to hitte
the nayl
                           •
                         on the heade, she thus began. What say you Madame,

(by your fauour) of the newe come Knight? did you
euer sée a brauer and more accomplisht Gentleman: Upon
my faith Madame, in mine opinion, I thinke that nature
hath wrought all her perfections in him, and fauoured him
aboue all other Knights in manhoode and Chiualrie. Ah
Brionella, aunswered the Princesse, thou art not alone of
this opinion, for I euer thought as much though I kept it
in silence: would God I had as great authoritie ouer him,
as he alreadie hath gotten ouer me. Is the matter so with
you, saide Brionella? it shoulde séeme you are in looue with
him then. To tell thée the trueth Brionella, quoth shee, I
am, and did I not doubt foure other hath preuented mee, I
would aduenture to make him mine. In good sooth Madam,
said Brionella, you two béeing vnited togeather in one reciprocall
league of loue, well might it bee reported the
most honourable match, and of the two noblest yong Princes
through the whole worlde: and séeing you haue made
a choyse so worthie, dismay not good Madame, but proceede
in your determination. Thus deuised the two Ladies together
on Palmerin, who was no lesse in affliction for ye looue
of Polinarda, whom hee had searched with so gréat payne
and trauaile, and had nowe founde with so high good fortune.
If loue was so earnest with him before in his sléeping
visions, hauing not séene her: much more vehement was
the impression nowe, hauing her in presence. Whereupon
the day folowing, he called for his garments, and as he was
making himselfe readie, the Emperour by one of his Gentlemen
sent him the good morrow, desirous to vnderstande
in what plight he felt himselfe. Good Sir, aunswered Palmerin
to the Gentleman, I beséeche you doo my humble dutie
to the Emperour for this great courtesie, and you may
thus assure him, that (heauen be praised) I féele my selfe
in so good estate as euer I did. Which the Emperour hearing
was highlie contented, and sent to desire his companie
to the Chappell, where Palmerin (neuer before so throughlie
touched with the forcible assaults of looue) glaunced so

manie swéete lookes on the Princesse Polinarda, and breathed
so many sighes, the secrete Ambassadours of his harte,
as it was a heauen to him to be in these passions. The Emperour
and all the traine returned from the Chappell, they
went to meate, and Palmerin beeing placed right against
Polinarda, was in such fits as hee knewe not what countenaunce
to vse: for his couller went and came in such manner,
as the Princesse might easilie iudge the cause of his dolour,
wherupon she presentlie presumed, that she had more
interrest in his thoughts then ere she looked for. The like
opinion conceiued he of her, yet was no other testimony deliuered
on either side, then sad countenances, the reuealers
of a tormented spirite. Thus continued these two louers,
till the Tables were withdrawne, and then the Lords and
Ladies fel to dauncing, in which delight and diuers other,
the whole day was spent, till the Empresse and her Ladies
departing to their Chambers, the good night on all sides
was reuerently giuen: when Palmerin went to his lodging
in such an agonie, as more likelie to die then liue, hee
threwe himselfe on his bedde, where hauing sighed and sorrowed
long time gréeuously, at length hee brake foorth into
these tearmes. Ah Palmerin, vnhappy, wretched and moste
miserable, nowe art thou entred into such a Laborinth, as
impossible is it for thée to get out again with life, but what
shoulde mooue thee to so high an enterprise, béeing no way
able to equall her that is second to none? Alas, nowe doo I
plainlie sée the small credite is to bee reposed in Dreames,
and that the visions I saw in my Father Gerrards house,
on the Mountaine Artifaeria and els where, are friuolous
illusions, and of no account: with them may I ioyne ye promise
made mee by olde Adrian, who boasted to knowe so
much of my fortunes, for looue is not of such power on my
behalfe, that faire Polinarda either can or will make anie
reckoning of me. Then Palmerin resolue thy selfe suddainlie
to die, that this inuisible and consuming fire, which by
little and little melts thée away, may bee extinguished, and

thy selfe eased. With these wordes he breathed foorth such
an extreame sighe, as Vrbanillo the Dwarffe (being néere)
hearde him, who doubting least any newe mischaunce had
happened, by the priuie woundes she enchaunted Archer
gaue him, made hast to know the cause of this euill. Ah Vrbanillo,
quoth Palmerin, I finde my selfe farre worse then
deade. What my Lorde, sayd the Dwarffe, now you ought
to be of best disposition, will you deceiue vs with this alteration?
The Emperour neuer gaue you bad countenaunce
since your comming, whence then shoulde procéede thys
straunge conceit? No no Vrbanillo, quoth hee, it is not the
Emperor, but a Lorde of greater power then his Maiestie.
It is Looue my Lad, the strickt commaunder of the stoutest
mindes, he hath conquered mee, and well I knowe I shall
die, if thou doo not finde the meane to helpe mee. By my
fayth my Lorde (quoth the Dwarffe) so please you to tell
me howe and wherein I may helpe you, let me die a thousande
deathes if I doo it not. Understande then my good
Vrbanillo, sayd Palmerin, that this strange alteration, procéedes frō the diuine lookes of my péerelesse Mistresse Polinarda,
whose fiery beames haue searched so narowly euery
corner of my thoughts, as I must die because I loue too déerlie.
But couldest thou make knowne to her the least parte
of my insupportable vexations, may bee shee woulde haue
some pittifull remorse of my martirdome: for well may it
be iudged, that a Lady accomplished with so many vertuous
perfections, must néedes bee stored with sweetnes, fauour
and pittie. Not vnlike my good Lord, said Vrbanillo,
but doo not you remember how I was punished, when in
the like case I ventured to sollicite your looue to Laurana,
Daughter to the Duke of Durace? by my fayth my Lorde,
I shall not forget it while I haue a day to liue, and am afrayde
to fall againe into the like daunger. And this spake
Vrbanillo with such a grace, as Palmerin coulde not but
laugh, noting with what feare the deformed felow gaue
it foorth, whereupon he sayd. Thou needest not be dismaid,

if she that smote thée in thy sléepe bee that Polinarda, for
whose loue I am thus tormēted, & for whom I was borne,
as many haue enformed me: I pray thée therefore speake
to her, and dreade no coullers. It is good, saide Vrbanillo,
that you woulde haue mee more hardie then you are your
selfe: speake to her your selfe if you dare, for I dare not aduenture
it for feare of my life. If thou doost it not (quoth
Palmerin) assure thy selfe thou shalt neuer henceforth serue
me. Nay then (quoth the Dwarffe) I will rather put my
selfe in ieoperdy, to be better beaten then I was ye last time
before I will loose so good a Maister. I pray thée doo, sayde
Palmerin, in respect thou séest the earnestnes of mine affections.
Feare not (quoth the Dwarffe) albeit you were a
great deale more fit to breake the matter then I: but I wil
gadge my life to gaine you the Ladie, and héereupon they
rested till the next morning.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXVIII.
                     
                        Howe Polinarda desired Palmerin to giue her his
Dwarffe, and of the speeche which she and Vrbanillo
had afterward togeather.
                     
                     
                        EArly the next morning Palmerin
arose, and hauing walked abroade
to contemplate his desires,
returned into the Chamber
of presence, where he founde
Trineus the Emperors Sonne,
conferring with the Ladies: at
which very instant the Dwarff
entred, whose badde shaped body
and face, made them all fall a
laughing, so that Trineus came to his Sister Polinarda, saying.
Sister, did you euer beholde a more proper Page to attende

on Ladies, then this gaunt Squire that serues my
Lorde Palmerin? In good 
                           •
                        ooth Brother, quoth she, hee is
farre vnlike his noble maister, yet wold I like well enough
if he were mine. I beséech you Sir Palmerin, said Trineus,
bestowe your Seruaunt on my Sister Polinarda. Madame,
quoth Palmerin, were he better, hee is yours and his
Maister likewise, then called hee Vrbanillo, who knéeling
to vnderstand his Maisters pleasure, hee saide: Vrbanillo,
I haue giuen you to my Ladie Polinarda as her man, will
you not serue her honourablie and truelie aboue all other?
Yea my Lorde, quoth he, next after you, but you will I not
leaue while I liue, although you woulde disdaine my seruice.
Good reason hast thou, said the Princesse, and wel am
I pleased it shold be so: yet during ye time of his stay heere,
you shall forsake him and abide with mee. For y• Madame,
quoth the Dwarffe, I am well contented. Then looke you
faile not, said the Princesse, hencefoorth to giue your attendaunce.
These spéeches were thus vsed as it were for pastime,
that shee might thereby deceiue the iudgments of other:
but her whole intent was, to know of Vrbanillo, if
his Maister were affected to any other Ladie, by whose
meanes her loue might be frustrate. For as you haue heard
a little before, that loue had brought her vnder such obeysaunce,
as did not the regarde of honour with-holde her, her
selfe would first breake the Ise of her vexations, rather thē
S
                           •
                        aie too long and not be solicited. Many other deuises had
the Ladies with Vrbanillo, who knewe so well howe to behaue
himselfe, as from thence forward he grew so familiar
amongst them: as he woulde enter their Chambers when
himselfe pleased, vnder couller of attendaunce on the Princesse
Polinarda, from time to time to mooue his Maisters
messages. But at length she preuented him in this sort, for
béeing alone at a windowe in the presence Chamber, shee
called the Dwarffe, and making her entraunce by other
occasions, she asked him whose Sonne Palmerin was. God
knowes Madame, quoth hee, for I doo not, nor himselfe

neither: but of this I can assure you, y• neuer was Knightlie
Chiualrie better imployed by any then by him, for since
the time of my knowledge, he hath doone such noble acts, as
it is not remembred that 
                           •
                        uer Knight in this age did the
like. And then from point to point he discoursed, all y• 
                        Palmerin
had doone since he came to him: and can you thinke
then Madame, (quoth the Dwarffe) that he is not d
                           •
                        sceded
of noble linage? Trust me Ladie, I haue my self heard
by manie learned Magitians and other, that their diuinations
were no lesse then I saie. When Polinarda heard the
Dwarffe thus speake on his Maisters behalfe, if before his
loue had kindled her liking, no meruaile if hart and spirite
were nowe enflamed: so that nowe she could no longer cō
                        ceale
what she had hetherto couered, and therefore sayde
to the Dwarffe. I beséech thée Vrbanillo, by the faith and
duetie thou bearest to thy Maister, t
                           •
                        l me one thing that I
desire to knowe of him, which shall bee nothing but to his
honour and aduantage. You haue so coniured mee, faire
Madame, quoth the Dwarffe, as death shall not make me
hide what you please to command, if it lye in me to resolue
you. Knowe then Vrbanillo, said the Princesse, that I looue
thy Maister as well as my Brother Trineus, and am desirous
to knowe of thee, what Ladie it is hee estéemes aboue
all other, because when I knowe her, I may loue her the
better for his sake: withall, that I may commend the Ladies
happines, whose fortune is to be loued of so braue a
Gallant. Well perceiued the Dwarffe, that now or neuer
was the time to bestirre himselfe, according to the promise
he made his Maister: wherefore hee aunswered the Princesse
in this manner. Beléeue me Madame, were it to anie
other, I would not reueale such secrets of my Lorde as you
desire to knowe: but to you that are his Lady & Mistresse,
I am content to bewraie ye whole. Suffiseth then Madame,
that he loueth in such sorte, as if the heauens sende him not
remedie the sooner, vnpossible is it that his life should long
endure: for I sée him so far beside himselfe, and tormented

with so manie passions, as euerie howre his death is expected.
What will ye Ladie that I say? hee complaines, hee
sighes, and daie by daie is in such dispaire for his Ladies
loue: as happie might I haue accounted him, had he neuer
séene her, or that his daies were as short as his desires. If
then Polinarda were in doubt (not iudging herselfe to bée
shée) it may easilie bee imagined, and presently was shee
brought into such perplexitie, as the vermillion couller in
her chéekes began to change, such suddaine feares possessed
her, and so manie sundry opinions thwarted her conceite, as
faine she woulde haue spoken, but coulde not of long time,
wherby the Dwarffe discerned the cause of her alteration,
yet he dissembled what he sawe, and thus continued on his
discourse. Nowe considering (faire Madame) the high deserts
of my Lorde, may she be estéemed happy (as you saie)
that shall cause the losse of the best Knight liuing this day?
Ah Mistresse, if he die (as God forbid) farwell the flower
of all noblenes, and the most assured Fre
                           •
                        nde to distressed
Ladies. Wherefore I beséeche you pardon
                           •
                         mee, if I shall
name her vnto you, and let mee intreate you to dealé with
her so farre, that the courtesie wherein she is indebted to so
goo
                           •
                         a Knight as my Master is, may be shewed effectually,
as that she would loue and fauour him, as he dooth & hath
verie well deserued. Trust me Vrbanillo, aunswered the
Princesse, when I knowe the Ladie, I will, and beside, if
she doo not regarde his passions as she ought, I will intreate
her at my request to be more pittifull. These wordes procured
a suddaine iealouzie in her, that shee shoulde promise
to another what she desired her selfe: yet earnest to bee resolued,
she vowed to fulfill her promise, and therefore desired
him to tell her name. So you will giue mee your
worde Madame, quoth the Dwarffe, not to take in ill parte
what I shall saie, I will satis-fie your request presently. Be
léeue me, saide the Princesse, I will not, rather perswade
thy selfe, that héerein thou doost me great pleasure. Ah fayre
Princesse, quoth the Dwarff, it is for you and no other that

my Lord is thus tormented, it is for you that heé liues and
dies a hundred times a daie: swéete Ladie haue pittie on
him, and séeke not the losse of so good a Knight, who looues
you déerer then his owne life. At which aunswere shee was
supprized with incredible pleasure, yet feigning the contrarie,
she saide: Is it I? and howe long I praie you? By my
faith Madame, quoth he, that can I not well tell yee, but I
haue hearde him say of long time, more then foure yeeres
before he was Knighted, hee vowed himselfe yours: since
which time, all his honourable actions hath hee onely dedicated
to your praise. So that to finde you, hee left the King
of Macedon, and his Sonne Florendos, of whom hee was
estéemed as no man the like, yet that honour hée forsooke to
doo you seruice: and for your loue he yéelded himselfe as vassaile
to the Emperour your Father, and gaue himselfe your
Knight if you deigne to accept him. When Polynarda had
well hearde the Dwarffe, (albeit her harte floted in ioyes)
yet could she so well commaunde her thoughts, as shee seemed
to make smal account of his words: notwithstanding,
she returned him this aunswéere. I promised thée Vrbanillo,
not to conceiue ill of ought thou shouldest tell me, nor doo
I: yet wold I haue thee to regard my calling, béeing daughter
to so great a Prince as is the Emperour. But if it bee
so, that Palmerin thy Lorde beares me such speciall affection,
I must let him knowe by thée, that it would haue 
                           •
                        éene
farre more séemelie, himselfe to haue told me, then to make
thée Ambassadour in such secrete affaires: neuerthelesse, I
not mislike his honourable loue and good will, whereof I
shall thinke better, when I knowe the effecte is conformable
to thy protestations. Madame (quoth the Dwarffe) so
you would please to vouchsafe him time and place, hee will
acquaint you with strange matter concerning bothe your
destinies: which courtesie can no waie impeache your honour.
Why tell him, saide the Princesse, he shall haue mee
dailie héere in the Chamber of presence, where he may saie
his pleasure with safetie: in meane space, I accept him as

my Knight, charging him, that he doo not depart the Court
without my licence, if hee desire to doo mee pleasure. The
Dwarffe well pleased with so good an aunswere, on hys
knee kissing the Princesse hande, tooke leaue of her to returne
towardes Palmerin: who méeting him by the waie,
in place conuenient, saide. Howe nowe Vrbanillo? what
newes hast thou brought me? life or death? So good newes
Maister, aunswered the Dwarffe, as you haue good occasion
to repute your selfe, the moste fortunate Knight that euer
bare Armes. Then Palmerin embracing him, saide. Ah tell
me what they are, hast thou spokē with diuine Polinarda?
takes shee anie pittie on my consuming cares? That dooth
she my Lorde, quoth the Dwarffe, and commandes you by
me, [if you be so vowed hers as I haue perswaded] y• hence
foorth you depart not the Emperours Courte without her
leaue. Then recited he the whole talke betwéene them, and
lastlie the pleasure she conceiued in so good tydings, so that
she accepted him onelie for her Knight. While y• Dwarffe
continued this discourse, Palmerin was rauished with such
inwarde ioy, as with a great sigh, he said. Oh heauens, how
doo you fauour me? nowe sée I well, that my seuerall apparitions
on the Mounts of Oliues and Artifaeria, are predestinations
ordeyned to mee by your gracious prescience: I
beséeche you therefore humblie, that what you haue promised,
may soone come to effect, for the regarde of incomparable
Polinarda. Then demaunded hee, by what meanes he
might attaine to speake with the Princesse? She sayth, ꝙ
he, that you shall dailie haue her in the presence, or in the
Empresse Chamber, and there may you safely impart your
whole minde vnto her. But I haue other newes to tel yee,
for I vnderstand certainlie, that the Emperour intendes a
matter greatlie for your aduauntage: he minds to morrow
to visite one of his Castelles neere at hande, and there to
passe the time in honour of the Ladies, will haue a Tourney.
There (better then any where els) may you and Polinarda
conferre togeather: therfore courage your selfe, and

goe keepe comanie with my Lorde the Emperour, it may
bee himselfe will acquaint you with this enterprise. Now
credite me Vrbanillo, saide Palmerin, thou hast doone so
much for mee, as I shall neuer recompence thée while I
liue: but I pray thée tell mee, did shee not at the first take
my message strangelie? That did she (quoth the Dwarffe)
when I perswaded her that you loued a Lady in such sorte,
as hardlie coulde you liue without her fauourable regarde:
then she thinking it was some other and not herselfe, changed
couller meruailous passionatlie, but let it suffise you,
that she is as deepe in loue as you are or can be. So went
Palmerin to the Emperour, who calling him to him, saide.
My noble Freende, I shal make knowne to you, what hath
béene concluded in your absence, the Ladies of our Courte
haue beene so long lockt in, for feare of the enchaunted
Knight whom you haue slaine, as they haue desired to prograce
a little: for which cause, and to pleasure them, I am
thus determined. Two leagues hence haue I a goodly Castell,
enuironed with woods and pleasant Meddowes, there
may wee hunte the wilde Harte and Bore with other pastimes:
but nowe haue I caused Scaffolds and other prouision
to be made there for a Tourney, and fortie Knightes
will I appoint in this action, tenne against tenne, and the
first conquerers shall keepe the fielde against tenne other
that shall reuenge the tenne vanquished, so hauing all iousted,
they shall fight at Barriers with rebated swordes, and
the brauest Champion shall haue a rich Iewell, which the
Empresse hath prouided for the purpose. Nowe woulde I
haue you one of the ten challengers, and my Nephew Ganareno
on the Defendants side, for him doo I esteeme one
of the best Knights in my Courte: will you not doo thus
much at my request? God forbid, saide Palmerin, that I
shoulde refuse any thing you please to commaunde. These
newes were immediatly published through the Courte,
which made euery Knight speedilie to prepare himselfe, in
hope to be of the number of the fortie, that should performe

the Tourney: and thus they priuilie imparted to their Ladies,
howe they would breake both Sword and Launce for
their loue. Among whom Ptolome was not the last, for he
so affected the yong Princesse Brionella, as he had made her
sole Mistresse of his hart, yet coulde he not find the meanes
to acquaint her therewith: but the next day, as shee rode among
the Ladies, they had good leysure to conferre togeather,
and before they arriued at the Castell, they discouered
thorowlie to eache other their affections, promising mutuallie
such a iust consent in loue, as the one should bragge of
the others happines. While they continued their amorous
discourses, Palmerin, who had newlie presented himselfe to
Polinarda, was greatly discontented, because so soone as he
came to her, the Empresse called her, and left not talking
with her till they alighted from horsebacke: notwithstanding
before night, he gayned recompence for that disaduantage,
for after Supper, the Emperor and the Ladies went
a walking by a goodlie Riuers side, there to disporte themselues
in the coole of the euening. Nowe was it the merrie
Maie moneth, when the fieldes were richlie decked with
Natures Tapistrie, and Cupid gaue oportunitie to hys
Subiects, to contemplate theyr swéete and affable desires,
and well came it to passe for Palmerin, while Trineus and
Ptolome were conuerssing with the Empresse: that he taking
his Mistresse by the arme, walked with her amongst
the faire flowers, and seeing the time and place serue him
so well, trembling (as supprised with a vehement passion)
thus began. Madame, your gracious nature will not count
it strange, but rather take it in good part, that I a Knight
errant, and as yet vnknowne among courtlie assemblies,
should presume to make known a secrete to you, which my
selfe dare not imagine without reuerence, & death can cause
me declare to none: nor may I procéede without some assurance
of my vncertaine hope, by her diuine pittie that giues
me life. And although the wordes of my Dwarffe haue acquainted
me with your princely fauour, sufficiēt to expel all

feare and suspition of reproofe: yet such is the height wher
to I aspire, as the greatest Monarche in the worlde 
                           •
                        anne
scantly deserue, then well may I estéeme my selfe vnworthie▪
But doubting whether your spéeches were such, or
that my Dwarffe (as such as he often may doo) hath reported
more then he had in charge: I am desirous, (trusting on
your benignitie and speciall fauour aboue all other) to vnderstande,
if your pleasure bee so highlye to honour mee,
as henceforth to accept me for your Knight and Seruaunt.
And if such vndeserued grace may fall to my lot: I shall not
onely acknowledge, that Fortune hath directed my course
to the onely place of honour, but shall haue good occasion beside
to make knowne by my Knighthoode, that I am the fauoured
of the most faire Princesse. Héerein good Madame,
you shall not dissent from reason, if I hauing lost my libertie
by beeing onelie yours, want the modestie that shoulde
sheelde me in your high regarde: therefore may you swéete
Ladie in mine excuse, accuse loue and your celestial beauty,
bothe stronger to cōmande then I to gainesay. My Dwarff
hath let you knowe (as he tolde me) part of the paine I endure
for your sake, which you cannot but thinke well off, in
that my destenie so commaunded mee, long time before I
sawe or knewe you, not alone in visions, but by manifest
sollicitings, so that in search of you, I haue suffered such trauaile,
as maruaile it is that nature coulde make me able to
sustaine. Notwithstanding, I account all right happily bestowed,
if I may gaine fauour in your gracious eyes, without
which it is vnpossible for me to liue: for there is no part
possessing life or spirite in mee, that is not vowed to your
onelie seruice. These words were dipt in teares, and deliuered
with manie a bitter sigh, which mooued Polinarda to
such compassion, as taking him by the right hand, she began
to playe with his fingers, her trembling testifying her
secrete afflictions: and breaking off Palmerins discourse, as
he thought to haue continued longer, thus aunswered. Syr
Knight, it seemes by your countenaunce that you dispayre

of something, or els haue more fortitude then I can conceiue.
Esteeme you mee of so simple iudgment, that knowing
your valour and knightly perfections, I shoulde not account
my selfe happy to haue so braue a Champion? Let it
suffise you, that what Vrbanillo tolde you, is true, and in
regarde of the paine you suffer for my loue, and fancying
mee so firmelie as you doo: beléeue mee good Knight, you
feele no gréefe, but it is as familiar with me, so that what
thought you haue of mee, the like haue I of you, as time and
the vnspotted loue I beare you shall witnesse, in meane
time promise me not to depart my Fathers Court without
my consent. And because I sée the Ladies approching, refer
we the rest till some other time, when wee shall haue more
leysure to conferre togeather: and tell mee nowe if you bee
determined to ioust to morrowe? That will I Madame,
quoth hee, if it please you to commaunde me. In sooth saide
she, I will not hinder ye, because I knowe the honor of the
Tourney will be yours: for my sake therefore shall you
were this Bracelet, as a signe of my fauour and pledge of
my loue. So taking off her Bracelet, shee gaue it to Palmerin,
who receiued it with no little content: and so concluding
their talke, because manie Knights and Ladies came about
them, they walked where the Emperor and the Empresse
were, deuising with Ptolome and Trineus. Nowe because
darke night drew on, and y• euening dewe was dangerous,
they returned to the Castell, entending the next day after
dinner to begin the Tournament.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXIX.
                     
                        Howe Palmerin gained the honour of the Tourney, and of
that which happened afterward.
                     
                     
                        AFter the order of the Tourney
was sette downe by the Emperour,
as you haue heard, Palmerin
did but expecte the howre to
goe to it, not doubting to performe
such chiual
                           •
                        ie, that his
Ladies fauour shoulde be woorthilie
honoured: wherefore hauing
prepared all his necessaries
readye, immediatly after
Dinner, accompanied with nine other Knights brauely Armed,
whereof Ptolome was one, hee entered the Lysts royall.
And espying his Mistresse, Polinarda in the windowe
with the Empresse, after he had doone her hūble reuerence,
hee began to mannage his Horse with such braue carr
                           •
                        res,
as euerie one delighted to beholde him: but speciallie the
Princesse, whose harte loue had thorowlye conquered,
so that she gloried to be beloued of a Knight so worthy and
commendable, as that her eye was neuer from the obiect of
her swéete desires. And marking his Shéelde, she beh
                           •
                        lde in
a Sable fielde, a Siluer hand fast closed, the import whereof
caused her to meruaile, in respecte what had passed betwéene
them before, and gladly would she haue knowne the
meaning, but the place would affoorde no such conuenience:
wherefore perswading herselfe for the time, shee was content
in séeing her Bracelet, which her Knight wore vppon
his right arme. And after manie courses and loftie poynts,
doone by Palmerin and other Knights before their Ladies,

among whom Ptolome shewed so correspondent, as the presence
of his Ladie Brionella highlie prouoked him. Then
entered the Prince Ganareno, Nephewe to the Emperor,
a Knight of no small reckoning amongst the Allemaignes,
and with him nine other in most sumptuous Armour, and
their braueries likewise ended to their Ladies (yet nothing
comparable to Palmerin and his companions) they went to
their Tent, and while the Trompets & Clarions summoned
the fielde, euery Knight prepared himselfe in readines.
Palmerin, not so much to winne common applause, as her
loue that had the soueraigne power ouer him, séeing Ganareno
ordering himselfe to run first, tooke a strong Launce,
and encountred him with such puissaunce, as Horse & man
were bothe ouerthrowne, and very sore brused: notwithstanding,
hee was soone recouered by his companions, and
in a Chayre carried forth of the fielde. One of his Knights
would néedes reuenge his mis-fortune, and was himselfe in
like sort serued: in bréefe, the other eight had all one payment,
not one of them béeing able to mooue Palmerin from
his saddle. Palmerin ioyfull of his good successe, was departing
away with his cōpanie, when one of them thus spake
vnto him. Sir Palmerin, you haue saued our labour, and got
the honour that we desired. The time will come, (ꝙ Palmerin)
whē you may doo as much for me: but for this time
(if you please) you may excuse me. All that were present,
as well Lordes as Ladies, m
                           •
                        ruailed at the valoure of Palmerin:
and among the rest the Emperour, who said aloud,
that he neuer kn
                           •
                        we a more valiant Gentleman. Polinarda
béeing so néere as she heard her Fathers words, and had
herselfe beh
                           •
                        lde his high good fortune, was suddainly sollicited
with such affectionate pleasure, as forgetting herselfe
and where she was, she thus spake to Brionella indifferent
loude. What say you faire Fréende? dooth not Palmerin
worthily deserue to be loued? By my faith Madame, aunswered
she, I neuer sawe Knight giue such 
                           •
                        ough encounters
with the Launce, as he did to Ganareno and the rest

of his companions. Polinarda wold haue procéeded further,
but there entered tenne other Knights, the formost beeing
Ptolome, not content (as it séemed) that hee 
                           •
                        anne not at
the first, and then entered tenne Knights more, of whome
the formost was Cormedes an Allemaigne Knight. They
raunging themselues in order, Ptolome and Cormedes
brauelie encountred, but neither were vnhorss
                           •
                        d: which
gréeued Ptolome to doo no better in presence of his Ladie,
wherefore taking another Launce, at the seconde course
Cormedes was cast quite out of his saddle, and thrée more
of his fellowes after him for companie. Which when the
Duke of Lorraynes Brother perceiued, a Knight well accounted
of in that Countrey, desirous to recouer the honour
his foregoers hadde lost, thus spake to Ptolome. It séemes
that these Grecian Knights, are come to rob vs of the honor
that is ours by inheritaunce, in vnhappie howre were the
Allemaignes borne if they so suffer it: and so cou
                           •
                        ching his
Launce, met Ptolome with so full a carr
                           •
                        re, as loosing saddle
and stirrops he fell to the ground, and 
                           •
                        oure more of his
Knights after him had like entertainment, but a hardye
Knight of the Emperours named Menadus, met y• Dukes
Brother so rudelie, as downe hee fell to the grounde with
his saddle betweene his legs. Thus were manie braue encounters
with the Launce to vanquish one another, and all
for the loue of their Ladies, who delighted to sée theyr
Knights so brauelie behaue thēselues. The Ioust finished,
eache one allighted, and with their blunt Swordes fell to
the Barriers, and so cruelly they laid on each other, as they
would not suffer one another to take breath: especially Ptolome,
who buckled with the Duke of Lorraynes Brother,
to winne the honor he lost in the Iousting. And now a fresh
entered noble Palmerin, who as the onelie man to whome
Loue and Fortune were fauourable, raunged among the
thickest, and with his Sworde made way among them valiantlie:
at length he came to the Duke of Lorraynes Brother,
and so can
                           •
                        azed him about the pate with his blunt

Fauchion, as he fell to the ground greatlie 
                           〈◊〉
                        , charging
him to speake no more in disgrace of 
                           
                              •
                           recian Knights.
All the sport ended, the Knights withdr
                           •
                        w themselues into
their Chambers to be vnarmed, and 
                           〈◊〉
                         Knight wrapping
himselfe in his Mantle, Palmerin was in his Ladies
li
                           •
                        ery, for she had sent him a 
                           〈◊〉
                         rich one, and so comming
into the Chamber of presence, the Emperour welcommed
him in this manner. Beléeue me my Lorde, I account the
Prince happie that hath you for his Fr
                           ••
                        nde. As I am my
gracious soueraigne, answered Palmerin, I am your humble
and obedient Seruaunt during life, ready to accomplish
what shall please you to commaunde me. The Emperour
highly thanked him, and presently came the Empresse, one
of her Ladies bringing with her a riche 
                           〈◊〉
                        , all couered
with pearles and stones of great valew, which she presented
to Palmerin, as the prize and 
                           〈…〉
                         in
the Tourney, and saide to Polinarda. 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         Daughter, I
am sure you will bestowe some gift on Sir Palmerin, in
that he hath so worthilie deserued. These wordes raysed a
swéete blushing in the Princesse countenaunce, not a little
reioysing that he whom shee loued, had carryed awaie the
prize from all the other Knights: so with a prettie modest
smile, she tooke a chayne of Gold from about her neck, saying.
Sée heere Sir Palmerin what I giue yee, this gift is
to tye and chaine you in such sort, as you may neuer depart
from the Emperours seruice. Palmerin with excéeding contentment
receiued the Chaine, and on his knée hūbly thanked
the Empresse and the Princesse, to whom hee spake as
followeth. Madame, I am well contented to abide in such
a pryson, and neuer will I desire any other libertie, but still
will bee his vassaile that hath power to commaunde mee.
This aunswere pleased the Emperour excéedinglie, in that
he desired to haue Palmerin still abide in his Court. Wherfore
he said to Polinarda, you haue doone well Daughter
thus to binde Palmerin, for nowe he can not escape awaie
when he list. So the Tables béeing couered, the Emperour

and all the Knights of the Tourney satte downe to meate,
where much talke was spe
                           •
                        t as concerning y• 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         on al
sides, but Palmerin & Polinarda had enough to doo to view
eache other, their eyes dooing their office, and carrying betwéene
them the m
                           •
                        ssage of their passions, yet so discreetlie
shaddowed as none could perceiue them. Supper ended, the
Knights and Ladi
                           •
                        s went to dauncing, and afterwarde to
their Chambers, because the Emperour had commaunded
the next daie an other Tournament: a breefe report wherof
may very wel serue, in that you can imagine there wanted
no braue chiualrie. What Palmerin did that daie, it
were in 
                           〈◊〉
                         to tell, because ye former da
                           •
                        e makes knowne
his woorthines, and Ptolome behaued himselfe in so good
sort, that Brionella was as proude of him as the Princesse
of her Knight, and therfore presented him with a very rich
Diamond, as a token of his desert & her loue. Thus while
the Ioustes endured, the Duke of Lorrayne had great familiaritie
with Palmerin, because he had deliuered his Sister
Cardonya, from the false treason of the Coūty of Ormequ
                              •
                           .
All pastimes thus finished, ye Emperour returned to Gaunt,
where Palmerin intreated his Mistresse to appoint him
time & place, where they might more priuatlie discourse on
their loue, the which the promised, and awaited oportunity.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXX.
                     
                        Howe Polinarda disclosed her secrets to Brionella, and
of the talke she had with Palmerin.
                     
                     
                        
                           POlinarda not forgetting ye promise she
made her Fréend, to meete him in some
place where they might argue on theyr
loue, determined to discouer her affections
to Brionella, the beloued of Ptolome:
well perceiuing, that without her
helpe, she could not attaine the end of

her desires, wherefore without any longer stay, shee thus
began with her. My chosen Freende, I would make known
one thing vnto thée, which death can compell me discouer to
no other, wherefore thou must haue care to keepe secret my
speeches, in respect of my calling, not doubting but in time
to recompence any paine thou takest for me. Fayre Princesse,
said Brionella, in that you doo me such honor, as to impart
your thoughts to me, rather will I die then fayle one
iote of your commaundement, and therefore assure your
selfe, that what you declare shall neuer be discouered. Then
Polinarda reuealed to her ye loue she bare Palmerin, what
passions did torment her, and in what extreamitie her desires
had driuen her: and therefore swéete Fréende (quoth
she with a déepe sigh) find thou the meane that I may priuatlie
talke with him. Brionella admiring the earnest loue
of the Princesse, knewe not readilie what to aunswere, but
séeing that by these meanes she might more easily conferre
with Ptolome, whom shee likewise intirelie loued, thus
spake. It is no wonder Madame, you béeing so incomparable,
as I knowe no Prince liuing of whō you are not woorthie,
if you haue resolued your loue on noble Palmerin, in
that there is no Knight in the worlde better deserues you,
his rare chiualrie beeing such, as it cannot otherwise bee,
but that he is discended of royall linage, béeing accomplished
with so many speciall perfections. Therefore Madam,
so like you, I haue deuised well for your purpose, as thus.
You knowe my Chamber window standes so commodious,
as you may with safetie confer with him at pleasure, which
you may let him vnderstande by his Dwarffe, and appoint
him time as you shall thinke conuenient. This counsel did
not a little content y• Princesse, because she longed to chatte
with her louer, and therefore concluded at his departure to
appoint Palmerin his time. Nowe was the Chamber of
Brionella ioyning to the Cittie wall, and had a goodly prospect
into the fieldes, and Palmerins lodging was néere vnto
it, facing the wall as the other did: so that one might

easilie passe betwéene the lodgings, nothing béeing betwixt
them but a little Garden, brauelie decked with flowres,
and goodlie fruite Trées. The time appointed, Polinarda
called the Dwarffe to her, saying. Vrbanillo, thou shalt goe
to thy Maister from me, and after thou hast saluted hym
with my manifolde well wishinges, wil him this night to
come secretlie to Lady Brionellas Chamber, where at the
windowe we may safelie talke togeather: and bid him not
misdoubt my Lady Brionella, for I haue made her acquainted
with all my secrets. And because thy selfe maist conduct
him to the place, come, and I will presently she we it thee.
So went the Dwarffe with Polinarda to Brionellas chamber,
where hauing séene the windowe, and gladde to carrie
such tydings to his Maister, beeing well assured howe they
woulde content him: he departed, and tarried not long on
his message, because Palmerin thought each howre a yeere
to heare from his Mistresse, wherefore hee beholding the
Dwarffe comming, tooke him in his armes, and demaunded
what newes he had brought him? The Dwarffe with
a cheerefull countenaunce thus aunswered. My Lord, Fortune
speede you as luckilie, as the newes that I bring you
doo well deserue. By this beginning, Palmerin perceiued
that he brought such tydings as he long looked for, which
was, howe he might speake with the Princesse: wherfore
embracing him againe, he commaunded him to make report
of that his sweete Mistresse had giuen him charge. Then
the Dwarffe deliuered, howe the Princesse had great desire
to see him, and where shee did intende to speake with
him. Which whē 
                        Palmerin heard, 
                           •
                        illed with vnspeakable
ioyes, he recorded the words to himselfe with many itterations,
and the more often he spake the words, the more his
delights increased. But tell me, (quoth he to the Dwarffe)
didst thou marke the place well, where I must talke with
my Goddesse? Thereof doubt you not my Lorde, sayde the
Dwarffe, for I shall not faile to bring you surely thither, if
it be your pleasure I shall goe with you, because y• Princesse

her selfe, in company of Lady Brionella shewed it me. How
am I beholding to her, said Palmerin, for this high fauour,
which els were my death if I had beene denyed? Uppon
this he called Ptolome, to whom he imparted euery circumstaunce,
which Ptolome reputed for his great auaile: thys
offering the meane for him to visite Brionella, and therfore
they concluded to goe togeather the night 
                           •
                        nsuing, to the
place appointed for this louing encounter. The howre of
rest beeing come, and euery one in theyr Chambers as best
beséemed, Palme
                              •
                           in, Ptolome and the Dwarffe remayned
togeather, and séeing the time readie to countenaunce theyr
enterprise, tooke eache of them a rich Mantle, and wyth
theyr Swordes vnder their armes, went out at a windowe
vppon the walles: and albeit the passage was somewhat
daungerous, yet loue had so encouraged them, as without
regarde of daunger or fortune, they came to the windowe
which the Dwarffe shewed them, not séene by any. Polinarda
who was most attentiue, hearing the trampling of
theyr feete, sayde to Brionella. Is not this Palmerin? So
opening the Casements, they sawe Palmerin and Ptolome
attending like dilligent Seruants. If then bothe parties
were pleased it is not to be doubted, nothing in the worlde
more contenting them then the sight of each other. And
truelye Palmerin and the Princesse had great reason, for
beside that their fatall destenies did so prouoke them, theyr
equal natures were so commendable and correspondent, as
though they had neuer séene, yet were they borne to loue
togeather. Now was Polinarda very brauely acco
                           •
                        stred
in a gorgious night Mantle, and such soft white silkes, as
the shewed more bright then the morning Starre, her firie
pointed lookes so wounding Palmerin, as rapt vppe as it
were into a second heauen, he remayned silent a long time,
not able to speake a worde. The Princesse was likewise in
the selfe same conceit, and so ouercome with regarde of her
Paramour, as she continued mute, and was loth to giue the
onsette. Palmerin ashamed to accompany his Ladie with

such silence, beganne thus mildlie to courte his Mistresse. I
did neuer thinke, faire Madame, that Fortune woulde honour
mee with such extraordinarie fauour, directing my
course to your noble Fathers Courte, to bee thus entertayned
into your gracious seruice, hauing no deserts in mee to
induce you to your choyse: but it may be in respect of some
good report by such, to whom I account my selfe highlie beholding,
hauing thus founde the place where I was pr
                           •
                        ordained
to loue, my Starre hath appointed it, and withall, to
make me the happiest man liuing. And it may be Madame,
that such as en
                           •
                        ie not my happines, haue acquainted you
with some of my exterior actions, which God [not I] hath
brought to passe: but they ignoraunt of the intire and feruent
loue I beare you, coulde make no iust report therof to
you, béeing a secret so speciall, and not to be comprehended,
beside, the depth and wonderfull nature thereof not to bee
measured, therefore to be buried in your heauenly opinion,
which howe ample so euer you please to graunt me, ye more
am I bounde both in duetie and affection, which in despight
of en
                           •
                        ie and his confederates, shall remaine immooueable,
and pleade the continuall loyaltie of your Knight and Seruaunt.
And if I shoulde reporte howe manie times your diuine
personne hath béene presented me in sléepe, I shoulde
therewithall discourse infinite passions, which I endured
séeing my selfe frustrate of that I nowe beholde. How many
Countries and Citties? what perrils and da
                           •
                        ngers haue
I past to finde you, prouoked on still with neuer chaunging
loue? If this then were sufficient to make me run through
a worlde of daungers, I leaue it to your iudgment (sweete
Madame) what it may doo nowe, séeing with myh
                           •
                         
                        
                           •
                        yes
what I dreamed on before, and may with 
                           ••
                        fetie saie, incomparable
beautie. Héerehence proceedeth, that my extreame
affections haue ouercome all other parts in m
                           •
                        , not
able to imagine howe manie reuerende opinions I vse of
you: which must intreate you on my behalfe, that your accustomed
clemencie will pardon my preiudicate concei
                           •
                        e, because

béeing not mine owne but yours onelie, I may easilie
offende. These spéeches moistened with ye teares of his eies
and like-warme blood of his hart, deliuered manifest euidence
how truelie he loued the Princesse, who bearing him
companie in all arguments of loue, thus answered. I doubt
not Sir Palmerin, but the looue you beare mee is excéeding
great, noting your earnest affections, and the great trauaile
you haue sustained in searche of me, and no other certaintie
doo I request to be perswaded by, béeing as vehement
in affection towards you, as you are to me, for proofe
whereof, this attempt maie suffise, that against my duetie
I should be séene thus secretlie, in a place so suspicious, and
time so vnnecessarie. But if I haue offended héerein, accuse
those séemelie perfections which I haue regarded in you,
and the confidence I repose in your good conceit, coupled
with the honourable estimation y• is generallie reputed in
your vertues. Pardon me (swéete Ladie) saide Palmerin, if
by my longing desire to speake with you, I haue in anye
thing displeased, for earnest good will to doo you seruice,
constrained me to be thus importunate. The matter is far
from anie desert of offence, quoth the Princesse, for hither
are you come by my commaundement, to the ende that wee
might sée one another, and talke of such thinges as neerest
concerne vs: and therefore resolue your selfe good Knight,
that I esteeme you aboue all other, and promise you by the
faith of a Princesse and loyall Fréende, to die rather then
anie other shall be Lorde of me. Which verie words, so rauished
his sences, as verie hardlie he could sustaine himself:
whereuppon Polinarda put her hande out at the windowe,
which he in often kissing well marking, behelde the Charracter
thereon as you haue hearde before. Ah Madame, ꝙ
hee, this is the token that makes me the happiest man liuing.
As howe I pray you? saide she, what know you héereof?
Then Palmerin discoursed all his dreames and visions,
and bréefely ranne thorow repetition of his whole life, how
the wise Adrian had sent him the Shéelde of Sable, wherin

in was figured a hand fast closed togeather, signifying the
same hand I holde at this present, because this hath ye same
marke the other had in figure. In trueth said the Princesse,
I was desirous to know the meaning of that Sheeld, wherin
I sawe a Siluer hand closed, which you bare the first day
of the Tournament, béeing nowe not a little glad that you
haue so satis-fied me. Afterwarde Palmerin made knowne
to her, the marke himselfe had on his face, which agreed
with hers in perfect likelihoode. O God (quoth she) happie
be the time of this meeting, blame me not my Lorde to bee
thus supprised with your loue, séeing our fatall deste
                           •
                        ies
haue so appointed: this will cause mee to liue in more hope
of good successe, then before I did, and that our amitie will
sorte to such ende, as our two harts shall bee combined in
one, yet let mee sée I beséeche you the marke on your face,
howe neere it resembles this on my hand. She fetching a
Taper which burned in the Chamber, lifted vp his comelie
locks of hayre, and sawe them bothe shaped in one forme,
wherefore suddainly setting awaie the light, shee embraced
Palmerins heade in her armes, and sealed many swéete kisses
on his amiable Charracter. The like louing salutation
passed betwéene Ptolome and Brionella, at another Casement
of the Windowe, with sollemne vowes and protestations
neuer to faile in their loue, and this to be the place for
conuersing on their desires, till Fortune affoorded thē better
opportunitie: and longer would they haue there cōtinued,
but that the Dwarffe came to his Maister in this manner.
My Lorde, I thinke you can neuer finde time to make
an ende, will you haue the day light preuent yee, and so discredite
you all? in sooth it is time you were in your Chamber.
Palmerin who was lothe to depart from the pleasure
of his thoughts, made small account of the dwarffes words
and continued on in amorous deuises: but the Princesse a
litle more fearefull then he, seeing the Dwarffe said true,
and lothe to be séene suspitiously, said. My Lord, it is time to
breake off, but I pray you faile not of your promise, let vs

visite one another now you knowe the way and place. So
Palmerin and Ptolome tooke leaue of their Ladies, & passed
to their Chambers without suspition: the successe of
their loue you shall vnderstande héereafter, as time & place
shall fitte for the purpose: but nowe to satis-fie you with
choyse of delights, wee will returne a while to another
discourse.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXXI.
                     
                        Howe the King of Fraunce kept a royall and magnificent
Courte, and howe his Sonne Lewes became enamored
of the Duchesse of Burgundie.
                     
                     
                        DUring the time that the Emperour
of Allemaigne liued in this
happines, accompanied (as you
haue hearde) with manie hardie
Knightes: there raigned in
Fraunce a mightie Prince named
Agariell, valiant, wise and
vertuous, hauing thrée Sonnes,
whereof the second was the hardiest
Knight at Armes, being named
Lewes. This King Agariell, the more to honour hys
Knights and noble Gentlemen abyding in his Realme, determined
to keepe open Court for all 
                           ••
                        mmers, as none
of his predecessors euer did the like before him: and therefore
sent abroade his Heraldes, Gentlemen of his escuyrie
and others, to summon his Lords and Barrons of Fraunce,
that on a day appointed they would all méete at the Court.
And because none shoulde be ignoraunt what hee intended,
he requested that all Gentlemen professing Armes, at the
feaste of Easter following, shoulde repaire to Parris, beeing

the heade and cheefest Cittie of his Realme. The Queene
likewise aduertised al Ladies and Gentlewomen, at whose
commaunde euery one obeyed, so that in fewe dayes the
Courte was furnished with Lordes and L
                           •
                        dies: nothing
nowe intended but delights and courtlie pastimes, which
made the Duke of Burgun
                              •••
                           
                         likewise repai
                           ••
                         thither. Now
was the Duke aged, a man of good prouidence, and a tryed
Knight, hauing matched in marriage with the King of
Denmarks Sister, a yong beautiful Ladie, and of vertuous
education: the Duke hoping to haue issue by her, because
by his first Wife he could not haue any. The King aduertised
of the Dukes comming, commaunded his Son Lewes
with an honourable traine to goe entertayne him, which he
did, so that many solemne reuerences passed betweene the
Duke and him, as also to the Duchesse, whom as he welcomed
with manie salutations, so did he earnestle cōtemplate
her excellent beautie, reputing her fairer then the fayrest,
and on a suddaine became amorous of her, such a violent
breach made loue into his hart at the very first sight of her.
In this great and vnlooked for vexation, hee conducted her
to the lodging was prepared for the Duke, dissembling so
well as hee coulde his newe desire: but so vehement was
his oppression, as without returning againe to the King,
he went to his Chamber. Prince Lewes béeing thus alone
by himselfe, Loue not a little tryumphing of his new pray,
tormented his thoughts with so manie conceits, as all the
night he spent in sighes and dolorous laments, his mind stil
trauailing by what meanes he might compasse his intent.
Sometimes he thought it vnpossible in respectet of y• Duke,
then againe as easie because of his age, a contrarie too y
                           •
                        ksome
in his eyes for the sweete florishing youth of the D
                           •
                        
                        chesse:
all which imaginations wrought so diuersly in him,
as his spirite forsaking counsell & reason, made him breake
foorth into these exclaimes. Ah heauens, haue you
beautie with such excellencie, as to cause me endure a torment
more then mortall? Ah mine eyes, too lauishe were

you in beholding her, who cannot chuse but vtterly disdaine
thée, thou hast no acquaintaunce with her, and therefore let
thy death chastise thy boldnes. Yet mayst thou bee deceiued
in thine opinion foolish man, perhappes in offering her
thy seruice she may accept it, for the Duke is old, and likelie
to die, howe happy were it for thee to be his executor for
his Ladie? Dispayre not then man, for things thought impossible
are easiest oftentimes in performance. In these and
such like tearmes hee spent the night, and séeing the fayre
morning salute him at his Chamber windowe, he arose, intending
that day to bewray his passions to the Duchesse,
and knowing that the Duke would goe visite the Quéene,
accompanied with many Knights he came to bid him good-morrow,
which the Duke taking very kindly, requited him
with many thankes, ignoraunt that for the faire Wyfe, he
was so courteous to the olde Husband. The Duke hauing
taken his way to the Queene, Lewes kept company wyth
the Duchesse very mannerlie, wayting oportunitie to dyscouer
his affections, and reuiewing her beautie so perfecte
and rare, not able longer to hold, beganne thus. It is maruaile
Madam, if fayre beautie should be so bitter, as a man
cannot surfette but hee must néedes die. The Duchesse not
knowing of whom the Prince spake, nor as yet regarding
that he was in loue, aunswered. In sooth my Lord, the Ladie
hath small reason, that shee shoulde vse you so hardlie, yf
you meane it by your selfe. In bréefe Madame, quoth hée, it
is you haue wounded me, and none but you can ease my afflictions:
if then (swéete Lady) you retaine such pittie, as
all your other excellencies shewe you to haue, you wyll not
disdaine to giue me remedie, which if you doo, for euer I remaine
your Knight and loyall Fréende. And in mine opinion
Madame, you can not well refuse me, séeing Fortune
hath béene such an enemie to you in marriage, the Duke
beeing olde and full of mellanchollie, you yong, tender and
daintie as may be, hee more méete to kéepe companye wyth
Atropos the mortall Goddesse, then liue with a Saint of

so rare perfections. But had my luck beene such, before you
were espoused to haue knowne you, I woulde with valoure
haue hindered your briding so, or Fortune should haue foullie
denied me: for such is my religion in looue, as better
death then discontent, and had I béene Lord of Europe, you
had béene Ladie. Notwithstanding Madame, so like it you,
I may be your Freende and knightly seruaunt: for Loue
wants no wyles to compasse desire, and my sute is modest
if you count it not vnséemely. The Duchesse, whom swéete
loue could easilie entice to folly, hardly might resist a present
conquest: wherefore chaunging countenaunce, and not
daring to reueale what she gladly would, sayd. Trust mee
my Lorde, your speeches are not comely, to violate chaste
wedlocke is so monstrous, as you can haue no priuiledge to
aske, nor I to graunt, and therefore content ye. This aunswere,
albeit it was sharpe, and scant pleasing to ye Prince,
yet loue so perswaded him, that the Duchesse had another
meaning then she bewrayed: for nothing her countenaunce
so full of change, he gessed that s
                           •
                        me sparks had fallen among
her affections, wherefore he began againe. I beséeche
you Madame accuse Loue, if I haue spoken to your dislyking,
yet hope I to sée the time, when I shall make knowne
howe great my affection is to doo you seruice: and continuing
this talke he brought her to the Quéenes lodging, Loue
following them bothe so narrowlie at the héeles, as ye Duchesse
was no lesse affectionate then Lewes was passionate.
Which when he got some light of, in hope to purchase hys
his desire, he sollicited her in more secrete manner then hee
was wont, so that being one day in place where they might
familiarlie talke: Lewes perseuering in his enterprise, declared
what torments he suffered for her loue, whereuppon
the Duchesse, not onely by ye Princes reasons which were
perswasiue, but as well to mittigate her owne oppressions,
thus aunswered. Great is the force of your perswasions my
Lord, but greater is y• of looue, which hath made me yours:
so that what you request, I cannot denie, and though it

stand not with mine honour, yet such is my fortune. Let me
intreate you therefore to conceale this loue so discréetlie, as
none may knowe of it, especially my Lord the Duke, and
expect the day that shall yéelde you content and make mee
happy. This aunswere so highly pleased the Prince, as neue
                           •
                        
man thought himselfe in greater felicitie, and rendering
her manifold thankes, sayd. I sweare to you Madame,
by the diuine force of loue that gouerns vs bothe, to bee for
euer your Knight, and neuer shall any other desire abide in
me, then you shall like and well allowe of, for otherwise I
were not worthy this speciall fauour. The Duchesse thanking
him, departed, and thenceforth so secretly shaddowed
their loue, as none suspected that the Prince loued the Duchesse.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXXII.
                     
                        Of the enterprise of Lewes the Prince of Fraunce, for
the loue of the Duchesse of Burgundie.
                     
                     
                        LOng continued the King of Fraunce
this state in all magnificence, there
méeting many noble personages, as
well Straungers as of ye Realme,
that it was meruailous to behold, as
also the Ladies and Damosels that
accompanyed the Quéene: who on a
day in the presence Chamber among
many Knights, conferred of the bountie and prowesse of the
florishing braue yong Courtiers, among whom the Prince
Lewes making one, eache one spake in behalfe of his Ladies
beautie, yet concealing their names to themselues, till
better occasions might cause thē deseruedly to be known. Al
this talke the Prince well marking, who for the Duchesse

loue was depriued of libertie, threw many swéete glaunces
at the Mistresse of his affections, perswading himselfe, that
nature neuer made a more perfect creature, and not able to
make her like againe, burst her molde, whereupon hee said.
Lordes and Ladies, who with such aduauntage haue chatted
on beautie, vnderstand that such as you haue yet spoken
of, or seuerally in your owne thoughts shall thinke vppon:
may not be equall with one that I knowe, euen she that is
Ladie and commaunder of my hart, whose beautie is so far
beyond all other, as bright Cynthia from the goodliest star
in the firmament. And because that none shal imagine, how
(being carried awaie with priuate opinion) I vse these spéeches,
I will make good my words by deedes of Armes, against
anie Knight whatsoeuer that dare saie the c
                           •
                        ntrarie.
Nowe in regard that none shall pleade ignoraunce, I will
aduertise all Knights, howe the first daie of Maie next ensuing,
and seauen daies more immediatlie following, I will
be in open fielde in my Tent, where I will e
                           •
                        ecte a statelie
monument, on the toppe whereof shall bee her figure whose
Knight I am, and there will I defende it in this honorable
quarrell, against such Knights as will Combat for ye beautie
of their Ladies, I affirming mine to excell all other in
perfections. This condition must be obserued by such as enter
the fielde, that they bring the Ladies figure with them
whom they honor most: and if Fortune frowne on them in
such sort as they be vanquished, they shall there leaue their
Ladies Image, to be placed vnder my Mistresse as her subiect.
Nowe if my vnhappy Starres so crosse me, as I loose
the credite I would bee lothe, the conquerer shall enter in
my Tent, and in my Ladies place shall his Mistresse bee
mounted, if he meane to maintaine her with such conditions
as I doo mine. And hee that last shall accomplishe these
eyght daies, shall beare away the honour with the portraitures
of the Ladies, which by him or anie other all the saide
time haue béene gained. And this libertie shall be granted,
that he which receiues the foyle with the Launce, shall Cō
                        bat

with the Sworde (if he please) before he yéelde. Nowe,
that this mine enterprise may be openlie knowne, and put
in execution as the vertue requireth: I will sende Horsemen
through all the prouinces of Christendome, that all
Knights willing thus to aduenture, shall be heere receiued.
His spéeches ended, the Gentlemen present could not maruaile
sufficiently, at this great and high enterprise of the
Prince Lewes, and the daunger whereinto he thrust himselfe,
yet not knowing who was the Ladie he woulde thus
aduenture for: but she béeing present, perceiued that the
Prince in honour of her loue, tooke in hande this perillo
                           •
                        s
hazarde, wherein she conceiued such secrete content, as the
passiōs of loue hauing penetrated her hart, made her feare
his mis-fortune, which she would not for her life. In this assemblie
was present the Duke of Sauoye, a yong Prince,
braue, hardie and couragious as might be, and estéeming so
well of himselfe, as he thought no Knight in ye world coulde
vanquish him, who to aunswere the Prince Lewes, arose
and thus spake. My Lorde, I would not willingly haue entered
the Combat against you, but that I heard you so farre
outreache your selfe, as shee whose beautie you maintaine,
is more perfecte then all other Ladies: but shee that is the
commaunder of my hart, is such a braue accomplished Ladie,
as (in trueth) her beautie may not be matched through
the whole worlde. And to affirme what I saie, I sweare by
the order of my knighthoode, that the morrowe after you
haue finished your eight daies enterprise, I will enter the
same fielde, and auerre against all Knights, that the Goddesse
to whom I am dedicated, excelles all other Ladies in
her heauenly gifts: and he that dare maintaine the c
                           •
                        ntrarie,
vnder my Sworde I will make him confesse it. All such
therefore as will make proofe of their valour, shall find me
there in my Tent at my appointed day, and nine daies after
to sustaine the same quarrell in plaine Combat, either
at the Launce, the Ma
                           •
                        e, the Sworde, on horsebacke or on
foote, at his choise. And though I vanquish one Knight, it

shall not be lawfull for me to rest a minute space, but presentlie
take him in hande that shall followe: and bee it my
fortune to b
                           •
                         
                        
                           •
                        oyled by him, he shall kéepe the fielde in manner
as you my Lord deuised. And to the ende all may be the
better executed, pleaseth you y• in such places where your
intelligenc
                           •
                        rs shall come, my enterprise may likewise bee
declared, in respect I hope to behaue my selfe so well, as my
Ladie will make speciall account of me. The Lady for whō
the Duke of Sauoye thus attempted, was Daughter to the
King, and Sister to Lewes named Lucemania, whom he loued
intirelie, and aboue all thinges desired in marriage:
which to compasse, and to honour his Ladie, he thus offered
the Combat against all Knights. These Princes, intending
to goe thorow with their intent, concluded betwéene them,
that the Duke of Sauoye shoulde breake it to the King, to
gaine his good-will: whereuppon the Duke departing towards
the Quéenes Chamber to finde the King, espyed him
a
                           •
                         very good leysure walking in his Garden, to whome hee
went in all haste, and on his knee thus began. So please it
your highnes to graunt me one
                           •
                        boone, I shall be bounde to
continue the 
                           •
                        oue I haue borne your Maiestie, which is to
prolong my life in your seruice, as ye most forwarde Knight
in your royall Court. The King who had long time fauoured
the Duke, 
                           〈◊〉
                         him by the hande, thus aunswered.
Dema
                           •
                        nde my good Cozin what you please, and it shall bée
graunted. Then the Duke deliberatelie discoursed, what
the Prince Lewes and he had intended for the loue of theyr
Ladies: wherwith the King scant content, and m
                           •
                        ruailing
at this hastie enterprise, said. Why Cozin? do you imagine
your selues able to maintaine so hard a taske, in res
                           •••
                        ance
of so manie hardie Knights, wherewith the worlde is now
plentifullie stored? Beléeue me, in maine Countries are
Ladies of greater beautie [I doubt] then is at this 
                           〈◊〉
                         in
our Realme of Fraunce. I promise you, I hardly like what
my Sonne and you attempt, but seeing my worde is paste,
you shall not nowe be hindered: doo 
                           •
                        herefore what your

thinke expedient, with this consideration alwaies,
that the ending of matters is greater then the beginning.
The Duke humbly thanking the King, aunswered. Wee
doubt not my Lorde, but by the hope of God and fauour of
our Ladies, to ende our affaires with fortunate successe, but
if nowe we should giue ouer, and not goe forward with our
promise, we might woorthily be reprooued of shame & cowardise,
the most villainous reproches that can be to any noble
hart. The King perceiuing the earnest affection of these
two yong Princes, and that to denie their request would be
more hurtfull then to graunt: commaunded him againe to
procéede with their intent, with such suretie against all
strange Knights, as what losse or victory happened to them,
they must be content with all that fell out. The Duke not
a little ioyfull, kissing his highnes hande departed, and immediatly
acquainted Prince Lewes therewith: but nowe
the Queene vnderstanding her Sonnes enterprise, sent for
him, and wt sad countenance thus spake. I would (my Son)
that the intent of you and the Duke of Sauoye, were eyther
awhile deferred, or vtterly forgotten, because I greatlie
doubt, that the ende will bring a further consequence then
you expect. For thinke you, that by all your forces and Chiualries,
the beauties of your Ladies shalbe any iote increased?
no beléeue me: but if they loue you as loyall Freendes
ought to doo, as greatlie wil they dislike your enterprise, as
feare the daunger whereinto you may fall, a matter causing
other desire then you thinke on, & more offensiue (perhaps)
to them, then anie honor you may winne can please
them. Lewes, who by no meanes would be disswaded from
his conceit, aunswered. Good Mother, if for no other feare,
this matter shal not be reuoked, in regard of ye shame, & neuer
dying dishonor I shall gaine thereby, which makes mee
desire a thousande deathes, then not to bee so good as my
worde: therefore perswade your selfe good Mother, that albeit
her beautie for whom I enter the Combat, cannot bee
more perfect hereby, in that it is without imperfection, yet

such is my resolution in a matter so certaine, as her sweete
lookes shall deliuer me strength enough to ende my taske,
without dreade of any inconuenience y• may happen. The
Duchesse (enflamed with loue) hearing these wordes on
her behalfe, must needes speake, and thus began. I knowe
not (my Lorde) who is the Ladie you loue, nor what are
her vertues, but heereof I can assure you, that she is highlie
beholding to you, and (except great reason to the contrarie)
ought to loue you, considering what perill you thruste your
selfe into for her beautie. Madame (quoth the Prince) the
trauaile I shall take, and the bad fortunes may befall mee,
are little & of no account in respect of her gracious deserts,
therefore for her honour, I will beare my inwarde paines
with secrete content, and attempt these outwarde actions
with the greatest courage I can possible, desiring no other
recompence then her fauourable conceit, whereof once assured,
nothing can seeme difficult to me, no, were it to dye in
her diuine seruice. And as he would haue continued longer,
the King (not yet thorowlie content with his promise past
to the Duke of Sauoye) entered the Chamber, by whose
countenaunce, Lewes wel knewe he was mal content wyth
him, wherefore falling on his knée, hee saide. My Lorde, no
one is ignoraunt, how all my welfare and reputation consisteth
onelie in your Maiestie, as a Prince and Father, the
most vertuous that I know, which great good in some part
to recompence, I haue enterprised a matter vnwoorthie of
dislike, so please your highnes (of your accustomed bountie)
to excuse & accept it in good part, in respect that such as are
borne to the highest places of dignitie, ought to bee more
prompt and readie to all magnanimious actions, then theyr
inferiors, chéefelie in prowesse, chiualry, and deedes of estimation.
What brought such renowne to Horatius, Mutius
Scaeuola, Marcus Curtius, Manlius Torquatus, and a number
more of Romaine Knights, if not the couragious folowing
of occasions offered? What made for euer immortall
the fame of Marius the Romaine Cittizen, Hanniball the

                        Carthaginian, and Agesila
                              ••
                           
                         the Greeke, if not the vndaunted
valour of their minds, deliuered in their déedes of kinglie
consequence? Assuredly I beleeue, that their Fathers
Uncles, and auncient progenitours, neuer made them noble
or ought renowmed: what then? onely vertue, the very
formatrix of all nobilitie. For this cause my good Lorde
and Father, hauing now oportunitie, as my Cozin y• Duke
of Sauoye hath informed you, may it please your grace to
permit my endeuours with fauour, to the ende I may deliuer
perfect testimonie, that I no whit degenerate frō your
heroycall and kingly vertues. The King somewhat moderating
his former opinion, answered. Trust me Sonne, full
well you know howe to disguise and couer your follye wyth
vertues coullers, God sende it to fall out so well: arise, and
be it as your Cozin and you haue requested. See in meane
tune that you prouide all needfull occasions, that when the
daie comes nothing bee wanting. Lewes humbly thanking
his Father, arose, euery one present not a little reioycing,
because they feared all woulde be squandered. Then began
the Lordes and Ladies to conferre togeather, and the Duchesse
departing to her lodging, béeing manned by the
Prince, did not [as I thinke] repent herselfe of her loue, as
a number of you (martching vnder the same Ensigne) wold
doo the like in such a case. In fine, the Duchesse fearefull of
the thwarts of Fortune, that she would work her disgrace
by some bad coniectures or wounding reports, said. I know
well (my Lorde) the good will you beare me, without anie
further shewes or confirmations by actions so daungerous,
which I had rather die then beholde, and therefore whatsoeuer
you shall performe, will condemne mee as vnwoorthy
of so good deserts: in this respect you shall therfore graunt
me one thing, which is, that aboue all you haue care of your
selfe, els will perpetuall discontent cut short my date, béeing
bereaued of the honour of my green
                           •
                         desires. Nowe
Madame (quoth the Prince) may I boast of my fortune,
not doubting to follow the deuise of a Ladie so vertuous, for

your swéete wordes prolong my life, els ere this had death
robd you of your Knight. The Duchesse héereto with an amiable
smile, aunswered. I muste not loose you yet good
Prince, for may I lengthen your life, it shall bee for euer.
Many sollemne thankes the Prince returned, and by this
time had brought her to her Chamber, wher hauing baise l
                              ••
                           
main, departed.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXXIII.
                     
                        Howe the Prince Lewes and the Duke of Sauoye, sent
theyr Heraldes and Horsemen into all parts, to make
knowne to all Knights their enterprises, and the conditions
of theyr Combats.
                     
                     
                        THe Prince Lewes ioyfull of the
King his Fathers consent, but
of the gracious aunswere of the
Duchesse most of all, dispatched
immediatlie his Heraldes into
all the prouinces of Europe, who
executed their charge with such
dilligēce, as there was no Court
of Emperour, King or Prince,
but they declared the enterprise
of these two yong Princes. So that one of the Princes Heraldes,
accompanied with the King of Armes belonging to
the Duke of Sauoye, came to the Emperors Court of Allemaigne,
which then was furnished with a great number of
Lordes and Knights, béeing there to sollemnize the day of
hys byrth, but especially Palmerin aboue all the rest, tryumphing
in the loue of his Mistresse Polinarda. The Heralds
béeing entred the great Hall, founde the Emperour
sitting in his chayre of estate, with many Princes, Barens

and noble personages about him: who graunting them libertie
of spéeche, the Heralde of Fraunce began first in this
manner. Illustrious and most redoubted Emperour, the
cause why we thus presume before your Maiestie, is by the
commaundement of the vertuous yong Prince Lewes, Son
to our dreade Lorde Agatiel King of Fraunce, as also of the
Duke of Sauoye his Cozin, so good a Knight as may well
commaunde: what our message is, so please your highnesse
to call all your Knights in presence, because it chéefelie concerneth
them, we with duetie will deliuer it. The Emperour
presentlie called for all Knights and Gentlemen of
his Courte, who desirous of the newes, were not long in
comming, before whom he saide. Dreade Lord, the Prince
Lewes of Fraunce my Maister, commends him to your Maiestie
with this Letter, may it please your grace commande
it to be read, and you shall soone sée the effect of our Embassade.
The Emperour caused his Secretarie to reade it openlie,
and because it contained what you haue heard alreadie,
it shall be needelesse to wast longer time in talke thereof:
but the Letter béeing read, the Heralde thus proceeded.
The Prince my Maister (woorthie Emperour) giues the
Knights of your Court (as els where) to vnderstande, that
he intendes to prooue by deedes of Armes, howe no Ladie
in the worlde is comparable in beautie to ye Lady he loues,
which he will bee readie to maintaine in Combat the first
of Maie next, and seauen daies following, in his Tent before
the Gates of Parris, there will he verifie it against all
commers that dare auerre the contrarie. Afterwarde he rehearsed
all the conditions to bee obserued in this Combat,
and the King of Armes to the Duke of Sauoie, made known
his Maisters challenge likewise as you haue hearde. The
Emperour meruailing at this message, said. Without doubt
the Ladies had neede to be faire, and my Cozins your Maisters
valiant and hardie, els it is doubtful howe such an enterprise
will fall out, for y• affections of persons are diuers,
and theyr fortunes daungerous, neuerthelesse I desire the

issue may sort to their honor. These Lordes and Knights
haue hearde your message, and I iudge some of them will
prouide to be there, because they prize the beautie of theyr
Ladies at as high a rate, as your Masters doo estéeme their
faire Freendes: yet let them doo what they thinke most expedien
                           •
                        ,
be
                           •
                        ause they are olde enough to make you answer.
As for me, you may salut
                           •
                         (on my behalfe) the King my
Brother, and my Cozins, to whom I sende thanks with all
my hart, that they thus acquainted me with their honourable
endeuours. All this while the Knights conferred together,
with diuers iudgments of these pretended Combats:
some were either fearefull or too forwarde, others well aduised
and prouoked with discréete courage. Among whome
repute we noble Palmerin, all pensiue, his eyes fixed on the
ground
                           •
                        , and not a word
                           •
                        , hauing in his spirite discoursed,
howe bitter the diuorc
                           •
                         would be of the eye from his swéete
obiect: in the ende concluded the Combat, perswading him
selfe, not in Christendome, nor in the other thrée habitable
parts of the earth, eyther Empresse, Queene or Ladie was
more accomplished with perfections, then his gracious Mistresse
Polinarda. And in respect of this Embassage, it seemed
to him vituperous, and a dishonour not sufferable if he
should not iustifie the trueth & haue so good occasion: wheruppon
he desired a thousande deathes, rather then he would
defer so braue a voyage, and so on his knée before the Emperour
thus began. Gracious Lorde and my woorthy Patrone,
I intende (with your good lyking & leaue) to depart
with all spéede possible, to the Ioustes and Combats of
Fraunce and Sauoye: let it not therefore displease (for the
honour of Chiualrie) that I leaue your Courte a while, but
maie commit my selfe to this iourney with your fauourable
opinion. The Emperour verie lothe to let Palmerin
goe, aunswered. In sooth Palmerin, I greatly doubted (so
soone as I heard these newes from Fraunce) that it would
not passe without your presence, which displeaseth mee, not
so much for their follie as your absence, which is and wilbe

to mee greater gréefe then you iudge: but let mee intreate
that thy returne may be spéedie, and stay no longer then
thou hast good occasion. I would gladlie knowe, would you
graunt it me, what Ladie she is for whom you thus aduenture,
you néede not Palmerin hide it from mée. My Lord (ꝙ
he) the Dame for whome I enter the Combat, is such, as
none may or ought compare w
                           •
                        th, so singuler, 
                           〈◊〉
                        , and (aboue
all) vertuous, and neuer would I think my selfe worthy
to beare Armes, if feare of danger, mis-fortune, or death
it selfe, should haue power to pluck me from my duetie. As
for my staie, she Ioustes ended, within one Moneth or sooner,
will I returne to your Maiestie: and let mee intreate
you not to feare anie thing in my iourney, because I goe for
your honour, and my sword shal ring on the stoutest Creast,
the euer continuing honours of the Emperour of Allemaigne.
The Emperor vnwilling to forgoe him, and loth to
hinder knightlie chiualrie, said. Without question Palmerin,
the Ladie is indebted to you, and you declare vnspeakable
loue, that for her beautie you deliuer your selfe to so
great hazard: but as for your intent to my honor, I rather
delight to haue it by your presence, then thirste after such
applause with your absence. But séeing you will néedes to
Fraunce, happie fortune goe with you, and make you victorious
in all your attempts: which I doubt not, but by your
valour & vertues of your Mistresse, ye 
                        French wil not braue
so much on the seauentéene of Maie, as perhaps they wil on
the first. Prouided, that before you depart, you demaund and
haue all thinges for your iourneie, as well for such as goe in
your companie, as for your owne necessarie prouision: and
some wil I appoint to trauaile with you, that may preuent
anie trecherous inconuenience. Palmerin not refusing thys
bountifull offer, with great obeisaunce thanked the Emperour,
and taking his leaue for that night, returned to his
Chamber, determining to depart with expedition, because
the daie of the Ioustes were at hande. Nowe was Tr
                              ••
                           eus
the Emperours Sonne a yong Prince, and had not yet receiued

his order of knighthoode, hee hearing of Palmerins
departure, was meruailous desirous to beare him cōpany:
whereuppon he knéeled before his Father, intreating him
not to denie him one request. Demaunde what thou wilt
my Sonne (quoth he) I graunt it thée. Then I beséech you
good Father, saide he, to suffer mee sée Fraunce with noble
Palmerin, that I may bee acquainted with ye courtesie and
ciuilitie of that nation, not doubting but soone to deserue my
knighthoode. And yet if before I receiue my order, I see
these high and woorthie déedes of Armes, happilie they may
entice me to follow their vertues: beside, if nowe I loose so
good an occasion offered, I knowe not when I shal compasse
the like commoditie, therefore (good Father) let me not be
denied. The Emperor offended for his rashe promise to his
Sonne, laboured to change his minde, but all woulde not
serue, for the Prince promised to goe so couertlie, as none
should knowe him. Wherefore he called Palmerin, who as
yet was not departed the Hall, saying. I sée Sir Palmerin,
you shall not goe alone in your voyage, for my Sonne Trineus
desires to be your companion: for which cause I commit
him to you, and desire you to conceiue so well of him, as
at your returne we maie be all merrie togeather. Which
Palmerin promised, whereuppon the Emperour called for
the Maister of his Horse, commanding him that all things
might bee in readines against their departure: all which
was doone with such diligence, as the thirde daie following
all thinges prepared, they tooke their leaue of the Emperour
and the Ladies, who at their departure shedde manie
teares (a common matter with them) wishing the victorie
and honor to Palmerin. Thus with Trineus and twentie
other Knights, a great number of Squires and seruants in
good equipage, they iourned towards Parris, without anie
hinderaunce by the waie, or matter of memorie.
                     Nowe before we passe anie further, you shall vnderstand,
that after the Heraldes of the Prince of Fraunce and
Duke of Sauoie were departed, and that Palmerin had obtained

leaue of the Emperor: the Princesse Polinarda aduertised
heereof, was greatlie displeased with this suddaine
departure, wherfore calling V
                              •
                           banillo the Dwarffe to her,
she saide. V
                              •
                           banillo, thou must goe to thy Maister, and will
him this night to meete me at our appointed place, that I
maie confer with him of a secrete néerelie concerning mee.
Which when Palmerin hearde, the earth béeing couered
with her blacke Mantle, and euerie one in their dead sléepe,
he called Ptolome and V
                              •
                           banillo, who were well acquainted
with this loue walke, and béeing there in presence of
their Ladies, the Princesse with a great sigh thus began.
Alas my Lord, what mind is this in you, thus to voyage towardes
Fraunce, and leaue mee alone sad and sollitarie? Alas,
not content to hazard so long a iourney, but a daungerous
Combat beside for my beautie, which is of so slender
estimation, as may not parragon with ye Ladies of Fraunce,
béeing péereles (as I haue hearde) among those of highest
perfection. Ah my Lorde, more comfort and content is it to
me to haue your companie, then to be crowned Quéene of
anie Realme conquered by your vertue & prowesse. Therefore
(swéete Fréende) I intreate you with all my hart, and
by the vnfained loue you beare me, to leaue such dangerous
enterprises, where death is commonlie more frequent
then life. These wordes came with such amiable coniurations
from the Princesse, as Palmerin (though loth to be disswaded)
answered. Let me preuaile with you so farre good
Madame, as not to mislike my enterprise for your gracious
loue, for the honour you haue doone me, in making mee your
Knight, I prize at no lesse valew then my déerest blood, and
shoulde I be helde from these French exploits, vnwoorthy
were I to bee your Seruaunt: in that (as you knowe) no
Knight but caries the honour of his Ladie in such account,
as he preferres that before his owne life. If then Madame
in religion of this office, I absent my selfe for a while, I shal
accomplish nothing but my duetie, wherto your selfe bound
me, and I hope to execute with such successe, as you shall

beare the prize for beautie, not onelie from the Ladies of
Fraunce and Allemaigne, but from all Christendome, yea,
the whole worlde may I liue to trauaile it. Doo not then
(swéete Mistresse) mislike, if I absent my selfe for a cause
so reasonable, and continue me still in your fauourable conceit,
as he that was borne to doo you seruice. And albeit I
can not depart without excéeding gréefe and anguish, yet
perswaded of your rare arguments, I arme my selfe with
patience and yéelde to reason, béeing present with you alwaies,
in that I carrie your diuine Image in my soule, and
leaue hart, life and all with you till I come. These wordes
were sealed with manie deuoute kisses, and Ptolome, had
like paine in perswading Brionella, yet this cōtented them
in the ende, that the honor of their trauaile was ye renowne
of their beautie, and so with forced content they louinglie
departed. The next morning the Princesse sent Palmerin
an arming coate of gréene Ueluet, imbroidered all ouer
with great Orientall Pearles, and verie thicke besett with
Starres of Golde, and in the midst of each Starre a costlie
Emeralde: and hee had caused her picture to bee most curiously
drawne in Golde, her face and hands formed wonderfull
neere the life, and all her linaments verie singulerlie
fashioned, and this portrait caused he to bee sette in a fayre
Litter couered with Crimson veluet, which hee had prouided
onelie for the purpose, and so set forward.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXXIIII.
                     
                        How the Prince Lewes came to see the Duchesse of Burgundie,
and what happened.
                     
                     
                        SO soone as the Heraldes & Horsemen
of Lewes of Fraunce and the
Duke of Sauoie, had dispatched
their charge, their Lordes gaue
order to prepare al things in readines
so soone as might bee: but
yet the Princes affection to the
Duchesse so tormented him, as
he dailie compassed new meanes
to conferre with her, that shee
might knowe the passions hee endured for her sake. At
length it came to passe, that the King, the Duke of Burgundie,
and diuers other Princes rode foorth on pleasure togeather,
and returned not againe for two daies space, which
made him thus begin with the Duchesse. I néede not tell
you Madame, for you knowe it well enough, howe continuallie
I languish in remedilesse afflictions, till nowe this opportunitie
puts me in some hope of comfort, that you performing
a sollemne promise, will deliuer me out of this extremitie.
Wherefore faire Mistresse, since time and occasion
hath pointed it, and Fortune (by nature forward and inconstant)
fauours it, let mee intreate you to take the benefit of
bothe, least héereafter we compasse not the like againe. My
Lorde (quoth the Duchesse) you must thinke I am more
yours then mine owne, and make that reckoning of you, as
no Ladie can the like: howe is it possible then for mee (louing
as I doo) to flie from that which loue commaunds me
to fulfill? Let it suffise you then, that the regarde of mine

honour defended, I am readie to doo ought may agrée with
your liking. What happened afterwarde, I leaue to your
oppinions, but by the halfe the whole may be discerned, notwithstanding,
vertuous Ladies haue power to resist such
motions, though time, occasion, and such amorous sollicitings
did offer it them: but such may be accounted more
diuine then humaine, and to them may worthilie be erected
a Trophe, in disgrace of the temptresse Venus. But this
little discourse, not much dissenting from y• matter, is written
in reproche of such yong daintie wantons, that attende
on their ouer fonde and vnchast desires: and may likewise
be a warning to vndiscr
                           •
                        et olde men, that they choose theyr
Pante
                           ••
                        e fit for their foote.
                     But nowe is come the first of Maie, the daie to beginne
the enterprises of the Princes of Fraunce & Sauoie: Lewes
                        
to entertaine the Duchesse loue begun with such aduauntage,
had greater desire nowe to execute his intent then before.
Wherefore this daie was his T
                           •
                        nt erected at ye Citty
Gates, béeing beautifull and verie sumptuous, and at the
enteraunce thereof was placed a goodlie monument of black
Marble, curiouslie sette foorth we collombes of white Marble,
verie thicke imbossed with golde and pearle. At the
side of his pauillion, was placed another monumēt of gréene
Iasper, adorned with manie Bases, Pillers and antique
imagerie of Golde, whereon he intended ye strange Knights
that came should place the figures of their Ladies. On the
other side was a séemelie place appointed for the Iudges of
the fielde, who were the Dukes of Orleaunce & Burgundie,
Princes greatlie estéemed for their nobilitie, and in theyr
time had béene hardie and aduenturous Knights. Manie other
Tents and Pauillions were that daie there set vppe,
as well for strange Knights that came, as Noble men and
Gentlemen of the Realme. And nowe comes the Prince
brauelie mounted to the fielde, accompanied with manie
yong Princes, Knights and Gentlemen, the Heralds and
King of Armes ryding before, the Drummes, Phifes, Trō
                        pets

and Clarions sounding so gallantlie, as made the ayre
deliuer a most swéete Eccho. Before him in a verye sumptuous
Coche, was carried the curious counterfeite of the
Duchesse, so superficiallie sette foorth with such perfection
of arte, as though it had béene the liuely Duchesse herselfe.
After followed Prince Lewes in gorgious gilt Armour, all
ouergrauen with most artificiall flowers, and mounted on a
Courser of Spaine, estéemed one of the best runners in Europe,
which made waie with braue and loftie voltages, as
did not a little delight y• beholders: one of the chéefe Princes
of the Court bearing his Helmet, and another hys
Launce. What néede I make further reporte of the Princes
tryumphe, he comming to the fielde in such equipage, as
well beséemed the house from whence he discended, and as
beséemed a louelie Knight in presence of his Ladie: who as
her fauour had sent him that morning, a costlie Girdle garnished
with Rubies, Diamondes, great Emeraldes & other
vnualuable stones, with a Sworde so good as euer Knight
wore, and therewith rode he gyrded to the Fielde. Before
he went, the King his Father thus spake to him. My Son,
this daie and all the other following. Fortune speede thee
so well, as thou maist winne the honour my hart doth wysh
thee. My Lorde, aunswered the Prince, I hope before the
sennight be finished, to accomplish your desire effectuallie, so
fauour me she that may commaunde me. So leauing the
King he came to the place appointed for the Combatte, the
Iudges placing themselues where they shoulde, and the
Prince himselfe in his Tent, where hauing his Mistresse
picture set on ye appointed place, he commaunded ye Trompets
to sound, and a Heralde to proclaime: that no Knight
bearing Armes shoulde bee so hardie as to ente
                           •
                         hys
Tent, except he first graunted his Ladie to bee the fayrest
creature in the worlde, and if any were so stubborne not to
confesse it, by knightly prowesse he would force him doo it.
The Heralde hauing doone his charge, and the Iudges caused
the conditions to bee openlie reade, the people deuided

themselues in conuenient places, and the Lords Ladies and
Gentlewomen betooke them to their Tents & Scaffoldes.
The first that entered the field against the Prince, was the
Countie Durcell of Arragon, his foure Squires conducting
before him in a great gorgious Litter, the stature of his Mistresse,
Daughter to the King of Arragon, the fairest Ladie
in all Spayne, and for whose beautie hee tooke in hande this
quarrell. After him came foure other Squires, the formost
leading his Courser, the seconde bearing his Helmette, the
thirde his Shéeld, and the fourth his Gauntl
                           •
                        ts & Launce:
and comming to the monument appointed for strange Ladies,
caused the portrait of his Ladie to bee placed thereon,
then comming to the Princes Tent, said. I know not Lord
Lewes, if ouercome with glorie, presumptiō of your strēgth,
or ouerwéening your selfe, you haue made this large enterprise,
to Combat with the best approoued Knightes in the
whole worlde, in iudging no fairer Ladie to be this daie liuing
then your owne: for mine own part, I am not so troubled
in conceit as you are, to quarrell for such a fabulous
matter, yet dare I tell yee, that my Ladie is much more
beautifull then yours, which if you will denie, I am readie
by the strength of mine arme to make you confesse it. Lewes
féeling himselfe gréeued with these iniurious spéeches of the
Countie, answered. Proude Knight, I am ashamed to heare
thy iudgment so simple, as to thinke I am come hether for
a matter of so light moment, as though I would not iustifie
against thée and all other what I haue promised: but let
that passe, before we part, I will cause thée know thy folly,
by that time thy pate and thy bodie is thorowly bumbasted,
looke to thy selfe, for I intende to doo it. So mounting on
horseback, and prepared as it had béene to a warre mortal,
encountred eache other with such furie, as their Launces
flying in shiuers vppe in the ayre, they met together so terriblie
with their bodies, their Shéeldes, their Horsses and
their heads, as they were bothe dismounted to the grounde.
But earnest desire to vanquish, they béeing beside, stronge

and will disposed Knights, made them quicklie beginne the
second assault with their Swords, which was so dangerous,
and handled with such dexteritie, as it was harde to iudge
who should haue the honour of the Combat. B
                           •
                        t Lewes beholding
the representation of his Ladie, and considering her
so excellent and fauourable to him, tooke hart a fresh, and (as
it were inspired with newe vigor) so laide on the Countie
D
                              ••
                           cell, as in short time he brought him vnder the mercie
of his Sworde, when holding it against his threate, he said.
Peremptorie Knight, if nowe thou confesse she not my Lady to

                           〈◊〉
                         thine in beautie, thy vndiscréete heade shall raunsome
thy soll
                           •
                        e. The Countie (for all this) woulde not aunswere
one worde, by reason of the debilitie he felt himselfe in, hauing
lost so much of his blood, as for the gréefe hee conceiued
to be thus vanquished: whereat Prince Lewes not content,
would haue taken his heade from his shoulders, but ye Iudges
of the fielde canie to him, saying. My Lorde, you ought
to forbeare, hauing brought your enemie beyonde his owne
defence, your victory 
                           •
                        éeing sufficient to content you, forbids
his death. The Prince perswaded, entred his Pauillion,
and ioyfull of his conquest, commaunded two Gardants of
the field, to take the figure of the Princesse of Arragon, and
place it at the féete of the Duchesse counterfeit, which was
doone immediatlie, and the Countie Durcell brought into
his owne Tent, where his Chirurgions tooke dilligent care
for the curing of his woundes. Soone after came a Knight
of Myllaine, who giuing such defiances as the other dyd,
was in the ende constrained with great shame, to confesse
vnder the conquering Sworde of Lewes, the imperfections
of his Ladie, and her stature placed by the Princesse of Arragon.
The same daie were fiue great Lords of Italie
brought in like subiection, and so the tryumphe ended till
the next daie, when the first that came into the fielde was a
braue Gallant of Spayne, a Knight of good estimation, and
specially reputed, who after a dain-glorious Oration made
(as the nature of the people is that way affected) put hys

fortune to the triall of his Launce, where hee sped so ill, as
he was vnhorssed, and in the following Combat likewise
receiued the foile. After him seauen other Knights of Castile
prooued as vnfortunate, their Ladies pictures all reuerencing
the Du
                           •
                        hesse, who béeing not a little proude of her
Knight, and the memorable renowne he witnessed of her
beautie: I leaue to your considerations, both of her conceite
that waie, as also in loue towards the Prince, who séeing no
more readie to enter the quarrell, returned thence to the
Pallace, to conferre with his swéete Mistresse of his high
good fortunes.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXXV.
                     
                        Of the Combat betweene Prince Lewes of Fraunce, and
Crenus the Duke of Gaule.
                     
                     
                        GReat pleasure did the King conceiue,
and all the nobilitie of the
Court, at the 
                           •
                        otten victories of
Prince Lewes, against so manie
woorthie Knights, so that they
altogeather accounted him most
fortunate. And nowe the thirde
daie when hee was entred his
Tent, an English Knight (no
lesse braue in termes then the
former) defied the Prince, and betwéene them began a dangerous
conflict, in the midst whereof, the King with manie
Princes, Barons and Lordes, as also the Quéene and the
Duchesse of Burgundie, came to their standing, and vnhappily
behelde the foyle of the English Knight, the Duchesse
hearing him confesse her beautie, and behelde his Ladyes
portrait placed vnder hers. But now the couragious Duke

of Gaule named Crenus, came brauelie mounted into the
fielde, dooing his duetie to the King, Quéene and Ladies,
who not knowing him, by his Armour iudged him some
great Lorde, in that no Knight before caused so good opinion
generallie, nor came with brauer countenaunce into ye field:
he béeing indéede a Prince of wonderfull possessions, and a
Knight at Armes woorthilie approoued. The Duke (as all
the other had doone) caused his Ladies counterfeite to bee
placed where it ought by his Squires, to the no little admiration
of all the beholders, noting what rare and excellent
beautie it was adorned withall, the workman hauing performed
such exquisite perfections, as it had béene the Ladie
herselfe naturallie liuing: while the Squires were thus
placing it on the monument, the Duke aduaunced himselfe
to Lewes in this manner. The ouermuch selfe conceite
(Lorde Lewes) of mindes but easily acquainted with matters
of difficultie, hath often béene, and yet is the cause, to
plucke great personages more lowe then they expecte: so
that men haue séene them deceiued of their intents, and rewarded
with ridiculous shame and confusion. This speake
I to you, hauing héere begun a busines, the ende whereof
will bee more harde to you, then as yet the beginning hath
béen: for Europe is sufficientlie stored with hardy Knights
to asswage your presumptuous opinion, and Ladies much
more faire and excellent, then she whom you contende for.
And this (by the fauour of Fortune, gracious regarde of my
Ladie and Mistresse, and helpe of my good Sworde) will I
enforce you to confesse: that incomparable Agriola, daughter
to the King of England, for vertue, for beautie and all diuine
perfections, excéedeth yours whatsoeuer she be. Before
such a leasing (quoth the Prince) shall passe the lippes of a
Sonne of Fraunce, rather will I consent to bee péecemeale
torne in sunder: and before fayre Phaebus haue paced one
howres iourney, I doubt not to make thée repent thy pride
and arrogancie. By the soule of King Arthur, said ye Duke,
looke thou garde thy selfe well, for I haue with my courtela
                           •
                        ,

abated the pride of a brauer man then thy selfe, and ere
we two part, I meane to trie if I can doo it againe, therefore
resolue thy selfe to thy best defence, for (by my life)
I will not fauour thee. Without any further spéeches they
encountred with such violence togeather, as Prince Lewes
was throwne betwéene his horsses féete, and he for England
lost his stirrops, but recouered himselfe well enough by the
mayne of his Horse: then he séeing his enemie not vppe againe,
cast himselfe out of his saddle to haue taken his aduauntage,
but Lewes preuented him, and came marching against
the Duke with his Sworde drawne, who staied him
thus. Me thinks Prince of Fraunce, before any worse befall
thée, thou wert best to yéelde thy selfe, and remember
that our Combatte beginnes for the excellencie of beautie.
By God man of England, aunswered Lewes, thou canst not
perswade me to a thing so farre from my thought, therfore
goe too, and he that hath the fairest Fréende, shall soone be
knowne. In this great choller, he reached the Duke such a
stroke on the head, as made him sette one knée to ye ground,
but recouering himselfe quicklie, and both thorowly angry,
they laid on eache other so cruellie, as the very hardiest of
the beholders feared the successe. Thus fought they for matter
of speciall value, the defence of theyr owne reputations,
and honor of their Ladies, whose loue was more precious
in their harts then their owne lines. So long these eager
charges continued on bothe sides, as Prince Lewes hauing
receiued more then twentie woundes on his bodie, feeling
himselfe fainte, fell downe before his enemie, saying.
O noble hart of Fraunce, the true succéeder of thy famous
predecessours. The victorious Englishman setting his foote
vpon him, saide. Lorde Lewes, if now thou declarest not my
Lady to excel thine in beautie, it c
                           •
                        sts thée thy life, a matter
nothing pleasing to me, in respect of the chiualry, and singuler
prowesse I haue founde in thée, as also this magna
                           •••
                        ious
enterprise of thine, which in despight of thy foyle, and
death it self, shall make thée liue for euer. But Lewes made

no aunswere, eyther for his weakenes, or sorowful conceite
of his mis-fortune, wherefore the Iudges came, who granting
the Duke victorie, desired him to procéede no further,
which he honourably graunting, was as ioyfull of the conquest,
as the Duchesse sad and pensiue, thinking Prince
Lewes had béene slaine outright, wherfore the floong away
to her lodging, not tarrying for the King or any of the Ladies,
who likewise departed the fielde in maruailous sorow,
séeing theyr Sonne so pittifully wounded: but aboue al, the
Duchesse made more lamentation, then shee woulde haue
doone for the death of her Husbande, yet fearing what shee
thought secretly, shoulde by her gréefe bee openly suspected,
comforted herselfe so well as she coulde: and béeing by herselfe,
with one of her trusty Gentlewomen, shee thus breathed
foorth her mones. Ah trecherous Fortune, enemye to
all actions of regarde, why hast thou suffered the man thou
most fauoured, thus to be vanquished? and (which is most to
be pittied) without hope of life? Ah deceitfull tremperesse,
séeing thou hast offered him so much wrong, doo mee the fauour
to beare him company in death, that liued and died so
honourably for my loue. Ah death, let it suffise thée y• Loue
hath wounded him, and make not thou experience of thy
                           •
                        e
ineuitable stroke, vnlesse thou wilt doo as much for mee. Ah
false and flattering Sonne of Venus, is this the guerdon
thou rewardest them withall, that serue thée faithfully? So
ceasing her complaint awhile, in great impatience she thus
began againe. Alas, neyther ye one or other are cause héerof,
but my most vnhappy selfe, when (prouoked by my beautye)
he tooke in hand this enterprise: but if it bee so (déere
Fréende) that enu
                           •
                        ous fate deale so harde with thée, soone
mayst thou be reuenged on her that caused it. And wyth
these wordes she sell betwéene the armes of one of her Ladyes
present, whom she specially trusted, who thus spake
to her, Why howe nowe Madame? w
                           •
                        l you perswade your
selfe no otherwise? beléeue me there is no remedy but you
must change this conceite. What wyll you forgette your

selfe? it is no time if you remember your selfe well, for if
he whom you loue and endure these paynes for, shoulde vnderstande
héereof: in stedde of séeking his health, you wyll
shorten hys dayes, if (as you say) hee liue not without your
welfare. More requisite is it, that you goe cōfort him wyth
your chéereful presence, then thus to bee the argument of
bothe your deathes. Beside Madame, if my Lord suruiue,
as no doubt he shall: what may he presume? trust me matter
sufficient (if you gouerne not your selfe better) that you
séeke to discouer, what most of all beséemes you to conceale.
Alas (my Fréende) aunswered the Duchesse, I knowe you
speake the trueth: but howe is it possible for me to content
my selfe, séeing what estate he is in onely for my loue? But
if he dye, small reckoning will I make of my life: for let
my honour bee blamed or otherwise, let all aduersities
and mis-fortunes go
                           •
                         togeather. Yet will I somewhat bee
aduised by thee, and I wyll goe sée if my presence wyl any
thing comfort him. To breake off this talke came an Esquire
from the Queene, to intreate her come to her Maiestie,
which she did, and went with the Quéene to the Princes
lodging, who beholding the Duchesse so pale and full of
greefe, with this conceit his woundes opened and bl
                           •
                        dde 
                           〈◊〉
                        :
for which cause his Chirurgions, who imagined the
occasion to proceede, by shame the Prince conceiued, that
any one should see what woundes he tooke by the Duke of
Gaule, wherfore they forbad any to enter his 
                           〈◊〉
                        , vntill
ye peril of death was better passed ouer, which was within
short time, when ye Duchesse by her oftē visiting him, cōuerted
his sorowes into many ioyful cōceits. But because our
History appertaines not onely to hys deedes, or the loue of
the Duchesse, we will returne to the Duke of Gaule, who
after he had thus conquered Prince Lewes, followed the
conditions of the fielde, taking the portraite of his Ladye
Agriola, and placed it where the Duchesse picture stoode,
setting it among the other conquered Ladyes. That day dyuers
other Knights came on behalfe of their Ladies, whō
                        
the valiant Englishman entertained with such valour, as
all his paines tourned to the honour of his Mistresse Agriola,
who nowe was seated as paragon of the fielde.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXXVI.
                     
                        Of the Combatte betweene Palmerin, and the Duke of
Gaule, with the successe thereof.
                     
                     
                        ON the same daie that the Prince
of Fraunce was vanquished by
the Duke of Gaule, arriued at Paris,
Palmerin, Trineus,
                         and theyr
trayne, but the Combat was first
ended, wherefore they commaunded
their Squyres to prepare
theyr Tent. Palmerin vnderstanding
y• the Duke was conquerer,
greeued not a little, in y• he came
no sooner to winne the honour of the Prince: yet knowing
if nowe he coulde conquer the Duke, more glory shoulde arise
to him then by the Prince Lewes, he contented himselfe,
passing that night in his Tent with the Prince Trineus,
in diuers arguments of the Combat between Lewes
of Fraunce and the Duke, yet was Lewes highly commended
to Palmerin though he were ouercome, because hee had
so brauely doone the two former daies against al y• Knights
that came. All this night could not Palmerin sleepe, thinking
on the day ensuing, but rising earlie in the morning, and
commending himselfe to God in his prayers, hee put on the
Coate of Armes his Ladye Polinarda gaue him before hys
departure, and tooke the counterfeite of his Lady in hys
armes, not thinking any of hys Knights or Squyres woorthie
to beare it, and thus accompanied with Trineus and

other Allemaigne Lordes, entred the Lystes with so braue
a gesture and countenaunce, as euery one commended him
for a good Knight. And hauing placed the picture on the accustomed
monument, as it had béene to the liuely creature
herselfe, he thus began. Ah perfect mirrour of all beautie,
vertue and excellencie, resolue thy selfe this daie to beare
the palme of honour from all Ladies in the worlde, in that
your Knight craues a thousand deathes, before he giue consent
to the contrarie: and perswades himselfe so assured of
your present fauour, as he durst venture on a whole Army,
to keepe his religion in your diuine seruice. These wordes
were spoken so loude, as ye Duke of Gaule hearde him, wherwith
not contented, he aunswered. What now Knight? demaundest
thou courage of a Ladie to defend her beautie, ill
canst thou performe what thou speakest, if thou bee no better
prou
                           •
                        ded. For all that Sir, saide Palmerin, I hope to
make you graunt what I saie, and that there is not a 
                           •
                        ayrer
Ladie liuing, then shee whose figure thou héere beholdest,
otherwise I shall constraine thée whether thou wylt
or no. That shall we sée, quoth the Duke, so departing into
their Tents to be armed, and readie to Ioust, they met so
valiantlie togeather, as they broke their Launces brauelie
without moouing eache other, and taking newe staues encountred
againe, when the Duke was vnhorssed, and Palmerin
verie sore wounded: so betaking th̄ to their swords,
continued a daungerous and doubtfull Combat, till in the
ende Palmerin ouercame the Duke, & holding his sworde
readie to cut off his heade, said. Knight thou art dead, if thou
graunt not my Ladie to excell thine in beautie. Ah sir, saide
the Duke, vnhappy be the howre that you tooke in hande
this voyage, to depriue me of that which made mee y• moste
happie Knight of the worlde, with what countenance may
I present my selfe before her, séeing Fortune hath béene so
aduerse to me? thus filling the ayre with his regrets, the
Iudges came, desiring Palmerin to saue his life, whereto he
cōsented, which words were more bitter to the Duke then

death, who in these complaints was leade into his Tent by
his Squires. Palmerin not forgetting the honour due to his
Ladie, tooke downe the Image of Agriola, and set his Ladies
in the roome, saying. Newe are you in the place Madame,
which is your owne by right. This victory was not a
little pleasaunt to the Frenchm
                              •
                           n, but especially to Prince
Lewes when he hearde thereof, who the better to make his
ioye knowne to Palmerin, sent him two of the best Horsses
in his stable, as glad of the reuenge on the Duke, as y• 
                        Palmerin
remained conquerour. Palmerin sent hartie thankes
to the Prince, as well for his present as his good-will, and
continued in his deuoire to his Ladies beautie, as that da
                           •
                        e
hee honoured her with y• conquest of foure French Knights,
and the submission of their Ladies portraitures: yet aboue
all, Palmerin commended to Trineus the valour of y• 
                        Englishman,
confirming y• Duke for a chosen Knight at Armes,
and neither Frenchman, Italian, Spanyard, Englishman, Romaine,
or Greeke, that attempted against Palmerin in the
following daies, but still he bare awaie the victory, and Polinardas
picture their Ladies obeysaunce. The last of the
eyght daies came into the fielde the Lord of Albret, greatlie
estéemed for prowesse and chiualrie, and hee woulde defende
the beautie of his French Ladie: but Palmerin after a long
and tedious fight, brought him and his Mistresse among the
vanquished, & so concluded ye 
                        French Princes enterprise to
his own immortal honor. Afterward came the King Agariell,
with the Princes and Lords of his Court to Palmerins.
Tent, making him the greatest entertainment could be deuised,
whereof Trineus and the other Allemaigne Lordes
were highlie contented, and after his wounds were healed,
caused him and his companie to be lodged in his own Pallace,
where the Quéene and her Ladies would often visite
him, and the Prince Lewes likewise, who by many intreaties
with 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           , vnderstoode her name for whom Palme
                           
                              •
                           in
thus aduentured. But when the King vnderstoode, that
Trineus was the Emperour of Allemaignes Sonne, and

all this honourable cōpanie came from his Fathers Court,
their welcome cannot be sufficiently sette downe, nor Palmerins
praises effectuallie rehearsed, whome the Prince
Lewes thus entertained. In sooth Sir Palmerin, ye Prince
may imagine himselfe happie, that is honoured with your
knightlie seruice, but aboue all, the noble Emperour of Allemaigne.
My Lorde, quoth Palmerin, it likes you to speake
your pleasure of me, yet did I neuer knowe Knightes more
worthy in fight then your Countrimen, among whom your
deserts may not escape vnreported, no more then the déeds
of Scipio can among the Romaines. Manie other honour able
and familiare spéeches passed betwéene the Prince and
Palmerin, about the Ladies figures that were brought to
the Ioustes: Polinarda onely tryumphing beyonde all the
rest, hauing no seconde but faire Agriola of England, the
Goddesse and Mistresse to the Duke of Gaule.
                     
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXXVII.
                     
                        Of the Combat which the Dukes of Sauoye and Lorrayne
had togeather, for the beauty of their Ladies,
and what was the issue thereof.
                     
                     
                        YOu haue héere before heard, the
enterprise of the Duke of Sauoy
for the beautie of his Ladie, and
howe after Prince Lewes hys
daies of Combat were finished,
he shoulde maintaine nine other
in the like quarrell: wherefore
the day after Palmerins victory,
hee put himselfe in order as the
time required, and hauing in the
field erected two Pillers of Porphire, displacing them that

belonged to the Prince Lewes, his Tent was there set vp
all of Crimson veluet, verye curiouslye imbroydered with
Golde and pearle, and rounde about within were manie
braue se
                           •
                        tences of loue, drawne frō Historiographers and
Poets, as well Gréeke as Latin, in prayse of the Mistresse
of his deuoted affections. In the morning hee went to gyue
the good morrowe to the Princesse Luc
                              •
                           ma
                              ••
                           a Daughter
to the King of Fraunce, whom he had chosen for his spouse
and Wife. After many sollemne courtesies passed between
them, fearing the Quéene shoulde finde them togeather, hee
tooke his leaue of her, she giuing him frō her arme a sump
                        
                           •
                        uo
                           •
                        s
Bracelet, garnished with sixe great Diamondes, and
sixe fayre Rubies, which gift encouraged him to follow his
enterprise. Béeing come into the Field, the Iudges appointed,
were the eldest Sonne of Fraunce, and the Countie of
Armigna
                              •
                           , wise Princes and valiant Knights, and standing
in y• Gate of his Tent vnarmed, because he sawe none
readie to offer him battell: the Duke of Lorrayne at length
entred the Fielde, attended on by a braue company of
Knights and Squires, who brought the portrait of his Ladie,
béeing a figure of rare beautie, and hauing a Crowne on
her heade, where ouer was written in great Letters of
Golde, Thys is Polinarda, exceedyng in beauty al Ladyes
in the world, which was read by manie, who coulde not satis-fie
their eyes in beholding so braue a spectacle, and being
sette on the Pillar appointed, he came to the Duke of Sauoye,
saying. Blasphemous Knight, detractour of the beautie
of Ladies, héere may thine owne eyes witnes how thou
hast belyed beautie, in presuming to thinke any more fayre
then this incomparable creature, to whome thy Ladye may
not worthilie be handmaide. And if thou will not presently
confesse what I commaunde thee, shéelde thy head from my
weapon, which I meane to knocke well for thy great vndiscretion.
The Duke of Sauoy enraged with these words,
armed himselfe presently without any aunswere, & mounting
on horsebacke with a strong Launce in his hande, encountred

his enemie so couragiouslye, as breaking their
staues brauely in thyuers to their verye Gauntlets, passed
on without any further harme. The Duke of Sauoy angrie
that he had not dismounted his enemie, with hys Sworde
drawne returned furiously vpon him, & laide on such strokes
as the fire flew foorth of his Helmet: yet the Duke of Lorrayne
like a good and hardie Knight, defended himselfe valiantly,
and reached the Duke of Sauoy many shrewd woundes,
so that bothe of them throughlie netled, rent eache others
Armour in such sort with their swords, and mangled
theyr flesh so vnmercifully, as the Iudges coulde not imagine
who had the better vauntage. The Duke of Sauoye
wondering to sée the Duke of Lorraine holde out so long, began
to storme more like a Fiend then a manne, rayling on
Fortune, that (in respect of his Ladies beautie) shee asisted
him no better, and béeing at the very point of dispaire, tooke
hart a 
                           〈◊〉
                        , and redoubling his strokes vpon his aduersarie,
at length 
                           •
                        lewe his horse vnder him, who falling downe,
and his Maister vnder him, by reason he was so sore wearyed,
and beside, had broken his thigh in the fall, coulde not
recouer himself, before the Duke of Sauoie (being alighted)
sette foote vpon him, and in furye woulde haue parted hys
heade from his shoulders, but that the Iudges ran quicklie
and stayed him. Then was ye Duke of Lorraine halfe deade
carried into his Tent, and the Duke of Sauoie caused Polinardas
picture to be set at Lucemanias féete, a thing verye
strange in respect of their great difference. Afterwarde hee
was vnarmed to haue his woundes bounde vp, which were
so dangerous, as gladlie he would haue béene excused from
the Combat with any other Knight for that day, didde not
shame, and the Lawe hée made himselfe prouoke him to the
contrary. But within an howre after, he was defied by a
Knight of Scicilie, who woulde Combat on foote with the
battel Axe, in which conflicte the Duke was verye néere ouercome,
he had lost so much bloode before: but in bréefe, the

                        Scicilian Knight lost the daie, hys Ladyes picture was yeelded
conquered, and the Duke of Sauoie went to rest him in
his Tent.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXXVIII.
                     
                        Howe the Duke of Sauoye entered the Combatte against
Ptolome, and howe he sped.
                     
                     
                        
                           PAlmerin not as yet in perfecte
health, was aduertised, how the
Duke of Sauoie hadde conquered
the Duke of Lorraine, fighting
for the beautie of the Princesse
Polinarda, the conceit whereof
so gréeued him as nothing coulde
more, to sée her honour so badlie
defended, whom aboue all other
he estéemed déerest, which made
him in great choller say before the Prince Trineus. By
God (my Lorde) Looue made a slender choyse of the Duke
of Lorraine for his vassayle, and Madame Polinarda scant
wise to chuse him for her Champion, in respect of the excellent
beautie Nature hath bestowed on her. And yet it could
not be imagined, howe the Duke of Lorraine shoulde gayne
the victory without shame, in séeking honor beyonde his desert,
because he is vnwoorthy such extraordinary fauoure:
which makes me repute it rather of a faynt hart, then anie
want of a iust quarrell. Trineus hearing Palmerin so affectionate
in his spéeches, in a merry laughter, sayd. In good
sooth Sir Palmerin, the Duke of Lorraine was but ill councelled,
to enter the Combat for my Sisters beautie without
her licence, in that he once learned, howe you coulde defend
it much better then hee. Palmerin fearing hee had spoken

more then he ought, because he discoursed his loue too openly,
excused the matter thus. If it were not (my Lorde) that
I doubt to offer wrong to a Lady, on whome dependeth my
lyfe, and whom I loue more déere then my selfe: I woulde
cause the Frenchman well to vnderstand, how Madame Polinarda
your Sister, surpasseth in all perfections eyther of
grace or beauty, all the Ladies of this Country, yea, I dare
say of the whole world, therefore one may easily coniecture,
that the Duke of Lorraine during ye Combat, had his mind
fixed on baser occasions. Then Trineus smyling to sée Palmerin
so dilligent to shadowe his loue, sayd. It is no strange
matter Fréende Palmerin, to sée presuming mindes payde
with selfe same coyne, as the Duke is: and yet I can not
meruaile enough, that my Sister Polinarda wold not commit
this matter to your charge, she hauing had so good knowledge
of your valour and prowesse. These speeches pleased
not Palmerin a little, and did in such sort encourage him, as
for the iniury doone his Ladie by the Duke of Sauoye, in setting
her figure at the féete of Lucemania, as had not Trineus
perswaded him wyth fayre spéeches, all sicke and sore as
he was, he would haue gone to reuenge this dishonor. Notwithstanding,
hee called Prolome secretly, saying. Thou
knowest (my déere Freende) what shame is offered her, to
whom I was destenied before my byrth, by the presumption
of an ouer-bolde Knight, and what greefe it is to mee,
that I cannot at this present reuenge this wrong my selfe,
I pray thee therefore supply my insufficiencie, and enter
the Combat with that vaine-glorious Duke, of whom thou
maist gaine honor and yéelde me content, in giuing ease to
my afflictions, which els are insupportable. I promise you
my Lorde, aunswered Ptolome, before you made the mo
                           ••
                        
                        on
I intended it, and I will accomplish it with such good
will, as I doubt not to ouercome the Duke of Sauoy. And
for my Mi
                           •••
                        esse Brionella, will I enter the fielde, whose
beautie is sufficient to enriche me with the victory, for in
my conceit, shee farre passeth Lucemania. Therefore my

Lorde let me request one courtesie, which I am lothe you
should denie me: that if you shall be able to morrow, but to
accompanie me with your presence in the fielde. If the ayre
will suffer me, quoth Palmerin, I will, in meane while I
will pray, that thy fortune may fall out to my harts desire.
Thus Trineus, Palmerin and Ptolome, were passing the
time with other noble men, of the valoure of the Duke of
Sauoy against all strange Knights, and how he had not foyled
the Duke of Lorraine, had not his Horse fallen on him
and maimed him, otherwise hee brought the Combatte to
so good a iudgment, as he had wunne the honour of ye fielde.
Wherat Palmerin was more offended then before, because
himselfe was not able to reuenge this mis-fortune, héerewithall
he conceiued a kind of iealousie of the Duke of Lorraine,
because hée hadde chosen his Ladie Polinarda for his
Mistresse, and on her behalfe had entred the Combatte,
and howe he durst place her picture on the Piller wyth her
name, without he had receiued some commandement from
her, which conceit so gréeued him, as his woundes began to
be as daungerous as at the first, continually labouring in
his thoughts, nowe with the lightnes, then againe with the
constancie of Women, neuerthelesse, he could not iudge (affecting
earnestly the vertues of his Lady) that she would be
of such a double lyking, and in this doubtful estate, sayd. Ah
God, I sée that Women winne lightly, & loose againe more
easilie. Then repenting his words, followes on thus. O heauens,
and what shall I say? it is impossible that shee (meaning
Polinarda) should be so forgetfull, and neuer will I
beléeue, that a Princesse so wise and vertuous, wold reward
me with such treason, which may not, nay I dare sweare
cannot, once enter her thoughts. Yet would not all opinions
serue to allay thys newe iealousie, but still it had power
to confounde reason, and al the night continued he in this
variable conceit, till the next morning, when Ptolome (so
soone as the Sunne arose) accōpanyed with Trineus, went
to his Tent, where béeing armed, all sauing his Helmet,

hauing his Launce and Shéelde, he came to the Duke, saying.
Thou knowest Knight the cause of my comming, stand
vpon thy guarde, for I sight for beautie. The Duke suddainly
at these words mounted on horseback, and ranne against
his enemie with such strength, as Ptolome cast the
Duke forth of his saddle, and suddainly alighted wyth hys
Sworde drawne: but the Duke recouering himselfe, entertained
him in sharper sort then he expected. Nowe beganne
betwéene them a cruell and pittious Combat, as their Armour,
sheeldes and swords, 
                           •
                        lewe about in péeces, and the
blood trickling downe their bodies in manie places, so that
it was generally reputed, how the fight could not end without
the losse of both their liues. Yet in the ende, the Duke
béeing of stronger constitution then Ptolome, and gréedy of
victory ouer his enemie, ranne so violentlie vpon him as hée
got him on the grounde, and he béeing vppermost, offered to
take the aduauntage of his life: but the Iudges forbidding
it, caused Ptolome to be carried into his Tent, where the
Prince Trineus staied not a little sorry for this great misfortune.
The Duke likewise sore wounded was carried into
his Pauillion, but first hee sawe the portrait of Brionella
sette in the ranke of the conquered. The same daie dyd the
Duke fight with a Knight of Scotland at the Ma
                           •
                        e, who
not nimble enough in vsing that weapon, in the end had the
foyle, and thrée other Knights afterwarde at seuerall weapons,
so that it was admirable to beholde the exploits of
Armes the Duke did, in that no Knight as yet medled with
him, but departed with shame, and their Ladies pictures
placed as vanquished. And nowe was Palmerins Combatte
against the Duke of Gaule not talked on, for the Duke of
Sauoy was accounted the onely Knight in the world, to the
no small ioy of the Princesse Lucemania, who perswaded
herselfe now, that her beautie was most excellent. But she
was not so pleasant as Palmerin was pensiue, and 
                           •
                        nraged
out of measure, notwithstanding his weakenes, and the often
intreaties of Trineus, he would néedes to the fielde, saying.

Good my Lord perswade me not, for I reckon not my
life, so I may take vengeaunce of the dishonour doone to
my Ladie your Sister: the manifolde courtesies of the Emperour
your Father, haue so bounde me to her and you, as
excéede my life farre, and therfore I beséech you not to hinder
me. Trineus yet ouercame him by perswasions, assuring
him to haue time sufficient for his reuenge, whereat greatlie
displeased, he feigned himselfe to be whole sooner then he
was indéede, for the great desire hee had to deale with the
Duke. And Prince Lewes angrie, to sée the Duke hold the
fielde longer then hee did, not able to bee ouercome by anye
Knight, came to Palmerin saying. I knowe not my Lorde,
whether you vnderstand the Duke of Sauoyes victories against
so manie hardie Knights, but belike his strength is
much better then mine was, or Fortune allowes him more
fauour then she did to me. In my conceit if you enter not
the Combat, you doo me wrong and your selfe too, and if hee
depart hence with victory, then shall I haue cause to complaine
of you: in that his successe hath made him so braue
and presumptuous, as though no Knight is able to answere
him in the field, let me intreate you Sir Palmerin to abate
his pride, and (as well hee deserues) make him knowe his
folly. Palmerin hauing greater desire to execute this matter,
then thus to be intreated, returned the Prince this answere.
My Lorde, God giues honour and victory to whom
he pleaseth, without either regarde of the cause or the persons.
If according to bountie or nobilitie of minde he distributed
such gifts, then had you béene among the better sorte,
as furnished sufficientlie with valour and magnanimitie:
yet if your enterprise haue not sorted to your desire, account
this for certaine that it is for your good, and for other reasons
thē are to you known, for such matters are his secrets,
and he dooth ballance them by his diuine wisedome. Notwithstanding,
as well to satis-fie your request, as ease mine
owne minde, to morrowe morning will I enter my Tent,
albeit my present estate would haue me stay awhile, there

will I Combat with the Duke, not certaine how Fortune
meanes to deale with me. But happen what shall, I goe
with a minde to conquere, and doubt not but the issue wyll
be such, as shall yéelde you content, and me the victory, so
shall your sadnes & mine be conuerted into pleasure. With
this aunswere the Prince satis-fied, departed, yet was hee
ignoraunt of Palmerins intent, which was farre otherwise
then he imagined: but pleased as he was he went into the
presence Chamber, where manie Knights were conferring
of déedes of Armes past, to whom hee opened the fantasie of
Palmerin, which caused a generall doubting of the Duke,
setting him downe for vanquished, except Palmerins weaknes
were his greater Fréende.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXXIX.
                     
                        Of the perillous Combat between Palmerin and the Duke
of Sauoye, and the issue thereof.
                     
                     
                        SIxe daies togeather had y• Duke
of Sauoye maintained this quarrell,
for the beautie of his Ladie
Lucemania, and no Knight as
yet could get anie aduauntage of
him, vntil ye seauenth daie, when
Palmerin prepared himselfe to
the fielde, and entred his Tent,
accōpanied with Prince Lewes
of Fraunce, Trineus
                         and many other
Princes. The King with all his trayne taking theyr
standing to behold ye Combat, Palmerin came armed foorth
of his Tent, sauing his Helmet, which was carryed before
him by two Squires with his Sheeld and Mace, and next
to them came two Princes, who bare the portraiture of
his Ladie Polinarda, which béeing sette on the Piller, hee

clasped on his Helmet, and taking his Mace in his hande,
martched to the Dukes Tent, and thus summoned him.
Knight, thou hast long enough defended the field, and to my
great gréefe that it hath béene so long, my turne is nowe
come, and it is good reason I shoulde kéepe it the rest of the
time: for the Ladie whom I loue, is not onely much more
beautifull then thine, but beside, excelleth all other whatsoeuer,
and if thou wilt not confesse the same, I wil not leaue
thée with this Mace till I haue forced thée to doo it. I know
not saide the Duke, what thou canst doo, but I am of the
minde, that I shall soone quallifie thy ouer bolde brauing.
At these words the Duke taking his Mace, deliuered Palmerin
so sounde a stroke on the heade, as made him to stagger,
but Palmerin requited him well againe for it, and long
had they fought togeather, and brused eache other very pittifully,
till at length Palmerin gaue the Duke such a cruell
stroke betwéene the heade and the shoulders, as he fell to
the grounde cleane bereft of sence: when Palmerin taking
off his Helmet, would not offer him any further violence,
but setting his sworde against his brest, said. Now am I sufficiently
reuenged on him, that so ill intreated the figure of
the most fayrest among Ladies. The Iudges of the fielde,
thinking Palmerin would haue slaine the Duke, came running
to him with these words. Content you Sir, he is vanquished,
and hath no power to defende himselfe. Whereupon
Palmerin put vppe his Sword againe, and leauing the
Duke, went presently to the Piller where his Ladies portrait
stoode, which embracing in his armes, he placed highest,
and Lucemania at her féete, saying. I beséeche you Madame
to pardon your Knight, in that he did no sooner repell
the famous iniurie offered you, and impute it not to feare,
or want of courage, but debility of bodie, which once a little
recouered, I came to maintaine your honor, and héere confirme
you for the most beautifull Ladie liuing. While Pal
                           
                              ••
                           erin
thus contemplated his Mistresse figure, the Iudges
commaunded the Duke to be carried into his Pauillion,

where with soueraigne drinks life was got into him again,
but when he knowe himselfe to be vanquished, and that in
one howre hee lost the greatest honour of all his life time,
very conceit of gréefe had well néere slaine him. No lesse
was the sorrowe of Madame Lucemania, but she and her
Knight were not so much discontented, as Palmerin, Trineus,
and Ptolome were ioyfull, but aboue all other Prince
Lewes of Fraunce, more pleasant then if himselfe had tryumphed
in victory, thinking he could not sufficiently extoll
the renowne of Palmerin, calling him y• onely puller downe
of the proude. That day did Palmerin encounter with seauen
other Knights, & in his conquests shewed himselfe not
onely magnanimious, but mercifull, sauing their liues, and
honoring his Mistresse with the humilitie of theirs. The
next day likewise after many braue exployts, béeing readie
to leaue fielde because none came to resist him, on a suddain
there entred a Knight in blacke Armour, stripte all ouer
with Golde, and bearing in hys sheelde of Azur the Golden
Sunne, whose braue order of entraunce declared him to
be a hardie Knight at Armes, who aduauncing him selfe to
Palmerin, said. My intent of comming hether (Sir Knight)
is to let thée vnderstand, that I am the Seruaunt and beloued
of a Ladie, who may not bee equalled with any other,
and because I am enformed, that y• maintainest thy F
                           •
                        éend,
to excell all Ladies whatsoeuer, I offer to prooue the contrary,
and will make thée confesse it. I neuer spoke wordes
more true, aunswered Palmerin, and heere abide to iustifie
them: but this place is ordeyned to no other ende, then to
make thée and thy like know, what vnaduised enterprises
you take in hande. And one thing is required of 
                           •
                        hée, that
before thou begin the Combat, thou sette vppon thys Pyller
the counterfeite of her, whom thou perswadest thy selfe
to excell my Lady in beautie, according to the conditions of
this field published through all Europe. That cannot I doo,
answered the Knight of the Sunne, for I haue no other picture
of her then is imprinted in my hart, where loue hath

so liuely figured her person, as she is daily presented to mee
by her incomparable beautie, which cannot be taken from
me but onely by death. And if loue follow the soule, [as diuers
holde opinion] whole worldes cannot seperate mee frō
her. And therefore are all men vnworthy to receiue fruition
(by their regard) of a thing so precious, which makes me
imagine, none but my selfe woorthy to looke on her diuine
figure. Prepare thee therefore to thy Horse, and defende
thy selfe. Palmerin desirous to know the name of this fayre
Ladie, sayd. I sée Sir Knight, that yu art meruailous proude
and surlie, which make mee desire rather to Combat wyth
thee then any other, to abate this hote humour: albeit this
is contrarie to his conditions, who was the principall Author
of this enterprise, which is, that thou shouldest set on
this Piller her portrait whom thou so estéemest, yet thys
exception shall be graunted thee, for the desire I haue to
knowe what thou canst doo, as also her name, if thou darest
reueale it. To tell thée her name (aunswered ye Knight
of the Sunne) I will not sticke with thee, and because in
concealing it, I shall offer her wrong, nature hauing in her
set downe the onely worke of beautie: know therfore that
her name is Polinarda, Daughter to the mighty Emperor
of Allemaigne. These wordes were so yrkesome to Palmerin,
and troubled his thoughts in such sort, that hee knewe
not readily what to aunswere: notwithstanding in midst
of his choller, thus spake. By God Knight thou hast made
a good choyse, for against her beautie will not I contende,
hauing it in greater estimation and reuerence then yu canst
haue: but I am ready to prooue, that thou deseruest not to
be named her Knight, no not so much as her meanest Seruaunt.
That shall we try, said the Knight of the Sunne, before
we part: and albeit her excellencie deserue farre greater
seruice then mine: yet so it is, that for the looue I beare
her, and the affection I haue to obey her by some agreeable
seruice, I may by good reason name my selfe hers. At these
spéeches Palmerin conceiued such iealousie, as without attending

any further matter, mounted in great anger on
horsebacke, and met the Knight of the Sunne so forcibly, as
bothe of them were sent to the ground: whereuppon they
drewe their Swordes, and charged eache other with such
furie, as their Armour and Shéeldes were hacked in péeces,
and ye ground coullered with their expence of blood. No permission
of breathing was suffered betwéene them, but blood
and death earnestly desired on either part, so that the King,
the Lordes and the Iudges, reputed this for the strangest
Combat that euer they sawe, nor could they say who was
likest to winne the fielde, but if the one died, the other could
not escape, so that the King mooued with compassion, caused
them to be seuered, and commaunded them to enter theyr
Tents. Which motion liked well the Knight of the Sun,
for long he perswaded himselfe he could not hold out, wherfore
he mounted on horsebacke so well as he coulde, & withdrewe
himselfe, Palmerin béeing wonderfully displeased,
that he could not obtayne the victory of thys Knight. Soone
after, the King and the Prince Lewes came into his Tent,
and séeing him very sore wounded, woulde not let him staye
there, but sayd. Beléeue me (Sir Palmerin) you haue great
néede of rest, and your woūds I sée are very dangerous, you
shall therefore be conueyed to my Pallace, where all helps
that may be deuised shall be giuen, assuring you, that greater
honour could neuer Knight purchase, then you haue
doone. And though this last Combat were not ended, you
néede not be displeased, the issue thereof importing y• death
of the one or the other, and perhaps of both, which I would
not haue séene for two of the best prouinces in my Realme.
And me thinks you should content your selfe, hauing receiued
before, such honour ouer so many Lords and Knights of
name, come you therfore with me, and Lord Trineus beare
vs company. Great thanks receiued the King of them for
this honourable courtesie, and Palmerin went with him to
the Pallace, where the Kinges Chirurgions tooke care of
his woundes, he béeing lodged in the most stately Chamber

in the Courte. Nowe the Prince Lewes beganne to loue
Palmerin so déerely, as he coulde not be an howre foorth of
his cōpanie, desiring his health as his owne welfare: wherfore
all thinges that he imagined Palmerin tooke pleasure
in, would he performe with his vttermost endeuours, and
would suffer none to hold him talk, but only of matter that
might yéeld pleasure and delight. Notwithstanding, diuers
Knights conferring with him that euening, as concerning
the Knight of the Sunne: Palmerin aunswered them, that
his mind should neuer be thorowly quieted, vntil such time
as he fought with him againe. The Prince, who still endeuoured
to kéepe him from sadnes, saide. I beléeue (my Lord)
that he will not easilie be induced to deale with you again,
for you brought him into such estate, as hee will kéepe himselfe
héereafter out of your handes: and well I am assured,
that had you continued but a little longer, the victorye had
béene yours, for the Knight was so weakened, that he did
nothing but defend your blowes. It pleaseth you (my Lord)
to say so quoth Palmerin, but had he felt such valour in me,
or such courage as beséemes a vertuous Combatant, hardlie
coulde he escape as he hath doone: neuerthelesse, I hope
(with the fauour of Fortune) to méete him once more, and
then we will trie who is the strongest. Much other talke
they had, but Palmerin intreated the Prince, that all the
portraits of the conquered Ladies might bee brought him,
which were aboue an hundred, of diuers beauties & most
strange fashions, and among them all could be founde none
seconde to Polinarda, but (as we haue said already) that of
Agriola the Princesse of England: who (by the report of a
Gentleman present that had séene her) was much more
beautifull then her figure presented. Such spéeches they
continued so long of the Englih Uirgin, as Trineus (albeit
he neuer sawe her) became amorous of her, and at y• instant
he so solemnly vowed himselfe hers, as thence forwarde he
swore neuer to loue any but her, so y• for her sake he thrust
himselfe into manie perrillous fortunes, as in the folowing

discourse of the History you shall reade more at large. From
whom let vs returne to the Prince Lewes, who seeing so
many portraitures of Princesses and Ladies, would dailie
congratulate Palmerins good fortune, and embracing him,
said. So helpe me God, my noble companion, I woulde neuer
desire greater riches in the world, thē to resemble you,
especially in chiualry, which in you is so surpassing al other,
as you haue ended to your honor, what a number haue fayled
in. Oh howe happy may the Ladie account herselfe, that
hath such a Knight? and were not the condition too cruell
towards my selfe, I could wish I were a Woman in her
place, to haue so high rule and commande ouer you. At
which words all present began to smile, yet shewing good
countenaunce to Palmerin, for the affection they sawe the
Prince beare him, which is yet to this day a common vsage
and practise among Courtiers: but Palmerin somewhat ashamed
of such superstitious prayses, aunswered. Trust me
my Lorde, I account my happines the greater, that I haue
doone seruice to so high a personage and so good a Knight as
you are, desiring to méete you in such place héerafter, where
you may perceiue the good wil I beare you, not only for this
high entertainement, which is more then I can deserue, as
for the pleasure I haue to honour so good a Prince, which if
the occasion happen, you shall perceiue the experience. I
haue spoken nothing (quoth the Prince) but what is more
acquainted to others then my selfe, and if I would conceale
them, then will they be most openly knowne, because vertue
doth so apparantlie shine in them. Manie other spéeches
passed betwéene, them, and longer had continued, but that
manie Lords which came to sée the Ioustes, were now vpon
departing, and therefore woulde take their leaue of the
King, whereuppon they were constrained to breake off, the
Prince going to the Chamber of presence, where hee gaue
thanks to a number that honoured the Courte with theyr
presence: and so one after another all departed, the Duke
of Sauoye béeing one of the first, ashamed (God knowes) to

be so conquered by Palmerin, and not bidding his Lady Lucemania
farewell. But Lewes did not serue the Duchesse
so, for her loue continued as resolute as before, and shee loued
him as wel conquered, as had he béene the conquerour,
whereof she assured him by many amorous méetinges, by
which meanes the Prince stayed the Duke at the Courte,
longer then himselfe would haue doone. Lewes thus lo
                           •
                        ing
Palmerin as you haue hearde, intreated the Duchesse to
come and visite him, which she accomplished the day folowing,
when Palmerin spent manie discourses with her, rather
of loue then entring into religion, for he perceiued by
her countenaunce, that she had no will to become a Nunne:
where we will leaue them togeather, to tell you who the
Knight of the Sunne was, that fought ye last Combat with
Palmerin.
                     
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XL.
                     
                        VVho the Knight of the Sunne was, and of his strange
aduentures.
                     
                     
                        THe King of Hungaria, Father
to the Prince Tarisius, that maried
the faire Griana, Mother to
Palmerin, had in his latter
yéeres a Sonne named Netrides,
and after he had long lyued
in rest and prosperitie, hee dyed,
leauing the yong Prince Netrides
fiftéene yéere olde, and in the
custodie of his elder brother Tarisius.
This Netrides growing in good constitution of bodie
and behauiour, béeing well beloued generally, so gracious,
gentle and well gouerned he was: as the Lords, Knights,

Gentlemen & the people of Hungaria, esteemed him more
then their King Tarisius, who béeing crowned after his fathers
decease, loued Netrides as brotherhoode required, till
Fortune (enuious of this concorde) not willing that ye vertues
of this yong Prince should be there extingushed: changed
his affection into excéeding hatred, by an occasion héereafter
following. One daie the King Tarisius walking in
his Garden to take the ayre, left his Brother Netrides in
his Chamber accompanied with the Quéene, who without
imagination of any harme, nor that his fatall sta
                           •
                        s woulde
sort him anie mis-fortune, sactte downe in the Kings chayre
as he talked with the Quéene, and continued there so long,
till Tarisius came vp and founde him there sitting, which
he tooke in such ill part, as in a great rage he thus bega
                           •
                        me.
Who made thée so audacious and presumptuous to sitte in
my seate, against thy duety and my liking? By mine honor
thou hast doone more then thou wéen
                           •
                        st, and if I sée the like
againe, or I may but heare thereof thy heade shall pay the
price of thy folly. Netrides, who of his owne nature was
humble and gentle, fell downe on his knée, intreating the
King his Brother to pardon him, for what hee had doone,
was not with any intent to displease his Maiestie, but an
ouersight, and that so he would permit it to passe. The King
made him no aunswere, because hee tooke Netrides reasons
for no payment, but conceiued a secret hatred in his minde,
by this occasiō of so slender moment, which increased thence
forward, as the matter prouoking a fierie Meteore: so that
he did repine at his Brother so much, as he would not speak
to him, nor affoorde him a good countenaunce. Then called
he to remembraunce the loue of his people towardes hys
Brother, and if this hatred should come to their knowledge
for so small a cause, he imagined they woulde displace him,
and make Netrides King. For which cause hee intended to
haue him slaine▪ and the execution 
                           ••
                        reof hee committed to
one of his Archers, but God (who is euermore the preseruer
of the innocent) would not suffer such a damned déede

of paracide to take effect. Which Tarisius perceiuing, and
finding one day his Brother alone, enflamed with this dyscontented
humour, sayd. Netrides, thou hast offended mee
more then I will now stand to argue on, I therefore banish
thée my Court and Kingdome, and looke that within three
daies thou get thée hence, and on thy life not to discouer it
to any man, or take any one with thée to beare thée cōpany.
The yong Prince obedient to his Brother, made answere,
that he wold accomplish his charge, and so withdrew himselfe
into his Chamber, not declaring to any one hys cause
of heauines. Then willing one of his Squires to saddle hys
Horse, departed so closely as he coulde, forbidding anie of
his Seruaunts to follow him, and such expedition he made,
as not resting but one night in any lodging, he left his brothers
kingdome, wandering without anie care of himselfe,
or which way he tooke, but went héere and there, as fortune
pleased to guide him. Hauing long time trauailed in Al
                              •
                           lemaigne,
his money fayled him, in that at his departure hee
was but badlie prouided: yet could not his pri
                           •
                        celie minde
abase it selfe to begge, so y• béeing without meate or drink,
or anie place to rest himselfe in, ashamed of himselfe, hee
sought to shroude him where none might discrye him,
and so entring a great Forrest, very thicke set with Trées,
shrubs, and bushes, hee estéemed this a conuenient place to
rest in, wherefore alighting from his Horse, and turning
him to féede, layd himselfe downe at the roote of a Trée, and
thus began to breathe foorth his complaints. Ah inconstant
Fortune, and to me most of all inconstant, didst thou erecte
me so high, and reiect mee nowe thus lowe? well then may
I saie, that more wrong thou doost a man in one houre, then
right all his life time: for it héeretofore thou diddest lende
me pleasure and delight, thou nowe makest me pay for it,
(and that with vsury too rigorous) not leauing anie hope
to comfort mee. Ah tirranous King, cruell and vnmanlike
Brother, thou hast with shame banished me, and brought
me into this poore estate, wherein I must die, Oh happy if

I might, rather then to liue in the vile estate of beggery.
So saying, he layde him downe among the Hearbes, and
was supprised with such extreame féeblenes, as he fell into
his lamentations againe, thus. Ah my Lord and Father, too
soone diddest thou leaue me, woulde God I then had borne
thée company, or that at this instant I could come to thee.
Ah men of Hung
                              •
                           ria, I am well assured (knowing the loue
you euer bare me) that you will pittie when you heare my
afflictions and calamities: alas, I neuer deserued this vnhappy
ende. And béeing vnable to continue longer spéeche,
he there determined to finish his life. But better fortune
befell him then he expected, by the meanes of an auncient
Knight named Lombardo, who béeing néere, hearde all his
dolorous complaints. This Knight béeing rich and of noble
blood, had neere that Forrest a strong, delightfull and sumptuous
Castell, and delighted to walke among the woods for
his recreation, as good hap it was fore Netrides that he walked
this euening. He hearing these sad and sorrowfull regrets,
pittie so touched his hart, as the teares bedewed hys

                           •
                        héekes: yet would he not trouble him while he continued
his mones, but afterward came and tooke him by the hand
saying. Arise my Freende and take courage, for you are in
the place, where you shall finde more good to benefit you,
then harme to offende you, therefore cherish your spirites,
and forget this heauines, which may endaunger you beyond
recouerie. Netrides séeing this honourable Gentlemanne,
with his bearde so white as snowe, hearing his courteous
offer, and for him nowe so necessary: with ioy, feare & bashfulnes
all coupled togeather, accepted it, and humbly thanked
him, albeit (quoth he) a contented death is better to me,
them a miserable and dispised life. The Knyght comforting
him aunswered, that it was not in his power to chuse lyfe
or death, but the founder of the heauens reserued that authoritie
in his owne handes. With these wordes hee tooke
him by the hand, and conducted him to his Castell, where he
was worthilie entertained by the Knight himselfe, his Ladie

and her Daughter, one of the fairest Uirgins in all that
Country. Lombardo hauing heard all his mis-fortunes and
hard aduentures, in the night discoursed the whole to hys
Ladie, wherefore (good Wife) quoth he, entertaine him so
well as may be, for I assure you he is discended of high degrée,
and if his manners and vertues bee correspondent to
his byrth, wee will giue him our Daughter in mariage, if
so himselfe accept our offer. The good Ladie misliked not
her Husbands opinion, wherefore the next morning shee
went to entertaine her guest, saying. My Lorde, your comming
hither hath well contented my Lorde and Husbande,
and so please it you to staie héere, he wil bee glad and fayne
of your companie: which gentle offer Netrides accepted,
thanking God and the Ladie for his good fortune. Thus remained
he with this auncient Knight Lombardo, who afterwarde
neuer remembred him of his miseries in ye Forrest,
but intreated him so well as though hee had béene his
owne Sonne. Netrides séeing the Knights Daughter so
faire and well conditioned, and she regarding not onely the
vertues of his minde, but also his comely and well featured
bodie, they began amorously to affect eache other secretlie,
but loue inuented y• meane to reueale it openlie: for Lombardo
well noting the great discretion of this yong Gentleman,
and knowing him to bee discended of bloode royall,
resolued to cause him marry his Daughter, demaunding
the question of Netrides among other spéeches, if so he liked
to marry his Daughter? My Lorde, quoth he, it is the sum
of my desire, and greater honor cannot you bestowe on me,
so please her to conceiue the same opinion I doo. The marriage
was soll
                           •
                        mnized with all expedition, with y• presence
of manie Gentles, neighbours thereabout, who meruailed
the Knight bestowed his Daughter so, in that they estéemed
Netrydes but a poore Knight errant. It fortuned afterward
that the auncient Knight and his Ladie deceased, leauing
theyr Daughter great with childe, to the no little content
of Netrydes, that after all his sorrowe he shoulde become a

Father. Thrée daies before this Ladie fell in trauaile, shee
dreamed that she was shut vppe in a very dark Chamber,
whereout she coulde by no meanes get, and therefore called
for helpe to one of her Gentlewomen. Then was she aduised
to take her childe in her armes, and to staye there still,
whereuppon she behelde her infant, and sawe that his face
resembled the beames of the Sunne, the brightnes whereof
chased away the darknes, so that shee might beholde the
place as cleere as any other, saying. My Lord, forgette thys
heauines, and you shall reioyce by this infant, for this is he
shall reestablish you in the place you haue lost, & shall seate
you in that Chayre with honour, for which you were exiled
thence, giuing you his crowne, that traiterously chased you
from his kingdome. He comforted with these words, tooke
the childe in his armes, and sayd. Little soule, I pray God
thy mother speake trueth, and that thou maist be able to
execute it. So saying, hee espyed a furious man who snatched
the infant foorth of his armes, and notwithstand
                           •
                        ng
all his intreaties & supplications, caryed it away with him.
This sorrowe for Netrydes made her giue a loude shryke,
when he calling his Wife, demaunded the cause of her suddaine
affright, whereupon she rehearsed to him the whole
manner of her Dreame, and reioysing thereat, said. I hope
my Lord that it will so happen to you as I haue dreamed,
and therefore comfort your selfe without feare of mis-fortune:
notwithstanding, he remained in many doubtfull opinions,
till they vnderstoode by effects the certaintye of
this dreame. Nowe was come the time of the Ladies deliueraunce,
which was a goodly man Childe, so fayre & well
fauoured as one should lightly beholde, béeing named Frysol,
and shee woulde suffer none to nursse it but her owne
selfe, for the certaine hope shee reposed in him. The Chylde
growing in time to such comely stature, as eache one tooke
great pleasure to beholde him, whereof the Mother was
so gladde, that albeit she had afterward two other Sonn
                           •
                        s,
yet shewed she no such speciall loue towards them as vnto

                        Frysol, which procured some hatred betwéene his brethren
and him. This yong Lord growing to fourtéene yéeres of
age, was in stature verie tall, delighting himselfe in ryding
great Horsses, shooting in the long Bowe, casting y• Barre,
and diuers other Gentlemanlike exercises, as also to chase
in the Forrest, where olde Lombardo mette with his Father.
So that one daie after long and wearie chasing of the
Hart, hauing sweated very sore, and meruailous drye for
want of drinke, finding a little spring by the foote of a Trée,
he la
                           •
                        e downe and dranke, but afterwarde he became so yll
and sicklie, as hee trembled 
                           ••
                        rie 
                           •
                        ore, so that one of hys
Squires could hardlie leade him againe to the Castell. Netrides
séeing him so excéeding ill, was meruailous sorrie,
commaunding his Phisition to séeke some present helpe for
him, who plied him with such wholsome potions, as his feu
                           •
                        r
left him, but his face and all his bodie was so painted,
as he had béene a Leaper: which made him bee mocked of
his other Brethron, and scorned of all the Seruaunts, except
his Father and Mother, which was such gréefe to him,
as he would haue died with fretting at them, but his Father
rebuked them, and comforted him in this manner. I
did hope my Sonne by thy meanes, to be restored againe to
the Realme of my deceased Father: but nowe, howe long it
will be before, God knowes, if this strange malladie of
thine be neuer holpen. Frysol amazed at his Fathers wordes,
desired him earnestly to report the whole circumstance,
which Netrides at length did, rehearsing how he was Brother
to the King of Hungaria, the hard intreataunce he vsed
towardes him, and lastlie hee tolde him the Dream
                           •
                         of his
Mother. Frisol studying along space on his fathers words,
at length aunswered. My Lord, you are not ignorant of the
soueraigne power of the highest, who by his diuine iudgement
hath sent mee this disease that thus torments mee:
euen so when pleaseth him he will take it from me againe,
and giue me health and strength much more then euer I
had, with meanes sufficient to giue you ayde and succoure,

according to the matter whereon you haue diuined. And albeit
I féele so extreame anguish, as death may not be likened
to it, yet doth thys hope comfort mee in such sorte, that
me thinkes already I am become more healthfull: therfore
my Lord dismay of nothing, but perswade your selfe there
is comfort behind. These words were so pleasing to Netrides,
as méere ioy caused the teares to trickle downe his
chéekes, meruailing at the wonderfull courage of his Son,
enduring such terrible paines as he did: wherefore what hee
thought, he could not reueale, but withdrewe himselfe into
his Chamber.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XLI.
                     
                        Howe Frisol persecuted with his disease, and the mockery
of his Bretheren, determined to goe seeke strange aduentures.
                     
                     
                        
                           FRisol hauing heard the originall
of his birthe, as also ye vision that
appeared to his Mother, was
thence forwarde more pensiue
then he had béene before, and perceiuing
his Brethren continued
their bad disposition, and day by
day mocked him more and more:
he determined to forsake his fathers
house, to séeke aduentures,
and remedie for his sicknes, if any were to be found. And being
one daie in the Forrest, more mellanchollie then accustomed,
hee espied a Knight vexed with Leprosie come by
the high waie, mounted on a poore Palfray, to whome he
said. My Fréend, I am infected with the same disease thou
art, wherefore wilt thou suffer me to beare thée companie,

and I will be readie to doo what thou shalt commaund me.
The Knight perceiuing hee might gaine some benefite by
Frisol, was well contented, and so bad him mount vppe behinde
him. So was he glad to doo what was contrarie to
his nature, and in this life continued two yéeres, trauailing
many Countries, bearing continually the wallet, and what
profit came he deliuered his Maister, reseruing nothing for
himselfe but what he gaue him, and bearing a minde so noble
and vertuous, as he desired rather death, then to enrich
himselfe by anie villainous or dishonest act. So many Coū
                        tries
and prouinces had they trauailed, as at last they came
into the Realme of Hungaria, when Frisol remembred that
he was in his Uncles Land, who ledde a life so base and ignominious:
hee was ouercome with excéeding heauines,
which ill agréed with his daungerous disease, so that his
companion desired to know ye cause of his sadnes, but Frysol
prayed him to content himselfe, saying that death was
more agréeable to him, then a life so dolorous and miserable.
At which words the Knight growing in choller, thruste
him beside the Horse, and rode away leaning poore Frysol
there, hauing no other comfort then to fill the ayre with his
teares and complaints, till at length he receiued succour by
a yong Maide named Leonarda, the Daughter of a riche
Countriman that dwelt on a Mountaine néere at hande.
This Maiden leading her Fathers Beastes and Cattell to
pasture, tooke great delight in gathering hearbes and roots,
wherewith to make oyntments for all woundes and diseases:
and this daie (by the diuine permission) shee chaunced
that way where she hearde the mornefull lamentations of
Frysol, whom when she behelde, ouercome with pittie and
compassion, said. Alas my Freend, howe came you into this
desert and comfortlesse place, béeing oppressed with such a
bad and daungerous sicknesse? In good sooth Mistresse, (ꝙ
hee) by no other meanes then the mis-fortune and displeasure
of my life: Oh howe happy were my death at thys instant,
thē to liue any longer in this monstrous languishing.

Fréend, aunswered the Mayden, you ought not thus to dyspayre
in sicknes, but consider, that the Lord and gouernour
of the heauens and earth, dooth by these meanes trye and
prooue his people, whom if he perceiue thankfull and patient
in their afflictions: of reprobate enemies, he makes thē
his Freends and Children, onely by the raunsome that his
beloued Sonne paide. If then you will put your whole confidence
in him, I am perswaded you shall soone finde remedie.
So causing him to arise, shee conducted him to her Fathers
house, where for certaine daies, she bathed him wyth
wholesome Hearbes, and annoynted him with such precious
oyntments, as in short time his disease forsooke him,
and he was as cleane as at the time hee dranke the water,
for which he humblie thanking the Maiden, said. God make
me able (faire Uyrgin) to requite this wonderfull kindnes
receiued at your handes, accounting my s
                           •
                        lfe more indebted
to you, then to my parents that gaue me first life, and this
perswade your selfe, that wheresoeuer my body bee seperated
from this place, my hart shall remaine readie to doo you
any seruice. That is my will & intent, quoth Leonarda, but
thanke him chéefelie that made 
                           〈◊〉
                         to helpe you, and in
so dooing shall I account my labour well bestowed. Frysol
for this vnexpected good fortune, was thence forward verie
dutifull and louing towardes Leonardas Father and her
Brethren, as the readiest Seruant he had in his house: but
the good man estéemed so well of him, as by no meanes hee
wold suffer him to be so painfull, but with such fare as God
sent him, entertained and welcommed him, not suffering
him to departe thence in the space of a yéere & more. Frysol
often accompanying Leonarda to the fielde, shee séeing
him so faire and comelie a personage, began secretlie to affect
him, yet would she not acquaint him therewith, fearing
more to offend then to be refused. So soone as Frysol had
thus recouered his strength, he determined to stay no longer
there, wherefore finding Leonarda at leysure conuenient,
he said. I know very well (fayre Mayden) how much I am

beholding to you, for the speciall grace and good I haue receiued
by you, which induceth mee to make you this promise,
that you shall not commaunde any thing, but I wyll
gladly accomplish it. And because I am desirous to trauaile
after strange aduentures, I would request that it might be
with your willing consent, promising you to stay no longer
hence then the tearme of thrée yéeres, in which time I will
not fayle to visite you againe: and if my fortune so fall out,
as I am perswaded, I doubt not to recompence what you
did for me. That which I alway feared (Sir Frysol) quoth
she, is nowe come to passe, notwithstanding, séeing it is
conuenient I should loue honour, more then mine own pleasure,
I am content that you shall goe séeke your aduauncement
so well begunne: but I pray you not to cast your promise
in obliuion. I will not to the death (quoth he) doo anie
thing to dislike you, or against your wil, and since you haue
so féelie graunted me libertie, perswade your selfe my word
shall be my déede. So taking his leaue of her Father and
Brethren, he trauayled towards Allemaigne, where hee
hearde that chiualrie was more maintained then in anie other
place, and so rode hee foure daies togeather without anie
aduenture: till passing through a Forrest, he hearde a
great noyse of people fighting, wherefore making hast that
way, hee espyed an auncient Knight, assaulted by sixe villaines
that sought to murder him, whom he resisted so well
as he could, albeit he had nothing but his sworde to defende
him. The Knight espying Frysol, called to him for helpe,
when he (suddainly finding a strong yong Trée pluckt vppe
by the roote) came therewith to the villaines, saying. Why
traiterous varlets, who prouoked you to offer such shame
to a Knight? with which hee tooke one of them so soundlye
on the pate with his Trée, as he neuer rose to tell who hurt
him. The Knight and he togeather so behaued themselues,
as thrée of the villaines were layd dead before them, which
the other thrée perceiuing, tooke themselues to flight: wher
vpon the old Knight séeing himselfe so well deliuered, came

and embraced Frysol with these wo
                           •
                        rdes. Howe may I say
my good Fréend, that my life had perished without your assistaunce,
bethinke your selfe therefore howe I may grately
this gentlenes: in meane time, I haue a house not farre
hence, let me intreate you to lodge with me this night, and
I will make you the best entertainment the Country wyll
aff
                           ••
                        rde. Whereto Frysol agréed, promising to leaue him
in safety before he departed, for which y• olde Knight thanked
him, and as they went he discoursed to him, howe these

                           〈◊〉
                         ass
                           ••
                        led him, because he had enforced them to surrender
certaine heritages, which vniustly they detained frō
poore Orphanes, and for that cause set spyes to watch him,
that they might set vppon him and kill him, which surelie
they had doone (quoth he) without your succour. In the continuaunce
of these spéeches, they arriued at his Castell,
where many of his Squires meruailed to sée him so sore
wounded, but especially his Lady and his two Sonnes, to
whome hee rehearsed the summe of his aduenture, and
the great fauour and helpe he founde by Frysol, for which
cause they entertained him with excéeding honour. And so
long aboade Frysol there with the Knight, till béeing desirous
to receiue the order of knighthoode, hee came to the
Knight in this manner. May it please you Sir to bestow on
me Horse and Armour, I wyll goe to the Emperors Court
of Allemaigne, he beeing the most renowned Prince in the
world. The good Knight seeing him so forward to chiualry,
gaue him Horse, Armour and money for his iourney, whervpon
he sette forwarde, and the third daie after hee arriued
at the Emperors Court, from whence (a little before) Trineus
and Palmerin were departed towards Fraunce: which
newes made Frisol earnestly desire his knighthood, because
he intended with all speede to trauaile thither likewise, in
respect of the honour was there to be wunne. Frysol vnderstanding
the Emperour was in the Chappell hearing diuine
seruice, went thither, where beholding the Princesse
Polinarda, he reputed her the onely fayre Lady of y• world,

thinking hee could neuer glut his eyes with regarding her,
whereupon, seruice beeing ended, he fell on his knee before
the Emperour in this manner. Because I knowe (inuincible
Lorde) that you are renowned beyonde all other potentates
whatsoeuer, and that you make no small accounte of
Knights aduenturous: I desire that by your hande I may
be numbred among them. The Emperour seeing him so
yong and yet valiantly giuen, aunswered. I would be lothe
my Freende to deny a request so reasonable, but I wil first
knowe if you be Gentle borne or no. My Lorde, quoth he, I
sweare by the fayth I owe to God and your Maiestie, that
I am noble borne, and of the bloode royall by my Fathers
side. God forbid then (sayd the Emperour) but you shoulde
be Knight, and Fortune sheelde you so well in chiualry, as
she hath indued you with comely shape and beautie▪ Then
was the Spurre put vpon hys right heele, and the Emperour
bad him ryse a Knight, commaunding his Daughter
Polmarda to gyrde hys Sworde to him, which she did, saying.
Worthily and with happines (Sir Knight) may you
imploy the order you haue receiued. Madame (quoth Frysol)
if heereafter any vertue or valoure abyde in me, it shal
be imployed onely for you, hauing thus honoured mee with
my Sword, wherewith I hope to accomplish such deeds of
Armes, as shall renowne her name that gaue me my weapon:
but Polinarda made him no aunswere, because Palmerin
was the onely Image of her thoughts. After Frysol
was thus Knighted, taking his leaue of the Emperour and
his Daughter, he departed, making no small hast till he arriued
at the Ioustes at Parris, where he determined for his
first deed of chiualry, to enter the Combat for the beauty of
Polinarda. But he could not get thither so soone as hee intended,
for hee was hindered by the way with an vnexpected
aduenture, which was in a fayre Forrest, where hee behelde
foure Knights carry away a Ladie perforce, who seeing
him, cryed. Ah good Knight, for Gods sake succour 
                           •
                        ee:
whereuppon Frysol coutching his Launce, sent one of the

Knights headlong to the grounde, and in short time wounded
another in such sort, as nowe hee had but two left to resist
him, on whom Frysol made tryall, howe well he coulde
unploy the gift of Polinarda. The Knights seeing the hard
fortune of their two other fellowes, the one hauing broken

                           〈◊〉
                         necke in the fall, and the other wounded past hope of recouerie:
tooke y• wisest way for themselues, posting thence
so fast as they coulde ride, but Frysol would not folow, least
they had some other companie in ambush that might haue
intrapped him, wherefore he conducted the Ladie to her
Mothers Castell, where hee remained that night, and the
next daie set forwarde to Parris, where hee arriued at the
time he fought with Palmerin, according as hath beene before
rehearsed.
                     After the Knight of the Sunne (who hencefoorth shall
passe by the name of Frysol) had left Palmerin, and was
departed the fielde, the night was so obscure as hee knewe
not which waie he rode, so that the moysture of the 
                           •
                        uening
dewe did great harme to his woundes, as if God had
not armed him with the better strength, he was in daunger
not to escape with life. The verie same daie was the Duke
of Gaule departed from Parris, to goe ayde the King of England
against y• Kings of Scots and Norvvay, who was Nephewe
to the Emperour of Allemaigne, for that they molested
him with troublesome warres: and the Duke beeing
benighted, was glad to pitch his Tents in a faire fielde,
through which it fortuned Frysol to passe, complayning of
the daunger he felt himselfe in. The Duke of Gaule beeing
abroade foorth of hys Tent to recreate himselfe, hearde this
sorrowfull noyse, which made him send his men to sée who
it was, and to bring him with them to the Tent, whither
when they had brought him, the Duke pitting his estate,
demaunded whence he came, and who had wounded him
in that sort. Then discoursed he the whole matter, how hee
had fought with the Knight that ouercame the Duke of Sauoye,
and so long their fight endured, that the darke night

and the King caused them to be parted, neyther of them as
yet conquered, and because he woulde not returne into the
Cittie, sought some Uillage where he might conuenientlie
lodge. The Duke of Gaule hearing the wordes of Frysol,
estéemed him for a hardy and valiant Knight, hauing so
long endured against Palmerin vnuanquished, wherefo
                           ••
                        
he saide. Sir Knight, you are very welcome to mee, all the
ayde and succour I can giue you, you shall bee sure to finde
with hartie good will: assuring you, that there is no Knight
liuing to whom I wysh more euill, then him whom you
haue this daie fought withall. So causing him to bee vnarmed,
willed him to rest himselfe vpon his owne bedde, and
made his woundes be dressed, abyding there eyght dayes
for the health of Frysol. In which time, the Duke had imparted
to him the warres of the King of England, which
made him make more hast to be gone, or els he would haue
kept him company longer. My Lord, quoth Frysol, so please
you to accept my companie, I hope to behaue my selfe so
well, as you shall not be discontented with me. The Duke
thanked him, and reioyced y• by his meanes so good a Knight
was preserued, and did him all the honour hee could deuise,
taking him with him into England, where he founde the
Countrey very much desolated with warres, to his no little
greefe: but leaue we them, and returne to Palme
                              •
                           in.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XLII.
                     
                        Of the great courtesie the King of Fraunce vsed to Trineus
and Palmerin: and of their returne into Allemaigne.
                     
                     
                        SO dilligently were Palmerins
woundes attended, which he had
receiued by the hand of Frysol, as
not long after hee recouered his
health, whereof the King and
Prince Lewes were highly glad,
and much more Trineus, to whōe
the King desired to giue his
Daughter Lucemania in marriage,
which to compasse, hée intended
a sumptuous banquet, whereto hee woulde inuite these
twaine, yet first he would acquaint the Quéene therewith,
and therefore began the matter with her thus. I see Madame,
that our Daughter Lucemania is of yéeres sufficient
for a Husband, and because I euermore desired her highest
preferment, and that I would kn
                           •
                        w if the Prince Trineus
to whom I could wish she were espoused, were anie thing
in loue that waie affected, for hardlie in my iudgment shall
we finde a greater Lord, béeing heyre to the famous Emperour
of Allemaigne: for this intent (I say) will I ordaine
a banquet, whereto hee and noble Palmerin shall bee
inuited, and our Daughter to beare them company in y• best
sorte you can deuise. The Quéene, who more desired this
marriage then the King her Husbande, aunswered. You
doubt not (my Lord) that I request her chéefest aduantage,
wherefore let it be as you haue determined, and shee shall
be present as you haue appointed. This matter thus procéeding,

two daies after were Trineus and Palmerin called
to this banquet, and to honour them the more, the King caused
his Sonne Lewes, with a braue companie of Knightes
and Gentlemen, to conduct them into the Pallace, where
they were royallie receiued by the King and Quéene, and
so led vppe into the Chamber appointed for their banquet.
After they had washed, the King caused Trineus to sitte by
him, and Palmerin against him, aboue whom sat faire Lucemania
his Daughter, béeing placed iust opposite to y• Prince
Trineus, the Quéene to furnish the Table, satte downe by
the King. And albeit nature had best
                           •
                        wed on y• Princesse
most exquisite beautie, yet her sumptuous accoustr
                           •
                        ments
made her appeare most amiable: but all coulde not mooue
the hart of Trineus, to forget her to whose shrine hee was
dedicated. The banquet ended, and y• Tables withdrawne,
Trineus daunced with the fayre yong Princesse, courting
her with manie honest & decent spéeches, which made Lucemania
suppose he loued her, but the Prince noted it well enough,
albeit his affections were bound to English Agriola.
                        
In this time the other Ladies were conferring of Palmerins
knightlie valour, when the Countie of Armignac his
Sonne, intreating the Duke of Orleaunce Daughter to
daunce, was thus staied by her spéeches to y• other Ladies.
You sée faire Ladies (quoth shee) that Palmerin hath misprized
our beauties, to reuenge our iniurie, let vs all fall
vppon him, and shut him in some place where hee may neuer
come foorth, for if he escape vs, the Allemaigne Ladies
shall beare the honor from the French, which will bee to vs
perpetuall discredite. These wordes she spake with such a
pleasant countenaunce, as mooued all the other Ladies to
smile, whereupon the Duchesse of Burgundie answered. In
sooth it is necessarie we should doo so, and let vs not suffer
him to gette out of our handes so easilie, as he did from the
Knights that came to the Combat. All the companie lyked
this motion well, but the King said. Ladies, I will not consent
that Palmerin shall haue anie wronge, because I haue

taken him into my guarde. And who shall make recompence
(quoth another Ladie) for the wrong hee hath
doone vs? You ought to suffer for satis-faction, saide y• King,
and bee glad that you had the meane to sée the best Knight
in the world, for mine owne part I promise you, I rest so
contented. Palmerin hearing the King so commende him,
bashfullie thus aunswered. Alas my Lorde, there is no such
matter in me as pleaseth your Maiesty to report, but what
my abilitie is, it remaines to doo you seruice: accounting my
selfe more then happy by comming to your Courte, to haue
knowledge of a Prince so noble and vertuous, and no man
liuing (next my Lord the Emperour) that maie commaūde
me more then your highnes. Among other speeches, y• King
broke the matter of his Daughters marriage to Palmerin,
desiring him to labour in the cause to Trineus, which hee
promised: but al in vain, for after they had taken their leaue
to returne towards Allemaigne, though Palmerin was earnest
in the matter, in respecte of the beautie and nobilitie of
the Princesse, as for the support he might haue by matching
with the Daughter of Fraunce, yet Trineus thus answered.
I thanke you my Lord for the good you wish mee,
as also the honour the King affoordes mee: but another beyond
her (whose renowne hath conquered me) is Lady and
Mistresse of my affections. And because you are hee fr
                           •
                        m
whom I will not hide my most secrete thoughts, know that
it is Agriola, Daughter to the King of England, to whom
though my Father be an enemie, yet by your aide & mine
owne good endeuours, I doo not doubt to compasse my loue.
You knowe my Lord (quoth Palmerin) that I wish as wel
to you as mine owne hart, and when occasion serues, tryall
shall make manifest. And séeing you haue fixed your loue on
faire Agriola of England, imparting likewise the same so
confidently to me: I am perswaded you coulde neuer make
a better choise, therefore let nothing chaunge your opinion.
Thus rode they on with manie sundrie spéeches, not a little
gladde they were returning to the Emperour, but Palmerin
                        
much more then was Trineus, for the desire hee had
to sée his Ladie Polinarda: wherefore with the consent of
the Prince, he sent a Squire before to aduertise the Emperour
of their comming, before whom he had no sooner doone
reuerence, but he was presentlie knowne, and demaunded
in what estate his Son Trineus and Palmerin were, where
he had left them, & what accidēts had happened in Fraunce?
Then the Squire rehearsed the Combats and victories of
his Maister against the Princes of Fraunce and the Dukes
of Gaule & Sauoye, with their royall entertainment by the
King and his Sonne, howe manie portraits of Ladies Palmerin
had conquered, with the whole discourse of euerie action.
Whereof the Emperour, the Empresse, and all the
Lords & Ladies were maruailous glad, yet was not theyr
ioy comparable to the Princesse Polinardas, hearing the
Squire reueale the honourable déedes of her loue, so that
her conceit might be discerned by her coūtenance, & needes
she must thus demaunde of the Squire. I praie thée tell me
my Fréende, howe fares my Lord and Brother, with his
noble companion Sir Palmerin? The Squire wel abuised,
because he knewe the loue betwéene her and his Maister,
sette his knee to the grounde againe with this aunswere. I
left the Prince your Brother, accompanied with my Lord,
Palmerin, well and in good health: but chéefely my Lorde,
who since you sawe him, hath wunne the greatest honour
that euer Knight did. Afterward he reported the manner of
the Combats to her, and what gréefe his Maister sustained
in his sicknes, when he coulde not be reuenged on ye Knight
that lost her counterfeit, which the Duke of Sauoye placed
at the féete of Lucemania, and last of all, the perillous Combat
betwéene his Maister & the Knight of the Sun. Which
she tooke such delight to heare, as she made him repeate
one thing manie times, and could not satis-fie herselfe sufficientlie
with these worthy reports. Which the Squire perceiuing,
delighted as much to itterate euerie thing, and said.
Beléeue me Madame, the loue my Maister beares to her,

for whose beautie he entered the Combat, in my opinion is
incredible, for he is much more hers then his owne, and I
haue séene him in such sort thinking on her, as one coulde
hardlie iudge him aliue or deade, fearing least anie other
shold rob him of his loue, such is ye iealousie of his vnspotted
affection, albeit my Maister reputes his Ladie immouable.
Polinarda changing countenance oftentimes at y• Squires
wordes, aunswered. The Ladie shoulde be very ill councelled,
béeing honoured with the looue of so good a Knight as
Palmerin, to make refusall of his worthie seruice: and I
promise thée, by the faith of a Princesse, that if I knew her,
for the vnwillingnes I haue to heare him cōplaine, I wold
endeuour to cause her like none but him, and therein to
thinke herselfe the most happie among Ladies. Wherfore
[if thou maist bee so bolde] tell thy Maister at his returne,
that I will be a meane to aide him towardes her he loues:
and therewithall present him my fauourable salutations,
in that I euermore desired the fortunate ende of his enterprise,
not so much for the lyking of his Ladie, béeing beloued
of the best, as for the renowned chiualrie that harbours in
his hart. These spéeches ended, the Squire returned to méet
the Prince Trineus and his Maister, to whom he reported
his talke with Polynarda: which Palmerin reioycing at,
let fall all iealousie, estéeming her nowe the truest Lady liuing.
The men of Gaunt for ioy of his returne, that so worthilie
deliuered them from the oppressions of the enchaunted
Knight, went foorth in seuerall companies, according as
honor, yéeres and office directed them, to méete him, and so
conueied him with signes of ioy to the Pallace, where the
Emperour so much abased himselfe, as he came downe into
the open Court to entertaine him, and glad likewise to see
the safe returne of his Sonne Tryneus, saying. My Sonne,
right happie is thy returne, & you Sir Palmerin, perswade
your selfe so welcome as hart can deuise, assuring you, that
your successe hath not a little pleased me. And needes must
I account the Ladie especially bounden to you, for whose

loue you haue past so manie dangerous Combats, good reason
hath she to loue you, in respect of your trauailes for her,
renowning her so much by your knightlie chiualrie, so that
if she recompence you not according to your merits, woorthilie
may she be condemned of ingratitude. Alas my Lords
(quoth he) her beautie commaundeth higher matters then
all my labours. Polynarda béeing in presence, remembred
well her Fathers words, and therfore she intended to shun
that condemnation, saying to herselfe. He that deserues honour
ought to were it, and he that commaundes the soule,
may easilie ouer-rule the passions of the minde: let my
Knight then be rewarded as he hath rightly deserued. All
this while, the eyes of these two louers so well discharged
their office, as Palmerin wished that Iuno had graunted
him so much, as she did somtime to Argus her shéepehearde,
that he might haue more ease in his afflictiō: for he thought
it not enough, onelie to behold the beautie of so rare and excellent
perfection. Againe, he was not a little tormented,
because Polynarda (to couer what she woulde gladlie none
should discerne) cast her lookes on the ground, which sometimes
shee likewise compelled him to doo: but her presence
whom he estéemed aboue all other things, would not allow
him that consideration. The Emperour at length commanded,
that all the figures of the Ladies which he had wunne
in Cōbat, should be brought before him: but when hée sawe
so manie, and of so contrarie qualitie, hee coulde not but cō
                        m
                           •
                        nd
                           •
                        
Sir Palmerins victorie. Then were diuers iudgments
giuen of the beauty of the portraits, eache one of the
beholders after their seuerall opinions. Ptolome made description
of whom they were, and who did enter Combatte
on their behalfe, omitting at no tune the honour of Palmerin:
whereat they all admired, some commending
their complexions, others their swéete yong yéeres, and altogeather
the prowesse of him that brought the conquest
with him, whereupon the Emperour said. In good faith Sir
Palmerio, I blesse the time that Fortune sent me so good a

Knight, and thinke not to carrie awaie all the glory of your
victorie your selfe, for I meane to haue part because you
gaue your selfe mine. And woulde the Ladie you loue were
in thys Courte or in my Realme, to the ende I might so
assist you in your sute▪ as you might both be mine. My Lord
(quoth Palmerin) the victorie is wholie yours, béeing gotten
by your Knight, and if the Ladie I loue were not vnder
your regiment, then shoulde I complaine of a greater matter
then abyding with you, béeing obedient to your highnes
as your humble subiect and Seruaunt. With which
aunswere the Emperour was highlie contented, and Tryneus
comming to his Sister Polynarda, saide. Trust mee
faire Sister, you are more indebted to Palmerin, then to anie
other Knight in the worlde beside, and rather accept of
him then of the Duke of Lorrayne, who maintaining your
beautie, was ouercome by the Duke of Sauoy, and your picture
placed at the féete of Lucemania, where yet it had remained,
but that Palmerin conquering the Duke, remooued
the figure of the French Princesse in obeysaunce to you. Polynarda
not content with the vndiscréete enterprise of the
Duke of Lorrayne, aunswered. In sooth good Brother, the
Duke of Lorrayne is none of my Knight, and I repute Palmerin
to haue more bountie and valour, then the Duke can
haue of wit or courage, therefore great meruaile that hee
was not slaine. The Emperour seeing Polynarda was offended
with the Duke of Lorrayne, aunswered. You cannot
(Daughter) forbid men to execute their owne pleasure, and
if the Duke liked to enter the Combat for your beautie, it
was for the honourable good will he bare you, and albeit hée
could not reache his desire, yet haue you no cause to thinke
the worsse of him. Polynarda béeing a Princesse of rare
wit and iudgment, as anie of her time, would multiply no
more words, but continued silent: neuerthelesse, Palmerin
remembring her aunswere to Tryneus, intreated her to
kéepe all the portraits of the Ladies, determining to sende
them to whom they belonged, according to their degrées in

birth and honor. Which she thankfully accepted, and spending
this whole daie in diuers delights, Palmerin béeing in
the euening in his Chamber accompanied with Ptolome,
sent his Dwarffe to the Princesse to appoint the time of
their méeting: and she séeing the Dwarffe, caught him about
the necke, demaunding of him what newes hee
brought. None but good Madame, answered the Dwarffe,
my Maister hath sent you the Bon soir, and therewith his
humble duetie to your highnes, for, being your Knight, and
liuing onelie to doo you seruice: he hath good hope that your
vertuous nature wyll not forget, howe many daungers he
hath past for your sake, and nowe dooth loue appeale for his
desired reward. Therefore good Madame, as you are hartfast,
vnite your selues handfast, giue my Maister life, your
selfe comfort, and make me happy by carrying of this message:
for I vowe by the reuerend faith I beare you bothe,
that I will not depart without some gracious aunswere.
Polynarda smyling to heare Vrbanillo speake so earnestlie,
sayd. The assuraunce thou giuest me of the trustie affection
thou bearest thy Maister, dooth not a little content mee, and
pitty it were so good a Knight shoulde labour all this while
in vaine: therefore perswade thy Maister, that to morrow
at night I will méete him where we were wont, and there
will I resolue him to his owne content.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XLIII.
                     
                        How Palmerin went in the night to the appointed place,
to conferre with his Lady Polinarda, and the amorous
communication they had togeather.
                     
                     
                        
                           VRbanillo with chéerefull countenaunce
returned to his Master,
declaring to him his talke wyth
Polynarda, her swéete lookes, her
gracious aunsweres, how choiselie
she loued him, and lastlie her
promise to meete him in the accustomed
place: yet is not this
all, for before you depart with
her, shee hath assured mee to resolue
you to your owne content. And that is it I want (ꝙ he)
for might I once receiue my content, then shoulde I
thinke my trauailes rewarded. And doubt you not thereof
saide the Dwarffe, if she be a woman of her worde. Then
Ptolome béeing present, asked the Dwarffe if he saw Bryonella.
No in sooth (quoth he) she was not in the Princesse
Chamber, nor (to my knowledge) was she acquainted with
my comming, yet dare I thinke she will be there with my
Lady. The time béeing come, the Ladies were at the place
with deuotion answerable to those silent howres, and theyr
Knights not fayling their appointment, what pleasure on
eache side was conceiued, is not to be enquired, for all wyshings
are nothing in respect of their contentments. Polynarda
hauing her fréendly Knight before her, so sweete a
blush ecclipsed her countenaunce, as woulde driue nature
into a studie to frame the like, and thus she began. Alas my
sweete Freende, in what paine, anguish and heauines of

hart, hath your absence brought me? what teares haue fallen
from mine eyes, and drops of blood frō my hart, by renting
sighes and 
                           •
                        easelesse acclamations, remembring our
pleasures past, our present comfort, and the hope of better
hap to come? What dolorous conceits hath often wounded
me, thinking on so many hazards and perrils as might hinder
me from séeing you againe? and not without cause, beléeue
me, for had you miscaried, neuer Ladie sustained such
a losse, in respect of your Knightlie valour, and the vnfeigned
loue I heare you, whereof (before I depart) I meane
assuredlie to resolue you, in requitall of your hon
                           •
                        urable
tranailes for maintenaunce of my beautie. And héereof perswade
your selfe good Knight, that to haue you, I refuse all
other good fortunes whatsoeuer: and therefore I car
                           •
                         not
though it were openlie knowne, how especiallie I prize, desire,
loue and estéeme you. Palmerin confounded with this
long expected comfort, and not able to endure with silence,
interrupted her in this manner. By ye faith of your sworne
Seruaunt, swéete Madame, the perrils, mishaps, and dangers
I haue past since my departure, neuer deserued the
verie least of your cōplaints, nor could my endeuours prooue
such, as your incomparable perfections merrited, the onelie
remembraunce whereof was sufficient to make me inuincible:
wherefore faire Mistresse, if I haue wunne anie honor
                           •
                        
your fauour was the meane, and your beautie gaue mée
the vertue, streaming so plentifullie from your chaste ei
                           •
                        s,
as the water from the Fountaine. To little purpose were
it nowe to rehearse, y• strange assaults, massacring thoughts,
and violent flames, wherein I haue buried and continuallie
béene crucified, since the howre it pleased you to let mee
sée Fraunce: vndoubtedly, y• verie meanest of my sufferings
was able to destroie me, without the resolute assuraunce of
your diuine fauour, which triūphing 
                           •
                        uer death, shall make
me liue continuallie. So that the desire to let you knowe
how assuredlie I am yours, and the continuall wyshing to
see you againe, gaue mee victorie ouer your enemies, and

brought me safe thorow all extreamities, to honour you; as
I doo at this present. It nowe remaines Madame, that you
regarde the trueth of my loue, the permanence thereof,
and the instant passions worsse then death to mee, yet with
this prouiso, that I presume not of anie action meritorious,
but your grace, which is able to strengthen me in greatest
debilitie. And no where know I to séeke for pittie and support
of my cares, if not onelie by her, who hath y• soueraigne
power to chase hence, the cruell and euer threatning menaces
of death. Forbeare good my Lorde, quoth she, thus to
talke of death, considering I cannot liue one howre without
you, nor holde I any comfort of my life, but onelie in loouing
you, to enioy you: so that what you endure, I suffer,
and no passion torments you, but I haue a share therein, so
deuoutlie is my spirit conforted with yours. And therefore
think
                           •
                         not your oppressions greator then mine, for if you
doo, it procéedeth by want of experience of feminine passions,
the extreamitie whereof farre surmounteth your sexe.
For which cause, to giue some rest to our long and ouertrauailed
desires, I giue you héere my hand, and therewithall
a chast hart, accepting you onely for my Lorde & Husbande,
and to my promise call Heauen & Earth to witnes. Where
is the wit so daintie, the tongue so florishing, or the penne so
dilligent, as can conceiue, report or set down in perfect coullers,
the ioyes of these louers? You faire Lordinges, and
you likewise swéete Ladies, that long haue trauailed in amorous
affections, and in the ende receiued the rewarde of
your passions, by your owne conceites can imagine the content
of these twaine: for Palmerin was of this opinion,
that Iupiter had not the like pleasure with faire Alemena,
for whom hee caused one might to endure the space of three
daies, as hee hadde with his gracious Mistresse Polinarda.
For nowe the manifolde strokes he gaue for beautie, were
héere remembred, his daungerous trauailes in all places,
recounted, his absence, with kinde gratulations welcommed,
his teares, sighes, complaints & feares, resolued,

and lastlie, his long, vnchangeable and most faithfull loue,
f
                           •
                        eendlie rewarded. Let vs not heere forget, that Ptolome
and Brionella were in y• same predicament, for he knowing
her to be of the noble and auncient ligne, beside, sole heyre
to the house of Saxon, might count himselfe highly honored
with such a Wife: and therefore the like coniunction was
made betwéene them, so that nowe these Knights and Ladies
were espoused before God, there wanted nothing but
the ceremonie of y• Church to confirme it. But nowe comes
Vrbanillo, and hee breakes of this pleasure, because y• time
was so farre spent, as they must néeds depart: which with
much a doo they did, leauing their Ladies examining theyr
content, the Princesse soone after thus conferring with
Brionella. Alas faire Fréende, it is doubtfull what danger
maie arise, because you haue contracted your selfe to Ptolome
without the Emperors consent: howe will you answer
when you are charged with the fault? Brionella, who now
feared nothing but the preuenting of her loue, aunswered.
In sooth Madame, you speake with great reason, you nowe
giue counsell when the déede is doone, and cannot bee reuoked
till it be dispatched: woulde you haue all the good fortune
your selfe, and suffer your Freende to enioy no part
with you? trust mee that is vnconscionable dealing, for he
that made you to loue, framed me of the selfe same mettall.
But I sée you make the occasion to me, to learne howe to
aunswere your owne déede: let vs referre all to him Madame,
that appointed your choise by destinie, and mine by
mine owne lyking. Manie other pleasaunt spéeches passed
betwéene them, and diuers times their Knights came to visite
them, till Fortune who will neuer suffer thinges long
in one estate, sent an occasion to hinder this delight of theyr
loue: for there was a Messenger come to the Courte from
the King of Norvvay, Nephew to the Emperour, who beeing
admitted audience, thus deliuered his message. Woorthie
Lord, the King of Norvvay my Maister, requires your
assistaunce in his great distresse, against the King of England,
                        
who with a mightie and puissaunt Armie is entered
his dominions, where he hath made great wast & slaughter
of his people, in diuers skirmishes and conflicts passed betweene
them, so that he neuer had like
                           •
                        néede as at this instant.
Trust me (quoth the Emperour) I will assiste him
with right good will, and his mis-fortune dooth not a little
gréeue me, but I will take order for it immediatlie, and my
power shall be with him so soone as possiblie maie be, with
which aunswere the Messenger departed. Nowe as concerning
the cause of these warres, betwéene the Kings of Norway
and England, it was procured by displeasure of succor,
that the King of Norway gaue to ye King of Scots his Brother,
who helde warre with England about the taking of
certaine Shippes: the Emperour likewise his heauie enemie,
and for that cause he promised helpe so soone to y• King
his Nephew. Which when Trineus vnderstoode, that his
Father declared himselfe displeased with the Father of his
beloued Agriola, (whose loue no occasion coulde alter) hee
was greatlie discontented: yet dissembling his conceit, determined
rather to aide the King of Englande, then his Cozin,
and therefore intreated Palmerin to accompanie him to
his Chamber, where hee woulde acquaint him with some
part of the sorrow he conceiued, by the succour his Father
would sende to the King of Norvvay, against her Father
whose Seruant he had vowed himselfe, and therfore (quoth
he) let me desire you to conceale a request I shall make to
you. You knowe my Lorde, said Palmerin, that I will no
lesse obey you then the Emperour your Father, commaund
therefore what you please, and be it in my power, it shal be
executed. So it is, quoth Trineus, that I woulde haue you
not accompanie the power my Father sendes by Sea, but
doo so much for me, that you, Ptolome, & my selfe (vnknown
to anie) may assist the King of England in his warres, by
which meanes I doubt not to compasse the thing I most of
all desire. And this I dare tell you, that my life is only dedicated
to her seruice, and so well doo I hope to imploye my

paines, that she shall haue cause to loue me, and regard the
paine I suffer for her sake: and but I gaine the fortune to
to purchase my loue, right soone & suddaine shall you heare
of my death. You that haue felt the like torments can censure
of mine, which I dare not impart to the Emperor my
Father, because of the hatred hee beares the King of England,
aduise mee therefore good Fréende what I shall doo.
These spéeches were nothing pleasing to Palmerin, seeing
he must nowe againe depart from his Ladie: but because
he earnestly affected Trineus, and knew how wel he might
helpe him in his loue, answered. Assure your selfe my Lord,
that I will labour dissigentlie for your good, and shall assist
you to my vttermost, in that you beare such loue to y• Princesse.
And I am of the opinion, that hauing receiued the order
of knighthood, which the Emperour your Father wyll
not denie, it woulde auaile you much, to tell your Father
how
                           •
                         you desire (vnknowne) to aide the King of Norway.
For my part, if he demaunde my aduise, I will like it so
well, as because the Annie cannot bee readie so soone, your
honor, Ptolome and my selfe will ryde before towards the
King, and so may we accomplish what you so earnestlie desire.
This counsell pleased so well Trineus, as he intended
on the morrow to request his order of the Emperor: as also
how gladlie he wold assist y• King of Norway, and howe necessary
it was for him to goe before the Armie, as Palmerin
and he had deuised togeather.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XLIIII.
                     
                        Howe Tri
                              •
                           eus was knighted, and what happened to him
afterward.
                     
                     
                        ON the morrow, this yong Prince
seeing that to accomplishe his intent,
it was ecessarie hee shoulde
be knighted, he gaue attenda
                           •
                        ce
to finde the Emperour at leysure,
when he might sollicite his highnesse
with his sute: and vnderstanding
that hee was walking in
his Gallerie, hee went to him, and
on his knée thus began. Dreade
L
                           •
                        rd and Father, so pleased your Mai
                           •
                        stie, it is nowe time
I shoulde receiue my order of Khighthoode, and more necess
                           ••
                        y
now then at any of her time, in respecte of my earnest
desire to aide the King of Norway my Gozin in his warres.
The Emperour meruailing whence this humour shoulde
procéede, answered. Why Trineus, doo you thinke your selfe
able to take so waightie a charge in hand
                           •
                        ? truely such honor
is soone receiued, but to maintaine it as it ought to be,
and preuent the dangers incident therto, is more hard then
you weene, and maketh proofe of the most couragious 
                           〈◊〉
                        ,
in that neither paine, 
                           •
                        eare or danger must hinder,
what a matter of so great consequence dooth command. And
perswade your selfe, that such as councelled you thereto,
knowe 
                           ••
                        aut thēselues their duetie in those affayres, wherefore
for a 
                           〈◊〉
                         haue patience, and referre it 
                           〈…〉
                         abilitie
                           •
                        
for I wil send good store of other Knights in this expedition,
who shall well excuse you to y• King my Nephew.

                           〈◊〉
                         not contented with this answere, replyed. In truth

my Lord, if I were not desirous to fulfill what is required
in chiualrie, I wold not so boldly haue made this demaund,
therefore for such exceptions as you admitted, let mee not I
beséeche you be denied at this time: and let this induce you,
that such as are borne to gouerne Kingdoms, if they giue
themselues onelie to pleasure, without passing through the
pykes of some dangerous hazarde, they are not woorthie to
be lifted to such honor. The Emperor hearing the braue
minde of his Sonne, and that his wordes fauoured of courage,
conceiuing well thereof, answered. Since your desire
is so earnest to be made Knight, I am well contented, but
I wold haue it doone honorablie, and before a greater assemblie
then now is in our Court, Alas my Lord, said Trineus,
there is no néede of tryumphe before victorie: let such pomp
remaine, I pray you, til I haue w
                           •
                        nne honor and accounte
by my déedes. The Emperor ioyfull of the Princes good opinion,
perswaded himselfe he wold 
                           〈◊〉
                         fortunate, wherfore
he graunted his request, so that Palmerin might accō
                        panie
him in his voyage. Of which condition Trineus was
not sorie, because in him consisted all his hope of successe:
so his Father commaunded him to prepare himselfe for hys
order, whereupon Trineus made himselfe a costlie Armor,
and another for Palmerin, the deuises béeing changed, because
they intended to passe vnknowne. Nowe had the Emperor
leuied an Armie of tenne thousande good Souldiers,
the conduct wherof was appointed to the Countie Tolano,
a Knight valiant and hardie, hauing had like charge in sundrie
occasions of war: therefore so soone as all things were
in readines, they were embarqued, and sayled with such benefite
of winde and weather, as soone after they tooke landing
in England. Where a while we will leaue, returning
to Polynarda, greatlie discontent with her Brothers departure,
because of Palmerin, and Brionella no lesse troubled
for her fréend Ptoleme: but the Princesse féeling newe afflictions
for the absence of her loue, came to her Brother,
saying. I knowe not (Brother) who hath aduised you to

venture so dangerously, our Cozin hauing assistance sufficient
without hazarding your personne, let mee then intreate
you (good Brother) to affect occasions that promise better
securitie. Better occasions Sister? quoth hee, it is impossible,
if it be a thing allowable & vertuous to succour a stranger,
howe much more then is it to our Kinsman, especially
such a one as is our Cozin of Norvvay? therefore I pray
you be of good comfort till my returne. And if it so happen,
that my Father in my absence intend your marriage, looke
that your consent not til I come home againe, for my not being
héere will serue you for a sufficient excuse. Which Polinarda
promised, and her word so past, stoode her in no small
sted afterward, as you shall finde in the discourse following.
So soone as Trineus was prouided of all thinges for his
knighthoode, he came to the Emperour in this maner. I desire
you my Lord to accomplish your promise, hauing doone
my duetie as you commaunded me. With right good will
my Sonne, saide the Emperor, goe Arme your selfe. Then
went hee, Palmerin and Ptolome armed to the Chappell,
Trineus béeing in Gréene Armour, figured all 
                           〈◊〉
                         with
harts of Golde, and in his Shéelde was portraied a Knight
vnarmed, holding in his hand a Bowe bent, with an arrow
readie to shoote against a gréene Trée, whereon hunge a
scrole, which had written in it in Letters of Gold this mot:
Madame, quand mourray-ie? Whereby he meant, that the
loue which made him enterprise this voyage, should beare
him companie till death. Palmerins Armor was all blacke,
declaring his mourning for his absence from his Lady, and
in his Shéelde for his deuise was figured, a goodlie Eagle,
sh
                           •
                        ouding a little Birde vnder his winges, declaring therby
the fauour he had receiued of his Mistresse. Soone after
came the Emperor into the Chappell, where hee Knighted
his Sonne, put his Spur on his héele, and gi
                           •
                        ded his sworde
about him: afterward they went to dinner, and spent the
wh
                           •
                        le daie in manie pleasures, for ioy of the newe Knight.
P
                              ••
                           merin & Ptolome to comfort their Ladies before theyr

departure according as they were wont, when y• Princesse
Polinarda thus began. Alas my Lorde, what gréefe wyll
your departure be to me? with what patience doo you think
I am able to endure it? perswade your selfe, the very conceit
of your absence will be my death, or at least a cause of
such danger as I shall neuer recouer. Bee well aduised
therefore how you deale with me, for the intent of my Brother
maie be broken if you would labour in it: but if it may
not be, then saue my life by your spéedie returne. These
words were deliuered with such teares and reking sighes,
as Palmerin might well perceiue the vehemence of her
gréefes, and answering her heauines with as earnest oppression,
said. Swéete Ladie bee perswaded, & tempe
                           •
                         your
sorrow with patience, considering the vnion of our spirites
makes a simpathie of afflictions, if then for my sake you
will not pacifie your selfe, yet to shéeld your owne perril let
me intreate you to be resolued, in that my returne shall bée
with such expedition as you will commaunde. But if you
continue thus melanchollie, you will bewray what as yet
shoulde bee concealed, and so may great harme ensue to vs
both: Wherfore I desire you to moderate your impatience,
and thinke well of my departure, which is chéefelie to seeke
out a Knight, against whome I fought in Fraunce for your
beautie, as for anie other matter you may beléeue me.
                     Whereuppon he reported his Combat with the Knight
of the Sunne, which made the Princesse (as well for Palmerins
promise, as ye account he made of Frysol) somewhat
better quieted, to answere. If it be so my Lord, that your returne
will bee with such spéede, I shall enforce my selfe to
beare the burthen of my cares with as much patience as I
can, and sée you faile not your appointed time: but tell mee
I praie you, what Armes beares the Knight of the Sunne
you spake off? which Palmerin discribing, Polinarda remembred
him, saying. My Lorde, I know nowe very well
what he is, for eight daies after your departure towardes
Fraunce, the Emperour my Father knighted him, commā
                        ding

mee to gird him with his Sworde, which I coulde not
but obey: wherein the Knight glorying, sollicited me with
affections not liking me, which I pray you reuenge, béeing
the man whom the matter néerest concerneth. After manie
other amiable conferences, the Knights humbly tooke their
leaue of their Ladies, and in the morning betimes, the Mariners
called on Trineus and his companie to hast aboorde,
because the winde serued well for England, which they performed
with all speede, hauing first taken their farwell of
the Emperour and the Court. So hoysing sayle, they sette
on to Sea, and in good t
                           •
                        me came within y• kenning of England:
where we will forsake them awhile, and returne to
the Emperors Armie, which he sent to the King of Norvvay
his Nephewe.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XLV.
                     
                        Howe the Armie of the emperour of Allemaigne arriued
in England, vnder the conducte of the Countie
Tolano: and howe they were discomfited.
                     
                     
                        REhearsed it hath béene alreadie,
how the Emperor of Allemaigne
promised y• Messenger of Norwaye,
to sende his Maister the
ayde of tenne thousand men at
Armes, of whome the Countie
Tolano was made General, and
they arriued in England without
any resistance▪ The Countie vnderstanding
by his auaunt coure
                           •
                        s,
the order of the Enemies Armie, and where the King
of Norway was encamped, raunged his men in good order,
and marched toward their Forte, which ye King had made

in the Duchie of Gaul
                              •
                           , and which he had destroyed during
the time the Duke was in Fraunce, hauing there fortifyed
the strongest Cittie, and the Hauen that stood best for their
commoditie. Crenus at his returne with Frisol, as you haue
hearde, vnderstanding the spoile of his Countrie, assembled
his people togeather, and with the ayde of the King of England,
came within a dayes iourney of his enemies. The
Countie Tolano hearing thereof, appointed his men in seuerall
companies, and the next daie gaue such sharpe skirmishes
to y• 
                        Gaulles, as they were cōstrained to kéepe within
their defences. Héereuppon the Duke determined to bid
them battaile, and to helpe him in his attempt, hee caused
an ambush of a thousand light Horsemen, to place thēselues
in a Forrest néere adioyning, of which companie Frisol was
the leader, and to prouoke the Norwayes to the field, he sent
out certaine men at Armes well prouided, who scouted
héere and there, to the ende the Allemaignes, who had béene
so hote the daie before, should be compassed with the secrete
ambush, which fel out according to Crenus his expectation.
For so soone as the Allemaignes saw the Englishmen so scattered,
they dislodged themselues and followed them, with
the whole Armie of the King of Norway, because they were
perswaded y• they tooke themselus to flight: but y• 
                        Gaulles
not dismayed with their comming, béeing but foure thousande
Horse, and tenne thousand footemen, came valiantlie
against the Allemaigne Ensignes, and then began a verie
fierce encounter, but the Englishmen wise & pollitique, fearing
mis-fortune, came on with their reregard towards the
Forrest where the ambush lay, when the King of Norway
ignoraunt of their intent, suddainlie made after them with
the greatest part of his power, but they had a worsse welcome
then they expected, for y• 
                        Englishmen aduertised what
they should doo, gathered vppon the Forrest side, charging
their enemies with such a sharpe assault, as in lesse spac
                           •
                        
then an howre, two thousand of them were slaine. Frysol
perceiuing the time was come to show himselfe, calling his

squadron togeather, cryed. Upon thē valiantly my fréends,
the spoyle is ours. So entred they pel mel am
                           •
                        ng y• 
                        Allemaignes,
making such slaughter of thē as was w
                           •
                        nderful to
behold, for albeit they thought not of this deceit, they were
so ouerwearied with dalliance, as when they cam to the exploit
they could doo nothing, but were slaine downe right,
such valour shewed Frysol & his fresh supplie, forcing them
to flight, and they following them, béeing glad to take the
Cittie of Tomar which was stronglie fortefied. Which whē
the King of Norway perceiued, he staied not long after thē,
because he sawe it was not best for him, and therefore fled
after them for companie at the hard héeles, and got the Cittie
in good time, els had they all perrished. Thus remained
Crenus Maister of the fielde, and following his successe, the
next daie begi
                           •
                        t the Cittie of Tomar with siedge, swearing
neuer to depart thence, till hee sawe the Cittizens eyther
through the Eates or the walles. Yet had this courage
of his béene soone cooled, if Frysol like a good Captaine had
not cherished vp his men, when Crenus at one saillie of the
enemie lost two thousand men, and therefore saide. Why
howe nowe my louing Fréendes and companions? wil you
flye or faint at the hower of good fortune? desire you not to
purchase the vertue so highlie estéemed? know you not that
you deale with people halfe conquered, and altogeather dyscouraged?
courage then my Brethren, courage, and let vs
not exchange our reputation with their feare and faynting:
you giue mee double strength good Fréendes, if but wyth
good countenaunce, you will make them know, what cowardlie
crauens they are. Follow me bra
                           •
                        e Englishmen, and
this very daie will we giue them punishment, as their treason
and rebellion hath well deserued. These words renewed
eache ones courage meruailously, so that the Duke with
a fresh supply beganne againe thus to annimate them. You
knowe my good Fréends, that although we are but a handful
in respect of them, what successe we haue alreadie had in
our encounters, so that with greater ease may wee nowe

conquere, weakening them so mightily as wee haue doone:
let vs not dismay then, but witnes that the worst manne
amongst vs, is more valiant and hardie in Armes, then the
greatest Lord that is in their companie, eache man therefore
cherrish his hope, and bearde our enemies to the very
téeth. The daie following, the enemie came foorth at a posterne
Gate, and held the Dukes power very good playe,
and the Norwayes very well appoynted with Bowes and
arrowes, gauled the Horsse so cruelly, as they were glad to
take their Campe, wherupon the Countie Tolano in hope
of the daie, followed vpon them with his Allemaigne courtlaces,
which Frysol perceiuing, mette him in the face with
his English squadron, and giuing the spurres to his Horse,
ran with his Launce quite thorow his bodie: whereat the
Allemaignes much amazed, when they saw their Generall
fall dead from his Horse, determined valiantly to reuenge
his death, but Frysol and his men dealt with them so round
lie, as the stoutest was glad and faine to make them waie.
Yet had they hemde in Frysol with such a troupe, as if the
Duke had not spéedilie come with reskewe, they had taken
him, and then began the sharpest bickering, for the Duke of
Gaule and Frysol with their men so bestirred them, as the
Allemaignes cleane discouraged, beganne to disorder themselues,
and with the Norwayes fled to the Cittie so fast as
they coulde, where Frysol & his men had entered, but that
the King of Norway not daring to come into the fielde, was
there with men sufficient to resist his entrie. Thus remained
the victory to the Duke of Gaule, by the braue pollicies
of Frysol and his men, he béeing generally commended of
the Armie: and thus retired the Allemaignes & Norvvayes
to their shame and dishonor. After the retrait sounded by
the King of Norway, hee sent to ye Duke to demaunde truce
for foure and twentie howres, that they might burye the
dead, among whom was the Countie Tolano: which beeing
graunted him, he caused the Counties bodie to bee embalmed,
who by the counsell of his Lorde and Captaines,

was sent home into his Country. The King and his company
secretlie in the night embarqued themselues, to ioyne
with the King of Scots, who expected his comming, & then
did the Cittizens sende word to the Duke, that by y• breake
of daie they would yéelde the keyes of their Gates to him:
whereuppon Frysol was Lieuetenant generall for y• Duke
of Gaule, and entred honorably the Cittie of Tomar, where
the Englishmen rested themselues for two or thrée dayes, to
recompence their paynes with profit and pleasure. The enemie
was no sooner departed vnder sayle, but there arose
such a terrible tempest, as the most part of their vessels perished
in the Sea, and the other were so scattered, as they
had lost the sight of one another: yet was some small number
remayning with the King, as well of Allemaignes as his
own Countreimen, so getting safe to shore in his kingdom,
he determined a reuenge for his great ouerthrowe, but hee
could not compasse his intent, as you shall reade héereafter.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XLVI.
                     
                        Howe after the Prince Trineus, Palmerin & Ptolome,
were arriued in England, they went to the Court, and
what torments the Prince endured for his looue to the
fayre Lady Agriola.
                     
                     
                        
                           TRineus, Palmerin and Ptolome,
béeing landed within 4. dayes
iourney of the Kinges Campe,
which was prouided against the
King of Scots, were aduertised,
that the King stayed but y• comming
of y• Duke of Tintriel, and
then he meant to bid his enemie
battaile, that had so boldlie presumed

vpon part of his Realme. The garders of the porte
where they landed, séeing they were strangers, woulde
suffer them passe no further, till they knewe their names,
whether they went, and what they came for. Palmerin answering
on the behalfe of them all, said. Good fréendes, we
are Grecian Knightes, and trauaile strange Countries to
séeke aduentures, and because we heard that your King menaceth
warre, against his auncient and maleuolent enemie
the King of Scots, wee come to offer our selues and our seruice
to him, so please his Maiestie to accept it. This aunswere
so well contented the Officers, as by their meanes
they were conducted to the Court, where they were honorably
entertained, and two daies togeather were there feasted
with the King, in which time Trineus vnderstood, that
that the Quéene and her Daughter, were aboue twentie
miles thence, whereupon the next morning they tooke their
iourney thither, and by dinner time came where ye Queene
laie. But it fell out so happilie for Trineus, as before they
came to the place where the Court aboade, they mette the
Quéene and her traine, who dailie went to a Chappell, not
a quarter of a mile from the Cittie, to heare diuine seruice,
as she kept it for a continuall exercise, and with her was
faire Agriola her Daughter. The Quéene and all her Ladies
alighted from their Palfrayes, they entred the Chappell,
the Prince well regarding the Goddesse of his hart,
who belike making her prayers more bréefe then her Mother,
came foorth with her wayting Ladies, to walke vnder
a companie of gréene Trées néere adioyning. Trineus séeing
her a creature so rare and excellent, made doubt in a matter
of assuraunce, least he should bee surprised as Acteon was,
when he found Diana bathing among her Nimphes. He being
thus caried away with meruailous conceit of her beautie,
saluted not the Princesse as shee passed before him, nor
heard Palmerin who reprooued him for omitting his courtesie:
but wading further & further into this amorous furie,
spake so loude as he was easilie hearde, in this manner.

O heauens, will you suffer the perfections of a Ladie so diuinelie
accomplished, to be ye cause of my vndeserued death?
when may the time come for me, to let her vnderstand my
desire to doo her seruice? or howe might she know the loyal
affection I beare her? One of the Ladies of honor attending
on the Princesse, reputing his wordes vnwise & ouer-bolde,
answered. Why Sir Knight, where learned you so little
courtship, as when the fairest in the Westerne world passeth
before you, you make no gentle gesture or salutation? I
doubt that what is counted honestie & vertue among men
of quallitie, with you is 
                           •••
                        eemed harsh and vnciuill, which
makes me repute you more méete for the Kitchen, then to
beare the honorable office and rich Armes of a Knight, as
you doo. Trineus as it were awaked out of a traunce, saide.
Ah swéete Ladie pardon me, for by my faith I can neither
tell what you said, nor well where I am my selfe: for euen
as you ended, I felt such a passion strike me to ye very hart,
as death will soone arrest me without remedie. The Ladie,
who knewe not his meaning, checked him againe, thus.
Were it not better then for you to be in the field, then héere
in this foolish and vndiscréete pensiuenes? It is true Lady,
(quoth ye Prince) that at this time I haue shewed my selfe
vnmannerlie, and a slender Courtier, yet is not the blame
altogeather to be throwne on me, ignoraunt who the Lady
was which you speake of: for wee are strange Knightes,
and are come farre from this Countrey, with intent to aide
and succour the King in his warres with our vttermost endeuours.
Notwithstanding, because we haue with no more
regard doone our duetie to your Mistresse, may it please you
to entreate her on our behalfe, to pardon this offence: for
satis-faction wherof, we wil goe serue the King her father in
battell, where we doubt not so wel to behaue our selues, as
shall deserue our pardon, if so be she will not at this instant
so fauour vs. And I gladlie woulde faire Ladie, that such
seruice shoulde bee doone by her commaundement, for our
strength and vertue by her perfections augmented, will attribute

the honor to her that so graciously assisted vs, 
                           〈◊〉
                        
fore, so please you to make known our good intent towards
her, we shall for such kindnes remain indebted to you. The
Ladie tooke pleasure in hearing Trineus, especially perceiuing
the zeale of him & his companions, to imploy theyr
valour on the Kings behalfe, which caused her immediatlie
doo this message to the Princesse, who at that instant (as a
thing fatall to her) was wounded with loue: whereuppon
she sent them answere by her Gouernesse, that shee entertained
them as her Knights, and as her Seruants desired
them to goe aide the King her Father, yet woulde shee not
consent to pardon them, till the renowne of their exploites
might shewe them to deserue it. Trineus tooke this answer
for better aduantage then the Princesse thought on, accounting
himselfe happy by such a good beginning, and therefore
saide to the Ladie. I think my selfe (faire Ladie) one of the
most fauoured by Fortune, hauing the meane to obey your
Mistresse in her commaund, and hope to execute her charge
in such sort, as I shall deserue the grace she dooth nowe denie
me, yet with all humilitie on our behalfe, I intreate you
to yeelde thankes for her princelie kindnes. The Ladie returning
to Agriola, accomplished what Trineus desired
her, wherupon she turned herselfe, and gaue them a countenaunce
of fauour, which was answered by Trineus, Palmerin
and Ptoleme, with great reuerence, and y• Princesse,
(shewing herselfe not too statelie towardes the Knights)
with her hand & gesture gaue a signe of her content, which
was not a little welcome to Trineus. Then the Quéene
comming foorth of the Chappell, with Ag
                              •
                           ola & her traine
mounted 
                           •
                        n horsebacke, taking their wa
                           •
                        e to the Courte againe:
but when Trineus had lest the sight of them, w
                           ••
                        
                        derfull
vexations began to assaile him, so that hee saide to
Palmerin. Ah my good Fréende, howe happie may that man
account himselfe, whose fortune honors him with the beauty
of Ag
                              •
                           iola? Ah Sir Palmerin, I féele my self so excéeding
lie tormented, as I doubt my death will be ineuitable. But

tell me the trueth and dissemble not, how thinke you of my
Mistresse? is shee not a Ladie more then diuine? In good
faith my Lord, said Palmerin, what the Knight in Fraunce
told vs, was but fables, in that she excéedeth report beyond
all opinion notwithstanding, it is necessary for you to nourish
your hope, hauing thus spoken to her, and bewrayed
your afflictions, not doubting but this good beginning of
your enterprise, will cause the ende fal out to your content.
So rode on these thrée Knights, pleasing their humors with
their seuerall iudgments of their Ladies, yet Palmerin had
séene such matter in English Agriola,
                         as, but his plighted
promise to Polynarda, was of force sufficient to change hys
fancie. The next daie they arriued at the King of Englands
Campe, where because they would not be known, they pitched
their Tents behinde all y• other: and soone after came
the Duke of Tin
                              •
                           riel, bringing with him a number of hardie
men at Armes, so that in short time y• Kinges strength
was such, as they excéeded their enemies in number. Héerevpon
the King assembled his counsell, and concluded, that
the next daie they woulde goe séeke out the King of Scots,
wh
                           •
                         in two encounters had the vpper hande, which made
him so peremptorie, as he perswaded himselfe vtterly to cō
                        found
the King of England: who raysing his power, followed
so dill
                           •
                        gentlie, as the third daie after, he encamped within
halfe a mile of his enemie, that had besieged the Towne
of Corfania, and had brought it readie to yéeld, but that the
King preuented it by the strength he brought.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XLVII.
                     
                        Of the cruell battayle, betweene the King of Englande
and the King of Scots.
                     
                     
                        WHen the King of Scots vnderderstoode
the comming of ye King
of England, and that in all hast he
would bid him battaile, he wold
no longer busie himselfe in besiedging
Corfania, but retired a
litle for his better aduantage, cō
                        ferring
with his Capitaines about
their present affaires, concluding
to offer the ennemie no
skirmishes, because thereby they would know their intent:
notwithstanding he gaue order to prepare for battaile, because
he knewe the King of England came for no other purpose.
The Englishmen not suffering the Scots to haue anie
leysure to fortefie themselues, were by the King the next
morning commaunded in array, and all winges & squadrons
appointed, the Duke of Tintriel was made leader of the
auaun
                           •
                        garde, wherein likewise were Trineus, Palmerin
and Ptolome, and to the Dukes Brother was committed
the charge of ye arrieregarde, and béeing all ready to martch
on, the King himselfe beganne this Oration. I thinke my
Fréendes that no one of you, but sufficientlie is acquainted
in what respect we continue this warre, namelie, to defend
the honor and reputation of our Realme, and to saue the
liues of you, your wiues and children, and your goods, which
the enemie wold violently spoile and take from you, intending
to throwe perpetuall bondage and slauerye on your
necks. Will you not then defende your liberties? will you

not maintaine your auncient renowne, which is, to bee
Lords and commaunders of the Scots? assure your selues,
that howe str
                           •
                        ng soeuer our enemie be, I hope with y• aide
of God, your vndaunted courages, and ye right of our cause,
to make a noble and victorious conquest. For I knowe, that
our enemie hath not one man in his Armie, endued with
such an intire hart and magnanimious courage, as you are,
nor that valueth his title of honor with his life, as you doo:
and therefore if we martch on valiantlie, continuing resolute
and confident togeather, euery man laboring for his
Prince, Countrey, fréende and fellow, and God for vs all,
your forwardnes will make them fearefull, and your verie
countenances enough to conquere. Euery manne then bee
chéerefull, with a desire to vanquish, and héere I vowe to
you on the worde of a King, that if Fortune stande so well
with vs, as to winne the daie, neuer shall the Scots héereafter
dare to lift vp thēselues against vs. Thus did the King
of England animate his men, and so martched on in good araie
to the sight of their enemies, who by this time hadde
ranged themselues for battaile, their auauntgarde conducted
by the Marques of Monthel, the King of Scots himselfe
in the maine battaile, and the arrieregarde led by the King
of the Isle Magdalen: and as the King of England had encouraged
his Souldiers, so began the King of Scots to harten
his men in this manner. The time is nowe come (loyal
Subiects and déere Fréendes) that the pride of the English
must bee abated by the vertue and valoure of the Scots,
so that if you set before your eyes the occasion calling vs to
the fielde, there is no one of you but will blame his predecessor,
for staying so long time to recouer, what by true patrimonie
belonged to them, and by the Kings of Englande,
(tirannous vsurpers) againste all right violentlye taken
from our Auncestors. Will you not then recouer you
losse, and reenter on those possessions, from which your Fathers
(against all reason) were expulsed? Duetie doth chalenge
it at your handes, béeing the good not onely for your

selues, but for your children and successors. Would you then
loose so good oportunitie, to reestablish things so lost? Are
your harts more timorous then your enem
                           •
                        es? are your
mindes made of worse mettall then theirs? No no, wel am
I assured that the least among you, is of higher vertue and
account then the best in their cōpanie. If it hath béene their
custome, (as they themselues vaunt) to tryumphe ouer vs,
let vs learne them to confesse with patience, that they haue
no such right or custome to vanquish, as in thrée skirmishes
alreadie we haue sufficiently made knowne, with what fortune
and vnconquerable spirits you entertained your enemies.
Dismay no more nowe (my good Fréendes) then you
haue doone, let eache-mans sworde make his entraunce amidst
his foes, and fauour one anothers life, so shall swéete
successe returne you with victory, The King hauing ended,
they discerned the English power eager to encounter, and 
                           •
                        o
the Armies méeting, began a dreadfull and dangerous battaile.
There might you heare the Dr
                           ••
                        mnes thunder, the
Trompets sounde, the Clarions ring, the Phifes warble,
Launces shyuered, Knights di
                           ••
                        noūted, Foo
                           •
                        men scattered,
heads defended, armes and bodies wounded, some crying,
other dying, a matter more then lam
                           •
                        ntable to beholde, and
so long continued this cruell and bloodie conflict, as the most
part of the auauntgarde were slaine, sore wounded, or taken
prisoners. Which when the King of Scots perceiued,
béeing a Prince so hardie and valiant as might bee, commaunded
the maine battaile to giue the charge, in middest
whereof he was in person: whereuppon, the fight beganne
again much more fierce then before, so that you might haue
heard the Horsses storme, the Armour clatter, and on euery
side behelde good and venturous Knights giue vppe their
liues. At this furious onset, Palmerin séeing the Scots to retire
for aduantage, cryed to the King of England. Why how
now my Lord? doo you forget your selfe? Why doo you not folow
on with your maine battell, séeing the enemie playes
vpon aduantage? chéerefully let vs vpon them for the daie

will be ours. The King séeing that Palmerin
                              •
                           
                         counsel was
verie expedient, commaunded his men to martch on valiantlie,
which they did with such courage, as not one of them
but was thorowlie busied. Palmerin fearing least Tr
                              •
                           neus
would be ouer venturous, because the y
                           •
                        ng Prince was
meruailo
                           •
                        s forward, desired him not to runne so farre into
danger, but kéepe by him▪ to the 
                           •
                        nde the one might succour
the other, if necessiti
                           •
                         required. With these words 
                           •
                        e ranne
vpon the S
                              •
                           ots like an angry Lyon, and no man durst withstand
him, they sawe him make such slaughter: the King of
England following him at an inche, deliuering true testimonie
of his inuincible hart. On the other side, Trineus
met with the Kinges Brother of the Isle Magdalen, piercing
his Launce quite through his bodie, so that he fel deade
among his owne Souldiers: and Ptolome all this whyle
was not idle▪ but where ere he came, he laid his enemie at
his féete, so that the Scots wondered at y• behauiour of these
thrée Knights. When the King of the Isl
                           •
                         
                        Magdalen vnderstood
the death of his Brother, incensed with vnquenchable
anger, ran fiercelie among the English, till hee came
where Trineus, Palmerin and Ptolome were, one of his
Knights shewing ye King the man that slew his Brother,
whereupon he making towards Trineus, lifted vppe hys
Sword, and thought to haue slaine him: but Palmerin stepping
béetwéene them, said▪ To me Captaine, to me, and so
the King and he encountered togeather so terribly, as Palmerin
was wounded in two or thrée places, for which hee
made such recompence to the King, as fastening his
Sword on his Helmet, cl
                           •
                        st his head in 
                           •
                        wayne, that doone
he fell deade to the grounde. The sight héereof enflamed the
Scots with such rage, as like mad men they ranne cutting
and killing among the English, as well to reuenge the King
of the Isle Magdalens death, as to defend their own King
whose danger they feared. In this hote skirmish the Kings
of England and Scots met togeather, who charged each other
with such forcible strokes, as the King of England was vnhorssed

and sore wounded: but Trineus béeing at hand, seeing
his déere fréendes Father in such perrill, buckled with
the King of Scots so valiantlie, as he gaue him many a cruell
wounde, and had not his men made hast to conuay him
through the throng, he had béene slaine by Trineus, so was
the King of England mounted againe, and reuenged hys
foyle on his enemie with meruailous valour. There tryumphed
the thrée Grecian Knights with inexplicable honor,
the Englishmen making such hauocke among the Scots,
as vtterly dispayring, they fled, one part to a Forrest neere
at hande, and the other towardes the Sea to their Shyps,
the King getting into one of them to saue his life, by the
meanes of one of his Knights, that lēt him a good Iennet of
Spayne to escape away withall. And so sayled thence the
King with greater shame, then did the Emperor Antonius
from Octauius Caesar, leauing his men fiercely pursued by
the English, who terrefied them in such sort, as many of the
poore Scots chose rather to run into the Sea & drowne them
selues, then to 
                           •
                        all into the handes of their conquering enemies.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XLVIII.
                     
                        Of the retrait of the King of Englands Armie, and the
honor he did to the three strange Knights.
                     
                     
                        AFter the King of Englande was
maister of the field, he caused the
retrait to be sounded, and hys
men called togeather, commaunding
likewise that search shoulde
bee made through the fielde, to
succour such as were sore wounded,
and to burie the deade, least

the ayre should be infected: wherupon the Englishmen took
ye spoile of their enemies, chéefely their bag & bagage which
they had left behind them. In meane while the King withdrew
himself into his Tent, where remembring the great
seruice of the thrée strange Knights, hee commaunded his
Nephewe Ce
                              •
                           des to séeke them immediatlie, who founde
them in a Scottish Tent binding vppe their woundes, and
béeing not a little glad of his good fortune, hee came to Palmerin,
saying. Gentlemen, the King my Uncle earnestlie
desireth you to come to him, because hee will neither enter
the Towne, nor vnarme himselfe, til he heare some tidings
of you. Séeing it pleas
                           •
                        th him, said Palmerin, to commaūd,
we humblie obey, wherefore we pray you Sir to returne
his Maiestie our dutifull thanks, and dilligent attendance.
After Cerid
                              •
                           s was departed, they resolued among themselues
(at the earnest request of Trineus) that Palmerin
shoulde bee the chéefest among them, and him they woulde
honor as their Lorde, because ye Prince feared to be known
if such account shoulde bee made of him: so went they presentlie
to the Kings Tent, where they were no sooner entered,
but the King (albe
                           •
                        t he was sore wounded) arose from
his Chaire, and embraced them louingly one after another,
not suffering them to knéele before him, but honorably thus
spake to them. Woorthie Gentlemen, howe welc
                           •
                        me you
are I cannot expresse, for I account my selfe so highlie beholding
to you, as the Realme of England had sustained this
daie great foyle, but by your fortunate valour: think then
woorthie Lords, wherein England may recompence you,
and on my worde it shall not be denied, in meane while I
praie you let me haue your companie, because I will see
your hurts carefully attended. The Knights with great reuerence
accepted the Kings noble offer, and were conducted
into a faire Tent next the Kinges, where the Chirurgions
with great dilligence dressed their wounds, and afterward
they came and supped with the King. And because the
King intended on the morrow to goe refresh himselfe at the

Towne of Corfania, which before had béene cruellie besiedged
by the Scots, to giue God thanks for his happie victorie,
a famous Sermon was made before him by the Archbishop
of Canterburie: to whom likewise he gaue order for enterring
such as had béene slaine of account, and in that place
for memorie of his good fortune, hee caused a goodlie Monasterie
to be builded, and dispatched a Poste presently to aduertise
the Quéene of his good successe. Now was his Maiestie
verie desirous to know the thrée strange Knights, that
had so valiantlie assisted him, especiallie the man that saued
his life: whereupon the next morning he went to sée them,
demaunding howe they fared, for (quoth he) we will nowe
set forwarde to Corfania, where wee will make you better
entertainement then we can héere in the field. Then mounted
they all on horsebacke, and rode to Corfania, where the
King remained till he and his Knights were better recoueced,
and where the King made the Duke of Tintriel high
Marshall of England, committing to his charge sixe thousand
men, commaunding him to chase all the Scots foorth of
his Kingdome, wheresoeuer he could find them, and to seaze
to his highnes vse the Townes and Cas
                           •
                        elles, which they
before had in vse: which the Duke executed with such expedition,
as hee left not a Scot in anie Uillage or Hamlett,
placing faithfull Officers for the King in euerie iurisdictiō.
During these labours of the Duke, the King euery daie visited
these thrée Knights, and finding Palmerin at a time cō
                        uenient,
he requested to knowe of whence hee was, and the
names of his companions. Let me intreate you (ꝙ hee) not
to hide your selues form me, because I shall not be in quiet
till I know, that I may remunerate your deserts according
to your persons. Palmerin, who feared to bee discouered,
coulde not readilie deuise what aunswere to make, yet at
length in great humilitie, thus said. We would desire your
Maiestie, that it might stande with your good liking, at this
time to excuse the knowledge of our present affaires, as also
what wee are: yet thus farre will I resolue your highnes,

that we are all Gentlemen of Greece, nourished in ye Court
of the King of Macedon, who in séeking strange aduētures,
haue trauailed manie prouinces, and nowe at length came
into your Kingdome, wel stored at this time with Knights
errant, and gouerned (as wee well perceiue) by a King so
gracious, as to such persons alloweth honor and good affection,
as no King where we yet haue come, doth the like. For
this cause my Lord, as also vnderstanding that the King of
Scots menaced warre against you, came we into your Countrey,
to serue you in all obeysaunce, as the verie simplest among
your Souldiers. Trust me (said the King) I haue wel
noted your seruice, and a man might bee deceiued in expecting
better assistaunce, for which I rest yours in ought I
may while I liue: but if you would name your selues, then
should I knowe to whom I were ind
                           •
                        bted, as also that my
Subiects might honor you accordinglie. That (ꝙ Palmerin)
will neither profit or preiudice your Maiestie, let suffise
then I beséeche you, the vnfeigned good will and seruice we
owe to your highnes. The King séeing hee coulde not gette
what he would, changed his talke, saying. Was it you Sir,
that on the daie of battell was armed all in blacke? Yea my
Lord, said Palmerin, and this Knight (pointing to Trineus)
is my Brother, who shéelded you from daunger against the
King of Scots. Ah déere Fréends, quoth the King, this made
me so importunate, & may it like you to stay in my Courte,
I will regard you according to your especiall deseruings, as
the onelie Knights of the worlde in my fauour, yeelding
thankes to heauen, for the good I haue receiued by your
meanes. Humblie did ye thrée Knights regratiate the King,
promising for a while to soiourne with him.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XLIX.
                     
                        How the Queene of England was aduertised of the victorie
against the King of Scots, and the ouerthrowe of
his whole Armie.
                     
                     
                        AFter the King of Englande had
sent tidinges to the Quéene of
his good fortune, and the honour
he intended to the thrée Knights
of Greece: the Messenger was
so spéed
                           •
                        e, as the seconde daie▪ following,
he arriued at the Cittie
wher ye Quéene kept her Court,
and presented her the Letters
from the King her Husband
                           •
                        ,
reciting the whole manner of the battell, with the rare exployts
of the thrée Grecia
                              •
                           
                         Knights▪ and how one of them
preserued the Kings life: omitting nothing that was néedfull
to be reported, as how the King intended to come with
the thrée Knights in great royaltie to London, and therfore
she shoulde prouide equall entertainment. The Queene
highlie contented with these newes, demanded of the Messenger,
if hee knewe the thrée Knightes that gaue such assistance
to the King: No indéede Madame, answered y• Messenger,
neither did I sée them, but at the time I was dispatched
with my message. Agriola, fin
                           •
                        ing in herselfe the
puissaunce of the little God that made loo
                           •
                        e, suddainlie suspected,
that these Knights were they which shee sawe at
the Chappell, and therefore saide. I pray thée tell mee my
Fréend, what Armes beare the Knights? One of them Madame
(quoth he) the verie best Knight in the worlde, is in
Gréene Armour, and that is he that saued the King your fathers

life, when the King of Scots had néere slaine him, but
he remounted my Lord, giuing his enemy such a danger
                           •
                        us
wound with his Launce, as it was greatlie doubted he had
kild him, he lost so much blood, and this was one of the principall
occasions of our victorie. This Knights companion in
Blacke Armour, behaued himselfe with wonderfull chiualrie,
for as a Lion makes hauock in a heard of Cattell, so did
he cut, slashe & mangle the Scots, as the very hardiest durst
not abide before him. The third is in Black Armor, sparckled
all ouer with white Roses, a Knight of no lesse courage
then his companions, and one that fought for England with
incredible prowesse. Let me die, said Agriola to y• Quéene,
if these be not the Knightes that past by this Cittie, when
we went to the Chappell to performe our exercise: & therwithall
she rehearsed what spéech her Gouernesse had with
them, and what she commaunded them. In sooth Daughter
quoth the Quéene, your Gouernesse and you may well bee
blamed, for the slender account you made of them: I praye
you therefore when they returne, let your former faulte be
sufficientlie recompenced. That shall I not fayle to doo, said
Agriola. So the Quéene honorablie rewarded the Messenger,
sending him backe with answer, that the Kings charge
should be effectuallie executed. The King aduertised of the
Quéenes replie, set forwarde with the Knightes of Greece
and his traine to the Courte, and by the way, remembring
the power sent by the Emperour of Allemaigne to the King
of Norway, he said to Palmerin. I cannot sufficienlie maruaile
gentle Knight, why the Emperor should declare himselfe
mine enemie, and giue assistance to the King of Norway
against mee, considering I neuer did any thing might
deserue his displeasure: but I sweare by the faith of a king,
that I will reuenge my wrong, and let him as
                           •
                        ure himselfe,
that while I haue one foote of ground, or a dozen of my Soldi
                           •
                        rs
to helpe me, I will neuer haue peace with him: to
mollest me so within mine owne dominions, by God, my
Freends, I cannot forget it. These words greatlie displea
                        
                           •••
                        
                        
                        Trineus, but especially Palmerin, who answered. In
my opinion my Lord, the Emperour did but reason, and as
duetie bound him, in respect he could not honestly refuse to
aide the King of Norway his Cosin, and hereof I can assure
you, in that I haue sometime béene in his Court, that hée is
one of the wisest and best gouerned Princes that euer I
heard of. Wherefore, bee it spoken vnder correction, your
Maiestie should forget this light offence, and consider if the
like had béene towards you, you would haue done no l
                           •
                        sse.
When the King heard him to support the Emperors cause,
he presently iudged him to be of his Course, and therefore
sayd. Are you he Sir, that woonne such honor and renowne
in Fraunce, at the combat maintained by the Prince Lewes
for the loue of his Ladie? If you be so, I pray you do not denie
it, for I shall henceforth thinke my Court most happie,
to harbour the most excellent among all Knights: and I
promise you I am so iealous of mine owne conceyte, as you
can hardly p
                           ••
                        swade mee otherwise, such experience haue I
made of your bountie and vertue. Palmerin blushing
at th
                           •
                        se wor
                           •
                        es, and doubting he should nowe be certainlye
knowne, answered. Wee humbly intreate your Maiestie
héeretofore, and so we doo now againe, that you would not
enquire whence we are: sufficeth your highnesse, that wee
are his humble Seruants, in any thing that shall like him
to commaunde vs. The King this hearing, repented himselfe
that hee had béene so importunate, for hée feared least
his spéeches would make them forsake his company, wherfore
by this time béeing come neere his Pallace, hée sayde.
What I haue sayd Gentlemen, I hope shall not offend you,
in my excuse admit my earnest desire to know you. By and
by ouertooke them the Duke of Tintriel, who went to restore
the Crowne (as you haue heard) what the Scots vsurped,
and he aduertised the King, that the Quéene and her
Ladies were ridden to a Castle foure miles from London
to sollace themselues, whereupon the king resolued to ryd
                           •
                        
thither? Whereof the Prince Trineus was not sorie, such

was his desire to sée his faire Fréend, whose loue still crossed
him with so many passions, as hée séemed a man of another
world, and did not his woundes s
                           •
                        rue somewhat to
couer his disease, hardly could he haue sounde any shift to
conceale it so closely, wherefore he beganne with Palmerin
thus. You knowe my chosen friend, that the hope of my
loue made me leaue my fathers court, and to preuent my
meaning consists onely in you, now in respect of my forcible
captiuitie, béeing vnprouided of strength sence, or any
meane to discouer my loue to her, who only can helpe mée:
I intreate you by the inuiolable league of our amitie, that
when you chaunce to speake with the Goddesse of my life,
my paines and anguishes may serue for my salutations,
and imparting to her the extreamitie of my sorrowes, shee
may perceiue in what estate I am, and what néede I haue
of her gracious pittie. These wordes were deliuered with
such sighs and teares, as Pa
                              •
                           merin was amazed thereat, albeit
hee knewe howe heauy the burthen was, and howe it
excéeded patience in suffering, comparing his absence from
his mistresse Polinarda to be as insupportable, as the presence
of Agriola (not daring to speake to her) was to Trineus,
whereupon he answered. My Lord, repose your trust
in this matter on me, which I doubt not to handle in such
sort, as you shall haue no cause to be mal content, or the
Princesse any reason to be ingratefull. But what thinke
you if my Dwarfe did carrie this message? in my opinion
(through the whole world) you could not finde a more fitte
fellow, such is his subtile and present inuention, as hee wil
prooue the onely string to your bowe. Alas sayd the prince,
I care not who were imployed héerein, so I were sure of
comfort. Then was the dwarfe called, to whom Palmerin
in this sort began. It is wel knowne to thée V
                              •
                           banil
                              •
                           o, with
what good will I would do any seruice I could to my Lord
Trineus, as well for the incomparable kindnes I haue receiued
of my Ladie his Sister, as for the affi
                           ••
                        tie I hope
shall one day be betwéene vs by his meanes. So 
                           •
                        ften haue

I made experience of my loyall seruice and fidelitie, in my
chiefest and very n
                           •
                        er
                           •
                        st affayres, as well may I impart to
thée, the secrets of my noble companion, p
                           •
                        rswading my self
of thy suretie and secrecie. It now remaines that thou pleasure
the Prince Trineus, in breaking his loue to the Princess
                           •
                        
                        Agriola, as thou diddest for me to my Mistresse Polynarda:
but aboue all things haue regard, that thou bewray
not of whence, or what we are, yet must thou assure her,
that the Prince is one of the greatest Lords in Europe. My
Lord, quoth the Dwarffe, I was neuer yet disobedient to
you in all my time, and very loath were I now to beginne:
but because I am such a little writhen fellowe, you make
me your Broker in these perillous loue matters. Notwithstanding,
I will doo it though I died for it, esteeming my
life well bestowed to pleasure such Princes. There can no
inconuenience arise hereby to thee, quoth Palmerin, but
profite euerie way: be not enemie then to thine owne good.
That will I neuer, sayd the Dwarffe, and well might the
Ladie be iudged vnprouided of reason, and verie farre from
vnderstanding, if she make refusall of the Princes honourable
offer: the King himselfe, if he knew it, woulde imagine
his day
                           •
                        s blessed: the issue then of this enterprise can not
but sort to good. The Dwarffes wordes pleased so well Trineus,
as he tooke him in his armes, saying: I commend my
selfe, and my happinesse to thée. Let me alone, quoth V
                              •
                           banillo,
if I bring you not hearbes that shall coole this hote
feuer, then let me neuer bee counted for a tall man: so went
he about it, as you shall vnderstand hereafter.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap: L.
                     
                        How the King of England went to the Castle to the Queene
and her Ladies, and of the honourable entertainment made
to the three strange Knights.
                     
                     
                        NEwes béeing brought to the Quéene,

                           •
                        hat the King was not farre off, shée
sent a verie honourable traine to méete
him, and with them his sonne the yong
Prince Fredericke, ten yéeres olde, but
beautifull and of such perfection, as promised
great hope in time to come. Hée
hauing made reuerence to his Father, and the other Princes,
demaun
                           •
                        ed for the straunge Knightes, and saluting
them with such kindnesse as was rare in a Childe, he rode
betwéene Trineus and Palmerin, giuing them harty thanks
for theyr fréendly succour to his Father, without which,
sayd hée, as the Quéene my Mother tolde mee, hée had dyed▪
and wée all béene distressed. By this tyme they were come to
the Castell, all the way so thicke p
                           •
                        stered with people, as
there was no roome to stirre among them, euerie one crying.
Happie be the Knights that foyled our enemyes. So
entring the Castell, in the vttermost Court they mette the
Quéene and her Ladyes, among whom fayre Agriola shyned,
as beautifull Venus among the other starres, wherewith
the Prince of Allemaigne was so nipt in the head, as
an off
                           •
                        n
                           •
                        our with his guilt before a Iudge, so that not regarding
what yong Fredericke, or the other Lords courteouslie
sayd to him, he was readie to fall beside his horse with
euermuch gazing: But Palmerin suddainly twitching him

softly, sayd. Fie, my Lorde, what meane you to forget your
selfe thus? sée you not her that is ordayned yours, and will
you not triumph in your happie sight, but sitte as one vtterly
discouraged? For shame let passe this pusillanimitie,
and with chéerefull countenaunce goe giue her the good morow.
The Prince did so, but with such timerous conceits,
as hauing saluted the Mother, hée durst not speake to the
Daughter: who imagining the best, and that bashfull reuerence
did so with-holde him, shée came to him in this manner.
Are not you sir, the Knight in the gréene Armour, that
not long since promised one of my Ladyes to ayde my Father
in his warres? I am fayre Princesse, quoth hée, and
what I haue done, was at your commaundement, the vertue
wherof gaue me such strength, as some of the Scots haue
felt to their cost: but had I gone vnprouided of such fauour,
I am perswaded I could neuer haue returned aliue. It now
remaines, swéete Ladie, that according to the request I then
made by your Ladie, it would please you to remitte his offence,
who deserued the sharpest punishment can bée deuised,
for not honouring that Princesse, which carryes the
Palme from all Ladyes liuing. In trueth, my Lorde, sayde
the Princesse, not onelie is your fault to bée forgiuen, if it
could be named a fault, but also ought I to recompence you
to my vttermost power, séeing by your meanes my Father
in safetie, and the Realme of England deliuered from
the tyrannous ser
                           •
                        itude of the Scots: wherefore you may
assure your selfe, that if I can stande you in any st
                           •
                        dde towards
the King my Father, you shall commaunde mée to
my vttermost. The Prince returned her a thousand thanks,
and sayde. Beléeue mée, Madame, the verie least title of
your good will, is recompence to mee more then sufficient,
and would prouoke such affection in mée towards your seruice,
as you could not commaunde the thing, but I shoulde
with dutifull willingnesse performe it, as I doubt not but
better occasions shall make manifest vnto you. Then entred
they the great Hall, where such a 
                           •
                        umptuous banquet was

prouided, as will aske more time to report, then leysure will
admit. Likewise here to set downe the wonderfull passions
of the amorous Prince Trineus, in regard of a Ladie so excéeding
in perfections, surpasseth my capacitie: but hée that
is seated so opposit to so faire a creature, and loues so earnestly
as Trineus, yet dare not speake least he should bee spyed,
may iudge of that which I cannot vtter. But séeing the libertie
of spéech was denyed, the spéedie eye posted betwéene
them with swéete con
                           •
                        eyances, and still must shée countenance
the straunger Knights, till fearing to be taken tardie,
she closely conferred with the Princesse Eufemia, daughter
to the Duke of Norgalles, saying: What thinke you Coz
                           •
                        n
of these strangers? are they not the séemelyest personages
that euer you sawe, both in fauour, conntenaunce, good
grace and hardinesse? I am of the opinion, that although
they report themselues but as simple Knights errant, they
bée doubtlesse great Lordes, discended of noble and princely
parentage: as one may easily gather by their ciuill and vertuous
behauiour, which is euermore the witnesse of true nobilitie.
These words caused Eufemia to marke well Trineus,
as her Cozin Agriola did, which hée perceyuing, and iudging
that they talked of him, his alterations were so sensible as
they might be easily discerned: for the more they eyed him,
the greater was his torment, till the Table béeing withdrawne,
he had some 
                           •
                        ase in opening his minde to Palmerin,
whose comfortable wordes were as good to him as restoratines.
Agriola on the other side escaped not frée, for her ease
was no greater when the arose, then when she sate downe,
and that must be little, hauing so daintie a dish before her to
fill her stomacke.
                     Th
                           •
                         next morning, the King and the Ladies mounted
on horseback, setting towards London, and God knowes
the Prince was not farre behinde them, liuing onely by
the regard of her, with whose rare beautie hée coulde neuer
satisfie his eyes. And as they rode thorowe a Forrest, the
King séeing the Trées so greene and delightfull, and because

the heate of the day hindered their trauaile, hee caused his
Pauilions and Tents to bee there presently pitched, and
intended to dine there vnder the coole trées. Dinner béeing
ended, hée would néedes go course the Hare, wasting the
afternoone in that pastime, and on the next day, rode to
chase a Hart which was taken in the toyles, and therewithall
a huge wilde Bore, the mightiest that euer was seene,
hauing wounded him in so many places, as the Dogs and
Bloodhoundes mig
                           •
                        t easily tracke him. Afterwarde they
rowsed▪ a fallow Déere, when the Huntsmen made ye woods
ring so brauely with winding their Hornes, and the Greyhoundes
pursued the course so spéedily: as Palemedes chose
was not comparable to this, till in the ende the Déere was
fallen. These pleasures finished, the King with his companie
returned to his Tents, shewing to the Quéene and her
Ladies the fruits of theyr pastime, saying. I promise you
Madame, I thinke these Grecian knightes excell in euerie
thing: for as in chiualrie, so this day haue they shewed
themselues excellent woodmen, as none in our trayne
may compare with them. By this time the Tables were
cou
                           •
                        red for Supper, all which time was spent in discoursing
of theyr sports: till the good night giuen on all sides, the
thrée knightes withdrew themselues into their tent. All
these pleasures made not Vrbanillo forgetfull of his Maisters
charge, wherefore practising how to accomplish it effectually,
hée founde meanes to come acquainted with the
Ladyes attending on the Princesse, and in respect the attended
on the knights of Greece, he was licenced the oftner into
theyr companie. The next morning, the king and the
knights walking into the Woods, the Dwarffe watching
time to deliuer his message, made so many walkes and returnes
before the Princesse Pauillion, as at last she espyed
him, and calling him to her, sayd: I pray thée, my Fréend, by
the 
                           •
                        aith thou bear
                           •
                        st thy Maister, tell mée the trueth of a
matter I shall aske thee. Madame (quoth the Dwarffe vpon
his knée) commaund what you please, for there is nothing

(my mistress
                           •
                         preiudice excepted) but I will truely tell
you. Which of the thrée, said the Princesse, is thy Maister?
My Maister (quoth the Dwarffe) hath not his second in all
perfections, he it is that was in the blacke Armour, who in
the battell for your Father did so manie woonderfull exployts,
as farre excéedeth the fabulous reportes of sir Gawen
or Launcelot du Lake. In sooth (quoth she) so haue I heard,
and beside thy dutie reserued to thy Maister, I sée thou canst
sette him foorth for a most hardie knight: but tell mée of
whence he is? what are his companions? and why to they
make it so daintie to be knowne? Herein Madame, sayde
he, I cannot with my dutie aunswere you, for I am restrayned
by a former promise, not to r
                           •
                        ueale the least matter that
may be hurtfull to them. Neuerthelesse, in regard of the reuerent
good will they beare you, and that I would not haue
you offended with such an abiect creature as I am, I would
gladly tell you some thing to your content, so you will promise
me on your princely worde, that what I reueale shall
neuer be disouered by you. Perswade thy selfe thereof, sayd
the Princesse, and looke what thou sayst, by my honor, shall
neuer turne to thy after harme. Then know fayre Madame,
(quoth he) that the gréene knight is of the most noble and
illustrious house in Europe, louing a Ladie as his proper
life, for whom he hath left his Countrey, parents & friends,
to come and do her seruice. The blacke knight, as I haue
alreadie tolde you, is my maister, and further then this I
may not tell you. What am I the nearer my desire, quoth
shée, by this aunswere? eyther thou shouldest haue sayde nothing,
or else thorowly satisfyed m
                           •
                        e, for now I can not bée
quieted, till thou tell me what Ladie it is, that the gréene
Knight loues so déerely: let mée not make so many intreaties,
for I promise to thée againe, by the faith of a Princesse,
that neuer shall any creature know it by my meanes. You
vrge me so farre, quoth the Dwarffe, and haue made mee
such great promises, as I am constrayned (beyond y• charge
giuen by my maister) to acquaint you with the trueth, in

respect, the fault wil be greater in you to make refusal, then
in yéelding. Resolue your selfe therefore good Madame, that
the braue gréene Knight, so rich in Armes, but more in
minde, is the Prince Trineus, Sonne to the Emperour of
Allemaigne, so passionate in loue, and so depriued of liberty,
by deuout seruice to your excellent bountie: as against both
duetie and nature, he hath deceiued his Father, feigning to
come ayde his Kinsman the King of Norway, where contrariwise,
he hath shewed himselfe his mortall enemie. And to
no other ende hath he thus offended both Father and Cozin,
then to make known his long & labourous desires, to make
you Lady and Mistresse of him and his: and such is his fear
                           •
                        
to be refused, as he endures more torments, then the martired
bodye of poore Prometheus. Bee not then the cause
swéete Ladie, that a Prince so famous, and a Knight so gentle,
shall buy his great good seruice to your Father and Coū
                        trey,
yea the most loyal loue he beares to you, with vntimelie,
vnfortunate, and cruell death. Thinke with your selfe,
is it not the highest among all honours, to be Wife to such a
Lord, and Empresse (in time) of renowned Allemaigne? Is
it not perpetuall report, to be Lady and commaundresse of
the principall parte of Europe? Let not him beare record
that a bodie so adorned, and countenaunce so milde and gracious,
can entertaine tirannie or crueltie: yea Madam such
crueltie, as if you receiue him not into your fauourable conceit,
you shall procure the death of ye truest Knight in loue,
that euer liued. The blacke knight is the renowned Palmerin d'Oliua,
the wonder of the world for 
                           •
                        alour, conquering
in Fraunce the Duke of Sauoy, in maintenaunce of his
Ladies beautie, fayre without compare: conforming his
Shéelde and Armour equall to his mourning thoughts, for
his absence from her that tryumphes in his loue. The third
knight, so adorned with white Roses, is called Ptolome,
loued by a Ladie well woorthy of him. It now remaineth
fayre Princesse, that you make the Prince Trineus equall
with them in felicitie, for you haue the mayden heade of his

loue, which with honor you may entertaine into your chast
                           •
                        
thoughtes. Thus haue I acquainted you with such a secrete,
as no creature but your selfe could haue got of mée,
and the danger to fall into your misconceit, hath made mée
such a blab: leauing all you haue heard to your gracious cō
                        struction.
Agriola, méetelie farre enough in loue before, but
now vtterly denied of longer libertie, hearing the wordes
of Vrbanillo, was surprised with such a strange alteration,
as a long time she was driuen to silence, not able to vtter
the secrete conceits of her minde, yet al length (to shadowe
her suddaine change from the Dwarfe) shée sayde. Ah my
Fréende, thou acquaintest me with matter altogither incredible,
is it possible that Trineus Sonne to the Emperor
of All
                              •••
                           aigne, would venture into this Court, considering
the mortall enmitie betwéene our Fathers? Trust mée my
Fréende I cannot credit thée. I renounce mine owne soule
s
                           •
                        ide the Dwarfe, if it be not as I haue told you: then iudge
Madame what acceptaunce shoulde be made of his seruice,
when loue to you excéedeth nature: may it not bee termed
loue surpassing all other, eyther registred in antiquities, or
present memorie? If it should be, quoth she, as then sayest,
it is beyonde my power to returne condigne recompence,
yet in respect of thy secrecie, I dare assure thée, mine owne
opinion of him hath so ouer-maistered me, as in honorable
modestie he may commaund, and I am not so well nurtured
to disagrée. But if eyther by my words thou hast gathered,
or by any chaunge of countenaunce perceiued, the suddaine
yéelding of a flexible nature: interprete it in this good sort,
that Princes afflictions make each other melt, as framed
of one mettall, which I charge thée conceale from him, as
thou regardest my word and his safetie. Pardon mee Madame,
quoth the Dwarfe, it standeth not with my allegeaunce
to obey you héerein, what a villaine might I bee accounted,
and vnworthy the name of a faithfull seruant if
I shoulde 
                           •
                        ide these happy tydings from him, to ease those
torments that euerye houre threaten his death? Yea

Madame, did my maister but thinke I would so abuse him,
well deserued I to be 
                           •
                        orne in péeces. Well, quoth she, if
thou findest time conuenient, till him, but no other I charge
thée on thy life: and withall certifie him, that I woulde not
for my Fathers Crowne he should be knowne. Feare you
not, good Madame, sayde the Dwarffe, they are alreadie so
well aduised, as none but your selfe ran any way endaunger
them. It sufficeth that the Prince vnderstande your
pleasure, which I will impart to him when the King is returned:
so kissing her hande hée departed, leauing her so
highly contented, in assurance of the loyall loue of Trineus,
as she neuer determined any other Husbande, yet woulde
shée not disclose her minde, no not to Eufemia, her secret companion,
thinking herselfe too much bewrayed, because the
Dwarffe knewe it. Soone after the Quéene sent for her, to
walke in the coole shadowe of the Trées, where not long
they stayed before the King returned, who reported what
pastime they had all that morning. The Knightes hauing
saluted the Quéene and her Ladies, Trineus saluting the
Princesse Agriola, was so transported as hée scant knewe
where he was. The Princesse likewise fixed with a stedfast
eye on him, as wounded both him and her selfe togither,
her complexion so aptly deciphering her sickenesse, as the
Prince perceyuing it, sayd to himselfe. Ah loue, hast thou
wrought so happily for mée, as my Ladie knowes my secrete
afflictions? shall I be so fortunate, as she will 
                           〈◊〉
                         remorse
on my passions? swéete hope perswades mee so, for
the often change of her diuince countenaunce, tels me there
is some mercie in working. The King and Quéene departing
into their Pauilion, Trineus and Palmerin did the like
into theirs, the Prince taking Vrbanillo aside, demaunded
if he had any good newes for him. If you will graunt mée
one thing, said the Dwarffe, I will tell you such tydings, as
cannot but content you. Demaunde what thou wilt, quoth
Trineus, and by the faith of a Prince, thou shalt not bee denied.
Then beganne the whole discourse hee had with the

Princesse, and what deuotion shée had for the recouerie of
his health. Iudge you in what rare humour the Prince now
felt himselfe, without question he imagined himselfe in a
more beautifull paradise, then euer was inuented by Epicurus
himselfe, and embracing the Dwarfe he said. Ah my good
fréend, what wilt thou y• I giue thée? tell mée what thou demaundest?
thou hast my whole life so much at thy command
as thou maist liberally share out thine owne recompence,
but séeing the beginning is so good, no doubt much better remaineth
behind. Why my Lord, ꝙ the Dwarfe, you know
I was borne to doo you seruice, commaund what you please
and I will accomplish it. Then shalt thou, said the Prince,
returne to my Mistresse againe, and kissing her hande, present
her from me this Emerald, desiring her to weare it for
my sake: with remembrance to pittie his painfull miseries,
whose life and death is onely in her hand. V
                              •
                           banillo taking
the ring, Trineus and Palmerin went to passe the time with
the King, and the Princesse at their entraunce regarding
Trineus, perceiued by his countenance that he vnderstoode
her message, for his blood was now risen chéerely in his face,
which before was suncke downe with too much langushing,
so that she imagined her selfe more happie, in béeing so be loued,
then to loue, and knew not well how to dissemble her
ioy. Ah poore Trineus, the paine thou endurest, attending
the wished houre to speake with her, far surmouneth the
torments of Leander, awaighting when Phoebus would go
bathe himself with Thetis and the Marine Goddesses, that
he might afterward swim to his affianced Heroe: and had
not shée giuen thée a better signe by her eye to aduenture, I
would haue reckoned thée more infortunate, then the be
                           •
                        r
                           •
                        
                        thed
spouse to the prisoner of Abydos. Now had Trineus
bashfully taken the Princesse by the hand, when vnhappily
one came to aduertise the king, that the hart he had 
                           •
                        hased
the day before, was now againe gotten within y• toyl
                           ••
                        ,
that if it pleased him to hunt in the morning, hee should no
doubt kill him with little labor. These newes were so welcome

to the King, that because he would the next morning
more earlie go to his past
                           •
                        ne, hée withdrewe himselfe for
that night, the Quéene and Agriola likewise departing to
their Pauillion: so that Trineus encounter was thus preuented,
and he with Palmerin returned to their T
                           •
                        nt, trusting
still on the Dwarfes diligence, that he should perfect
all things to his hearts desire, & to perswade him the more,
Palmerin thus began. I haue this hope my Lord, séeing alreadie
so manie good signes, that you cannot any way 
                           •
                        ée
deceiued in your loue: and this I would aduise you, Fortune
béeing so fauourable, & assisting you to her very vttermost,
you should n
                           •
                        t hence-foorth shewe your selfe so feminine, but
in hardie manner, reueale to the Princesse, when you shall
find her at conuenient leysure, both howe you loue her, and
what fauourable grace you expect at her hands. I must confesse,
that Letters and messages are able to doo much: but
the person béeing present, and knowing how to request, and
how to be answered, is more auailable a thousand times:
and in bréefe, no Messenger can bée like himselfe. I speake
not this, as though my Dwarfe were not faithfull, but to
this ende, that shée should receiue no occasion of displeasure.
In how manie dangers haue Gentlemen béene, only by the
bad construction of their seruants message? the readiest wit
that it cannot number them: therefore if you find oportunitie,
attend no other suter but your selfe. This councell wel
liked the Prince Trineus, wherfore he determined to speak
to her himselfe, so soone as time and leysure woulde permit
him, and in this resolution they went to take theyr rest but
the remembrance of Polinarda, would not suffer Palmerin
to sléepe, comparing his ioy in her presence, with his tormē
                        ting
passions nowe in her absence breathed foorth ma
                           •
                        i
                           •
                        
sighes, & 
                           •
                        hed manie teares, till at length hee began to slumber
wherin he thought he discerned this sight. Béeing in cō
                        panie
with the King, he sawe come foorth of a darke caue a
dreadful Lyon, who with open throat set vpon him, and assayled
him in such maner, as with his nailes & téeth he rent

his Armor, and put him in verie great daunger of his life,
so that he stroue in such sort in his sleepe, as Trineus béeing
in bed with him, awaked him, deemaunding why he strugled
so earnestly. Palmerin thus awaked desired God to
withstand all his euils, and afterward recounted to Trineus
the whole effect of his dreame, and said. It will not bée amisse
my Lord that to morrow we ride armed in the Kings
companie, for such illusions, albeit they commonly fall out
vntrue, yet can presage no good to follow. I like your counsell
well, aunswered Trineus, and that Ptolome go armed
as well as we. In the morning they arose and armed themselues,
all saue their Helmets and Launces, which their
Squires caried, and in this sort came to bid the King goodmorrow,
who meruailed much to sée them so prepared, and
doubting they had receiued some occasion of offence, demanded
what mooued them so to be armed. You know my Lord
quoth Palmerin, that a Knight ought euermore to be ready
for all aduentures, and not knowing what inconuenience
or danger may happen, before such time we shall returne againe,
we haue armed our selues to preuent the worst. The
King not discontented with this answer mounted on horsebacke,
& comming to the chase, had excellent game at Déere,
Hart, Bore and wilde Buffell, wherein hée tooke such excéeding
pleasure, as he determined to stay there fiue or sixe
daies longer. But in the place where he supposed himselfe
safe, and frée from all hazard, suddainly hée was solicited
with the chaunges of fortune, for the Quéen and her daughter
Agriola were in meruailous danger, as you shall reade
in the discourse following.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. LI.
                     
                        How the Queen of England and Agriola her daughter, were
in danger to be rauished by the giant Franarco, and of the
succour they had by Trineus, Palmerin and Ptolome.
                     
                     
                        THe king returning from the chase with his
companie, little minding any infortunate euent,
and conferring with Palmerin til they
drew néere vnto their Tents: at length they
heard a great tumult, and beheld a Squire
making towards them so fast as his Horse
could gallop. Palmerin doubting some vnhappy chaunce, and
remembring his dreame, said to the king. Neuer credit mée
my Lord, if this squire come not to you about some speciall
affaires, as well maye be gathered by his spéedie pace. At
these words the Gentlemā came to the king, reporting how
the Giant Franarco, Lord of the castle of Carbones, since his
departure came to his Tents, and from thence had violently
taken the Quéene and her Daugter Agriola, notwithstanding
the resistance of manie knights, who striuing to defend
her, lost their liues. The King with these words strooken in
wonderfull gréefe, said.
                     Ah Gentlemen, this villainous Traytor hath notoriously
wro
                           •
                        ged vs. How is it possible to recouer them againe before
they be dishonoured? Trineus and Pa
                              •
                           merin mooued
at these newes, asked the Squire, which way he went with
the Quéen and her Daughter? In truth my Lord quoth he,
I cannot tell yée which way he tooke, we all were so troubled,

and misused by his traine: except they went along the
Forrest, and so are gone to the next village. Then Palmerin
clasping on his Helmet, and snatching his Launce from his
Dwarfe, Galloped amaine after the Giant, not speaking a
word to Trineus, who accompanied with Ptolome, rode apace
after him, and as they passed by the Quéenes Tent,
they saw the Ladies and gentlewomen heauily lamenting,
especially Eufemia, the chéefe companion to the Princesse
Agriola. Diuers Knights beside armed themselues to pursue
the Giant, but Trineus not a little enraged, followed the
tracke of the horse, demaunding of all he met, if they saw the
villaine that had stolen away the Ladies. As concerning
this Giant Franarco, you must note that hee was the cruellest
tyrant and most notable fellon in all ye Realme, hauing
a dayes iourney from the Forrest where the King hunted,
a Castle so well fortefied, and furnished with munition and
all things necessarie, as in England was not the like, which
was left to him by the death of his Father, who forciblie
tooke it from a Lorde his neighbour, and diuers other places,
especially the Isle Magdalen. There succéeded 
                           •
                        e ye royall
dignitie, after the death of the elder Brother,, who (as
you haue heard) was slaine in the battaile by Palmerin, and
hée vnderstanding the death of the king of the Isle Magdalen,
was so 
                           •
                        ighlie displeased, y• although he had alwaies
before boorne allegeaunce to the king, hée nowe solemnly
swore to reuenge his Brothers death, béeing so feared of the
whole Countrey, as none durst enterprise to deale with
him. So to reuenge the slaughter of his eldest Brother,
with diuers of his kindred and Fréendes likewise 
                           •
                        layne in
the battaile, he strengthened himselfe with thirtie hardie
knightes, intending to displease the king so much as hee
coulde. And hearing y• he was comming to London, to feast
the knights that were the cause of this victory, but chéefely
him that slewe his brother, came with his cōpany this way,
in hope to finde them all vnpr
                           •
                        uided. And co
                           •
                        ming that
morning the king was gone on hunting, hée 
                           •
                        ound these hée

desired to méete withall, for the hatred he bare them, thinking
himselfe sufficiently reuenged, if hée could carry away
with him the Quéene and her Daughter: which he accomplished
to his owne desire, causing them mount vp behinde
two of his Knights. The gentlemen that were left to kéepe
the Quéene companye, offended to sée such villany offered
theyr Ladie and Mistresse, defended her so well as they
could, but all auayled not against the Giant and his power,
because they were armed, and they with the Quéene were
vnprouided, so that a number of them were slaine and sore
wounded, and more had béene, but that he feared the return
of the King, which made him in hast ride thence with his
spoyle, sending them somewhat before, and loytering behind
himselfe, to fight with anie that shuld come to reskew them.
Trineus hauing gotten the s
                           •
                        ght of them, came passing to the
Giant, saying. Stay trayterous théefe, for thou maist not so
cary her away that is worthy the greatest lord in the world.
With these words they ran fiercely togither, Trineus giuing
the Giant a sore wound on the shoulder, but the Prince
re
                           •
                        eiued such a mightie stroke from the Giant, as he fell frō
his Horse with his héeles vpward. Palmerin béeing not far
off, and doubting least the Prince had béene slaine, came in
a great rage to Franarco, saying. Monstrous enemie to menhoode,
who made thée so saucie to lay violent hands on Ladies
of such account, by my Sworde villaine, I shall make
thée déerely to pay for thy folly. So couching theyr Launces
they met togither, the Giant fayling, but Palmerin gaue
him a shrewd wound on his body, and their horsses roughly
shouldring one another, as their masters were both thr
                           •
                        wn
to the ground. Franarco (béeing heauie and vnweldie) had
such a fall, as easily he could not recouer himselfe. Palmerin
nimbly getting vp againe, gaue the Giant such a
wound on his right legge, as the flesh hung downe pittifully
to beholde. The Giant béeing not able to stande any longer
on that leg, set his knée to the ground, béeing glad to defend
the strokes of Palmerin, who reached him such a sound

blowe on the forehead with the hils of his sworde, as the
Giant fell along on his backe, when Palmerin soone setting
his foote on his breast, with his Sword deuided his heade
from his shoulders. During this fight, Trineus & Ptolome,
made after the Quéene and her Daughter, whome the Giants
Knights droue cruelly before them. Nowe was it a
matter well worthy memory, to sée the braue behauiour of
these two Knights, but cheefely of Trineus before his swéete
Mistresse, whose presence endued him with such exceeding
courage, as hée thought himselfe able to conquer the whole
world, and therefore sufficient for all them, were they as
manie more in number. But strength dooth not alwaies equall
courage, and louers thinke more then they are able to
doo, as to Trineus perill it had now fallen out, but that a
companie of the Kings Knights arriued, whereupon began
a hote encounter betwéene them, and Trineus comming to
the Knight y• had Agriola behinde him, set him soone beside
his horse, with his neck broken in his fall, so that ye princesse
getting forth of the throng, and séeing her beloued so valiant
in prowesse, b
                           •
                        twéene ioy and gréefe, she said. Ah happie
Knight, the mirror of all such as follow armes, I desire thy
fortune may prooue such, as thou & thy company may haue
victory ouer these traytors. Now may I bée well assured of
the loue thou bearest me, for which, (if we may escape this
hard brunt) perswade thy selfe not to passe vnrecompenced.
Trineus hearing the words of Agriola, was enflamed
with such a spirite of conquering desire, as breaking in among
the thickest, his strokes gaue witnes he fought for a
wife. But the Giants Knights were men of such proofe, as
the fresh s
                           •
                        pply that came were all wel-néere slaine, and
doubtlesse the rest had borne them company, but that the
King and Palmerin, with fifty Knights more, came to assist
them: for Palmerin hauing slayne the Giant, mounted on
his horse, because it was one of the goodliest y• euer he saw,
and espying the King comming with his train
                           •
                        , set on with
him, and found Trineus in great danger, because so many of

his side were slaine, but this fresh assistance brought by the
king, was the meane that all the Giants knightes were
slaughtered, and they knéeling down thanking God for their
victory. The king alighting, came and embraced the quéene,
saying. Now happy may we thinke our selues Madame, hauing
so well preuented this trecherous villaine? for neuer
did I thinke to sée you againe, but that God & these knights
so highlie befréended vs. The Quéene and her Daughter
were as yet so dismayed, in remembraunce of theyr former
daunger, as beholding so many lye slaine before them, and
ioyfull beside béeing so fortunatelye deliuered, as betwéene
these extreames they knew not what to say, but desired spéedilie
to s
                           •
                        t forward thence, which they presently did, y• king
commaunding his Nephew Cerides, to sée Franarco and his
men burned to ashes, and honorable Sepulture to be prouided
for the other. When the Quéene heard that Eranarco
was dead. Tell me my Lord (quoth she) who hath doone
such a gracious acte to kill that monstrous villaine? Euen
hee Madame, said the king, that was cause of my victorie in
battell, the knight héere in blacke Armour, to whome I am
so far indebted, as I cannot imagine any recompence sufficient
for him: and this can I not speak without great maruaile,
séeing so rare valour performed with so little danger
on his behalfe. Long may the good knight liue saide the
Quéene that hath so defended vs, and may they all thrée
prosper in their affaires, for their knightly seruice to the
Realme of England. While these spéeches endured, Trineus
béeing sore wounded, was brought betwéen two squires and
set vpon his horse, but the king, the quéene, and chéefely faire
Agriola was glad, when she heard there was no such danger
but he might well escape it. Wherefore mounting al on
horsebacke, they rode to sée the Giants bodie, which made
Agriola repute Palmerin for no lesse then his Dwarfe commended
him. Then the king commaunded to vnarme the
body, and one of his knightes should bring away his Helmet
and Shéelde, which would be tokens sufficient for him

to recouer the Castle of Garbones which he seised on, and
all other things belonging to the Giant, he sent the Count
of Bonneroy with fiue hundred men to confiscate and return
to his Maiesties vse. The Count well knowing such matters
would not easily be accomplished, if they in the Castle
should make resistance, therefore politikely he sent the Giants
Targe and Helmet, before, as sent from Franarco,
who was with the king, and they should open the gates because
they were comming thither, for witnes wherof they
shewed the giants signet of arms. The guard too cr
                           •
                        dulous,
and thinking it vnpossible for any man to conquere the giant,
opened the gates, wherupō the Count presently entred
with his power, putting all to the sword, not sparing any,
not so much as the giants yonger brother, who escaping aliue
from the battel, was the cause who Franarco dealt thus
villanously. Thus did the Count yéeld the Castle into the
Kings obeysance: remaining Captaine thereof vnder the
Kings authoritie, the like hee did in many other places,
where the people aduertised of the Giants rebellion, and
that the Castle of Garbones was taken, there was non
                           •
                        
would resist the kings commandement: whereof the Count
was not a little glad, returning as soone as he could with
the glad tidings of his successe to the Court, certifying the
King how all things happened.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. LII.
                     
                        Of the conference Palmerin had with the Princesse Agriola,
after he had slaine the Giant Franarco.
                     
                     
                        BY this time the King was come to his
Pauillion, where he caused his Chirurgions
dilligently to attend the thrée
knights, for the curing of their wounds,
who found that the prince of Allemaigne
was worst of al hurt, yet the king vnderstāding
he was in no danger of life, was
the better pacified, because he loued him déerely, and intended
to honour him so much as lay in his power, promising
not to depart thence till hee recouered his health: and because
he would preuent like mischances, he caused dilligent
watch to be made euerie night, as though he hadde lien in
field encamped with the enemie. During the Princes
sicknesse, 
                           •
                        ee was oftentimes visited by the Quéene and
fayre Agriola, not vnthankfull of the courtesie receiued
by him and his companions, and for which they requited
him with manifold thankes. Trineus estéeming himselfe
worthily recompenced, séeing that heauenly spectacle, whose
presence healed a greater wound then any hee had receiued
in fight, desiring the continuance of the outward hurts, for
comforting of his inward oppressions. And while the quéene
thus conferred wi
                           ••
                         
                        T
                              •
                           ineus, Palmerin came to the princesse
Agriola, seeing the time so lawfull and commo
                           ••••
                        s, that
hee might thorowly acquaint her with matter long enough
before premeditated, but because shee was desirous to talke
with him, she first began in manner following. I know not
sir Knig
                           •
                        t, how the king my Father will satisfie the great

seruice you haue doone him, in so many hazards to his
Realme and himselfe: but for mine owne part, I think my
selfe so bounden, that after life, which he gaue me by generation,
my deuoted soule shall remaine to honour you. And
if these occasions passed doo giue mée iust cause to thinke my
selfe happie, what lesse account may I make of that vertuous
Prince. Trineus your companion, who came into this
Countrey onely for my loue, as I am perswaded: yet doubtfull
to be lightly carried away with report, I should accept
it for more sound assurance, so please you to speake the truth
herein. Madame (quoth Palmerin) if I haue doone any seruice
to the King or you, it is rewarded with much more thē
sufficient, séeing it pleaseth you to make such account thereof,
and I promise you, you haue two knights wholly at commaund
for the loue of the third, who is so confidently 
                           •
                        owed
your friend and seruant, as no man in the world can bee
more, & this is he that lieth wounded in his bed, the princely
sonne and heire of the Emperor of Allemaigne, in which report
my Dwarfe hath not deceiued you. And giue my word
this credit. (Madame) that since the time hee first heard
of your excellent beautie, béeing then in Fraunce, he neuer
had other determination, but to spend his life in your gracious
seruice, and making refusall of many faire Ladies, especially
of Lucemania, daughter to the most christian king
of Fraunce, set downe this princely and commendable resolution,
neuer to espouse any other but you, so it may stand
with your liking to accept him for your husband: think then
aduisedly swéete madam, of the incomparable happines ordai
                           •
                        ed
for 
                           •
                        ou, and stand not in your owne light to loose so
good fortune. In truth my Lord quoth the princesse, I were
well worthy to be reputed among the number of most har
                           •
                        
harted and ingratefull Ladies, if I shuld not loue the prince
Trineus, were it but for the danger he remaines in for me,
and the vnfaigned loue which you say he heares m
                           •
                        e. And
thus farre I presume my Lorde on your credit, that if it
were otherwise, you would not disguise the 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        
this 
                           ••
                        ner, much lesse deceiue such a Lady as I am, which
(notwithstanding) would bee to you but a slender conquest.
Therefore you may assure him on my behalfe, that the loue
I beare him is more then he thinks, and very far excéedeth
his iudgement, as the proofe hereof (in time) shall deliuer
true testimonie. Madame, quoth Palmerin, his onely desire
in this world you haue faithfully vnderstoode, in you then it
consisteth to preuent the contrarie, by mercifull regarde of
his afflictions, and your presence will appease the anger of
the Emperour your father, in that so nobly he would enterprise
                           •
                        
(though against his will) to ayde the King your Father
onely for your loue. And this will be the meane that
the conceiued pleasure of the Fathers, shall conclu
                           •
                        e in
the happie coniunction of their Children. My Lorde, quoth
the Princesse, I wil do what shall please my father and mother
to command me, and no otherwise, considering the danger
I may fall into by yéelding my honour to any preiudiciall
occasion. Palmerin who had no other feare but to bee
knowne what himselfe was, thus answered. I am perswaded
madame, that your iudgement is so perfect, that to attaine
a place of such dignitie, and a husband so royall as the
Prince Trineus, you will not stand 
                           〈◊〉
                         friuolous tearmes,
nor be carried away with any light or feminine feares, séeing
that (setting apart these doubts) you shall worthily accōplish
the thing which shall make you the most renowned
Lady vnder the Occident. I pray you Sir Palmerin, quoth
she, referre this talke to some other time, for the answere
of such a high and weightie matter, deserueth to be excogitated
with leysure, for oftentimes we sée, that such actions
sodainely and slightly performed, causeth more repentaunce
afterward then is expected. Yet thus farre I venture, and
so faithfully perswade him, that he is the onely Prince in
the world I would accept for my husband, if they were so
agréed to whom God, nature, and dutie hath bounde mée:
and to let him vnderstand my wiliing desire towardes him,
I will speake to him my selfe, as soone as the Quéene is departed.

Not long after, the Quéene returned to the King,
leauing her Daughter with two of her Ladyes to comfort
the prince, whereupon Palmerin taking her by the hande,
brought her to the bedde side where Trineus lay, to whome
she made very curteous reuerence, & trembling with modest
bashfulnesse, said. How fare ye gentle knight? trust mee
your hard fortune doth greatly displease mee, and if I could
beare part therein, beléeue me I would gladly endure the
paine: for it is good reason that the ca
                           •
                        ser of the harme,
should haue a portion of the torment, gratifying you with a
Maidens thankes, for your good assistance without any desert.
Trineus was so rauished with her presence, and hearing
her speake so friendly, in whom consisted the safetie of
his life, as hee could not vtter the ioy hee conceiued: which
the Princesse well noted and Palmerin likewise, who aunswered
her in this manner. It cannot be madame but my
Lord Trineus will soone amend, hauing the sodaine medecine
so néere him, that is onely able to helpe him: and
with these wordes he left them both together, to acquaint
each other with their secret afflictions: when the Prince
giuing a gréeuous sigh, saide. Faire madame, to accomplish
what you commanded the first day I sawe you, I did my
beuoire to execute the effect of the charge, albeit not so sufficiently
as I could wish: yet since that time I neuer enioyed
one minute of rest, till this instant, when mine eyes
delighted with your swéete presence, gaue hope to my heart
of further comfort. For this onely cause (faire mistresse)
haue I forsaken my Parents and countrey, regarding nothing
more then this present happinesse, whereby my
woundes are cured, my spirit contented, and my heart from
all daungers sufficiently recouer
                           •
                        d, so that no gréefe can
now molest me, when your gracious fauour thorowly confoundeth
all. And nowe might I imagine my misfortune beyonde
all other, were not this fearefull doubt left to crosse
it, that scanning disdaine should be hid in such rare perfections,
as oftentimes it commeth so to passe: therefore I beséech

you Madame, may it stand with your liking to resolue
all doubts by your direct opinion, and héerein shall I
account my selfe more honoured, then were I monarch of
the whole worlde. Loue hauing then so wounded the princesse,
as for a while she was driuē to silence, at length withdrew
the passio
                           •
                        , and caused her returne this answere. Alas
my Lord, I was (ere this) so certaine of your affection towardes
me, in respect of the dangerous trauailes endured
for my sake, as you néede not séeke any other prooues, then
what mine owne hart was fully resolued on: and so I continue
still, expecting the day to make vs both fortunate,
which I would haue you as yet dissemble, least crooked mishap
any way preuent vs. As she was procéeding in her discourse,
the Quéene entred the tent againe, by which occasion
Trineus could not say what he intended, wherefore taking
her secretly by the hand, wrong her fingers with such
a trembling passion, as all the night following he lay meditating
on his gooddesse Agriola, and the comfortable answere
shee gaue him. If the young prince were in such torments,
his Lady beare him companie, thinking on the spéeches
past betwéene her and Palmerin, and this euening
the Dwarfe (not compassing before to speake with Agriola)
presented her with the Emeralde from the Prince,
which she kindly receiuing, in recompence thereof sent him
a fayre Diamond, rewarding the Dwarfe liberally for his
paines, who among the rest of his talke, highly commended
the vertues of the Prince, which increased her loue so
confidently, as she assured him of the Princesse loue, that
death could not change her setled affection. Trineus fully
resoluing héereon, gaue such chéerefull phisicke to his heart,
and the Chururgions such dilligence to his woundes, as
within seauen or eight daies he was able to beare armor:
whereupon the King departed thence towardes London,
where the strange knights were entertained with meruailous
honor, the Lords, Knights, Burgesses, Officers and
other Citizens, welcomming them with great 
                           •
                        ampe and

royaltie, saying. Welcome are the knights that deliuered
the Quéene and her Daughter, from the cruell Giant
Franarco, with diuers other salutations, whereat Pa
                              •
                           merin
and his friendes were greatly abashed. Passing on to the
Pallace, all the way they were still presented with rare
shewes and deuises, and the Knights lodgings were appointed
in very stately Chambers in the Court, causing open
Court to be kept for eight dayes space, for the honour
of these knights, and entertainement of all friendly commers,
in all which time there wanted no sports & delights,
as such times rnd occasions do necessarily require. Nowe
came all the Princes, Lords, and renowned Knights in
England to the Court, except the Duke of Gaule, who excused
himselfe by the warre in his owne prouince, which
yet was not the chéefest cause of his absence: but the shame
hée reputed to himselfe for his foyle in Fraunce, when
hée entred the Combatte for the beautie of the fayre princesse
Agriola. These knights thus worthily intreated,
they were at no time denied entrance into the King and
Quéenes Chambers, by which meanes Trineus might
when himselfe pleased, conferre with the Princesse, till this
instant among all other, the prince thus began to his Ladie
and Mistresse. You may easily presume swéete madam,
what secret Conbattes I continually endure for your
loue, and no helpe is expected but the onely hope of your
fauour, which as you haue promised to my especiall friend
Sir Palmerin, I doubt not but you will perseuer in that
gracious opinion, and what promise hee hath made of my
seruice to you, thinke not but I obserue with religious
care & deuotion, though not sufficient to equal your deserts,
yet because ingratitude shal not insult against me. So many
thanks (quoth the Princesse) I returne you my Lord, as
good opinions can bee imagined betwéene vs both, and
accounting you for my friende, which is a higher degrée,
I héere discharge you of my seruice, and (mine honour
guarded from blame) I shall iudge my selfe happie to yéelde

you any content, which I will fulfill, notwithstanding any
daunger towardes mee. But I praye you tell mée my Lord,
what is the intent of your loue in this action. Madame,
(quoth the Prince) Syr Palmerin, who is nowe come to
beare vs companie, shall crediblie enforme you, so please
you to rest contented therewith. Palmerin thus entred, and
imagined theyr talke was not about affayres of Merchandise,
wherefore hée sayde to the Princesse. God spéede you
Madame, pardon mée, I should call you Ladie, and Wife to
the Prince of Allemaigne, for I doubt not but you haue
chosen him your Husband in heart. Agriola blushing and
smyling 
                           •
                        eereat, made no aunswere: Wherefore Palmerin
went forward in this manner. In faith Madame if you
haue doone so, I would counsell you to accomplish it presen
                           •
                        
                        lie,
and prouide to go with vs to Allemaigne, where the
Emperour will entertaine you with such gracious fauour,
as you will not loose if you beare the minde of a Princesse:
beside, you shall be the meane of euerlasting peace betwéene
the King your Father and his Maiestie. To which wordes,
Agriola thus discréetly answered.
                     I promise you my Lord, there is no Prince thys daye ly
                        
                           •
                        ing,
whome I would more gladlie accept for my Husband,
then the Prince Trineus: notwithstanding, for mée to departe
without the knowledge of the King or Quéene my
Parents, is an acte in (mine opinion) farre dissenting from
duetie and honest reporte. Therefore my Lord, louing myne
honour as you say you doo, I pray you let our behauiour
be with better wisdome, least we both fall into dangers not
r
                           •
                        couerable. Palmerin perceyuing Agriola contrary to the
most necessary occasion, vsed such arguments, and played so
well the Oratour, that the poore Princesse had no power
to resist: considering the great loue shee bare the Princ
                           •
                        
                        Trineus, which made her yeelde more easily to his perswasions,
so that shée agréed to accomplish their determination,
and depart with them towards the Realme of Allemaigne.
T
                              •
                           ineus ioyes nowe excéeded measure, and Palmerin (for)

his sake) was no lesse contented, in respect hee should the
sooner sée his mistresse Polinarda, whose very rememberaunce
gaue him life, as the ayre doth the Camelion. But
fortune beholding each thing prosper as liked their fancies,
woulde nowe néedes beginne to play her Pagant,
crossing them with the vnhappiest stratageme, that euer
could happen to so noble Princes, as in the sequell shall bée
laxgely discoursed. They little expecting such a chaunce,
are earnestly following their serious enterprise, which was
secretly to carrie Agriola with them into Allemaigne, for
which purpose they prouided shippes and skilfull Pilots
to conduct them, conueying all their necessaries abroade, at
what time this aduenture following happened in the Court
of England.
                  
                  
                     Chap. LIII.
                     
                        Howe in the time of this pleasant and great assembly, there
came a Damosell to London, who desired the king to do
her iustice against a knight of his owne Court.
                     
                     
                        DUring the time that this royall company
continued at London, minding nothing
but pleasures, pastimes, and
courtly recreations: there came a 
                           •
                        amosell
so faire as might be, accompanied
with two auncient knights, and a
lustie Champion brauely armed, with
sixe Squires attending on him. The Damosell entring
the Pallace, came before the King, and on her knee

began
                           •
                        e in this manner. Dreade Lorde, hauing long time
hearde your good iustice towardes your Subiects, without
any fauour or exception of persons: I am the more bolde,
(albeit he that hath iniuried mee, is reputed for a Man of
good quallity, and holdeth place of authority in your Court)
humbly to craue of your highnesse one request, against the
most false and disloyall Knight that euer was: whom when
I but remember, more weightie and gréeuous oppressions
fall vpon my soule, then this wretched body of mine is able
to endure.
                     Damosell saide the King, I shall right gladly reléeue
your heauines, if it ly in my power to doo it: therefore tell
mée the cause of your offence: and what hée is that hath so
wronged you. Knowe my good Lorde (quoth shée) that I
loued a Knight so déerelye, as contrary to the lyking of my
Parents and Fréendes, and two much forgetfull of mine
owne selfe, I tooke him to my Husband, thinking he loued
mée so faithfully, as his shewes and behauiour gaue
demonstration. But the Traytour had no other meaning,
then to beguile and falsely deceyue mee, for after I hadde
made him Lorde of mee & mine, and brought him to a Castle
of mine, so strong and fayre as anye in your highnesse
dominions: the Traytour expulsed mée thence violently,
pretending that wée were so néere allyed, as he might no
longer account mee for his Wife. Since which time, notwithstanding
all the humble intreaties I haue made: hée
will neither restore mée my goods and possessions againe,
nor yet accepte mee as his espoused Wife. Therefore I beséeche
you my Lord, as becomes a good & vertuous Prince,
for the honour of nobilitie and regarde of womanhoode, you
will take pittie on a poore distressed Ladye, and that in such
a rightfull demaunde, you woulde doo mée iustice, which I
had sooner demaunded, but coulde not by the occasions of
your troublesome warres.
                     Ladye, sayde the King, as yet you haue not named the
man that hath offered you this surpassing iniury. My Lord

(quoth shée) this is the man in your presence, name Miseres,
a vile Traytour, and publique adulterer. And if he dare
affirme that I haue spoken vntruth, I haue héere brought
a Knight with mée, who by Combatte shall make him confesse
his falshood and treason, so please your Maiestie to fauour
my request. Miseres, (quoth the King) how answere
you this accusation and offence, wherewith this Lady chargeth
you? Miseres béeing suddainly driuen into this dumpe,
knewe not well what to saye: yet at length (with humble
reuerence) hée thus beganne. My soueraigne Lorde, if credite
may be giuen to the first countenaunce of accusations,
without hearing howe the partye accused can iustifie himselfe,
I doubt not but your Maiestie will presentlye condemne
mee: but when the matter is well debated and discided,
they which séemed at first vnreprooueable, are found
malicious and slaunderous persons, and the accused, innocent
and frée from blame, as heere your highnesse shall
most plainely beholde. The matter whereof this Ladye
detecteth mée, is forged, and most villainously inuented:
for to mée belonged the Castle shée quarrelles for, discended
from my Predecessours, to whom I am the true, lawfull,
and legitimate inheritour. True it is that this dissembling
Womanne, by swéete spéeches, feminine guiles, and
secrete deceits, oftentimes practised to winne mée for her
Husbande: but knowing her behauiour such as beséemed
not a Woman of modestie and vertue, I would not héere
her, much lesse consent to match with her. And this is the
cause of her complaint, in hope that you, (béeing aboue all
other Princes most b
                           •
                        nigne and honourable) will constraine
mée to wedde her, in respecte of your absolute authoritie,
as the duetifull obedience wherein I am bounde.
When the Knight which came with the Lady, heard Myseres
blame her in this sorte, hee stepped before the King
with these words.
                     It is great follie (my Lord) in Miseres, to deny a matter
so apparantly knowne, although, if it were put to the

iudgement of honeste personnes, his common good reporte
might cause him be beléeued: but the poore Ladye desires
that her right may bée cleared by Combatte, wherein let
him confounde her if hée can, or else receiue rewarde for his
notorious offence. On her behalfe, therefore my Lorde, I
saye and will maintaine, that Myseres is a most disloyall
Traytour, and his mouth shall confesse it, or this day will
I take his heade from his bodie. Myseres feeling himselfe
somewhat touched, grewe into great anger, and albeit the
shame he did the Ladie deliuered him culpable, and made
him doubt the issue of the Combatte: yet in meruaylous
choller hée aun
                           •
                        wered the Knight, that hée falselye belyed
him, and was readie to make proofe thereof in Combatte,
if it pleased the King so to appoint it. And I doubt not (quoth
hée) to make thée paye for thy rashnesse, and force thée confesse
thy lacke of discretion, in giuing credite to the trothlesse
complaints of this deceitfull Woman. Then was it
ordained▪ that this difference should bée tryed by Armes:
wherupon the Ladies Knight spake thus to the King. Séeing
it hath pleased your Maiestie, to graunt the Fielde to
Myseres and mée, may it please you (as it is the custome) to
commaunde, that he deliuer hostages: to the ende, if hée
bee vanquished, the Castle maye bee deliuered into your
handes, to deliuer it in iustice where it appertaines. Good
reason, saide the King, and therefore Myseres, you must before
you enter the Fielde, accomplishe what the Knight in
equitie hath demaunded.
                     Then Myseres called one of his Brethren, whom he required
to stande as his hostage: and doubt not before the
Sunne be sette, but I will discharge my selfe & my pledge,
with which wordes hee departed the Hall to arme himselfe:
but because the daye was too farre spent, the matter
was deferred till the next morning. The King & his Lords,
séeing the Ladies Knight in such resolute assurance, merueiled
of whence and what he was, for none there knewe
him but Palmerin, who neither coulde gesse assuredly what

he was, but by the golden Sunne in the Azure sheeld, which
made him remember that at the Ioustes in Fraunce the perillous
Combate without victorie on either side, was fought
betwéene him and this knight. Palmerin being glad to sée
the man he long looked for, and purposing now to bee fully
reuenged on him, secretly went forth of the hall, commaunding
one of his Squires, to conuey his horse and armour the
next morning out of the Citie, because if he vanquished Miseres,
at his returne be intended to fight with him, or if Miseres
had the better, yet he should not depart thence againe
with life.
                     Nowe you must vnderstande, that this Knight which
came with the Ladie, was the Knight of the Sunne, named
Frysoll, who euer since the Combatte betwéene Palmerin
and him, remained with the Duke of Gaule, and was of
him highly honoured for his woorthie chiualrie. Of whom
when this distressed Ladie heard, shée made her complaint
to him of the wrong Myseres had done her, and Frysol pittying
her case, promised to ayde her in recouerie of 
                           •
                        er right:
and so came with her to the King of Englands Court, to the
great gréefe of the Duke of Gaule, who made Frysol promise
him to returne againe after the Combatte: but Frysol
was more desirous thereof then the Duke, in respect of
his fayre Syster, because hée was specially beloued of her.
Thus Palmerin following his enterprise, feared to bée preuented,
because the Féeld was appoynted by the King, in
the same place where hée intended to méete with Frysol,
and beside, Palmerin and the Duke of Norgalles were ordained
Iudges of the field, which hée would not willingly
haue taken vpon him, doubting by that meane to bee hindered
of his other determination. The time being come that
the Knights should to the Combatte, the King and the Ladyes
came to their Scaffolds, and the two Iudges were placed
in their Tent, accompanied with many Princes and honourable
persons.
                     After that the Heraulds bad commaunded the Champions

to doo theyr deuoyre, then they clasped their helmets▪
and fetching their carrire, mette with such puissaunce as
Miseres brake his Launce on Frysols Shéelde, not mouing
him in his Saddle: but Frysol driuing his Launce through
Miseres bodie, caused the Traytour to fall deade to the
earth. Then he allighting, and opening Miseres Helmette,
sawe no life in him, came to the Iudges, saying. You may
nowe perceyue my Lordes, whether hee that offered this
Ladie such villanie, hath receyued his due desert, or no, if
there yet remaine any thing else to do for recouering of her
right, I am here ready to maintaine her cause. Palmerin,
who was not verie well pleased with this victorie, answered.
Knight, you haue done enough at this time, pray that other
affayres may proue as prosperous to you héereafter, and
in anger went forth of the field, commaunding the bodie of
Miseres to be brought thence, which was afterward interred
with great honour.
                     
                        Frysol hauing thus vanquished Miseres, the Ladie for
whom he entred the Combatte, fell on her knées before the
King, desiring him to surrender the castell which Myseres
vniustly detained from her. In sooth Ladie, quoth the King,
it is reason you should haue iustice, and your owne deliuered
you, but know you his name that defended your quarrell?
My Lord (quoth she) in concealing his name, I should
offer him great wrong, concealing the bountie and prowesse
of the man, which hath not béene sparingly shewed heretofore,
in presence of the Duke of Gaule, agaynst the King of
Norway, whose armie was 
                           •
                        icomfited by the worthy valour
and pollicy of this knight, who calleth himselfe by the name
of Frysol, the Duke of Gaule bringing him foorth of Fraunc
                              •
                           
                        
at his last voyage, and euer since hath so dearly loued him,
as he were his owne naturall brother. I promise you Ladie,
sayde the King, you made no ill choyse of your Knight,
for I haue heeretofore heard of his actions, and am not a
little glad that I know him, wishing he were of my Court,
because a King accompanyed with such persons, must

néedes imagine his Countrie happie. And in respect he is
so braue a Champion, it is impossible but hée shoulde bée a
wyse and vertuous Knight, wherefore I pray you cause
him to come to mee: which shée presently did. And hauing
saluted his Maiestie with honourable reuerence, the King
embraced him with these wordes. Woorthie Sir, you are
most heartily welcome: I coulde wish you were one of my
Knights, in respect that my Court should bee the more honoured,
and I might requite your paines better then I can
on a sudden.
                     Mightie Prince, (quoth Frisol) in assisting this distressed
Ladie, I haue done but my dutie: but if I could any way
do your highnesse seruice, I knowe no Prince liuing, for
whom I wold more gladly employ my selfe. And at this
time vrgent affayres excuse me from staying héere any longer:
neuerthelesse, I intreate you my good Lord, (if it may
stande with your fauourable liking) to repute mee among
the number of your Souldiours and Seruaunts. If it must
néedes be so, sayde the King, you shall doo what please you,
yet will I reckon you amongst those to whom I owe continuall
loue and affection. And although the death of Myseres
doth somwhat grée
                           •
                        e me, because I made some estimation
of him: yet for your sake shall I deliuer the Ladie her
Castell, which you haue conquered with so knightly chi
                        
                           •
                        alrie.
Frysol humblie thanked his Maiestie, and departed
with the Ladie, which way they came: but Palmerin very
much offended at his departure, and earnestly desiring to be
reuenged on him, commaunded his Dwarffe to marke well
which way they went.
                     The Dwarffe diligently fulfilling his Maisters charge,
returned and told him which way they tooke: wherevpon, he
beeing desirous to follow, without giuing any knowledge
thereof to his companions, left Trineus to conferre with his
fayre Mystresse Agriola, and departed the C
                           •
                        urt so secretly,
as neither the Prince or Ptolomie suspec
                           •
                        ed any thing.
And so accompanied with the Dwarffe Vibanillo, 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         c
                           •
                        me

to the place where his Squire stayed with his Armour,
where, when hée 
                           〈◊〉
                         armed, hee mounted on horsebacke
thus speaking to his man. Returne you to the Cittie, and
there expect my comming: as for thée Vrbanillo, thou
shalt say to Tryneus, that hée must pardon mee, though I
did not acquaint him with the cause of my departure: which
I was more enforced to doe then he thinkes on: ne
                           •
                        erthelesse,
pray him take no paine to enquire after mee, because
I doubt not to returne verie shortly, although not so soone
as hee woulde: yet pray him to vse so little speech thereof
as may be. The like mayst thou say to Ptolome, and to
them both commende me most heartily: With this charge
to you both, that vppon payne of your lyues, neither of
you doo followe mée, nor cause anie other to séeke after
mee.
                     So taking his Launce, hee galloped that way which
his Dwarffe shewed him they were gone, and he with the
Squire returned to the Cittie, making verie sorrowfull lamentation,
because they thought their maister woulde returne
no more, in that hée would not bee knowne whither
hee went, yet would they bewray nothing theyr maister
had forbid
                           •
                        e them. Trineus and Ptolome were maruellous
sorowfull, especially the Prince, who without the Dwarffes
assurance of his Maisters short returne, had followed to
seeke him: yet not thorowlie contented with Vrbanillo
                              •
                           
                        
perswasions, the King came to comfort him, saying. You
must thinke good Sir, that your noble Fréend is gone about
some straunge aduenture, for you knowe he neuer enterprised
any thing, but it returned him to honour. If héeretofore
for the loue of his Ladie, hée shewed himselfe without his
Péere in chiualrie, thinke you be will not regarde his reputation,
and premeditate his actions before hee runne to
farre in daunger? Content your selfe I pray you, for if his
returne be not the sooner, I will cause such prouision to bée
made, as hée shall be found againe. The Princesse Agriola
likewise intreated him not to bee displeased at the absence

of Palmerin, for with the helpe of God and his Fréendes,
quoth shée, his returne will cause as much ioy, as his departure
dooth gr
                           •
                        efe. All this coulde hardly content Trineus,
for hée dreamed in his sléepe, that the Knight which slewe
Myseres, was hée against whom Palmerin entred the Combat
in Fraunce, at what time they could not ouercome each
other. And remembring what ill will Palmerin bare him,
vehemently suspected that for this cause hee followed him,
which imagination somewhat comforted him, and he reputed
the Knight vnwise if hée medled any more with Palmerin.
                     
                  
                  
                     Chap. LIIII.
                     
                        How after the death of Myseres, Palmerin followed Frysol,
whom he had slaine, but that a Damosel
                              •
                            intreated his life.
                     
                     
                        AL that day Palmerin trauailed, and most
part of the next, yet coulde hee heare no
tidings of the Lady and Frisol, which
made him ryde in great melancholly,
till at length méeting with a Damosel,
mounted on a goodlie Palfray very richly
harnessed, of whome he demaunded, if
shee mette not a Knight armed, who bare in a Shéelde
of Azure a Golden Sunne, and with him a Ladye attended
on by manye Squires. Truelie Sir, quoth the Damosell,
if you will graunt mée two requests that I shall demaunde,
I will bring you to him you séeke for, before to
morrowe the third houre of the day. Palmerin who was
woonderfull desirous to finde his enemie, granted to anye

thing shee woulde desire: on condition (quoth he) that you
shewe mee the Knight. Followe mée then sayde the Damosell,
for I will accomplishe what I haue promised. So
rode they togither, and among other speeches, Palmerin
asked her if shee knewe the Knight, and what his name
was? The Damosell aunswered, that shée knewe not the
Knight, but shée was very well acquainted with the Ladye
in his company, and this night (quoth shee) they mind
to lodge at a Castle of mine Auntes. in the euening they
arriued within the sight of the Castle, where they alighted
from their Horsses, and entred a little thicket, for feare of
béeing séene, and the Damosell hauing a flagon of Wine,
and a pastie of redde Déere in a maunde at her saddle bowe.
Palmerin and shée refreshed themselues therewithall: but
all that night coulde not Palmerin settle himselfe to sleepe,
watching the castle Gate, least in the time of his sléeping
his enemie should escape him. The next morning, so soone
as the breake of day appeared, Frysol came foorth of the
Castle with his companye, wherefore Palmerin not a litle
gladde, saide to the Damosell. Now (Lady) is your promise
perfourmed, for this is the Knight I séeke: if therefore
you will any thing with mée, I must intreat you to followe
mee, for I would be very lothe that he shoulde escape
me.
                     With which wordes hée mounted on horsebacke, galloping
after Frysol so fast as the Horse coulde away, and ouertaking
him, sayde. Stay a while Sir Knight, thinke
you to passe away in such sorte? haue you forgot your words
at Parris, to the Knight that guarded the Duke of Sauoyes
Tent? now is the time I hope to correcte your presumptiō,
when thou shalt well perceiue, that thou neyther deseruest
to be Seruant to the Princesse Polinarda, nor art worthy
to talke of her honourable name. Frysol thus slaying,
kn
                           •
                        we by Palmerins words, that it w
                           •
                        s hée against whome
he fought the Combat
                           •
                         in Fraunce, whereupon he aunswered.
                     
                        Truely Sir Knight, I haue not as yet forgotten what
I then sayde, nor is the beautie of Polinarda, or my loue
to her so little, that my desire to doo her seruice shoulde not
bée now remembered, nor will I forbeare to confesse it stil,
for feare of thée or any other whatsoeuer. And if thou hast
                           •
                        
sought me foorth in this quarrell, thou hast found me to readie
to defend it: as I will more willingly choose to die, then
denye any parte of my duetie to that gracious Princesse.
                     
                        Palmerin béeing so angrye, as hee woulde multiply
no more wordes, encountred his enemie so valyantly, as
they brake theyr Launces, and yet coulde not vn
                           •
                        orse each
other, then dr
                           •
                        wing their swordes, they laide so cruelly
vppon their bodies, as theyr shéeldes being broken, theyr
Helmets battered, their Armour defaced, and their fl
                           •
                        sh
so gr
                           ••
                        uously mangled, as neither of them both could iudge
who was likest to winne the victorie. Till at length Frisol
                              •
                           
                        
Horse fayling vnder him, fell to the grounde, and hée so
weakened with his great losse of blood, as hée coulde not
recouer himselfe, before Palmerin came to him, thinking to
haue parted his head from his shoulders with his swoord,
which when the Ladye sawe, for whome Frysol had slaine
Myseres, shée fell into most pittifull acclamations, not sparing
her louelye tresses of hayre, but with great impatience
renting them violentlye, made the ayre to eccho her
lamentable complaints. Which the Damosell seeing that
guyded Palmerin, and mooued with compassion of her excéeceeding
gréefes: fell on her knées before Palmerin, intreating
him to giue ouer the fight. But he, feyning that hee
heard her not, because Frysol with rough strugling had got
on foote againe: charged him with such violent strokes, as
Frisol (beeing of inuincible courage) requited him with
as woorthy chiualrie.
                     Againe the Damosel came on her knées to him, intreating
him to giue ouer the fight, saying. You know my Lord,
that before you came hither, you promised me two requests
and this I make one of them, that you continue no longer

Combatte against this Knight, and in so dooing I shall acquite
you of part of the promise which you made mee. Palmerin
cha
                           •
                        ing like a furious Lyon, aunswered. I pray you
Damosell aske some other thing, for in this matter, of force
you must pardon mée. In sooth saide the Damosell, if you
denie mée my demaunde, I will complaine at the King of
Englands Courte, and there will I declare you periured, for
ill it beséemes such a Knight as you are, to make promise
to a Lady and not obserue it. By God Lady, saide Palmerin,
you doo me great wrong, in with-holding mee from
reuenge on him, whom aboue all menne in the worlde, I
hate most deadlye, vnhappye was the houre wherein I
mette you: and so mounting vppe on horsebacke, he galloped
awaye in very great anger. When the other sorrowfull
Lady sawe, that Palmerin was gone, and hadde left
her Knight, with great ioye shée embraced the Damosell
that had procured it, thanking her for 
                           •
                        héelding the life of
a most noble Knight, for which courtesie shee remained
bound to her during life.
                     What I haue doone, (quoth the Damosell) is for the
loue of you and this Knight, swearing to you by the fayth
of a Gentle womanne, that I haue another thing to aske of
the Knight which is gone, that concerneth mée very neerelie.
Notwithstanding, your teares mooued mée
                           •
                        with such
compassion, that I stande in daunger to loose what I shall
neuer rec
                           •
                        uer, yet in respecte the cause was so honest and
vertuous, I doo not repent what I haue doone: but because
he remaineth indebted to mée for another request, I must
néedes leaue you and followe him, so mounting vppon her
Palfraye, shée rode after Palmerin with all the haste shee
possiblye coulde make. And in her iourney wée will leaue
her, returning to Frysol, whose woundes béeing very dangerous,
the Lady bounde them vppe so well as shée coulde,
till they came at theyr next Lodging, where by good Fortune
was a Lady so well séene in Chirurgery, as in shorte
time she cured his woundes whole and sounde. Frysol so

well recouered, departed thence with the Ladie, because
the thirde day following they shoulde bee at the Castell,
whither alreadie was come Hermes, one of the King of
Englands Knights, béeing sent by his Lord the King to deliuer
the Ladie her right: which Hermes did according to
his charge, entertained the Ladie honourably, deliuered
her the Keyes of the Castell, and commaunded all the
Subiects to reuerence the Ladie, which they refused not to
doe, but were glad of her comming. For ioy hereof, were
very solemne feastes prepared, and the Ladie recounted to
Hermes, Commissioner for the king, howe Frysol fought
the Combate by the way, agaynst the Knight of the blacke
armour: whereby Hermes presently knewe, that it was
the stra
                           •
                        nge Knight, who had left the Court, vnknowne
to his Companions, or any of his Friendes, whereof hée
was not a little glad, because hée iudged that these newes
woulde bee welcome to the King. Wherefore so soone as
he had accomplished his charge, and seated the Ladie quietly
in her Castell, hee departed, intending to follow Palmerin
till he found him, trauayling the way was assigned him
by the Ladie.
                     
                        Frisol stayed there with the Ladie till hee had perfectly
recouered his health, and then without any other recompenc
                           •
                        
for his paynes, but onely a Horse, because his owne
was slaine, and a newe Armour, his owne béeing spoyled,
hée returned to the Duke of Gaule, who reioyced greatly to
haue his companie. But when the Duke vnderstood how
discourteously he had béene vsed by the blacke Knight, who
was so highly fauoured in the English Court, hée deuised
by all the meanes possible to bée reuenged on him: so that
béeing in a Castell on the Frontiers of his Duchie, yet
within the King of Englandes dominion, hée vnderstoode
the blacke Knight should passe that way, because he coulde
not else returne to the Court. Now perswading himselfe
for resolute vengeaunce, hée pitched his Tents in a fayre
Medow neare a Bridge, and there placed twelue knights,

the most hardie and valiant men in all his Dukedome, who
should maintaine this order: that no Knight shoulde passe
ouer the Bridge, vnlesse hée entred Combate with those
twelue Knightes one after another, and such as were vanquished,
shoulde submitte themselues to the Dukes mercy,
eyther for their deliueraunce, or to remaine his prysoners,
and the horsse of the partie foyled, should belong to the conquerer,
but if they were dismounted, the passenger shoulde
go on his iourney, and take theyr Horsses with him. Thys
aduenture thus established, many good Knights were ouer
come, because it was a verye harde matter to vanquishe
twelue Knights, and yet escape: But the Duke tooke no
little pleasure heerein, who detained Frysol more by constraint
then otherwise, for his anger so vehemently encreased
against Palmerin, as no delight or pleasure coulde
expiate his reuenging desires.
                  
                  
                     Chap. LV.
                     
                        How Palmerin went with the Damosell to accomplish the
promise he made her, and what befell him.
                     
                     
                        
                           PAlmerin (as you haue heard) departed
from the Damosell in a rage, because he
coulde not execute what he intended,
wherefore hee deuised to deale some other
way, and to single foorth Frisol in
such conuenient place, as one of them
should dye before they departed. And as
he was imagining some other way to ouertake Frysol, the
Damosel had now againe recouered his company, saying. I
pray you Sir Knight, conceiue no il opinion of me, for hindering

you from killing your enemie, whome you haue left in
very great ieoperdy, considering what bountie and courage
is in him, and which your selfe perhaps will bee sorye for.
Wherefore I pray you forget this displeasure, & determin
                           •
                        
to fulfill what you haue promised, which if you will doo, you
must go with me.
                     Beléeue me Damosell, saide Palmerin, you shewed but
little courtesie, so often hindering me from the thing, which
aboue all other in this worlde most tormenteth mée. What
vnhappye bodye are you? but more vnhappye the houre I
mette with you? but séeing it is reason I shoulde kéepe my
promise, leade the way, and I will not faile to follow you.
So rode they on, and for foure dayes space hée woulde not
speake one word to her, and fayne he would haue left her
company, but that he could not with honor forsake her. The
next daye, as they rode by a Riuers side, Palmerin espyed a
Knight standing with a Bowe and arrow in his hand, which
he let flye at his Horse & killed him. Palmerin impacient by
remembraunce of Frysol, and angrye that the Knight had
thus killed his Horse, made towardes him so fast as hee
coulde, but the Knight was suddainlye gotte on the further
site of the Lake, and Palmerin vppe to the middle in Water
before hée was ware of it, and nowe hee could neyther
sée the Knight that slewe his Horse, nor the Damosell that
came in his companie. Palmerin béeing in great perplexity,
when he sawe nothing but water rounde about him, and
féeling he was vpon a Bridge, behelde a meruailous déepe
streame running vnder it, and at the ende thereof a goodly
Castle. Walking along the Bridge toward the Castle, amazed
at this contrary aduenture, hée espyed a Knight on
the battlements of th̄ Castle, who sayde. Staye a while
Syr Knight, one shall come presentlye and open the Gate.
Palmerin knewe not what to say, but determined to defende
himselfe if any came to assaulte him, so the Castle
Gate béeing opened, hée entred with his sword drawne, yet
was there no man that displeased him, but euery one made

him humble reuerence, with very good wordes and gentle
countenaunce, declaring by their behauiour, that hée was
more then welcome thither. Thus walking on to the inner
Court, there came towardes him a Ladie, accompanied
with manie Damosels and Knights, all shewing chéerefull
gestures, and the Ladie taking Palmerin by the hande,
sayde.
                     Ah, gentle knight, right welcome are you to this place,
and heauen bée praysed for the good it dooth mée, to sée you
here, that is able to a
                           •
                        complish the thing, which no other
as yet coulde bée able to finish: enter hardily in good assuraunce,
for you will wee make all the honour wée are able.
Palmerin beléeuing the Ladie, was brought into a maruailous
goodly Chamber, where certaine Squires holpe to
vnarme him, bringing him a gorgeous Mantle to wrap about
him. This done, he was conducted into a large Hall,
where the Table was couered▪ the Ladie entertaining him
so nobly, as in the King of Englands Court hée coulde not
be better. The feast ended, and the Tables withdrawne,
the Ladie beganne to deuise with Palmerin, saying. Long
time (my Lord) haue we desired your comming, as the man
in whome our onely helpe consisteth: for by your valour
we are perswaded to be deliuered from the miserie, wherin
I and mine haue too long time béene detained. I beséech
you, Madame, quoth Palmerin, to tell mée your affayres,
as also what the Knight meant to kill my Horse, and why
you entertaine mée with so great kindnesse. If you wil promise
mee, saide the Ladie, to accomplish a néedfull occasion,
and which I thinke is destinied to you: I will resolue you,
otherwise, I shall but loose my labour. If it bée a matter reasonable,
(quoth Palmerin) and that a knight may compasse,
spare not to tell mee, for I will do my endeuour therein.
Gramercies gentle knight sayde the Ladie, the circūstance
of the occasion followeth in this sort. This Castel (my Lord)
sometime belonged to my noble Father, a Knight so hardie
and valiant as any in these parts, in whose yonger yeares

loue so ouerruled him aa he aff
                           •
                        cted a lady of no lesse quanlitie
and condition then himselfe, by whom he had a 
                           •
                        aughter,
at whose birth his Lady and Wife deceased. My Father
being yet in the flower of his youth, matched the second
time with a Lady of very honourable and auncient
discent, by whom he had me the first Childe. My Sister
come to fourtéene yéeres of age, my father oftentimes
would haue richly married her, whereto she béeing vnwilling,
by my Fathers consent shée remained with her mothers
Sister, whose skill was very great in all sciences, by
whose counsel my sister caused a goodly Pallace to be edified▪
and a strong Lower in an Isle on the other side of this
Castle, where afterwarde they made their continuall abiding.
During this time, my father louing mee déerely,
matched me with a wealthie and noble knight, excelling in
all perfections, but chéefely in chiualrie, by whom I had a
Daughter a yéere after our espousall: but the more my
gréefe, my Husband and Father both died, within little
space after my Childs birth. My Daughter being come to
the yeeres of marriage, her beautie made her desired of many
noble Lords: but because I still reputed her too yong,
I denied all her sute
                           •
                        s, which afterwarde turned me to verie
great detriment. For my Sisters aunt had a sonne, the
most mishapped, deformed, and worst conditioned knight, as
all the Countrey could not shew such another, yet became
he so amorous of my Daughter, as hee requested his mother
to demaund her of me for his Wife: but when I heard
thereof, you may well perswade your selfe that neuer woman
disliked any thing more, and yet to this time doo as
much as I then did, so that I made her answere, howe I
would rather desire my Daughters death, then so to dishonour
her, because he was altogether vnworthie such speciall
fortune. Notwithstanding this sharpe repulse, he continued
his amorous desires to my Daughter, so that he earnestly
perswaded his mother to permitte him to take her
from me perforce, to which suite the vndiscréete mother

consented, either mooued with pittie, or ouercome by the
importunate solliciting of her, so that one day (vnder colour
of a friend méeting me to be merry) he robbed me of my
Daughter. This wicked traytor hadde long before that
time intended this trecherie, compacting the matter secretly
with villaines and théeues, by whose assistance he carried
away my Daughter, shutting her vppe in a strong
Lower whereof I told you. And because he feared I would
gather some strength to reskew her, considering how well
I was beloued of my neighbours, hee preuented mée by a
strange enchauntment, enuironing the castle and the tower
with such a maruailous water, as no knight shoulde
enter vppon them without their consent. Now that themselues
might come forth and returne againe at their pleasure,
they deuised a little Boate, which is guarded by two
fierce Lions, and a puissant knight that hath charge of
them, so that none comes to them but whome they list.
Since this vnhappie time did I neuer sée my Daughter,
whom this damnable villaine (which most of all gréeues
mée) immediatly violated and rauished at his pleasure,
swearing now neuer to take her as his Wife, but to vse
her as his Concubine: and beside all this, the Traitour in
despight of mee, and to reuenge the words I gaue him,
doth monstrously abuse her, and (vnmanly) whippeth her
dayly with Roddes, which my Sister hath often intreated
to be spared, but he by no meanes will be perswaded. Thus
séeing my selfe out of all hope to recouer her againe, haue
euer since continued in earnest inuocation to Heauen, that
some notable vengeance might punish this villaine: and
such fauour haue I founde in my deuout imprecations, as
first his mother was chastized with a disease called Saint
Anthonyes fire in one of her legges, which so gréeuously
torments her, as no remedie can bée founde to asswage
the vexation. Her Sonne vnderstanding héereof, would
haue slaine my sister, accusing her to procure his Mothers
infirmity by her learned knowledge: whereuppon

my Sister feari
                           •
                        g her life, and watching time conuenient
for her purpose, escaped from the villaine hither to mée,
béeing sorrie that her Aunt should thus iniuriously deale
with me, and promised to worke the meane that I should
recouer my Daughier. These wordes not a little pleasing
mée, I would néedes knowe howe I should come by my
Daughter againe, whose misfortune had béene so yrksom
                           •
                        
to me, where to she thus answered.
                     It is so good Sister, that I cannot nowe reuerse the
enchauntments I haue alreadie made for your Daughter,
though gladly I would if it lay in my power, wherefore
you must attende the comming of a Knight, who excéedeth
all other in vertue and prowesse: for he shall passe the water,
kill the Knight, enter the Tower, and deliuer my
Niece your Daughter againe into your custody. As concerning
the Knight: good Sister, that shall so hardly passe the
water without feare, and fully accomplish my former enchauntment,
for him will I leaue with you a Sworde, a
very sumptuous armour, and diuers other gifts to bestowe
on him, because my selfe shall not liue to sée him,
which came to passe, for very shortly after my Sister died.
Nowe know you Sir Knight what matter is preordained
for you, therefore take pittie on mée a poore desolate
Mother, and aduenture your selfe in this cause of
honour, as bounde héereto by vertue and néedefull occasion.
                     Beléeue mee Madame, saide Palmerin, your discourse
hath béene strange, and good reason mooues you to request
vengeance, because your wrong is the greatest that euer
I heard of, which may sometimes perswade you, that the
offender cannot long escape, without shame aunswerable
to his villanie, for Heauen will not suffer it, by assistance
whereof I hope to reuenge your Daughters rape. And
trust mee Lady, I am sorrie I came not in your Sisters
life time, because shee coulde haue resolued mee in a doubtfull
matter: neuerthelesse, I will doo so much for you as if

she were liuing. But I maruaile what is become of the
knight that slewe my horse, and the Damosell that conducted
me hither. As for the Damosell (quoth the Lady)
she shall come anone to attend vppon you: but the knight
was onely a matter of enchauntment, deuised by my Sister
to discouer the man that should ende this aduenture.
And the Damosell whereof you speake hath brought hither
many knights to the Lake, but when their horses were
slaine, none of them durst be so hardy as to enter the water,
but onely you, beeing predestinated of th
                           •
                        s aduenture.
In this and other such like talke they spent the day till
Supper time, and afterwarde was Palmerin c
                           ••
                        ducted 
                           •
                        o
his Chamber, and béeing in bedde hee could take no rest,
first for gréefe that he hadde not slaine Frysol, then againe
by the strange tale the lady tolde him: wherefore rysing
the sooner in the morning, hee went with the Lady to seruice
in her Chappell, where hée d
                           •
                        sired of God that hée
might preuaile against th
                           •
                        se co
                           ••
                        ura
                           •
                        ions, and vanquish the
Knight that had so much abused his order. Returning from
the Chappell, the Lady among other talke thus saide. I
sée Sir knight that your Armour is broken and much defaced,
that one may iudge you haue not kept it idle in your
Armorie, wherfore I thinke you met not with your friend,
when you were enforced to so dangerous tryall: but as I
vnderstande by the Damosell that was your guide, hither
you returned him good payment for his paines. To supply
your want, I will bestow an Armour on you, which my
Sister long since prouided for you, and with careful regard
kept close in her Chest: therfore let me intreate you not to
refuse it, in respect it was not prouided but for speciell purpose,
beeing néedfull for the present occasion you must nowe
enterprise. Palmerin would not refuse her offer, wherefore
opening the Chest, there lay the Armour couered with
white Taffata, whereon was wrought in letters of Golde
this inscription: These Armes were made for the good
knight Palmerin D'Oliua, Sonne to the most royall King

                        that 
                              •
                           his day liueth, in all Greece▪
                         That woorthie present
greatly delighted Palmerin, because héerein his desire was
somewhat satisfied, which was to knowe the estate of his
Father: wherefore in midst of this pleasing humour hee
saide to his Lady: I perceiue faire Madame, that your sister
kn
                           •
                        w more of my destinie then any other, for séeing she
could so truely describe my name, I néede make no great
doubt of her further iudgement. So taking away the silke,
beholde there a more 
                           •
                        umptuous Armour, then that which
halting Vulcan made for noble Achilles, at the earnest intreati
                           •
                        
of beautifull. Thetis, béeing curiously chased ouer
with flowers of Gold, and the Sheeld of stéele, engrauen
with rare deuises, as well might beséeme the greatest
Prince in the world. Palmerin presently put off his own
                           •
                        
Armour, and inuested himselfe with the Ladies gift, which
so well agréed with him in euery poynt, as the like could
hardly be framed for his body.
                     When hee was thus armed, he desired the Lady to shew
him the way, that might conduct him to the place where he
should discharge his promise, for he would delay no further
time in a matter of such weight. The Lady commanded
thrée of her Squires to conduct him, who lead him along a
narrow pathway, which brought him to the enchaunted
water so déepe and dangerous, and there they shewed him
the boate to passe ouer in, which was fastened with a great
Chaine to a Trée, whereupon Palmerin sought the meanes
to vntie it: but so 
                           •
                        oone as hee laide hand on the Chaine to
plucke it towardes him, there rushed presently foorth of
the enchaunted water two mighty Lyons, who assaulted
Palmerin in such forcible manner, as they got him down on
the ground vnder them, yet he recouered himselfe quic
                           •
                        ly,
and valiantly encountred these hidious monsters, who
had such a deuillish charme on them, as no Sword could
any way hurt or wound them. Palmerin perceiuing that
all his lab
                           •
                        ur was in vai
                           •
                        e, called to Heauen for helpe in
this necessity, and commending his abili
                           •
                        y to the highest

protection, and his heart to the gracious regarde of his mystresse:
hée gaue one of the Lyons such a cruell stroke betwéene
the eyes, as he tumbled headlong into the Water,
and was afterwarde séene no more, and soone after he sent
the other after for company, but had not his Armour béene
of meruailous vertue, doubtlesse this should haue béene his
last aduenture.
                     Not a little ioyfull of this happy victory, he entred the
Boate, and with one of the Oares beganne to rowe, but
nowe was hée surprised with a woonderfull daunger, for the
Water arose in hung billowes, beating and tossing the
Boate so fearefully, as hee had much a doo to kéepe the bottome
from turning vpwarde. In this perplexitie, which
hée coulde not deuise him to mittigate, a matter of greater
mischaunce yet befel him, for a meruailous great and ouglie
Monster suddainlie started out of the Water, which laboured
by all meanes possible to ouerturne the Boate.
Nowe was hée constrayned to forgoe his Oare, and draw
his weapon to resist this Monster, which terrified him so
cruellye on the one side, and the rough Waters so daungerously
on the other, as hee was not in the like hazarde,
when he fought with the Serpent on the Mountaine Artifaeria.
                     
                     To comfort him in this contagious extreamitie, hée
implored his diuin
                           •
                         assistaunce, whose onely prouidence
must nowe defende him, else had the raging and distempered
Water, or the rauenous Monster that gaped for his
life, d
                           •
                        uoured him. But he that in greatest perrilies, was
euer of vndaunted spirite, made such harde shifte to rowe
with his Sworde, as in despight of the Monster, and the

                           •
                        urling waues of the Water, hée landed on the other side:
when immediatlye all the coniuration ceased, so that neyther
Water, Monster, Boate or any thing else might then

                           •
                        ée discerned. I leaue to imagine, whither Palmerin
were gladde or no, that he had so happily escaped this danger:
for ioye whereof he fell vpon his knées, and with hea
                        
                           •
                        ed

hands and eyes to Heauen, gaue thankes vnto God for
his deliuerance. His praier being ended, he went to the Castle,
where he heard a most gréeuous and doleful complaint
of a Lady, saying.
                     Unhappie bée the houre of my natiuitye, alas is it possible
that in all the whole worlde, any Ladie may compare
with my miseries, Palmerin attentiuelye marking these
spéches, knewe well it was the imprisoned Lady, wherefore
mooued with compassion, hée called aloude for one to
open the Gate, and so long hée called that the Knight heard
him, who looking foorth at a Windowe of the Fortresse,
saide. In an euill houre (Knight) cammest thou hither,
and I meruaile what foolish presumption guyded thée to
this place, séeing thou canst no waye escape my hands, but
in my courtesie it remaines, eyther to spare thée, or put
th
                           ••
                         to a most cruell death, although my enchauntment
haue suffered thy passage. Thou art meruailous har
                           •
                        ye,
quoth Palmerin, there at thy Windowe, but if thy courage
bee such, as to deals with mée hands to hande: I shall let
thée vnderstande, that thy great wordes cannot sheelde
thée from my Sworde, for I will pull downe that pro
                           •
                        d
stomacke, and rewarde thy inexorable tyranny, to that good
Ladie I hearde complaine, whom villainously thou lookest
from her Mother. Come downe I pray thée if thou bée not
afraid, and thou shalt sée what entertainment I giue to such
as thou art.
                     Are you Sir (quoth the Knight) such a corre
                           •
                        tor and reformer
of 
                           •
                        ices? Darest thou but tarrie till I come 
                           •
                        owne
I shall teache thée the way to be better aduised. So arming
himselfe presently, hee mounted on hors
                           •
                        backe, and came
foorth of the Castle: whereupon▪ 
                        Palmerin thus spake to
him, There is 
                           〈◊〉
                         great 
                           〈…〉
                         Knight, you to be on
horsebacke, and I on foote, you shall shewe in all manhood
                           •
                        
in offering me such wrong: I pray thée (of courtes
                           •
                        e) alight,
otherwise I shall bestowe such a c
                           •
                        rrying on your 
                           •
                        alfray,
as your seruaunt afterwar
                           •
                        e shall take 
                           〈◊〉
                         small paynes

with him. The knight of the Castle made as though hée
hear
                           •
                         him not, and ranne fiercely with his launce against
Palmerin, who escaped his enemie, with his Sword
gaue his Horse such a stroke on the leg as hee past by him,
that the bone béeing cut in twaine▪ he fell to the ground, hauing
one of the knights legges so fast vnder him, as hée
was not able to recouer himselfe. Palmerin willing to help
                           •
                        
him vppe againe, gaue him halfe a dozen such raps about
the pate, as hee lay quiet enough without any moouing:
whereupon he vnclasped his helmet, when the knight hauing
some aire, beganne to striue with him, and drawing
his pocket 
                           •
                        agger, gaue Palmerin a sore wound therewith
in the thigh, in recompence whereof, at one stroke he
tooke his head from his shoulders. The Squires and
Seruant
                           •
                         of the Castle, who came foorth to sée the issue
of the fight, ranne apace to the Castle againe, to shut the
Gate for theyr owne safety: but Palmerin (albeit hée was
hurt, preuented them, laying about him so roughly on euery
side, as hee sware if they would not bring him to the
imprisoned Lady, they should all presently die the death.
Many of them with feare 
                           •
                        ombled headlong into the ditch,
other on theyr 
                           〈◊〉
                         asked for mercy; promising to doo what
euer he commaunded them, whereupon he sayd to him that
had the keyes. Arise quickly villaine, and conduct mée to
the prison, or I shall pay thée for thy lazinesse. The poore
fellow almost frighted out of his witte, brought him to the
Tower where the Lady was, whome they 
                           •
                        ound nak
                           •
                        d
from the middle vpwarde, and so gréeuously beaten, as all
her body was gore bloud, which the knight had 
                           •••
                        ne that
morning, for a Dreame he had the night before, howe her
mother would sende a Knight that should take her thence
perforce, and murther him in which opinion he came to the
Lady saying. I perceiue that thy 
                           ••
                        other and friendes labour
to get thée from me, and practise my destruction by all
the meanes they may: but for their sakes thou shalt dé
                           •
                        rely
a
                           •
                        ye their dealing. And with these words the villaine

so cruelly whipped her, as shee was ready to giue vppe the
ghoste, and so left her in hope she would haue dyed. Palmerin
finding the Ladie in this lamentable plight, sayde.
Arise good Ladie and leaue your sorrowfull acclamations,
for the villaine that thus misused you, hath had such absolution
for his deserts, as he hath left his heade in signe
of his p
                           •
                        naunce: and if you will depart with me towardes
your Mother, I will shewe you the Traytour where hée
lies nowe quiet enough. Ah my Lorde, (quoth the Ladye
is the Trayterous Scloto deade, that so monstrouslye
wronged mee? Hée is Ladie, sayde Palmerin, you 
                           •
                        éede
feare him no more. Then Heauen bée praysed (quoth she)
for this happy daye, and among all Knightes bée you the
most renow
                           •
                        ed, for euer, with which wordes shée arose,
and wrapping a 
                           •
                        urred Mantle aboute her, without anye
other garments on her bodye, shée wente with Palmerin,
and passing by the place where Scloto laye slaine, lifting
her eyes, and hand
                           •
                         to Heauen, she sayde. O my God, 
                           •
                        ow
is thy name to be praysed, so iustlye punishing the trecherie
and disloyal
                           •
                        ye of this villayne: Ah Traytor, how
worthilye haste thou receyued this death, which is not rygorous,
as thy mercilesse tyrany hath béene to me.
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         Héere you must note, that so soone as the Knight was
deade, all the enchauntments about the Castle were presentlye
finished, the great Lake béeing consumed after
Palmerins passage, so that the Ladies Mother aduertised
thereof, came to méete Palmerin, embracing her daughter
with such excéeding ioye, as they coulde not sp
                           •
                        ake to
eache other theyr teares so hind
                           •
                        red them, at length the
Mother knéeled before Palmerin with these wor
                           •
                        es. Ah
woorthy Knight, howe happye haue you this daye made
mée? all my former gréefes (by your meanes) béeing now
conuerted into a singuler contentation. A
                           •
                         she would haue
procéeded in her gratulations, she perceiued the bloude to
trickle downe Palmerins Armour, which shée sorrowing
to be holde, sayde. He thinkes Syr Knight you are very

sore wounded, I beseech you graunt me so much honour, as
to repose your selfe a while within my Castle, where I
doubt not to vse such dilligent are, as you shall bée whole
and sounde in verye short time. Palmerin not min
                           •
                        ing to
refuse her offer, returned with the Lady, and béeing vnarmed,
was brought to his Chamber, where the Ladye
dressed his woundes, and hee was so well entertained as
heart could deuise. Then went the Ladies squires and Seruants
to Sclotos Castle, from whence bringing all things
that were of anye value, they burned the Traytours body,
and putting his heade on the poynt of a Launce, they placed
it on the toppe of the Tower for a perpetuall memorye.
The next daye came people from all partes of the Istande,
to sée the Knight that ended the enchauntments, and among
other, the Damosell that conducted him thither was
one, who on her knée thus spake to him. Nowe am I satisfied
Sir Knight, and you discharged of the promise
you made mee, which was onelye for the deliueraunce of
this Lady, whome you haue valiantly conquered from the
tyrant that tormented her. I beséech him, who euermore
hath regarde of the poore afflicted, that his pleasure may
be to sende you the like, or a better aduenture, whereby
you maye accomplish all your ha
                           •
                        tie enterprises. So will
hée I doubt not, sayde Palmerin, and that was one from
which you disswaded mée: but I shall n
                           •
                        uer bée merrye till
I finde him againe, though then at your entreatie hee escaped
my handes so well. And Fortune spéede the matter
so happilye, quoth the Damosell, as peace and Fréendship
maye bée vnited betwéene you: for if eyther of you miscarrye,
it were great pittye, con
                           ••
                        dering the woorthy valour
wherewith you are both noblye furnished. Let come what
will, sayde Palmerin, neuer shall other agréement be betwéene
vs. With these wordes the Damosell helde her
peace, for the perceyued by his answers, that hee was not
halfe pleased with the other Knight.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. LVI.
                     
                        How Palmerin trauailing through a great Forrest, e
                              •
                           pyed a
Dwarfe enter into a Caue, whom he followed, and found
there a Knight, with whom he had much conference.
                     
                     
                        SO long cōtinued Palmerin in the castle
with the Lady, till his woundes béeing
healed, and he able to heare Armour, he
said to the Lady. Madame, by the help of
God and your diligent endeuour, I find
my self in good cōstitution of body wherfore
with your fauorable licēce, I mean
to morrowe to depart hence, because occasions of great importaunce
so commaundeth me: yet this assuraunce will I
leaue with you, that in any place where I shall come héereafter,
your woonderful courtesie hath gained such power ouer
mée, as at all times I remaine to doo you any pleasure.
                     The Ladie right glad of Palmerins noble offer, and her
Daughter thankeful for her benefit receiued, returned him
many thankful gratulations: but séeing they could no lōnger
detaine him, for his spéeches were such as he 
                           •
                        ould néedes
be gone, she said.
                     Gentle Knight, séeing it likes you no longer to soiourne
heere, but that you thinke it expedient to departe,
I woulde gladlye present you with a simple gift, not
as recompence of your painefull trauailes, but onelye
that héereafter you might remember from whence i
                           •
                        
came.
                     
                        Then tooke shée out of a Coffer two riche and precious
Ringes, and presenting him one of them, she sayde. You
shall giue this Ring to her whome aboue all other you
moste estéeme, the Ring contayning this speciall vertue,
that the longer shée weares it, the more shée shall loue you,
and daylye shall her loue so vehementlye encrease, as all
aduersities and troubles, shée shall beare with patyence
that by meanes of your loue maye anye waye endaunger
her.
                     This other Eing is of a contrarye vertue, which you
must giue to the Ladye your deere Fréende beloueth, and
to him may you safelye saye, that anye occasion whatsoeuer,
cannot plucke it from this Ladyes finger: for this
is the nature thereof, that the Ladye which weares it,
shall not h
                           •
                        e disparaged, and neyther intreaties, giftes, or
whatsoeuer beside, cannot compell her, to doo anye thing
contrarye to her lyking. If it came so to passe that shee
were beloued by anye other, then him shee nowe affecteth,
shee shall be able by vertue of this Ring, to quenche
all such libidinous desire in her sollicitour, and cause him
neuer afterwarde to mooue her with anye dishoneste request.
As for these stones of so rare and excellent quali
                        
                           •
                        ie,
you must note that they were preciselye chosen for
you by my Sister, and placed as you sée them, by her superficiall
knowledge in the Magicall sciences, that in
time to come they shall too such seruice, as no Iewels (of
what value so euer they were) might bee able to doo the
like.
                     Beside these, shee gaue him diuers other Iewels
to carrie to his Ladye, for which he humblye thanked her,
and taking his leaue of her a
                           •
                        d her Daughter, who shed
manye teares for his departure, hee mounted on horsebacke,
and trauailing thorowe a great Forrest, hée espy
                        
                           •
                        d
a Dwarfe, whome hée iudging to bee his Seruaunt
Vrbanillo, because hee was of his stature, and very much
resembled him, he called aloude. Hearest thou 
                           •
                        all fellowe,

howe camest thou in this place, so vnfrequented and inhabited?
The Dwarfe béeing in a great feare, ranne so
fast as hée coulde into a great Caue betwéene two Bushes,
which made Palmerin alight and followe him, and
very farre went hee into the Caue not séeing anye bodye,
till at length he came into a little roome, as it had béene
cut out of a quarrie, which had light into it by a little
chinke cutte through a Rocke: and there hée founde a
young Knigh layde vppon a bedde, at whose féete lay the
Dwarfe, quaking and trembling with his late feare,
whome Palmerin nowe sawe that hee was not Vrbanillo,
wherefore he saluted the Knight, saying. I must intreate
you Sir Knight to pardon mee, because I entred
so boldlye, neyther knocking first, or calling for any of
your Seruaunts: albeit I desired to speake with this
little man, but nothing coulde induce him to tarry my
comming, for hée fledde from mée as I hadde béene a deuill.
Whereuppon perswading my selfe, to finde some
other body héere more courteous, I followed him at the
harde héeles, with no other intent, but onelye to know
howe I might possible gette foorth of this dissolate Forrest,
wherein by misaduenture I haue lost my way, for
I woulde not willinglye straye too farre, least I should
be forced to remaine héere as an holye Hermit, considering
my profession is cleane contrarye. To preuent such
chaunce, I thinke it was Gods will I shoulde followe
your Seruaunt, let mee therefore intreate you, to know
what you are, and wherefore you liue héere so solitarye,
shunning as it séemes the company of men: protesting to
you, that if I may in ought assist you, whereby to drawe
you from this obscure life, I wil with all my heart accomplishe
it, though it were matter that should concerne my
life.
                     The Knight raysing vppe himselfe, and sighing so
bitterlye as life and soule woulde haue parted in sunder,
aunswered. Alas noble Knight, séeke not to vnderstand

the depth of my sorrowe, in respect the remedie is altogether
impossible: yet in that your demaund procéedeth
from such a gentle spirite, as pitieth the miseries of despised
creatures, I will acquaint you with some part of
mine estate.
                     Knowe then gentle Knight, that I am the most forlorne
Varnan, whose vnfortunate life excéedeth all mens
whatsoeuer, for this worlde affoordeth me nothing but
mishappe, disgrace, contempt, and all tormenting griefes,
as for delight and pleasure, they are loathsome to mée, my
monethes, wéekes, dayes, howres, and minutes, béeing
continually accompanyed with all extreame passions.
My greatest ease consisteth in dolorous lamentations,
remembraunce of passed infortunes, sad regrets, and insupportable
melancholie. In bréefe, I am onelie hee,
whose companions are, a trauelled spirit, thoughts confounded
with frustrate hope, hauing vtterly lost the
light of those gladsome Sunnes, whereof the one shined
in my face, the other in my heart, that nowe nothing is
left for me but a life despised, yet welcome to me that am
so disdayned.
                     These wordes were vttered with so many sighes,
such flouds of teares, and haling his flesh with such impatience,
as woulde haue relented a heart of Adamant,
which mooued Palmerin by gentle perswasions, to request
of him the cause of his disquiet: and so long he continued
his importunate intreaties, that the Knight at
length thus answered. Gentle Syr, so well contenteth
me the sorrowes which I suffer, that in hope of any remedie,
I would not bewray them: but séeing Fortune
hath thus conducted you hither, in respect of your gracious
and affable nature, as also that you shall not repute
mée vndiscréete and misgouerned, I will satisfie you in
the cause of my sadnesse.
                     True it is, Syr Knight, that I haue hitherto, and euer
shall, loue a Ladie, Daughter to a Knight my neighbour,

shée béeing (in my iudgement) one of y• fayrest Ladyes
in the whole worlde. And perceyuing by her behauiour
that shée loued me as well, or rather more, which
indéede shée did not: for her I accomplished all thinges
that a Knight could for his Ladie, aduenturing mine
honour, and my life in all daungers for her sake, yea, nothing
might bee refused for the diuine Mistresse of my
thoughts. Perceyuing my selfe to bée so equally loued,
and my passions to growe beyonde my abilitie, finding
occasion to acquaint her with the secretes of my heart, I
desired her to pittie my oppressions, which if shee refused
to doo, she should loose her louer, and his life withall. For
I was so solemnely vowed to her seruice, as she could not
commaund any thing so hard or daungerous, but by her
fauourable regarde would be most easie to mee. Thes
                           •
                        
words could drawe no pittie from her, but displeased and
in great anger she answered. That I might not bee reckoned
among those Knights, who deserued the loue of a
Ladie of her calling, and thenceforth I should not bee so
hardie, as to speake to her, or come in her presence. Go
                           •
                        
quoth sh
                           •
                        e, and followe her loue that gaue thée thy Faulcon,
wherein thou takest such pleasure, and neuer mayst
thou 
                           •
                        urne againe to me.
                     With these wordes shée 
                           〈◊〉
                         from mee to a Windowe,
where I was woont alwayes to stande and talke
with her, beguiling the time in no lesse contentation,
then those happy soules in the Ely
                              •
                           ian Fieldes, such was
the rare beautie, good grace, and singular courtesie of my
(sometime) beloued Ladie Valerica. I cannot denie: but
that a Ladie bestowed the Falcon on me, but in any such
respect as my Ladie imagined, God knowes is most vntrue,
nor could death compell mee so much to abuse my
chosen Mistresse.
                     Seeing my Ladie then so rigorous, and her answere
so seuere, yet assured of mine owne innocencie and loyaltie:
I was surprised with such surpassing heauinesse, as

euerye houre expected when my féeble spirite, would
                           •
                        
forsake his long despyed habitation. My Ladie béeing
thus resolute in her owne opinion, and disdayning all
meanes I shewed to perswade her, despayring likewise
of any after hope: I determined with my selfe, to abandone
all companye, as vnwoorthie of theyr societye, and
then betooke my selfe to this brutish kind of life, where I
might without any impeach, breathe forth my continuall
complaints.
                     In this resolution I came to this place, without the
knowledge of my Lady or any other, this Dwarffe onelye
excepted, who euermore hath beene my most trustie
Seruaunt, and fetcheth my necessaries at a village
néere adioyning, and by his honest perswasions, hath manie
times with-helde mee from committing violence on
my selfe. Thus haue you heard in bréefe the cause of my
sorrowe the depth whereof cannot bée considered or valued,
but by such as haue in like manner tryed and suffered,
the disdayne and ingratitude of vnconstant Ladies.
Palmerin hauing heard the fortunes of the Knight, repeated
to him the graces and fauours of his Ladye Polynarda,
what honour shée did him in her Fathers Court,
and how hee was in daunger to receiue the like rewarde,
as the Knight did of his Valerica: and fearing indéede
that his mishappe woulde sorte to that issue, he fell down
at the féete of this poore refused Louer. The Knight
perceiuing, that the reputitiō of his misfortune was cause
of this alteration, bre
                           •
                        thing foorth a vehement sighe, hee
sayde.
                     Alas wretched 
                           •
                        atife that I am, hath my dest
                           •
                        ny
made mee so vnhappie, that enduring an extreamitye
worse then death, I cannot dye, and yet hée that did but
heare my miserie hath lost his life? I will not liue any
longer to preiudice any other men, but will now make
waye to the ende of mine owne troubles. So drewe 
                           •
                        ée
foorth Palmerins Sworde, and 
                           •
                        ffered to thrust it into

his bodye: but Palmerin receiued his former estate,
started suddainlye vppe, and catching him in his armes,
sayde.
                     How now my Fréende? will you bée so inc
                           •
                        nsiderate,
that for a little temporall paine which your body endureth,
to condemne your soule to euerlasting perdition?
And though your passions touch you so seuerelye, as you
will affoorde no pittie to your selfe: yet l
                           •
                        t trée intr
                           •
                        ate
you to forbeare this humour. For not without reason
haue I sustained this suddaine motion, remembring the
vnspeakable comfort I receiued by one, who by false suggestions,
or slaundreous reports (which woundeth more
déepe then the fatall weapon) may in like sorte be chaunged
into such conceit, as her iudgement may excéede a hel
of torments. Yet canne I not denye (your Lady hauing
with such shame refused you) but you haue great occasion
to gréeue thereat, yet not to stretch the extreamily so
farre as to dispayre, or worke iniurie to your 
                           •
                        elfe calling
to memory how light the opinion of a Woman is, how
suddaine shée will alter, and howe prompt shée is to iealousie,
especially where shee loueth effectually. And if
héeretofore shée loued you feruentlye, it is impossible
but shee should féele some part of your anguish, and more
violently (I thinke) then your selfe can Trust then in
him that hath all hearts at commaunde, repose your self
constantly on his prouidence, for hée will not leaue you
frustrate of your honourable intent, standing with iustl
                           •
                        e
and perfect integritie.
                     As Palmerin continued these comfortable perswasions,
the Dwarfe couered the Table, and sette before
them such a small pitta
                           •
                        nce, as he had prouided, & when
they hadde refreshed themselues: Palmerin tooke his
leaue of the Knight, promising him (if hée coulde by anye
meanes) to giue some ease to his oppressions. Varnan
returned him many thankes, commanding his Dwarfe
to conduct him to the high waye, béeing not a little sorrowfull

to leaue his compa
                           •
                        ie, who had so well aduised
and comforted him. Palmerin being come into his ready
way, sent backe the Dwarfe, and rode on till he was g
                           •
                        t
out of the Forrest, intending to finde out the Castl
                           •
                        
where Valerica remained, because he would somewhat
sollicite the cause of sollitarie Verman. Ryding along in
this determination, hée espyed a Knight and two squires
before him, y• knight thus speaking to one of his squires.
I knowe not whether it be time as yet to enter the Garden,
or if Madame Valerica be as yet come thither. Go
sée if she be there, and returne quickly to mée againe.
Palmerin hearing the name of Valerica, knewe well it
was shée for whome the solitarie Knight liued in such
pensiuenes: wherefore mooued with pitty of his miseries,
hee sayde to himselfe. Sée héere the trecherie of a
trothlesse Woman, so vnhonorablie to forsake the man
that loues her so déerely, and preferre the villanie of
this intercepting Traytour: but I shall teach him ere
I go, what a penalty belongs to the preuenting of a loyall
knight, and so comming to the knight hee say
                           •
                        e. Art
thou a man villaine, that wouldest forest all the loue of
the best Knights in England? by my Sword, thou shalt
déerely pay for thy disloyalty. With these words he gaue
him such a stroake on the head, as he cleft it therewith to
the very téeth.
                     The Squires séeing theyr maister slaine, beganne to
haste away: but Palmerin caught him that was sent to
the Garden, to whome he sayde. Come on Sirra, if thou
louest thy life, bring mée to the Lady if thou doost: not,
thou shalt neuer followe thy trade any longer. The
Squire durst doo no otherwise, so he brought him to the
little gate where Valerica was wont to receiue in her louer,
and knocking with his finger as his Master was accustomed,
Valerica opened the doore, and thinking it was
her Fréend, cast her armes about Palmerins necke, who
brought her in his armes forth of the Garden, commanding

the Squire presently to followe him. Valerica abashed
hereat, sayde. Howe nowe swéete fréende? whether
will you carry mee? Knowe you not if my father heard
héereof, that neyther of vs durst approch before him?
Tush Madame, sayde Palmerin, these are but wordes,
there is no remedy but you must go with mée. So neyther
with teares nor requests would hee be intreated,
but mounting on horsebacke, caused the Squire to helpe
the Lady vppe before him, because he would be sure shée
should not escape from him, and riding on towardes the
Forrest, because the night drew on, he left the rode way,
séeking some place where they might cōueniently repose
themselues for that night. At length hee founde out a
little thicket, where they alighted, and hee returning his
Horse to pasture, tooke off his Helmet and came to the
Lady, desiring her to bée content with such hard lodging
for that night: but when shée behelde that it was not
her fréend, wringing her handes she thus exclaimed. Alas
vnhappy wretch that I am, how trecherously am I
deceiued? What mishappe may be comparable to mine,
hauing lost my fréende, and abyding at his pleasure that
hath cruelly murdered him? Ah Fortune, why art
thou so inconstant, to chaunge my former pleasure into
this gréeuous stratage
                           ••
                        e?
                     
                        Palmerin hearing her so impatient, sayde. You must
thinke Lady, that what hath happened, is by diuine permission,
who hath thus appoynted to punish your loosenesse,
and your excéeding disloyalty towardes him, who
loues you dearer then his owne soule, and for your loue
leades a most austere life, in the very desolate and vncomfortable
place of the worlde. If hée haue thus long
endured such hardnesse for your sake, it is good reason that
you should participate a little with his misery. Feare
not therefore, for I speake nothing of him but what I
haue séene: and by great chaunce, haue I thus brought
you from your Fathers house, meaning by Gods grace

(this humor forgottē) to cause you match with him, whose
true loue aboue all other hath deserued you. Ah miserye
incomparable, said the Lady, I sée now it is in vaine to
shun what the destenies haue appointed, how falles my
fortune from ill to worse? Must I now go to that coward
Varnan, whom hitherto I haue continually despised? me
rather die a most shamefull death.
                     I know not Lady what you thinke, said Palmerin, but
in my opinion, Varnan is much better then you estéeme
him, and a better Knight then he, that coulde defende
his pate with no wiser pollicy: woorthilye may you call
him cowarde, and loue the other that liues to d
                           ••
                         you seruice.
So long they stood on these tearmes, vntill a knight
passed by them, to whome Valerica cryed. Helpe gentle
Knight, for Gods sake pittie me, & deliuer me from this
Traytour, who falselie hath be guiled me, and violentlie
brought me hither against my will. What art thou sayde
the Knight, that thus dishonorest this Ladye? I shall
teache thée better knowledge of thine order before wee
part. Palmerin quicklie bridling his Horsse, and clasping
on his Helmet, sayd to the Knight. What art thou that
wouldest take her from me, whō I conquered euen nowe
by my Sworde? followe thy way, or I shall she we thee
what discipline I vse to fooles, that wil meddle with matters
aboue theyr capacitye. Doost thou so obstinatelye
stande in thy trecherie? sayde the Knight: Marke what
will be the end of thy presumption.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. LVII.
                     
                        Howe Palmerin hauing thus brought away Valerica, conducted
her to the Caue to her beloued Varnan, and there
confirmed the agreement of their loue.
                     
                     
                        BEfore we passe any further, you shal vnderstande
that the Knight thus contending
with Palmerin, was Hermes, who
the King sent after the Lady with Frysol,
to make deliueraunce of the Castle,
as you haue heard before: he béeing
Palmerins Fréende, yet neither knowing
the other. For Hermes tooke such regard of y• ladies cō
                        plaint,
as he marked not Palmerin before he put on his helmet.
Palmerin séeing that Hermes woulde néedes trye his
fortune, encountred him with such a rough stroke, as downe
hee fell to the ground, Hermes thinking his head was shyuered
in a hundred péeces: so Palmerin called Hermes
Squire, commaunding him to helpe vp the Lady, or else
he woulde sende him after his Maister. The Squire alighted
and h
                           •
                        lpe vppe the Ladye, rewarding her with an
infinite number of cursses, because his Maister had sped so
ill by her meanes.
                     Trust mée Lady, quoth Palmerin, though you thinke my
labour but ill bestowed, yet such is the regarde of the solitary
Varnan, as ending the Hell of torments he suffers,
I must néedes holde better opinion of my paines. With
these and such like spéeches hée be guiled the time, till they
came néere to Varnans Ca
                           •
                        e, who to take the ayre, was
there walking vnder the Trées: but when hee sawe Palmerin
returned, and a Lady with him, yea, perceiuing

well that it was Valerica, they were no sooner alighted but
he caught her in his armes, saying. Is it possible swéete fortune,
that after so long mishap, and when all hope was vtterly
gone, thou canst affoord me this gracious fa
                           •
                        our? Ah
happy eyes that haue powred forth such showers of teares,
what felicity may compare with yours, cōtemplating now
the rare beauty of your mistresse? May it be, that after so many
insupportable torments, the meane therof shuld return
such pleasure, comfort and sollace? Depart then teares, pack
hence lamentations, gréefe, torments & all melancholy conceits,
get you else-where & in the most barbarous countries
of the world make your abiding▪ for she cōmands you hence,
in whom cōsists my special cōtentment. O fortunate knight,
how may I recompence this inexplicable kind
                           •
                        es, surmoū
                        ting
al other that euer was heard of? impossible is it for me

                           〈◊〉
                         requite this fauor, though al my possessions, life, body and
spirit were bound to your seruice. But heauen will supply
my want, and continue 
                           〈◊〉
                         in as great happinesse, as your
noble bountie hath brought me comfort. Forbeare these
spéeches sayd Palmerin, albeit I had doone a thousand times
as much, yet should I but accomplishe what one Christian
owes to another. I pray you therefore let vs go into your
Caue least we be espied, and so preuented, beside, I am so ouerwatched,
as I cannot stand on my féete through want of
sléepe. Valerica séeing her selfe in such an vncouth place, and
in his custody she most 
                           •
                        etested, her angry stomacke would
not suffer her to speake one word, but when 
                           •
                        he had a while
rested her selfe, on a seate of Hearbes and flowers which
Varnan diligently prepar
                           •
                        d, Palmerin said. 
                           •
                        ehold Madame
Valerica, sée in what place, in what solitary, austere
and sharpe kind of life, your Varnan liues by your commandement,
now 
                           •
                        éeing time and fortune is so fauourable, let
not your rig
                           •
                        r and dis
                           •
                        aine excéede their mu
                           •
                        abili
                           •
                        y. Consider
a little, what gréefes hee hath endured in this comfortlesse
place, which veryly haue béene so great, as all the pleasures
in the world, cannot recompence the verye leaste 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        
them. I beséech you then, if héeretofore you haue borne him
hard liking, let it now be forgott
                           •
                        n, and if vnaduisedlye 
                           〈◊〉
                        
hath any way offēded yo
                           •
                        , let his long tor
                           •
                        ēts & surpas
                           •
                        ing
loyalty s
                           •
                        ruel now for satisfaction, & take him to your 
                           〈◊〉
                        ,
as y• most perfect and faithful 
                           〈◊〉
                         in England. You likewise
sir Varnan, without remembrance of your 
                           〈…〉
                        ,
or her too rigorous refusals héeretofore, take her as your lady
& wife, and in al honor vnite your self to her by presēt spéeches,
for séeing I 
                           •
                        aue brought her hither, it will remaine a
continual reproch to me, if you should not accept her as your
spouse and wife. Ah my Lord ꝙ Varnan, with right good wil
shall I accomplish your command, so it may stand with my
ladies liking, for héerin is comprised ye whole sum of my desires.
Ah miserable beyond al other, said Valerica to Palmerin,
must I by a varlet be subiected to so vile an extreami
                           •
                        y,
and constrained to take him for my husbande whō I cannot
affect, he being the most false and cowardly Knight y• euer I
knew? must I against my fathers wil, and by my Traytors
procurement that hath so abused me, as no vertuous knight
would so haue wronged a Lady, be cōpelled to my mariage?
heauen cannot like héereof, & rather well I die, then doo the
thing shal return me such reproch. The
                           •
                         shriked she sopit
                           •
                        ifully
as though she had bene quite distraught of her sences,
which Varnan beholding, beganne thus to complaine. Ah
gentle Knight, what gréefe is it to heare her in these torments,
whom I loue much better then mine owne life? and
for whom I rather desire to die, then not to 
                           •
                        nioye her with
her owne liking. I cannot liue séeing her in these 
                           •
                        fflictions,
and therefore conuay her againe to her fathers house,
and no sooner shall shée be departed hence, but life will 
                           •
                        orsake
this forlorne Carkasse, then shall 
                           〈…〉
                        
how faithfullye I loued. Palmerin 
                        
                           〈…〉
                         of
Valerica, sayd. By God Lady, I thinke in all the 
                           〈…〉
                        
not a more cruell and dis
                           •
                        oyall 
                           〈◊〉
                         then you are, perswade
your selfe, that if I take the paine to carry you againe
to your fathers Castle, I shall 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        
there in such sorte, as all your life time repentance will
hardly 
                           •
                        xcuse you. And to speake the truth, Varnan dooth
much more then you deserue, if you well remember your
selfe, and for you are so stubborne, I shall giue you the desart
(offering to drawe his Sworde) that such ingratefull
and trecherous women woorthily merit. Va
                              •
                           erica afr
                           •
                        yde
when shée saw him in such choler, and doubting hée would
discouer her incontinent loue past, threwe her selfe at his
féete, desiring him to appease his anger, & shée would obey
what ere he commaunded. For (ꝙ she) séeing my fortune
hath brought me into his company, who for his vnfeigned
loue to me, hath so long suffered woonderfull calamities:
well might I be 
                           •
                        stéemed of brutish nature, if I did
not acknowledge it, therefore I will be his wife, and giue
him my faith héere in your presence. Palmerin well pleased
with this aunswere, 
                           •
                        ooke her vp by the hand, and taking
Varnan by the other, esp
                           •
                        used them there togither
by solemne promises, and afterwarde laide him downe to
rest himselfe a while. Then Varnan taking Valerica in
his armes, with swéete kisses and amorous speeches, expelled
all former 
                           〈◊〉
                        , estéeming himselfe the happiest
Knight in the whole worlde, hauing now at length obtayned
the fauour of his Mistresse, giuing her to vnderstande,
howe acceptable the gift of pittie was, comming from so

                           •
                        are a creature to her languishing beloued. Palmerin
séeing them so well agréede, would nowe depart and leaue
them to their fortune: but by earnest importunitie of these
louers, he stayed there longer then hee entended. Now
was the loue betwéen these twaine, far greater then theyr
hatred had béeene, so that after they had stayed thrée or foure
dayes in the Caue, with such entertainment as the Dwarfe
could 
                           〈…〉
                         of Valerica, continuing long time togither in comfort of their
loue, and ending their liues in loyaltie thereof.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. LVIII.
                     
                        How Palmerin, after he departed from Varnan and Valerica,
met with two Ladies in chase, one of thē giuing him
a Faulcon. And what happened to him against the duke
of Gaule his twelue Knights, out of whose hands he deliuered
Hermes.
                     
                     
                        WHen Palmerin sawe Varnan and Valerica
so well contented, after many offers
of their seruice, and kinde a diewes
deliuered on al sides, he left them in their
Uault, and set forwarde on his iourney,
lodging y• night in an auncient knightes
castle, where he vnderstood, how the brethren
of the slaine Knight, besieged Valericas father in his
Castle: Wherefore he turned an other course, and leauing
the broad way that guided to London, he met two ladies accompanied
with thrée squires, who had cast off a faulcon and
a Martin to 
                           •
                        lie, the sight whereof so highly contented him, as
he would née
                           •
                        es tarry to sée the end thereof, which made one
of the Ladies thus speake to him. I s
                           •
                        e sir knight you haue no
hast on your iournie, because you staie to behold our pastime,
therfore if you will go with vs to a water héereby, you shall
there sée a braue 
                           •
                        light indéede, such worthy gam
                           •
                         is there so
plētifull, & my faulcon so good as she will neuer faile. Palmerin
who aboue all pastimes loued Hauking, rode with the
Ladies to the Marshes by their Castle, where they hadds
such excellent sporte at Heron, Duck and Mallard: as the
day beguiling them, Palmerin was forced to stay with them
that night. When they were come to the castle Palmemerin
                        
manned the Ladies Faulcon so w
                           •
                        ll, as though all
his life time hee hadde béene a Faulconer. The Lady séeing
him so braue a Ge
                           •
                        tleman, so courteous, af
                           •
                        able & 
                           〈◊〉
                        
in behauiour, and that he tendered her Hauke so gently:
was immediately supprised with his loue, so that she desired
to knowe of whence hée was, wh
                           •
                        me she could so gladlye
affoorde to chuse for her beloued, and hauing long earnestlye
beheld him, shée sayd. Sir Knight, that I may entertaine
you as your estate beseemeth, I pray you tell me your
nanie, & whither you trauaile. Lady (quoth Palmerin) I am
a straunger, who by fortune on the Sea was brought to this
Countrey, and because the King had warre against the Emperour
of Allemaigne, I remained a while héere as a souldiour,
attending a prosperous winde, to conuay me home
againe into my natiue Countrey. The Ladye hearing this,
and iudging him one of the famous Knightes, that came to
the Courte, loued him more earnestly then shée did before,
prouiding such surpassing delightes for him, as shee
wished that night hadde béene a yeere in length. The Tables
withdrawne, and many pleasaunt spéeches past betwéen
                           •
                        
                        Palmerin and the Ladies Daughter, shée conducted him to
his Chamber, wishing if her honour might so auouche it,
that Palmerin neuer might haue any other bedfellowe But
leauing him to his good rest, shée departed to her chamber,
where little sléepe suffised her that night. In the morning,
Palmerin called for his Horse to beegon, the Lady very sorowfull
to forgo his companye: but séeing shée had no meane
to holde him, she sayde. Séeing your departure Syr may not
bée denied, I would present you with the Faulcon, which
yesterday did so speciallye content you, which if you please
to accept for my sake, I shall not forget the honour you haue
doone me, chéefely that you vouchsafed to stay héere this night
béeing as welcome hither as the King himselfe. Séeing it
is your pleasure Madame, sayd Palmerin, to best
                           •
                        we your
Faulcon on mée, I accept it as the onelye thing you
could giue me, and by the faith of a Knight I promise you,

that I will kéepe it for your sake, and neuer parte therewith,
if by force or villainie it bée not taken from mée. Th
                           •
                        
Ladye so ioyfull héereof as might be deuised, caused the Faulcon
to be brought to him. Héere must you note, that this is
the selfe-same Ladye, which sent the Faulcon to Varnan,
and loued him so déerely as after she vnderstoode hee had forsooke
the Countrey, shée gaue her selfe altogither to this recreation.
Her Father perceiuing how shée was affected, suffered
her to take her pleasure, sending her euermore the
best Haukes that could be gotten. But it came so to passe,
that two Faulcons so fréendlie giuen, and in the like sort
                           •
                        
taken, prooued very vnfortunate to both the Knightes, causing
them to cur
                           ••
                        e the houre, that euer they accepted th
                           •
                        
Ladyes liberalitie, came néere her Castle, or sawe her
Haukes, as you haue already heard by solitary Varnan▪
                         and
héereafter shall perceiue in Palmerins fortune, hée being departed
from the Ladye, rode two dayes togither without
any aduenture, till at length hee came to the Tent, where
the Duke of Gaules Knightes guarded the passage, which
scant pleased Palmerin, because he imagined if hée fought
with them, he should be deceiued in his intent, and not sé
                           •
                        
                        Trineus so soone as hée would, whom he left at the Court expecting
his comming, wherefore he would haue turned anotherway,
but one of the Knightes called to him. Returne
cowarde returne, thou shalt not escape without tryall of thy
manhoode, for we must make proofe if there bee anye in thée.
Palmerin not knowing where to set his Hauke, and very
loth to loose it, was not desirous to Iouste: but séeing that
with honour he could not refuse it, aunswered. It is small
courtesie Sir Knight, to challenge the man that hath no wil
to your sporte: but if there be no remedye, your will be fulfilled,
albeit I hope you will first repent it. I sée thou canst
prate well, qu
                           •
                        th the Knight▪ and beléeue mee thou wert
wise if thou couldest so escape: but séeing thou art so long before
thou art readye, Ile bring thee to such a place where
haukes shal not hinder thee, and in one yéere thou shalt spare

the wearing of B
                           ••
                        tes and spurres in such a comfortable
place, as the Sunne nor day light shall 
                           •
                        ffend thine eyes.
I hope I haue learned, sayd Palmerin, to kéepe my selfe from
such places: but I would faine knowe the gentle Chamber
Page, that is so skilfull in waiting with his Pantofies, as
he can teach Knights errant how to weare them. The knight
being angry, called foorth the rest of his compani
                           ••
                        s, among
whome he espied Hermes prisoner, his Helmet lying by him,
and his armes pinni
                           •
                        nd: therefore to reuenge his wr
                           •
                        nge,
he called his Squire, saying. I pray thée my Fréend looke to
my Hauke a while, for I am come to defend
                           •
                         thy Maisters
honour, and calling to the dukes Knight, saying. Come Sir
let vs dispatch quickly, for I haue earnest busines in another
place: the Knight laughing at him, answered. Why
how now Captaine? thinke you to passe hence so easilye?
Héere are sufficient to stay your hasty iourney, eleuen more
must talke with you, the w
                           •
                        orst of them able to abate your
pride, for your horsse lackes a stable, and wee will prouide
him one. So couching theyr Launces, they mette togither
with such force, as the Dukes knight was throwne from his
Hor
                           ••
                        e, his shoulder béeing broken with the weight of his
fall: Palmerin arresting the Knightes hor
                           ••
                        e for his 
                           •
                        wn
                           •
                        ,
gaue him to Hermes squire in kéeping, saying. Because the
Knight is not willing to get on horse-backe againe, h
                           •
                        ld
this for mee, and he maye lie at ease to sée the fortune of his
fellowes. Then came another Knight from the tent, whom
Palmerin welcommed in so fréendlye manner, as he lay not
able to stirre hand or foote: with this one Launce hée vnhorssed
foure more, and brake it so valiantlye on the seauenth
Knight, as while he liued he meant to ioust no more. With
a fresh Launce hée dismounted all the rest, none of them being
willing to deale with him any further, wherefore Palmerin
came to Hermes, saying. What doo you 
                           〈◊〉
                         Knight?
Why take you not the best Horse among all the 
                           〈◊〉
                        ?
That 
                           ••
                        all I Sir, séeing you commaund me, albeit not lo
                           ••
                        
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         you serue me as th
                           •
                        se Knights are: yet God be thanked

that by your meanes I am deliuered from imprisonment,
wherein these knights intended to kéepe me, because I
vnhorsed foure of them, and at the fift encounter my horse
was killed, which was the cause of my foyle and taking.
The knights (quoth Palmerin) haue nowe leysure to res
                           •
                        
them, for they were troubled before with watching for
passengers: I doubt not now but we may quietly passe the
bridge, for I sée none of them offer to hinder vs. Hermes
mounting on horse backe, commauded his squire to take
a fresh one for him likewise, and so they rode on together
reioycing at this good fortune. They had not ridden the
space of a mile, but Hermes demauded Palmerins name,
which when hee knewe, in great reioysing he saide: Ah
worthy knight, now is my trauel ended in search of you:
trust me, I would refuse the best citie in England, in respect
of the great friendship I haue found at your hands, as
also for the comfort your presence will bring to our dread
Lord and your noble companions, who long time haue
expected your desired returne. As they rode on in these
spéeches, they came to a fayre fountaine, where Palmerin
would alight to refresh himselfe, and to bind vp such smal
wounds, as he had taken in iousting against the knights
of Gaule.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. LIX.
                     
                        ¶How Frisol was deliuered out of Palmerins handes, by
the meanes of Colmelio his Squire.
                     
                     
                        THe same day that Palmerin 
                        
                           •
                        ousted
with the knights of Gaule, the duke
himselfe was gone on hunting, by
meanes whereof, he lost the sight of
the pastime, which afterward hée
repented, because he had with him
the most part of his knights, so that
no one was left in his Castle but Frisol, that might bee
counted of any value, who beholding so many knights

                           •
                        oyled by one, maruailed not a little what be might bee,
and after long consideration of his haughtie exploits, hée
saide to himselfe, I cannot thinke this knight to be the
man, against whom I combatted sometime in Fraunce.
yet know I no man liuing but 
                           〈◊〉
                        , that could performe
such rare chiualrie. Now, because Palmerin had changed
his armor, he verily imagined that it was not he, yet was
he desirous to know, but doubtfull to follow him by reason
of his former experience: againe, if he should suffer him
to passe without some triall, he iudged it would returne to
his great dishonour, wherefore he resolued to aduenture
his fortune. And in this determination he came to the
dukes sister, who loued him intirely, as you heard before:
she beginning with him in this manner. I cannot sufficiently
maruell 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        Frisol, how you haue suffered in your
own view, my brothers knights to be so shamefully con
                        
                           ••
                        unded
by one passenger: I de
                           ••
                        re you swéet friend, if euer
you brake launce for a Ladies loue, that for my sake you

will deale with that proude knight, and make him know
that you can abate his courage, were his head framed of y•
hardest hammered brasse. If you fulfill my request, you
shal do an acceptable déed to my brother, & to me such seruice,
as I shal hereafter requite to your own content. Madame,
quoth Frisol, I did intende to fight with him, but
séeing it pleaseth you so graciously to cōmand me, no danger
can withhold me, because the world can witnes, what
great auaile so honorable a Ladyes fauor is, to the knight
that liues to renowne her name. So departing from his
lady, he presently armed himselfe, & mounting on a lustie
Courser, followed the way that Palmerin was gone: the
12. knights not a little glad therof, wel hoping y• he wold
reuenge theyr dishonour. Frisol continued his trauaile so
long, til at length he came to the fountaine where Palmerin
refreshed himselfe, who had no sooner espied him, but
surpris
                           ••
                         with great ioy, sayd to Hermes. I am sure this
knight comes hither is to seek me, wherfore I intreat you
by the reuerend loue you beare to your best beloued, not any
way to hinder y• fight betwéene vs, til the end deliuer
victorie to one 
                           〈◊〉
                         or other: for he thinking to reuēge the
reproch of his felow, hath followed me to performe what
they were not able. Then Palmerin sodainly clasping on
his helmet, mounted on horsback, and taking aduantage
of the plaine field, because it was most conuenient for the
combat, which Frisol perceiuing, scornefully sayd. I think
Sir knight, you are some kinde of prophet, because you
deuine so wel the cause of my comming: vnhappie was it
for you to preuaile in such sort against the duke of Gaules
knights, which you must now pay for with too late repentance.
If I did them any harme, sayd Palmerin, it was
their owne séeking, and by your arrogant spéeches it may
be presumed, you are one of the same company: but y• loue
of the Dukes sister, cannot shéelde you from your deserued
recompence. At these words Frisol well perceiued,
that this was the knight he so much doubted: Neuerthelesse

his courage was so good, as remembring the promise
he made to his Lady, gaue spurres to his Hose, and they
encountred with such braue chiualry, as y• shiuers of their
Launces flew vp into the aire, and then they assaulted
each other so roughly with their Swordes, as well they
might bée estéemed right valiant Champions. No mercy
was intended on either side, for Frysol was determined to
die or conquere, and Palmerin held the same resolution, so
that the ground was coloured with their bloud, their armour
and shéeldes battered in péeces, and no hope left on
either side of life. But as alwaies some mischance or other
followes a noble mind, so fel it out with Frisol, for in their
close buckling togither, Palmerin had got sure hold on his
shéeld, which Frisol striuing forcibly to recouer, the buckl
                           •
                        
brake in sunder, and with the sodaine breach therof he fel
down backward, when Palmerin leaping from his horse,
said. And let me neuer hereafter bee called Palmerin, if
now I do not reuenge my selfe sufficiently. Which words
when Frisols squire heard, he came hastily and fell at his
féete, saying. Noble knight, I beséech you for the honour
you beare to arms, to pause a while, & tel me if you be Palmerin
D'Oliua, for if you be, I am your brother, who haue
suffered great paine and trauaile to finds you out. Palmerin
presently knew Colmelio, the sonne of Gerrard his foster
father, whose sight was so ioyfull to his, as casting away
his sword, he ran and embraced him about the neck,
saying: My déere friend Colmelio, the most welcome man
in the world to me. How happie may I account my selfe
quoth Colmelio, to finde you when all hope was past? hauing
trauailed so many countryes, and al 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           •
                        ai
                           •
                        e: if then
you loue me as you make protestation, let me intreate one
fauour at your hand, that you forget your anger towards
my maister Frysol, and giue ouer your fight, for long time
haue I serued him as my Lord, and well hath hee deserued
much better seruice then mine. Colmelio, sayde Palmerin,
the thing thou demandest is meruailous great, neuerthelesse,

such is my comfort hauing met with thée, as I
graunt thy request, and happily hath he now escaped with
life, cōsidering what occasions haue past vs héertofore. So
taking Colmelio by the hand, he said to Frisol. Sir knight,
at your squires intreatie,, I suffer you quietly to departe,
and méete with me againe at any time you thinke good:
but you shall go looke another Squire, for Colmelio at
this time goes with me. Frisol, who was wou
                           •
                        ded in many
places, & very faint with losse of his bloud, might ea
                           ••
                        ly
be induced to this agréement of peace: but cōming to Colmelio,
he said. Wilt thou forsake thy master and go with
his enemy? Trust me sir, quoth Colmelio, you must néeds
pardon me, if in this matter I chance to offend you, for to
séeke him I forsooke my fathers house, & haue continued
a verie laboursome search. If thou wilt néeds go, said Frisol,
and that my intreaties may not dissawde thée, I will
pray for the successe of thy desires, and thy aduancement
to honour, and while I liue will I account of thée as my
fréend and brother. So returning as he came, he began in
this manner to exclaime against Fortune. Ah cruell & inconstant
Lady, sufficed not thée to dishonour mee before
mine enemie, but thou must rob me of my squire I loued

                           •
                        o deerely? but so hast thou dealt with them of highest cal
                        
                           •••
                        g,
for infinit kings and potentates hast thou deceiued,

                           •
                        nd (before their very chéefest enemies) dishonoured: such
hath beene thy trecherye to me at this instant, that I may
iustly cōplaine of thée while I liue. As he continued these
complaints, he met diuers armed Knightes that came to
assist him, and the duke himself in company among them
who demanded of Frisol, whither his enemie were slaine
or sent away vanquished. Uanquished, sayd Frysol thinke
you so good a knight may be so easily vanquished? Then he
d
                           •••••
                        rsed his whole successe, which the duke hearing, exclaimed
on his hūting, that he was not present when Palmerin
passed: wherefore he would néeds followe him, but
that Frisol intreated him to the cōtrary, because the night

approched so néere, as it was impossible for him to ouertake
Palmerin. The duke in a maruellous rage, for y• his
enterprise fell out no better, returned with Frisol, and an
houre within night they came to his Castell, where hee
called for his chirurgi
                           ••
                        s, charging them to giue diligent
attendance 
                           •
                        n Frisol. When the Dukes sister heard the
misfortune of her friend, she came hastily to him in his
chamber, & after many swéet kisses, said. I beséech you my
lord f
                           •
                        rget my folly, for I was y• cause of your mischance.
Madame, said Frisol, where no offence is cōmitted, what
néeds any remission? If my fortune haue béene ill, it is not
for mée to complaine on you, for your request tended to
mine owne honour: but I must be content with my hap,
though it hath sorted to so bad effect, and this doth yet comfort
me, that I receiued my foile by the onely Knight in
the worlde. And if the heauens please to lengthen my
dayes, I shall be desirous to do him seruice, for there is no
man liuing to whom I could better affoord it. Now néede
I not mislike (hauing tried him so often) if he be worthy
the loue of diuine Polinarda, for he (beyond all other) doth
best deserue it. Why, how now? quoth the Lady, are you so
vnwise, to honour him so much, that hath so iniuried
you? and which is most childish, to desire his seruice? Go
                           •
                        
then and séeke him whom thou so louest, for by mine h
                           •
                        
                        nour,
I more despise thée now then any man in the world,
thou making such reputation of him, whom thou oughtest
to pursue with mortall hatred. Frisol smiling hereat, said.
Madame, I must néeds say so, séeing no ill wordes can amend
my mischaunce: so without any aunswer, she 
                           ••
                        oong
foorth of his Chamber. The next day, the Duke called all
his Knights, commanding them to restraine the passage

                           •
                        o longer at the bridge, intending to go to the Court, s
                           •
                        
soone as Frisol had recouered his health.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. LX.
                     
                        Howe Palmerin, Hermes, and Colmelio returned to London,
and the good entertainment the king of England
made them.
                     
                     
                        AFter that Frisol was returned from
the Combate, Palmerin after many
embracings of Colmelio, went with
him to the fountaine where hee left
Hermes, all thrée togither making no
little ioy: Colmelio for his happie finding
of Palmerin, and he for the loue
of his supposed brother, and Hermes for the comfort hée
shoulde bring the King his Maister, béeing able nowe to
acquaint his highnesse with Palmerins name, which hée
was loath any in the English Court shoulde knowe,
wherefore he sayde. Nowe can you not my Lord hereafter
bide your name, though you haue béene daintie
of it all this while. It is true Syr, quoth Palmerin,
albeit I little thought to be discouered so soone: but séeing
it is so come to passe, my hope is in y• highest, who wil
defend me in all mine attempts: now tell me Colmelio,
what newes in Greece? Truly my Lord, quoth he, the
discourse will be long and tedious: therefore if you pleas
                           •
                        
to m
                           •
                        unt on horsebacke, it will serue well to shorten the
thought of our iourny. So as they rode towards London,
Colmelio began to discourse, in how many places he had

                           •••
                        ght him in Greece, and how at length he heard of him
at Macedon, by report of his cōquest of the serpent at the
mountaine Arti
                              •
                           aeria, which was the meane that bro
                           •
                        g
                           ••
                        
the King of Macedon to his former health. Afterward,

how he left Greece, trauailing into Allemaigne, and frō
thence into England, at what time the Emperors power
was discomfited: and hearing great fame of Frisol his late
Maister, he spent some time in his seruice, not doubting
but by his meanes to find the man he looked for. Palmerin
was somewhat mooued, hearing Colmelio so commend
Frisol, wherefore he demaunded of him, if he knewe any
thing of that Knights linage. No my Lord, quoth he but I
can assure ye, that he is one of the most gentle Knights in
the world, and he concealeth his parentage very secretly,
which makes me iudge he is discēded of royal birth. After
Colmelio had ended his discourse, he repeated to him some
parte of his fortunes, in the end perswading him that hée
would remunerate his paines in séeking him and in time
manifest the loue he bare him. By this time they were
come to the Citie of London, Hermes riding before to the
pallace, where he aduertised the king, how Palmerin was
returned to y• Citie, which newes so highly contented the
king, as oftentimes he imbraced Hermes for bringing the
man he long desired to sée: but Trineus and Ptolome excéeded
him in ioy, and mounted presently on horsebacke to
go méete theyr fréend, when so many embracings, courte
                           ••
                        es
and kinde gratulations had passed betwéene them,
as is vsuall at the méeting of long absent louers: Ah my
Lord and fréend, quoth Trineus, how long hath Fortune
kept you from me? & why did you depart not vouchsafing
a farewel? What earnest occasion might cause such an vnking
departure trust me, I perswaded my selfe in respecte
of the long continuaunce of our amitie, that death could
not procure such a seuere enterprise. My Lord, quoth Palmerin
it séemeth you haue some cause to complain of mée:
but whē you vnderstand how matters haue happened, you
will not condemne me altogither. For at the time of my
departure, I thought verely to return the next day following:
but such importunate affaires continually fell out, as
I could not return till this very instant. Ptolome said as

much as Trineus did, notwithstanding, this fortunate meeting
forbad all further accusations, and they became as good
friendes as euer they were. So rode they to the Pallace,
where the king attending theyr comming, perceiued at
length they were entred the Hall, when Palmerin falling
on his knée, kissed his highnesse hand, who very honourably
embracing him, saide Where hath my noble friend béene so
long? What crooked fortune hath caused your so long absence?
you departed from vs in blacke Armour, I pray
you tell vs, where did you conquere these sumptuous
Armes? by the loue you beare to chiualrie and to mee: satisfie
me in my demaund. Palmerin séeing the king coniured
him so straightly, reported the truth of all his aduentures,
howe he had that armour of the Ladie whose daughter
hee deliuered, and left his owne there broken▪ in péeces.
The king embracing him againe saide. I cannot be perswaded,
but all especiall aduentures, high good fortunes, and
chéefest honours in the world are onely reserued for you, and
among all the rest, most maruailous is this of the Castle
in the enchaunted Lake, which many knights haue heretofore
attempted, but returned with the losse of their horses,
Armour, and with great dishonour. Thrise welcome are
you for these happy tydings, as also for your gentle courtes
                           •
                        e
to Erisol, who is a knight of most honourable reputation.
But in regarde of your wearisome trauailes, it is verie
requisite that you nowe go rest your selfe, therefore lette
some body helpe to disarme you, and betake your selfe (on
Gods name) to your Chamber, Palmerin reputed the
kings councell most expedient, and therefore did as hee
commaunded him, so hauing reposed himselfe a while, hee
came to sée howe the Quéene and her daughter fared, who
would not suffer him to departe, before hee hadde likewise
acquainted her with all his fortunes, especially the whole
circumstaunce of his tra
                           ••
                        ile at the Ca
                           ••
                        le of the Lake.
But night being come, and euerie one betaking themselues
to rest, Palmerin demaunded of the Prince, how hee 
                           ••
                        ll
                           •
                        wed

his desires, and what hee had concluded as concerning
his loue? Ah d
                           ••
                        re fréende, sayd Trineus, why aske you mée
that question? doo you not thinke that hauing so lost you,
I likewise was disappointed of any meane to helpe mee?
know then, that at this instant I am in the middest of all
my misfortunes, for so badly hath it happened, that I am
now further from Agriola then euer I was, and I shall tell
you how. Not many dayes since, as I was familiarlye de
                        
                           •
                        ising
with my Ladye, the Duke of Gaules daughter chaunced
to hear
                           •
                         such amorous spéeches as passed betwéene the
Princesse and mée, wherby she gathered, that Agriola made
some estimation of me: whereupon shée laboured, to cause
my Mistresse in shorte time mislike what I hadde so long
trauailed to perswade her with, as thus. That it ill beséemed
a Princesse of her account, of so gracious discent, and
Daughter to such a mightie King, to conferre with straungers,
or vouchsafe a listening to any thing they sayde: for
they were none such as she reputed them, but after they
hadde brought a Ladyes honour in daunger, they then
were satisfied, as they vsed it for a custome among
theyr companions. And so well could shée féede the Princesse
humour, with these suborning and spightfull detractions,
which séemed to her as swéete and freendlye perswasions,
that in stéede of the little loue I latelye conquered,
I finde nothing but frownes and disdaine, that she will
scant affoord mée a looke. Which discourtesie hath well nere
driuen me to dispayre, in regarde of her slender opinion of
mee, as being so hindered onely through your absence. Often
I determined with Ptolome, to leaue the Courte and followe
you in trauaile: but the King by no meanes woulde
permit mée, sending many of his owne Knightes, because I
shoulde not go: yet was I resolued, that had you not come,
no displeasure whatsoeuer shoulde haue helde mée héere: but
to finde you I intended, or loose my life. This falles out very
harde, quoth Palmerin, for by these meanes we shall stay
héere God knowes how long: beside, Hermes knowes my

name, which makes me doubt least we shalbe reuealed: the
Emperour likewise may be offended at our long tarriaunce.
In regarde of all this, good Prince, I thinke it best, that we
sende your squire and Vrbanillo my Dwarffe, to aduertise
his Maiestie of our affaires, and how by reason of the tempest,
we were cast quite out of course so far, as we could not
by any meanes assist his Armie, not doubting but to sée his
highnesse in very short time. In the meane while, we may
practise meanes to win the Princesse fauour againe, and
so in good time departe hence, with the honourable prize that
we came for. Trineus was newlye reuiued with these spéeches,
wherefore he desired, that betimes in the morning hée
would dispatche theyr Seruauntes towardes Allemaigne.
Which Palmerin fayled not to doo, in respect of a dreame he
had the night before, for he imagined that he sawe his Lady
Polynarda in meruailous heauinesse, and that she sayde to
him. Alas my Lord, what shall become of me? for I am narrowly
sought to be seperated from you. This fearefull vision
so discouraged him, as he sent thence his Dwarfe, to
shewe her what trouble he hadde with his dreame, and how
constant he remained in his loue to her.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. LXI.
                     
                        How Palmerin promised the princesse Agriola, to con
                              •
                           ay
her out of England, with his friendes, which he performed,
to the speciall content of the prince Trineus.
                     
                     
                        EArly on the next morning Palmerin arose,
and wrote a letter to his Lady Polinarda
wherin he secretly put a ring,
which shee gaue him when he departed
from her, straightly commaunding
Vrbanillo that hee shoulde diligently
attende on the Princesse till hee came,
which should bée with all the spéede hee could possible. Ptolome
likewise wrote to his Ladi
                           •
                         
                        Brionella, and these
Letters dispatched, the Messengers immediatly sette forwarde
on theyr iourney. From this time Colmelio was
Palmerins Squire, which pleased him very well, because
hee knewe that Palmerin was nobly borne, so that by
his meanes in time hee should rise to preferment. This
day the king would ride abroade a Hunting, which gaue
Palmerin occasion to sée the Faulcon fli
                           •
                        , béeing reputed
by the king and all his traine, to be the best that euer flew.
In this time of recreation, Hermes reported to the King,
that the knight so long absent was named Palmerin, and
the same knight that woonne so much honour in Fraunce,
which so well contented the king, as he more and more desired
his companie: summoning all his Barons and Lordes
to his Courte, where hee made such feastes, triumphs, and
other sportes, for the honour of the noble Palmarin and his

companions as the like had not béen of long time before.
At night, when the Maskers, Mumeries and Moriscoes
were in presence, that Palmerin espied conuenient time
to talk with the princesse, he tooke her aside to a window,
and thus began. Madam, before I begin what I haue to
acquaint you withal, I must giue you this ring, as I was
commanded by the lady of the castel in the lake: the singular
vertues thereof are such, as I intreate you to kéepe it
cōtinually on your finger: which Agriola receiuing, with
a curteous reuerence, faithfully promised to accomplish
his request: then Palmerin, with earnest affection on his
friends behalfe, thus continued his discourse. I cannot but
maruell, fayre Princesse, you being a Ladie of so speciall
qualitie, renowmed among the most vertuous creatures
in the world, for your rare integrity & profound iudgemēt
that you will be gouerned by the vnaduised perswasiōs of
other: which I would not beléeue, had not the Prince Trineus
certenly assured me, how since my departure, in stéed
of fauorable countenance, and the intreatance beséeming
so great a Lord, he can haue nothing but frownes, disdaine
& coy regard, which is as easy for him to indure, as a thousand
deaths one after another. Assure your self so farre beguiled,
as your councellers disswade you frō your chéefest
good, desirous to withhold you from the height of honour,
wherof you cannot faile, being matched in mariage with
the most vertuo
                           •
                        s Prince Trineus. Make you no small
account, that he being one of the most noble states on the
earth, hath left his parents, his friends and countrey, hath
past so many strange & vncouth regions, hath aduentured
the iniurie of the seas, b
                           •
                        aten with so many bitter blastes
and raging billowes, euerie minute in daunger of Shipwracke,
& all for your loue? Thinke you that he being son
to the Emperour of Allemaigne, attending euery day the
rule of the Empire, that he came hither to you in hope of
your rich dowrie? No trust me, Madame, and I thinke
your own conscience doth so resolue you, that néerer home

he could haue found other, endued with larger possessions
then this Realme affords you. But hearing the fame of
your manifold vertues, rare life, choise beautie, and all other
good gifts, he was willing wtout regard of his owne
estate, to thrust himselfe in daunger, yea, to forget himselfe
for your loue, which hitherto he hath with religious
seruice intreated, and except you intertaine him with
more gracious fauour, he is in danger of life. Which if it
should happen by your occasion, for euer you shal be noted
of monstrous ingratitude, and Christendome should sustain
a losse vnrecouerable. How far such a thought ought
to be frō you, I leaue to your own cōstruction. If hitherto
you haue knowne me, a knight readie to support the causes
of Ladies far beneath your height, thinke you I haue
not greater reason to honour you? yea, not a moue you
with any request, but what may euery way aduance your
credite. And though my lord Trineus were not of the blood
imperiall, yet might his gentle heart, vnfeigned loue, and

                           •
                        urpassing humanitie, cause you to make choyse of him,
aboue all other whatsoeuer they be. But séeing it so falles
out, that you will not regard good counsell, following rather
the perswasion of mean capacities, whose iudgemēts
may not reach to so high occasions, continue in your obstinacie,
and marke the end of such indiscréet consures. I sée
that our company is yrksome to you, therfore (sooner then
you imagin) we will remoue that occa
                           ••
                        on. I knowe well
enough, that you intend to match with the duke of Gaule,
who is but your fathers subiect: so refusing y• degrée of an
Empresse, you shall tarry in England, and be a Dutchesse.
Thinke you, that if my Lord matched not with you, the
greatest Princesse in Europe would not triumph in his
loue? Yes certainly Madam, when you may at leysure sit
downe & recount your 
                           〈◊〉
                        , which you sustained by flatterers
& par
                           •
                        sites. Think what will be the danger after our
departure, the Emperour his father, not minding to poc
                        
                           ••
                        t
the losse of his late armie, will send such a puissaunt

strength into England, as the King your father, nor 
                           〈◊〉
                        
duke your husband that must be, wil scant excuse y• whole
ruine of this country. The mean to preuent this mishap,
and assure your continual tranquilitie, is in entertaining
the counsell I haue giuen you: where otherwise your selfe
conceit, makes way to manifold misfortunes & dangers.
Thus concluding his spéeches, in great heauines he turned
from her, wherat the Princesse inwardly gréeued, for
the Ring which he had giuen her was of such vertue, that
after she had put it on her finger, shee was wonderfully
affected toward Trineus, as she could not thinke on any other:
wherfore in this sudden change, and trembling with
the doubtful conceit of her owne spirit, she called Palmerin
to her, thus answering. Alas my Lord, and only comfort
in these heauy passions, what feare hath these hard
and rigorous spéeches brought me into? It is very true
that folowing the counsell of yong Ladies like my selfe, I
haue béene perswaded to cast off the Princes loue, accounting
him but a simple knight errant: but now being assured
of his nobility, loialty, and great gentlenesse, & that
he would not request (as I hope) any thing contrary to
vertue and honor, I beléeue what you haue said, & submit
my selfe to your discretion, as willing to obey any thing
you shall commaund me. Yet this I must request, that aboue
all things mine honour may be defended, for rather
would I suffer mine own losse for euer, then this famous
realme or my father should be any way endangered. Beléeue
me Lady▪ quoth Palmerin, if thus you continue, you
may wel venture to gain this generall benefit, for henceforth
there will none be so hardy, as to molest your father
with warre, hauing matched his daughter with the great
Emperours sonne of Allemagne. To confirme this promise,
you shall giue me this swéete hand which I kisse, as
the hand of the soueraigne Lady & Empresse of high Allemaigne,
that you will not shrinke hereafter frō this honorable
determination: but for your owne regard, you must

conceale this contract from your most trustie friends, and
dispose in such sort of your selfe, for I hope to compasse the
meane and opportunitie, that you shal leaue England, and
go to the noble regions of your worthy Lorde and husband.
What I haue promised, sayd Agriola, I will performe,
and with what spéede you shall thinke conuenient:
albeit I repose such trust in you, that hauing béene so fortunate
hitherto in your interprises, you wil be carefull in
accomplishing these daungerous intentions. Thus before
they departed, the mariage of Trineus and Agriola was
concluded, and because they would not as then bee suspected,
they stept into the daunce next the yong prince, shewing
very amiable & pleasant gestures: which Trineus (in
his often turning) diligētly noted, imagining that Palmerin
had not so long conferred with his Lady, but some assured
resolutiō was determined, yet he dissembled his inward
ioies so cunningly as he could. Ech eie was fixed on
these two braue knights, the Ladies and Gentlewomen
perswading themselues, that they neuer beheld more noble
personages, deseruing like estimation for their special
chiualrie, as also for their bountie and Courtly 
                           •
                        iuilitie.
Thus passed the feast in all kinde of pleasures, and these
two Knights withdrawing themselues into their chamber,
Palmerin discoursed to Trineus his talk with Agriola,
and how he had with such cunning pursued the matter
that in the end be obtained what he demaunded, reporting
the gentle conclusion hee made with the Princesse.
These ioyfull newes dro
                           •
                        e the prince into such a quandarie,
as he could not expresse his secret content, wherefore
Palmerin awaking him out of his musing, said. As I am
true knight, I neuer thought y• a man of your estate could
be of so slender courage. What countenance woulde you
vse in a matter of sorrow, when such dainty tidings make
you so effeminate? Be of good chéere man, Agriola is your
owne, and none but Trineus must bee her Lorde and husband.
I must confesse my lord, said Trineus, that my behauior,

but little beséemes my calling: but y• cause therof is,
that I know no desert in my selfe y• may be estéemed▪ worthy
y• least fauor of my Lady. Beside, these newes brought
me such special contentmēt, as I am no longer mine own,
but in her onely I liue, and shée holdes the ballan
                           ••
                         of my
daunger or felicity, in that I was borne to be her 
                           •
                        eruant.
But now I desire you my Lord, séeing the occasion offereth
itself, we hinder it not by any negligence: for if now
we loose the fauour of the time, we neuer (I feare) shal recouer
the like, therefore let vs so soone as we can, pro
                           ••
                        d
                           •
                        
al things ready for our depart
                           ••
                        e. Refer that to me, quoth
Palmerin, be you as ready as I shall make prouision. The
next day he went to the maister of a ship, to knowe when
time would serue for their secret departure, who answered
him, that the time was then very conuenient, the
winde seruing prosperously, and the Sea calme and nauigable,
and he would furnish him with all necessaries for
his passage. Quoth Palmerin, sée that your men and all
things be in readines, y• we may launch away vpon halfe
an houres warning. So departed the maister about his
busines, and Palmerin to the prince Trineus, whom he informed
with these glad tydings, now nothing remaining
but to know the princesse pleasure, 
                           •
                        he being 
                           〈◊〉
                         wi
                           •
                        e as
ready to depart as y• most forward. But (quoth Palmerin)
how shall we safely get you foorth of the Court? I will,
sayd the Princesse, this night feigne my selfe sicke, and for
my greater quiet, cause my Ladyes to absent my Chamber,
and so secretly will I escape disg
                           ••
                        s
                           •
                        d to the 
                           〈◊〉
                         gate
of the Pallace, which is not far from my todging, wherto
I may passe vnséene of any, and from thence go with
you sa
                           ••
                        ly to the Hauen. This practise was faithfully concluded
betwéene them, and Agriola withdrewe her selfe
closely to her chamber, where at night she began her c
                           •
                        ū
                        terfeit
sicknesse, commanding her Lady
                           ••
                         to 
                           〈◊〉
                         h
                           •
                        r alone,
because 
                           •
                        he 
                           〈…〉
                         Her
Ladyes little thinking of 
                           〈…〉
                         went to their

owne lodgings very pe
                           •
                        siue and sorowful, which Agriola
perceiuing, couered her self with her night mantle, and
came to the place where the Knights staid her comming.
Palmerin taking hir vnder his arme, conuaied hir in that
maner to the princes chāber, where they altogither laid
downe the order for their embarking, Trineus extolling
his happy fortune, séeing his Lady so ready to accomplish
his desire. They arming themselues, and taking with
them the princesse costly iewels, wherof she had plentifully
stored her self, they came to the hauen, where they foūd
the ship and mariners ready, and getting all aboord, the
wind seruing for their auaile, they set saile, and before day
they got farre enough from London.
                     
                  
                  
                     Chap. LXII.
                     
                        How the king of England and the Queene were aduertised,
how their daughter Agriola was conuayed away,
and of their sorrow for her departure.
                     
                     
                        THe Duke of Gaules daughter, who continually
was bedfellow to the Princesse,
absenting her selfe very long from bed,
fearing to disquiet her Ladie, being sicke
as she supposed: but comming at length
to sée h
                           •
                        w shee fared, finding the bedde
emptie, and Agriola gone, shee presently made a great
out-crie, whereat the other Ladies came, and altogither
amazed at this sudden aduenture, went to the Quéenes
Chamber, where they reported how the Princesse was
gone, but howe, or when, they knew not. The Quéene
at these tydings suddenly arose, and comming to her

daughters Chamber found it too true, which made her fal
into such pitiful acclamations, farre surpassing those of
Maguelona, when she lost her friend Peter of Prouince
in the wood.
                     In these lamentings shee returned to the king, whose
heauines excéeded iudgment, for the losse of his daughter,
and then came diuerse lords & gentlemen, who declared
that the strange Knights were likewise departed. Which
raised such a 
                           •
                        umour through all the Citie, that they had
stolen away the Princesse. The King vnderstanding the
general sorow for his daughters absence, said. In sooth my
friends, if these Knights haue done such seruice for mée,
they haue sufficiently recompenced themselues, in doing
me the greatest dishonour they could deuise: yet wil I not
condemne them so much as my daughter, for that I am
perswaded shée procured this mischaunce. But nowe I
well perceiue what credit a mā may repose in his enemy:
for Palmerin euermore serued the Emperour of Allemaigne,
then h
                           •
                        rdly could he be true to mee. Yet is it in
vain for me to blame him, or his companions, if they took
                           •
                        
the aduauntage of their owne intents. But now there 
                           〈◊〉
                        
no remedy, my daughter is in the company of most chosen
knights: if she haue done well, or ill, hereafter her deserts
will answer her misdemeanour. Thus the king would
not suffer any pursute after them, though the Quéen and
her Ladies earnestly intreated him: he answering that
no such mone should be made, for a child so vngrateful 
                           〈◊〉
                        
disobedient, but hauing committed an action so 
                           •
                        ile & 
                           ••
                        
                        
                        
                           •
                        rme,
she should no more account of her as 
                           〈◊〉
                         childe. And
well may wee (quoth hee) so refuse her, in that she wou
                           ••
                        
leaue her parents, and depart with straungers: 
                           〈◊〉
                        
might we haue accounted our selues▪ if we had lost her in her infancie.
The Quéene séeing her 
                           •
                        ord so impatient, appeased
his displeasure so well as she could, because shee
would not mooue him too much. Within few dayes after
the Duke of Gaule arriued at the Court, who most of all

gréeued at th
                           •
                        se vnhappy tidings, wherefore he perswaded
the king to proclaime open warre against the Emperour
of Allemaigne, assuring him, that the knight which
most commonly accompanied Palmerin, was Trineus the
Emperors sonne. When the king heard the Dukes spéeches,
forgetting his anger, he reioyced, estéeming himselfe
happy, and his daughter wise, in matching her selfe with
such a husband: and if she had made her choyse among al
the Princes of the world, shee could not haue sorted out
one comparable in honor. In bréefe aunswered the duke,
that for a daughter so lost, he would not séeke the death of
his louers and subiects: but being one of Fortunes changes,
he could not withstand it, and thus the king wisely
and patiently ent
                           •
                        red hi
                           •
                         grée
                           •
                        e.
                  
                  
                     Chap. LXIII.
                     
                        How Vrbanillo and the Prince Trineus Esquire, arriued
at the Emperours Court, and what great ioy their comming
procured.
                     
                     
                        IN this place 
                           •
                        ur history taketh this
occasion, howe the King of Fraunce
daily expecting newes from Palmerin,
as concerning his intent of marriage,
betwéene his daughter and the
Prince Trineus: but séeing he heard
no tidings at all, he determined to
send his ambassad
                           •
                        rs to the Emperor, electing for chéef
                           •
                        
in this embassage the Count of A
                              •
                           mignac, to whom hee
gaue ful power & authority to conclude the marriage betweene
Trineus & his daughter Lucemania, as also of the

princesse Polinarda with his son and heyre. The king dispatching
al things for his ambassage, sent many 
                           •
                        arons
and knight
                           •
                         of name to accompany the Count, to countenance
the matter with more royaltie & magnificence, and
in this maner they came to Gaunt, where the Emperour
being aduertised of theyr arriuall, 
                           〈◊〉
                         no gr
                           •
                        at account
thereof, such was his gréefe for his sonne
                           •
                         absence & Palmerins,
of whom he could not heare any tidings, as also for
the foyle his Armie sustained in England. But while the
messenger from the ambassadours of Fraunce stayed with
the Emperour, Vrbanillo and the princes Squire entred
the hall, whose presence highly contented the Emperour,
as embracing them very louingly, he demaunded for Palmerin
and his sonne Trineus, when they deliuering their
letters, and the Emperour perswaded therby of their spéedie
return, was greatly contented, saying to the Ambassadours
messenger. My fréend, séeing I haue heard such long
looked for tidings of my sonne, you may returne to the

                           〈◊〉
                         your maister, desiring him to come when hee
thinks conuenient, & he shall be heartily welcome to me:
with this answer the messenger departed. Thē the emperor
taking Vrbanillo by y• hand, said. Tel me now I pray
thée, how fares thy maister? where is he? is my sonne with
him? My gracious lord, quoth the dwar
                           •
                        e, where your noble
son abideth, there is my maister, both of 
                           •••
                        ght good
disposition, and highly honored. And hereof I can assure
your maiesty, y• you haue a son, who by good reason 
                           〈◊〉
                        
to be numbred among the best knights liuing, for such
honourable experience hath hee made of his worthines,
that perpetuall memorie will recorde his déeds of chiualry:
what els remaineth you shal know at their comming,
which will be so soone as they can possibly. I euer perswaded
my selfe, said the Emperour, that in the company o
                           •
                         so
good a knight as Palmerin, my son could not but purchase
credit and honour: the refore séeing they haue such prosperity
of health, I care the lesse for their stay, but welcome

are they whensoeuer they come. By this time Polinarda
heard of the Dwarfes arriual, which greatly pleasing her
she sayd to Brionella. I pray thée swéete fréend go spéedily
and séeke the Dwarfe, that we may knowe what is become
of our Lords and my brother Trineus. Brionella,
who longed to heare of hir loue Sir Ptolome, whom wel
she knew to be one of the companie, with all spéed accomplished
the Princesse commandement, and found the ioyfull
messenger with the Emperour, who tooke great delight
in the Dwarfes reports: but his maiestie perceiuing
with what chéerefull countenance she came to bring
Vrbanillo to her Lady the princesse, bad him go with her,
hoping by his meanes his Daughters extreame sadnesse
would be comforted. Brionella béeing forth of the Emperours
presence, embraced him many times to know his
tydings, when the Dwarfe not ignorant of the Ladyes
passions, deliuered Ptolomes letter to chéere her: but whē
the Princesse saw Vrbanillo comming, with the teares
in her eyes she ranne apace to méete him, and casting her
armes about his neck, embraced him verie often, saying.
Tell me Vrbanillo, tell mee, how fares my brother & thy
Maister Palmerin? Madame, quoth the Dwarfe, so well
as your owne heart can wish, and will ere long be héere
with you. Then deliuered he y• letter frō 
                        Trineus, which
certified her of his short returne, & that hee would bring
with him y• thing she most estéemed. But the wag knowing
she expected other matters, and that her brothers medicine
was not sufficient for her cure, he gaue her his masters
letter, when she hastily breaking open y• seale, found
the ring which her loyal friend had sent her, and after she
had welcomd it with many deuout kisses, she put it on hir
finger, with these words. I charge thée kéepe this token
safely, in witnesse of the knights gentlenesse that sent it,
whome my heart hath made speciall choyse of aboue all other.
Then reading the letter, and discrée
                           •
                        ly considering
(not without great e
                           •
                        fuse of teares) the swéet words, humble

supplications, entire excuses, & extreame passions, that
her friend continually suffered for her loue, deliuering
many bitter sighs, she said. Ah my true and loyall friend,
I beléeue wel, and take in good part your cause of absence,
béeing assured, that if possibly you could returne sooner, nothing
should stay you from the place, where y• only remedie
of your dolorous gréefes abideth. But séeing for my
loue you may not forsake my brother, I pray you for your
continuall safetie, and spéedie conduction to your longing
desires, that mine eies ouerwatched with tedious expectation,
& my hart néere tired with bootlesse wishings, may
by your presence be thorowly cōforted. Afterward Vrbanillo
bréefely reported to her the noble actions of his Lord
and maister, the loue of Ttineus to the Princesse Agriola,
discribing her beautie and rare perfections, whereupon
Polinarda thus answered. Beléeue mee Vrbani
                              •
                           lo, if the
Princesse be so faire as thou saist she is, her great vertues
and firme loyaltie likewise comparable, enuie & false report
shal not impeach her, to be reckoned among the most
happie Ladies of the world, and her desires wil be as honorably
effected, as with vertuous thoughts she first began
them. The like (I doubt not) will happen to thy maister,
for fortune hath euermore so specially fauored him, as
now it were against reason shée should alter her countenance.
So departed the Dwarfe from the Princesse, returning
to the Emperor, who by no meanes could get any
other tidings of his son then what you haue heard, which
made him doubt the dwarfe iuggled with him. The next
day the Emperour sent his chéefest Lords and Barons, to
conduct the French ambassadors to the court, which was
sumptuously hanged with Tapistrie, especially the great
hall, which was adorned with costly cloth of gold, and rich
purple, as it had béene the Pallace of Salomon. The Ambassadours
entertained with maruailous royaltie, & hauing
deliuered the summe of their embassage, the Emperour
answered that hée would conferre thereon with his

councel, in me any while they might returne to their lodgings.
After they were departed the hall, the Emperour
demanded of the princes electours and the rest of his nobilitie,
if these marriages of his sonne and daughter, with
the heire and princesse of Fraunce, might not be granted,
as well for the vtilitie and honor of the Empire, as for the
generall benefit of Christendome, commanding them to
speake their iudgements without feare. The Lords altogether
answered, that the m
                           •
                        tion was so good & the aliance
so honorable, as it was no way to be misliked. I will
then (quoth he) talke with the empresse, that she may vnderstand
hir daughters opinion, & then my lords of France
shalbe answered. So leauing them hee went to the Empresse
chamber, to whom he reported his agréement with
his councel, which pleased her likewise maruailous wel:
but when sh
                           •
                         had a little considered on the matter, she answered,
that but little could be said before Trineus returned
home againe. You reason well, quoth the Emperour,
but in meane time I pray you 
                           •
                        oūd your daughters iudgement,
y• we may returne our brother of Fraunce some certain
answer. Which she promised to do, & so departing frō
her lord, she went to her daughters chāber, where hauing
cōmanded her ladies aside, she thus began. Faire daughter,
it is the emperors pleasure and mine, that you marrie
with the eldest sonne and heire of Fraunce, and your
brother Trineus with his sister, for hee is one of the most
renowned kings in Europe, & his son recounted among
the best knights of the world: for which good fortune you
may thanke the heauens, that so great a prince offers his
Sonne to be your husband. Aduise your selfe of your answer,
for by your opinion must the ambassadors be dispatched
hence, who came to the court for nothing else but to
conclude these honorable marriages. Polinarda hearing y•
words of her mother, was surprized with such sodain heauines,
as she could not tel what to answer: but fearing the
Empresse should perceiue that her loue was already determined,

with sad countenance thus replied. Madame,
you know what promise I made my brother the day when
he departed from the Court, in the presen
                           ••
                         of you and all
the nobility, that I would not marry before his returne:
and me thinks I were greatly to be blamed, and well
worthy gréeuous reprehension, if I shoulde so falsifie my
word, which I cannot do without impeach of myne honor.
And héerein shall I follow the laudable bertue of the
Emperor my father, who euermore estéemed his promise
aboue al earthly possessions. Beside, I can assure you that
my brother wil neuer marry with the princesse Lucemania,
for he loues one many degrées beyond her, and (may I
speake it without offence) one of the most beautifull Ladyes
that euer nature framed. Thus Madame, my Father
and you haue excuses sufficient & auayleable, wherewith
to aunswere the king of France. It may be, quoth the
empresse, that your brother loues els where: but I can tell
ye, that neyther hée nor you shall do any thing contrary to
the Emperors commandement. Polinarda séeing her mother
persist in her opinyon, bit in her sorrowes with many
secret sighs: yet knew she so wel how to dissemble her passions,
as the Empresse could not discerne her priuat meaning.
So returned she to the Emperor, aduertising him of
hir daughters answere: wherat he was so offended, as in
great anger hee came himselfe to his Daughter, saying.
Why howe now Daughter? are you so bolde to disobey
my commandemēt? or dare you repugne against my wil?
al is to no end that you haue babled with your mother, for
(will ye or no) it shall bée as I haue appoynted. I knowe
right well dread Lord and father, quoth she, that I ought
no way to deny your pleasure, but rather wil I die a thousand
deaths, then consent to match with the Sonne of
Fraunce, considering what promise I haue made my brother▪
and if I should so farre dishonour my selfe, as not to
regarde what I haue promised, I were not worthy hereafter
to be called your daughter. Thus stoode she resolute

in her answere, and therewith shedde such aboundance of
teares, as the Emperour was constrayned to tell the Ambassadours,
that the marriages could not be concluded till
the returne of Trineus, notwithstanding he granted all
the articles of their embassage. The princesse qualli
                           ••
                        
                        ing
her gréefe as well as shee could, sent for the Dwarfe,
and taking him by the hand, sayde. Alas my freend, I am
now in y• greatest perplexity in the world, neuerthelesse,
one thing comforts me: that thou be holdest the true loue
and loyaltie I beare thy maister, which neuer shal be broken,
what euer become of me. And would to God he were
now heere, then would I speake it openly without feare
of any, that I am 
                           •
                        is, and he myne. Madame, quoth the
Dwarfe, if you continue faithfull to my maister, perswade
your selfe of his assurance, for he building on your constancie,
takes such continual pleasure in remembring you, that
it is the onely meane that preserues his life: and you may
be b
                           •
                        lde to credit me, that if your brothers loue did not
with-hold him, he would haue bin here long ere this, but
he wil come soone inough (I hope) to end this doubt. As for
me, I am of the opinion that heauen wil not suffer so good
a knight to die, but first wil permit him to sée his mistris.
Die? quoth the princesse, sooner let all the knights in the
world ende theyr dayes, and the eldest Sonne of Franc
                              •
                           
                        
likewise, though hée loue mée so déerely, so might I be rid
of these importunate Ambassadours. The Emperour séeing
hée could get no other answer of his daughter, concluded
with the French ambassadors, that so soone as his son
was returned, he should be aduertized, and so for that time
they might depart: but the empresse and he first bestowed
on them many rich presents, and so in short time they arriued
againe in Fraunce, where great ioye was made in
hope of these marriages, albeit they little thought the
Prince Trineus would tarrie so long. Aboue all other, the
French prince was most ioyfull, hearing the Countie of
Armignac report the wonderfull beauty of Polinarda: but

                        
                           •
                        he good Lady was of another mind, for she had rather b
                           •
                        
take her self to a Cloister, then to breake her faith to Palmerin
whom shée loued so constantly. Thus leaue we her
conferring with Vrbanillo, returning to Palmerin and the
Prince Trineus.
                     
                  
                  
                     Chap. LXIIII.
                     
                        ¶How Palmerin beeing thus on the Sea, caused Trineus
there to marrie the Princesse Agriola.
                     
                     
                        THis noble company being thus on the
Sea, hauing winde at will, sayled
with such expedition, as in four
                           •
                        
dayes they had gotten farre enough
from England, and the prince séeing
Agriola very pensiue and sad, comforting
her with many swéete kisses,
and taking her by the hande, thus spake. O soueraigne
Creatour, how shal I render sufficient thanks and praise
to thée, in graunting me the onely thing I desired? A
                           •
                        
swéete madame, and my onely mistresse Agriola, how
                           •
                        
much is your seruant indeb
                           •
                        ed to you? hath any knight
more cause to honour & extol his lady then I? Beléeue me
fayre Princesse, such are the rare effects of your gracious
nature, and I so ioyfull of my happie fortune, as neither
friend or father shall fetch you againe from mée. I
                           •
                        
my life might endure the length of tenne men
                           •
                        , and euery
day I shuld accomplish wonders in your seruice, yet could
I not remunerate the least part of your Princely deserts.
But if your loue be such to me, as I am right wel assured

                        
                           •
                        t is, let me intreat you forbeare this heauines, and banish
from your thoughts your melancholy humours: for seeing
you so sad & pensiue, I suffer a torment worser then death
it selfe. F
                           •
                        r l
                           •
                        t me perceiue (how little soeuer it be) y• my
presence may be to your lyking, & our present enterprise
somwhat more pleasing: I fly to the heauens with conceit
of happines, and value my fortune aboue the reach of humane
capacity. In stéede of teares, let vs vse quaint
tearmes, and for these dumps, pleasant imaginations,
perswade your selfe Madam, you are now in his custody,
that honours you for your vertues, reuerenceth you for
your diuine perfections, extols you for incomparable merits,
and liues for you with his very vttermost endeuors,
Thinke not though you haue left your parents, the fault
is not pardonable, for the new alyance wherein you haue
combyned your self, shal one day glad you with such speciall
content, that what you do imagine nowe a dangerous
offence, will bee reputed on act of prouid
                           •
                        nt and princely
discretion. Then shall you finde true, what Palmerin hath
spoken, and his promises of preferment and imperial dignity
shall be both rightly & sufficiently perfo
                           •
                        rmed. Let
these perswasions, if not my intreatyes excell these passions,
and procure better comfort. Madam, quoth Palmerin,
though you haue left your country, consider the occasion, y•
loue of a mighty prince, and the heauenly appoyntment,
that your noble vertues should be coupled together, hath
brought you from England, to sit on the imperyal seate in
Allemaigne. How carefull we haue béene of your honor,
your selfe can witnes, no motion béeing offered to preiudice
your lyking. That you are contracted before the only
immortall witnes, you wil not deny: therfore to preuent
all ensuing dangers, the actual ceremony shalbe héere celebrated,
and the royaltie thereof solemnized when we
come into Allemaigne. So, if Himen claimes his due, you
may graunt it without reproch, and Iuno will as well
smile at her sacred offering here, as if it were in bower or

hall. The credite of Princes, are charie, and angry parent
                           ••
                        
may hinder, what heauen dooth further: but the déede doon,
it cannot be recalled, nor can you be diuorced but onelye by
death, and pittie were it, loue so well begun, but should
                           •
                        
continue, therefore (so please you▪) let it bée perfourmed.
The Princes both agreed, they were there maried, requiting
theyr chast loue, with a simpathie of vertuous desires: but
this time of delight and pleasure hadde small continuaunce,
for Fortune enemie to prosperitie, accompanied with her
eldest sonne Mischaunce, conuerted their ioyes into sorrowe,
teares and paynes vnspeakeable, as you shall reade héereafter.
These Louers thus ryding merilye on the streame, suddenlye
the Sea began to swell, the winde chaunged roughly,
the Skyes were troubled, and such a daungerous tempest
beate vppon theyr Ship, as the Pilot, Maister and Mariners
knewe not what to say, and fiue dayes togither they
were in this perplexitie, sometime forwarde, then again
                           •
                        
backward, that no hope of life was expected, but euerye on
                           •
                        
prepared themselues for death, the implacable messenger of
God, for they could discerne no other remedie. Agriola not
accustomed to these daungers, was meruailously discomforted:
but Trineus perswaded her with many examples,
in that such stratagems were vsuall on the Sea, albeit, sh
                           ••
                        
to ende the feare shee sawe before her eyes, woulde often
times haue cast her selfe into the raging waters. At length
the tempest ouer-passed, they discryed an Island, wheret
                           •
                        
with the helpe of theyr Oares they coasted, shrouding them
selues vnder the sides of an highe mountain
                           •
                        : and although
the place séemed casuall, yet there they determened to ca
                           •
                        t
                           •
                        
Anker, vntill the Seas were more calme and quiet B
                           •
                        ing
thus vnder the lée, and defended from the winde with the
h
                           •
                        ge R
                           •
                        cke, Palmerin came vp on the ha
                           •
                        ches, to sée what
iudgement he could make of the Island, a
                           •
                        d so delectable th
                           •
                        
country seemed vnto him, as he was desirous to go on shore,
taking his Faulcon on his fist that was giuen him in England,
so with no other defence but his Sworde, he went to

viewe the soyle, not suffering any body to beare him cōpany.
Trineus and Agriola perswaded him to the contrary, but all
would not serue: for the scituation of the Countrey pleased
him so well, as he walked on in great contentation, not minding
to returne againe to the ship, till toward the euening.
                  
                  
                     Chap. LXV.
                     
                        How Trineus, Agriola, Ptolome and all their Mariners,
were taken by the Turkes, after that Palmerin was gone
to viewe the Island.
                     
                     
                        THe Historie reporteth, that while Palmerin
was thus absent, there arriued
foure or fiue Turkish Gallies, who likewise
glad to shun the tempesteous weather,
cast Anker néere to Trineus ship,
and séeing no bodye on the decke of this
strange vessel, because (fearing no harm)
they were all at rest: they enuironed it about,
and hauing boorded it, the Captaine of the Turks called
to them, saying. What? are yée asléepe within, that ye let vs
boord ye without any resistance? by the reuerence of our gods
we shal awake yée: but litle to your ease. So came the Souldiours
on boorde after theyr Captaine, who put the Pilote,
the Maister, and many of the Marriners to the Sword, sparing
none but such as they pleased to ransome. Then searching
the Cabins, they 
                           •
                        ound Trineus, Agriola and Ptolome,
whom they tooke prisoners, by reason they were vnarmed,
as also somewhat sicklye after theyr roughe passage.
This rouing Captaine or Pyrate, named Olimael, noting

the singuler beautie of Agriola, commaunded her to be 
                           •
                        arryed
on boord his Galley. When the Princesse sawe her
selfe so hardly handeled, and that her Lorde was prisoner
with these villainous Moores, so that perforce they must abandon
one another: she brake foorth into pitifull acclamations,
and looking on her husband, thus spake. Ah my Lord,
how hard & straunge is this fortune? haue we escaped a tempest
so daungerous, now to fall into this mercilesse extremitie?
Oh that you and Sir Ptolome had béene Armed, that
these Moores might haue bought our liues with the sword:
but despightfull chaunce hath 
                           〈◊〉
                         thwarted vs, as no mean
                           •
                        
is left to preuent our perill. Ah Palmerin, how gréenous i
                           •
                        
                        
                           •
                        hine absence, and how displeasaunt will our mishap bee to
thée? how much would thy valour now auaile vs, being vtterly
destitute of any succour or refuge? I knowe our mishap
will so offend 
                           •
                        hée, as I feare thou wilt vse some outrag
                           •
                        
on thy selfe. With these words shée fell down
                           •
                         among them
in a dead traunce, the sight whereof so enraged Trineus and
Ptolome, as snatching weapons out of the Moores handes,
they layde about them so lustily, that in short time they had

                           •
                        laine halfe a score of them. But vnable were they to con
                        
                           ••
                        nd
against so many, wherefore being taken againe, they
were bounde so cruelly with cordes and chaines, as ren
                           •
                        e
their tender and delicate flesh in many places: and being so
conueyed into an other Galley, theyr Squires likewise prisoners
with them, the Moores tooke what they pleased out
of the Shippe, and when they had done, set it on fire. Then
presently they weyed Anchor, and launching away, made
haste, least any reskewe should followe them, so that quickly
they losse the sight of the Islande, and Olimael comming
to sée Agriola, assaied by many meanes to asswage her
heauinesse, embracing her in his armes, and promising her
great 
                           •
                        iche
                           •
                         if shée would be paci
                           ••
                        ed. But 
                           〈◊〉
                         his spéeches
were in vaine, for shée séeing the Moore imbrace her, with
angry 
                           〈…〉
                         like a Lyon enraged, caught him by the
haire and the throat, saying. Thou villaine Dogge, thinkest

thou I take any delight in thy company? How darest tho
                           •
                        
traitourlye thée
                           •
                        e lay hande on mee? And so roughly did sh
                           •
                        
struggle with Olimael, as if his men had not assisted him,
shée had strangled him: notwithstanding hée tooke all patiently,
perswading himselfe, that by gentle speeches, smooth

                           •
                        latterings, and large promises, hée should in time win her
to his pleasure. So came he forth of the cabin, with his throat
and face brauely painted with Agriolaes nayles, washing away
the bloud, which made comely circles about his phisno
                        
                           •
                        ie:
then called he the Captaines and chiefe of his companie,
willing them to share the bootie among them, and hée
would haue nothing but the Princesse for his parte, for he
was so inueigled with the beautie of his prisoner, as he had
no delight but onely in beholding her. In this manner then
he bestowed his prisonners, Trineus he gaue to one of his

                           〈◊〉
                        , and Ptolome to a Knight that seru
                           •
                        d the Sold
                           •••
                        
of 
                           〈…〉
                         hee gaue among th
                           •
                        
common 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        ▪ But when the Prince sawe hée must
néedes leaue his Ladye, and each man would carye his prysoner
whether him pleased: his gréefe for his wife, and sorrowe
for his friendes, I leaue to your iudgement, as not 
                           •
                        
                        able
to 
                           •
                        ée expressed. Yet some hope of comfort hée reposed in
Palmerin, tha
                           •
                        by his meanes (
                           〈◊〉
                         escaped theyr hands)
he should get againe Agriola, else was there no waye lefte
to helpe him. Ptolome who déerely loued the Prince, before
they parted, thus began. Why how now my Lorde?
where is your woonted prudence and dis
                           ••
                        etion? Where
is that constant mag
                           ••
                        nimitie, which in so many fortunes
héeretofore you vsed? what? is it lost, or haue you forget it?
What meane ye? will ye be subiect to passions, as a weake
effeminate person? You that are sprung from the most auncient
noble and generous race of Christendome, esteemed
for a most courag
                           •
                        ous and vertuous Knight, will you 
                           •
                        ée
driuen into these sad and desolate 
                           •
                        pinions? What then
would a Turke▪ Moore or barbarous Myr
                              ••
                           don doo in like
afflictions? when he y• hath assurance of his God, and knows

that all persecutions, fortunes and mishaps, are prooues of
his fidelitie, and the meanes to attaine eternal quiet, shewes
th
                           •
                        se vndutifull behauiors, as though he had lost all meanes
of hope and comforte. If the body be afflicted, let the spirite
be animated, and armed with patience, against all infirmities
of the flesh. Leaue these soft countenances for Women,
and if you will not perswade your selfe, that these troubles
happen for the encreasing of our ioye, it maye bée the mean
                           •
                        
that God will forsake vs. Then neyther feare or dispayr
                           •
                        
I praye you, for he that suffered vs to fall into these Moores
handes, both can and will deliuer vs againe. As for your
Lady Agriola, doubt not of her vnconquerable loyalty, for
shée hath in her custody a iewel of such vertue, as no one can
dishonour her against her owne lyking. Comfort your selfe
then in the power of the highest, and repose your selfe on the
constancie of your Ladye, with this certaine perswasion, that
this crosse and aduersitie hath fallen vpon vs, for our greater
good and aduauncement héereafter. Then came Olimael,
and interrupted theyr talke, commaunding nine or ten
of his people, to conuay Trineus into another Galley, and
Ptolome into that where his Maister was, that so they

                           •
                        ight depart, to recouer the rest of theyr Galleyes, which
were scattered from them by reason of the tempest. And s
                           •
                        
they departed one from another, the Galley wherein Trineus
was discrying a goodly Ship of Christians, whereof
they béeing glad, sette sayle with the winde towardes the
Christians, who rode awaye so fast as th
                           •
                        y could, and had
escaped, but that they met full with certaine Pyrates of
Natolia, who ioyning with the Gallies, in the ende boorded
her, and parted the spoyle among them: the winde suddenly
began to chaunge, so that they were constrained to

                           •
                        lye for succour to an Islande in the Kingdome of Persia,
which they reached in good time, glad to sheelde themselues
from daunger: These Pyrates thus come to the Hauen,
went all on shore to refresh themselues: but they hadde no
sooner sette foote on land▪ such enchauntments were there dispersed

through the whole Isle, as they presently knew not
one another. But to acquaint you with the manner of these
enchauntments, you must note, that the Isle where they
landed was called Malfada, which name was giuen it by
the Lady thereof, who was called likewise Malfada, the
most subtill Magitian of her time: so that wee may say of
her, as the Poets feigned of the auncient Circes. And albeit
she was issued of Christian parentes, yet hauing such familiaritie
with the diuell and his maligne spirites, she would
not acquaint her selfe with any goodnesse towardes Christians,
but daily practise their harme and destruction. And
for this intent, shée had long time enchaunted this Island
with such charmes, that what Ships arriued there, could neuer
depart thence againe, much lesse such as entred within
the Isle. They being thus staied, Malfada would come her
selfe, and chuse such as shée lyked, the rest shée transformed
into Hartes, Wolues, Dogges, Boares, and all manner of
beastes. Such likewise as shée tooke with her into her Fortresse,
when she had abused them to content her owne pleasure,
shée would cast them foorth, transforming them as shée
did the other: in bréefe, she was worse then a Diuell, and
the whole Isle a very disguised hell. This wicked woman
knowing, that more vnfortunate people were landed at the
Hauen, called her seruaunts, and came to see them: but she
made no great account of them, wherefore she commaunded
her seruaunts to take all the riches foorth of the Shippe,
conuerting it by her inchauntment, that it séemed lyke a
bottomlesse gulfe. Afterward at her pleasure, shée transformed
them that came in it, among whome Trineus was
chaunged into the shape of a very fayre Dogge, not that hée
was so, for that is a thing against nature, and which God
no way will permit, that man shall take any brutish shape,
or a brute beast any humane forme. For the Magicall dispositions
thus holde theyr Arte, that the enchaunted estéeme
themselues beastes, and of that sort was this 
                           〈◊〉
                        
Mastiue: notwithstanding, these distressed captiues had

naturall reason and humane power, but the benefit of spéech
was taken from them. And thus was Trineus transformed,
which he séemed not to mistike, for not remembring himselfe,
he forgot all his heauie passions, maruelling only at his suddaine
mutation. And here will we leaue him in his straunge
deformitie, to report what befell to the Princesse Agriola,
after that dolorous separation betwéene her Lord and her.
                     THus Gentlemen haue wee left the Prince Trineus
transformed into the shape of a Dogge, in the Isle of
Malfada, by the Enchauntresse: the English Princesse
Agriola, in the custody of the Turkish Pirate Olimael:
Ptolome and Colmelio carried into Aethiopia, and Palm
                              •
                           
                           rin
raunging in the Islande with his Hauke for his delight.
Right straunge will bee the meeting of all these friendes againe,
after the hazards of many perillous fortunes. For
Agriola thus separated from the Prince her husband, is maried
to the great Emperour of Turkie: howe wonderfully
the ring which Palmerin gaue her, preserues her chastitie,
will be worth the hearing. How Palmerin counterfeiting
himself dumbe, doth many rare exployts in the Isle of Calpha,
will be as acceptable. How Palmerin gaines his Polinarda,

                              〈◊〉
                           
                         his chast wife Agriola, Ptolome his Brionella,
and all Honors meeting togither in the Emperours Court
of Allemaigne, wil be so strange as the like was neuer heard:
and all this performes the second part, which shall be published
so soone as it can be printed.
                     A. Mundy.
                     FINIS.
Honos alit Artes.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  THE
Second Part of the
honourable Historie,
of Palmerin d'Oliua:
                  
                  
                     Continuing his rare fortunes, Knightly deeds
of Chiualrie, happie successe in loue: and how
he was Crowned Emperour of
Constantinople.
                  
                  
                     Herein is likewise concluded the variable troubles of the
Prince TRINEVS, and faire AGRIOLA, the
Kings daughter of ENGLAND: with
their fortunate Marriage.
                  Translated by A. M. one of the Messengers of
her Maiesties Chamber.
                  
                  Patere aut abstine.
                  LONDON
Printed by Thomas Creede.
1597.
               
               
                  
                  
                  To the worshipfull Maister
Fraunces Young, of Bre
                        •
                     t Pelham, in the Countie
of Hertford Esquire, and to Mistresse Susan
Young, his wife, and my most kind Mistresse:
this worldes ioy and heauenly felicitie intirely
wished.
                  
                     PRomise is debt (worshipfull
Syr) as the Prouerbe auoucheth,
and debt must needes
be paide, as reason requireth:
the one not arguing so much
liberalitie in speech, as the other
doth vertue in accomplishing. When I
presented ye my first part of Palmerin of England,
I promised to hasten these likewise that
should preceede it: because this Historie of
Palmerin d'Oliua, is the beginning and inducement
to all those that followe thereon.
Wherfore hauing sent ye the first, so likewise
doe I now the seconde, and will make what
speede I can in translating the third and last,

if your kinde fauour spurre me on, as I doubt
not but it will. So still remaining yours (euen
to my vttermost,) I humbly take my leaue,
this first of August.
                  Your VVorships euer to be commaunded,
Anthony Mundy.
                  
               
               
                  
                  To the Freendlie
READERS.
                  
                     THough long, yet at length this second
booke of Palmerin is finished, and he hauing
endured so manie bitter brunts in
search of aduentures: after all, nowe remaineth
either to bee commended or condemned
by your censure. Condemne him you cannot with
reason, considering all his actions haue beene so honourable:
as too malicious were the man would deale so hardly
with him that hath giuen no occasion of offence. Commend
him then you must, in respect of his manifold vertues,
thrust altogither in the face of Fortune, onelie for
your delight and recreation.
                  As concerning his Sonnes, Palmendos and Primaleon,
the one is kept vnder his mothers wing, the Queen
of Tharsus▪
                      and the other sporting in the Court at Constantinople:
not daring to sette foote in the stirroppe
after Knightly exercises, til they heare how their Father
speedes. If he haue that fauour his deedes deserued, then
on goes their Armor, and in the cheefest places of Christendome
wil they shewe themselues, with repetition to the
world of wonderfull aduentures.
                  
                     
But while they expect good newes or bad, I will hasten
on the translation of the third part of this most famous
Historie, which beeing of some great qua
                        •
                     titie, wil aske
the longer time e
                        •
                     e hee can enioy the benefit thereof: bee
therefore kind to these two former Bookes, and that will
be the better meanes of hastening the third.
                  Yours to his vttermost,
Anthony Mundy.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  The second part of
the auncient and honourable
Historie of Palmerin
D'Oliua.
                  Continuing his rare fortunes, Knig
                        •
                     tly deedes of Chiualrie,
happie successe in loue, and how he was crowned Emperour
of Constantinople. Herein is likewise concluded
the variable troubles of Trineus, and faire
Agriola of England, with their fortunate
mariage, &c.
                  
                     Chap. I.
                     
                        How Olimael presented the Princesse Agriola to the grea
                              •
                           
Turke, who immediately became amorous of her: and
what rewardes and preferment the Pyrate receiued, for
his gift.
                     
                     
                        A
                        
                           •
                         yet I am sure you remember in the
first part, how the Pyrate Olimael 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
his prisoners reseruin
                           •
                         for 
                           〈◊〉
                        
none but the King of Englandes
daughter, hop
                           •
                        ng in time to 
                           〈◊〉
                        
her 
                           〈◊〉
                        . An béeing alone 
                           〈…〉
                        
in the fayrest Cabin in the 
                           〈…〉
                        
hée could to comfort her: but 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        
were bestowed in vaine, for shée woulde receyue
no kinde of sustenaunce, desyring euerie houre to die, hauing
so lost her Lord Trineus. He séeing that fayre spéeches,
offers, gifts, and other inticements proper to perswasion,
could not compasse the thing he desired, he grewe into choler,
intending to gaine his pleasure perforce, so that after
manie threatnings, with rough violence hée woulde néedes
rauish her. Agriola séeing that her féeble strength coulde
not long withstand the Turke, albeit she stroue and resisted
so well as shée coulde: therefore with deuout prayer shee
called on God, desiring him to take pittie on her, and not to
suffer that villainous Ruffian to dishonour her. Her prayer
béeing ended, Olimael beganne in such sort to tremble, as
hée staggered backe warde foure or fiue times, and so excéedingly
was hée surprised with feare, as hée was constrayned
to leaue her, and withdraw himselfe into another place.
The Princesse, though shée were amazed at this suddaine
chaunge, noting with what terrour the Captaine departed,
yet was she greatly comforted by her deliuerance, imputing
the whole worke thereof to the Almightie prouidence,
and the vertue of the Ring that Palmerin gaue her: wherefore
with thankfull heart, and eleuated eyes to heauen, shée
sayd, O celestiall Father, howe great and infinite is thy
goodnesse? howe happie is the creature, whom thou regardest
with the eye of pittie? assurdly I nowe perceyue, that
such as in extremitie haue recourse to thee, shall no waie
perish. Then taking the vertuous Ring, and kissing it many
times, sayd:
                     Unualuable Iewell, giuen me by the best Knight in
the worlde, howe carefully will I kéepe thée? howe true is
that saying: That great persons giue great presents. Hencefoorth
shalt 
                           〈…〉
                         bee kept (for the loue of him that gaue thée,
and for thy singular vertue) in the place where I vsually
store things of greatest price. So taking a little Chayne
of Golde, which serued her as a Bracelet, shée fastened this

                           〈◊〉
                         Iewell thereto, and put it about her necke, so that

the sumptuous Stone laye glistering betwéene her 
                           〈◊〉
                        
white breasts, a prospect so rare and delicate, and of no lesse
power to drawe the beholders eyes, then the A
                           •
                        amant, the
Amber, or the Ieate, can by their vertue: beside, so woonderfully
repleat with swéete regard, as I dare affirme that
the most cruell Tyrant in Turkie, would stand amazed at
those two daintie Mountaines, more mortifyed and humbled
then the aged Hermits of Thebaida, Olimael yet quaking
at his suddaine a
                           •
                        teration, durst presume no more to
offer her villaynie, but by rich gifts and presents sought to
perswade her: all which auailed not, for as hée got but little
profit by his violence, so wonne he much lesse by his trecherous
offerings. So sayled they eight dayes togither,
Olimael not able to compasse Agriolas loue, nor hearing anie
tydings of the vessels that were lost, neyther of his Cozin
who had Trineus captiue, which grieued him as nothing
could do more, in that he was so vnprouided, as well
he could not present himselfe before his Lord, to whom hée
had promised to bring store of Christian prisoners, and now
hée had in his bootelesse loue so lost his time, as either the
tempest or shipwracke, had spoyled him of his owne companie.
In this doubtfull opinion, he debated with himselfe,
that the great Turke did earnestly affect fayre Ladyes, so
by the meane of his beautifull prisoner, he imagined to bée
entertained with good countenaunce, and his losse woulde
be past ouer with forgetfulnesse: wherefore hee commaunded
the Pilot to make toward the port of Ottobant, where
as then the great Emperour of Turkie soiourned, and 
                           〈◊〉
                        
they came in short time after. Notwithstanding, as a
Seruant well instructed, not daring to abuse the familiaritie
of his Lorde, hée sent one of his Knights to excuse his
cause, and to report, that by casuall mischaunce he had lost
his men and Gallies: but if his Maiestie pleased to forget
his misfortune, and receyue him into his accustomed fauour,
he would bring him one of the fayrest Ladies in Chri
                        
                           •
                        endome,
and discended of most royall percentage. The

Emperour béeing las
                           •
                        iuions, and more addicted to vnchaste
desires then any in his Realme, hearing this message, was
so supprised with the onely report of her beautie, as immediately
he became passionate for her loue: sending the Pyrate
worde that hee could not bring a more desired present,

                           〈◊〉
                         therfore remitted all his offences, promising him greatter
fauour then euer he had. And because no contrarie occasion
may hinder his comming, quoth the Emperour, thou
shalt carrie him this Letter, sealed with mine owne signet,
that hée may no way 
                           •
                        oubt of his assurance. The Knight
taking the Letter, and kissing the Emperours feete, according
to the cu
                           ••
                        ome, return
                           •
                        d to his Maister, deliuering
him the aunswere hée had receiue
                           •
                        . Olimael ioyfull thereof,
caused Agriola to cloath her selfe in her most sumptuous
garments, and so with al
                           •
                         his men s
                           •
                        t forwarde towarde
the Court. Nowe although the Prin
                           •
                        esse was all blubbered
with teares, and halfe deade to see her selfe in the power
of these Straungers, professed an
                           •
                         sworne enemies to h
                           •
                        r
faith and religion: yet could not the rare perfections of her
beautie be shadowed, but the glimse thereof set euery eye
to wonder. And as she lookes about her, to sée if any of her
companie were landed with her, she espied Ptolome, whom
they minded secretly to conuey from her, but shee beholding
him so sad and sorrowfull, stept towards him, saying. Ah, my
déere fréend Ptolome, what wreakfull chaunce hath Fortune
throwne vppon vs: but well may I content my selfe,
for this is a iust scourge for mine offence, and vndutifull obedience
to the King my father. Ah my Lord and loyall husband
Trineus, neuer shall I sée thée againe, for God dooth
know whither these villaines hath s
                           •
                        nt thee. Ah noble Palmerin,
who was woont héeretofore to comfort me, too much
hast thou failed vs, all thy former promises are nowe altered:
for in steede of imperiall soueraigntie, pleasure an
                           •
                         honor▪
I am requited with pouerue, greefe, shame and mockerie.
Ah death, sweet death▪ too long desired 
                           •
                        rath: why commest
thou not to end all these miseries? But God will not

permit thée, because by my torments and afflictions, I may
féele the weightie burthen of my offences, and large bountie
of his mercies.
                     
                        Ptolome séeing her in this mournfull vexation, sayde.
It is no time nowe (Madame) thus to offende your selfe,
but rather (as wise and well gouerned) is beare these aduersities,
euen with as great content as your former prosperities,
taking in good part whatsoeuer shall happen: for
I am in good hope, and my minde perswades me, that wée
shall be deliuered by noble Palmerin, who I am sure endureth
greater gréefe in his libertie, hauing left vs, 
                           〈◊〉
                         wee
can doo in our imprisonment. Olimael excéeding angry to

                           〈◊〉
                         
                        Agriola wéepe, violently puld Ptolome from her, charging
his men, not to suffer him once to come in her sight,
which he suffered patiently because he saw it was in vaine
to kicke against the pricke. When they were come to the
Pallace, and admitted to the Emperours presence, Olimael
knéeling downe and kissing his foote, presented Agriola
to his maiestie: who séeing her of such rare and wonderfull
beautie, said to Olimael. This present (my Fréende)
is of such surpassing value, as thou couldest neuer honour
me with the like: good reason is it therefore, that a gift so
precious should be rewarded with like recompence, and so
perswade thy selfe I will, and thou shalt say the Emperou
                           •
                        
is bountifull. As for the Ladie thou hast giuen me, I 
                           •••
                        
                        ceiue
her so faire and gracious, as I inte
                           •
                        d neuer to haue
any other wi
                           •
                        e: and that I may espouse her with the 
                           〈◊〉
                        
magnificence, I will stay till the hallowed day 
                           〈…〉
                         
                        
                           ••
                        
                        ronation
when all my Princes, Barons, and 
                           〈◊〉
                        , wil
be héere assembled, and then in their prsence shal our nuptialles
be solemnized. Nowe had the Emperour a Woman
captiue, named Hippolita, who was a Marchant
                           •
                         Daughter
of Scicile, and better skilled in all languages then anie
Ladie in the Court, for which he made speciall account of
her, reposing great confidence in her, and acquainting her
with his chéefest secrets, wherefore hee sent for her before

                        Agriola, and sayd. Hippolita I giue you this Ladie in kéeping,
commanding you to intreat her as our owne person,
and that all meanes may be practised, to cause her forsake
this sad mellancholy. In conference, you may shewe her
what honour and happinesse she shall receiue by falling into
our han
                           •
                        es, and what incomparable fortune it is to her,
whom we shall please to accept for our Wife. All which
Hippo
                              •
                           ita (with great humilitie) promised to accomplish,
and so conducted her into a maruailous princely Chamber,
the floore couered all ouer with cloth of Tissue, and hung about
with such sumptuous Tapistrie and bloth of Gol
                           •
                        , as
hardly might the richnesse thereof be valued. There Hippolita
caused the Princesse to fitte downe in a Chayre of
state, which was purposely prouided for her, demaunding
her name, and of what countrey shee was. The Princesse
answered, that shee was of England, but further of her
state shee would not bewray. Hippolita speaking perfectly
the English tongue, tooke great delight daily to commune
with her, and because Agriola should the better like of her
conuersation, she tolde her that she was like wise a Christian:
but by constraint she followed the Law of Mahomet,
and his Alchoran. In further spéeches shée acquainted her
with the estate of the Sultanes, in the Court of the great
Emperour of Asia: which communication serued well to
weare away the time, albeit the Princesse tooke small pleasure
therein. Olimael in consideration his noble present,
was created high Admirall of the Mediterranean sea, and
furnished with greater store of Foystes and Gallies then

                           〈◊〉
                         before.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. II.
                     
                        How the great Turke summoned all the Kings and Princes
his Subiects, because hee minded to hold open Court: and
howe he married with the Princesse Agriola his prisoner.
                     
                     
                        
                           HIppolita daily conuersing with Agriola,
                        
                           •
                        ecause shee could not so well speake her
language, at length the Emperor came
to her chamber, and because he might
the better behold the princesse, hee sate
downe in a Chaire opposite to her, an
                           •
                        
there he sate a long time, not able to cō
                        tent
his eyes with looking on her: for, speake to her he could
not because shee vnderstood not the Turkish language.
Wherefore he commanded H
                              •
                           ppolita to request her name,
and what her Parents were, which to satisfie his mai
                           •
                        stie,
shee did, Agriola thus answering her. In vaine Lady séeke
you to know of me the thing which death cannot force mée
bewray: let this suffice you, that I am a poore Gentlewoman,
the most infortunate that euer liued, with which
words shee wept very greeuously. The Emperour moued
with pittie, departed to his Chamber so surprised and enflamed
with her loue, as hée could take no 
                           •
                        est one minute 
                           〈◊〉
                        
the night, considering with himself, that seeing she estéemed
so little of the riches she sawe in his Pallace, and refuse
                           •
                        
the offers made her by Hippolita, that doubtlesse shee was
extract of s
                           •
                        me noble Image.
                     The next morning he called his foure Secretaries, commaunding
them to write to all the Princes of his Empire,

that they should not fayle to honour the day of his coronation
with their presence, and to bring with them theyr
Quéenes and Daughters, and this they should do on paine
of displeasure: all which was performed with present expedition.
In the meane time, hee caused sundrie sumptuous
ornaments to bee prepared, with all manner of precious
Iewels could be deuised, and these he daily sent to Agriola,
but all these presents, promises, and munificent entertainment,
could no way mooue her, not so much as to grant
him a gracious countenance. He likewise sent for the brauest
Ladies in his Court, that they should kéepe the Princesse
companie: but she would be conuersant with none but
Hippolita, of whom she had so prettily learned the Arabian
tongue, as many times she could indifferently answere the
Emperour. But when he behelde her continually so pensiue,
and that by no meanes shee would bee comforted, hée
doubted least his presence did offende her, and therefore
hée forbare so often to visit her. For so déerely he loued her,
as for the halfe of his Empire hee would giue her no occasion
of discontent, hoping in time (which is the Lorde and
conquerour of all things) to alter that humour, and purchase
her loue, which he desired with earnest affection. But
now at this day, where may we find a Lady so vertuousand
wel gouerned, being captiue as Agriola was, that could not
be woon by such a mightie Emperor, consid
                           ••
                        ing her youth
and beautie, and the wonderfull riches incessantly offered
her. Yet the highest Lord so protected her, that the more liberall
the Turke was in honors and perswasions, the more
loyall continued her loue to Trineus, whose perfect image
was engrauen in her heart. And not fearing torments or
death, she boldly answered the Emperor that he trauailed
in vain, for she might not loue him, in that she was married
to an husband, more noble euery way then he, and none but
him shée would loue while she liued: yet made he no great
account of her words, considering what frailtie commo
                           •
                        ly
is in women. The day being come of this great preparatiō,

and al the Princes present to vnderstand their soueraigne
                           •
                        
will: he béeing placed in his imperiall seate, said. That hée
intended to take to wife, one of the most beautifull Ladyes
in the world, & for that cause he sent for them, to vnderstand

                           〈◊〉
                         they liked thereof. Their aunswere was, that they
liked well thereof, and would gladly honour her as wel beseemed
them. Then sent he for Agriola, and before them
all, saide vnto her: that it was his pleasure to accept her
for 
                           〈◊〉
                         wife, and therefore shee should prepare her selfe on
the 
                           〈◊〉
                         to be married. The Princesse abashed at these
spéeches, fell downe before him in a dead traunce, where vpon,
by the Quéenes and Ladies present, shée was conuayed
into her Chamber, where béeing againe reuiued, she began
most pitifull and dolorous lamentations: so when all the
companie had left her, that shée was alone with Hippolita,
falling downe on her knées at her beds 
                           ••
                        ete, shée thus began.
                     O my God and benigne Father, pittie thy poore distressed
creature, and forget the offences I haue heretofore committed:
for what is a sinner, vnlesse thou in mercie suffer
her to come before thée? Wilt thou then vouchsafe (O wonderfull
wordeman of the whole worlde) one eye of pittie
vpon thy humble forsaken seruant
                           •
                         and suffer her not to fall
into subiection, to the vewed enemie of thy holy worde, arming
me so strongly in this temptation, that I no way iniurie
my Lord and husbande Trineus, but rather graunt
this desolate spirit, may leaue this bodie and the worlde togither.
Ah my honourable Lord Trineus, where art thou
nowe? that thou art not héere so defen
                           •
                        e the sham
                           •
                         and
wrong this Tyrant offers thée? What? art thou dead? or
hast thou forg
                           •
                        tten me? No, no, so well am I assured of
thy fidelitie, as no forment can diuert thée from mée. Yet if
I knewe directly that thou art not liuing, the lesse woulde

                           •
                        ée my feare to follow thée: for then the greatest pleasure
this Pagan could doe 
                           〈◊〉
                        , were to make mée happie onely
by death. But for the matter is vncertaine, and that I liue

in hope once more to see thée: I will patiently endure all
afflictions whatsoeuer, for so swéete a reward as is thy lou
                           •
                        .
These sorrowes of the Princesse so gréeued Hippolita, as
one coulde hardly iudge who was most passionate, yet at
length shée thus spake to Agriola. I beséech you good Lady
to leaue these gréeuous lamentations, and regarde the high
estate, honour and dignitie, that you shall haue in marrying
with my Lord. Neuer perswade me (quoth the Princesse)
to manifest disloyaltie: for such pre
                           •
                        erments, if they bée not
gotten iustly and by vertue, they ought not to bée coueted,
but to be shunned as diuelish Serpents. Thus spent they
the whole night, and in the morning came the Quéenes and
Ladies newlie come to the Court, to bid the sorrowfull
Bride good morrow in her Chamber, attyring her in wonderfull
gorgious vestures, after their Country maner▪ farre
beyonde the royaltie of Helena, after her arriuall at Troy.
Betwéene foure Kings shée was brought into the greate
Hall, and from thence conducted to the Temple, where they
were espoused by the Mosti. To recount here thy royall solemnitie
in the temple, the Maiestie and vnspeakable dignitie
at the pallace, the excellent Comedies, rare triumphs,
Maskes, Momeries, Moriscoes, and such like courtly pleasures,
would bée a matter too prolixious: for they are not to
our purpose. Let it then suffice yee, that after they were
magnificently entreated at Dinner and Supper, the daun
                        
                           •
                        ing
began, and God knowes how the Turks, Moores, Arabes,
and Medes, set foorth themselues in th
                           •
                        ir d
                           •
                        uises, and
sports before their Ladies, much lyke the Satyres and 
                           •
                        orned
Faunes, giuing new inuasions on the Nimphes of Diana.
But all these maruayles, ioyes and follies, coulde not
chaunge the Princesse countenaunce, for shée continuing in
her pen
                           ••
                        uenesse, these sports were worsse to her then the
torment
                           •
                         of death: aboue all, fearing the losse of her chastitie,
which was a Iewell neuer to be recouered. The Pastimes
ended by the Quéenes and Ladies, shée was conducted
to the nuptiall 
                           〈◊〉
                        , so braue and 
                           ••
                        ately as the Prince

                        Aeneas, when he came to Quéene Dido of Carthage, and
there was the vnfortunate Bride committed to her rest.
Soone after came the hastie Bridegroome, calling for Torches
that hée might be holde the Goddesse hée honoured, and
as hée was preparing himselfe to bed, he was troubled with
such feares, passions, and ap
                           •
                        plexie, as nowe he séemed more
lyke a ghost then a man. Perforce hée was constrained to
forsake the Chamber, when the extremitie of the fit somewhat
asswaging, and his former louepassions freshly assayling
him, comming to the Princesse againe, heauily hée
thus spake.
                     Ah, Agriola, Ladie and sole Mistresse of my heart, I
thinke thou art some Goddesse, or (at least) excéeding all humanitie:
so strange is this aduenture, as neuer any man (I
thinke) heard of the like. Alas, cannot thy anger be appeased?
nor thou induced to loue him, who for thy sake endures
most horrible torments? I pray thée bée not the cause of my
death: or if thou néedes wilt, suffer mée first to eni
                           •
                        y the
fruites so my desires. Know, my Lord answered Agriola,
that with my will yo
                           •
                         neuer shall enioy it, and if perforce
you séeke to dishonour me, assure your selfe, I am resolued
rather to suffer endlesse miseries, then to violate my faith to
my loyall Husbande: for such is my trust in God, that hée
will not forget such as call on him. But in respect thou
hast not béene cruell to mée, nor hast exercised mée,
with any
tyrannie, I shall suffer thée to lye vpon the bed by mée,
as my Brother might doo, and sometime (though it be more
then modestie) embrace thée in mine armes: but if farthe
                           •
                        
thou presumest, thou mayst not bée permitted, but shall loose
that fauour, thy selfe, and mee togither. Madame, quoth hée,
in graunting mée that courtesie, you saue my life, for I haue
many Concubines to qualifie those passions, and neuer
will I attempt your dishonour while I liue: if I but off
                           •
                        r
the motion, refuse mée foreuer. I shall therefore account of
you as my Sister, and death shall not make me doo contrarie
to your appoyntment. The yong Princesse glad of this

solemne promise, gaue him a kisse or twaine, and suffered
him to embrace her: but other kindnesse could be neuer obtaine,
contenting himselfe with this, because hée loued her
so specially. At fiftéene dayes end, the feastes béeing ended,
the Princes tooke their leaue of the great Sultane, who with
many rich presents sent them home into their Countryes.
Thus remained Agriola with the great Turke, and the
Knight to whom Olimael had giuen Ptolome and Colmelio,
sailed with his prisoners into Aethiopia: and thenceforward
vsed them not as slaues, but as Gentlemen of good
qualitie, especially Ptolome, whom hée reputed a hardie
Knight, and a man borne to great enterprises.
                  
                  
                     Chap. III.
                     
                        How Palmerin after his recreation, returned to the sea side,
and seeing the Ship and his companie gone, made great lamentation,
and what after followed.
                     
                     
                        BEfore in this Historie you haue heard,
how Palmerin walking on shore with
his Faulcon on his fist, desired to see
the pleasantnesse of the Isle, and finding
so manie delights to with-holde
him, returned not towarde the Ship
till it was néere night: but when hée
came thither againe, and could not sée the Shippe, nor
anie one to question withall, he was greatly amazed, running
héere and there, yet all to no purpose. Sometime

                           〈◊〉
                         imagined that Trineus had betrayed him, because he had
acquainted him with his loue toward his Sister: and then
againe resolued himselfe on the contrarie. All about hee looked

for his companions, not knowing what to think: whether,
they were carried away by Pirats, or taken prisoners
by the Inhabitants of the Island. In the end, hauing compassed
in his minde all imaginations hee could, and séeing
that by his regard of pleasure he had lost his Friendes, hee
entred into many sorrowfull lamentations, farre 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        Cadmus when hee lost his Souldiers by the horrible Serpent,
cursing and exclaiming on himselfe, as he had béene
guiltie of the death of his father. Alas (quoth hee) why did
I not remember these wretched misfortunes by poore.
Varnan? whose sorrowes was likewise procured by a
Hawke: in hapl
                           •
                        sse houre was this wicked Byrde giuen
me. Ah trecherous and deceiuing strumpet, I thinke thou
art some incorporate Fiende sent from Hell, to iniurie the
most constant Louers: and therefore gentle O
                           •
                        le, or rather
enchanted Diuell, thou shalt neuer hereafter disple
                           •••
                        
any other, so taking her by the necke, hée pulled her in 
                           〈◊〉
                        ,
and said:
                     Ah sweete Lady Polynarda, how contrarie is Fortune
                           •
                        
and howe vnhappily our desir
                           •
                        s preuented? well am I
assured, if Trineus come to the Court without me, it will
endanger your life, and the onely thing that sheeldes mée
from death, is comfortable hope to sée you once again. Therfore
diuine mistresse, I call for your succour, that by your
gracious assistante, I may endure these vehement occasions.
Ah gentle Princesse Agriola, howe haue I deceiued
you? but in requitall of your wrong, no rest nor ease shall
possesse my soule, till I haue brought Trineus and you 
                           〈◊〉
                        
as great ioy, as by my meanes you haue receiued discomfort.
In these complaints 
                           〈◊〉
                         laide him downe 
                           〈…〉
                        ,
and so wasted the time till morning cam
                           •
                        , when 
                           〈◊〉
                         no
treatures to speake withall, nor any meane for his to p
                           •
                        sse
the Sea, hee determined to passe through the Island till
hee might méete some body to 
                           •
                        o
                           •
                        ferre with. Thus hauing
no defence but his sword vnder his arme, hee walked along,
and at length he met a Moore with foure Spanielles,

and a Marlin on his fist: whome hee humbly saluting, demaunded
the name of the Countrey, and if there were any
shipping neere for his passage. The Moore perceiuing by
his language that he was a Christian, in great anger answered.
Art thou come so farre to séeke thine owne misfortune?
by Mahomet I shall welcome thee hither with a vengeance.
So laying hande on his Semitary, Palmerin perceiuing
by his gesture (though hee vnderstood not his talk)
that he wished him no good, wherefore drawing his sword,
hee gaue the Moore such a stroke on the head, as he cleaued
it to his very téeth, and sayd. By God villaine, thou shalt not
take me prisoner, or send me into the sea to séeke my raunsome,
and so may all discourteous varlets be serued, as resemble
thée in conditions. Thus leauing the Moore dead,
hée tooke another way, least if he should bée followed, hée
might fall into danger: but séeing hee was vnarmed, and
could not speake the Arabian tongue, hée imagined that
at length he must néedes be taken. Hereupon he returned
backe to the Moore, and taking his garments, left his own
there, and thence forward determined to counterfeit himselfe
dumbe: by which subtiltie he thought to escape vnknowne,
and preuent his imprisonment, till hee founde
meanes to returne to wards Allemaigne againe. The day
stealling on apace, and darke night approching, he came to a
fayre Fountaine, of the cleerest water (in his opinion) that
euer hee sawe, where laying him downe to rest, consumed
the night as quietly as he could. On the morrow he began
to remember his miseries, his dangers past, and such as

                           〈◊〉
                         imminent, the conceit whereof made him very melancholy:
so after hée hadde eaten a little bread which hee

                           •
                        ound in the Moores budget, according to the maner of Diogenes,
he layd him downe againe and slept.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. IIII.
                     
                        How Palmerin counterfeiting himselfe dumbe in the Isle
of Calpha, was found by certaine Turkes, as he lay a sleepe
by the Fountaine: and howe hee was receiued into the
seruice of Alchidiana, Daughter to the Soldane of Babilon.
                     
                     
                        NOw that you may the more easily vnderstand
in that which followeth, the full intent
of our discourse, you must call to
memorie how Gamezio, who was slaine
before Constantinople by the Prince
Florendos, as you haue heard in the
first parte of this Historie: was Sonne
to the Soldane of Babilon named Mysos,
and brother to Maulicus, who at his death was a verie
yong prince. Mysos vnderstanding by his Subiects, that
Gamezio the hope of his declining age, was gone by the
summons of Atropos to the habitation of the Gods, could
not afterward enioy the health of body, or quiet in minde:
and therefore ere a yeere was fully expired, hée went to
séeke his sonne among his equalles in the fields of Elysium.
Before hée tooke his iourney wherein no creature returneth
againe, hée charged his succéeding Sonne Maulicus,
to reuenge his brothers death, béeing perswaded that
himselfe should not be discharged of his infortunate remembrance
in the other world, if hée failed to accomplish his
latest commaundement. Maulicus, not to hinder his departure,
promised he would, yet could hee not fulfill it, beeing
troubled in his own Kingdoms more then 20 yeeres after.

But after he had reduced the rebellious Prouinces into obedience,
he married with the King of Armeniaes Daughter,
by whom he had the Princesse Alchidiana, one of the
most beautifull and gracious La
                           •
                        ies of her time: who beeing
come to age of experience, was so loued of her fath
                           •
                        r,
as he would neuer suffer her out of his sight, so that he made

                           〈◊〉
                         to all such as requested her in marriage. Alchidiana,
when shee vnderstood her owne singularitie, desired the

                           〈◊〉
                         of the most beautifull Ladies in Asia, because she
held this opinion, that when the fayrest were present, beautie
would then bee most sple
                           •
                        dant. For this cause hee sent
to Prince Guilhara
                              •
                           , Sonne to Polidia her mothers sist
                           •
                        r,
that he should bring his Sister Ardemia to the Court, who
was counted the Paragon through all the Monarchie of
Babilon.
                     
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page〉
                        
                        
and defende thy selfe so woorthily as thou hast done. Then
was shée certifyed by an auncient Knight, that one of the
squyres of her Chamber smote him as he lay a sleepe, which
he reuenged in such sort as she had séene. Trust me (quoth
she) the dumbe man did as well be seemed him, wherefore, in
respect of his ciuilitie, and that he can so well correct the ouerboldnesse
of fooles: I will intertaine him as one of our
Court, forbidding any to wrong him, as they 
                           •
                        ender my fauour,
and their owne liues. So commaunding buriall for
the dead, and prouision for the wounded, shée went to her
Pauilion, which was not farre off, willing Palmerin (by
sign
                           •
                        s) to go with her, deliuering him his sword again, and
saying he should he her seruant. Humble graces did Palmerin
requi
                           •
                        e her withall, and in signe of his obeysance offred

                           〈…〉
                         would not permit him, and taking

                           〈…〉
                        : Looke that hereafter thou go not
from me, whereto by signes be consented, knowing that by
he
                           •
                         meanes he 
                           〈◊〉
                         be safely protected.
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                        
Princesse Pauillion, but the Greyhounde 
                           〈…〉
                        
pace, as he caught her in the presence of Alchidiana, 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
with 
                           〈◊〉
                         owne handes tooke her from the Dogge, and gaue
her in kéeping to one of her Pages. By this tyme it 
                           〈◊〉
                        
towards night, wherfore each one mounting on their Palfrayrs,
set forwarde to the Cittie: the two Princesses hauing
no other talke all the way, but of the singuler behauiour
of the 
                           〈◊〉
                         Knight. They riding faire and easily, because
Palmerin trauayled by them on foote, Ardemia beholding
his goodly Sworde, demaunded of him if hée wer
                           •
                        
a Knight, which he by signes made knowne, vnto her, wherof
Alchidiana verie ioyfull, sayde, that shée woulde present
him to the Soldane her Father, and for this cause, the more
she beheld him, the greater pleasure shée conceyued in him.
Beeing nowe come to the Gates of Calpha, there stood manie
Knights readie with lighted Torches, to conduct the
Ladies and their traine to the Pallace, which was so rare
and sumptuously edifyed, as Palmerin was amazed to 
                           〈◊〉
                        
such royaltie.
                     All the way Alchidiana had the dumbe knight by her
site, giuing him her hand to alight from her Palfray, which
hée did with excéeding reuerence, and nothing discontented
with his office: but manie Kings and Princes there present,
murmured thereat, thinking him not worthie to come
so néere her, nor might he so be suffered, but that the Princesse
somewhat 
                           〈◊〉
                         of him, would suffer none to
contrarie her pleasure: and leaned on his arme al the while
shée went vppe the stayres of the Pallace, to giue the 
                           〈◊〉
                        
euen to the Soldane, who stayed his Daughters returne in
the great hall. Still leaned shée on Palmerin, till she came
to her Father, who 
                           〈◊〉
                         in a magnificent Chaire of estate,
hauing the resemblaunce of the firmament ouer his heade,
(after the Turkish maner) so garnished with Rub
                           •
                        es and
Dyamonds, which with the lights of the Torches shined
most gloriously: whereat Palmerin wondered, 
                           〈◊〉
                        
the Princesse with so braue gesture, as many reputed▪ 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        
some noble person, and other (
                           〈◊〉
                        ) thought the woorst
of him.
                     The Soldane, who loued his Daughter, as you haue
heard before, arose from his Chayre to welcome her home,
demaunding what sport shée had on hunting, and if shée had
brought any venison home with her? Certes my Lord, quoth
she, we haue had better fortune then you thinke on: but before
I declare the manner thereof to you, will it please you
to giue mee what I haue found this day? The Soldane,
not able to denie his Daughter any thing, liberally graunted
her request. A thousande thankes good Father, quoth
shée: this dumbe Knight hath your Maiestie giuen me, who
(in his owne defence) hath this day slaine certaine of your
Knights, and hereof you may assure your selfe, that hee is
one of the most hardy Gentlemen that euer came into these
partes. Séeing it is your request Daughter, quoth hée,
I coulde hée well contented to graunt it, but how shall I
aunswere 
                           •
                        he Fréende
                           •
                         of the murthered, to whom I haue
alreadie promised, that for his offence he shall be deliuered
to the Lions? So, which of these graunts ought best to bée
kept: yours béeing my Daught
                           •
                        r, wherein nature ruleth,
or theirs béeing my Subiects, which the Lawe commaundeth?
I may not bée i
                           •
                        dge herein, sayde the Princesse, notwithstanding,
me thinkes (vnder your highnesse correction)
that you haue béene but 
                           〈…〉
                        , to giue a sentence
so cruell, hauing not heard or séene the partie. And albeit
hée were guiltie of blame, as he
                           •
                         is not, yet before his
condemnation, hée ought to bée heard howe hée could cléere
himselfe: but if hée must die, I hauing assured him life, and
taken him into my defence: the disgrace is so great to mée,
as mine honour must remaine for 
                           •
                        uer condemned. And
you my Lord and Father, whose authoritie may discharge
me of this reproch, if you refuse now to assist me, the gréefe
hereof will bée my death. Th
                           •
                        se words she spake with such
affection, and so heauily wéeping, as woulde haue mooued a

                           〈◊〉
                         heart to pittie her: where
                           ••••
                         
                        M
                              •
                           uli
                              •
                           us touched with

naturall remorse, sayd: You shall peceyue Daughter what
I haue deuised, to the ende my worde may not bee impeached.
He shall be put into the Lyons Denne, and suddenly
taken out againe, by this meane I shall kéepe my promise
to his accusers, and satisfie your earnest desire. And the
better to content you herein, his enemies shall bee perswaded
that he escaped the Lions with life, and then will I
giue him safetie thorow all my dominions. The Princesse
fearing the bloodthirstie desire of the Lions, coulde not so
content her selfe, which Palmerin perceyuing, that the Father
and daughter thus contended for him, fel downe on his
knée before the Soldane, making signes that hee should accomplish
his promise, for hee feared not the daunger of his
life. Maulicus maruailing hereat, perswaded his daughter
that being so hardie, hee might escape: therefore to content
her selfe, for thing should bee handled in such sort, as the
Knight should no way be endangered. These words somewhat
contented the Princesse, causing Palmerin to be conducted
to his chamber, charging him that was appoynted to
attend on him, to sée that he were very honourably vsed, and
in the morning to bring him againe before her father. The
Soldane and his Knights spent all that euening in diuerse
iudgements on the dumbe Knight, each one being glad of
the Soldanes sentence: but Alchidiana was so pensiue (considering
the dangerous hazard he should passe, as she 
                           〈◊〉
                        
to her Chamber, refusing all sustenaunce, and spending the
time in 
                           •
                        oloro
                           •
                        s complaints, desiring rather her own death,
then the dumbe knight should be any way harmed.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. V.
                     
                        How Palmerin is put into the Denne among the Lions and
Leopards, and hauing killed three of them, escaped valiantly.
                     
                     
                        
                           PAlmerin béeing brought to his Chamber,
which was one of the most sumptuous
in all the Pallace, accoridng as
the Princesse had appoynted, he made
signe to the Gentlman that attended
on him, to withdrawe himselfe, for he
was accustomed to bee alone in his
chamber, which he immediatly did, being
loath to offend him. Palmerin béeing alone by himselfe,
ga
                           •
                        e thanks to the God of heauen, who in midst of his misfortunes,
caused such a gracious Ladie to fauour him so kindly,
as defended his life when hee was in daunger, and by
whose means hée conceyued good hope to escape his enemies
hands, and to returne safely toward Allemaigne. His meditations
ended, he betooke himselfe to rest, and in the morning
Linus the Gentleman that had him in charge, came
and presented him before the Soldane, who commaunded
him to bée carryed presently to the Lions. Alchidiana vnderstanding
that the dumbe Knight was with her Father,
sent him a rich Mantle of scarlet, desiring him to weare it
for her sake: which hee putting about him, went frankely
with his kéeper to the Lions Denne, where the doore béeing
opened, hée boldly entered, desiring God to assist him
in this perill. Palmerin being in the Denne, because none
of the Lions should get forth to hurt any other, howe euer

God disposed of him, made fast the doore after him, and with
his sworde drawne, & his Mantle wrapped about his arme,
went to sée how the beasts would deale with him. The Lions
comming about him, smelling on his cloathes woulde
not touch him: but (as it were knowing the bloud royall)
lay downe at his féete and licked him, and afterward went
to their places againe. But there were among them thrée
Leopards, that furiouslie came and assayled him, the formost
where of hée paunched with his Sworde, that hée was
able to doo no more harme. The other two, although they
had torne his Mantle, and put him in verie great daunger,
as they that looked in at the windowes and creuises perceyued,
yet to their no little admiration, in the end hée slue
them both, and so went forth of the Denne againe, to whom
Linus came, and louingly taking him by the hand, brought
him to the Soldane, to whom hee discoursed his fight with
the Leopardes, and howe gentle the Lions had beene to
him.
                     The Soldane greatly astonished hereat, made more
estimation of him then hée did before, and because the Lions
refused to touch him, reputed him of royall parentage.
Whereupon he sent for his Daughter, praying her to intreate
him not as a Knight, but as a noble and vertuous
Prince, considering his behauiour so well deserued. The
Princesse entertayned him very graciously, and hearing
the successe of his happy fortune, spake thus in the hearing
of them all. Because euery one shall know, Sir knight, how
much I honour your good gifts, I will cause my Father so
well to loue you, as hée shall repent himselfe a thousande
tymes of the 
                           •
                        aunger hée put you to: and so veri
                           •
                         louingly
embracing him, desired pa
                           •
                        don on her own behalfe, because
she suffered him to be thrust to the Lions. Palmerin in signe
of attonement, & that hee was nothing displeased, kissed her
hand, and sitting downe in a Chaire by her, behelde A
                              •
                           demia,
who resembled his Mistresse so equall in beautie, and
could not holde his eye from her, so that hée conceiued such

pleasure in his regard, as he iudged it sustenance enough to
maintaine life. But she that was ignorant of the cause, presumed
that he loued her, wherfore thenceforwart, she began
so amorously to affect him, as shee enioyed no rest but in his
presence. Thus were these two Ladies Alchidiana and Ardemia
touched with one disease, and that so sharpely to the
quicke, that the least torment they endured (séeing hée could
neither speake nor vnderstand their language) was woorse
to them then death. And so it fell out, that each of them thinking
her selfe best beloued: concealed her thoughts from the
other, and would in no case be reputed amorous, least so her
desires should be discouered. Alchidiana for arguments of
her loue, gaue him horses, esquires, seruants, and pages, so
that the greatest Prince in the Court was no better equipped
then he: and in this fortune such was his mind, that for
all the honor and fauour the Soldane and his daughter bare
him, he did not outreach himselfe in behauiour, but was benigne
and full of courtesie, that each one loued and desired
to be familiar with him. And if any enterprise of Ioustes or
Tourneyes were in hand, Palmerin was the formost in the
field, and carried the prize away from all whatsoeuer, which
incited Maulicus to loue him in such sort, that he entertained
him into such speciall credite, as he would neuer resolue on
any matter of importance, without his shew of good liking.
And albeit the Princes of the Court shewed him good countenance,
yet Enuy (that neuer can rest in ambitious hearts)
caused them in the ende to raise slaunder against him: which
Palmerin perceiued, but being vnable to remedie, awaited
conuenient time for his departure, notwithstanding the
earnest affection Alchidiana bare him. He knew likewise so
well to disguise his matters, that so often as the Princesse
would hold him in talke, he still feigned not to vnderstand
her: which made her iealous towards Ardemia her Cozin,
who by Alchidianaes iniuries and Palmerins refusall of her
loue, lost her life, as you shall read in the chapters folowing.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. VI.
                     
                        How the Prince Maurice sent his Ambassadors to the Soldane,
to desire safe conduct for his comming to the Court:
to trie if he could find any Knight there, able to deliuer
him of an extreame trouble that hee dured by enchauntment.
                     
                     
                        DUring the time that Palmerin was thus
estéemed and beloued in the Court of the
great Monarch of Assiria, vpon a Sunday
after dinner, as the Soldane was
in the great Hall conferring with his
Daughter, and many other great Princes
and Lordes present: there entred a
Moore Knight armed, except his Helmet
and Gauntlets, which were carried after him by two
Squires, and making his solemne reuerence, humbled
himselfe at Maulicus féete, saying. Most high and redoubted
Monarch, my soueraigne Lord Maurice, sworne Prince of
whole Pasmeria, kisseth your highnesse hand, sending to require
your gracious safe conduct, that himselfe may come to
your Court, to trie among all your knights, if there bee any
one so loyal and valiant, as can deliuer him from a torment
he endures, the most cruell and straunge that euer was
heard of, and happened to him in this sort.
                     The King of Pasmeria, great gouernour of the Moor
                           •
                        s,
and father to my Lord, béeing vnable (through extreme
age) to weilde the gouernment of his Realme, gaue the administration
thereof, and made his Lieutenant generall,

my Lord Maurice, a Knight so hardy and puissant as any
of his time, and so renowned for his beautie, sagacitie, and
braue lineaments of body, as there is none of the Kings
of Iudea, Egypt, Ethiopia, and neighbour Countreyes round
about, but gladly desire his 
                           〈◊〉
                         and friendshippe. So
that many haue sent their Ambassadours to him, presenting
their Daughters and Kingdomes to him, the greater
part whereof he hath hitherto refused, 
                           •
                        xcusing himselfe by
his fathers age and his owne youth. But as often times
it happeneth, Fortune enemie to all good endeuours, not
suffering him to remaine in quiet, permitted that the quéene
of Tharsus, the fayrest of the Orientall pa
                           •
                        ts, a young
Widdow and rich, as is very well knowne, after shee had
sent him many presents of incomparable value, intreated
him to come and sée her, shaddowing in this message, the
great desire shée had to mat
                           •
                        h with him. The Prince being
benigne and courteous, would not denie her, but in short
time after iourneyed to her. The Quéene entertaining him
with great royaltie, and séeing in him farre more gracious
and beautifull gifts then before she heard reported: was so
surprised with loue, as in stéede of looking to be woo
                           •
                        d, her
selfe was constrained to demaund, knowing so w
                           •
                        ll to declare
her desirous and affectionate passions, as the Prince
mooued with amorous pittie, granted what she requested,
without any further condition or promise, presuming on
himselfe, in respect of her great and fauorable entertainment,
that hee would not leaue her for any other. But herein
was she deceiued, for the yong Prince hauing staied with
her t
                           •
                        nne or twelue dayes, desired leaue to departe, saying
that hée had receiued Letters from his Father, which commaunded
his spéedy returne home againe, promising her,
(if so his father consented) to take her in marriage, and
that with such expe
                           •
                        ition as might bée. The Queene somewhat
contented with this answere, thinking hee would
performe what hée promised, let him depart. He being come
home into his owne Countrey, forgot his loue to his newe

Fréend, and by his Fathers commaundement, marryed
with a yong Princesse, Daughter to the King Lycomedes.
The Quéene hearing these newes, was almost dead with
conceit of gréefe, and conceiued such hatred against my Lord
Maurice, as she determindd to be reuenged on him, whatsoeuer
came after. And the better to compasse her intent, shée
sent to search out one of her knights, a learned Magitian,
promising him, if he would help her to be reuenged on him
that so deceiued her, shée would make him one of the chéefest
in her Realme. The Magitian, who euermore was
desirous to please her, promised her to worke such a deuise,
that Maurice should endure such cruel torments, as her selfe
should be constrayned to pittie him. And to accomplish this
practise, hée onely desired the King her Fathers Crowne,
which was one of the richest in the whole world: which
Crowne he coniured in such sort, as the diuell himself could
not imagine the like, and comming therwith to the Quéen,
said.
                     Madame, you must sende this Crowne to the Prince
of Pasmeria, desiring him for your sake hée will weare it on
his head, in the chéefest affayres of his estate, which hée immediatly
will accomplish: but this I dare assure you, that
hereby hée shall suffer so many vexations, as hee would endure
a thousand deaths if hee could possible, to be deliuered
from this torment, which he neuer shall be till the most loyall
louer in the world take it from his head. The Quéene
so ioyfull hereof as could be, sent the Crowne to the prince,
who receiued it thankfully, and beholding it sumptuous,
sodainely put it on his head: but presently flew out of his
head such a flame of fire, as it had béene the blaze that commeth
from a discharged Cannon. Then called hee for ayde
and succour, making the greatest lamentations that euer
were heard, but all was to no ende, for no Knight or Lady
there could do him any good, and so all the whole day hée remained
in this cruell martirdome, burning aline, yet
not perishing, resembling the Salamander in the extreame

fire. When his people saw that they could procure him no
ease, they sent two of the greatest Lords of the Realme to
the Quéene, who humbly intreated her to pittie the Prince,
and to recompence the fault he had committed, hée should
take her to his Wife, and endow her with those honourable
possessions belonging to him. The Quéene entertained
them very nobly, and after she had vnderstood their message,
answered.
                     My Lord
                           •
                        , the marriage betwéene your maister and me,
is intollerable, and no way can hée nowe contract himselfe
againe, for I remembring his disloyaltie, and hée the torments
hée suffers by my meanes, it were impossible that
wée should louingly liue togither, therefore in this matter
you shall excuse me. And let him know, that séeing hée was
so presumptuous contrarie to his faith and promise, to refuse
me for his Wife, I now so much disdain and contemne
him, as my heart by no meanes can be induced to loue him.
And no other remedie is there for his torments, but that
hée séeke through Asia, Europe, and Affrica, a louer so perfect,
who by his loyaltie may cease the paines he suffers for
trecherie and treason. With this short answere depart my
Countrey, for your Maister is so worthie of fauour, as for
his sake I hate his people.
                     The Ambassadours maruailing at this fatall destenie,
returned to their Lord, to whom they reported the Quéenes
answere, and what remained to ease his affliction, which
more and more encreased his gréefe: wherfore séeing what
he was enioyned to doo, the next day hée left the Court, entending
not to stay a day in any place, till he should finde
a Knight so vertuous and loyall. Thus hath he trauailed Ethiopia,
India, Tartaria, & the greater part of your realmes,
but as yet hee hath founde none to remedie his misfortune:
but if any other disloyall Knight in triall touch the
crowne, his vexations are far more greater then before. For
this cause most mighty Lord, ha
                           •
                        ing heard the great fame
of valiant knights in your Court, especiall of a stranger

Knight being dumbe, who came hither but of very late
time: he desires your maiestie, his assurance graunted, to
suffer him trie his fortune heere, if in your presence 
                           •
                        e may
finde any helpe, or else to seeke further in other Princes
Courts. These are the principall points of my charge,
may it please your highnesse to consider of mine answere,
how I shall returne and certifie my Maister, that you may
like wise sée an aduenture maruailous.
                  
                  
                     Chap. VII.
                     
                        How the Prince Maurice came to the Court of the Sold
                              •
                           ne
of Babilon, where he was deliuered of his burning Crowne
that tormented him, by the loyaltie of Palmerin.
                     
                     
                        
                           MAulicus wondering at this strange discourse,
thus answered the Moore. You
may (my friend) returne to your maister
when you please, and say from vs,
that hee shall be welcome to our court,
with as safe a
                           ••
                        urance as our own p
                           •
                        rson,
as well for his valour and bountie,
which I haue heard greatly esteemed,
as for that wee are desirous to see so strange an aduenture
ended in our presence. And wee cannot sufficiently
maruaile, howe he could bee so forg
                           •
                        tfull of himselfe, that
after his faith so broken, hee could extinguish her remembra
                           •
                        ce
that loued him so vn
                           •
                        eigne
                           •
                        ly: but hee
                           •
                        ein may
wee beholde the soueraignitie of confident loue 
                           〈…〉
                         then
and certifie him of our pleasures, and that we pray 
                           〈◊〉
                         god
                           •
                        
his 
                           〈◊〉
                         may be in such an houre, as hee may depart

hence to his owne content: yet am I greatly afraid, that he
shall not finde any Knight in our Court, but hath eyther
forfaited or failed towardes his Lady. The Moore kissing
the Sol
                           •
                        ans hand, and humbly taking his leaue, returned
to his Lord, leauing the Soldane and his Knights, admyring
this rare accident, so that hee exhorted euery one to aduenture
his fortune at this Crowne, to giue the greater
assurance to their Ladies, of their loyall fidelitie: but many
of them were herein deceiued, for in stéede of prayse and
glorie, they receiued shame and reproch, as you shall sée
héereafter.
                     The Prince aduertised of the Soldans aunswere, in
hope of good successe sette forwarde on his iourney, and the
next day following hée came to Calpha, where Maulicus
caused him to be honourably lodged in the Cittie, because
that day he would not come to the Pallace. On the morrow,
after that Lethea, wife to the Soldane, her Daughter Alchidiana,
the fayre Ardemia, with many other Ladies and
Princes were come into the Hall, to sée the tryall of this noueltie:
Prince Maurice vnderstanding how the Soldane
with all his courtly assistants, stayed his comming, went
to the Pallace accompanied with a hundred Knights, all
clad in mourning blacke, in signe of their continuall sorrow
for their Princes misfortune. There he was very royally
entertained, the Soldane causing him to sitte by him in a
sumptuous Chayre of estate, of purpose prouided, and after
many welcomes and kinde gratulations, the Soldane demaunded
how hee felt himselfe, and whether hee sustayned
any ease of his torment. Ah my Lord quoth the prince, I can
not expresse to your maiestie the paine which I féele, being a
thousand times worse to mée then death, and euerie houre
enforcing mée to despayre, but I must endure it with what
patience I can, till incomparable loyaltie discharge mee of
this burthen. With these words he lamented excéedingly,
so that each one was mooued to pittie him, for such a burning
flame continued in the Crowne, and so f
                           •
                        rious heate

procéeded from his mouth, as sette the Hall in maruailou
                           •
                        
hotnesse, yet consumed hee nothing at all, but in euery part
was as formall as any other man. Beloued Couzin, said the
Soldane, for my selfe I will not enterprise to meddle with
your Crowne, for I doo not imagine my selfe so fauoured of
loue, as I can finish that wherein so many haue fayled, nor
would I willingly séeke mine owne dishonour, being farre
vnable to profit you: as for my knights, let them make
proofe of theyr loyalty and spare not, and sée which of them
can winne the honour of this aduenture. Hereupon Gui
                              ••
                           
                           haran,
brother to faire Ardemia first entred, and 
                           〈◊〉
                        
to the enchaunted Prince, sayd. Trust me my Lord, since I
began my profession in loue, I neuer committed any preiudice
to my Lady, therefore will I trie to end this enchaunt
                        
                           •
                        ient.
                     Then earnestly beholding Alchidiana, for whose loue
onely hee came to Court, hée approched to the enchaunted
Prince, and pul
                           •
                         so hard as he could at the Crowne, but
hée crying aloude, sayde. For Gods sake Sir knight striue
no longer, for if by disloyaltie I could be cured, I sée you are
able to giue me remedie. Alas, in all my life I neuer felt
like paine by any Knight that tried his fortune, great
neede haue you to doo seuere pennance, if you will bée fauoured
by loue any more, towards whom you haue so haynously
offended, for my infirmitie may not be holpen, but by
loyaltie, firmnesse, faithfull persuit, constant perseuerance,
and such other honoured vertues estéemed in loue, whereof
you haue not the least particular. Thus retyred this newe
louer, more ashamed then a Uirgin to bee seene lightly disposed,
and so sate downe among the other 
                           〈◊〉
                        , whose
fortune prooued as effectuall as the first, to 
                           〈◊〉
                         owne disgrace,
and great torment of the languishing 
                           〈◊〉
                        . The
Kings and auncient Princes séeing the young Knights
could doo no good, put themselues in deuoire, each one conceiuing
so well of himselfe, as if theyr fortune serued to
ende the aduenture, their yéeres should carrie the honour,

and they be renowned for euer by their Ladies: but their
vaine conceit and desire to accomplish an impossibilitie,
much abused them, so that they shamefully remained frustrate
in their intents, and the paines of the enchaunted
Prince greatly augmented, who thus sp
                           •
                        ke to them. Truly
my Lords, it is the custome of your auncient and au
                           •
                        acious
opinions, to extoll your loue
                           •
                         and valour: but for any thing
I sée, your olde yéeres haue much lesse merited amorous
mercy, then the indiscréete and vnconstant dealing of these
yong Princes. Then seeing that no other offered to prooue
his vertue, deliuering many greeuous sighs, he sayde. Unhappie
wretch that I am, howe much more had it béene to
my ease and benefit, if the Quéene of Tharsus (whome I
so 
                           〈◊〉
                         offended) would haue contented her selfe in
her reuenge, to cause mée be péece meale torne in sunder,
then thus haue deliuered me into this insupportable vexation,
the ende where of will neuer be accomplished, séeing
that in this honourable Court of my Lord the Soldane, I
find no one can giue me comfort.
                     
                        Palmerin hearing the lamentation of this amorous

                           〈◊〉
                        , fell into a profound imagination, and after he had
long regarded Ardemia, who so liuely resembled his Mistresse
Polynarda, saide within himselfe. Ah swéet Madame
and onely mistresre, vouchsafe at this instant to assist mee,
for by your succour I shall nowe make proofe of my faithfull
and inuiolable loyaltie, which neuer in ought offended
you, if not at Durace in affecting Laurana, whom I simplie
thought to be the Lady, who was so often promised in my
vi
                           •
                        ions. But seeing my thoughts neuer sorted to effects, as
also that I was deceiued in your name: that ought not be
imputed to me for any trespasse, and therefore 
                           〈◊〉
                         Goddesse
bee fauourable to me. Then surprised with sodaine
ioy, hée beganne againe earnestly to be holde the Princesse
Ardemia, who imagining her selfe onely beloued of him,
cast foorth a bitter sigh; turning to Alchidiana, 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . Ah
Madame and my déere Couzin, what great fault hath this

cruell Quéene committed, appointing her Magique in such
sorte, as loyall and faithfull Ladies maye not be suffered
héerein, for deliueraunce of this yong and beautifull Prince
                           •
                        
doubtlesse hee should sooner receiue helpe by them then by
Knights, 
                           〈◊〉
                         much more loyally doo they loue, then men, and
are in their affections firme and constant. Alchidiana, who
felt her selfe touched with this intricate furie, whereof the

                           〈◊〉
                         
                        Ardemia complained, suddainly coniectured, whereto
her sighes and faultering spéeches tended, which raysed priuate
conceit, and such a vehement attaint of iealous
                           ••
                        , as
she would not aunswere any worde, but feigning to smell
some discontented fauour, turned her face the contrary way.
Palmerin looking round about him, and séeing no one would
meddle with the 
                           〈◊〉
                        , fell on his knée before the 
                           〈◊〉
                        ,
crauing

                           〈…〉
                        .
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                        
well be coniectured, prostrated himselfe at Palmerins féete,
and with vnspeakable ioy thus said. Most noble and fortunate
Knight, how much am I bound and indebted to thée?
right happie was the howre of thy byrth, but much more
happie my iourney to see thée: let my word suffise, I so far
deliuer my selfe yours, as my selfe, my Subiects, my possessions,
or whatsoeuer else is mine, I fréely offer to your disposition.
Palmerin, who euer bare the most noble minde of
a Knight, was displeased that so great a Prince shoulde honour
him with such reuerence, wherefore with great humilitie
hée tooke him vppe in his armes, causing him to sit
downe where before hée did: but the Soldane and all his
Lords greatly amazed, not so much at his courtesie, as his

                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. VIII.
                     
                        How the 
                              •
                           ayre Princesse Ardemia, enduring extreame
passions and torments in loue, made offer of her affections
to Palmerin, which he refused: wherewith the
Princesse (through extreame conceit of greefe and despight)
suddainly died.
                     
                     
                        EA
                           •••
                        ye may be cōiectured, the great pleasure
of the two Ladies, Alchidiana and
Ardemia, beholding the man 
                           〈◊〉
                        
they loued as their liues, to haue the honour
of the enchaunted 
                           〈◊〉
                        : for eac
                           •
                        
of them seuerally perswaded her selfe,
that he had thus aduentured in ho
                           •
                        or of
he
                           •
                         loue. And as they returned from the Hall to their chambers,
Alchidiana came and tooke Palmerin by the hand, and
walking on with him, thus spake. Ah gentle knight, how are
you to bee regarded aboue all other? I knowe not why the

                           〈◊〉
                         should depriue you of speeche: except that in all things,
this on
                           •
                        lie excepted, you should be perfectly resembled to thē.
Oh how happie is shee, that might aduenture to make you
her Seruant, doubtlesse, if in her appeare so singuler perfections,
as apparantly shew themselues in you: well might it be
reputed a rare coniunction, when the cele
                           •
                        tiall 
                           〈◊〉
                        
gouerning 
                           〈…〉
                         affections, hath vnited you in 
                           •
                        o amiable
alliaunce.
                     The Gentlemen that attended on the Princesse, great
                        
                           •••
                        
murmured at this priuate familiaritie: but shée 
                           〈…〉
                        
in her affections, as virginall 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        
now forgotten, and earelesse of regarde, openly shewed her
desires. Thus were these two Ladies now, much more amorous
of the dumbe Knight then before: so that they were
not well, but eyther in his company
                           •
                        , or thinking on him.
Alchidiana remaining iealous of her Cozin, seemed not to
loue her as she was woont, but deuised all the meanes shée
could, that she might be sent to her Fathers Court againe:
yet she that little made account thereof, sought opportunitie
to bewraye her loue to Palmerin, and by hap séeing Alchidiana
in the Gallerie, conferring with two of her Ladies,
shée entred alone into her Cozins Chamber, where sitting
downe on the bedde, shée compassed many imaginations,
howe she might discouer to the dumbe Knight, the secrete
fire that was kindled in her bre
                           ••
                        . So long shée staied there,
till Palmerin came, because about that time hée was woont
to visite the Prin
                           •
                        esse Alchidiana, Ardemia so glad héereof
as could be possible, suddainlie started vppe, and saluting
him with more then common reuer
                           •
                        nce, taking him by the
hand, and causing him to fit downe by her vpon the bedde.
Then enflamed with wonderfull passions, surpassing Pasiphaes
desire to the brutish Bull, when shée mette him in the
wood made by Dedalus, shée beheld him with such a piercing
countunaunce, as the least glimse whereof, was able to confounde
the reason of the most constant person, as the aspect
of the Sunne in the 
                           〈◊〉
                         of Leo, dooth the eyes of the beholders,
and of force to warme the coldest complexion, although
it were an 
                           〈◊〉
                         himselfe in her presence. Then
deliuering thrée or foure bitter sighes, fetcht from the verye
bottome of her heart, as cruell as y• 
                        
                           〈…〉
                        :
she tooke a rich Diamond from her finger, and put it on Palmerins,
with these words.
                     Swéete Fréends, and onely comforte of my soule, let
me intreate you to weare this as an argument of my loue,
thereby to knowe, howe well you estéeme of mée, assuring
you, that I am so deuoted yours, as if you vouchsafe to

                           〈◊〉
                         me the fauour and honour, by iournying to the Court

of my Father with mee, I neuer will haue any Husband
but you, and there shall such account be made of you, as wel
beséemes a Knight so noble and vertuous. Ah diuine defence
of my life, and more woorthie to bee loued then Loue
himselfe, misdéeme not of these spéeches so aduenturouslye
vttered, by a yong Ladie and vnmaried: for the loue I beare
you is such, as I am constrained (forgetting the decent regard
of a bashfull Uirgin, who naturallie is shamefas
                           •
                        e) to
estéeme of you honestlye, and as is conuenable to 
                           〈◊〉
                         estate.
Then séeing the Gods, the place, the occasion, and the
time, permits me to bewraye, that which I dare not otherwise
manifest: haue then faire Knight some pittie on mee,
and let mée enioy assuraunce of grace, for which I 
                           〈◊〉
                        
in ceaselesse torments. With which wordes shée embraced
him, and sealed so many swéete kisses on his hand, as apparantly
deciphered her earnest affection.
                     
                        Palmerin amazed at this strange accident, because shée
was a Pagan, and contrary to him in faith, that making 
                           〈◊〉
                        
aunswere, but following the example of chaste Ioseph, who
refused Zephira Wife to Putiphar, great prou
                           •
                        st to the
King of Aegipt: started from her suddainlie, and mooued
with displeasure, departed the Chamber, thinking in himselfe,
that such occasions more ouer-rule the hearts of men,
then all other matters that might bée deuised, and 
                           〈◊〉
                         the
practises of 
                           •
                        ellish P
                              •
                           uto. Then calling to his Ladie for assistance,
said to himselfe. Ah swéete Mistresse, succour now
your seruant, for I rather desire a thousand deathes, then
to violate the chaste honor of my loue, or to giue that fauour
to this Lady which is onelye yours. Alchidiana, by chance
                           •
                        
séeing Palmerin when he entred her Chamber, and 
                           〈◊〉
                        
him now to depart againe: imagined presentlie the

                           〈◊〉
                         of the cause, wherefore entring the guarderobe which
was adioyning to her Chamber, shée closely stood and 
                           〈◊〉
                        
all that had passed, and at his comming foorth staied him in
this maner.
                     Notwithout great cause (good Knight) 
                           〈◊〉
                         thou take

the fatall Crowne from the head of Maurice, for in thée is
more 
                           ••
                        rmnesse and continencie, then is in the disloyall Ardemia,
vnchaste desires and villainie: but in vnfitte nine
did shée rip open her vnmaidenlike affections, for I will publish
her shame to euery one, and cause her to be lesse estéemed
then a knowne offender.
                     
                        Palmerin fearing that in her choller she would doo no
lesse then she said, fell on his knée before her, intreating her
by signes to forbeare, otherwise it would be his death. She
seeing him so faire and gracious, and thus to humble himselfe
at her feete, quallified her displeasure, promising to
kéepe it in secret. So Palmerin withdrewe himselfe to his
Chamber, leauing the two Ladies nowe togither: but
Ardemia agréeued at the dumbe Knights refusall, woulde
not reueale her wrong to Alchidiana, (who so soone as Palmerin
was out of hearing) thus began. Why? shamelesse
Ardemia, thinkest thou thy beautie of such value, that the
Knight, to whome my Father and I haue doone so great honours,
would leaue vs, and depart with thée? trust me
                           •
                        
thou art farre from thine account: for if thou vauntest to
doo him such honor in thy Fathers Courte, as his nobilitie
deserueth, it consisteth in my power to exalt him more in
one howre, then thou canst doo in a thousand yéeres, mightest
thou liue so long. I did neuer thinke that such audacious
and incontinent tempting a man, could any way enter
thy heart: but if such bee thy disposition, thou oughtest rather
to abide in thy Fathers Courte, where thou maist
haue leysure to followe thy base affection, with some of the

                           〈◊〉
                         or youthes attending on thy Father, then to offer
the 
                           〈◊〉
                         héere in my Chamber. Hence, hence, foorth of
my presence, for I will not kéepe company with such an
intemperate Woman. What regard hadst thou of thy great
linage, or the place from whence thou art discended? Yea,
what comfort will it be to me when I shall heare, that a
Ladie, issued of the blood royall, should bée more shamelesse
and impudent then a 
                           〈◊〉
                        , a villaine, or an high way

begger? Many other such like hard spéeches vsed Alchidiana,
all which gréeued her not so much, as to 
                           〈…〉
                         of
him, whom she reputed as passionate for her loue, as shée
was for his.
                     These high words of the Princesse, caused the Ladies
attending on Ardemia to enter the Chamber, which ma
                           •
                        e
her then breake off, because she woulde not haue euerie one
knowe the matter: and they séeing their Mistresse so sad
and discomforted, brought her to her owne Chamber, where
on her bedde shee sorrowed so impatiently, as each one 
                           〈◊〉
                        
she would 
                           〈◊〉
                         her selfe, and faine shée woulde, but
that their presence hindered her: therefore shee deferred it
till better opportunitie. And because shee had spent the most
part of her yonger yéeres, in reading the workes of 
                           〈◊〉
                        ,
as wel Greekes as Arabians, she remembred the mou
                           •
                        nfull
Tragedie of Biblis, which caused her to frame a Dittie,
that shée had translated from the Greeke 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         of Sapho,
into her vulgar spéech: and turning towardes her Ladies
and Gentlewomen, she began in this maner.
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 The lamentable Dittie of Ardemia, dying for loue.
                                 
                                    MVsenot (fayre virgins) at Ardemia,
                                    
                                    Although her end be hard and dolorous:
                                    For death is pleasant as mine elders say,
                                    To any Ladie sometime amorous.
                                 
                                 
                                    For as the Swan in cold Meander glide,
                                    By mournfull notes foretelles her speedy death:
                                    So my complaint doth bid me to prouide,
                                    For sweetest loue makes hast to stop my breath.
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    The ill that endlesse and vncessantly
                                    Torments my heart, is fayre and choysest beautie:
                                    And this vnhappie awkwarde desteny,
                                    Falles to my lot through spotlesse loyaltie.
                                 
                                 
                                    For fond conceit that ouer-rulde my wit,
                                    More wretched then fayre Biblis maketh me:
                                    And he I loue more stony hard is knit,
                                    Then Caunus, who could ken no courtesie.
                                 
                                 
                                    Yet Bibli
                                             •
                                          
                                        oftentimes could ease her heart,
                                    By sweete deuising with her louely freend:
                                    But he I honor, recks not of my smart,
                                    Nor will vouchsafe one gracious looke to lend.
                                 
                                 
                                    And as her sorrowes cheefely did arise,
                                    Because the secrets of her loue were knowne:
                                    So I reueald, each one will me despise,
                                    VVhich death can stint ere it too farre be blowne.
                                 
                                 
                                    Vnhappie wretch, that could not this foresee,
                                    And be more chary of so choyse a thing:
                                    But all too late I wish the remedie,
                                    Therefore my folly doth due guerdon bring.
                                 
                                 
                                    if loue that is esteemde a power diuine,
                                    Vnto his Seruaunts giue so sharpereward:
                                    VVhat merit may vile hatred then resigne,
                                    Vnto his vassayles that his Lawes regard?
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    Oft haue I heard mine auncient elders say,
                                    That such as loue not, are vnwoorthie life:
                                    Yet doth my loue imagine my decay,
                                    And throwes my hope into whole worlds of strife.
                                 
                                 
                                    And yet the paynes I wish for my mischaunce,
                                    May not be valued with my present woe:
                                    For to compare them is meere dalliaunce,
                                    And neither sence or reason should 
                                          •
                                        sho
                                          •
                                       e.
                                 
                                 
                                    Life is to me lothsome and burdenous,
                                    All pleasure seemes to mee tormenting hell?
                                    Ah poore refused, and abused thus,
                                    Must thou needes die for louing all too well?
                                 
                                 
                                    O sacred Venus, patr
                                          •
                                       nesse of loue,
                                    In this distresse wilt thou not pittie me?
                                    And thy fayre Sonne that thus his shaft did proue,
                                    VVill he forsake me in this ieopardie?
                                 
                                 
                                    If you forsake me in this iust request,
                                    And will not fauour what you did procure:
                                    Giue leaue to him that bringeth all to rest,
                                    And he will ease the torments I endure.
                                 
                                 
                                    You fatall Sisters that haue spunne my thred,
                                    And now thinke good it should be cut in twaine:
                                    Fulfill the taske as you are destenied,
                                    And let my heart abide no longer paine.
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    Come sweetest death, expected too too long,
                                    Ende all the euils vnhappie loue begun:
                                    If thou delay, I challenge thee of wrong,
                                    Hast then good death, that loue and life were done.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     Her complaints thus finished, shée commaunded her
Ladies to depart the Chamber, and being alone by her selfe,
shee againe began to consider, the rigorous refusall of Palmerin,
the conceit whereof gréeued her so extreamely, as
also the reproachfull wordes of her Cozin: that making a
conscience of her sorrowes, and raging with extreamitie
of this despight, brake the vaines of her heart in sunder, and
the artiries of her bodie, as the bloud issued foorth at many
places aboundantly, and therewithall in short time she was
strangled.
                     The nxet morning, her chéefest Lady that attended on
her, and loued her excéedingly, came to the bedde side to sée
how shée fared: but finding her dead▪ and so 
                           〈◊〉
                         with
her owne bloud, gaue such a loude shrieke, as Alchidiana
and her D
                           •
                        moselles, affrighted at the noyse, ranne in all
haste to the Chamber. The Princesse knowing the cause
of this mischaunce, was maruellous sorrowfull, assuring
her selfe, that the wordes shée spake in her anger, occasioned
this bloudie 
                           〈◊〉
                        . And the 
                           •
                        umor of this mishop was
so soone spread through the Palace, as all the Ladies, Damoselles,
Knightes, Squires, and other, c
                           •
                        me to beholde the
harde fortune of Ardemia. What lamentation was made
on all sides, is not to be expressed: especially the Ladies attendant
on Ardemia, and her Broth
                           •
                        r Gu
                              ••
                           haran, who
brought her with him thither: but her Gouernesse, not able
to endure the burthen of her heauinesse, without feare of
dread of any, thus openly complained. Ah swéete Princesse
A
                              •
                           demia, the flowre of beautie, howe deare hast thou
bought this precious gift? for I knowe assuredly, that for

this cause onely thy death happened: vnhappie was the
houre, when thou didst leaue thy Fathers Court, to accompanie
the Princesse Alchidiana. After her mones and the
funerall pompe accomplished, the Soldane erected for her a
most beautifull T
                           •
                        mbe, with a sumptuous Coronet on the
toppe thereof, being vpheld by two inestimable Pill
                           •
                        rs of
engrauen and guilded Alablaster, the like whereof were neuer
séene, since the first King of Greece. Yet was hée ignorant
in the cause of her death, and Palmerin, not imagining
whence this inconuenience did arise, was so sorrowfull for
the death of the Princesse, as day and night hee mourned
for her, and at length remembring her wordes to him, and
doubting his vnkindnesse to be the cause of her death, sayd
within himselfe:
                     Alas faire Princesse, must I (at the first motion) driue
thée to dispaire? had I dissembled a little, or temporized
the matter, thou hadst not fallen into this extremitie, but
my onely wilfull indiscretion, is cause of thy losse. O Female
sexe, howe are you subiect to casuall passions? Yet
néede I not wonder at this present mishappe, for from the
beginning of the worlde, the Woman hath béene so suddein
and voluntarie to the effect of her desires, were they good or
euill, but especially in the action of loue: as neyther feare,
honor, shame, torments, no nor death, could diuert her from
her vndiscre
                           •
                        te fantasies. Hereof beare record Hyp
                              ••
                           mnestra,
Myrrha, Deianira, Scylla, 
                              〈…〉
                           
Phyllis, Salmacis, Hero and Dydo, whose deathe
                           •
                         were
procured onely by lauish loue. O diuine wisedome, that
hast suffered me to fall into this lucklesse accident, protect
mée from any further disaduauntage: séeing thou hast taken
her hence, who gaue some ease to mine 
                           〈…〉
                        
that so liuely shée resembled my swéete Mistresse, 
                           〈…〉
                        
desire to serue with continuall loyaltie. I n
                           •
                        we 
                           〈◊〉
                        
my selfe, that this loue was not accompanied with vertue,
and that for my good it hath so chaunced: forgette 
                           〈◊〉
                         not
then, but so enable me, as in such badde occasions 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        
not from my duetie. And such is my confidence in thy promises,
as no te
                           •
                        ptation shall preuaile against mée: but this

                           •
                        aptiuitie once discharged, I hope to direct my course pleasing
in thy sight, and to 
                           〈◊〉
                         such gracious seruice, as
thy name 
                           〈…〉
                         and glorified for euer. So long continued
he in this silent contemplation, as Alchidiana perceiued
him, which greatlie displeased her: but fearing any
way to 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        Palmerin, shée durst not saye what shée
thought, liuing in hope, that her Cozin being dead, she should
now compasse the effecte of her desires. Ardemia enterred
in her honourable Tombe, Guilharan her Brother with
his traine, and the Ladies that attended on his Sister, returned
into Armenia, where great sorrowe was made for
the death of the Princesse, and the renowne of her beautie,
blazed the report of her death through euery region.
                  
                  
                     Chap. IX
                     
                        How Amarano of Nigrea, eldest son to the king of Phrygia,
vnderstanding the death of the faire Princesse Ardemia▪
who was newly promised him in mariage: made
many greeuous lamētations for her losse. And how Alchidiana
discouered her amorous affections to Palme
                           
                              •
                           in.
                     
                     
                        SO farre was spread the reporte, of the
strange death of the Princesse Ardemia,
as 
                           〈◊〉
                         came to the hearing
of 
                           〈◊〉
                         eldest sonne to the king of
Ph
                              •
                           ygia, the most valiant & redoubt
                           •
                        d
knight of y• 
                        
                           〈…〉
                        : as wel for his great

                           〈◊〉
                         and déedes of Armes, which
he before that time accompli
                           •••
                        d in Asia, as for his affable

nature, vertue and courtesie. This yong Prince, being in the
King his fathers Court, and hearing commended beyond al
other Ladies of the East, the faire Ardemia Daughter to
the King of Armenia, at the verye sounde of the Trompe
of this blazing Goddesse, and setting the newes downe for
true, from her affecting spéech, he became so amorous of her,
as he had no content but in thinking on her. Héereupon, he
sent his Ambassadours to her Father, to request her in mariage,
wherto right willingly he condiscended, and nowe
at the instant, when he intended to go visite her, newes
came to the Court of her admirable death, which for a while
was 
                           〈◊〉
                         from him, because each one doubted the conceit

                           〈◊〉
                         would cause his death. For they knowing the
loue he 
                           〈◊〉
                         her to be so vehement, as hée vnderstanding
her strange kinde of death, they thought it impossible, but it
would 
                           〈◊〉
                         to very scandalous inconuenience, yet in the
ende he 
                           〈◊〉
                         thereof: but to sette downe héere the gréefe,
teares and complaints of this yong Prince, is more then I
am able: 
                           〈◊〉
                         it therefore suffise you, that his sorrowes were
such, as euery houre his death was likewise expected. It
was likewise told him, howe through the enuie of Alchidiana,
shée dyed, and that (for certaintie) shee was one of
the chéefest causes thereof: which mooued him then into
such an alteration, as hée swore by the great Prophet Mahomet,
to reuenge her iniurie, so that the Solda
                           •
                        e shoulde
for euer remember the daunger in suffering so great a treason.
In conclusion, hée intended to take with him, two hundred
chosen Knights, all clad in mourning for the gréefe of
their Maister, and 
                           •
                        oure of his Brethren, Knights of great
hardinesse and so well they iourneied, as they 
                           •
                        ame within
twentie miles of the 
                           〈◊〉
                         Courte. But that wée may
not too farre 
                           〈◊〉
                         from our intent, Alchidiana, ioyfull
(as you haue hearde) for the departure of Guilharan and
his 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        Palmerin 
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                        
to all louers, such account she made of her beautie and
riches, as she imagined that Palmerin would not disdaine
her: but rather would repute himselfe happy, to haue that
at his pleasure, whereof so many Kings and great Lordes
had béene denyed. And in this opinion, the next time that
Palmerin came to her Chamber, she beganne with him in
this manner.
                     Now Syr Knight, what thinke you of the death of Ardem
                              •
                           a,
who so falselye would haue seduced you to goe with
her hence? did shée not commit great treason against mee
if shée had preuailed? but right well is shée rewarded, and
as I desired. Thinke then no more of her presumptuous
follie, or the ridiculous conceit of her vaine loue, which shée
made her pretence, to cause you forsake my Fathers Court:
where you haue receiued so many speciall honours, chéefelie
of his Daughter, who loues you déerelie, and in
                           ••
                        nds to
make you Lord ouer all her possessions. Beléeue mee Sir
Knight, if hitherto I deferred to acquaint you héerewith,
it was in respect I doubted her: but now shée being gone,
estéeme henceforth of me as your owne, and to begin this
alliaunce, I honour you with all that is mine, and my selfe
to be disposed at your pleasure. For my heart which is onely
subiect to you, applyes it selfe to your lyking, and can wish
nothing but what you will 
                           〈◊〉
                        . How long haue I
desired this happie day? howe often haue I contemned and
despised my selfe, in not daring to breake the seale of my
affections, which nowe I 
                           〈◊〉
                         aduentured to your knowledge?
As for that which now troubleth mee, is the want
of your spéech, which the Gods haue depriued you off, being
enuious of your manifolde perfections. Alas my Lord, why
did they not endue 
                           •
                        hée with that benifit, that in declaring
my desires, thy answeres might returne reciprocall pleasure.
                     Some in their loue delight themselues, with embracing,
kissing, and such ceremoniall behauiour: as for mée, amo
                           •
                        
                        rous,
priuate and 
                           〈…〉
                        , I repute a 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        
content. Yet hath Loue one shaft in his 
                           〈…〉
                        
then all these, béeing the onely argument of each others
resolution: in respect whereof, I commit my honour into
your protection, prizing, estéeming, and chusing you aboue
all men in the world beside. Palmerin exceedingly abashed at
these vnséemelye spéeches, knewe what signes to make for
his aunswere, and hauing recourse to his onely comforter,
li
                           •
                        ting his eyes to heauen, thus priuately inuocated. My
God, deliuer me from this enemie, and suffer me not to fall
in consent to this temptation, for I thinke her a Deuill incarnate,
and sent to deceiue me. Impossible is it that a maiden,
by nature modest and bashfull, would let slip such effronted
wordes and audacious. The conceit héereof so vexed
and offended him, as the Princesse feared he would haue
dyed: not with conceit that like hap might come to Alchidiana,
as did to Ardemia, but because he shuld so wickedly sin
against his owne soule, and falsefie his loue to his swéetest
Mistresse. Yet knowing that this sadnesse would not satisfie
the Princesse, he feigned to swoune, his colour changing
in such sort, as one would haue iudged him past recouerie.
Alchidiana was so gréeued héereat, as wée could not imagine
what to saye: but séeing that Palmerin séemed nowe
not to vnderstand her, and before had by signes 
                           〈◊〉
                         reuealed
his meaning, saide. By our great God, it may well be
                           •
                        
said, that this man is a huge lumpe of flesh, which the deuil
hath enchaunted to torment me withall, or else some other
shaddowe and resemblaunce: for hée refuseth what all men
desire, yea, and often despayre, because they cannot 
                           〈◊〉
                        
it. But fearing least her ende would imitate her Cozins, or
that the dumbe Knight should die in her presence, shée 
                           〈◊〉
                        
presume no further: but threwe her selfe downe vppon a
Pallet, not able to speake her stomacke was so enraged.
Which Palmerin perceiuing, arose out of his feigned
traunce, and giuing a great sighe, departed the Chamber,

                           〈…〉
                         owne. The Princesse séeing him gone, 
                           〈◊〉
                        
to 
                           〈◊〉
                         and lament very gréeuouslye, and in midst of

her n
                           •
                        elancholy, fell into these spéeches. You Gods, how
can you suffer one so contrary to nature, as is this dumbe
Knight, 
                           •
                        o liue among men? Can you behold that he whom
I deliuered frō death, brought into y• grace of my father, and
to whom I haue doone more honour then had hée béene mine
owne Brother, will not regarde me? but against all reason,
disdaineth, refuseth, maketh no reckoning of my dolours,
and setteth at nought my earnest intreaties? Ah vndiscréete
and carelesse Girle, thy folly at this time too much ouerruled
thée, that knowing thine owne estate and high linage,
wouldest submit thy selfe to loue one vnknowne to thée, and
of whom thou canst haue no answere, more then of a sencelesse
stocke or stone. If I can now learne to hate thée, it will
be some comfort to me: but the more he iniurieth mee, the
more am I deuoted to his loue. Then againe she contraryed
her selfe in this sort. Yet séeing it is so, ingratefull▪ wretch
that thou a
                           •
                        t, I will cause thée (ere it be long) to repent thy

                           〈◊〉
                        . In this anger she continued all the day, not 
                           〈◊〉
                        
foorth of her Chamber, intending 
                           〈◊〉
                         vtterly
to despise him: but the first time shée sawe him againe,
shee reputed him so louely, faire and gracious, that (to dye)
shée could not with him any harme, but loued him much better
then before. Yet to couer her owne inconstancie, shee
sent him no more presents, nor did him such 
                           〈◊〉
                         as she
was accustomed, which Palmerin well perceiued: but hee
could dissemble it in such sort, as the Princesse hardly might
decipher him. For hée 
                           〈…〉
                        
had made to his deceased Father, to sende his
Brethren to Constantinople, in whose company hee might
trauaile thither, and so escape the Turks and Moorish 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. X.
                     
                        How Amarano Prince of Nigrea, came to the Soldans court,
to accuse A
                              •
                           chidiana, as causer of the death of the fayre
Princesse Ardemia her Cozin.
                     
                     
                        DUring the time that the Prince
                           •••
                         
                        A
                              •
                           
                           chidiana
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                        
the Princesse Ardemia, and if hée made such lamentat
                           •
                        
                        ons,
when hée but heard of her death, what iudgement may
bée set downe of his mo
                           ••
                        s, béeing nowe at the Sepulchre
of his best beloued. Ah inconstant Fortune, quoth hée, why
wouldest thou not permit mée to sée her liuing? Ah Ardemia,
accomplished with admirable beautie, great was her
sinne, wh
                           •
                         enuying thy perfections, procured thy cruell
death yet this is my comfort, that I shall come time inough
to reuenge thy vndeserued 
                           〈◊〉
                        , and he that dare gainesay
mée, with her the authour of thy tragedie, shall receyu
                           •
                        
such condigne punishment, as shall remaine for euer in mem
                           •
                        ri.
                     These complaint
                           •
                         deliuered with excéeding sorrowe,
his Brethren perswaded him, that such behauiour

                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                        
I haue left my Countrey, and aduentured into your
presence, to accuse your Daughter Alchidiana, whom (
                           •
                        o
please you) to call before this assemblie, I will charge, 
                           〈◊〉
                        
she by false and spightfull hatred, as a most cruell and disloyall
Ladie, trayterously murthered her Cozin the Princesse
Ardemia. And because this v
                           ••
                        lainie hath hitherto
béene concealed verie secret, in respect it could not easily bée
verified: I am héere readie to proue in open 
                           〈◊〉
                        , agaynst
any of your Knights that dare maintaine her cause▪ howe
the treason before rehearsed, was committed by her: in reue
                           •
                        ge
whereof, she ought to bée rewarded with sharpe and
shamefull death.
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
part whereof (séeing the pride of the Prince of Nig
                              ••
                           a)
wo
                           •
                        ld furiously haue runne vpon him, saying, that hée
should repent his follie: but the Soldane offended thereat,
caused a Herauld presently to proclayme, that on paine of
death, no one should harme or offende the Prince, nor anie
in his companie, and whosoeuer did otherwise, shoulde presentlie
die for breaking his commaundement: then 
                           •
                        raming
his speeches to the Prince, sayde. Amarano, nowe
maist thou behold my Daughter before thée: disburden the
greefe of thy minde to her, and iustice shall bée doone thée to
thine owne desire. Imagine, quoth the Prince, that such as

knowe you Madame Aldhidiana, will not a little maruaile,
séeing you accomplished with such gracious beautie, that
you should so farre forget your selfe, as to commit treason.
But because a matter so vnlikely, demaundeth as hard a
proofe, I will auerre with mine owne person in Combat, agaynst
any one that dare support your quarell, that you are
guiltie in the accusation alreadie alleaged, and principall
cause of the death of the Arminian Princesse your Cozin.
To reuenge such famous wrong, I haue forsaken my countrey,
trauelling night and day, and haue presented my accusation
before your Father, with this condition: that if your
Knight shall bee vanquished, you are to bee punished as a
cause of such weight requireth. If it he may fortune to bée
foyled, and your Champion victor, I shall yéeld my selfe as
conquered, and demaund no better recompence, for it can
not gréeue mee to remaine with her bodie, whose verie remembraunce

                           〈…〉
                        
in this maner. Alchidiana, you haue heard the spéeches of
the Prince, aduise your selfe well of your answer
                           •
                         for which
of you both shall be sound attainted in the cryme, be it Le
                              •
                           e
Maiestaris, or other 
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. XI.
                     
                        Howe Pa
                              •
                           merin seeing that none of the Soldans Knights
would aduenture for Alchidiana against Amarano, eaterprised
himself her cause in combat. And how the Queene
of Tharsus sent him a sumptuous helmet.
                     
                     
                        
                           ALchidiana hauing heard the 
                           〈◊〉
                        
of Amarano, and that he 
                           〈◊〉
                         sp
                           •
                        
                        ken

                           〈◊〉
                         of her in the presente
of the 
                           〈…〉
                         with
maruailous anger and disdaine, returned
him this aunswere. Amarano the
most rash and 
                           〈◊〉
                        . Knight that
euer I sawe, I wonder howe thy folly
could make thée so audacious, to come and accuse me of treason
(against all truth) before my Father and his 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
But thy spéeches well noted and consider
                           ••
                        , shew nothing
but carelesse youth, 
                           〈◊〉
                        , and too va
                           •
                        nglorious conceit:
chiefly in this, that thou armed 
                           〈◊〉
                        , and accompanied
with so many well appoynted Knights, commest in this sort
to molest a poore maiden, who neuer to thée or thine committed
any offence, but all seruiceable honour, especially to
her, on whose behalfe than offerest the combat. As for the valour
thou reputest in thy selfe, that 
                           〈◊〉
                         which this slaunder
doth encourage thée withall, 
                           〈◊〉
                         thy hartinesse
and resolution of heart, thou oughtest rather oppose against
a Knight able to aunswere thée, then a siely Uirgin, who
hath no weapon but her 
                           •
                        onour wherewith to defende her
selfe. I confesse I am a Ladie, but not traiterous or false,

as thou auouchest, yet of so noble courage, as were I of thy
sexe, thou neuer shouldest depart this Hall, before I had
that conspyring head from thy shoulders, to witnesse thy
falshoode and maleuolent spirit. Notwithstanding, as I am,
so please my Lorde and Father, with a Kitchin cudgell I
shall let thée know, that thou dotest in thy spéeches, and against
thine owne conscience chargest me, with the murder
of my Cozin. Examine thy thoughts, what likely reason
might induce mée to such an offence? If shée was fayre,
thanks to our Gods, mine owne talent is so good, as I néede
not enuie her beautie. If shée made account of her rich dowrie,
I béeing sole heyre to the Signories of the Soldane,
might iudge my selfe farre beyond her, being desired in mariage
by many Kings and Princes, whereof I am well assured
shée neuer had the like. I knowe not then what cause
should anie way induce me, to request her death. But what
néede I make such pr
                           ••
                        estations to thée? séeing that by
some one of my Fathers 
                           〈◊〉
                         thy pride will bee abated,
and I reuenged of the iniurie thou hast doone me. Amarano
not aunswering her a 
                           〈◊〉
                        , spake to the Soldane in this
sort.
                     It is not decent my Lord, that a Prince or Knight
of qualitie, should stay on the wordes of a Woman so little
considerate, who more by anger then vertue, thinkes to reprooue
and annihilate a 
                           〈◊〉
                         accusation. Wherefore, according
to the agréement 
                           〈◊〉
                         determined, cal for the knight
that dare vndertake the quarrell of your daughter, to whom
I will manifest in plaine Combat, that what I haue, said, is
trueth: and if hée bée vanquished, your Daughter Alchidiana,
and he shall bée burned togither, as the greatnesse of
the offence well deserueth: contrariwise, if Fortune denie
mée successe, I will request no other iustice, then what shall
please you to appoynt for me. Maulicus séeing that well he
could not denie the Prince, though to his gréefe, pronouced
the sentence, that his Daughter that day shoulde present
a Knight, to sustaine her cause, according to his conditions

alleaged. This hard prescription, made neuer a
Knight willing to aduenture the Combatte, so much they
feared Amarano, for the great report they heard of his
prowesse, but stoode all silent, as though themselues were
condemned to death. Alchidiana séeing the courage fayle
of so manie Knights, whom shée estéemed for men of great
account, knewe not to whom shée should haue recourse: and
therefore ouercome with excéeding sorrowe, but that her
Ladies assisted her, had twise or thrise swouned before
her Father. Palmerin beholding her, and knowing that
his refusall was greater cause of Ardemiaes 
                        
                           •
                        eath, then
the iniurious wordes of Alchidiana, pityed her estate, and
hauing before his eyes the loue she bare him, the great honours
was done him for her sake, and the pustillanimitie o
                           •
                        
the Soldanes Knights, was so mooued, 
                           〈◊〉
                         forgetting all
daunger, and his dissembled dumbnesse, which hitherto hée
had so cunningly obserued, as though he had béene borne in
that Countrey, hée thus began in the Arabian tongue.

                           〈…〉
                        , vnwoorthie hencefoorth the name of
Knights, how can your hearts endure, that a proude and
presumptuous Prince shall come into your 
                           〈…〉
                        
to accuse your Ladie and Mistresse, and not one of you
daring to defende her right? By the celestiall powers, 
                           〈◊〉
                        
may you bee accounted heartlesse men, and (in suffering this
wrong) to be depriued of all noble titles, and to bee solde in
the market as slaues and villaines. Thinke you the Prince
Amarano is come hither for anie other intent, then to
make tryall of his great hardinesse? Can you be destitute of
reason, and so easily abused, as to thinke 
                           〈…〉
                         Princesse
Alchidiana, whom nature hath so worthily 
                           〈◊〉
                         with
beautie, and with whom no other may make comparison,
could be prouoked to murther Ardemia, for this onely occasion,
because she was faire? And you Lord Amarano, for a
matter so slender, haue you enterprised to blame a Ladie so
vertuous, as is the Princesse Alchidiana? I accept the
Combat on her behalfe, auouching, that shamefully and

without reason you haue accused her, behold me readie likewise
to maintaine in open fielde, that falsely and maliciously
thou lyest in thy throate: in witnesse whereof, there
is my gage, and I beseech your highnesse affoorde vs presently
Iudges, that may discerne the issue of our Combat.
I take thy offer, quoth the Prince, and before the Sun set,
will giue thée the payment that belongs to such a frollick
                           •
                        
companion.
                     Who can nowe imagine the ioy of Maulicus and his
Daughter, séeing him whome they reputed 
                           〈◊〉
                         by nature,
thus to recouer his spéech? assuredly they were all so
amazed, that they thought Mahomet had come from the

                           〈◊〉
                         to performe this myracle. The Soldane thus surprised
with vnspeakeable comfort, forgetting the maiestie
of his person, 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        Palmerin in his armes, saying: Ah,

                           〈◊〉
                         Knight, h
                           •
                        we may this bée? dreame I? or dooth but
my fancie delude me with your spéech? O Maho
                           •
                        et, for euer
bée thou praysed for this great grace. By the highest
God, I am more ioyfull of this good fortune, then 
                           〈◊〉
                         I 
                           〈◊〉
                        
the fayrest Island in the Mediter
                              •••
                           ean Sea. Nowe
will I dismay 
                           •
                        o longer 
                           〈…〉
                         Daughters fortune, séeing
that you take her quarrel in hand, and for her sake wil com
                        
                           •
                        at
with Amarano: with all my heart I graunt you the
Fielde, and thinke that my Daughter will not denie it.
But tell mée, noble Fréend, howe you haue so happily recouered
your speech. Palmerin abashed that hee had so forgotten
himselfe, knewe not what excuse to make, neuerthelesse,

                           •
                        éeing nowe there was no remedie, and that the

                           〈◊〉
                         throwne could not bée recalled, imagine
                           •
                         some likely

                           ••
                        militude of his suddaine spéech, saying: I promise you,
my Lord, that the cer
                           •
                        itude of your Daughters i
                           ••
                        ocencie,
and the great griefe I conceyued, séeing your Knightes so
cowardly and faint in courage, mooued mée into such cho
                           •
                        
                        ler,
as the Catarr
                           •
                        , which of long time hath hind
                           •
                        red my
spéech, dissolued it selfe, and 
                           ••
                        th giuen my tongue libertie
to reueale, what I was enforced to bewraye before by

signes. And this is not a thing altogether strange, for I
haue heretofore read in Histories, that a Knight called
Aegle Samien, dumbe from his byrth, when one of his companions
would vsurpe the honour of a victorie, which iustly
appertained to him, was so enraged and incensed with displeasure,
as that very passion, with the helpe of the Gods,
restored his spéech. And thus hath it happened to mée, for
which I honour theyr names with immortall thanks, not
so much for my speaking, as that I may nowe declare my
earnest aff
                           •••
                        ion to do you seruice, and fayre Alchidiana
your Daughter, to whome I am so greatly indebted, for
the manifolde honours shée hath doo
                           ••
                         mée without d
                           •
                        sert,
as I shall neuer be able to recompence. Ah my noble friend
quoth the Soldane, this liberall offer for the defence of 
                           〈◊〉
                        
Daughters honour contents mée in such sort, as both shée
and I 
                           〈◊〉
                         to requite your paines. Amarano 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
at the braue disposition of Palmerin, but specially at the great
honour Maulicus did him, knew not well what to thinke:
and did not feare and reproch ouer-rule him, I thinke hé
                           •
                        
would haue deferred the Combat till another yéere. Notwithstanding,
to couer his new opinion, he be thought him
of a pretie subt
                           •
                        ltie, and saide. I beséech your Maiesti
                           •
                         to
tell mée of whence this dumbe Knight is, to whome ou
                           •
                        
Gods (by miracles) haue restored such brauing language. I
                           •
                        
is necessarie that I know what hee is, and whence he is discended,
because the fight béeing enterprises for two such
Princesses, as sometime was fayre Ardemia and your
Daughter present: if hée be not the Sonne of a King, as 
                           •
                        
am, hée may not be permitted the Field with me. Amarano,
answered the Soldane, I know not what hee is, for 
                           〈◊〉
                        
this time hée hath continued dumbe in our Court: to him
therefore you shall frame your demaund, for this opinion
I holde of him, as hee will answere you nothing but truth▪
but if you go about so cra
                           •
                        tily to excuse your self
                           •
                        , each
one may iudge that in you which but ill beséemes 
                           〈◊〉
                        
of a noble man, that is, to bee double in your speech. And

(which is more) hee béeing a Knight as good as your selfe,
you may not refuse him, because you demaunded the Combat
against any Knight in my Court, and in your challenge
made no exception. Perswade your selfe (quoth the Prince)
that if hée be not the sonne of a King, hee shall not enter the
Fielde against mée: therefore if hee bée none such, hée hath
not to meddle with Armes in this cause, and so the fight
on his behalfe is finished. If thou make such doubt, said the
Soldane, aske him the question thy selfe, I hope hee is able
to resolue thée in these subtill cauils and sophisticall questions.
                     During this contention, there entred the Hall a fayre
yong Damosell, bearing betwéene her handes a goodly Helmet,
the richest and most beautifull that euer was seene,
and falling on her knées before the Soldane, with such gracious
salutations as stood with her dutie, shée demaunded
which was Amarano of Nigrea, who had accused his
Daughter, and which was likewise the dumbe knight▪ who
enterprised her defence. Maulicus without any other inquisition,
shewed them both to her, whereupon the Damosell
arose, and comming to the Prince, thus began. Amarano
of Nigrea, the Quéene of Tharsus my Lady and mistresse
beeing certaine that this day thou wouldest be in this place,
sent mée hither to aduertise thée, that the dumbe knight is
of higher linage then thou art, a
                           •
                        d such a one he is, as the
greatest Lorde or Prince may not compare with him in
bountie. And if thou wilt knowe the certaintie of his discent,
more then any other as yet dooth: shee aduiseth thée
(for thy profit) to desist from the Combat whereto thou hast
challenged him, in defence of thy false accusation against
Alchidiana. And further shée doth admonish thée, that if
thou doost not as shee commandeth, the knight late dumbe,
surpassing all other in knightly chiualrie, shall ouercome
thée, and thou shalt not bee able to stande against him. Damosell,
quoth the Prince, you may answere your mistresse,
that ouerlate shee sent me her counsell, and I am not accustomed

to giue credit to such sorcerers: besides, I will
not loose mine honour at the simple wordes of a Woman
I knowe not. And it doth not a little content mee, that this
knight is such an one as hee should be, wherefore, being so
sure of his bounty, I am the more desirous to Combatte
with him, to make experience of his renowne: yet this I
still maintaine, that what I haue spoken is true, and thereon
wee will presently enter the Feeld, so please the Soldane
to giue consent. Maulicus séeing the day was too farre
spent, adiornde if till the day following, wherefore the
Prince withdrew himselfe to his lodging, reposing great
confidence in his owne strength, and after his departure,
the Soldane taking Palmerin by the hand, sayde. I knowe
not my Lorde how I may acknowledge the honour you do
my Daughter, whom I estéeme as mine owne selfe: but if
the Gods affoord me life, I will deuise some rich recompence,
as I hope shall returne your owne content. Then
the Damosell sent from the Quéene of Tharsus, approching
to Palmerin, presented him the Helmet, saying. Noble
and vertuous knight, the Quéene saluteth you with this
taken of her good will, in remembraunce of your speciall
loyaltie, whereby you deliuered the Prince Maurice, for
which she so much remaineth yours, as you shall command
her any seruice hence forward, albeit she could haue wished
him longer torment, that proued so vnfaithfull to her. She
likewise desireth you to weare this Helmet in fight with
Amarano, for it will greatly auayle you, and more then anyother:
for such is her hope, that after you know this present
seruice, you will not deny her one request, which one
day shée intendeth to craue of you. Palmerin taking the Helmet,
answered.
                     Fayre Uirgin, most humbly thanke the Quéene on my
behalfe, and tell her that wheresoeuer I am, she shall finde
mée ready to fulfill any thing shee will commaunde. The
Damosell departed, and made such spéede, as in short time
she came to the Queene her Mistres, whom she acquainted

with her whole message: whereof she was very ioyfull, especially
of Palmerins great courtesie, whom she beganne to
aff
                           •
                        ct very greatly.
                  
                  
                     Chap. XII.
                     
                        How Palmerin entred the Combat with the Prince Arma
                              •
                           ano
of Nigrea▪ whom he slew, and the great honors the Soldane
and his Daughter did him.
                     
                     
                        THe Princesse Alchidiana hearing the
words which the Quéene of Tharsus cano
                           •
                        ell
reported before the Soldane her
Father, beeing likewise glad that Palmerin
was of so noble parentage, and so

                           •
                        enowned in the region farre thence distant,
began to loue him more extreamely
then euer she did before, and resolued
with her selfe, that seeing for her sake hee vndert
                           •
                        ke the
Combate, hee bare her more secret affection then hee
durst bewray, and in this opinion shee practised howe to
co
                           •
                        ferre with him againe, which this day shee could not
compasse, because hee was continually with the Souldane.
But when Palmerin tooke his leaue for that night, the
Princesse had a little leysure to thanke him for his honorable
kindnes, and how glad she was that the Gods had restored
his speech againe. Soone after she sent him a most
sumptuous golden Armour, desiring him (for her sake) to
weare it in the Combate: which Palmerin thankfully accepting,
assure
                           •
                         the messenger that hee would sufficiently
reuenge his Ladies iniurie. In meane time, the Soldane
commanded his Knight Marshall to see the field prepared

in readinesse, and the Scaffolds for the Ladies prouided,
and to haue two thousand Armed men in place, for defenc
                           •
                        
of his owne person. All which the next morning was duely
executed, the Soldane appointed two Kings, and Amarano
his two brethren, Iudges of the field: who going to
their te
                           •
                        t, and all the nobilitie to their appointed places,
expected nowe the issue of the fight. The Ladies came to
their standing, among whom Alchidiana shewed like fayre
Vesper among the other stars, and soone after came the two
Combattants, so brauely and richly appointed, as nothing
wanted that could 
                           •
                        e imagined, especially Palmerin, before
whom a King bare his Helmet, and the great Admiral
of Assiria his Sword, and so brauely did hee mannage his
Horse, with such sightly behauiour and gallant countenance,
that each one iudged hee had learned his knowledge before
he came thither into Turkie: and cause Maulicus to perswade
himselfe, that the victorie was destenied to him. In
the ende, that they might the sooner begin the Combat, the
Iudges tooke their seates, commaunding silence through
the field, which was pestered with wonderfull resort of
people: and then the Heralds fulfilling their charge, gaue
liberty to the Champions to doo their deuoire. Palmerin
clasping his Helmet, gaue the Spurres to his Horse, and
encountred Amarano with such furie, as they were 
                           〈◊〉
                        
dismounted headlong to the grounde: but Palmerin 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
to be so 
                           •
                        oyled before the Soldane, recouered himselfe
quickly, and aduaunting his shéeld, gaue Amarano such
a found stroke on the head with his Sword, as made him
stagger in great amazednes. Notwithstanding, his courage

                           〈…〉
                        , as well declared hee had 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        
                        
                           ••
                        rokes. Which when the Pol
                           ••
                        ces two Brethren be helde,
they were mar
                           •
                        ailously 
                           •
                        bashed, for they imagined that
through the East parts, 
                           〈◊〉
                         Knight might bee sounde to equall
him, wherefore one of them sayde. I thought my brother
would haue dispatched this companion at the first encounter,
but séeing he hath held out so long: no doubt be
                           •
                        
is more expert in Armes, then wée at first made account of
him.
                     The two Kings were somewhat mooued with these
words, willing him to be silent, vntill such time as the end
was determined. Amarano hearing what his brother had
spoken, offended with himselfe because hee could not ouercome
Palmerin, began to encourage himselfe, and albeit hée
was sore wounded in many places on his body, yet he followed
his intent so nobly, as taking his sword in both his
handes, hée stroke Palmerin so violently on the Helmet,
as made him set one of his knées to the ground to saue himselfe.
But hee perceiuing that if he had many such blowes,
it would returne his disaduantage, intended to play double
or quitte, and remembring the honour of his Mistresse
Polynarda, he ranne with such valour on Amarano, as
clea
                           •
                        ing his Shéelde in two péec
                           •
                        s, cut away a great parte
of his arme. The Prince féeling himselfe so maimed, bega
                           •
                        
to faint, hardly enduring to defende his enemies strokes,
which Palmerin perceyued, and chased him about which
way him listed, first héere, then there, where best the Prince
had hope of safetie: but all these delayes little auayled him,
for Palmerin left not till he got him downe, when Amarano
thinking to hel
                           •
                        e himselfe, drewe a little packet Dagger,
and therewith thurst Palmerin vnder the short ribbes,
which wound so mooued him, as renting his Helmet from
his head immediatly smote it from his shoulders, Pa
                              •
                           merin
beeing then so gladde and well disposed, as though hee ha
                           •
                        
but no w
                           ••
                        e entred the fielde, tooke the heade of his enemis
by the haire, and presented it to the Princesse Alchidiana,
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . Madame, I nowe thinke my selfe acquite
                           •
                         of the

promise, which I made to my gracious Lord your Father,
for héere is that conspyring head that first accused you: bethinke
your selfe therefore, if there be anything else to bee

                           〈◊〉
                         for you, because I remaine heere readie to accomplish
it.
                     The Princesse excéeding ioyfull for this worthie victory,
aunswered. Truely my Lord, you haue doone so much for
mée, that although my Father, my selfe, and all my friendes
should bequeath our liues to your seruice, yet could wee
not recompence the very least of your noble courtesies,
chéefely this one, surpassing all the other, and beyonde our
abilities to remunerate. Yet let me intreate you to carrie
the Traytours head to the Iudges, that they may censure
my innocencie in this slaunder, and whether the accuser
hath not receiued condigne punishment. Which he did, and
threw the head before the Princes brethren, whose gréef
                           •
                        
excéeded measure for their brothers ill fortune, and taking

                           •
                        ppe the head with the body likewise, they caused it to bee
sorrowfully conueied foorth of the fielde. Immediatly was
Palmerins Horse brought him, whereon he mounted, and
was conducted with great pompe by the two Kings that
were the Iudges, and other mightie Princes, as well Ca
                           
                              ••
                           ffes,
Agaz, as Taborlanes, to the gate of the Pallace, where
the Soldane (to doo him the greater honour) attended in
person his comming, the like hee neuer did before to any
king or Prince, how mightie soeuer hee was, and therefore
his Subiects maruailed not a little hereat. Palmerin would
haue 
                           〈◊〉
                         him reuerence on his knee, but he would not suffer
him, for taking him in his armes, he thus sayd. For euer
(ge
                           •
                        tle Knight) be the honour of thy victorie against our 
                           〈◊〉
                        ,
and th
                           •
                         false accuser of our Daughter▪ for which I

                           〈…〉
                         so bound to thee, that all the dignities 
                           〈…〉
                        
I am able to giue thée, may not counteruaile 
                           〈…〉
                        
des
                           •
                        rts: therefore I will remaine so much at thy
disposition, as I and mine shall be at your command. So 
                           〈◊〉
                        
him by the 
                           〈◊〉
                        , he conducted him to his Chamber,

                           〈◊〉
                        
                        
where himselfe h
                           •
                        lpe to v
                           •
                        arme him, commaunding his
Chirurgio
                           •
                        s to be so carefull of him, as of his owne person.
Thus leauing him to haue his wounds dressed, he returned
to the great Hall, where hee found his nobility attending
his comming, to whom he sayd. What think you my Lords
of our state, if our Champion had béene foyled? I had béene
the most forlorne and abiect Lorde in all Assiria, to haue
béene forced to do iustice on myne owne Daughter. But
thanks to our Gods, hee deliuered mée from that 
                           •
                        aunger,
therefore maruaile not, if (beyonde my custome) I welcommed
him with reuerence and honour: for one that renowmeth
himselfe by vertue and prowesse through the whole
world, ought to bée so entertained, rather then such as liue
in vayne pompe and glory, whispering deceitfull tales into
Ladyes eares. Neyther can you (in my iudgement) honour
him sufficiently, because my Daughter and mée hee hath
shéelded from death, expulsed our ignominious slaunder, and
slaine our false accusing enemy, to make vs liue in perpetuall
fame and memory. The most part of them well 
                           〈◊〉
                        
his words, and confounded with the remembrance 
                           〈◊〉
                        
theyr shame, when they 
                           〈◊〉
                         not enterprise the Combat
for their Lady, knew not what to answere, but fearing to
grow in further offence, sought how to change his minde to
some other talke.
                     
                        Alchidiana béeing all this while in her Chamber, prepared
her selfe to goe visite 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           , not knowing how to
shape her 
                           〈◊〉
                        , for fresh bewraying of 
                           〈…〉
                        :
for the Goddesse Iuno, when shée stoode before Syr
Paris for sentence of her beautie, was not more sumptuously
adorned then the Princesse. Nowe be 
                           〈◊〉
                         shée to
dispute in her thoughts, the honourable grace
                           •
                         of Palmerin,
his nobilitie so farre renowmed, his knightly prowesse and
magnanimitie, whereof herselfe had so good experience, as
shée resolued neuer to haue any other Husband. Then 
                           〈◊〉
                        
she of her Ladies, how she might 
                           〈◊〉
                         her
Knight, if her head 
                           •
                        yre 
                           〈◊〉
                         orderly, if her 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        
were tressed as they ought, and if her garments were braue
enough. For conclusion, the louely Mayden knew not how
to dispose of herselfe, to gaine his loue shée so earnestly longed
for.
                     In this equipage she goes to sée her Friend, and in his
Chamber shée findes her Mother, who hindered her languishing
Daughter, from discouering her sicknesse to him, that
onely had the power to helpe her: wherefore liuing in hope
of some better oportunitie, for this time she smothered her
gréefes so wel as she could, finding other talke with her Ladies,
least her mother should suspect her.
                  
                  
                     Chap. XIII.
                     
                        How the brethren of Amarano, would haue buried his bodie
in the Tombe with Ardemia, which Alchidiana would not
suffer, but constrained them to carrie him home againe into
his Countrey.
                     
                     
                        
                           AMarano thus slaine, his Brethren) according
to his charge thus giuen them,
before hée entred the Combat) tooke his
bodie, and with great mourning they
brought it to the Princesse Ardemiaes
Tombe, thinking to burie him there
with her: but Alchidmia aduertised
héereof came presently and intreated her Father, that
hée woulde sende an Herauld to the Brethren of the vanquished
Prince, to charge them not to leaue the bodie of Amarano
in his Dominions, for if they did, he would cause it
to be burned as a Traytor deserued. Moreouer, that they
themselues should depart within foure and twentie hours,

on paine of the daunger should ensue by their default. For
good Father (quoth she) if you should permitte their boldnesse,
it will be great blame and dishonour to you: in that it
is commonly knowne, with what great pride and arrogancie
he came to your Court, thinking to iniurie your good report,
and eyther to shut mée from your presence for euer,
or else with open scandale to ende my life. The Soldane
well regarding her wordes, willingly graunted her request,
whereupon the Princesse Brethren were certified of
the Soldanes pleasure, by a Trumpet: whereat they maruailed
not a little: but séeing they could no way remedie it,
they said. Herauld, it is reason that your Lord should bée obeied
within his owne territories, neuerthelesse you may
say vnto him, that the crueltie he shewes to a dead bodie, is
verie great, and against all equitie, which he héereafter happilie
may repent. So opening the Tombe againe, they
tooke foorth their Brothers bodie, and the Princesse Ardemiaes
likewise, conuaying them into a Litter of Cipres,
to kéepe them from corrupting, and thus returned with
them to Phrygia, where the Princes death was greatly lamented,
but chéefly by the aged King his Father, who
séeing his Sonne dead before him, after many dolorous passions,
thus complained. Ah Fortune, howe cruell doost thou
shew thy selfe to the mightie, as well as the meanest? Ah
my Sonne Amarano, too déere hast thou bought thy loue
to Ardemia. Wretched and dispised olde man, howe vnfortunate
art thou among all other? For when thou perswadest
thy selfe to haue ioy and comfort by thy Sonnes,
thou findest the chéefe cause of sorrowe and discontent. O
death, thou sufferest me too importunate. Yet if the Soldane
had graunted thée buriall, where thou diddest desire
it before thy death, the lesse had béene my gréefe. But soone
shall I cause him repent his hard dealing, and reuenge thy
death with sufficient requitall. The second brother to Amarano,
named Gramiel, séeing his father in such extreame
heauinesse, assayed by all meanes he coulde to comfort him:

promising in the presence of all his Knights, with all possible
spéede to reuenge his Brothers death, and so did all the
sixe Brethren solemnly vowe togither. Which spéeches
did somewhat comfort the aged King, who commaunded
the bodies of the two louers to be taken from his presence,
and for a perpetuall memorie of his Sonnes death, he caused
a sumptuous monument to be made of marble and Porphire,
whereon was grauen the cause of their vnhappie
death. All this while, Gramiell, who vndertooke his Brothers
reuenge, gaue charge to the people round about him,
as also to the Kinges and Princes of Suria, who were then
enemies to the Soldane, to prepare themselues in readinesse,
so that within a Moneths space, hée had assembled a
power of fiue thousand hardie Soldiers, himselfe béeing
appointed leader and generall ouer them. In this sort
they tooke themselues to the Feelde, hoping to ruinate the
Soldanes Countrey with fire and sworde: but they were
better entertained then they expected, as hereafter shall bée
largely discoursed.
                  
                  
                     Chap. XIIII.
                     
                        Howe Alchidiana ouercome by vehemencie of her loue,
offered her selfe to Palmerin as his wife, and of the aunswere
he made her.
                     
                     
                        REmembring what hath past in the chapters
before, we may not forget, how by
the message of the Quéene of Tharsus
sent to the Soldanes Court: Alchidiana
(who began as it were to despise Palmerin)
was cōstrained to renue her loue:
thus conferring with her selfe, that if so

great a person as the Quéene of Tharsus, commended, estéemed
and honoured him, hauing neuer séene him, the better
meane had she, béeing dayly in his companie, to practise the
furtheraunce of her earnest desires. Shée therefore continually
awayted oportunitie, to discouer the fire newly raked
from the embers, and which day and night consumed
her with languishing: but so well it came to passe, that not
many dayes after the Combat with Amarano, hee came to
visite her in her Chamber, right ioyfull of the talke hee had
with the Soldan, as cōcerning the prouision of his strength,
to goe ruinate the Citie of Constantinople, which gaue him
hope of his returne to Allemaigne. Alchidiana, hauing courteously
saluted him, and shewing better countenaunce then
before shée did, caused him to sit downe by her, and soone after
began in this sort.
                     I desire you, Sir Knight, by the reuerence you beare
our God
                           •
                        , and the 
                           •
                        ayth you owe to her, for whose loue you
tooke the enchaunted Crowne from the Prince Maurice:
to tell me your name, what your Parents be, and of whence
you are. For I sweare to you by the honour of a Princesse,
that the guerdon you shall receyue in so dooing, is my heart,
hauing once conquered those desires that long haue tormented
me: intending to make you Lorde of my selfe, and all
the possessions of the Soldane my Father, without anie sinister
meaning, you may beléeue mée. Consider therefore
good Knight, that without feare or dissimulation, I haue
tolde you what néerest concerneth mee, if then you desire
not my present death, make aunswere as honourable dutie
requireth, ballancing in your owne thoughts, howe vehemently
the impressions 
                           〈◊〉
                         loue haue touched me: in respect
that now I haue twise for your sake, excéeded the limits of
mine owne regar
                           •
                        , 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        
of my passions. But séeing our Gods haue béene so fauourable,
as to restore the thing was earst taken from you, and
likewise hath brought you into her companie, who loues
you dearer then her owne life: shew not your selfe so hard
of nature, to flie the howre that Loue and Fortune presents
you withall. Therefore 
                           •
                        y onely beloued Lorde, in
recompence of your sharpe Combat with proud Amarano,
receyue me as your wife, whom you haue woorthily deserued.
                     
                        Palmerin séeing himselfe assayled by so faire an enemie,
who coulde sooner bring in subiection an other Hercules,
then euer did Iole, and as easily giue life to a statue of Marble,
as Venus sometime did, at th
                           •
                         request of Pigmalion
the Caruer: was in maruellous affliction, hauing before
him, on the one side, feare to offende God, on the other, the
loyaltie he ought his Mistresse, and then the 
                           〈◊〉
                        
death of Alchidiana, if he denied her. In the ende, remembring
what the Soldan had spoken, concerning his voyage
to Constantinople, hée deuised by this meane to 
                           〈◊〉
                        
her such aunswere, as she should rest contented, and neither
God nor his Mistresse be offended, he thus began. 
                           〈◊〉
                        
and most excellent Princesse, 
                           〈◊〉
                         I am assuredly pe
                           •
                        
                        waded,
that there is not any Mon
                           •
                        rce or Prin
                           •
                        h so noble
in all Asia, but might reckon himselfe among the happiest,
in respect of your perfections and vnualuable riches, to espouse
you as his wife. By farre greater reason, I that am
poore, a Knight errant, vnknowne, and whose life you haue
saued, may say, and name my selfe aboue all other in fortune.
But knowing my selfe to simple, and of so slender deseruing
towardes you, I estéeme it impossible for the Gods,
and nature likewise, to lift mée to so wonderfull 
                           〈◊〉
                         of
happinesse. Wherefore, séeing the cause such, and greater
then I can desire or imagine: likewise that it is 
                           〈◊〉
                        
to your commaundement, 
                           〈◊〉
                         I were 
                           〈◊〉
                        
any fauour of Fortune, and to bée 
                           〈◊〉
                         among the
most vngratefull Knights in the worlde, i
                           •
                         may any thing I

should disobey your pleasure. My reason is, that you (béeing
reckoned as chéefe among the most perfect and accomplished
Ladies) deigne so much to abase your selfe, as to make mée
Lord of your loue, which hath béene desired by so many worthie
personages.
                     For these causes, most gracious Mistresse, I am bound
to loue you aboue all other Ladies liuing, which henceforth
I hope to doo, and loyally to serue you with my vttermost
endeuours. And as I ought (swéete Madame) to loue none
but you, so is my dutie to hold your regard in chéefest commendation:
therefore will I with such secrecie, as so honourable
a conquest will permit, conceale this extraordinarie
gra
                           •
                        e. And had I not this morning made promise to your
Father, to accompanie his power Constantinople, there
to reuenge the death of your deceassed vncle Gamezio, soone
should our loue sort to wished effect, and I gather that swéet
flower, which aboue all other would beautifie my Garland.
Notwithstanding, my hope is such, that in this voyage I
shall do such seruice to the Soldane your Father, as at my
returne hée will recompence mee to your content, and good
lyking of his Princes and Subiects: which may no way
nowe bee mooued, least his minde otherwayes busied, should
conceyue displeasure against me, and so all our fortune for
euer squandered. In this respect (swéete Madame) if euer
hereafter I shall doo you seruice, let me intreate you to patience
till my returne, resoluing your selfe in the meane
while, that I am more yours then mine owne, and dedicate
my life to your gracious seruice. As concerning the rest of

                           〈◊〉
                         demaund, my name is Palmerin d'Oliua, and what my
Parents are, the Quéene of Tharsus within these thrée daies
will tell me more, then hitherto I could vnderstand by any,
when you shall vnderstand more of my estate and Country
also: but so farre as I yet gather by mine owne knowledge,
my 
                           •
                        iscent is from Persia.
                     
                     This excuse hée made, because Alchidiana should not
suspect him to bée a Christian: and with this aunswere shée

was so ioyfull and contented, as nothing was able to inspyre
more chéerefull life into her languishing soule, which
Palmerin perceyuing, and the better to continue her in
this opinion, verie often he kissed her hande in signe of his
affectionate obeysaunce, and in this sort hee departed to his
owne Chamber, leauing the Princesse triumphing of her
conquest.
                     He was no sooner come into his Chamber, but solicited
with the remembraunce of his Ladie Polinarda, hee
imagined how she blamed him with mournfull complaint
                           •
                        
for his late promises: which thought so diuersly afflicted
him, as he spent all the rest of the day in teares, and as shée
had béene present, humblie requesting her to pardon what
had past him, in respect hée did it not willingly, nor gaue anie
consent with his heart thereto, but dissembled the matter,
least the Princes by his deniall shoulde fall into despayre:
and rather then he would violate his solemne vow
to his gracious Goddesse, hée woulde aduenture on infinit
                           •
                        
dangers. Yet did this feigned answere to Alchidiana greatlie
auaile him, and caused him to bée more honoured then
euen hée was before: as also to bée continually accompanied
with her presence, whose onely delight was in dayly beholding
him.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. XV.
                     
                        Howe the Soldane hauing determined to send his armie to
Constantinople, would elect Palmerin his Lieutenant generall:
which he refused, intreating him to giue the charge
to the olde King of Balisarca.
                     
                     
                        NOw was the Soldan continually mindfull
of the promise hée made to his deceassed
Father Misos, to reuenge the
death of his Brother Gamezio: wherefore
séeing all his dominions in peace,
and that hée had with him the valiaunt
Palmerin, hee concluded to leuie a
mightie Armie, to 
                           〈◊〉
                         that which dutie daylie called
for. And hauing prouided a huge number of Galions,

                           〈◊〉
                        , Gallyes and other v
                           •
                        ssels, hée sent abroade to aduertise
all the Kinges, Princes, Califfes, and Toborlanes
his Subiects, of his will and pleasure: who likewise gathering
their forces togither, were numbred to bée aboue an
hundred and fiftie thousand fighting men. All this while the
Soldane so fauoured Palmerin, as he had bestowed on him

                           〈…〉
                        , which he made but slender account of,

                           〈…〉
                         continually expected time to sée his Polynarda,
Alchidinia likewise building on his passed promises, daylie
presented him with many rich gifts, and practised all the
deuises shee coulde to please his fancie: for so deuoutly did
the Princesss loue him, as shée rather desired her owne
death, then to giue him the least occasion of dislyking. And
Palmerin by fayre and affecting speeches, perswaded such
setled opinions in her, as shee helde his promises with

greater pertinacie, then euer did any Logitian maintain
                           •
                        
his Aristotle. By this time were the men of Armes come
from all places, wherefore the Soldane calling to Palmerin,
beganne with him in this manner. Syr Palmerin, considering
how much I am indebted to you, my affections are
so resolutely perswaded, that I estéeme of you as you were
my Sonne, and much more then I am able to vtter: not so
much for seruices you haue done mée from time to time, as
for the incomparable déedes of armes and chiualrie, which
makes you honoured through the whole world. Hauing
nowe determined to sende my forces to Constantinople, my
onely hope I repose in you, and well it liketh mée that you
beare the office of my Lieutenant Generall, and principall
gouernour of the Kings and Princes in this expedition.
Therefore my noble and approoued good Friend, vsing your
wonted magnanimitie and discretion, my people shal think
well of my appointment, referring the honor of their victorie,
to the generall hauocke and confusion of their enemies.
                     Nowe I perceiue (my gracious Lord) answered Palmerin,
that by your manifolde fauours and courtesies, you
would depriue mée of acknowledging mine owne dutie:
notwithstanding, in respect it is your pleasure, I would aduenture
the vttermost of my life for you, which I cannot
with greater honour loose, then in your noble seruice. Yet,
may it be spoken within compasse of your highnesse controll,
me thinks you should rather giue this charge to the
King of Balisarca, a man wise, experienced, and farre more
skilfull in Armes then I am. Beside, your people hauing
a man of their owne nation for theyr head, will obey him
more willingly, and serue with much more chéerefull co
                           •
                        
                        rage,
then vnder him whom they know not, but onely by
your Princely and liberall bountie, which hath béene such,
that from the meanest estate, where fortune helde mée as
altogether despised, your Maiestie hath lifted mee to the
highest earthly honour. Thus speake I, dread Lorde, as

not gain saying your commaundement, but for this consideration,
that taking this honourable charge, the Souldiers
may mutinie against me, and so your seruice be altogether
disappointed.
                     And thinke you (quoth the Soldane) that my people
will be more obedient to the King of Ba
                              •
                           isarca then to you?
Yea doubtlesse my Lord, saide Palmerin, that is my opinion.
Know then, quoth the Soldane, that for this counsell you
haue giuen mée, my loue is nothing diminished towardes
you: for I sée by this noble regarde, how deseruedly you
gaine the fauours of Kings and great personages: it shall be
therefore as you haue appointed. This counsell gaue Palmerin,
not for any good he wished to Maulicus, or the King
of Balisarca, but (desiring nothing more, then the ruine
and generall destruction of these Heathen hounds, sworne
enemies to Christ and his Seruants) to ridde himselfe of
that charge, which would bring him so great and shamefull
report, to 
                           •
                        ight against his Lord and maker: therefore premeditating
on all these inconueniences, he but expected the
meane to gette footing in Christendome againe. Maulicus
thus contented with his aunswere, the King of Balisarca
was appointed generall of his Armie, yet he gaue commandement
that Palmerin should bee reuerenced among them,
as the second person to himselfe, and on paine of death
none to offende him. As all this strength was readie to
take shipping, newes came to the Court of Gramiell and
his brethren, what slaughter and spoyle they made through
all Assiria, whereat the Souldane béeing greatly offended,
séeing his prouision against Christendome thus chaunged,
came to Palmerin, and sayde. My Sonne, what thinke you
of our enemies? What shall I doo to these followers of
their Brother in pride? I pray you counsell mée in this
necessitie. Palmerin perceiuing his desire preuented, was
ouercome with maruailous passions: yet to hide his discontent
from the Soldane, he thus answered. Séeing it hath
so fallen out my Lord, that without any summons our enemies

haue presumed vppon vs, I thinke it most expedient
that your Armie prouided in so good readinesse, beginne first
with these arrogant inuaders: for I doubt not, their attempt
béeing so trecherous, and the courage of our men so resolute,
but they shall déerely buy their presumptuous aduenture. A
matter soone begunne, will bee as soone ended, and our
shipping readie, wee may afterwarde set forwarde to Constantinople,
for this will bee a good whetting to our stomackes,
to deale with our enemies of greater multitude.
This counsell was accepted, wherefore it was immediatly
proclaimed through the field, that euery man should be readie
to depart within thrée daies.
                  
                  
                     Chap. XVI.
                     
                        How the Prince Olorico, sonne to the King of Arabia, came
and offered his seruice to the Soldane, bringing with him
fiue hundred armed Knights, and of his entertainment.
                     
                     
                        SOmewhat before the Soldanes Armie
was readie to departe, the Prince Olorico,
eldest sonne to the King of Arabia,
came to the Court, and with him fiue
hundred Knights, so hardy, braue,
and comely personages, as both for the
Court and the war, better might not be
imagined. This yong prince reputed among the most valiāt
of his time, hearing report of the rare beauty of Alchidiana,
vnder colour of offring the Soldane his assistance, determined
to behaue himselfe so brauely in his court, that by his liberalitie
and honorable actions, he would obtaine the Princesse

to his Wife, wherefore beeing come to the Court,
and hauing doone his obeysance to the Soldane, hee began
in this manner.
                     Right mightie Lorde of all Assiria and Palestine, hauing
of long time heard your great forwardnesse to the
encreasing of our faith, chéefely of the last honourable councell
you held, to reuenge the death of your famous deceased
Brother Gamezio, whom our Gods nowe entertaine at
their celestiall banquets: I tooke my selfe to trauaile, with
aduised resolution to doo you such seruice as might stande
with my abilitie, and your pleasure to command. And for
I now beholde, that my arriuall is in a time so fortunate,
I celebrate theyr names with immortall thankes, assuring
your Maiestie so farre to stretch my endeouurs, as the sonne
that is beunde by dutie to his Father. The Soldane who
had heard great report of his bountie and valour, his Father
likewise béeing one of his friendes and confederates:
after he had made him very gracious welcome, thanked
him for the succour he brought him, and henceforth he would
not estéeme of him as a stranger, but as his Sonne and
most especiall Friende. All this while Palmerin noted the
behauior of the yong Prince, and iudging by his complection
that hée was of better nature then the other Assirians,
began to affect him, so that after the Soldane had giuen
them all the good night, Palmerin accompanied the Prince
to his Chamber, where they could deuise no other conference,
but of this new and warlike enterprise, which made
Olorico demaunde of Palmerin, if hee should go in those
affaires. That will I verily (quoth he) if sicknesse or prison
do not withhold mee. Let me intreate you then, fay
                           •
                        e the
Prince, to doo me so much honour, as to accept me for your
companion. Whereto Palmerin right soone condiscended,
and then began such a league of am
                           ••
                        y betwéene them, that
it endured to the death, as you shall reade héereafter. But
because it was nowe late, they tooke their leaue of each other
till the next morning, when Maulicus would haue

                        Olorico dine at his Table with Palmerin, where wanted
no prouision that beséemed so great a person, béeing now set
foorth in most rich and honourable pompe. The Tables being
withdrawne, the Prince began the daunce, thinking to
sée faire Alchidiana: but hée was deceiued, for she kept her
Chamber in her amorous opinions, and would not be séene
till the appointed day, when the Armie should make shewe
in open field.
                     This day the Soldane went to order the battaile, and
to appoint the wings and squadrons, which made Alchidiana
likewise take delight so walke abroad with Palmerin,
who was now in maruailous sumptuous Armour, bearing
a shéeld of Sinople, with a barre of Gold figured therein,
signifying his inward ioy, that in so short time he should
get from these barbarous and vnchristian helhounds. Before
them went two yong Lords bareheaded, and behinde a
great number of Ladies and Knights, so rich in apparrel
                           •
                         as
could be deuised. Beeing thus brought to their Palfrayes.
Palmerin beganne to carri
                           •
                        e and braue with his Horse before
the Princesse, who tooke no little delight in her supposed
louer, and riding along with him, fell into many discourses,
nothing tending to Religion as I gesse, but such
deuout seruice as loue teacheth his Schollers. In the
midst of their communication, came the Prince Olorico, so
altred with his affection to the Princesse, that they which
haue felt like assaults, might easily iudge the cause of his
passions. Hauing made two or thrée humble reuerences to
her, he offered to kisse her hand: which shée would not permit
him, excusing the matter so modestly, and wishing his
welfare as her owne, that he imagined himselfe greatly fauoured.
                     
                        Palmerin regarding the afflictions of this new come
louer, and that hée might giue him the better meane, to deuise
with her so priuatly as he desired, turned his Horse to
the other side of the Princesse, thus speaking to her. What
thinke you (Madame) of the gentle succour which my

Lord Olorico hath brought your Father? beléeue mée, the
courtesse is so surpassing great, as your selfe ought especially
to thanke him, if it were but for his forwardnesse, in qualifying
the haughtie courage of Amaranos brethrē. Doubtlesse
(quoth she) his companie is to be estéemed, and among
tenne thousand Knights, hardly may bee founde so braue
men as is in his troupe, in recompence whereof, I will not
denie the Prince any thing, that hée with honour will request
of me. Olorico perceiuing this sodaine inuention of
Palmerin, returned him many thanks, and after the accustomed
dissimulations vsed in such causes, albeit Loue had
for a while depriued him of spéech: earnestly beholding the
rare beautie of the Princesse, he thus began. Madame, although
I should doo to my Lord your Father all the seruices
that a Knight is able to yéelde his gracious patrone, yet
the very least of these fauours, which it hath pleased your
excellencie to bestowe on mée, may bee reckoned for much
more then deserued recompence. Wherefore béeing perswaded
that my seruice is placed in your good conceit, I
shall not hencefoorth feare to put my life in hazard, so much
I desire to sée these present promises accomplished: whereof
you Sir Palmerin, béeing estéemed among the most famous
persons liuing, shall beare mée witnesse, when time
graunteth conuenient opportunitie. I haue promised nothing,
sayde the Princesse, but what I will right gladly accomplish,
requiring nothing but your good opinion, which
so many choyse Ladies haue heretofore desired. And I demaund
no better pay (quoth the Prince) then her gracious
fauour whom I desire to please. Thus beguiled they the
time, till the Armie marched forward in array, which they
faire and softly followed, till tenne Pages belonging to the
Princesse, leading tenne goodly Coursers most richly caparassoned,
came before them. Another Page brought a
séemely Launce, the bandrole whereof was the Princesse
colours, and a Golden Shéeld, wherein was portraied the
head of Amarano, helde vppe by the haire by a Knights

hands signifying the victory of Palmerin against him: the
Shéeld béeing bordered rounde about with Pearles, Rubyes,
Emeraulds, Crisolites, and other precious stones of
inestimable value, then beganne the Princesse thus to Palmerin.
                     
                     My noble Friend, in this warre I desire you to bée my
Knight, and for my sake to beare this Launce ond Shéeld,
that the proude Brethren may see the shame of Amarano.
And such is my hope, that as you serued the eldest, so will
you deale with the other, while one of them remains aliue.
These Horses likewise for the warre I bestow vppon you,
they beeing accounted the very best in Turkie, and these
will serue you well when you are in fielde: our Gods bearing
mée witnesse (faire Friend) that did not my estate hinder
me, and the regarde of mine honour withhold me, with
right good will would I beare you companie, to sée your noble
and Knightly deedes of armes. And this I dare boldly
say, that Hipsicratea neuer followed her Husband Mithredates
with greater affection, were he on sea, or on lande,
on Horsebacke, or on foote, then I could doo the noble Palmerin
d'Oliua. Notwithstanding, though my body may
not be there, yet shall my spirit bee continually present, to
comfort my languishing life, which will be but a shadow of
death to me till your returne. But because I sée many eies
are fixed on vs, all the Kings likewise taking their leaue,
of my father, I will leaue you to the protection of our Gods
who send you happily and right soone againe. These words
were coupled with such sighs and teares, as shee had fallen
from her horse, but that one of her Ladies of honour stayed
her.
                     
                        Palmerin after hee had with great kindnesse thanked
her, kissed her hande, saying. Perswade your selfe swéete
Madame, your shéeld shall be shewne in such place, where
his Brethren that de
                           •
                        ract your honour, shall easily sée it,
though but little to theyr aduantage. Thus tooke they

leaue of each other, and O
                              •
                           orico likewise had the Princesse
farewell: then doing their dutie to the Soldane, followed
the armie, leauing him and Alchidiana sorrowfull
for their departure.
                  
                  
                     Chap. XVII.
                     
                        How the prince Olorico being with Palmerin in his Tent,
demaunded of him if hee loued the princesse Alchidiana,
and of the answere he made him.
                     
                     
                        THese two Princes Palmerin and Olorico,
conferring still as they rode, with
what gréefe and sorrow Alchidiana
parted from them, and falling from one
imagination to another, they concluded
to lodge together in one tent. And because
Palmerin was the better & more
richly prouided of all things necessarie
for the field, Olorico was the more glad of his companie:
so the day béeing spent, and the Tents pitched in a goodly
plaine, Palmerin inuited the Prince of Arabia to suppe
with him, for the Souldane had appointed him such honourable
prouision, as better hée could not for his owne sonne.
The Tables withdrawne, and spending the time a while
at Chesse play, they went to bed, where Olorico (not able
to sléepe) beganne in this manner to his friendly companion.
                     Most fortunate Palmerin, howe much more could I
wish to resemble you, then the greatest King or Lorde in
the world, to be likewise beloued of her, who in beautie,
good grace, and swéete spéech, hath not her like. And because

my good Friend and Brother, I haue noted the specia
                           ••
                        
loue of the Princesse Alchidiana towardes you, let me intreate
you to tell me, who shée is you aboue all other loue,
and intend to make your espoused Wife: vowing to you
on the word of a Prince, whosoeuer it bee, to conceale it
with secrecie, and to disswade my selfe from my loue newly
begunne for your sake, albeit I died therefore. For your
noble minde and braue gentilitie, hath gained such soueraigntie
ouer me, as all other pleasures whatsoeuer I despise,
onely to haue your companye and fauour. Thus quallifying
the passions, which day and night doo secretly torment
mée, I will sette downe such order, as my Father shall
not néede to send his Ambassadours, nor imploy any of my
Fréendes to demaunde her for mee: albeit for this onelye
cause, I left my Countrey in such sort as you haue seene.
Palmerin hearing the wordes of the yoong Prince, and perceiuing
him wounded with her loue, whom he desired to be
furthest from, smyling said. My Lorde Olori
                              •
                           o, I sweare
to you by the honour of my Knighthoode, I neuer thought of
the loue which you demaunde, nor haue I any desire to followe
that humour. But true it is, that I would doo so much
for her, as a Knight may for his Ladie, for so shée well deserues,
her fauour and gentle behauiour woorthye farre
better abilitie: wherefore my déere Fréende, if you will beléeue
me, giue not ouer your intent, but practise to gaine
her to your Wife: and I promise you that I will so mooue
the matter to the Soldane and her, as happilie maye effect
the end of your desires. Yet let me intreate you to continue
so iust a Fréende to her, as her high calling well deserueth:
otherwise I had rather die the death, then once to speake a
word on your behalfe. These newes so cheered the Prince,
as embracing him manie times, and returning him manifold
thanks, he said. Assuredlie my noble Freend, I am greatly
beholding to my father, who gaue me my present being:
but much more owe I to you, because my estate had now
ended, but that your gracious spéeches called me againe to

                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . My second selfe, hauing thus lost my libertie, I despaire
of attaining what you haue promised, and endure a death
more then mortall: but that you breath hope of successe into
me, assuring mée of immediate felicitie and ioyfull dayes
héereafter, which no father, but so good a fréende was able to
doo. After other such like spéeches, the Prince slept, but Palmerin
touched in another sort, was solliced with the remembraunce
of his lost fréendes: and perceiuing his companion
slept soundlie, he began thus to deliuer his sorrowes.
Ah vnfortunate and wretched Palmerin, how can thy mind
so long beare this yoke of seruitude, onely standing in feare
of death? Hast thou so forgot those two perfect louers, Trineus
and Agriola, with thy true fréend Ptolome not knowing
whether they bee aliue or deade? what? wilt thou not
searche for them? The Emperour of Allemaigne, hath not
hée good cause to complaine of thée, yea, and to blame thée, if
his sonne be not returned? Darest thou present thy selfe before
him? Ah touch of loyaltie, faire Agriola, how iustlye
mayst thou call mée thine enemie, inuenter and fi
                           •
                        st motion
of thy misfortunes? O wretched and miserable that I am,
for leauing thée so discourteouslye, I well deserue a million
of torments, farre worse then those exercised by the cruell
Dyonise on the Scicilians. Nor coulde they be sufficient to
expiate my hainous guilt, in that forgetting thée fayre Princesse,
I liue in daylie delights among these Moores and Tartars.
But were I such as I ought to bee, mindfull of a fault
so foullie committed, I shoulde not liue one houre in rest
or quiet, till I had found my déerest Fréendes againe. Ah
disloyall Traytour, how canst thou thus waste thy time
héere slothfullie, knowing the great and continuall trauails,
thy Ladye and Mistresse endureth for thée? But I vowe to
God, this warre finished, I will not abide in the Soldanes
Courte tenne dayes, but intende to sette forwarde to sée the
Iewell of of my welfare. And were it not to my perpetuall
discredit, as also that I should be iudged a faynting coward,
I would begin my iourney presently.
                     
                        Thus all the night continued Palmerin such like co
                           •
                        
                        plaints,
considering his Fréendes misfortune and his owne,
with such déepe impressions, as thence forward hee liued in
meruailous melancholie, and would not delight himselfe,

                           〈◊〉
                         before hee was accustomed.
                  
                  
                     Chap. XVIII.
                     
                        Of the Combat betweene Palmerin, and two of A
                              •
                           aranoes,
Brethren, whom he valiantly ouercame, and killed
                     
                     
                        FOllowing the true discourse of our historie,
the King of Balisarca, Lieuetenant
generall of the whole Armie, caused the
next morning to bée proclaimed by soūd
of Trompet, that euery man should attend
on his Ensigne: and not go robbing
and forraging the Uillages, on
paine of death to be inflicted on the offender. So marching on
in good array, in short time after they encamped themselues
before a citie, where the enemies kept themselues in garison:
and planting themselues there for their aduantage, the next
morning they determined to giue the assault. All y• night they
were ordering the maner of their batterie, the Pyoners making
Trenches, and such defences as are requisit in warlike
occasions.
                     Euery thing in due and perfect order, at Sun rysing
they beganne to assaile the Cittie rounde about: following
their intent with such courage and alacritie, as with scaling
Ladders and other Engines, in lesse then two h
                           •
                        wres

they gotte vpon the walles, and (in despight of their enemies)
entred the Cittie, murdering and expulsing the Phrygians,
and sharing the spoyle among themselues. All other
Citties, Townes and Uillages, that were taken by the
enemie, within sixe dayes after were recouered, they not
daring to withstand the Soldans power. Gramiell, Amaranoes
eldest Brother amazed héereat, hauing vndertaken to
reuenge his Brothers death, with his men betooke himselfe
to open Fielde, determining to giue the Assirians, battaile,
and that way to make triall of their fortune, in which
resolution they came within halfe a dayes iourney of theyr enemies.
                     The King of Balisarca aduertised héereof, dislodged immediatlie,
taking aduauntage of a little Mountaine, which
was in the open sight of the enemie. And Palmerin who desired
nothing more then the fight, that hée might accomplish
his promise to the Princesse Alchidiana, when hee receiued
of her his rich Shéelde and Launce: perswaded the Generall,
that hée should the next morning summon the Bretheren
of Amarano, that within foure and twentie howres,
they should depart the Soldanes confines, or else endure the
daunger of the Sworde. The King of Balisarca aduising
héereon in counsaile, founde it verie necessarie and expedient:
wherefore calling his Sonne, Sir Pa
                              •
                           merin, and the Prince
Olorico, hee committed the charge thereof to theyr present
dispatch. They béeing come to the Armie of Gramie
                              •
                           l, were
immediatly conducted to the Princes Tent, who was then
deliberating with his Brethren, and other Captaines of
the Armie. So soone as he vnderstoode the arriuall of these
Ambassadours, he caused them to come before him, and their
message béeing deliuered, the Phrygian Princes, who were
of meruailous haughtie disposition, aunswered, that they
would not obey any such commaundement. Moreouer, they
intended to chase thence the Soldanes Lieuetenant, euen
to the verie Gates of his owne Cittie: for that (contrarie
to all equitie) hée withstoode the buriall of their Brothers

bodie in his kingdome. Gueresin, Sonne to the King of B
                              •
                           
                           lisarca,
could not suffer such iniurie to his Lorde in his presence,
wherefore he said: that the Soldane had doone them
no wrong, but receiued their Brother and his traine with
greater honour then they deserued, and that none of them
should haue the like againe. So went hée foorth of the Pauillion,
Gramiell and two of his Brethren following him,
whereof the one had béene in Asiria with his Brother Amarano:
who séeing Palmerin, that all this while kept
himselfe without the Tent, and marking his Shéeld, wherin
mockage was painted his Brothers head: he knew him
immediatlie, and in great rage pulling himselfe by the haire,
said.
                     Uillaine that I am, how can I suffer in my presence
the Traytour that murdered my Brother? Bold and presumptuous
catife, how durst thou aduenture before mee,
thus to deride me with thy villainie? Trust me, saide Palmerin,
I dare come before thée with better assuraunce of
my selfe, Then thy Brother had when he entred Combat
with me. Whereore, if thou be such a Gallant, as thou
wouldest haue me iudge thée by these brauadoes, and likewise
hast any stomacke to reuenge thy Brothers shame:
Arme thy selfe, and an other of thy Brethren with thée,
and come to me in place conuenient, where I my selfe will
iustifie to you both, that Amarano was woorthilye slaine,
and as such a false accusing Traytour well deserued. I desire
nothing more, saide Orinella, for so was hée called that
gaue these hotte spéeches, but my Brother shall not deale
with thée, till I haue tried my fortune alone: and if I faile
of my purpose, then shall he afterwarde Combat with thée,
this prouided, that thou assure mée from any in thy companie,
but thine owne person. That will I vppon my Knighthoode,
said Palmerin, thou perfourming as much on thy behalfe:
yet I thinke before the sport be doone that thou wilt
wi
                           •
                        h thy fellow with thée. Thus Palmeriu, Olorico, and
Gueresin withdrewe themselues, Orinello and his brother

presently going to Arme them. and accompanied with manie
Knights, came into the field, Palmerin likewise as readie
as the formost, came in with a good traine of Souldiers
hee had brought with him, least any treason shoulde bée
wrought against him. Olorico, shewed himselfe greatly
discontented, because hée might not accompanie his Fréende
in the Combat: but Palmerin perswaded him, that more
néedefull occasions were reserued for him, which should returne
him greater honour, and whom he should court in better
sort then euer he did, the Ladies of Arabia. Gramiell being
verie richly armed, woulde néedes come see his Brethrens
Combat, which hée had good hope would sort to theyr
honor: but Palmerin séeing Orinello readie to the carrire,
encountred his enemie with such puissance, as his Launce
passing through his boyd, caused him fall dead from his horse
without moouing eyther hand or foote.
                     Hauing performed his course, hee returned to take his
Launce out of his enemies body, striking him with the great
Trunchion ende on the stomacke, to sée if any life was left
in him: but séeing his soule was departed to Lucifers Pallace,
hée coutched his stafe to receiue the other Brother,
who met him with such strength, as he was well néere dismounted,
yet in the ende hée was sent after his Brother,
though manie hardie strokes first passed betwéene them.
Héereupon was such a suddaine crie on all sides, some with
ioy, and other with sorrowe, as made the ayre resound theyr
voices. And I thinke that the Greekes when they receiued
their libertie by Quintus Elaminius, made not the like clamour:
when (as Valerius rehearseth) the Byrds fell from
the ayre with the furie of theyr cries. In the meane while,
the King of Balisarca, hauing hearde héereof, came into the
Fielde, accompanied with mani
                           •
                         Lords, and conducted Palmerin
with great honour and tryumphe backe to his Tent:
especiallie the Prince Olorico, who excéeding ioyfull for
the good fortune of his companion, embracing him, saide. Ah
gentle Palmerin, how brauelie haue you accomplished your

promise to the Princesse? the like successe heauen graunt
you in labouring my cause. Beléeue me good Prince, quoth
Palmerin, so well will I imploye my selfe in that action, as
I hope you shall haue cause to thanke me. Now to returne
to Gramiell, he caused his Brethrens bodyes to be conuaied
thence, and embalmed them in two Chests of leade, referring
their Funerall till his returne: and with the teares
in his eyes, he thus began to encite his people. Not knowing
howe (my louing Freendes and Countreymen) to animate
your mindes sufficiently, with remembraunce of the
tirannie, exercised by the Soldane on the bodye of my Brother
and your Prince: vnhappie occasion presents you with
a fresh memory of reuenge, séeing these two yong Princes,
the beloued Sonnes of your King, so shamefullye slaine in
your presence. For this cause, déere Fréendes, that each of
you may take a newe couragious spirite, to morrowe to encounter
these effeminate Assirians: let vs all be resolute togither,
and cause them to vnderstand, that you, who haue
lead your liues in the Deserts of Affrica, much better
know how to mannage Armes, then such loyterers in theyr
Mistresses Chambers, who can doo nothing but before theyr
Ladies.
                     Héerevpon two hundred Knightes aduaunsed themselues
before him, swearing and vndertaking, to bring Palmerins
bodie to him the day following: and therefore all
that might they prepared themselues, strengthening theyr
Shéeldes and Armour, and all other things necessarie for
the fight, thinking the next morning by Sunne rysing to
bid them battaile, these knightes inuenting to ambush th
                           •
                        mselues,
as you shall heare. Palmerin beeing brought thus
honorablye to his Tent, called for the Chirurgions to visit
his woundes, which they founde so easie to bee cured, as
they assured him of spéedie recouerie. Hée then 
                           •
                        mmoning the
whole Counsaile togither, aduised them, that in his opinion
hée thought it expedient, to dislodge that place about midnight
with bag and baggadge, and so to coast the Mountain,

feigning a fearefull departure. For (quoth hée) the enemie
aduertised of our retyre, will imagine that we despayre of
our successe, by reason of the death of the two slaine Princes.
                     Thus our dissembled flight, will cause them disorderlie
to pursue vs, which we will suffer, till espying our aduantage:
when returning valiantly vpon them, I dare gadge
my life we shall eyther kill them downe right before vs, or
at least driue them to a shamefull foyle. This deuise was
generallie allowed for good, and at the howre appointed
was executed. By chaunce this morning Gramiell came among
his menne verie earlie, and vnderstanding the Soldans
power was departed with such silence: presentlye
cryed alarme, charging all his men to followe them, for he
doubted they woulde enter a Cittie néere at hande, which
was so stronglye fortefied, as they should neuer entise them
foorth to skirmish, therefore he desired to preuent them of that
helpe.
                     Héereupon the Horsemen galloped after them amaine,
crying: vpon them (my Fréendes) vpon them, the day is
ours. Palmerin, the Prince Olorico, the King of Balisarca,
Gueresin his Sonne, with a thousande men at Armes, séeing
howe they were disordered: returned vppon them, and
made such a slaughter among the Phrygians, as the Field
was couered all ouer with their bodies. Gramiell, séeing,
that of the first sallie not one came backe againe, sette forward
with his battaile, wherein hée had a thousand Horsemen,
and furiouslye runnning on the Soldans power: by
misfortune hée mette with the Prince Olorico, to whome
he gaue such a cruell stroke on the head, as had almost sette
him beside his Saddle. Olorico greatly discontented héereat
turned valiantlie towards his eneme, and betwéene them
continued a very daungerous fight: but in the ende, Gramiells
Helmet béeing cutte from his heade, hee beganne to despayre,
when Olorico following his intent, noblie at one
blowe smote his heade from his shoulders. This mishap
was séene by one of his yonger Brethren, who running

fiercelie with his Launce against Olorico, was suddainlye
preuented by Palmerin, in that hée stroke him beside his
Horse, where hee was troden to death with the trampling
of the Horsses.
                     Then came foorth the two hundred swoorne Knightes
from their ambush, who had vndertaken Palmerins death,
and him they hemde in so subtillie, as hée was brought into
very great daunger, Which the Prince of Arabia beholding,
made way through the thickest to assist his Fréende,
after whom followed Gueresin with an hundred Knights:
without which supply, both Palmerin and Olorico had béen
slayne, for theyr Horsses were killed vnder them, and they
enforced to fight on foote. But when they beheld this fortunate
succour, theyr courage nobly increased, and then beganne
the sharpest encounter, for the winges on eyther
side approched, the Archers and Crossebowes likewise,
sending their Arrowes as thicke as hayle among them, so
that the battaile endured till darke night. Then the Brethren
sounded the retraite, for which the King of Balisarca
was not sorrie, hauing so ouertrauailed himselfe that day,
as he could no longer 
                           •
                        itte on Horsebacke: notwithstanding,
before hée woulde enter his Tent, he sawe the Field
                           •
                        
assured, the watch placed, and all the Souldiours planted
in good order.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. XIX
                     
                        How the Brethren of Gramiell, with all their traine, tooke
themselues to flight, and how Palmerin suddainly pursued
them with his power, and tooke them prisoners.
                     
                     
                        IMmediatlie after that these two Phrigian
princes had thus soūded the retrait,
and considered how they had lost fiue of
theyr brethren, thrée in single fight with
Palmerin, and the other in the battaile,
the greatest part of their power likewise
almost vtterly dismaid: to know the certaintie
of their strength, they commaunded a deuision to bee
made of the whole and wounded, and séeing how small their
number was, they concluded not to stay in any place, til they
came to the Realme of Pasmeria, whereof Maurice was
King, and their kiseman, from whom Palmerin tooke the enchaunted
Crowne, where they thought to supply their want,
with men actiue and able to Armes.
                     The next day, the king of Balisarca raunged a thousand
men in order, to giue a fresh assault on the enemie: but
he was suddainlie aduertised by his espiall, how the Phrygians
were fledde. He not a little glad of these newes, sent
word to Palmerin thereof, who though he was sore wounded,
Armed himselfe, commaunding his Captaines to prouide
sixe thousand men presently, to goe sée the certaintie of
these tydings. With this strength he ioyned the Kings
power, and so went to the ememies Campe, where they

found no resistanuce, nor any but such as laye gréeuonslye
wounded, of whome hee enquired which way the cowards
were fled: which the poore Souldiours reporting to him,
hée vowed to followe till hée ouertooke them. The resolution
agréede vpon, betwéene the King of Balisarca, and him
with tenne thousand light Horsemen hée determined to pursue
them: and the King to staye there with the rest of the
Armie, to recouer the Townes againe to the Soldane,
which before had béene taken of the enemie, and to bee in
readines with assistaunce, if he shoulde happen to stande in
any néede.
                     While Palmerin made election of his company, a horseman
was dispatched with these newes to the Soldane, how
the enemies had béene foyled, and of their flight. The messenger
béeing come before Maulicus, and the Letter open
and read, how valiantly Palmerin dealt with his enemies:
before all his nobility, the Soldane sayde. By all the Oracles
of Delphos, I may well perswade my selfe, that whersoeuer
Palmerin is for vs, wee are assured of the victorie.
The Princesse hauing heard these newes, sent for the messenger,
and after shee vnderstoode by him, howe Palmerin
bare her Shéelde in the face of her enemies, and had slaine
in Combat two of Amaranos Brethren: shée was meruailous
ioyfull, and rewarded the Messenger so well for his
paynes, as for euer hée might extoll the bountie of the Princesse.
                     The Messenger dispatched againe with the Soldans
Letters, brought spéedie aunswere to the King of Balisarca
and Palmerin, of their packet: wherein the Soldane hartylie
thanked them, desiring them to followe theyr fortune.
Palmerin vnderstanding the will of the Soldane and Alchidiana,
and howe they desired him to pursue the Brethren
of Gramiell: determined to set forwarde next morning,
aduertising the Prince Olorico thereof, that hée
might put himselfe in readines. But notwithstanding all
theyr dilligence, their enemies gotte before them into Pasmeria,
                        
where they rested thēselues, in hope to be assisted by
their Cozin Maurice. And he was giuen to vnderstand, how
the dumbe Knight named Palmerin, followed them: wherfore
he commaunded them to depart his Realme, for hee
would not ayde them against his déerest Fréende. This repulse
droue them into great dispayre, yet séeing they coulde
not helpe it, they were constrained to make a vertue of necessitie,
and so secretly as they coulde deuise, by little and
little stole toward their owne Countrey. Maurice hearing
how Palmerin was come into his Realme, rode thrée or
foure daies iourney to méete him, and entertaining him with
excéeding honor, offered himselfe, his people and substance
to his seruice. Palmerin verie thankfull for the Princes
kindness
                           •
                        , woulde nothing but certaine Horsses of him, because
diuers of his owne had miscaried. By this time were
the Brethren entred the confines, which belonged to the
Admirall of Tharsus, where they had doone verye much
harme, by exactions and great misusing of the people. This
Admirall was a verie gentle Knight, and named Alfarano,
which seeing what iniurie they did him, and vnderstanding
that they had béene conquered, and now fl
                           •
                        dde without anie
place of assuraunce: leueyed an hoste of hardie Souldiours,
wherewith he intended to kéepe a straite, through
which they must of necessitie passe, béeing so narrowe as
they could passe but two togither: and no way else could
                           •
                        
they escape him, except they woulde climbe the tops of the
Mountaines.
                     In this place lay the Admirall ambushed, with so manie
men as he thought conuenient, and within thrée dayes
after, Pa
                              •
                           merin with his power came to assist them. The
Phrygians hauing heard héereof, were greatlie amazed at
this vnexpected aduenture, and had no other helpe but to
climbe the Mountaine, where in wholes & Caues they were
glad to hide themselues: and there they continued fiue or
sixe daies in safetie, albeit they were readie to die for want
of sustenaunce. Palmerin foreséeing the incommoditie of the

place, and that they could not escape him, nor néeded hée anie
further to followe them: caused the Mountaine to be enuironed
on all sides, thinking the ende heereof woulde bée
such, as indéede it afterward prooued to be. For these poore
distressed menne, hauing neyther foode or other prouision,
came foorth of their Caues, and assembled togither on the
side of the Mountaine, where entering into conference
of their estate, some gaue counsaile to goe fight it out, but
other (better aduised) would not consent thereto, for better
is it (quoth they) to yéelde our selues to the mercy of our
enemies, then to aduenture our fortune where no hope of
successe is to be expected.
                     Héereuppon they concluded, and the two Brethren of
Gramiell were the first that vnarmed themselues, and comming
in this manner to Palmerins Tent, thus they began.
Noble Knight Palmerin, more fortunate then any man in
the world, we, Brethren to the renowmed Prince Amarano,
whom thou hast with thine owne hand slaine, and
thrée other of our brethren likewise, whereof the noble Orinello
deserueth spéeche, all sonnes to a King, and themselues
héeretofore worthy accomplished Princes, though nowe

                           •
                        oyled and consorted with the deade: we (noble Lord) more
certaine of thy clemencie and courtesie, then any successiue
ende of a battaile so vnreasonable and desperate, come to
yéelde our bodies and goods to thy disposing, desiring thee
to pittie our estate, and regarde the works of Fortune, so
whom thou art Subiect as well as we. Beside, that the more
shall greater persons bée praised for honorable fauour, then
by vsing rigour and vnnaturall crueltie, which maketh them
euery where hated and despised. When Palmerin sawe
them so humble, considering his owne estate, and how time
might frowne on him, returned them this aunswere. Now
(my Lords) haue you doone wiselie, to laye by Armes, and
submit your selues, for otherwise your destruction was at
hande. Notwithstanding, in respect you haue thus yéelded
your selues to me, I entertaine you into my safe defence,

assuring you peace with the Soldane, so that you sweare
your faithfull loue, and doo him homage. So gaue hée them
in kéeping to one of his Knights, whome hée especially trusted,
& returning to Alfarano, in recompence of his wrongs
and losse sustained by the Phrygians, gaue him all theyr
spoyle, and the 
                           •
                        aun
                           ••
                        me of all the Knightes taken prysoners.
The Admirall humblye kissing his hand, desire
                           •
                        
him to rest himselfe in one of his Citties, which was within
fiue or sixe miles of the place: which gentle offer Palmerin
would not refuse, because he was sore wearied with trauaile:
wherefore by the Admiralles appointment, the Pallace
was prouided for Palmerin and his Fréende Olorico.
                     
                  
                  
                     Chap. XX.
                     
                        How the Queene of Tharsus came to see Palmerin, in the
Citie belonging to Alfarano her Admiral, where by the
meane of an enchaunted drinke, shee accomplished her
pleasure with him.
                     
                     
                        HHere our History willeth vs to remember,
how in our former discourse was
mentioned, that the Quéene of Tharsus
sent a rich Helmet to Palmerin, and at
the Damoselles returne, was acquainted
with his singular composed feature,
rare courtesse, and Knightly chiualrie:
the reporte whereof, caused her amorously to affe
                           •
                        t him, and
in such vehemēt maner, as she determined her onwn death,
vnlesse she might enioy his louelie company.
                     Which the better to compasse, shee discouered her desires

to a cunning Magitian, hée by whose meanes she 
                           〈◊〉
                        
the Helmet to Palmerin: who gaue her such an 
                           〈◊〉
                        
powder, as Palmerin drinking it in wine or otherwise,
should soone after become so forgetfull of himselfe, as the
Quéene might accomplish whatsoeuer shée desired. He likewise
did reueale to her, the seuerall loues of Palmerin and
Olorico, which tale made her more earnest in following
her intent. And vnderstanding his arriuall in the Realme
of Pa
                              •
                           meria, concluded in person to goe sée him: furnishing
her selfe with all things necessary, both rich Tapestry, and
great store of Gold and Siluer plate, habillements, precious
stones, rings and vnualuable Iewels. With thes
                           •
                        
shée adorned her Knights, Ladies and Gentlewomen to the
vttermost, and when she had finished her traine to her own
liking, shée sette forward with such expedition, as within
thrée dayes shée arriued at the Cittie where hée was, but
first shée aduertised her Admirall of her comming, that hée
shoulde imagine nothing by her suddaine presence. The
Admirall so ioyfull héereof as could be deuised, in that by
this meane hee shoulde the more honourably entertaine his
guestes: acquainted Palmerin and the Prince Olorico therwith,
who likewise were excéeding glad of the newes, especially
Palmerin, desirous to know by her his offspring.
                     Therefore in most magnificent order with theyr men
at Armes, and the Admirall Alfarano, they rode to méete
the Quéene for her greater honour: who by the speciall intelligence
was giuen her, knewe Palmerin among them
all, in that hee marched formost with the Prince Olorico
and the Admirall of Tharsus. Shee regarding in him farre
more singularities, then sparing report had acquainted her
withall: after that Palmerin had saluted her with very great
reuer
                           •
                        nce, as he was not to learne courtly
                           •
                         courtesie, the
Quéene requited him with a swéete kisse, and thus began.
Sir Knight, the fayrest beyond all other that euer I sawe,
well woorthie are you to be esteemed among the most happie,
béeing able to winne the loue of Ladies that neuer sawe

you. Aduise your selfe well of this great fauour, and what a
precious Iewell you receiue of them, in requitall of your
seruice, or acceptaunce of any amorous contentment. Then
wonder not not, (Gentle Knight) if to sée you I haue left my
Country for beside your great valour, bountie and loyal
                           •
                        ie,
which neuer can be sufficiently commended, your beautie,
affabilitie and most rare perfections, deserue not onelye the
loue of the greatest Ladye and Princesse, but their continuall
seruice likewise, if they but consider theyr owne dueties.
If then your vertues and gifts of nature are of such value
and merit, what may shée imagine of her selfe, who is your
onelie Ladie and Mistresse, and aboue all other is honored
with your faithfull seruice, as well records the memorye of
the burning Crowne? Palmerin hearing himselfe so commended
by such an excellent Quéene, blushed with bashfulnesse,
and humbly shaped this aunswere. Madame, so far
vnable am I, to deserue the loue and good will you beare
me, as neuer will Fortune fauour me sufficiently, to recompence
the least part of this princelie kindnesse. Yet
héereof (faire Quéene) you may assure your selfe, that you
haue a Knight so forward in your seruice, as nothing shall
with-holde him from executing your commaundemente,
though the penaltie of my life were ioyned thereon. Trust
me (quoth the Quéene) your behauiour promiseth no lesse
then you speake off, and if I haue taken anie paine for you,
I thinke my selfe now thorowlye satisfied: lette it suffise you
then, that I account my fortune not the least, hauing gayned
such place in your good opinion. These and such like
spéeches passed betwéene them, till they came to Alfaranos
Pallace, where they spent the rest of the daye in diuersitie
of pleasures: the Quéene intreating Palmerin and Olorico
the next daye to dine with her in her lodging, where
shee intended honorably to feast them. The next day at ten
of the clocke, these two yong Princes came to see her, finding
her in a goodlie Hall, which was richlie hanged with
doth of Golde, and therein 
                           ••
                        oode a Cupboorde, garnished

with the most costly plate that euer was séene, for the basest
péece was cleane gold, imb
                           •
                        lished with precious stones,
beside diuerse other inestimable strange Cups, and Glasses
of Agatha. What their seruice at Dinner was, I leaue
to the iudgement of Ladies desirous of fauour. Yet this I
dare say, that the 
                           •
                        iands were so rare and exquisite, and abounding
in such plentie, as though s
                           •
                        ee had them dayly at
commaund. The Tables withdrawne, the Qu
                           ••
                        ne tooke
each of the Princess
                           •
                         by the hand
                           •
                        , and 
                           ••
                        tting downe betwéene
them, with a swéete s
                           •
                        iling countenance beganne
thus.
                     I pray you gentle Knights, to tell mée which of you is
most affected to the seruice of Loue, & followes it with greatest
endeuour: gladly would I be resolued by you, albéeit I
know the certaintie as well as your selues. Madam (quoth
Palmerin) if you haue such knowledge of our affections,
well may our answere hée excused. Uerie true, sayde the
Quéene, especially you, of whose loyaltie the Prince Maurice
is so notable a witnesse. Notwithstanding which of you
doth most mistrust the attainment of her grace, to whom he
is most denoted in loue, let him not giue ouer the pursui
                           •
                         of
his desire: but rather let me intreate you to continue your
loue with much more seruencie, as to those renowmed Ladies,
who by their vertues and graces, doo woorthily cha
                           •
                        
                        lenge
you from all other: for I dare assure you such a successiue
end of your loue, as with especiall content you shall finish
your 
                           〈◊〉
                         desires.
                     If the 
                           〈◊〉
                         ioyfull of this assurance, it is no question to
be dema
                           ••
                        ded, chiefly Olorico, who till then disp
                           •••
                        ed: but
now so happily resolued, gaue place to Palmerin, who was
desirous to conferre more priuately with the Quéene, therfore
in the meane time he deuised with 
                           〈◊〉
                         Lady, and
Palmerin séeing the occasion so fit, began his tale in this maner.
I cannot forget, fair Quéene, when you sent your 
                           〈◊〉
                        
to me at the Soldans court, that after her message 
                           〈◊〉
                        
she saide to me, y• you were acquainted with further secrets

concerning my estate. For this cause, I intreate your highnesse,
if you doo not imagine mee too importunate, that it
might please you to acquaint mée with my Father and Mother,
for that aboue all other things I most desire. The
Quéene amazed at this demaund, thus answered. Knowe
(gentle Knight) that what the Ladie in this matter saide to
you, as also what my selfe euen now promised you, commeth
not from mee, for one of my Knights acquainted mée
therewith, hée béeing the most skilfull in the Magical sciences
that is in all Turkie. As now he is returned into his
owne Countrey, and no other answere could I get of him:
but that you are the Sonne of the most loyall redoubted and
valiant Prince in the worlde, whom before you haue anie
further knowledge of, you shall deliuer from death, and that
very shortly. Beside you loue a Ladie, who in all perfections
of nature, fortune or spirit, hath not her equall.
                     In sooth (quoth Palmerin) I shall account my selfe
right happie, to deliuer my Father from such daunger, and
Heauen I beséech that it may so bée. On these tearmes came
Alfarano, and the dauncing began, which constrained them
to breake of talke, and step into the daunce, in which delight
they spent the time till Supper was summoned, till
which aduertisement, they were so well, as was Ogyer the
Dane in Faeria. For neuer was Dido such an affectionate

                           ••
                        ditrice of Aeneas, recounting the ruine of the Troians,
then was the Quéene of Tharsus to Palmerin: towards whē
her heart was so enthralled, and with secret fire so wasted

                           •
                        nd consumed, as dooth the Waxe before the fire. Being
s
                           •
                        t at the Banquet, Palmerin and Olorico on the one
side, and the Quéene and Alfarano on the other, the Tasters
attending on them were two Ladies, who had in
charge to giue the one the sléeping and daungerous drinke,
and to the other, the amorous & delicate, yet in effect to prouoke
forgetfulnesse. So well did the Ladies discharge their
office, and the Princes tooke this mixed drinke so substantially,
as they coulde hardly forbeare sleeping at the Tables

wherefore euery one arysing, the Quéene 
                           〈◊〉
                         the 
                           〈◊〉
                        
to Alfarano, who presently went to his lodging. Thē
                        
                           •
                        ere these two sléepie Princes conducted to their chamber,
where beeing in bed, they slept soundly, and the Quéene
comming to them, accompanied with those trustie Ladies
that wayted at Supper, tooke the Prince Olorico, conuaying
him to another bed, for he was so charmed as hée coulde
not awake.
                     Afterward the Ladies departed, and the Quéene went
to bedde to Palmerin, whom she abused at her owne pleasure.
A matter not to bée esteemed fabulous, in that other
haue béene brought into the like case, as well may witnesse
Brangiena, who endured these swéet skirmishes, because she
should not manifest the Historie of Ysuel her Mistresse, and
Tristram. The Quéene hauing satisfied her vnchast desire,
caused Olorico to be brought into his place againe, and then
returned to her owne Chamber. But now this enchauntment
loosing his operation, a fantasie appeared to Palmerin,
resembling his Ladie Polynarda, who sayd: Ah Palmerin,
disloyall Traytour and adulterer, howe much are they
deceyued, that repute thée a loyall and faithfull Louer? Ah
wretch vnworthie of so good a name, hauing so iniuriouslie
forgotten mee. Doost thou not consider thy great offence,
committed against the God of heauen: medling with a
Woman more brute then brutishnesse it selfe, and thy disloyall
treason agaynst my selfe? Be assured, that if thou presently
forsake not her companie, I will neuer forget thy
fault, but chastise thée continually as a dissembling reprobate.
So she departed, Palmerin intreating her to pardon
this iuiurie, which she would not heare, but floong away in
great anger: and he awaking, brake foorth into these spéeches.
                     Ah vnhappie wretch that I am, thus to loose the gracious
fauour of my Mistresse. These wordes awaked the
Prince Olorico, who embracing him in his armes demau
                        
                           •
                        ed
the cause of his sorrow; but Palmerin was so surprised

wish 
                           〈◊〉
                         he would make no answere, but fell from
the Bedde in a swoune. Olorico fearing he was dead, cried
out for helpe, whereat the Quéene arose, and casting her
night Mantle about her, came to know the occasion of this
clamour: and finding Palmerin breathlesse, shée called for
so many present remedyes, as extinguished the passionate
fitte. Palmerin séeing the Quéene so néere him, clothed himselfe
immediately, and departed the Chamber, commaunding
all his people to prouide themselues, for he would depart
thence within an howres space. Neither could the
earnest intreaties of the Quéene, nor courteous perswasions
of Alfarano, cause him to stay till Dinner time: but
his carriage béeing sent before, and his men attending him,
hée came to take his leaue of the Quéene, who verie sorrowfull
for this straunge accident, said to him at his departure.
Noble Palmerin, my heart attainted with such extreame
gréefe, as the sight of you doth somewhat remedie; expected
further hope of ease by your presence: but séeing your departure
may not bée withstoode, I pray you vouchsafe to
weare this King for my sake, and kéepe it safely, till my
messenger bring you another like vnto it. Madame (quoth
Palmerin) beeing vnable to remunerate the great honours
you haue done me, I will not denie you so small a request,
that I may the better fulfill the bond of allegiaunce, wherin
I stande bound to you while I liue. Go then in the safe
protection of the Gods, quoth shée, for thou hast left me such
a recompence, as all my life time will be ioyfull to mée. Palmerin
not vnderstanding 
                           •
                        er darke spéeches, departed, putting
the King on his finger, béeing the most rich and curious
péece of worke that euer was séene: for in it was
a goodly great Rubie, cutte in faces, so liuely as could be de
                        
                           •
                        ised,
which shone so brightly, as in the night time it sparckled
great light. The Quéene like wise, 
                           〈◊〉
                         shée had giuen
great riches to the Admirall, returned to her Countrey,
leading thenceforwarde a verie chaste and continent life,

                           •
                        nely for his sake, by whom 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        
selfe conceyued with Childe. And at the time appointed, b
                           •
                        
nature, shee was deliuered of a goodlie Sonne, resembling
his Father in braue constitution: whome the mother caused
to bée named Palmendos, as well in memorie of his father
Palmerin, as also of his Graundsire Florendos, from
them deriuing his name, as béeing the onlie flower of Chiualrie.
And as Palmerin was vertuous, so did his Sonne
follow him in all bountie, prudence, magnanimitie, loyalty,
liberalitie, courtesse and humanitie: in briefe, he had all the
noble vertues that a Child might receiue from his father,
as you may at large perceyue in his Historie. But because
his deeds as yet serue not to our purpose, we will leaue him
growing vnder his mothers charge, and returne to them
whom lately we left.
                  
                  
                     Chap. XXI.
                     
                        Howe Palmerin, to colour his intended and desirous voyage
into Christendome, perswaded the Soldane to
sende his Armie to Constantinople, and what followed
thereon.
                     
                     
                        GReatlie desirous was Palmerin to returne
towards the Soldane, and therefore
would not make his way by Pasmeria,
but iourneyed thitherwarde,
where the King of Balisarca staied his
comming, who came to méet him with
all the Lordes and Captaines of his
Armie. Thus hauing brought the Countrey in quiet
obeysaunce of the Soldane, with theyr prisoners they
returned towardes his Maiestie, sending worde before of

their spéedie comming. The Soldane was not a little ioyfull
of these tydings, as also of the fortunate victorie against
his enemies, wherefore he left the Cittie of Calpha, and
determined to méete them at a Castell of pleasure, which
hee had lately edifyed, chéefely because hée would sée the
good order of his Armie, which was now conducted in better
equipage, then before was woont to bée séene in Assiria.
The King of Balisarca caused the captiues to be ledde before,
who (by his commaundement) when they came in the
Soldanes presence, threw their Armour to the ground, and
thrée times fell on their knées kissing the ground, prostrating
themselues before him with great reuerence. All these
ceremonies finished, Palmerin, the Prince Olorico, with
the other Gouernours of the Féelde, came, and kissing his
highnesse hande, hée intertained them verie graciously: and
after he had embraced Palmerin, he woulde néedes ryde betwéene
him and the King of Balisarca. In this order rode
thy on to the Pallace Gate, where his Ladie Lethea and
Alchidinia her Daughter, trickt vp in vestures of surpassing
value, attended their comming: and after the accustomed reuerences
on all sides, entered the great Hall, where the
Princesse taking Palmerin by the hande, before her Father
and all his Barons, thus spake.
                     Sir Palmerin, so well is your prowesse and haughtie
déedes of Armes knowne to euery one, as my prayse cannot
extoll them to aduauntage: notwithstanding I dare
say before my Father, and all his Lords héere present, that
hée is so much indebted to you, as he can n
                           •
                        uer returne sufficient
recompence. These words vttered with such affection,
were noted by euery one, especially the Prince Olorico,
when Palmerin made this answere to the Princesse. Madame,
héere may you behold the Prince of Arabia, one of
the best Knights that euer I knewe, and who hath doone
more seruice to your Father and you in this warre, then
any other beside: for with his owne hande he slue Gramiell,
who was chiefe leader of the Phrygian Armie. Beside,

such and so many haue béene his rare exploytes, as no one
that I knowe may be equalled with him. And all this hée
admitteh to your fauour, wherein hée earnestly desireth to
continue, so please you to accept him for your Knight: deliuering
this assurance before hand, that héereafter hée will
aduenture his life in your cause, whersoeuer it shal like you
to commaund him. For this cause (Madame) you may not refuse
him, being the man that among all the Assirians, dooth
best deserue to be your seruaunt. Alchidinia, who well
vnderstoode to what ende his spéeches tended, and the occasion
why Palmerin thus spake, aduised her selfe well, and
returned this answere.
                     So helpe me our Gods, I know well that the Prince
Olorico is so puyssant and renowmed, as any man of whom
I yet heard: notwithstanding, I hope the Soldane my Father
will not be ingratefull in the knowledge thereof, and
that sufficiently I dare awarrant yée. But I desire you
faire sir, to tell me howe the Quéene of Tharsus intreated
you, and what is your opinion of her? In good faith, Madam,
aunswered Palmerin, shée is one of the most honest and vertuous
Ladies that euer I came in companie withall, and to
whom I greatly desire to do any seruice. You haue good reason,
quoth the Princesse, in that she came so farre to sée you,
and discouer her loue: which other coulde as well accomplish,
as good, or rather in honor beyonde her, if they might
hope of anie ease in their passionate desires. Palmerin feigning
to vnderstand her meaning, entred into other kinde
of talke, vntill supper time, which finished, each one returned
to their Chamber, when the Prince séeing himselfe
alone with his Fréend, thus sayd. Ah my déere Fréende
Palme
                              •
                           in, howe worthily may you be sayde to bee without
co
                           •
                        pare, in all perfections that a Knight ought to haue,
loue onely excepted? yet héerein (if I be not deceyued) you
doe for mée agaynst all reason, for a thousand times are you
more beloued, then your selfe can loue anie. Notwithstanding,
for this default, if so it may bée named, and for 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        
wordes this day vsed in my presence to Achidinia, I remaine
vowed to your seruice: for in trueth you know not
the good you did me, supporting my imperfection of speech
when I was before my Mistresse. Yet know I not whence
such imbecilitie should procéede, if not by béeing rauished
with regarde of her celestiall countenaunce, my ouer laboured
spiri
                           •
                        e forsooke me, and béeing too much tormented in
this languishing bodie, abandoned all the partes sensatiue,
placing it selfe onely in mine eyes, which neuer could imagine
themselues satisfied, contemplating beautie of so rare
and especiall estimation. And were it not that my hope onely
consisteth in you, comparing my small desert, and the
excellencie of my Ladie, long ere this had my soule forsooke
her infortunate habitation, which so indiscreetlie fell into
these oppressing passions. And this I earnestly intreate you
to let her vnderstand: in that I feare least shée impute my
happie alteration, to want of wisedome and ciuilitie. Trust
me, quoth Palmerin, I promise you my vttermost abilitie,
and so much will I do, as one Friend may for another, to
discharge my selfe of the promise which héeretofore I made
you.
                     And let me intreate you on mine owne behalfe, to remooue
that opinion of speciall loue, which you report the
Princesse beares me, béeing not such as you doe imagine:
for (noble Prince, and my deare Fréende) you néede not
despayre of the benefit whereof I haue so solemnely assured
you. After many other speeches, they slept till the next morning,
when clothing themselues in their richest garments,
they went and gaue the good morrow to the Soldane, who
verie honourablie thanked them: and Palmerin espying
conuenient occasion, thus began.
                     My Lord, you haue sufficient experience, that by the
bountie and great fauour of the Gods, you haue obteyned
victory against your enemies, to the no little content of your
Subiects: all which béeing so happily finished, base were
the thought, to feare the perfection of higher enterprises.

Therefore my Lord, I thinke it expedient, so it may stand
with your good liking, considering your prouision for the sea
is in such readinesse, your people likewise acquainted with
your intent, before we meddle with the Brethren of Amarano,
came daily in troupes to offer their seruice: that
now you send your Armie to Constantinople, for your answere
once heard, right soone will we embarke our selues,
and set forward on our voyage. For the rest, I pray you
deliuer these prisoners to be vsed as your slaues: but as for
the Princes, I thinke (hauing séene the fortune of theyr
Brethren, and their owne badde successe in Armes) that
they will serue you with continuall loyaltie. My Sonne,
quoth the Soldane, let all bée doone as you haue appointed,
for such is my confidence in you, that your intent cannot
but sort to good ende: wherefore my Gallies and al things
readie furnished, depart when you please, hauing first sent
your Souldiers abroad.
                     The Prince Olorico beeing present, offered againe to
go in this voyage, with like number of men, as he brought
against the Brethren of Amarano: for which the Soldane
greatly thanked him, promising him such satisfaction
at his returne, as should agrée with his owne content. Alchidiana
taking in ill part the words of Palmerin on the
Prince Oloricos behalfe, sent for him to come speake with
her, which hée did, and finding her very sad and melancholy,
hée demaunded if any one had doone her displeasure, and
what the cause might bee of her pensiuenesse. Ah my déere
friend, quoth shée, how can I but be agréeued, séeing no one
Lady in the world, hath so many contrarie fortunes as my
selfe? Alas, my heart hath chosen you for my onely Lords
and Friend, thinking to finde place woorthy my conceite,
and that your loue would answere me with the like: but in
ought I can perceiue, I am too much beguiled, for you, either
as ingratefull or carelesse, vse affecting spéeches to me,
importing no other ende, but that in leauing you, I should
take the Prince Olorico for my Husband. Do you imagine

me so mutable and inconstant, that I will or can loue anie
other but you? or that my affection intirely setled so high,
can brooke such a downefall, as to like the man so much inferiour
to mée? And (which most of all offendeth me) not
contented to mocke me, in disdaining my knowne loue, so
discourteously would perswade me to choose another? Let
all our Gods be iudge, if I haue not iust cause to complaine
of you, albeit I haue greater cause to hate and despise my
owne selfe: for in that I haue more then deserued your
loue, yet (as too much vnwise) I cannot consider, that in
the heart of an ingratefull person, loue hath no place of certaine
abyding. But seeing our gods haue in such sort subiected
mee, as (against my will) I am constrained to loue
mine enemie: in vaine were it for me to resist against them,
that they beholding the vnspotted loue of the one, may in
the ende punish the ingratitude of the other. Th
                           •
                        s thinking
to continue longer spéech, so many violent sighs intercepted
her, as she was not able to proffer one word more,
whereby Palmerin enforced, thus answered. I beséech you
Madame, crosse me not with these néedelesse words, for although
the Prince is so worthie to be loued, as any man
that euer I saw: yet were I very much vnprouided of
witte, and a méere stranger of good consideration, if I
would refuse that speciall felicitie, then which I can desire
no greater.
                     I knowe (swéete Lady) that you loue mee intirely,
perswade your selfe then, that my loyaltie is no lesse, nor
can death make mee gainesay the promises I haue made
you: and were it not to the great disaduantage of mine honour,
to leaue the honourable warre your Father hath intended,
which might procure each one to misconceiue of
mee, assure your selfe, that I would forsake dignities,
Armes, and all, to do you the seruice you worthily deserue:
all which at my returne, feare not, shal be effected. So well
could Palmerin dissemble the matter, as the Princesse was
somewhat better pacified, and taking his leaue of her, returned

to the Soldane: before whome he caused to bee
brought, the Princes and Lords that were prisoners, and at
his request Maulicus gaue them libertie, with this charge
notwithstanding, that they should serue him in his warre.
Which that they might the better accomplish, he commanded
them horse, armour, and all other things necessarie, making
all possible spéed could be deuised, that his armie might
set forwards to sea.
                  
                  
                     Chap. XXII.
                     
                        How Palmerin sailing with the Soldanes armie, was brought
by tempest into the Sea of Allemaigne, where hee tooke
landing with the prince Olorico.
                     
                     
                        QUickly Palmein consented to embarke
the Armie, desiring the Prince Olorico
to accompanie him to the Hauen, to
make choyse of the best vessel for themselues:
and suruaying them all, they
found a goodly Carricke, new and very
well appointed, wherein many prisoners
lay chained, which had beene taken
by the Soldanes gallies, and other Rouers of the Moores,
of whom Palmerin demaunded what people they were,
they answered that they were christians, and had long time
liued there in that thraldome. Palmerin not a little glad of
these newes, asked of what Countrey they were, whereupon
one of them that could well sp
                           •
                        ake the Arabian tongue,
answered. Wee are all of Allemaigne, to whome Fortune
hath excéeded in crueltie. These wordes were maruailous
welcome to Palmerin, and for which inwardly he thanked

his God: but the better to dissemble his ioy, he thus spake.
This Countrey should séeme to be very farre from hence,
because I neuer heard thereof before. So finding this vessell
fitte for his purpose, hée appointed it for himselfe and
the Prince Olorico, discharging all other that were therein,
two Knights onely excepted, to whose charge hee committed
the Christians: causing his Horses, Tents, and all
other necessaries, to be carried abroad, as well the Prince
Oloricos as his owne, accomplishing euerie thing in such
order, as within thrée dayes after the Souldiers were readie
to depart: and nowe the day is come to launch away,
when the Soldane and other Taborlanes, accompanied the
King of Balisarca to the Hauen. But the faire Alchidiana
would not bee séene, by reason of her great greefe for her
Friendes departure: for when shee came to take her leaue
of Palmerin in his Chamber, shee fell (in a manner) dead at
his féete, soone after shee deliuered these lamentable spéeches.
                     This is no common farewell my beloued Lord, which
you now take of me, but say it is my very last adiew: for
my heart perswades mee that I shall neuer sée you more,
because the extremities of my sorrowes are such, as well
I know I cannot long endure. Adiew my sweete Fréende,
who in stéede of my ioy and comfort, leauest me in despayre,
which neuer can haue ende but by immediate death. God
Madame say not so, quoth Palmerin, for I hope right soone
to sée you againe. So leauing her, Olorico and he went towards
the Hauen: the Prince beeing so passionate to leaue
her sight, by whose swéete lookes his life was maintained:
as had not his friendly companion comforted him, vnable
was hee to departe the Pallace. But béeing nowe come to
the Port, and féeling the winde and sea seruiceable, loth to
trifle the time with any longer stay, they came to take
their leaue of the Souldane, who tooke great care for theyr
contentment, and many times embracing Palmerin, commending
to him the disposition of all his affayres, sayd. My

noble Sonne and friend, I vowe to you in presence of our
Gods, that if you returne hither againe with victorie, with
such honours I will endowe you, as shall be sufficient for
the whole worlde to talke on. Palmerin humbly kissing
his hande, went aboord, the Marriners hoysing sayle,
launched foorth into the Sea, with such a braue noyse of
Drums, Trompets, Clarions, Cornets, Fifes, and other
instruments, as though Heauen and earth would haue encountred
together. Palmerin thus floting on the gouernment
of Neptune, imagined how with safety he might
forsake his companie, wherefore he commanded to vnbinde
all the Christians. For (quoth hee to Olorico) séeing they
are Marriners, and well skilled in the art of Nauigation,
they may stand vs in good stéede, if time so require, or any
sodaine tempest should assaile vs: but the better to beguile
his owne people, he caused them to sweare their faithfull
seruice to him.
                     The neght being come, and he séeing that euerie one slept
soundly, called two of the Christians, and in the Allemaigne
tongue thus beganne. My Friends, giue thanks to
God for your fortune, in that you Christians haue founde
one of your faith and religion, who hath good hope shortly
to deliuer you from these heathen helhoundes: therefore
set feare apart, and regarde well your Quadrant, if you can
compasse any meane to get the coast of Allemaigne. The
Christians more glad then can be expressed, answered, that
they would accomplish his commandement, and therefore
he should repose his trust in them. About midnight, as God
would, beganne a great tempest and blustring of winde, so
that in despight of the Pylots and Marriners, the Fléete
was seuered in many parts: but the Christians perceiuing
that this winde serued well for their auaile, kn
                           •
                        w so well
how to order their course, that in short time they got farre
inough from their companie, and thus continued the winde
for tenne or twelue dayes, for which Palmerin deuoutly

                           〈◊〉
                         God.
                     
                        So happily strained Palmerin with his Allemaignes,
that one of them at length tolde him they were neere
the straites of Gibraltare, for which Palmerin not a little
ioyfull, said, that they might passe Spaine without any feare,
and so the sooner reach Allemaigne. But when they began
to coast the straight the Turkish marriners were amazed,
saying that the Christians knew not their course, beeing
more then eight hundred thousand leagues foorth of theyr
compasse.
                     
                        Palmerin fearing to be discouered before hée came to his
intent, aunswered in choler, that the Christians knewe
their course much better then they did, and they to prate no
more on paine of their liues: which threatning presently
droue them all to silence. Afterwarde they sayled with so
good winde, as they tooke landing at a Port in Allemaigne,
which at this day is called Tolledo, when the Christians
said to Palmerin, how that was the place where they were
borne, where (if so he pleased) they desired their libertie.
Palmerin assuring them of their request, answered that hée
himselfe would land there, and therfore went first on shore,
feigning to séeke fresh water, and all ihings accomplished
to his owne desire, he caused his Horse to be brought forth,
and Oloricos likewise, who was importunate to beare him
companie. No sooner was Palmerin on shore, but he knéeled
downe, giuing thanks to God for his safe deliuerance. The
Marchants and Marrines of the Citie, séeing them whome
they thought lost in the Sea more then tenne yéeres before,
were greatly abashed, welcomming them home with excéeding
ioy, but they answered, that they ought rather to
thanke the Knight in gréene Armour, for hee deliuered vs
from the Moores and Infidels, without request of any ransome.
                     
                        Olorico amazed at these signes of ioy, as also when hee
sawe Palmerin pray, knew not well what to thinke, which
Palmerin presently perceiuing, and to resolue him of all
doubts whatsoeuer, sayd. No longer neede I know my good

Lord and Friende, to hide the affaires and secrets of my
heart from you, know therefore that I am a Christian, and
a Gentleman of the Emperours Court of Allemaigne. But
that which most of all gréeueth me, is, that I am constrayned
to forsake your companie, and returne againe to my
Lorde, for too much should I offend my God, to go with
you to the Soldanes seruice. Wherefore my louing friend,
let me intreate you to holde me excused, swearing to you by
the faith of a Knight, that whether else it shall like you to
go, I will accomplish your minde in any thing. I intreate
you likewise, to entertaine al my Squires and Gentlemen
into your seruice, and among them to share all my treasure
in the Shippe, because I will haue nothing with me but
my Horse and armour. And notwithstanding all this,
feare nor to present your selfe before the Soldane and Alchidiana:
for to them will I write such matter of you, as
they shall accept you in my place, and with as great honour
as euer they did mee. If heauen so fauour mee as I may
come to the knowledge of my father, I will certifie you
with the truth of all. As for my counterfeiting to be dumbe,
was onely but to awaite opportunitie, when with safety I
might escape thence.
                     If Olorico at the first was amazed, what may be iudged
of him nowe? notwithstanding, hee loued Palmerin so
perfectly, as hee returned him this answere. Although Syr
Palmerin, wee are of contrary faith and opinion, yet hath
your noblenesse and humanitie gained such priuiledge ouer
me, that as you haue long time liued a Christian among
the Turks, so for your sake will I liue a Turke among the
Christians, dissembling in like sort as you did, and neuer
shall any occasion force mée to forsake you, till you haue
found your Father, and know if he be discended of the Soldanes
bloud. No honour will it be for me nowe, to returne
again to the Assirian Princes, and as for my people, I force
not though they go backe againe with my treasure: for on
my Knighthood, I will bee no richer then you, nor will

reserue any thing with mée, then what belongs to a Knight
errant, which is Horse and Armour. For the rest, let Fortune
do the worst she can, I hope for all this, one day to be
King of Arabia. Then noble friend, be not offended, for
I will beare you companie, if death and strong imprisonment
doo not withhold mee. Palemrin embraicng him,
saide.
                     Ah worthie Prince, so noble is your minde, and repleate
with fidelitie, as perswade your selfe to find me your loyall
Brother, and fellow in Armee, neuer to forsake you while
I can lift my Sword, so please you to abide with mee. So
calling the chéefest of them in the ship, they sayde as much
to them as you haue heard, commaunding them not to stir
from Arabia before they heard some other tydings. As for
their strange conceit at these newes, I bequeath to your
iudgements, yet durst they not gainsay their Maisters, but
launching into the deepe, sayled backe again into their own
Countrey.
                     
                        Palmerin and Olorico for this night lodged in the Cittie,
to refresh themselues, and the next morning, after they
had taken leaue of the Merchants, they deliuered, they set
forward on their iourney. Continuing their trauaile thrée
daies together, at length they mette a Knight, who séeing
them armed after the Turkish manner, sayde. Gentlemen,
God saue ye, if I should not seeme troublesome to you because
I iudge you to be strangers, I would gladly knowe if
you could tell me any tidings of two Knights, which long
since left this Countrey. Howe were they named? (quoth
Palmerin) Syr saide the Knight, one of them is Trineus,
Some to our dread Lord the Emperour, and the other, the
most valiant Palmerin d' Oliua. Two yéeres and more since
they left the Court, without any newes what became of
them, sauing that wee heard they were a while with the
King of England, and thence they conuayed his Daughter,
the Emperous continuing so sorrowfull for theyr losse, as euery
houre his death is expected. May it be (quoth Palmerin)
                        
that all this while Trineus is not returned? What daunger
will noble Allemaigne receiue, by loosing their young
Prince? Ouercome with exceeding griefe and sorrow by report
of these vnhappie tidings, to himselfe he beganne in this
maner.
                     What shall I doo? dare I be so presumptuous, as to
present my selfe before my Mistresse? what sufficient excuse
can I make for the loue of her brother? Doubtlesse, if it were
such a hell to me, to finde the meane for my departure, from
that long captiuitie in the Soldanes Court, much more will
it be to me now in the search of the Prince, for without him
I dare not approach the Emperours presence. While he thus
secretly discoursed with himselfe, he became so excéeding passionate,
as Olorico thought he had lost his sences: which
was the cause, that without any further enquirie, the Allemaigne
Knight departed from them: when Olorico, amazed
at this suddain alteration, said. How now Sir Palmerin,
what hath moued you to this heauinesse? I beséech you conceale
not the cause from me: for if it be by any offence, that
the Knight offered which spake to you, soone shall I deliuer
him his penance. Therefore tell me I pray you, for vndoubtedly
I will not suffer you to rest, vntill you haue acquainted
me with the truth. Palmerin knowing how déerly y• Prince
loued him, and that for his sake he had left Country, parents
and friends, reposing on his loyaltie, imparted his loue to
him, as also the lesse of Trineus and the Princesse Agriola,
Olorico then laboured to perswade him, aduising him to
compasse some secret spéech with his Ladie, of whome hée
might learne how to recouer her lost brother, and the faire
Agriola of England againe. Palmerin following this counsell,
pacified himselfe, and kept himselfe so closely as he could,
from being knowne to any.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. XX.
                     
                        How Palmerin by the meanes of Vrbanillo his Dwarfe,
spake with his Lady Polynarda, with whom he stayed
fiue daies, to recompence some part of his long absence,
and to the great contentment of them both.
                     
                     
                        SUch expedition in their iourney made
these noble companions, that at length
they arriued néere a castle, which was
foure leagues from Gaunt, where the
Emperour as then was, disposed to
hunting for the delight of the Ladies:
but chéefely to expell his owne melancholy,
for the losse of his sonne, as also
to recreate the Princesse Polynarda, who shadowing the
cause by her Brothers absence, lamented continually for
her noble Friend Palmerin, of whome shee could vnderstand
no tydings, albeit she had trauailed her verie vttermost
endeuours, which forced her to so manie extreame
imaginations, as the very least was worse then death it
selfe.
                     The Emperours trayne lodging each way about the
Castle, hindered our two Knights from any good hostage, so
that they were constrained to abide in a little simple house,
where they demaunded of a Courtier that lay there,
what time the Emperour would depart thence, who aunswered,
that his highnesse was minded that day to returne
to Gaunt, to conferre with the Princes electours of speciall
affaires concerning the Empire. Palmerin ioyfull heereof,
caused his Horse to bée brideled, and accompanied with

                        Olorico, went and ambushed themselues in a little thicket,
néere the high way where the Emperour must needes
passe, to the ende he might beholde his Ladie Polynarda,
Palmerin attending her comming who was the onely support
of his life, his heart leapt with conceite of his ioy to
come, yet trembled likewise because hee durst not present
himselfe before the imperiall maiestie, without the noble
Trineus.
                     
                     Soone after, by the Guarde of Archers that came formost,
hee well perceiued the Emperour was at hand, when
remembring the honors and fa
                           •
                        ours he had receiued in his
Court, the teares trickled downe his chéekes, chéefely for
want of his highnesse sonne, who was so especially committed
to his trust, then followed the Empresse, and with
her the faire Princesse Polynarda, clothed all in black, witnessing
by her outwarde habit, the secret sorrowes of her
heart. Her thoughts still hammering on her priuat gréefes,
yet assailed with a sodaine motion, shee gaue such a sigh
as Palmerin easily heard it, which troubled him in such
sort, as without the assurance of Olorico, hee had fallen
downe from his Horse. Polynarda beholding his sodaine
alteration, without any regarde of her Mother, called Vrbanillo
the Dwarfe to her, who since his comming from
England neuer boudged from her, and to him she sayd. Hast
thou héeretofore (Vrbanillo) séene these two Knights,
which shaddow themselues in the wood side while wee passe
by? No trust mee Madame (quoth the Dwarfe) I neuer
sawe them to my remembrance. I pray thee, said she, ride
to them so fast as thou canst, and demaunde of th
                           •
                        m from
me, of whence they are, and if they can tell any tydings of
thy maister, and my Brother Trineus. The Dwarfe, who
was more then a Doctor in such affaires, dissembling that
his Horse would stale, suffered the traine to passe by, and
then rode towards the knights, who were deuising on the
Princesse beautie. Palmerin well knowing Vrbanillo, and
séeing him come in such hast, was not a little glad, thinking

now he should heare some newes of his Mistresse, wherefore
he saide is Olorico. I pray you let vs goe méete this
Horseman, for I thinke his returne is onely to vs. Nowe
was the Dwarffe come to them, and hauing humbly saluted
them, said. I beséech you faire Knights to tell me whether
you belong to the Emperour, or are straungers, for the
Ladie whome I serue, is verie desirous to knowe, and that
for matters néerely concerning her, whereof if you can any
way truely resolue her, your rewarde shall aunswere
your owne contentment? What Vrbanillo? quoth Palmerin,
lifting vp his Beuer, didst thou not knowe thy Maister?
Oh Heauen, (quoth the Dwarffe,) praised by thy maker
for euer for this aduenture. And moued with extreame
ioy, he fell at this Maisters féete, saying. Ah my Lord, what
comfort will this be to the Princesse Polynarda, when shée
shall vnderstande your presen
                           ••
                        ? and not without iuste
cause: for by this meane is shée deliuered from the greatest
torments in the worlde. And that nothing may want to
furnish this long expected ioy, tell me if the Knight in your
companie, be the Prince Trineus or no? It is not hée, quoth
Palmerin, for it is more then a year since, that of him, and
faire English Agriola (after that I vnfortunate lost them)
heard anie certaine report. For this cause Vrbanillo, it
behooues thée to be faithfull and secrete, not discouering my
béeing héere to any but my Ladie, of whome thou must
learne, by what meanes I may best come to sée her. The
Dwarffe taking his leaue of his Maister, turned his Horse
to be gone: but comming backe suddainlie againe, saide. Is
this Sir Ptolome that is with you? Madame Brionella will
not be a litle glad to hear of him likewise. Nor is it he, (quoth
Palmerin) I lost him in company with the rest. God will restore
them one day againe, saide the Dwarffe, so giuing the
spurres to his horse, he galloped till he came to the Princesse,
who séeing him returned in such haste, knew not well what
to think: 
                           〈◊〉
                         fearing to be discouered by a k
                           •
                        ight that accompanied
her, determined not to request his tidings, vntill shée

came home into her Chamber. But neuer was poore Louer
in greater agony, when she expected her friend in some priuat
place, then was the faire Princesse at this present: wherefore,
so soone as shée came to her Chamber, shée called for the
Dwarffe, who being come, shée said, I pray thée Vrbanillo,
by the reuerend dutie thou owest mée, whence are the two
Knights, and what answere did they make thée? They are
such swéet Madam, quoth the Dwarffe, as when all the men
in the world could tell no tydings of, my selfe by happie fortune
haue found: for by them I bring you the Key of Paradise,
if your self wil but find the meane to enter. Tush, I pray
thée quoth the Princesse, iest not with me in this sort, for now
is no time of sport or meriment: tell mée who they are I desire
thée? Know then fair Madam, quoth he, that one of them
is my Maister Palmerin, who thus concealeth him, because
he hath not brought the Prince your brother with him, and
he (humbly kissing your hand) commends him to your gracious
fauour, desiring you to send him answer, how he may secretly
speak with you, because he wold not be knowne to the
Emperor, or any other of y• Court. How welcome these long
expected newes were to the Princesse, I leaue to the opinion
of long absent friends. O heauens, quoth she, doth Palmerin
liue, and is so near at hand? now hath my hart his only desired
comfort: and such is my hope, that séeing he is come, my
brother (by his meanes) shall not be long hence, to such good
fortune are all his actions destenied. Presently she ran to tell
Brionella these newes, who likewise was excéeding ioyfull,
because she imagined Palmerins companion to be her Ptolome.
Whereupon they concluded togither, that Palmerin
should the night following come to the Gardein, where first
his swéet Amours were sollicited, and by a L
                           •
                        dder of Cords
he should ascend their Chamber. This resolution set downe,
the Dwarffe departed to execute his charge, when Polinarda
thus began to Brionella. Ah my deare friend, how impossible
is it for me to hide the ioy my heart conceiueth, that
was so late in such surpassing heauinesse?
                     
                        What will my Ladies now thinke, when they behold
their Mistresse so pleasaunt? Let them speake what
please them, (quoth Brionella) should you render them account
of your behauiour? yet thus I thinke, that your discretion
is so good, when you haue séene the onelye comforts
for your cares, that you can so wel dissemble your thoughts,
as the most warie eye can hardly discerne you. Well haue
you said, (quoth the Princesse) if loue could be gouerned by
wisedome: but the pleasure which the wisest haue receyued
by his rules, hath in the ende discouered 
                           〈…〉
                        
and folly. Such were the speeche betwéene these two Ladies,
attending the night in good deuotion, when each one
thought to sée her Lorde and best beleued, that their lo
                           •
                        y
sorrowes might somewhat be qualified.
                     The Dwarfe beeing gone on his message as you haue
hearde, the Knights repeted themselues on the greene 
                           〈◊〉
                        
till Sunne setting, that they might the more 
                           〈◊〉
                         enter
the Cittie: and the time béeing c
                           •
                        me that they woulde
sette forward, Palmerin said to Olorico. My Lorde, 
                           〈◊〉
                        
will take this by waye which leadeth to the Cittie, 
                           〈◊〉
                         intende
before I depart, to heare same n
                           •
                        wes from my Mistresse.
Goe which way you please (quoth the Prince) yet
mu
                           ••
                         I néedes meruaile at you, that you woulde bee so long
absent from such an excellent Princesse: trust me, Alchidiana
is fayre, yet may not shee be equalled with your lady.
The gréefes I haue endured, said Palmerin, by my long absence,
are not to be spoken off: yet could I no way 
                           〈◊〉
                        
my returne sooner. By this time they were come to the
Cittie, and to a lodging appointed them by Vibanillo, who
béeing now come to his Maister, deliuered the message hée
was commaunded. Palmerin vnderstanding his Mistress
                           •
                        
pleasure, presently vnarmed himselfe, and wrapped a scarlet
Mantle about him, taking his tru
                           ••
                        ie Sworde vnder his
Arme: hée intreated Olorico, to staye there till hée returned,
or heard further tydings from him, leauing Vrbanillo in
his companie, with charge to vse him as his owne person.

He béeing come to the walles of louelie Paradise, sounde
the Ladder reatie prepared for him, whereby hée made a
spéedie passage: and finding Brionella there staying his
comming, embracing her sweetly, saide. Trust me Ladie,
the want of Sir Ptolome your Fréende, dooth not a little
gréeue me: but by the grace of God, ere it be long I hope
to bring him with me. Ah my Lord quoth the, right happie
is your comming: for your presence hath béene héere most
of all desired. But albeit shee sette a good countenaunce on
this aunswere, yet were her secret sor
                           •
                        owes innumerable,
beeing deceiued of the comfort shée 
                           〈◊〉
                        . Palmerin
who thought hée stayed too long from his desire, woulde trifle
no further time, but entred his Ladies Chamber: who
angerly had throwne her selfe on a Pallet, because hée staied
to speake with Brionella, then falling on his knee before
her, hée offered to 
                           〈◊〉
                         her hande, which with dissembling
disdaine she would not suffer him, saying. Truelie you shall
receiue no fauour of mée, before I knowe certainlie who you
are: for I stand in doubt to bée deceiued, and that you ar
                           •
                        
some other then my Palmerin, seeing you haue béen so long
time from me, and (which is more would neuer vouchsafe
to send to me.
                     Then taking a light in her hand, and 
                           〈◊〉
                         beholding
him, hardlie coulde 
                           〈◊〉
                         sette it from her againe: when
welcomming him with an infinite number of swéete kisses,

                           〈◊〉
                         saide. Now knowe I well 
                           〈…〉
                         is my Palmerin:
what Countrey might be so 
                           〈◊〉
                        , or fortune so
contrarie, that could withholde you all this while from me?
O that it might haue stoode with mine honor, for my selfe
to séeke you foorth: with good will could I haue endured
the trauaile, yea much more then you haue doone for mée.
How often (considering the daungers of the Sea) hath very
death surprised me
                           •
                         and into how manie sundrie opinions
haue I fallen, sometime to disguis
                           •
                         my selfe into a mans
attire, to enter the e
                           •
                        tate of a Knight errant, and beg
                           ••
                        ne a
search which neuer shoulde bee ended, till I founde you?

For this hath bene receiued as a generall rule, that by 
                           〈◊〉
                        
long sufferance and expectation, one may endure a thousand
deaths: and thinke not but the very least of my afflictions,
haue bene of force to depriue my life. Consider that griefe, desire,
remembrance, languor, sorrow, hope, suspition, teares,
complaints, and other such like passions common in loue,
continually beate vpon the heart with burning affection: and
to such inconuenience their issue growes, as the vitall spirit
is chased from the bodie. For Gods sake Madame, quoth
Palmerin, leaue these wounding spéeches, and suffer me to
take a litle life, in b
                           •
                        holding that which is no lesse diuin
                           •
                         the
humane, for my offence deserues not these accusations. Thē
discouered he all his fortunes passed, which droue the Princesse
to no litle admiration, when she said.
                     Beléeue me my Lord, séeing that by your meanes my
Brother Trineus is lost, for my loue, and to satisfie your
promise to my Lord and Father, you must néedes goe finde
him againe. That shall I Madame, quoth Palmerin, but
before I begin this iourney, let me intreate that fauourable
regard: which is the comfort in loue, and vniteth life & soule
togither, which heretofore you haue graunted, and I hope
will not now deny me. What may I iudge (quoth she) of
your constancie since your absence? for not long since I was
sollicited with a vision, which tolde me that you commited
breach of loyaltie with a Quéene, to my no litle griefe: although
full often I reprooued you therefore, to cause you forsake
that sinns, when me séemed the Quéene thus answered.
Be thou assured Polynarda, that although Palmerin
estéeme thée aboue all other, yet shall he leaue some part of his
loue with me. Hearing these words, I brake forth into tears,
wherewith you séemed to be moued, and so forsaking her,
followed me: and herewith I awaked, finding (indéed) my
face besprent with teares, and my heart ouercome with
insupportable griefe. Palmerin abashed hereat, remembred
what entertainment the Quéene of Tharsus made him at
the Banquet, of her sundry delights and great fauours for

his arriuall, her piercing, amorous, and alluring spéeches,
wherewith incessantly shee did sollicite him: and such was
conceit, as he verely perswaded himselfe, that by enchaunted
practises she had abused him, wherupon he said. I swear
                           •
                        
to you Madame, by the religious vowes of our loue, that neuer
did. I commit such wrong against you: if the Quéene of
Tharsus of whome you haue spoken, did not one night deceiue
me by an enchaunted drinke, which vnwittingly I receiued
as I sate at supper, causing me to loose both sence and
vnderstanding: and so acquainted her with his dreame that
night likewise.
                     Doubtlesse my Lord, quoth she, considering the extremitie
of her affection, she practised some meanes to compasse
her desire: but séeing it fell out in that sort, and beléeuing you
would not willingly offend me, I am contented to pardon
that fault. In these and such like spéeches, they spent that
night, and foure more afterward, all which time Palmerin
was kept vnséene in her Chamber: till his departing time
being come, when the Prince attiring her selfe in her w
                           •
                        nted
mourning garments, and shaping her countenance to
her former sorrow, throwded her pleasures past, and thus
we will leaue them, returning to our Affirian
                              •
                           
                         sayling on
the Sea.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. XXIIII.
                     
                        How after the tempest was past, the soldans Armie assembled
togither, & came against Constantinople, where
by the Emperours power they were discomfited: & the
King of Balisarca, his sonne Gueresin, and 
                              〈◊〉
                            other
great Lords of Turkie slaine.
                     
                     
                        THe tempest which had thrown Palmerin
on Hercu
                              •
                           es pillars, after many lōg
and contagious stormes, began n
                           •
                        w to
cease, the Sea béeing faire and calme,
and the windes very quiet, whereupon
the king of Balisarca General of the Armie,
in short time assembled togither the
most part of his Fléete, and came vpon
the Coast of Natolia, where hée attended the rest of his
Foystes and Galleyes. And hauing there 
                           ••
                        ayed about fifteene
dayes, among all the Shippes that came, hée could
heare no 
                           ••
                        dings of Palmerins Carrick: the long slay wherof
caused him to doubt, least he had vnhappily 
                           〈◊〉
                         in
the Sea, and ouercome with excéeding gréefe, hee thus began.
                     Ah gentle Palmerin, the flower of all Chiualrie, in
lucklesse howre didst thon betal
                           •
                        e thy selfe to the Sea: what
answere shal I make the Soldane for the 
                           〈…〉
                        
the Prince Olorico, béeing so especially committed to my
trust? Nowe cannot Fortune 
                           〈◊〉
                         so fauourable to vs as she
would: for by thy losse I vtterlye despayre of expected victorie.
To cut off these 
                           〈◊〉
                         complaints, he was counselled
by the Lords, Knights and auncient Captaines, to sette

forward to Cōstantinople, to discharge themselues of their
promise to the Soldane, least in returning without dealing
with the enemie, they should be reputed for fearefull & faintharted

                           •
                        owards. Setting their sailes to the wind, at length
they came to the Bosphor. Now was the Emperour veri
                           •
                        
aged and sickly, hauing altogither committed the superintendaunce
of the Empire, to his sonne Caniano, who had a son
aged 
                           •
                        eaurntéene yéeres, named Cariteos. And being aduertised
of the comming of so manie Assiri
                              •
                           ns, Turkes, and
Moores, hée sent to all the Christian Princes for succour:
the greater parte whereof, was there as nowe arriued,
with resolute determination, to welcome these Infidels.
                     When the Emperours scoutes had espied the enemi
                           •
                        
to enter the straight, yong Cariteos beholding the Knightes
on all sides, some on the walles, and other in the Fielde,
came and knéeled before his Graundfather, earnes
                           •
                        lye desiring
him to graunt him his Knighthood. For my Lord, quoth
he, a better time and occasion cannot be then newe. The
aged Emperour graunted his request, and with the teares
in his eyes, said. In the name of God, my Sonne, maist thou
receiue thy order, and to the glorious maintenaunce of the
Christian faith: albeit thy youth forbids thée to venture so
soone.
                     Presentlye arose the yong Knight Cariteos, and clasping
on his Helmet, was the first that went foorth of the
Cittie, accompanied with tenne thousand Horsemen, and
twentie thousand Footemen, to hinder the landing of the
enemies: which a great while hee did with such valour, as
the Hauen was channged with the bloud of the slaughtred.
The King of Balisarca hearing thereof, commaunded
his Archers to their taske, 
                           〈◊〉
                         shafts 
                           〈◊〉
                         so thicke in
such multitude, as it were the Hayle that falleth from the
Cleudes: and on the other side hée gotte thi
                           •
                        tie thousande
men on land, who assayled the Christians so 
                           〈◊〉
                        , as
yong Cariteos was slaine, and a great 
                           〈◊〉
                         of noble

personages, which was the cause that the Christians retired
to the verie Gates of the Citie. The Prince Caniano aduertised
of his sonnes death, and the great daunger wherein the

                           〈◊〉
                        , issued foorth of the Cittie with eight thousande
Horsmen, and foure thousand hardie Archers, who like hungry
Tygers ranne vpon the Turkes, beating them to the
earth in such heapes, as twelue thousand of them were slain
at this encounter, and the rest repulsed backe to their ships,
where many entred for sauegard of their liues, and a great
number were miserably drown
                           •
                        d in the Sea.
                     At this mishap the King of Balisarca was greatly e
                           ••
                        
                        ged,
who with his power presently went on shore: the fight
enduring so cruell and bloudie thrée howres space, as neyther
side could be reputed likeliest of victorie. In this encounter
ended their liues, the King of Balisarca, his Sonne
Gueresin, and a great number of Cailiffes and Taborlanes
of Turkie: and of the Christians, the Prince Caniano,
with diuers other great Princes and Lords, whose deathes
are to this day lamented in Greece: yet were the Pagans
and Christians so animated one against another, as darke
night was the cause of their seperation. When the Emperour
vnderstood the death of his Sonne and Nephew, hée
was readie to die with conceit of griefe: but séeing the necessitie
of the time required other matter, then sorrowing
teares and vnprofitable lamentations, hée presently dispatched
Postes and Messengers, to haste
                           •
                         the succour was
comming from Christendome. In short time arriued a
mightie Christian power, and despight of the Turkes entred
the Cittie, when the Emperour presently sent tenne
thousand into the Field, and prouided a signall for the other,
to set fire among the Turkishe Fléete, at what time they
receiued the signe from the Cittie. The Infidelles séeing the
Christians to sallie abroad, left their Shippes and came to
méete them: whereupon the Christians diuided themselues
into squadrons, and running furiously on the Moores,
Arabies, and Assirians, made such hauocke and slaughter of

them, as happie was he coulde best defend himselfe. Then
suddainly was the signall of fire made, on the highest stéeple
in Constantinople, to the Emperours power wasting on
the Sea: which immediately launching among the Turkish
Fléete, suncke the greater part of them, and burned the rest
with their wilde fire. When the Turkes beheld this stratageme,
and that they were now destitute of any helpe, they
beganne to faint: so that at the comming of the Emperour,
who came himself vpon them, with a fresh sallie of fiue thousand
men, they were all slaine, except a fewe that escaped into
Galleyes, that brake from the rest vpon fight of the pollicie.
Great was the spoyle gotten by this conquest, which the
Christians taking with them, entred Constantinople, where
they gaue God thankes for their happie victorie.
                     But although the Emperour sawe his enemies vanquished,
after the Princes were departed that came to his
succour, right gréeueus was the losse of his Sonnes to him:
wherefore his Lordes aduised him, to send for his da
                           •
                        ghter
the Quéene Griana, and King Tarisius her husband, and to
commit the gouernment of the Empire to him. For the accomplishment
of this generall determination, the Duke of
Pera was appointed Lord Ambassadour, being one of the
most auncient Princes of Greece: who accompanied with
many noble Gentlemen, made such expedition in his iourney,
as hée arriued in Hungaria, before the King and his
Quéene Oriana, whose sorrowes may not be expressed for
the death of her brother. When they vnderstood the Emperours
pleasure, they resolued on their obedience, which caused
the King to sende for two of his Nephewes, who were
sonnes to the Duchesse of Ormeda his sister, the one named
Promptaleon, and the other Oudin, to be his Lieutenants
in Hungaria during his absence. Upon their presence, before
the Ambassador of Constantinople the King Tarisius tooke
their oathes, for their loyall and faithfull gouernment. But
because we must now reuiue matter long expected, as concerning
the noble Prince Florendos of Macedon, I am

loth to spende any further time in vaine, and will now report
what happened at Buda, during the time of this determination.
                  
                  
                     Chap. XXV.
                     
                        How the Prince Florendos of Macedon, accompanied
with none but his Cozin Frenato, departed from his
Countrey in a Pilgrims habit, iourneying in Hungaria,
where he killed the King Tarisius: and how he and the
Queene Griana were taken prisoners.
                     
                     
                        LOrdings, let vs nowe remember how
after that Palmerin was departed
from Macedon, hauing recouered
the health of the olde king Primaleon,
Father to the noble Prince Florendos,
who during the time of Palmerins
presence, was somewhat more
pleasant then of long time he had béene, appeasing his complaints
for the Princesse Griana, by the happie tidings of the
ancient knight, that sent the shéeld to Palmerin at his knighting.
But now Florendos hearing no newes of him, returned
to his former heauines, and languished much more then
euer he did: so that when the Macedonian Princes & Lords
pressed him with continuall request of marriage, that hee
might haue issue to succéede in the Kingdome, hee was constrained
by their importunitie, to make them promise of
their request, crauing a yéeres respite before, in which time
he intended to make a deuout voyage, whereto they consented
in respect of his promise. Nowe did he not demaunde

this time of his Subiects, for any desire he had to bée a Pilgrim,
or any superstitious zeals to the Spanishe Leather
Cape, Shooes, Frocke, and such like: but for he longed to sée
his swéete mistresse Griana, whom he serued in heart with
such loyall affection, as till death he would not marrie with
out her consent and licence.
                     The day being come that he would depart, he tooke his
leaue of all the Princes, Lords and Gentlemen, and accompanied
with Frenato Father to P
                              •
                           olome, both caped after
the manner of Pilgrimes: mounted on two Palfrayes of
small value, and without anie weapons, except each of them
a little short Dagger, departed the Cittie, making such
haste in their iourney, as they arriued at Buda, where as
then the King kept his Court, prouiding to set forwarde to
Constantinople. There were they lodged in one of the best
Osteries in the Cittie, and the next morning went to the
great Church, where the Quéene was euer woont to heare
diuine seruice: and so well it fortuned, that at the time
these two Pilgrims entred the Church, the Quéene her
selfe was in the Chappel. Florendos who was maruaileusly
disguised, stoode not in doubt to bee knowne: but séeing the
Chaplaine had begunne seruice, hypocritically he approched
to Aulta
                           •
                         with holie deuotion, to the ende hee might
the better beholde the Quéene. Regarding her swéete countenaunce,
he remembring the courtesies he sometime receyued
of her, and what excéeding affection as then shée bare
him: but now being in the custodie of another, and he out of
hope to haue any more gracious pittie, his spirits were so
wonderfully troubled, and so manie passionate sighes hée
breathes from his heart, as he fell downe in a swoune, that
euerie one reputed him for dead. The Quéen, who manie
times had noted his pit
                           •
                        ious lookes, commaunded Tolomestra
one of her Ladies, shée that had the charge of her in
the Tower of Constantinople, that shee should go vnderstand
the Pilgrims disease, and do the best to recouer him againe,
which Frenato had done before she came.
                     
                        
                        Tolomestra demanded of Frenata, the cause of his sicknes
                           ••
                        ,
who answered. Madame, we are newly come from the holy
voyage of Ierusa
                              •
                           em, and hee (who was wont to endure
many vehement alterations, which the contrary ayres by
the waye do
                           •
                         bréede) féelyng the freshe coolenesse of this
Church, hath therewit béene ouercome as it should appeare.
                     My friendes, quoth Tolomestra, withdrawe your
selues to the Court, and enquire for the Gallery, in which
place the Quéene dooth daily giue her almes: there shall
be prouided some remedie for you, and I will giue you certaine
precious Drugges, which shall héereafter comfort
you, when any such humour offendeth you. A thousand
thankes (good Ladie) sayd Frenato, we will doo as you haue
commaunded vs. Seruice béeing ended, they went to th
                           •
                        
Gallery, whither soone after came the Quéene, and opening
the Casement of her Window as shée was wont, stood
to behold the Almes giuen to the poore Pilgrims. Frenato
and his companion had gotten so neare the Windowe, that
the Quéene might easily heare any thing they sayd. After
most humble reuerence made, Florendos thus beganne.
Most excellent Quéene, renowmed beyond all other Ladies,
among so many of your daily charities, may it please you
to pittie the most poore and miserable Knight in the world?
The Quéene at these wordes knewe him, and was in such
feare least the King should know of his being there, as shée
could hardly sustaine her selfe, but satte downe on a Pallet
by Tolomestra, who séeing her suddaine alteration, sayd.
What ayle you Madame, that your colour changeth in such
sort?
                     Ah my trustie friende (quoth the Qu
                           •••
                        e) the Pylgrime
that swouned in the Church, is the 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        Florendos
of Macedon. I pray thée goe to him, and 
                           〈◊〉
                         him
presently to depart hence: for if the King come to the knowledge
of him, all the worlde cannot shéelde him from death.
For the rest, will him follow no further, what he lost by his

owne default: and that the sauour héeretofore graunted,
my duetie and honour now forbiddeth mée. Tolomestra entring
the Gallerie, saide the message to the Prince Florendos,
who vnderstanding this sharpe answere, shed manie
teares with gréefe, saying. Ah my déere Fréend Tolemestra,
desire my gracious mystresse Griana, that in requitall
of so manie tormenting passions, which nowe twentie
yéeres I haue patiently endured, shée will affoord me once
so speake with her, and kisse her hand before I depart. Tolomestra
brought this answere to the Quéene, perswading
her to heare him speake, which shée might do with safetie,
vnder colour of requesting to know the maruales of Palestine,
with the precious and worthie monuments of the holie
Citie.
                     I am content to graunt so much (quoth the Quéene) but
I greatly feare the issue of his spéeches, go then and cause
him secretly to enter. Ah gentle habit, where-under many
doe often beginne their delight, which in the ende proues
woorsse then Tragicall. The two Pilgrims béeing entred,
Florendos 
                        
                           •
                        ell on his knée before his Ladie, and kissing her
hand, sayd.
                     O my God, thy name be praysed through all worldes,
permitting mee to kisse these handes so long time desired.
Sée héere swéete Mistresse your Florendos, that with such
loyaltie hath loued you, and hitherto hath kept the fayth,
which hée vowed to you at Constantinople in your fathers
Pallace, and which no death can make me falsifie or change,
vnlesse you please to suffer me take another wise, wherein
I shall satisfie the importunate requests, which daylie th
                           •
                        
Lords of Macedon make to me for marriage, that I might
leaue them an heyre of my linage. Which is a matter so
grée
                           •
                        ous to me, in that I failed of you to whom I first gaue
my fayth, as I resolued neuer to take any other, which I
knowe not how I shall performe without losse of my life.
As he thought to haue procéeded further in spéeches, and
the Quéene hauing not answered one worde, vnhappily the

King entred, which the Quéene beholding, swouned with
feare. But she was immediately recouered by her Ladyes.
When the King séeing her in such estate, and in what secrecie
the two Pilgrim
                           •
                         talked with her, hée gathered some
suspition, and ouercome likewise with the force of iealousie,
saide.
                     Madame, what make you here at this time? and in
so slender companie of Ladies, how dare you stande talking
with these Straungers? I woulde gladly know the matter,
and what hath made them so bold to enter your Chamber?
Florendos séeing his affaires to growe from badde to
woorsse, and that his Ladie was so threatned, entring into
choler, he drew his Dagger from vnder his Frocke, and taking
the King by the bosome, said: Tarisius, I will not hyde
from thée who I am: it is more then twentie yéeres since I
promised thy death, and nowe I am come in person to performe
it. With these wordes he stabde the Dagger to his
heart, and downe fell Tarisius dead at his féete: which when
the Quéene saw, she on the other side fell in swoune again.
Frenato greatly amazed hereat, sayde to Florendos. For
Gods sake my Lord let vs shift for our selues, before this
misfortune bée blazed abroade. Content thy selfe, sayd Florendos,
neuer shall it bee reported that I left my Ladie to
suffer for mine offence: or that for the feare of death, which
is the ende of all mishaps, I will endure such intollerable
anguishes and torments.
                     Now by ill fortune one of the Pages of honour attended
on the King, and hauing séene this homicide, hastili
                           •
                        
ranne downe the stayres, crying aloude. Arme ye Knights,
arme ye, and reuenge the Kings death, who by a trayterous
Pilgrime is slaine in the Quéenes Chamber. Cardino
one of the Quéenes Squires, her brother that caried yong
Palmerin to the mountaine, had no leysure to take anie
other armes then a Sword and Shéelde, wherefore he was
the first that came to the Quéenes Chamber, where hee
found Florendos guarding the entraunce, who presentlie

knew him, saying. Depart my good Friend Cardyno, vnlesse
for the Quéenes loue I shal take thy life from thée. And
what art thou (sayde Cardyno) that knowest mee so well?
I am thy Fréend (quoth the Prince) the most vnfortunate
Florendos.
                     
                     Straunge it is my Lord, quoth Cardyno, that you durst
venture into this Court: but take héere my Swoorde and
Sheelde, and defend your selfe, for I thinke you will stande
in great néede thereof. In the means while, I wil go aduertise
the Duke of Pera of this mishap, he is your good fréend,
and by his meanes you may haue some succour: for oftentimes
haue I heard him say at Constantinople, that he wished
you as well as my Lord the Emperour. Dispatch then
said Florendos, that thou be not found héere with me, assuring
thée, if I may escape this daunger, I will acknowledge
this seruice to thine owne content. Florendos armed
himselfe with the Sword and Shéeld, whereof hée was so
glad, as if hée had béene backed with manie trustie fréends:
vowing before he died, to make such a spoyle among his enemies,
as should remaine for an after memorie. Cardyno
went with all diligence to the Duke, and secretly acquainted
him with all this misfortune: whereat the Duke
greatly amazed, answered, I will do my vttermost for his
safetie, because full well he hath deserued it. And so accompanied with many Grecian Knights, he went to y• Quéenes
Chamber: and thrusting through the throng in despight of
them that guarded the stayres, bée got to the Chamber. At
the entrance whereof he found Florendos defending himselfe
with such manly courage, as nine or ten lay slaine at
his féete.
                     The Duke and his men caused the Hungarians to withdraw
themselues, saying: that himselfe would not suffer the
matter so to escape, for the offence ought to bee punished by
iustice, after the truth were knowne and thorowlie vnderstoode.
Hereupon the kings two Nephewes came in great
rage, saying to the Duke of Pera, that the Quéene and the

Pilgrime ought presently to die. What? quoth the Duke,
depart you likewise, your willes shall not héere stande for
Lawe, nor is the Quéene to bée intreated with such rigour.
                     So drawing his swoorde, and his Knights likewise,
resisted the Hungarians, so that manie of them were slaine,
vntill certaine Gentlemen came, who louing and estéeming
the Quéene, appeased this tumult. Then was it agréed vpon,
that the Duke should take him into his charge, who had
murthered the King, on whom such punishment should bee
inflicted as the cause required: and héereupon the Duke
tooke his oath before all the companie. In this sort the
Kinges Nephewes were quieted, who presentlie departed
the Chamber, causing the dead and wounded to bee conuayed
thence, that the people might receiue no further occasion
of offence, and the Duke comming to the Prince Florendos,
said.
                     Yéeld your selfe to me my Lord, and I will promise you
on the faith of a Prince, that I will maintaine both your
right and the Quéenes, whatsoeuer daunger I hazard therby.
If you will not, assure your selfe, that your bodies cannot
suffice the villainous surie of these people, for they haue
confidently sworne your deathes I know my Lord, (quoth
Florendos) that you speake the trueth, and I repose my
trust on your nobilitie, which is such, as you will not suffer
anie iniury to the man béeing in your gū
                        
                           •
                        rde: I yéelde my
selfe to you, and earnestly intreate you not to imprison the
Quéene, for (on mine honour) she is guiltlesse. And if any
offence hath béene committed, it was by me: yet not without
iust cause, and in defence of mine own life. My comming
hither-was, because I am newly returned from Ierusalem,
and remembring the manifold honours, which sometime I
receyued of my Ladie in the Emperour her Fathers Court:
in my passing by, I was destrous to do my dutie to her. At
the instant time I was saluting her, the King came into
the Chamber, who moued with an auncient hatred, which

you verie well know, would haue slaine me, but I preuenting
his intent with the ayde of my weapon, bestowed that
on him which he wished to mee. I beléeue well what you
haue sayd, quoth the Duke, yet must you néedes abide triall
in this case.
                     
                        Frenato perceyuing his Cozin in such daunger, sought
about the Chamber for some weapon to defende him: and
finding the Kings Sworde by the Quéenes bed side, shewed
it to the Duke, that he might giue the better credite to the
Princes wordes. Yet notwithstanding all their excuses,
these two Pilgrims were taken into sure custodie, and shut
vp both togither in a strong Towre, which was verie long
before they could accomplish, because in leading them thither,
many sought meanes to kill them, and they had done
it, but that the Duke verie strongly defended them.
                  
                  
                     Chap. XXVI.
                     
                        The sorowfull complaints made by the Queene Griana, seeing
her Hu
                              •
                           band dead, and her friend taken. And howe
the Duke of Pera conueyed her to Constantinople, causing
Florendos and Frenato to be brought thither by fiue
hundred armed Knights.
                     
                     
                        VErie sorrowfull was the Quéene Griana,
séeing so manie misfortunes succéede
one another, as euerie houre
her death was expected: and sa
                           •
                        s she
woulde haue committed violence on
her selfe, but that Cardyno with diuerse
Knights attended on her, that
none of the Kinges kindred shoulde

offend her, while the Duke of Pera led Florendos and Frenato
to the Tower. At whose return, as he thought to comfort
her, shée fell on her knées before him saying: Ah noble
Duke of Pera, if euer pittie had place within your heart, for
Gods sake make an end of my vnfortunate life: and execute
on me (without any fauour) the sharpest rigour of equall
iustice, not suffering longer life to a woman so dispised and
miserable.
                     O God, doost thou permit a happie life, to enioy so bad
an end? Thou that onely knowest the inward secrets of the
heart, séeing I stand suspected in this treason, let my spéedie
death deliuer mine innocencie. Ah inconstant Fortune, that
in my yonger yéeres was so aduerse to mee, how might I
credite thy continuall mallice but by this strange and vnexpected
accident? Ah gentle Prince Florendos, it was not
for loue that thou camest to sée mée, but for a secret hatred
more then deadly, séeing that by thée (and that with great
shame) I shall remaine for euer defamed. Where was that
loyaltie, and the great feare to offend mée, which sometime
thou séemedst to haue? Knowest thou not that in a royall
and noble minde, one onely note of infamie is an extreame
torment? Doubtlesse, if thou wouldest well consider the
wrong thou hast done me, thou shalt finde it to excéede all
other worldly iniuries. But I may perswade my selfe,
that my destinie was such, for being long since by thée dishonoured,
it must fall out for a finall conclusion, that by thée
also I shall receiue death.
                     In this maner the Quéene complained, with such effuse
of teares and bitter sighes, as the Duke pitying her
case, sayd. I beséech you Madame, to endure this mishap paciently,
séeing now it cannot be recalled, and consider that
these teares and lamentations can yéelde yée no amendes,
but rather threaten daunger, and will in the ende not onely
weaken your bodie, but hazard desperation. The King is
dead, he must be buried: Florendos hath offended, hée shall
be punished: your people are wounded, they must be cured.

Offende not then your selfe with these bootlesse regr
                           ••
                        tes:
but commaund that the proofe of your innocencie be followed.
Hereupon the Duke caused preparation for the funerall
pompe, and brought the king to the bed of honor, not without
many teares and lamentations of his Subiects. When
the obsequies were finished, Promptaleon and Oudin came
and exclaimed on the Duke, because hée brought not the
Quéene and Florendos to open punishment. My friends,
quoth the Duke, haue I not heretofore tolde you, that wée
must not inconsiderate
                           •
                        y put such persons to death▪ let the
Councell bee called togither, and as they determine I will
procéede.
                     Then were all the Princes and Lordes assembled, among
whome the Duke was intreated to speake his opinion,
which hée did in this maner. I thinke it con
                           •
                        enient vnder
correction of you my noble Lords, that the Prince Florendos,
and the Queene, ought to bée sent to my Lord the
Emperour, and there to haue iustice extended on them, as
well for the sure
                           •
                        ie of your owne persons, as for the conseruation
of the Realme. For except iustice and by probable
causes you condemne the Prince Florendos, hardly may
you perswade the Macedonian Princes: beside, the Lordes
may say, that without hearing hee was cut off, and likewise
by his open enemies. Againe thinke you that the Emperour
will let passe in silence so great a wrong, to punish
his Daughter, and not arquaint him with her offence? Considering
this indifferently, you shall fin
                           •
                         your selues on eyther
side endangered: your goods will be spoyled, your liues
endamaged, for hardly can you resist agaynst such power.
So well coulde the Duke sette foorth his discourse, with
confirmation of Hystories both auncient and moderne, that
in despight of the Kings Nephewes it was concluded, how
the prisoners should be sent to Constantiople. If they were
hereat offended, it is not to bee doubted, but hearing the
Counsu
                           •
                        les resolution, prepared themselues to goe to the
Emperour, determining a sharpe and seuere accusation:

trusting so much in their strength and prowesse, that if the
Emperour (for proofe of the cause) shoulde committe it is
the Combat, they easily thought to compasse their intent.
So were the two Pilgryms committed to the Dukes Nephew,
with an hundred Knights of Greece for their guard,
and foure hundred Hungarians, who would néedes followe
for the loue they bare the Quéene: she béeing maruellous
                           •••
                        
fauoured in her countrey, for her many vertues, and chiefly
charitie.
                     The Quéene her selfe, with the yong Princesse Armida
her Daughter, and all her Ladyes and Gentlewomen,
were committed to the Duke of Pera his charge, and
the rest of the traine that came with him in the Ambassade.
When the Quéene vnderstoode shée should be caried
to the Emperour, shée 
                           〈◊〉
                         further out of pacience then shée
was before, rather desiring a thousand deaths, then is come
with this reproach before her Father: yet notwithstanding
all her intreaties, shee was conueyed into a Litter, and
not so much as a pinne left about her, for feare of inconuenience.
                     To comfort her, her Daughter Armida was placed in
the Litter, without whose companie, such was her gréets
to come before her Parents, as shée was diuerse times in
daunger of death by the way. But the yong Princesse béeing
twelue or thirtéene yeares of age, coulde so well comfort
her sorrowfull mother, as her talke expelled many bitter
imaginations. If the Quéene was in heauinesse, wée
must thinke Florendos griefes nothing inferiour, séeing
his Ladie led in such sort, and accused of a crime wherein
none but himselfe was culpable: yet made hee no account,
béeing reuenged of his auncient enemie, so the Quéene
were deliuered, though himselfe endured the death. But
nowe are they come to Constantinople, yet not so soone, but
the Nephewes of the deceassed King were before them,
where they had blazed a false and most shamefull reporte.
And but for the aduise of certaine noble Princesse, that

fauoured Florendos and the Quéene Griana, vpon the trothlesse
spéeches of these twaine: the Emperour had concluded
to burne his Daughter and the Prince so soone as they
came, such horrible slaunders had these traytours spread of
them. Namely, that the King was murdered, finding
Griana committing adulteris with Florendos, At which
words the Emperour was so enraged, that like a man depriued
of reason, he violently pulled himselfe by the heard,
saying.
                     Ah wre
                           •
                        ched and infortunate olde man, haue the heauens
suffered 
                           〈◊〉
                         thus long life, that after the death of thy
sonnes Caniano and yong Cariteos, thou must sée thy daughter
conuicted of treason, adulterie, and murder? If I haue
had some comfort by my Sonnes, lying now in the Hearse
of honour, for maintenance of the Christian faith: doubtlesse
this iniurie is so great and enorme, as no ioy or comfort
can now abide in mée. Ah my louely Daughter Griana,
whom I had good hope would bee the onely support of
mine age, and for that cause sent to haue thy companie:
commest thou now with such shame and monstrous report?
Florendos, if héeretofore against the Turke Gamezio thou
didst me seruice, with great wrong hast thou now reuenged
thy selfe, taking from mee that good which thou canst
neuer restore againe. But let it suffice, that knowing the
truth of thy disordered dealing, such shall bee thy punishment,
as shall remaine for perpetuall memorie. The Empresse
likewise forsaking her Chamber, came and knéeled
before the Emperour, desiring him to put Florendos to the
first councell, and be to be dispatched with dilligence. At
which words the choler of olde Remicius augmented, hee
answering.
                     Madame, for Gods sake get
                           •
                        e you gone, for you are the
onely cause of my dishonour: and then you beganne it, when
you would not suffer the Prince Florendos of Macedon
to match with our daughter, but gaue her to your Nephew
perforce, and contrarie to her owne liking. The Prince

séeing him so offended, intreated her to depart, perswading
her that the accusers of Griana were her cheefest enemies,
and that might easily be gathered by their proude and maleuolent
detractions, which happily would proue false rather
then truth. For if they might heerein spéede of their
purpose, and theyr accusation passe for currant, the princesse
Armida should be disinherited, and themselues be the
onely heyres of the Kingdome. This was their principall
drift, not any deuotion to reuenge their Uncles death, as
they in outward shew declared: and hereupon all opinions
were set aside vntill the next day, when the prisoners arriued.
                  
                  
                     Chap. XXVII.
                     
                        How Florendos and Griana were brought to Constantinople,
and there were appointed by the Emperours Councell,
to purge themselues of their accusation, by the combate
of two knights, against their accusers Promptaleon
and Oudin.
                     
                     
                        THe Duke being arriued at Constantiople,
immediately caused the Queene
Griana and Armida her daughter, to be
conducted to the Pallace, by manie
noble Lords and Gentleman. When
Griana saw shée must néedes go before
her father, she began again her wonted
pittifull complaints, notwithstanding
shee was so comforted by the Lordes of Greece, by theyr
solemne promise to defende her right, as shee encouraged
her selfe, and comming before her Father, fell on her

knées, and thus beganne. My gracious Lord and father, inconstant
fortune euermore hath beene, and still will continue,
a most cruell enemie of them of highest calling: and
no further néede I speake for proofe of my words, then the
History of your last warres against the Turks, and the
present slaunder of mine enemies against mée. I cannot
likewise forget that twentie yéeres and more are nowe expired,
since (to my great gréefe) I was seperated from you:
but with much more excéeding heauines am I now returned,
if by my misaduenture you receiue any impeach, or
I deserue to loose the name of your Daughter. Therefore
my Lord, forgetting the name and office of a Father, let
naturall regarde be exempted from me, and exercise on mée
tyrannous 
                           •
                        orments, with the greatest rigour that may be
de
                           •
                        ised. Yet all too little in respect of my deserts, not for any
offence in this matter, as God is my witnesse, but for
the suspition of the common and vulgare people, more credulous
of the faults of Princes and noble Ladies, then of
their discréete and sober vertues. Neuerthelesse, receiuing
death for a matter neuer committed, and with patience,
despight of mine enemies, it will redound to my immortall
honour.
                     Upon these spéeches, the Princesse Armida making
great reuerence to the Emperor, and with the teares trickling
downe her chéekes, saide. Dread Lord, my chéefest desires
euermore haue béene to sée your maiestie, but so it
falleth out nowe, that in stéede of ioy and pleasure, it is with
gréefe, teares, and tribulation. Yet gracious Lord, for the
first request that euer I made to your highnesse, I beséech
you to credit me, that my mother hath committed no treason,
or any dishonour to the deceased King my Father, neither
euer permitted any man entrance into her Chamber,
but hee whom now the question cencerneth, and at that
time, I with these other Ladies were present, and are credible
witnesses of the whole action. Such efficacie wrought
her words in the Emperours minde, as he beganne to defie

the accusation, perswading himselfe that it was nothing
but falshood: and louingly taking the yong Princesse vp
by the hand, addressed his spéeches in this manner to the
Quéene.
                     Well hast thou sayde, that Fortune hath béene too
contrarie towards thee, for when my whole hope remained
in thée, and that the Crowne of mine Empire should haue
béene placed on thy head, thou hast fallen into such wounding
reproch, as both thou and I shall be for euer dishonoured.
My Lorde, quoth Griana, vnder correction, and sauing
the reuerence of your imperiall Maiestie, neuer imagine
the case any thing to your defame: if you credite not mine
enemies or common report, from whence is engendred all
vntruth. This speake I not to exc
                           •
                        se my death, which I
know to be the refuge for the desolate, and ende of al afflictions,
but to declare mine owne innocencie, and that mine
honour shall at length be founde vnspotted. But now consider
good Father, with what violence you enforce mee to
match with the King Tarisius, my heart being still against
it, and the néerenesse of linage betwéene vs forbidding it.
Nor were you ignorant of my loue to the Prince Florendos,
the most gentle Knight of Greece, and whose only trauaile
hither was to make mee his Wife: all this will I
not denie, nor can my heart permit to passe in silence. Notwithstanding,
by your commaundement I was constrayned
to forsake my best beloued, and take the man I was
not borne to fancie. After I sawe it must néedes be so, acknowledging
him my Lord and Husband, and my selfe his
Wife and Subiect, neither in word or déede, nor so much
as very thought, did I dispose my selfe to any disobedience,
but liued in most loyall and h
                           •
                        nourable dutie. Uerie truest
is, that he founde Florendos talking with mee, but I protest
before Heauen, that it was with such chaste and modest
regarde, as the Sister might conferre with her Brother.
And so little time our talke endured, as I had not the meane
to answere the Prince, for the King comming in, and pr
                           •
                        
                        uoked

with frenzie or wicked iealous
                           •
                        ie, woulde haue slaine
him, whereby such fortune fell out, as the King receiued
what he would haue giuen. Nor can Florendos hée worthily
blamed for comming to sée me, in respect of the long
time since our last companie: beside, hauing not forsaken
his Pylgrims wéede, wherein hee trauailed to the holie
Lande, he came to acquaint me with the maruailes in his
iourney.
                     Sée héere in brée
                           ••
                         the whole truth of his Historie,
and if the Kings Nephewes auouch otherwise, I say (my
Lord) they lie falsely. In this respect, as well to prote
                           •
                        t
mine owne honour as the Princes, I humbly desire your
Maiestie, that our innocencie may be discided by Combate:
for such is my hope in a rightfull cause, as I shall find some
Knight to fight for me. The Lords of the Empire were altogether
of the same opinion, and instantly desired the
Emperour, to graunt his Daughter her lawfull request:
whereto hee answered that he would take counsell thereon,
and iustice should be doone her as it ought. Héereupon
the Emperour went into his Chamber, and the Quéene
was brought to the Empresse her Mother, where the poore
Lady was assaulted afresh, for shée was no sooner entred
the Chamber, but her Mother thus beganne. I knowe not
Daughter how badly thou hast béene counselled, that since
the day of thine espousall to the Prince Tarisius, who loued
thée so déerely, thou hast continued such hatred against
him, that at length thou art become the onely cause of his
death.
                     Madame, quoth the Quéene, you speake your pleasure,
but (in regarde of my reuerence to you) I aunswere, that I
neuer though it. Wherefore I intreate you to forbeare
such spéeches, and if you consider all things well, your selfe
will be founde in greater fault then I. For con
                           •
                        rarie to my
solemne promise which I had made to the Prince of Macedon,
you compelled mee to marrie with him: and if Florendos
had the opportunitie, and in defence of his owne

person hath slaine him, ought you then to impute the crime
to me? With these words the Empresse held her peace, and
sate conferring with the yong Princesse Armida: in meane
while came the Duke of Pera, who had the Quéene in
charge, and conducted her to her Chamber, and afterward
(by the Emperours commandement) he shut Florendos into
a strong prison.
                     The next day, Promptaleon and Oudin came to the
Pallace, where with great and audacious impudencie they
came before the Emperour, saying. Why haue you not my
Lord, prouided the fire to burne your Daughter, and her adulterer
Florendos? Soft and fayre, aunswered the good
Remicius, bee not so hastie, I finde them not so faultie as
your accusation deliuereth: for no other harme was committed
then talking together, and because Florendos was
disguised, is that a consequence my daughter must die? Nor
will I encurre with infamous report, in putting such a
Prince to death, without hearing how he can answere for
himselfe: you therefore my Lord of Pera, go fetch Florendos,
that hee may answere to their propositions. The Duke
obeyed his commandement, and brought the Prince so
spent with extreame gréefe, because hee had caused the
Quéene into such danger, as hardly he could sustaine himselfe,
but after he had with great humilitie, prostrated himselfe
before the Emperour, he began in this manner. Most
mightie Loed and Emperour of Greece, maruaile, not that
with such heauinesse I come before your maiestie, when in
stéede of dooing you seruice according as my dutie commandeth
me, I bring you cause of offence and displeasure. Neuerthelesse,
I repose my self on your benignitie and princely
iustice, wherein I must intreate you, to haue regard on
the Quéene your Daughters innocence, for the fault that
is committed, if it deserue to be called a fault, was doone
without the Quéenes knowledge, or so much as a thought
of the matter on her part, before it happened. Moreouer,
there is none of so harsh iudgement or reason, but will consider

what familiaritie and friendship, both passe betwéene
Princes and Ladies in occasions of honour. Which may
serue to answere the cause of my comming to sée the Quéen,
being thereto bound by dutie and honest loue, wherewith
in my yonger yéeres I faithfully serued her. And this I
did without any iniurie to her honor, much lesse occasion of
offence to the King, which hee would néedes interprete in
that sort, when with so good indiscretion hée came and assailed
me.
                     These are fables, quoth Promptaleon, for the conspiracie
and treason betwéene thée and the Quéene is so manifest,
as euerie one knowes it. And if the Emperour doo not
this day consumate your liues both together in one fire:
he offereth the greatest iniurie that euer Prince did, and
before the whole world wee will héereafter accuse him.
Darest thou maintaine by Combate in fielde, saide Florendos,
what thou with such brauerie affirmest in this Hall?
that will I by mine honour, quoth Promptaleon, and let
the Knight come that dares aduenture, on this condition,
that if I be the conquerour, the Quéene and thou may be
                           •
                        
burned as ye haue deserued, and the Princesse Armida declared
not legitimate, and so disinherited of the Kingdome.
Now hast thou reuealed thy villany, saide Florendos, and
for the last condition doost thou follow the cause so earnestly,
rather then by any matter of truth and equitie: but
thou art deceiued in thine intent, and thy death (villaine)
shall deliuer assurance of her succession. So please my Lord
the Emperour of his grace, to prolong the day of Combate
till I haue recouered some health: my selfe alone, against
thée and thy Brother, will prooue ye false Traytours, and
that maliciously yée haue accused the Quéene. The Emperour
seeing the Prince so weake and sickly, and yet with
so good courage willing so defence his Daughters wrong,
resolued himselfe that shee was innocent. Remembring
then his noble seruices in defende of his Empire, and hows
iniuriously he denied him his Daughter: he was mooued in

such sort as he could not refraine from teares, thinking for
vengeance of that offence, that heauen had iustly permitted
the death of Tarisius, wherefore beholding Flo
                              •
                           e
                              •
                           dos
with pittifull lookes, pronounced the sentence in this manner.
You Promptaleon and Oudin, Nephewes to our deceased,
déere, and beloued sonne, the King of Hungaria, shall
mainteine your words in open Fielde, against two such
Knights, as my Daughter and the Prince Florendos can
deliuer on their behalfe, and that within twelue dayes after
this instant, one of which the Prince himselfe shall bée,
if he be not furnished with another to his liking: alwayes
prouided, that the vanquished shall be declared Traitors,
and attainted of the crime of Lese Maiestatis, and so punished
according to the exigence of the case. The two Brothren
accepted these conditions, béeing so farre ouercome
with their owne pride, as they reputed themselues the most
valiant Knights of the world. Florendos féeling himselfe
so weake of body, would gladly haue demaunded a longer
day, but the sentence being giuen, the Emperour likewise
promising to appoint another knight in his stéede, hée
was contented, and committing all to the Emperors pleasure,
was carried backe againe to prison in such pensiuenesse,
as he was iudged not able to liue til the combat day.
The Quéene likewise was kept in sure guarde, despayring
howe she shoulde finde a Knight, that would aduenture on
her behalfe in fight, because the strength and prowesse of the
Challenger was so renowmed. Leauing thus these two
louers in doubts and feares, let vs returne where we left
before, to noble Palmerin, that hee may bring them some
better comfort.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. XXVIII.
                     
                        How Palmerin hauing staid with his Ladie fiue dayes, in so
great pleasure as his heart could desire, fearing to be discouered
to the Emperour, tooke his leaue of her, promising
to begin the search of Trineus and Ptolome.
                     
                     
                        
                           POlynarda hauing her Fréend in her
custodie, would not presume so farre
vpon her selfe, or the faithfulnesse of
her Ladies, as shée would suffer him
to stay there in the day time: and doubting
likewise least his comming in the
night should be espyed, committed the
whole matter in such trust to Bryonella, as they performed
their ioyes without any impeachment. During these
delights and amourous contentments, which these timorous
Louers passed togither, the Princesse among other
talke rehearsed to her Fréend, how the King of Fraunce
sent his Ambassadours to the Emperour, to treate on the
marriage betwéene her and his eldest Sonne, as also her
Brother Trineus with his Daughter Lucemania. And
howe importunate the Empresse had béene with her, discouering
what honour and felicitie it should bée to her, to bée
Quéene of so great a Kingdome as Fraunce is. And trust
mée my Lord, quoth shée, I know my Parents are so affected
to this alliaunce, as if my Brother Trineus were come, I
know no meane whereby to excuse my selfe. Alas Madame,
quoth Palmerin, herein you may consider, if the Emperour
by violent force constraine you héereto, what continuall
gréefe it will bée to your Seruaunt Palmerin? What torment?

What tyrannous paines of strange conceit, may equall
themselues with the verie least of my passions? nor
can I any way bee able to endure them. The doubtfull
feares of this misfortune strooke to his heart, with such an
impression, as hee fell in a swoune betwéene his Ladies
armes, shée embracing him with such ardent affection, as
the soule of the poore tormented Louer, séeling with what
equall desire his Ladie requited him, receiued fresh strēgth
into his languishing bodie, and béeing come to his former
estate, the Princesse said. Alas my Lord, at the time I supposed
to be in assuraunce with you, and to thinke on no imaginations,
but new pleasures and delights, forgetting the
regarde you haue long continued, in expectation of the wished
fortunate houre, will yée bée nowe the cause of my
death? Thinke you, that if loue bée so violent on your behalfe,
it excéedeth not a thousand times more in mée? Beléeue
me, you men make your vaunts of the great passions,
feares and doubts you haue to offende your Ladyes, whom
to serue loyally you haue especially chosen: but in no wise
may these oppressions be compared to ours. Where is hée among
ye, who hath experimented, howe great the paine of
dishonor is, and can couer his extreame loue with dissimulation?
What a death is it to constraine violence agaynst it
selfe? to containe the piercing eye, and subdue an heart so
affectionate, as bringeth death to the rest of the bodie: if
shee shewe not some part of her desire, by lookes (the faithfull
and secrete messengers) to him she hath chosen, loueth, and
wisheth? The torment of the will like wise, when one dare
not come in presence, nor behold her fauoured, to languish,
and yet may séeke no meane of helpe: all these insupportable
miscries we poore Ladies must endure, béeing giuen
by nature, or forced for a custome. Wherefore my Lorde,
present not me with your passions, considering each thing
as it ought, they may not be compared to the least of mine:
for loue who hath ouermaistred me, reigueth with such resolute
authoritie, as I must sooner die, then offer you anie

wrong, séeing that as my Lord and Husband I haue elected
you, and bestowed those fauours on you which are most desired,
to wit, willing obedience, and that (then which) nothing
is more precious. Hauing then made you soueraigne
of my selfe, the Prince of Fraunce cannot enioy an other
mans right. And if my Father vsing his authoritie, shall
enforce mée, although it be gréeuous to mée, I will tell him
what hath happened, and no menaces whatsoeuer shall alter
mine opinion.
                     
                        Palmerin séeing his Ladie so firme and loyall, was not
a little ioyfull, thus answering. Doubtlesse my deare and
most gracious Mistresse, hitherto I durst presume on my
selfe, that by my manifolde loyall seruices, I shoulde one
day deliuer recompence, for some part of the honours you
haue done mée: but nowe I perceiue, that abounding in
your graces, you depriue me of all meanes to acknowledge
your bountie, which commonly men desire to shew by their
obedience, nor shall I be able to deserue the inestimable value,
contained in the simplest worde of your last most honorable
promise.
                     Nowe the Princesse discerning by the Window, that
Aurora Phoebus his faire Porter, began to let foorth the
morning light, and prouide way for his Maisters iourney,
withdrew her selfe to her Chamber, and quicklie layde her
downe by Brionella, who the better to hide her Ladies affayres,
dissembled that she had a feuer Quotidian, by which
meaue shée compassed to kéepe her Chamber, and entertained
Palmerin as her selfe desired. All this while Vrbanillo
brought newes from the Prince Olorico, who was so
desirous to sée the Princesse againe: as hée vowed not to
depart the Cittie, before hée accomplished what hée intended.
Palmerin who loued him as his Brother, was in great
doubt howe hée shoulde safelye bring it to passe: till
Bryonella, whose deuises were euer readyest, sayde. My
Lord, the man béeing no way able to hurt you, of the lesse
importance néede you make the matter: will yée sée howe

we will a little iuggle with the Emperour? Let it be sayd,
that the Prince is Cozin to Vrbanillo, and the cause of his
comming into his Countrey, was to séeke you: then because
he vnderstandes how my Ladie loues the Dwarffe,

                           〈◊〉
                         Maiestie (without anie doubt) will suffer the two Cozins
to take their leaue of her: will not this deuise then
shadow his séeing the Princesse? Without question, quoth
Palmerin, I shoulde neuer haue inuented such a subtiltie,
be it then as you haue determined, but with great politie,
that the Emperour misdoubt nothing, for if he discouer vs,
we are shamed for euer. Referre it to me, sayd Brionella, if
I discribe not their kindred cunningly, neuer beléeue that
a Woman can inuent a lie without studie. Brinella conferring
with the Dwarffe, layde downe the platforme in
such order, as the next day the Prince came before the Emperour:
when Vrbanillo on his knée desired leaue, that hée
might depart with his Cozin there present, to séeke his
Maister, in whose search he woulde trauaile, till he heard
certainly of his life or death.
                     Ah, Vrbanillo, quoth the Emperour, in such a luckie
howre maist thou goe, as to finde both him and my Sonne
Trineus, good leaue hast thou to goe when thou wilt. But
when I beholde you both aduisedly, verie hardly doo you
séeme to bée Cozins: for if there be anie alliaunce betwéene
you, it neuer came by the Fathers side: and if it be by the
Mother, the one was then married in Barbarie, and the other
in Scotland. Why my Lord (quoth the Dwarffe) rather
had I die, then tell an vntruth before your highnesse:
and with such protestations did the Dwarffe sooth his tale,
as they of greatest doubt gaue credite to him. Hereupon the
Emperour commaunded them to goe take their leaue of
his Daughter, willing her to write to her Brother. Hauing
obtained what they desired, they stayed not long in returning
thankes: but went presently to the Princesse Chamber,
where shée (aduertized of their comming) staid for them.
Honourable salutations on each side deliuered, a Chayre

was brought for the Prince, and he sitting downe by Polynarda,
she thus began. Albeit my Lord I am verie loath to
forgoe my Seruaunt: yet hauing found him so honest, and
for the good will I wish to all his kindred, especially you,
who haue enterprised to séeke his Maister and my Brother,
I am the better contented to part with him. If the
Prince commended her beautie, when being ambushed hée
sawe her passe by: what may wee imagine of his opinion
nowe? For beholding her, the comfort of her long absent
Fréende, had called all her beauties togither, enriched
with so many swéete and ami
                           •
                        ble graces, as hee coulde
not repute her of humaine linage, but rather some Angell
discended from heauen, to make the glorie of Palmerin more
ample: whereupon, to deceiue the Ladies béeing present, hée
returned this answere. Undoubtedly Madame, if I and all
mine had spent our soules in your seruice, we should holde
our selues sufficiently recompenced, with the princely fauor
you affoord our Cozin, which he is no way able to deserue.
And perswade your selfe faire, Princesse, that if he be your
obedient Seruaunt, my selfe am no lesse, in all things that
your excellencie shall please to commaunde mee: so that if
there were not vrgent occasions to excuse my departure, it
would be my onely content to remaine at your disposition.
Yet such is my hope, that this gréefe shall bee changed into
ioy by a spéedie returne, when wee shall bring the Prince
Trineus and our noble Maister Palmerin. The sooner, the
better welcome will they be, quoth the Princesse, for therin
consisteth my chéefest comfort. And after many other spéeches
betwéene them, she gaue him manie rich gifts, wherewith
he helde himselfe so honoured, as if he had gained the
Monarchie of Asia: so kissing her hande, the Prince with
his newe Cozin, returned to his lodging. Now was it
concluded betwéene Palmerin and the Princesse, because
the Empresse on the morrow would come to sée her daughter,
that he should depart the same way he came, wherefore
the hower béeing come that hée shoulde passe the Wall,

                        Polinarda thus spake. Nowe is the time (my Lorde) that
you must leaue me, and I be forced to consent, because there
is no remedie: but perswade your selfe, that with this parting
begins my sorrowes. Yet if I knowe where you trauailed,
my gréefe woulde be the 
                           〈◊〉
                        , and my life prolonged
with better hope: but béeing vncertaine of your way,
and knowing what misfortunes and daungerous perilles,
may incounter you in vnknowne Countries, I knowe not
howe I shall dissemble my torments. Notwithstanding,
swéete Fréende, if your stay be long, send Vrbanillo againe,
to comfort poore Bryonella, and myselfe: for loosing the
onely maintenaunce of our languishing liues, impossible is
it but our spirits will soone forsake their miserable habitations.
For Gods sake Ma
                           •
                        ame quoth Palmerin, neuer talke
of such a separation, for the remembraunce thereof, is death
to me: and it so offendeth mee to sée you in this perturbation,
as I loose both courage and hope of well dooing. Continue
then the humour you haue done since my comming,
that I beholding you pleasaunt, may be comforted thereby
during the search of your Brother, which I hope will bée
both short and sudden. Otherwise, before the earth bée readie
for mée, I shall bée forced to take vp my endlesse Hostage.
So after many swéete kisses, and gracious courtesies
passed betwéene them, they tooke their leaue each of
other, with such effusion of teares, as the verie inwarde
soule bemoned their departing. So with his Ladder of
Cordes hee gotte ouer the wall againe, and came to the
lodging where he left Olorico: then arming themselues,
they rode away in great haste, because they feared to bee
knowne by any.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. XXIX.
                     
                        Howe after Palmerin was departed from his Ladie, there
appeared to him one of the Fayries of the Mountaine Artefaeria,
who declared to him part of his fortunes following.
And of a Combat which he and Olorico had against
ten Knights.
                     
                     
                        GReat haste in their iourney made these
two knights, so that in short time they
came into the Kingdome of Hungaria,
where passing through a great forrest,
they ascended a high Mountaine, at
what time the ayre béeing calme and
cleare, was suddainly obscured by manie
darke Clowdes, and such outragious windes and
rayne beganne, as they were glad to shrowde themselues
vnder certaine Pine Trées néere at hande. Hauing
there rested themselues a while, they behelde a verie
thicke mis
                           •
                        e about a Fyrre Trée, and heard withall a
verie terrible thunder: and the fogge somewhat clearing,
they behelde a comely Ladie vnder the Trée, whereat they
were strooke into no little admiration, yet Palmerin desirous
to vnderstand the effect of this aduenture, made towards
the Trée, when the Ladie began in this maner to
him.
                     
                        Palmerin d'Oliua, meruaile not at this accident, which
hath happened onely for thy sake and profite. Heretofore
I came to thée on another Mountaine, where I and my
Sisters healed the woundes thou didst receiue by the Serpent.
At this time I am come to thée, so wish thée followe

thy iourney begunne: assuring thée that they whom thou
séekest, are yet liuing, and in the custodie of Turkes and
Infidels: but before thou canst find them, thou shalt be deliuered
from death by him thou hatest most. And after thou
hast founde this fauour by him, hée shall ayde thée in restoring
from prison and death, thy best and dearest Fréendes:
and so I leaue thée to thy happie successe. Then suddainlie
vanished the Woman away, and coulde not afterwarde bée
seene againe, leauing Palmerin verie pensiue for what hée
had heard, which he estéemed to bée true, because hitherto
hée had found no lesse, all that the Sisters sayd to him on the
Mountaine Artifaeria.
                     
                     Returning to his companie, Olorico demaunded what
Goddesse had talked with him, and what made him on a
suddaine so chéerefull? Trust me my noble Fréend, quoth
be, the matter is such, as for all the Golde in the worlde, I
would not but haue knowne, which Vrbanillo can better
declare vnto you, then I am able: but because wée woulde
méete no more strange aduentures in this Mountaine, let
vs spéedily set forwarde on our iourney. All that day
they rode without any occasion to stay them, and the next
day likewise till towarde the Euening, when they espyed
tenne Knights comming before them, the formost of them
leading a Ladie, who made verie gréeuous and pitifull lamentations:
whereupon Palmerin clasped his Helmette,
desiring Olorico to do the like, because (quoth hée) for anie
thing I sée, we shall haue pastime with some daunger. The
Prince did as his Fréende requested him, and when the
Ladie was come somewhat neerer them, shée framed her
spéeches to them in this maner. Gentle Knights, for Gods
sake helpe me, for these Traitors haue 
                           •
                        orcibly brought me
hither: and to compasse their villainous intent, they haue
murthered my Husband and two of my brethren. Palmerin
without answering one word, approched to him that ledde
her, and gaue him such a rap on the pate, with a Mace that
hee carryed at his Saddle 
                           •
                        owe, as with the stroke he fell

dead to the earth, making him sure not to escape, during
the time that hee dealt with the other. Olorico had taken
his carryre against another of them, whom he encountred
so puissantly, as the Knight breaking his Launce, Olorico
thrust his quite through his bodie, whereof Palmerin being
glad, said.
                     To the rest noble Prince, for wee are sure two of them
can doo vs no harme. With such courage did these Gallants
bestirre themselues, as in lesse space then halfe an howre,
sixe more of them were slaine: for Palmerin neuer gaue
stroke, but either he brake an arme, head, or necke. The two
which were left, séeing the hard fortune of their fellowes,
would bide no further daunger, but tooke themselues to
flight with all the spéede they could. When the Lady sawe
her selfe deliuered of her enemies, she came and humbled
her selfe at Palmerins féete, earnestly desiring him not to
leaue her, but that it would please him to conuay her to her
Castle néere at hand: whereuppon Vrbanillo alighting,
holpe her to mount on one of the vanquished Knights Horses.
                     By the way shee rehearsed how hee that led her, had
of long time loued her, but because he was proude and of euill
conditions, her Father could not like of the match, but
gaue her to a yong Gentleman his neighbour, who was a
verie vertuous and worthie minded Knight. This seemed
displeasing to him that was refused, so that he brought nine
of his kindred and Friendes with him, and hid themselues
in ambush néere my fathers Castle, whereto I haue intreated
you to conduct me. They staying there thus vnknowne
to any all the night, and the most parte of the day, till

                           〈◊〉
                         husband, two of my brethren, and my selfe, tooke Horse,
intending to go hunt at the Riuers side, they séeing vs far
inough from any reskew, 
                           〈◊〉
                         set on vs, killed my
Husband and Brethren, and brought me away with th
                           •
                        m,
the Traitour himselfe saying, that after hee had 
                           〈◊〉
                        
mée of mine honour, he would commit me to the like vsage

by the Groomes of the Stable, who when they had satisfied
their vallainous willes, should put mée to cruell and
shamefull death.
                     Beléeue me Madame, quoth Olorico, you are happily
deliuered from such violence, and I thinke if all such like
Russians were so serued as they are, Ladyes might passe
through the Countrey safely and without danger. By this
time they were come to the Castle, where (because it was
night) the Bridge was drawne, but when the guard heard
that the Lady was come, it was presently let downe, and
one of them ranne to the Ladies mother, who fearing shée
had lost her Daughter, was now greatly comforted, especially
when shée vnderstoode, that they which had slaine her
Sonnes, were likewise killed themselues: and certainely
both the Mother and the Daughter reputed themselues so
beholding to these Knights, as they knew not in what sort
to entertaine them, whereby they might expresse their comfort.
                     Béeing very honourably vsed by these Ladies, after supper
they were conducted to their Chamber, where they reposed
themselues that night, and the next morning came
to take their leaue of the Ladies, to the no little gréefe
both of the one and the other. All this day they trauailed
without any aduenture, till at length they came to a goodly
fountaine, where they alighted to let their Horses pasture
a while: and hauing refreshed themselues with certaine
victualles that Vrbanillo had prouided for them, Palmerin
laide him downe and slept, and Vrbanillo by him, finding
themselues somewhat wearie with riding all the day. Olorico
being a yong Prince, and desirous to sée any strange
occasion, walked about into diuers places, regarding héere
and there the s
                           •
                        ituation of the Countrey, the Mountaines
and goodly Castles builded vppon them. Hee was no sooner
departed, but there arriued fiue armed knights, two of
them béeing they that escaped, when Palmerin so nobly deliuered
the Ladie, they hauing that night past lodged at his

Fathers house who ledde the Lady, and which Palmerin
first killed with his Mace. And thinking nowe to reueng
                           •
                        
themselues, had brought thrée of his Couzins in their company,
and watched at the Ladies Castle the comming forth
of the Princes, but their stomackes would not serue them
to meddle with them there, wherefore they followed them
all that day, till they behelde them seperated as you 
                           •
                        aue
heard.
                     When they sawe that Palmerin slept, one of them
(fearing least the noyse of the Horses should awake him)
alighted, and drawing his Sword, came there with to haue
slaine him: but by good fortune there arriued a Knight, who
had béene hunting there about all that day, and hée cried to
him with his Sword drawne. Ah villaine, kill not the man
that sleepes. The Traitour séeing this new come Knight
so braue a person, beganne to be afraide, and therefore slept
backe again a little, at what time Palmerin, by the knights
crie, awaked, and séeing him so néere that thought to giue
the mortall stroke, was greatly amazed, sodainely drawing
his sword to defende himselfe, not hauing the leysure
to put on his Helmet, by which occasion he receiued a small
wound vpon his head. The Knight séeing the cowardly
villainie of them that assailed Palmerin altogether, bestirred
himselfe so worthily among them, as hée that gaue the
wound died soone after vnder his sword. Whereupon the
foure Knights diuided themselues, two against Palmerin,
and two against him, who defended themselues so worthily,
and had brought their enemies into such danger, as they
two that before escaped, séeing to what danger the fight
would tende, gaue the spurs to theyr Horses, and galloped
away so fast as the horse could pace. By this time the prince
Olorico heard the Dwarfes clamours, béeing greatly afraide
of his maisters death, came running thither with
all spéede, when the Knight that had sauled Palmerins life,
sayde.
                     Noble Knight, well may you giue thanks to Heauen,

in that your enemies, who thought to kill you sléeping, are
foyled: for if God had not permitted my course this way,
without all doubt you had lost your life. But since it hath
béene my good happe to preuent your ominous fortune, I
must aduise yée heereafter to beware of like hazard: and
may it please you to accompanie me to a Castle within two
miles distance, your entertainment shall be good, and your
wounds cured by a Ladie very expert in Ch
                           ••
                        urg
                           •
                        rie. I
accept your offer gentle Sir, quoth Palmerin, with right
good will, as well to haue your friendly companie, as to
shéelde you from any other such like villanies, who happily
may séeke your harme for this noble fauour. So they rode
on altogether, Palmerin remembring the wordes of the
Fairie Ladie, and could not imagine who the knight should
be that had so honourably preserued his life: this made him
more to maruaile, that hée should be his enemie, whom (to
his remembrance) hee had neuer séene in any place before.
                     To put him from these cogitations, Olorico ashamed
of his absence in such a néedfull time, came to Palmerin
with these words. Certes my noble Friende, I am henceforth
vnworthie to beare armes, séeing that in such daunger
I left your companie: vnhappie that I am, might not
former experience teach me what sodaine aduentures doo
often happen to Knights errant? what punishment may
be sufficient for my hainous offence? Leaue such spéeches
to Women, quoth Palmerin, for if we kn
                           •
                        we before what
would happen afterward, neuer should we fall into any inconueniences,
but it is sufficient that we haue so well escaped,
and let God haue the glorie for so happie deliuerance.
By this time they were come to the Castle, and entring
the base Court, the Seruants came to take their Horses
to the stable: meane while the Knight himselfe went to
aduertise the lady of the other knights arriual, saying. Faire
Leonarda, I pray you vouchsafe the best honour and entertainment
you can deuise, to two Gentlemen I haue héere

brought with me, for I imagine by their rich armes and
courtly behauiour, that either they are Princes, or discended
of very honorable parentage. Trust me my Lord, quoth
she, for your sake I will endeuor my selfe to welcome them
as they ought.
                     And comming into the hall to salute them, after many
courtesies deliuered on either side, the Lady séeing Palmerins
armour besmeared with bloud, by reason of the wound
he receiued on his hea
                           •
                        , saide. I feare my Lord you are very
sore hurt, therefore the sooner it be séene to, the better ease
you shall finde. Héereupon her selfe holpe to vnarme him,
and afterward brought him into a goodly Chamber, where
when shee had staunched his bléeding, and bound vp the
wound, he was laide in a maruailous rich bedde prouided
for him, she promising within ten dayes and lesse to restore
him so well, as he would at pleasure trauaile without any
danger.
                     For this kindnesse Palmerin returned her many thanks,
and because hee might the better rest without disturbance,
shée caused euerie one to depart the Chamber, her
selfe likewise courteously bidding him good night. Palmerin
béeing alone, looked rounde about the Chamer, to sée if
by any armes of deuise, hée might knowe the Knight that
so happily deliuered him: at length, hard by his bed side he
espied the Shéeld of Frysol, with the Sunne painted therein,
which hee well remembred to be his deuise, whom for
Polynardaes loue he hated, according as you haue heard in
the former part of this Historie, which when he beheld, the
teares trickling down his chéekes, he thus began to himself.
I perceiue that the lady which saluted me on the mountaine
is of excellent knowledge, for though the Knight bee my
chéefest enemie, yet for the honorable kindnesse he hath this
day shewed me, I wil forget all former iniuries, and loue
him henceforth as hée were my brother, and what I could
neuer compasse by rigour and force of Armes, I will nowe
séeke to conquer by loue and courtesie. While he continued

these priuat spéeches, Frysoll opened the Chamber doore,
and entred to bid Sir Palmerin good night, who not a little
glad of his comming, said.
                     I pray you Sir knight, by the honourable loue you beare
to Chiualrie, to tell me your name, and if héeretofore you
were neuer in the Realme of England? My name, quoth the
Knight, which hitherto I neuer hid from any man, is Frysoll,
and two yéeres I remained in the Realme you speake
of, with the Duke of Gaule in his Court. You rememb
                           ••
                        
then a Knight, saide Palmerin, with whom in lesse space
then twelue dayes together, you had two seuerall Combats?
Uery true, quoth Frysoll, and some good reason I
haue to remember it, for the fight on my behalfe was so
dangerous, as but by the fauour of a Lady and a Squire,
I neuer had escaped with life. Nowe hast thou in thy custodie,
saide Palmerin, the man that did thée such wrong, no
more an enemie, but for euer thy vowed, true, and trustie
Friend: and by the order I haue receiued, there is no man
this day liuing, that shall withdraw me from thy friendshippe,
because thou better deseruest it then any Knight in
the world.
                     And hath by my meanes, quoth Frysoll, the onely flower
of Chiualrie béene deliuered from death, and the resolute
hatred betwéene vs, vnited nowe with loue more
then brotherlike? in happie howre went I on hunting this
day, and fortune could neuer honour mée with more desired
successe. For confirmation of this new alliance, hee ranne
and called Leonarda, Olorico, and the rest, and before them
all kissed Palmerin in the Bedde, to seale the perpetuall
league of amitie betwéene them. Then was recounted
their aduentures and hatred past, whereat euery one greatly
maruailed, séeing this sodaine change to such surpassing
loue.
                     
                        Frysoll also rehearsed, how after the rape of Agriola,
the Duke Crenus his Lord, went to the Court, where hée
aduised the King to pursue his Daughter, or to sende him

in search of her, whereto he could not any way perswade
the King. Moreouer, howe his Maiestie would haue kept
him still in his seruice, whereto he might not graunt, for
the promise he made the Ladie that came thither, whome
after hée had brought to her Castle, hee trauailed by the
Emperour of Allemaignes Court, where hée certainely vnderstood
that Trineus and Agriola were not as yet there
arriued, nor could any newes bee heard what became of
them.
                     Yet during all these spéeches, he concealed all his owne
noble déeds of chiualrie in England, Allemaigne, and other
places: so vertuous and vebonarie was this gentle knight,
coueting in nothing to extoll himselfe. He forgot not likewise
to report how that Lady cured him of a long and gréeuous
disease, for which hée had so giuen himselfe to her seruice,
as for euer he vowed himself her knight. Palmerin not
a little contented with this discourse, said. I thinke the King
of England would not sennde his Shippes after his daughter,
remembring her happinesse to come, béeing nowe the
espoused wife to Lord Trineus, and the honour thereof ha
                           •
                        
béene alreadie séene, but that the tempest of the Sea was too
much their enemie. Then declared hée their troublesom
                           •
                        
time on the Sea, in what manner he lost them, and how he
now trauailed to finde them againe. Since fortune hath
so appointed (quoth Frysoll) that this loue and friendship
should bee begunne betwéene vs, to continue the same I
will beare you companie, and will not forsake you till yée
haue found them, may it like you to accept me for your companion.
                     If it like mée? quoth Palmerin, you néede not doubt
thereof, and rather you then any man that I knowe, for
which noble kindnesse I thinke my selfe most fortunate. In
this manner beganne the concorde betwéene Palmerin
and Frysoll, which continued with vertuous and perfect
constancie, as in the Chapters following you shal perceiue.
Thus soiourned these Knights, there louingly togither, till

                        Palmerin being recouered and able to beare armes, they departed
thence, leauing the poore Lady Leonarda in great
heauinesse, because her friend Frysol left her so soone.
                  
                  
                     Chap. XXX.
                     
                        How Palmerin, the prince Olorico, and Frysoll, went to Buda,
thinking to finde the Court there, where beeing arriued,
they heard newes howe the prince Florendos was taken,
whom they went to succour with all diligence at Constantinople.
                     
                     
                        
                           FFysol, because he would not haue his Ladie
Leonarda too much discontented,
made promise of spéedie returne to her:
which words somewhat pleasing her,
he departed with his two friendes, and
such quicke hast they made in theyr
iourney, and within sixe daies after they
arriued at Buda. There were they aduertised
of the Kings death, whereof the Prince of Macedon
was accused, and the Quéene likewise: for which cause
they were as prisoners conuaied to the Cittie of Constantinople.
                     
                     At these tydings Palmerin was very displeasant, wherefore
he sayde to his companions, Beléeue mée good Friends,
my heart will neuer be in quiet, till I haue beene before the
Emperour, who ought to bée an indifferent Iudge to Florendos,
and hée is the onely man of the world, to whome
most gladly I would do any seruice: therefore let vs make
hast to Constantinople, to the end we may succour him, if he
stand in any néede of our ayde. I am ready, quoth Frysoll,
                        
and let vs sette forwarde when you please. Héerewith hee remembred
his father, to whom the Crowne by right appertayned,
if Tarisius deceased without anie heire: where to
(by this meane) hée might attaine right soone. Perswading
himselfe with assuraunce héereof, hée was now more 
                           •
                        arnest
to be gone, and hastened his companions in such sort, as
they came to Constantinople, two daies before the appointed
time for the Combat. As they entred the Cittie, they
met a Knight riding on hunting, whome after they had saluted,
Palmerin questioned with all: if hée knew any thing
of the Prince Florendos his misfortune, & what the Emperor
intended to doo with him. Sir, quoth the knight, the
Emperour hath resolutely set down, that the Prince and his
daughter shall receiue their triall by Combate, against the
two Nephewes to the deceased King: and furnished they
must bée of their Champions, before the limitted time of
ten dayes bée expired, and nothing else as yet is doone, to my
knowledge. I thank you good Syr, quoth Palmerin, it is
happie the matter is no further forward. So leauing the

                           ••
                        ight, they praunc
                           •
                        d merrilie into the Cittie, and because
it was 
                           〈◊〉
                         soone to take vp their lodging, they rode to the
Pallace, to know
                           •
                         at full the certainetye of the matter:
thus beeing all Armed, except their Helmets, which their
Squir
                           •
                        s carr
                           ••
                        d after them, they made a séemely shew as
they rode, in th
                           •
                        t they were all thrée of one stature, and verye
beautifull young Princes, they were especially noted,
and followed by many Knights and Gentlemen, who imagined
su
                           •
                        h persons went to the Pallace, for other matters
then Co
                           ••
                        tlie dauncing.
                     These thrée companions béeing entred the great Hall,
which was hang
                           •
                        d rounde about with blacke veluet, in
signe of mourning, 
                           ••
                        ey meruailed what might bée the occasion
thereof: wherefore Palmerin falling on his knée before
the Emperour, and hauing humblye kissed his hande,
thus spake, Most renowmes Monarch of the worlde, my
Fréendes héere and my selfe, within these f
                           •
                        we dayes, as

we trauailed through the Realme of Hungaria, were aduertised
that you kéepe in pryson the Prince of Macedon,
whom so please your Maiestie to vouchsafe) I woulde gladlie
sée, in respect that hée is my Lord, as for the desire I haue
to deale in the Combat appointed, if it like him to make
choyse of me.
                     The Emperour perceiuing Palmerin so faire, modest,
and couragious, began with himselfe to conceiue well of
him: and imagined that his Sonne Caniano was again
                           •
                        
receiued, so néere did he resemble him in countenaunce, stature,
and all proportions of the bodie, wherefore hée returned
him this answere. It shall not in ought displease mée,
my Fréende, to let you sée him, to the ende you may conceiue
no suspition of iniustice. So calling a Gentleman Usher,
commaunded him to conduct the Knight to the Towre
where the Prince Florendos was: afterwarde enquiring
of the Prince Olorico and Frysoll, what the Knight was
that so hardily did enterprise the Combat. Dreade Lord,
quoth Frysoll, he is called Palmerin d'Oliua, a Knight (in
my iudgment) of the verie highest qualitie in the worlde.
Then hée and the Prince Olorico, rehearsed the prowesse
and déedes of Chiualrie by him accomplished, in France,
England, Allemaigne, Bohemia and Turkie: which béeing
heard by a Bohemian Knight then present, he came to Frysoll, saying.
                     I pray you Sir, is this that Palmerin who kild the
Serpent on the Mountaine Artifaeria, and brought the water
from the Fountaine, which healed the good King Prymaleon
Father to Florendos? It is he Sir quoth Frysoll,
and no other. Then dare I say, gracious Lorde, quoth the
Knight, that you haue séene the most valiant and vertuous
Gentleman, that euer came in Thrace. Héereuppon he discouered
the noble victorie he obtained in Bohemia, against
the two Gyants Da
                              ••
                           aco and Mordano, whome hée slew
before his woorthy Combat on the behalfe of Dyardo, Co
                        
                           •
                        i
                           •
                        
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         to the King and fayre Cardonya: against the

Counte of Ormeque and his Cozins, in the Companie of
Prince Adrian, and Ptolome. Héereat were all the Princes
and Knights present amazed, so that the Emperor himselfe
saide.
                     Well maye Florendos nowe aduenture the tryall of
his rause, hauing the onelye Champion of the woilde on his
side: and in this manner they deuised of him, till his returne
from the pryson againe. Palmerin entring the Tower,
Florendos was astonied, because no person was wont
to come sée him: but chiefely when he sawe him on his knées
to him, vsing these spéeches. Alas my Lord Florendos, how
gréeuous to mée is your imprisonment? in vnhappie time
did you knowe him, that hath caused you to bée so ill intreated.
I pray you my Lord comfort your selfe and take courage,
for héere may you beholde your Seruaunt Palmerin:
who will be hewed in a thousand péeces, but hée will deliuer
you from this miserie. Florendos, whole eyes and fac
                           •
                        
were greatlie swolne with incessant wéeping, onelye with
the sorrow hée conceiued for his Ladie, knowing him to bée
the same man indéede: was so excéeding ioyfull, as infinit
embracings and kissings, woulde not serue to bewraye his
comfort, for such gracious welcomes, reuerence and courtesie
he vsed, as Palmerin (bashfull to bee vsed with such honour)
said.
                     Unseemelie is it my Lord, that you should thus much
abase your selfe to mee: for (vnder correction) it ill agrees
that the Maister should honour the Seruaunt. The poore
Prince could not but still holde him in his armes, and with
teares and meruailous affection, thus aunswered. Ah Palmerin,
mine onelie hope and comfort in trouble, where hast
thou beene? what fortune hath kept thee so long from mee?
My déere Fréende, howe manie yrkesome thoughts haue I
endured, expecting thy comming? so that when I saw thou
didst not returne, and I could no way heare what was become
of thée: the verye conceite of thy absence had néer
                           •
                        
                        
                           •
                        laine me. Then carelesse what became of my selfe, being

depriued of my loue and honour of my life, I am fallen into
these miseries farre excéeding death: which Fortune I sée
hath permitted, because I am perswaded that thou must
deliuer me from all mishappes, and by thée shall I attaine
my chéefest desires. Ah happie and fortunate hower, well
worthie for euer to be celebrated with tryumph
                           •
                        s, finding
thée the onely cause of my good, whome long since I feared
was consorted with the dead: but séeing thou art now so happilie
come, acquaint me with the fortunes that 
                           •
                        raied thée
thus long, for very desirous am I to knowe them. Palmerin
was so gréeued to sée him in such weake & sicklie estate,
as hée could hardlie make any aunswere, yet striuing with
himselfe, said.
                     My noble Lord, the time requireth now other occasions,
héereafter shall I tell you the whole discourse. Graunt
mée I beséeche you, without further intreating, that I may
enter the Combat in your name, against one of those Traitours
who haue accused you: for such is my hope in God,
that I shall spéede luckilie, and bring him to the end such a
villaine deserues. With all my heart, quoth the Prince I
am contented, assuring my successe so well in your vertues,
as if fiue hundred of my Knights did enter the fielde for mée.
And to the ende that without feare or doubt you maye take
my cause in hand, I sweare to you by the liuing God, that
since Tarsius espoused Griana, I neuer sawe her, till when
the King came and found me with her: which was so short
a time, as she had not the leysure to make mée any answer.
True it is that I kild the King: but howe? I did it in respect
hée was mine enemie, and abused my Lady and lawful
wife. What though they were espoused togither? the
mariage was not to be allowed, in that it was doone against
her will: she béeing (as I haue said) my Wife, by solemne
spéeches before God married to me. It suffiseth, said Palmerin,
I haue enough. You shall likewise vnderstande my
Lord, that I haue brought with me another Knight, who
will gladlie aduenture the Combate on the Quéenes behalfe,

and such a one he is, as the other accuser will scant
dare to stande against him: wherefore let mée intreate you
to comfort your selfe, expecting our happy and fortunate successe.
                     
                        Florendos falling on his knée, gaue thanks to Heauen
for this luckie euent, and hauing an indifferent while conferred
togither: after Palmerin had aduertised Frenato,
of his Sonne Ptolomes health, and that in short time hee
had good hope to finde him, he returned to the Emperour,
to whome making great reuerence, he saide. Now my gracious
Lorde, I come to vnderstand your answer. I pray you
sir Knight quoth the Emperour, holde me excused, if I haue
not welcommed you, as your nobilitie, bountie and highe
Chiualrie deserueth: but after the Combat is ended, which
for my part I graunt ye, what hath wanted now shall bée
supplyed, so that your selfe shall rest contented. I thanke
your Maiestie for this extraordinarie fauour, said Palmerin,
and séeing the Prince hath committed his cause to my fortune,
I beséech you send for the Kings Nephewes, that
the appointed daye may not bee preuented by any further
delayes. And if the Quéene your Daughter be not prouided
of a Champion, this Knight (poynting to Frysoll, my vowed
Fréende and companion, shall vndertake her cause, in
that he came hither for no other businesse: and such good experience
haue I made of his valour and hardinesse, as if by
knightlie Chiualrie her right may be defended, assure your
selfe my Lord, this is the man. I thinke, said the Emperor,
she is not as yet determined of anie one, albeit full manie
haue made offer of themselues: and for wee will expect no
further, this Knight shall be preferred before all that come.
I humbly thanke your Maiestie for this fauour, aunswered
Frysoll: yet would I bee loth to presume too farre, before
I vnderstand the Quéenes pleasure. The Emperour caused
him to be conducted to the Quéenes Chamber, and his
two companions with him, who desired to sée the Ladies:
where béeing entred, Frysoll humbly vpon his knée, began

in this manner. Right noble and excellent Quéene, so far
through Christendome, is spread the report of your rare
vertuous and integritie of life, especially your innocencie in
the crime wherewith you are accused: as from farre Countreyes
I am come to be your Knight, if you will vouchsafe
me such honour as to accept me. Assuring you, that vnder
your commaundement, and in the companie of my noble
Fréend, who vndertakes the Combat for my Lord Florendos,
right willing am I to aduenture life and credit. Alas
Gentle Knight, quoth the Quéene, this offer procéedeth from
your courtesie and bountie, not by any vertue on my parte
deseruing: for too contrarie hath Fortune euermore sette
her selfe against me. But verie ingratefull might I bee accounted,
and neuer be reckoned among Ladies of regard, if
hauing taken such paines for me, I shoulde not accept you
for my Knight, especiallie in so vrgent occasion. Therefore
I entertaine you into this seruice, and I desire of God, that
you may be as easilie deliuered from the charge you take in
hand for me, as my conscience is cléere from the faulte wherwith
I am accused.
                     I hope Madame quoth Frysoll, that my Lord your Father
shall ere long perceiue, your loyall, perfect, and pure
nobilite, which neuer can kéepe companie with seruile an
                           •
                        
detestable treason. All this while Palmerin beholding the
Quéene, séeing her swéete face so stained and blubbered with
teares: mooued with naturall remorse, was constrained to
turne his head aside, to hide the teares that trickled down his
chéekes.
                     The Quéene likewise regarded him so earnestlye, as
when 
                           •
                        he behelde him wéepe, she imagined that one gaue
a violent pull at her heart: which shee dissembled so well as
she could, determining not to demand the cause thereof, vntill
such time as the Combatte were finished. So taking
their leaue of the Quéene and the Princesse Armida, they
returned to their lodging till the next morning, when the
Emperour sending for them to the Pallace, where Promptaleon
                        
and Oudin staied their comming, the Emperour
himselfe thus began. Now Promptaleon, héere maist thou
behold two yong Knights, who speake the contrarie of that
thou hast reported: wilt thou yet maintaine that my daughter
hath committed treason, and hath béene disloyall to her
Husband, thy deceased Unckle? I will my Lorde, quoth
he, and sweare by my Baptisme, for that cause she shal die
the death: and if anie dare vndertake the contrarye, I am
readie to prooue it by force of Armes. I thinke it conuenient,
said Palmerin, my Good Lord, that no Combat should
be graunted, without the presence of the accused. Immediatelie
Florendos and Griana were sent for, and being come
before the Emperour, Palmerin said to the Prince? How
saye you, my Lorde, doo you permit in maintenance of your
right, that I giue these false accusers such discipline, as
their wicked and treacherous dealings deserue? I doo, (quoth
the Prince) and Heauen prosper thée in thine enterprise.
What saye you Madame, quoth Frysoll to the Quéene, doo
you affoorde the like to me? Shee aunswered as Florendos
before had doone, whereuppon Palmerin thus spake to the
accusers.
                     We two Knights will maintaine, that you both are
Traitours, and that by couetous and gréedie desire of rule,
and to enioy the Kingdome, you woulde (against all right)
disinherit the yong Princesse Armida: for which cause you
haue shamefullie accused the Quéene her Mother, to haue
committed murder, and more then that, charge her with disloyall
lubricitie. For if the Prince Florendos talked with
her, when the King founde him in her Chamber: it was in
no other sort then honor allowed, and according to 
                           •
                        he dutie
of honest loue, wherein all Princes are bounde to their
Ladies. Beside, if your King was slaine by the Prince, if
was in defence of his owne life, and in repelling the iniurious
spéeches he gaue him: to approoue what I say, wée
present our gadges to the Emperour, so please him to receiue
them. The like did the too Brethren, desiring his

highnesse to appoint the Combat presentlie, in the wide and
necessarie place before the Pallace. For (quoth they) wée
will teache these vaine-glorious Strangers, the price of such
iniurious spéeches, spoken to those that know how to correct
them.
                     I thinke (quoth Palmerin) thou shalt néede to teache
thy selfe: but if thou hast learned anie newe dexteritie,
practise it well thou art best, for I can tell thée the time
will require it. The good Emperour Remicius commaunded
silence, and taking the gadges of these foure Knights,
bad them goe arme themselues, saying hée woulde sée the
ende thereof before he tooke any sustenaunce. The Duke
of Mensa, and the Counte of Redona, auncient Princes of
Greece, were appointed to bee Iudges of the Fielde: who
commaunded two hundred knights to Arme themselues, for
assurance of their owne persons.
                  
                  
                     Chap. XXXI.
                     
                        Of the noble Combat in the Cittie of Constantinople, by
Palmerin and Frysoll, against the two Nephewes of
the deceased King of Hungaria, whome they vanquished,
by which meane the Prince Florendos and
Queene Griana were deliuered.
                     
                     
                        
                           PRomptaleon, and Oudin being departed
the Hall, Palmerin and Frisoll taking
their leaue of Florendos and the
Quéene, whom the Emperour caused
to be shut vppe in their prisons againe:
went to their lodgings to Arme themselues.
The Duke of Mecaena, an honorable

prince, discended of y• most ancient race in al Greece,
with many other great Lords went after them: and when
they were Armed, the Duke would néedes beare Palmerins
Launce, and the graund Squire attending on the Emperor,
caried Frysols. In this maner came they to the place appointed
for the Combat, where the two Brethren were alreadie
staying for them, the eldest thus beginning in mockage. Beléeue
mée Knights, for men that shewed themselues so hardie
in a Hall, mée thinks you haue béene very long Arming your
selues.
                     I thinke you came on your footcloth Mules to the Fields
entraunce, for feare of felling to hurt your selues: but soone
shall ye be taught better horsemanshippe I warrant ye. If
there were in thée so much wisdome and exercise of Armes,
aunswered Frysoll, as are high words and brauing behauiour,
it would bée a little better discerned then it is: notwithstanding
ere wee haue doone, I thinke they that came first
into the Fielde will tarrie last héere, vnlesse some bodie
for pittie carrie them out before. Héerewith the Trompets
sounded, and the Heraldes commaunded the Champions
to doo their deuoire, which was the cause, that
these hotte words were chaunged into déedes: and running
fiercelie against eache other, they encountred with such puissaunce,
as Palmerin cast Oudin foorth of his saddle, with
a verie great wound on his left side, and Promptaleon was
receiued by Frysoll so roughlie, as he fell backwarde on the
crupper of his Horse, because hée was lothe his Brother
should fall without companie. The two Brethren, enraged
to bée thus foyled at the first, came with their swords drawn
to kill their aduersaries Horsses: so that they were constrained
quicklie to alight, when they assayled each other
with meruailous furie, for either side expected victorie, the
one in hope of a kingdome, the other to saue their Freends
liues.
                     Strange was it so beholde this violent fight, yet the
two Brethren seemed vnable long to holde out, for theyr

Armor was so cut and mangled, and themselues so driuen
foorth of breath, as hardly they coulde sustaine themselues:
so that Promptaleon desired Frysoll to rest a while, who
mooued with anger, thus aunswered. Nay Traytor, now
shall I teach thée how to defende thy selfe, and not one minute
will I graunt thee to trauerse with mée: but will send
thy soule to the Father of thy villaine, vnlesse with spéede
thou denie thy slaunder. With these words he laid so many
sounde strokes on him, as at length hee fell downe deade at
his féete, which when Oudin perceiued: hee threwe his
Sworde at Palmerin, and caught him fast about the middle,
thinking that way to get him downe, but Palmerin
striking away his féet, caused him fal on his backe, and without
attending for his reuolt, noblye stroke his head from his
shoulders.
                     So comming to Frysol, he asked if he were wounded.
No my Lord (quoth he) I thanke God, the greatest wound
I haue cannot with-holde me to doo you further seruice, if
so be you haue anie néede. Then putting vp their Swords,
they demaunded of the Iudges, if any thing else remained
to be doone, for deliueraunce of the prisoners. Nothing worthy
Lords, answered the Iudges, and them will the Emperour
nowe deliuer, with all possible spéede. The good
Remicius heartilie thanking God for his victorie, sente a
Knight to the Champions, with request to come and lodge
in his Pallace, as also that they should presently come speake
with his Maiestie: yet could not the Messenger make such
haste, but they were come foorth of the Fielde, the Duke of
Mecaena and the Prince Olorico bearing them companie.
                     When the Knight had ouertaken them, hée saide. Returne
woorthie Knightes to my Lord the Emperour, for hee
would conferre with you, and haue your wounds attended
by his owne Chirurgions. So turning again to the Pallace,
they entred the Hall, where the Emperour méeting them,
said. Right welcome are ye my noble Fréendes, who hau
                           •
                        
                        
so happilie defended my Daughters honor: for whose sake
I shall make ye such recompence, as shalbe hencefoorth an
encouragement to all Knights, to aduenture the Combat
on the behalfe of anie distressed Ladye Imediatlye in theyr
presence, by sounde of Trompet hée caused to bee declared,
that the Prince Florendos and the Quéene Griana, were
innocent of the trayterous accusation, and therefore in open
Fielde bad they should bee deliuered: commaunding likewise
his most expert Chirurgions to giue diligent attendaunce
on the wounded Knights, causing them to be lodged
in the most statelie Chambers of his Pallace. Afterwarde,
hée suffered the bodies of the vanquished to bee buried, giuing
expresse charge on paine of death, that none of the
knights of Hungaria should depart from Constantinople,
without his leaue: because hée woulde while they stayed
there, prouide for the gouernment of the kingdom, as appertaining
to his yong Daughter the Princesse Armida. The
Empresse was so ioyfull for the deliueraunce of Griana,
as shee had soone forgotte her Nephewes misfortune: the
Quéenes Ladies likewise were not a little glad, but aboue
all, the yong Princesse Armida, her comfort could not be expressed,
that her Mother was so graciouslie defended: and
now the Duke of Pera, who hadde the Prince Florendos in
custodie, fetching him foorth of prison, said. My Lord thanke
God and the Knights that fought the Combat for you: for
by theyr meanes the Emperour declareth you absolued and
set at libertie.
                     The Prince lifting his eyes to Heauen, thus began.
Ah my God, how happie is the man that trusteth in thy
mercie? doubtlesse, he that beléeueth in thy promises, shall
neuer perish. Noble Duke, in all mine afflictions I haue
euermore founde your speciall fauour: but if God prolong
my life, I will not be vnmindfull of your gentlenesse. In sooth
my Lord, quoth the Duke, for so good a Prince, any honest
minde would gladlie endeuour himselfe: and if I haue pleasured
you in anie thing, I did no more then my dutye,

which christian amitie requireth of each other. So taking
him by the hand, hée brought him before the Emperour,
when falling on his knées, the Prince thus spake. If héeretofore
dread Lord, both I and my people gaue our selues to

                           •
                        rauaile, and aduentured desperate hazard in your defence:
at this time I count my selfe sufficientlie recompenced, séeing
your displeasure qualified, and the hard opinion you conceiued
against me, chaunged into princely and honorable iustice.
                     Syr Florendos, aunswered the Emperour, when I
remember the wrong you did my Daughter, leauing such a
scandalous report of her, at the first time you came to this
Cittie, I thinke you woorthie of the sharpest death. But
placing mercie before rigorous iustice, I am desirous to let
you knowe, that it liketh me better to be loued then feared:
forgetting quite the offence against our person, the murder
of our Sonne, without any regard to the murmur of the people,
whose ignoraunce cannot consider of Princes mercie.
Nor will I stayne mine aged yéeres with mine owne proper
bloud, or the death of a Prince so noble, whereby I
shoulde leaue to my following posteritie, as a Trophe of my
life, an endlesse memorie of tirannous crueltie: but rather
shall my chéefest aduersaries stop their mouthes, with remembrance
of my clemencie and princelie bountie, as your
owne conscience shall well witnesse with me. You therefore
my Lorde, the Duke of Pera, see that the Prince Florendos
be lodged in the best place in our Cittie, and kéepe him
companie vntill his traine shall come from Macedon. With
great humilitie the Prince kissed the Emperours hande,
acknowledging his manifolde and princelie courtesies: desiring
the Duke likewise before his departure, that hee
might speake with the two Knightes, Frysoll and Palmerin.
                     
                     Béeing brought to their Chambers, the embracings
and gracious courtesies hée vsed to them, I am not able to
vtter, and verie loth was hee to parte from them, but that

hée woulde no way preiudise theyr health: wherefore giuing
them the good night, he was conducted to his lodging,
leauing Palmerin verie sadde and pensiue, remembring
what the Quéene of Tharsus had saide to him, howe hée
should deliuer his Father from death, before he could know
him, which was likewise confirmed by the apparition of
the Ladie to him, vnder the name of his best and déerest
Fréendes.
                     O that the Heauens did so fauour me, quoth he, that I
were the Sonne of the Prince Florendos and Quéene Griana, then woulde I imagine my selfe the happiest man in
the world. Yet can I not forget, that the Fayries tolde mée
on the Mountaine Artifaeria, that one daie I shoulde bée
Lord of all Greece: but God is my witnesse, that I couet
not such honor and preferment, were it not for the loue of my
Ladie, to the ende her Father might not dislike of our contract.
And hence will I not depart before I vnderstand the
truth héereof, and to what ende this aduenture will happen.
Frysoll on the other side, he deuised how to make himselfe
knowne to the Emperour and Empresse: because he
had good hope when himselfe might bée knowne, that his
Father Netrides shoulde enioy the Kingdome of Hungaria.
The Prince Florendos likewise coulde take no rest, for his
great desire to recouer the Quéene Griana. Such were the
passions of these thrée Princes, eache one liuing in hope of
good successe, which happens according to their expectations,
as you shall reade héereafter.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. XXXII.
                     
                        How the Queene Griana with the yong Princesse Armida,
went to visit Palmerin and Frysoll, and howe the
Queene knew Palmerin to be her sonne, to the no litle
ioy of the Emperour and the Prince Florendos.
                     
                     
                        TWo daies after the deliueraunce of the
Prince Florendos, the yong Princesse
Armida deuising with the Quéene her
Mother, said. Me thinks gracious Madame,
we are to be reprooued of ingratitude,
in that we haue not as yet visited
the poore wounded knights, considering
how greatly we are beholding to them
I beséech you let vs this morning go sée how they fare.
                     Alas Daughter, aunswered the Quéene, hast thou the
heart to bring me among such persons, when I am saide to
bee the cause of thy fathers death? Then the Princesse
breaking foorth in teares, replied. Beléeue me Madame,
if you remember your selfe well, you are in as little faulte
as Iam, and so hath an honorable victorie declared: but
had you béene anye way culpable therein, yet nowe you
ought to comfort your selfe, hauing had such a famous proofe
of innocencie. In signe whereof, and to declare your thankfulnesse
to those gentle Knights: it will bée counted a speciall
point of courtesie, to visite them that ventured for you. Go
we then, said the Quéene, séeing you thinke it so necessarie,
and are so desirous. So accompanied with manie Ladies,

clothed all in mourning blacke, they went first to Frysoll,
greatlie thanking him for the paines hée had taken, putting
his life in daunger, for the conseruation of their honors. Not
to mée Ladie answered Frysol, ought you giue these thanks,
but to him that onelye giueth strength to man: and if
from my byrth I had continually trauailed in your seruice,
yet your graces are such as I shoulde neuer deserue to bee
reckoned among your meanest fauorites. The yong Princesse
thinking her selfe greatlie bounde to him, woulde not
giue him good morrowe with so little talke: but sitting
downe on the bedde by him, taking him by the hand, began
againe thus.
                     I knowe not Sir Knight, how the Quéene my Mother
will procéede in requita
                           ••
                         of your noble seruice, for mine
owne parte, not forgetting howe the Traytours threatned
me, whom (to their endlesse shame) you haue vanquished
and slaine: I find my selfe so indebted to you, as it far excéedeth
my power, to guerdon you with answerable recompence.
Frysol perceiuing the yong princesse affection, whom
Loue had caught somewhat within his reache, knewe immediatlie
by her sober bashfull lookes, the cause why so manie
sighes were coupled with her words, himselfe likewise
suddainlie sicke of the same disease, returned this aunswere.
Madame, if Fortune the Fréend to your happinesse, would
fauour mée so much, as the enterprise doone by your commanding,
might sorte to an ende fitting my desire: I shoulde
then accounte my selfe more then sufficientlie gratefied in
this, that the act is agréeable to your liking, and the fau
                           •
                        urable
countenaunce of such a Ladie, is more then so meane
a Knight as my selfe can merit. Beside, from the daye that
the high renowme of your prudence and gracious beautie,
assured me of those exquisite gifts, wherewith nature hath
plentifullie enriched you: I tooke such a religious vowe of
b
                           •
                        ndage on mée, as (considering your high calling, and my
self
                           •
                         so far inferiour) I shall neuer obtaine the fauour of libertie,
if your 
                           •
                        enignitie, excéeding all things else, graunt

me not that speciall grace. The Quéene loth to trouble this
forme of confession, withdrewe her selfe into Palmerins
Chamber, where (as it fell out) shee founde no bodye but
himselfe: by which occasion, remembring the loue she bare
to Florendos, after shée had humblie saluted him, shée thus
began.
                     Beléeue me gentle Sir, your knightlie Chiu
                           •
                        lrie hath
shewed it selfe of such desert, as the Prince Florendos, for
defence of whose honor, you haue not feared to aduenture
your life, your daungerous woundes well witnessing the
same, shall neuer deuise sufficient satisfaction. For in my
iudgement it may well bee said, that goods, honor and life,
hath beene restored him by your noble magnanimitie. Madam,
quoth Palmerin, these wounds that for th
                           •
                        se two daies
haue made me keepe my Chamber, thank
                           •
                        s b
                           •
                         to God are
not so daungerous, as if occasion were offered, either for you
or my Lord Florendos: but full well could I bee seene therein,
to purchase entertainment into your gracious conceite.
The Quéene then sitting downe in a Chaire by him, and
viewing him verie earnestly, his lockes of haire kept down
by a gorgious wrought Cap, embroidered with Saphires
and small Emeralds, shée behelde the mole on his face like
a Crosse, which made her remember that her Son had the
like, and in the selfe same place, when Cardyna tooke him
from her and caried him to the Mountaine. Héereupon she
tooke greater occasion to regard his countenaunce, and imagining
him verie much to resemble the Prince Florendos,
immediatlie shée perswaded her selfe that hee was her Son.
Which conceit mooued her to such alterations, as of long

                           •
                        he continued silent, though Palmerin (in mean
                           •
                         while) demaunded
manie questions of her. These changes ouer-ruled
by reason and discretion, shée commaunded her Ladies
to depart the Chamber, and to goe accompanie the yong
Princesse Armida: they béeing no sooner gone, but shée began
in this maner.
                     Let me request Sir Palmerin, to know your Parents

and the name of the Countrey where you were borne. Palmerin
somewhat amazed at this demaund, was nowe in the
midst of his onely desire, verilie perswading himselfe that
the Quéene was his mother, wherefore he thus aunswered.
                     Madame, I sweare to you by my faith, that I knowe
no Ladie this day liuing, to whom I woulde willinglie reueale
more then to your selfe: but so contrarie was Fortune
to mée in mine infancie, that as yet I could not get anie
knowledge either of my Father or Mother, nor of the
Countrey where I was borne. Yet thus I haue beene certified,
that I was nourished on a Mountaine not farre from
this Citie, which is called the Mount of Oliues, where (as
I haue béene many times tolde) my Foster-father founde
mée in rich swadling cloathes: and more then this, so please
you to credite mée, cannot I bewray of whence or what I
am.
                     O heauens (quoth the Quéene) how greatly am I bound
to prayse your infinite bountie and pittie, for so safe protecting
mine infant, whom I forsooke so cruelly? Ah gentle
Knight, sée héere thy Mother, euen shee that commaunded
thou shouldest bée caried to the Mountaine: and the Prince
Florendos, whom so lately thou diddest deliuer from death,
hée (noble Palmerin) is thy Father. Norwithstanding my
Sonne, I desire thee by the reuerent loue thou bearest mée,
to conceale secretlie what I haue sayde, vntill I gaine the
meane to discouer my shame to the Emperour: yet such a
shame, as neuer came greater good to thy Mother: nor can
I nowe account the déede sinfull, in that my fortune hath
brought mée such an honourable Sonne. So rauished with
ioy was both the Mother and the Sonne, as neither coulde
expresse their inward contentation, for such was their alteration
as they reputed for an illusion or dreame, what was
most certaine indéed: such wonderfull comfort brought this
vnexpected chaunce, wherewith the greatest indowments
of honour or riches may not bee compared. Béeing in this

extasie, the Mother for her Sonne, and the Sonne for his
Mother: Palmerin hauing now againe recouered his forces,
sayd.
                     My God I render thy name immortall thanks, in that
I drewe my breath from so noble and vertuous persons,
as also for graunting mée knowledge of them in a time so
fortunate: forbeare then (good Mother) to mis
                           •
                        éeme of any
thing, for I will discourse the matter in such sort to the
Emperour, as forgetting all things past, hée shall receiue
both the mother and sonne with greater ioy then you can
imagine. But to the ende (Madame) you may be more certaine
of your sonne, see héere a Crucifixe of Golde, which
was tied about my necke when I was founde, and hath of
long time béene kept by the most perfect Lady in the world.
The Quéene knowing it right well, after shee had kissed it
manie times, answered. Assuredly my sonne, it is the veri
                           •
                        
same that my selfe tied about thy necke, when I was in
the greatest gréefe that euer distressed mother might bée:
to sée her infant violatelie rapt from her, so soone as Nature
had brought him into the world. But if my mishap as
then surpassed all other womens: yet now is it recompenced
with such a fortunate houre, as no Ladie may compar
                           •
                        
her felicitie with mine. Ah, my sonne, by thée are my sorrowes
chaunged into ioy, my dispaire into content, and from
death it selfe am I brought againe to life: for if my husbands
hard hap made me d
                           •
                        spise life, now may you be assured how
much I desire it.
                     Then declared shée, how to saue the Prince Florendos
life, whose faithfull loue brought him to such extremitie by
sicknesse, she aduentured her honor for his safetie, and entering
the paradise of loue, bestowed that iewel on him, which
she most of all estéemed. And so maist thou (quoth shée) report
to the Emperour, yet in this manner, that not by car
                        
                           •
                        all
impudicitie I so consented: for God is my witnesse,
that notwithstanding the perill wherein I sawe him, no
perswasion could cause me yéeld him that especiall remedie,

before he had first solemnly vowed marriage to mée, which
against all right was broken by the Emperours commaundement.
                     Madame, quoth Palmerin, Florendos is of such valour,
and his honorable actions so well receiued among men, that
albeit he had made you no such promise, yet reason may excuse
you in this matter. But if by promised faith, and to
saue the life of so gentle a Knight (who happilie by your refusall
might haue miscaried) you honoured the Temple of
Loue with so swéete an offering: among people of good
minde, it ought rather to bée tearmed a vertue, then anie
bad affection or vnlawfull lust. And therfore, Madame, comfort
your selfe, for shortly I hope to assure your peace with
the Emperour: and séeing I haue you for my mother, and
the Prince Florendos for my Father, I féele my selfe frée
from any gréefe or vexation, assuring you, that I will driue
it to no further delay, but this morning will I confer with
his Maiestie.
                     The Quéene béeing fearefull, that her long stay should
cause anie bad opinion, hauing kissed her sonne, gaue him
the good morrowe, and so went to her Chamber, where shée
found Cardyna her Gentlewoman, to w
                           •
                        om she shewed
the Crucifixe her sonne had giuen her, saying. Tell me, I
pray thée Cardina, doost thou remember that heeretofore
thou hast séene this Crucifixe, and in what place? Beléeue
me, Madame, quoth shée, I thinke I haue seene it before
nowe, but in what place I am not certaine? Why? forgetfull
creature, knowest thou not that this is the Crucifixe
which was tied about my sonnes necke, when thy selfe did
carrie him to the mountaine? In goo
                           •
                         faith, the Knight
is hée, who fought the Combate for my Lorde Florendos.
Nowe sée the great mercie and bountie of our God, who
preserued his life then, and from infinite daungers hath defended
him hitherto. Notwithstanding, bee thou secret, and
on perill of thy life reueale it to none, vntill the Emperour
my Father be acquainted therewith. Cardyna was so ioyfull

héereof, as shée must néedes goe presently to sée Palmerin,
and finding the Chirugions with him visiting his
woundes, shée fetched a gorgious Mantle of purple Ueluet
broydered round about with Pearles, Diamonds and Rubies,
as wel might beséeme the greatest Monarch to weare.
As Cardina holpe him to put on this Mantle, she noted the
marke on his face, which she remembred since th
                           •
                         time of
his birth: and in this maner goes Palmerin chéerefully to
the Emperour, whom he founde conferring with his Lords
and Barons, but his presence caused them breake off talke,
imagining him the comeliest person that euer they sawe.
The good olde Emperour Remicius, reioycing to sée him in
so good and able plight, demaunded of him howe he fared▪
Right well, quoth he, I thank God and your highnesse, readie
to aduenture on any occasion shal like you to commaund
me: and now am I come to aduertise your Maiestie of such
matters as will not a little glad ye in the hearing, so please
your grace to vouchsafe me priuate audience. Hereupon the
Emperour commaunded euery one to depart the Hall, and
they béeing nowe alone, Palmerin thus began. Drea
                           •
                        
Lord and mighty Emperour, till this time haue I frequented
the Courts of manie Kings and Potentates, without
desire of requesting anie thing, vntill this present: when
faine would I request one boone of your Maiestie, the grant
whereof shall returne you both profit and honor. My noble
Fréend Palmerin, aunswered the Emperour, what euer
thou pleasest, demaund, and on my worde it shall bée graunted.
                     
                        Palmerin with humble obeysaunce kissing the Emperours
hand, sayd. In sooth, my Lorde, all that I haue to request,
is onely to desire your highnesse, that all offences
committed by the Prince Florendos, and Madame Griana
your Daughter, may not onely be forgotten, but also forgiuen.
For thy sake Palmerin, quoth the Emperour, I forgiue
all their offences whatsoeuer. May it then please your Maiestie,
quoth he, to remember, howe when Florendos came

to doo you seruice during your warres agaynst Gamezio,
because you denied to giu
                           •
                         him your Daughter, hée was so
sicke, as euerie howre his death was expected? It then so
fortuned my Lord, the Princesse your Daughter, acquainted
with the cause of his sicknesse, to giue him some comfort,
as also to defend so good a Prince from death: by gracious
spéeches shée gaue him such hope of her loue, and such (for
trueth) as before they parted, a solemne promise of marriage
was concluded betwéene them. I know not the conditions
of their agréements, but it séemed the Articles consisted
on no difficult accorde, for each receyued of other the
swéete desires of loue, in so much as that night was I begotten.
And for a trueth, my Lord, I am the Sonne to the
Prince Florendos, and Madame Griana your Daughter,
who (as I vnderstand) by the Empresse perswasion, against
all right you compelled to marrie with the Prince Tarisius.
Florendos, notwithstanding my Mothers wrong was verye
great, hath continued so loyall, as hée would neuer accept
anie other for his Wife, nor as yet will, but onely her.
Nowe my Lord, that this matter may not séeme a fantasticall
inuention, I can resolue you of the place of my by
                           ••
                        h,
which was in the Tower, where my Mother remained
prisoner by your commaundement, vnder the charge of a
Ladie named Tolomestra: who to defende your daughters
honor, caused me to be carried to a place not far hence, which
is called the M
                           •
                        unt of Oliues, from whence my surname
is likewise deriued, & in that place was I 
                           •
                        ound by a Countrey
pesant vnder a Palme Trée, who in signe thereof named
me Palmerin d'Oliua. My sorrowfull Mother, hoping
one day to sée me againe, diligently noted diuerse marke
                           •
                        
I haue, and hung about my necke a golden Crucifixe▪ which
this day I gaue her againe: and by this marke 
                           〈…〉
                        
like a Crosse, shée well remembers me to be her Sonne. In
this respect my Lord, that your Daughters offence, was occasioned
by true and faithfull loue, and hauing likewise promised
to forgiue all causes of displeasure: graunt my father

nowe at length to enioy his lawfull Wife, that I béeing
their Sonne, may not bée estéemed as illegitimate, the d
                           ••
                        
                        ing
whereof will renowme your name for euer, and loue
tryed in so manie affli
                           •
                        tions, shall be crowned with his long
and desired reward.
                     The Emperour amazed at this strange discourse, could
not imagine what answer to make: wherefore hauing 
                           •
                        itten
a prettie while silent, lifting his eyes to heauen, hée
thus began. O mightie King of Kings, onely good and full
of mercie, I render thy name euerlasting thankes, for thy
gracious regarde to the distressed Empire of Greece: for
though in our last warres thou tookest away my Sonne Caniano,
thou hast at this instant sent me another, who well
hath learned to defend this state, from the proude inuading
Gouernour of Turkie. Ah my Sonne Palmerin, right well
doo I beléeue what thou hast said. And albeit thou hadst not
shewen such probable arguments, yet doost thou so perfectlie
resemble my Sonne Caniano, as easily may be coniectured
whence thou art discended. Whatsouer thou demaundest
my Sonne, is already graunted. And with these word
                           •
                        
the teares trickled downe his milke-white Bearde, such
was his inward earnest conceyt of ioy: and imbracing Palmerin
in his armes, he called his Lords, who maruelled not
a little at this euent, and thus spake the Emperour. Sée
héere my Fréendes your liege Lorde and Soueraign
                           •
                        , the
Sonne of my Daughter Griana, and the Prince Florendos,
how may you applaud the bountie of Heauen, prouiding
for you such a noble Prince? The Lords all wondering at
these spéeches, came and entertained him with manie sign
                           ••
                        
of honour: so that it is not registred in any auncient mem
                           •
                        
                        rie,
that euer King or prince had such suddaine and gracious

                           〈◊〉
                        .
                     By this time these newes were spredde through the
whole Pallace, and the Empresse 
                           •
                        earing thereof, sent one
of her Squires for Palmerin: when the Emperour taking
him by the hand, brought him to her Chamber, saying. Sée

héere Madame your Sonne, who by your meanes hath long
time béene banished our Court: héereafter looke hée bée better
vsed.
                     The Empresse surprised with incredible ioy, louingly
embracing him, said. Welcome my Sonne, forget my
heynous o
                           ••
                        ence, when I would not suffer thy Mother to
enioy the Prince Florendos, which fault Heauen hath reuenged
with the death of my thrée Nephewes, whereof I
nowe make no reckoning, séeing God hath sent vs such a
gracious comfort. The Emperor on the other side welcommed
the Quéene his Daughter, which as yet hée had not
doone since her comming from Hungaria. Lay by (quoth hée)
fayre Daughter, these blacke garments, the witnes of your
inward mourning, and decke your selfe presently in reioycing
habits: for now before all my Lords of Greece, will I
haue you espoused to the Prince Florendos. So departed
the Emperour and the Princes, leauing the Quéene 
                           •
                        it
                           •
                        
her Ladies, who disrobed her of her mourning garments▪
his Maiestie commaunding Palmerin to go séeke the Prince
of Macedon his Father, accompanied with all the noble
men of the Court.
                     In the meane while, he caused all the ornaments of black
to bée taken downe, and the Pallace to bée hanged with
sumptuous cloth of Golde: and gaue in charge to the Empresse,
that the Quéene, the Princesse Armida, and all the
Ladies, should adorne themselues, as to receiue the verie
greatest Prince in the worlde. Likewise he saide to all his
Knights. Reioyce my good Fréends with mée: for God
tooke away my Children, and hath double restored them:
for those that bée dead, hée hath raysed vs more. Palmerin
hauing with him all the Emperours Knights, went to the
lodging of the Prince Florendos, and by the way the Cittizens
of Constantinople, Nobles, Marchants, and Artezans,
welcommed him verie honourablie, making bonfires and
Garlandes of tryumph, in euerie stréete, crying. Welcome
to this noble Cittie our newe Lord and Maister: and such

chéerefull delights did they solemnize the time withall, as
though it had béene the feast of Christmasse. Palmerin & his
train being come to the Princes lodging, found two squires
at the Gate▪ sent thither by the Emperour, the one holding

                           〈◊〉
                         Horse verie richly c
                           •
                        parassoned, and the other costly garments
of cloath of Golde, which h
                           •
                         caused t
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         brought vp
after him into the Chamber, where falling on his knée before
the Prince, he said.
                     Nowe come I my Lord to kisse your hande, not as I
haue done héeretofore, but as becommeth a Sonne to his
Father: for I am your Sonne, begotten on the Quéen
                           •
                        
                        Griana, whom the Emperour will n
                           •
                        we bestow on you in
marriage. Florendos was so rauished with these spéeches,
as hee was readie to swoune betwéene Palmerins armes:
but at length 
                           ••
                        tching a great sigh, saide. O celestiall Soueraigne,
what am I, whom thou shouldest so respect, and lif
                           •
                        
to such surpassing happinesse? Ah poore Florendos, not long
since the m
                           •
                        st wretched among men: what man may now
                           •
                        
compare with thy fortune, hauing such a knight to thy Son,
and fayre Quéene Griana to thy Wife? Go wée my sonne,
quoth hée, embracing Palmerin, for it is no reason to stay,
when such happie newe a hath sent for vs. And credit mée,
the verie first time I did behold thée, my heart was solicited
with greater ioy then I am able nowe to expresse,
which euer since made me coniecture, that there was mor
                           •
                        
betwéene vs then fréendly alliaunce. Then was hée cloathed
in the rich garments sent by the Emperour, and his
Cozin Frenato in like maner: so comming on horsebacke,
the Duke of Pera rode on his right hande, and his Sonn
                           •
                        
                        Palmerin on the left, with many Princes, Lords, Knights,
and Gentlemen, ryding both before and behind them. In
this manner came they to the Pallace, where the Emperour
himselfe staied their comming at the Gate: and after
they were alighted, the Prince making humble reuerence
to his Maiestie, thus spake. Mightie and redoubted Lord,
I knowe not how to render sufficient thanks, in that your

highnes is pleased to honor me with your daughter, which
is the thing I alwaies desired. Notwithstanding, I hope to

                           ••
                        ew such deserts héereafter, as neither shée shall be miscontented,
nor your maiestie repent your gentle gift. No
                        
                           •
                        le
Lord, quoth the Emperour, well haue you deserued her,
and mine Empire with her, in respect of your worthy sonn
                           •
                        
                        Palmerin, whome all Europe, Asia, and Affrica honours.
Wherefore in the presence of all my Lords I will giue her

                           〈◊〉
                         you, deferring the day of solemnitie, vntill the states of
Macedon come, therefore Sonne Palmerin go for your
Mother.
                     Presently hee departed, the Dukes of Pera and Mecaena
with him, and soone they returned, bringing with

                           〈◊〉
                         the Empresse, the Quéene, and his Sister the yong
Princesse Armida, whom hee had schooled with such gra
                        
                           •••
                        s
spéeches, as she had nowe forgotten her displeasure
towardes the Prince Florendos, for the death of the King

                           〈◊〉
                         Father. There openly in the Hall, by the Archbishop
of Constantinople, the Prince Florendos and Griana were

                           •••
                        i
                           •
                        nced together, to their no little contentment, as also
to the good lyking of all the Princes and Lords of Greece,
who spent the rest of the day in ioyfull disports and try
                        
                           ••
                        ph
                           •
                        .
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. XXXIII.
                     
                        How Frysoll declared to the Empresse, that he was sonne to
her Nephew Netrides.
                     
                     
                        ALl this pleasure of the Princes and lords
of Greece, for so many ioyfull and vnexpected
accidents, might not be compared
with the pleasures of the Prince Olorico
and Frysoll, who would nowe no
longer kéep his bed, in respect of his ioy
for the good fortune of his friend, wherfore
putting on his garments, and accompanied with Olorico,
he came downe into the great Hall, as the Prince
of Macedon was betrothed to his Ladie, when Palmerin
stepping from al the rest, welcommed them with very gracious
courtesie. After they had béene generally saluted, Frysoll
came before the Empresse, and on his knée began in this
manner.
                     Most excellent and gracious Madame, may it please
you pardon mine offence in shedding the bloud of your kinsman.
Notwithstanding, as the Law of iudgement and reason
exhorteth me, of two euilles I choose to take the least: so
did I rather thinke it good to bathe my handes in the bloud
of mine owne Couzin, then permit him (by the Prince Florendos
offence) to suffer open violence. This speake I
Madame, as being the Sonne to your Nephew Netrides,
whom long since his eldest Brother disinherited, and banished
him his Countrey to a little Castle, where at this
time he remaineth in good disposition. Now iudge which
of these euents is most admirable, that of your noble sonne

                        Palmerin, or this which I haue now rehearsed. But may
it be (quoth the Empresse) that my Nephew Netrides is
yet liuing? and can it be possible that thou art his Sonne?
Trust me Madame, saide Frysoll, I haue tolde you truth,
and by Gods leaue you shall haue more ample proofe therof
within these few dayes.
                     Héereuppon the Emperour, the Empresse, Florendos,
and Palmerin, with inexplicable reioycing, embraced Frysoll,
not a little extolling theyr fortune, that such hardie
knights were discended of their linage. Then Frisol rehearsed
before them all the thrée Combats hée had with Palmerin,
and what great honour he woonne at the Tourney in
France, which report greatly contented the Prince Florendos,
hearing the honourable Chiualrie of his sonne, nor
would hée forget to ioyne therewith, his conquest on the
Mountaine Artifaeria, with his Combats both in Bohemia
and Durace.
                     
                     At these reports the Emperour somewhat amazed,
saide before all his Lords. I beléeue my Friendes, that the
maruailous rare fortunes of these two Cozins Palmerin
and Frysoll, with the strange aduentures they haue finished
in their youth, promise greater matters in their following
yéeres. Then an auncient Knight of Hungaria,
who was named Apolonio, said to the Emperour, how in
time past hee had béene Page to the Father of Tarisius, by
which meane hee knew Netrides right well if hee might sée
him. And if he be yet liuing, quoth hée, in regard of his manifolde
princely vertues, the Realme of Hungaria néede
no better Gouernour, nor will the people themselues mislike
of so good a change. Wherefore, may it so stande with
your highnesse pleasure, to grant mée companie beséeming
the cause: I wil do my dutie in the search of him, and bring
him hither with mée to the Court. Willingly the Emperor
consented thereto, and like order tooke the Prince Florendos,
that Cardyna with her Brethren and other Gentlemen,
should go to the Mountaine of Oliues, and enquir
                           •
                        
                        
for Gerrard Palmerins foster-father, Marcella his Wife,
and Dyo
                              •
                           ena their Daughter. Palmerin séeing all things
sort to so good ende, falling on his knée before the Emperour
and his Father, saide. Séeing it hath pleased God to
make me knowne for your Sonne, I will not conceale a
matter from you, which concerneth mée very néerely, and
although it be of great importaunce, yet will I not further
procéede without your aduise. So discoursed he all his seuerall
apparitions, while he continued with his supposed Father,
whereby he was prouoked to go séeke the lady, who by
fatall destenie was promised him: nor did he hide his troubles
in her search, but therewith bewrayed that her name
was Polynarda, daughter to the Emperour of Allemaigne,
and his Wife by solemne vowes passed betwéene them.
He declared moreouer, how he trauailed to find the Prince
Trineus, whome hée lost on the Sea with the Princesse of
England, and them hée would recouer againe, in respect of
his faithfull promise to his Ladie. Notwithstanding, quoth
he, if you thinke it conuenient, I would gladly sende to aduertise
the Emperour and my Lady his Daughter of my
present good fortune, that his Maiestie may confirme our
priuate agréement, because I doubt the Prince of Fraunce,
whose Ambassadours haue béene there to conferre on the
matter, may otherwise present me of mine onely choyse.
In like manner, if Netrides shall be founde to bee made
King of Hungaria, and the Princesse Armida to be bestowed
in marriage on Syr Frysoll, who is such a Knight in my
iudgement, as well deserues one of the chéefest Ladies in
the world.
                     So God helpe me my Sonne, quoth the Emperour, no
reason were it to disappoint what thou hast so well contriued:
for séeing things haue beene fore-pointed by fortune,
méere folly it is for men to contrarie them. And because I
haue héeretofore heard, that the Emperours Daughter is
the flower and choyse Ladie among all other, whose vertues
challenge the man beyonde compare in Chiualri
                           •
                        : I

will sende mine Ambassadours to the Emperour, as well
for the perfection of the marriage, as to comfort her in her
despayres, with certaine assurance of our health and welfare,
and so shall your intended trauaile not bee hindered.
Notwithstanding, before you begin your iourney, you shall
receiue the homage of all the Princes and Lords of Greece,
as their liege Lord and supreme Gouernour, which béeing
doone, I will likewise take order for my Nephew Frysoll,
so soone as his Father shall come to the Court. Then calling
for the Maister of his Horse, commaundement was
giuen for spéedie dispatch of messengers to all parts. So leauing
the Emperour busied in these affayres, Florendos and
Palmerin went to the Quéene, who causing them to sitte
downe by her, after shee had very graciously welcommed
them, sayde.
                     I pray you tell me, which of vs thrée is most beholding
to Fortune, the Father, the Mother, or the Sonne? Doubtlesse,
who so considereth the condition of our aduenture, will

                           •••
                        nde it such, as seldome hath the like béene séene héeretofore.
And in sooth my Lorde Florendos, the grée
                           •
                        ous torments
I haue endured since the losse of my Sonne, and my
great disloyaltie towards you by breach of my promise, I
iudge may bee equalled with the burthen of mine offence.
Neuerthelesse, if you estéeme not your selfe satisfied, let
your noble regarde excuse what nature hath perfected,
which is, to endure much more then as yet wee haue done.
Madame, answered Florendos, in time of ioy remember
not our passed misfortunes, but thinke what now is doone,
our gracious starres haue graciously furthered and limitted
to this end, that my loyaltie, with the bountie and prowesse
of our sonne, should be laid open to euerie iudgement. Héere
had the Prince occasion to rehearse his afflictions in loue,
endured twentie yéeres space and more for her sake, which
Palmerin hearing, either fearing to offend them, or induced
by modest bashfulnes, he went to his Sister the Princesse
Armida, whose thoughts hée sounded by such subtilties and

dissimulations, as he found the effect of her desires, which
was to enioy Sir Frysoll to her Husband. He not a little
contented héerewith, confirmed her choyse to be commendable,
sealing the assurance thereof with an honourable report
of his knightly déedes of Armes. Then the Emperour
called for the Duke of Mecaena and the Counte of Re
                              •
                           fo
                              •
                           t,
as also his principall Secretarie, whom hee commaunded
to write to the Emperour of Allemaigne, touching the
marriage of the Princesse Polinarda and his sonne Pa
                              •
                           merin,
shadowing the secret agréement betw
                           •
                        ene themselues,
and committed t
                           •
                        e rest to the discre
                           •
                        ion of the Ambassadours.
                     The Letters sealed with his great Signet, was deliuered
to them that had the charge of this message, who
could not so spéedily departe from Constantinople, because
the winde and weather was not nauigable. Now had Palmerin
promised Frysoll that he would speake to the Princesse
his sister, and solemnely resolue vpon their marriage:
wherefore (méeting with this earnest L
                           •
                        uer) hee thus laboured
to please him. Trust me Cozin, I haue so surely imprinted
your especiall generositie in my Sisters minde, as
the carracters can neuer be defaced, but remaine more perfect
by your spéedie marriage. Frysoll reuiued with these
newes, as all pretenders of loue may well imagine, offered
to kisse his hande, which Palmerin would not suffer,
whereupon hée thus procéeded. Ah my Lorde, howe am I
more and more indebted to you? right wise was hee which
saide, that affabilitie and liberalitie are continuall companions
with noblenesse and magnanimitie. And though by al
my seruices I cannot deserue the honour you do mee in accepting
me for your Brother, yet am I so faithfully vowed
yours, as the honours of my Father nor loue of the Princesse
your Sister, can seperate mee from your companie,
vntill you haue founde your long desired Friende Trineus.
And for this cause my Lord, I earnestly intreate you to hasten
Apolonio towards my Father, for I will sende him to

                        
                           〈◊〉
                         place, where he shall be assured to finde him. Palmerin
accorded thereto immediatly, and so labored with the Emperour,
that the Letters were deliuered, and the oathes taken
of all the Hungarians, they were sent home into theyr
Countrey, with a Lieutenant appointed to gouerne them
vntill the comming of Netrides, to whom Frysoll wrote the
truth of all his fortunes, with earnest request of his spéedie
presence.
                     And to enduce him to the greater haste, hée feigned that
many Princes laboured for the Crowne of Hungaria, and
were in likelihood to obtaine it: all which was but to enioy
the faire princesse Armida. The same day Florendos sent to
the King his Father at Macedon, that hée should send the
cheefest states of his Realme, against the day that Palmerin
should be sworne the Prince of Greece.
                     
                  
                  
                     Chap. XXXIIII.
                     
                        How C
                              •
                           tdyna the Gentlewoman attending on the Queene,
accompanied with her Brother and diuers other Squires,
brought Gerrard, his wi
                              •
                           e and daughter to the Court, and
what entertainment Palmerin made them.
                     
                     
                        
                           CArdyna, with those that were comma
                           •
                        
                        ded
to kéepe her company, in short time
came to Gerrards house, whom shee
found sitting at dinner with his familie.
The good man was at first amazed,
séeing such courtly personages enter
his house, a matter estéemed rare among
y• persons dwelling on the mountaine:

but séeing they came in decent and modest sort, not
proffering any discourtesie, he entertained them very friendly,
when Cardyna taking him by the hande, said. Good Father,
are you the man that is called Gerrard? I am the same
quoth he, gentle mistresse. You are then the man, aunswered
Cardyna, that I séeke, and therefore I pray thée tell
me what thou didst with a Childe, that twentie yéeres and
more since, thou foundest in swadling clothes vnder a Palm
Trée on this Mountaine: for certaine I am that thou didst
take him home with thée to thy house? Ah mistresse, quoth
the good old man, you haue killed my heart in remembring
me of him, whom I loued déerer then any of mine owne.
The infant of whom you speake, I founde not farre hence
vnder a Palme Trée, for which cause at his Baptisme I
named him Palmerin. From that time forwarde, I nourished
him as hée had béene mine owne Sonne, till hée rame
to tall stature, and as he grew in yéeres, so did hee in vertuous
and noble qualities, which made him not a little beloued
in these parts, for when hee attended my Cattell,
he tooke pleasure to course the Wolfe, Hart, Beare, Bore,
and Lion, and oftentimes would kill them when him listed,
which none of mine owne Children durst at any time aduenture.
                     Ah swéete Mistresse, when I remember his many seruices,
the dutifull reuerence and loue hee bare mée, I am
readie to die with conceite of gréefe, that it was my ill hap
so soone to loose him. Yet came not this misfortune alone,
for mine eldest Sonne, who loued him as he had béene his
owne Brother, immediately went after him, and yet could
I neuer heare any tidings of them. Notwithstanding Mistresse,
if you know of whence hée was, I can shewe you all
the clothes wherein I founde him. I shall be contented to
sée them, quoth Cardyna, but what will ye giue the partie
that can tell ye whee he is? Cerrard at these wordes fell
on his knée before her, and with the teares trickling downe
his graie beard, saide. By my troth mistresse, if it shall like

you to doo me so great pleasure, of all my substance I will
giue yée the one halfe: or all my heard of Beastes, which
ye saw féeding on the Mountain as ye came, beside my continuall
seruice while I liue. Gramercies Father, sayd Cardyna,
but call for your Wife and Daughter, and then shall
I tell ye newes that well content you. As for him, whose
friendly Parentes you were so long time, hée is nowe at
Constantinople, and is the Sonne of Madam Griana, daughter
to the Emperour: who commaundeth you thrée to come
to the Court, that she may content ye for nourishing so well
the noble young Prince. The olde man excéeding ioyfull,
without ordering his affaires, or appointing his Seruaunts
their course of labour, saide to his Wife and Dyofena his
Daughter.
                     Make ye readie presently in your best garments, and
let vs goe sée that noble Gentleman: for all the Golde in the
world cannot make me staie, nowe I haue heard so happie
tidings. The good woman and her daughter, trickt vp themselues
in their countrey fines, and taking the rich swadling
clothes, sette forward to Constantinople so merely, as sometime
did the foster Father of Paris, Alexander, his Wife,
and their Daughter Pegasis, when they brought the Cradle
and acoustrements of the infant royall, to the Cittie of
Troy, after he was knowne by his Father King Priam, and
Quéene Hecuba his Mother.
                     
                        Palmerin being aduertised by one of the Ladies of Honour
attending on the Empresse, that Cardyna had brought
Gerrard, to prouoke greater contentation, he would néedes
goe méete him, and so went downe into the Court, accompanied
with many yoong knights lately come to the Emperours
seruice. Gerrard séeing this goodly troupe, among
them all knewe Palmerin perfectly, wherefore alighting
from his Horsse, and without giuing him in charge to any
Page or Lacki
                           •
                        , 
                           •
                        an and fel downe at his féete▪ but Palmerin
staying him in his 
                           〈◊〉
                        , said. Father Gerrard and 
                           〈◊〉
                        
deare friends, the G
                           •
                        d of Heauen 
                           〈…〉
                        , praysed, in

that by bringing me to the knowledge of my Parentes, I
haue the meane to satisfie your paine and trauaile for me, sauing
my life in my yongest yeares, and nourishing me to the
state of discretion.
                     Ah my Lord, quoth Gerrard, I thinke in all the world
is no man so happie as my selfe, hauing defended from perill
so noble a person, therefore néedelesse is it to make offer
of money for your nurriture: in that I prize your golde
and siluer lesse then drosse, such is my content to sée you so
well. Palmerin likewise, whose match might not be founde
in courtesie and nobilitie of heart, louingly welcommed
Marcella, and her daughter Dyofena, walking along with
them vp into the Pallace, where in this sort hée presented
them to the Emperour. Sée héere my good Lord, they that
from mine infancie, with excéeding kindnesse and loue nourished
mée: let mée therefore intreate your Maiestie so to
conceiue of them, as their paines and charges may be sufficiently
requited. The Emperour taking great pleasure to
beholde them, saide they should continue in the Court with
him, commaunding them to bee brought to his daughters
Chamber, who entertained them verie graciously: but
when they came to vnfold Palmerins little pack of cloathes,
hardly can you imagine the inwarde ioyes of the Mother.
For Tolomestra well knew the Scarlet mantle, which her
selfe had all embroydered with curious knots of Gold, and
all the other prettie trinkets, saying. Doubtlesse Madame,
it cannot bée but that Palmerin is your Sonne: for well I
knowe hée was wrapped in these cloathes, when Cardyna
carried him hence to the Mountaine. Then did Gerrard discourse
before all the Ladies, in what manner hée founde
yong Palmerin among the Trées: not forgetting to report
euery thing, from that day till his departure without his
knowledge.
                     Many swéete smiles did the Quéene intermedle with
her forced teares, hearing the 
                           〈◊〉
                         daungers her Sonne
had endured: and for the great loue shée bare to Marcella,
                        
she made her one of the Ladies of her Chamber, and gaue
Dyofena a worthie dowrie to her marriage. As for Gerrad
himselfe, the Emperor made him one of his chéefest Barons,
and dubbed his Sonnes Knights, who proued afterward
of hardie courage, as héereafter in the Historie you
may perceiue. This done, the Emperour brought Florendos
and Palmerin into his Treasurie, saying. My friends,
take, beare away, all is yours, dispose thereof as you please:
furnish your selues with all néedefull thinges, against the
day of my Daughters marriage. Giue bountifully to the
poore Knights, that they may likewise prepare themselues
in readinesse, all which will redound to your perpetuall honour.
                     In sooth my Lord, answered Florendos, it is against
all equitie and reason, that during your life I should presume
so farre: well worthie were I of the sharpest reprehension,
to vsurpe that, which by right appertaines to him
who gaue me life and honour. When the Emperour sawe
hée coulde not perswade them, hée sent a sumpter Horsse
loaden with Golde, to the Prince Olorico and Erysoll: beside
diuers other Iewels of inestimable value, that they
might the better furnish their estate, against the solemnitie
of the Macedonian Prince. On which day, these two
Knights determined a Tryumyhe at Armes, for the loue
of their friende and companion Palmerin: who the same
day should bee sworne Prince, and sole heire to the Empire.
Upon this occasion, and by his highnesse commaundement,
the Heraldes were sent abroad to publish the Tourney,
which should endure tenne dayes togither: with the
excellencie of the prize to them, that should beare the honour
of the Ioust each day. These disports so prouoked the Lords
of Greece, as neither King, Duke, Countie, Barron, or
Knight, that was able to mannage Horsse and Armes, but
repaired to Constantinople, in such troupes, as though a new
world had bene to be conquered.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. XXXV.
                     
                        Howe the Knight that Florendos sent to Macedon, rehearsed
to the King Primaleon the effect of his charge:
and how Palmerin entertained his fathers, Princes and
Knights.
                     
                     
                        
                           FLorēdos hauing sent one of his knights
to Macedon, in verie short time y• Messenger
arriued at a Castle of pleasure,
where as then the King remayned for
his delight, with the Princesse Arismena
his Daughter, to expell such contagious
thoughts as daily troubled them,
for the absence of the Prince, of whome
they coulde vnderstande no tydings. The knight beeing
come into the Kinges Chamber, where his Maiestie satt
                           •
                        
deuising with his Daughter: and setting his knée to the
grounde, in this maner beganne his message. Right high
and mightie King, I bring you the very straungest tidings,
yet repleate with ioy and speciall comfort, whereof your
Maiestie neuer heard the like. My Lorde the Prince Florendos
your Sonne, with humble dutie saluteth your excellencie,
and the faire Princesse Arismena his Sister, certefying
you, that the aduenturous knight Sir Palmerin,
euen hee by whose meanes your health was recouered, is
his owne Sonne, begotten on the princesse Griana, Daughter
to my Lord the Emperour, to whom hee is nowe betr
                           •
                        
                        thed,
by the consent of all the Princes of the Empire, and
Sir Palmerin your Sonne shall be Emperour, after the
decease of his noble Grandfather. The good king Primaleon
                        
olde and decrepite, was so surprised with these newes,
as he imagined he heard some fantastical illuding voice, rather
then matter of trueth and certaintie: with which inwarde
oppressing conceite, his weake estate not able to support
it selfe, béeing ouercome with ioy, doubt and suspition,
as hardly could Arismena his Daughter kéepe life in him,
so often hee swouned with hearing this reporte, yet at
length taking the Knight by the hande, he sayde. My good
Fréend, God I trust will blesse thée with honour and prosperitie,
for bringing mee the tidings I haue long desired.
Nowe may I well say, that neuer anie Princes age was
more beautified with happinesse, then mine is, hauing my
Sonne allyed in such an house, and another Sonne excelling
all the Knights in the worlde. But if the Heauens
vouchsafe me so much grace and fauour, that I may once
sée him before I ende this life, it will be such sufficient content
to mée, as then I force not though I liue no longer.
Then calling for one of his Secretaries, to reade the Letters
his sonne had sent him, and hauing heard the contents
there of▪ commaunded present dispatch of Messengers, to
aduertise the Lords and nobilitie of his Realme, who likewise
were so gladde of these newes, as each one prepared
himselfe agaynst the day appoynted. The King hauing
written Letters to his Sonne, as also to Palmerin, whom
hée entreated to come and sée him, gaue them to the Messenger,
and withall such an honourable gift for his paynes,
as well might content a greater personage. He returning
to Constantinople, effectually discharged his aunswere: and
Palmerin reading his Grandfathers Letters, vowed to fulfill
his request, and afterward to follow the search of Try
                           
                              •
                           eus.
                     
                     Now the day béeing come, when the Lords of Macedon
shoulde set forwarde to Constantinople, they came to
take theyr leaue of the King, who began to them in this
manner. Ah, my good Fréends, God is my witnesse, with
what good will I would beare you companie, if my aged

yéeres did not forbid me: neuerthelesse, let mée desire yée to
behaue your selues in such sort, as if I were in person with
ye, and honour Prince Palmerin no lesse then my selfe. So
creating the Duke of Pontus his Lieutenant in this Ambassade,
because hée was a braue and comely yong Prince:
bequeathed them to happie Fortune in their iourney, commaunding
a Knight to poste before them, that Palmerin
might be first aduertised of their comming. On the same
day as they should arriue at the Cittie, Palmerin accompanied,
with the yong King of Sparta, the most subtill and
ingenious Prince of his time, (as well instructed in the
manners and conditions of the auncient Kings his predecessours,
especially imitating cautelous V
                              •
                           isses) and diuerse
other yong Princes and Knights, rode to méete the Lords
of Macedon, at the Gates of the Citie. There alighted all
the Lords to kisse his hand, which hée woulde not permit
them to doo: but casting himselfe likewise from his Horse,
embraced them all one after another. And mounting on
horsebacke againe, entered the Cittie, which was so plentifullie
stored with Knights and gentlemen against the tryumph:
as the Prince Olorico and Frysoll were appoynted
by the Emperour, to sée the Lords lodged according to
their estate, and to erect Tents and Pauillions without the
Cittie, where the rest of their traine might be decently entertained.
                     This choyse made the Emperour of these twaine in
this matter, because in all his Court were not two more
courteous Princes: beside, they were the onely men in the
worlde, for affable and gracious entertaining straungers.
All this businesse ended, and Palmerin deuising with the
Quéene his Mother, Frysoll béeing in his companie, sawe
her enter the Chamber, to whom he had vowed his seruiceable
deuotions: wherfore feigning some occasiō at the windowe
where the Princesse stood, he went and stood by her a
prettie while, and at length entred into these spéeches. Madame,
as yet in all my life I neuer requested any thing of a

Ladie, and now would I gladly moue one sute to you, (as to
her that is the onely Mistresse of my heart) if I should not
séeme ouer-bold in this petition: assuring you, that hauing
obtained this fauour of you, you shall not commaunde anie
thing, how difficult so euer it bée, but I will gladlie enterprise
it for your sake. Beléeue me, Sir Frysoll, aunswered
the Princesse, you speake but reason, demaunde then what
you please, and you shall obtaine it: because I holde this opinion
of you, that you will not request any thing, that shall
in ought be preiudiciall to mine honour. A thousand thanks
good Madame, said Frysoll, this houre I hope hath boaded
mée good fortune, and this is my request, that you would so
much honor me, as to permit me enter the Tourney vnder
the name of your Knight, because I would enterprise nothing
but by your commaundement. And this (in my iudgement)
is such an especiall 
                           •
                        auour, as I durst not presume to
solicite you withall, without the graunt my Lorde your
Brother Palmerin made mée: with this addition, that according
to my deserts in the Tourney (if you can so fancie)
to accept me as your Lord and husband. With these wordes
the Princesse was touched to the quicke, in that her desires
were that way addicted: and her colour chaunging with
her priuate conce
                           •
                        te, shée shadowed so artificially as shée
could, and with wordes fearefull and trembling, thus aunswered.
                     In sooth my Lord, neuer was I mooued with any such sute
héeretofore: but my Brother may so farre commaund mee,
as what liketh him I would be loth to gain-say. As for your
demaund, to enter the field vnder the name of my Knight,
with right good will I graunt it: assuring you thereof with
this Iewell, which henceforth so please you to weare, shall
remaine as a token of my loue to you. So taking a goodly
Emeralde from her finger, kissing it, with great courtesie
gaue it him. Nowe am I sure Madame, quoth Frysoll, to
haue part of the prize, séeing I shall aduenture in your seruice:
nor is this ring of so little value, but when in the

Combat I shall behold it, my forces will be redoubled, and
newe life enter my fainting spirit. Moreouer I dare say,
that neuer did the Ring of Giges bring him more honour,
then this will to mée: for his could not profite or aduantage
him, but onely by béeing inuisible. On the contrary, I haue
no pleasure but in your presence, nor shall I thinke my selfe
at better ease, then when among Launces and Swordes I
may labour for your loue. Then entred the Empresse, with
other Ladies newlie come to the Court to sée the Iousts:
which brake of their talke, wherefore taking leaue of each
other, they departed the Chamber.
                  
                  
                     Chap. XXXVI.
                     
                        Howe the Duke of Mecaena, and the Counte of Reifort,
arriued at Allemaigne, at the Emperours Court, and
after theyr Ambassage dispatched, the Emperour
sent backe with them to Constantinople, the Duke of
Lorraine, and the Marquesse of Licena, as his Ambassadours.
                     
                     
                        NOwe is the day come, when the Fléete
appoynted for the Ambassade to Allemaigne,
should depart, wherefore
béeing furnished with all things necessari
                           •
                        
for their voyage, the winde
and Sea likewise verie seruiceable:
came to aduertise Palmerin thereof,
to knowe if he would commaund them
any further seruice.
                     
                        Palmerin walked with them to the Hauen, and by the
way gaue a Letter to the Duke of Mecaena, saying. Worthy

Duke, present my humble dutie to my Lady Polynarda,
and giue her this Letter, whereof I pray you bring mee an
answere. And pleased God that I might go with you, neuer
could any voyage better please me: therefore lette me intreate
you returne so soone as possible may be. The Duke
promised to accomplish his desire, and taking leaue of each
other, they went abroade, where hoysing theyr sayles, with
a merrie wind a way they went, and arriued in Allemaigne
sooner then expected. When they were come on shore, they
sent a Knight before to the Emperour, that hee might bée
acquainted with their comming, yet could not his Maiestie
but maruaile at this Ambassage, because in all his time
he neuer had the like, and therefore thought this strange
occasion would sort to as strange an ende. At length, to doo
them the greater honour, he sent all his Knights and Gentlemen
to receiue them, who conducted the Duke of Mecaena
and the Counte of Reifort to the Pallace, and afterwarde
to the presence of the Emperour. When the Duke
entred the Chamber, 
                           •
                        hee saluted his Maiestie with great
reuerence, yet not kissing his hande, because he came from
as great a state as hee was: afterwrd he beganne in this
manner.
                     Mightie and redoubted Monarch of Allemaigne, the
most high and excellent Emperour of Constantinople my
Maister, vnderstanding the losse of your Sonne Trineus,
gréeteth you with health and continuall happinesse. Giuing
you to vnderstande, that within these fewe daies such good
fortune hath befallen him, as in all his life time hée neuer
had the like. And albeit in his last warre with the Turkes
and Moores, he lost both Sonnes, Nephewes, and many
great Lords of his kindred, and since that time hath béene
troubled with the hard 
                           •
                        ap of his daughter Griana, Quéene
of Hungaria, and the sodaine death of her Husband the
King: yet hath his Maiestie changed all these gréefes into
ioy, by knowledge of the good Knight Sir Palmerin, whose
renowne liues as wel in Heathenesse as in Christendome,

béeing now found Sonne to my Lord the Emperour, and
therefore created sole heyre to the Empire. And the noble
Prince Palmerin on his behalfe, humbly saluteth your imperiall
maiestie, béeing the Lord to whom he is most affected
in seruice, so that to finde out your Sonne Trineus and
the faire Agriola Daughter of England, whom two yéeres
since and more hee lost in the East Seas: he abandoneth all
honorable preferments, vntill his trauaile shall be finished:
and he hath brought him hither before your highnesse. And
hauing alreadie searched in many Kingdomes, at length
hée vnderstood that they were liuing and in health, also that
himselfe should in the ende recouer them, hée thought it
necessarie to acquaint you herewith, because he doubted of
your extreame sorrow and heauinesse. The Emperor astonied
to heare the good fortune of Palmerin, as also the losse
of his Sonne Trineus, could not subdue his passions, which
mooued the teares to trickle downe his chéekes, with conceit
of ioy and gréefe together: yet shadowing his alteration
so well as he could, thus replyed. In truth my Lorde
Ambassadour, I alwaies imagined by Palmerins woorthie
actions, that he was discended of noble or royall linage, and
greatly it contenteth me, that he so happily hath founde the
house of his discent, expelling altogether (considering his
promise and prowesse) what hath béene long imprinted in
my heart, considering the losse of my Sonne Trineus. For
so fauourable are the heauens to Palmerin, in all his enterprises
and admirable aduentures, as one may imagine, that
déeds of honor and account are reserued onely for him, chéefely
the recouerie of my Sonne, which I hope hee will effectually
bring to passe. And trust me, not without great and
sufficient reason, doth the Emperour your Maister repute
himselfe happie: this onely good fortune béeing of force enough
to discharge his mind of all sorrowes and cares, that
former occasions mooued him with all. Now know I howe
to recompence his princely kindnesse, honoring me with so
good and happy tidings, but that it may please him to accept

of mee héereafter, as his louing Brother and faithfull
Friend. No other thing my Lord (quoth the Duke) dooth
his Maiestie desire, and to beginne this amitie and alliance
betwéene you, hee requesteth that if his Sonne Palmerin
hath héeretofore founde such fauour in your eyes, you would
now confirme it, by giuing him to wife the Princesse Polynarda
your Daughter, whom he will not marrie vntill he
haue brought home your Sonne Trineus. As for the other
conuentions of the marriage, this Letters shall certifie you:
so kissing them, hée deliuered them with very great reuerence.
                     And her shall he haue with right good will, sayde the
Emperour, for a fitter husband can shée not haue: I thinke
likewise her selfe will consent thereto, for the good opinion
she had of him while he remained in our Court. But because
I will not displease the King of Fraunce, who in like
manner requesteth her for his Sonne and heyre, I will conferre
with the estates of the Empire, and then deliuer you
certaine answere. So the Ambassadours withdrew themselues
to their lodgings, and the Emperor caused the Letters
to bee read before all his Princes and Lordes, who
could no way mislike of this marriage, and therefore great
ioy was made through the Empire, in hope the Prince
Trineus should soone be recouered. These ioyfull newes
soone spreading through the Court, at length were brought
to the Princesse Polinarda in her Chamber, who not able
to conceale her sodaine ioy, ranne to Bryonella, saying.
Swéete friende, nowe maist thou reioyce with me, in that
our loues are nowe assured vs, whereof before wée vtterly
despayred. Ah my Brionella, Heauen hath now confirmed
our fortunate successe, in that my Palmerin is founde to bee
the Emperours Sonne of Constantinople, whereof he hath
certified my Lord and Father by his Embassage, and howe
Palmerin hath heard tydings of my Brother Trineus,
whom shortly he will bring home againe, yet not without
thy Ptolome I hope. Therefore (my on
                           •
                        ly copartner in

loue and feare) let vs abandon all gréefe and sorrow, which
greatly may preiudice our health and welfare: and nowe
dispose our selues to a contented resolution of life, attending
our long desired fortune. God graunt it may be so,
quoth Bryonella, yet my minde perswades mee that wée
shall not sée them so soone as you wéene. The Emperour
hauing conferred with the Lorde of Allemaigne, who very
well allowed the marriage of his daughter with Palmerin:
determined to send to the Emperor of Constantinople ambassadours,
for perfect confirmation of the marriage. And by
generall consent, the Duke of Lorrayne and the Marquesse
of Licena, were chosen for this present Embassage. Which
being doone, the Emperour went to the Empresse Chamber,
and sent for his Daughter Polynarda, who was so ioyfull
of these happie newes, as she could scant imagine how
to dissemble her content, when shee should come in her Fathers
presence, yet shadowing it from any open suspect, after
shee had saluted her Father with great reuerence, the
Emperour, thus spake.
                     Daughter, you haue hitherto refused so many noble
offers, as hardly can I permitte to mooue you with any other:
yet once more will I trie you againe, in hope you will
stand vpon no more refusals, but ioyne with me in opinion,
as beyonde all other best beséemes you. The man of whom
I speake, is noble Palmerin, of whose honourable behauiour
you haue some knowledge, and for no other cause hath the
Emperour sent his Ambassadours, aduise your selfe then
what you answere, for all our nobilitie allow the match, and
thereto haue generally subscribed their consent. The Princesse
couering her inwarde ioy with modest bashfulnesse,
thus answered.
                     If héeretofore my good Lorde, I excused my obeysance
to your commandement, especially for taking a husband,
it was onely for the promise I made to my Brother Trineus:
but nowe seeing it is your pleasure, and the good lyking
of al the estates, as also that the marriage shall not be

solemnized till my Brothers presence: I will not disobey
your commaund, assuring your Maiestie, that more content
am I to match with him, then any other you named heretofore.
And this one speciall cause, that he laboureth to bring
home my noble Brother, which Heauen graunt hee may:
otherwise can I not marry, without verie great impeach to
mine honour.
                     The Emperour well perceiued by the grace of her answere,
and her countenance nowe nothing sadoe or melanchollie,
that shee was nothing offended with this motion,
wherfore he said. Happie may I count my selfe faire daughter,
that among all the Christian Princes you haue chosen
such a Husband: therefore apparrell your selfe to morrow
in the best sort you may, for then shall my Lordes the Ambassadours
see you. So departed the Princesse to her Chamber,
and no more spéeches were vsed till the next day, when
the Emperour sent for the Ambassadours of Constantinople,
and in the presence of the principall estate of the Empire,
ratefied the mariage betwéen Palmerin and his daughter.
And for further confirmation thereof, promised to send
his owne Ambassadours with them, to satisfie (on his behalfe)
the Emperour, Florendos and Palmerin. For which
excéeding gentlenesse, the Duke of Mec
                              •
                           ena (in the Emperours
name) thanked his Maiestie, earnestly entreating
him to dispatch them thence so soone as might bee, because
their charge was to returne with all possible spéede. This
resolution absolutely sette downe, the Emperour (for the
greater honour) caused them to dine with him at his owne
Table, and grace being said by the Lord Almoner, the Duke
of Mecana desired his Maiestie, that hée might sée the
Princesse Polynarda: whereof hée made promise so soone
as Dinner was done, when taking the Duke of Mecaena
by the one hande, and the Countie of Reifort by the other,
brought them to the Empresse Chamber, where they founde
the Princesse in such sumptuous ornaments, and accompanied
with such rare grace and exquisite beautie, as they

iudged her rather an Angell then anie earthly creature.
And greatly was the Duke abashed at such a singular spectacle,
not knowing how to frame his opinions: but hauing
humbly saluted the Empresse, came to the Princesse, and
on his knée reuerently kissed her hand, with these spéeches.
Let it not displease ye faire Madame, that I vse this honourable
dutie to you: for I doo it in this respect, as to the
gracious Ladie and Empresse (héereafter) of Constantinople.
                     
                     By this meane hée secretly conueyed Palmerins Letter
into her hande, for which the Princesse gaue him many
deuout thankes, which were coupled with such magesticall
gestures, as neither to Nero or Galba were done the
like, no not by Constantine himself to the Pope. And though
the Dukes words had raised a swéete blush in her chéekes,
yet could she with such choyse answeres excuse the same, as
gaue greater countenaunce to all her behauiour. Then turned
the Duke to the Emperour, and smiling, saide. Trust
me my Lord, nowe doo I verely beléeue what hath heretofore
bene told me of the Prince Palmerin, that hée is an especiall
Iudge of the beautie of Ladies, for in mine opinion,
hée hath chosen one without a second: and of her may truly
be affirmed, what the Poets described of Helena, tearming
her the Goddesse of beautie. With this rare Princesse to
be matched an Husband so famous, well may be saide, the
couple to be without compare: for the faire formed Paris
may not be equalled with Palmerin. So the Ambassadours
departing, the Princesse withdrewe her selfe to her Chamber,
where reading her friends Letter, her ioyes and pleasures
redoubled, because shée might now boldly credite her
fortune.
                     And before she would forget the inuention her spirite offered,

                           •
                        hée presently wrote an answere: earnestly entreating
him to hasten his returne, to abreuiate her languishing
desires, which nowe made her life but a shadow of death.
Hauing close sealed her Letter, shée sent it to the Duke by

one of her most trustie Ladies, with diuers other rich gifts
and presentes. The Duke of Lorraine and his companie
readie, departed thence with the Ambassadours, and winde
and weather seruing so well, they arriued at Constantinople
the day before Florendo's his nuptialls. Newes being
brought héereof to the Courte, Palmerin accompanied with
many Princes and Knightes, went to the Hauen, and at
the landing of the Ambassadours, Palmerin embraced the
Duke of Lorr
                              •
                           ine, and the Marquesse of Cicena: and so ryding
to the Pallace, beguiled the time with diuers discourses,
where among, the Duke of Lorraine thus spake. Syr
Palmerin, I alwayes did imagine, that those straunge aduentures
a
                           •
                        chiued by you, during the obscuritie of your yonger
yeares, would in the end reueale your honourable parentage,
and make your name for euer immortall: and were
the Prince Tryneus with you nowe, for the verie best condition
in the world would I not leaue your companie. Gentle
Duke, answered Palmerin, if I did not perswade my
selfe, how greatly I should comfort your minde, by recouering
your Prince Tryneus: I should account my life so vnhappie,
as presently I would 
                           ••
                        sire my death. God graunt
quoth the Duke, that you may finde him againe, for that
will bee the greatest good that euer came to our Empire:
considering the vertues, magnanimitie and speciall chiualrie,
which is as currant in our yong Prince as in any other.
And thus they spent the time till they came to the
Pallace, where the Duke of Lorraine after hee had saluted
the Emperour and the Princes, deliuered the message
committed to his charge. Wherewith Palmerin was not
a little pleased, considering what he had read in his Ladies
Letter, which discouered the sorrowes shee endured for his
absence: but being assured of her firme loyaltie, as also that
shée was now promised him in marriage, his cares were the
lesse, commaunding the Duke to be lodged neare his owne
Chamber, that he might the better conferre with him of his
Mistresse, whom he loued as deare as his owne life.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. XXXVII.
                     
                        Howe after the Prince Florendos and Queene Griana,
were espoused togither, Palmerin was sworne Prince
and heire of Greece and Macedon, by the consent of
the Lords of the Empire and the Realme.
                     
                     
                        THe Ambassadours of Allemaigne being
now come, the Emperour was aduertised
thereof, and considering that the
Princes of Thrace and Macedon, had
expected their presence for the space of
sixe dayes, it was appointed, that on the
morrow the Prince Florendos & Griana
should be married. And the day being
come of this long desired wedding, shée was cloathed in
such rich and costly garments, as though she had bene still a
virgine. But héere to set downe the sumptuous vestures of
her, her husband, the Emperour, the Empresse, with diuers
other Lords, Ladies and Gentlewomen, also the solemnitie
and ceremonies, both at the Church and at the Pallace,
would waste a great deale of time in vaine, and without any
pleasure or profit to the Readers, and therefore I will let it
passe vnder your conceit, and speake of such things as are
most néedfull.
                     After that the Prince Florendos and Griana were
espoused by the Patriache of Constantinople, the whole
traine returned to the Pallace, where before the Gate was
erected a goodly Theater, hanged rounde about with cloth
of Golde, and therein were set manie Chaires and Canapies
of estate. There was the Prince Palmerin placed in

the cheefest seate, the Emperour and Florendos on the one
side, and the Empresse and Griana on the other: then was
Palmerin sworne Prince of Greece, with all the obseruations
in such causes accustomed, by all the Lords of the Empire,
from the Emperor himselfe to the verie meanest Gentleman.
In like sorts did the states of Macedon, his Father
Florendos first beginning, the Duke of Pontus next,
and in the selfe same order as the Imperialistes had doone.
This doone, the Tables were couered, and all the Princes
placed according to their dignities: the Emperour and Empresse
at the chéefest, the newe married couple at the second,
and the Prince Palmerin at the third: so consequently the
Kings, Princes, Dukes, Marqusses, Counties, and all the
rest in order. As for the magnificence of the seruice, the royal
order obserued, the Tryumphes, Momeries, Masques, and
dauncing: would but fill paper with néedlesse reports, in
that your iudgements can conceiue thereof sufficientlie. But
the Tabels béeing withdrawne, the noble Gallants went
and Armed themselues, and entred the field which was appointed
without the Cittie, and furnished with Scaffoldes
and standings for the Lords and Ladies, where the afternoone
was spent brauelie at Tylt and Tourney, with daintie
chiualrie performed by Frysoll, Olorico, the King of
Sparta, the duke of Pontus and many other knights. When
night was come, and Supper ended, the Bride and Bridegroome
were honorablye brought to th
                           •
                        ir Chamber, and
Florendos beeing alone with his Ladie, thus beganne. Ah
swéete Madame, how manie sorrow
                           •
                        s haue I endured, in
expectation of this long desired h
                           •
                        ur
                           •
                        ? but 
                           〈◊〉
                         at length
compassed my wish, I holde my selfe sufficientlie satisfied:
giuing credite to the auncient prouerbe, That true loue neuer
wanteth his reward, and that which I thought woulde
haue béene my death, hath now returned me greatest honor
and profit. In sooth my Lord, answered the Quéene, I was
euermore perswaded of your loyaltie: but where necessitie
ruleth, reason hath no place. And if by the exteriour action

I haue béene disloyall to you: yet my heart, which first of all
I gaue to you, neuer diminished in will to loue you firmelie.
For which Tarisius verie often reprooued me, notwithstanding
in the ende, and by the sufferaunce of God I think,
he receiued the rewarde, that the vsurper of another mans
right deserueth. But why should we (my Lorde) call now
to memorie things past, or remember matters which bréed
nothing but heauinesse? it is for you to excuse mée, and for
my selfe to loue and honor you. All the points of theyr former
diuorce debated betweene them, to such effecte theyr
pleasures sorted in the end, as that night shée conceiued with
a Daughter, which prooued to bée beyond all other in beautie.
On the morrow the Prince Palmerin entred the Lists
royall, because this daye he desired to Ioust: before him went
the chéefest Princes of Greece on foote, and sixe Trompets
to make him waye: he managing his Horse with such loftie
voltages, as euerie one delighted to behold him. After
he had doone his reuerence to the Emperour, hée gaue the
spurres to his horse to encounter Frysoll: but when they
came to méete, Frysoll threwe by his Launce and would not
touch him. The like did the Prince Olorico and diuers other
Knights, whereat Palmerin somewhat angry, s
                           •
                        rooke
his Launce into the ground and brake it: and causing himselfe
to be vnarmed, went vp to the Emperour in his standing,
to sée the pastime of the other Knights, and hee was
no sooner come, but the Emperour thus spake to him. Bée
not offended my Sonne, because you haue vnarmed your
selfe without tryall of the Ioust: for the Knightes haue
doone as best beséemed them, not to aduenture on thei
                           •
                         Lord
and Maister. But if you would so faine haue some sport
                           •
                        
with them, you must héereafter disguise your selfe from 
                           ••
                        
                        ing
knowne: otherwise I sée you shall but 
                           〈◊〉
                         your labor.
When Palmerin heard these words, to the ende hée might
somewhat delight the Emperour and the Ladies, especi
                           ••
                        
                        lie
such as neuer sawe his behauiour in chiu
                           •
                        lrie: hee was
determined the last day of the Tryumphe to come suddainlie

among them, and Armed in such sorte as none shoulde
knowe him. In bree
                           •
                        e, now is the last daye come, and the
Emperour vnderstanding that Palmerin woulde enter the
Listes disguised, went to his standing, and Palmerin secretlie
entring his Chamber, found there a white Armour,
such as the yong Knights was accustomed to weare, which
his Dwarfe had there prouided for him: Armed himselfe
presentlie therewith, and mounted on a Horse of the same
colour, entred the Fielde on the assailants side, because he
had heard, that this daie the King of Sparta would encounter
the Duke of Pontus, Frysoll, Olorico, and other of the
most gentle Knightes in the companie. The Emperour
knewe Palmerin, among all the rest, and said to Florendos:
what thinke you (Sonne) of the white Knight? Doo you
know him? No my Lorde, quoth the Prince, I know not
what hée is but me thought hee entred with a iollie countenaunce,
it now remaines to sée what hee can doo. At the
encounter, Palmerin vnhorssed the Prince Olorico, afterward
the Duke of Pontus, and fiue other Knights in his
companie: then hauing broken his Launce, the Emperor
sent him another by a Squire, willing him (for his sake) to
imploy it as he had doone the other, but hee would make no
answer because he feared to be knowne. Now was Frysoll
much offended at the Prince Oloricos misfortune, wherefore
hée would reuenge his Fréendes cause: but the king of
Sparta, estéemed a hardie and approoued knight, stept betwéene
them, and being cast from his horse, was so hurt with
the fall, as he was caried foorth of the Field to his Chamber.
Then Frysoll gaue spurres to his Horse, and encountred
Palmerin with such puis
                           •
                        aunce, as hee made him loose
his styrrops, and had hee not caught holde about his horse
necke, hee had fallen to the ground: but Frysoll, his fortune
was so bad, as his Horse stumbling fel down, and his Maister
vnder him, whereuppon the Emperour said to Florendos,
that the Knight in white Armour was his sonne Palmerin.
In sooth my Lord, quoth the Prince, his fortune is

good if it be hee, and well may he be estéemed the worthiest
in the companie. The duke of Lorrayne hearing their talke,
said.
                     Meruaile not my Lorde that Prince Palmerin hath
so good successe, for in Allemaigne haue I seene him doo
much more then this, and so much, as my Lorde the Emperour
hath béene constrained to commaund them giue
ouer. Palmerin séeing himselfe Maister of the Fielde, departed
as secretlie as hée came thither, and so did the Emperour,
Florendos, Griana, and all other Ladies▪ among
whome the yong Princesse Armida w
                           •
                        s most pensiue
for her Freendes misfortune, so that by her countenaunce
her inwarde affections might easilie bée discerned.
But on the morrowe, when Palmerin sent for all the
Knights of name with whome he had Iousted, and euerie
one knewe that hee woonne the prize of the last daies Tryumphe:
the sorrowe of the Princesse Armida was conuerted
into pleasure, reputing it an honor to her Knight to bée
vnhorssed by her Brother.
                     When the Emperour vnderstoode that Palmerin
was iesting with the Knights, hée came into the Hall, and
taking him by the hande, merrilie saide. Sée héere my
Fréendes the white Knight, whome you all were so desirous
to knowe, but if you finde your selues agréeued with
him, you must laye the blame on mée: for I was the onely
cause of this enterprise, to the ende that hauing made open
proofe of himselfe, you all might witnesse his valour and
bountie, who after me decease must be your Lord and Gouernour.
                     Nowe were all the Knightes well contented againe,
especially the Prince Olorico and Frysol: who though hée
was somewhat brused with his Horse falling on him, came
and embraced Palmerin, saying. In sooth my Lorde, the
strength of your arme and Launce yesterdaye, hath giuen
vs good experience of your vertue: yet our desire to reuenge
our companions foyle was such, as had you béene

our Father we shoulde not haue knowne yée. It may bee
(said Palmerin) that yee made no reckoning of the Knight,
who handled ye in this rough manner: or that you thought
him not woorthie to beare a Launce, because you refused to
Ioust with him the other daye. A kinde 
                           •
                        loute (quoth Frysoll,
perceiuing how Palmerin iested) and queintlie deliuered,
is this your recompence to the Knights that Fréendly
spared you? If I had knowne so much before, I should
haue cryed quittance with you before wee parted. These
words Frisoll spake in such sorte, as Palmerin imagined
he was in choller: wherefore he thus answered. Good brother
I pray you excuse mée, if in dooing my deuoire I haue
offended yée: when you please I will doo penaunce for it, if it
be but to please her, who cannot hide her good will towardes
you.
                     Héereuppon all the thrée Fréendes embraced togither,
taking leaue of each other till the next morning, when a
newe Tourney was begunne againe, and continued for
fiue daies togither: the honour whereof (to make shorte)
happened to Frysoll, vntill the last daye, when a strange
Knight came into the Fielde, and brought one with him resembling
a Giant in stat
                           •
                        re, who with a Turkish Bowe
and enuenomed arrowes, 
                           •
                        lewe and wounded verye 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
So that Palmerin séeing the spoyle of his Fréendes, was
constrained to go Arme himselfe, and defying the Giant,
ouercame both him and the Knight that brought him.
                     Some haue reported this Giant to be a Mon
                           •
                        ter, informe
of the Centaures that encountred Hercules at the nuptials
of Hippodamia: but such rediculous follies are not héer to be
inserted, and though the Spaniard in his Historie affirme it,
yet carries it no likelihoode, wherefore leauing such impertinent
discourses, let vs procéede as occasion doth lead 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. XXXVIII.
                     
                        How the aged Knight Apolonio, found Netrydes, father
to Frysol, and brought him to Constantinople, where
hee was made Gouernour generall of Hungaria: and
how Frysol espoused the Princesse Armida.
                     
                     
                        
                           APolonio hauing receiued Frysols Letters,
and a briefe direction for his iourney,
to the place where he should finde
his father Net
                              •
                           ydes: followed his intent
with such 
                           •
                        iligence▪ as he came to
the Castle where hée remained, and
founde him sitting at the Gate, being
newly returned from hunting in y• Forrest.
No sooner 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        Apolonio beheld him, but he presently
knew him, 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           •
                        eigning that he & his company were
Knights errant, saluted him, and dem
                           •
                        unded if he woulde
giue them entertainment for that night, because they knew
no place of lodging neare at hand. Netrydes, who was euer
of a most noble minde, 
                           〈◊〉
                         them verie courteously,
commaunding their Horsses to the stable, and themselues
to be honourably feasted at Supper. All supper time, Netrydes
verie earnestly eyed Apolonio, perswading himselfe
that hee had seene 
                           〈◊〉
                         before: and Apolonio likewise well
regarded Netrydes, neither daring to question with other
for 
                           ••
                        are of misconcei
                           •
                        .
                     In the end, Apolonio thorowly resolued that this was
the man hée 
                           ••
                        ught, and séeing two yong Gentlemen sitting
at the Table by him, hée thus beganne. I pray you Sir tell
me, are these two Gentlemen your Sons? They are Sir,

answered Netrydes. Haue you not one more (quoth Apolonio)
elder then these? Then Netrydes remembred his sonne
Frysol, whom he iudged to be dead because of his long absence:
wherefore breathing foorth a verie great sighe, saide.
In trueth Sir, I knowe not whether I haue 
                           〈…〉
                        , for it
is long since I lost 
                           〈◊〉
                         eldest Sonne by great misfortune,
and hetherto hearde no tydings of him, nor know I whether
hée is liuing or dead. By what mishappe▪ I pray you
Sir, quoth Apolonio, did you loose him? Whereupon Netrydes
discoursed the whole circumstaunce, in selfe same
manner as Frysol had reported: whereby he was now assured
that Frysol was his sonne, and so without dissembling
any longer, said. I can resolue ye my Lord, that hée is
yet liuing, and in very good disposition. O my God (answered
Netrydes) if▪ these newes may be true, then am I the
most happie Knight in the world. And so are you, said Apolonio,
for hée is liuing, recouered of the disease hée had
when hée departed from you, and is nowe one of the most
estéemed Knights in all Greece: so that hauing deliuered the
Quéene Griana 
                        
                           •
                        rom prison, which victorie hée obtained in
the company of noble Palmerin, against the two Nephewes
of King Ta
                              •
                           isius, hée is found to be neare kinsman to the
E
                           •
                        presse. For which cause he hath sent, and I am expreslie
hither come, to bring you with me to Constantinople, to
the ende you may receiue your owne by right, I meane the
principall regiment in the Realme of Hungari. Ah Heauens,
answered Netrydes, for ouer be your prayses, in reuealing
the wrong my Brother did, when causelesse he banished
me my natiue Countrey: but that I may bee resolued
in one doubte, I praye ye tell me, were ye not sometime
of my Brothers Court? Yes truel
                           •
                        e answered Apolonia,
and to your Father I serued as a Page in his Chamber,
nowe in respect of the manifolde courtesies▪ I receiued at
your hands, for euer I vowed my selfe to doo you anie seruice,
desiring you with all possible spéede to hasten your departure:
for I greatlie doubt wée shall not else finde your

Sonne at the Courte, because hee determineth to iourney
with Palmerin, in the search of Trineus the Emperours
Sonne of Allemaigne.
                     
                     Héereupon Netrides leauing the charge of his house to
one of his Cozins, departed with his Wife and his two
Sonnes: making such spéedie dispatch in their iourney, as
not manie daies after the Tryumph, they arriued at Constantinople.
Which when Frysoll vnderstood, hée went to
méete them: béeing accompanied (for the greater honour to
his Parents) with Palmerin, the King of Sparta, and manie
other yong Princes. There were manie salutations
and welcomes, giuen with great ioy by the Sonne to his
Father, Mother, and Brethren, and by the Parents likewise
to their Sonne, with such excéeding 
                           •
                        ignes of loue, as
you can better conceiue, then I expresse. After all these
courteous gr
                           •
                        etings, they went to the Court, where began
a fresh occasion of ioy, betwéene the Empresse and her Nephewe
Netrydes: shée then embracing him in her Armes,
thus spake.
                     Ah my noble Nephew, how haue the Heauens blessed
me with speciall fauour, in suffering me before my death to
sée my chéefest Fréendes, whom I was out of all hope to
behold againe: especiallie you, whose long absence from
your Countrey, hath rather deliuered imagination of your
death then life. Neuerthelesse, it is the prouidence of the
highest, that after all the troubles you suffered in your youth,
you might receiue the recompence in your age, by the
knightlie honour and bountie of your linage. In sooth Madame
sayd Netrydes, not so pleasant to mée is high preferment,
as that I liue to sée my sonne againe, for hauing
contented my selfe in my little Castle, with a life frée from
offence and sollitarie, I did account it to excéede all other:
but nowe séeing in my declining yéeres, the God of Heauen
hath thought good that I might profit his people, the
thought were base and abiect in me to make refusall. So
long were they deuising on these and other matters, as the

good night beeing giuen on all sides, the Emperour caused
these newe come Fréendes to bée conducted to theyr lodgings.
                     But on the morrowe when Palmerin came to bid the
Emperour good morrow, he thus began. You knowe my
Lord, that a Common wealth without a heade and Gouernour,
(as for example) is the Realme of Hungaria, cannot
long endure without sedicious tumults or rebellion: wherefore,
vnder your Maiesties reuerende regarde, I thinke it
expedient that my Sister Armida shoulde bee giuen in mariage
to Sir Frysoll, because in nobilitie of minde and perfection
of iudgement, hardly may so good a Knight be found,
nor shée enioy a fitter Husbande, and so may the Realme lineallie
discende, from Netrides nowe aged, to his noble
sonne.
                     The Emperour liked well of this aduise, wherefore the
same day were Frysoll and the Princesse Armida espoused
togither: to the good lyking of all, but especially of the louers
themselues, whose secrete desires were now effectuallie
requited. After the feast was ended, Netrides instituted
Gouernour of Hungaria, departed with his wife and Sons
to his Kingdome: where hee was receiued very honorablie
by his subiects, who had not forgot their former loue to him:
and the vnnatural dealing of their king his deceased brother.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. XXXIX.
                     
                        How Palmerin tooke his leaue of the Emperor, his father
and mother, to follow the search of the Prince Trineus.
                     
                     
                        CErtaine daies after the solemnitie of
this honorable mariage was ended, betwéene
Frysoll and the yong Princesse
of Hungaria, Netrides likewise gone to
his seate of gouernment: all the Lordes
and Princes of the Empire, except such
as continuallie aboad in the Emperors
Court, returned to their own homes, y• like did al the strange
knights that came to the tryumphs, except the king of Spar
                           
                              •
                           a
and the Lords of Macedon. Wherefore Palmerin nowe
remembring his promise to his Ladie, and how long he had
stayed slothfull at Constantinople, determined to departe,
and vnderstanding that his Father was with the Emperor,
came to them with these spéeches.
                     My gracious Lords, it is now thrée monethes and
more, that I haue remained héere by your commaundement,
contrarie to the promise that I made my Ladie: wherfore
(
                           •
                        y your leaue) I am nowe determined to departe
hence, before the Duke of Lorrayne returne backe againe,
that hée may assure my Lord the Emperour that I am gone
to séeke my Fréendes. My Sonne quoth the Emperour, vnwilling
am I thou shouldest leaue vs so soone, but if the
matter may not be contraryed, in respect you are bounde to
her by faithfull promise, who aboue all other deserueth loyall

seruice: I neither maye or will gaine-saye you, but intreate
your returne so soone as may be. You shall therefore
take with you a good companie of Knightes, who may preuent
anie s
                           •
                        nister occasions, which your trauaile in strange
Countreyes happilie may offer: that my hart enioying life
by your presence, may once more sée you before my date bée
expired.
                     I beséech you my Lord aunswered Palmerin, gréeue
not your selfe by my absence which shall not be long I hope,
neither will the multitude of Knights auaile in my enterprise,
for more by fortune then by force of Armes must the
aduenture bée finished. Doo then as you thinke good aunswered
the Emperour, in meane time I will cause prouision
for your traine. Palmerin hauing now licence to depart,
perswaded Frysoll so earnestlie as hee coulde, to abide a
                           •
                        
                        Constantinople, as well for the loue he bare his Sister Armida,
as because he was loth to depart the new maried couple:
but all the circumstances he could vse, might not perswade
him, for his religious vowe to his Fréend, excéeded,
his affection to the Princesse: so that for a flat resolution,
he aunswered, that nothing but death shoulde seperat their
companie. Palmerin seeing Frysoll continue in his former
amitie, and that the desire which conquers all men, coulde
not preuaile in his noble minde: reioysed greatlye thereat,
determining to recompence his princelie kindnesse, if Fortune
did not contrarie him in this enterprised iourney. And
fearing least anie newe occasion should arise to delaye this
intent, dispatched presently his Letters to the Emperor of
Allemaigne and his Ladie Polynarda, honoring his highnesse▪
Ambassadours with manie sumptuous gifts. Hauing
nowe ordered all his affayres, and euerie one béeing ready
to mount on horsebacke, hée came to bid the Queene his
Mother farewell, for well he knewe, that if shée could any
waie hinder his departure, his iourney should be soone preuented.
The Quéene with motherlie loue embracing her
Sonne, saide. Ah my Sonne, 
                           〈◊〉
                         thou béene so short a time

with me, and wilt thou now leaue mee? trust me it is a
point of great vngentlenesse, to deale so hardly with thy mother:
but séeing the Emperour and my Lorde haue giuen
their consent, my gain-saye will bée to little purpose. And
nothing would it auaile mée to sette before thine eyes, the
inconstancie of Fortune, her sleights and trecherie, commonly
against great persons: when they are in the waye
to prosperitie, honor and renowme. Therefore my sonne,
I committe shée to the protection of Heauen, desiring thée to
regard mine honor, which by thée ought to be defended, and
now may runne in daunger of common reproche, in that
the vulgar sort iudge after their owne humours, not according
to the quallitie and estimation of vertue. For this cause
let thine returne be the sooner, as thou tenderest my life and
thine owne good.
                     All which Palmerin promised to doo, and so comming
downe into the Court, founde there the Emperour and his
Father mounted on horsebacke, who bare him companie
two miles from the Citie: where after many courtesies
betwéene them, the Emperour and Florendos returned to
the Courte againe, where the Duke of Lorrayne stayed
their comming, when taking his leaue likewise, went aboorde,
and sayled with so good a winde, as in short time he
arriued in Allemaigne, where hee was graciously welcommed
by the Emperour, and especially by the Princesse his
Daughter, to whome he reported the honorable behauiour
of Palmerin, and howe he was sworne Prince of Greece
and Macedon. Héereof was she so ioyfull, as neuer coulde
shée be satisfied, with the discourse, making many demaunds
to the Duke, as well of the Tryumphes, Tourney and disports,
as also of the marriage celebrated at Constantinople:
whereto the Duke returned such fitte aunswers, as nothing
wanted to extoll her Fréendes honor, yet without anye occasion
of iealouzie to the Princesse, wherto amorous Ladies
are commonlie subiect.
                     But nowe returning where wee left before, you must

note, that Palmerin béeing departed the confines of ye Empire,
entred his Fathers Realme, where in euery Cittie he
was entertained with great tryumphing: especiallye in the
Cittie of Hermida, where the Merchaunt dwelt that was
Palmerins Maister, for whom he sent, but hée was aduertised
by his Wife, that her Husband was gone to the Sea,
and his two Sonnes with him, wherefore he gaue her manie
rich gifts, and Letters for his Maisters frée enfranchise
and libertie. At his departure from thence, he came to the
place where Vrbanillo his Dwarfe was borne, whose father
was there liuing a poore auncient Knight, and his Sister
of as tall stature as Vrbanillo, whom Palmerin (at her
Brothers request) sent to Constantinople to his Mother.
And for the honor of the order his Dwarfes Father had receiued,
hée gaue him the Uillage wherein he dwelt, and in
the presence of the Macedonians put him in possession thereof,
who not a little commended the discréete and liberal mind
of the Prince.
                     From thence he iourneyed to the chéefe Cittie of Macedon,
where remained the aged King his Grandfather: but
how the Cittizens entertained him, and what honorable
Tryumphes were made at the Court, I list not héere sette
downe, because it would be more tedious then benificiall.
As for his Aunt the Princesse Arismenia, shée at his comming
mette him in the base Court with all her Ladies: and
as Palmerin fell on his knée before her to kisse her hande,
she stayed him in her armes, saying. God forbid Sir Palmerin,
that the Knight of the greatest fame in the world, should
reuerence so simple a Damosell as my selfe: but rather am
I bound by duetie to honor you, as the man by whose especiall
vertues, our linage is this daie crowned with perpetuall
memorie.
                     Fayre Aunt, answered Palmerin, if before I knewe
you to be my Fathers Sister, I deuoted my selfe to your seruice,
with much more affection shall I desire to followe it
nowe: wherefore suffer me (swéete Madame) to kisse your

hand, as being the Ladie to whome I rest continually bounden.
I beséech you my Lord, quoth the Princesse, to pardon
me, for neuer shall Macedonian Maiden be so rep
                           •••
                        ued,
but that she well knowes her dutie to her betters. At these
spéeches came the King of Sparta, the Dukes of Pontus and
Mecaena, and the Prince Eustace, whom the Princesse welcommed
with excéeding honor. After all courtesies ended,
Palmerin said.
                     I vnderstand Madame, that the king your Father is
crazed and sicklie: if it be so I am verie sorrie, I praye you
therefore let vs goe sée howe his Maiestie fareth. When
you please my Lord, quoth the Princesse, for I thinke if
héeretofore hee receiued health by you, Fortune may at this
time affoord the like: and yet (as I haue read) there is no
remedie for troublesome age, but onelie death it selfe, which
is the Gate to immortalitie, and endeth all diseases whatsoeuer.
So entred they the Kings Chamber, and the Princesse
going to the bed side to her Father, saide. My Lorde, sée
héere the good Knight Palmerin your Nephew, may it
please you to speake to him, and bid him welcome? Well
know I that he is right welcome to your Maiestie, were
there no other cause then the happye recouerie of your former
health, which his aduenturous trauaile héeretofore
brought ye.
                     The good olde King, whome the palsie caused to shake
and tremble: raysed himselfe vppe a little, and beholding
Palmerin, with weake and féeble voice, thus spake. Come
néere my noble Sonne, that these armes halfe deade may
embrace thée, and my lips now drie and withered, may once
kisse thée before I die. So holding him betwéene his armes,
and lifting his eyes to Heauen, said. O my God, for euer be
thy name honored and praysed, in vouchsafing me to sée my
Sonne before my death. Ah swéete death, the ende of all miseries,
and beginning of felicitie, now art thou welcome, forbeare
not thy stroke, in that I haue now séene the honorable
defence of my Subiests héereafter, yea such a worthie

Fréende for them, as neuer had they the like. Ah my Son,
howe déerelie ought I to loue thée? how gracious hath thy
remembraunce béene of mee? yet féele I my selfe so weake
and feeble, as nature cannot prolong my life thrée daies. Alas,
I knowe not which of vs twaine hath greatest cause to
reioyce: eyther the Father seeing his Sonne, euen when
he is readie to leaue him, or the Sonne finding his Father
attending his comming before he giue vp the ghost. I hope
my good Lord, said Palmerin, that you shall not leaue vs so
soone, therefore take a good heart, and that no doubt will prolong
your life. Alas my Sonne, quoth the King, vnweldie
age hath so weakened my body, and euen dried vp my vitall
blood, as longer I may not liue: and had not hope to sée thée
lengthened my languishing daies, thou hadst found my bodie
breathlesse, which yet sustaineth féeble life, onely by thy
presence.
                     Now that I may leaue this worlde with content, and
trauaile with better quiet to mine ende: tell mée (good
Sonne) the whole matter concerning thy Father Florendos,
with the perfect discourse of thine owne fortunes. Then
Palmerin rehearsed euery circumstaunce, both of his Fathers
deliuerie, howe hée had maried the Quéene Griana,
and in what estate he left them both at his departure.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. XL.
                     
                        How the aged King Primaleon of Macedon, graundfather
to Palmerin, dyed, and how the King of Spa
                              •
                           ta espoused
the faire P
                              •
                           incesse Arismen, Sister to the prince
Florendos,
                     
                     
                        NOt two dayes had Palmerin stayed in
the Court of his Graundfather, but the
aged king resined his life to the celistiall
powers: for which cause all ye triumphes
ceased, and generall sorrow entertained
for the losse of their good king. Arismena
who so reuerently loued her father, as in
his life time she would not match in mariage with any one,
because it was his will it should be so: neuer shewed her selfe
disconted therewith, but her Father béeing now dead, shee
committed the whole affayres of the Realme to the Counte
Roldin, one appointed for that office by generall good liking.
With such honorable pompe was the funerall obsequies executed,
and the Princesse gracious behauiour therein so especially
commended: as the young King of Sparta became
amorous of her, & discouered his mind to Palmerin, intreating
him so to fauour the cause, as he might make Arismena
his Quéene.
                     
                        Palmerin verie ioyfull of the Kings motion, in that
he was one of the chéefest estates of Greece, acquainted his
Aunt with the Kings request, and what an honor it was to
her to be so matched. Nor was the Princesse heart so colde
by her Fathers death, but séeing the yong beautifull King

loued her so well, it began to warme againe: so that considering
her owne estate, béeing nowe in yeares past foure
and twentie, shée made some excuses by her Fathers late

                           •
                        ecea
                           •
                        e, But Palmerin perceiued by her modest ye
                           •
                        lding
lookes, that the heart consented, although the mouth was
loath to vtter it. Wherefore the next day they were espoused
togither, by which meane the King was more affected
to follow Palmerin, as he determined before hée came from
Constantinople, as well for the great kindnesse he found in
him, as for his fauour in furthering him with the ende of
his desires.
                     Now was the King more importunate on Palmerin,
to accept him for his companion in his trauaile, who at
length condiscended, although he imagined that his Aunte
had rather haue her newe Husbande 
                           •
                        arrie with her. The
day béeing appoynted for their departure, Palmerin concluded
with the King of Sparta, that hée should sende Arismena
to Constant
                              •
                           nople, there to stay his returne wish her
Brother Florendos. For her safe conduct thither, all the
chéefest Knights that came thence with him where chosen,
except the Prince Eust
                              •
                           ce Son to the duke of Mecaena. And
Palmerin fearing his voyage woulde be longer then hée expected,
commaunded Vrbanillo his Dwarffe to returne to
the Quéene Arismena: and if I 
                           ••
                        ay (quoth hée) longer then
a yeare from Constantinople, go then to Allemaigne with
this Letter to comfort my Ladie, and take with thée thy
Sister, whom I sent to the Quéene my Mother.
                     The Dwarffe (although he had rather haue gone with
his Maister, then attend on Ladies) not daring to gain-say
him, returned with Arismena, who in short time after arriued
at Constantinople, where the Prince Florendos very
ioyfully receiued her, béeing not a little contented that shée
was ioyned in marriage with the King of Sparta, yet his
Fathers death hée tooke verie heauily. How welcome she
was to the Emperour, the Empresse, and Qu
                           ••
                        ne Griana,
I doubt not but you can sufficiently imagine, who cont
                           •••
                        
                        allie

comforted her till her Husbands returne. Before Palmerin
departed from Macedon, he established all things in
due and decent order, creating the Counte Roldin Lieutenaunt
generall for the Realme, commaunding as dutifull
obeysaunce to him, as to their souereigne Lord the King
his Father. Afterward hee tooke order that his shipping
might be ready, because he would delay no longer the search
of Trineus.
                     
                  
                  
                     Chap. XLI.
                     
                        Howe Palmerin and his companions sayling on the Mediterranean
Sea, were taken by, Olimaell Admirall to the
great Turke: and their fortunes in Greece, where Palmerin
saued Laurana the princesse of Durace.
                     
                     
                        
                           ROldin established in the gouernment of
Macedon, and the Ship readie which
Palmerin had appoynted, hée went aboord
with his vowed Fréendes that
would not leaue him, vz. Frysoll, th
                           •
                        
Prince Olorico, the Duke of Pontus,
the King of Sparta, and Eustace sonne
to the Duke of Mecaena. These sixe hauing
sworne the search of Trineus, committed themselues
to the mercy▪ of the winds and Seas, not knowing where
they should first take landing. Hauing thus sayled sixe or
seuen dayes togither, and the Seas nothing rough or tempestio
                           •
                        s:
they went vp on the decke to see if they coulde descry
any shore. And as they were deuising merily togither,
they suddainlie espyed a great Fléete of Ships, which
with wind at will made apace towards them: but because

you shall vnderstand of whence and what they were, attend
the sequell and you shall be resolued. The Moore Olimaell,
as ye haue read in the former part of this Historie, after
he had giuen the Princesse Agriola to the great Turke, entred
into so great credit, as in recompence of his gift, 
                           〈◊〉
                        
was made high Admirall of Turkie, so that béeing renowmed
for a Knight of Péerelesse desert, the Turke gaue him
the charge of his great Armie, where with he shoulde continually
disturbe the Christians. This Olimaell was Generall
of this huge Fléete descried by Palmerin, wherat somewhat
amazed, he called one of the Pilots, demaunding if hée
knew the ensigne of whence they were. The Pilot had
no sooner behelde them, but hée presently saide they were
Turkes, and no way there was for themselues to escape, because
he saw sixe light Gallies were made out to hem them
in, and the rest came mainly vpon them. But Palmerin as
a Prince experimented in daungers, thus spake to his companions.
                     Noble Fréendes, where Knightlie force or be
                           ••
                        
                        tie
cannot auaile, it were méere follie to vse it, we are but
sixe and all in one vessell, and farre wee ca
                           •
                        not 
                           •
                        lie before
we shall bée taken: I thinke it best therefore that w
                           •
                        e vse

                           •
                        ound dissimulation, and so expect when Fortune will better
teach vs the way to recouer our losse, and reuenge vs
on our enemies to their confusion. Withdraw your selues,
and leaue me alone to talke with them, because I can well
speake the Arabian language. Yet thinke not that 
                           •
                        owardise
or feare of death makes mée vse these spéeches: for in
an action inuincible, hardinesse and knightly prowesse will
bée estéemed as follie and indiscretion. Haue then patience
my good Fréendes, I hope that all shall turne to our good.
No sooner had he ended his spéeches, but hée heard the Captaine
commaund them to yeeld, or else they should die
                           •
                         Die?
quoth Palmerin, that goes verie hard: assure vs our liues
and we yéeld, otherwise not. I promise thée, said the Captaine,
neither thou nor thy companie shall haue any harme.

So seazing vpon the ship, they brought it to the Admirall
Olimaell, presenting to him all the Knights they tooke therin:
for which he hartily thanked them, saying.
                     Tell me Gentlemen and dissemble not, are ye Turks,
or Christians▪ Sir, quoth Palmerin, séeing Fortune hath
béene so contrarie to vs, you shall vnderstand truly what
we are. We are Christians and poore Knights, searching
aduentures to gaine honour and profit, in some Princes seruice
be he Heathen or Christian. And because we can not
now shew you what we are able to doo, so please you to suffer
vs enioy our libertie, and graunt vs the benefite of our
Armour, we will promise you loyall and faythfull seruice.
Olimaell, who was by nature sterne and austere, séeing
these sixe Knights so yong and braue accomplished persons,
imagined theyr assistaunce woulde greatlie auaile him:
wherefore he thus answered. Gentlemen, if you wil sweare
to me by your fayth, that you will not depart from me without
my licence, but will loyally imploy your selues in what
I shall commaund, you shall haue your Armour againe,
and I will not vse you as my slaues and prisoners, but as
my honest companions and Friends. Which oath they all
tooke to him, wherefore they were immediately armed againe
and remained in the Galley with Olimaell, who séeing
their armour so rich and costly, estéemed them to bee of
noble blood, and therefore caused them to be verie honourablie
intreated.
                     So s
                           •
                        yling on, at length they came neare the great
Cittie of Albania, when O
                              •
                           imaell commaunded two or
thrée Foystes, to goe vnderstand in what estate the Citie
was, who were aduertised by certaine Frenchmen, that
the people were vnprouided of anie fortifications, so that
winning the Port, the whole Cittie might easily bée conquered.
These tydings caused them forciblie to enter▪ the
Hauen, where setting all the Shippes on fire, they went
on shore, and murthering the Warders of the Gates, 
                           •
                        ooke
the Cittie at the first assault, when Palmerin and his noble

Fréends (to their great sorrow) declared howe well they
could skill of such affayres. The Citie was ouercome, and
the chiefest Citizens therein taken prisoners, the Turkes
following their fortune, marched further, and came to the
Cittie of Durace, where the faire Princesse Laurana abode,
of whom Palmerin sometime was amorous: when he imagined
by her excellent beautie, that it was shée who so often
solicited him in his dreames. Palmerin béeing there come
on land, presently knewe the Countrey, wherefore hée sayd
to his companions.
                     I nowe perceiue déere Fréends, that fortune forceth
vs from ill to worse, this speake I in respect of this Cittie,
agaynst which wée must be compelled to fight: and not manie
yéeres since, with the price of my blood I laboured to
defende it. But because the Dukes Daughter is so good a
Ladie, as in my heart I reuerence and honor, I beséech you
euery one imploy your selfe, to preserue her and her Ladies,
and demaund them of the Admirall for our part of the
spoyle.
                     While Palmerin thus conferred with his Fréendes,
Olimaell vnderstoode by certaine prisoners, that the Cittie
was verie slenderly defended, therefore no great maistrie
to winne it quickly. Yet at their first assault they were so
valiantlie repulsed, as Olimaell and his men began to despaire
of victorie: wherefore hee made open protestation,
that hée who first could enter the Cittie, should haue anie
boone of him hée woulde request. Palmerin ioyfull of this
promise, caused sixe scaling Ladders to be sette agaynst the
wall, whereon hée and his Fréends ascended, and on the
wall cryed, the Citie is ours: wherewith the people within
were so dismaied, hauing endured a long and furious
skirmish, as they all fledde out at the further Gate. The
Turkes then burned the Gates on the Sea side, and entering
the Citie, put olde and yong to the Swoord. But Palmerin
and his companions feigning to pursue them that
fled, ranne strait to the Pallace, at the entraunce whereof

they found many Moores, who had taken the Duke, wherefore
they went to finde the Princesse Laurana, who sate in
her Chamber, well néere deade for gréefe, because sh
                           •
                        e
heard that her Father was slaine. Her hée committed to
the custodie of the King of Sparta, Frysoll, Olorico, and
Eustace, desiring them to comfort the Princesse, in that neither
shée or her Ladies should fall into the Tyrants power,
and so comming to Olimaell, on his knée he began in this
manner. You knowe my Lord the promise you made to day,
by vertue whereof beca
                           •
                        se I first got ouer the wall into the
Cittie, for my share I request the Dukes Daughter, and
for my Fréendes that followed mée, her Ladyes and Gentlewomen:
for other spoyle of the riches and treasure we desire
not.
                     
                        Olimaell graunted his demaunde, charging his people
on paine of their liues, not any way to offende the Ladies.
In this manner was the Princesse saued, whereupon the
Duke of Pontus presently went to her, and taking her by
the hand, acquainted her with this ioyfull newes, whereto
shée thus replied. Can it bée possible that Palmerin, who
héeretofore ventured his life in my fathers defence, against
the Count Passaco of Mecaena, should now become so familiar
among Turkes and Moores? Hath hée so forgot his
honour to God, that himselfe is not onely a vassaile to the enemies
of his faith, but dooth likewise séeke their destruction
that serue Christ Iesus? Be silent good Madame, aunswered
the Duke, for if his name be knowne, we all perish:
what hath béene doone, is for the safetie of your life, and our
owne likewise, which hée hath obtained of the Generall of
the Armie.
                     With these words she was somewhat pacified, and the
old cinders of loue, which nowe began to spreade abroade,
caused her to returne this answere. In sooth, my Lord, séeing
I am become Palmerins prisoner, I thinke my honour in
better assuraunce, and my Fathers death is the lesse grée
                        
                           •
                        ous
to mée, in that this matter may sort to better effecte

then I can conceiue. By this time was Palmerin come to
her, who intreated her to kéepe all things secretly, for hée
woulde endure a thousand deathes, before shee should be any
way dishonoured. In time (quoth he) wée may be deliuered
from these Hell-houndes: as for you and your Ladyes, the
Admirall hath openly commaunded, that you be reuerently
vsed.
                     A thousand thanks my Lord, quoth the Princesse, and
séeing matters are so come to passe, yet do I reioyce that I
fell into your power. The Citie of Durace left in the same
state as Albania was, the Turkes went all aboorde, taking
no prisoners thence, but Laurana and her Ladies, whome
Olimaell intended to giue to the great Turke. So passing
along the Coast of Thessalie, they spoyled many Citties on
the Sea side, tooke the King and many noble men: so that
nowe they were stored with a number of Christian prisoners.
Now O
                              •
                           imaell feared, that the Christian Princes
hearing what spoyle he made in their Dominions, woulde
r
                           •
                        yse a mightie power agaynst him, wherefore hée gaue
charge to his Pilots, to order their course towards the Cittie
of Tubant, where as then the great Turke kept his
Court.
                     The King of Thessalie, thrée dayes before his taking,
sent his Queene (who was great with Childe) to one of his
Castel
                           •
                        , a good daye iourney from the Sea: but when shée
heard her Husbandes misfortune, the gréefe shée conceyued
caused her presently to fall in trauell, when shée was deliuered
of a goodly Daughter, named Francelina. At this
time the thrée Magical Sisters, who appeared to Palmerin
on the Mountaine Artifaeria, and one of them afterwarde in
his going to Buda, made theyr aboode in an Isle thereby
named Carderia. When they (by their hidden Philosophie)
heard how the King was taken, and should be kept in perpetuall
prison, without the helpe of his Daughter which
was newly borne: they concluded to frame such an enchauntment,
as ma
                           •
                        ger the Turke and his power, as hée

that would not deigne to kisse his shooe, should be deliuered
from imprisonment. Héereupon the yongest of these thrée
Sisters, went to the Castell where the wofull Quéene remained,
where shée was verie honourablie entertained, because
the Quéene desired to know, if the King her Husband
was dead or aliue, and if any hope might be expected of his
deliuerance.
                     The Damosell Enchauntresse aduertised the Quéene,
that in departing with her Daughter Francelina, the King
her Husband should enioy his libertie, and in time to come,
she should be maried to one of the best Knights of the world.
Wée néede not doubt that the Quéene was héereat amazed,
yet the loue of the Mother to her infant, cannot conquer
the loue of the Wife to her Husbande, which among
all loues is the most honest and loyall: so that in hope to
frée him againe, on whom depended her health and welfare,
shée gaue her Childe to the Damosell, intreating that shée
might be vsed as beséemed the Daughter of a King, and as
the swéete beautie of the infant deserued. Shée returning to
Carderia with the Childe, made her Sisters verie ioyful by
her comming, who there nourished the infant till shée was
three yéeres olde, when the beautie of the yong Princesse
beganne to shewe it selfe, as fayre Cynthia dooth among the
Starres.
                     Nowe did the Sisters inclose her in a strong Tower,
made of purpose for young Francelina, wherein was the
most goodly Garden in the worlde, there was shee attended
by her Nursses, and sixe waiting Gentlewomen: and such
enchauntments were imposed on the Tower, as no man
should euer sée her, vnlesse he were the best Knight of his
time. The entraunce into the Tower was verie strayte
and narrowe, barred vppe with a great Gate of yron, and
guarded with two furious Lyons. Ouer the gate stoode a
huge Image of Copper, holding a mightie Mace of Stéele,
wrought by such cunning, as if anie Knight but he that was
destenied to end the aduenture, should assay to enter, hardly

might he escape to returne againe. Moreouer, the conquerour
should not demaund the first demaund of the princesse,
which was the deliuerance of her Father, and for this
cause the Sisters enchaunted the faire Francelina, whose
Historie wée must yet forbeare, procéeding where wee le
                           •
                        t
before.
                     
                        Olimaell béeing thus on the Sea, laden with Christian
spoyles and prisoners, at length entred the port of the great
Cittie of Tubant, where hée made such a chéerefull noyse
of Droms, Trumpets, Clarions, and Cornets, as though
the greatest Monarch in the worlde had come to take landing.
The great Turke maruailing at this sodaine melodie,
sent one of his Knights to vnderstand the cause, who
béeing certified by Olimaell, what great victories hee had
obtained against the Christians, and the number of prysoners
he brought with him, returned to the Pallace, where
he told his Lord that the Admirall Olimaell was come, and
had brought with him great spoyles from the Christians:
where among (quoth hee) is a Christian King in person,
many worthy Knights and Gentlemen, and a young Princesse
of incomparable beautie. Not a little ioyfull was the
Turke at these newes, wherefore comming into his great
Hall, where the imperiall seates of maiestie were erected,
himselfe fate downe in the 
                           •
                        one, and faire Agriola of England
in the other, expecting the comming of Olimaell, who
in tryumphant manner set forward with his prize, brauely
mounted on a lustie Co
                           •
                        rser sumptuously caparasoned,
and aduauncing his sword drawne in signe of victorie. Béeing
come to the Pallace, Olimaell saluted his Lorde with
great reuerence, standing by him to make report of his conquest,
and make present of his prisoners after their estate
and calling.
                     First he caused all the riches to be brought, and all the
meanest captiues one after another to kisse the great Turks
foote, then commaunding them to be carried thence, he began
in this manner. It is not to be doubted, most high and

mightie Monarch, that this victorie gotten on the Christians,
enemies to our Gods, hath beene obtained onely by
your fauour, therefore it is good reason that the principall
head of this enterprise, the great and chéefest honour
should be doone. The witnesse héereof are the treasures present,
and these prisoners abyding your mercie, who from
the very meanest to the highest, shall humble themselues at
your maiesties f
                           ••
                        te. When very many had doone theyr
reuerence, and the King of Thessaly shoulde next follow,
who though his handes were pinniond behinde him, yet
had a Crowne of Gold on his head to shewe what hée was:
although he sawe himselfe in the Traitours power, and Olimaell
had commaunded him to kisse his Maisters foote,
boldly made this answere. Nor will I so much displease my
God, vncircumcized Tirant as thou art, in such sort to abase
my self, being a king, and administratour of iustice to faithfull
Christians, to kisse the foote of the most
                           •
                        nastie and vncleane
creature in the world, profaning the worship which
I onely owe to my maker. It is in thy power to take my
life from mee, but not to constraine me do the thing wherein
consists my damnation, and a thousand deathes I will
endure, before I yéelde so much as in thought to thée. Uillaine
(quoth the Admirall) darest thou speake so vnreuerently
in the presence of my Lorde? did not my regarde of
him withholde mée, soone should I seperate thy cursed he
                           •
                        d
from thy shoulders. With these words he gaue the King
such a blow on the face, as made him fall on his knées to the
ground.
                     Ah Traytour, quoth the King, well hast thou shewen
the nature of a villaine, that without commaunde strykest a
King captiue, and vnprouided of Armes: but might it so
please thy Lorde, in open Fielde will I prooue thée a disloyall
and vnchristened Curre, that thus abusest the bloud royall.
The great Turke séeing the King so moued and angrie,
the bloud likewise trickling from his nose and mouth: commaunded
him to be carried thence, to one of the strongest

Castles in Nacolia, where he should be enclosed without any
companie, that his captiuitie might be the more gréenous
to him.
                     When the King of Thessaly was departed, Palmerin
approched, leading the Princesse Laurana by the hande, hée
and his fiue companions beeing Armed, except theyr Helmets,
Gantlets, and swords, whereat the great Turke
maruailing, demaunded of Olimaell why hée suffered them
to be armed? My Lord, quoth hee, these sixe Knights were
the first prize I tooke, who (after they had giuen me theyr
oathes) haue done such seruice to your Maiestie, especially
this, poynting to Palm
                              •
                           rin, one of the best knights that
euer I saw: as full well do they deserue libertie, which in
recompēce of aduenturing their liues in your seruice, vnder
your highnesse correction, I promised them. By Mahomet,
answered the great Turk, for thy sake I likewise confirm
                           •
                        
it, and if héereafter they will abide with mée, I will make
them greater then euer they were. While the Turke was
making these promises, Agriola hauing well noted Palmerin,
knew him, and with the sodaine conceit thereof was
readie to swoune: but staying her selfe on her Chayre, said.
O sole bountie, who is this? are not mine eyes deluded and
my thoughts be guiled? At these wordes Palmerin knewe
her, which before hee did not, by reason of her strange disguysed
apparrell: yet thought hee best to conceale his inward
ioy, least crooked fortune should now againe preuent
him.
                     The great Turke séeing Agriola looke so pale and wan,
started from his Chayre, and taking her in his Armes,
said. Alas Madame, hath any sodaine ill befallen yée? hath
any one in this companie offended yée? By our Gods, if I
knew him, presently shoulde he die the death. The Princesse
trembling with feare, séeing Hippolyta was not present,
spake thus in English. What will my Lorde and Husband
Trineus say, if hee be in this companie, séeing I haue
so dissloyally forsaken him, and thus (though God knowes

perforce) in stéed of him, haue taken the enemie to him and
our faith? Yet one comfort haue I, that this Infidell hath
not carnally knowne me, for which perfection I thanke the
heauenly maiestie. At these spéeches Palmerin was so glad,
as the feare of death could not withholde him, but in the
same language he thus answered.
                     Feare not good Madame, Trineus is not in our companie,
but so please you to say I am your Brother, you
may happily saue my life and practise your deliuerance.
The Turke misdoubting by Palmerins perswading, that
hée had caused this sodaine alteration, imagining him to
be her husband of whom he had heard her talke so often, in
a great rage said: Knight, how durst thou presume my Ladies
presence, knowing the sight of thée would any way displease
her? By the Prophet Mahomet thou shalt immediately
die, that all such audacious villaines may take an example
by thée.
                     
                        Agriola knowing the Turks censures were very peremptorie,
and commonly no sooner saide then excuted, embracing
him, thus replied. Ah my Lorde, do not the thing in
haste, for which afterwarde you will be sorrie, for I assure
you on my honor, the Knight that spake to mée is my Brother,
and hath left his Countrey onely to finde me, and him
I do loue so effectually, as if you put him to death, impossible
is it for me to liue afterward. When the Turke heard
her speake with such affection, qualifying his anger, saide. I
promise ye Madame, for your sake hée shall haue no harme,
but bee entertained with loue and honour, conditionally
that you forgette this melancholy, and hencefoorth shewe
your selfe more pleasant: for in séeing you sad, I am more
gréeued, then if I had lost the moitie of dominions. In sooth
my Lorde, answered Agriola, now shall I be merrie, séeing
you intende to loue my Brother, for greater good cannot
happen to me then this gentle entertainment, and hencefoorth
shall I tread vnder foote, the sad remembraunce of
my Countrey and Parents, hauing him with me, by whom

I hope to gaine my greatest comfort. So the Turke arising
from his Chayre, caused Palmerin and Laurana to accompanie
Agriola, and the other fiue Knights hauing kissed his
hande, hee went to his Chamber, commaunding Olimaell
(for his greater honor) to vsher Agrola, who as she went,
thus spake.
                     Beléeue me Admirall, if I was offended when thou
broughtest me prisoners hither, thou hast now made mée
sufficient amendes, in that by thée I enioy my Brother,
whom I was out of all hope to sée againe. Alas Madame,
quoth he, little did I thinke him to be such a one, for had I:
his vsage should haue béene much better, which fault I hope
heereafter to recompence. I commend him to thy countesie,
sayde Agriola, let him and his friendes haue all things they
want, according as my Lorde hath appointed. So taking her
leaue of them, she entred her chamber, where she and Hyppolita
conferred with Laurana, of all her fortunes passed,
and the aduentures of her Brother. Nowe was Palmerin
and his companions by the Turks commaundement, lodged
néere the Pallace, and to each of them he sent a goodly
Horse with costly furniture, thinking by these meanes to
conquere Agriola, and purchase that of her which he long
had desired, and talking with Palmerin, sayde. Right well
may you be Brother to my Lady Agriola▪
                         in that your beautie
and complexion deliuers great likelihood, séeing then
our Gods haue permitted that for her comfort you shoulde
be brought hither perswade her I pray yée, that she be no
longer repugnant to my will, for could I haue a Child by
her, I would thinke my selfe the happiest Lord on the earth.
Beside, I would haue you forsake the follie of your Christianotie,
and yéel
                           •
                         your selfe to our Law, which is much better
then yours, and you shall sée how our Gods will fauour
you, likewise what great good you shall receiue therby. My
Lord, quoth Palmerin, I will labour with my Sister so
much as lies in me to do
                           •
                         as for your Law, as yet I am vnacquainted
therwith, but when I shall find it to be such as

you assure mee, easily may I bee drawen thereto, and to
serue you with such loyaltie, as so great an estate doth worthily
deserue. I confesse my selfe likewise greatly b
                           •
                        unden
to your maiestie, in that you haue accepted my Sister as
your Wife, and to mee a poore slaue giuen life and libertie,
which I beséech you also graunt to the Marriners, in whose
Uessell it was my chaunce to bée taken, in so dooing she may
be greatly mooued by your magnificent libertie and
mercie.
                     The great Turke presently gaue his consent, causing
their safe conduct to bee openly proclaimed, so Palmerin
and his Friendes humbly departing to their l
                           •
                        dging, the
Turke went to Agriolaes Chamber, where sitting downe
by her, he thus began. Now shall I perceiue Madame, how
much your Brother may preuaile with you: for hée hath
promised me so to order the matter, as you shall graunt my
long desired sute. My Lord, quoth shée, my Brother shall
command me nothing, but I will doo it with all my heart:
as for your request, it is not in my power, but in the hande
of God, who defendeth me as best him pleaseth. Nor can I
change the opinion I haue held so long, though by hauing
my Brother with me, I enioy farre greater content then I
did before.
                     It sufficeth me, saide the Turke, to sée you so well pleased,
and as for your Brother, that you may perceiue howe well
I loue him, before one moneth be expired, I will make
him the chéefest Lord in my Court, next mine owne person:
so kissing the Princesse, he departed to his Chamber. The
day following Palmerin saide to his companions. You sée
my friendes, how friendly Fortune smileth on vs, but
least shee change, as euermore she is wont, wée must practise
some meanes to escape from these Turkish infidels.
Beside, séeing wée haue founde the Princesse Agriola, I
hope Trineus is not so secretly hidden, but we shall heare
some tyding
                           •
                         of him. Of her will I therefore enquire, if she
know what became of him and Ptolome whē we left them:

in meane while you may closely conclude with our Marriners,
that they be euer readie at an howres warning, for I
hope we shall set hence before eight dayes be past. Palmerin
went to Agriolaes Chamber, and there by good hap hée

                           •
                        ound her alone, whome after he had humbly saluted, the
Princesse thus spake to him. My noble friende, you must
be carefull howe you speake to me, especially before the aged
Lady you sawe héere yesterday, for shee vnderstandeth
all languages, and if we be discouered, there is no way but
death, therefore when you sée her with me, conferre rather
with Laurana, and say to her what you would haue mee
know, because shee is a Lady both vertuous and faithfull.
No lesse (Madame) haue I alwaies found her, quoth Palmerin:
therefore I beséech you make account of her, and acquaint
her with your greatest affaires, for shée is daughter
to one of the most gentle Princes in the world. But Madame,
I would gladly know what became of Trineus, after
that so vnhappily I departed from you. The Admirall
Olimaell, quoth shée, came with his Gallies so soone as you
were departed, who tooke vs, and then seperated vs in sunder,
scant permitting me to speake to him or Ptolome, nor
knowe I what is become of them. It sufficeth then Madame
aunswered Palmerin, that I haue founde you, for on
you dependeth the life of Trineus, who shall not long (I
hope) bee concealed from vs, therefore aduise your selfe on
the day when you will departe, for I haue a shippe readie to
carrie you from this seruitude. Thanks be to heauen quoth
she, for so good fortune, I will be so readie as you shall not
stay for me. Now entred Hippolyta, who brake off, theyr
talke to other occasions, where we will leaue, and return
                           •
                        
to the Prince Trineus.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. XLII.
                     
                        How Trineus beeing enchaunted into the shape of a Dogge
in the Isle of Malfada, there came a Princesse of the
Moores, who requested him of the aged Enchauntresse,
to whom he was giuen, and what happened to him afterward.
                     
                     
                        I Thinke as yet you remember, without
repetition of the former discourse,
in what manner the Knight, Cozin to
the Admirall Olimaell, to whome the
Prince Trineus was giuen, arriued by
tempest in the Is
                           •
                        le of Malfada, and
how he with his people were transformed
into diuors shapes of Beasts, among
whom Trineus bare the likenesse of a goodly Dogge.
Béeing thus disguised, a yong Princesse named Zephira,
Daughter to the King of the same Countrey, came to demaund
counsell of the aged Enchauntresse Malfada, for the
cure of a certain disease, which by strange aduenture happened
to her in this manner.
                     This yong Princesse one day béeing pleasant in her
Fathers Court, among many of her waiting Ladyes, entred
a goodly Garden, which abounded with great diuersitie
of swéet flowers, and after shee had walked a prettie while
in an Arbour of Muske-roses, shee espied a Gille-flower,
which séemed so faire and beautifull in her eye, as shee was
prouoked to goe crop it from the stalke. Hauing this dellicate
flower in her hand, wherein (by misfortune) a venemous
worme was crept, she tooke such delight in smelling

it: as her breath drewe vp the worme into one of her nose?
thrilles, not béeing able to get it out againe. So the venome
and poysome of this little worme, engendred a putrifaction
and other like worms, which gaue a smell so filthy and lothsome,
as hardly could any abide to stand by her. Her Father
not a little agréeued at this mischaunce, sent for the
most skilfull Phisitions, to sée what remedie might bedeuised:
but all their paine and trauaile was in vaine, for
the disease continued still without any amendment. In the
end, the King fearing it would change to a Canker incurable,
and hauing heard what straunge actions the Enchauntresse
Malfada performed, sent the Princesse Zephira to
her, where shée béeing arriued without anie daunger, because
she would not hurt anie inhabiting in the Isle, declared
to the Sorceresse the whole manner of her misfortune.
                     The Enchauntresse answered, that shée could giue her
no remedie, and hardly should she finde any at all: except it
were by an ancient Knight, who remained in the Court
of the King of Romata and Grisca, Realmes subiect to the
Soldane of Persia, and the knight was named Muzabelino.
The Princesse was so displeased at this answere, séeing her
intent frustrated, as shée would receyue no sustenaunce:
wherefore walking in the Féeldes to represse her anger,
and so to the Sea-side, where the Ships lay confused, shée
behelde the Dogge which was the Prince Trineus, and so
farre in liking was shée with him, as she des
                           •
                        red the Enchauntresse
to giue him her, and hauing obtained her request,
returned to her Father, who lay sicke in one of his
Citties called Nabor, whereof the whole Realme bare the
name.
                     When the King saw his Daughter returned without
cure, his Mela
                           •
                        cholie conceit so strooke to his heart, as with
in thrée daies after he died. Hauing made his Testament
before his deceasse, hee gaue his Daughter as her portion a
Citie called Elain, one of the greatest and surest strength in

the Realme, with all the signories belonging thereto. To
Maulerino his yongest Sonne, he gaue an other like portion,
which was a dayes iourney distaunt from Elain. After
the Kings funerall rytes were solemnized, the Princesse
with her brother Mulerino, went to their owne possessions,
doubting the furie of the Prince Tyreno, their eldest Brother,
who alwayes had showen himselfe proude and contentious.
                     Shée béeing thus in quiet by her selfe, tooke no other
pleasure then in playing with her Dog, because hée seemed
verie subtile and politique: so that shée prepared a Couch
for him at her beds féete. Tyreno béeing crowned King after
his Fathers deceasse, began greatly to despise that his
Sister should enioy the fayrest Cittie in the Realme: for
which cause hée practised all the meanes he coulde to put her
to death. And that he might the better compasse his purpose,
hee secretly sent a Messenger to the maister of the
Princesse horses, that if hée woulde kill or poyson his Brother
and Sister, hée would giue him thirtie thousande Seraphes,
and make him gouernour of Elain. The wicked
noble man, gréedie and couetous, séeing the large promise of
the Tyrant, consented thereto: so that one night the Princesse
béeing asléepe, he entred her Chamber with his Sword
drawne, there to haue murthered her, and afterward the
Prince her Brother. Trineus, who had lost nothing belonging
to a man but bodily shape and voyce, seeing the
Traytour enter his Ladies Chamber with his weapon
drawne, started vp presently, and setting his two foreféete
on the villaines breast, bit him so cruelly by the face and
thraote, as he being vnable to helpe himselfe, was constrained
to crie out aloude. With this noyse the Princesse awaked,
and her Brother likewise, who lay in the next Chamber,
comming in haste to sée the cause of this outcrie, and
knowing the Traytour, beate him so fore with the Pommell
of his Sword about the stomacke, as in the end enforced
him to confesse his treason. Whereat Maulerino not

a little maruailing, and wrathfull at his villainous intent,
smote his heade from his shoulders. In the morning he appoynted
such guarde in the Cittie, as no straunger might
enter without great examination. The Princesse knowing
howe her Dog had saued her life, loued him afterwarde
so tenderly, as shée would féede him at her owne Table, and
none but her selfe might giue him anie foode. Héere will we
likewise pause a while, and declare the deliuerance of the
Princesse Agriola.
                     
                  
                  
                     Chap. XLIII.
                     
                        Howe the great Turke became enamoured with the Princesse
Laurana, by means wherof he was slaine, and Agriola
deliuered.
                     
                     
                        
                           PAlmerin being vpon a day in his Chamber
with his Companions, practising
some meane for the deliuerance of Agriola:
the Princesse Laurana of Durace,
came to them, framing her spéeches
in this maner. Gentlemen if any
of you be desirous to deliuer vs from
this cruell enemie, who holdes vs in this thrall and
bondage, I haue deuised the best meanes that may be, and
thus it is. The Turke the most luxurious and vnchast man
in the worlde, not contented with infinite number of Concubines,
hath many times made loue to me, so that to compasse
mine intent, I haue made him promise within thrée
dayes to graunt his request. In this time I haue intreated
the Princesse Agriola to shewe him the most disdamefull
countenaunce that may bée, which shée hath faythfully promised,

and for this cause hath sent mee to you, to conuay
hence all the riches he hath giuen yée, and which shée herselfe
will likewise send ye: so that when the houre is come
for me to fulfill his pleasure, one of you béeing priuilie armed,
shall in my place murther him, in reuenge of the ill
Christendome hath sustained, by the last vnhappie voyage
of Olimaell, who determineth verie shortly, as I vnderstand,
to goe spoyle to Isle of Rhodes. Palmerin very glad
of the Princesse notable inuention, thus answered. Because
(Madame) I lately promised the Turke, not to depart
his Court, but to kéepe him companie, when he denied
his Admirall, that I and my companions shoulde go with
him to the Rhodes: I cannot be the man to ende this woorthie
reuenge, therefore one of you (my Fréendes) must resolue
to performe it. In meane while, you Madame Laurana
may returne to the Turke, pleasing him with faire
and fréendly spéeches: for if neeuer so little suspition bée gathered,
not one of vs can escape with life. Feare not, sayde
the Princesse, I will vse the matter so carefully as you can
desire, right well knowe howe to enflame his heart with

                           •
                        ueint lookes, coy disdaines, faint dealings, aud other such
like ceremonies vsed in loue, as feare not you to prosecute
the stratageme, in that a beginning so good, must néedes
sort to a successiue ende. The yong Duke of Pontus, who
began to growe affectionate towards the Princesse Laurana,
sayd.
                     In sooth my Lord, so please you to commit the charge
héereof to me: so well hope I to execute the same, for her
sake that did so woorthily inuent it, as I dare warrant to
deserue no reproch thereby. For my first earnest to gentle
Loue, shall be so gracious, as in qualifying the vnlawfull
heate of our enemie, I will binde my selfe neuer to loue anie
other: and her faith receyued, if I bring not his head to
Madame Laurana, let mée bée accounted as one of the most
slothfull Knights that euer bare Armes. Aduertise mée
therefore of the place and houre, and doubt not of my faithfull

performance. At this pleasant answer they all be ganne
to smile, whereupon Palmerin thus spake. Beléeue mee noble
Duke, considering your youth and braue disposition, I
knowe no one in this 
                           ••
                        mpanie more méete for the Princesse
Laurana, then you are: but I thinke when the appoynted
houre shall come, you will bée a little more angrie
with the Turke then her, if she haue you in that subi
                           •
                        ction
as it séemes she hath. Yet let vs not nowe trifle the time in
vaine, when such waightie occasions commaundeth our diligence.
                     So returned Laurana to the Princesse Agriola, acquainting
her with the Knights determination, when not
long after, the great Turke entred the Chamber, accompanied
with Palmerin and the King of Sparta, & that he might
the better speake to her hée so earnestly desired, hée caused
Palmorin to sit betwéene him and Agriola, then turning
to Laurana, he began to deuise familiarlie with her. Which
whe
                           •
                         
                        Palmerin and Agriola perceiued, the better to beguile
him, hée made a signe to the King of Sparta, that hée
should enter into some talke of hunting: wherat the Turke
presently arose, and taking Laurana by the hand, led her to
the window, with these spéeches. Mistresse of my heart, and
the very fairest creature that euer mine eyes behelde, will
ye graunt the request I made to you yesterday? Sée you
not what great honour I haue done to Madame Agriola?
Notwithstanding, if you will loue me, I will make you my
Wife, that I may haue issue by you to succéede in my kingdome,
and your honours shall be nothing inferiour to hers.
And though she still denie me the fauour, which with long
and continuall pursuite I haue desired: yet doe you consider
my gréefe, and if in short time you vouchsafe me no pitti,
the extreame afflictions I endure for your loue, are rated
at the price of my life. God forbid, quoth Laurana, that
so great a losse shoulde come to the Orientall Empyre by
me, rather will I forget the accustomed regard of mine honour,
to bée accepted in your grace and fauour. And the

cause that made me deferre so long from this answere, was
the feare I haue of Madame Agriola, and her Brother, to
whome I was giuen by your Admirall after my Fathers
decease.
                     But to the ende, my Lorde, that none of them may suspect
our loue, I thinke it conuenient that Hyppolita, who
alway lyeth in your Chamber, remoue her selfe to the Ladies
attending on Agriola, and her shall you commaunde to
giue me the Key of my Ladies Chamber, which hitherto
shée hath vsed to carrie. By this meane may I the more
safely, and without suspition of any one, come in the night
to fulfill your desire. The Turke imagining he had gayned
the Princesse loue indéede, was not a little ioyfull, wherefore
he said.
                     Swéete Ladie, you shall haue the Key as you request,
nor shall she longer lodge in my Chamber, whom you feare
so much. Moreouer, this night will I perswade Agriola,
that I féele my selfe not halfe currant: and therefore to
kéepe her selfe in her owne Chamber, and so may you come
boldlie to me this night. If any man chaunce to méete yée,
say that I sent for you: and if they dare bee so bolde as to
hinder your comming, in the morning shall my Ianizaries
put them to death, whatsoeuer they be. So taking a King
from his finger, wherein was a stone of inestimable value,
hée gaue it to the Princesse, saying. Holde Madame, take
this as a pledge of my promise: for which Laurana humblie
thanking him, thus replied. My Lord, I sée Agriola,
hath foure or fiue times earnestlie noted you, I thinke it
good therefore that we breake off talke, assuring you, that I
will not faile at midnight, when euerie one is fast a sléepe,
to kéepe my worde, and in the Mantle which you sent mée
yesterday, I will couertly enter your Chamber, conditionallie
that you kéepe your promise to mée afterwarde.
                     Doubt not thereof, said the Turke, and so taking his leaue
of he
                           •
                        , went presently to his Chamber, where finding
Hyppol
                              •
                           ta, he commaunded her to take thence her bed, and

                        
                           •
                        arrie it to the Ladies Chamber, likewise taking the Key
from her, hée sent it by one of his Pages to Laurana, who
hauing it in her hand, came laughing therewith to Palmerin,
saying.
                     Howe say you my Lord, haue I not handled the matter

                           〈◊〉
                         it should be? the Turke mooued with pittie of our straite
imprisonment, hath giuen me the charge of Madame Agri
                           
                              •
                           la:
for by his Page hath he sent me the Key of her Chamber,
and Hyppolita shall lodge nowe among other Ladies.
And because this night the action must bee fulfilled, doo you
aduertise the Duke of Pontus, that at midnight he faile not
to come, to vse drunken Holofernes as hée hath deserued.
Palmerin and the King of Sparta, praysing God, that their
affaires went forwarde so luckily, returned to their lodging,
intreating Agriola to be ready at the houre, that their
intent might not be hindered by her. Afterwarde they rehearsed
to their companions, what was concluded by the
Princesse Laurana: wherefore, quoth hée to the Duke, prepare
to bring your Armour secretlye to Agriolaes Chamber,
where you shall finde the King of Sparta, and my selfe.
Meane while, Frysoll, Olorico, and Eustace, sée that all
out baggage be conueyed into our shi
                           •
                        pe, which may safely
be done without suspect, considering what great multitude
of Souldiours are embarquing, and therefore prouide all
things readie agaynst our comming. The houre being at
hand, Palmerin, the King of Sparta, and the Duke of Pontus,
went to the Princesse Chamber, where the Duke was immediately
Armed, except his Helmet, which he left on the
Table, couered with the Mantle whereof Laurana spake,
putting on the attyre the Princes wore vppon her heade,
and so finely was he disguised in those habits, as in the dark
he might be reputed rather a woman then a man, and béeing
readie to depart about the practise, he saide to Palmerin.
I thinke it best my Lord, that you and the King of Sparta,
con
                           •
                        uct the Ladyes before to the Porte: for if in mine attempt
I should happen to 
                           •
                        aile, yet shoul
                           •
                         you loose but the

worst in your companie. So importunate was hee with
them to follow his aduise, as he caused them to depart presently
to the Hauen, where they were ioyfully welcommed
by Frysoll, and the rest, without méeting anie by the way to
hinder them. When the Duke saw himselfe left alone, and
now he was to dispose himselfe to his intent, falling on his
knée, he thus spake.
                     O my God, that suffered the mightie Holofernes to bée
be headed by thy Seruaunt Iudith: affoorde me at this time
the like grace, and giue mée strength to worke his death,
who is the greatest liuing enemy to Christians. This said,
hée went to the Turks Chamber, where he found the doore
readie open, and approching the bed, the Turke (who verilie
thought it was Laurana) raysed vp himselfe, and taking
him by the arme, said. Welcome, swéete Ladie, for verie
long haue I expected thy comming. Ah Traitour, quoth
the Duke, I am not she thou lookest for
                           •
                         regarde of honour
will not suffer her to sinne in such sort. With which wordes
hée stabbed him to the heart, and smiting off his head, wrapped
it in the Mantle that Laurana gaue him: so going to
Agriolaes Chamber, and clasping on his Helmet, went presentlie
to his Fréendes, whom hée founde in prayer for his
good successe, and throwing the head into Lauranaes lappe,
said.
                     Madame, hée that was so importunate for your dishonour,
as a witnesse of his loue to you, hath sent you his head
here by me: wherwith I present you so deuoutlie, as henceforth
I dedicate my life and seruice to your disposing. A thousand
thanks my Lorde, quoth the Princesse, this vertuous
act hath made mée so constanlie to bée yours: as in anie
thing that toucheth not the impeach of mine honour, I remaine
with my vttermost endeuours to pleasure you. As
the Duke woulde haue replied, the other Knights came to
looke on the head, which when they ha
                           •
                         cast into the Sea,
they presently hoysed 
                           •
                        aile, and before day had gotte
                           •
                         farre
enough from thence.
                     
                        In the morning, as the marriners came from theyr
Gallies towardes the Cittie, they espied the head floting
on the water, and taking it vp, shewed it to their companions,
to know if they could tell whose it was. When they
be helde it so dreadfull, the mu
                           ••
                        achoes 
                           ••
                        routing out like

                           〈◊〉
                         bristles, and the locks of hayre hang shagging downe,
they knew not what to thinke, and one of them hauing well
marked it, said.
                     By all our Gods, if I be not deceiued, this is the head
of my Lord the great Turke, at which words all the other
began to scorne and 
                           •
                        ocke. Hyppolita séeing faire Phoebus
let foorth the morning light, came to the Princesse Agriolaes
chamber, where not finding her nor Laurana, the chamber
likewise dispoyled of many things, she doubted immediatly
that they were fled, whereof to be resolued, she went
to the great Turks Chamber, and séeing the Pages standing
at the doore, saide. Why enter ye not? the howre is
past, and my Lorde is not yet risen. Lady, quoth they, as
yet hee hath not called vs, and you knowe as yesternight
be forb
                           •
                        d our entrance till we were called: it may bée hée

                           〈◊〉
                         but badly this night, and therefore now is contented
to take his rest. I feare, quoth she, some other matter then
sléepe dooth hinder his calling you, so thrusting open the
doore, and entring the Chamber, sawe the bloud dispersed
on the ground, and the headlesse truncke hanging beside the
bed, with which sight they made a verie pittifull outcrie,
whereat many noble men and Gentlemen came, who likewise
beholding what had happened, ioyned with them in
sorrowfull complaints. Soone was the report of this murder
blazed through the Cittie, so that Olimaell bearing
thereof, ranne thither with all haste, where he was no sooner
presēt, but Hyppolita thus began. Ah Olimaell thou broughtest
the Traytours hither that haue slaine my Lorde, and
by thy meanes hath this treason béene committed. By all
our Gods, sayde one of the Turks Nephewes present, it is
true, but because thou hast suffered Agriola, her Brother,

and the other Knights to escape, thou villaine shalt abide it
déerely. So drawing foorth his Semitarie, killed Olimaell
therewith, saying. Such be their reward that trayterously
betray theyr Soueraigne: mine Unckle of a poore Ianizarie
made thée his chéefe Admirall, and thou for his kindnesse
hast requited him with death, but now thy villainy is worthily
recompenced.
                     
                        Olimaell thus slaine, his men ranne furiously on the
Turks Nephew, and 
                           ••
                        ew him, with fiftie Knights beside
that defended his quarrell, and had it not béene for an auncient
Basso, who with an hundred Souldiours came to
part them, they were in danger of a greater sedition, because
they sawe none pursue Palmerin and his companions.
                     The Basso that had thus pacified this tumult, by promises
perswaded the Ianizaries, and preuailed so well
with them, as the same day he was proclaimed yonger Brother
to the Soldane deceased, and great Emperour of Turkie.
Many iniuries did he to Christendome afterwarde, in
reuenge of his Brothers death, which yet we will forbeare,
to rehearse what happened to Palmerin and his companions
being on the sea.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. XLIIII.
                     
                        How Palmerin and his companions metre two Turkish
Ships, from whom they deliuered Estebon the Merchant
and his Sonnes: and came to the Isle of Malfada, where
Palmerin lost them all, and of the sorrow hee made for
his mishap.
                     
                     
                        
                           LAurana was so ioyfull, that shee had so
fortunately escaped the Turks hands, &
beside was so reuenged of hir chéefest enemie,
as nothing could yéeld her greater
contentation: but howe much more
would shee haue reioyced, if shee had
known the slaughter at the Pallace? As
she sat discoursing heereon with Palmerin and the Duke of
Pontus, Frysoll béeing aloft on the de
                           •
                        ke, espied foure ships
comming towards them with full saile, whereupon hée called
to his companions, that they shoulde presently arme
themselues. For (quoth he) I see two 
                           〈◊〉
                         Shippes, and
they haue taken two other, or els my iudgement fayleth: let
vs therefore labour to withstand them, least we 
                           〈◊〉
                         a
further danger.
                     No sooner had he spoken these words, but they all pu
                           •
                        
themselues in readinesse, so that when the enemie close
                           •
                        
with them, and many entred the shippe, thinking it was
yéelded, they had a sharper entertainment then they expected,
for not one escaped aliue that came aboord, but either
were slaine or thrown into the Sea. In bréefe, they ouercame
both the Pirates; and left not one aliue to carrie tydings
hereof into Turkie. Afterward, as Palmerin searched

the Cabins, to sée what prisoners the Moores had taken:
he espied his maister Estebon the Merchant of Hermida,
and his two sonnes by him, with two other Merchants,
chained by the handes and necks, in like sort as the poore
slaues are in the Gallies, whereupon he saide. Trust mée
Maister, hee that put this coller about your necke, was little
acquainted with your honest humanitie. So looking vp
and downe for the 
                           〈◊〉
                         that opened the locks of the
chaines, hee 
                           •
                        spied a Turkish marriner, who fearefull of
his life had hid himselfe, to whom he said. By God villaine,
it thou she west me not quickly where the Keyes are, I will
sende thy soule after thy fellowes. Spare my life most noble
Knight, cryed the Turke, and I will giue ye not onely
the Keyes, but also shew you such secrets héere within, as
no other now but my selfe can shew ye, wherein is infinite
wealth and riches.
                     Dispatch then, sayde Palmerin. The Moore fetching,
the Keyes, opened the locks, tooke off their chaines, and
brake the manacles bounde about their handes, when Palmerin
lifting vp his eyes to Heauen, saide. Thanks to my
God, that so happily sent mee 
                           •
                        o succour Estebon, by whose
meanes I came to the knowledge of my Friendes and Parents,
and who first gaue me horse and armour for knightly
seruice. Estebon hearing Palmerins words, maruailing not
a little, fell on his 
                           〈◊〉
                        , saying. I beséech you my Lorde to
tell me your name, to the ende I may be thankfull to him,
by whom I haue escaped the cruell Infidels, and receiued
such an vnspeakeable benefit. Why maister, quoth Palmerin,
know ye not me▪ I am your seruant Palmerin, who you
first prouoked to follow armes by your liberalitie, and euer
since haue I followed that profession, and nowe haue requited
some parte of your kindnesse. Ah my noble Friende
Palmerin, said old Estebon, suffer me to kisse thy hande, for
if heeretofore thou didst deliuer me from the Lions throat:
what may I say of the daunger from which I am nowe defended?
In happie houre was that knightly furniture

giuen, and with successefull fortune haue you imployed
them, but may it please ye to goe with mée, I will prouide
you of all things necessarie, and giue you my Sonnes héere
to be your Seruant.
                     The King of Sparta séeing Estebon vse such zealous
spéeches, saide to him. Father, you are very much deceiued
imagine you the sonne to the Emperour of Constantinople,
a simble Souldier? your age (Father) makes you forgette
your selfe. At these words the good olde man somewhat astonied,
excused himselfe to the King, and turning to Palmerin,
saide. Alas my Lord, in not knowing you otherwise
then one of my seruants, I haue offered your excellencie
very great wrong, and great hath béene my desert of punishment,
vsing the great Lorde of Greece so vnreuerently.
But pardon my boldnesse, noble Lorde, and let mine ignoraunce
excuse the offence committed: for vnwittingly did
I fall into this error. Content thy selfe good maister, quoth
Palmerin, in nothing hast thou offended mée, but it thou
wilt returne to thy Countrey, these vesselles belonging to
the Moores, and all the treasure in them, will I frankely
bestow on thée. Ah my Lorde, answered Estebon, since Fortune
hath so happily brought me into your companie, so
please you to lisence me, loth am I to departe from y
                           •
                        u, for
such store of Théeues and Robbers are on the Seas, as
hardly can I escape their handes aliue. And sorrie would I
be, saide Palmerin, that you or these merchaunts should any
way miscarrie, though perhaps your Wiues would
gladly haue ye at home: but this I must tell ye, that I cannot
retu
                           •
                        ne to Constantinople. I shall be contented, saide
Estebon, to stay your good leysure, for a poore life is better
to mée in this companie, then welthie possessions among
mine enemies.
                     Héereuppon, Palmerin commaunding all the riches
in the Moores Shippes to bee conuayed into the other, sette
are on the vessels, and hoising sayle, rode on merrily. Within
thrée daies after arose a mightie winde at Northeast,

which carried them with such violence, as the Pilots 
                           •
                        old
Palmerin they were nowe come on the borders of Persia,
and very néere the Isle of Malfada, where they arriued before
the Sunne setting. They séeing the Countrey so faire
and delectable, would néedes goe on shore to refresh themselues,
for the Ladies were so distempered with the rough
storme, as they were very desirous to recreate themselues
a little.
                     
                        Palmerin not able to shun this fatall chaunce, went on
shore with his friendes and the two Princesses, all the other
likewise spéedily followed them, where they had not
long stayde, but they were all diuersly enchaunted. The
two Ladyes were transformed into the shape of Hindes,
the other to Dogges, Wolues, and Leopards, all of them
running with such swiftnesse, as though the furies had stood
to chase them: but Palmerin could not be enchaunted, by
reason of the gift hee receiued of the thrée wise Sisters on
the Mountaine Artifaeria, whereat hee greatly gréeued, for
such was his impatience thus to loose his friendes, as hee
entred into these lamentations.
                     Ah peruerse and vnconstant fortune, how diuers and
daungerous are thy trecheries? Ah stepmother too cruell,
why dost thou not exercise thy rage on simple and forsaken
soules, but on such as excéede in honour and vertue? Doubtlesse
my sinne hath caused this mishap, when I perswaded
my Friendes to goe against their Christian Brethren, onely
by feare of my wretched life. As he stoode thus complayning,
hee behelde the Ladie of the Isle with her Seruants,
comming to take the spoyle of their bootie, whereof béeing
ioyfull, and thinking by her mea
                           •
                        es to finde some succour,
be ranne apace towards her, and falling on his knée, thus
spake. Alas noble Ladie, if euer power had pittie to 
                           〈◊〉
                        
ye, instruct me howe to recouer my companions, and two
woorthie Ladies transformed into brute Beasts. Malfada
swelling with anger, to sée that he was not likewise
enchaunted▪ aunswered. Wretched knight, accursed bée

their power that defended thée from my incontations, liue
not thou in hope to finde any remedie héere: for these enchauntments
are of such strength, as they may not be vndane,
but by the most skilfull magitian in the world, which
thou art not I am well assured, and therefore dost thou but
loose thy labour. But because by mine art I cannot be reuenged
on thée, some other meanes will I seeke for thy destruction.
You therefore my Seruants, lay handes on him,
and carrie him to the darkest of my prysons, that his following
dayes may be spent in greater miserie. Uncourteous
and despightfull, quoth Palmerin, are these speeches, especially
comming from one that vaunteth of her knowledge,
nor can they bee measured by loue or charitie, and
therefore shall I chastise such bad creatures, as refuse a
matter no way hurtfull to themselues, but wherein theyr
owne honour might be discerned. With which words hée
smote her head from her shoulders, and valiantly buckling
with the other, in the ende left not one to carrie reporte of
this massacre: afterwarde hee fell into this lamentation againe
in this manner.
                     Infortunate Palmerin, séest thou not how mishap will
neuer leaue thée? for where thou thoughtest with comfort
to finde thy Brother Tryneus, nowe hath Fortune ouerwhelmed
thée with a whole world of mischaunces. Ah noble
Agriola and gentle Laurana, two of the most modest
Princesses that euer the earth bare, howe may you iustly
blame me? bringing you from where you liued in honour, in
this accursed place to bee transformed to brute Beastes.
Neuer did Circes deale so cruelly with Grillus, and other
Souldiers to the wise Vlysses, as this villainous olde bag
hath doone with me. Had you yet beene altered to Lyons
and Tygers, you might haue defended your selues from
the cruel
                           •
                        ie of other Beasts: but this damned Sorceress
                           •
                        
hath transformed you, to the most fearefull and timerous
among all other creatures, and therefore subiect to euerie
inconuenience.
                     
                        Ah loyall companions, who loued me déerer then your
Father or Brother: from the Turks which cherished you
with such kindnes and loue, haue I brought you to the cruell
and mercilesse Malfada. My noble Friende and Brother
Frysoll, what now will auaile thy haughty Chiualrie?
And gentle Prince Olorico, who for my sake forsooke countrey,
Parents, Friendes and all: how maist thou iustly
condemne me of infamous reproach? What answere shall I
make to mine Aunt Arismena, for her noble husbande the
King of Sparta? And vertuous Duke of Pontus, a Knight
of high and especiall qualitie: greatly maist thou blame thy
fortune to bee acquainted with mée. Not forgetting the
magnanimious Prince Eustace, how can I excuse thy hard

                           〈◊〉
                        , to the good olde Duke of Mecaena thy Father? Had it
pleased the soueraigne Creator of all things, that among
you my selfe had taken the strange shape, my quiet would
haue béene the better, to accompanie you with mishappe,
as I haue doone in good fortune. Ah swéete Sister Armyda,
little thinkest thou what offence thy Brother Palmerin
hath committed: and gracious Mistresse Polynarda, what
torment will this bee to your heauenly thoughts, when
you shall vnderstand the summe of my ill successe? Wandering
along in these mones, he came to the Enchauntresse
Castale, where at the gate he sawe two Damoselles, who
humbly saluting him, saide. Welcome Sir Knight, heere
may you repose your selfe if you please. Alas Ladys, quoth
be, it is nowe no time for me to rest, because the Ladie of
this place I thinke, béeing the most ingrate and despightfull
woman that euer I sawe, hath depriued mée of all my ioye
and comfort: but I hope I haue so well paide her for her
paines, as héereafter shee shall do no further harme. Yet if
any of you haue béene so well instructed by her, as to finish
the deuellish coniurations, and will accomplish it, or tell
me, if by force they may bee reduced to their former shapes,
who remaine enchaunted héere in this Islande, for euer
will I bee her Knight, and will preferre her in honour beyond

all other of her race. The Damosels (who thought
their Ladies cunning had brought them thither, that shee
might abuse him, and afterwarde transforme him as was
her custome) béeing amazed at this aunswere, thus spake.
Accursed villaine, of an euill death maist thou die, whom
our Mistresse by her knowledge cannot transforme, now
knowe we that thou hast murdered her: but assure thy selfe
to finde vs thy two most mortall enemies, and though we
can change thy Fréendes to their former shapes, yet in despight
of thy villainie, wee will not, nor shalt thou knowe
how it may be doone.
                     Awaie strumpets, quoth hee, get yee going, or I will
sende your soules after your Mistresse: and were it not a
disgrace to mine honor, to defile my hands with the bloode
of such wicked creatures, by heauen I would cutte yee as
small as flesh to the pot. Then came a knight foorth of the
Castell, who embracing Palmerin, said. My Lord Palmerin,
what fortune hath brought you into this accursed Iland?
Palmerin séeing such strange euents succéede one an
other, knewe not what to imagine: but at length returned
this answer. You must hold me excused Sir, for in truth I
knowe ye not. Why my Lorde, quoth the knight, haue you
forgotten D
                              •
                           ardo, whose life you defended in the king of
Bohemiaes Court? By heauen, said Palmerin, I could not
call you to remembraunce, but tell mee good Knight, what
aduenture brought you hither? for my chaunce hath béene
so vnfortunate, as the rehearsall woulde bee most dolorous.
Then Dyardo declared, howe the King had sent him with
some small assistaunce, to pursue fiue Foystes of Moorish
Pirats, who had doone manie iniuries to his subiects. And,
quothe hee, after I had long time chased them, fiue other
Galleyes came, and ioyning with them, tooke mee, and 
                           ••
                        ue
all my men.
                     At length, by tempesteous wether we were cast on this
Isle, where we landing to séeke fresh water, all the Moores
were changed into Harts, Dogs and Bores: but the Ladie

sparing me in regard of amorous desire, hath kept mee in
this Castle a yéere and more, abusing mee at her owne pleasure,
and neuer could I compasse any meane to escape hence
againe, for if I had but made offer néere the Gate, by forcible
strokes haue I béene beaten backe, yet not able to discerne
who smote me.
                     Your hap, quoth Palmerin, hath béene verie harde, but
her cursed head lying on the shore side, perswades me héereafter
she shall doo no more harme. But tell me good Dyardo,
is there no one within so skilfull in her Science, as wée
may winne to doo vs some good? Not one, aunswered Dyardo,
therefore am I lothe you shoulde staie long heere, in
doubt of further daunger. I will then, saide Palmerin, goe
séeke such a one as shall ende these enchauntments: and
because you shall not be iniuried by anie in the Castle, wée
will make them fast in prisons till my returne. After they
had so doone, they went to the stable, where Dyardo gaue
Palmerin a lustie Courser, and taking leaue of him, set forward
on his iourney.
                  
                  
                     Chap. XLV.
                     
                        How Palmerin departing from the Isle of Mal
                              •
                           ada, came
to the Court of the Princesse Zephira, shee that kept
Tryneus transformed: where he was entertained, to
ayde her against her eldest brother, who vexed her with
dayly troubles.
                     
                     
                        SO soone as Palmerin had thus left the
Isle of Malfada, and had y• day likewise
passed a very dangerous riuer, at night
he came to a little village, where taking
vp his lodging, he fell in talke wt his host
in y• 
                        Arabian tong, if he knewe any one

that was expert in Nigromancie. I knowe none, quoth the
Hoste, but an olde Ladie in an Islande harde by, to whome
our Princesse not long since went, for remedie of a strange
disease wherewith she is tormented. Where abideth your
Princesse? saide Palmerin. Not past thirtie miles thence,
(quoth the Hoste) in a Cittie called Elain. Perhappes, quoth
Palmerin, by her I may be better resolued. So bidding his
Hoste good night, withdrewe himselfe into his Chamber,
where many imaginations passed him concerning the Princesse
Zephira.
                     
                     It may bee, (quoth hée within himselfe) that the Enchauntresse
vnable to helpe her, hath yet assigned her to
some man more expert in that diuellish Science: who compassing
her health, happily may giue mée some counsell to
amende my misfortune. In this opinion the next morning
he rode to the Cittie of Elain, heauie and sadde, yet in hope of
comfort: and as hee came neare the Cittie, hée was enclosed
with two or thrée hundreth light Horsse men, whome the
Prince Maulerino Brother to Zephira had there ambushed,
to taste all auaunt, currers and Knights passing by
them. Yet obserued they these conditions, that who so would
take the Princes paie, and sweare faithfull seruice, shoulde
sustaine no harme: but such as refused so to doo, were carried
into the Cittie, their Horsse and Armour taken from
them, and they enclosed in strong prison. These Moores
were amazed to sée Palmerin so richly armed, and much
more beholding him so brauely mounted, wherfore they said
to him.
                     Yéeld your selfe Sir knight, and sweare to maintaine
our Princesse quarrel: or else be assured thy death is present.
The condition is very harde, said Palmerin, but for I haue
heard the wrong offered by the king to your Princesse, I
will sustaine her cause, not as a prisonrr enforced héereto,
but of mine owne good will, as all knights errant are bound
by dutie, to definde the iust quarrell of distressed Ladies.
Presently was Pa
                              •
                           merin brought to the Princesse and her

Brother, who were conferring togither about these earnest
affaires: when the Knight that conducteth Palmerin,
stept to the Prince Maulerino, and thus spake. Sée héere
my Lord, a Knight latelie taken, whome wee haue found
honest and courteous, we haue suffered him to remain Armed,
and commit him to your opinion. While the knight
continued these spéeches, transformed Trineus, who lay
                           •
                        
at the Princesse foote, séeing Palmerin with his beuer open,
ran and leaped on him, whining and fawning on him so louingly,
as euery one greatlie meruailed thereat. In bréefe,
they might discerne by cries, colling about his legs, and
pittifull mourning, that faine he would haue spoken, and
shewed his loyall Fréende his inward complainings. The
Princesse meruailing at this strange occasion, said. I thinke
(Sir Knight) my dog knowes you, for since Malfada gaue
him me, I neuer could sée him so faune on anie body. In
sooth Madame, answered Palmerin, to my remembraunce,
I neuer sawe your dog before this present. Héereupon shée
called him to her, and made many meanes that hee shoulde
come to her, yet would he not leaue Palmerin, but shaking
his head, still whined to his Fréende, as crauing aide and
succour at his hand, wherewith the Princesse mooued, thus
spake.
                     I praye thée Knight conceale not any thing from mee,
for I perswade my selfe, that thou hast beene héeretofore
some Fréende to the Enchauntresse Malfada, seeing my
dogge is so loth to come from thée. Let mee vnderstand the
truth I praye thée, and if thou likewise wilt assist mee against
my cruell Brother, thou shalt be honourablye vsed,
and thy ordinarie paye redoubled. Madame, answered Palmerin,
héere may you beholde the most distressed Knight
liuing, and a Christian, whose harde fortune hath béene such,
as arriuing in the Enchauntresse Isle whereof you spake,
I haue lost fiue Fréends, my true and honourable companions,
and with them two Ladies, who in all vertues may
not be equalled. Yet haue I reuenged their losse on the olde

hagge and her seruaunts, whose breathlesse bodies remaine
for foode to the foules of the ayre. And because I hearde
(fayre Princesse) your selfe was not long since with her,
for councell in some vnhappie fortune befallen you, faine
woulde I knowe, maye it please you to graunt mee so much
fauour, if shee assigned you to anie other more skilfull then
her selfe, by whom you not alone shall finde remedie, but my
tormenting gréefes maye likewise bée comforted. Good
Knight, aunswered the Princesse, the Gods themselues will
trauaile to helpe thée, and it may be I haue learned of her,
by whose death thou hast reuenged the wrong of manie noble
persons: some hope of further good, to ease those passions
which thy spéeches bewray. True it is, that I stayed
with Malfada the space of eight daies, yet not learning any
thing of her woorthie the rehearsall, this onelie excepted:
she tolde me that in the kings Court of Grisca and Romata,
remained an auncient Knight named Muzabelino, by
whome (if my maladie were curable) I should finde helpe,
and by no other man whatsoeuer, so did she extoll him beyond
all other. And had not the king my Father died soone
after my returne, and my iniurious brother euer since molested
mée, long ere this had I gone to that skilfull man,
whome I meane to finde, so soone as I can bring my troubles
to anie good ende. By all our Gods, quoth the Prince
Maulerino, séeing Malfada is deade, Muzabelino maye
finish all the enchauntments: but during her life, neither
he nor all the Magitians in the world were able to compasse
it.
                     As for the kingdome of Romata, it is very farre from
this Couutrey, the greater will your paine and daunger be
in trauailing thither. Right pleasant will the paine bee to
me, said Palmerin, so may I recouer my déerest Fréends
againe: and for you swéete Madame will I aduenture my
life, eyther to winne you peace with your Brother, or a happie
victorie by his death, that wee maye the sooner sette forward
to Romata.
                     
                     
                        A thousand thankes good Knight, quoth the Princesse,
and this day shall we knowe what our Brother intendeth:
if peace, it is welcome, if warre, we must defend our selues
so well as we may. Still did the dogge cling about Palmerins
féete, so that hée demaunded of the Princesse, if shée
brought him from the Isle of Malfada, for doubtlesse, quoth
he, I thinke it is some Knight transformed by that cruell
woman, who héeretofore belike hath knowne me. At which
words the dog howled excéedingly, when Pa
                              •
                           merin tooke
an oath that hée would searche all the worlde ouer, to finde
some meane to bring him to his former sh
                           •
                        pe, that hée might
know from whence this loue procéededed. The next day the
king Tyreno assaulted the Cittie, who was slaine in the
battaile by Palmerin, so afterward was Maulerino crowned
king of Nabor, and all the Countrey enioyed their
former quiet: whereupon the Princesse Zephira gaue Palmerin
her dogge, who requited her with many gracious
thanks, because he greatlie suspected, that it was his fréend
Trineus transformed into that shape: but now let vs returne
to the soldane of Babilon, vnderstanding how his Armie
was discomfited at Constantinople.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. XLVI.
                     
                        Howe one of the Nephewes to the King of Balisarca,
brought newes to the Soldane of his vncles death, the
foyle of his Armie, the losse of Palmerin and Olorico.
And how the Princesse Alchidiana bought Ptolome,
whom she greatly honored for Palmerins sake▪
                        
                     
                     
                        THe King of Balisarca▪
                         (as you haue heard
before) being slaine, his Armie discomfited
and al his Galleys burnt before Constantinople,
one of his Nephewes that kept
the straight of y• 
                        Bosphor, with two foysts,
least any succour should come that way to
the Christians, by one Galley that escaped, hearde all this
misfortune: wherefore making haste backe againe fearing
to be taken, at length arriued in the Soldans Kingdome,
where not staying long, hée posted to the Courte, and to the
Soldane reuealed all that had happened. When the Soldane
heard how his Armie was thus ouerthrowne, Palmerin
whom he loued so well, and the Prince Olorico lost
in the storme on the sea: vexed with greefe and rage, hee
called his Lorde Ambassadour Mauce to to him, saying.
                     Haste thée good Mauc
                              ••
                           to to my Brother the Soldane
of Persia, and desire him to leu
                           •
                        y me a strong Armie against
the Moneth of March next ensuing, to encounter with the
Emperour of Greece: promising him the spoyle whatsoeuer
it bee, reseruing for my selfe nothing but the 
                           ••
                        me of
reuenge.
                     
                        
                        Maucetto departed presentlie on his iourney, and by
the way mette sixe Moores, leading two Christians to the
Soldans Court to sell, which were Ptolome and Colmelio,
of whome hee demaunded why they were so bounde in
chaines?
                     My Lord, quoth one of the Moores, they be Christian
slaues, who not long since were taken at the Sea by Olimaell
Admirall to the great Turke. And how came you by
them? said Maucetto. The Admirall, quoth the Moore, gaue
them to one of his Cozins, who now is deade, and his wife
béeing loth to kéepe them anie longer, sendes them to the
Court to be solde for money. Maucetto bought Colmelio of
them, refusing Ptolome because he was somewhat s
                           •
                        cklie,
and so passed on his Embassade. The Moores comming
to the Court with poore Ptolome, and placing him among
other slaues that stoode to bee solde, there came a deformed
Moore, farre worsse mishapen then was Thersites y• 
                        Greek,
and he would néedes buy Ptolome of the Merchaunt: but
Ptolome disdaining to be subiect to so vile a creature, gaue
him such a stroke on the stomacke with his fiste, as made
him tumble ouer backward, saying. Thou monstrous Uillaine,
let me rather die, then come into thy subiection. At
this instant passed by the Princesse Alchidiana, smiling is
sée the Moore lie along: but when shée behelde the good personage
of Ptolome, shée remembred her louer Palmerin,
and was therewith mooued thus to speake. Nowe durst
thou take such hardinesse vpon thee, béeing a bondslaue and
a captiue, thus to strike a Moore, frée of this Countrey? Ptolome
perceiuing by the Ladies attending on her, that shee
was the Soldanes Daughter, falling on his knée, thus aunswered.
                     Assuredlie Madame, rather desire I death, then to li
                           ••
                        
at such an ill fauoured villaines controll, my selfe beeing a
Knight at Armes. Are you then a knight? said the Princesse?
I am good Madaine, quoth he, although my seruitude hath
very much altered mée. Alchidiana with
                           •
                        ut any further

questions, deliuered the Merchant two hundred Seraphes,
and by two of her Squires caused him to bee conducted to
her Chamber, where he was presentlie disroabed of his vnséemelie
garments, and cloathed in such as well became a
knight to weare: afterwarde, she commaunded her attendants
to depart the chamber, and comming to Ptolome, she
thus began.
                     Nowe Syr Knight, I intreate you by the holy faith
you owe to your best beloued, that you will truelie tell mee,
by what misfortune you happened first into thraldome.
Madame, quoth he, séeing of your owne grace and bountie,
you haue deliuered mee from these villaines that made sale
of my life, I will not fable with you in any one point, but
tell you a Historie repleat with wonderfull sorrowe. Hauing
reuealed the manner of his taking, and all the mishaps hée
endured euer since, the teares trickling downe his chéekes,
he said. And yet sweete Ladie, all these passed miseries, and
still abiding your slaue, gréeues me not so much, as the losse
of my déerest Fréende, the best knight in the worlde, who
went to sée his Falcon flie, when the Pirates came and vnhappilie
tooke vs. Tell me good freende, quoth the Princesse,
what may the knight bee called, of whom you make such estimation?
Quoth Ptolome, he nameth himselfe Palmerin
d'Oliua.
                     
                     O soueraigne Gods, said Alchidiana, haue you béen
                           •
                        
companion to the noble Palmerin? That haue I in truth
Madame, quoth he, and knowe more of his affayres then anie
other man doth. Unhappie that I am, said the Princesse,
nowe sée I well that I am deceiued in all my hope.
Saye good knight, naie more, I coniure thee by thy faith to
the soueraigne Creator of all things, to tell mee, if he bee of
our Lawe, and hath béene dumbe of long, or no? By God
Madame, answered Ptolome, your adiuration is such, as
rather will I make a sacrifice of my selfe, then bee found
vntrue to you in any thing. Hée is a Christian, borne in
Greece, and neuer had defect in his spéech: if discréet consideration

of following euents, eyther to escape captiuitie or
death, did not inforce him to feigne such a deceite, for hée is
most expert among all other, in dissembling anye matter
may turne him aduauntage. Then such hath béene my fortune
quoth Alchidiana, as his vertue, bountie & wise foresight,
vsed for the space of a yéere and more in my Fathers
Court, made me so religiously vowed to him in loue, as neuer
intend I to make other choise: and I sweare by all our
Gods, that if I heare not the better tydings of him by thée,
my spirit will forsake this wretched bodye, and except better
fortune among the soules in Elisium. Ah imperious
loue, how wonderfull is thy strooke? My fréende is contrarie
to me in lawe and profession, a Knight errant, vnknowne,
absent from mee, and loues me not: for these occasions,
were I the onelie Daughter to the great Emperor
of Turkie, I neither can or will change my former opinion.
                     Happe then what shall, and let my Father make an
oblation of my blood to his secret Idoll, I will not desist from
louing him. And thou my Fréend (quoth she) to Ptolome,
because thou hast not hid the truth from mée, bee thou at
this instant frée, and vse thy libertie as thou pleasest: for
rather let me abide the death, then the companion to my
noble Lorde suffer shame by mee. Ptolome falling on his
knee, humblie kissed her hande, and began to reueale the
knightly chiualrie, that Palmerin and Treneus sometime
did in England: likewise howe they brought the Kings
Daughter from thence, who remained captiue among the
Turks, and her Husband giuen as slaue to the Admiralles
Cozin. It is enough said the Princesse, talke to me no more
héereof, for by the great God, the verie remembraunce of
him is greater gréefe to me, then the mercilesse seruitude
a poore slaue endureth. The loue he bare to you, to the other
knight, and the yong English Princesse, whose misfortune
I cannot sufficiently bewayle: calleth mée hence to trauaile
in search of him, and may I find him with them, right

gladsome will the iourney bee to mee, because hee is th
                           •
                        
onelie darling and fauorite of Fortune. And now shall I
tell you howe I meane to couller mine intent. My Father
not knowing your captiuitie, to him shall I saye how you
are the onelie companion to Palmerin, and hither are you
come to séeke him, as hauing hearde before that hee remained
in your seruice: of this I dare assure you, his Maiestie
so déerelie loueth Palmerin, that hee will deliuer you all
things necessarie for his search, be it by land or sea. And if
your God shall fauour you so much, as in your trauaile you
happen to finde him, or else to send mée certaine tidings of
him, you shall doo me the greatest honor, that euer Knight
did to distressed Ladie. So forwarde was the Princesse in
her amorous desire, and loth to waste time with tedious
delaye: as that daie shee acquainted her Father therewith,
and so cunningly shée plaid the Dratrix, as the soldane gaue
Ptolome Armour, Horsses, Seruants, and fortie Knights
to attend on him. Beside, he furnished him with two great
Ships, that he might enquire at all the Ports on the Sea for
Palmerin.
                     
                     The daye béeing come of his departure, hée tooke his
leaue of the Soldane, the Princesse Alchidiana accompanying
him to the Porte, where for her adieu shee gaue
him a swéet kisse, saying. Sir Knight, if your fortune bee
such as to bring mee the man, who onelie hath power to
mittigate my torments: beside the continuall fauours of
a Princesse, I will make you one of the greatest Lordes in
the Orient. Madame (quoth hée) I will doo my diligence,
and till I returne let good hope perswade yee. So ho
                           •
                        sing
saile they set to Sea, where we will leaue him till hee méets
with Palmerin.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. XLVII.
                     
                        How Palmerin and the princesse Zephira, departed from
Elain towards Romata, to seeke Muzabelino, and what
happened by the way in their iourney.
                     
                     
                        AFter that Maulerino was crowned
King of Nabor, the rebellious Subiects
brought to obedience, and the bodie of

                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           •
                        laine king Tireno enterred, y• yong
Princesse Zephira & Palmerin thought
long to set forwarde on their iourney,
wherefore the king allowing them a very
honourable trayne, bequeathing them to their desired fortune,
Hauing passed many regions, and sundrie dangers incident
in trauaile, chiefely of a Basilisque, whome Palmerin
with the helpe of the dog Tryneus valiantly ouercame. At
length they entred y• realme of Romata, where by commandement
of the king Abimar, their entertainment was according
to their estates, the occasion thereof being thus. This
king Abimar holding the greatest possessions in that region,
would neuer yéeld himself as subiect to the signorie of Persia:
wherat the soldan now growing offended, sent an Ambassadour
to commaund him, presently to determine on his obedience,
or else he would ouer-run his Countrey with a mighty
Armie, and put both olde and yong to the Sworde. Abimar
                        
                           •
                        bashed at this threatning Embassade, demaunded counsell
of the wise Muzabelino, what answer hee should make the
Ambassadour, whereto the Magitian thus anuswered.
Feare not my Lord the threatning menaces of the Soldane,

for in that you haue two noble Sonnes, so witte the Princes
Tomano and Drumino knights of high and speciall account:
yet come there two others, (one whereof maye not
be knowne) with the Princesse Zephira, Daughter to the
King of Nabor, who shall deliuer you from his tirannie,
and make him your Fréende, therefore dismaie not to sende
him a hardie answer, as well beseemeth a Prince frée, and
not to be commaunded. And though one of his knights that
commeth with the Princesse shall a while bee vnknowne to
you, by the bountie of his companion, with whom no other
may well compare: yet ere long you shall knowe him, to
your no little ioye and contentation. Abimar giuing credit
to Muzabelinos spéeches, gaue charge in all the Citties
where through the Princesse should passe, that shée shoulde
be entertained with honorable tryumphes, as if himselfe
had béene in companie. And though the Prince T
                              •
                           mano
gréeued héereat, who loued the yongest Daughter to the
Soldane of Persia, yet the King answered the Ambassado
                           •
                        
that hee woulde maintaine his right by the Sworde, and if
the Soldane came to assayle him, he would defend his Co
                           •
                        ntrey
so well as he could.
                     The Ambassadour dispatched with this answer, Tomano
came to Muzabelino, saying. Ah my déere Fréende
Muz
                              •
                           belino, what wrong haue you doone mee, in perswading
my Father to holde warre with the Soldane? whose
Daughter you know I loue in such sort, as if I obtaine her
not in mariage, hardly can my life long endure. Conte
                           •
                        t
your slefe my Lord, answered Muzabelino: for if the two
knights that come, bring 
                           •
                        ortune for your father, you must
expect the like for your selfe. But, said the Prince, maye I
not knowe their names? Let it suffise (quoth Muzabelino)
what I haue saide, yet héereof I daer as
                           •
                        ure you, that
they are Christians, and extract of the greatest linage on
the earth, in bountie and valour incomparable: whereof if
you list to make experience, and thereby to credit what I
haue said beside, I shall shewe you a meane auaylable for

the purpose. You shall cause two Tents to be erected by the
C
                           •
                        dar Fountaine, which is halfe a mile distant from this
Cittie, in the one of them let be your Brother Drumino,
and your selfe, with tenne of the best Knightes in your Fathers
Court, and in the other let be your Sister: accompanied
with tenne of her chéefest Ladies, and about a bowe
shot from thence towards the high way side, you shall sette
vp a Marble Pillar, where
                           •
                        pon let these lines be engrauen.
                     Sir Knight, in these pauillions doth remaine,
                     A Lady fayre, kept by a Princes sonne:
                     Foyle him by Ioust, and winne her hence againe,
                     Thou maist not passe before the deede be doone.
                     If it happen that they passe by and sée not the Pillar,
send one of the Ladies to them, to let them vnderstande
that they may not passe, before one of them haue 
                           〈◊〉
                        
with the Prince and his Knights. If they be vnhorssed by
him, the Ladie must be deliuered to him: yet with this condition,
that he refuse not to graunt her one demaunde. By
Mahomet, s
                           •
                        yd Drumino husband to the Lady, I will not
meddle in this matter, he may be such a one, as if he hap to
winne my Wife, he will be loth to restore her backe againe.
Feare not that (quoth the Magitian) hee is so courteous,
and hath so faire a Fréend himselfe, as he neyther may or
will with-holde her. By heauen said Tomano, I will cope
with him, and to morrowe let the Pill
                           •
                        r and Pauillions bée
erected, there will I with my companions stay his comming.
Sée heere the cause why the King A
                              •
                           imar, commaunded
the Princesse Zephira and her Knights to be so honourablie
entertained. By this time is the Princesse come within a
daies iourney of Romata and Tomano with his Brother,
Sister, Ladies and knightes, betake themselues to 
                           •
                        he pauillions,
hearing that Zephira was come so neere: and being

themselues Armed, their sister decked likewise in most
sumptuous ornaments, they vowed to breake many launces
for her sake.
                  
                  
                     Chap. XLVIII.
                     
                        How Palmerin Ious
                              •
                           ed against Tomano, Drumino and
their knights, whome he all dismounted, and what entertainment
the king Abimar, and the wise Nigromancer
Muzabelino made them.
                     
                     
                        BY this time is the princesse with Palmerin,
and her companie, come to the place
where the pauillions were erected, and
not séeing the Piller, they passed on:
wherefore Tomano sent a Damosell to
declare the conditions of the passage.
Palmerin feigning himselfe somewhat
wearie, made this answer. Damosell, you may saye to the
Prince and his knights, that the Princesse Zephira is not in
our guarde, as the Lady he fights for abideth with him. Nor
comes she hither to he fought for, rather doth she intreat him
to spare vs the Ioust, in that it will be small honor to him to
conquer knights ouerlaboured in trauaile, and whose horses
are not able for that exercise.
                     The Damosell certifying the Prince of this aunswer,
he grew into anger, swearing they should not passe before
they tryed their fortune: wherefore hee sent the Damosell
againe, who thus spake to Palmerin. Sir knight, your excuses
may not serue you, you must eyther Ioust or leaue the
Princesse behind you. Trust me Damosell, answered Palmerin,
                        
sorrie woulde I be to accompanie her so far, and leaue
her in the custody of one I know not, did your Prince shewe
more courtesie, if woulde agrée much better with his order:
but because he shall not think, that we refuse the Iouste
through feare or cowardise, say hee shall haue his desire,
both he and all his shall try their fortune ere wee passe further.
                     This answer returned to the Prince, Drumino first
shewed himselfe in the Fielde, and by importunate intreatie,
certaine of the Princesses Knights would first try their
valour: but such was their ill fortune, as Drumino vnhorsed
them one after another. Zephira somewhat offended
heereat, intreated Palmerin eyther to win them passage,
or else with his successe she was content to staye Prisoner. I
goe Madame (quoth Palmerin) and Fortune spéede mee,
as I regard the safetie of your honor. Muzabelino, hauing
acquainted the King with this pastime, they came in habits
disguised to beholde it, at what time the Prince Drumino
encountred Palmerin. But not to hold you with tedious
discourse considering which way the victorie is intended,
the twe Princes and all their knights were manfullye
foyled by Palmerin.
                     
                     The Ioust béeing ended, and the king returned again
to the Cittie, Muzabelino came to Palmerin, and hauing
saluted him with great reuerence, thus spake. Woorthie
Lord, who onelie deseruest the name of chiualrie, let mee
intreate you to excuse the kings Son, who to make proofe
of your valour, by my meanes attempted this noble aduenture,
from which you haue escaped with great honour, and
to their shame that made the challenge. What are you Syr,
said Palmeiin, that know me so well, and the cause why I
came into this Countrey? Your Fréend Muzabelino, (quoth
he) whome you haue taken such paines to finde, and who
knowing you to be a Christian, will kéepe you from all dangers
among these Mahumetistes. Palmerin suddainlie allighting
from his Horsse, came and embraced him, saying

Noble Fréend, suffer mée to kisse your hand, as a witnesse of
my reuerence to your honourable age. Not so my Lord, answered
Muzabelino, rather suffer me to doo my dutie, to that
incomparable person, by whose meanes ere sixe Monethes
be past, the greatest nobilitie in the world shall receyue incredible
honour.
                     While these courteous ceremonies endured, the conquered
Princesse with her Ladies came from the Pauillion,
and saluting Palmerin with great courtesie, sayde. Sée
héere, Sir Knight, the Lady, who trusting in your honourable
benignitie, commeth to submit her selfe at your disposition,
béeing woonne with more choyse chiualrie, then euer
any other Ladie was. Notwithstanding, I hope that you
will not refuse to graunt me one demaund, according to the
conditions agréed in the Ioust. Palmerin séeing her so discréet
and modest, so sumptuous in apparell, and accompanied
with so manie Ladies, iudged that she was the Kings
Daughter, and Wife to the Prince Drumino, wherefore
entertaining her verie graciously, hée thus replyed. Unfitting
it is, faire Ladie, that a Princesse of so high and speciall
qualitie, shoulde bée subiect to a poore and vnknowne
Knight: and though the agréement of the Ioust bee such,
yet do I humblie thanke you for this honour, bequeathing
you to your former libertie, and restoring you to him that
hath best right to you.
                     A thousand thankes worthie Lorde, said the Princesse,
now I se'e the words of Muzabelino to my father are true,
that the Knight who conducted Madame Zephira, as in
chi
                           •
                        alrie hée surpasseth all other: so in sranke ininde and ltberalitic,
hée hath not his seconde, which was the chéefest
cause why I aduentured my selfe in this hazarde of Fortune.
Madame, quoth Palmerin, if the wise Muzabelino
hath vsed any speach of mée in mine absence, and to my honor,
it procéeded not by my vertue, but his good will in so

                           •••
                        ing, which if I liue, I will one day acknowledge. Right
welcome are you, saide the Princesse, and faire Zephira, the

rather for your sake: and such be the houre of your arriuall
héere, as you may obtaine the ende of your desires. Zephira
humblie thanked the Princesse, Tomano, Drumino, and
all the rest embracing Palmerin, thinking it no dishonour to
b
                           •
                         conquered by him: they mou
                           •
                        ted all on horsebacke, and
comming to the Cittie, founde the King there, readie with
an honorable traine to receiue them, who saluting the princesse
Zephira, verie kindly, said. No maruell Madame, if
you durst vndertake so long a iourney, hauing y• only knight
of Fortune in your companie, as my Sonnes haue good occasion
to witnesse: and shée that ommits her selfe to his
charge, may bée well assured of 
                           〈◊〉
                         defence. Zephira
with humble thanks requiting the K
                           ••
                        g, Palmerin and all
the rest graciously welcommed, they rode all to the Pallace,
where being intertained in choysest sor
                           •
                        , Muzabelino still
accompanied Palmerin, who forgot not his woonted kindnes
to his louing Dogge.
                  
                  
                     Chap. XLIX.
                     
                        The talke that the princesse Zephira and Palmerin had
with the wise Muzabelino: and how Palmerin departed
from Romato to the Castell of the ten Rocks.
                     
                     
                        THe Princesse Zephira, who had not yet
talked with Muzabelino, in the morning
sent for him and Palmerin, shée
causing them to sit downe by her, began
in this manner. My Lord, if your
great iudgement haue acquainted you
with the cause of my comming, and
that you will doe anie thing for the

loue of Sir Palmerin, let pittie perswade you, for in
you onely consisteth my remedie. Madame, quoth Muzabelino,
vse not such speaches, for what my studie and
practise hath taught me, you must make no account of, but
referre your selfe to the supreame Creator, who by the
meanes of noble Palmerin, will restore your health, and
him will I acquaint with the manner how it must be compassed.
                     Your disease happened by smelling to a flower, and by
the smell of another it must be recouered. The flower appoynted
to giue you health, groweth in an Arbour in the
Castell of the tenne Rocks, and kept by the enchauntment
of a Ladie, more skilfull in all artes, then euer was the skilfull
Medea. This Ladie deceasing an hundred yeares
since, and more. Shée séeing before her death the vertue of
this flower, and of a Bird which is kept there by the selfe
same meanes, hauing inchaunted them in a Garden, the
must sumptuous in the world, raysed ten Rocks of Marble
without the Castell, each one ascending higher then an
other, and by these Rocks was the Castle named. Such
enchauntment did the Ladie exorcise on them, as when anie
one thinketh to passe them, presently starteth out of each
Rocke an armed Knight, who returneth the aduenturer so
forciblie, as to to this day they haue not béene passed by any.
Couragious therefore must he be that passeth these Rocks,
which if Palmerin by his bountie and prowesse doo not accomplish,
no man liuing can ende the aduenture: for by
force, not cunning must the enchauntment be ended. When
the Princesse heard, that by the daungerous trauaile of noble
Palmerin her health must be restored, she thus sor
                           •
                        owfully
complained.
                     Ah Gods, suffiseth it not that héeretofore this good
Knight aduentured his life, in the daungerous battell when
my Brother was slaine: but nowe he must abide the diuellish
coniurations, where death is dayly and hourelie expe
                           •••
                        ed?
shall I consent to offer him such wrong, and bée

guiltie of his blood, who surpasseth all other in chiualrie?
rather let my death be a warrant for his safetie, then noble
Palmerin shoulde endure such perrill for me. Lament not
Madame, quoth Muzabelino, before you haue cause, hée
that slewe Malfada, and her Seruaunts, is so specially fauoured
of the heauenlie powers, as no enchauntment
whatsoeuer hath power to hurt him. Why Madame, said
Palmerin, thinke you my good will is lesse to doo you seruice,
then when I was first brought to your Court? Forbeare
these teares, I pray you, and offend not your selfe: for such
is my hope in God, that what is done by man, shall bée destroyed
by man: besides, it will bée great reproach to mée,
if comming into straunge Countries to séeke aduentures, I
shall depart without triall of my fortune. Muzabelino hearing
him speake so couragiouslie, tooke him aside, saying.
Noble and hardie Knight, whom feare of death cannot dismay,
happie shall I account my selfe to doo thée anie seruice.
                     And to the ende thou mayst with better affection followe
this enterprise, assure thyselfe to passe the Rockes,
and enter the Castell with happie victorie, where ending
all the aduentures therein contained, thou shalt finde a
part of remedie for recouering thy companions, but not all,
for the rest is in the Tower of Malfada, where as yet thou
canst not enter, but at thy returne shalt easily open, and in
the ende ioyfully finde all thy Companions and Fréendes.
For the rest, feare not my discouerie of thy secrete loue and
parentage, which is the most noble in all Christendome, for
rather will I bée torne in a thousand péeces, then so good a
Knight shall bée iniuried by mée. Séeing you know so much
quoth Palmerin, I commit all to God and you, let me therefore
right soone craue leaue of the King for my departure,
because I long that the Princesse were eased. Right sorie
was the King to part with him so soone, yet the hope of his
short returne somewhat pacified him. And when the newes
were spreade abroade that Palmerin should trauaile to the

Castell of the tenne Rockes: Tomano Drumino, and the
Princesse Zephira woulde néedes beare him companie,
which hée being not able to gaine-say, because they were
importunate on him, gaue his consent. So departing from
Romata, they made such haste in their iourney, as within
fewe dayes after they arriued at the Castell: and comming
to the first Rocke, they behelde a goodly Sworde, enclose
                           •
                        
therein hp to the crosse. The two yong Psinces maruailing
thereat, allighted from their Horsses, and assailed by
strength to pull it out. Which they were not able to doe:
wherefore Tomano entreated Palmerin to trie his fortune,
who after many courteous refusals offered to pull it foorth,
but a fearef
                           •
                        ll flame of fire suddenly issued foorth of the
Rocke, which compelled them to retyre back, wherfore Palmerin
said to the Princes: This Sword I sée must be none
of ours, therefore it is in vaine to striue any further.
                  
                  
                     Chap. L.
                     
                        Howe Palmerin passed the tenne Rockes, vanquished the
tenne enchaunted Knightes, and entered the Castell,
where hee finished all the enchauntments: Tri
                              •
                           eus returning
to his former shape, and what happened to them
afterward.
                     
                     
                        
                           PAlmerin when hee had failed in drawing
the Sworde out of the Rocke, hée
prepared himselfe to the Combat with
the enchaunted Knights, whome as
yet hée coulde not anie way discerne:
but first he began his orisons in this
manner. O soueraigne Creator, who
euermore hath succ
                           •
                        ure
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                        
aduersities and fortunes, this day giue mée strength to confound
these diuelries and enchauntments, and let thy name
haue the honour of a glorious victorie.
                     Then giuing his horse the spurres, gallopped onward,
saying. Sweete Mistresse Polynarda, if euer your remembraunce
gaue mée ayde and fauour, now let your diuine regard
comfort your seruaunt. Béeing then betwéene the
two foremost Rocks, a mightie Knight mounted on a lustie
Courser, with a huge Launce in his hande, called to him,
saying.
                     Turne Sir Knight, you may passe no further, then furiouslie
enco
                           •
                        ntering one another, they met so roughlie togither
with their bodyes, as they were both cast foorth of
their saddles. The Dog that still followed Palmerin, séeing
his Fréend
                           •
                         horse offered to stray, caught the bridle by
the raignes with his téeth, and would not let him passe anie
further. In the meane while, Palmerin hauing fought
with the Knight, and after a long and cruell combat, smote
his head from his shoulders. In bréefe, he was so fauoured
of Fortune, as hauing vanquished all the tenne Knights, he
passed the tenne Rocks: and no sooner was he mounted on
the foremost, but a darke Clowde compassed him about, so
that the two Princes, Zephira and their Knights, to theyr
great amazement lost the sight of him, yet his former victorie,
exempted all feare from them of bad successe. There

                           〈…〉
                         
                        Palmerins returne till Sunne setting; when
the two Princes demaunded of Zephira, if shée woulde depart
thence, or stay there all night? Depart? quoth shée, no
by my life, héere will I abide the good knights returne from
the Castell: wherupon her seruants hauing erected theyr
pauillions, they there tooke vp their lodging for that night.
By this time Palmerin was come to the Castell Gate,
where looking on his Armour which was 
                           •
                        acked in péeces,
his flesh cut and mangled in manie places, breathing foorth
a bitter sigh, sayd. If yet this trauaile may availe the Prin
                        
                           •
                        esse,
and my noble companions that are enchau
                           •
                        ted, let

happe to mée what please the Heauens, for theyr libertie is
more déere to mée then life. Then looking on his Dog, who
all his while held the Horses bridle in his mouth, hée remembred,
that he had not demaunded of Muzabelino anie
thing concerning him, wherefore he said. Ah gentle dog,
yet no Dog (I thinke) but rather some Knight thus transformed,
howe forgetfull haue I béene of thy seruice in my
necessitie? why did I not demaund the trueth of Muzabelino,
what thou art? But mayst thou prooue to be my good
Fréend Trineus, when all the enchauntments of this Castell
shall bée ended, thy former shape (I hope) shall bee restored.
                     So striking at the Castell Gate, to sée if anie way hée
could get it open, at length hée looked vppe to the battlements,
and beheld an auncient Knight, with a long beard so
white as snowe, who furiously thus spake to him. Proude
Knight, who made thée so bolde thus to beate on the Gate?
enter, vnto thy further ill I hope: with these wordes the
Gates opened of themselues, when presently Palmerin
with his Dog entred, and the olde man, who séemed ouerspent
with yéeres and weaknesse, méeting him in the Gate,
taking him by the arme, threw him violently agaynst the
ground, saying. Thou that hast ouercome the ten Knights,
yong and armed, what canst thou doo to an olde man without
defence? Wretched villaine, aunswered Palmerin,
wherefore hast thou strooken me? by the liuing God, did
not thine age excuse thée, soone should I lay the breathlesse
at my foote.
                     Soft and faire, said the olde man, thou shalt haue work
enough to defend thy selfe. So catching Palmerin about the
middle, he wroong him so cruelly, as one might heare his
bones cracke. O my God cried Palmerin, defend me against
this cursed diuell. At length hee forced the olde man to let
goe his holde: when began such a furious fight betwéene
them, as neuer was Palmerin in such daunger, in that eueri
                           •
                        
blowe was giuen him, hée thought did breake all his

bones in péeces. The 
                           •
                        og séeing his Maister in such extremitie,
caught the olde man by the throate, and neuer left
tugging till he got him downe, when suddenly he vanished
away, and was no more séene afterward. For this victorie
Palmerin thanked God, and hauing cherished his Dog, entred
further into the Castell. Where he behelde most stately
Galleries, erected on great colombes of Porpherie and
Alabaster, as neuer did hée beholde a more sumptuous spectacle.
                     In the middest of the Court was a goodly Tombe, enclosed
with barr
                           •
                        s of beaten Golde, and ouer it stoode a
goodly Table of Christal, vphelde by foure Satyrs of Agatha:
and on the Table was pictured the personages of a
Ladie, drawne by such curious arte and woorkmanship, as
hardly could it bée equalled through the world. Palmerin
approched to behold the counterfeit, which helde in the one
hande a Booke fast shutte, and in the other a Key of Golde,
poynting with the Key towarde the Gate of the Pallace:
whereupon he imagined, that this was the Tombe of the
Ladie Enchauntresse, whereof Muzabelino had told him
before, and putting his hand betwéene the golden Barres,
the Image presently offered him the Key. Héereat béeing
some what abashed, he iudged that this happened not without
great cause, wherefore taking the Key, hée went and opened
the Pallace Gate, and entering the great Hall, hée
founde it so richlie paued, and garnished rounde about with
such costly Tapistrie, as the greatest Monarch in the world
had not the like.
                     Looking behinde him for his Dog, he beheld him suddainlie
chaunged to his former shape, and running to embrace
Palmerin, said. Happie be the houre of thy comming
déere Fréend, to whom I remaine for euer bounde, in acknowledging
the speciall graces and fauours receiued. But
Palmerin deceiued with so manie illusions before, woulde
hardlie giue credite to what he now behelde, reputing him
rather s
                           •
                        me he 
                           〈◊〉
                         furie so disguised, onely to entrap him

with further danger, which Trineus perceiuing, spake againe.
Ah my noble Friend Palmerin, for Gods sake doubt
no more, I am thy Brother Tryneus, who since thy comming
from Elain, followed thée in the enchaunted forme of
a Dogge: reioyce then with me, for since thy long desired
hope hath now so good an ende, doubt not but the residue of
thine affaires will prooue as fortunate. Palmerin béeing
nowe thorowly resolued, I leaue to your iudgements the
kinde gratulations betwéene them, who well can conceiue
the wonderfull ioy of longabsent Friendes, especally
of such as liue and die for each other. Ah my Lord quoth Palmerin,
why did I not sooner acknowledge thee? the great succour
thou gauest me by the
                           •
                        way, might well haue perswaded
me, yet though I still imagined thee my friend transformed,
hardly could I resolue thereon till further experience.
                     A
                           •
                         fortune, if héeretofore thou hast béene enuious
towardes mée, yet now hast thou recompenced me in such
sort, as now I haue no cause to exclaime on thée. So sitting
downe together, Trineus reuealed the manner of his taking,
and all that befell him till his transformation. Which
Palmerin to requite, discoursed the knowledge of his Parents,
how he was betrothed to his Lady Polynarda, and
howe he recouered the Princesse Agriola, who afterward
                           •
                        
was likewise enchaunted in the Isle of Malfada. 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
at these newes, was readie to die with gréefe, but Palmerin
perswaded him of the wise Muzabelinos promise, that
shortly hee should returne againe to the Isle, and there finish
all the enchauntments whatsoeuer. While they thus
conferred together, they sawe sodainely, sette before them
a Table furnished with all kinde of meates, and a hand holding
two great Golden Candlesticks, wherein burned two
faire waxe Tapers, beside, they heard a trambling of
their féete that brought the meate to the Table, but they
could not discerne any liuing creature. Trust mee, quoth
Palmerin, I thinke some bodie knowes I haue an hungrie

appetite, 
                           •
                        itte downe with me good friend, for these two
moneths had I not a better stomacke. After they had well
refreshed themselues, the table was presently taken away
againe, and they entring a goodly, wardrobe, were vnder
a Canapie of cloth of Golde, they founde two maruailous
costly gréene Armours, so beset with faire Emeraldes and
great Oriental Pearles, as neuer proude Pagon wore the
like in heathenesse. By them stood two goodly Shéeldes
of proofe, in the one béeing figured the Armes of Constantinople,
and in the other the Creast of Allemaigne, whereat
Palmerin not a little maruailing, saide to Trineus. I think
my Lord, that these Armours were prouided for vs, l
                           •
                        t vs
trie if they doe fitte for our bodies, so helping to arme each
other, they founde them so fitte as they had béene purposely
made for them. There founde they likewise a Siluer Casket,
wherein were two sumptuous Kingly Crownes of
Golde, and betwéene them stood a rich Golden Cup, hauing
in it a King, with the most beautifull stone in it that euer
was séene.
                     Wondering at these euents, and doubtfull to take thence
those rare presents, immediately a Damosell came before
them, and humbly on her knée thus spake. Most mightie
and magnanimious Princes, the Iewels you haue founde
in the Casket are yours, and them must you carrie to the
Ladies of your affections, because they were purposely
made for them, as these worthie Armours were for
you. As for her that deuised them, in this shée accounteth
her selfe right happie, that this day they are fallen into
your power, and by you shall all the aduentures héere be
finished.
                     You my Lord, quoth shee to Trineus, must take the
King that is in the Cup, and leaue it not wheresoeuer you
come, least you be changed into the shape of a dogge againe.
And you my Lord Palmerin must take the Cup, to put the
flowers therein, which you must bear
                           •
                         to the Princesse Zephira,
assuring you that no one must drinke therein, but

she to whom you must carrie it. Faire Damosell, saide Palmerin,
                        
                           •
                        ell me howe I shall finde the Garden, where those
flowers grow of such soueraigne vertue, and howe I may
come to the Arbour where the strange Birde remaineth
pearched: likewise if any other then your selfe is in this
Castle?
                     My Lord, quoth shee, the Ladie of this Castle at her

                           •
                        ecease, left all the persons in this Castle a sléepe by enchauntment,
except my selfe that am her Néece, and such
coniurations hath she charmed them withall, as they shall
not stirre till you haue taken the Birde you aske for: at
whose fearefull crie they shall all awake, in all this long
time no whit consumed. And héere haue I euer since remained
forepointed by her to doo you seruice, in shewing
you the manner howe to gather the flowers, and to tak
                           •
                        
the fatall Birde pearched in the Arbour, whether I will
bring you at an appointed 
                           •
                        oure. In meane while rest
your selues on this rich bedde, which hath béene 
                           〈◊〉
                        
onely for you, and here repose your selues till my returne.
By my sword Damosell, quoth Palmerin, you tell vs matters
full of wonder, notwithstanding, séeing 
                           〈◊〉
                         finde some
parte of them true, we giue credit to the rest. 
                           •
                        o bidding
her good night, there slept they till the next morning, when
the Damosell came to call them, conducting them into the
Garden, the most braue and stately that euer they behelde,
and after she had shewed them the Arbour, departed. Palmerin
looking round about him, maruailed at the ingenious
foundation of the Castle, the surpassing faire Galleries,
and the beautifull Fountaines in the Garden, where hée
heard an excéeding pleasant harmonie of Birds. Then calling
Tryneus to him, entred the Arbour, where taking the
fatall Birde by the wings, shée gaue thrée great cryes so
loude and fearefull, as made both the Princes greatly amazed.
                     At this instant were all the enchauntments there ended,
and the Seruants▪ restored to their former libertie, when

                        Palmerin hauing tied the Bird to his fist with a thréed the
damosell gaue him, and filling his Cup with the soueraigne
flowers, they came foorth of the Garden, and in the great
Hall mette them the Lord and Ladie of the Castle, so olde
withered, and decrepite, as it s
                           •
                        emed hardly they could sustaine
themselues, casting themselues at Palmerins féete,
they saide.
                     Ah noble Prince, flower of all chiualrie, the highest
God hath blessed thée from thy Cradle, and in the end shall
make thée the happiest in the worlde, for the especiall good
thou hast this day doone, restoring all them to life that here
slumbred, except the aged Ladie my wiues Sister, who
for these hundred yéeres past hath slept in her Tombe. After
many courteous spéeches passed betwéene them, Palmerin
and Trineus departed the Castle, and as they went
downe the Rocks, Tomano and the Princesse Zephira
came to méete them, she courteously embracing him, saide.
How fares my noble Lord? greatly did I despaire of your
health, for this morning I heard such a fearefull crie from
the Castle, as wee were out of all hope to sée you againe.
By the ayd of God, Madame, answered Palmerin, and this
Knight 
                           •
                        y déere Friende, whom in the shape of a Dogge
you brought from Malfada, I finde my selfe in perfect content,
and héere haue I brought you the soueraigne remedie
for your so long and vnfortunate disease. But may it bée,
quoth the Princesse, that so faire a knight shoulde bee so
transformed? No lesse do I reioyce for his good fortune then
mine owne. So entred they the Princesse pauillion, discoursing
all the maruailes they had séene.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. LI.
                     
                        How the Princesse Zephira was cured of her disease, and
Trineus ended the aduenture of the enchaunted sword in
the Rocke.
                     
                     
                        AFter that the Princesse Zephira had felt
the swéete odours of the flowers Palmerin
brought her, the enuenomed
wormes which so long time had tormented
her, fell from her head dead to
the ground, and the lothsome smell of
her Canker beganne to ceas
                           •
                        . Yet all
the 
                           ••
                        ars on her face were not throughly
healed: but the sedaine ease that she found by the flowers,
gaue hir hope that in time they would weare away. Meane
while the two Princes of Romata, conferred with Palmerin
about the strange Birde, and also of the costly Armours
they brought with them from the Castle, which béeing
past ouer with no little admiration, they remembred the
Sword enchaunted in the Rocke, whereuppon the Prince
Tomano entreated Trineus, to trie if that aduenture were
reserued for him.
                     Nay quoth Trineus, if you haue alreadie failed, hardly
may I hope of better fortune, yet can I but loose my
labour as you haue doone, and shame were it for me to passe
hence without triall. So taking the Sword by the handle,
with very great 
                           •
                        ase he puld it out of the Rocke, being the
goodliest Sword in workmanshippe that euer was deuised.
Trust me, quoth Trineus, he that made this weapon doubtlesse
hath tride the vertue thereof. That may bée, answered

                        Palmerin, but had hee likewise knowne the valour of the
Knight, who nowe is worthily become maister thereof, of
greater 
                           •
                        ount would he haue estéemed his lab
                           •
                        ur, and to
thy perpetuall honour déere friende maist thou imploy it.
But now woorthy Lords? séeing the Princesse Zephira hath
found so good 
                           •
                        ase, and my louing Brother Trineus hath
wonne this Sword, I thinke it best that wee set forwards
to Romata, which (after they had séene the sumptuous
buildings in the Castle, the rich Tombe, the beautifull
Garden, and all other mounments worthie view) they
did.
                     Béeing come to Romata, and there receiued with speciall
signes of honor, the wise Muzabelino caused the fatall
Bird to féede of the flowers, which Palmerin hadde
brought from the Castle of the tenne Rocks. No sooner
had the Bird tasted the flowers, but presently shee deliuered
such melodious notes, as swéeter harmonie was neuer
heard before, and during the time of her singing, fell so
many droppes of precious water from her beake, as before
Dinner time the Cuppe was well néere filled. Which
when the wise Nigromancer perceiued, hee brought a verie
faire Lute to Palmerin, saying. I beséech you my Lorde
play some exquisite péece of Musique, that the Bird listening
to your melodie, may cease her owne recordes, els shal
we loose the soueraigne vertue contained in the Water.
Palme
                              •
                           in taking the Lute, plaide thereon so artificially,
that the Princesse of Romata whom he woonne in the Io
                           •
                        st,
was enforced to vse these spéeches. How can wee sufficiently
maruaile at the perfections of Palmerin? for if in prowesse
he surpasse Hercules of Libia, who ouercame Tyrants
and Monsters at his pleasure: well may wee name him another
Amphion or Orpheus of Thrace, who with theyr
melodie 
                           •
                        amed the Fishes, Beasts, and Bir
                           •
                        s, Trineus
taking the Cup, brought it to the Princesse Zephira, who
dipping her handkercher therein, bathed her face therewith:
the precious vertue whereof was such, as all the

enuenomed scarres the wormes had made, were presently
washed away, and her face so delicate as euer it was before:
whereupon the Princesse falling at Palmerins féete,
ioyfully thus spake. Doubtlesse my Lord, I am greatly beholding
to the Prince Trineus, who saued my life when
the Traytour would haue slaine mee in my bedde: but I
must confesse my selfe much more indebted to your worthinesse,
by whose paines the venomous putrefaction is extinguished,
whereby I endured torments farre excéeding
death.
                     Madame, answered Palmerin, your happie recouerie
must not be imputed to me, but to the soueraigne Lorde
that so prouided for you, and seeing your health is so worthily
restored, I thi
                           •
                        ke best that wee sette forward to morrow
on our iourney, that we may finish the Magicall coniurations
of Malfada, as wee haue alreadie doone those at
the tenne Rocks. The Princesse of Romata hearing these
words, preuented the answere of Zephira, and comming to
Palmerin, said. I beséech you Sir Knight, in honour of that
God which you reuerence, that you will not refuse me one
demaund, according to your promise made me, when you
ouercame my Brother and his Knights in the Io
                           •
                        st. Aske
Lady (saide Palmerin) what you will, and you shall not bee
denied, so that the matter consist in my power to performe.
Well may you performe it (quoth she) and to your endlesse
honour I hope. The summe of my request is, that you wil
not forsake the King my Father, till his warre against the
Soldane of Persia be finished. And that you would entreate
your Friende to accompanie you therein. Denie mée not
good Sir, for no greater shame is to a Knight then breach
of promise: nor will I stirre from your foote, vntill you
haue graunted what I request. In sooth Madame, answered
Palmerin, although my Friendes and I haue great affaires
in our Countrey, yet (in respect of my promise) we
will assist your Father, let vs in meane while intreate you,
to pardon our returne with the Princesse Zephira, who

thinks the time long before shee come to Nabor. Doubtlesse
my Lorde, quoth Zephira, rather then you and my Lorde
Trineus shall breake your promise to the Princesse, in giuing
succour to the King Arbimar her Father: I can content
my selfe to stay héere more willingly then to returne
to the King my Brother. Madame, saide Muzabelino, assure
your selfe that Palmerin is the onely meane whereby
you haue attained your present felicitie, and by him shall
you with honour sée your Countrey againe. In sooth my
Lord, saide the Princesse, full well I know his owne gracious
nature induced him, first to aduenture his life for the
safetie of my Countrey: then to passe strange Countreyes
with daunger, onely to finde you, and lastly his rare fortune
at the Castle of the tenne Rocks, from whence hée
brought those precious flowers, and the fatall Byrd, wherby
my long infirmitie hath béene cured. To off
                           •
                        r him fauour
or all my possessions in way of recompence of so great
paines, they are not comparable: for though I made him
Lorde of my selfe, and all those territories my father left
me, yet doth my conscience tell mée they are too base. In
brée
                           •
                        e, I know his deserts so excéeding my reach, as well
may I sitte downe to imagine, but neuer bee able to contriue
a sufficient rewarde. Beleeue me Madame, aunswered
Muzabelino, you haue spoken truth, and his noble
magnanimitie must onely helpe my Lorde, and this I assure
you, that were it not the daunger of his kingly honour,
and hazard of the whole Monarchie of Asia, hard
                           •
                        y might
the knight be stayed héere, of such waight and importance
are his other affaires. Then calling Palmerin to him,
whose inward thoughts were busied with the remembrance
of his Lady, he said.
                     Let not your stay héere my Lorde offende you, though
well I knowe the waight of your gréefe, for that God who
hath called you to this present estate, hath forepoynted
things that you cannot shunne, in recompence whereof, before
your departure from this countrey, great & victorious

honours are appoynted you. Beside, for a perfect resolution
in your further doubts, take you no care for nourishing your
Birde: for when your Musique made her cease singing, at
that instant I threw such a charme on her, as hencefoorth
shée shall liue without taking any foode. And when you returne
to your Citie of Constantinople, let her bée pearched
in some conuenient place, in the great hall of your Pallace,
and there shall she remaine as a certaine Oracle vntill the
day of your death, to deliuer tydings of good or bad. If an
                           •
                        e
Knight or Ladie shall enter your Court, either with intent
of treason, or bringing ill newes, the Birde shall giue such
fearefull shrikes, as she did at the time when you tooke her
in the Arbour: but if the newes be of ioy, and for your good,
then shall she sing more swéetly, then when the souereigne
water fell from her beake, wherewith the Princesse Zephira
was cured.
                     In bréefe my Lorde, at the time when you must leaue
this life, for the glorious habitation among the blessed, shée
shall foretel such strange occasions, as shall dismay the most
resolute courage. By this meane shall you be guarded from
all inconueniences, and your good fortune continued in such
sort, as you shall bee the most peaceable Emperour that euer
liued in Greece. Certes my Lord, answered Palmerin,
not by any desert in me, am I thus honoured with so high a
present, which I will kéepe so charie as mine owne person:
but that the name of Muzabelino may for euer be imprinted
in my heart▪ giue mée some one of your name or kindred,
who 
                           •
                        uermore may bée néerest to my person. My Lord quoth
Muzabelino, to you will I giue one of my Sonnes, begotten
by me on a Christian Ladie, agréeing with you in faith,
and o
                           •
                        inion: whereof I am not sorie, yet feare I that the
King should knowe so much, least his religion might cause
his death.
                     Déere fréend, said Palmerin, for Gods sake giue him
me presently, and him will I loue as hee were my brother.
Your request (quoth he) can I not yet satisfie, till wée goe

to my Castle where he is kept, which because I will no
longer deferre, to morrow will I perswa
                           •
                        e the King to
iourney to his great Cittie of Grisca, there to take view
of his Armie, when I shal compasse the meane to giue him
you, vpon this conclusion they departed to their cambe
                           •
                        s.
                  
                  
                     Chap. LII.
                     
                        How Muzabelino gaue Palmerin his Sonne Bellechino, entertaining
the King and all his companie royally at his
Castle, and how the two Armies of the King Abimar and
the Soldane of Persia encountred, with the successe therof.
                     
                     
                        
                           MVzabelino perceiuing by his art, that
the Soldane of Persia with his power
was néere at hand, thinking to ruinate
the great Cittie of Grisca, aduertised
the King thereof, willing him with all
spéede to muster his Armie, and preuent
the soldanes determination. The
King not misliking his aduise, set forward
presently to Grisca, and by the way, at the earnest
intreatie of Muzabelino, the King with all his courtly companie
lay at his Castle, where many rare deuises were
showen them by enchauntment, which I passe ouer as
matter altogether impertinent. There did the Magitian
giue Palmerin his Sonne Bellechino, one of his Daughters
likewise to the Quéene, and another to the Princesse
Zephira.
                     
                     Afterward they iourneyed to the Cittie of Grisca, where
all his armie was ranged in readines, béeing numbred an

hundred thousand fighting men: the auantguarde he committed
to the two Princes, Palmerin and Trineus, consisting
of twentie thousand horsemen, his two battailes of
30000. Archers on horsebacke, the two Princes Tomano
and Drumino had in charge, and the rereward was gouerned
by the two Kinges of Seuata and Garara. The Soldanes
power béeing ordained in battailewise, within few
dayes after the fight beganne, which continued with such
danger on either side, as the victorie hung very long in
suspence. In the ende, after a mightie massacre made of the
Persians, among whom was Donadel Prince of Siconia
slaine, with many other great Califes and Lords, the Soldane
himselfe was taken prisoner by Palmerin, & sent bound
with 
                           •
                        etters of Gold to the Princesse Zephira. The Messenger
comming to the Princesse Chamber, declared how
Palmerin had sent her that prisoner, to entreate him as her
selfe liked best. In sooth my Lord quoth the Princesse to
the Soldane, you are right welcome for his sake that sent
you: héere shall your entertainement be as fittes your calling,
and mi
                           •
                        like not your mishap, in that the knight who
sent you, is wont to conquere where himselfe pleaseth. The
Soldane angrie at his hard fortune, yet séeing hée was prisoner
to a Lady so beautifull, was immediately so surprised
with loue, as hee was not able to answere the Princesse
one word. But she perceiuing he was very sore wounded,
caused him to bée conducted to a goodly Chamber,
commaunding her Chirurgions to attend him dilligently.
                     On the morrow shee came to sée how hee 
                           •
                        ared, when
Loueouer mastering all his senses, made him forgette his
hatred to the King Abimar, resoluing to become his friend
by marriage of the Princesse, and vnable longer to suppresse
his waighting passions. which more troubled him
then his dangerous wounds, hee thus beganne. Fairest among
the daughters of men, tell me I desire you, if you bée
the Childe of the King Abimar, or els of whence you are, to

the ende I may one day acknowledge this fauour, which
your milde nature affoordes your prisoner. Heereunto the
Princesse answered, howe shée was Daughter to the King
Onodius of Nabor, coupling therewith all her passed fortunes:
concluding in the ende, that in all actions agréeing
with honour, shée remained his humble Seruant. Fortune,
quoth he, neuer constant but in vnconstancie, once yesterday
was I the greatest Prince in the worlde, and now none
in my Kingdome so miserable as my selfe, béeing brought
in subiection to my inferiour, and snared in loue with my
vassailes Daughter. Wisely sayd the Poet, That badlie
doo loue and Maiestie agree togither: for though the
height of mine estate forbids my desire, yet loue and mine
owne lyking are two such seuere enemies, as I must not
nowe stand to dispute the cause. Happie is the Knight in
whose power remaines a Ladie so excellent: but much
more happie is the Ladie that can commaunde so great a
person, by whom such honours are this day affoorded you
fayre Princesse, as wel may you vaunt to bée the greatest in
Persia.
                     
                     If by a Knight surpassing in prowesse I was conquered
in battaile, by one in beautie and curtesie incomparable am
I againe ouermaistred: so that I am enforced to present you
my heart, and all the signories I possesse, to vse at your pleasure,
vowing (for your sake) perpetuall peace with Abimar
mine enemie. The Princesse abashed at this vnexpected
offer, a sw
                           •
                        ete blush colourer her daintie chéekes, and
fearing to be imputed too indiscréete, shaped her answere to
the last poynt of the Soldanes spéeches, as thus. In sooth
my Lord, well could I like, that peace were concluded betwéene
the King and you, though not by any meane in mée,
but by the omnipotent power of the Goddes: who letting
you know the weaknesse of your owne strength, would not
haue any warre betwéene you and the King Abimar. And
if it like you so much to abase your selfe, as to like the simple
Daughter of a King, who while hée liued, was your

highnesse Subiect: well may I with modestie giue consent
                           •
                        
for if my Father all his life time obeyed you as his Lorde,
vnséemely were disobedience in his Daughter. By the
hol
                           •
                        e Alcaron of Mahomet, aunswered the Soldane, your
benigne humilitie hath more conquered me, then the proudest
enemie in the worl
                           •
                        e coulde doo: doo you therefore appoynt
the Articles of our peace, and I as vnpartiall will agree
thereto.
                     Thus began the peace and the promise of mariage betwéene
the Soldane and the Princes Zephira, which béeing
thorowlie agréed vppon, the King Abimar, Palmerin,
Tryneus, and all the states subscribing thereto, the Camps
on either side were discharged, and the Soldane with his
great Seneshall openly in the Citie of Grisca, protested
peace in this manner. That the Soldane shoulde espouse
Zephira, and Tomano the Princesse Bel
                              •
                           ina the Soldanes
Daughter. Beside, hee renounced all pretended rights to
the Realmes of Grisca and Romata, nor would he demaund
anie tribute of them afterward, or enter his confines with
anie violence, but assist the King continually against all his
enemies.
                     Moreouer, within two Moneths, hée would deliuer
tenne thousand talents of Golde, and two millions of Seraphes,
in recompence of his wrong doone to the King Abimar.
All this my Lord, quoth the Soldane, will I faythfullie
performe, and all the Kinges my Subiects shall subscribe
thereto: on this condition, that you accompanie the
Princesse to the Cittie of Harano, there to honor with your
presence our espousall, where your sonne Tomano shall
likewise match with our Daughter. To this the King willingly
consented, whereupon the Soldane sent his Seneshall,
to cause his Armie march homewardes into Persia,
except sixe thousand men at Armes, to guard to Soldanes
person: then openly in the field was the peace proclaimed,
and the Captaines on either side fréendly embracing each
other. Afterward the soldane comming to the king Abimar
                        
and in the presence of Palmerin and Trineus, thus spake.
Néedlesse were it now (my Lord) to remember our passed
displeasures, but generally to conferre of warre and peace:
yet hereof I can assure you, that the Princesse Zephira,
and these two strange Knights, preuailed more agaynst me
then all the rest of your Armie. But least your people
should thinke, that our concluded peace is not thorowlie
grounded, to morrowe will I bée openlie affian
                           •
                        ed to the
Princesse Zephira, and afterward set forward to Harano,
that my Sisters may bée present at our nuptials, in the
meane while, our Seneshall and sixe other noble Lordes,
shall remaine with you as our hostages. These determinations
fulfilled, the Soldane passed to Harano, where hée
heard of the death of the Prince Donadel, and the Kinges
sonne of Rosillia, with diuerse other Princes of his kindred

                           ••
                        aine in the battell: but the heate of his newe loue caused
him to make small account therof, preparing all things readie
for the solemnitie of his marriage.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. LIII.
                     
                        The conference that the Soldane of Persia had with his
Sisters, thinking by theyr meanes to stay Palmerin,
and Tryneus in his Court, and the honourable entertainement
hee made them at the arriuall of the Princesse
Zephira. And how by good fortune Palmerin recouered
his Squire Colmelio, from the Ambassadour
Maucetto.
                     
                     
                        NO sooner was the soldane come to Harano,
but hée presently dispatched Messengers
to his sisters, that they might
bée present at his honourable marriage:
and calling for his Daughter the
yong Princesse Belsina, he thus began.
Faire Daughter, I thinke you are not
ignorant, for report f
                           ••
                        eth quicklie f
                           •
                        r,
that I haue promised you in mariage to the Prince Tomano:
therefore I account it verie requisitie, that your solemnitie
bee done on the same day, when I shall espouse the
Princesse Zephira.
                     
                     My gracious Lorde and Father, quoth shée, I remaine
altogither at your highnesse direction: and if for conclusion
of peace you match with so faire a Princesse as is Zephira,
it were agaynst reason I should refuse the worthie Prince
Tomano of Romata. When hée perceyued the readie good-will
of his Daughter, and his two sisters by this time
were come to the Court. After hée had welcommed them
in most gracious manner, hée entred into these spéeches. I
thought it verie expedient (fayre sisters) since you vnderstand

the peace concluded betwéene the King of Grisca and
my selfe, to acquaint you with other matters greatly concerning
you.
                     There commeth hither in the companie of the Princesse
Zephira, two strange knights of very rare perfections,
to whom I would willingly haue you vse such especiall behauiour,
as wée might purchase the meanes to enioy them
continually in our Court, for no other intent I promise
you, but onely that they may match with you in marriage.
You sister Lyzanda, (quoth hée to the eldest) I commit to
the cheefest Knight, the verie same man that most valiantlie
tooke mée prisoner in the battaile: and you Arecinda,
(for so was the yongest named) I bequeath to the other,
who is one of the goodliest personages that euer Nature
framed.
                     Héereunto they were right soone entreated, especiallie
Aurecinda, who though her elder sister were graue and
well aduised, yet was shée pleasant, quaint and so subtile,
as easily could shee practise the meane to deceiue the wisest
man, whereof she made some experience, as you shal
hereafter perceiue in the Chapters following. The Soldane
hauing sent for all the Kings, Princes and Lordes
his subiects, to bée present on the day of this great solemnitie:
the Prince Tomano, earnestlie des
                           •
                        ring to sée his
best beloued, desired Palmerin, Trineus, and the Princesse
Zephira, that they might set forwardes to Harano. But
Muzabelino, who knew what troubles would succéede the
marriage, aduised the King Abimar not to goe, and counsailed
the two Princes, Trineus and Palmerin, to kéepe
themselues continuallie Armed, because the Soldane was
a man continually subiect to incertaine chaunces. So giuing
of each of them a Cote of Armes of Crimson Ueluet,
most curious
                           •
                        ie embroidered with Pearles, hee departed
from them, returning backe againe to the Citie of Grisca.
Nowe ride these Princes ioyfully to Harano, where they
were receiued by the soldane with wonderfull pompe and

honor, each one admiring the rare bea
                           •
                        tie of the Princesse
Zephira, who was conducted with such a royall traine, as
neuer was the like séene before in Harano. At the Cittie
Gate the Soldane mette them, and in a sumptuous C
                           ••
                        che
accompanied them to the Pallace, where after many solemne
curtesies on each side deliuered, and such magnifical
royaltie beséeming the time and place, the Soldane came
to his Sisters, who had not yet talked with the two strange
Knights, and thus spake.
                     Sisters, to the e
                           •
                        de that héereafter you shall not be beguiled,
the Knights that accompanie my Ladie the Princesse,
and whome I haue so much commended to you, are
Christians, notwithstanding they bee such, as they twaine
deserue greater honor then I am any way able to expresse.
As for their comely stature, after that your 
                           •
                        ye hath conferred
with your heart, I referre my opinion to your iudgement,
regarde then that they bee loued and estéemed as
their perfections doo worthily deserue. Aurecinda the yongest
and most voluntarie Sister, hauing her eye continually
fixed on the Prince Trineus, thus conferred with herselfe.
                     My Brother verie lightly commaundeth vs to loue
these strange Knights, I knowe not what my Sisters opinion
is, as for mine owne, the beginning alreadie of my
loue is such, that if I do not quickly obtaine my desire, I
feare that my affection is rated at the price of my life. The
time is passed ouer with many delights, and daily pastimes
after the Persian manner, but all this while Lizanda and
Aurecinda are tormented with loue, so that all patience
was vtterly denied them, yet bearing this waightie burden
so well as they coulde, at length the two Sisters came
to the Princesse Zephira
                              •
                           s Chamber, where they founde
Palmerin and Trineus conferring together, feigning the
cause of their comming to bid the Princesse good morrow.
Palmerin perceiuing that Lizanda sodainely chaunged her
colour, imagined the cause of her secret disease, and béeing

loth to bée tempted with anie such occasion, dissembling
that he sawe her not, tooke Zephira by the hande, and leading
her to the window, 
                           •
                        ounde some cause of conference,
which Lizanda perceiuing, in anger shée 
                           •
                        long forth of the
Chamber, yet Aurecinda would not follow her, for she being
thorowly conquered with loue, neither regarding feare,
shame, or other such like behauiour séemely in Maidens,
tooke Trineus by the hand, and causing him to sitte downe
by her, thus beganne. I doo not a little maruaile Syr
knight, that when Ladies come to sée you, their entertainment
is no better. It is not the manner of Gentlemen to
be so sollitarie, without hauing some friend or beloue
                           •
                        ,
which you shall soone finde in this Court, of higher calling
then you imagine, if Ladies may discerne some signe of
your fauourable liking. In good 
                           •
                        aith Madame, answered
Trineus, if to you and your sister I haue not done such 
                           •
                        uety
as beséemed me, it procéeded by forgetfulnesse, or my minde
carried away with other occasions, for nature made me obedient
to Ladies. If these words Sir knight (quoth she) procéede
from your heart▪ I can assure you to be loued of such a
one, who is not vnworthie the like good will, and of such
account is shée with the Solda
                           ••
                        e, as he shall create you one
of the greatest Lords in Persia, so please you to stay in his
highnesse Court. That may not be (quoth Trineus) for so
soone as the Soldane and the prince Tomano shall be espoused,
I must néeds depart with my companion, about affaires
of very great importance. Palmerin who with one eare listened
to the Princesse Zephi
                              •
                           a, and with the other to the
words of Aurecinda, after she was departed to her Chamber,
thus spake to Trineus.
                     
                     Good Friende, beware of this Ladie, that shee cause
you not to offende God, and violate the loyaltie you owe to
Madame Agriola. Such experience haue I had in these actions,
as when Ladies haue enterprised theyr amarous furies,
if they cannot compasse it by the meanes of men, they
will aduenture it with hellish familiars, that can deceiue

the very wisest, especially in this wicked Countrey, where
is no knowledge of God or his Lawes. Beside you know,
that such impudent loue cannot bee carried about without
such apt m
                           ••
                        engers, and from whence procéedeth manie
inconueniences. Brother, aunswered Trineus, feare not
my constancie, for my Ladyes loue hath taken such sure
foundation▪ as death cannot make me false to her, yet prooued
his words contrarie in the end, and for which hée repented
afterwarde.
                     While these delights continued, 
                           〈◊〉
                         Ambassadour
to the soldane of Babilon, arriued at the Courte,
where the Monarch of Persia receiued him verie honourably,
willing him to conceale the newes till the marriages
were past, which on the morrow was performed with maruailous
royaltie. As the Princes and Lordes accompanied
the soldane to the Temple, it happened that Aurecinda
was conducted by the Prince Trineus, whereof she béeing
not a little glad, by the way entred into these spéeches.
Ah my true Friend and Lord Trineus, when will the day
come that I may be thus led, to espouse the man whom I
loue more déere then my life? Madame, quoth Trineus, I
cannot maruaile sufficiently to sée you thus changed, considering
the greatest Lord in the Orient may be thought too
simple for such a Wife: yet did you choose one that perhaps
would not espouse you, my Lorde the soldane béeing
your Brother, may constraine him thereto. Héere-hence
(quoth shée) procéedeth my sorrow, for hée whome I loue is
not the soldanes subiect, nor dooth agrée with mee in faith
and opinion, he will gi
                           •
                        e no eare to mine intreaties, much
lesse to such a one, as can make him one of the greatest
Lords in Persia.
                     
                     But thinke you my Lorde that I can conceale what
you may plainely discerne in mine eyes? You are the onely
man my heart 
                           〈◊〉
                         chosen, and whome the soldane loueth
more then his Brother. Alas Madame, quoth the Prince,
vnfitting is it that a Knight errant, shoulde espouse the

Sisters of so great a Lord as is the Soldane of Persia. And
would his Maiestie so much honour me, yet the contraritie
of our faith is such an impeach, as flatly it may not be, for
rather will I be torne in péeces then match with a Pagan,
or renounce my faith for her loue. No, no, my Lord, saide
the Princesse, I will r
                           •
                        nounce mine for your loue, and
worship Iesus Christ the sonne of the blessed Uirgin. Well
worthie then were I of reproch, quoth Trineus, if I should
not requite you with loue againe, considering what you aduenture
for my sake.
                     As they would haue procéeded further in talke, Colmelio
Palmerins. Squire whome Maucetto hadde bought,
standing to sée the t
                           •
                        aine of Persian Lords and Ladies passe
by, espied his maister and the Prince Trineus, wherefore
preasing through the guarde of Archers, hee came to the
Prince, and taking him by the Mantle, saide. Most happie
be this houre my noble Lorde, to finde you and my Maister
Palmerin, What fortune hath brought thée hither Colmelio,
saide Trineus, hast thou yet spoken to thy Maister?
No my Lord, aunswered Colmelio, he conducteth the Princesse
with the Calife of Siconia, wherefore I durst not presume
to trouble him.
                     Beléeue mee, saide the Prince, but thou shall speake
with him, and while the Arch Flamin was performing the
ceremonies in the Temple, Trineus presented him to his
Maister Palmerin, who was thereof so ioyfull, as if he had
gotten the best Cittie in Persia. Hee demaunded by what
meanes hee escaped the Pirates handes, the true discourse
whereof Colmelio rehearsed, and howe Maucetto the Ambassadour
bought him, as Ptolome and he were brought to
the Soldane of Babilon his Court to be sold, and there doth
Ptolome finde great fauour as I haue heard, of the fayre
Princesse Alchidiana the Soldanes Daughter, onely for
your sake. Thou tellest me wonders, said Palmerin, depart
not from me till after Dinner, when I will goe to thy Maister
Maucetto to demaunde 
                           •
                        hée, which I hope hee will

not denie, because when I was Knight to Alchidiana, hee
was one of my most specially good Friendes. After the solemnitie
of the marriage was ended, and Dinner ended at
the Pallace for preparation of pastime: Palmerin calling
Colmelio, went with him to the Ambassadour Maucetto,
who not a little abashed to sée him, that was generally reputed
dead in the soldanes Court, came and embraced him
with these spéeches. My Lorde Palmerin, what great God
hath raysed you againe? The soldane was credible enformed,
that you and Olorico were drowned in the sea: for
which both hée and Madame Alchidiana more lamented,
then for the losse of his whole Armie before the Cittie of
Constantinople.
                     
                     
                        Palmerin dissembling as though he knew not thereof,
séemed to maruaile thereat very much, and the better to
shaddow his conceit, saide, that after the tempest was ceased,
which cast him verie farre from the Soldanes Armie,
thinking to returne to Constantinople, hée was by violent
windes brought to the Isle of Malfada, where the Prince
Olorico, quoth hee, and all the rest of my companions remaine
enchaunted, whom I hope to recouer againe after I
can get hence. Little thought I my Lord, a
                           •
                        nswered Maucetto,
to finde you in this Countrey, but did Madame Alchidiana
know so much, her sorrow would soone be conuerted
into ioy.
                     But what newes with you my Lord? said Palmerin.
What may bee the cause of your Ambassage? I will not
conceale the truth thereof from you, quoth Maucetto, I
come to demaund ayde of the Soldane of Persia, for a fresh
inuasion against Constantinople. I maruaile quoth Palmerin,
that he will enterprise the voyage againe, which hath
cost him so much, and returned so little profit: rather would
I counsaile him to forbeare, and so will I write to his maiestie
before your departure, as also to Madame Alchidiana
his Daughter. But I would request one curtesie of
you Sir Maucetto, that you woulde giue mée your slaue

                        Colmelio, who in time past hath béene my Squire. Him
shall you hau
                           •
                         with all my heart, quoth Maucetto, and not
onely him but whatsoeuer els is mine beside, so please you
to accept thereof.
                     I thanke you good Sir, aunswered Palmerin, and I
doubt not in time to requite your gentlenesse. While they
thus talked together, the Soldane came to Palmerin, saying.
Will not you make one my Lord in this daunce? the
Ladies say they cannot haue your companie. In sooth my
gracious Lorde, answered Palmerin, little doo I delight in
any such exercises, very earnest affaires haue I with the
Ambassadour Maucetto, which craue suddaine and spéedie
dispatch. Beside, faine would I know some tydings of him
from my Ladie Alchidiana, from whose seruice I haue now
discontinued a yéere and more. The Soldane abashed at
these wordes, saide. I pray you tell mee the truth, are not
you hee that slewe the Prince Amarano of Nigrea in Combat,
and afterwarde two other of his Brethren, of which exploits
remaine such fame through all Turkie? In sooth
my Lord aunswered Palmerin, béeing vowed to my Ladies
seruice, I neuer could suffer her honour to be any way
distained, and in that dutie I will continue, for the manifolde
curtesies I haue receiued by her. By the liuing God,
sayd the Soldane, now think I my selfe the happiest prince
in the world, hauing the man in my Court, whose verie
name maketh the stoutest to tremble. But séeing wee are
thus farre entred, tell mée, is the Princesse Alchidiana so
beatifull as Fame reports her, That is she my Lord, quoth
shee, and much more then fame is able to vtter, beside, shée
is one of the most gracious and affable Princesses that euer
I beheld in any Kings Court.
                     Nowe is night come, and after the Courtly pastimes
were ended, the Bridegroome went to receiue the honur
of his Bride, commaunding Palmerin to bee intreated as
his owne person, which not a little contented the Princesse
Lyzanda, thinking héereby (alas too lauishly) to obtaine

him for her husband, but héerein she was deceiued, so that
her rash loue procured her miserable death. Aerecinda
likewise continually courted Trineus, as though shée had
alwaies béene trained vp in his company, wherefore one
day, after hee had béene warned foure or fiue times by Palmerin,
he thus spake to her. Madame, if your honestly and
vertue hath imprinted in noble mindes, an especiall conceite
of your continencie and chastity, I maruaile nowe
what many will thinke, in that you should not shewe any
such signes of loue to me, for it séemes yée yéelde the Cittie
before any assault be giuen. Al these spéeches could not qualifie
her humour, for loue had so emboldened her with such
vnshamefastnesse, as shee made no conscience of following
the cause, giuing credit to one of her Ladies perswasions,
that by good pursuit all things enioy a happy ende.
                  
                  
                     Chap. LIIII.
                     
                        How Maucetto the Ambassadour to the Monarch Misos of
Balylon, declared his message before the Soldane and all
the princes of Persia. And of the Combate betweene
Trineus, and the King Orzadine of Galappa.
                     
                     
                        AFter the mariage feast was fully ended,
the Soldane sent for the Ambassadour
Maucetto, who in the presenc
                           •
                        
of al the Persian Lordes, thus began to
deliuer his embssage. Mighty & illuous
Monarch of Persia the soldane of
Babilon my lord and maister, hauing euermore
cōtinued in faithfull alliance

to your maiestie, lets you knowe by mee his great and damageable
losse, which he sustained before the Citie of Constantinople.
For recouerie whereof, hee humbly intreateth
your highnesse most fauourable assistaunce, which well
you cannot denie him, in respect of the great sway you hold
in Turkie, as also for the establishment of our faith and generall
destruction of the G
                              •
                           ecian Empire. Ambassdor, quoth
the Soldane, I will better consider heereon, and aunswere
you accordingly. So calling all the Princes presently to
counsell, diuers confused iudgements were amongst them:
whereupon hee sent for Palm
                              •
                           rin, and before them all demaunded
his opinion, whereto hee shaped this aunswere.
Might it stand with your highnesse liking, and the good conceit
of all th
                           •
                        se noble Princes, gladly would I bée excused
in this matter, wherein I may not speake without suspition,
because the entent is against mine owne natiue countrey,
and those whome I agrée withall in fayth and opinion.
                     But séeing your Maiestie will néedes know my iudgement,
pardon in speaking boldly what I would be loth to
dissemble. I thinke no one of you my gracious Lords, but
well remembers the late warres against the King of Grisca,
si
                           •
                        ce which time the souldiers are hardly recouered,
and extreamitie were it to endanger the liues of wounded
men. Moreouer, the Soldane of Babilon who nowe demaundeth
succour, sending his Armie into Greece, where
raignes a Prince so mightie and puissant, as well coulde
repulse them with shamefull confusion. Perswade your
selues as yet there is no other, but he that tryumpht in conquest
before, I feare can do the like againe, and thus my
Lords is mine opinion.
                     Well haue you answered, quoth the Soldane, and this
peaceable conclusion liketh me best, so arysing from counsell,
they went into the great Hall, where before theyr
comming, as the Princesse Zephira was deuising with many
Lords and Ladies, entred an armed knight, accompanied

with sixe other in Armour, and twelue Squires, who séeing
the Soldane not in his chayre of estate, demaunded of the
Quéene where he was. Knight, quoth she, he is in counsell
with the Princes and Lordes of his Realme, and long it
will not be before he come: in meane while you may passe
the time in conference with the Ladies. By God, said Trineus
to the Quéene, I thinke he scant knoweth howe to
conferre with Ladies, for his indiscr
                           •
                        ete behauiour shewes
him to be the woorst nurtured Knight y• euer I sawe: saw you
not (quoth hee to the Princesse Zephira) how vnmannerly
hée sot downe without vsing any reuerence to your Maiestie?
                     The Knight sitting strouting in a Chayre, and hauing
vnclasped his Helmet, said to the Quéene. I pray you tell
me Madame, are those two strange Knights in this Court,
that were against your Husbande in the battaile and tooke
him? They be Sir Knight, quoth she, well and in good disposition
thanks to the soueraigne Creator. I aske not of
their health, quoth he, how are they called? The one said
the Quéene, is named Palmerin, the other Trineus. And I
quoth he, am Orzadine King of Galappa, to whome fortune
hath béene more fauourable in loue, then in riches:
making me Fréende to the faire Oronia, Daughter to the
Calife of Siconia, and Sister to the Prince Donadell, who
was slaine in the battaile against the King Abimar: shée in
my iudgement, not hauing her second in beautie, at whose
request I haue trauailed the greatest part of Asia, to spread
her name and honorable reputation, which I haue doone 
                           •
                        o
her perpetuall fame: and returning to her when my labours
were finished, in sted of ioy and pleasure, I found her
sad and pensiue for the death of her Brother. These newes
were worse to me then death, and to comfort her, I promised
to reuenge her Brothers misfortune: and this is the
onelie cause of my comming, for hauing Combatted with
him that sl
                           •
                        w the Prince, her loue to mee will be the greater,
and mine honour shall be spread with more aduantage.

I bel
                           •
                        eue well, quoth the Quéene, if you escape with life
from the Combat: but tell me Sir Knight, why beare you
such ill will to him that sl
                           •
                        w the Prince? considering that
it was doon in plaine battaile, and he his enemie who would
haue doone as much to him if he could. Not for this cause alon
                           •
                        
will I enter the Combat, said Orzodine, but for I am
desirous to let him knowe that I am more fauoured in loue
then hee: and as I am one of the most happie Louers, so am
I the best Knight in the world, which I will maintaine against
anie that dare gain-say it. Happy louer, Dieu Vous
gard, said Trineus. If the Poets had hetherto spared the
discription of Cupid, Sonne to the Goddesse of loue, now
might they iustly haue sette him downe for blind: yet is hée
worthilie to be condemned, that hee would vouchsafe anye
fauour to the most foolish among men, hée hauing dedicated
me to the seruice of a Ladie, to whom your gentle Ironia,
Oronia, I should saye, dooth not deserue the name of her
seruant.
                     For the rest, where you vaunt your selfe to bée the
best Knight in the world, your follie is too apparaunt, for
there are manie Knightes errant in the worlde, who can
giue you a braue ca
                           •
                        uazado at the Launce: and after they
haue foyled you in the Ioust, bestowe a little paines to take
your gréene head from your grosse shoulders. My selfe that
flew the Brother to your Goddesse of beautie, will doo you
so much pleasure, as to heale the incurable disease wherewith
you are day and night tormented. O diuine spirites
cryed the Pagan, fauour me so much, that this Knight may
but dare to enter the Fielde with mee. Yes I dare, sayde
Tryneus, and before we part, I doubt not but to make thée
quiet enough.
                     
                        Ozodine presentlie threwe his Gauntlet as his gage,
and Tryneus a Golden bracelet, which Aurecinda had giuen
him, entreating Zephi
                              •
                           a to kéepe them, which she refused
to doo, fearing the daunger of the Prince Tryneus.
Héereupon the Soldane entred the Hall, leading Palmerin
                        
by the hand, but when they sawe the Armed Knight thus
contend with Trineus, they meruailed greatly what might
be the occasion thereof. When Orzadine sawe the Soldane
was sette, he entred into these spéeches. Soldane, I am hither
come to accuse thée, of a villainous act which thou hast
committed, harbouring in thy Court, the man that 
                           •
                        lewe the
the valiant Donadell: whose murther thou canst not so cunningly
couer, but thy treacherie shall be openly discouered.
                     What art thou, said the Soldane, that darest speake
thus presumptuously in our presence? Orzodine King of
Galappa▪
                         quoth he, of whom thou hast heard heretofore, and
now haue I presented my gage against this Knight, which
I will maintaine in despight of the proudest. The Soldane
abashed at this euent, sought to disswade them from
the Combatte, because hée had heard great spéeches of the
Kings prowesse, but all was in vaine, for Orzodine was
so obstinate, and Tryneus so earnest to reuenge the Turks
proud blasphemie against his Ladie, as they would not be
pacified till the Fielde was graunted them. Let vs haue
Iudges presently, quoth Orzodine, and the Fielde assured
for our Combat, that I may discipline this glorious straunger.
                     Make not such haste, sayd Tryneus, for I feare thou
wilt thinke thy comming too soone. Immediately were the
the two Combattants Armed, the Iudges placed in their
Tent, when the Soldane and Palmerin with manie Princes,
went to beholde this exployt. But such a mightie man
was the King of Galappa, as Palmerin feared his fréends
successe. The Tr
                           •
                        mpets sou
                           ••
                        ding, the Knights brake their
Launces brauelie, and mette togither so furiouslye with
their bodies, as they were both throwne out of their Saddles:
but they quickly recouering themselues, dr
                           •
                        we theyr
swordes, and marched against eache other with lyke courage,
as did Achilles against noble Hector. Long continued
the fight with danger on either side, but the king of Galappa
                        
strooke such peasant strokes, béeing a man of equall stature
with a Giant, as hée wounded Trineus in manie places:
and such was his ill fortune, after long trauersing about,
hee sette his foote vnwarilye on the Trunchion of a Launce,
whereby he fell downe backward to the ground. Orzodine
taking aduauntage of this fall, sette his foote on the Princes
breast, striuing to pull his Helmet from his head: but
God knowes in what agonie Palmerin was newe, when
he breathed foorth these spéeches to himselfe. Ah Heauens
quoth he, haue I taken such paine and trauaile to finde my
Fréend, and must he now die among his enemies, Aureeinda
likewise readie to yéeld vp her ghost with gréefe, seeing
Palmerin readie to swo
                           •
                        ne as he stood. Alas, quoth she,
is it not enough that my Fréend must die, but his noble c
                           •
                        mpanion
will beare him companie? While this doubtfull
feare was among the Courtiers, Tryneus had so well scufled
with Orzodine, as he laye along by him likewise, when
drawing a pocket dagger, he stabbed it through his Helmet,
into one of his eyes, so that he nailed his head to the ground.
Orzodine féeling himselfe wounded to the death, gaue a
very loude cry: when Tryneus hauing gotten his Helmet
off, presentlie smote his heade from his shoulders. If the
Knights of Galappa were now dismaide, and the soldane,
Palmerin, Zephira, Tomano, and all the rest ioyfull, I
leaue to your iudgements: especially Palmerin, who reioycing
that Trineus had thus conquered his enemie, entred
the Lystes and embraced him, and bringing him foorth of
the Fielde, 
                           •
                        he was welcommed to the Pallace with wonderfull
honor.
                     The bodie of the dead King was giuen to them that
came with him, with meruailous reprehension of theyr
Maisters audacious challenge, and so with great heauinesse
they returned home againe. Nor would the Soldane
longer stay in his Court the Assirian Ambassadour. But
excused himselfe to the Babylonian Mysos, that he could not
giue him anie assistaunce, couering this aunswer vnder his

vnfortunate battaile against the King Abimar. Maucetto
séeing that to staye longer would not auaile him, tooke his
leaue of the Soldane, saying. Albeit my Lorde, you cannot
giue my Maister anie assistance, yet let Palmerin returne
to him at his departure from your Court. What I can doo
héerein, aunswered the Soldane, your Lord shall be assured
to finde, although I thinke his minde bee otherwise adicted:
but you were best to knowe his minde your selfe, because
I heard him saye he would write to Madame Alchidiana.
                     
                     
                        Maucetto departing to Palmerins lodging, the Soldane
went to see his Sisters, of whome hée demaunded, if
they had as yet practised anie thing with the Knights. My
Lord, aunswered Aurecinda, who in all things was more
prompt then her eldest Sister, I haue fixed my loue on the
knight Trineus, with full resolution neuer to loue anie other:
yet dooth not he intend to staye héere in your Courte,
much lesse (I feare) to make me his wife. As for my Sister,
shée cannot compasse the meane, howe to impart her
loue to Sir Palmerin. Right strange is it, quoth the Soldanen,
that the promises you haue made them, and so apparant
signes of ardent affection, cannot disswade them to
make choyse of you: Doubtlesse they bée some great Princes,
who to sée the fashions of the worlde haue thus disguised
themselues. Continue your loue as you haue begunne,
and if by other meanes you cannot stay them, aduenture
your honors as a meane to entrappe them. And now dooth
occasion well serue you Sister Aurecinda, for by courteous
intreating Tryneus now he is wounded, you maye more
profit in one houre, then you haue doone during this tedious
pursuit.
                     Néedlesse was it for the Soldane thus to perswade
her, in that she laboured for no other matter, kéeping Trineus
companie both day and night: but Palmerin offended
thereat, secretlye thus rebuked the Prince. What meane
you my Lord? If you mend not this order I must be angry

with you. You sée this Princesse excéedes in her desire, and
you giue her occasion to continue it: I know not what will
happen héereon, but my mind perswades mee that you
will hardlie depart hence with honour. Be aduised I desire
you and take this of me: that if the wisest man will lende
his eares to loose persons, and followe theyr affections: hée
shall become more vnreasonable then a bruite Beaste, regarding
nothing but what is obiect to his eyes, and what
the flesh, (the onelie mortall enemie to the spirit) shall soonest
perswade him.
                  
                  
                     Chap. LV.
                     
                        How Aur
                              •
                           cinda Sister to the Soldane of Persia, pursued
the Prince Tryneus so neere, as in the end, she had her
desire, and what followed thereon.
                     
                     
                        
                           PAlmerin hauing thus schooled y• prince
Trineus, that he should giue no eare to
the enticements of Aurecinda: Lyzanda
came to his chamber, and feigning
vrgent businesse with him, tooke him aside,
deliuering her affections in this
maner. Right happie wold I think my
selfe Sir Palmerin, so you would deigne to continue in the
Soldans Court, who doubtlesse would aduance you to the
highest step of honor, and giue me to you in mariage that am
his Sister, and a Lady worthie some reckoning.
                     
                        Palmerin offred to depart the Chamber, but Lyzanda
stayed him, procéeding thus. Alas my Lord will you neuer
vouchsafe to speake to mee? nowe see I well that you

are the most dis
                           •
                        oyall Knight in the worlde. Madame aunswered
Palmerin, rather will I die then one iote of di
                           ••
                        oyaltie
shall be found in me: nor can I graunt your importunate
requests, without committing notorious treason to
my Ladie, and offending my God, whom foolish loue shall
neuer make me to displease. So without any further spéeches
he went to the Prince Tomano, leauing the poore
Ladie well-néere dead with this vnkinde refusall, who going
to her owne cabbanet, thus began to breath foorth her
sorrowes.
                     Ah Loue, the most cruell passion that euer entred the
hart of anie Ladie, how great and meruailous is thy power?
Some thou enforcest to desire and intreat, without being
heard or regarded: others thou causest to be happily fauoured,
estéemed of their Fréends, Seruaunts and louers.
Unhappie that I am, but much more vnhappie Brother,
accursed be the houre when thou didest commaund mee,
to loue the most cruell and vnkinde among men. Can there
be anie Ladie in the worlde more disgraced then I am? had
I not reuealed my loue to him, some comfort I might thereby
enioy among my sorrowes: but the frozen minde knowing
my loue, dooth holde mée in the greater contempt. My
Sister tolde me, that by too long concealement of loue, many
haue lost them they most estéemed: but I (alas) doo
finde it cleane contrary. Now was Aurecinda (by chaunce)
in the Chamber next her Sisters Cabinette) and hearing
her thus sorrowfully complaine, shée came to her, and thus
spake.
                     Good Sister discomfort not your selfe by your friendes
refusall: I would not thinke my selfe woorthie the name of
a woman, if I could not winne you the man that thus torments
you. As for me, I haue founde the meane to compasse
mine owne desire. Yet could not all these spéeches appease
her, wherfore shée left her, and vnderstanding by one of her
Ladies, that Tryneus should this night suppe in the Soldans
Chamber, whereuppon shée went to the Ladies hote

house, amd there prepared his bed, and such swéete delicate
bathes, as might mooue the spirits of a verie staied Gentleman.
This doone, she came to one of the Pages of honor,
Brother to the Ladie whome shee most of all trusted, saying.
                     I praye thée good Page, goe to the Prince Trineus
his Chamber, and there attende till he come foorth: then
feigning that some one hath doone thée iniurie, thou shalt
intreat him to helpe thée against him that abused thée. If
hée condiscende, as doubtlesse he will, bring him to the bathe,
where I will stay his comming with thy Sister, and so
soone as he is entred, make fast the doore on him, and gette
thée gone, but in anie case be secret héerein, and I will recompence
thée to thine owne content. The wagge was so
well instructed in his arte, as he failed not in any one point
o
                           •
                         his charge. But as the Prince Tryneus came alone from
his Chamber, he fell on his knées before him saying. My
Lord, if euer you pittie a Gentleman abused, let mee intreate
you to reuenge my cause, on a villaine that hath too
much wronged me.
                     
                        Tryneus, who had often séene the Page in his Chamber
with Aurecinda, answered. Beléeue me Page, it were
pittie to denie thy request, considering thou doost demaunde
it so courteously: shall I néede to bee better prouided then
I am? No my Lord, quoth he, your sword is sufficient. So
was he conducted by the Page along the Gallery, and béeing
come to the appointed place, he opened the doore, thus
speaking to the Prince. My Lord, the partie you must deale
withall is in this Chamber, accompanied but with one Ladie,
wherefore you may enter secure from daunger. Hee
was no sooner in, but the Page clapt to the doore and departed.
Now was Tryneus not a little amazed, when he saw
no bodie but the Princesse with her Ladie, shée being come
thither to bathe her selfe, and layd in her bed: but in such
surpassing brauerye, as Iupiter with his lightning, Neptune
with his thrée forked Mace, and Pluto with his Cerberus,
                        
would stand and wonder thereat. So 
                           •
                        in
                           •
                        lie had she
tressed the golden wyres of her hayre, and her heade attyre
embellished with such goodlie Orientall Pearles, as made
her séeme a beautifull Angell, béeing couered with a gorgious
Canapie, resemblingng the Sunne vnder a faire cloud.
Betwéene her daintie Breastes hung a precious Carbunckle
which supplied the office of Venus her firebrand: when
she sawe Tryneus stand so agast, she said. Why? my Lord,
are you more afraide of a naked Ladie, then of the most puissaunt
Knight in Persia, armed cap ape? I can iudge no
lesse, séeing you dare approch no néerer. In sooth my Lord,
quoth the Pages Sister, you may thinke your selfe happy
to be desired of such a ladie, whome mightie kings and princes
haue earnestly sought, and woulde gladly haue had the
least fauour shée bestowes on you. So taking him by the
hand, shee caused him to sit down in a Chayre by the beds
side, and giuing her Mistresse her Harpe, she departed, leauig
them together. Ah page, quoth Trinens, howe hast
thou deceiued mee? What? saide the princesse, you forgette
where you are, you must at this time somewhat pittie my
sorrowes, and heare a dittie which I haue made for your
sake. Then taking her Harpe, shee thus beganne to sing as
followeth.
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 The Dittie sung by Aurecinda to the Prince Trineus.
                                 
                                    THe God of warre, fierce, stearne, and rigorous,
                                    when he beheld faire Venus heauenly beautie:
                                    Made small account of her disloyalay,
                                    But suddainlie became full amorous.
                                    
                                       Beautie had th
                                          •
                                       n h
                                          •
                                       r power vigorous,
                                    Chaunging rough lookes to sweetest secrecie.
                                    But he I loue, incenst with crueltie,
                                    Doth not regard my torments langourous.
                                    VVhy should I then pursue that stubborne minde,
                                    That with excuses kils my hope out-right?
                                    Yet if he helpe not, death must me acquite
                                    Ah mightie loue in nature most vnkinde
                                    Thou doost constraine me to affect the man:
                                    That neither fauour, loue nor kindnes can.
                                 
                                 
                                    VVhat haue I sayd? the Knight of my desire,
                                    Is meere diuine, and furthest from compare:
                                    VVhose Eagles eyes can well discerne my care,
                                    Vnd with sweete pitties droppes 
                                          •
                                       lay this fire,
                                    The little Cod hath made him gracious,
                                    His Mother, mild, to rue the Ladies smart:
                                    That shrines his liuely Image in her hart,
                                    Then to despaire beseemes no vertuous.
                                    Regard sweet freend the passions of thy Freend,
                                    VVhom God and nature hath appointed thine:
                                    Giue loue his due, and then thou must be mine,
                                    So shall long sorrow haue a happie ende.
                                    The Persian mayd, say boldly thou hast wonne:
                                    That Monarches, Kings and Princes neere could donne.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     With excellent cunning did shée handle her instrument,
but with farre better grace and affection deliuered her dittie,
gracing it with such sadde countenaunce, mournfull lookes,
and renting sighes, as forced the Prince Tryneus to become
excéeding amorous. And burning in this newe fierie

impression, beheld the singuler beautie of Auredinda, which
rauished his sences in such sort, as (trembling like the Aspen
leafe) hee satte downe by her on the beddes side. The
Princesse laying her Harpe from her, embraced him very
louinglie with these spéeches. Alas my Lord, will you still
continue in this rigour and cruell inhumanitie? your heart
is more harde then Adamant, that will not bee mollified
with so manie intreaties: I sweare to you by the Sunne
that lightneth the worlde, vnlesse you graunt me one request,
before your face will I presentlye s
                           •
                        eye my selfe. Full
well doo I perceiue, quoth Tryneus, that hardlie can I escape
mis-fortune: the Seruaunt hath deceiued mee, and
now the Mistresse séekes my death. Ah Madam, quoth he,
how can I graunt your request, considering mine offence to
God, and he that loueth me loyallie? Eyther bée as good as
thy worde, quoth she, else stand to the danger that may befall
thée.
                     Why? Syr Knight, is my beautie of so slender account,
as I am not woorthie to bee helde betwéene thine armes?
wilt thou 
                           〈◊〉
                         me to consume in this violent flame, which
thou maist with such ease and honor extinguish? hadst thou
rather sée a Ladie split her heart before thée, then thou wilt
vouchsafe to preserue her life? Come, come swéet Fréende,
sée how loue and his Mother hath made waye for thée, refuse
not opportunitie so fauourablie offered. What blemish
is on this bodie, that shoulde deserue disdaine? If the
King of Gods would thinke himselfe honored with this conquest:
much more estimation shouldest thou make héereof.
In bréefe, she was so perfect in her subtiltie, and kn
                           •
                        we so
well how to inueigle the Prince with queint spéeches and
swéete embracings: that she made him forget God, his Ladie,
loyaltie, and himselfe, so that of a Maiden, he made her
the fayrest woman in Persia. When the time came that hee
should depart, the Princesse saide to him. Yet haue I a further
request, my Lord, you must promise to m
                           •
                        ete mee in
this place at times
                           •
                         conuenient, and endeuour with your

companion that he may likewise loue my Sister. Trineus
made promise hee would, but rather hee desired to stab himselfe
with his weapon: then that Palmerin shoulde knowe
this great abuse, so heinous did his offence séeme to himselfe.
                     
                        Aurecinda perswaded her Sister, still to pursue Palmerin
with her loue, and what had passed betwéene her
and the Prince Trineus, she declared: whereupon her desire
grewe the greater, yet all was in vaine, for Palmerin
would giue no eare to her complaints, which was the cause
of this mishap following. Lyzanda aduertised by her Sister,
that Tryneus still thus vsed her companie in the Bath:
euious of her Sisters benefit, and despightfull at Palmerins
obstinate refusall, she went to the Soldane, and with
manie teares thus deliuered her gréefe. Ah my Lorde, how
much better had it béene, that wee had neuer knowne these
cruell Christian Knightes? whose ingratitude will bee the
cause of my death: for the yonger of them is meruailouslie
beloued of my Sister, who forgetting her faith, honor, and
her obedience to your Maiestie, hath dishonored both her
selfe and you, onelie to make proofe of the other knights Crueltie
to me. The Soldane admiring his Sisters report, answered.
                     I did not will my Sister to abuse her selfe, without
promise of marriage: but séeing it hath so fallen out, by my
Fathers soule they shall both repent it. Durst the Traytour
abuse me so much in mine owne Courte? Why? my
Lord, quoth Lyzanda, you are the onelie cause thereof, and
therefore you must bee angrie with no bodie but your selfe.
Let me not liue an houre sayde the Soldane, if I be not sufficiently
reuenged on him: Sister, be you but secrete, and
referre the rest to my direction. Then calling for the Captaine
of his Guard, willing him to take fiftie Knights, and
when his Maiestie was at Supper, they shoulde goe take
his Sister and the Knight with her in the Bathe, and afterwarde
carrie them to strong pryson. But sée it doone secretlye,

quoth he, for if his companion know thereof, it may
arise to further inconuenience. And because Palmerin
should not misdoubt this treason, all Supper-time the Soldane
held him in familiar talke: he hoping by this fetch, to
staie them still in his Courte, but it fell out afterward to b
                           •
                        e
the cause, that manie of his best and chée
                           •
                        est Knightes were
slaine.
                     Not long had the ambushed Knightes waited where
they were appointed, but the Princesse Aurecinda opened
the doore, and came foorth with her Fréendes as she was accustomed:
where they were suddainlie taken, Tryneus
not hauing the leysure to drawe his sworde, so was hee caried
prisoner to one of the strongest Towers in the Pallace,
and Aurecinda at the same time to another. Tryneus
s
                           •
                        eing himselfe thus betraide, fell into these lamentable discourses.
Unfortunate wretch that I am, haue I so lately
escaped by my fréende, the cruell enchauntments of the
hellish Malfada, wherein I endured so manie paines and
torments, and am now come to the place where they shall be
redoubled?
                     Ah Palmerin my good Brother and companion, what
wilt thou say when thou hearest of my taking, but most of
all when thou vnderstandest the cause thereof? Miserable
wretch, how often did my Fréend warne mee of this inconuenience,
yet had not I the grace to credite his Cousaile:
doubtlesse, my very conceit of shame, when thou shalt bee
acquainted with my soule offence, will bee more gréeuous
to me then death. What dishonour, paine, torment and punishment,
shall bee sufficient for my misdéede? Forlorne
and despised Catife, could not the feare of God, which hath
hitherto so graciously protected thée, nor the loyaltie of Agriola,
who forsooke Parents, Fréendes, and all for thée,
haue kept thée from this monstrous acte? O eternall God,
the man that forsaketh thee is vile and abh
                           •
                        minable. When
I had thy feare before mine eyes, I was at rest and quiet
in conscience, estéemed and beloued of all men: but when

thou gauest mée raynes of libertie, I became dissolute and
forgetfull of thée, as also of them that honoured me so much.
Ah miserable occasion, and those deceits, entisements, and
subtill perswasions, howe mightie are they in operation?
neither men nor diue
                           ••
                         could bring mée into such daunger,
as you haue plunged mée in vp to the eares. Ah villainous
Page that first brought mée thither, and thou the falsest
Ladíe in the world art cause of my euill. Nor are they to be
accused but my wretched selfe, who séeking mine owne hur
                           •
                        ,

                           •
                        ound it, and hauing found it, continued in it. Thus sorrowfully
wayled Tryneus, where on the contrarie side Aurecinda
reioyced: for when shée considered the estate of her
Fréende, shée perswaded her selfe by this meane, that the
Soldane her Brother woulde enforce him to marrie her,
which hope made her as ioyfull, Tryneus was sadde and
pensiue.
                     When the Captaine had imprisoned Tryneus and Aurecinda
he came to the Soldan sitting at the Table, saying.
Will your Maiestie commaund me any further seruice? I
haue enclosed the knight Tryneus in one Tower, and your
sister Aurecinda in another. Why? quoth the Soldane,
did you find them togither? I did my Lord, quoth the Captaine,
your sister leading him by the hande out of the Ladies
hote-house. By Mah
                           •
                        met, quoth the Soldane, but that
you speake it, hardly coulde I beléeue it, what shamefull
villainie is this committed in our Pallace? by the greatest
God, the facte shall be so worthi
                           •
                        y punished, as it shall remaine
for a perpetuall memorie. At these spéeches Palmerin
was not a little amazed, and dissembling his anger so well
as he could, said to the Soldane. I cannot be perswaded my
Lord, that Tryneus would commit so vile an acte, without
entisement thereto by your sisters treason: shée béeing
(vnder your Maiesties correction) the most shamelesse Girle
that euer I sawe, for twentie and twentie times haue I
séene her followe him, with gestures farre vnfitting one of
her calling. Then starting from the Table, quoth he▪ Consider

what hée is, and what thou intendest against him, for
neuer was imprisonment so dearely bought as this will
be, and before thou puttest him to death, it shall cost mee my
life, and the liues of an hundreth thousand Knightes beside,
in reuenge of his wrong. Béeing thus enflamed with ire,
hée could not so giue ouer, but thus beganne againe. By
God Soldane, thy treason is so manifest as thou canst not
hide it, full well doo I vnderstand thy flatteries, whereby
thou hopest to kéepe vs in thy seruice, but farre art thou from
thy reckoning, for rather will I be torne in a thousande péeces,
then endure the reproach of such a mans seruice, who
vnder colour of friendship imprisoneth his Knightes, and
afterward threatneth them with death. Tomano, Drumino,
Corax, and many other knights belonging to the King
Abimar, séeing Palmerin in such a rage, as it séemed the
fire did sparkle from his eyes, endeuoured to perswade him,
and Tomano thus spake to the Soldane. My Lorde, vnder
my safe conduct and your faith promised, are these two
Knights come with vs to your Court, and yo
                           •
                         haue now
imprisoned one of them, aduise your selfe of spéedie iustice:
for this shame doone him is against all right, and foreuer
shall you be noted with breache of faith: beside, I repute his
iniurie as done to my selfe. The Soldane séeing the Princes
thus mooued, although himselfe procured those fif
                           ••
                        e
Armed knights to take Tryneus, yet with smooth countenance
hée thus answered. Content your setues my friends,
Tryneus in right shall be defended: and if I finde my Sister
culpable, shee shall be punished as she were a straunger.
More I demaund not, said Palmerin, for I am assured that
by her flatteries Tryneus hath bene seduced. So departing
to his Chamber, he met his two Squires, Bellechino, and
Colmelio, of whom he demaunded, if they at any time perceiued
the loue betwéene Tryneus and the Princesse Aurecinda.
                     
                     They answered that they did perceiue it, and diuers
nightes they sawe him goe to the Princesse Chamber. And

why did you not reueale it to me? quoth he, worthilye haue
you deserued death, in concealing the shame of your Maisters
Fréende, wherein my selfe cannot escape vntouched.
Héereupon he Armed himselfe, and sending for the Prince
Tomano, said to him.
                     I thinke it best my Lord, that you kéepe your ordinarie
guarde about your person, till we knowe how the soldane
will deale with Trineus. As for my selfe, I intende (if your
Brother Drumino and the Prince Corax will ioyne with
mee) to keepe the Fielde with the thousand Knightes that
came hither with vs, that none may enter into the Cittie
without our licence. In meane while, you may sende a
Courtier to the King your Father, that he presentlye sende
vs what helpe he may. Sir Palmerin answered Tomano,
not onelie my Knightes shall enter the Fielde for you, but
my selfe likewise, so please you to commaund mee, and what
you thinke best for the deliueraunce of your Fréende Tryneus,
I will bee willing to accomplishe to my vttermost.
Presentlye will I send a Horseman to Grisca, and conferre
with my Brother Drumino, that his Knights and Gentlemen
may be Armed that came from Sauata, as also they
that came with my Nephewe Corax from Garara, which
will be in number a thousand more: your selfe in meane time
may get foorth your necessaries.
                     Who then had séene the Knights Arming, the horses
prouiding, the bag and baggage carrying, would haue said
that Palmerin was as much feared and beloued in a strange
Countrey, as in his owne. Such was the dilligence of the
Nobles and Souldiours of Grisca, Sauata and Garara, as
they were right soone before the Pallace attending for
Palmerin: who commaunded Tryneus his Horse and rich
Armour shoulde be brought foorth by his Squires, leauing
in his Chamber all the riches and treasure, that the soldane
and the Princesse Zephira had giuen him: and mounting
on his owne Courser, he came and embraced the prince
Corax, saying. Let vs depart (my Lord) from these ingratefull

                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           〈1 paragraph〉
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Chap. LVI.
                     
                        Howe the Soldan seeing hee coulde not perswade Trineus
to marrie his sister, condemned him to death▪ and what
followed afterward.
                     
                     
                        
                           TOmano, who by the aduise of Palmerin
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
for the deliueraunce of the Prince
Trineus, and comming to the Quéene
Zephira, thus spake. Madame, séeing

                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
him, that so willingly aduentured his life for you. Ah my
Lord, sayd Zephir
                              •
                           , I feare the Soldane will hardly heare

                           •
                        ée: for when su
                           ••
                         mightie persons are in anger, little account
make they of loue or vertue, yet will I willingly too
what lies in me.
                     So bidding the Prince good night, shée went wéeping
to the Soldanes Chamber: which his Maiestie perceiuing,
came and embraced her, demaunding who had anie way
offended her. Euen you my Lorde, quoth shée, and in such
sort, 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page〉
                        
                        
and there before all his Knights, said. You haue heard my
Lordes, the confession of them both, and withall haue séene
their great obstinacie: therefore by sentence irreuocable I
condemne them to death, and this day shall they be burned
in the place accustomed, none of you all mooue me to the
contrarie, for I will not be otherwise perswaded. By heauen,
saie the Prince Tomano, vnhappie should I be to stay
with you any longer, wherfore at this instant I forsake your
alliaunce, and henceforth will shew my selfe your mortall
enemie. Alas my Lord, quoth the yong Princesse Bel-sina,
will ye so soone abandon my companie? Follow me then answered
Tomano, where I go, for no more will I be séene in
this tyrannous Court, where nothing but dishonour and
crueltie is vsed.
                     Presently the Princesse and hée mounted on Horsebacke,
and with their traine came to Palmerins Campe:
who hauing heard the Soldanes sentence, was readie to
haue slaine himselfe, but that hée hoped to saue the life of
Trineus at the fatall houre. Alas my Fréendes, quoth hée,
to his companie, this day must you assist mée, to deliuer the
most gentle Knight that euer bare Armes. Set forwarde
couragiouslie agaynst the Tyrant, whom with the ayde of
my God, wee shall easily vanquish. Zephira hearing that
Tomano and Belsina were gone, and how the Soldane had
iudged Tryneus and Aurecinda to death, entred into maruailous
regrets and acclamations, whereat the Soldane
was so enraged, as hée commaunded that Tryneus and his
Sister, shoulde presently bee led to the place of execution,
and vnder the charge of fiue thousand soldiours, they were
brought on horsebacke foorth of the Citie: but when Aurecinda
sawe herselfe so hardly vsed, wringing her hands, and
renting her comely locks of haire, shée brake forth into these
pittifull spéeches.
                     Alas Gentlemen, why are you the instruments to execute
a Tyrants will? what recompence can you expect at
his handes, that for gréedie desire of my patrimonie, sendeth

mee to death? So piercing were these wordes in the
eares of the Souldiours, as they verie much lamented her
case: but Tryneus neuer chaunged colour, ryding on with
resolute constancie, not once listning to the mones of the
Princesse.
                     When they were come within sight of Palmerins power,
they raunged themselues in battell array, committing
Tryneus and Aurecinda to fiftie Knights, who should conuey
them to the Furnace where their death was appoynted,
which was a good quarter of a league from the Cittie.
Trineus nowe séeing death before his eyes, and no succour
néere to reskewe him, prepared himselfe to the latest extremitie,
and with many sorrowfull farewels to Agriola
and Palmerin, was fully perswaded to endure the torment.
Palmerin knowing which way his Fréend should be led to
death, with a sufficient traine lay secretlie ambushed, and
espying oportunitie, gaue summons to his men, wherevppon
they all issued foorth verie couragiouslie. But as they
rushed out from their secrete ambushment, the ayre was
suddenly obscured, and such thunder, haile and raine fell,
as neuer was the lyke heard or séene before, the Soldanes
squadron séemed to bée all in a flaming fire. The poore Persians
thinking the end of the world was come vppon them,
fledde towards the Cittie: but notwithstanding all theyr
haste, the greatest part of them remained dead in the field.
If the natural fire (prepared for Tryneus) made him fearful,
doubtlesse this fire raysed by coniuration made him much
more a
                           •
                        righted, but suddainly came to him an Armed
Knight with his Sworde drawne, and mounted on a horse
of mightie bignesse, who tooke the Horse of Tryneus by the
brydle, saying.
                     Come Sir Tryneus, in despight of the Tyrant thou
shalt not die. At these wordes arriued Palmerin, who embracing
Tryneus, said. Ah my déere Fréend and Brother,
what villanous minds beare they that would doo you this
outrage? 
                           〈…〉
                         my Squire

hath brought hither, that wée may with honour reuenge
this shame. As they thought to goe set on the enemie, the
Armed Knight, who was Muzabelino, thus spake. My
Lorde, let vs not tarrie tryfling time héere, but summon
                           •
                        
your people togither, and sette forwarde to Grisca, where
you shall 
                           〈…〉
                        . The disolate
Tryneus, what with his former feare; and present ioy
to beholde his Fréende, was not able to speake one worde,
but Palmerin hauing well noted the Armed Knight, at
length knewe him to bée Muzabelino, wherfore embracing
him, sayd.
                     Ah my Lorde, for euer be the King of Kings praysed,
in graunting me to haue knowledge of you, let me be worthilie
condemned of ingratitude, if I doo not acknowledge
this great fauour to my Fréend, which I account as déere
as doone to my selfe. After many courteous salutation
                           •
                        
passed on all sides, they set forwarde to Grisca with theyr
men and prouision: where wée will leaue them, to shewe
what afterward befell to the Soldane and his people. After
a long and verie dangerous tempest, with whirle-windes,
lightnings, and straunge apparitions, to the great discomfort
of all the Persians: one of the Princes, came to the Soldane,
saying.
                     My Lord, the lightning hath fallen so terriblie in the
Court, as all the Ladies of honour are 
                           •
                        laine therewith. An
other brought newes, that thrée partes of the soldiours,
which conducted Tryneus and Aurecinda foorth of the Cittie,
lay all slaine in the rough tempest. While these strange
mishappes were discoursing, Aurecinda entred the Chamber,
saying. Now soldane maist thou behold thy sinne▪ Séest
thou not that the celestiall spirits, haue reuenged our wrong
with the death of thy people? and for my escape I r
                           •
                        nder
thanks to the highest, not to thée that gaue my life to the
fire, yet much better would my death haue contente
                           •
                         mée,
then to liue without him whose absence is my torment: and
did not the hope of his life giue mee some comfort, thou

shouldest perceiue how little I estéeme of my life. Then
entred the Quéene Zephira, and she falling at the Soldanes
féete, thus began. Ah my Lord, the dishonour you haue this
day done mée is vnspeakeable. Haue my deserts béene so
simple in your eyes, that I might not intreate the libertie
of one Knight, who this day (I feare) hath perished by
your ingratitude? Neuer shall I sée those noble Knights againe,
whose liues haue béene endaungered for my welfare.
Ah my Lorde, if you looke into the weight of your offence,
you shall perceyue my teares are not shedde without
great reason.
                     Madame, quoth the Soldane, and you faire Sister, at
this time excuse my fault committed, and patientlie beare
what hath happened: for I vowe to you by the fayth of a
Prince, that I will make sufficient amendes for my trespasse.
When hée now thought to bée no further troubled,
his Sister Lyzanda entred mad and raging, and snatching
his Fauchion from his side, said. Sée villaine, sée what happeneth
by thy commaundement, one of thy Sisters is for
euer defamed, and the other will presently and her life before
thée. Héerewith shée st
                           ••
                        d the weapon to her heart, and
felt downe dead at the Soldans féets, to the no little sorrow
of his Maiestie, and all that were present: but Zephira,
causing the bodie to bée taken away, the Soldane commanded
she should be honourablie buried, and erecting a goodlie
Tombe of Marble ouer her graue, caused the maner of her
death to be thereon described. Afterward, by the counsell of
the Lords of Persia, hee sent the Prince Tomano, and the
straunge Knights, all the riches and treasure they had left
behinde them: the Princesse Aurecinda remaining in continuall
heauinesse, and within short time shée felt her selfe to
be conceiued with 
                           〈◊〉
                        . Héere in shée somewhat comforted
her selfe, though Fortune would not suffer her to enioy
the companie of her Fréend, yet one day shée hoped to
sée his liuely image: which at the time appoynted by Nature
shée did, béeing deliuered of the goodlyest male Childe

that euer was séene in Persia, naming him Ryfarano, wh
                           •
                        
carried the beautifull complexion of his Mother, as hee did
the hardinesse and magnanimitie of his Father.
                  
                  
                     Chap. LVII.
                     
                        Howe Palmerin and Trineus hauing soiourned a while at
Grisca with the king Abimar, departed to the Isle of Malfada,
where by the meanes of Dulacco and Palmerin, all
the enchauntments were finished.
                     
                     
                        BY the way as the Princes rode towards
Grisca, Palmerin vsed these spéeches to
Trineus. Howe happie is the Prince
that giues credit to good counsell, and
will not be led by flatteries, or subiect
himselfe to his own passions? and how
vnfortunate are they that fall into the
the contrarie? Can ye haue a better example héere of then
the trayterous Soldane? who first (causelesse) disquieted the
good King Ab
                              •
                           mar, and afterwarde at his sisters motion, I
imprisoned his Friend: for your good successe héerein my
Lord, you must thanke Muzabelino, and the Prince Tomano,
whose power was so readie to defende you. Tryneus remembring
his follies past, was still so ashamed thereof,
as hee could make no aunswere, wherefore Palmerin thus
spake againe.
                     Why? my Lorde, hath the imprisonment for fayre
Aurecinda strooke you dumbe? leaue this bashfulnesse to
Women, and remember your former courage. Stoute
Hercules, whose honors are yet so rise in memorie, did not
hée for the loue of Iole, weare feminine garments, and spin

among women? Did not Achilles the like, when hée was
with his faire friend in the Courte of King Lycomedes,
Marke Anthonie the Romaine Emperor, did not he follow
Cleopatra before Octauius, although his armie on the Sea
was two folde the number of his enemies? And you, for a
little familiar loue to a yong Princesse, who conquered
you onely by 
                           〈…〉
                         sute, remaine thus confounded.
Doo you imagine your selfe to excell in strength, prowesse,
and knowledge, Hercules, Achilles, and the Emperour Anthonie?
                     
                     Alas déere Brother, aunswered Tryneus, well may you

                           〈◊〉
                         of your especiall graces, béeing able to tryumph ouer
co
                           •
                        cupis
                           •
                        ence, but so yrkesome is my offence in mine owne
conceit, as I thinke myselfe vnworthie to be séene among
men of vertue. What shall I say to my Agriola, when
she shall vnderstand my hainous offence? howe shall I dare
to present my selfe before her? For that, saide Palmerin,
we shall doo well enough, but I would it were so welcome
to passe, that we were with her to abide her censure. Continuing
these spéeches, they arriued at Grisca, where the king
béeing aduertised of their comming, came to méete them
                           •
                        
vsing these words at their gracious enter
                           ••••
                        ment. Righ
                           •
                        
welcome are ye my noble Friendes, no maruaile though
the Soldane sought to wrong you, remembring howe for
my sake you vsed him in the battaile. In sooth my Lord, aunswered
Palmerin, well doth your nobilitie deserue our seruice,
and his iniurious dealing sharpe reuenge, which happily
héereafter hée may féele to his cost, vsing strangers so
vnhonorably: but héere we present your Daughter Belsina
to your Maiestie, after whose marriage al these troubles
began.
                     Welcome faire Daughter, saide the King, much better
then my so
                           •
                        ne hath béene to your Fathers Court. When
my Father, quoth the Princesse, hath considered his furie,
doubtlesse he will be heartly sorrie therefore, and make satisfaction
for any thing mis
                           •
                        oone, till then I beséech your

highnesse to conceiue the best. And according as the Princesse
had spoken it came to passe, for within thrée dayes after,
the Soldane sent Ambassadours to the King Abimar,
to excuse the imprisonment of Trineus, and the sentence of
death hée gaue against him, sending to him and Palmerin
all their treasure and sumptuous presents, in signe of satisfaction,
and to his Daughter Belsina and the Prince Tomano,
he sent sixe Camelles laden with gold, as the dowry of
their marriage.
                     Nowe are Palmerin and Trineus wearie of theyr so
long stay from their friendes, wherefore they desired
leaue of the king to depart, who séeing hée coulde not well
intreate their longer aboade, right thankfully yéelted to
their request, giuing them all things néedefull for theyr
iourney, as Horses, Armour, men, money, and diuers other
gifts of inestimable value. For which kindnesse they humbly
thanked his maiestie, refusing to trouble themselues
with such riches in their trauaile, nor would they take that
the Soldane sent them, or what they brought from the ten
Ro
                           •
                        ks, except the Birde and the two Crownes, giuing all
the rest to Muzabelino, desiring him to continue them in
remembrance. My Lordes, quoth he, no seruice can bee lost
that is doone to such liberall Princes, as nowe you giue mée
good occasion to confesse, and though both I and mine should
spend all our following daies in your seruice, yet can wée
not recompence the verie least of your courte
                           ••
                        es, recommending
my sonne Bellechino once more to you my Lorde
in hope he will prooue a loyall and faithfull Seruant, otherwise
I could part his head from his shoulders in your presence.
                     And because the way you brought Madame zephira,
is verie long, trouble some, and dangerous: I 
                           〈…〉
                        
Shippe for you, which without any perrill shall
spéedily carrie you to Malfada, and a yong Knight my brother
haue I appointed Pilot therein, who 
                           〈…〉
                         you
howe to finish all the enchauntments in the Isle, 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        
I desire you to order the matter with the King
Maulerino, that my Brother may haue the gouernment
thereof after your departure. Be
                           •
                        éeue me noble Friende,
aunswered Palmerin, your Sonne will I intreate as well
be
                           •
                        éemes him, and your Brother shall not onely haue the
charge of the Isle, which I will fréely giue him, but I will
so worke with the Brother to Zephira, that he shall endow
him with greater possessions. So taking theyr leaue of all
the Courtiers, M
                              •
                           zabelino brought him to the Shippe,
wherein they were no sonner entred, but it presently cut
through the waters with such violence, as they were verie
quickly come to Malfada. They going on shore, Dulacco
Brother to Muzabelino, demaunded of the Prince Trineus,
if he had the Ring he founde in the Cuppe at the Castle
of the tenne Rocks. I haue it on my finger sir, aunswered
Tryneus. Let vs thrée enter the Isle, saide Dulacco, as
for you Bellechino and Colmelio, stay you in the shippe till
you heare the sounde of a Cornet, and then may you safely
venture on the land.
                     
                        Dyardo standing in one of the Turrets in the Castle,
sawe when the shippe came and cast Anker, wherefore hée
expected if any durst come foorth thereof on the shore, and
so amazed hee was that the thrée knights were not transformed,
as till Palmerin spake to him, hee knewe not what
to imagine, but afterward he made hast downe, and letting
downe the Bridge, came and embraced him, saying. Welcome
is my noble Lorde to Malfada, haue you learned or
brought any remedy with you, whereby to recouer your
Friendes héere enchaunted? in happie houre did you bestow
your labour, if so it came to passe, but what may these two
knights 
                           •
                        ee that come in your companie? The one is the
Prince Trineus, quoth Palmerin, whom I so long time
sought for, and the other is the man that must giue vs assistance.
                     After many friendly embracings, Palmerin demaunded
what was become of the two 
                           〈◊〉
                         he left there.

My Lord saide Dyardo, they remaine prisoners 
                           〈…〉
                        
for the hard spéeches they gaue you. So went they
all to the prison, where Palmerin demanded which of them
had the Key of the enchaunted Tower: but they continuing
in their former obstinacie and mallice, would not aunswere
one word. False harlots, quoth Palmerin, why speak
                           •
                        
ye not? if you giue me not the Key quickly, all your forcerie
shall not saue your liues. Then béeing fearefull of death,
presently fell on their knées, and one of them taking the

                           •
                        ey foorth of her pocket, opened the 
                           〈◊〉
                         of the Tower,

                           〈◊〉
                        .
                     Enter Knight, I hope thou wilt repent th
                           •
                         hastine
                           ••
                        e▪
                        Palmerin and his thrée companions went in, where they
behelde a huge I doll of 
                           〈◊〉
                        , holding a Bowe with an
arrow readie 
                           〈◊〉
                         to shoote: by him hung a 
                           〈…〉
                        ,
and on the other side a faire Booke. My Lord,
said Dulaceo, we must haue both the Cornet and the booke
                           •
                        
and if you 
                           〈◊〉
                         in getting them, no one aliue can ende the
enchauntments, my God will strengthen me, sayd Palmerin,
so 
                           〈◊〉
                         his Sword, and couering himselfe with his

                           〈…〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     Afterward hee went to bid Agriola and Laurana good
morrow, and then comming to Frysoll, the king of Sparta,
and Olorico, who were all pleasantly disc
                           •
                        ursing together
in their Chamber, hee saide to them. Assure
                           •
                        ly my good
friendes, if fortune had béene so aduerse to me, that I could
not haue found Tryneus, or the meane to deliuer you from
the enchauntment, I had giuen my farewell to Armes, riches,
and honor, and would haue haunted those paths where
neuer 
                           〈…〉
                        . For with what face could I approch the
presence of my sister and Aunt, hauing lost them whome
they liue onely to loue. And you noble Prince Olorico,
haue iust occasion to complaine on me, that haue caused
you to endure such paine and trauaile: but in recompence
of this ouer great wrong, I will cause you to enioy her
whom you haue so long faithfully lou
                           •
                        d, and so soone as I
am arriued at Constantinople, I will send Ambassadours to
my Lord the Soldane, that he may accept you as his sonne
in my stéede.
                     My Lorde, aunswered Olorico, the honour you haue
doone me in accepting my companie, I account to excéede al
other curtesies, and though for a time I haue béene vnfortunate,
I take it patiently, assuring you by the word of a
Prince, that I imagine the man not woorthie to taste the
swéete, that cannot abide to féele the sower. By this time
are Palmerins Letters come to the King Maulerino, who
hauing vnderstood their contents, ioyfull of Palmerins returne,
and of his good fortune in finishing the enchauntments,
hee came presently with his traine to Malfada,
where to discourse the pleasure on each side conceiued, the
honourable and gracious curtesies bestowed, with all the
especiall fauours besée
                           •
                        ing a king and so woorthie personages,
is farre beyonde my capacitie, and therefore I referre
it to your gentle consideration. But at Palmerins intreatie,
Dulacco was made Lorde and chéefe Gouerno
                           •
                        r of
Malfada, and diuers other territories néere adioyning,

which mooued Palmerin thus to thanke the King. Séeing
your maiestie for thy sake, hath bestowed this Istance on
my woorthie good friende, to the ende that the name of the
wicked Malfada may be vtterly raced forth, let me intreate
that it may 
                           〈…〉
                         in the ende to their n
                           •
                        
little comfort.
                     Let it be, quoth the King, as you haue appointed, and
whosoeuer hencefoorth 
                           〈…〉
                        . After warde the King accompanied
Palmerin and his friendes to their Shippes,
and there committed them to their prosperous voyage: so
Palmerin, his seauen 
                           〈◊〉
                        , the two Princesses, with
his Squires Bellech 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         and Col
                              ••
                           elio, 
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
other shippe well appointed, so hoysing saile, with a merrie

                           •
                        ale of winde they 
                           〈…〉
                        .
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. LVIII.
                     
                        How Palmerin and his companions sayling on the Sea, met
with Ptolome: and of the honourable entertainment the
Emperour Florendos, and the Ladies made them, when
they arriued at Constantinople.
                     
                     
                        THrée dayes sayled our Knights without
anie aduenture, and on the fourth, as
Phoebus gan enter his Chariot, to display
his golden beames on his Uncle
Neptunes regions, Palmerin standing
alo
                           •
                        ton the decke, espied a great Carricke,
which with full saile made haste
towards them, and by the Banners he
discerned that it was of Turkie, wherefore he cried to his
companions to arme themselues. Suddenly were they all
come alo
                           •
                        t armed, and the hundred knights in the other ship
were likewise in rea
                           •
                        inesse, when the Carricke being come
néere them, they might behold the Turks strongly prouided,
and Ptolome their Captaine brauely encouraging them. At
length they bu
                           •
                        keled togither, and a daungerous fight began
betwéene them, so that seuen of the King Maulerinos
Knights were slaine, the King of Sparta sore wounded
by Ptolome, and Dyardo in great perill of his life. When
Palmerin saw the King of Sparta fall, and that the Moores
had daungerouslie hurt diuerse of his Fréends, fearing the
King was slaine, hée came to Ptolome, and after manie
sharpe strokes on either side, at last got him downe, when
pulling his Helmet furiouslie from him, thinking to haue
smitten off his head, Ptolome cried: Kill me not sir Knight,

for I yéelde my selfe to thée, Palmerin knowing his fréend,
sayd to his companions and the rest. Giue ouer my fréends
and fight no longer, for false fortune hath too much deluded
vs.
                     Ah, worthi
                           •
                         
                        Ptolome, why haue I dealt so hardly with
thée? is it possible that any man may bee likened to mée in
mishap? no sooner am I out of one, but presently I fall into
another: by heauen (déere Fréende) if I had slame thée,
right soone woulde I haue béene reuenged on my selfe. Sée
then, swéet Ptolome, how Palmerin gréeues for his offence,
more then if he had lost the best limme on his bodie. When
Ptolome behelde his Friend Palmerin, and by him the noble
Prince Tryneus, embracing them, he said. O Sauiour
of the world, howe highly hast thou this day fauoured mée,
permitting mée to finde my déerest Fréendes: then they
brought him to the Princesse Agriola, in her Cabin, who
was not a little glad to beholde the man, that endured with
her some part of miserie, and Colmelio was ioyfull to behold
Sir Ptolome, in that their hap was to bée parted when
they were ledde to be solde as 
                           •
                        laues: but Agriola woulde
néedes heare all his fortunes, since the first time of their
separation, which hée and Colmelio trulie recounted. Beléeue
me Ptolome, said Palmerin, I sée wée all haue had
our shares in aduersitie, and hardlie can we iudge whose
wrong hath béene greatest: but howe came you thus to bée
Captaine among the Turks? My Lord, quoth he, the Princesse
Alchidiana bought me, and charged mée to séeke you,
both by Sea and Lande: and for my defence gaue mee fortie
Knights, of whom there nowe remaines but ten aliue.
That Ladie am I highlie behol
                           •
                        ing to, sayde Palmerin, and
for the wrong I haue done her by the death of her Knights,
I will excuse my selfe by an honourable Ambassade, when I
shall send the Prince Olorico to her againe. And that thou
Ptolome maist knowe some of my good happe, vnderstande
that I haue founde my Father and Mother, who are Florendos,
the King of Macedon, and Gr
                              •
                           ana the Daughter

and 
                           •
                        eyre to the Emperour of Greece. I did euer perswade
my selfe, quoth Polome, that your discent was of royall linage:
but I intreate you for my sake, that these Knights
which your men haue taken, may be gentlie vsed, and enioy
their libertie. Palmerin calling them to him, said. For
Ptolome his sake that was your Captaine, and her loue
that commaunded you to trauaile with him, I wish to you
as to my selfe: yet shall you all go with mée to Constantinople,
that you may helpe to conduct the Prince Olorico
backe againe, whom I meane to send with you to your Mistresse.
                     We abide my Lord (quoth they) at your direction, and
willingly obey your will, in that wée haue knowne howe
déerelie the Soldane loued you, and better fortune coulde
not befall vs, then so luckilie to méete with you, and the
Prince Olorico: as for our Companions that are s
                           •
                        aine,
there is no remedie, for such mishaps are common where
Fortune 
                           •
                        rowneth. So sailed they on fréendlie togither,
and on the Sea we will leaue them, to tell you of the return
of the Ambassadour Maucetto to the Soldane of Babylon,
who hearing that the Persian had refused to assist him, was
somewhat offended thereat, but when he saw that Palmerin
had written, he pacified himselfe, saying. Ah gentle Palmerin,
hadst thou béene in the battell at Constantinople, I
had not néeded to demaunde helpe of him whom I iudged
my Fréend: but séeing Fortune hath showne her selfe so
contrarie, I will not attempt anie thing from which thou
disswadest me.
                     
                        Maucetto declared, that Palmerin had likewise sent a
Letter to the Princesse Alchidiana, which hee commaun
                        
                           •••
                        
him presentlie to carrie her: no sooner had she read the
Letter, and thereby vnderstoode his knightly déedes of

                           〈◊〉
                        , but embracing the Ambassadour, thus spake.
Maucetto, neuer couldest thou haue brought mee better
newes, thou of the man whose name flourisheth in all 
                           〈…〉
                        
Letter, written by the hand of the most perfect

Knight liuing, full char
                           •
                        e and choisly will I kéepe thée.
Ah Ptolome, whom my noble Fréend loues so déerely, thée
haue I sent in daungerous hazarde of thy life: but may I
once sée thée againe, thou shalt perceiue my loue for Palmerins
sake.
                     Happie art thou Princesse Zephira, hauing with thée
the myrror of mankinde. My Lord, quoth shée, (as though
Palmerin had béene present) willt thou wrong thy selfe so
much as to tarrie with her? Dare the Soldans Sisters
vaunt that they loue thée? They be faire, as I vnderstand,
but not so faire that thou shouldest refuse me for thē. What
haue I said? doubtlesse matter to mine owne reproach, for
if thou wouldest, the kingly offers of my Father, and my
importunate intreattes could no way mooue thée: hardlie
may the Persians preuaile with thée, especiallie in such a
weightie cause as loue is. Maucetto, what sayest thou? is
Lord Palmerin like to stay long in Persia with the Soldans
Sisters? No Madame, quoth he. I heard him 
                           〈◊〉
                         verie often
that he woulde depart thence before a Moneth was expired.
                     In these and such like spéeches they continued, wherin
wee purpose to leaue them, for by this time is Palmerin
and his Fréendes arriued in the Hauen of Constantinople,
and Colmelio is sent before to the Pallace, to aduertise
the Emperour of these ioyfull tydings. As Colmelio entered
the great Hall, the 
                           〈◊〉
                         man he mette was his Father
Gerrard, who was newly made Lord Chamberlaine to the
King Florendos: wherefore falling on his knée before him,
he said. Father, 
                           •
                        ittle did I thinke to finde you exalted to
such honou
                           •
                        , happie was the day when you 
                           〈◊〉
                         Prince
Palmerin, and much more 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        
you shall heare matter of maruaile. 
                           〈…〉
                        
the Emperour with the King Florendos 
                        
                           〈…〉
                         Hall, an
                           •
                        
all the Ladies going to heare 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        Gerrard thus spake to his highnesse. My Lord, sée héere my
Sonne Colmelio, who long time hath trauailed in seare
of Prince Palmerin, hee hath some 
                           〈…〉
                        
to deliuer to your Maiestie. Right welcome is 
                           〈…〉
                        
the Emperour, say what thou 
                           〈◊〉
                        , my fréend, 
                           〈…〉
                        
libertie.
                     Mightie Emperour, sayd Colmelio, your Son Prince
Palmerin 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         arriued in the Hauen, and with 
                           〈…〉
                        
Prince Tryneus, Sonne to the Emperour of 
                           〈◊〉
                        ,
the good Knight Sir Ptolome, the fiue Princes which
went with him from Macedon, the two Princesses of England
and Durace, with diuerse other vnknowne to me: and
saluting your Maiestie with his humble dutie, intreateth
that 
                           〈…〉
                        
and they may come to kisse your 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        Florendos and the Ladies, were 
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     Long liue your Maiestie in health and happinesse, here
may you beholde the man, for whom my Lorde Palmerin
your Sonne, hath endured such paine and trauaile. The

                           〈◊〉
                         perceiuing by his spéeches that hée was Trineus
the Prince of Allemaigne, thus aunswered. I hope my
Lorde, that you will beare with mine age and weakenesse,
which hinders me from entertaining you as fain I would,

but I beséech you to aryse, for it ill beséemes so great a
Prince, to humble himselfe in such sort. Florendos and Griana
(in this time) welcommed their Sonne, Arismena the
King of Sparta, Armida her Frysoll, and the olde Emperour
and Empresse graciously entertained Agriola and Laurana,
each absent Fréend so embraced and welcommed, as all
the day was spent onelie in those ceremonies. The next
morning Palmerin dispatched his Dwarffe Vrbanillo to
the Emperour of Allemaigne, that he and Polynarda might
vnderstand these long expected newes: and afterward comming
to Sir Frysoll, he sayd to him. Brother, our Mother
hath e
                           •
                        riched vs with a Sister since our departure, and my
Sister Armida me with two Nephewes, I pray you let vs
go sée them.
                     Héereupon the Nurses brought the yong Princes, the

                           •
                        ldest of them being named Dytrius, and the yongest Belear,
the yong Princesse, Daughter to Florendos and Griana,
was called Denisa, so faire and comely were the infants,
as if Nature had studied to make them most exquisite. Beléeue
me Sir Frysoll, quoth Palmerin, if my sister continu
                           •
                        
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         she begins, the Realme of Hungaria shall hardly want

                           〈◊〉
                        : what? two at a blow, hir Ladie it is a 
                           ••
                        gne of good

                           〈◊〉
                        . And when you are entred the estate of wedlocke,
answered Frysoll, if your linage increase according to the
greatnesse of desire, Madam Polynarda shall be as well sped

                           〈◊〉
                         her neighbors. Thus iested the Princes togither, attending

                           •
                        ewes of 
                           〈◊〉
                         courrier, that went with Vrbanillo to the
Emperor of Allemaigne, 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         at that time was at Vienna.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. LIX.
                     
                        How the Duke of Mensa, and the Countie of Redona, conducted
the prince Olorico into Assiria, where hee was
espoused to the princesse Alchidiana.
                     
                     
                        FOr the space of a Moneth and mor
                           •
                        ,
Palmerin, Trineus and Agriola, soiourned
at Constantinople, till all thing
                           •
                        
were prepared for them to 
                           〈◊〉
                        
towardes Allemaigne: during which
time, Palmerin shewed such signes of
loue to the Prince Olorico as he wold
seldome be 
                           〈…〉
                         that more and
more his amourous passions encreased, hée sayde. Déere

                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     Nor doo I this (swéete Prince) as enuious of your
companie, or that I stand in feare of the Soldane, but onelie
to kéepe my promise, which was, that I would ayde you
to my 
                           •
                        ttermost, to accomplish the marriage

                           〈…〉
                        , for whom I see your 
                           〈…〉
                        
troubled. My Lorde, aunswered Olorico, if euer
perfect loue might be discerned in a Princes heart, doubtlesse
it is most amplie 
                           〈◊〉
                         in yours. Where you can

finde in anie Historie, se
                           •
                        blable affection? or that a Christian
would so fauour his enemie, that is contrarie to him
in law and 
                           〈…〉
                         that so great

                           •
                         Prince would 
                           〈…〉
                         to accept as his
companion in Armes, the poore Sonne of the King of Arabia,
practising for his good, not the suretie alone of the
Christians, but the alliance of the greatest Lord in Asia.
                        
                           〈…〉
                         Lorde, since of your accustomed good

                           〈…〉
                         this offer, of simple iudgement
should I shewe my selfe to refuse it. I accept your gracious
kindnesse, and assure your selfe of his readie seruice, whom

                           〈…〉
                        
to the Prince of Greece.
                        
                           〈…〉
                         the Soldane of Babylon in

                           〈…〉
                        .
                     
                        
                           The Letter of Prince Palmerin, to the
great Soldane of Babylon.
                           
                              
                                 〈…〉
                              
                              
                              
                                 〈…〉
                              
against all your enemies. Contrariwise, if you
will follow your former opinion, wee must defende our
selues so well as we may. And for I can no more (with 
                                 〈◊〉
                              )
forsake my Cou
                                 •
                              trey▪ Parents and friendes, to returne
againe to your seruice: I sende you the Prince Olorico, a
Knight both valiant and hardie as anie in all Turkie, without
exception of your Court, the great Turks, or the Soldane
of Persia, and he to serue you in my 
                                 〈◊〉
                              . Desiring
your highnes by that affection which you did beare me wh
                                 •
                              
                              ̄
the Prince 
                                 〈…〉
                              , that you
accept him as your Sonne, and giue him in marriage your
Daughter Alchidiana, as the man that hath best deserued
her, if euer Prince might merit 
                                 •
                               Ladies loue by bountie
and choyse chiualrie. So shall you performe an action of

                                 〈◊〉
                               honour, and 
                                 〈◊〉
                               me continually to acknowledge
this kindnesse.
                           Your Palmerin d'Oliua.
                        
                     
                     Another Letter he wrote to the Princesse Alchidiana, the
tenure whereof was thus.
                     
                        
                           The Letter of Prince Palmerin,
to the Princesse of Assiria.
                           TO you Madam Alchidiana, daughter to the great Soldane
of Babilon, Palmerin d'Oliua your knight, sendeth
health condigne to your magnificence. Madame,
sending to your Father the Duke of Mensa, and the Count

                                 〈…〉
                              
                              
to the Crowne of Arabia. You know faire Madame, that
neuer had he come to your Fathers Court, had not the perillous
battaile against the proude Brother of Amarano
prouoked him, nor would be haue aduentured the dangers
of the Sea, but in hope (at length) to purchase your gracious
loue. For these considerations, good Madame, entertaine
him into your sober thoughts, who hath no more feared
to spend his bloud for your sake, and thrust his life into
infinite dangers, then I haue doone to sette my hande and
penne to this paper. I know that your grace, beautie, and
great 
                                 〈◊〉
                              , commandeth the chéefest Prince on the earth
for your Husband, and (to shéelde my selfe from blame) I
know that I promised you my seruice. When I should returne
from Constantinople: but how hath it fallen out? your
Palmerin is knowne by them that haue like authoritie ouer
him, as your loue hath of the Prince Olorico. I am a
Christian, a stranger, Sonne to the simple king of Macedon,
and the Daughter to the Emperour of Greece, beside,
of verie little or no desert at all. Hee is of your Lawe, your
Neighbour, sonne to the rich king of Arabia, and a Prince
of as high vertue as euer was in my companie: witnesse
whereof he made on the Phrigians, and in an hundred places
since in my presence. Wherefore Madame, if noblenesse
of hart, and loyall loue deserue so great an alliance. I know
no Prince this day liuing more worthie then he. Assuring
you withall, that more gladly would I die th
                                 •
                               death, then
sollicite the cause of him, whome I would not imagine vnworthie
my person.
                           Your Knight, Palmerin d'Oliua.
                        
                     
                     When he had sealed these Letters, hee gene them to
to the 
                           〈◊〉
                         who accompanied with fiftie Grecian
                        
                           〈…〉
                         where their shippes was 
                           〈◊〉
                        ,
after them followed the King Maulerinos hundred
Knights▪ the number being supplied with other, instead

of them that were slaine, and after them went the
Knights that came with Ptolome, then came the Prince
Olorico and Palmerin, deuising by the way on manie matters.
                     My Lord, quoth Palmerin, I imagine you nowe remember
our taking by the Admirall Olimaell, and feare
that the like mishappe may againe befall you: I therfore (as
your guarde) giue you the hundred Knights I had of the
King Maulerino, and fiftie Knights naturally borne in
Greece, as able in Armes as any other whatsoeuer, intreating
you to holde me excused, if I giue you not such estate as

                           〈◊〉
                         your nobilitie. Woorthie Palmerin, answered the
Prince, the greatest Lord that is, might well content himselfe
with the honourable companie you haue giuen mee.
And did not extreame passions ouer-rule me, and call mée
hence to her seruice whom I haue onely chosen, I woulde
renounce Arabia and the Lawe of Mahomet, onely to liue
in your companie. But in what place my fortune guides me
héereafter, neither Parents or Friendes shall hinder mee
to saie that I am your vowed and affectionate seruaunt.
The like doo you conceiue of me, sayde Palmerin. So with
teares they left each other, Olorico and all his compani
                           •
                        
béeing aboord, such fauourable winde and weather they had,
as without any danger they safely arriued where the Soldane
lay: and first the tenne knights went 
                           •
                        n shore, they
that were left of the companie which the Princesse Alchidiana
gaue to Ptolome, and comming before the Princesse,
saide.
                     Madame, your Knight sir Ptolome humbly saluteth
you by vs, sending your excellencie this Letter. Beside,
there is nowe arriued at the porte, the Prince O
                              •
                           orico, and
certaine Ambassadours from the valiant Palmerin, Prince
of Greece and Macedon, who come on his behalfe to kiss
                           •
                        
your hand. The Princesse hauing heard these newes, and
read the Letter which Ptolome sent, containing the great

                           〈◊〉
                         fortunes of Palmerin, was inwardly so rauished with

delight, as a long space she remained silent, but at 
                           〈◊〉
                        
brake foorth into these spéeches. Ah Fortune, how well
thou knowest to change matters which way thou plea
                        
                           •
                        est,
not according to the wil and desire of passionate minds,
but on the behalfe of the highest in perfections. Ah Palmerin,
the man whom my heart shall euer loue, howe may
faire Polinarda iustly tearme her selfe happie, hauing thee
for her Lord and loue, considering that the beautie and graces
of so manie Ladies conquered with thy deserts nor the
sumptuous riches continually offered thée, could once diuer
                           •
                        
thee from thy first affection. Ah Alchidiana, that which
hath made so many Ladyes and knights fortunate, in compassing
the onely issue of their desires, dooth now remaine
for 
                           •
                        hy torment alone, making thée the most vnhappie creature
vnder the Sunne. Agriola, Griana, Arismena, Armida,
and Zeplura, are they (swéete Knight) by thy meanes in
assuraunce of theyr loues. Trineus, Frysoll, the King of
Sparta, Maulerino, Abimar, Tomano, and 
                           •
                        iuers other,
are their Realmes quieted, and their Ladyes triumphing
in their ioyes, onely by the price of thy bloud and daunger

                           〈◊〉
                         thy life? And must I alone remaine disgraced, for euer

                           〈◊〉
                        , hauing lost the knight I loued a
                           •
                         my soule?
While the princesse continued these complaints, the prince
Olorico and the Ambassadoures were come before the soldane,
and be
                           •
                        ng entertained by him with verie gracious

                           〈◊〉
                        , they presented the Letters from Palmerin,
which béeing read in presence of all his Lords, the Soladne
thus answered.
                     My Friends, I will impart these 
                           〈◊〉
                         to my Counsell
and my Daughter, and afterwarde make you answere
as I may. Héereuppon the Duke of Mensa, the Counte
                           •
                        
of Redona, and the Prince Olorico 
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
and soone after the Soldane sent for his daughter, thus
speaking to her. Daughter, our Princes thinke good, and
haue counselled mee to make peace with Palmerin, who at

                           〈…〉
                         of Greece, and requireth in 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        
of our truce, that I should giue you in marriage to the renowned
Prince Olorico. Aduise your selfe hereon, for Palmerin
hath earnestly intreated it by writing, and héere I
haue a letter for you, I think to the same effect. The Princesse
hauing read the Letter, returned this answere. It is
verie true my Lord, his request to mee is for the selfe same
cause: séeing therefore it liketh you, and the Princes of our
Realme think it conuenient, in respect of the common profit
and good may ensue thereby, it is not for me to make deniall.
                     Right glad was the Soldane of this aunswere, wherefore
he saide, go then faire Daughter and 
                           〈◊〉
                         your selfe
accordingly, for after Di
                           •
                        ner in the presence of the Ambassadours,
you shall be affiaunced to the Prince. Olorico
since his arriuall had talked but little with his Ladie,
wherefore hée nowe determined to go sée her, and meeting
her as she returned from the Soldane, he saluted her with
great reuerence, but the Princesse 
                           •
                        eig
                           •
                        ing that she knew
nothing yet of their marriage, thus spake to him. I vnderstand
my Lorde, that your companion Palmerin hath altogether
forsaken vs. Madame, quoth the Prince, if hee haue
abandoned your companie, it is onely by the fauour of Fortune,
who hath béene a greater Friend to him then any
man beside: yet cannot the great honours and possessions
he now enioyeth, make him forgette you, in that at my departure
he said, for e
                           •
                        er he would liue and die your knight.
God kéepe him, said the Princesse, where euer he is, for still
is my heart vowed to his remembrance, and gladly can I
doo as 
                           〈◊〉
                         for him as for my Brother, though his present

                           〈…〉
                         from my seruice. Such is his
trust 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        
present you my heart, that neuer since the day of our departure
from Constantinople, hath enioyed any rest, béeing absent
from the onely meane of my comfort. If then I haue
liued all this while in some hope, by remembraunce of your
excéeding graces and courtesies, beyonde all other should I
account my selfe in happinesse, if now at length you receiue
me as your Seruant. I receiue you, saide the Princesse, for
Palmerins sake, and for your owne deserts which haue béene
so worthie, requiting you with equall affection, so that you
denie mée not one request. Nothing shall you bée denied
(swéete Princesse) quoth hée, if by my life it may be compassed.
                     Nor will I demaunde any thing of so great value, said
she, this is the fauour you shall graunt me, héereafter when
time shal serue, that you wil conduct me to Constantinople,
there to behold the faire princesse Polynarda, and the magnificent
Court of noble Palmerin, in recompence whereof,
I giue my selfe to be your wife, and accept you as my Lord
and Husband. If Olorico was now well pleased, I referre
to your iudgements, wherefore confirming their promises,
by kisses and embracings, with solemne protestations and
irreuocable vowes, they departed thence to their Chambers.
                     After Dinner, the Princesse attired in most sumptuous
garments, came into the Hall with her waiting Ladies,
when the Soldane sent for the Ambassadours, and thus
spake to them. My Friendes, I now perceiue the man to
bee ouer foolish that trusteth in himselfe. I thought by my
power to destroy Greece, where on the contrarie my people
are destroyed. I thought to continue vnquenchabl
                           •
                         hatred
toward your Maister, and now I am constrained to graunt
him peace, yet not constrained, but by the worke of the
greatest God I am mooued so to doo, which in the presence
of all my Lordes I protest, and with as good will as hée

                           •
                        ooth d
                           •
                        maunde it. Sée then the power of that Maiestie,
which can 
                           〈◊〉
                         and conquer
                           •
                         where he lift, and I swear
                           •
                        
                        
to you by my Crowne, that the good fortune of Palmeri
                              •
                           
                        
contenteth me as well, as if he were mine owne sonne.
Mightie Soldane, answered the Duke of Mensa, if you resolue
to loue the worthie Prince Palmerin, both hée and his
will performe the like to you, and on his behalfe we promise
faithfully, that against all your enemies (Christendome excepted)
you shall be assured of his succour and assistance.
                     I request no better assurance, quoth the Soldane, then
this that he hath sent, and that you may witnesse I am his
faithfull Friendes: at this instant shall the peace be ratified
by all the Lordes and Princes here present, and to seale
the same, as he requested, I giue my daughter to the Prince
Olorico. Great ioy was generally made for this good agréement,
and the two louers were espoused together within
few dayes after: and the time being come for the Ambassadours
returne to Constantinople, Alchidiana sent diuer
                           •
                        
rich gifts to Palmerin and Polinarda, the like did the Soldane
and the Prince Olorico.
                     
                  
                  
                     Chap. LX.
                     
                        How Palmerin, Trineus, and Agriola, accompanied with many
great Lords and princes, went to the Emperor of Allemaigne
at Vienna, where great triumphs were made at
the celebrating of the marriage between Trineus and the
princesse Agriola.
                     
                     
                        SOone after the Prince Olorico, and
the Ambassadours of Greece were
gone towardes Assiria, Palmerin (although
the aged Emperour very much
disswaded him) made prouision for
his spéedy voyage to Allemaigne, and
hauing conducted the King of Sparta
                        
and his Aunt Arismena some parte of their way homeward,
at their returne to the Cittie of Constantinople, hée
came to the Duke of Pontus, saying. I remember the time
when you did cutte off the great Turks head, an acte deseruing
good and especiall recompence, and that you thereby
deliuered vs, and performed it at the motion of the Princesse
Laurana, her haue you loued euer since both on lande
and Sea, and her Countrey is not farre hence: will ye now
make her your Ladie and Wife? I promise ye my assistance
so farre as I can.
                     My Lord, aunswered the Duke, fearing to offend you,
I still deferred to mooue you in this cause, but seeing wee
are nowe so happily fallen into these tearmes, I will not
conceale the truth from you. In sooth my Lorde, when first
I sawe her, I loued her, and haue euer since continued in
this hope, that time at length would fauour my intent. It
sufficeth, saide Palmerin, and presently hée acquainted the
Emperour therewith, who thinking the match very méete
and conuenient, they were the next day married by the
Achbishop of Constantinople, and in short time after went
to take possession of their Duchie of Durace, where they
were receiued very honourably, and the whole state yéelded
vp into the Dukes hande.
                     When Palmerin sawe that the most parte of his companions
were departed, at the earnest intreataunce of the
Prince Trineus and Agriola, he set forward to Allemaigne,
accompanied with Frysoll and Armida, whome hée conducted
into the Realme of Hungaria, where Frysoll was crowned
King by reason of his Fathers decease: there went
with him like wise Diardo of Bohemia, the Prince Eustace,
Ptolome, and other Lords of great account▪ 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         good speed
they made in theyr iourney, as in short time they arriued
at Vienna, where the Emperour béeing aduertised of their
comming by the Dwarfe, came with his courtly trayne to
méete them, and taking his Sonne Tryneus in his armes,
said. I sée it is the will of God my Sonne, that héere after

I shall haue as great ioy by thée, as in thy long absence I
haue had gréefe and sorrow, all which I patiently put vp,
for the loue of thy brother, the noble Prince Palmerin, and
faire Agriola of England, that well deserues it. But in good

                           •••
                        th my Children, had you not come in so happie time, I
should haue bene driuen to meruailous fears. For the King
of Fraunce perceiuing, that I would not giue my daughter
in marriage to his eldest sonne, demaunded the King Recinde
of Spaine his daughter, who graunted his request:
so that they twaine, with the aide of the King of England,
haue leueyed such an Armie on the Sea, as neuer was the
like séene to passe the Rheine. But séeing you returned in
so good disposition, the lesse account I make of their angrie
menaces: yet are they the thrée principall Kings of Christendome.
                     My Lord answered Palmerin, be not you dismaide at
their enterprise, for ere manie dayes bee expired, I hope to
sée all matters quietly pacified, and that without anie effusion
of blood. The lesse is my doubt, quoth the Emperour,
in that with such good fortune you haue finished your intentions,
for nothing you begin but comes to luckie ende. Witnesse
héerof appeareth in the search of my Sonne Tryneus,
whom the best Knights in Christendome haue laboured
to finde: but all their trauaile I sée hath béene spent in vaine.
By this time they were come to the Pallace, where they
were graciously receiued by the Ladies. Alas my Fréendes,
said the Empresse, which of you shall I first embrace? Ah
my Sonne Tryneus, howe sorrowfull hast thou made mée
since thy departure from England? iust cause hast thou to
thanke the Heauens, who protected thée still in so manie
daungers, and forget not thy Brother Palmerin, who hath
endured such trouble for thy sake. Faire Daughter, quoth
she to the Princesse Agriola, welcome are you indeed. God
send you better fortune héereafter, then you haue had alreadie,
which yet hath bene a Touch-stone of your loyaltie.
But while these spéeches continued, howe the other two

Louers with piercing regard beheld eache other, and how
many gracious signes passed as secrete Ambassadours betweene
them. Polynarda was clad in such costly 
                           〈◊〉
                        
for the pleasure she conceiued since the Dwarffes 
                           〈◊〉
                        
at the Court, as shee seemed anoth
                           •
                        r Iuno, when shée
stood to abide the arbitr
                           •
                        ment of 
                           〈◊〉
                        , or like Voluptas f
                           •
                        llowing
her Mother Venus.
                     
                     But fearing least this amiable encounter, should decipher
some part of her former courtesies to her friend, which
as yet was vnknowne to any but Bryonella, she locked vp
all secrets with so swéet a kisse, as would haue contented the
rudest of the Gods, had it b
                           •
                        ne Vulcan or Neptune themselues.
And comming to salute the Princesse Agria
                              •
                           a sayd.
No meruaile (faire sister) if your loue wrought wonders in
my brothers minde, for vnfainedly I speake it, your exquisite
graces deserue the greatest seruice in the world. Alas Madame,
aunswered Agriola, if nature, or they that had the
charge of me in my youth, could haue painted me with such
beautie as I see in you, or enriched me with wisedome, able
to deuise with my Lord when he came to sée mee: then could
I haue said somewhat of the paines he hath taken for mée,
but I know my selfe so full of imperfections, as the loue hée
beares me procéedeth of his owne good nature, not by any
merit he can behold me. Then Palmerin kneeling before the
Emperour, said. I beseech you my Lord graunt me one request,
which shall be no way preiudiciall to your Maiestie.
Arise sir Palmerin, quoth the Emperour, aske what thou
wilt, and thou shalt haue it.
                     My Lord Tryneus, and the Princesse Agriola, saide
Palmerin, are religiously married betweene themselues, let
me intreate your highnesse to confirme it wit
                           •
                         open sol
                           •
                        mnization,
before the Duke of Mecaena héere present: whom
I meane to send into England, that he may resolue the King
howe himselfe was an eye witnesse of their marriage. The
Emperour liked so well of Palmerins motion, as soone after
the wedding was solemnized, and he comming to Bryonella,
                        
courteously taking her by the hand, said. My good friend
Brionella, I am now to be discharged of the promise I made
at my last being here: in witnesse whereof, I haue brought
your knight sir Ptolome, and him I commend to your further
fauour. So highly am I beholding vnto you my Lord,
quoth shée, as neuer shall I bee able to returne sufficient recompence:
but were we equall in ioy with the Prince Tryneus
and faire Agriola, then would I think no storme could
wrong vs.
                     
                        Palmerin at these words presently left her, and perswaded
the Emperour so well, as Ptolome and Brionella were
likewise espoused togither, when Palmerin conferring with
the Princesse Agriola, thus spake to her. Now may you
iudge Madame whether I deceiued ye or no, and if the estate
of my Lord Tryneus be any lesse then I told ye. Had I
not giuen faithfull credit to your spéeches, answered Agriola,
I would not haue forsaken my Parents and friendes so
rashly: but I hope they will pardon me, in that I haue done
nothing but to their honour. On the morrow, with excéeding
ioy and rare tryumphs, were Palmerin and Polinarda married
togither, and thus was long and faithfull loue worthily
requited. Ptolome was now created Duke of Saxon, and
Dyardo tooke his leaue to goe sée his wife Cordonya, whom
he had not heard of since the time he was taken by the Pirates.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. LXI.
                     
                        Howe Palmerin sent Ptolome Duke of Saxon (as his
Ambassador) to the King of France, and the Duke Eustace
of Mecaena, to the King of England, to treate of
the peace betweene them.
                     
                     
                        CErtaine dayes before the departure of
Dyardo toward Bohemia, Palmerin
in the presence of the Emperour and
all the Princes, gaue the charge of his
Embassade to the Duke Ptolome:
which he should deliuer not onely to the
most Christian King of France himself,
but also to his yongest sonne, who now
had espoused the Duchesse of Buroundie. So departed Ptolome
from Vienna, accompanied with many Lordes and
knights, and at length arriued at Digeon, where the Prince
L
                              •
                           wes being acquainted with the cause of his comming,
thus answered the Ambassadour.
                     My Lorde, sometime I had acquaintance in Fraunce,
with the most renowned Palmerin, and because hée is the
onely man of the worlde, to whom I owe all friendly affection,
I will perswade my Father to ioyne in peace with
him. Nowe was Ptolome in good hope that his trauaile
woulde sorte to successiue ende: wherefore they presently
iourneyed to the King, who as then was with his estates at
Paris, and hauing hearde Palmerins request, who nowe
was wedded to the Princesse Polynarda, and therefore his
intended warre with the Emperour, would extende to the
hurt of the man he loued, thus answered. Duke of Saxon, I

am sufficiently acquainted with the bountie of thy Maister,
and verie well I doo remember, that at his béeing in
Fraunce he combatted for his Ladie Polinarda: yet was I
ignoraunt till nowe of that hath happened. But leaste hée
should conceiue, that I séeke to make a commotion in Christe
                           •
                        dome,
let him enioy his Ladie and Wife in peace, although
shée was sometime promised to mine eldest Sonne,
reseruing the conditions of our amitie, that our first Nephewes
and Néeces may match togither in marriage, therby
to continue the honour of their predecessours. As for the
Kings of Spaine and England, who moued me to giue them
assistaunce, on there behalfe I can make you no certaine answere,
vntill my Messengers be returned home againe.
Gracious Lord, quoth Ptolome▪
                         I dare assure you in the
name of my Maister, that hée hath euermore estéemed your
fauour among the best Christian Princes, and will not refuse
the marriage betwéene your Children héereafter. And
this coniunction of your amitie, will cause that neither the
Kings of Spaine or England will séeke to molest him: but
with your highnesse ioyne in loue and friendship. With
this answer Ptolome returned to Vienna, where the Emperour
and Palmerin welcommed him with excéeding honour:
and by this time had the Duke Eustace taken landing
in England, where deliuering the summe of his charge
to the King, his highnesse returned him this answere. Although
my Lord Ambassadour, both your Maister and the
Prince Tryneus did me manifest dishonor, yet not to withstand
peace, which still ought to b
                           ••
                         preferred before warre,
I graunt his request, and will presently call home my
Garrisons, shaking hands with him in honourable concord.
As for the wrong doone to my Daughter, I am content to
excuse it, beléeuing that shée was not conueyed hence but
with her will: thanking the Prince for the honour he hath
done her, séeing she would leaue her Parents and friendes
so lightly. I thinke my gracious Lord, answered the Duke,
that when you consider what your Daughter hath done,

you will not touch her with want of witte or iudgement: for
in respect of the long enmitie betwéene the Emperour and
you, shée desired that her marriage might sort this happie
ende. Nor would she haue departed hence with the Prince
Tryneus, without a faithfull and resolued promise of marriage:
which is performed, with as great honour as euer was
done to the daughter of a King. Thinke you, quoth the King,
that had not the great friendship of Tryneus, (when against
his Fathers will, he came with Palmerin to assist me) quallified
the weight of mine anger against him, but I woulde
haue pursued the iniurie he did to me? yet did I referre his
seruice, to the iudgements of my Lords of England, who
perswaded me to reuenge, which you well perceiue as yet I
haue not done.
                     Prince Palmerin, quoth the Duke, is so vertuous, as
rather woulde hée haue runne on a thousande deathes, then
your daughters honour shoulde anie way haue béene impeached:
but béeing assured of this fortunate issue, both hée
and Tryneus aduentured as they did. And sorrie am not I,
said the King, that all things are come so well to passe, but
séeing we are entred thus farre in spéeche, tell mée (I pray
you) how Palmerin came to the knowledge of his Parents,
and howe hée finished the aduentures at the Castle of the
tenne Rockes, and the daungerous Isle of Malfada, which
neuer any Knight could compasse before? Then the Duke
rehearsed euerie accident, how amourous the great Turke
was on the Princesse Agriola, and each seuerall occasion as
they fell out: at which report, the Quéene with her Ladies
were present, who hearing the discourse of so straunge and
variable fortunes, said.
                     I thought my Daughter had learned more modestie,
then leauing her Fathers Court, to followe a Knight vnknowne
to her in straunge Countries: but séeing the ende
hath fallen out so well, hencefoorth I shall remaine in better
contentment, séeing a Prince of so great renowne hath now
espoused her.
                     
                        While this conference endured, the Duke earnestly
beheld the Princesse Sabinda, Daughter to the Prince of
Sansuega, and Néece to the Quéene: and of such excellent
grace and beautie he estéemed her, as forgetting the death
of his Father, who deceased since his departure from Allemaigne,
hée became so amourous of her, that he demaunded
of the Quéene if shée were her Daughter. Shée is not my
Daughter, quoth the Quéene, but the Daughter of my
Brother, the Princes of Sansuega.
                     
                     Right glad was the Duke thereof, and resolued to request
her of the King in marriage, who knowing the honourable
place he held among the Prince of Greece, and what
account Palmerin made of him, consented thereto, so that
within fewe dayes after they were espoused togither. Herevpon,
to accompany the Princesse, and to confirm the peace,
the King sent the Duke of Gaule, and another great Lorde
with them into Allemaigne, the Quéen likewise sent twelue
English Ladies to attend on her Daughter.
                     Thus returned the Duke of Mecaena to Vienna, where

                           〈◊〉
                         was worthily welcommed by the Emperour, Palmerin
and Tryneus, especially the yong Duchesse, and the Ambassadours
of England, by whom the peace was faithfully ratified
and confirmed.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. LXII.
                     
                        How Palmerin and Polinarda, departed from Vienna
toward Constantinople, where after the decease of the
aged Emperour Remicius, Palmerin was crowned Emperour
of Greece, and what ioy was made at the byrth
of Polinarda her first sonne.
                     
                     
                        AF
                           ••
                        er the Ambassadours of England
were returned home, Palmerin pereciuing
the Empire of Allemaigne was
in quiet, tooke his leaue of the Emperor,
minding to conduct his Polinarda to
Constantinople, not without manie
sorrowfull lamentations, of the mother
to forgo her daughter, and faire Agriola
her new acquainted sister, yet the Emperour pacified them
well inough, by shewing what benefit this contract would
be to Christendome, and so procéeded to his daughter in this
maner.
                     Thou goest Polinarda to the séate of a great Empire,
but more pleaseth mée the péerelesse name of Palmerin
d'Oliua thy husbands, then the regiment of such a
mightie Monarche. Farewell faire Daughter, continue
in faithfull loue and obedience, remembring the reuerende
honour a Wife oweth to her Husband. Polinarda hearing
with what earnest affection her Father spake, was so ouercome
with modest duetie of a Childe to her Father, as shée
was not able to aunswere one word: which Palmerin beholding,
kissed the Emperours hande, embraced Tryneus,
and tooke a courteous farewell of all the Ladies, commaunding

the Pages presently to bring away the Princesse 
                           〈◊〉
                        ,
saying to her. Madame, the longer you staie héere, the
greater will be your conceit of sorrow, by absence the griefe
will be forgotten: let vs then merely iourney to the Cittie
of Constantinople, where they that neuer sawe you wil reioyce
more at your comming, then all the Allemaignes can
sorrow for your departure. With like comfortable spéeches
Palmerin frequented his Ladie by the way, till at length
they entred the Realme of Hungaria, where Frysoll with
his chéefest Lords attended their comming, to whom Palmerin
in iesting, said.
                     Brother, I haue aduentured to bring your Sister Polinarda
into your Kingdome, take héede if you laie claime
to her now as sometime yée did, for I am readie to defende
her against whosoeuer dare. I perceiue my Lorde,(quoth
Frysoll) that you will haue my follie generally knowne, I
pray 
                           〈◊〉
                         let no such youthfull pranckes be nowe remembred:
for as you are the chéefest in chiualrie, so haue the
destenie giuen you a Ladie, whome no one in the whole
world may paragon. Well may it be said, that God and Nature
fore-pointed this match: nothing inferiour to louelie
Paris and faire Helena, or puissaunt Hector and wise Andromacha.
                     
                     
                        Frysoll accompanied them so farre as Alba, where
courteously parting from each other, Frysoll returned to his
Kingdome, and Palmerin soone after came to Constantinople,
where no litle ioy was made for his safe arriual, especially
for the Princesse Polinarda, who was a right welcome
Ladie into Greece, the olde Emperour prouiding such
deuises and tryumphes, as the Chronicles to this daye recorde
the memorie thereof. About tenne or twelue Monethes
after, Polynarda was deliuered of a goodly Sonne,
who was named Primaleon, whereat the good olde Emperour
so inwardly reioyced, as his spirit onely comforted
in the good fortune of his Sonnes, and fearing afterwarde
to sée anie sinister chaunce fall to them, departed this fraile

and transitorie life, whose death was signified thrée dayes
before, by the enchaunted Bird. His Funerall was performed
as beséemed so great an estate, and faine woulde Palmerin
haue had his Father the King Florendos crowned
Emperour, earnestly labouring the Princes in the cause.
But he desiring them to holde him excused, returned them
this answere.
                     Great offence were it to God my Friendes, that the
honour due to him, who gaue me libertie, defended my renowne,
and saued my life, shoulde bee taken from him and
giuen mée: for if vertue, authoritie, and good fortune, are
the properties whereby to make choyse of an Emperour,
Palmerin is verie many degrées before me. As for his generositie,
it is so well knowne to you, that it were but lost
labour to make report thereof. For his authoritie, the 
                           •
                        arbarous
nations among whome hée hath liued and conqueringly
controlled, deliuer sufficient testimonie. And for his
high good fortune in all his enterprises, where is the man
that may bee equalled with him? or what hath hée at anie
time attempted, but he hath finished the same with wonderfull
honour? I could name Kings and Princes that raign
onely by his meanes. To speake of the victories he hath obtained,
either in battell or single Combate, your eyes haue
beheld, and the whole worlde apparantly witnesseth. This
dare I boldly say, and some of you doo know it better then
I, that his onely name will be more feared in Greece, then
all your fore-passed Emperours haue bene by their greatest
puissance.
                     So well did the people like what the King Florendos
had sayd, as immediately was the Prince Palmerin proclaimed
Emperour of Constantinople, and the same day he
was crowned according to the accustomed rites and ceremonies.
Not long afterward did the King Florendos stay
with his Sonne, but returned with his Quéene to Macedon,
where hée goue
                           •
                        ned in loue and iustice among his
Subiects: daily sending Messengers to Constantinople, as

well to vnderstand the health of the Emperour and Empresse,
as also of yong Prymaleon, who daily increased in
strength and beautie.
                  
                  
                     Chap. LXIII.
                     
                        How the Prince Olorico and Alchidiana, thinking to trauaile
to Constantinople to see the Emperour Palmerin
and the Empresse Polinarda, strayed on the Sea. And
what sorrowful mone she made, and how she was found
by Palmerin.
                     
                     
                        IN one of the Chapters before you haue
heard, how Olorico promised the Princesse
Alchidiana, that he would bring
her to the Emperor Palmerins Court,
which she imprinted to déepe in her fancie,
as but for the common malladie incident
to yong Ladies, which is to become
great soone after they are espoused,
she would haue betaken her selfe to trauaile, within thrée
Moneths after her mariage. Notwithstanding, within short
time after that trouble was past, she came to begge a bone
of the Soldane, which he would not denie her, thinking shée
would demaund no matter of weight. Father, (quoth shée)
you must néeds giue leaue to the Prince Olorico, that hée
may accompanie me to Constantinople, for I desire to sée
the Emperour Palmerin.
                     
                     Daughter, saide the Soldane, the trauaile on the Sea
is verie perillous, and oftentimes great estates p
                           •
                        ri
                           ••
                         by
shipwracke: but séeing you are so desirous, and I 
                           •
                        naduisedly
haue past my promise, you shall not in ought be 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        
by mée. H
                           •
                        ereuppon was presently prepared terme
Shippes and Galleyes, the greater part whereof was laden
with Horses, riche Tapistry, and other things of great v
                           •••
                        lue,
which should be giuen to Palmerin and his Polinarda.
In the rest were embarqued chosen Knightes for her defence,
with Ladies and Gentlewomen to attende on her,
and all néedefull necessaries: thinking to shewe her sumptuous
magnificence in the Emperous Courte, which in
conclusion fell out otherwise. For Fortune who is euer variable
and neuer permanent, at the instant when Olorico
and Alchidiana builded most on her fauour, and were come
within tenne dayes sayling of Constantinople: she altered
their opinions in most doubtfull manner, as they expected
nothing but the ende of their liues. The winde now ariseth
contrary to them, a suddaine and terrible tempest ouertaketh
them, and with such rough billowes their Shippes
were beaten, as in their sight fire of their Galleyes were
drowned, the residue were verie farre scattered from them,
and the great Carricke wherein themselues were, against
a Rocke was spilt in the middest. Nowe are they left to
the mercie of the waters, and Alchidiana wasting on a
plancke for safegarde of her life: and had not one of the Pylots
by swimming recouered a little Squiffe, wherewith
he presently made to her and got her in, otherwise there had
the Princesse vnhappily perished. This Pylot was so expert
& cunning, as cutting through the vnmercifull waues,
hée gained landing at a Porte distant from Constantinople
about thirtie miles. The Inhabitants where they came on
shoare, wondred to sée her so gorgiously attired, and had
not the Pylot friendly perswaded them, that shée was a
Princesse trauailing to the Emperours Court, and by mishap
had lost all her companie on the Sea, they would haue
dealt with her verie hardly. But when they vnderstoode
the cause of her comming, they entertained her with fauour
and ciuilitie, causing her to be lodged at a very welthy Merchaunts
house, where she wanted nothing shée could desire.

                        Alchidiana séeing shée had escaped the daunger of the Sea,
and was nowe in better assuraunce then before, comforted
her selfe with this good fortune: but when shée remembred
her losse, into what want & pouertie shee was now brought,
and that through her foolish desire, her Husband was drowned,
(as shée thought) shée was so ouercome with griefe,
that neither her owne noble minde, nor the daily presence of
the Greekes that came to sée her, could disswade her from
ceaselesse lamentations.
                     Ah wr
                           •
                        tch that I am, quoth she, how well haue I deserued
this wreakefull aduenture? Ah ill aduised Alchidiana,
what moued thée to crosse the Seas? if not an inordinate
desire to see him, of whome thou maist expect no remedie
for thy sorrow: or else to sée her that is Mistresse of his
heart, and so make thine owne conceites more languishing?
My Lord and Husband Olorico, I am the vnhappie cause
of thy death, thy loue hath euer béene to mée sounde and
perfect: Why could it not then make thée forgette the man,
who alwayes disdained my passions, and neuer loued mée
but with dissimulation? If thou escape death as I haue
done, iust cause hast thou to hast mée continually. Coulde
not I remember, howe thy people spent their blood for me,
onely to witnesse thy neuer da
                           •
                        nted affection? and I haue
requited thy loue with monstrous ingratitude. Why then
did not our Gods make me alone to suffer the desert of my
folly, but take reuenge on them that neuer offended? Ah noble
Ladies, howe heard is your recompence in my seruice,
that your tender and delicate bodies should be foode for the
Fishes? And you worthie Knights and Gentlemen, in 
                           •
                        léed
of purchasing honour and renowne with your Maister, you
are lost for euer, to my no little gréefe and vexation. The
Merchaunt in whose house shée was lodged, hearing her
heauie and lamentable complaintes, thus comforted her.
Be of good cheare Madame, your Husband (by the grace of
God) will well enough escape this daunger. As for your
treasure, it is a matter soone gotten and soone lost: and to

mourne for your Ladies and Gentlemen, it is to purpose,
because it can no way benefit them. When wee poor
                           •
                        
men loose our goods, wiues and Children, wée must with patience
please our selues: you then hauing knowledge of
vertue, and that we are all subiect to the transitorie chaunges
of the worlde, to despaire is farre vnseemelye your estate.
                     My Lord the Emperour is bountifull and liberall, and
the most vertuous Prince that euer raigned in Greece: hee
will so well recompence your losse, as you shall not complaine
of your comming. With these perswasio
                           •
                        s shee was
somewhat pacified, and hauing stayed there nine or tenne
daies to see if anie other of the Galleyes would arriue there,
séeing none came, shée sold diuers of her precious Iewells
that was about her, for halfe the value they were worthe,
and prouided her selfe of fixe Horses, for her selfe, her Hostesse
and her two Daughters, the Pilot that had saued her
from drowning, and one of the Merchants Seruants, with
which companie shée rode toward Constantinople, hauing
chaunged her rich attire into mourning wéedes. As they
were in a great Forrest 
                           〈◊〉
                         miles from the Cittie, the
Princesse calling to remembrounce, howe poore and simple
she should come before the Emperour, hauing beene one of
the welthiest Ladies in the world: was so ouercome with
this conceit, as hardly could her hostesse kéepe her 
                           〈…〉
                        
wherefore séeing they were néere a goodlie Fountaine,
there they alighted to rest her a little. And after shee hadde
walked in the coole shaddowe of the Trées, shee founde her
sel
                           •
                        e in better disposition, preparing to mount on horsebacke
againe: but it came so to passe, that the Emperour Palmerin
hauing béene hunting in that Forrest, and by earnest
pursuit of the game lost all his companie, so that at length
he came to the Fountaine where Alchidiana walked. His
arriuall greatly amazed the women, and before hee would
demaund what they were, hee alighted and dranke of the
Fountaine water. Alchidiana earnestly beholding him,

and 
                           ••
                        eling inwardlie a strange alteration, presen
                           ••
                        ye 
                           〈◊〉
                        
againe in her Hostesse Armes. Alas, said the Emperou
                           •
                        ,
haue I so offended the Ladie, that the sight of mee
should endaunger her life? tell me my Fréende quoth hée to
the Pilot, do
                           •
                        st thou know of whence she is? No my Lord,
aunswered the Pilot, but I vnderstand she is a noble Princesse,
who comming to sée the Emperour, hath lost her people
and goods in the Sea. Me thinks I haue séene her heertofore,
saide Palmerin, but I cannot remember the place
where. Then beholding her more aduisedly, he said. I 
                           〈◊〉
                         of
this the Princesse Alchidiana? that cannot bee: my Ambassadours
tolde me that shee was married to the Prince
Olorico.
                     
                     By this time was she a litle recouered, and séeing how
he helde her in his armes, thus spake. Ah Syr Palmerin,
why doo you hinder the departure of miserable Alchidiana?
thinke
                           •
                         o
                           •
                         shee can ende her life in better time and place,
then in this Countrey, and betwéene his armes whome she
loued as her life, yet neuer receiued courtesie by him till
this instant. Ah my Lorde, héere maist thou behold the foolish
and indiscréete Alchidiana, who for thée hath lost her
Husband Olorico that loued her deerelye: Knightes, Ladies
and inestimable treasure hath shee likewise lost, all
which she maketh no account off, but of her beloued whom
she shall neuer recouer. But may it be Madame quoth the
Emperour, that you are indéed the Princesse Alchidiana,
Daughter to the Soldane of Babilon, the flower of all the
Ladies in Turkie? The same am I 
                           •
                        saide shee, who loued
thee so vnmeasurably, as the loyaltie of mariage, 
                           •
                        eare of
daungers of the Sea, nor thy 
                           •
                        oo rigorous refusall, both in
my presence and by thy Messengers, coulde not 
                           〈◊〉
                        
me from this shame, onelie to see thy Court and the beautie
of Polynarda. And that at leng
                           •
                        h I might 
                           〈◊〉
                         my
desire, I brought my Husbande with mee, who I feare the
cruell waters haue swalowed, and as braue Ladies as 
                           〈◊〉
                        
were séene, with riches that well might decorate
                           •••
                        . Empire.

By Heauen, Madame quoth Palmerin, if the Prince
haue lost his life in this aduenture, neuer will my heart be
merrie againe. Nowe sée I the vnspeakable loue you beare
me, which I haue in some part requi
                           •
                        ed toward your Olorico:
yet dismay not (swéete Ladie) nor feare his death before
further tryall, for by mine honour I sweare, no sooner
shall I come to Constantinople, but I will cause his search
presently to be followed, not doubting but hée may be found
againe.
                     And nowe faire Princesse, tell what vertue or desert
you sawe in mée, that might value the least paine you haue
endured? committing your gracious personne to so manie
doubtfull hazards, of feares, affrightes, perturbations, heat
                           •
                        
and colde, which your choyse nature could hardly brooke in
trauell: vnworthie were I the name of a man, if nowe I
shoulde not pittie you. And I sweare to you by the liuing
God, that if your mishap sort to an euill ende, neuer will I,
weare my Diademe longer. Alas Madame, if heeretofore
I haue deluded you, consider it was a Louers deceit: that
had bequeathed his heart to such a Ladie, as loues you as if
you were her Sister. But haue you, quoth shée, among your
amorous delights, acquainted her with my vnséemely boldnesse?
what may she theen conceiue of me, but as of a Girl
                           •
                        
giuen to loose and lauish appeti
                           •
                        e? The loue of wedlock
                           •
                        
faire Princesse, said Palmerin, cannot make me disclose her
preiudice that honoured me so much: let it suffise you, that
for the fauour I obtained when you found me in lyke place,
she remaineth to recompence you with all possible kindnesse.
Let vs then depart hence toward Constantinople, that you
may be vsed as beseemeth your high calling. Héere despised
that I am, quoth the Princesse, had I entred into conceit
of your former illusions, neuer had I fallen into so
great daunger: but as for matters past, either of your rygour
or disdaine, your present affabilitie compelles mée to
forget, set on then when you please, and I will beare ye companie.
                     
                        The Pilot, the Marchants Wife and her Daughters,
on their knées, desired the Emperour to excuse them,
in that they had not reuerenced his Maiestie as they ought.
Worldly honour I expect not, sayde the Emperour, come
with mée, that I may recompence your paines taken for

                           •
                        his worthie Princesse. So rode they on, and as they issued
forth of the Forrest, their staied the Knights and Hunters,
attending the Emperours comming, they all maruailing
at the great courtesie hee vsed to the Ladie: then his Mai
                           •
                        
                        stie
calling the Duke Eustace to him, sayd. Thou must presently
with thy Companions goe Arme ye, and trauaile to
finde the Prince Olorico, whom the tempestuous seas hath
separated from his Ladie. Who brought these heauie tydings
to your highnesse, sayd the Duke. This Ladie who is
his Wife, quoth hée, hauing myraculouslie escaped shipwracke
by the meanes of this Mariner. When they were
come to the Pallace, the Duke of Saxon came to holde the
Emperours Horse while he alighted. Ptolome, sayde Palmerin,
know you no better your Mistresse Alchidiana? you
must now remember her passed fauours, when shée redeemed
you from base seruitude. And that shall not I forget
my Lorde, quoth the Duke, while I haue a day to liue: but
I cannot thinke that this Ladie is she
                           •
                        . It is euen shée without
further question, sayd the Emperour, doo you and the
Duke of Mecaena helpe her from her Horse, and conduct
her by into the Pallace, while I in meane time goe to aduertise
the Empresse.
                     Madame, quoth Ptolome, yet can I not be thorowlie
resolued. In sooth Ptolome, said shée, I am Alchidiana, who
to accomplish what thou and thy companions coulde not,
am come hither in this pouertie: discouering my want of
knowledge by an vnrecouerable losse, except you my Lords
take the greater pittie on me. Thinke you Madame, quoth
Ptolome, that my Lord Olorico is lost? neuer feare it I
beséech ye, but thinke you shall finde as great fauour in this
Court, as if you were with the Soldane your Father.
                     
                        
                        Palmerin comming to the Empresse, said, Madame, as I
was hunting this day, I found in our Forrest the Princesse
Alchidiana, of whom I haue so often tolde yeée, shée
béeing
wife to the Prince Olorico, that named himselfe my
Dwarffes Brother when I was with you last at Gaunt, I
desire ye to intreate her as her calling deserueth, because I
am not a little beholding to her. So taking her by the hand,
they came and met the Princesse, and Palmerin taking her▪
courteouslie in his armes, deliuered her to the Empresse
saying.
                     Faire Princesse, you shall remaine with my Ladie, till
our knights haue found your Lord an
                           •
                         Husband. God will
requite your kindnesse to a distressed Ladie, said Alchidiana,
although I feare for my offences his fortune will be much
the woorse. Madame, quoth the Empresse, so noble and debonaire
is your Lord and Husband, as no danger can any way
preiudice his life, but thinke him as safe as if he were héere
present with you, which doubtlesse will be right soone, and
in good time: therefore let mee intreate you to bée of good
chéere, as if you were now in Assyria. And although we cannot
compare with the Court of Babylon, yet théere shall you
be vsed as be séemes so great a Princesse.
                     I doubt not thereof good Madame, said Alchidiana, the
more am I indebted to the Emperour and you: yet can I not
forget the absence of my Lord, beeing separated from him in
a place so vncouth. He that 
                           •
                        s the defender of the iust, quoth
the Empresse, will send ye to méete againe in place more
comfortable, & in that hope I pray ye to perswade your selfe,
laying aside these moutning garments, the very sight therof
cannot but affend yée. These gracious spéeches somewhat
contented her, and expelled all priuate conceit of sorrow: yet
would she not chaunge her habite, till she heard either good
or bad newes of the Prince Olorico.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. LXIIII.
                     
                        Howe the Prince Olorico was reskewed from the Moores,
by the yong Knights that the Emperour Palmerin sent
in his search: and what ioy was made at Constantinople
at his arriuall.
                     
                     
                        VPon the Emperours resolution for the
search of Olorico, the Dukes of Mecaena
and Saxon, with each of them fi
                           •
                        
                        tie
Knights, were prepared to see with
two Gall
                           ••
                        s: and Colmelio, Bellechino,
Sergillo Sonne to Gardino, and
the Marchant Estebons two Sonnes,
whom the Emperor had newly knigh
                        
                           •
                        ed
                           •
                        
with thirtie hardie Souldiours departed in an other.
Eight other vessels were sent on the Coast of Propontida,
and the Bosphor, to séeke the Prince.
                     It so cause to passe, that the same day Alchidiana was
preserued from drowning, Alibarbanco, a Pirat, was sayling
towardes Natolia, and passed verie néere where the
Princes Carricke was split, and him did hée espie floting on
a Chest, which was filled within with Martin skinnes, being
then mooued to behold him in such daunger, hée caused
his men to take him into the Shippe, who readie to yéelde
vp his ghost hée was so 
                           ••••
                        mmed with colde. When Ali
                           
                              •
                           arbanco
sawe him so richly appar
                           •
                        lied, and the Chest
stuffed with thinges of such value, hée imagined him presently
to hée some great Lorde, for whom he shoulde haue
some large raunsome, wherefore he vsed him verie courteouslie.
Olorico se
                           •
                        ing he was so happily escaped, lifting his

eyes to Heauen, sayd. Great is thy mercie O God, that hast
so fauourablie vouchsafed to regard thy poore creature, nor
were losse woorthie reckoning, so my Ladie Alchidiana
were safe in Assyria. What angrie planet raigned when
we be tooke our selues to Sea? what answere shall I make
to the Soldane your Father, that gaue me such charge of
your person at my departure? hardly may I dare to come
before him any more.
                     
                        Alibarbanco hearing these complaints, reioiced thereat.
By Mahomet, quoth hée to himselfe, nor shalt thou sée
him anie more if I can hinder it, for I will present thée to
the great Turke his mortall enemie, and for thy raunsome
I shall receiue a bountifull recompence. So thinking to
strike toward Natolia, he happened among the Emperours
yong Knights ere hée was beware: wherefore hée thought
to takē their ships likewise, yet therein hée 
                           •
                        ound him selfe
greatly deceyued. For Bellechino knowing them to bée
Turkes by their Banners, said to his companions. We are
now I feare in the daunger of Turkish Pirat
                           •
                        , let vs therfore
with courage winne our deliueraunce. Héereuppon
they fiercely assayled Alibarbanco, and buckled so closelie
that in the ende they hoorded him, making such a slaughter
among his men, and throwing him likewise slaine into
the Sea, as none were left to resist their further entraunce,
where they found the Prince Olorico, and béeing
not a little glad of their good successe, they each one embraced
him with gracious courtesie. Alas my Fréends, quoth
the Prince, how knew you my béeing héere? who gaue you
in charge to séeke mée forth? who hath béene the Messenger
of my misfortune? My Lord the Emperour Palmerin,
aunswered Colmelio, vnderstoode thereof by your Ladie
Alchidiana, whom hée founde by good happe as hée r
                           •
                        de on
hunting.
                     But may I giue credite to your woordes? said the
Prince, is my Ladie with his Maiestie at the Court? Shée
is in trueth my Lorde, sayde Bellechino, and the Mariner

likewise that saued her life, whome the Emperour hath
highlie recompenced for his faithfull seruice. I beséech you
quoth Olorico, let vs ho
                           ••
                        e 
                           •
                        aile presentlie towarde Constantinople,
for my heart cannot bee perswaded till I haue
séene her, 
                           •
                        so great is my doubt, considering our vnfortunate
separation.
                     Neuer may I beare Armes in Knight-hoode, sail Bellechino,
or lift my Sworde in honourable Chiualrie, if Alchidiana
be not at Constantinople, where I both sawe her,
and spake to her, before our departure. So taking the vessell
that belonged to the Pirate Alibarbanco with them, in
short time after they arryued at Constantinople, where
their chéerefull sounding of Drums, Trumpets, and Clarions
at their landing, deliuered testimonie of their good
successe. If the Emperour was glad for the recouerie of his
Fréend, the Princesse Alchidiana of her Husband, and euerie
one generallie for the man lost by such mishappe, I
leaue to your iudgements, that can censure the rare ioyes of
loue and fréendship. What Triumphes, Tournamentes,
Bonfires, Maskes, Momeries, and other delightfull exercises
were performed, for ioy of the Prince Oloricos safetie,
whome the Emperour made account of, as you haue heard
before, it would demaunde a larger volume to set downe:
you must therefore héere imagine, that you behold his Maiestie
highly contented, Alchidiana thorowlie satisfied, and
the whole Court well pleased by this happie event, giuing
themselues to expresse the same in open & manifest signes,
beséeming so great estates to prosecute, and therefore of as
great honour as may be deuised.
                     The yong Knights are especially welcommed for their
woorthie seruice, the Dukes of Saxon and Mecaena likewise,
though they failed of bringing the Prince, yet they
brought two Foystes belonging to the Pirate Aliba
                              •
                           banco,
richlie laden with manie wealthie spoyles, which were
giuen among the yong Knights, in recompence of their
paines. During the time of these surpassing pleasures

and delights, there entred the hauen of Constantinople
thrée shippes, laden with merua
                           •
                        lous sumptuous gifts and
presents, from the Quéene Zephira, and her Brother the
King Maulenno, beeing sent to the Emperour Palmerin,
and his Empresse Polynarda, by two great Lords Ambassadours
from Persia, to request familiar loue and alliaunce
with the Emperour, the Soldane confessing his iniurie to
Trineus, while he was in his Court. When the Persians
came before the Emperour, who was honourably accompanied
with Kings, Dukes, Princes, Counties, and many
braue Ladies, they were gr
                           •
                        atly abashed, yet thinking on
the argument of their Ambas
                           •
                        ade, one of them began in this
manner.
                     It is no maruell (redoubted Emperour and Monarch
of Greece) if thy subiects both loue thé
                           •
                        , and 
                           •
                        site thee, when
thy beha
                           ••
                        our hath conquered the mindes of forraine Pote
                           •
                        tates,
who to enter a
                           •
                        ititie and peace with thée, some
haue left their Countreys to sende their Ambassadours hither,
other dare not stirre, or assemble their men in warlike
manner, so is the name of Palmerin feared thorowe all
Asia. Hereof beare witnesse the great Turke, the Cal
                           ••••
                        
of Siconia, and the heyres to the Prince Amarano of Nigrea:
not much inferiour in this condition, is the Soldane
of Babylon, whose daughter with her Husband I héere beholde.
The victorious Ambimar, King of Romata and Grisc
                              •
                           ,
the worthie Maulerino, and the pui
                           ••
                        aunt Soldane of Persia
my Maister, Husbande to the vertuous Quéene Zephira,
who with their Brother haue sent your high
                           •
                        esse thrée
Shippes laden with the most wealthie riches their Countreyes
can yéeld. My Lord and they humbly kisse your Maiesties
hande, desiring you to forget his disceur
                           ••
                        sie to the
gentle Knight T
                              •
                           yneus, when hee became 
                           ••
                        amoured on
the Princesse Aurecinda. But if their loue then sorted to a
philosophicall trope or figure, it hath sithence pr
                           •
                        ued effec
                           ••
                        uall
in procreation, to the no little ioy of my Lorde and
Maister.
                     
                        The Princesse was deliuered of a goodly Son, growing
in such exquisite forme and feature, as it is expected hée
will one day resemble his Father in ch
                           •
                        ualrie, as he dooth
alreadie his Mother in amiable perfection.
                     Ambassadour, quoth the Emperour, for the great vertue
and nobilitie I haue founde, as well in the Princesse
Zephira, as also her noble Brother, I graunt the fréendly
all
                           •
                        ance thou demaundest. Yet heereof am I sorie, that the
Son to the Prince Tryneus, should be nourished and spend
his youth among Ma
                           •
                        umetists, without knowledge of hi
                           •
                        
God and Redéemer: for in such sort should hée be instructed,
after he is come to the yéeres of vnderstanding, that all the
Alchoran is tales an
                           •
                         fables, and doubtlesse God will so
deale with him in time, as hée shall imitate the steppes of
his noble Father. As for the presents sent Vs by the King
Maulerino, the Sol
                           •
                        a
                           •
                        e, and his Queen Zephira, we accept
them as from our Fréen
                           •
                        s, and will returne them some remembraunce
of our thankfulnesse. His Maiestie commaunded
the Persians to bée lodged in his Pallace, and continued
still their former ioyes and tryumphs: but to alter those
Courtly pastimes and delights, this misfortune happened
which héereafter followeth.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. LXV.
                     
                        Howe the great Turke refused to assist Lycado, Nephewe
to the Admiral Olimaell, against the Emperor Palmerin:
and what trouble happened to Constantinople by the
Traitor Nardides, Nephew to the King Tarisius, Lycado,
Meuadeno, and their father.
                     
                     
                        SUch was the humanitie and pittie of
Palmerin, when hee finished the enchantments
at the Isle of Malfada, as
he gaue libertie to all the Turks and
Christians, which were before transformed,
as you haue heard: among
whom was Lycado, Nephew to the
Admirall Olimaell, hée that at the taking
of Agriola, had the Prince Tryneus for his prisoner.
This Lycado, séeing himselfe in his owne Countrey,
and out of daunger, where he heard howe the great Turke
was slaine, and his Uncle likewise, hée came before the
Sultane that then raigned, saying. Worthy lord, as men are
naturallie inclined to bemone their losses, so are Subiects
bound to aduertise their Soueraignes, of any shame or iniurie
done to their Maiesties. This speak I my Lord, because
you haue not as yet reuenged the death of your deceassed
Brother, now sléeping in the Armes of Mahomet,
albéeit trayt
                           •
                        rouslie slaine by Palmerin and his Companions:
at which time my noble U
                           •
                        cle was likewise murthered,
with many Knights of cheefe and especiall account.
And least you should be ignoraunt in the truth of the déede,
and who also 
                           •
                        arryed hence the Princesse Agriola, I haue

credibly vnderstood, that Palmerin is Nephew to the Emperour
of Greece, one of his companions is the Emperours
Sonne of Allemaigne, and all the rest were Princes and
Lords of Greece, onely sent as spyes into Turkie. Wherefore,
séeing you now holde the state in such peace and quietnes,
it were necessarie you should leauie a mightie Armie:
and please you to commit the charge thereof to mée, I will
loose my life, or make an absolute destruction of all Greece.
I remember, said the great Turke, that your Unckle made
like entraunce into my dec
                           •
                        ased Brothers Courte, as you
by your spéeches now labour to doo, but I will so warilie
looke to such intrusions, as no Traytors shall rest héere if
I can hinder thē. Your Unckle vexed the Christians, what
followed thereon? the death of his maister, and a daungerous
confusion. By you likewise may 
                           •
                        nsue as bad fortune,
departe you therefore from the Court, and but that we are
loth to bee noted with tyrannie, thou shouldest presently
be dr
                           •
                        wne in péeces with Horses. False Traytour, thou
that commest to counsaile vs in a matter wherein we cannot
meddle but with great dishonour, it beh
                           •
                        ues thée first
to regard the end of thy intent, and what he is that gouerns
in Greece. Go villaine go, and on perill of thy life neuer
presume before our presence againe.
                     
                        Lycado was greatly astonied at this sharpe answere,
and séeing he could haue no better successe, hee went to his
Father the Brother to Olimaell, béeing one of the chéefest
Magitians in all Turkie, to him he made his complaints,
saying, he would die in that resolution, but he would cause
the Turke to knowe that hee was no Traytour, and this
(quoth he) shall be the meane whereby I will compasse it.
I meane to disguise my selfe, and trauaille to the Cittie of
Constantinople, where priuily I wil murder the Emperor
Palmerin, so 
                           〈◊〉
                         my Lorde the great Turke t
                           •
                        uch mée
with no further suspition, but will reward me with greater
benefits then euer my Unckle had. My Sonne, answered
his Father, thinkest thou that thy deuise will sort to effect?

thy Brother Menadeno would helpe thée héerein, but hée
is too yong: yet when time serueth for thy departure, I
will not onely tell thée, but conduct thee my selfe. I beséech
you good father, saide Lycado, further me in what you may,
for neuer will my hart be at rest, till I haue paid Palmerin
with the selfe same coyne the great Turke was. In meane
while do you studie, and search all our Book
                           •
                        s of 
                           〈◊〉
                        , Diuination,
Magique, and Nigromanc
                           •
                        e, as Zabulus,
Orpheus, Hermes, Zoroastres, Ciroes, Medea. Alphonsus,
Bacon, Aponius, and all the rest that write of the blacke
speculatiue: reade them againe and againe, deui
                           •
                        e such
sp
                           •
                        lles, exorcismes, and coniurations, as the very 
                           •
                        pirits
may spea
                           •
                        e of the feast I will make at the Citt
                           •
                        e of Constantinole.
                     
                     Héereupon the olde man made his Sonne Menadeno
Knight, and with Lycado betooke themselues to Sea, saying.
My Sonnes I will bring ye to Constantinople, where
(by vertue of mine arte) we will arriue before thrée dayes
be expired: remember your vnckles death, and behaue your
selues in such sort, as you may be Registred for euer. The
time doth nowe fauour you with sufficient reuenge, and
therein shall you be assisted by a Christian Knight, whome
we shall finde readie landed there for the same cause.
                     Their Ankers being w
                           •
                        yed, they launch into the déepe,
and cut through the waues with such violence, as if the deuill
himselfe were in their sailes, so that they tooke landing
at the selfe same houre as Nardides arriued at Constantinople.
As concerning what this Nardides was, you remember
the two Traytors Promptaleon and Oudin, Nephewes
to the King Tarisius of Hungaria, whome Pa
                              •
                           merin
and Frysoll slew at Constantinople, hée was their Brother,
and Sonne to the Duchesse of Ormeda. Shée vnderstanding
the death of her two Sonnes, could not conceale
it from the Duke her Husband, who presently died with
very conceit of gréefe: whereuppon, shée to reuenge this
mishappe caused by her report, as also the death of her tw
                           •
                        
                        
Sonnes, made promise to Nardides, (then béeing eightéene
yeeres olde) that so soone as hée was knighted, hee should go
to Constantinople, and there (if it were possible) to murder
the Emperour and Frysoll. All this he 
                           •
                        owed to performe,
and two or thrée dayes after, hauing married the Kings
Daughter of Polonia, hee embarqued himselfe with 
                           •
                        orty
Knights, determining by a Combat for treason, to compasse
his intent.
                     These wreakfull aymers at reuenge, landed all in one
instant at Constantinople, when the old Magitian calling
to Nardydes, sayde hee would gladly sprake with him in secret,
as concerning matters greatly for his aua
                           •
                        le. Hereupon
they went all closely together into one of the Cabins,
and the olde man entred into the
                           •
                        e spéeches. Sir Nardides,
néedel
                           •
                        sie is it for you to hide your affaires from mee, for I
knowe that you depart from Poloma with fortie Knights
disguised like Merchants, onely with this determination,
to destroy the Emperour, in reuenge of certaine iniuryes
done to your Brethren. But if you will giue credit to mée,
and go to worke in such sort as I shall aduise yée, yée shall
happily obtayne the end of your desire. By God, sayd Nardides,
you 
                           〈◊〉
                         mée wonders, there is not one in the shippe
that knowes mine intent, yet you haue sayde the truth,
whereat I cannot marua
                           •
                        le sufficiently. Seeing then you
know so much, it were but foll
                           •
                        e to dissemble, say then your
minde and I will heare yée. This night, sayd the old man,
the Emperour wil suppe in the great Hall with the Prince
Olorico, and the Princesse Alchidiana, the King of Sparta
and his Queene, with many other great Princes and
Lordes, so that such store of people are in the Pallace, as
little regarde will bee had of strangers or housholde s
                           •
                        ruants.
                     You then with my Sonne M
                              •
                           nadeno, beeing Armed,
as besee
                           •
                        es a cause so 
                           〈◊〉
                        , shall sodainely enter and

                           •
                        ill the Emperour: my Sonne Lycado and I will stay
your returne heere, and I that can commaunde the winde

and weather, will carrie ye hence without danger of following.
And true it is, that there is a Bird pearched in the
Hall, which the wise Muzabelino hath so enchaunted, as
neither good or ill tydings can come to the Emperour, but
she bewrayes the same by her song or fearefull crie: yet
doubt not you thereof, strike boldly, there will be none Armed,
so that you departe againe at your owne pleasure. My
Friend, said Nardides, happie be the houre I 
                           •
                        ette with
thée, assure thy selfe, that if I can kill the Emperour, and
thou afterwarde deliuer me safely, such recompence will I
bestow on thée, as both thou and thine shall for euer remember
me.
                     Other recompence I demaund not, sayde the olde man,
then the death of the Emperour, prepare thy selfe therefore
so follow thine intent. The night béeing come, these
Traytors Armed themselues, and casting their mantles about
them, entred the Pallace, were among the Pages
and seruants, without suspition they came into the Hall:
leauing Lycado and his Father at the Port, where hée
threwe abroade such enchauntments, that all such as came
foorth of their houses, presently fell downe a sleepe in the
stréetes. No sooner were the Traytours entred the Hall,
but the Bird gaue a horrible and fearefull crie, beating her
beake against her breast with such furie, as though shee
would haue rent foorth her heart. My God, sayd the Emperour,
in mercie behold mée, for the cry of this Birde dooth
foretell great misfortune. Looke about my friendes, quoth
he to his Guard, and sée if any Stranger or vnknowne
body is entred our presence, Nardides by these spéeches
knew hée was the Emperour, wherefore drawing his
Sword, hée thought to haue cleaued his head, yet hée fayled
of his intent, for the Emperour séeing the blow comming,
with a great Golden Cuppe awarded it indifferently, notwithstanding,
the Sword in slipping from the Cuppe, gaue
him a 
                           •
                        ore wound vpon the head. Olorico sitting on the other
side the Table, ranne at the Traitour, but the Emperour

had receiued two strokes more ere he could come at
him, so that his maiestie fell from his Chaire as he had
béene dead.
                     As the Prince Olorico held the Traytor Nardides by
the armes, Menadeno str
                           •
                        oke at him so rigorously, as if
Ptolome had not borne off the blowes with a great siluer
plate, Olorico there had lost his life. Duke Eustace séeing
this shamefull outrage, wrong the Sword out of Nardides
hande, and gaue him such a sounde stroke therewith on the
head, as made him tomble his héeles vpwarde, and by the
helpe of Bellechino, who founde the meanes to gette off his
Helmet, hée smote his head from his shoulders. Bellechino
who had béene newly baptised, loued the Emperour as hée
had béene his Father, and comming to Menadeno, whome
Duke Ptolome strongly helde in his armes, gaue him so
many stabs on his throate, that he likewise fell downe at
his féete. The Empresse séeing her Lord so wounded, rent
her garments, tore her comely locks of hayre, and smote
her faire face with maruailous violence. Ah my Lord, quoth
shée, thou art not wounded alone, for if thou die, as God
forbid, right soone will my ghost follow thée. Cease Madam
your complaints, saide the Emperour, and comfort your
selfe so wel as you may, for this is the houre wherin I must
leaue you: I haue lost such aboundance of my bloud, as longer
may I not liue with you: O my God forgiue my sins,
and receiue my soule. In vttering these words he swouned
againe, and the Empresse with him for companie, to the no
little amazement of all the Lords and Ladies, who were
well née
                           •
                        e at their wits ende to be holde this vnexpected alteration.
Alchidiana likewise was in wonderfull perplexitie,
fearing also that her Lord was wounded to the death, but
to comfort this sorrowfull and desolate Court, good fortune
sent this helpe ensuing.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. LXVI.
                     
                        How the wise Muzabelino knowing by his arte, the cruell
treason doone to the Emperour, came to succour him, and
of that which followed.
                     
                     
                        
                           MVzabelino the Nigraman
                           •
                        er, of whom
we haue alreadie spoken, by chaunce
this day was turning ouer his Booke,
and 
                           •
                        ound the dangerous strat
                           •
                        g
                           •
                        me
deuised by these Traitours, and calling
his familiars together, demaunded the
danger that would ensue by this treason:
whereto one of them replied, that
if hée went not spéedily to Constantinople, the Emperour,
the Prince Olorico, and their Ladies, would hardly
escape that day with life. Then armed he himselfe, in the
selfe same maner as he was when he succoured the Prince
Tryneus, and calling two spirits of the ayre resembling
Giants, their faces so vglie and fearefull, as no humane
creature durst beholde them: them hee commanded to carrie
him to Constantinople, and with a great flaming firebrand
in his hand, he cut through the ayre with such horrible
thunder, as cach one thought the world had béene ended.
When he beheld the olde man that defended the Port,
hée sayd to him. False and disloyall Traitour, darest thou
meddie with the man whome thou knowest to bée in my
guarde? take him to yée, (quoth hee to his two spirits) and
conuay him to your Courte, and there kéepe him aliue for
mée, for I will giue him a paine a thousande times worse
th
                           ••
                         death: you know how to vse my gentle guest, let him

be dealt withall as his behauiour hath deserued. The miserable
olde man astonied héereat, and thinking to helpe
himselfe by his Magique, was presently transformed into
a Serpent. Now thou shalt perceiue, saide Muzabelino,
that I am greater in power then thou art. So taking two
great Golden Chaines, he tied the Serpent about the neck
therewith, and his Sonne together, setting such a coniuration
on them, as he should neuer be chaunged to hi
                           •
                         former
shape.
                     Then came hée to the Pallace, where taking off his
Helmet, hée entred the Hall, saying to the Knights. Ah my
déere friendes, the Traytour that thus hath molested you,
is taken, reioyce therefore, and be of good chéere, your Lord
is not dead, he liueth, he must liue, and in despight of enuie
shal florish more then euer he did. The princes and knights
hearing him speake so friendly, and yet knew not what hée
was, notwithstanding his promises they were greatly amazed,
but when they sawe Bellechino and Colmelio so
reuerently embrace him, they began to conceiue better opinion
of him. Alas my Lord and Father, said Bellechino,
in a happie houre came you hether, and your presence puts
vs out of al further feare, vouchsafe to succour the Empresse
Polynarda, for pittie it is to sée her thus chaunged. Héereupon
Muzabelino embraced the Empresse, whose face was
colde, pale, and w
                           •
                        n. Why Madame? quoth he, where is
your former wisedome and discretion? leaue these d
                           •
                        solate
countenances to common people, your Lord
                           •
                         is in no
danger, but within thrée dayes hée shall be well againe.
Conuey her hence, saide he to the Ladies, I am ashamed to
sée your follie, suffering her to lye in this sort and no one
helpe her. Then was shée conducted to her Chamber, and
Muzabelino with the ayde of his Sonne and Duke Eustace,
carried the Emperour to his bed, where staunching
his woundes with a precious Oyntment, Mu
                              •
                           abelino
gaue him some of the water to drink, which before had healed
the Princesse Zephira, and which hee had brought with

him in a little viall of Christall, when the Emperor béeing
some what better recouered, lifting his eies to Heauen, said.
How 
                           〈◊〉
                         art thou in mercy my soueraign Redéemer, sending

                           〈◊〉
                         from the furthest regions, to helpe me in
so great 
                           〈◊〉
                        ? Ah my noble fr
                           •
                        ende, what haue I

                           〈◊〉
                         at any time for thée, that might induce thée to fauour
me so much▪ My Lord, answered Muzabelino, so precious
are your deserts in mine eies, as I can do no lesse, except
I should be accounted the most in gratefull among men. So

                           •
                        athing his woundes with the iuyce of certaine vertuous
hearbs, he will
                           ••
                         al that were present to depart the Chamber,
and on the morrow they should sée their Lord in better
estate. So left they the Emperor to his rest, and al the princes,
Knights, 
                           •
                        nd Ladies, came to welcome Muzabelino,
who comforted the Princesse Alchidiana, ass
                           •
                        ring her that
the Prince Olorico should do wel enough, for he had likewise
bathed his woundes, and left him in his chamber quietly
sléeping. On the morrow hee commaunded the bodi
                           ••
                        
of Nardides and Menadeno to be burned, afterwarde he loosed
Lycado from his father, causing him to be put in prison
till the Emperour were amented, and taking the Serpent
by the chaine, he brought him by the helpe of his two spirits
into the great court, where by his cunning hée erected a
goodly Marble piller, and on the top thereof a strong Cage
of yron, saying to the olde man transformed. Accursed creature,
to the ende thy paine may bee the greater during the
Emperor
                           •
                         life, thou shal
                           •
                         remain in this monstrous shape,
and die thou shalt not, till the God of heauen call him hence
whose death thou diddest contriue. Incontinent the spirits
thrust the Serpent into the Cage, and afterward vanished
away, leauing the monster casting fearefull flames of fire
out at his mouth, and howling with strange and pittifull
cries. Then went Muzabelino to the Empresse, who still
remained sad and pensiue, and bringing her to the Emperour,
said, Sée Madame, am I not so good as my word, your
Lord is well and perfectly recouered, be you then pleasant

and mourne no longer. Not a little ioyfull was 
                           〈◊〉
                         this
sight, embracing his highne
                           ••
                        e with such affection, 
                           〈…〉
                        
she had béen absent from him a long time: but when the Emperor
saw 
                           〈◊〉
                         face so martered with lamenting, and her
swéete countenaunce so much altred, Alas Madam, quoth he,

                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. LXVII.
                     
                        How the So
                              •
                           dane of Babylon sent for the Prince Olori

                              〈◊〉
                            and his Daughter Alchidiana, and of the sorrow the
Emperior and E
                              ••
                           resse made for their departure.
                     
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         
      
   