
      
         
            
            
            THE Third and laſt part of Palmerin of England.
            
            Enterlaced with the loues and fortunes of many gallant Knights and Ladies: A hiſtorie full of moſt choiſe and ſweet varietie.
            VVritten in Spanish, Italian, and French, and tranſlated into Engliſh by A. M. one of the Meſſengers of her Maiesties Chamber.
            Patere, aut abstine.
            
               I liue to dy. I dy to liue.
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            AT LONDON, Printed by I. R. for VVilliam Leake, at the ſigne of the Greyhound in Paules Church-yard. 1602.
         
         
            
            
            To the right Worſhipfull, Maiſter Iohn Swynnerton, Eſquire: And to the moſt vertuous Gentlewoman his wife: the compleate iſſue of their owne harts deſires intirely wiſhed.
            
               THis long labour (right Worſhipfull, and my moſt affected) hauing cost me ſo many late and earlie houres, among other miſhaps of much bodilie ſickneſſe: beeing nowe fully perfected, and past through all contrary oppoſitions, comes to kiſſe the hand of my most gentle Patrone, and to honour him with his very vttermost ſeruice. If you finde the tranſlation to come ſhort of ſuch abſolute perfection, as a worke of ſo much merit in right might challenge: burie that blemiſh in your euer-knowne affable nature, & prize my good will beyond all other ability, which gladly would attaine to higher ſufficiencie. Againe, where a man is abridged of ſo neceſſary a helpe, as not to haue the reperuſall of his owne raſh-written papers, which an after iudgement may eaſilie checke and controule: many errours may eſcape, & groſſe ſlyps be committed, all which I muſt now beare the burden of, and endure the ſentence (as I may) of euery strict cenſure. But if your Worſhip countenaunce my endeuours with your wonted kindneſſe, and hold them any way worthy your very meanest acceptation: I haue all I deſire, and which I will further studie to deſerue, remaining to you and yours for euer obliged, and (in what I may) continuallie to be commaunded.
            
               
                  Your Worſhips poore, yet vnfained wel-willer. A. Mundy.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ To Maiſter Iohn Swynnerton Eſquire.
            TO thee true friende and fauourer of learning,
            The foſter-father of my meane deſarts:
            Great Palmerin perfected, now imparts
            His worth and mine, to paſſe by thy diſcerning.
            
               Spayne, Italie and Fraunce, haue entertainde him,
            And made theyr greateſt Peeres to write his praiſes:
            But now his natiue Countries loue him raiſes,
            And that high zeale hath home to England wainde him.
            Long trauaile reſt him of his language quite,
            Therefore he is conſtrainde to ſpeake by me:
            This then he ſaies: He onely comes to thee,
            To entercourſe ſome matter of delight,
            Whereof his Hiſtory affoordeth ſtore:
            Then bid him welcome, and he craues no more.
            
               A. Mundy.
            
            Finis.
         
         
            
            
               ❧ TO THE TOVVARDLY young Gentleman, Maiſter Henry Swynnerton. AN ODE.
            
               FAire iſſue of a worthy Sire
               (like Roſe in bud)
               O let thy blood
               Taſte the true Promethian fire
               Of ſacred Arte: twill beare thee boue thy birth,
               So many times is Learning tried from earth.
            
            
               Thou ſecond Patrone of my Muſe,
               Guild thy browes
               VVith Laurell bowes,
               Perfection ſhall be thine to vſe.
               And liue a happy heire (being thus inclinde)
               To the ſweet treaſure of thy Fathers minde.
            
            
               A. Mundy.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            To his good friende, Ma. An. Mundy.
            
               IF pure tranſlation reach as high a glory
               As beſt inuention: (to denie't were ſinne)
               Then thou (deere friend) in publishing this Story,
               Hast grac'd thy ſelfe, and thy queint Palmerin,
               
               Thou much by him, he most by thee shall win.
            
            
               For tho in courtly French hee ſweetly ſpake,
               Influent Thuſcane, graue Caſtillian:
               
               A harder labour thou doost vndertake
               Thus to create him a fine Engliſhman,
               
               VVhoſe Language now dare more then any can.
               Nor thou, nor Palmerin in choice doe erre:
               Thou of thy Scholler, he his Schoolemaister.
            
            
               Tho. Dekker.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            ¶ To my kinde friend, Ma. An. Mundy.
            
               THe ſighes of Ladies, and the ſpleene of Knights,
               The force of Magicke, and the Map of fate:
               Strange Pigmey-ſinglenes in Giant-fights,
               Thy true tranſlation ſweetly doth relate.
               Nor for the fiction is the worke leſſe fine:
               Fables haue pith and morall diſcipline.
            
            
               Now Palmerin, in his owne language ſinges,
               That (till thy ſtudie) maskt in vnknowne faſhion:
               Like a fantaſtick Brittaine, and hence ſprings,
               The Mappe of his faire life, to his owne Nation.
               Tranſlation is a traffique of high price:
               It brings all learning in one Paradiſe.
            
            
               Io. VVebster.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            To his very kinde friend, Ma. An. Mundy.
            FReend, if thy Booke allowe me ſo much grace,
            Though no ſuch merit, I must needes confeſſe:
            Yet (if thou canst) affoorde theſe lines a place,
            More in thy loue, then theyr owne worthines,
            Let greater ſpirits speake by richer pennes,
            Plaine poore affection hath as true a tongue:
            And though his voyce be vnder other mens,
            Yet highest keyes haue lower noates among.
            Of Languages I skill not, whence thy paines,
            Hath now at length compleated Palmerin:
            Praiſe is a true Tranſlatours worthie gaines,
            T'abridge thee of it then, were halfe a ſinne.
            Yet no ſuch torture is there (in my minde:)
            As when great paines haue no reward but winde.
            
               An. Gybſon.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            The third Booke of the two valiant Knights, Palmerin of England, and Don Florian his brother.
            VVherein is likewiſe diſcourſed, the hardie attempts of Primaleon the ſecond, and of many other young Knights, with their ſtrange aduentures and wonderfull fortunes.
            
               CHAP. I. How the bodies aliue and dead, of the Princes, Dramuſiande, and others, (ſuppoſed ſlaine) were conuayed vnto the Perillous Iſle.
               
               
                  THE wiſe Aliart, who (giuing credite to his fore-knowledge, that all the Princes would miſcarie, & the Pagans gaining the victory, ſhould beare the ſway in Cōstantinople) hauing made ſuch prouiſion as for the purpoſe was conuenient, when hee noted, that the higheſt Power woulde not permit, yt man ſhoulde certainlie knowe what was to enſue: comforted himſelfe by ſome of the Princes, who beeing yet aliue, (though voyde of ſence or feeling) might yet recouer. And therefore determined, by meanes of his arte and ſingular medicines, to giue them hope of life: albeit they coulde not ſpeake one

word, through the extreame loſſe of their blood, yet by lifting vp their eyes, and geſture of countenaunce, they ſeemed to intreate helpe: which was with ſuch diligence adminiſtred to them, that howſoeuer theyr mindes were afflicted, yet their bodies amended. Héereupon his ioy excéedinglie increaſed, ſéeing their weaknes ſo diminiſh, and their outward appearance ſo pleaſing: as nowe hee h
                     •
                  ld no longer doubt of their death, which was verilie expected in the end of their laſt battaile. And as his minde was thus buſied about their recouerie, he heard of the ſhip which brought the dead, wherein was Argentao with heauie countenaunce: which was the leſſe to be meruailed at, in regard of the ſmall comfort there to bee expected: and ſending to vnderſtand ſome tidings, ſuddenlie iſſued forth certaine perſons in two ſmall boates, crying, good newes, good newes. At which noyſe, Aliart, as one wakened out of ſleepe, knewe not well what to ſay, or how to conceiue thereof. But béeing come neere this Ship, he heard them all ſay, that Dramuſiande (who for two daies had lien as dead) was c
                     •
                  me to himſelfe againe, and lying with his eyes wide open, ſéemed to requeſt remedie for his wounds.
               Theſe tidings were ſo ioyfull to them all, eſpeciallie Aliart, that intending preſentlie to ſuccour Dramuſiande: hée entred where the Princes aliue were, who though they ſpake not, yet in their traunce could they vnderſtand what was ſaid or done to them. My Lordes (quoth Aliart) take comfort, for one of your louing friends, who hath hartilie bemoned the dead, liueth, and hopeth yet to reſtore them, that you may reioyce in their liues ſo déerelie loued of you. But hee would not name Dramuſiande, fearing leaſt the weake bodies of the princes, by ſuch matter of ſo great and ſuddaine ioy, ſhould bee the more ſhaken and endangered. As he was going to medicine Dramuſiande, ſome of the other perſons turned backe, crying: Sir Aliart, ſuccour the liues of theſe Princes, whom we ſuſpect for dead, that wée looſe not all hope, which this good aduenture hath perſwaded.
               
                  
                  Aliart hauing about him all neceſſaries, that are required in ſuch an vrgent néede, went to Argentaos ſhip, wherein béeing entred, he found Dramuſiande, Almaroll, Francian prince of 
                     Theſſaly, Dragonalte king of 
                     Nauarre, Don Roſuell, with Dirdan ſonne to Maiortes, in whom appeared verie little ſhew of life. Then beginning to annoynt thē with a certaine vnguent, thought powerfull enough to reuiue their weakened forces: Dramuſiande and two of the Princes ſéemed ſomwhat reſtored. But Almaroll, whoſe heade was in a manner cleft, as one not to be hoped of by any outward teſtimony: the other holding him déere in friendſhip, could not but ſhew themſelues highly contented, to ſée him raiſed from death, the want of whoſe companie might be a hinderance to their health. Theſe buſineſſes thus proceeding (as in like caſes of miſerie) ſomewhat proſperouſlie, the ſhips béeing vnder full ſaile, attained néere to the Perillous Iſle, where none elſe coulde diſcerne them but the ſage Aliart, who had couered thē with a cloude, that they might not be ſéene by anie other: becauſe the Pagans remaining vict
                     •
                  s (as they thought) might haue no power to violate this royall Signorie, neither that they might extinguiſh all hope yet remaining, of preſeruing the memorie of ſo many wounded Princes. Wherefore cauſing the ſhypps thus to enter the Iſle in this cloude, he commaunded that Dramuſiande, with the Princes Francian and Dragonalte, ſhould be brought into the ſhippe, where Primaleon and the reſt aliue were: but ſeperated them from the other, becauſe as yet no expreſſe ſigne appeared in thē, whether they ſhould eſcape the danger or no: and the rather, that the extreame affliction of the one, might raiſe no diſcomfort in the other. Afterward he appointed, that the ſhippe which brought the dead, ſhould enter the néereſt Bay to the Fountaine where the beaſts of mettall were, like them which Palmerin ſlew when he conquered that Iſle: and thence they were caried into a faire Pallace, where they remained til he could giue them ſufficient buriall. All which he did, to the end, the Ladies (whoſe huſbands were dead) ſhould not offend the

liuing with theyr dolorous complaints: intending by little and little to make them forget theyr loſſes, and with patience to beare their ouer-hard fortune.
               The ſhyppe béeing thus come into the Bay, immediatly the newes of theyr arriuall was knowne to the Ladies, where-upon, accompanied with the men of the Iſle, they came in great fury running thetherward, each of them thinking to finde her huſband aliue, not déeming how ſoone they ſhould rue theyr miſhaps. When they were come to the ſhippe, Aliart, who beſt knew the eſtate of the wounded Princes: with chéerefull countenaunce met them, and béeing round enuironed with them, taking Gridonia and Flerida each by the hand, ſaid: Ladies, I am glad of a deceite happening to me in mine owne arte, which vntruly tolde me, that all the defenders of the Grecian Empire, ſhould perriſh, and the Cittie of Constantinople be in the enemies poſſeſſion: but (prayſed be the diuine bounty) the Pagans are diſcomfited, & all your Lords in good hope of life. But thus I would aduiſe, that without any noyſe, or your diſturbance, they might be brought foorth of the Shippe, and each one quietly carried to his Ladies lodging: For thys I muſt tell yée, there is another Shyppe at hand, wherein commeth Argentao with many other, among whom are they that died before you were conueyed to this Iſland.
               All the Ladies, betwéene hope & dread, departed thence, each to her Cabinet, becauſe they would not contrary what Aliart had appointed. Then cauſed he to be caried Primaleon to Gridonia, Florendos to Miragarda, Platir to Sidelia, Don Edward to Flerida, Palmerin to Polinarda, Florian to Leonarda, Berolde, Gracian, and Dragonalte, ſeuerallie to their wiues: Floraman to a Pallace hard by, and Blandidon to his mother.
               And one thing moſt notable happened, when Palmerin was brought to his Lady, the loue which betwéene them had euer beene equall, wrought now a contrary effect. For Polinarda, ſeeing her huſband not able to ſtand on his féete, in great amazement was depriued of her ſpeech: And hée

that had not the power to ſpeake a worde while hee was in the Shyp, when hée beheld his loue thus ouer-gone with gréefe, ſuddainly ſaid: Feare not ſwéete Lady, for I ſhall ſoone be well.
               
                  Aliart gaue order to the Princeſſes, how they ſhould dreſſe and regard their wounded huſbands: then taking with him Cardigea, Bernarda, and Arlencea, hee conducted them to the Shyp, where they might looke to their Lords, becauſe as yet they were not in caſe to be brought out of the Shippe. Ioy intermedled with feare, made theſe Ladies diligent & carefull each of her charge: but they whoſe huſbands were not there preſent, neither dead nor aliue, were wondrouſly afflicted with gréefe, and had not ye place béene ſo enchaunted, that thence they could not depart, many of them would haue aduentured by land and ſea to haue found them.
               But Aliart by faire promiſes ſtill gaue them hope, that ſhortlie they would be there, all which auailed not: For when they ſawe ſo many Princes, which were the verie flower of all the Chriſtian Knights, ſo dangerouſly wounded, & in ſuch perill, they had little hope of their huſbands liues. And this was partlie occaſioned, by one of the prince Beroldes ſeruants, who comming in the Shippe with Argentao, where the dead were, happened to ſteppe in at the ſame inſtant, when Aliart laboured to continue the hope of the widdowed Ladies, & ſaid, that Argentao had brought back the Knights dead.
               Theſe wordes did ſo dampe and vtterly diſmay theyr mindes, that beeing nowe more then certaine of theyr ſeuerall loſſe, in rage they would preſentlie haue runne to ſéeke their dead bodies: But Aliart, who by the ſkilfulnes of his Arte ſought to quallifie their diſcontentment, cauſed certaine ſpirits ſpéedily to appeare before them, reſembling in ſhape and proportion the knowne ſeruants to theyr Huſbands, and they to each Lady deliuered ſuch 
                     •
                  nde Embaſſages, as they then verilie beléeued theyr Knights were liuing.
               
                  Thus pacified he this impatient furie of the Ladies, and attended to the curing of the other Princes: who (with the helpe of their kinde wiues companie) began to be indifferentlie recouered, and now all ſpake chéerefully one to another.
            
            
               CHAP. II. VVhat Targiana did, after the Campe was diſſolued, and the Soldane Albayzar her husband dead.
               
                  
                     TArgiana & the Princeſſe of Armenia, when the third daies fight began, conſidering yt in ſo many battailes, not any of the Chriſtians (moſt famous for armes) were dead: began to perſwade themſelues, that ye Pagan part woulde be ouerthrowne and diſcomforted, where-vppon they with-drew thēſelues into a ſhip: which from her Father was thether ſent well prouided, and wherein likewiſe were manie of her friendes, where hearing the ſucceſſe of the battaile, and the death of Albayzar, they lanched out into the maine, attended on by ſome other ſhips, that prepared themſelues to returne with her towards Babylon.
               
               But her vnkinde ſtarres, not ſatiſ-fied, firſt with her ſcorning by Prince Florian, then to ſée her huſband baſelie led priſoner by Florendos, to preſent him before faire Miragarda, (as is declared in the ſecond part of this hiſtorie,) and now laſtly, that he was ſlaine by the ſame Florian, of whom ſhee had béene ſo greatly deſpiſed: but that nowe a new diſgrace 
                     •
                  as prepared for her. Wherefore, contending inwardlie with her pride of minde, where-with her former conceits had alwaies béene ledde, when ſhe beheld her ſelfe to be his widdow, who by ſo many Trophies had

renowned her beautie: ſhée nowe ſate amazedly mourning at her wonderfull miſ-fortunes. Hauing ſailed on tenne leagues and more, they were met with an Armie of twentie ſhippes, guided by Riſtorano her Coſin, who (after the deceaſe of his vnckle the great Turke) imagined how hee might ſignorize ouer that ſtate: and taking this to bee his beſt way, prouided himſelfe of the afore-ſaid Nauie, when comming within an hundred miles of Constantinople, hee made ſtay, awayting from time to time, what newes hee could heare of Albayzar and his power.
               When he vnderſtood of the Pagans diſcomfiture, he ſet on towards their Campe, to diſcloſe ſome ſecrets to the vnaduiſed Albayzar: holding for certaintie, that if hee were aliue, hee was conquered and in great diſtreſſe: thus with a gentle gale he ſailed onward.
               
                  Targianas Nauie béeing ſurpriſed, that little expected any ſuch fierce encounter, and therefore rode on at pleaſure: were all boorded and ſeazed on, ere they had any libertie to prepare themſelues for fight. When the priſoners were brought before him, and that he behelde Targiana among them, he was ſo ioyfull that he could not diſſemble his déep contentment. Then began he to ſcorne the Lady, caſting in her teeth what ſhe had doone in fauour of the Chriſtians, how greeuouſly ſhée tooke it, when Polendos and the reſt were her Fathers priſoners, & how ſhe fled (vnrequeſted) with Florian of the Forreſt.
               The Lady, who was of a great ſpirite, diſmaied not a iote, albeit ſhee was his priſoner, of whoſe intent before hand ſhée could eaſilie diuine: Wherefore, ſhee aunſwered him ſternly, as one dreadleſſe of death, for life (among ſo manie loſſes,) was not by her regarded. Heare me (quoth ſhe) Riſtorano, I confeſſe I haue fauoured the Chriſtians, in repaiment of infinite curteſies frō them receiued, while I remained in Constantinople, not that I did negligently carie my ſelfe, in any thing that might or did diſpleaſe my huſband. But for I am aſſured, that in vaine I doe excuſe my ſelfe to thee, were all true where-with thou couldeſt

charge me: diſpoſe of me as thou wilt, but looke for warre from the Chriſtians, in regard of the loue they beare mée. And though I haue béene abſent from my hereditarie kingdome, (which thou vniuſtlie ſéekeſt to vſurpe) yet haue I a childe, as is well knowne through all Babylon: and thoſe people, who for their loue to Albayzar, deſire to haue his ſonne their Soueraigne, will chaſtiſe thee as thou well deſerueſt.
               
                  Riſtorano (who willinglie would haue ſlaine her, the eaſier to compaſſe what hee deſired) conſidering on her ſpéeches, thought it better to deferre her death, till with more ſecurity he might effect it: and ſéeming to ſhew no outward ſigne of feare, with angry lookes thus he replied. Thy offences merrite more then a common kinde of death: wherfore ſo lightlie will I not kill thée, as I ſée thou wiſheſt I would.
               Héere-vpon, hee commaunded her with the Armenian Princeſſe, into a priuate roome of the ſhippe: and hee was in a thouſand opinions, whether he ſhould land, and take the Cittie of Constantinople, or turne backe into Turkie, and rule that kingdome. For it was the Citties good hap, that Riſtorano, not hearing what had happened to the principal Knights, who had defended the Cittie, (as the wiſe Aliart ſo procured, who likewiſe knewe of this Armies making thitherward) but beléeuing that the Chriſtians were conquerers, and therefore doubtful of his owne fortune: durſt not goe on ſhoare, the rather, becauſe his owne men were more willing to be gone then tarry. So contenting himſelfe, that Fortune had deliuered Targiana into his hand, and hearing by his ſpials, that Brundo, ſonne to Don Roſiran de la Bronde, with foure thouſande horſe, lay before Constantinople, expecting if they durſt land or no: fearing to be taken, with all ſpéede poſſible, he made haſt to be gone from thence.
               When Targiana behelde her ſelfe in his power, whom vndoubtedly ſhe knew intended her death, albeit her mind was inuincible, yet ſate ſhée very penſiue, not giuing a

word to the Armenian Princeſſe: who likewiſe gréeued to ſee her ſelfe a priſoner; neuertheleſſe, becauſe ſhe expected not death, ſhee laboured her thoughts the better for her eſcape, and turning to Targiana, ſaid.
               I remember good Princeſſe, that when I was to depart from Perſia, a wiſe Enchauntreſſe named Druſa Velona, gaue me a Ring of ſuch vertue: that being ſent in a Letter to any Knight, whom I ſhould make choyſe of for my defence, he would preſently come to helpe me. Thinke then what Knight may be moſt conuenient for your purpoſe, and I will write the Letter: for the Ring is of ſuch force, as to wound the hart of any Knight, and make him loue ye, although before he hated ye neuer ſo much.
               
                  Targiana right ioyfull to heare Druſa Velonas name, whoſe Art had before auailed her, when ſhe conducted her away, and enchaunted the Princeſſe Leonarda: began to thinke with her ſelfe, what Knight ſhe ſhould determine on, to deliuer her from the hands of Riſtorano. But among ſo many opinions not knowing how to reſolue, the Nauie entred Turkie, where Riſtorano ſecretly conuayed her to a Caſtle, accompanying her with certaine Matrones, who had charge that ſhe ſhould ſend no Letters abroade. For he feared, that if the Turkes ſhould vnderſtand, howe their Lady Targiana was impriſoned in her owne Kingdome: they would ſtirre in her behalfe. This hindered their former deſſeignment, of ſending the Letter with the Ring: and which by reaſon of the companie appointed to attend them, could not be performed.
            
            
               
               CHAP. III. VVhat they did in Constantinople, after the departure of the ſage Aliart.
               
               
                  VEry ſorrowfull remained all the Cittizens of Constantinople, for the departure of the ſage Aliart, who had caried with him thence the Knights aliue and dead: but becauſe on the contrary ſide they were ſome-what fearefull, leaſt the Pagans ſhould renue their forces, ſeaze on the Citty, and ſo all hope be vtterly loſt in repoſſeſſing it: they began to ſtrengthen their walls, and take order for matters concerning gouernment. And ſtudying to elect one, who might be fit for ſuch affaires: there thither came (as hath beene declared) Brundo accompanied with foure thouſand Horſe, who ſlewe and put to flight all the Pagans remayning there-about: wherefore it was generally iudged, that God had ſent him to be Gouernour of their Citty, vntill ſuch time as their owne Prince returned. Héere-vpon, by publique voyce he was elected, to his owne no little contentment: not ſo much for deſire of the gouernment, as that he eſtéemed it a matter glorious, to preſerue the Grecian Empire to the progenie of Palmerin. Being thus enſtalled as Gouernour, he gaue himſelfe to refortifying the walls, and leueying ſummes of money for maintenance of the ſtate. To this end he would often aſſemble his forces, and accompanied with people of the Citty likewiſe, would ſack and deſtroy the enemies holds neereſt the Sea: for therein were found abiding many Pagans, which had not as yet beene dealt withall by the people: there likewiſe were hid great ſummes of treaſure, which brought much benefit to the weale publique, helping well to enritch both the Souldiours and Cittizens.

The walls being fully perfected, and the ruined buildings in better forme then before they had béene: ſuch diligence on all ſides was vſed, that within two moneths, the Citty was as beautifull as euer it was, ſo yt nothing elſe wanted, but the noble preſence of the abſent Knights, which made it moſt of all to be regarded: but by the aſſembly of people from all parts, it ſéemed to excéede the former populous eſtimation, and Brundo with ſoundeſt iuſtice ſtill preſerued them in peace. Yet often was the breach héereof endangered, by the Embaſſadours from Spaine, Fraunce, and other Kingdomes, who came to demaund the dead bodies of their Princes, and not finding them there, lamented excéedingly, becauſe they would not credite what was ſaid, concerning their carrying thence. But Aliart fore-ſéeing this danger by his Art, ſuddenly ſhewed himſelfe amongſt thē, when by vertue of his authority and vnreprooueable reaſons, he vrged them to reſt ſatiſfied, ſaying: That he had prepared for their Lords more honourable buriall, then euer could be beſtowed on Princes: euen as the wiſe Vrganda, who in the time of Amadis & his ſonne Eſplandion, fore-ſeeing what would be the end of the paſſed battailes, had prouided the like. The Embaſſadours contented with this aunſwere, returned to their ſeuerall Countries: and Aliart confirmed the Regiment of Brundo, giuing order for many matters, that might redound to the Cittizens profit. He likewiſe told them newes of the Princes, who being caried thence with ſo little hope of life, were yet now reduced into ſo good eſtate, as within little while they ſhould haue their Emperour Primaleon, though no more he might aduenture the life of a Knight at Armes. The people of Constantinople were very ioyfull of theſe tydings, becauſe now they were aſſured to ſee their Prince againe, whoſe vertues they did both loue and reuerence. So abiding in prouident ca
                     •
                  e for their Citty, they entreated Aliart, that (ſo ſoone as might be) he would ſend their Prince Primaleon: which he promiſed to doo, and ſo returned to the Perillous Ile.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. IIII. How the Princes that were in the Perillous Ile, were now recouered paſt any danger: And what happened to Madam Leonarda in child-trauaile. How the other Princeſſes in like manner were deliuered of children: and how the Prince Florian of the Forrest departed thence.
               
                  
                     ALiart being gone from Constantinople toward the Perillous Ile, perceauing by his ſkill, that there would happen a miſchaunce, ſufficient to diſturbe the Princes quiet: made his arriuall there the ſooner, finding all things wel as yet, that the Knights had indifferently recouered their great loſſe of blood, and walked about the Iland, albeit their wounds were not thorowly healed: which ſome-what offended them, & made them (in a manner) ſcorne Aliarts wiſedome, as the like they did in foreiudging the iſſue of the perillous battaile, handled at large in the end of the ſecond booke of this Hiſtory. But tenne dayes were not fully expired, till they found themſelues in better diſpoſition, ioying more entirely in each others amendment.
               Nowe the Quéene Leonarda, ouer-charged with the irkſome panges of child-bearing, hauing foure dayes together endured the bitter agonies incident thereto, was at length deliuered of a faire daughter named Victoria: who being no ſooner borne, but the weake Mother (folding her armes together, and lifting her eyes to heauen) departed this life. This her ſuddaine death, which the wiſe Aliart before ſuſpected not, very much troubled all the royall company: but eſpecially Florian, who was wonderouſly enamoured

of her, he ranne about in ſuch fury, as at euery inſtant he would haue ſlaine himſelfe, and he had done it, but that Palmerin, Pompides, and Aliart his brethren, were ſtill enforced to kéepe him company. At length, growing into extreame hate of the Iland, becauſe he had loſt the company of his beloued Leonarda: one day taking Aliart aſide, he thus began.
               My Lord and brother, eyther giue me leaue to diſpatch my ſelfe, that I may not out-liue her, whoſe beauty remē
                  bred makes life loathſome to me: or let me depart this Iland, to the end I may not ſée the place, which daily renuing the memory of my loue, wil vrge me but to the greater impatience. All the Princes liked wel this determination of Florian, who was not yet perfectly healed, albeit his dexterity vſed in the battaile, hindered his hurts from being ſo déepe as others were, by meanes whereof he was the beſt recouered amongſt them all. All the Lords & Ladies greatly laboured to comfort Florian, & pacifie his greefes, but all their endeuour amounted to nothing: for hée was ſo tranſported with griefe & paſſions, as he liued the moſt deſpiſed life that euer malcontent did. When Aliart made proofe of his Art and induſtry, and ſaw all was in vaine to remooue theſe humors: he prouided him a Ship, and cauſing him to put on like Armour as hée was went to weare, as alſo a ſhield with his former ſauage mans deuiſe: accompanied him foorth of the Iland, to the great griefe of all the Princes, eſpecially Don Edward his father, whoſe age made his wounds more offenſiue to him. His brethren would gladly haue borne him company, but hee (reiecting all comfort) would not permit them: ſo taking his leaue of them all, & laſtly of Aliart, gone is he for all aduentures whatſoeuer. The griefe for Florians departure, was partly qualified, by ioy of ye princeſſes, who now were to behold ye fruits of their labors. Miragarda was deliuered of a ſon, ſo like her ſelfe, as in beauty he excelled all the youth of thoſe times, & was named Oliuanto. Polinarda had a ſonne likewiſe, who was called Leonato. Claricia, wife to Gracian Prince of France,
                  
brought foorth a ſonne, hee had to name Caro. Oniſtalda, wife to Berolde Prince of Spaine, was brought to bed of a daughter, who was named Argentina: in beauty ſhee ſeemed another Miragarda, but for honeſt curteſie much more affable. Bernarda, wife to the Prince Francian, and daughter to Belcar, had a ſonne, who was called Belcar after his Grandfather. Sidelia, Platirs wife and Primaleons daughter, brought foorth a ſonne, named Eſtrellant. Deniſa
                  ▪ wife to Beliſart, had twinnes, a male and female: the ſonne was called Fortenbracio, the daughter Candida. This Lady grew ſo faire, that ſhe excelled all the dames of Greece, and made the minds diſtracted both of Palmerin and the Emperour Primaleon: becauſe each of them for this rare and ſinguler beauty, without regard of honour or kindred, made choyſe of her as their chiefeſt Patroneſſe. Clariana, wife to Dramian, ſhe had a ſonne named Orino Leonida, daughter to the Duke of Pera, & wife to Friſoll, brought a ſonne, called Arguto. This was no leſſe an enemie to Primaleon the ſecond, (then was Friſoll his Grandfather, who was named in thoſe times the Knight of the Sunne, to Palmerin d'Oliua) according as in fit place ſhall be declared Arlencea brought her huſband Dramuſiande, a ſonne of great ſtature, who had to name Franardo, excéeding his father in valure, and dooing ſeruice like him to the Empire of Conſtantinople. Cardigea, daughter to the Giant Gatarin, and wife to Almaroll, had likewiſe a ſonne, who became no leſſe faithfull and valiant then his father, and therefore after his name was called Almaroll. Florenda, daughter to Arnedes King of Fraunce, and wife to Germaine of Orleaunce, had a daughter named Spira: who was ſo faire, but yet arrogant withall, that not contenting her ſelfe with any Knights offer to her ſeruice, thinking her ſelfe to be the onely woman: remayned without a huſband, as ſhall be declared when we come to ſpeake of her. Clariana brought to Guerin a ſonne, who was called Armindo. The ioy was great through the whole Iland, for theſe Princeſſes good ſucceſſe in child-birth, and when the children came to

be chriſtened, they were all named as ye haue heard alreadie: but as for thoſe Ladies whoſe huſbands were dead, they remayned in griefe, as they had good cauſe: For the kinde harted woman being bereft of her huſband, can take no true delight in any thing elſe what ſo euer.
            
            
               CHAP. V. VVhat happened for the buriall of the dead Princes bodies.
               
                  
                     ALiart beholding the wounded Princes ſo well recouered, preſently began to bethinke him on buriall for the dead, that due honour might be done to each one, to remayne for all their ſuccéeding poſterity. And that the Ladies might not knowe whether he went, hee ſecretly tooke ſhipping, and ſo paſſed to the place where the dead bodies were. Comming néere the ſhoare, he eſpied Argentao, with others accompanied (who noted the Ships making thitherward) haſtning to the Port, and there they met together euen as Aliart landed. Argentao with a loud voyce told him, how Satrafort, Gouernour of the Caſtle, had taken into his cuſtodie the Princes dead bodies, by reaſon of a ſtrange accident there happening in this manner. The day before, in the chamber where Aliart found the bookes of the ſkilfull Vrganda, was heard a wonderfull noyſe, and going to know the reaſon thereof: they beheld round about the chamber many faire Toombs, equalling the number of the dead Princes, whereby they found themſelues diſburdened of their former care, which was, how they might finde meanes to interre the Princes, with ſuch honour as they had all highly deſerued. And holding this aduenture to be very important, they ſtoode conferring

héereon with Alfernao at the Caſtle, euen as they beheld this Shippe comming vnder ſaile, when Satrafort meeting Alfernao on the bridge, and ioying to be accompanied with ſo wiſe and woorthy a Lord as Aliart, began to acquaint him with the whole accident.
               It nowe remayneth ſir (quoth Argentao to Aliart) that your arriuall héere in ſo happy an houre, may thoroughly reſolue vs in many doubtfull caſes: becauſe▪ though all theſe Toombs are of moſt beautifull Marble, yet know we not how to appoint each Prince the place beſt beſéeming him. As for you my Lord, to whom farre greater aduentures then this are reſerued in knowledge: you can beſt appoint how matters ſhall be ordered, in that you are to diſpoſe both of them and vs. Aliart very ioyfull of theſe good newes, perſwading himſelfe, that whoſoeuer prepared theſe Toombs ſo ready, had likewiſe appointed them to the dignity of each perſon: without ſhaping them any aunſwere at all, entred the Caſtle, where being conducted to the Toombs, and aſſaying to remooue them thence, but could not: he meruailed not a little thereat, and ſtanding in a ſolemne conceite héereon, he bethought himſelfe, that it were neceſſary to haue al the other liuing Princes there, in defence of whom all they had loſt their liues: but eſpecially the wiues of theſe ſlaine Knights, that they beholring their honourable buriall, ſhould take their loſſe the more contentedly.
               Héere-vpon he diſpatched thence Satrafort, by whom hee aduertiſed Primaleon, Don Edward, and the reſt, that with conuenient ſpéede they ſhould come thither, and bring with them all the Princeſſes. Within two dayes following, they had there perſonally preſent, the Emperour, Don Edward, Florendos, Palmerin, of England, Platir, Gracian, Berolde, Floraman, Francian, Dragonalte, Blandidon, Pompides, Dramuſiande,
                   who now began to walke a little, leaning on a ſpeares trunchion, and Dirdan with him. But Almaroll could not be there, by reaſon of his weakenes, marrie all the Princeſſes were there together: with ioy

and great kindnes did Aliart welcome them, that all their paſſed gréefes were vtterlie forgotten: and each had their lodgings ſeuerallie appointed, that ſuch as were not ſoundlie healed, might haue the better attendance.
            
            
               CHAP. VI. How the ſeuerall Tombes were made manifeſt, with the Epitaphs belonging to each of them.
               
                  THE Ladies whoſe huſbandes were dead, did not as yet behold where they ſhould be buried: but imagining it would be in ye Caſtle, grewe into the greater penſiuenes, and wept as women in like caſe will doo. Which when Aliart perceiued, hee gaue order the next day, that all the Princes with the Ladies, ſhould come into the chamber, where hauing cauſed the dead bodies to be brought, they flocked all together to beholde the euent. No ſooner were they there aſſembled, but appeared foorth of the wall the figure of an old woman, who holding a rod in her hand, made ſigne by her lookes bent on Aliart, that he ſhould commaund to bee brought into the midſt of the Chamber, the bodie of Arnedes king of Fraunce, which no ſooner was done, but a goodly Tombe like a bed, preſented it ſelfe vnto them, which was bedect with flowers of golde ſo curiouſly formed, as it was moſt meruailous to beholde, and in the midſt of a cloth rarelie wrought thereon, was written this Epitaph.
               
                  The honour of Fraunce is not heerein encloſed,
                  Which nor to time nor place can be diſpoſed.
               
               
                  Policia, the wife and Quéene to Arnedes, ſtanding before this Tombe, with Flerida & the other Ladies, made great

lamentation ouer the Kings dead bodie: which they would haue continued both that day and the next, if the Sepulcher (after it was cloſed) had not béene ſuddenly taken away, they knew not by whom, and then againe beheld if placed in the midſt of the wall, vnder the féete of the figure of the ſame Policia his Queene. When preſentlie another tombe moſt richlie wrought, was ſéene to ſtand in ye others place, hauing this Epitaph on it.
               
                  Spayne, grieue not thou, ſith death cannot depriue
                  Thy fame and honour which thou heldst aliue:
                  For thou in greater glory doost ſuruiue.
               
               
                  Meliſſa his Quéene would haue ſtept before it, to witnes her inward gréefe by her teares: but the third Tombe (as pleaſed the power that ſent it, to hinder her laments) intruded it ſelfe, and the ſecond was likewiſe conueyed to the other in the wall. Each one meruailed at this third Sepulcher, ſéeing there was nere a Croſſe thereon, nor anie Chriſtian ſigne vſed on ſuch monuments, yet béeing verie huge & great: wherefore they imagined, that it was made for the Graund Cane Maiortes, who was a Pagan, and the doubt héereof was fully reſolued, ſo ſoone as they read the Epitaph, which was thus.

                     From man, became a dogge, then changd to humane ſtate,
                     He ſeru'd me with a dogs firme loue, for times to wōder at.
                  
All the Princes ſhed teares, when faithfull Maiortes was layd in his Sepulcher, eſpecially Don Edward, who had him with him in the forme of a dog, and afterward a man, (as in Primaleons hiſtorie is declared) coulde not refraine from weeping.
               It pleaſed Aliart to behold all theſe teſtimonies of loue, and hee laboured to conuert all this gréefe to ioy, in regard the totall ruine of Constantinople had not happened, but that the other Princes, whoſe death were once as much to be doubted, were now to be ſéene in ſo good eſtate. But (as in like caſes) gréefe is not eaſilie remooued, ſo ſtill they helde on, till this Tombe was lifted vp and conueied thence:

marie foorth of the Chamber, becauſe hee was not a Chriſtian. And then was placed another Tombe before them, ſo roially adorned: as they were verie deſirous to knowe for whom it was, when looking on the Epitaph, they read thus.
               
                  
                     Belcar heere ſleepes, heauen hath his ſoule by right,
                  The world his ſpoyles, all won in fayrest fight:
                  With ſuch rare honour as became a Knight.
               
               
                  Belcar encloſed in his hearſſe, with many ſilent paſſions of his wife Alderina, his ſonne, and all the reſt (becauſe Aliart had intreated no more acceſſe to the bodies) it was cō
                  uaied thence, and (as the former) placed at the foote of his wiues figure, the ſtatue ſéeming to ſhed lifelie teares, ſuch wondrous arte had the ſkilfull Vrganda vſed on them all. Then appeared to them another Tombe, the fore-part whereof was ingeniouſlie formed, and béeing couered with a ſumptuous cloth all of golde, they read thereon this Epitaph.
               
                  
                     Friſols fayre deedes doe merrite more regard
                  Then earth can yeeld, true fame is his reward.
               
               The ſucceſſe of this Tombe, reſembled the former, whē another was immediatly preſented, not one iote leſſe beautified or adorned: whereon appeared the inſtability of Fortune, and thus the Epitaph.
               
                  
                     Belyſart dyed, but not infamouſly,
                  His vertues conquer deaths blacke obloquie.
               
               This Sepulcher taken away before Deniſa could do her dutie to it: there was another intruded, whereon in verie faire letters this Epitaph was engrauen.
               
                  
                     Onistade, dreadleſſe of deaths crueltie:
                  With fame hath wonne faire lifes eternitie.
               
               Quickly was this tombe conuaied thence, and in ſteede thereof another, containing this motto.
               
                  
                     Albanis hath wonne what neuer can be lost,
                  Then death how canst thou of thy conquest boast?
               
               This likewiſe being remoued, another more rich & precious was preſented, with this Epitaph.
               
                  
                  Mourne not Bohemia though thy King be dead,
                  His life and death, hath made thee famozed.
               
               King Rodamont béeing in his graue, and bemoned generallie, it was taken to place appointed for it, when Aliart ſéeing another alreadie in roome therof, peruſing the deuiſe, found thereon this inſcription.
               
                  
                     Estrellant fought not for an earthly crowne,
                  Immortall life trode thoſe affections downe.
               
               The Ladies and Princes could not ceaſe from wéeping, beholding the loſſe of ſo many hardie Knights, but when this Tombe was caried to the wall, the next approching had this Epitaph.
               
                  
                     Vaſſiliards fayth did testifie his end,
                  Whoſe deeds, whole worlds of time ſhall ſtill commend.
               
               Next, followed the Sepulcher for Duke Drapos of Normandie, with theſe two lines thereon.
               
                  
                     Normans, it is in vaine to weepe for mee,
                  Country farewell, my fame ſhall liue with thee.
               
               Another faire Tombe was next preſented, with this ſentence to be read thereon.
               
                  
                     Tremoran no better way could finde to die,
                  Then in ſtoute warre, by fairest chiualrie.
               
               Euerie one ſtoode ſilent, except ſuch as ſighed, not knowing what to ſay, ſeeing the Tombes ſo ſtrangely carried from place to place, and yet not diſcerned by whom, vpon the next were theſe lines.
               
                  Fierce Tenebrant, when death had him in chaſe,
                  Turnd manfully, and died with deaths diſgrace.
               
               His bedde of honour béeing couered and gone, another as magnificent was produced, deliuering theſe verſes.
               
                  No blame can Orleaunce to my death impute,
                  That loſt my life in honours ſwift purſute.
               
               Then Luymans Tombe was the next in courſe, bearing this teſtimonie of his vertues.
               
                  
                  
                     Ʋertue the obiect of my high deſire,
                  Bestowed on me what most I did require.
               
               Next was to be ſeene another Sepulcher, not of white ſtone, as all the former were: but more red and bloody cullored, containing this Epitaph.
               
                  Though Roſiran were not the greateſt Lord,
                  His honour heere doth with the reſt accord.
               
               Nowe euen at the dayes ſhutting vp, Dramians hearſſe preſented it ſelfe, with this deuiſe.
               
                  So ſweetly Dramian dyed among the rest,
                  That now he liues as famous as the best.
               
               And when it was conuaied thence, as all the reſt had béene, Aliart looked about, and behelde no more Tombes thus to be offered, wherein the greater ſtates were to bee encloſed: then looking on the old Womans figure, it turned the face thereof toward the wall, as if it ſéemed to commaund them now to depart. Heereupon he cauſed the Ladies whoſe huſbands were liuing, to lead the widdowed Princeſſes by the hand, and hee followed, comforting them in this manner.
               Fayre Ladies, ſéeing it pleaſed GOD, that your Lords ſhould looſe their liues in defence of his faith, you ought to conforme your ſelues to his will, and with-drawing yée to more quiet of minde, be carefull of your owne health, leaſt your loſſe be a greater endamagement to Chriſtendome. To morrowe we ſhall ſée, in what manner theſe greater Lords are to be buried, for I cannot beléeue, that the wiſe Vrganda would prouide ſuch rare Sepulchers for theſe, and haue no care of them of higher deſert. Héere-with they departed the chamber, meruailing at the ſtrange accidents they 
                     •
                  ad ſéene.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VII. How Pandricia, hauing hid herſelfe in the Chamber among the Tombes, was found dead by the bodie of her husband Bellagris.
               
               
                  BEeing all of them greatlie gréeued for the death of ſo many woorthy Lords, Pandricias ſorrowes grew to extreamity, for ſhe béeing hidde among the Sepulchers, with reſolued minde to purſue her intent, and weeping to die ouer her huſbands dead bodie: when ſhee perceiued that by the time of night they were all aſléepe, ſhe came to the bodie of Bellagris, and ouer it made the moſt wofulſt lamentation, that euer did woman for her huſbands death. Recounting the tedious time of miſery, wherein not long they had liued, which béeing ouer-blowne with a little better comfort, had now ſo ſmall continuance. Then remembring Blandidon her ſonne, whoſe life ſhe likewiſe feared, becauſe his great expence of blood ſtill made him keepe his bed: this double corſiue of gréefe ſo laboured her thoughts, that ouer-come there-with, cloſing hand in hand, ſhee fell downe dead, ouer her huſbands body.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII. How the other Princes were buried the day following.
               
                  YEt was not Blandidon ſo greatly weakened, but that he remembred his mother, who was wont to ſtand very penſiue by his bedde ſide: but ſéeing all had betaken themſelues to reſt, loth was hee to trouble ſo honourable a companie,

and therefore paſſed ouer this night, ſuſpecting what he found too true in the end. The morning following, they roſe not ouer-earlie, by reaſon of the Princes weake diſpoſition, and the greefe they endured the day paſt, in burying the dead.
               
                  Aliart, who ſtoode pondering with himſelfe, where the Princes of greateſt merrite ſhould be interred, becauſe hee ſawe no Sepulchers as yet there appointed for them: earlie that morning went where the other had béene buried, and beheld all the chamber was changed into the forme of halfe a Theater, with degrées and pillers of Alablaſter ſo beautifull, as at midnight cléere day might there be diſcerned, and the Tombes which had béene vſed the day before, aunſwered in order to the perſons encloſed in them. Now in the midſt of a place more high and ſpacious, and vnder the féete of Polinardas figure, was a Sepulcher wrought into the wall, held vp by pillers of Porphirie, and arched ouer the head moſt richlie, where on the couerture ſtood (in pure golde) the ſtatue of the Emperour Palmerin, holding Fortune by the locks, and out-brauing her power, as ſeeming to threaten her if ſhe parted from him. On the ſide before, was engrauen in Letters of golde theſe verſes following.
               
                  By valour and good hap I ouercame
                  All mine attempts: To kindred of my name,
                  Leaue I perpetuall memory and fame.
               
               On the right hand was another Tombe, little leſſe differing in beautie, béeing placed vnder the féete of Agriola, and in the midſt thereof was two Epitaphs, the firſt was thus.
               
                  The ſtate I ioyde, made mee not feare to die,
                  Becauſe I knewe that ſhame and infamie,
                  Followeth a life not led heroycallie.
               
               The other, which was ſome-what lower, and written in leſſer Letters, was thus.
               
                  
                  Tis endleſſe death to liue without content:
                  Die then like me, who will the ſame preuent.
               
               This ſecond Epitaph made knowne, that Polynard was buried with the Emperour Vernar his Brother, whereat they all meruailed. Now on the left hand of the Emperour Palmerin, was another Sepulcher richlie adorned, hauing this Epitaph thereon.
               
                  Yeeres did not let me from deſire to die,
                  Wanting the life my father got thereby.
               
               The deſcription thus engrauen on this Tombe, made it apparant to euerie one, that therein lay encloſed, Polendos King of Theſſaly. Then vnder that of Palmerin, there was another of redde Marble: but the Epitaph thereon was written in Gréeke, and is thus interpreted.
               
                  It was ill hap for me to end my daies,
                  Not ſpending of my blood, as others haue:
                  To guarde the walls and gates got me no prayſe,
                  They did me wrong that ſent me ſo to graue.
               
               Euery one gathered, that this was King Tarnaes, who in regard of his graue yéeres, was left to guarde the Citty of Constantinople.
               
               Nowe ſtande all the Princes and Lords dumbe (as it were) at ſo many meruailes, and nothing elſe coulde bee heard, but earneſt and profound ſighes, ſent from the melting harts of the widdowed Ladies. And Aliart, to knowe certainlie whether the bodies, which were not buried the day before, remained as they had beene left, went to the chamber, and finding that of Bellagris, as alſo Pandricia lying dead by it, he ſtoode as one agaſt thereat, the Princeſſes likewiſe, when they beheld her in that caſe, deliuered forth ſuch lamentations, as might eaſily be heard thorowe the whole Caſtle: which raiſed ſuch admiration in them that lay wounded, as made them forſake their lodgings, to the great perill of their liues: eſpecially Blandidon, whoſe mind miſgaue him of ſome enſuing ill, not hauing all that night ſeene his wofull mother.
               
                  
                  Aliart by his words could not pacifie their complaints, but worſe was like to haue enſued thereon, if the olde womans figure had not made a ſuddaine noyſe with her rod: where-with they all turned about, to vnderſtand the cauſe thereof, and beeing in a generall meruaile, immediatly they behelde a goodly Sepulcher woorthily wrought, hauing two Epitaphs engrauen thereon: the firſt in this maner.
               
                  I liu'd a Pagan, but for truth I know,
                  That following time will bliſſe on me bestow.
               
               The other which was faſtened to this former, with many braunches (as it were) was thus.
               
                  Life full of griefe, with little ioy or none,
                  Welcome ſweet death that knits two harts in one:
                  For with Bellagris is my hope alone.
               
               In this Sepulcher were they both layd together, & without any one putting hand thereto, it was taken vp, and placed vnder that of King Tarnaes: for Pandricia, albeit ſhe was nominated amongſt the faireſt in the world, yet was ſhe not pictured in this chamber, the reaſon was, ſhe led ſuch a ſorrowfull kinde of life, as hindred the perfection of her beauty from ſight. Theſe Princes buried thus with ſuch glory, as the wiſe Vrganda in her prouidence thought méete, preſeruing by her in readines ſo many Toombs, as might ſerue ſuch great Princes to take their lateſt reſt in. Aliart (hauing brought thither from the Profound Ile, diuers Prieſts and religious perſons) cauſed their obſequies to be celebrated, as in a Countrey ſo farre from Chriſtendome could be performed. Which being done, he brought them all back to the Pallace, hauing firſt ſéene the old womans Image take her leaue: who with her wand made certaine ſignes to them, which ſéemed by Aliarts ſignifying the ſame, that, that Theater of Toombs ſhould there continue, while any of Palmerins blood ſhould ſuruiue, whoſe race and fortune for euer ſhould be moſt famous, and to the very laſt not vtterly aboliſhed. Blandidon, in whom could not be hid the ſad hap of his Mother, vſed ſuch paſſions of griefe,

as ſéemed to menace him with death: but that Aliart got ſome mittigation thereto by his Art, cauſing him in ſleepe to ſee his father Bellagris, who ſpake to him, that he ſhould abandon all other thoughts, ſtudying onely to recouer his health, that ſo he might goe gouerne the ſtate of Niquea: becauſe a baſtard ſiſter of his, by the fauour of ſome Barrons confederating with her, one whereof expected her to be his wife, were practiſing how to enioy it. And this viſion was not a dreame, by reaſon theſe affaires were there in good forwardnes: but the young Lady named Tirena, would not conſent to any Barron of that Kingdome, becauſe ſhe was déepely enamoured on Dirdan, ſonne to Maiortes the great Cane, and meant to deny her faith ſo lately receaued, thereby to make him Soldane of Niquea. Nor was this hidden from Dirdan, who becauſe he was young and amorous likewiſe, looked not ſo much at the friendſhip of a Chriſtian Princeſſe, for ſatiſfying her loue: as perhaps he did to the ioyning of ſo great a neighbouring Signorie to his owne Kingdome.
               
                  Blandidon giuing credite to his dreame, and perceauing if hee ſlackt the redreſſe héereof, hee might remayne ſtill a priuate man as he was: began to conſider aduiſedly thereon, for he knew right well, that albeit he was ſonne to noble Don Edward, yet coulde hee expect no gouernment in England, therefore he tooke truce with his thoughts, and attended his health.
            
            
               
               CHAP. IX. How the Knight of the Sauage man following aduentures, there happened to his hand a Letter with a Ring.
               
                  
                     TArgiana and the Armenian Princeſſe, who attended no other oportunity, but howe to write, concluded to put in truſt therewith a young mayden daughter to one of her néereſt kindred, who at this time ſhould ſerue inſted of a Squire, ſhe hauing good knowledge of Targiana, yet fained not to know her, for feare of Riſtorano. But on a day following, when the Matrones were buſily bathing themſelues, they called her a-ſide, and Targiana at full diſcloſed herſelfe, and what ſhee ſought to compaſſe by her: promiſing her no meane aduauncement, if by her meanes ſhe might recouer her liberty and Kingdome.
               The Mayden, who was diſcréete, and ſo loued her Lady, as for her helpe ſhee would make venture of her life: made ready one euening ſuch a kinde of wine, that diſtributing it frankly amongſt the Matrones, they all went to ſléepe, and not one of them boudged till the next morning. Targiana ſetting her ſelfe to write, among many other, made choyſe of ſending her Letter to Florian, becauſe ſhee loued him before Albayzar: and beſtowing the flower of her honour on him, it could not be, that in this her great miſhap he would forſake her, albeit the vertue of the Ring ſhold faile her. Beſide, ſhe conceited another helping hope, that Leonarda might be dead, becauſe Druſa Velona, (when

ſhe enchaunted her into the Serpent) ſaid withall, that Florian ſhould not long time enioy his faire Leonarda: according as the conſtellation gouerning at her birth declared, that ſhe ſhould liue but a little while, and when that happened, ſhe might promiſe her ſelfe Prince Florian to her huſband, in that ſhe could not beléeue, that her curteſies vſed toward him were vtterly forgotten. On this conceite ſhe framed the Letter, and folding the Ring therein, the Princeſſe of Armenia commaunded it to flie to the hand of Florian of the Forreſt: and opening the window, the Letter with the Ring mounted in the ayre, betaking it ſelfe as it was directed.
               
                  Florian (as you haue heard) being parted from the Iland, with intent to come in no place of humane reſort, ſought with his Shippe to kéepe aloofe from land, where he might diſcerne either Citty or Caſtle: and holding on a ſolitary courſe of Nauigation, he came to a deſolate and ruined Hauen, ſo vnfrequented in his owne opinion, as he imagined himſelfe highly beholding to Fortune, for bringing him to a place ſo fitting his deſire. Héere going on ſhoare, he left the Ship, and becauſe he coueted to be alone, walked on into a Wood: where ouer-taken by the night, weary, troubled, and burdened with many thoughts, he lay downe vnder a trée to repoſe himſelfe. Héere, redoubling gréefe on gréefe, becauſe he had ſo ſoone loſt his faire Leonarda; at length toward morning, his eyes (ouer-charged with watching) began to folde downe their lids, yet ſtill dreaming on his conceites waking: but pauſing a while, he felt him ſelfe lifted from the ground, and inwardly touched ſomewhat amourouſly.
               This was by a Néece of Eutropa, Aunt to Dramuſiande, who when Florian combated with her brother, became ſo enamoured of his valour, as euer afterward ſhe laboured to get hold of him, and make him tractable to her deſires: She being ſom-what ſkilfull in Magicall ſciences, knowing thereby, that Florian (after the death of Leonarda) was in deſperate humours departed from the Perillous Ile: by

her cunning conducted him to this vaſt Deſert, meaning thence to guide him to a Pallace of hers, which ſtoode ſomwhat further within the Land. Florian féeling himſelfe lifted vp in ſuch manner as hath béene declared, ſaid: what mayſt thou be that thus troubleſt my quietnes? thinke not that any amorous thought hath power to enter my breaſt. Then Dorina, for ſo was the mayden called that burned thus in loue, forgetting to helpe her ſelfe any more by Art: came in perſon to be ſéene, and ſaid. Sir Knight, take pitty on the loue of a young Damoſell, who not able to repaire the hurt by thine eyes and her owne committed: deſires to beſtow her ſelfe on thée, not as a Louer, but to be thy Seruant. At theſe ſwéete ſpéeches, which auaile very much in generous minds, and could not be quite extinct in Florian, who was (by nature) to women enclined: he began ſome-what to yéeld, not as one diſpoſed to graunt what ſhe requeſted, but with an intent to hold her in ſome hope, till he could better compaſſe to be rid of her, whereon hée thus replied.
               Such are my fortunes (faire creature) as my heart can hardly yéeld to loue any woman: neuertheleſſe, your paſſions haue vrged me to ſome pitty, and makes me willing to depart hence with you, hoping that when your ſelfe ſhall behold me in like manner afflicted, and with ſuch amorous torments as I now behold in you, you will the ſooner deſiſt from this ouer-fond humour. The Damoſell being wiſe, was highly contented to haue him with her: perſwading her ſelfe, that hardly could hote young blood defend it ſelfe, from the ſwéete enticements of an amorous Lady. So taking him by the hand, ſhee conducted him to her Caſtle: where he was ſo gallantly entertayned by light of Torches, as ſcant could he imagine how to deny loue to ſo gentle a creature. Being entred a goodly hall, he was ſeated at a table right againſt Dorina: who ſéeing him ſo often looke babies in her eyes, ſuppoſed him thorowly vanquiſhed by her loue, making the leſſe account to vſe any more enchauntments. The houre being come of going to reſt,

a chamber moſt ſumptuouſly adorned was prepared for Florian: where by reaſon the night was very far ſpent, he laid him downe and ſlept right ſoundly. Dorina, eyther weary with ſo long watching that night, or making her ſelfe certainly aſſured, to be beloued where ſhe thought her ſelfe neuer enough pleaſed: would not then goe ſée him in bed, becauſe ſhe imagined not that a victory ſufficient. But ariſing the next morning, very richly decked, ſhe went to awake the Knight: who being glad he had no further that night béene tempted by the Lady; aroſe, with intent to depart thence, that hee might no more be aſſailed the next night following. But he found his hope fore-ſtalled, for as he iſſued foorth of his chamber, Targianaes Letter with the Ring came flying into his hand: the vertue whereof was ſuch, that ſuddainly he felt himſelfe enamoured on her that wrote it. So being further preſſed on by force of the enchauntment, he went to the Stable, where mounting on horſe-backe, he departed without taking leaue of Dorina: who had no power to hinder him, by reaſon Druſa Velonaes Art was of ſuch perfection, as no other Magitian (how ſkilfull ſo euer) could withſtand it.
            
            
               CHAP. X. VVhat Florian did, after his departure from Dorina.
               
               
                  FLorian, when he was gotten about a ſtones caſt from the Caſtle, opened the Letter, and began to reade it, the tenour thereof béeing thus.
               
                  
                     
                        Targianaes Letter to Prince Florian of the Deſert.
                     
                     IF ſincere loue (by gentlenes onely occaſioned) may neuer be al togeher quite forgotten: then I perſwade my ſelfe, albeit you are (in effect) fully eſtraunged from me, yet ſome

little ſparke of loue may be remayning, that will be your conductour to my abiding, if the ſame be not vtterly quenched in your heart. By this perſwaſion I am mooued, to ſollicite you with an honourable enterprize, which is; to free mee from the hands of Ristorano my Coſen, who holds me as priſoner within mine own Kingdom. Take pitty then on Targiana, who heere-to-fore hath been not ingratefull to you, & (by theſe meanes) win to your ſelfe eternall glory. The way how to deliuer me, you ſhall vnderſtand when you come into Turkie, to the Citty of Tubante, where I will take knowledge of ye from a windowe; if you weare a greene plume in your helmet, pointed with gold, whereof you ſhall finde very many in this Citty.
                     
                        Deſolate Targiana.
                     
                  
               
               The Letter, which of it ſelfe was enough to wound a firmer heart then Florian had, with the ſtrong enchauntment thereto applied: ſo wrought with the Prince, that forgetting altogether his late Leonarda, he became enflamed beyond reaſon toward Targiana: remembring her manifold curteſies vſed to him, when beeing priſoner, he combated with Arduramet. Setting forward on his way, hee might heare behind him many dolorous exclamations: to wit, of Dorina, who ſéeing her ſelfe thus forſaken, & hopeleſſe of recouering him againe, fell into ſuch fury, that taking a knife, ſhee would haue ſlaine her ſelfe there-with, and being ſome-what wounded, ſhe was eſpied, and ſtayed by her Damoſells, who altogether railed on the diſcourteous Knight. But he making no reckoning thereof, got to the Sea-ſide, where finding a Shippe of Turkie, which by fortune had made ſtay a while by this deſolate Wildernes, he ſpeaking Turkiſh very readily: was by them receaued into the Ship, imagining him verily to be a Turke. With this Shippe went Florian for Turkie, making them beléeue, that he had béene at Albayzars warres, the ſucceſſe whereof he rehearſed ſo perticulerly, as euery one delighted much to heare him.
               
                  Thus ſayling with a proſperous winde, at length they reached the Citty of Turbante, where Targiana remained impriſoned. Nowe was Riſtorano gone againſt certaine Barrons of ye Kingdom, who diſdaining his Regiment, raiſed warre vpon him: knowing withall, that Targiana was enthralled within the Caſtle, and now was likewiſe come thither with a great power, Sucuſano brother to ye 
                  Armenian Princeſſe, and to the Soldane of Perſia, that died at Conſtantinople. By meanes héereof, Florian might the more fréely ſhew himſelfe before the Caſtle, and bearing his appointed notice of the gréene plume: hée was knowne by Targiana, who not a little glad of his arriuall, deuiſed how ſhe might get him lodged néere the Caſtle, ſo to expect the houre when he beſt might frée her.
            
            
               CHAP. XI. How Ristorano returning to Turbante, prouided good guardance for Targiana, deliuering the Armenian Princeſſe to Sucuſano: and what Florian did for Targiana.
               
               
                  
                     RIſtorano beeing aduertiſed, that Sucuſano (with a mighty Army of Perſians) was entred Turkie, to recouer the Armenian Princeſſe: returned in haſt to Tubante, where ſéeking to pacifie the people, who knew Targiana to bee there impriſoned, hee ſent word to the Perſian, that he ſhold haue the Lady without further contradiction, prouided, he would paſſe on no further: ſo cauſing her to be brought from the Caſtle, with a very ſmall traine he ſent her to her brother, becauſe hee elſe ſuſpected nothing. But Florian, whoſe thoughts were buſied

howe to deliuer Targiana, perceiuing that Riſtorano (fearing ſhe ſhould be recouered by the people) had manned her with a very ſtrong guard, when hee heard the Armenian Princeſſe was ſent to Sucuſano, intended an enterpriſe (ouer-venturous indeede) but that hee was ſtill fauourablie protected by Dorina, who in ſo many perrils gaue him help. And this was his determination, to take ye Princeſſe forcibly from them that conducted her to Sucuſano: ſo to procure warre betwéene the Turkes and Perſians, when reſtoring her againe to them (his owne turne beeing ſerued) it muſt needes ſort to eyther of their contentments. Making thys knowne to Targiana, who not imagining what to hope of this doubtfull enterpriſe, remained betweene ioy & feare: but referring all to the good or ill ſucceſſe, ſent him worde, that he ſhould compaſſe what euer he thought good for her eſcape.
               
                  Florian arming himſelfe for the purpoſe, went to purſue the tract of the Armenian Princeſſe, who by an hundred Turkes was ſent toward her brother, and béeing come to them, he cryed: Abyde, and let goe the Lady, except ye all meane to die by my hand.
               The Captaine of theſe Turkes, who was a man verie arrogant: turning to his followers, ſayde: This fellowe ſéemes as though he would fight with men made of ſtrawe, that he is ſo liberall (at firſt ſight) in his threatnings, but we ſhall ſee what he can doe: then turning to him, he thus ſpake. Braue man, I will try my ſelfe with thée, becauſe I will not ſée ſo many of mine perriſh by thy ſtrong hand: but yet thus I condition, that if thou ouer-come mee, thou ſhalt leade me whether thou pleaſeſt: but if I foyle thée, Ile keepe thée as my laughing ſtock, to ſmile at in my brauerie.
               
                  Florian hearing himſelfe thus ſcorned, in déepe diſdaine (without ſpeaking a worde) turned his horſe, and met the proude Turke on the breaſt with ſuch an incounter, as his Launce ran a handfull & more thorow his ſhoulder, whereby he tombled dead to the ground. When his followers

ſaw their Captaine ſo ſuddainly falne, and remembring how this ſtrange Knight had threatned them all, without any regard of ſhame, they ranne altogether fiercely vppon him, ſome wounding him, others his horſe, becauſe hee ſhould haue no meanes to eſcape.
               Thus Florian beeing on foote, and wounded, ſéeing death imminent before him, leant his ſhoulder againſt an olde withered trée, minding yet to ſell his life a little déerer. And byding the battell for a good ſpace, he grew ſo wearie, as nothing was to be expected but death: if enamored Dorina, who had no power to kill him, had not at his departure intended eſpeciall care of him. And albeit by her arte ſhée vnderſtoode, what effect the Letter and Ring had wrought, as alſo that Florian afreſh ſollicited by his former loue borne to Targiana, endeuoured greatly for her deliuerance: notwithſtanding all hope of euer enioying him, the more reſolued and ſoundly grewe her affection to loue him. Now ſeeing in what perrill he was to looſe his life, by reſcuing the Armenian Princeſſe from the Turkes handes: ſhee changed her ſelfe into the ſhape of Palmerin of England his brother, prouided of horſe and armour accordingly, and aloude ſhée cryed to Florian, ſaying: Feare not Brother, I am come hether for thy defence: ſo placing herſelfe by him, performed ſuch deedes of valour, as the Turkes began to retyre, as reſolued that thys Knight would be the death of them all. But becauſe Florian had loſt much blood, ſhe gaue helpe to mount himſelfe vpon his horſe, that he ſate behind toward the crupper, and ſo the Armenian Princeſſe was placed before him: and ſhe was ſo ſuddainly carried thence into a wood, as the Turkiſh Knights ſtoode in amazement thereat.
               
                  Dorina, when ſhée had Florian ſafe from his enemies, ſhewed her ſelfe to him what ſhe was: and perceiuing that hée affected not the Armenian Princeſſe, without any regard of her, ſhee thus ſpake to him. Moſt gentle Knight, loue, that hath made mee altogether yours, enforceth an opinion contrary to all hope, of ioy, when no likelihood is

that euer it will be: for I knowe yee to be enamoured of a Ladie, who ſtrictly by enchauntment bindes ye to loue her, when perhaps her beautie might faile in other meanes of preuailing, all which makes me the more deſirous of yee: and to witneſſe my inward inflamed loue, ſée heere the wound I gaue on this breaſt with my knife, as willing to haue ſlaine my ſelfe vpon your vnkinde departure.
               The Lady was young and beautifull, her wordes likewiſe vttered ſo effectually, as Florian woulde haue yeelded her loue, if the other enchauntment had béene no let thereto. But he vnable to vſe any mercie to her, and the Ladie (béeing wiſe) conſidering all this was occaſioned by the Ring, determined to awaite fitter opportunitie, till Florian ſhould be releaſed from that enchauntment, and taking order, that one of her Damoſels ſhould cure his wounds, ſhée thus beganne againe. Thou canſt not let me from louing thee for euer, albeit thou takeſt no pitty on mine affliction: and ſo ſhe departed.
               
                  Florian, without regarding her ſpeeches, ſuffered what ſoeuer was applyed for his recouerie: and by reaſon Dorina holpe him by her arte, in foure daies he was able to ſitte his horſe againe. Then conferring with the Armenian princeſſe, he excuſed what had béene done in hindering her from her brother Sucuſano, diſcloſing likewiſe what he was, as alſo to what end this iniurie was offered her, as not able by any meanes elſe to redéeme Targiana.
               
               It diſpleaſed the Princeſſe, that thus her returne into Perſia was fore-ſtalled, but when ſhee knew him to be the Prince Florian, ſo farre famed, and noted withall his gentle behauiour, ſhe accounted her ſelfe indebted to Fortune, for letting her fal thus into his hands, with whoſe loue ſhe felt herſelfe ſuddenly amated. Then remembring that ſhe ſent the ring in Targianaes name, ſhe had little hope of winning him to her loue, ſo long as that enchantment laſted: wherfore ſhe pacified herſelfe, and Florian deſirous to returne toward Tubante, had newe Armour and horſes for conduct of the Princeſſe, all right after the Tartarian manner.
               
                  And this was doone by Dorina, that Florian might goe backe to Tubante, and was not knowne to be he that fought with the Turkes in reſcue of the Princeſſe: whoſe habite was likewiſe in ſuch ſort tranſ-formed, as none in all the cittie could know her. Thus béeing in Tubante, often times hee ſhewed himſelfe to Targiana by meanes of his greene plume, but hee could no further preuaile, becauſe of the watchfull guard appointed by Riſtorano, for which (good Lady) ſhée was euen ready to die. And the Armenian princeſſe ſo curbd in her gréefe, that ſhe might not enioy the benefit of Florians loue: as day and night ſhe offered to ſléepe by him, yet would hee mooue towards her no more then a ſtone.
            
            
               CHAP. XII. VVhat Sucuſano did, when he heard that the Armenian Princeſſe was forcibly reſcued from them, that had charge of conducting her to him: And further concerning the Prince Florian.
               
               
                  THe Turkes that had fought in this manner with the Knight of the Sauage man, ſeeing they had gotten them-ſelues ſo farre onward, as they needed not to ſtande in feare of their enemie: becauſe they had loſt ye 
                  Armenian Princeſſe, they made no haſt of returning to Riſtorano, but intended their iourney to Sucuſano, to let him vnderſtand what had happened them in purſuite, ſo to excuſe their Lorde who had ſent him his Siſter. Béeing come to his Armie, and newes ſpread that the princeſſe came not with them: it was expected that they ſhould all preſently die, but yet on more deliberation, they were

admitted to his royall Pauillion. Sucuſano ſéeing them without his Siſter, with ſterne countenaunce demaunded from whom they came. They fearefully falling on theyr knees, reported their whole ſucceſſe, and in what ſort ſhée was taken from them. But it ſeemed ſo diſagréeing with truth, that one Knight alone ſhoulde performe ſo much, in taking the Lady frō them, though (néedleſſe) another came at length to helpe him, as it was méerely ſcoft at: but for better aſſurance héerein, he ſent many of his owne men to the place, where the Turkes declared that their Captaine lay ſlaine.
               
                  Dorina, who marked all theſe procéedings, to binde her louer to her ſo much as might bee, hoping one day the enchauntment ſhould be diſſolued, and then hee woulde take compaſſion on her, by her arte conuaied all the dead bodies thence, yea, all ſignes that any fighting had béene there at all. Where-vpon, the Perſians returned to Sucuſano, ſaying, they found no ſhew of any ſuch matter as the Turkes had told him: when hee (ſtarting vp furiouſly) without admitting any more wordes, commaunded them all immediatlie to be hanged, and rayſing his Campe, conſiſting of an hundred thouſand braue Souldiers, beſide a moſt gallant troupe of Infanterie: went and aſſailed Tubante ſo ſuddenly, as they could not prouide themſelues of victuals to withſtand the ſiedge, though otherwiſe the Citty of it ſelfe was ſtrong enough.
               When Florian ſaw what he deſired to take ſuch effect, he earneſtly intreated the Princeſſe of Armenia, that faining her ſelfe to be eſcaped from the Knight who tooke her from the Turkes, ſhee would get into the Caſtle where Targiana was, ſo might ſhe be out of danger of her owne life, and a meane likewiſe of Targianas libertie. The Princeſſe ſéeing her brother ſo neere to deliuer her, and louing Florian ſo earneſtly as ſhe did, was well contented to performe his requeſt: ſo ſlipping with him foorth of the Citty, entred a wood neere adioyning, where letting her horſe run looſe on his bridle, like one eſcaped from an enemy, ſhee entred the

Citty, diſſembling extraordinarie feare, and comming to the Caſtell gate, where Riſtoranos guard gaue their attendance, was quickly knowne by them, and ſoone conueyed in at the wicket, ſhee ſtill ſeeming doubtful of her ſecuritie. And comming to Targiana, ſo artificially ſhe continued her feigned feare: as ſhee verily imagined her to bee eſcaped from Florian. But when time came that they might more ſafely conuerſſe together, ſhee then reuealed all: whereby Targianaes hope very greatly increaſed, ſeeing now an entrance to her freedome ſo ſoundly begun.
               
                  Florian perceiuing that the Princeſſe was got into the Caſtle, and hauing with his preſence (a farre off) comforted Targiana, armed Turke-like, he went and offered his ſeruice to Sucuſano, who ſéeing him ſo brauely diſpoſed, and but young withall, would needes haue him ſit downe by him, but Florian dooing him double reuerence, beganne in this manner. Moſt mightie Lord, I am ſonne to a Turke, who ſerued moſt faithfully the great Emperour deceaſſed, and thereby receiued of him no meane benefits. I that deſire to doe you as loyall ſeruice, hearing that my Princeſſe is impriſoned by Riſtorano in the Caſtell of Tubante, and that he would vſurpe the ſtate from her, am minded to aduenture my life for her deliuerie. Let me then entreat your highneſſe, to doe ſome-what for ſo great a ſiſter as your owne, and my Soueraigne: wherein, beſide eternall fame following ſo glorious an enterpriſe, ſhée will acknowledge herſelfe deeply indebted vnto you, when ſhe ſhall be ſeated in her kingdoms of Babilon and Turkie. And might it pleaſe yee but to fauour me in thys enterpriſe, I offer my ſelfe bodie to bodie, againſt ſo many as dare maintaine Riſtorano to be no traytour: truſting more in iuſtice of the cauſe, then any hardiment or valour in my ſelfe.
               
                  Sucuſano very reſpectiuely noted Florian all the while he ſpake, and iudging him to be a man very valiant, replyed: that ſeeing him ſo loyally inclined towards his princeſſe, he woulde gladly haue both the Ladies ſet at libertie, becauſe his ſiſter was likewiſe priſoner with her, and therefore hee

wiſhed to them both alike. Then preſently he ſent one of his Captaines well accompanied, to the citty to Riſtorano, requeſting to haue deliuered him his Siſter and Targiana, whom he laboured to diſpoſſeſſe of her eſtate: and if anie of his would iuſtifie Riſtorano not to be a traytor, hee ſhoulde meete a Knight in field, who would make it good vpon him by ſword and Launce.
               
                  Riſtorano offended at this demaund, which diſſolued all his former diſſignes: would haue ſatiſ-fied Sucuſanos Embaſſadour, that he did ſend him his Siſter, and knewe not how his purpoſe was impeached. But now, his demaunding of both the Ladies, droue his ſences into ſuch a confuſion, as hee knew not what to imagine concerning the Armenian Princeſſe. And in regard a Turkiſh Knight, backt by Perſians, would fight againſt the Citty, and requeſted combate: he intended to prouide for the preſent perrill, lycencing the Embaſſadour to depart, ſaying: His Siſter he had already ſent him, but with Targiana he had not to meddle. The Embaſſador bringing this aunſwere to his Lord, and Florian beeing aduertiſed thereof, made haſt to the field, to looſe no time, and leaſt the Perſians mind ſhould hap to be changed: hearing that his ſiſter had beene ſent him before, and taken from the Knights, as hath béen before declared.
               
                  Riſtorano, fearing no leſſe the Turkes then the Perſians, turning him to his Knights, ſaid: Which of you dare goe combat this companion, & bring his head to me? Many valiant Lords profered themſelues in haſt, and great contention there was who ſhould goe firſt: but the lot falling to the Prince of Tharſus, he armed himſelfe for the purpoſe, and came ſo diſdainfully forth of ye Citty, that without ſpeaking any word to Florian, hee ranne againſt him with his Launce: wherewith Florian being mooued, met him in the midſt of the courſe, the Turkes ſtaffe hitting on his ſhielde, made him looſe a ſtirrop, but Florians paſſed with ſuch force through his breaſt, that he fel downe dead to the earth. The Perſians ſeeing a victory ſo eaſily obtained, both ioyed & meruailed thereat. Contrariwiſe, they of the citty ſtood amazed.

Neuertheleſſe, the Lord of Antioche, (a man of great mind and opinion) preſented himſelfe, & encountring with Florian, hurt him a little on the arme, albeit himſelfe had ſuch a ſalutation on the pate, as he was liker to lie along, then keepe his ſaddle. Then Florian determining, either to die this day, or regaine Targiana, ſmote at him with his ſword, which lighting on his ſhoulder, cleft him downe to the ſaddle, and cut off his horſes head likewiſe.
               This was ſuch a fearefull aſtoniſhment to Riſtoranos Knights, as no more beeing willing to aduenture themſelues, they drewe backe into the Citty: where Riſtorano (fearefull of the people) ſought by what meanes Targiana might be ſlaine, as alwaies before hee aymed thereat: but becauſe he knew not who to truſt, and ſawe euery one enclined to fauour their naturall Soueraigne, hee reſolued with himſelfe vppon ſpéedie flight. Then hearing what a great rumor was at the walls, the Perſians fully perſwaded of ſucceſſe, hauing him for their Captaine, who had ſo ſoone ouer-come two ſuch valiant Turkes, hée drew neere (with diuers of his truſtieſt folowers) to make head againſt them, & going to a falſe poſterne of the Caſtle, cauſed Targiana to be fetched foorth, that he might haue her along with him: hoping in extremitie, to yeeld her for ſafegarde of his owne life, or elſe by béeing ſtill poſſeſt of her, to haue vſe and gouernment of the ſtate.
               This could he not performe ſo ſecretly, but hee was diſcouered by the people, who cryed out with loud voyce, that Targiana was led away to death: whereon he was purſued by ſo great multitudes, that hee (hauing worke enough to doe to eſcape aliue, and knowing howe fewe of his owne people did affect him,) left Targiana behinde him. Some fearing leaſt the Citty ſhould bee taken and ſpoyled by the Perſians, hung foorth their flagge of truce, and opening the gate, receiued in Florian and foure thouſand Knights with him, according as Sucuſano had before appoynted, who behaued himſelfe on the other ſide very valiantly. But Florian fearing leaſt ſome diſaſter ſhoulde betide Targiana,
                  
ranne preſently to the Caſtell, where he found her in companie of them that Riſtorano left her withall, who perceiuing the Tyrant fledde, laboured to kéepe her from perrill, and ſo were returned backe with her thither againe. Of him they grewe all afraide, and in danger had they béene, but that Targiana knewe him by managing his weapon, thē ſtepping forward: Sheath your ſword my Lord (quoth ſhee) for theſe Knights are for my ſafetie, and at your ſeruice.
               
                  Florian, ſéeing his intent accompliſhed, full of ioy, tooke Targiana by the hand, but ſhee trembled, as ſhewing the great loue ſhee bare him, from the beginning when he was in her Court. Thence was ſhée conducted by the people to her Pallace, and béeing placed in the royall ſeate of her Father, was publiquely proclaimed and confirmed theyr Queene.
               
                  Sucuſano, glad for recouerie of his Siſter, and that hee had doone ſo ſpeciall ſeruice to Targiana, without the loſſe of any of his people, entred that night into the Citty, with an hundred of his worthieſt Barons: and becauſe it was late, as then hée could not goe to ſée the Ladie, by reaſon Targiana had withdrawne herſelfe aſide, none in her companie but Prince Florian, as not béeing able to ſatiſ-fie her ſelfe with embracing him, and yéelding him thanks, as his great paines had well deſerued. But thus far they procéeded, that promiſing ſhée would become a Chriſtian, they were affianced together, in preſence of the Armenian Princeſſe, and the Damoſell that holpe her when ſhe wrote the Letter. Afterward, by other kinde of ceremonies (in ſuch caſes required) they ſo ratified theyr marriage, as it was paſt recalling: but nowe returne wee to the Perilous Ile.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XIII. How the Princes in the Perilous Ile, beeing recouered to their former health, would haue returned thence to their ſeuerall eſtates: but they were ſtayed there for a while. And of a newe accident that ſuddainly happened.
               
                  THe Emperor Primaleon, beeing thorowly healed of his wounds, had yet his right arme benummed in ſuch ſort, as it was great paine to him to vſe his ſworde, and little helpe any way coulde it yeeld vnto him▪ 
                  Don Edward, by meanes of a wound receiued through his necke, held his head awry, leaning to one ſhoulder, ſo that it gréeued him to beare armour thereon. The other were well recouered, and of indifferent ſtrength, except Florendos, who went ſome-what lamely on his right leg: and Dramuſiande, who was (as it were) beſide himſelfe, although of his hurts he was very wel amended. Almaroll could not be throughly ſound in a long time. Floraman was better recouered then all the reſt, becauſe nowe he had loſt the remembrance, of his former earneſt affection to Altea, finding himſelfe quite deliuered from that vaine humour: yet ſoone enough ouer-taken with another, when caſting his eyes on the widdowed Ladies, he moſt regarded Clariana, who in his conceite was a thouſand times fairer, then any other amongſt them all. But afterward, his ſilent thoughts ſhewed him much more enamoured on Victoria, daughter to Prince Florian: but becauſe he might not enioy her, he deſperatly ſlew himſelfe, as ſhal be declared in place conuenient.
               
                  
                  Aliart, ſéeing theſe Lordes ſo mindfull of their ſeuerall homes, ſitting one day conuerſing with them, hee entred into theſe ſpeeches. Great Princes, I reioyce that mine own arte hath ſo deceiued me, which made me beléeue, that all you ſhould die in the paſſed warre, and Constantinople fall into the Pagans power: but moſt of all this deceite delighteth me, that I behold yee ſo well recouered, and the Grecian Empire yet at libertie. Therefore you ſhall doo verie well, that each of you returne to his proper ſtate, to giue order for prouiding men in readines, and fortefying your Citties: becauſe it may ſo fall out, that the Heathen renuing their forces, will on a ſuddaine ſeeke your endamagement. The Emperour Primaleon very glad héereof, cauſed a Galley to be made ready, when calling all the Princes and widdowed Ladies, with large proteſtations, hee gaue them thanks for the loſſe they had ſuffered to maintaine his eſtate: offering himſelfe for euer a Father to the widdows, as alſo a defender of them and their children. So embracing altogether, hee went aboard, with Florendos, Almaroll, Dramuſiande, and their Ladies, who greatly deſired to viſite their owne homes, and to be in their former eſtate of dignitie.
               As they were ſetting off from the ſhoare, they deſcryed a little Barque a farre off, which (as ſwift as a byrd) came flying toward them: they expecting what it might be, beheld it no ſooner néere neighboured with them, but thereout leaped the moſt miſhapen olde woman, that euer in anie time had béene ſeene: ſhée making toward the Emperour, who as yet ſtoode vpon the decke, thus ſpake. Moſt powerfull Lord, meruaile not that I appeare ſo ſpent with yéeres, and yet at this inſtant hazard thus the perrill of my life, for the cauſe of my preſent comming hether, is to make proofe among thy Knights, of an aduenture which holdes theſe conditions, that who ſoeuer can finiſh it, ſhal haue promiſe of a boone from mée: but attempting & failing, is preſently to goe along with mée. The Emperour, who was loth to ſee any of his oppoſe themſelues to perrill, being not yet ſo

ſtrong and luſtie, as when they attempted the laſt dreadful battaile, thus anſwered. Perhaps the late vnfortunate battaile is not knowne to thee, wherein the moſt woorthy amongſt all Chriſtian Princes haue periſhed: and wee that yet remaine are in ſo weake eſtate, as I could gladly wiſh thee chuſe ſome other time, both more fit for thee and them in this caſe.
               The old Woman, very diſdainfully, and with a countenaunce ſeeming none of the beſt, thus ſpake to the Emperour. Bleſſed for euer be the conſtancie of the royall Emperour Palmerine, that neuer made ſhew of any baſeneſſe, albeit himſelfe paſt through many miſeries. Theſe words ſo pierced the Emperours princely minde, that his choller ariſing, he craued pardon of the old woman for his vnkind aunſwere: deſiring her to declare the aduenture. Then ſhe withdrew herſelfe toward the Barque, ſhewing as if ſhee were gréeued beyond compariſon, for not hauing founde what ſhée ſought in ſo many Princes Courts: yet beeing ſtill mooued by his highneſſe intreates, and Don Edwards likewiſe, who would not leaue her, ſhee drewe the ſmall Barque alande, vſing certaine wordes to her ſelfe: when ſuddainly iſſued foorth a Monſter of very ſtrange ſhape, hauing the head of a Serpent, the necke of a Lyon, the bodie of a Bull, the feete of a Horſe, and the tayle deuided in two parts, ſo piercing withall, as it woulde paſſe through anie Armour. With this beaſt (quoth the hagge) muſt thy Knights combat, vnder condition before expreſſed: ſo many as ſhall be vanquiſhed by it, muſt goe with me to an enterpriſe as honourable, as pleaſing to themſelues.
               The Knights, whoſe ſpirits were heated with high reſolution, cōtended amongſt themſelues who ſhould be firſt: but the Emperour willed, that Don Edward, who coulde make no proofe of himſelfe, by the reaſons before rehearſed, ſhould nominate them after his owne liking. Don Edward, highly thanking the Emperour for this great honor, not to ſhewe himſelfe ouer-ruled by affection, as might be iudged if hee ſhould name anie of his owne Sonnes: gaue

the firſt battaile to Dyrdan
                  ▪ in honour of his Father Maiortes, ſo faithfull alwaies to the Grecian Empire. The young Lord, glad of ſo ſpeciall a fauour, hoping beſide of glorious victorie, came foorth armed, with his ſword ready drawne, and drawing neere the Monſter, ſmote him ouer the heade with his ſword: but he found it ſo impiercible, and rather damageable to his weapon, as he grew doubtfull of the honour, belonging to this enterpriſe. Neuertheleſſe, turning againe to the beaſt, he was caught within the deuided taile, and throwne thrée times about ſo furiouſly, as his memory failing him, he fell to the ground greatly aſtonied. But hée beeing of a very valiant ſpirit, quickly recouered footing againe, and offered once more to make proofe of himſelfe: but the old Woman thus preuented him.
               No more Sir Knight, becauſe if well yee vnderſtand mée, the condition by mée propounded was thus: that if anie Knight were ouer-throwne by the Monſter, hee ſhould be admitted to fight no longer. The Emperour perceiuing the olde Womans intent, gaue a ſigne to Dirdan that hee ſhould with-draw himſelfe, and Don Edward cauſed Pompides to preſent himſelfe: who very boldly aſſailed ye Monſter with his ſworde, reaching him ſuch a thruſt in the flanke, as wel neere had made him to tumble ouer. But the beaſt gaue him ſuch a blow on the breaſt with his foote, as made him fall downe backward: Whereat each one both greeued and meruailed, ſéeing two ſo good Knights ſo ſoone diſabled.
               
                  Dragonalte, by Don Edwards licence, was the next that aſſayled the Monſter, and hee beeing very nimble at all aduantages, gaue the beaſt diuers hurts, which (by reaſon of his ſlothfulneſſe) hée coulde not ſhunne: But catching at length the ſworde betweene his teeth, ſnatcht it out of his hand, and made at him ſo furiouſly, that ſtriking him rudelie againſt the ground, very hardly could hee ariſe to withdrawe himſelfe. Floraman, hauing receiued his ſigne from Don Edward, deliuered many rough ſtrokes to the Monſter, but coulde not by anie meanes wounde him:

and trauerſing about to kéepe him foorth of danger, ſtill vſing his ſword for his beſt aduantage, at length hee was caught betweene the monſters taile, which caſt him vp the height of a Launce, when falling downe, he lay as if he had béene dead, to the great griefe of euery one, who doubted leaſt this ſtrange aduenture, would ſerue as a ſhame to the Grecian Court.
               
                  Don Edward, fearing this monſter would ſley ſome of the Knights, called for Palmerin, who ſtaying a little to gird on his ſword, was preuented by Dramuſiande, who though he ſtoode before as one amazed, meruailing at theſe ſtrange encounters: pricked forward by valour, hee ſette himſelfe againſt the beaſt, and not ſéeking how to hurt him otherwiſe, caught faſt holde on his great tayle, which hee held ſo ſtrongly, as the beaſt could not recouer it from him: for ſuch was the Giants greatnes, as hee could neither lift him vp, nor caſt him downe. During this contention, to the great paines of Dramuſiande, who woulde not let goe the tayle, neither could haue other kinde of victorie: euery one was very penſiue, not knowing what iſſue of theſe affaires to hope for. Dramuſiande, endeuouring with all his ſtrength to caſt the monſter, became ſo wearied, as he was not able to ſtriue any longer: whereupon, entring into better aduiſe, with a leape hee threwe himſelfe vppon the beaſts backe, and holding him with his hande at the vauntage of the chaine, gaue him ſuch prouokings with his legs, as the monſter to be diſburdened of ſo great a weight, ran to the ſhoare ſide, & at one ſkip mounted into the Sea: where Dramuſiande, not terrified with feare, though hee beheld himſelfe but dead as it were, kept ſtill his holde vppon the beaſt, as if afterward he ſhould chaunce to leape on ſhoare againe.
               
                  Arlencea, when ſhée beheld her huſband in this danger, for whom ſhe had ſhed ſo many teares when he was reputed dead: fell on her knees at the olde womans féete, & thus beſpake her. Sweet Lady, if euer thou didſt vouchſafe loue to any one, I pray thée ſuffer not my huſband to be drowned.

The olde woman, hearing herſelfe coniured in thys manner, beeing herſelfe (as you ſhall heare) deeply enamored, made a ſigne, and the monſter mounted backe with Dramuſiande into the Barque, which ſtood ready for purpoſe at the Land-ſide. Afterward, by her arte ſhee cauſed the other foure Knights that receiued the foyle, to be therein likewiſe conuayed: then entring the Barque herſelfe, ſhée launched ſo far into the Sea, as ſhee could be but heard to ſpeake in this manner.
               My Lord, I muſt haue theſe Knights with me, becauſe I may by good reaſon claime them, and Dramuſiande ſhall beare them company likewiſe, for I am Dorina his Cooſin, that preſerued him, as now your ſelues haue beheld: him haue I great occaſions to employ in, and ſhortly ſhall hee returne againe in the ſame eſtate, as when hee was young and eyghteene yéeres old. Then cauſing him to come vpon the decke with her, they were hearde conferre together verie familiarlie, to the great liking of all the beholders, though loth to haue them thus caried thence.
               
                  Arlencea (aboue the reſt) ſéeing her huſband with ſuch a light Damoſell, as nowe ſhée ſhewed herſelfe, was almoſt dead with iealouſie: but that ſhee had heard Dramuſiande often ſweare ſhée was his Cooſin, and therefore ſhe had the leſſe cauſe of feare. Dorina bidding them adiewe, ſette ſayle and departed. The cauſe of her comming thus, and carrying away the Knights with her, the ſequell of the hiſtorie ſhall make manifeſt: for now we muſt returne againe to Targiana, at Tubante.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XIIII. How Sucuſano became enamoured of Targiana, and knowing Florian to be Nephewe to the Emperour Primaleon, layde hold on him: ſuſpecting likewiſe euill betweene him and Targiana.
               
               
                  ON the next morning, when Sucuſano was entred Tubante, as yee heard before declared, Targiana with the Armenian Princeſſe, entred the great Hall, ſhee likewiſe leading Florian by the hand: and ſo ſumptuouſly was ſhe attyred, as the Perſian (giuen more by nature to martial affaires, thē loues wanton allurements) ſeeing her ſuch a princely and beautifull creature: became foorth-with enamoured, and ſo much the rather did hee promiſe ſucceſſe to his loue, in that the ſuppoſed Turke which came to him, to wit, the Prince Florian, had by his ſtrength freed her, and was nowe in her companie. Therefore, at the firſt to make knowne his loue, he tooke her by the hand, and placing her in her Fathers ſeate, there pronounced her to bee rightfull Queene: of which fauour before ſhe had but little hope, when it was generally ſuſpected, yt 
                  Sucuſano ſought to ſignorize ouer all Turkie himſelfe.
               The Perſian made many amourous ſemblances to Targiana, but yet ſo ſimply, as none of the beholders tooke anie heede thereof: except Florian, who diligently noted all, and ruminating with himſelfe, what ſucceſſe was likely to enſue vpon this newe loue, grew in ſome ſort fearefull of violence, that might be offered him by this Pagan. Another while he was ſurprized with doubts, leaſt Targiana, mooued by ſo great a ſtate as the Perſian, ſhould alter her mind. So floting on this varietie of opinions, Sucuſano embraced

his Siſter, who knowing that Florian was married to Targiana, whereby herſelfe was diſappointed of all hope, ſhee began to conuert her loue into hatred, and ſéeing howe her Brother was likely to growe franticke for Targiana, ſhee imagined this the beſt way to trouble this marriage, alreadie celebrated with ſuch loue. But like one very ſubtile, ſhe diſſembled her intent, and ſhewing nothing but chéerefull diſpoſition, offered to ſitte downe by Targiana: who not dreaming at all on her fond affection, cōmitted to her truſt her neereſt ſecrets.
               A ſupper of great pompe was prepared, whereat Sucuſano would ſit right before Targiana, where-with Florian was ſo highly offended, as many times he thought to haue ſlaine him: and he had doone it, but that he knewe not how to defend the Citty from ſo great an Armie, and Targiana béeing ſo lately ſeated, had no people in readineſſe to backe ſuch an enterpriſe. Sucuſano, not minding Florian, reputing him a Turke but of meane quality, ſet downe his reſt, to enioy Turkie, and the Souldaneſſe of Babylon, conſidering withall, that when he was become Lord of ſuch a ſtrength, he might be reuenged on the Chriſtians for the death of his Brother.
               Tenne dayes together the feaſtes and banquetting endured, in which time Sucuſano courted Targiana to ye proofe, as making himſelfe aſſured, that ſhee ſhoulde be his wife: and among other amourous ceremonies, placing his rude hand vpon her delicate breaſt, ſayd: I loue thée, and yet am ſilent. The Lady, yt abhorred him more then death, ſhewed herſelfe ſo diſdainfull, as the Perſian beganne to perſwade himſelfe, that the Ladies thoughts were elſe-where addicted.
               Betwéene this loue and diſdaine, ſtept in the Armenian Princeſſe, who ſéeing Targiana ſo ſcornful toward her brother, knowing alſo what had paſt betweene her and Florian, her thoughts labouring twixt loue and hatred, would, (and yet ſhe would not) declare to Sucuſano what Florian was, whom hee imagined to be a Turke. Continuing in

theſe imaginations, a matter hapned, that made her enemie with Targiana, and thus it was. Targiana one day buſied about affaires concerning the eſtate, the Armenian Princeſſe finding Florian alone and penſiue: reputing herſelfe no way inferiour to Targiana in beautie, ſhe came and ſate downe by him, entring into theſe ſpeeches. Knewe I not that your ſelfe hath made proofe of loues ſoueraigne forces, I ſhould forbeare to reaſon with you in amourous diſcourſe: but your gentlenes, and my hard fortune conſtrayneth, that albeit I know your thoughts are deuoted to Targiana, yet muſt I intreat one graunt of loue, yéelding my ſelfe wholie to your power. And as ſhee deliuered theſe words, a ſea of teares ſtreamed from her eyes, her hart ſtil trembling, expecting his aunſwers.
               
                  Florian, ouercome with gréefe, for the loue he ſawe Sucuſano vſe toward Targiana, made her no reply: and ſhee (by his ſilence) conceiuing ſome hope that hee would loue her, threw her armes about his neck, when it hapned that Targiana (hauing ended her buſines) ſuddainly ſtept in, and ſéeing in her ſuch vnſeemely behauiour, thus ſpake. Ah ſhameleſſe Damoſell, whether hath thy luxurious appetite tranſported, thus to inſult vppon anothers right? And into worſer termes would ſhe haue growne, but that the Ladie (as one confounded) without returning any anſwere, ſtept forth of the Chamber, leauing both them ſo aſtoniſhed, as neither of them well knew what to ſay: eſpecially Florian, who conſidering the great perrill and doubt wherein Targiana ſtoode at this inſtant, had not the power to comfort her, himſelfe being oppreſſed with what he moſt feared.
               The Princeſſe of Armenia, conceiuing déepe diſdaine at Targianas wordes, and ſeeing herſelfe deſpiſed by Florian, went directly to her Brother, and there declared, that the diſſembled Turke, who had doone ſo much for Targiana, was Prince Florian of the Forreſt, termed the Knight of the Sauage man: who was maried to Targiana, not withſtanding yt by his hand her former huſband Albayzar was ſlaine, yet had ſhe made a laſciuious choyſe of him.
               
                  
                  Sucuſano perceiuing within his power, the very greateſt enemie that Heatheneſſe had, reputed himſelfe moſt happie, ſaying: Since Targiana had committed an offence ſo vnpardonable, hee thought her vnwoorthy to be his wife. But becauſe he would not looſe ſo rich a bootie, hee cauſed the chamber to be round engirt where Florian was, whence Targiana but little before was angerly departed, and was buſilie talking with certaine of her chiefeſt Barons, howe Sucuſano intended to take away her Kingdome from her. The Perſians beeing entring the Chamber, aſſailed Florian, finding him vnarmed, but onely with his Rapier: nor ſought they to kill him, but thronged round about him, to take him aliue, ſo in the end he was bound, & carried forcibly to Sucuſano.
               
               
                  Targiana, hearing the rumour and noyſe, ranne to the Chamber, and diuers with her, whom ſhee had made to arme themſelues: but ouer-late was her comming, for they had thence conueied her louer, and doubting nowe what might become of him, attyring herſelfe like a man, and accompanied with an auncient Knight, ſhee got preſently foorth of the Citty.
               
                  Sucuſano hauing thus gotten Florian, intended a ſollemne reuenge, for all the iniuries before receiued, but yet hee was much offended, that he had not Targiana: wherefore hée ſent to ſearch the Pallace, and not finding her, hee vnderſtood by a Damoſell committed to torment, that two howres before, ſhee was departed in habite of a man, giuing diuers other ſignes beſide, whereby ſhe might be ſooneſt knowne.
               Nowe was not the Perſian ſlacke in ſending foorth his Knights by ſundry wayes, to purſue her, that they might bring her backe againe vnto him: and perceiuing howe the Turkes were addicted in loue to her, hee mindid as yet no violence toward her, till firſt hee were fully poſſeſſe of her Kingdome: then hee concluded to ſatiſ-fie his luſt with her, and afterward (to deſpight her the more) to giue her as a ſpoyle to his very worſt boy.
               
                  The Knights poſting about euery way, toward Sun-ſetting, they found her by a Fountaine, where (being wearied with riding) ſhée ſtept aſide to refreſh herſelfe, minding to haue ridden all that night. When ſhee beheld herſelfe ouertaken by the Perſians, without any on her behalfe to make reſiſtance, ſhée was ſo ſtrangly diſtracted with gréefe, as the Knights ſetting her on horſe-backe, had carried her more then a mile, before ſhée made any ſigne of reuiuing: but béeing come to herſelfe, ſhee vttered ye wofulſt lamentations that euer was heard from any Lady.
               The Knights, who little knew her caſe, vſed ſome comfortable ſpéeches, that Sucuſano, the great Lord of Perſia, earneſtly deſired to make her his Wife: ſo that ſhee had more cauſe to reioyce, then to offende her ſelfe with greefe and wéeping. Theſe reaſons little auailed with her afflicted thoughts, in that ſhee well knewe to what end Sucuſano ſent to take her: ſo recommending all the Chriſtians to God, in whoſe faith ſhee had firmely promiſed to continue, ſhée rode on quietly, remembring ſhe had often heard ſome of her Chriſtian ſlaues ſay, that Chriſtians calling onelie to their God in time of their tribulation, receiued helpe by him: as likewiſe ſhe did, as ſhalbe declared in the Chapter following.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XV. How Dorina, with the foure Knights and Dramuſiande, arriued at the Cittie of Tubante, and deliuered Targiana, with whom they entred the Fortreſſe.
               
                  THe Knights that had the charge of Targiana, not ſuſpecting anie thing, rode on diſorderly, ieſting among themſelues to delight the Ladie. But Dorina, who knew the ſucceſſe of all that had happened, qualified her courſe of nauigation in ſuch ſort, as ſhe made choyce of time for deliuerance of Targiana. And this ſhe did, to the end Sucuſano might not prooue the marriage by her teſtimonie, that ſhe had taken Florian to her huſband: for the Perſian (by this accuſation) might lawfully depriue her of her kingdome, and put Florian to death as he had determined, though the Turkes knew nothing what he was before his taking.
               Afterward, when they vnderſtood more of him, in regard of the ſeruice hee had doone their Soueraigne, they would not conſent that hee ſhould bee ſlaine: but rather inſtantly deſired, he might ſafely be ſent into Chriſtendome, becauſe they had receiued certaine tydings from Constantinople, that the Emperour Primaleon, with all the moſt famous men at Armes, were aliue and recouered. But when it was tolde, that Targiana their Quéene had made thys Knight her huſband, with promiſe likewiſe to refuſe her fayth: they would preſently haue both him and her torne in a thouſand peeces. Dorina then, that Florian might not perriſh by this occaſion, bethought her on theſe Knights, ſuſpecting what danger was like to enſue, & brought them (as you haue heard) from the Perilous Ile, conducting them

on to the reſt of the enterpriſe. And hauing particulerlie conferred with Dramuſiande, knowing the eſpeciall loue he bare to Florian, who had aduentured many perrills for him: ſhee would not diſcloſe that he had married Targiana, but laboured him with earneſt perſwaſions, that nowe hee would ſtand her louer in ſome ſteede, euen as hee had anie pittie of her, ſhewing him likewiſe the wounde ſhee gaue her ſelfe, when Florian ſo vngentlie departed from her Caſtell.
               
                  Dramuſiande, who well knew how intirely ſhe affected the Prince, had compaſſion on her, and promiſed his vttermoſt on her behalfe: but (in his opinion) it would very little auaile her, ſuch was his conceit for loſſe of the Princeſſe Leonarda, after whoſe death deſperatly hee left the Perilous Ile. So bringing her Barque on ſhoare, ſhee mounted all the Knights, diſguiſing them after the Turkiſh manner, to the end they might (without ſuſpition) fall in companie of Targiana. From midnight rode on theſe fiue Knights, till morning appeared, and then they ouertooke the Perſians, as they were entring at a ſecrete gate of the Caſtell, that Targiana might not publiquely be ſeene of the Turkes.
               
                  Dramuſiande, getting neere Targiana, lifting vp his beuer, ſpake to her in the Greeke tongue, (which ſhée very well vnderſtoode, by meanes of her aboade in the Emperours Court:) Feare not Lady, for héere is come in your defence Dramuſiande, with theſe foure Knights of Conſtantinople Court: ſo taking her by the arme, ſet her before him on his ſaddle.
               The Perſians ſeeing onely fiue Knights take the Ladie from them, ranne all to aſſaile Dramuſiande, on whom they had beſtowed manie Launces, but that they feared to kill Targiana, whom they had ſpeciall charge to bring backe aliue, yet receiued ſhée a little hurt on her backe. Floraman, Pompides, Dragonalte, and Dirdan, circkling her about, defended her all the way toward the Caſtel, killing with forcible ſtrokes many Perſians. The croude was ſo great, that very hardly coulde they get onward, yet getting

neerer the Caſtell ſide, one of the Guarde, who ſometime had beene Page to Targiana, knew her by her habite, and crying, Behold our Princeſſe, without longer ſtay, let downe the Bridge, when Dramuſiande and his foure companions, though well neere wearied with vſing their weapons, got themſelues vppon it: and Dorina (by her arte) hauing the gate readie open, permitted them entrance, but aboue an hundred Perſians entred with them, who ſtanding in feare of theyr Lord Sucuſano, if they did not bring back Targiana with them: cōcluded to regaine her aliue or dead, for ere long an infinite number more would come to aſſiſt them, becauſe all the Perſian Campe was hereon in an vproare.
               
                  Dramuſiande, hauing gotten in the Princeſſe, returned on the Bridge with a mightie Mace in his hand, which hée found by chaunce at the entrance of the gate: and dealing his blowes about him, ſo many hee ſent headlong into the Ditch, that the reſt beholding their manifeſt perrill, were gladde to giue backe: ſo the Bridge was drawne vp, euen as Sucuſano (hearing of theſe newes) came thether with the flower of all his Armie.
               
                  Dirdan, and the other Knights, with the men of the Caſtell, gaue ſuch entertainement to the Perſians which got in with them, as they diſpatcht them all, not leauing one aliue.
               
                  Targiana, when ſhee had conſidered with herſelfe, that thorowe want of victuals ſhee could not keepe long in that Caſtell: ſhee went to the gate next to the Cittie, where cauſing a Trumpet to be ſounded, great concourſe of people was immediatly aſſembled, and ſhee comming herſelfe vpon the Porte, ſpake to them in thys manner. You ſee (my faythfull friendes and louing Countrimen) howe Sucuſano, vrging falſe ſlaunders againſt mee, hath ſought to inflict ſharpe torments on mee, to make mée confeſſe what neuer entred into my thoughts, and afterward (by that excuſe) vniuſtlie to defeate mee of my lawful right and kingdome, and to enioy it himſelfe. I am certaine, that you

would not willingly be vnder the Perſian gouernment, and my ſelfe doubting you ſhoulde bee in ſubiection to forraine rule: will rather yeeld the kingdome to Riſtorano, who is of the royall progenie of your owne Princes. Now, ſeeing in what eſtate I am, if you reſpect my life, haue care of me and of theſe Knights, who haue aduentured themſelues for defence of my libertie: and becauſe ye are likewiſe beholding to Florian, who (onely mooued by his owne gentle nature) put himſelfe into ſo many perrils, to deliuer me from impriſonment: goe therefore with your power to the Pallace, ſo ſoone as ye ſhall be conducted the way, and frée him from priſon, that enfranchiſed your Quéene.
               By chaunce there was then preſent in hearing heereof, a great Signior of Antioch, beeing ſubiect to the Crowne of Turkie, who bearing ſome affection to Targiana, and imagining, by accompliſhing a ſeruice of ſuch import, it was the readieſt way to attaine her loue: forth-with hee called together a very ſufficient troope, and to the Pallace they went, where they could not finde Florian, becauſe the Perſians, (doubtful of maintaining themſelues in the Citty) had ſecretly led him with them to their Campe. Which tidings greatly diſpleaſed Targiana and the Knights, but eſpecially Dramuſiande, who was ready to die with conceit of greefe. Now becauſe the Perſians had forſaken the Cittie, they iſſued foorth of the Caſtell, leauing Targiana & Floraman ſtill to keepe it, ſo running to the Pallace, they gaue order for defence of the walls: intending likewiſe to aduertiſe the Emperour of theſe affaires thus happening in Turkie, but by reaſon of the multitude of Perſian horeſemen, as yet they knew not how to compaſſe the meanes.
               
                  Dramuſiande, to ſhewe what perrill ſhould enſue on Sucuſano, if hee durſt put to death the Knight of the Sauage man, went armed into the fielde to demaund battaile: carrying this opinion, that if he could kill any great Cōmaunders of the fielde, or take them priſoners, he ſhould vrge diſmay in the reſt, and ſo the eaſier recouer his friende. The Perſians hearing the battaile called for, and not knowing as

yet againſt whō to wage it, fell in contention among themſelues on the matter: contrary to the liking of Sucuſano, who reputed Dramuſiande one of the moſt ſignall Chriſtian Knights, that euer ſearched after aduentures. After his Perſians had long importuned him, he gaue them licence for the fight, and the firſt that came forth was a Gyant, diſcended frō the progenie of Darmaque, who was ſlaine by Palmerin d' Oliua, for which, hauing mortall hatred againſt all Chriſtians, he declared his diſcontented moode, and making his ſigne for the Iouſt, without ſpeaking one word, he procéeded to encounter him.
               
                  Alfiero, for ſo was hee named, beeing a hardie man at armes, wounded Dramuſiande vppon the ſhoulder, bearing away with his Launce the péece of Armour that couered it, but the Chriſtian piercing him thorow the ſhielde, paſſed on through his arme, bearing both horſe & man to the ground, when eaſily he might haue ſlaine him before he could gette from vnder his horſe: but vſing knightly curteſie, he ſtayd his leyſure till he could ariſe. The Giant, who neuer knew what curteſie meant: imagined, that this fauour procéeded from his enemies ſlender ſkill in chiualrie, whereupon hée ſaid: Fooliſh Knight, ſéeing thy wit ſerued thee not, to ouercome me when I could not defend my ſelfe: Ile teach thee better iudgement by the temper of this ſword.
               
                  Dramuſiande, returning no aunſwere, diſmounted from his horſe, and aduauncing his weapon, began to hacke and hew Alfiero: which ſtrokes were ſo well replyed vnto, as both of them were very ſore wounded. Mary Dramuſiande beſtird himſelfe about ſo nimbly, as his hurts ſeemed but little to offend him: and now he began to beate his enemie round about the field, euen at his owne pleaſure, and the others great diſaduantage.
               
                  Alfieros two Brethren, no leſſe couragious then himſelfe, ſéeing their brother grow into ſuch extreame weakenes, hauing purpoſely hid themſelues in a wood néere hand, ſuddenly ruſhed forth together vpon Dramuſiande, who finding himſelfe much wearied, and béeing now ſo ouer-matched,

could not defend himſelfe againſt theſe thrée, but they buckling round about him, tooke him priſoner. For which Targiana was at deaths doore, yet the other foure Knights renued her comfort: albeit they greatly reprooued themſelues, becauſe they were not as then armed in the fielde, truſting but ſhallowly the Pagans faithfulneſſe. Sucuſano feyned, that this Knights impriſonment, rather diſpleaſed him, then otherwiſe, and would not that he ſhoulde be ledde to his Tent: yet made he no other ſhew, of ſetting him at libertie againe.
               
                  Dorina, when ſhe beheld matters fall from ill to worſe, repented that ſhe had not brought Palmerin and Florendos with her: but that nothing might want which ſhee was able to performe, ſhe would perſonally goe to Constantinople, and thence bring with her the moſt famous Knights, that Florian might not die, whoſe griefe was incomparable, becauſe hee coulde not heare what was become of Targiana. And Sucuſano many times would haue ſlaine him, not ſo much for reuenge of his Brothers death, as vtterly depriuing Targiana of all hope, to enioy him as her huſband, were he ſo or not: or if ſhee were not married to him, then her minde might alter, and chuſe him for her huſband. But ſtill herein his Counſell diſwaded him, ſaying: That when neuer ſo many Pagan Lords preuailed by their powerfull Armies, euermore the moſt valiant of the Chriſtians were permitted to liue: as not to incite thoſe ſpirits forward, that before were animated to purſue reuenge.
               Notwithſtanding, he might cauſe it to be noyſed abroad, that Florian ſhould bee beheaded, and placing a Scaffolde neere the Cittie, engirt it rounde with his owne Caual
                     •
                  erie: then to bring thether ſome other malefactor, yt ſhoulde be of his height, and apparrelled ſo like him, as it might be generally reputed to be he. By theſe meanes he ſhould perceiue the diſpoſition of Targiana, and yet kéepe the Knight in pryſon ſtill, for all accidents that after might enſue. Sucuſano was highly pleaſed with this aduiſe, and cauſed a Scaffolde to bee raiſed in ſight of the Cittie, and the day

following, a pryſoner was brought thether after the order appoynted: who by the diſtaunce of ground, and multitude of horſemen hemming it about, could not otherwiſe be diſcouered but to be Florian. But now we muſt needes turne to the Perilous Ile, where (as you knowe) wee left the Emperour.
            
            
               CHAP. XVI. How the Emperour Primaleon returned to Constantinople with Don Roſuell, and what hapned to the reſt. Likewiſe, how the wiſe Aliart, aduertiſed Palmerin, Florendos, and other more, of Prince Florians caſe, who needs would depart to giue him ſuccour.
               
                  
                     PRimaleon the Emperour, béeing now in full readines, ſet ſaile for Constantinople, hauing Don Roſuell with him, which elſe had not beene permitted, but that the danger of death was paſt him. The morrowe following, Don Edward, very malecontent that hee could not weare his Armour, embarqued himſelfe for England, and left the Perilous Ile. Wiſe Aliart, who while the Emperour and Don Edward remained there, would not diſcloſe to what end Dorina had led away ye Knights, becauſe greefe for the Knight of the Sauage man, as alſo their vnableneſſe to trauaile, béeing vnapt to beare Armes, would haue hazarded their liues: but they beeing gone, calling Palmerin and Florendos aſide, he made knowne vnto them Prince Florians caſe, who was taken but the day before. Hee tolde withall, howe Dramuſiande, and the other foure Knights, was conducted thether by Dorina, for hee ſtood in great need of helpe, and all was for the ſafetie of Targiana.
               
               
                  The Knights, béeing very penſiue at theſe newes, armed themſelues in all haſt, and without taking leaue of anie other but Aliart, with a ſhip are ſayling toward Turkie. This their ſudden departure, not a little moued the other Princes, and deſirous to know the cauſe, they importuned Aliart: who as yet would not let them goe, for although theyr wounds were thorowly healed, yet were they weake and feeble: but béeing vnable to contayne, ſuch was his feare of Florian, hee told the whole diſcourſe, whereon the Knights prepared themſelues preſently.
               
                  Platir, Berolde, & Gracian, were in ſuch haſt to be gone, to be there in time for helpe of their friend, that deſiring no more company, (for they thought it a ſhame to goe ſo many together) they ſet on toward the place where Aliart had appointed them. Blandidon very angry that they woulde not ſtay for him, was faine to goe alone, and ſo did Francian likewiſe: but leaue we them to their iourney, and ſpeak of ſome matters doone in the Perilous Ile.
               
               
                  Aliart, who tooke care to maintaine the familie of Palmerin, cauſed the chyldren of theſe Princes to bee brought vp very induſtriouſly: that when occaſion ſerued, it ſhould appeare they were well gouerned, wiſe, & apt to armes. Among whō, the ſecond Primaleon was of ſuch fierce courage, as hee terrified Aliart, doubting leaſt afterward hee would not be benigne to other Knights, but proue as ſterne as his Graundfather Palmerin. Wherfore Arguto, ſonne to Friſoll, who declared himſelfe to be ſome-what proude, when he came to deale with him at his weapon, woulde fight diſdainfully, and was deſirous to kill him: but Aliart, who diligently regarded them, would ſuffer them to fight no more together, for héereby he gathered, that when theſe Princes came to yeeres, there woulde be mortall hatred betweene them.
               The like ſtrife was in Leonato and Tarnaes, by reaſon they both delighted in Candida, daughter to Belizart, whoſe very name obſcured euery one, that ſought to be famous by beautie. For theſe reaſons Aliart was deſieous to ſeperate

them, but he could not ſend the one away, except he did the like to the other: therefore (though againſt their wils) they abode there together: and he likewiſe deſired as yet to kéep them there, till matters were better eſtabliſhed in Chriſtendome, for Fraunce, Spayne, Almayne, and moſt of the other Kingdomes (hauing loſt their Princes) were ſubiected to mutinous ſeditions, whence great ruine was likelieſt to enſue: beſide, hee was the more willing to ſtay them ſtill there, that they might not ſéeke after their order of Knighthoode, vntill they were growne in yeares more ſtrong and able.
               
                  Oliuanto, brother to Primaleon, beeing yet very young, gaue aſſured teſtimony that he would become valiant: but Leonato, ſonne to Palmerin of England, ſhewed himſelfe ſo forward to chiualrie, & was ſo like in countenance to great Palmerin his father, as wonderfull matter was expected of him, becauſe he gaue himſelfe to ſo braue diſpoſition. Caro, ſonne to Gracian, kept in ſecret by his Nurſe, was conuayed thence into 
                     Spayne. Belcar, ſonne of Francian, Eſtrellant of Roſuell, Fortenbracio of Bellizart, and Orino of Dramian, were all of great towardlines: but Tarnaes ſonne to Platir, was ſo vnlike the other in managing Armes and other behauiour, as there ſéemed to ſhine in him a kind of Lacedemonian ſeuerity, for whoſoeuer had marked the image of Lycurgus the Lacedemonian law-maker, euen the ſame that was to be ſéene on his Tombe: haue ſworne that he rather reſembled his figure, then that of Platir his father. Franardo & Almaroll of young Gyants ſtature, declared the ſame ſpirits remained in their fathers: but being children as yet, no other iudgment could be made of them. Now leaue we them, to goe ſée with what loue the Emperour Primaleon entred Constantinople.
               
               The people being aduertiſed of their Lords returne, came vppon the bridge with ſuch ſportes and feaſting, as neuer was the like ſéene in Constantinople before, for Brundo the Gouernour ſuffered nothing wanting, that might any way ſerue to honour him withall. At the gates and croſſe-wayes

of the ſtréetes, were placed triumphall arches, whereon was preſented the paſſed battailes againſt the Pagans: to wit, the death of the enemies, but not of the Chriſtian princes. Both great & ſmall there humbly ſubmitted thēſelues, all weeping for ioy, which made the Emperour and Grydonia ſhed teares: and according as it was appointed, in the firſt Church of the Citty they came at, the Emperiall Crowne was ſet on their heads, to make the ſolemnitie more royall, and this the onely ioyfull day that euer before was ſéene in that Citty.
               The Emperours walke continued from morning till night, not able to ſatiſ-fie himſelfe, ſeeing each ruined place newly reedified: ſo that now hee might ſpend his time in ioy, but for the paine of his arme. Yet the death of ſo manie Princes was greeuous to him, to whoſe children therefore he confeſt himſelfe the more indebted: chiefely to the Emperour of Almaigne, who died, both hee and Polinard his brother. Wherefore, by ſending his Embaſſadors into that Kingdome, there came to his Court Bazilia very aged, and with her a ſonne of Polinards, named Trineus, which he begot on a Lady of that Country, whom he tooke to wife onely for her beautie.
               The Emperour was excéeding ioyfull to beholde the young Prince, who was about the age of thirteene yéeres, apt and towardly to receiue his charge of the Empire. After ſolemne welcomes vſed to his ſiſter, and the Princes that were come to the coronation of their Emperour: hee cauſed young Trineus to ſitte downe in a chayre of eſtate by him, and with all royall pompe to bee annoynted Emperour: then ſetting the Crowne on his head, in magnificent ſtate hee rode with him thorough the Cittie, to the end hee might the better be knowne, and more publiquelie honoured.
               All the ceremonies beeing accompliſhed, hée gaue himſelfe to the hearing of weightie cauſes, ſuch as Brundo wanted authoritie to perfect: for hée beeing but a Lieuetenant, would not put his hand to euery buſineſſe, but reſerued

them of moſt importance for the Emperour himſelfe, whoſe comming was from time to time ſo long expected.
            
            
               CHAP. XVII. VVhat hapned in Turkie, when the priſoner diſſembled in the ſteed of Florian was led to death.
               
                  
                     SVcuſano, according as hee had béene councelled, commaunded, that fifty thouſand horſemen (readie prepared for fight, ſhould circle the Scaffold: where each of them verily beléeued, that iuſtice was to bée performed on Prince Florian, and the very ſame opinion was conceited in the Cittie. With much adoe the pryſoner was brought thether, and the Chriſtian Knights (full of gréefe) armed thēſelues to goe to death with him, for nowe they were voyd of all hope to free him. Targiana, becauſe Dorina was gone to Constantinople for ayde, ſeeing ſhee now ſhoulde remaine alone in the Caſtell, began to be diſmaied: and though her fréendes laboured to comfort her, yet would ſhee not remaine as a pray to her enemie, but prouiding herſelfe with Armour accordingly, would needes beare them companie, conſidering, that ſéeing ſhe muſt needs die, ſhee could neuer haue better occaſion, then to ſpende her life in giuing helpe to her huſband. So ſhe with ye foure Knights mounted on horſeback, hauing about a thouſand Turkes with them: who perceiuing that their Princeſſe went to this diſmall ſtratageme, were the more willing to beare her companie. Great was the rumour amongſt the Perſians, and the crowde ſo wonderfull, as hardly could they bring their diſſembled priſoner to the Scaffold: but Targiana and her traine ſhouldering in among them, got into the way where they muſt paſſe with the priſoner.
               
                  
                  Dirdan fearing they would ouer-ſoone attaine the Scaffold with his friend, made ſuch ſpéede forward, & outſtript his company ſo farre, that he was knowne by the Perſians, who fiercely aſſailing him, ſlew his horſe vnder him, and at length (after he had ſlaine about fiftie of them,) he was taken priſoner. They neuer minding to carry him before Sucuſano, but taking him by his Armour to bee a Pagan, that was a fauourer of the Chriſtians, led him along with the other to behead him. Pompides, Dragonalte, Floraman, and Targiana with the reſt, hauing loſt the ſight of Dirdan, and hearing the meruailous noyſe among the Souldiers, imagined what was to true: then ſtriuing to get onward, the preaſſe was ſo innumerable, they could make no way, but ſtill were driuen back by ſuch a ſhock of people, as they knewe not well how to ſtirre themſelues.
               
                  Dragonalte, béeing gotten hand to hand with a Giant, brother to Alfiero, that had taken Dramuſiande, ſo ſeperated the companie, that beeing alone with him, hee founde ſmall curteſie at the Giants hands, who béeing aſſiſted by many of his followers, tooke him likewiſe, and led him on with the other priſoners to the Scaffold. Floraman, Pompides, and Targiana, carying themſelues very valiantly, did very much with their weapons, but to ſmall auaile: becauſe they were ſo hemd in with enemies, as they coulde not hope to get forth aliue. Wherefore, procéeding on ſo farre as they could, Targiana, who laboured to attaine the place, where ſhée imagined her Florian to be, pricked ſtill forward, but béeing kept backe by the Perſians, that kept the priſoners in a round, after ſhée had defended herſelfe ſo wel as ſhe could, (hauing on an enchaunted Armour, that ſomtime belonged to her great Graundfather) ſhee was taken vnwounded, and led bounde to ſuffer death with the other priſoners, becauſe ſhee was not knowne, and ſhee herſelfe, perceiuing this was no place to make her ſelfe knowne, kept ſilence, leaſt ſhe ſhould be further tormented.
               Theſe affaires falling out thus vnfortunately, it came to paſſe, that (the night before) Palmerin and Florendos,
                  
were arriued at the Caſtel of Albayzo, which was held by the Chriſtians, (as is declared in the booke of Primaleon) and that it was conquered by Polendos. Heere they were giuen to vnderſtand, that the next morning, Prince Florian ſhould looſe his head: it was no need to bidde them ride all night, and ſuch ſpéede they made, that (by the ninth howre the next day) they reached the Perſian Campe. When they heard ſuch a mighty noyſe as was made, they thought the Chriſtian to be dead, or in extreame perrill, wherfore putting ſpur too luſtily, they hapned on that ſide, where Pompides & Floraman, with about thrée hundred Turkes, were ſtrongly borne backe. Then running into the crowde with full carrire, not hiding their ſignall at Armes, they began ſo to lay about them, that the Perſians amazed, to ſee a man ſliced through the midſt, and ſome-time both horſe and man hewen thorow at a blow: beganne to make way for them. Beſide, when ſome noted the Armes imperiall, and others the badge of the Serpent, both which they feared ſo much in the war at Constantinople, gladlie they with-drew themſelues.
               So got theſe two Knights into company of Pompides and Floraman, who reckoning thē but in ſtate of dead men, onely ſought to ſell their liues ſo deerely as they could: and béeing both on foote, Palmerin (knowing Pompides by his Scottiſh Armes) cryed to him: Feare not Knight, for héere is Palmerin of England. Then killing a Giant that ſtoode contending with him for the maiſterie, he tooke the Giants horſe, and gaue it to Pompides: who becauſe hée would be no longer troden among the people, mounted thereon quiclie.
               
                  Florendos, ſided his friend Floraman, & dealt his almes ſo bountifully about him, that he had ſoone got him on horſbacke to. Thus theſe foure Knights kept theyr owne ſquadron, defending their Turkiſh aſſiſtants, who were verie wearie, and but fewe in number: yet ſeeing what valiant Captaines fought for them, they ſtoode to it manfully euerie one.
               
                  A Perſian that knew Palmerin and Florendos by theyr Armes, went preſently to acquaint Sucuſano there-with, who imagining the game were abſolutely wonne, if hée could be poſſeſſed of theſe two Knights, beſide, that not onlie the Grecian Empire were conquered, but all Turkie likewiſe aſſuredly his owne: cōmaunded all his whole power foorthwith in a readines, determining ſo to encloſe them with Armed men, as they ſhoulde compaſſe no meanes to eſcape.
               So buſily was euery one arming himſelfe, as Dramuſiande was quite forgotten, who beeing ſhut vp in a Chamber in the Tent, had bound vp his woundes and recouered good ſtrength. Hee ſéeing each one ſo earneſtly imployed, and that little or no care at all was had of him, couering himſelfe with a Perſian cloake, as if hee meant to lay him downe and ſléepe: watched opportunitie, when ſtealing foorth, hée went along lymping like a wounded Perſian, holding downe his head on his hand, as hiding a hurt, and béeing thus gotten foorth of the Campe, made haſt toward the Citty, where making himſelfe knowne, he was let in, there compaſſing the meanes to Arme himſelfe anew.
               All this while the priſoners were in leading forward, and now they had attained neere the Scaffold, when ſuddenly a Turkiſh Knight, one of them that went forth with Targiana, returned to the Cittie, bringing newes that the Princeſſe was taken, and ſhould be beheaded. At theſe tydings, all the people aroſe, and arming themſelues immediatly, went and ioyned with tenne thouſand Souldiours, which came vnder the conduct of the before named Lord of Antioche.
               
               
                  Dramuſiande, not a little gladde of this ſupply, led the way out of the Citty, hauing thirty hundred horſe in his companie, and ſo ſoone as he reached the Perſian power, hée made toward the Scaffold ſo neere as he could, bearing a Mace, yt ſometime belonged to Alfiero, which hee brought with him foorth of the enemies Campe, becauſe it was ſtrong, and well knotted. Such hauocke made hée therewith

amongſt the Perſians, that where he came, euery one gaue him place, and nowe had the Turkes recouered the priſoners, but ye fiftie thouſand horſe, with a braue troope of Infanterie ſuddainly came vpon them: theſe ſo enuironed the Turkes on euery ſide, as not a man could deuiſe how to get away.
               
                  Palmerin, Florendos, and the other twaine, being earneſtly fighting on the contrary wing, knew nothing of this ſtirre, by reaſon whereof they had greatly béene endangered: but that the Perſians (ſore weakened by their mightie ſtrokes) ſhunned ſo much as they could, from dealing with them at the ſwords poynt any longer, but ſent Launces, darts, and arrowes to them very thick from a farre off, hauing no other helpe left to defend their owne liues.
               By this time was there arriued from the Sea, Platir, Berolde, and Gratian, who hauing met a footman wounded to the death, heard, that this battaile was in reſcue of a Knight, in danger to be executed, his name béeing Florian: and three other (thruſting themſelues in for his defence) were likewiſe in the fight taken priſoners.
               Theſe Knights, ſeeing the Armie (in a manner) numberleſſe, not able in ten dayes ſpace to be diſcomfited, when likewiſe they beheld mountaines of ſlaughtered men, they thought it impoſſible to recouer Florian: yet not to fayle one iote in Knightly dutie, they ſet vpon the Campe, euen where they imagined the ſkirmiſh to be hotteſt, & that was where Dramuſiande was circled in with the enemie, yet chéerefully fighting to encourage his followers. This ſmal handfull of vnited harts preuailed ſo ſucceſſefully, as the Perſians (ſeeing ſuch a freſh charge come backward, imagined themſelues aſſailed with Turkes both before and behind: ſo beginning more and more to looſe the fielde, the Turkes compaſſed the meanes to get néere the Scaffold, whereon already they had mounted the diſſembled priſoner to behead him.
               
                  Florendos and the reſt ſéeing him on the Scaffold, made ſuch haſt to helpe him, as beating downe euery one that

ſtood in the way to reſiſt them, they got neere the other priſoners: and cutting the cordes where-with Dirdan, Dragonalte, and Targiana were bound, holp to mount them on horſeback againe, prouiding them of ſwords and ſhieldes for their defence. Targiana, giuing the ſpurres to her horſe, rode on with ſuch furie to free her Florian, that ſhee beeing the firſt which got vpon the Scaffold, at one blow ſlew the executioner, and cut the halter where-with the priſoner was bound: but when ſhée ſaw it was not Florian, ſhe was greatly aſtoniſhed, neuertheleſſe, finding him in ſuch danger, ſhee vſed all meanes ſhee could to ſaue him, calling to the Chriſtians, not to forſake him, but ſeeing Florian was not there, to reſcue him.
               When Dramuſiande ſawe the priſoner vnbound, and perceiued what had béene performed by the valour of Palmerin and Florendos, without making any reckoning of his owne life, perforce he got him ſelfe vp on the Scaffold, taking the priſoner vp vnder his ſhielde, to beare him to the Citty, he knowing no other but that it was Florian: but by reaſon the priſoner was vnarmed, he could neuer haue caried him foorth of the Armie aliue, had not Platir, Berolde, and Gracian made toward him, who layd ſo valiantly euery way about them, as Dramuſiande got thorow ye throng, and went to the Citty.
               When he beheld the priſoner not to be Florian, he ſtoode awhile as one amazed, but to help the reſt of his friends againſt the enemie, hee returned foorth-with againe to the fielde: where the Perſians ſeeing the priſoner was carried away, and that ſuch loſſe had enſued on them beſide, full gladly would they haue retyred, but ſtanding in feare of their Lord, and beeing ſo ſtrictly hemd in, they ſtoode ſtill to it valiantly, to the great hazard of the Chriſtian Knights liues, but that Blandidon and Francian came to helpe at a dead lift, who as they paſſed by Constantinople, had receiued of the Emperor a band of foure thouſand Souldiers, wherwith hauing winde & Sea at will, they came in good time to ioyne with them thus diſtreſſed: and entring on that ſide

where the Tents ſtoode, they gaue ſuch a ſudden terror to the Perſians, (who well knew the Grecian power, and that few of them were too many to be reſiſted) as they began to retyre: ſo this new ſupply ioyned with Palmerin & the reſt, conuaying Targiana into the midſt among them, becauſe ſhee ſhould be no more endangered, yet were they all diſcontented, becauſe they had not recouered Florian.
               
               
                  Sucuſano, ſeeing ſuch a freſh ſupply there arriued, and doubting now the deſtruction of his whole Armie, ſounded a retreat: which was not a little pleaſing to the Chriſtians, who beeing wounded and wearied, eſpecially the Turkes that were their aſſiſtants, let the enemy gladlie goe, and withdrew themſelues likewiſe to the Citty. There did they ioyfully feaſt and banquet together, giuing charge that the wounded ſhould be carefully reſpected: afterward, they called for the diſſembled priſoner, & knowing by him the ſubtil drift of Sucuſano, deſired to vnderſtand of whence and what he was.
               Hee ſéeing himſelfe in the handes of Chriſtians, lifting his eyes to heauen, thanked God, that had ordained ſo happy a meane for his deliuerance, and thus aunſwered. My Lordes, I am called Mirante, diſcended of Maulerino, the famous Magitian, that did ſo much in fauour of Palmerin d' Oliua, and becauſe I delighted to conferre with Chriſtians, Sucuſano at his comming into Turkie, hearing of my inclination, tooke mee priſoner, threatning to kill mee at Constantinople in preſence of the Chriſtians. Right gladde were the Knights of méeting with this man, both in regard of his diſcen
                     •
                   from Maulerino, as alſo to haue firme inſtructions from him, concerning all occurrences of the Kingdome. But minding more earneſtly the fréedome of Florian, they perceiued ye 
                  Sucuſano purpoſed to ſley him: therefore they ſhoulde beſtirre themſelues the better for his deliueraunce.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XVIII. How Sucuſano raiſed his Campe to be gone: and beeing followed by the Chriſtian Knights with their power, yeelded Florian.
               
               
                  AFter Sucuſano beheld, that on euery ſide ſo many Chriſtians were entred the fielde, and theyr certaine number coulde not be diſcerned, by the confuſion they made amongſt themſelues, hée purpoſed a preſent returne into Perſia: for ſéeing ye moſt famous Princes of Chriſtendome were ſo ſoone arriued there, hee feared that in ſhort time no meane ſtrength would be ſent them, and ſo their Armie might growe to an infinite multitude. But that which moſt of all diſmaied him, was the ſhallow diſpoſition he found in his Knights, who though they had doone good ſeruice in the late warre at Constantinople, yet nowe they wexed hartleſſe or voyde of all ſpirite, by verie beholding the Knights of the Grecian Court, whoſe behauiour was as an vnrecouerable daunting to them all. Ouerſwayed with theſe varying & piercing thoughts, that night he raiſed his Campe, and very ſilently made away with his Armie: leauing Tents and Pauilions good ſtore behind him, yt their baſe flight might not ſuddenly be knowne or perceiued.
               The morning enſuing, the Chriſtian Caualierie armed themſelues, to try what they could doe for the freedome of Florian, and drawing neere the Tents, where they coulde neither ſee man nor heare any noyſe: vppon theyr further entrance into the fielde Trenches, they perceiued that the Perſians were fled, and had carried away the Prince Florian with them. This miſhap was ſo diſpleaſing to all thoſe

generous ſpirits, as it made them to excéede in vehement impacience: eſpecially Palmerin, who could reſtraine his rage within no boundes or limits, becauſe he had ſo negligently loſt his noble brother. Héereupon, they called a counſell very ſuddenly, wherein they concluded to turne backe to the Citty: and taking ſo many Chriſtians and Turks with them as they could make choyſe of, purſue the flying footſteps of cowardly Sucuſano.
               
               Beeing come to the Cittie, they found a freſh reioynder of tenne thouſande Turkes, who were but nowe come in the ayde of Targiana theyr Soueraigne. Them they tooke along, as alſo the Grecian 
                  
                     •
                  and, and diuers others, amounting to the number of an hundred thouſand horſe: and ſo they put themſelues in purſute of the Perſians, taking likewiſe with them Mirante, the Nephew of Maulerino, who promiſed to conduct them by ſo néere a way, as they ſhould ſoone ioyne with the Perſian Armie.
               So ſetting forward with good prouiſion of victuals, becauſe it was a very deſert Country, they were faine to aduenture by ſuch dangerous paſſages, as they were much troubled with defending themſelues from manie wilde beaſtes: but the Captaines and Leaders being careful and diligent, made ſlaughter of diuers, and guarded all in ſafetie.
               
                  Palmerin, who would needes ſtray further from the Armie then any of the reſt, to track more narrowly the footing of Sucuſano, was aſſailed by two very furious Lyons: that ſlewe his horſe vnder him, and by reaſon of his foote hanging faſt in the ſtirrop, had likewiſe ſlaine him, but that Platir & Blandidon came in good time, for one Lyon had grappled him by the ſhoulder, and very eaſily had dragd him away, but that by the woundes theſe Knights gaue them both, they were diſappointed, and made ſuch loude outcryes on their hurts, that their cry called thether two Lyons more.
               
                  Platir wounded deadly the Lyon that had faſtned on Palmerin, and cutting off one of his leggs, made him fal downe

along vpon the earth. Blandidon cut the other Lyon quite thorow the reynes of the back, which made the beaſt meddle no more with Palmerin, but turne to reuenge that hurt on him which gaue it: ſo cloſing with Blandidon, the Lyon had intreated him very curſtly, but that he plyed his hande with his ſhort ſword, and pierced ſo farre into his entrailes, as the beaſt tumbled backward ouer and ouer.
               In this time had Palmerin freed his foote out of the ſtirrop, and it hapned well that he did recouer himſelfe ſo ſoone, becauſe of the two other Lyons, that were come at the clamour of them now ſlaine, and a ſhée Beare beſide, the very fierceſt that was in all that deſert Forreſt, and hauing but little before béene robbed of her whelpes, made her to be much more violent and furious. The Lyons ranne, the one at Palmerin, the other at Platir, and the beaſts finding them as yet not to be crowned (for they neither can nor will offend any of royal progenie) aſſayled them ſomewhat ſharplie. The ſhée Beare onely dealt with Blandidon: but hee ordered her in ſuch ſort, as there hee made her to leaue her life, where-vppon there came running at him two other huge Beares, and they had well néere layde him along on ground, but that Florendos (enuying that theſe Knights ſhould ſéeke glory alone by themſelues, in a place where ſtrange aduentures were to be found) hauing committed the Armies care to Floraman, ſpurred amaine thether, béeing followed likewiſe by Dramuſiande, Gracian, & Berolde. Pompides, Dirdan, & Dragonalte, could not ſo readilie haſt along with them, by reaſon of the wounds they receiued in the laſt battaile, whereof as yet they were not thorowlie recouered.
               Theſe Knights came and ioyned with the other, euen as they were ſo hardly beſet by the Lyons and the Beares, ſo that the iſſue of this encounter might very well be doubted. The Lyons (according to theyr nature) were excéeding furious, and the Knights béeing diſmounted, ſpared not to let them feele the goodnes of theyr weapons: but Dramuſiande perceiuing Blandidon in very great perrill, went to helpe

him, and gaue the Beare ſuch a wound vpon the head, as part of it fell there-with to the ground: yet for all this the beaſt made hard at him, and got him by the boſome, griping hard his right hand with his rude pawes, and but that the Beare was much weakened by his former hurt, hee had béene brought into very hard diſtreſſe, wherefore the other Knights beholding the neceſſity, & that Dramuſiande was ſo narrowlie beſted, came to reſcue him, euen as Dramuſiande hauing got his ſword into his left hand, made therewith the beaſts right pawe fall to the earth. And ſo the Giant being now out of danger, went once more to giue ſuccour to Blandidon, who was mightily diſaduantaged by the other Beare: and running mainly at him with a ful thruſt, the ſword paſſed quite thorow him, and the beaſt tumbled ouer dead to the ground.
               
                  Palmerin, who had now vnbuckled his Cuiraſſe, founde himſelfe ſore wounded in the left flanck: but an vndaunted minde béeing his onely ſupporter, he drew his hand-kircher through the beaſtes belly, and clapping it to the hurt, ſo bound it vp as an eſpeciall medicine. Florendos, who in enuie was come to this bickering, had almoſt founde the iuſt puniſhment to ſuch a ſin: for one of the Lyons caught hold on his Creaſt behinde, and threw him ſo violentlie againſt the ground, as the Helmet flew off his head, and had not Dramuſiande ſtept to him in time, his life had béen diſpatcht for euer. But he ſmiting the Lyon vpon the buttock, made him paſt abilitie of further going, and lying ſprawling along in raging manner, he roared ſo extreamely, as the cry brought thether aboue an hundred Lyons, Wolues and Beares: and they had very ſpéedily deuoured theſe Princes, but that by hap the Armie was neere at hande, where beholding an occaſion offered of ſuch deſert, they ſlew moſt part of the beaſts, and the reſt fled: notwithſtanding, Blandidon, Palmerin, and Berolde, were ſo hurte in theyr firſt encounters, as for certaine dayes they continued in weake diſpoſition. Mirante went ſtill before the Armie, and now began to get intelligence of the Perſian forces, ſo

that determining vppon more ſpeedie iourneyes, within eight dayes they could eaſily diſcerne them from a Mountaine, which ſeruing as a ſafe Sanctuarie to the Chriſtians, allowed them nowe ſome reſt after ſo teadious labour.
               Soone after, Floraman who had béene created Captaine of the whole power, gaue order for entrance into a Woode neere adioyning, where quietly repoſing themſelues till 
                     •
                  t were night, they might then take the Perſians vnprouided and in their ſleepe: for otherwiſe they did ſo exceed them in multitude, as there could be but ſlender expectation of victory, nor ſtood they ſo much vpon ſlaughter of the enemie, as onely the recouering againe of Prince Florian.
               
               So pacing on very ſilently, about midnight they came cloſe to the Armie: which ſtoode vpon ſmall guarde or defence, becauſe they were voyde of all ſuſpition. Our Chriſtian Knights woulde not aſſaile the weaker forces, but made way for themſelues to the Tent of Sucuſano, where then giuing out the voyce of battaile, they gaue a valiant aſſault, & ſlew at the firſt cloſing aboue ten thouſand Perſians. But becauſe Sucuſano had before giuen order, that fiue and twentie thouſand ſhould attend euery night the guarde of his owne perſon, and thoſe now, though very ſléepie, had their bodies vnarmed, and their horſes not ſadled: yet ſuddenly put themſelues into ſo good ſort, as they reſiſted the Chriſtian power very reſolutely, and among them was the Giant Alfiero with his two Brethren, and they beſtird themſelues with no meane furie: for, hauing Maces of vnreaſonable weight & greatnes, they made hauocke enough of all that durſt come neere them.
               
                  Dramuſiande, hearing the report of theſe Giants, imagined it was they that before had taken him: wherefore, ruſhing through the preaſe, he encountered Alfiero face to face, ſaying: Behold how Fortune hath once more made vs meete, becauſe at my handes thou ſhouldſt receaue thy death. Alfiero, who had ſoundly felt his blowes before, could gladly haue béene rid of him: notwithſtanding, as it was

now no time for cowardly frights or feares, ſo he gaue forward boldly to buckle with him, and there they two were at it alone by themſelues.
               
                  Dramuſiande, whoſe onely deſire was Prince Florians fréedome, fought with ſuch furie and earneſtnes together, as within a ſmall while Alfiero was brought into ſuch eſtate, that falling downe ouer-laboured among the horſe féete, there the huge Giant was troden to death. The Perſians did what they could to reſiſt this hote aſſault, but what with the ſuddennes, & frighted amazement, neither could they arme one part of their people, nor endure in any degrée againſt the Chriſtians. And (which moſt diſmayed them) Sucuſano, who ſuppoſed ſo ſlender a ſtrength of his enemies, durſt not thus ſo haue perſued and aſſailed him: could now determine on nothing but flight, ſo cauſing Florian forthwith to bee horſed, with about two thouſand of his truſtieſt followers, away both he and they fledde toward a Caſtell.
               This was not doone with ſuch cunning or ſecrecie, but it was diſcerned by his owne Souldiers: who falling into the like affright as their Lord before had doone, and imagining the number of their foes to be more then they coulde poſſibly withſtand, began likewiſe to leaue the field, and ſo the Chriſtians remained victors.
               But when they came to Sucuſanos Pauillion, & founde that hee was eſcaped and gone: they grew very deſperate, and fearing leaſt they ſhould looſe his track, purſued immediatly with all poſſible ſpéede. But to no purpoſe had thys labour ſorted, had not Dramuſiande (by good hap) light on a Dwarffe by the way falne into a Ditch, whom hee helping out, and taking vp before him on his ſaddle bowe, vnderſtood by him whether Sucuſano was fled. Hee aduertiſing Floraman and the reſt heereof, without taking any prouiſion, or great part of the Campe with them, they ſpurrd ſpeedily after, and came thether at the inſtant, when Sucuſano was comming foorth of the Caſtell, with intent to poſt toward Perſia preſently.
               
                  But ſéeing his enemies thus come vpon him, hee returned in againe, where nowe hee meant to make himſelfe ſtrong, and ſend for freſh ſupply to be his deliuerance. But by reaſon of the Countries barrennes, not affording victuall or other prouiſion: they grew to articles of agréement, which were, that Florian ſhould be rendered ſafe & ſound, and he paſſe without moleſtation into Perſia, vpon promiſe, neuer to mooue more warre againſt the Chriſtians, nor againſt the royall Lady Targiana. Thus was Prince Florian deliuered, and Sucuſano departed thence, after hee had aſſembled his ſcattered forces together.
            
            
               CHAP. XIX. How Dorina left of her loue to the Prince Florian, with intent to aduaunce the honour of Primaleon the ſecond, ſonne to Florendos: not becauſe ſhe bare any immodeſt affection to him, but onely to make him famous through the world.
               
                  
                     DOrina, after her departure from the cittie of Tubante, for demaund of further helpe, when ſhée was alone within her Barque, began to thinke with herſelfe, that all her labour was but in vaine, in ſéeking to gaine any grace from Prince Florian: becauſe, beſide her beeing farre leſſe faire then the Princeſſe Targiana, ſhee was likewiſe but poore. In thys regard, herſelfe helde it as a matter moſt vnreaſonable, that ſhée ſhould labour him to anie ſuch indignitie, conſidering his ſtrict bond of affection to the Turkiſh Ladie: wherefore, béeing aſhamed of what ſhée had already doone to him, and much reprehending her former wanton deſires, ſhée altered her thoughts nowe to

doo ſomewhat woorthy good repute, without any more ſubiecting her minde to carnall inclinations. And entring into conſideration with herſelfe, vpon what perſon ſhee might imploy this induſtrious purpoſe: immediatly ſhe apprehended, that Primaleon the ſonne of Florendos, was an apt ſubiect to worke matter of worth vpon. Then looking aduiſedlie into his natiuitie, ſhe ſaw, that hee was borne to finiſh manie high aduentures, and ſhoulde likewiſe ſuffer verie ſharpe trauailes for a Ladies loue: wherefore, being now come to the yéeres of fifteene, and the wiſe Aliart hauing ſo ordered all matters, that all the young Princes ſhould be ſent to their ſeuerall eſtates, Dorina cauſed a young beautifull Damoſell, to appeare to young Primaleon in his ſléepe, and ſhée taking him by the hand, ſpake in this manner vnto him.
               My beautie (if any) is onely dedicated to be thine, nor can I otherwiſe chooſe but loue thée: neuertheleſſe, I haue very many great perrils to paſſe, which becauſe thy valour muſt be the onely meanes of, they ſhall make thée glorious. For proofe héereof, thou ſhalt ſée a young Virgine, which héereafter ſhal bring a Monſter into this Iland: and when thou ſéeſt thy ſelfe crowned with the conqueſt thereof, goe whether ſhée ſhall guide thee for my beauties ſake, and according as thou findeſt thy deſires enflamed with my loue. This dreame ſo delighted the young Princes minde, that hee found himſelfe preſently to be enamoured, but knewe not of whom: for the Damoſell that thus ſaluted him in his ſléepe, he could not now diſcerne waking, & therefore could not deuiſe howe to be further ſatiſ-fied heerein. Heereupon his thoughts became much altered, and daily would hee walke downe to the Sea ſhoare, to try if he might gaine a ſight of her, that ſhould be his conduct to ſo woorthy an enterpriſe.
               Not many dayes were paſt, but as he ſtoode alone vpon the ſtrond, hee ſaw a farre off a little Barque making thetherward: whereon, imagining that this might be it which ſhould bring the Monſter, he ſtayed in further expectation,

within an howre or little more, Dorina put in her Barque to Land, and ſtepping foorth on ſhoare, went vp directlie to the Pallace: where was Aliart, and all the other young Princes, who beholding her there arriued in ſuch ſort, troopt together to vnderſtand of whence ſhe was.
               The Lady falling on her knee before Aliart, ſpake in this maner. Mighty & moſt diſcreet Lord, once more am I come hether with my Monſter, to try if I can conclude an enterpriſe of mine: but nowe I partly repent my comming hether, becauſe (turning and looking about her) I ſée none heere likely to conquer the Monſter, for he that could performe it, is to goe with me to a greater and much more honorable aduenture.
               
                  Aliart, who was not now accompanied with any Knights likely to vntertake a matter of ſuch moment, thus aunſwered. Good Lady, the aduenture of your Monſter could not haue failed héere, when we had ſuch Knights as your ſelfe haue made proofe of: but nowe you come at a very vnapt time, for heere are none now but youthes onely, and ſuch as yet haue neuer beene knighted.
               
                  Dorina, interrupting Aliarts aunſwere, ſaid: My Lord, I am not come hether by chaunce, but directed by a vehement deſire, which I haue to make famous this gallant Infantrie, whom Fortune may fauour with vanquiſhing the Monſter. And albeit they are not knighted as yet, that may very eaſily be prouided for: let them but be had to Constantinople, where the Emperour is readie to knight any woorthy deſeruer, and there they may be ready for all good haps whatſoeuer.
               
                  Aliart, who could not wel gaine-ſay her reaſonable ſpéeches, (for all the young Lordes longed to bee exerciſing armes, & wearied with practizing vſuall feates of defence, began to murmure that they were thus long hindered) and hoping the beſt of theyr towardly forwardnes, forth-with commaunded a ſhip to be made in readines, and ſending all the young Princes aboard, with prouiſion conuenient for ſuch a voyage, vnder the conduct of Argentao, and with licence

of their mothers, though loath to leaue them, they were thence diſmiſſed.
               
                  Dorina who woulde not goe to Constantinople, dealt ſo ſubtilly, as ſhe made her Monſter to appeare, euen as Primaleon the ſecond was ready to ſtep into the ſhyp: whereof hee béeing deſirous to haue a further ſight, without anie longer tarrying, leapt into the Barque, which ſuddenlie was ſeene to put off from the ſhoare, and got more then halfe a leagues diſtance, ere they coulde ſee what was become of Primaleon, and afterward it ſayled ſo ſwiftlie, that quickly had they loſt the ſight of it altogether. The Shyp with the young Lords, made on for Constantinople, and in meete place ſhall be ſhewen what after became of them.
               
                  Dorina was not a little gladde ſhee had got this young Prince, made him promiſe of horſe and Armour, and afterward he ſhould vndertake an aduenture: which although it would prooue dangerous, yet he ſhould accompliſh it, and attaine to as great glorie and renowne, as euer had the Emperour Primaleon, Don Edward, or Florendos his Father.
               
                  Primaleon, who had mind on nothing elſe but horſe, Armour, and knighthood, made liberall promiſe of his lyfes hazard in any attempt what ſoeuer, as thinking it a death moſt glorious, to be afterward eternized famous. So ſayling on, the Barque at length put in at an Iland, which ſeemed rather a receptacle for wilde beaſtes, then any habitation for ciuill people: there hee (forſaking the Barque) ſtepping foorth on Land, walked a little along by himſelfe, and hauing not béene accuſtomed to ſuch accidents, the vncouthnes of the place ſome-what diſmaied him. But afterward, making better remembrance of himſelfe, conſidering alſo what Dorina had ſayd vnto him, & doubting leaſt ſhée ſhould diſcerne any deiected ſpirit in him, hee entred a wood neere adioyning, and not farre had hee paced along therein, but hee had a glimpſe of bright Armour hanging there on a high trée, and beeing not a little glad that hée had found what he ſought for, he hied him to the place, cōming

ſo neere to it, that hee might eaſily take it downe with his hand, which as hee made offer to doe, intending to arme himſelfe therewith, hee felt a forcible ſtrength to reſtraine him from it, whereat meruayling in his minde, and ſomewhat offended that hee could not arme himſelfe ſo ſoone as he would haue done, he made a more violent proffer, when ſuddenly hee hearde a voyce from the trée, ſaying: Fond youth, ſince thou though
                     •
                  ſt to haue this Armour ſo eaſilie, thou muſt knowe thou art deceiued therein, for this is the Tree dedicated to Fortune: and who ſoeuer will haue this Armour, muſt ſweare and vow, to proceede without anie feare or diſtruſt, in all ſuch actions as Fortune ſhall aſſigne vnto him. All which attempts ſhall make him much more famous, then any that hath ſprung from the familie of Palmerin d' Oliua: and ſhall likewiſe beſtow on him the fayreſt Ladie, that in all ages paſt hath beene ſeene to this day.
               
                  Primaleon, who thought there was no occaſion ſo perrilous, but by his courage hee ſhoulde out-goe it: tooke his oath immediatly, and proteſting the ſame with ſtrict aſſeuerations, to ſée what further might thereon enſue, hee beheld the Armour to be taken from the trée, and the tree to extend it ſelfe into ſuch largenes, as by little and little it formed it ſelfe into a goodly Pallace, after the ſhape & reſemblance of a Theater. In the midſt whereof appeared a ſeat royall, and thereon ſate a Quéene very maieſtically, with fayre goodly treſſes of haire before, but all bald behind: afterward ſhee tooke a wheele vnto her, whereon there ſeemed to be many men and women, who changed from place to place as often as the wheele turned about. There were alwayes ſome, (though very fewe) entreated as fauorites, that ſtoode neere the footeſteps of the ſtate, and other ſo neere, as they might eaſily touch it: but at no time durſt any make offer of dooing it, nor hold they this happines for any long continuaunce, but euer as they grew proude of th
                     •
                  ſe graces by Fortune, ſhée whéeled them about into farre more lowlines.
               
                  The place was figured foorth in very liuely cullers, where might be diſcerned the foure Monarchies in theyr firſt flower and beautie, afterward, how the three (alreadie ruined and deſtroyed) fell into their ouerthrow, and the fourth (to wit, the Romaine) toſſed vp and downe by the whéeles turnings, now aloft, then as lowe, was yet ſtill in the warie eye of Fortune.
               There were infinite Kings and Princes together on a heape, ſtriuing and contending for her fauouring countenaunce: but all their labor was in vaine, for the more they ſtroue, the leſſe ſhe reſpected them.
               The young Prince Primaleon, who had care of nothing elſe but how to compaſſe the Armour, made no regarde of all theſe apparitions, but preſſing on a little more, hee behelde Fortune to diſcend from her ſeate, and ſhewing him very kinde lookes, as to one whom ſhée eſpecially fauoured: by her owne hands he was armed Knight-like in all reſpects, with ſuch loude applauſe of all the other by-ſtanders, as it appeared hee held no meane roome in her grace, which afterward altred into ſome ſhewes of enuie, becauſe he alone was regarded, and they helde as neglected, then thus ſhe ſpake to him.
               Henceforth be thou called Fortunes Knight, and verie aptly art thou ſo entiteled, becauſe thy deſires ſhall neuer aime at any thing: but for euery drop of ſweat thou ſpendeſt therein, thou ſhalt haue infinites of fame and glorie, and my ſelfe alwaies to be thy ſoueraigne Patroneſſe. Primaleon, who onely thirſted after honour, as alſo to reach the height of his hope in loue, thought this (as well hee might) a bleſſing beyond all other to be thus armed, and fauoured by Fortune: then gaue ſhée him her forelockes to hold in her hand, as a ſigne, that by ſuch progreſſion was his likelieſt way of preuailing.
               So taking her ſeate againe, ſhe made a ſigne of his departure, when preſently all vaniſhed; the trée cloſed again, and the wood appeared as it had doone before: whereat hée meruailing not a little, ſaw a goodly horſe cōming toward

him, with a faire ſhielde faſtned at the ſaddle-bowe, the horſe gently cōming to his hand, he mounted on his back, and looking on the ſhielde, hee behelde a Knight portrayed thereon, holding Fortune (in the habite of a beautifull woman) by the forelocks.
               So pleaſing was this deuiſe vnto him, as now he concluded to call himſelfe the Knight of Fortune: and looking ſomewhat lower vpon the ſheelde, he perceiued the face of a Lady, but couered with a vaile in ſuch manner, as hee could not apprehend the forme of her beautie, but there appeared a hande as pointing to her, and vnder it was written this motto, Proude beautie.
               
               Thus rode the Knight on, his minde ſtill hammering on loue, and deſire of glory, and then he eſpied Dorina comming toward, who before had ſtoode inuiſible by, and ſhee cauſing him to goe on board againe, ſet ſayle immediatlie for Constantinople.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XX. How the young Princes arriued at Constantinople, where they receiued their order of Knight-hoode: and how preparation was made for a Tournament.
               
                  THe Shyp that was embowelled with the gallant young Princes, caſting Anchor in the Port at Constantinople, they were by the Emperour & Empreſſe verie louingly entertained: and vnderſtanding by Aliarts Letters the cauſe of their comming, it was appointed that they ſhould be Knighted the Sunday folowing, and each one hauing watched in his Armor the night before, accoring to the cuſtome in ſuch caſes prouided, there

appeared certaine ſignes vnto them, which gaue notice of important matters to diuers of them. Leonato the ſonne of Palmerin beeing deuoutly at prayer, he beheld an aged Emperour enter the Chappell, who laying his hand vpon his breaſt, ſaid. Behold, I take all feare from thee, that may be iniurious, or hurt thee in any perrillous enterpriſe, & make thee Knight of the Sword: which deuiſe he bare while he liued, atchiuing manifold honours thereby, and it was imagined, that this old man was the ſhadow of the Emperour Palmerin d' Oliua.
               
               Theſe ſpéeches were plainly heard by diuers of the reſt, and others entring the Chappell, founde him both armed and girt with a Sword: which made them ſuppoſe, that hee ſhould neede no doubt of arming by the Emperour. To Arguto, who was at his deuotions in another place by himſelfe, appeared a King with a Shielde, which had figured in it a goodly Sunne, and taking him by the hand ſaid. I know that thy fortune, will heereafter cauſe thee to offende one, whō thou rather oughteſt to honour: but becauſe thou ſhalt not be the meaneſt in thoſe ſeruices which thou art to vndertake, I giue thée my ſhield of the Sunne, which ſhal be impenetrable, part therefore from hence, after thou haſt thy title of Knighthoode. No other hearde what this King had ſayde to Arguto, but ſawe howe hee armed him as a Knight.
               To Tarnaes the ſonne of Platir, came an old man in verie ſhort garments, who wanted one eye, and in breefe termes he ſpake thus to him. I giue thee this Armor, which once belonged to King Phillip of Macedon, which ſhall make thee famous in all thine enterpriſes: and arming him therewith, preſently departed. Many that ſaw him at his departure, iudged him to be Lycurgus the Law-maker of Lacedemonia.
               
               In the morning, the Emperour not a little wondering at theſe ſtrange accidents, gaue the other Knights theyr degrees: whereat Oliuanto, the ſecond ſonne of Florendos, was much diſcontented, becauſe the Emperour had not in

like manner knighted him, though indeed his young yéeres was his onely hinderance.
               The feaſting was very pompous, and the Emperour ſhewed himſelfe exceeding ioyfull, as beholding his Court now begin to flouriſh againe, which had béene before very ſad and ſolitarie, in regard of the mighty loſſes ſuſtained: and the caſe of Prince Florian cauſed ſome diſcontentment, albeit a little glimmering of good hap appeared, in that ſo many Knights was departed in queſt of him, and doubtleſſe would defend him from any perrill of life.
               The new created Knights, to giue ſome preſage of their hopefull valour, concluded a Tournament among themſelues, at the Launce onely, and it was free for all commers what ſoeuer: onely it was in this manner ordained, becauſe if any Pagan Princes ſhould chaunce to be there, no treaſon or villainie could then be offered. The fame of this Iouſting flew through diuers parts of the world, yea, euen into Turkie, where the Chriſtian Knights were in great ioy and feaſting, for the happy deliuerance of the Prince Florian. And Targiana omitted no gracious kindneſſe what ſoeuer, that might auaile for his delight or contentment: ſo that the Turkes thought ſhee had made him her huſband, whereat they grewe ſad, and much diſpleaſed, expecting euery howre when they ſhould be forced to deny their fayth, and be ſubiected to a Chriſtian Prince, the thought wherof to them was worſe then death. Very gladlie would theſe Chriſtian Lordes be preſent at Constantinople, as well to ſee the behauior of their Sonnes, as to make proofe of them by their owne experience: for at theſe yeres men ought endeuour to make themſelues glorious, and (in imitation of their Fathers) contend who ſhould be moſt famous.
               But they could not as yet get away from that Country, becauſe Riſtorano, hauing muſtered together many Perſian Knights, collected from diuers parts of the Prouinces, that came not in time for the ayde of Sucuſano: were reputed to be a very great Armie, and they were making ſpeedilie

to Tubante, hauing foure crowned Kings in their companie, who were to be knowne by theſe deſcriptions. Carino King of Illium was ye firſt, who had with him two huge Giants, and thirty thouſand armed Souldiours. Drago King of Memphis, the ſecond, who had a Monſter in humane ſhape, the very ſtrangeſt that euer was ſéene before. It went both on two feete, and likewiſe on foure, the heade like a Goate, with foure long bending hornes, two turning toward the face, and two forward: with the firſt hée wounded when hee ſtoode on his two féete, and with the other when he went vpon his foure. His armes were hairie briſtled, and more long then they that bore his bodie, hauing nayles or talents ſo ſharpe & piercing, as they woulde enter through any Shielde: in all the reſt hee reſembled a man, except his feete, and in ſtature greatly he excéeded any Giant whatſoeuer.
               
                  Vlderino King of Tanais was the third, a man very valiant of himſelfe, hauing twentie thouſand followers, and two Sonnes of a Giantlike ſtature. The fourth was Stupendo, the moſt cruell King of Scithia, with fiftéene thouſand of his armed people: according as theyr cuſtome is to goe, onely with Launce and bow, mounted on horſebacke, but without any bridle.
               All theſe ioyned their forces with Riſtorano, who likewiſe had an hundred thouſand men, what with his Perſians and thoſe of Turkie, who marching diſordredly, cumbred much ground, and were greatly feared all the way they went: for now no other newes ranne any where abroade, but that their Princeſſe Targiana was married to Florian King of Thrace, and thereby they doubted ſubiection to the Grecian Empire, which was very yrkeſome to them but to heare.
               When the Chriſtian Knights heard what a power was comming againſt them, and that ſo many Kings had ioyned their ſtrength with Riſtorano, fearing leaſt theyr ſupporting this preſent occaſion in Turkie, might abridge them from euer beholding their owne Countries, they diſpatched

thence certaine Turkes to perſwade the Kings, that the Chriſtians had no other buſines there, but onely to ſeate Targiana their naturall borne Lady in her Kingdome. And th
                     •
                  s perſwaſion had paſt for currant with them, but that Riſtorano (hauing no meane care to keepe thoſe Kinges firme vnto him) got intelligence of this treatie from the Chriſtians: and cauſing the Turkes to be quickly apprehended, commaunded them forth-with to be hewen in péeces.
               This diſſigne thus miſcarrying, the Chriſtian Knights prouided for their beſt defence, but they founde all thinges out of or
                     •
                  er that ſhould auaile them: for all the Turkes were in a mutinie about the marriage of Targiana, and ſhe (beeing altogether tranſported with her affection to Florian) made ſuch outward appearance of but an inward ſuppoſition, as the matter ſuſpected grewe to be ſoundly aſſured, ſo that not daring to build any truſt vpon the Turkes, and themſelues prouided of very fewe people, they ſtoode in an amazement, not knowing what to ſay or doo for theyr owne aduantage.
               
                  Blandidon, perceiuing he was not farre from his Kingdome of Niquea, promiſed to write thether, that ſo many armed men ſhould be ſent him as they could make, and Dirdan the Graund Cane was vrged to the like, that he would alſo ſend to his kingdome of Paraz. But he that ſtoode rather diſpoſed to make conqueſt of Niquea, and take to wife the beautifull Lady Tirrena, béeing thereto before ſollicited by ſundry inuitations: alleaged ſuch excuſes, which although they were ſlenderly credited, yet none knew directlie how to obiect againſt them.
               The meſſengers from Blandidon béeing come to Nequea, there they vnderſtoode by diuers good friendes of his, howe matters ſtood already accorded cōcerning Tirrena: wherfore, without deliuerance of their Embaſſage, they returned backe againe, and certified the Chriſtian Lords of their ill ſucceſſe. This diſaſtrous chaunce much troubled Palmerin and the reſt, but eſpecially Blandidon beyond them

all, who remembring the dreame he had in the Perilous Ile, and telling the ſame to the Knights, they all founde it not fit to contend with ſo mighty a puiſſaunce, but to take the beſt courſe for the ſafetie of the Cittie, which not beeing ſo intirely furniſhed with prouiſion, they thought it beſt, day by day to deale by ſingle fights, vntill they had made hauock of the Leaders and Captaines.
               In theſe hopes and determinations, they expected the enemies approch, who founde as they came but ſmall reſiſtance, by reaſon of the fault imputed to Targiana: and the Turkes were very deſirous and thirſty after newes, becauſe they heard that Targiana (with Prince Florian) was with-drawne into the Caſtell, and daily they endeuoured to fortifie Tubante.
               
               Héereupon, Riſtorano béeing come within a league of the Citty, and there deuiſing on his beſt and apteſt meanes in procéeding, to beſiedge it was the generall concluſion. Palmerin, to giue a beginning to their former intention, armed himſelfe, and comming foorth of the Citty, ſtaying a place farre enough from the enemies Campe, gaue them to vnderſtand by an Heralde at Armes, after what manner they demaunded battaile.
               
                  Riſtorano, who was wiſe and prouident found very readily the purpoſe of the Chriſtians: and knowing that theſe were the flower of all the Grecian Caualierie, would not agrée vpon ſuch ſingle combate or fight, alleadging, that in regard they were but few, they had no other way more expedient for their owne defence. For, they coulde not expect any further aſſiſtance, becauſe the Empire of Constantinople was ſo emptied of her Souldiours in the late battaile, as thence could come no ſupply: and therefore it was meeteſt to engirt the Citty with ſtrong ſledge, which was the onely way to vanquiſh without any damage.
               This indéede was the ſoundeſt counſell and aduiſe, but the Kings beeing youthfull and gallant, vnexperienced in the proofe of the Chriſtian warriours: would not allow of any thing but Combate, and becauſe they contended who

ſhould be formoſt, to conclude all further iarring, it was determined, that Carino, with one of his Gyants, Drago King of Memphis, and Stupendo King of Scithia, ſhoulde combate with any foure Knights of the Citty. This aunſwere was returned to Palmerin, that he and three other ſhould prepare themſelues, to deale in Combate the day following, neere to the Citty, and in meane while ſhoulde no wayes by them be iniured.
               Theſe newes were not a little welcome to the Chriſtians, ſeeing theyr deſſeignment ſort to ſo good effect: heerevpon they made theyr preparation, and becauſe that all of them were willing to goe forth, they were commaunded to be in readines, according as afterward ſhould more aptlie be concluded vpon.
               So Palmerin, who already had accepted the Combate, (Floraman remaining ſtill as Captaine generall) Florendos, Dramuſiande, and Berolde, were to be the other with him, whereat the Prince Florian was greatly offended: and this was a good helpe of preſeruing the Cittie from loſſe, as in the ſucceſſe heereof ſhal be declared. But leaue we them now in their former preparation, and returne againe a while to Constantinople.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXI. How they proceeded to the Tournament, wherein Arguto would haue ſlaine an vnknowne Knight, becauſe he could not endure his company.
               
                  
                     ALiart, who truſted not a little to his arte, ſent diuers of his Magicall meſſengers, to vnderſtand by them how the affaires went in the enemies kingdome: and when he was reſolued, that there was no Armie prepared to come againſt the Chriſtians, but onely that of Riſtoranos, (who would much more willingly haue held his gouernment in quiet, then hazard it by medling with the Chriſtians, whom he verily imagined to be inuincible) he grew excéedingly deſirous, to ſend all the Princeſſes with their daughters into their owne iuriſdictions. And as they conferred héereon together, they concluded to goe for Constantinople, eſpecially ſuch as had loſt their huſbands: becauſe theyr ſad mindes would not admit them to ſée their natiue homes, where they were aſſured to find nothing but greefe and deſolation.
               This their determination diſpleaſed not Aliart, wherefore cauſing a Ship to be very well prouided, they all went aboord, and himſelfe was the more willing to beare them company, becauſe no ſiniſter chaunce ſhould befall them by Sea: which vſually was wont to be perrillous by reaſon of the enemies forces béeing abroade, but nowe in better quiet by their late diſabling.
               Safely they ſayled along to Constantinople, where the newes of their arriuall ranne quickly through the Cittie, and the Emperour cōmaunding the young Knights forthwith

to Arme themſelues, accompanied with ye Empreſſe Grydonia and Baſilia, went to giue welcome vnto the Ladies.
               The Quéenes Palitia, Meliſſa, Francellina, Arnalte, Miragarda, and Polynarda, were the firſt that went on Land, the three formoſt in their widdowed attires, but Arnalte more pompous and proude then euer before: there followed them Alderina, Leonida, Bramaciana, Deniſa, Sidelia, Oniſtalda, Clariſsima, Bernarda, Clariana, and Florenda, who becauſe ſhee was high minded, would needes be the laſt, and went alone by herſelfe from all the reſt. Then followed the younger Ladies in ſuch ſumptuous ornaments, as they drew all eyes to behold and admire them. Victoria, daughter to Prince Florian, becauſe ſhe was eldeſt, was admitted the priuiledge of landing firſt, ſeconded by Argentina the Spanyard, ſo excelling in beauty, as it delighted all harts to behold her.
               
                  Candida came next, whoſe perfections aunſwering her name, made her much wondred at. Spyna woulde haue gone with Florenda her mother, béeing of ſuch a haugtie proude diſpoſition, that though her ſinguler beautie made many to commend her, yet her coy diſdainfulnes, gaue iuſt cauſe of as great condemning her. Then followed Arlencea, with her Sonne Franardo, that was left with her in the Perillous Ile, and Cardigea likewiſe with her Sonne Almaroll.
               
               The newe created Knights led the young Ladies Palfrayes by the bridles, and the younger men the Palfrayes of the maried Princeſſes: whereat the Emperour laughed indifferently, and many pretty frumps and ieſts were broken on the elder Ladies.
               
                  Arguto, whoſe expectation was at the Kingdome of Hungaria, as giuing place to no one in iuſtice of his title, preſented himſelfe forward, and taking Victoriaes Steede by the bridle, ſhewed her the greateſt kindneſſe hee coulde poſſibly vſe, with ſpéeches ſwéetly couched, and very effectuall: but the young Lady, not acquainted with ſuch ſalutations,

nor vnderſtanding the youthful gallants purpoſe, by naturall curteſie returned him a very accomodate aunſwere, which he entertayning as a good preſage of future happy fortune, thought him bleſſed in ſo faire a beginning. Oliuanto was the leader to Argentinaes Palfray: but becauſe he was yet ouer-young, and not endued with knighthood, he did not behold her with the eye of affection. Tarnaes laying hand on Spynaes bridle, was welcomde ſo ſullenlie by her that knew no courſe of kindnes, as ſhe ſhewing apparant ſignes of diſcontentment, and the young Lord bluſhing at ſuch diſcourteous behauiour, ſtept backe againe, very much amated in his thoughts: & this repulſe of hers béeing generally noted, raiſed a preſent imagination among them all, that this ſcornefull pride, would keep Spyna long enough without a huſband.
               When the Emperour Primaleon had well beheld the beautie of Candida, albeit hee was olde, hee could not containe, but needes he would goe and be the guide to her palfray: whereat the Princeſſes ſmyled a good among them ſelues, but his ſiſter Baſilia (to thwart their intended ieſtings herevpon) called Arlencea, and giuing her roome to ride in the midſt of them, began to talke pleaſantly concerning Dramuſiande, and howe if hee had not departed with Doryna, what little hope remained of his longer life. So entred they the Cittie in very great tryumph, and wonderfull preparation made by the inhabitants, vnable to conceale their ioy and contentment, hauing their Emperour ſo royally among them, and matters reduced into their former dignitie.
               And in this manner they came to the Pallace, where the Empreſſe Grydonia hauing richly furniſhed many tables, euery one was ſeated according to his woorth and eſtimate: the newe Knights and other Princes, at Tables by themſelues, and the Ladies with their daughters, at other by themſelues. The feaſt was aunſwerable to ſuch a time of ſolemnitie, and the tables beeing withdrawne, the newe Knights went ioyntly to the Emperour together, deſiring

that now they might procéede to the Tournament: for diuers Pagan Princes were already there arriued, with eſpeciall intent to make knowne their hardines, and ſome of them hauing ſeene the forementioned Ladies, were in theyr heat of affection become ſo amourous, as they practiſed all meanes to be poſſeſſed of theſe beauties, and haue them thence with them into their owne Countries, if by theyr chiualrie they could attaine to ſuch happines.
               Thether was come a ſonne of Sucuſanos the Soldane of Perſia, who was called Salaman: and from Romata came the young King Gorgoneo, who forgetfull of the benefites his Graund-father receiued by Palmerin d' Oliua, ioyned in confederacie with Sucuſano, & both theſe Princes were purpoſely come thether, to pry into the procéedings of the Chriſtians, and thereby to catch occaſion of a newe commencement of warre.
               There was alſo arriued a King of India, called Tamerco, who had brought his Siſter with him, a Lady of ſuch beauty, as ſhée was enuied of very many, and thought to be fayre by the Chriſtians themſelues: this he did as mooued thereto by a vaine opinion, thinking to equall any Chriſtian Lady with his Siſters beautie. Tinto King of Armenia was likewiſe there, the onely valiant man of his perſon, and moſt famous amongſt the Pagans: and had he not died by miſhap in the Tourney, the victory had not gone on the newe made Knights ſide. Thether came alſo the Prince of Apuglia, the Earle of Antwerpe, who was a Chriſtian, and many other great perſonages of Chriſtendome, whoſe names ſhall be reported in theyr apt time and place.
               The Emperour gaue authoritie to the Duke of Pera, to ſée the Liſts prepared, and to take care for the obſeruation of the lawes to a Tournament belonging, wherein it was prouided, that neither Sword, Mace, nor Poleaxe ſhould be brought within the Liſts, but onely the Launce, whereof tenne were allowed to euery Knight, who hauing runne and broken their ſtaues, ſhould depart & giue place

to all freſh commers. The new Knights came with their attendants in coſtly liueries, to make the ſhewe appeare more pompous, the like obſeruation was among the ſtrangers: and the limitted day béeing come, they entred according to appoyntment within the Liſtes.
               
                  Leonato and Arguto had the honour to beginne, the firſt with Salaman, and brake their Launces brauely, parting thence without any aduantage diſcerned, more on one ſide then another. The ſecond encountred Tinto of Armenia, and by ouer-much haſt failed in the breake: neuertheleſſe, their Shieldes ſo mainly met together, as the horſes (not able to endure the ſhocke) fell downe, that belonging to Tinto, breaking one of his legges behind in the fall, and Leonatos three of his ribbs in the ſide. The Knights quickly leaping from their ſadles, and hauing no ſwords to enter further tryall, ſtoode as men diſcontented: but the Emperour (ſome-what diſpleaſed that two ſuch Knights were thus excluded the Iouſt, without any fault by themſelues cōmitted) gaue this ſentence, yt the foyle of the horſes, cauſed by the hardiment of the Knights, did not depriue them of fame or reputation, and therefore with freſh horſes they ſhould once more try their fortune.
               While theſe two Knights were gone to prepare themſelues, Tarnaes entred the Liſtes, againſt whom Gorgoneo aduaunced foorth himſelfe, this encounter was with ſuch fierceneſſe performed, that Tarnaes bare away the Pagans ſhoulder-plate, and Gorgoneo brake his Shielde in two parts: then turning to recouer other Launces, they intended to approue which of them exceeded the other in valour. But the Emperour, who would not that any one ſhoulde miſcary in this Tournament, hauing an eſpeciall and prouident care, that no Pagan Prince ſhould be offended, and thereon to ground a newe occaſion of warre, the Grecian Empire béeing yet but in weake eſtate, and hauing heard likewiſe of the procéedings in Turkie, ordained immediatly, that the Knights ſhould take newe Armes for thē loſt, and ſo without any blame to enter the Liſtes againe.
               
                  
                  Tamarco was nowe prepared for the Iouſt, and Belcar the man hee was to cope withall, who beeing as yet but verie young, could not withſtand the ſhock, but fel backward ouer the crupper of his horſe: when preſently Fortenbracio made againſt Tamarco, and ſuch was his ſucceſſe, that Tamarco loſt his ſtirrop, and nodded forward verie neere falling: but Fortenbracio had ſuch a ſtroke on the ſide, as he had kiſt the ground, but that very quickly hee recouered himſelfe againe.
               
                  Franardo, who beheld a Giant of Trebiſonde preparing himſelfe to the Iouſt, made forth to encounter him: but by reaſon of his great ſtrength, & more agility to armes then the Pagan had, he made him try his length along vpon the earth, hurte both with the Launce, as alſo the fall. Thys highly did content the Emperour, to behold ſhining in him the vertues of Dramuſiande his Father: and Arlencea his mother, who among the other Ladies ſtood to ſée the ſports, was not a little delighted to ſee this ſight, to behold her ſon ſo eſpecially honoured, and to beare away the victory from his enemy.
               A brother to the Giant ſo lately diſmounted, woulde néedes reuenge the others diſgrace, but hee dealing with Almaroll, the ſonne to valiant Almaroll, though ſmall inequalitie ſéemed to be betwéene them, yet the Giant felt his braines ſomewhat dizzied and diſtracted. Caro encountred with the Prince of Apuglia: Eſtellant with the Earle of Antwerpe: Orino and Armindo with two Kings, one of Lamech, the other of Cuſco.
               
               
                  Eſtrellant afterward Iouſted with an vnknown Knight, who tooke diſdaine to be ſhooke in his ſaddle, albeit he ſaw it apparantly noted, and therefore it ſtood him to ſit the ſurer. He gallantly managed his horſe about the Liſtes, vnhorſing euery one that came to deale with him, and the mixture of the Knights was nowe in ſuch a confuſed manner, as he could not ſuddenly apprehend which part was of moſt valour, nor to which ſide he might beſt appoynt himſelfe: wherefore at aduenture hee tooke the Pagan ſide,

which euen then was ready to forſake the place, becauſe that Tinto of Armenia, the onely flower of all the Pagans, had receiued a blow, not ſeene from whom, and hee lifting vp his arme, as it were to aunſwere his enemie that had wounded him, he felt his ſtrength faile him, for his hurt had entred his very hart, ſo downe hée fell dead: a ſight no leſſe offenſiue to the Emperour then to the Pagans.
               
                  Arguto, beholding that the Knight vnknowne had diſmounted Eſtrellant, Belcar, Armindo, and was now to giue the like curteſie to Almaroll, gaue forth himſelfe to reuenge their miſ-fortunes: and the vnknowne gallant perceiuing him, they ranne three Launces with ſuch furie, as all the beholders expected nothing but death on each ſide, and no aduauntage as yet could be diſcerned, but that Arguto was ſomewhat dazzeld at the third ſhocke, whereas the Knight vnknowne, ſate ſtill freſh and luſtie, to the admiration of all the Knights which had runne already, expecting nowe ſome matter of great valour to be performed betwéen theſe two Knights.
               
                  Arguto, who little dreampt on ſo ſharpe an entertainement, grew excéedingly aſhamed of himſelfe, that the Infant Victoria, who was in the window with the other Ladies, ſhould ſée him ſo diſgraced: therefore to amend that miſchaunce, he verily purpoſed the death of the vnknowne Knight, who ſtil demeaned himſelfe ſo worthily in Armes, as the Pagans (thinking him to be the like) greatly triumphed ouer the other. So comming with a péece of a very ſharpe poynted Launce, hée gaue a thruſt there-with at the flanck of the Knight vnknowne, which happening where the Vaunt-plate was not well ioyned, might much haue endamaged him: and but that he rarely ſhunned it, by an encounter of Franardo, who at that inſtant was coping with him, he there had ſlaine him.
               This diſcourteous deed ſo diſpleaſed the Emperour, and all the by-ſtanders, as preſently there grew a generall murmure, euery one ſaying: that a Knight neuer ought to ſake aduantage by trecherie, or by any baſe meanes to

diſhonour his owne reputation.
               The vnknowne Knight, foreſéeing the harme intended, made forward to Arguto, and hauing nothing to hurt him withall, caught faſt hold about his middle, the like did the other by him: and tugging ſo together for an indifferent while, their ſtriuing was ſo troubleſome to their horſes, (much wearied with Iouſting) that they both fell downe vnder their maiſters, but themſelues recouered footing againe very quickly, and catching like faſt hold on each other as before, the ſtrength of all the by-ſtanders in the Liſtes could not part them, no nor the out-cries made to them by the Emperour: who fearing to ſée the death of two ſo valiant Knights, forſooke his Scaffold of ſtate where hée ſate, and entred the Liſtes with his weapon drawne, accompanied with Tryneus Emperour of Almaine, who could not make one in this Tournament, becauſe hée found himſelfe very vnapt and ſickly.
               The Knights beholding the Emperours ſo néere, let goe theyr hold of theyr owne accord, and ſtepping forward to him to requeſt his departure thence againe, the Helmet fell off from Primaleons head: for Arguto ſtill purſuing his intent of aduantage, in the time of their ſo ſtrict buſtling together, had cut the laces in ſunder. But when the Emperour had knowledge of him, very graciouſly he embraced him, and taking him by the hand, conducted him to the Empreſſe Grydonia and the other Ladies, who were not a little deſirous to know of whence he was.
               Nowe they perceiuing him to be the young Primaleon, the Empreſſe caught him by the hand, and plucking him gladly to her, kiſſed him oftentimes: but Miragarda, beeing ouer-come with excéeding ioy, could not brooke with patience his ſo long ſtay from her, and therefore without excuſe or otherwiſe, ſhée went and tooke him in her armes, and that in ſuch manner, as ſhe wreſted him quite out of the Empreſſes hand, whereat both the Emperour and all there preſent, laughed hartily. The mother ſatiſ-fied with her kinde embracings, gaue him leaue elſe where to diſpoſe

himſelfe, and he who was not meanely inſtructed in courtſhip, went firſt and kiſſed the hand of his Aunte the Empreſſe Bazilia afterward to the Quéenes and all the Princeſſes: but when he came to doe that curteous office to the Infant Victoria, he felt himſelfe ſuddenly ſurprized with an vnaccuſtomed paſſion, and noting wel her face, remembred that he had elſewhere beheld her, but neuer bethought him of his dreame.
               The Lady, who as yet had neuer felt any amourous fire, was ſo well pleaſed with his affable preſence, as ſhée forgot to with-draw her hand backe from him, but continued on ſuch kinde diſcourſe with him, and amiable geſtures, that Arguto, who ſtood and aduiſedly marked this behauiour, thought he ſhould haue died with extremitie of affliction. For albeit hee had made many ſignes of loue to her, yet ſhee as yet had neuer requited him with any, or declared that he was eſtéemed by her at all.
               And heere began a hatred of long continuaunce, till marying with a Siſter to the ſaid Primaleon, which Miragarda was deliuered off in Constantinople, and named Concordia, whoſe name and nature afterward wrought that happie effect: for by her were Primaleon & Arguto drawne to amitie: likewiſe was borne of Polynarda a beautiful mayden, who at the ſame time was called Fior-nouella.
               
               The careſſes and embracings on all ſides finiſhed, and euery one departed frō the Liſtes, the Pagans came with theyr Helmets off into the Pallace, to behold the Court of the noble Emperor, but eſpecially the Ladies, whoſe beauties were blazed thorow the whole world: and Tamerco led Auriana his Siſter with him, a young Lady, but of fiftéene yéeres of age, ſo faire and richly adorned after the Indian manner, that all began to grow in admiration of her, forſaking their opinion of them whom they ſaw daily. And indeed ſhee carryed herſelfe with ſuch a ſtately geſture, that the Ladies of the Court (noting theyr loue ſeruants to eye her ſo entirely) beganne to wexe iealous and doubtfull of them.
               
                  The feaſting endured with great ſollemnitie, and euerie 
                     •
                  ne might freely diſcourſe with the miſtreſſe of his affections: among which goodly be
                     •
                  ie of Ladies, Tamerco hauing iudicially viewed them all, reckoned Polinarda to ſurpaſſe the reſt in beautie: and became ſo earneſtly affected to her, yt he deuiſed how he might beſt ſteale her thence, and leaue his Siſter there in ſted of her: ſuch was his indiſcréete and ouer-fond deſire, whereof what enſued, ſhall heereafter be ſpoken in place more expedient.
            
            
               CHAP. XXII. How the Knights of Tubante combatted againſt the Pagane Kings, and howe the Citty was neere hand looſing, by a trecherous deuiſe that Ristorano wrought.
               
                  
                     PAlmerin, Florendos, Dramuſiande, and Berolde, who were to fight the Combate with the Pagane Kings: armed themſelues earlie the morning following, and went foorth into the Fielde, whether ſoone after came the thrée Kings and the Giant, who becauſe they rather fought for deſire of glory, then any couetous affection after rule and Emperie, ſaluted our Chriſtian Champions very kindly, as if they had béene friendes and acquaintance, perhaps more to ſée ye faces of thoſe Knights, whoſe fame and reputation was reckoned ſo great, then any other reſpect of affabilitie, when beholding their lookes to be ſo gentle and debonnaire, they made the leſſe account of whatſoeuer might be in them.
               The Pagane Giant, who was farre greater in ſtature then Dramuſiande, came with a ſmile and tooke him by the

hand, thinking with a by-wreſt to ouerthrowe him on the earth: but he béeing of a very great ſpirit, and not ſo eaſie to be ouerturned, vnawares (with his yron Gauntlet) gaue the other ſuch a blow on the face, as made him ſtagger to and fro. So beganne the fight betwixt them without anie Iouſting, and embracing ſtrongly together, fell both beſide their horſes: but béeing recouered vppon their feete againe, ſtoutly with their ſwords they hackt and hewed each other.
               
                  Palmerin and the reſt perceiuing the fight was begun, challenged them foorth whom they were to deale withall: Carino, King of Illium, went againſt Florendos, and they combatted in the midſt amongſt the other. Drago of Memphis vndertooke Palmerin, and Stupendo the Scithian, encountred Berold.
               
               The Launces which Carino and Florendos ranne withall, were ſo tough & boyſtrous, that they would not breake, but bare both the Champions to the ground, with the ſaddles betwéene their legges, but quickly getting foote againe, they drew their ſwords and cheerefully fell to it. Palmerin receiued ſuch a ſalutation from Drago, as hee (minding more Dramuſiande who was down on ye ground, then the perrill whereto hee appoſed himſelfe) had almoſt kiſt the grounde for his negligence, and fayled of any ſucceſſe with his owne Launce. But comming afterward to try it by the ſword, he deliuered ſuch forcible ſtrokes at his enemy, that Drago béeing glad to make his ſhield his beſt ſhelter, had it cleft in two parts, and his Helmet ſhrewdly battered beſide.
               
                  Drago, who neuer dreampt of any ſuch vallour in a Chriſtian, began to conſider with himſelfe, that if now hée did not declare his very vttermoſt man-hood, hee ſawe no way but immediat death: wherefore bringing his ſworde ouer his head with a backe ſtroake, it lighted ſo ſhrewdlie on the ſide of Palmerins head, that it made him reele about in ſuch ſort, as if he had not ſuddenly ſette his ſword to the ground with his right hand, he néedes muſt haue tumbled

ouer and ouer. But that helpe ſeruing him in his need, as a good ſupport, and he now ſoundly acquainted with ye Kings ſtrength, ſhewed himſelfe not ſlacke in aunſwering ſtroke for ſtroke, ſo the fight as yet continued betwixt them without any great difference.
               
                  Stupendo was valiantly encountred by Berolde, both of them in the ſhocke beeing diſmounted, and referred to the combate of the ſword: wherein the King behaued himſelfe very gallantly, but Berolde by his more agill turnings and windings, cauſed many of his huge blowes to be ſpent but in vaine.
               
                  Florendos had hurt Carino in the ſword hand, by béeing more ſkilfull in his weapon then he: and Palmerin founde Drago ſo deſperate and reſolute, as he very much doubted the iſſue of their Combate: but all this might iuſtly be termed as nothing, in reſpect of the fight betweene Dramuſiande and Lamiro the Giant, for they fought more by force and meere might, then any engenie or cunning, whereuppon, Dramuſiande ſéeing his enemie obſerue no order of Combate, which hindered him often from many proffered aduantages, began to chéere himſelfe with this hope, that this immoderate furie would at length tyre the Giant, and ſo he held him play vpon ſo faire a likelihood: beſide, he had already wounded him in the left ſide, whereout the blood did iſſue aboundantly, both which confirmed his not long continuance.
               
                  Stupendo had ſlightly hurt Berolde in two places, and he had awarded his aduerſarie ſo well, that himſelfe receiued a wound vpon his eye-brow: ſo the blood tricking downe, much hindered his ſight, and aduantaged Berolde in his further procéeding.
               The Knights in the Citty grewe ſuſpitious of ſome trecherie, becauſe they beheld diuers betake them to theyr Launces, whereon they forth-with armed themſelues, ſetting downe this order: that Platir, Pompides, Dirdan, and Blandidon, ſhould goe forth of the Citty, accompanied with fiftie other valiant Knights, as a defence to them yt fought

the Combate, and that Florian, Dragonalte, Gracian, Francian, and Floraman, ſhould be readie armed in the Cittie with all the Caualierie, beſide fiue thouſand Turkes ſworne faythfull to Targiana, and many of them ſecretlie baptized.
               
                  Riſtorano, who beheld the fight to faile on theyr ſide whom he truſted, when he ſaw Platir and the reſt iſſue forth of the Citty, commaunded tenne thouſand horſe to be readie within halfe a mile of the field, cloaking his intent with this excuſe, that they were but to guard the Kinges from treaſon: likewiſe he placed an ambuſh in a wood, which was not aboue a bowe ſhoote from the Combattants. All which béeing doone, hee cauſed a great huge ſtone to be taken vp, that couered the mouth of a Caue or vault, from whence was a paſſage vnder the Citty. This conueiance was long before made by a certaine Lord, as a meanes for his owne eſcape, when any harme ſhould happen to the Citty, and Targiana béeing a woman of no ſuch ſuſpect, knew nothing of this vault, nor any about her.
               His armed Souldiours entring this Cauerne, they were to riſe in the houſe of the Prince of Antioche, who perceiuing he could not ioyne in marriage with Targiana, feyned himſelfe to be ſicke, as no way willing to impeach ye war, but expecting ſtill ſome occaſion of treaſon. Hee hearing them breaking the ground in his houſe, and that there ſéemed a vaulte to be vnderneth, whereby might growe ſome matter of conſequence, called certaine of his faithful attendants vnto him, and commaunding them to breake open the vault aboue, beheld vnderneath the Enſignes of Riſtorano, which on purpoſe were carryed formoſt, for the ſpéedie knowledge of his people.
               This aduenture ſo highly pleaſed the Prince of Antioche, that he ſuffered them gladly to come forth, and there now appeared to be a full Court. But a Chriſtian Knight, who vſed to walke euery way of the Citty, to note what the Turkes eyther ſayd or did, leaning to a wall that abutted on this place, heard what a murmuring ſo many people

made within, and cauſing very ſoftly a litle rift to be made, beheld of what a multitude they conſiſted, where-vpon hee poſted immediatly to Floraman, and to him diſcouered thys vnlooked for accident.
               The Captaine, béeing a man of mighty courage, diſmaied not a iote, but hauing imparted theſe newes to Prince Florian and the reſt, they all went preſently to the Prince of Antioches Pallace: prouiding that ſo many men ſhould not come foorth into the Citty, neither that theyr number ſhould be any further increaſed, by that or any other paſſage vnder the ground. Then aduertiſing Targiana to fortifie herſelfe in the Caſtell, without any noyſe they gathered their ſtrength together, thoſe foure thouſand vnder the conduct of Blandidon, and two thouſand which were in the Caſtell of Albayzo, leauing the Turkiſh power for guarde of the Caſtell: ſo marching ſoftly to the Princes Pallace, they found the gate open, where preſentlie they entred, and nowe intended to make proofe of theyr valour.
               
                  Florian méeting the Prince of Antioche, calling him him Traytor, ſlew him at one blow, by reaſon he was vnarmed: his death gaue the victory to our Chriſtian forces, becauſe the Pagans béeing there thus ſuddenly amazed, and ignorant of further proceeding into the Citty, whereof the Prince of Antioche had before receiued the ful charge, they fell to a confuſion among themſelues, and the Chriſtians to diſcréet and orderly care of their charge.
               
                  Dragonalte, Francian, and an hundred more with them, were gotten vp on the battlements of the Pallace, and thence tumbled downe huge ſtones ſo mainely, that the Courts béeing full of the enemies Souldiours, they brayned them in great multitudes together.
               
                  Floraman, with Florian, Gracian, and their followers, ſawe that diuers ſought to ſaue themſelues thorowe the vaults paſſage againe: but that was quickly rammd vp with dead bodies, and no way nowe left for them but preſent death, thus was the ſafetie of the Citty aſſured, and

many throwing downe their weapons to the ground, vpon their knees intreated pardon.
               
                  Riſtorano, who not knowing of this ill ſucceſſe, but imagining the ſight to be as then ſcarce begunne in the Citty, and that all things would fall out to his contentment, cauſed the tenne thouſand and thoſe ambuſhed in the wood, to ruſh foorth vpon the Chriſtian Combattants, to make them ſure for euer ſéeing theyr Countries any more, and himſelfe with thirtie thouſand men very well appointed, intended to goe and beleager the Citty walls, Platir beholding ſuch a power to appeare, prepared to ſuccour his friendes, and founde that Palmerin (to frée himſelfe from further danger) had cleft both the Helmet and head of Drago, and there hee lay gaſping and ſprawling vppon the earth.
               
                  Dramuſiande hauing the Giant faſt about the middle, got him downe vnderneath him, but could not kill him, becauſe he béeing fearefull of death, had got him faſt by the hand wherein he held his weapon, and able to remooue no further, there they lay both tumbling ready to be trodden on.
               
                  Carino held out indifferently againſt Florendos, who by reaſon of his lamenes, cou
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  ot ſo readily beſtir himſelfe on foote: as for Berolde and Stupendo, they had ſo ouer-laboured one another, as their ſtrokes did little harme to either.
               
                  Palmerin perceiuing the treaſon toward, and the danger of Dramuſiande, gaue the Giant ſuch a ſtroke on the ſide, as making him let goe his hold, gaue Dramuſiande libertie to recouer his feete againe, and ſo together they prepared for their enemies approching. Carino, beeing a Knight of an honourable diſpoſition, calling Stupendo to him, excuſed the Chriſtian Combattants very much, as no way deſeruing to be thus intrapt by treaſon, & ſo withdrew them among their people.
               
                  Florendos and his companions, ſeazing on ſuch horſes, as were neereſt hand, firſt killing their riders, made afterward

with what ſpeede they could to the Cittie, but finding at their backes aboue twentie thouſand to withſtand them, could hardly geſſe what ſhould now become of them. Riſtorano beeing gotten to the Cittie wall, vnregarded of any within to reſiſt him, becauſe as yet the ſtirre was not ended at the Prince of Antioches Pallace, and the Turks had ſhut vp themſelues in their houſes, expecting to ſée the Chriſtians ſo weakened, as man to man might ſley them ſafely: euen as they were paſſing along the ditches, certaine Squires belonging to Platir, that watched vpon the gates by his appointment, to eſpy a farre off any trecherie intended, beholding the imminent perrill, one ran preſently to Floraman to acquaint him there-with, who leauing there Florian, Gracian, Francian, and two thouſand armed men, went with Dragonalte and the reſt of the Souldiers to defend the walls, calling likewiſe thoſe Turkes along with him that guarded the Caſtell, and his comming thether was in very apt ſeaſon, becauſe an enemie Banner was already ſpred on a Turret adioyning.
               
                  Dragonalte made no meane haſt to bee there, where mounting his Turkes ſo faſt as he could, and cutting him quite through the midſt that held the Banner, it encouraged all the reſt to mount ch
                     ••
                  rely after them.
               
                  Riſtorano, ſéeing the wall in that quarter ſo ſtronglie manned, cauſed his men to get vp in diuers other places, and (deſpight of all the Chriſtians could doe,) aboue tenne thouſand Turkes were got vpon the walls, who began to deſcend downe into the Cittie, by the helpe of diuers falſe-harted Cittizens, that rather then the Chriſtians ſhould be Conquerers, were content to take part with the enemy.
               
                  Florian, Gracian, and Francian, behaued themſelues wonderfully, but when they heard the enemies had aſſayled the walls, and danger appeared of yeelding in the Cittizens, they could not readily determine what to doe: for they which had yéelded before at the Pallace, beholding the Chriſtians now in ſo narrow a ſtraight, forgot all former receiued fauour, and ioyned with the reſt to murder theyr

preſeruers, but all this ſorted to very ſlender effect, ſo worthilie did our Chriſtian Knights withſtand their proceedings.
               
                  Floraman, Dragonalte, and their followers, fought verie valiantly, and the Pagans thronged together in ſuch huge troopes, as they hindered one another from mounting the walls: and but for thoſe Turkes that were friends and ſworne to Targiana, the Citty doubtleſſe had béen loſt. For they tooke away certaine vnder-ſhoaring Rampiers and ſupporters, which on the inſide vpheld the maine ſtrength of the wall: and when it was loaden with aboue thirtie thouſand perſons, downe fell they into the ditches, and the battlements vpon them, and there they all periſhed without one eſcaping.
               This miſhap not a little diſpleaſed Riſtorano, whereupon he thought beſt to make toward the Chriſtian Knights, as hoping by their deaths to end this controuerſie, much more the ſooner be poſſeſſed of the Cittie. The Pagans that oppoſed themſelues againſt Prince Florian, when they ſawe what a loſſe had ſucceeded, by the walls fall, they were ſo affrighted, that hurling downe their weapons, they humbly intreated for ſafetie of their liues: but they that had experience of theyr former trechery, and how bloodily they procéeded in all their actions, would lende no eare to them, but ſlew them apace on euery ſide, and quicklie had they made an end of them all, if a meſſenger had not come from Floraman, who gaue them to vnderſtand, that Florendos and his friendes were ſhutte vp in the enemies Campe, and no meanes for their eſcape was nowe to be had, but by thruſting foorth part of thoſe Turkes to ſuccour them.
               Theſe newes ſaued the liues of ſixe thouſand Turkes, who perceiuing Targianas affaires to ſpéede better then theyrs, lifting vp theyr hands all diſarmed, made a ſigne that they would fight faithfully for the Chriſtians. Florian, although he could not well truſt them, yet beholding the neceſſity of their owne extremity, gaue them their Armes,

and promiſed them many great rewards if they proued loyall, appointing them alſo the charge of that part where the wall was falne, as the beſt way to make triall of their conſtancie.
               So ioyning with Floraman, and leauing Dragonalte with two thouſand for ſafetie of the Citty, they iſſued foorth on the enemie, finding in one part Platir, Pompides, Dirdan, and Blandidon, who had made themſelues way thorow the crowde, with no meane ſlaughter of theyr enemies: after them followed Palmerin and the other three, ſo wearied with their combate and fighting all day, that very hardly could they lift theyr ſwordes: yet were they forced to ſtand vppon their owne defence, becauſe Vlderino King of Tanais, with two ſonnes of his that were two Giants, continually purſued them, and had preuailed ſhrewdlie againſt them, if Florian, Floraman, and Platir had not béene neere, who vndertaking the quarrell with Vlderino and his ſonnes gaue roome for the foure to paſſe the preaſe, though encloſed with the enemie ſtill on euery ſide.
               
                  Platir buckled cloſe with Vlderino, and at the firſt ſtroke cleft his Shielde through the midſt, himſelfe receiuing a ſmall hurt in the left hand. Florian encountred Arabo one of the Giants, and had a blowe from him that made him ſtagger: but Florian loth to die in his debt, returned him ſuch a requitall for it, as he wounded him ſome-what déepe vppon his right ſhoulder. Traccio the other Giant, gaue Floraman a thwarting ſtroake, and therewith had borne him to the earth, but that his Launce kept him vp in his ſaddle, by the rude ſhock hee gaue the Giant: notwithſtanding, he was a little giddied, at which aduantage the Giant tooke faſt hold of him, and lifting him quite beſide his horſe, thought thus to beare him away to his Pauillion, and there to teare him in peeces at his pleaſure, but that the crowde of people was his onely hinderance.
               
                  Palmerin being by this time ſomewhat refreſhed among the Chriſtians, when hee heard the caſe of Floraman, hee tooke a Launce to purſue Traccio, who yet had gotten no

great diſtance of ground: and running him in at the ſhoulder, quite through the breaſt, had likewiſe ſlaine Floraman before him, but that the Launce brake.
               This accident beheld by the Pagans, made them ſo fearefull and diſmayed, that they began to retire, ſome one way, ſome another, and Floraman falling to the earth vnder the ſlaine Giant, was very ſore preſt with his heauie weight vpon him, yet made hee good ſhyft to get from vnderneath him, and taking hold of a ſtrayed Courſer mounted vpon him.
               
                  Vlderino was ſo full of rage for the death of his ſonne, that Platir (amongſt all the reſt) hee choſe to reuenge his furie on, and indeed had handled him very vnhappily, but that Dramuſiande hauing bound vp ſome ſmall woundes of his owne, interpoſed himſelfe with Berolde betweene the danger intended, and nowe the fight began to alter otherwiſe, for thether flocked all Vlderinos Caualierie, & Florian with Arabo were ſhouldered in among them.
               The battaile grew to be very dangerous, for Riſtorano came freſh vpon them, with forty thouſand men, which he had gathered from the vttermoſt margents of the Armie, againſt which multitude fought valiantly Pompides, Dirdan & Blandidon, ſhewing vnexpreſſable deeds of valour.
               When Arabo beheld his Father in great danger, with his Mace he gaue ſuch a blow at Florian, (who had an eye to ſuccour his Brother Platir, beholding that the blood guſhed out at his noſe, by a ſtroke which he had receiued from Vlderino) that it wounded him in ſuch ſort, as had not Palmerin ſtept in to ſuccour him, he had falne among the horſe féete, and there beene trodden to death.
               
                  Dramuſiande hauing cleft Vlderinos Helmet through the midſt, had likewiſe ſlaine him, if Carinos other Giant had not béene his hinderance, for he ſtrooke Berolde with his Mace quite out of his ſaddle, and falling downe, he was reputed for dead. Palmerin, béeing loth to looſe any of the Chriſtian Princes, noted the Giant at his firſt intruſion, and had ſtopt his way, but for the peoples concourſe, before

that Berolde was in ſuch perrill: but being compeld to ſtay for better aduauntage, thruſt by where Florian fought with Arabo, and wounding the Giant firſt vppon the left ſhoulder, gaue him next ſuch a gaſh vppon the head, as hee had forthwith died of that terrible hurt, but for immediate ſuccour which came to reſcue him: and they perceiuing him to be likewiſe ſore wounded in the ſide, aduiſed him to get a while out of the throng, for very hardly could he ſtand on his leggs.
               
                  Vlderino, ſéeing his Helmet ſplit about his eares, would gladly haue fled, but Gratian meeting with him, (for Dramuſiande beeing wounded by Vlderino in the throat, was with-drawne vpon that hurt) beholding his Helmet off, cleft him downe to the breſt. Arabo grew ſtarke mad whē he ſaw his Father fall downe dead, and therefore thruſt in with ſuch rage amongſt them, as wounding Florendos firſt on the ſide of his head, hee made toward Gracian, on him to reuenge his Fathers blood: and queſtionleſſe had preuailed in his purpoſe, but that Florendos, ſcorning to receaue ſuch a hurt without requitall, gaue him ſuch a thruſt in the bottome of his belly, as his guts began to fall foorth thereat, & the Giant perceiuing himſelfe paſt all hope of eſcape, caught Florendos beſides his horſe in his armes, intending ſo to haue cruſht him to death.
               This great danger of Florendos, and rauing out-cryes of the Giant, made the people on both ſides to troope to that place, as iudging the fight to be there moſt cruell: but Platir, hauing now well recouered his former faintnes, beholding his brother in ſuch a deſperate eſtate, ſtept forward to ſuccour him, and finding one of Carinos cooſins there, ready to kill Florendos, he ſmote him downe dead at the very firſt ſtroke.
               
                  Gracian béeing likewiſe by, and ſéeing Florendos downe vnder the Giant, whoſe burdenous weight was enough to ſtifle him, hee gaue him ſuch a cut vpon the chine bone, as he tumbled dead from off Florendos, who had his wind wel neere tweakt out with ſo heauie a loade, which made him

lye ſtill a good while without any moouing, and this béeing ſeene by diuers, was at laſt reported to Palmerin and Prince Florian, who cut foorth way with their weapons, to be reſolued in this feare of their friende. Palmerin catching him vp in his armes, gaue him to Dramuſiande, who layd him before him vpon his horſe, and ſo like friends they conuaid him among the Chriſtian Caualierie.
               
                  Blandidon, Pompides, Dirdan, and Francian, had much adoe to get on toward the Cittie, becauſe one of Riſtoranos brethren, and others of his kindred, had ſo narrowly beſet them in euery place, as they were oftentimes in very great hazards. Dramuſiande hauing borne Florendos foorth of the ſquadron, he began to recouer his ſences againe, and imagining he was carried by the Giant his enemie, ſtrooke backward at him with the dagger he held in his hand, and wounded Dramuſiande in the ſide, who ſayde vnto him: How now my Lord, reſpect you not your friends? Florendos, perceiuing the fault he had committed, leapt downe on his feete, and would haue deſired pardon, but Dramuſiande thus ſpake: It is no time now my Lord to vſe complement of wordes, rather get to horſe againe, and let vs into the battaile, and redéeme our deere friendes, whoſe liues are in danger.
               
                  Palmerin hearing the terrifying noyſe, where Riſtorano and his friends had ſo beſet Blandidon and others, imagined there to be moſt neede of his preſence, and Pompides followed him, there he found Blandidon hardly engirt with two valiant Knights, who ſtill had freſh ſupply to backe them, and there hee had béene ſlaine, if Florendos had not ſtept in amongſt them, who at the firſt ſtroke kild one of the Knights, and they together made ſuch hauock of the other reſiſters, as the Pagans (not accuſtomed to endure ſuch blowes) ſtroue who ſhould get furtheſt from this maſſacre.
               
                  Dramuſiande with Dirdan, ſuccoured Blandidon & Platir, who had made ſuch ſlaughter on euery ſide about them, as méere wearines would not permit them ſcarce to lyft

their weapons: there ſlewe they in ſhort while ſo manie Pagans, that their death bréeding a diſmay in ſuch as beheld it, made them giue way for the Chriſtians to reſt thē
                  ſelues a little, which time of breathing renewing their former courage, they followed freſhly on them with Dramuſiands ſquadron, making a mighty ſpoile of the enemy. But an other multitude of Pagans, ſuch as had not ſeene the ſharpe ſtrokes of the Chriſtians, came vppon them with a freſh charge, and Riſtorano not diſmaied with all that had happened, prouoked them forward with all his endeuour. There now began a very hote encounter on either ſide, for the Pagan Knights, béeing fiered with mightie diſdaine, to ſee ſo many of theyr greateſt Signiors ſlaine, procéeded on with ſuch violence and furie, as making no eſtimation at all of death, they gaue a very ſharpe aſſault vpon the Chriſtians, who ſeeing what a huge number more they had to kill, would gladly haue returned to the Citty, for nowe ſmall hope of life was promiſed. But now to make the vtmoſt proofe of valiant defending their liues, they put them ſelues in rancks, with their faces toward the Citty: Palmerin, Platir, Floraman, and their traine leading before, Florian, Berolde, Gracian, Francian and theyr followers behind: and albeit they were very curſtly handled by the enemy, yet in deſpight of them they got forward ſtill, and made ſuch way for themſelues with theyr weapons, that at laſt they came where Riſtoranos forces had round beſet them.
               
                  Florendos and Dramuſiande with their attendants did very great ſeruice, to ſupport the ſeuerall rancks of theyr friends and Countrimen, for euer as they ſmit downe ten men to the ground, an hundred would immediatlie make freſhly vpon them. The ſquadron that was guided by Palmerin and his part, brake the ring or circle of Souldiours which had inuirond them, and forward they marched thorowe the throng: but béeing purſued by a ſtrong Pagan ſquadron, they were ſuddenly ſhut vp againe in ſuch manner, as their eſtate ſtoode then much more deſperate then

before. Florian, who purpoſed to die or ſaue his people, ſéeing Dramuſiande had ſlaine a great Pagan Lord, ſtept to his horſe and mounted vpon him, then gallopping fierce
                     •
                  ie vppon the enemie, and Floraman (newly mounted) gallantly following, they layd ſo about them on euery ſide, as the huge crowde of Pagans were glad to giue them paſſage.
               So dooing incredible déedes all the way as they went, they came where Riſtorano had cauſed his men to giue a freſh charge on the Citty, with vndoubted hope that nowe they ſhould obtaine it, becauſe our Chriſtian forces were ſore wearied with fighting, and béeing taken now at thys aduauntage, no hope could remaine for ſafety of their liues, but there to be vtterly ſlaine and vanquiſhed.
               Our two former named Knights, held on theyr intended courſe, and an hundred choſen men very ſtiffely withſtoode them, who becauſe they deerely loued theyr Lorde Riſtorano, would make proofe of their valour vpon thoſe two: and ſo ſtrictly had they beſet Florian, & Floraman, as there theyr liues had perriſhed, but that Florendos and Dramuſiande breaking through that quarter by chaunce, beheld theyr hard diſtreſſe, and doubting the danger which might enſue them, they got thorow the throng, reſolued to aſſiſt them, hauing left Pompides & the other twaine with their ſquadron, which making head as boldly vpon the other part, did mightily diſappoint Riſtoranos great hope.
               
                  Florendos aſſayled that route where the two were incloſed, and meeting with Riſtorano, tooke ſo ſtrong hold of him, as in the ſtrugling and reſiſting, both fell beſide theyr horſes: but Riſtorano was downe vnder him, to the great perrill of Florendos life: for many darts and Launces were caſt at him by the Turkes, that in huge troopes ſtil flocked about him. But in a happy houre came thither Dirdan, Pompides, & Blandidon, who allighted on foote with Dramuſiande, and hauing quitted the place where their friends were ſo endangered, afterward engirt Riſtorano as it had béene in a circle, who beholding nowe no other way but

death, for ſafety of his life yeelded himſelfe priſoner. Palmerin and his compeeres were ſome-what further off, but hearing the rumor, and ſeeing howe in numbers they flocked to that place, where they vnderſtood their Lorde to be in ſuch diſtreſſe, they likewiſe would needes thether, and Palmerin hauing changed his horſe, came at laſt where hée ſawe Florendos holding Riſtorano by the arme, but by no meanes could he get into ye circle, becauſe ſo many Knights had ringd it round, though the others made what meanes they could for his entrance.
               
                  Florian & Floraman came thither at that inſtant, where the one helping his Brother, the other his friends Gracian and Francian, they waded through a ſtreame of blood and dead bodies, and none durſt ſtand before them but they died the death. Afterward, Palmerin béeing diſmounted, tooke the Helmet from off Riſtoranos head, who imagining his life to be now at an end, ſought what meanes hée might to haue it yet prolonged: and therefore, both with ſignes and words to his Souldiours, commaunded them to giue ouer the fight, for hee was not able to make any longer reſiſtance.
               Now becauſe the battell was not as yet ceaſſed in all places, Dramuſiande ſet Riſtorano before him on horſebacke, hauing with him Pompides, Dirdan, & Berolde, who were ſore wounded, the reſt rode on toward the Flagge or Standard, about which (for defence) ſtood the flower of the Armie, and till that were downe or recouered, they could not determine on any concluſion. Florian ſtroue for the honour of beating downe the Banner, which he could not ſo eaſily compaſſe as he thought to haue doone, but by multitudes of Launces was often in great hazards: whereuppon Palmerin and his vndaunted followers, regarding honour more then life, brake through in deſpight of all that withſtoode them, and valiantly ſmote the Enſigne royall down to the ground, which was the diſcomfiture of the whole Campe, according to the Turkiſh cuſtome. So betaking themſelues to flight, ſome one way, ſome another, ye Chriſtians

had the fréer meanes of withdrawing thence together, and entring the Citty, Riſtorano was bounde as priſoner on a ſilly poore Nagge, for Dramuſiande coulde no longer take the charge of him, by reaſon of the dangerous hurt hée had receiued in his throate.
               Beeing come within the Citty, they went to be diſarmed and haue their wounds dreſſed, whereof not one had ſcaped free: but Palmerin, Floraman, and Florendos, by reaſon they were in the beſt eſtate, they ſhewed themſelues daily with ſuch as could be armed, becauſe ye people ſhould not grow into weake oppinion of them, nor the enemy gather any ſtomacke of freſh aſſayling the Cittie.
            
            
               CHAP. XXIII. VVhat followed vpon the warre at Tubante, and how the Monſter was ouercome.
               
                  THE day enſuing after the battaile, Riſtorano (who hourelie expected nothing but death, was as a priſoner led to the Caſtell: but firſt Targiana came forth to ſee him, becauſe he had vſed her ſo farre vnkindly, yet was ſhée aduiſed not to goe vnarmed, nor durſt ſhe repoſe any aſſurance in the Turks, becauſe there can be no greater alteration then changing of fayth, eſpecially being falſe, as is the Mahumetane, and in this regarde ſhee would not goe vngarded.
               Prince Florian kéeping his bed by reaſon of his wounds, wrought ſo with his wife, that for her leſſe trouble in thys caſe, Riſtorano ſhould be there kept impriſoned, and referred ouer for iudgement to the Emperour Primaleon, all which accordingly was agreed vnto. Carino, (who as no

pertaker in Riſtoranos treaſon, refuſed to enter the day before into the battaile) when he ſaw the fielde was loſt, vſed all diligence he could deuiſe to get his troopes together, all of them within compaſſe of his owne lodgings & quarters, becauſe the lame and wounded which were left in the field, ſlew as many as offered to hinder their flight. And finding himſelfe to be foureſcore thouſand ſtrong, beſide the Monſter before deſcribed, he grew into ſome hope of conquering the Citty, and thereby to gaine the whole gouernment of Turkie, in which oppinion he there continued, expecting the recouery of his ſicke and hurt, which were many. Thys fell out moſt commodious for our Chriſtian Knights, who were wounded ſo dangerouſly, eſpecially Dramuſiande in his throate, as hardly a months ſpace could ſerue for theyr recouerie: but that Dorina (who abode ſecretly in Constantinople, to conclude the aduenture of her Monſter) reſoning on this caſe with young Primaleon, and the deſperate hazard of ſo many good Knights, the onely ſupport of the famous Grecian Empire, was intreated by him to haue care of their liues, leaſt the enemy ſhoulde aſſaile them againe before they were cured.
               The young Lady, remembring how déerely ſhee had affected Florian, and yet all hope loſt of euer enioying him, would not her ſelfe goe thether, to grow amourous againe and all to no purpoſe: for they that determine not to ſinne in luxurie, ſhould ſhunne all occaſions thereto inciting, the acte beeing ſo eaſie, and the will ſo weake in reſiſtance, therfore (by her Arte) ſhée ſent a Damoſell to Tubante, giuing her moſt powerfull vnguents and emplaiſters, but expreſſe charge not to reueale who ſent her thether. Shee came to the gates of Tubante the third day after the battaile, and béeing ſeene alone by the guardians with her Surgerie boxes, ſhée was brought firſt to the Chamber where Florian lay, according as herſelfe had before deſired. After very Lady-like and modeſt ſalutations, ſhee dreſſed his woundes, and comforting him with ſundry precious reſtoratiues, his hurts did heale with wondrous expedition: the

like ſhée did to Dramuſiande, though at firſt ſhee was ſomewhat doubtfull of his life, by reaſon he had loſt ſuch aboundance of blood, ſo dealt ſhe with all the other, albeit Berolds ſences were greatly bereft him.
               
                  Dragonalte hauing no hurts, had charge of the Citties ſafetie, and therefore daily would he walke abroade with two hundred Knights, that had likewiſe eſcaped hurting in the battaile, and they vſed ſtill to march about the walls, (laboriouſly repayring where the ruine had falne) leaſt the enemy ſhould gather any means of freſh inuaſion, and that doubt was eſpecially reſpected by Floraman, who by ſecrete ſpyes had notice of the enemies purpoſes, and therfore they were the readier for all occaſions whatſoeuer.
               
                  Carino, whoſe woundes were not cured by ſuch extraordinary meanes as the Chriſtians had, as yet kept his bed, full of great anguiſh, and expreſſe charge had hee giuen to all his folowers, that they ſhould not attempt any ſkirmiſh at all, becauſe hee could not gather by his ſpyes, in what eſtate as yet the Chriſtian Princes were: but ſuch was the diligent care of Floraman, albeit hee was ſore hurte in the left arme, that the fourth day after the battaile, hee put on his Armour, and walked about thorow the Citty, which much terrified the Turks that hated Targiana.
               
               Such ſucceſſe had the Damoſell in her curing the wounded, as within eyght dayes they could all beare Armes, except Berolde, and Dramuſiande, who ſtayed eyght dayes longer before theyr hurts were healed, and then they were but in ſo weake eſtate neither, as they might not ſafely aduenture the fight.
               
                  Palmerin, who greeued to be thus long coopt vp in the Citty, and beholding likewiſe their ſtore of victuall to decreaſe, committing the Citties charge to Pompides, Dirdan, and Gracian, armed himſelfe with the reſt, and iſſued foorth: and béeing come within a bow ſhoote of the enemies Campe, he ſent a Herald to demaund a ſingle fight. Carino knowing well the ſtoute courage of the Chriſtians, thought how to returne an indifferent aunſwere, and thus replyed:

that in his Campe were not Princes ſufficient to vndergoe a Combate, & they beeing all Captaines of ſo great worth, did not wel in vrging a matter ſo farre vnequall, nor knew he how Fortune would determine of him, in the ſafetie or perriſhing of his people. Notwithſtanding, if they were of ſuch mettle as Fame publiſhed them to be, hee had a Monſter in his Armie, with whom they might aduenture body to body: Thys offer made Carino, as thinking for certaintie, that no one of the Knights alone could preuaile againſt his Monſter.
               Our valiant Caualiers hearing this aunſwere, began to conceiue this opinion among themſelues, that this proffer was the very vttermoſt refuge of the Pagans, and the Monſter béeing vanquiſhed, they were for euer foyled: ſo withdrawing aſide to further conſideration, euery one ſtroue who ſhould be the formoſt, and who ſhould firſt be armed for this encounter: for in thoſe times, neyther kindred, friendſhip nor dignitie was reſpected, in any attempt where honour was to be atchiued, but euery one would make way to his owne aduauncement: but Floraman beeing their elected Generall, though good to ſet downe ſome diſcreete order among them, and therefore hee beganne in this manner following.
               Honourable and generous ſpirits, in matter of ſo maine and important conſequence, raſh forwardnes may be as preiudiciall, as dull ſlacknes thought baſe and ignominious. Firſt, conſider therefore the Country wherein wee are, and vpon what termes of hazard we haue béene, and yet doe ſtand in: if then you would haue the enemy vnderſtand the true weight of your worth, and howe farre you out-pace Pagans in reſolution and courage, let the care of lyfe and honour be coupled together, for to looſe eyther among Infidels, were inglorious, and to be reſpectiue of neyther, degenerate and infamous. I would therefore aduiſe yée, that ſuch of you ſhall firſt fight with the Monſter, againſt whom the beaſt ſhall firſt oppoſe himſelfe, and ſo what ſoeuer happen, let the blame be imputed to fortune:

be ready then euery one in ſeuerall diſtances, and happie man by luck and ſucceſſe in the tryall.
               This counſell did highly content them all, and thereupon aunſwere was carried to Carino, that they would combate his Monſter ſeuerally, as himſelfe had propounded: each man appointing him ſelfe to his place, where he imagined the Monſter would be neereſt to him, but each one a bow ſhoote from the other.
               
                  Carino beholding all this, beganne to doubt the iſſue of his proffered fight, as thinking that theſe vnuanquiſhable ſpirits, could runne thorowe any enterpriſe what-ſoeuer: neuertheleſſe, hee cauſed his Monſter to feede on nothing but ſtrong meates and mixed wines, which made him ſo full of ſtomack & furie, as hee could not be reſtrained within any limits. And béeing brought where he might behold theſe valiant Champions, the beaſt made firſt of all at Dragonalte, getting ſo ſuddenly vppon him, as he had not the power to wound him: but béeing rapt vp between his rude armes, he would haue carried him to his Pauillion, till the Knight (doubtfull of imminent death) punched ye beaſt in the ſides with his dagger, which though it pierced not through his hard ſkinne, yet did the blowes ſo painefullie grieue him, as caſting Dragonalte againſt the ground, hée returned mainly againſt Gracian, who thought to giue him a ſound welcome becauſe he was neere him, but the Monſter falling on his foure féete, ſo affrighted the horſe whereon the knight rode, that being vnable to hold him in, he was violently carried among the enemies, and there detayned as a priſoner.
               The Monſter next made out at Floraman, who hauing his ſword ready drawne, beſtowed many rough ſtroakes vpon the beaſt: but all to no end, his hide was ſo impiercible, and the Monſter ſmote him with his horne ſo rudelie on the breaſt, that downe hee fell backward along on the ground.
               
                  Palmerin was the next he offered to deale withall, who running at him with his Launce, gaue him ſuch a forcible

ſtroke, as albeit it wounded him not to outward fight, yet it made him to writhe aſide, as feeling ſhrewd paine, and runne againe at the Knight ſo furiouſly, that catching faſt hold on his Launce, he got it from him, and had he beene poſſeſt of ſo much knowledge, as to haue turned the poynt vpon the owner, the ſtrife betweene them had ſoone beene concluded, for the beaſt was of ſuch powerfull ſtrength, as no Armour could haue reſiſted his blowes. Notwithſtanding, with his hoofes and hornes hee much moleſted the Knight, and many times brought him to very deſperate hazards, till Palmerin perceiuing, that his horſe beſtird not himſelfe ſo nimbly, as in ſuch an aduenture was held moſt expedient: he quickly leapt from him, and with ſterne courage came againſt the Monſter, who beganne to expreſſe ſignes of ioy at his béeing thus on foote, as hoping the eaſier to carry him away.
               Wherefore, hurling away the Launce, which he could not well graſpe in his long tallents, hee fell againe on his foure féete, fighting one while with his hornes, another while with his long clawes, whereby hee ſhrewly bruſed and battered the Knights Armour. Palmerin, who by his ſprightly agilitie well defended theſe ſharpe ſtrokes, with a downe right blow deliuered at the beaſt, cut off his left horne that bended backward, and this ſtroke was giuen with ſuch violence, as the ſword falling out of Palmerins hand, ſtucke 
                     •
                  ight vppon the poynt a good way in the ground: but the Monſter perceiuing hee had loſt his weapon, roſe vpon his hindmoſt féete, and running haſtily vpon him, caught him faſt in his armes. When Palmerin ſeeing himſelfe thus ſtrongly griped, got ſome-what thwart the beaſts breaſt, and then began to ſtruggle and writhe to get from him.
               The Monſter ſtill held him with ſuch ſtrength, as the valour of foure Palmerins auailed not with him, if hee had béene prouided of diſcretion to gouerne his might, but hee had no other kinde of induſtrie, but how to gripe his claws into the Knights Armour: which Palmerin féeling verie

ſore to afflict him, gaue ſo many ſtabbs to the beaſt with his ponyard, as beeing glad to rid himſelfe of his burden, hee ranne mainly at Florian, who minding more the ſtrange manner of theſe ſeuerall encounters, then any perrill that might happen to himſelfe, receiued ſuch a ſtroke with the beaſts forth-right horne, as deſpight of his hart feld him downe to the ground.
               The Monſter procéeded no further with him, but went and aſſayled Florendos, who ſtanding prepared vppon his owne guarde, defended himſelfe very gallantly: and the fight had continued long betweene them, but that Florian beeing recouered, and hauing drawne his ſword, leaſt hée ſhould be as vnaduiſedly taken as he was before, the beaſt left Florendos, and ſet againe vpon him, where now began a very fierce conflict, full of craft in the Monſter to auoyde his ſtrokes, and expreſſing an vndauntable ſpirit in the Prince.
               
                  Florian, full of nimble changes from place to place, eſcaped ſtill the horne and fangs of the beaſt, but he belaboured him with blowes on euery ſide: as what with wearineſſe and extremitie of paine he felt, his fierceneſſe was nothing ſo violent as at the firſt.
               When Carino beheld the knightly ſkill of Prince Florian, hee verily thought the day would be loſt, for the Monſter (in whom hee had no meane opinion of preuailing) apparantly he ſaw to grow weaker and weaker: wherefore, as his very lateſt refuge in this diſtreſſe, he ſent tenne thouſand of his ſouldiers into a wood neere adioyning, with an appoynted ſignall when they ſhould mooue thence: to wit, when himſelfe with an hundred diſarmed Knights, not hauing eyther ſword or Launce, ſhould enter the publique place of Combate, then ſhould the tenne thouſand iſſue forth of the wood, and ſuddenly ſet vpon the Chriſtians.
               Thus Carino, who would haue no hand in the other battailes treaſon, as hating to ſupport anothers trechery, and loth to mangle his honour for another mans intereſt: yet now in a matter tending to his owne benefite, had his eare

ſhut vp to all reſpect of ſhame and diſgrace. And yet thys policie of his was to very ſlender purpoſe, eſpyed in the managing and therefore mard before effecting: for Blandidon with his troope béeing neere the wood, met with the chiefe leader of thoſe ambuſhed forces, and running him thorowe with his Launce, there he fell downe dead. This to the Chriſtians prooued very aduantageable, for when thoſe in ambuſh ſaw theyr Captaine ſlaine, and what danger depended vpon the iſſue of this fight, that Targiana was liker to preuaile then Carino attaine to what hee deſired: they would not prepare themſelues for any further reſiſtance, but onely referred all to the ſucceſſe of the Monſter, which by this time was brought into ſuch eſtate by Florian, as the Pagans were now out of all hope of preuailing.
               The Prince had cut and mangled the beaſt in diuers parts of his body, driuing him vp & downe the fielde at his pleaſure, vntill hauing loſt all vigour and ſtrength, he fell flatte on the ground, where Florian bound his armes and legges together, intending to ſend the beaſt to 
                     Constantinople. Carino at his fall was ſtrooken into ſuch amazement, that hauing no minde at all of his owne further perrill, hée was taken priſoner by Palmerin, and all the Turkiſh ſouldiours in the enemies Campe, came & yeelded themſelues diſarmed, promiſing true vaſſailage to Targiana, and ſo returned they backe to the Citty in tryumph, cauſing the Monſter to be carried along with them.
               But Fortune permitting no man to enioy any perfect happines, thwarted this ſucceſſe in ſuch ſort, as they had not long beene in the Citty, before Pompides and Gracian came to certifie the reſt, that Dirdan, with tenne others whom he eſpecially truſted, leauing open a gate of the Cittie, was departed thence toward Niquea: whereupon Blandidon immediatly gathered, that Dirdans intent was to ſurprize Niquea, and to enioy his Siſter Tirrena & the ſtate, therefore in haſt hee would haue purſued him, but that his hurts in the late conflict did onely hinder him. But Palmerin and the reſt gaue him this comfort, that all matters

béeing eſtabliſhed, which nowe were in indifferent good forwardneſſe: they would then aſſiſt him againſt Dirdan, and doubtleſſe hee ſhould eaſily preuaile againſt him: by which perſwaſions Blandidon was very well pacified. So Carino beeing impriſoned where Riſtorano was detayned, they all began to reſolue on mirth and iollitie, cheefely the faire Princeſſe Targiana, who lately had béene brought to bedde of a Sonne, begotten by Albayzo her former huſband: but ſhee nor any other miſtruſting the Barons of the kingdome of Babylon, who ſecretely had ſtolne into her territories, and becauſe Targiana was married to Florian, and was in ſhort time after to be baptized, they grewe héereon ſo malicious againſt her, that one morning they came and ſtole away the childe, departing there-with preſently towards Babylon.
               
               
                  Targiana, greatly gréeuing to haue her child ſo borne away, would gladly haue had her Knights to purſue them: but by better aduiſe it was cōſidered, that this might moue the people of Babilon to riſe in armes, and oppreſſe the kingdome of Turkie with warre, which already was greatlie weakened, as the late paſſed troubles apparantly witneſſed. Beſide, hauing occaſion of going to Niquea, according as before they had promiſed Blandidon, they were content as yet to endure the loſſe of the Childe, ſetting downe decrees for better eſtabliſhing their owne eſtate: for Princes euermore ſhould haue this reſpect, to take the moſt prouident courſes for their ſtate affayres, labouring by their verie vttermoſt meanes for the weale publique.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXIIII. How Dorina preſented her Monſter in the Liſtes at Constantinople, and how Tamerco carried away the faire Polinarda.
               
               
                  
                     DOrina, who determined to conduct young Primaleon to ſome attempt of great glory, entiteling him by the impreſe on his ſhield, the Knight of Fortune, and purpoſing that all the Grecian Court ſhould haue knowledge, becauſe his fame might appeare in the brighter luſter: when they were all ſeriouſly buſied in their ſollemne feaſting, preſented her Monſter in the ſame place where the Tournament had béene before performed, the report whereof was preſently noyſed through the Cittie, which foorth-with drew thether the Knights in generall, to behold a matter of ſuch importance.
               When the Emperour in perſon was likewiſe come thether, he knew it to be the ſame Monſter which hee had before ſeene in the Perilous Ile, when Dramuſiande and the other foure Knights were thereby drawne thence, wherevpon calling Dorina vnto him, in the hearing of all he thus ſpake to her. Fayre Lady, you ought to conſider, that my Court is now vnfurniſhed of thoſe Knights, that ſcorned to giue place to the greateſt aduenture what ſoeuer, and theſe young Princes may eaſily perriſh in medling with your Monſter: therefore I hold it very requiſite, that the tryall of this caſe be deferred till the arriuall of their Fathers, who are able euery way to aunſwere your deſires.
               The Lady ſomewhat offended with theſe ſpéeches, thus replyed. Full well I perceiue, that the paſſed battell hath

frozen vp your blood, ſince you ſéeke deferring of thys ſmall aduenture: I pray you let theſe young Knight make proofe of their valour, and vnderſtand withall, that the aduenture is no way dangerous, becauſe they are not to combate with my Monſter, but he ſhall be held to haue finiſhed the ſame, that can mount vpon his backe, and then ſalute you.
               This ſéemed to the Emperor no matter of impoſſibilitie, and therefore hee conſented the ſooner to Dorinas requeſt, whereupon the day following, all the young Knights of the Court, as alſo the ſtrangers, (except Don Roſuell, who was falne into ſuch debilitie of ſence, as his ſpeeches appeared to be ſilly and peeuiſh) reſorted to the place appointed for tryumphs, and thether came likewiſe all the Ladies, who mounting vppon the Scaffolds, made readie to entertaine thē, bringing with them Auriana, whoſe beautie glittered like a bright ſplendant ſtarre.
               The monſter was there already in the fielde, and Dorina had taken vp her place, to iudge who ſhould accompliſh the aduenture, and the formoſt man appoynted was Franardo, who made his vaunts to be more nimble in leaping, then any foure Knights there preſent. After his reuerence doone to the Emperour, he prepared himſelfe for the enterpriſe, and cōming ſo néere the Monſter, as he thought immediatly to be vppon his backe, hee was ſuddainly caſt backward with his héeles ouer his head, of which apparant repulſe he ſeemed ſo aſhamed, as without vſing any words he went quietly foorth of the Liſts.
               
                  Almaroll, who was brother-like affected to Franardo, preſented himſelfe to make tryall of his fortune, and making an agill offer to be quickly aloft, the Monſter turning quite ſide-ward from him, gaue the young gallant ſuch a kick with his foote, as he was likewiſe downe, and departed diſgraced.
               Theſe miſhaps made the young Lordes to thinke with themſelues, that this aduenture would proue of ſome difficultie in the finiſhing, and whoſoeuer ſhould haue the honour of ending it, muſt out-goe all the reſt in the height of

his good happe. Trineus the Almaigne Emperour would gladly haue aduentured, but the Emperour Primaleon, hauing more reſpect of his dignitie, by no meanes would yéeld that he ſhould attempt it. Armindo was ſo forward to get vpon the Monſter, that he was caſt quite ouer on the other ſide, as though hee had neuer come neere the beaſt at all, which he tooke in no meane ſcorne I warrant yee. Orino performed his attempt in ſuch ſort, and béeing ſmitten by the Monſter vpon the breaſt, he fell downe very ſtrangely amazed and giddied.
               
                  Gorgoneo King of Romata, deſirous to eſſay what luck he ſhould haue, procéeded in his attempt quite contrary to the former aduenturers: but the Monſter catching faſt hold on his legge, caſt him with his head ſo rudely againſt the ground, that he lay ſtill in a traunce for a great while, and ſo was carried forth of the Liſts. Fortenbracio would néedes be the next after Gorgoneo, but hee was ſo ſlightlie caſt off by the Monſter, as though it made him bluſh, yet euery one laughed a good at the conceite. Leonato, ſeeing Arguto preparing himſelfe, was ſo haſtie to be before him, that the Monſter made a ſhewe as if hee feared him: but when he drew neere him, and the young Knight was halfe perſwaded he ſhould end the aduenture, he gaue him ſuch a fall vpon his back, that Polinarda his Mother was thereat much diſpleaſed, and forſaking the Scaffolde whereon ſhée ſtoode, ſhée went to the very entrance of the Liſts, and there embraced her Sonne in her armes.
               
                  Tamerco was highly pleaſed at the ſight heereof, thinking this a happy meanes to compaſſe his intent: for when a man is reſolutely bent to commit an offence, he wil ſerue his owne turne with the very ſlendreſt occaſions. Among the reſt, Salaman the Perſian had the foyle in his tryall, and gréeued not a little to bee ſo diſgraced. Caro and Belcar ſuſtayned the ſame miſhap, and ſo did Eſtrellant part without any honour. But Arguto, whoſe eye was ſtill fixed on the Knight of Fortune, knowing howe well Victoria fauoured him, expreſſing more loue then hee thought conuenient

ſhould be beſtowed vpon him, eſpecially, where hee iudged himſelfe to be farre more woorthy: departed foorth of the fielde deepely diſcontented, for he ſaue no honour for him to be had by this enterpriſe, but beeing ſo diſ-fauoured by his Miſtreſſe, he thought his ſtay there could no way aduauntage him: nor did this departure any iote imbaſe him, by reaſon his ſtoute courage was ſufficiently knowne to all, but none coulde truly geſſe ye cauſe of his leauing the place, neyther did any Knight follow to be inquiſitiue thereof.
               Béeing entred the Citty, he went to the Pallace of Friſoll his Graundfather, and deuiſing what ſignall he might beare whereby to become famous, hee ſawe in a lodging hanging on a wall, the Shield of the Sunne, and hee remembred it to be the very ſame, which was promiſed him at his enſtaulement in Knighthood, and had crowned with ſo much glory the firſt Friſoll, ſo taking downe the Shield, he ſent for an excellent Painter, to flouriſh ouer againe the Sunne with his Penſill, which he either by ſkill or chance ſo well performed, that it appeared as freſh and liuelie as flaming fire.
               
                  Arguto had many matters buſying his braines, what ſucceſſe might befall him on this his ſuddaine enterpriſe, and to kéepe him the more from knowledge of any, he cauſed a fayre Ladies face to be likewiſe painted in his ſhield, with ſome ſigne of diſcontentment in her lookes: then armed and well mounted, he left the Citty, and ſet on toward Thrace, where leaue we him to his trauell, till we heare of him againe, in ſuch a ſtrange aduenture as will bring perrill to his life, and that an vnknowne Knight came to aſſiſt him, with whom afterward he goeth to battaile.
               
                  Tamerco, hauing made his preparation for the rape of Polinarda, a Galley béeing likewiſe readie hard at hand to carry her away: the Knight of Fortune came to make proofe of his ability, and leapt vpon the Monſters backe ſo lightly as he had beene a byrd, where-uppon the Monſter immediatly vaniſhed, becauſe no more ſhould afterward meddle with him: for ſuch was ye qualitie of the enchauntment,

that any one Knight hauing béene vppon his backe, euery one might then very eaſily performe as much.
               
                  Miragarda, Grydonia, & all the Princeſſes greatly ioyed heereat, but eſpecially Victoria was not a little pleaſed, ſo that to ſuch as narrowly noted her behauiour, it plainly appeared how earneſtly ſhee affected the Knight of Fortune. Nowe in the confuſed departure of the people, the Emperour with the Princes were deſcended from the Scaffolds, to accompany his Nephew with ſuch glory to the Cittie, as his happy ſucceſſe had worthily merrited.
               
                  Tamerco, ſeeing Polynarda withdrawne into a Tent, where her Sonne (by her comforted) had newly left her, went ſuddainly thether with twenty armed Knights, and laying his hand on her mouth, leaſt ſhe ſhould call for help, ripping vp the hinder part of the Tent, they ſtole forth ſoftlie, leading along two Damoſels whom they found with her, and them they threatned with death, if they kept not ſilence.
               They had gotten neere the Sea ſide, when a ſeruaunt of Leonatos, ſent from him to his mother about ſome buſines, ſeeing her and her Damoſells thus violently hurried: cryed out aloude, that his Lady Polynarda was carried away, which called a number of Knights to reſcue her, without any other defence then their ſwords onely, becauſe the tryall of the Monſter was not to be performed in Armour. Tamerco oppoſed himſelfe againſt all commers, and firſt hurt Tarnaes in the arme, likewiſe Armindo in the left hand: but béeing cloſed with Franardo, the Knights wounded him in two ſeuerall places, ſo without any more reſiſtance he got into the Gallie, hauing Polinarda faſt in his arme, and ſetting ſayle, left tenne of his Knights on Land behind him, ſixe of which were quickly bereft of their liues, for Franardo and Almaroll had recouered certaine huge Maces, where-with they brayned all withſtanders about them, but the other foure yeelded themſelues as priſoners. When Leonato heard how his Mother was carried away, he ranne in great haſt with his ſword and ſhield, and béeing

come to the place, he ſaw the Gallie was put off a good way from the ſhore, and his mother lifting vp her hands deſiring helpe: whereon in a rage he would haue leapt into the ſea to reſcue her, as ſhe made many the like offers for her own deliuerance, but that Tamerco with-held her from it.
               
                  Leonato was ſo immeaſurably outragious, that laying about him without any diſcretion, he ſlew two more of Tamercos Knights, and likewiſe had diſpatched the other twaine, but that the Emperor Trineus, beeing by this time come thither armed, taking him by the arme, ſaid: Holde your hand my Lord, except you will diſappoynt your ſelfe of meanes, how to follow him that hath borne hence your mother. Theſe ſpeeches made Leonato to temper his anger with more mildnes, and deliuering thoſe two Knights ouer to cuſtodie, ſought all the meanes he coulde to purſue Tamerco, but finding no Ship or Frigot there ready to further his intent, was forced to abide the leyſure of better occaſion.
            
            
               CHAP. XXV. How Dorina carried away with her the Knight of Fortune, and how Polynarda was recouered againe by the valour of Arguto.
               
               
                  
                     MIragarda, not meanely proude of her ſonnes glory obtained, went home-ward with ſuch a gate of maieſtie, as euery eye admired to behold her: when ſhee ſawe Dorina approching neere her, and heard her ſay that her ſonne was to depart thence with her, ſhée grew into great affliction of minde, and began to deuiſe with her ſelfe, how Dorina might by threatning be enforced to leaue the Court, but the Emperour deſirous to doe iuſtice

euery way, went to her, ſaying: What heare I Madam? would you hinder your Sonne from the atchiuement of honour? Shall not he aſſiſt the Lady in her aduenture, that gaue this Empire to the familie of Palmerin? that were an act of great iniuſtice, vnbeſéeming your vertues any way to impeach, or your Sonne (but in a priuate thought) to gaine-ſay.
               Nature and loue (I confeſſe) pleades ſome excuſe for you, but no iuſt meanes of deniall is left for him, becauſe deſire of glory is circumſcribed within no bounds, nor any affection ſhould be preferd before the loue of our Countrey: for howe can that Knight be reckoned truly famous, that dooth not daily oppoſe himſelfe againſt the chiefeſt dangers? And as he would haue further proceeded, Miragarda, perceiuing her folly did but blemiſh her ſonnes deſire of honour, kneeled downe and kiſſed her Fathers hand, for the gracious aduiſe he had thus giuen her, and calling Dorina to her, ſayd.
               Lady, I vnderſtand that in honour you affect the Fortunes of my Sonne, and ſéeke to crowne his head with the wreathes of many high good happs, whereto hee hath no poſſible meanes of attaining, but by the deſperate hazards of his life, and your fauourable regard: let it ſuffice you thē I reſt contented, that you guide him where your arte and deſire ſhall conduct him, and as his fame increaſeth by your furtherance, ſo may your vertues be renowned by his endeuours.
               
                  Dorina humbly falling on her knées, kiſſing her hande, returned this aunſwere: Madame, the deſire I ſometime had to a Knight of this Courte, gouerned then by looſe thoughts & idle diſpoſitions, is long ſince altered to a more chaſte determination of life: ſince when, my fauours haue haue ſhone vpon the Knight of Fortune, whereof he hath found ſome effects, and of ſuch mine arte likewiſe: and as many great aduentures doo eſpecially challenge his preſence, ſo (to his eternall honour) ſhall hee effect and finiſh them.
               
                  Then ſtepping from her, ſhee went to the Emperour and ſaid. Right high and mighty Lord, my onely requeſt to you, is, that within ſixe houres I may haue the Knight of Fortune hence with me, to vndertake an action that onely ſtayes his comming: whereto the Emperour cheerefullie replied. Your demaund by no meanes is to be denied, therefore both hee, and his time of departure, remaines at your appointment.
               The Lady hauing kiſſed the Emperours hand, went to the Knight of Fortune, who ſtoode betweene the Empreſſe and his Mother, and the beautifull Victoria very néere vnto them, but her eyes full of teares, and hartfull of greefe, hearing that her affected Knight was to depart ſo ſoone, Dorina thus ſpake to him. Time fits not now Sir, to ſtand thus idely diſcourſing with theſe Ladies, therefore prepare yee with ſome expedition, becauſe your preſence elſe-where is more néedfull then here, & your horſe and Armour ſtayes ready for you.
               The youthfull gallants thoughts combatting with loue and thirſt of honour, coulde gladly haue wiſht that his departure might two dayes longer be deferred, for further aſſurance of the Infant Victoriaes loue, whoſe verie eye lauiſhly blabd the true paſſions of her ſoule: but Dorina ſtill calling him away, hee had no better excuſe to hide his loth-depart from his Goddeſſe Victoria, but onely that there hée would be armed in the Preſence, which was accordinglie performed to his owne deſire.
               After he was armed, hee humbly tooke his leaue of the Emperour, the Empreſſe, his Mother, and the other princeſſes, and comming to the young Infantrie, it happened fayre Candida then to be neereſt him, who had ſuch a ſuddaine apprehenſion of ye young Knights louely lookes, and vnable to checke the preſent entrance of an amourous deſire, though to this inſtant ſhée neuer held him worthy anie reſpect, yet nowe her thoughts founde themſelues ſtrangly altered. Hée taking his leaue verie reuerently of her, ſhée ſuddenly loſt her cullour and ſpéech in ſuch manner, as ſhée

was not able to vtter one worde: whereat the Emperour grew ſo diſpleaſed, that he could not imagine what to conceiue thereof: and but that reaſon reſtrained him frō raſhneſſe, hee would haue ſtept to her as ſhee ſtoode before the Knight, to haue knowne if his departure were ſo diſpleaſing to her, as ſhée could not affoorde him a kinde farewell. Ariſing from before Candida, he went and kneeled to fayre Victoria, béeing both ſtrooken with ſuch an amorous dumbe ſilence, as ſighes were more plentifull then any ſpeech: Onely the young louer ſaid, I am your Knight, and ſhee replied, ſo doo I accept you, at which wordes hee gaue her a iewell, which ſhe preſently faſtned in the pleites of her haire. Heere-hence it happened, that betwéene Candida and Victoria grew a long diſſention, each iniuring other as their apteſt occaſions ſerued.
               The Knight of Fortune, after hee had doone his dutie to the Emperour, and the other Princes there preſent, deſcended downe the ſtayres, and béeing mounted on horſebacke, left Victoriaes thoughts cumbred with a little iealouſie: for it ſeemed to her a matter diſagréeing with reaſon, that Dorina, (who indeede was a woman ſufficient enough to be liked) ſhould fixe her deſire onely vpon her louer, and carry him away with her, whether ſhe pleaſed, but heerin ſhee apparantly expreſſed her ignorance, that ſhe knew not how déerely the Knight affected her, and the firme reſolution of the Lady, whoſe affection could not be chained to any man whatſoeuer, ſince ſhée fayled in her choyce election of Florian, and loſt the fruite of her hopes in her younger dayes.
               But let vs leaue Dorina gone with the Knight, & ſpeake now of Tamerco the Indian King, who ſayling in the high Seas with Polynarda, thought himſelfe happy by his beautifull purchaſe, and hauing brought her into his Cabinet, began to embrace and kindly entreate her: but ſhe that rather deſired death, then to conſent to his vnchaſt deſire, conſidering her diſtreſſed eſtate, & that violence might wrong her beyond compaſſe of ſufferance, thought better to diſſemble

a little with him, then hazard neglectly the vnrecouerable loſſe of honour: whereuppon ſhe vſed theſe ſpeeches vnto him.
               My Lord, I am not to learne, that miſery is made much worſe by crueltie, and ſad greefe doubled by oppoſed extremitie: my wretched eſtate the true mappe of the one, your violent will firme inſtance of the other. I coulde ſay, that this courſe of yours is farre vnkingly, & that honour bindes you to better reſpect of a Ladie: but that were for the priſoner to controule his Kéeper, or the deiected ſlaue to checke his commaunder. Héere am I in your power, deſeruing rather to be pittied then rigorouſly intreated, and you may gaine that by force▪ which otherwiſe you are aſſured to faile of: yet violence to women is no badge of man-hoode, for chaſtities ſpoyle, is tyrannies tryumph. But admit (as men in their oppinion of women are ſoone perſwaded) that time may yeeld hope better ſucceſſe in your ſéeking, and that my minde may be altred from this ſtrict courſe of ſeuerity: I cannot tell, I am no Saint to aſſure aboue mine owne power, nor ſo certaine of my fortune in a caſe ſo deſperate, for as yet my blood is chill with the feare wherein you ſurprizde me, and my thoughts as diſtracted as at that very inſtant, but vpon further quiet, I ſhall haue more abilitie of my ſelfe, both to iudge of mine owne diſtreſſe, and of anie gentlenes you ſhall beſtow on me.
               
                  Tamerco, who loued her very earneſtly, was ſo highlie pleaſed with her ſpeeches, that hée grewe halfe perſwaded ere long to compaſſe his loue: wherefore, without any further moleſtation, taking her by the hand, he brought her vp vppon the decke againe, vſing many amourous curteſies vnto her. But the iuſt heauens, neuer permitting violence to that faire body, wherein ſo chaſte a ſoule was encloſed, ſuddainly raiſed ſuch a turbulent tempeſt, as diuers times they were in danger of perriſhing: and Polynarda, ſeeing ſo good meanes for preſeruation of her chaſtitie, namely by imminent and ſtill expected death, leſſe gréeuous to endure then Tamercoes proſtitution, to whom ſhee could haue no

will to conſent, made this her ioy and onely comfort: for death deſired by any to eſcape a diaſter, is leſſe feare then the extremitie of the others conflict.
               The Gallie drawing neere to the ſhore of Theſſalie, at laſt put to ſhore, Tamerco béeing not a little glad hee had ſo well eſcaped, though ſome of his men were loſt in the tempeſt, but by the helpe of ſuch as were there with him, he brought Polinarda on land vpon a little table, for which the Pagane looking ſhée ſhould be thankfull to him, & finding no returne of gratitude at all, hee fell into ſuch an outragious furie, as once he purpoſed there to haue ſlaine her: but conuerting his intent to rauiſh her immediatly, had euen then accompliſhed his wicked deſire, but yt the Knight of the Sunne chaunced to paſſe by at that inſtant, who parted (as you heard before) in ſo deſperate a caſe from Constantinople, and hauing ridden many miles, founde no aduenture worthy of remembrance, which made him of thys oppinion, that by Land he ſhould light on nothing to make him famous, therefore he would goe try his fortune on the Sea: and ſpying a farre off the ſayle of Tamerco, made toward the poynt where hee landed, and came thether at the very time, when Tamerco villainouſly would haue deflowred Polinarda. Where albeit he knew her not, becauſe the Sea had much altered her pure complexion, yet he ſcorned that a Knight ſhould ſo abuſe a Ladie, and therefore called to him, but hee who little thought with whom hee was to deale, ſaid: Fooliſh Knight, if thou haſt no better aduauntage then I ſ
                     •
                  e to combate with me, let mee but lace on my Helmet, and I ſhall ſoone ſhew thee, howe much better it had béene for thée to haue held on thy way, then thus to vndertake this womans defence.
               I will ſuffer thee to arme thy ſelfe, anſwered the Knight of the Sunne: in which while, Polinarda beholding either her immediate death or ſhame, in teares thus ſpake. Defend mine honour, thou faire-ſéeming Knight, for I am the wofull ſtolne wife to noble Palmerin of England. Arguto knowing her very well by her voyce, replied: Feare not

déere-eſtéemed Lady, the ſword of iuſtice is come to deliuer you. So diſmounting from his horſe, becauſe Tamerco was on foote, a very ſharp battaile began betwéene them, which becauſe it ſéemed doubtfull on either ſide, poſſeſſed the thoughts of Polinarda with ſuch feare, that ſtanding in ſuſpence of her Knights ſucceſſe, ſhee fledde into a wood thereto neere adioyning, vnſeene by either of the Combattants. When Arguto had loſt the ſight of the Lady, he feared leaſt Tamercoes followers had carried her away, which raiſing a more violent furie in his reſolution, made him reach Tamerco ſuch a cruell ſtroke ouer the temples of his head, as he fell downe amazed to the earth: then mounting on horſbacke, he fiercely aſſailed Tamercoes men, & hauing ſlaine one of them, demaunded who had borne thence the Ladie. Another of them, béeing ſo wounded that hee could not flie, ſhewed which way the Lady had taken: whereupon Arguto leauing them, gallopped amaine after her, and before he had ridden the ſpace of a mile, hee eſpied her running, with her haire diſheueled about her ſhoulders, & calling to her, ſhée looked back, with ſome ſmall ioy to behold it was he, and not the other that had ſo miſuſed her.
               
                  Arguto, who conceiued ſome good hope, that by the meanes of Polinarda, he might gaine Victoria in mariage, very kindly comforted her, promiſing not to forſake her, till hee had brought her backe to Constantinople. So taking her vp behind him, rode onward ſo ſpéedily, that Tamerco, who had now recouered footing, was out of hope to regaine her by purſuing: beſide, the wound on his head was verie painfull to him, but there hapned an occaſion to hinder theſe diſſeignes, as ſhall be declared in the Chapter following.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXVI. How Arguto was aſſailed by three Giants, which tooke the faire Princeſſe Polynarda from him: How ſhe was afterward recouered by the Knight of Fortune, and giuen by him to Leonato, that hee might goe onward to the Ile of Fortune.
               
               
                  
                     TAmerco, béeing ſet downe in a ſhade, while his ſeruaunts holpe to binde vp his hurts, ſawe three Giants comming toward him, armed all in blacke, with Maces of yron and ſwordes of huge length: theſe Giants demaunded of him, if hee had not ſéene a Lady of theirs, ſcaping frō them that way? Hée replied, hée had ſéene ſuch a one, & ſhee could not be far gone from them, but he ſaw a Knight likewiſe that offered her defence, and it might be he had carried her away behind him.
               This aunſwere made Tamerco, as well knowing that the Giants ſought not after Polinarda, but ſome Ladie to them belonging: yet this would ſerue as two reuenges at once, both on the Princeſſe & the Knight her reſcuer, iudging it impoſſible for him to eſcape from men of ſuch might. The Giants giuing credite to Tamercoes aunſwere, & ſeeing the new paſſed footing of the horſe, prepared thēſelues preſently to follow after, and running with all the ſpéede they could make, they tore downe the trées that ſtoode in their way to let them: and ſuch a noyſe they made all the way they went, that Arguto and Polinarda heard thē more then a mile off.
               
                  Polinarda would faine haue had Arguto put the ſpurres to his horſe, for his better eſcape from ſo great a danger:

but Arguto, who would not flée, if death himſelfe had ſtoode before him, by no meanes coulde be wonne to amend his pace: where-vpon the Giants ſtill following by the track, at length ouer-tooke them, and the youngeſt Giant called to them, that they ſhould ſtay.
               
                  Arguto, cauſing Polinarda to alight, couering himſelfe with his Shield, ſaid: If any ſparke of true valour doe remaine in yee, then let vs ſingle deale man to man, ſo ſhall your conqueſt of me be the more glorious. Theſe Giants, (who were of the progenie of the Giant Lurcon, ſometime reputed a bolde and hardie Knight, and was ſlaine by the Emperour Primaleon) hauing well learned all kindes of knightly curteſie, thus forth-with ordained: that the youngeſt, who indéede was the moſt agill and actiue, ſhould firſt try his fortune againſt the Knight of the Sunne, and ſo the combate was agréed vpon betweene them.
               The Giant gaue many vnmercifull blowes, ſuch as had ſurely preuailed euen to the death, but that the Knight awarded them by dexteritie and nimblenes, and wounded the Giant in thrée ſeuerall places, though little to any ſound purpoſe, becauſe his Mace brake off their ſpéede in the fall: at laſt, the Knight beeing hardly beſet, and dangerouſlie indeede, deliuered ſuch a forcible ſtroke at the Giant, as he cut the Mace in ſunder very neere to his hand, which made him in a rage draw forth his ſword, and nowe began the fight to be fierce and cruell on both ſides.
               The two other Giants ſtanding by, aduiſedly looking vpon Polinarda, perceiued that this was not ſhée whō they ſought, but ſeeing ſhée was of excellent beautie, they became ſo amourouſly affected to her, as they purpoſed to be poſſeſt of her, and ſpeaking in their language to their brother that combatted, to leaue off the fight and follow them, the elder Giant diſſemblingly drawing neere her, rapt her vp vnder his arme, the other making the way before him, for ſooner carriage of her to his Caue. The third, that fought with Arguto, turning his backe, ranne away with ſuch ſpéede, as the Knight by no meanes could ouer-reach him:

thus ſéeing at one inſtant Polinarda borne away, and al the Giants borne quite out of his ſight, himſelfe now ignorant which way he ſhould take, he got vp on horſebacke, riding as he thought the ſame way the Giants had taken, but in leſſe then halfe a myles trauaile, hee had vtterly loſt the tract of their footing, ſo pacing on careleſly till it was night, and yet altogether ignorant whether he went, at laſt hee layd him downe to ſleepe vnder a tree, all woe begon that he could not recouer Polinarda
                  ▪ to whom he had (by the ſmall way they rode) imparted his loue, and receiued likewiſe a promiſe from her, to doo her vttermoſt in his behalfe: notwithſtanding, very ſlender fruite was to be expected by her paines, becauſe Victoria in her ſoule affected young Primaleon.
               
               But the Knight of the Sunne conceiued ſuch hope by her gentle ſpeeches, as he made certaine account to enioy the Ladie hee loued: a propertie incident 
                     •
                  o louers to deceaue themſelues, by beléeuing aſſuredly the follie of their owne deſires. Thus all that night he fed vppon thoſe perſwaſiue hopes, not hauing any thing elſe to ſatiſ-fie his hungry appetite withall, and in the morning mounted on horſe-back againe, with intent either to finde Polinarda, and be her deliuerer, or end his owne life by the crueltie of the Giants.
               The Giants, after they had brought Polinarda to theyr Denne, were each of them ſeuerally ſo enflamed with her loue, as each one would haue her alone to himſelfe, without admitting any fellowſhippe in ſo rich a purchaſe: the elder Giant would haue carried her into the furtheſt nooke of the Caue, there to poſſeſſe the benefit of his laſciuious deſires, but the other two came running vpon him with their weapons, and there had ſlaine him, but that hee caught vp Polinarda in his armes, as a buckler betwéen them. When the two Giants ſaw they could doo nothing againſt ye third, but that Polinarda was ſtill in perrill of her life, they fell to him by handy gripes, charging him to let the Ladie goe, or els they would kill both him and her together: and then the two fell at ſtrife amongſt themſelues, which of thē ſhould

firſt haue her when ſhée was frée from the other, and being both vnarmed, the youngeſt thruſt the other quite thorowe the body, that there he fell downe dead at his foote, and in the ſame furie he ranne the elder in vnder the arme-pit, as minding to kill both him & the woman, becauſe hee ſhould not vaunt of carrying her alone frō him: and this his purpoſe had beene effected, if the Knight of Fortune had not euen then arriued at the Caues mouth, beeing led along that Coaſt by his fauourer Dorina, without telling him of anie action there to be performed. Hee hearing the noyſe the Giants made within, and lending his liſtning eare to be further reſolued, heard the dolourous complaints of ſome diſtreſſed woman, which made him ſuddainly diſmount from his horſe, and boldly enter into the Caue.
               The young Giant beholding an armed Knight thus enter, left the other to deale with him, and then the elder Giant threw Polinarda ſo rudely againſt the ground, that hée had almoſt kild her with the falls violence: then drewe hée foorth his ſword to ſuccour his brother, and although they were both vnarmed, yet was their power and puiſſance ſuch, as the Knight had there béene ſlaine betwéene them, if he had not made meanes to get out of the Caue, for there hee coulde not ſo nimbly beſtirre him, but ſtill felt his enemies ſtrokes much to offend him.
               But drawing ſtill backward, like the Lyon in his fighting, till he found himſelfe where he had more commoditie of place, by his quicke and agill turnings to euery offered aduauntage, hee made the Giants ſtrokes to be beſtowed but in vaine, and had giuen to them both diuers dangerous wounds.
               The Giants full of furie to be thus ouer-maiſtered by one onely Knight, layd at him like deuils, without any intermiſſion: but during the fight, ſuch was the Knights ſucceſſe in deliuerie of his blowes, as one of them was verie ſore hurte in the breaſt, and the other vnder his right ſide: whereupon the younger Giant thought to haue cloſed with him, but the Knight ranne his ſworde quite thorowe his

ſhoulder, and the other (offring to flie) had one of his leggs cut off.
               
                  Dorina, who had béene inuiſibly preſent all this while, to the end it ſhould not be ſaid, that by the power of her enchauntments the Knight did theſe admirable deeds: made herſelfe to be ſéene, and running into the Caue, founde Polinarda newly riſen vp, ſitting on a little rock, but greatlie bruiſed with her fal, then putting a certaine ſirrop into her mouth, it very much comforted her. By this time was the Knight himſelfe come thether, who preſently knowing her to be Polinarda, he offered to kiſſe her hand: but Dorina ſéeing his blood iſſue forth at two or three places, would needes diſarme him, and both they together bound vp his wounds. So there they remained thrée dayes in that place, feeding on ſuch prouiſion as the Giants had there prepared, and the Knight of Fortune grew much perplexed in his minde, not knowing how to conuay Polinarda to Constantinople again: for his deſires led him to a ſecond ſight of the Ile of Fortune, where he was armed Knight, and thether likewiſe Dorina intended to guide him, for the perfecting of a very ſtrange aduenture.
               So fetching his horſe, which was tyed by the bridle to a tree when he entred the Caue, and afterward let at liberty to feede till occaſion was to vſe him, they ſet on their iourney: but Dorina as yet led them toward Constantinople, and as they ſoftly paced on, they met a Knight riding ſo ſadlie, as it ſéemed his thoughts were greatly perplexed, for hys Launce lay quite ouer-thwart before him, & the end thereof gaue Polinarda ſuch a puſh on the ſide, as it had almoſt ſet her beſide the horſe.
               The Knight of Fortune offended at ſo vnciuill a parte, caught the horſe by the bridle, & forcing him to ſtand, ſpake in this manner. Diſcourteous Knight, thou muſt make a mends for the iniurie thou haſt doone this Lady: for ſhee (as her iuſt merrite) deſerueth to be honoured, and in my ſight there is no man liuing ſhall wrong her. The Knight, who was Leonato, Sonne to the ſame Polinarda, béeing angry

to ſée his horſe ſo helde by the bridle, without regarding what Lady it might be, and ſhée likewiſe ignorant of him as yet, by reaſon of his ſtrange habite and Beuer beeing cloſed: gaue the ſpurres to his horſe, returning no aunſwere, but prepared to haue a race with the Knight of Fortune.
               They encountred together in ſuch fierce manner, that Leonato loſt one of his ſtirrops, and the other founde himſelfe indifferently well ſhaken: whereat Polinarda began to be agréeued, béeing eſpecially mooued with ſome kinde compaſſion toward the ſtrange Knight, for their conformitie in blood vrged her to this pitty, albeit as yet ſhe knewe no manifeſt reaſon why ſhee ſhoulde reſpect him. The Knights drew theyr ſwordes, and ſo buckled together, in which bickering, the Knight of Fortune wounded Leonato on the left arme, whereat Polinardo was ſo vehemently afflicted in minde, as if the hurt had lighted vppon her very hart, and compelled her in teares to cry out aloude after thys manner.
               Forbeare fayre Knights, and kill not one another for any cauſe concerning me, I fréely pardon any iniury whatſoeuer, rather then to ſee the ruine of ſuch rare vertue. But ſhée could not ſo ſuddenly ſpeake theſe words, as Leonatoes ſword lighting vpon Primaleons Shield, ſlided downe the ſaddle bowe, and entring where the Armour was ioynted, wounded him a little vpon the thigh: and afterward lending eare to the voyce, perceiued that it was his mothers ſpeech, wherefore, without any further contention, he caſt his ſworde from him to the grounde, admiring who his aduerſarie ſhould be, yet with no ſuch inferiour reſolution, as to yeeld or ſubmit him to any Knight whatſoeuer.
               
                  Leonato hauing lifted vp his Beuer, embraced and knéeled to his mother, who preſently knew him, and lifting vp her handes to heauen, prayſed God that no greater harme had befalne him: and the Knight of Fortune perceiuing it was Leonato, caſt from him his ſword likewiſe, and ranne and caught him in his armes, deſiring pardon for his ſo raſh

aſſayling him, when Leonato embracing him, ſaid. Noble Primaleon, well haue you witneſſed your ſelfe, to be deriued from the race of that famous Palmerin, who made ſo many deſperate hazards of his life, rather then to looſe the leaſt title of his atchiued honour.
               During theſe ſpeeches, Dorina had made ready her vng
                     •
                  ents & reſtoratiues, and cauſing both the Knights to be vnarmed, bound vp their hurts and highly comforted them, but they abode all that night vnder faire trees there growing, feeding on ſuch viands as they had brought with them from the Giants Caue. The next morning they ſate in counſell among themſelues, howe Polinarda ſhould be conducted back to 
                     Constantinople, Leonato affirming, that the Knight of Fortune, was the meeteſt man to doe it, becauſe by his vertue ſhe had beene deliuered: but he whoſe minde was oppoſed to all aduentures what ſoeuer, and deſirous to goe where Dorina ſhould conduct him, replyed, that Leonato had the greateſt reaſon to be her guide, becauſe, beeing her Sonne, meere dutie challenged that intereſt in him.
               
                  Polinarda, perceiuing howe the Knight of Fortunes thoughts were addicted, and that nothing more diſpleaſed him then to be hindered in his iourney, vſed theſe ſpeeches. Sonne, the charge of helping me backe againe, dooth moſt neceſſarily belong to you, and no diſparagement any way imputed to you, albeit by your meanes I was not recouered: but rather it declares a child-like office performed to your Mother, and a curteous kindneſſe beſtowed on thys Knight, to whom no paine ſéemes greater then hinderance in his voyage.
               
                  Leonato, not knowing well how to gaine-ſay his Mothers reaſons alleaged, agréed to returne with her to Constantinople: ſo changing his horſe with the Knight of Fortune, and mutually thanking each other for all kindneſſe expreſſed, they parted on their ſeuerall iourneyes. Leonato dooing all things hee could beſt deuiſe to pleaſe his Mother, (who trauailed ſtill with feareful and diſtracted thoughts)

by the time hee had ridden about the ſpace of two leagues, happened on a ſmall Foiſt, whereof Almaroll was Captaine, the ſonne to Almaroll: who hearing great report of the Iland belonging to Dorina, would needes ſaile thether to ſeeke the Knight of Fortune, as deſirous (with him) to vndergoe ſome great enterpriſe, and in regard of the intire affection he bare him.
               
                  Leonato, riding without his Helmet on, was the eaſier knowne a farre off by Almaroll, who was walking vp and downe vpon the ſhoares ſide, and gotten vp at laſt vppon a little riſing bancke, to ſee what occaſion might befall him from the Land, or any accident which might be offered frō the Sea. The young Giant, not a little glad of his preſence, went & met him with very chéerefull countenance: but when he beheld the Princeſſe Polinarda, hee could not be much more iocond then before he was, becauſe all hope was loſt in Constantinople of euer ſéeing her againe.
               
                  Almaroll made them a banquet ſufficiently, of ſuch prouiſion as he had aboard in his Foiſte, and hauing with foode and ſléepe that night well refreſhed themſelues, the next day they fell in ſome diſcourſing together, Polynarda earneſtly entreating Almaroll, that with his veſſell, he would bring her to Constantinople.
               
               The Giant (deſirous onely to méete with the Knight of Fortune, and hearing howe lately they had parted from him,) ſtoode a while pondering with himſelfe: and but that he had reſpect to the Ladies great degrée, and his Fathers Caſtle béeing likewiſe in ſome ſubiection to her, hee could hardly haue béene diſwaded from his former purpoſe, but perceiuing it was in vaine to denie her, foorth-with they ſet ſaile, with intent to kéepe off farre from the Land, leaſt they ſhould méet with any accident to be their hinderance: but matters hapned beyond their expectation, as ſhal be declared in the Chapter following.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXVII. Of the fight that chaunced at Sea, betweene theſe guydes to the Princeſſe, and an vnknowne Knight.
               
                  
                     POlinarda was nowe not a little contented, ſeeing her-ſelfe in ſo faire likely-hood to reuiſite Constantinople, but giddy & vnconſtant Fortune, who will permit no confidence in any worldly bliſſe, of what apparant ſecuritie ſoeuer it ſeeme, troubled the Sea with ſuch furious and tempeſtious windes, as the Foiſt beeing in no ſafetie if it ſhould ſaile néere the ſhoare, they were inforced to launch out into the height of the Sea, where toſſing vp & downe, till by a ſtorme of raine the rough windes began to be more calme, they were at laſt carried toward Turkie, and farre off they might diſcerne a Turkiſh Shippe, which mainly made toward them with ful ſpredde ſayles, whereupon they prepared themſelues for the fight, and the Ships béeing ioyned, they encountred together.
               
                  Leonato, doubting leaſt feare might be hurtfull to his Mother, eſpecially if the Turkes ſhould happen to boorde the Foiſte, leapt into the enemies Shippe, where killing euery one that durſt ſtand againſt him, at laſt he chaunced to meete with the Captaine, who boldly comming forth againſt him, there chaunced a very ſharpe conflict betweene them. The Turkes, ſeeing with what valour their Captaine defended himſelfe, hauing another Captaine in companie among them, they would néedes goe fight with them in the Foiſte: which Almaroll perceiuing, came forward to withſtand them, and to kéepe them from entring into his Foiſte, he likewiſe leapt foorth into their Ship.
               
                  The Captaine that led the way to fight with the Foiſte, doubting leaſt his fellow Captaine ſhould be ſlaine by Leonato, forſaking his owne Ship, got into the Foiſte, where ſetting ſayle quickly, and the winde aptly ſeruing, they were twentie leagues off from the other in a verie ſhort ſpace. The Marriners beeing but few in number, he menaced them with preſent death, to tell him of whence their Foiſte was, and what other paſſengers they had aboorde: whereupon, they told him that they were Chriſtians, and that Polinarda the Emperour Primaleons daughter was there aboord.
               The Knight right glad to meete with ſo great a Ladie, putting off his Helmet, bad one of them goe and comfort the Princeſſe, telling her, that he was Dragonalte King of Nauara, and in the other ſhippe where Leonato and Almaroll were, was King Platir her brother: they by commiſſion of the Princes that remained at Tubante, were ſent to require ayde of the Emperour in fauour of Blandidon. The Princeſſe, doubtfull of euer ſeeing Constantinople againe, or enioying the long deſired preſence of Palmerin her huſband, lifted vp her head at theſe tydings, and taking truce a little with her diſturbed cogitations, came forth to the Knight, who curteouſly taking her by the hand, ſaid.
               Reioyce faire Princeſſe, that from ſuggeſtion of feare, ſo great hope is thus deriued: & miſtruſt not danger of your ſonnes life, for there can no ſuch ſiniſter chaunce happen, but one ſigne or other will diſcloſe him to the King of Lacedemonia. So breaking off conference, they turned back againe to recouer the Shippe, wherein they left Platir and Leonato fighting.
               
                  Alma
                        •
                     oll, hauing put all the ſlaues and Mariners vnder cuſtodie, becauſe they yeelded themſelues for ſafety of their liues, ſtoode to behold the ſucceſſe of this combate, and looking aduiſedly on the Knight of the Ship, vnder his Creaſt he diſcerned a little golden Croſſe, which giuing him cauſe to thinke he was a Chriſtian, made him ſteppe betwéene thē, vſing theſe words. Stay your weapons a little gentle

Knights, and heare me but ſpeake: then turning to the Knight of the Ship, he thus proceeded. Woorthy Sir, I know not whence or what you are, but the Croſſe that I haue eſpied in your Helmet, perſwades me you cannot but be a Chriſtian as we are.
               
                  Platir hearing theſe wordes, and thinking the Giant might be Franardo, or Almaroll, lifted vp his Beuer, and before he ſpake, they knew him. Leonato perceiuing how he had iniured his vnckle, threw his ſword at his féete, and falling on his knée to kiſſe his hand, was ſtaied vp by Platir, who ſmiling, thus ſpake. I would neuer deſire better proofe of your valour, then in this tryall you haue made on mée: and now I ſée the Empire of Constantinople may hope of long continuance, when her young Knights deliuer ſuch aſſurance of theyr man-hood and chiualry.
               
                  Leonato bluſhed to heare himſelfe ſo praiſed, but returning then no aunſwere (becauſe gréefe had ſurprized his thoughts for the loſſe of his Mother) at laſt hee demaunded what Knight it was yt had departed thence with the Foiſt: but when he heard it was Dragonalte, he became greatlie comforted, knowing him to be a man of no meane valour. So they ſet ſaile for Constantinople, and hauing a proſperous winde for their purpoſe, within two dayes both the Foiſte and they arriued there together, where Polynarda béeing gone firſt on lande to paſſe to the Citty, looking backe by chaunce, ſhée ſaw her brother followe after, accompanied with her Sonne and Almoroll. You may geſſe that this ſight was very pleaſing to her, eſpecially after ſo many greefes before endured, and béeing entred into the Shyppe againe, till newes of this good hap was carried to the Pallace, ere long they beheld the Empreſſe Gridonia, Miragarda, Bazilia, Arnalte, and all the other Princeſſes, riding haſtily thether to welcome Polinarda.
               
               The ioy of a Mother for recouerie of his loſt daughter, I doubt not but you can better conceiue then I expreſſe, as alſo the mutuall ioy and embracings betwéene newe met friendes, after ſo ſad and diſaſtrous a ſeperation: all which

on eyther ſide was effectually performed, nothing wanting that might declare the true feeling of affection, nor no praiſes fayling to thoſe Knights for their great deſeruings. By this time was Polinarda clad in other abiliments, and ledd onward by the hand of her Mother, exceeding ioyful for her ſo happy recouerie: there met them the Emperour, and thoſe of elder yéeres with him, among whom was olde Almaroll, whoſe vigour was nowe very ſufficiently reſtored. The Emperour embraced Platir, & Dragonalte afterward, beeing a King: then folding Leonato in his armes, ſaid. I now ſee the fortunate ſucceſſe of our family, ſince the young men doo not degenerate from the ſteps of their Fathers and Grandſires.
               So riding on betwéene Platir and Dragonalte, Sydelia and Cardigia agreed pleaſantly to ieſt with his Highneſſe, and putting themſelues forward, ſo trauerſſed the ſtreete with their luſtie Palfraies, that hee could by no meanes paſſe along: and béeing diſpoſed to hold on their merry beginning, quoth one of them. My Lord, if we were armed, there's not one of vs but would challenge ye ſeuerally to the fight, and puniſh yée for vſurping on our prerogatiue. The Emperor ſmiling to ſée the Ladies ſo ſhut vp the way, ſaid: Beleeue mee faire ſoules, Ile kéepe my ſelfe well enough from warring with any of you, when yée declare ſo many ſignes of courage, but tell mee I pray yée, what prerogatiue of yours doo we vſurpe vpon?
               The Ladies not willing to aunſwere him by wordes, tooke each of them her huſband by the hand, and one of thē welcomming hers with kiſſes, and the other with kinde embraces, declared that their prerogatiue conſiſted in thoſe fauours, from which they were bard before, by the Emperours conuerſing with them. All the company laughed at the Ladies pleaſant diſpoſition, and the Emperour confeſt his errour, in kéeping their huſbands ſo long from them: but ſince the faulte grew through the great loue he bare to his Knights, hee iudged it might be the ſooner pardoned, whereon the Ladies reſigned them to his maieſtie againe,

ſaying, though he had power to commaunde their preſence in the day, yet they hoped to deſire their company at night, whereat ſuch as were maried, laughed hartily, and the maidens bluſhed very modeſtly.
               So breaking wittie ieſt vpon ieſt, they entred the Cittie, Almaroll and Cardigea then riding with their ſonne betwéene them, and they founde the tables ready couered in faire Fleridaes garden, where they dined with great pompe and royaltie. But when the tables were withdrawne, the Emperour ſate in ſad conference with Platir and Dragonalte, of all the paſſed accidents at the Citty of Tubante: wherein was at large diſcourſed, all matters betwéen the Prince Florian and Targiana, what ſucceſſe the war had, as alſo the ſudden flight of Dirdan, ſuſpected to vſurpe the kingdome of Niquea: adding, to fill vp the full compleat honour of their Embaſſie, that all the Knights (by them) acknowledged their duties to his Highneſſe, but more eſpecially Blandidon, who fearing leaſt Tirenna his baſtard Siſter intended foreſtalling of his dignitie, would labour his mightines by ſome meanes for her ſupporting.
               The Emperour diſcourſing diuerſly on the paſſed wars, was greatly gréeued to looſe ſo good a Knight as Dirdan, but much more offended at his giuing this occaſion of freſh ſtrife: neuertheleſſe, not forgetfull any way of Blandidons good deſeruings, (to whom in choyſe regard of his Fathers faithfulnes, and ſufficient proofe of his owne vertue, the Grecian Empire was ſo much obliged) immediatly he tooke order, that good aſſiſtance ſhould bee ſent him by the ſame Knights.
               And this occaſion very fitly made offer of it ſelfe, for the new created Knights remaining idle at home, and diſpleaſed at the Knight of Fortunes departure from the Court, he altogether ſéeking honour by ſearch of aduentures, and they (as willing) yet no way imployed: they tooke it as a note of ſhame impoſed vpon them, and reputed themſelues vnworthy of the dignitie they held, hauing no meanes to expreſſe theyr worth of that office, and therfore by ſeuerall

wayes they diſcloſed their diſcontentments. Oliuanto, the ſecond ſonne to Florendos, hearing that ayde was to be ſent into Turkie, he fell at the Emperours feete, holding his vnkle Platir faſt by the hand, and ſaid. High and mightie Prince, I humbly beſéech you, that you kill me not by too much loue of kéeping mee in your Court, letting my young yéeres looſe the flower of their owne felicitie: for were I poſſeſſed of my Knight-hood, I might ſhare a part of that honourable reputation, which makes my companions ſo famous and glorious: and if they make a full concluſion to all actions of merrite, what ſhall I ſay I was borne for, or iudge of mine owne condition?
               The Emperour ſmiling on Platir, who entreated fauour on his Nephewes behalfe, returned Oliuanto this aunſwere: Feare not faire Sonne, time falls out fit to thine owne contentment, goe and performe your watch for Knighthood, and be religiouſly deuout in your prayers, that that ſacred order may be woorthily receiued by you, to the honour of our Chriſtian fayth, and fame of your ſelfe.
               
                  Oliuanto departed, and béeing in the chappell to accompliſh his vigill, about the midſt of night, hee heard a voyce procéeding frō the high Altar, ſaying: I make thee Knight of the Lyon, beeing mine owne Armes and Enſigne, & thou heereafter ſhalt be King of Macedon. This was ſuppoſed to be the ghoſt of Florendos, ſometime King of Lacedemonia, and Father to the famous Palmerin d' Oliua. The voyce was heard of many that were without the Chappell, who ſuddenly entring, founde Oliuanto armed, and bearing a Shield, with the figure of a Lyon in it paſſant on his feete. In the morning the Emperor was aduertiſed hereof, who came with great pompe on horſebacke to the Chappell, where a very reuerend Biſhop celebrated the Maſſe: and ſo returning thence to the pallace, they heard that Leonato was newly thence departed, vnder the title of the Knight of the Sword, as the old Knight had béen before called that armed him Knight, whereat his Mother was much diſpleaſed, but the Emperour perceiuing that this was the way,

whereby his Court ſhould grow great againe in former reputation, comforted her thus.
               Grieue not faire Daughter for your Sonne Leonatos departure, if you deſire hee ſhoulde reſemble his famous Graund-father, by whoſe hands we beleeue he receaued his knight-hoode. So taking further order for ſending ayde into Turkie, made Oliuanto expect his employment thether, and within eyght dayes tenne great Ships, with as many Foyſtes were prepared, whereinto entred fifteene thouſand hardie ſpirits, with Platir, Dragonalte, Oliuanto, and Almaroll the younger, with his Father: who ſeeing his ſonne of ſo honourable towardlines, would needs beare him companie, that he might the better learne by him, with what diſcretion to guide himſelfe in any dangerous battaile.
               The Shyps put off from the ſhoare, but ſcantly with the good liking of Auriana, who hauing thus long conuerſed among the Chriſtian Princeſſes, and learned the miſteries of our fayth, beholding no likelihood of her returne to India, Tamerco
                   her brother hauing committed ſuch an errour as the rape of Polinarda, was the willinger to be baptized, and ſo was preſented at the holy Font, Platir and Miragarda being her ſureties. Shée béeing thus become a Chriſtian, ſought how to haue a huſband aunſwerable to her quality, and noting Oliuanto with the piercing eye of iudgement, what high and eſpeciall hope was held of him, and how in all fayre parts he reſembled his mother: ſhee grewe verie much enamoured of him, neuer manifeſting her loue but now at his departing: when the young Knight taking his leaue of her, as before he had doone of the other Princeſſes and Infantries, ſeeming very gracious as hee was on his knee before her, the Lady tooke the ſpirit to ſpeake in thys manner. Although I am a ſtranger, yet I may challenge one of this royall aſſembly, whom I may boldly entitle by the name of my Knight.
               
                  Oliuanto, remembring howe many times Auriana had affably eyed him, and ſuſpecting that loue might be the ſpeciall reaſon thereof, repented hee had béene ſo ſlacke in exchange

of kindneſſe, according as ſuch a beauty in dutie deſerued, wherefore taking her ſoftly by the hand, and ſealing his affection with a ſweet kiſſe, ſaid. There is nothing (faire Lady) by mee more deſired, then to be called the Knight to ſo great a Princeſſe, that all my enterpriſes beeing performed vnder the name of your beauty, might proue the more ſucceſſefull and fortunate. So after he had expreſſed, what loue in time might be equally entertained, hee aroſe with a Diamond in his hand, which ſhee had giuen him as a remembrance of her affection: but becauſe it was now vpon the very inſtant of departing, and Miragarda had gathered ſome ſuſpition of this new commenced loue, ſhee pleaſantly brake this ieſt vpon him. Alas Sonne, you muſt firſt make your vertue cleare in Armes, and thereby become famous, before you learne the idle offices of loue: of which frumpe Oliuanto was ſo aſhamed, as to cut off further entrance into ſuch imaginations of him, hee mounted on his horſe, and ſo rode downe with the reſt towards the Shippes.
            
            
               CHAP. XXVIII. How Franardo found Belcar, Fortenbracio, & Forcino hand to hand with three Giants, that dwelt at the foote of the Mountaine Arteferia in Macedonia, and hauing ſlaine two of them, they went toward the Iland of Carderia.
               
               
                  ALl the young Knights (as wée haue alreadie declared) beeing departed from the Emperours Court, by deedes of woorth ſo make themſelues famous, and amongſt them Franardo: whoſe fierie heate could not endure the ſearch of meane aduentures, or any ſlender occaſion that might

befall him on the way. So poſting on in haſt, at laſt hee came to the Kingdome of Macedon, very neere vnto the Mountaine Arteferia▪
                   & muſing ſeriouſly in his thoughts, in what place hee might light on ſome aduenture, which might beſeeme his valour, he ſuddainly heard a great clattering of weapons, and following directly to the place by his eare, he ſawe three Knights combatting with three Giants, who had with them twenty armed men beſide, and all they together, had ſet vppon thoſe thrée, and doubtleſſe had there ſlaine them, but that this Giant by ſo good hap chaunced to come thether, who although hee knewe them not, yet ſeeing they were ſo villainouſly intreated, hée ſtept in to aſſiſt them, and drawing his ſword, ſpake thus aloud: Knights be of good courage, for I purpoſe to ayde you.
               
                  Fortenbracio béeing neereſt him, knewe him by the impreſe of a Caſtell which hee bare in his Shield, and therevpon ſaid: Welcome is my Lord the woorthy Franardo: which words cheered the other to haue ſo good helpe. One of the Giants making at Franardo with a great yron mace, was ſo encountred againe by him with his Sword, as hee cut off the Mace in the very midſt, and gaue him a dangerous wound in the breaſt, whereat the Giant beganne to ſtagger, and not knowing which way to betake himſelfe, made offer of eſcape away: but foure of his Knights ruſhing in to defend him, hee was the willinger to abide by it, where the fight continued very ſharply for more then halfe an howre, and the young Knights, who had fought there foure whole howres together, were growne very wearie, and Forcino hurt to his great diſaduantage.
               But Franardo béeing freſh and luſtie, when he ſawe the battaile endure ſo long, ſaid within himſelfe: If I doe no greater good then hetherto I haue doone, I may accompanie theſe Knights in death. Héereon he buckled to ye wounded Giant, and making a larger entrance, where hee had before opened his Cuiraſſe at his firſt hurt, he made ſuch a window in his body, that his hart might be ſeene panting for life. But minding him no more, hee ſmote off the head

of one of his Knights, & ſmit two other dead to the ground. When the two Giants ſaw their third companion ſlaine, they ſtroue to get behind Franardo, and there they had ſlain him ere he could be aware of them, if Belcar and Fortenbracio had not runne quickly to reſiſt them, for now hee was very narrowly beſet, and had receiued two blowes beſide, which did aſtoniſh him in ſuch ſort, as if Forcino had not lightly leapt to him, hee could not chuſe but muſt needes there haue falne.
               But hauing well recouered himſelfe againe, hée looked about him, and ſawe Fortenbracio runne another Giant thorow the ſhoulder, and afterwarde cleaue him downe to the left flancke: which made the third, ſeeing both his companions dead, throw downe his ſword and gauntlet on the ground, deſiring truce and mercie at their hands, as in like manner did ſuch of his Knights as were left aliue, whereon they were afforded grace and fauour.
               The Giant béeing named Forzato, humbly embraced Franardo, ſaying: Sir Knight, ſo highly hath your vertue pleaſed me, as I meane to leaue a little Caſtell, which I hold in yonder vally (pointing to it with his finger) and attend vpon you to a very ſtrange enchauntment, which I am verily perſwaded will be concluded onely by your valour.
               
                  Franardo would gladly haue gone vp the Mountaine Arteferia, thinking there to make proofe of himſelfe in ſome hardy aduenture, becauſe the place was very famous, by high déedes of great honour there doone by noble Palmerin: but hearing now of this other aduenture, by conſent of the other thrée Knights he thus determined, that the Giant ſhould firſt conduct them to his Caſtell, where they meant that their wounds ſhould be reſpectiuely cured, for Forcino, ſonne to the King of Nauara, (not remembred before in the calender of their names borne in the Perilous Ile,) had receiued a dangerous hurt in his flancke. Beeing come to the Caſtell, a Siſter to the Giant, who was named Grandonia, hauing heard of the death of the other twaine, and fearing

leaſt her Brother ſhould likewiſe follow them, was now not a little glad to ſee him returned: and entertaining them very curteouſly, cauſed them to be vnarmed, taking Forcino firſt to dreſſe his wound, aſſured them that none of his entrailes were touched. Afterward ſhee dreſſed the other two Knights, but when ſhee came to tooke on Franardos hurts, ſhee felt a worſer wound ſtrike her to the verie hart: for the young gallant, though the ſhape and members of his body were as a Giants, yet had hee a very gracious and amiable aſpect, and knew withall, ſo well howe to demeane himſelfe, as might incite a ſetled oppinion to grow amorous of him: but himſelfe hauing not as yet made experience of any loue caſes, let ſlip all ſuch occaſions in a dreame as it were.
               The Giant Forzato, who beganne to affect Franardo in his very ſoule, and grew deſirous of accompanying him to the Emperours Court, left nothing vnattempted that beſt might honour him, and ſhewed himſelfe very ſeruiceable to the thrée other Knights likewiſe, vnderſtanding that they were Princes of very royall diſcent. Eyght dayes were thus ſpent in phiſicke & Surgerie, in which time the young Gianteſſe vſed kinde cherriſhings to Franardo, and beeing one day alone with him, ſpake in this manner. I knowe not (Sir Knight) what to conceite of my ſelfe, or howe to take this ſtrange alteration of my thoughts: except it be thus, that Fortune hath béene your conduct to this place, onely to make mee ſo much yours, as I can no longer be mine owne.
               
                  Franardos d
                     •
                  ll conceits were ſo wakened with theſe words, that ſeeing her to be of ſo goodly a ſhape, and withall ſo deepely enamoured of him: he began to conſider with himſelfe, that when his Father applyed himſelfe to marriage, he could finde no other Gianteſſe then Arlencea, and when he ſhould intend to take the ſame courſe, hee knewe not what fortune might betide him, if he ſhould now make no eſtimation of her, who he beheld to affect him with ſuch ſeruencie of loue, whereupon he thus replied.
               
                  Lady, you are young, and I vnwoorthy yet of the eſtate of marriage, not hauing doone any thing worthy the name of a Knight, as my Father did before he was married. But becauſe you ſhall not looſe the hope of enioying me as your owne, if I may remaine as aſſured of you, I promiſe you héere vppon my faith, neuer to match with any other woman then your ſelfe: and taking her by the hand, contented himſelfe onely with a kiſſe, which perhaps was not ſo pleaſing to the Lady, who might expect other kindnes from him: for the beginning of loue is neuer firmely ſuffiſed, without the efficient cauſe that makes both parties beſt contented.
               The Lady returned to her lodging, gladde of this good fortune, ſince it ſuccéeded no further, and Franardo in like manner, whoſe thoughts hammered on the aduenture propounded by Forzato, ſeeing the Knights were now in ſtate to were ſhortly their Armour, tooke his leaue of them and the Lady: & beeing departed thence, before they had ridden any great diſtance of ground, the Giant began thus. My Lord Franardo, the aduenture whereunto I am your guide, is in the Iland of Carderia, which the famous King Polendos of Theſſalie conquered, to obtaine the faire Princeſſe Francellina: but to him remained no more, then what onelie ſerued for purchaſe of the Lady.
               Nowe concerning this matter of honour reſerued for you, let me tell you that it is a wondrous enchauntment, wrought by a wiſe Enchauntreſſe, ſecond to none for her excellent Arte, and one of the Fairies of the Mount Arteferia: but withall, ſo dreadfull and horrid in effecting, that many Knights haue loſt their liues in triall of the aduenture: and if any haue hapned to returne backe aliue, hee hath béene ſo forgetfull of what ſoeuer he there ſawe, as hée could giue no information at all of dangers nature: therefore ſuch as are minded to try it by their vertue, muſt goe without direction of what may betide them.
               
                  Franardo, whoſe bolde hope perſwaded him able to finiſh the greateſt aduenture, made no reckoning at all of the

Giants ſpéeches, and ryding on foure dayes together, at laſt they came in ſight of the Ile Carderia, to the high contentment of Franardo, for vnexperienced young men are feareleſſe of perrills, but when they haue paſſed thorowe ſome proofe of ſuch caſes, they then are content to proceede more conſiderately: let it then ſuffiſe, that his late arriual there, allowed him no other lodging then vnder a trée for that night, expecting what might befall him in the morning.
            
            
               CHAP. XXIX. Howe Arguto arriued at the Ile of Carderia, and combatted with Franardo, and how they were ſeazed on by an enchaunted Knight.
               
                  NOt long had the faire morning ſaluted the worlde, before an armed Knight, mounted vppon a pied-roane Courſer, came riding toward the Giant, and ſaluting him curteouſly, receiued backe from him the like forme of kindnes, demaūding afterward what they did in that place? When Franardo hearing with what humanitie hee mooued the queſtion, returned him this aunſwere. Sir Knight, (for leſſe you cannot be by your outward appearance,) this place is called ye Iland of Carderia, where is ſaid to be a very perrillous enchauntment, and hether came I to make proofe of my courage.
               That ſhall not you doo, replyed the Knight, becauſe I intend my ſelfe to aduenture it firſt. By reaſon (quoth Franardo) hee ſhoulde be firſt, that firſt was poſſeſſour of the place. Words, aunſwered the other, ſerue not to try that lawe by, but weapons, and they will quickly diſcide thys controuerſie.
               
                  While thus they parled together, the day grewe out brighter, ſo that they had knowledge of one another, which was as much as nothing, becauſe in diſputation and ſtrife for honour, a priuate Knight reſpects neither King nor Emperour, whereon (béeing both mounted) they gaue the carrire and met together. Arguto, (who was the other newcome Knight) beeing ſome-what diſdainfull, failde in the encounter, but Franardos Launce met him ſo ſtronglie on the breaſt, as he was tumbled ouer the crupper of his horſe, and had not his Shield béene impenitrable, this encounter had ſlaine him.
               
                  Arguto, highly diſpleaſed with this bad ſucceſſe, came vpon him quickly with his ſword drawne, and wounded Franardo in one of his armes: but hee whéeling about his ouer-long weapon, glided in ſuch ſort downe his Shield, as lighting vpon his pouldrous, it made a little entrance, and ſlightly hurt him. When each of them had felt the waightie ſtrokes of his aduerſary, they began to order themſelues with more diſcretion, managing the fight with ſuch regard, as they might the better vndertake the aduenture of the Iland, yet held the battell very long and fearefull, their horſes béeing ſo wearie as they coulde ſcarce lift their legges, whereupon they both diſmounted, to make euident proofe which was moſt valorous. And albeit their Squires (well knowing either by their impreſes) vſed ſpéeches ſufficient to haue them giue ouer, alleaging the Emperours deepe diſpleaſure to them, yet would not Arguto liſten to any one word, notwithſtanding, hee could not laugh at any great lucke he had in this difference, for but that his Shield was impiercible, hee had gotten little aduantage by this bargaine, the ſtrokes of Franardo were ſo waightie and dangerous.
               While thys fight endured, ſuddainly there appeared a bridge vppon the firme land, and a Knight couered with blacke Armour, hauing the image of death portraied on his Shielde, hee comming vnto them, ſaid. Fooliſh Knights, what will yee kill one another, in hope of that which neyther

of you can make proofe of? Come turne to mee, and leane this follie.
               Héereon Franardo firſt aſſailed him with ſuch a ſtr
                     •
                  ke, as he thought he had ſeuerd him quite in the middle, though indeede he toucht him not, for this was but the illuſion of the enchauntment: and as he offerd againe to ſmite at the Knight, he was layd hold on by his Helmet, and griped in ſuch ſort, as hee thought that his head had béene rift in ſunder, and béeing quite out of all ſence, was taken vp by the enchaunted Knight very lightly, and carried as eaſilie away as it had béene a lambe, yet was hee a Giant of great hugenes, and the other ſéemed a Knight but of common ſtature.
               No ſooner had the Knight of the Iland fréed himſelfe of Franardo, but he preſently returned againe to Arguto, and without giuing him any word, ſo griped him in the flanck, that Arguto thought his very bowels were falne forth, and hee ſtabd at the Knights Shielde, but did no harme at all, whereon the Knight grypt him vppon the other legge, at which Arguto felt ſuch paine, as he imagined that it was quite ſmitten off, and falling downe, was taken vp by the Knight, and carried into the Iland.
               
                  Forzato and the Squires, would haue departed thence, but they were immediatly turnd backe by a wheeling cloude, and before they could geſſe how, or which way, they were in the Ile of Carderia with their Maiſters, who found no lacke of any thing but libertie onely, nor could they tell to whō they were priſoners: but theyr impriſonment grew the more offenſiue to them, when they ſaw brought thether to them by the ſame Knight, Belcar, Forcino, and Fortenbracio. Then they called to minde, that this might prooue the like caſe to them, as hapned at the Caſtell of Dramuſiande, for there had béene other Knights held as priſoners, and yet they could not know to whom. But leaue we them héere in durance, to ſpeake awhile of the Knight of the Sword, and the other Knights which had betaken themſelues to trauaile.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXX. How the Knight of the Sword vanquiſhed a Sauage Monſter, and afterward found Caro and Eſtrellant combatting together: likewiſe what hapned to them, and diuers other Knights.
               
                  
                     LEonato, who (as you haue heard) tearmed himſelfe the Knight of the Sword, according to the nomination giuen when hée was knighted, after hee had brought his mother to Constantinople, departed without vſing ſpeech to any, enuying both Arguto & the Knight of Fortune, becauſe hee imagined, that they woulde ingroſſe vp all aduentures to themſelues, and none would remaine whereby he might be glorious. As he rode thorowe woods & vnknowne deſerts, he met a wilde Sauage man, holding an angry Beare by the taile, and wraſtling with him ſo violently, that the beaſt féeling himſelfe ouer-maiſtred, did what he could to get frée from him: but when the Sauage man had eſpied the Knight, hee left the Beare, (which ranne away mainely into the thickeſt wood) and came running at him, with a knotted young trée as his weapon.
               The Knight made no regard of encountring this Monſter, becauſe (as we haue ſaide before) no feare or terrour lodged within his boſome, but experience now taught him, that nimble agilitie was his beſt defence: for the Sauage gaue him ſuch a thruſt with his trée in the flanck, that (his breath failing him) hee fell backward into a ſhallow pit, and the Sauage, (who ſometime had béen a humaine creature, and indifferently ſkild in managing a fight,) would

not take him vp in his armes, becauſe béeing naked and vndefenced, the Knight might ſtab or wound him beeing ſo neere him, wherfore lifting vp his tree, he purpoſed to beate out his braines, and indeede had doone it, but that ye Knight (awaked from his traunce) recouered footing, and putting by the blowe, reached him ſuch a ſounde ſalutation on the head, that the Sauage reeling heere and there, at the laſt fell flat on his backe.
               Then thought the Knight ſurely to haue ſmitten off his head, but by reaſon the ſtroke fel ſome-what ſhort, the hurt was the leſſe, and the Sauage ſtarting vp, auoyded another blow, that came with much more furie. So by reaſon of the Monſters ſtrength, and the Knights ſkilfull agilitie, the fight continued without inequalitie for a long ſpace, nor could it eaſily be diſcerned, to whether ſide the victory inclined: for the Sauage deliuered ſuch blowes with his tree, that if (by good hap) it had not the ſooner beene cut off in the midſt, the Knight queſtionleſſe had perriſhed. And albeit the Sauage had receiued ſome ſmall hurts, yet expreſſing himſelfe careleſſe of them, hee layde about him with ſuch rage and madnes, as hee would not permit the Knight the very leaſt breathing while.
               This fell out very offenſiue to Leonato, and therefore, to end life, or winne victory at an inſtant, he got neere the Sauage, and giuing a full blow at his face, wounded him ſo déepely in the fore-head, that beeing no longer able to ſée the light, becauſe the blood iſſued forth ſo aboundantlie into both his eyes, he ranne about groaping for his way to flie. The Knight of the Sword lifting vp his weapon, with intent to kill him, heard ſuddainly a voyce call to him from farre off, and to his iudgement it ſeemed to be a womans ſpéech, ſaying: Oh holde thy hand faire Knight, for it is againſt thy dutie to kill.
               Heereupon he ſtept back, imagining this Sauage might be ſome friend of ye Emperor of Constantinoples Court, ſo enchaunted, and looking a while about, there came to him a Damoſell with a very ſorrowfull countenaunce, but otherwiſe

beautifull and gracious, who beganne to him in this manner. Vnderſtand thou honourable and moſt famous warriour, that this Monſter was the ſonne of the Giant Seluaggio, and the comlieſt youth that euer was ſeene among Giants, it was then my fortune (being Neece to the wiſe Fileſmena) to become ſo earneſtly enamoured of him, as, finding no other helpe for my cureleſſe malady, I was cōſtrained to mooue loues ſute vnto him: but he, who made regard of any other ſaue me, caſt mee off with ſuch ſcornefull and opprobrious diſdaines, as, not contented alone in ſuch baſe ſort to repulſe mee, gaue out in euery eare howe much I had importunde him.
               Nowe I doubt not (faire Knight) but thou very well knoweſt, that the loue is very vrgent which makes a woman become a ſuppliant to a man, which vnhappy condition falling to my lot, and I noting his daily frequented luxuries, reproouing him for them with all modeſt demeanor, yet all this returning no benefite to mee: neuer Serpent ſweld with more venim in his bowels, then will a woman ſo extraordinarily iniuried. Wherefore, without any thought of after repentance, I wrought in ſuch manner by mine arte (which is with mee in higheſt perfection) as by one of my Damoſels, I made him to be brought into this Forreſt, where trayning him into a circkle, I neuer ceaſed by my Carracters and iuyce of fatall hearbes, (the heauenly influence béeing likewiſe very liberall in aſſiſting) that from the ſhape of man I brought him into this forme, but left him ſo much vnderſtanding withall, as hourely to remember how much he had wronged me.
               But for my ſelfe, ſo extreamely was I bent in diſdaine againſt him, as rather then I woulde conſent to let him haue his former ſhape againe, I could haue caſt my ſelfe headlong into the Sea: yet loues paſſion at length appeaſed this choller, and I became ſo ſad to ſee him in this ougly forme, as no reſt could take hold of me, eſpecially, when by his pittifull geſtures, I noted howe truly penitent he was become.
               
                  Whereuppon, not to throw by all hope of enioying his ſhape again, by arte I framed a great vault or Caue, whoſe depth doth ſtretch vnder the bottome of the Sea, and therein I encloſed foure Giants, in ſuch ſort, as no mans power can hinder them from turning a wheele, which continually there they muſt keepe going, till ſuch a one chaunce to happen thether, whoſe good fortune ſhall manifeſt apparantly vnto him, in what thing conſiſteth the force of the enchauntment, and ſuch a one eaſily ſhall conclude it, but all others elſe remaine there dead. If nowe thy courage ſerue thée to vndertake ſuch a danger, I will be thy guyde thether, for no meanes elſe is left, or can be found, whereby this wretched man ſhall euer recouer his former ſhape againe.
               The Knight of the Sword, who made no reckoning of any perrill, offered himſelfe very readily, and riding on the way, before they had paſt halfe a league in the wood, they heard a noyſe of ſwords clattring vpon Armour, and drawing ſomewhat neerer, they ſaw two Knights fighting very fiercely together, but neither as yet wounded, becauſe each ſtoode vpon his beſt defence, onely to attempt the aduenture of the Vaulte, the fame whereof was greatly noyſed through that country. The Lady entreated the Knight to ſtep betwéene them, for they were of the Court of Constantinople: whereon Leonato thruſting in betwéene them, ſaid. My Lords, I dare be ſo bolde as to ſtay your combate, becauſe ye are my déere and beſt eſtéemed friends.
               The Knights, who had not their proper deuiſes on theyr Shields, which partly was the cauſe of their quarrell, immediatly knew noble Palmerins Sonne: and each raiſing his Beuer, became better acquainted, the one beeing Caro the Prince of Fraunce, the other Eſtrellant, the Prince of Durace, all right ioyfull of méeting in that place, declaring the reaſon why they combatted together, which was for ſupremacie in attempting the aduenture of the vault, which when the Lady heard, ſhe ſaid. Knights, it auailes not who is firſt or ſecond in triall of the caſe, for fortune with valour

is more neceſſarily required: therefore let vs all ride on together, for my minde perſwades mee that one of you will prooue famous by this aduenture.
               This made the Knights much more deſirous of attayning their iourneyes end, and ryding on a pace, they ſuddenly heard a Knight call to them, who with like enflamed zeale of this great enterpriſe, made haſt to be there as ſoone as they: but by reaſon his Beuer was not cloſed, they had the ſooner knowledge of him, to be Don Roſuell, the father of Eſtrellant, who though hee was well ſtept into yeeres, could not content himſelfe with the déedes he had done, but béeing in good eſtate of health, and hearing in Constantinople the fame of an aduenture called the Vault, would needes goe thether to prooue his vallour.
               The gladnes of this encounter was great on all ſides, eſpecially in Eſtrellant, who very dutiouſly expreſſed his loue to his Father, the rather, becauſe it had before paſt in cōmon opinion, yt he would neuer be able to beare armes any more. So riding on & diſcourſing kindly together, they came at laſt within hearing the noyſe of the whéele, which was of ſuch a dreadfull nature, as it was able to affright a very bold reſolue: yet failed it of yt power in theſe Knights, who when they receiued their order of Knight-hood, made a full oppoſition of their liues to all perrils whatſoeuer, eſpecially, where honour was to be expected.
               Drawing néerer and neerer vnto the Vault, on the right hand ſide they heard the footing of a horſe, and ſtaying a while to ſée who it was, they beheld a Giant, whoſe Armor reſembled an Aſhe-couller, & the deuiſe of his Shield was a whéele broken in péeces, becauſe hee came with a reſolued intent to breake the enchaunted whéele: but when hée beheld the Knights, hee cryed out aloude to them: Let no man to venture a foote before mée, for I am the man that muſt and will breake the Whéele.
               As ſome of them prepared to aunſwer him, Don Roſuell who alwaies vſed to beare him company, during the time of both their weake eſtates, knewe him preſently by his

voice, and ſaide: My Lord Almaroll, neuer menace them that are your true intire friends. So lifting vp his Helmet, Almaroll came & embraced him, and did the like to all the other Knights, then rode they on toward the vault togeather. And béeing come thether, Eſtrellant entreated his Father, that he would permit him to be the firſt, and without any tarrying to attend his aunſwere, through his ouer forwardnes in deſire to finiſh the aduenture, before hee came neere it by a ſtones caſt, one of the Giants that turned the whéele, was come forth of the Vault, armed in bright ſhining yron, bearing a white Sickle in a blacke Shield, for his deuiſe, and hauing neither Mace nor Sword, but a very long rope made all of ſinnewes.
               The Knight meruailing at this kinde of fight, gaue his horſe the ſpurres, and ſmote the Giant with his Launce in ſuch ſort vpon the head, as made him ſtagger ſomewhat amazedly: but in his paſſage by, the Giant caſting his corde abroade, by a ſleight bound it ſo faſt about him, as lifting him lightly from beſide his horſe, in his armes thus carried him into the Vault.
               
                  Don Roſuell, ſéeing his Sonne thus made a priſoner, would needes be the next in triall of his fortune, and another Giant in like Armour came forth againſt him, but the couller of his Shield was yellow, and a mountaine turned topſie turuie as his deuiſe, becauſe hee vaunted of ouerturning mountaines. This fierce fellowe held a great hooke in his hand, with foure poynts (Drag-wiſe) bending toward the ſtaffe, and hauing béene ſoundly ſaluted by Don Roſuells Launce, that neere hand he was ready to be ouerthrowne, the Giant ſtrooke at him with his hooke, & catching faſt hold vnder one of his ſhoulder plates, drew him beſide his horſe euen in the full carrire, and béeing quicklie ſnatcht vp by the Giant, in like ſort was carried into the Vault.
               Theſe accidents were highly diſpleaſing to the reſt, but becauſe a Giant of farre greater ſtature was iſſued foorth, (clad in blacke Armour, a Serpents head in his Shield, of

ruſtie yron couller, & figured in a bloodie field, alſo a mightie huge Holbard in his hand) Almaroll went againſt him with his ſword drawne, becauſe hee had no Launce at all. Betwéene them continued a fierce fight for halfe an houres ſpace, but with ſome diſaduantage to Almaroll, who, by reaſon of his youth, could not withſtand the others immeaſurable ſtrokes: and therefore when they came to cloſing, Almaroll felt himſelfe rapt vp in the Giants ſtrong armes, and (whether he would or no) carryed priſoner to the vault. The ſelfe ſame miſhap befell to Caro, albeit he carried him ſelfe very valiantly.
               The Lady, ſtanding aſide with her Sauage Monſter, to behold theſe battailes, wondred that theſe Knights could hold out againſt the Giants the very leaſt moment, for ouer and beſide the enchauntment, whence they receiued an extraordinarie power, ſhe had choſen them amongſt the very fierceſt that could be found in India, & ſéeing Leonato nowe left there alone, ſhée went vnto him with theſe ſpéeches. As for you, Sir Knight, this day I would not haue you to vndertake thys enterpriſe, not for any doubt I make of your abilitie, but becauſe to morrow morning, two full yeeres will be finiſhed ſince I made this enchauntment: and it wil better agrée both with the time and purpoſe: for incantations are oftentimes ſooner ouer-come by happineſſe in fortune, then outward ſtrength, or humaine poſſibilitie.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXXI. Howe the Knight of the Sword vndertooke the aduenture of the Vault.
               
                  THe Lady of the Sauage Monſter, hauing by good reaſons perſwaded the Knight of ye Sword to deferre his attempt vntill the day following, and then to vndertake the perrill of the vault: conducted him to a Pallace of hers neere adioyning, where hée was both greatly honoured and curiouſly ſerued. At his entrance into this Pallace, he tooke off his Helmet, and his daintie curld locks ſo ſwéetly adorned his amiable countenaunce, that the Lady waxed wearie of her Monſters preſence, and fearing he was ouer young to hazard the aduenture, as alſo to endure againſt the Giants, began in méere compaſſion to be enamoured of him, willing withall, to hinder him from the danger ſhe feared.
               When night was come, ſhée imagining with herſelfe that ſo young and ſweete blood would eaſily be heated, and not deſpiſe the loue of a beautifull Lady, ſuch as ſhée tooke herſelfe to be, and indeed might iuſtly ſo reckon of herſelfe: when ſhee ſaw all ſafe, and euery one in the dead of ſleepe, ſhe went to his Chamber, where waking him with a mild and gentle touch, ſhée thus began. Meruaile not thou faire young blood of chiualrie, that I (made a priſoner to thy perfections) thus willingly come as yéelded to thy power: for thy conquering features haue the ſoueraigne priuiledge, to enforce any Nimph or Goddeſſe immortall, yea, though they had abiured loues mighty controulment, to be enamoured on a man ſo extraordinarie in merrite. Take pitty

therefore on a diſtreſſed Maiden, who not able to reſiſt ſo vehement a fire, as thy bright eyes burne vp and conſume my ſoule withall, is come thus alone to offer thee her loue.
               As the Knight of the Sword would haue made her aunſwere, the Sauage Monſter that loued the Lady, perceiuing when ſhe left her chamber, ſoftly followed, and euen as the Lady awaked Leonato, and ſate downe by him holding him faſt by the hand, ſuddainly he leapt vpon the bedde, ano there had meanes good enough to haue ſlaine him, but that Leonato preſently ſtarted out of the bed, and drawing foorth his ſword, the Sauage kept off with great feare and terrour, as hauing before felt it deerely to his coſt, running backe, and falling downe for ſafetie at his Ladies féete, whereon ſhee entreated the Knight, that hee would not be diſpleaſed at the Monſters furie, but in his knightly pittie to forgiue and forget it.
               At her entreaties, the Knight of the Sword ſtept backe from hurting the Sauage, becauſe alſo vpon his life depended the finiſhing of the Vaults aduenture, which made him the ſooner to ſhewe himſelfe pacified: and to frée himſelfe from the Ladies importunitie, hee roſe and got on his Armour, which done, he departed forth of the Pallace, laying him downe on a moſſy bancke vnder a trée, where he ſlumbred away the time vntill the mornings riſe, charged with many thoughts and ſuſpitious doubts, that the Lady would performe as much as in her lay, to hinder him from finiſhing the aduenture, becauſe he had made ſuch light regard of her loue: yet referring all to God, and his owne good fortune, hee determined there to abide and to try the vttermoſt.
               The morning no ſooner put on her bright maieſtie, but a ſtranger noyſe was heard then euer before had béene, and the reaſon was, becauſe that day the enchauntment ſhould be ended: alſo the Giants ſawe by manifeſt ſignes, that their liues was to end with the enchauntment, and therefore they turned the wheele with ſuch fury, as the horrible

terror thereof, might be heard more then a hundred miles of. The Knight not a iote diſmaied for all this garboyle, laced on his Helmet, and went ſomewhat neerer to ye vaults mouth, where neuer was heard ſuch a terrible noyſe: and thence he ſaw to iſſue forth the fourth Giant, armed all in great broade plates of Maile, which in diuers parts ſhotte out ſharpe piercing poynts of ſteele, but hee had neyther Sword, Shield, nor Launce.
               
                  Leonato ſeeing him no better prouided for his owne defence, was the more cheerefully comforted, but the Giant ſtauking toward him with mightie large ſtepps, and catching faſt hold on him betweene his armes, wrung him ſo hard together, that hee could compaſſe no meanes of hurting him with his ſword: and the ſharpe pointed ſteeles vppon his coate of Maile, bruſed and rent the Knights Armour in many places, whereby he receiued certaine ſmall wounds.
               Very much ſtroue the Knight to get out of his hold, but béeing euery way diſappointed, he beganne to haue reſpect to himſelfe, leaſt the Giant ſhould get off his Helmet, and giuing him wounds about the head, be ſo vtterly diſappointed of ending the aduenture: wherefore, making meanes to get out his dagger, he perceiued that the Giant was moſt affrayd of his face, and defended it with all the cunning he could deuiſe.
               In this ſtrange kinde of fight, the Knight was ſo dangerouſly afflicted by the pointed ſteeles, that very faintlie he was ready to fall downe, but that the Giant (feareful of the many offers he made with the dagger at his face) forgot himſelfe, and opening his armes, Leonato leapt from him, kéeping then the Giant off the length of his Sword: but all this auailed not, for as hee made a full thruſt at his face, thinking aſſuredly that way to conclude this troubleſome fight, he was ſuddainly caught faſt in ye Giants armes againe, and farre worſe oppreſſed then he had béene before. In this miſerable ſtate he knew not what to doe, but began to bethinke himſelfe, that in ſome eſpeciall matter conſiſted

the onely ſtrength of the enchauntment, which hee imagined to be the Giants face, becauſe he was feareful of no other part but that: wherefore watching a happy aduauntage to get vp his Sword, with the poynt he gaue him a ſuddaine ſtab in the mouth, which made the Giant immediatly to let him goe, but there-with he got hold of Leonatos Sword, and writhde it with ſuch a violent power, as at laſt he wrung it quite out of his hand.
               Now was the Knight in extreame and pittifull diſtreſſe, not knowing what defence hee ſhould vſe for himſelfe, nor how to keepe out of the Giants armes, whereinto if he got againe, béeing depriued of the helpe that beſt would ſtedde him, vpon the ſharpe ſteeles hee ſhould be cruſht to death. But as good fortune fell out, this prooued the very laſt refuge the Giant had, for béeing thus wounded in the mouth, he was able to holde out no longer in the tryall, but ranne from him with all the haſt he could vſe into the Vault, the Knight following after him, hard at the heeles. Downe they deſcended a very long paire of ſtayres, without ſeeing each other till they came in ſight of the wheele, which ſuddainly gaue thrée turnes with ſuch noyſe & terror, as brake the earth aboue it, and ſo the light of the Sunne might preſently be diſcerned, whoſe beames no ſooner ſhone vppon the whéele, but forthwith it ſtood ſtill.
               But the Giants (who were not as yet voyde of their magicall helpe, though diſburdened of their labour at the wheele) calling this laſt Giant to them, (who in his flight had let fall Leonatos Sword,) prepared altogether againſt him, the formoſt beeing he that had the Holbard, to whom Leonato gaue ſuch a ſtroke, as hee let fall the Holbard out of his hand, and the ſtrife betwéene them had quickly béene concluded, but that the Giant with the hooke caught him faſt by the Helmet, and the other with his cord got him faſt by one leg, and ſo together they lifted him vppon ye whéele, which then beganne to goe againe, where betweene them and the violent turnes of the wheele hee had periſhed, but that hee ſhewed the admirable fortitude & courage of one of

noble Palmerins of-ſpring: and nowe it ſtoode him highly vpon to declare no leſſe, becauſe his life was in ſuch exceeding hazard, wherefore, with all the ſtrength hee had, hee flung from them, and ſtoode vpright on his feete vppon the wheele, and ſetting one of his handes firmely againſt the wall, ſtayde it ſo ſtrictly, that the Giants with all theyr might could neuer more mooue it.
               The Giants doubting theyr deaths to be at hand, could gladly haue wiſhed themſelues further off from that place: notwithſtanding, he with the corde ſtill held his hold, and ſo did the other with the hooke in his Helmet: but the Knight with a reuerſſe blow cut the corde in twaine, which made that Giant forſake his hold on the whéele, and the other with the hooke he did ſo belabour, driuing him to many hard and narrowe ſhyfts, that béeing paſt hope of anie longer continuance, when hee ſawe the ſtaffe of his hooke cut in ſunder, he ſtrone yet to outbraue the Knight if hee could, and ſhewed all the vttermoſt he was able to deuiſe: whereto the Knight had likewiſe a very ſpeciall care, and marking all the fetches and ſlights of the Giant, that hee had now got the mangled hooke into his left hand, yet alwaies made his proffers with the right, thought ſurely to giue him ſuch a maime as ſhould cleerely acquite him. But heerein he found himſelfe very much deceiued, for the Giant watching his aduantages at euery turne, at laſt preuailed ſo much in his policie, as he caught hold of him againe by one of the branching fangs, and ſo would haue pu
                     ••
                   him from off the whéele againe, but by maine ſtrength he got looſe from his hooke, and nimbly turning him, at one ſtroke with his Sword ſmote off his left hand.
               At this very inſtant, came in the Lady with her Sauage Monſter, who be holding what had happened, thus ſpake vnto him. Right woorthy Knight, well maiſt thou vaunt of ending the rareſt aduenture that euer was, if now in the very laſt attempt thou prooue as fortunate: for thou muſt cut the beame whereby the wheele turnes, and fight with ſuch as ſhall hinder thée from it, hauing ſtill an eſpeciall

care to the Giants, for they will withſtand thée ſo much as in them lyes.
               The Knight of the Sword, to whom no aduenture ſeemed beyond poſſibilitie, boldly ſtrooke at it to cut it with his weapon, labouring himſelfe excéedingly till he was almoſt out of breath, and yet all his blowes prooued not to any purpoſe: whereat the Lady laughed hartily, knowing well no Sword was able to enter it, which the Knight perceiuing, and reſting himſelfe a while, eſpied at laſt the Giants Holbard lying vpon the ground, and geſſing it ſerued to ſome purpoſe about the enchauntment, ſuddainly catching it vp in his hands, there-with he preſently cut it in two parts, and forth of it came a new ſtrange kind of Monſter, reſembling a great Eagle crowned, with tallents long and ſtraite, but meruailous piercing, hauing leggs ſo large and long, as her very breaſt reached as high as his helmet, her beake extended the length of ones arme, but faſhioned like a Smithes paire of ſheeres, and her wings appeared like two ſpred ſailes, hauing arrowes in them in ſted of quills, which ſhe vſed to dart frō her as ſhe flapt her wings. This Monſtrous Fowle, at the very firſt ſeazed vppon his arme with her beake, and bit him in ſuch piercing manner, as he verily imagined ſhe would haue bit it quite off: whereon ſtriking angerly at her with his Sword, he cut away halfe of one of her wings, which forced her to let goe her hold on his arme.
               Nowe wexed the Eagle extreamely furious, and the blood did iſſue aboundantly from her, which made her let flie the arrowes from her other wing like haile, and gaue him wounds in diuers parts of his body, which though they were not deepe, yet they much pained him: beſides, ſhe did greatly annoy him with her tallents, for ſhe had torne one ſide of his Cuiraſſe, which made him refraine from hazarding himſelfe ouer deſperately, leaſt ſhe ſhould get off the reſt of his Armour: notwithſtanding, as ſhe ſtoode thus tyring vpon him, with a winding ſtroke about his head, hée cut off one of her leggs, when ſhee leaping from him, and

lighting on the legge, ſeemed to féele the torments of enſuing death, yet would ſhe not giue him ouer ſo, but hopping from place to place, bit him ſometimes by the leggs, otherwhiles by the armes, albeit the Knight had ſore hurt her in many parts of the body.
               At laſt he got hold of her faſt by the necke, & with méere ſtrength had neere hand ſtifled her, but that by biting his hand ſhe got away from him, when beeing thus releaſt ſhée mounted on the whéele, where ſprinckling both it and the Giants with her bloode, by meanes thereof the whéele began to turne round againe a little, and the Giants recouered part of their former vigour, according to the nature of the enchauntment, and ſo at one inſtant they all began a freſh to oppoſe themſelues againſt him, though but ſlenderly prouided for their owne defence.
               The ſpeede of the Knight in his paſſed actions, made him imagine the aduenture to be almoſt ended, and being withall very much wearied, he grew the more deſirous of a little eaſe and reſt, which perceiuing he could not as yet wel compaſſe, but that the whéele was ſet on going againe, and the foure Giants prepared a new to aſſaile him, which admitted no place of quiet for him, he caſt by his Sword, and taking vp the Holbard againe, began to lay about him in ſuch furious manner, that the Giants, who were no longer ſecured by power of the enchauntment, had many gréeuous wounds giuen them, ſo that hee which before had loſt his hand, fell downe dead at his foote.
               Now ſtoode the whéele ſtill for euer moouing more, and Leonato feeling his ſtrength increaſed with very great courage, intended with the Holbard to kill the other Giants, leaſt by their former ſlights they ſhould take hold of him againe: but they (not a little wondring at his dexteritie and valour) feigning to ſet all thrée vpon him together, ſuddainly turned theyr backs and ranne out of the Vaulte, which hee perceiuing, & béeing more deſirous to perfect the labour, then to follow after them, went and ſate downe on a ſtone to reſt himſelfe a while, when preſently hee heard

the whéele broken in péeces, but could not diſcerne by whō it was doone. So béeing of good hope, that now hee had not to deale with any other, ſéeing the wheele was thus broken in péeces, the Ladies Sauage Monſter (who coulde not recouer the ſhape of man againe, vntill a bone was taken out of his head, which in her former furie ſhee had therein incloſed, when ſhee intended to let him liue and die in that monſtrous deformitie) getting néere to the Holbard which Leonato had layd by the ſtone whereon he ſate, tooke it vp, and gaue him ſuch blowes there-with, as ſhewed he had forgot how the other had conquered him.
               
                  Leonato, who for any treaſure deſired not to bee his death, gently bare off his ſtroakes, till féeling his arme much pained by the Holbards waightines, he lifted vp his Sword againſt the Monſters head, with intent to kill him, for indeed he ſuppoſed he had too long forborne him: and entring into like conſideration (as like Champions in ſuch caſes cōmonly vſe to doo) in what part of him the enchauntments force conſiſted, ſaw the Monſter defend no place about him but his head onely, wherefore he laboured to be his death there, & giuing him a glenting blow on the head with his Sword, out fell ye enchaunted bone on the ground. And then was a wonderfull ſight to be ſéene, howe the Sauage writhing his head about him, beganne to receiue his former manly ſhape: the head and face firſt, next all the other members in their ſeuerall dimenſions, and that with ſuch ſuddaine ſwiftnes and ſpéede, as it was impoſſible for ſence to comprehend, how he became thus deſpoiled of his monſtrous forme.
               Then founde they themſelues all thrée deliuered out of the Vault, the Lady expreſſing her ſelfe highly contented, that her loue had recouered the ſhape of man againe, then by a mighty winde was the whéele brought thether, which as he ſtoode ſtudying how to conuay it to Constantinople, hée eſpyed the thrée Giants ſtanding by a Trée, ſo ſore bruſed with the blowes and wounds they had receiued, that they were hardly able to ſtirre themſelues, and fearing he was

now come to kill them out-right, they cryed out to him, ſaying: For Gods ſake Sir Knight haue cōpaſſion on vs, and we will deliuer all your friends and companions ſafe and aliue.
               When Leonato ſaw them in ſubiection vnder checke of his Sword, hee aunſwered: I will firſt haue all my priſoned freends reſtored me, and next you ſhall promiſe mee, to beare this whéele hence to Constantinople. This iniunction ſeemed very hard vnto them, but ſeeing in what deſperate ſtate they ſtoode, eyther to die preſently by the Knights Sword, or of the hurts they had in fight without ſpéedie cure, they made promiſe to fulfill what hee had enioyned them.
               So all of them going to the Pallace together, they were there with very great diligence cured, ſo were the Giants likewiſe, by a Squire of their owne, that was the ſonne to Ariſdeno, ſometime the Emperour Primaleons Dwarffe. In eyght dayes ſpace they were all well recouered, which made them very iocond and merry: for then they began to talke of nothing elſe, but the aduenture in the Ile of Carderia, the fame whereof was noyſed farre and neere, and that many woorthy Knights of the Grecian Court, were there likewiſe detayned as priſoners: ſo they tooke order for carriage of the Whéele thence to Constantinople, but there hapned a hinderance, by an accident which ſhall be héereafter declared.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXXII. How Tarnaes comming to try his fortune in the aduenture of the VVheele, combatted with Leonato, and how by Orino they were friendly pacified.
               
                  NO ſooner were the Giants cured of their hurts, but they ſet forward with the Wheele, beeing bound to beare it thence to Constantinople, when inſtantly there arriued Tarnaes of Lacedemonia, who came thether in hope to end the aduenture of the Whéele, but when hee ſaw it in ſuch readines to be caried away, he grew meruailouſly offended at the loſſe of ſuch an honour, and wexing ſome-what arrogant in oppinion of himſelfe, he called out aloude to them in this manner. Whoſoeuer hee be among you, that hath accompliſhed an aduenture of ſo high eſteeme, let him prepare to fight with me: for I ſhall gaine greater glory by the conqueſt of him, then if I had in perſon concluded the enchauntment.
               The Knight of the Sword, who knew him very well to be Tarnaes by his faire armes and deuiſe in his Shield, returned aunſwere, that the Knight which had finiſhed the aduenture, would quickly be with him: ſo returning to the Pallace, he put on his Armour, and commaunding two Launces to be brought foorth, ſent one of them to his aduerſarie, and kept the other for himſelfe. Then without vſing any words at all, becauſe he would not be knowne by his voyce, (which at firſt hee ſo diſſembled as no one could deſcry him:) they met together in the carriere with ſuch violence, as either looſing their ſtirrops, were glad to catch holde about their horſes neckes, and the beaſts meeting

breaſt to breaſt, tumbled ouer backward with their Maiſters beſide them, when both of them enraged to be thus diſgraced, lightly leaping on their féete drew foorth theyr Swords, vowing inwardly no peace, till each man was reuenged.
               The blowes fell as thicke as Sommers haile, but by reaſon of eythers nimblenes & good defence, they had not as yet receiued any hurt. Tarnaes was more gouerned by furie then diſcréete regard, but Leonato, who in all points reſembled his Fathers kinde of combatting, went to work more aduiſedly, which kept his Armour ſtill more ſounde and whole, and made him holde out the freſher and luſtier. Neuertheleſſe, his enemy at laſt gaue him a ſhrewd wound vpon the arme, by reaſon the buckle leathers of his Shield were broken, and ſo he was faine to let it hang before him: but feeling himſelfe hurt, he caſt a thruſt at his aduerſaries Beuer, which breaking a little open, he gaue him a wound full in the forehead.
               Now began the battaile to be much fiercer then before, that the Knights ſtanding by to behold it, thought it the moſt cruelſt fight that euer they had ſéene, making certaine account, that both of them would perriſh ere they gaue ouer: yet durſt they not offer to ſtep betwéene them, becauſe they knewe how offenſiuely eyther would take it. At one inſtant were two ſhrewd hurts receiued, Tarnaes had his in his left ſide, and the Knight of the Swords was on his head, when the fight continuing in this deſperate eſtate, at laſt was ſéene a far off a Knight come gallopping, in gréene Armour, figured full of golden flowers, and a mans head in his Shield with faire ſpreading locks, ſignifying a victorie he had, againſt a Sauage ſhagge-haired man. Beeing nowe come neere them, hee vnderſtood by the other what theſe Knights were, who likewiſe knew him to be Orino: whereuppon hee would néedes aduenture to part them, as loth to ſee ye death of two ſo worthy men, whoſe loſſe would be great to the Empire of Constantinople, ſo ſtepping in betwéene them, he ſaid.
               
                  My noble Lordes, Leonato and Tarnaes, endanger not by your deathes the famous Grecian Empire. Tarnaes, who imagined all this while hee had fought with the Knight of Fortune, to whom he bare a certaine hatred in emulation of honour, when he heard it was Leonato, whom hee euer déerely loued, deſired pardon for his ſo raſh prouoking him to the combate, and ſo letting fall all iniuries on either ſide committed, they went to the Ladies Pallace to be cured of their wounds: where ſhe vſed ſuch carefull diligence vnto them (for her Giants ſake fréed from enchauntment, and now deerely affecting her) as in very ſhort while they were perfecty recouered.
               
                  Tarnaes ſtayed there foure daies with the Knights, ſpending the time in diſcourſe of diuers aduentures, till he ſaw himſelfe paſt all perrill of death, and afterward (although not thorowly well) they would ſette forward to the Ile of Carderia, where they vnderſtood ſo many Knights to be impriſoned, and there make proofe of their fortunes in that perillous aduenture. So leaue we them on their iourney, becauſe it is very neceſſary, to remember in this place, the Chriſtian Armie that went to Tubante, with Platir, Dragonalte, and Oliuanto, who tooke in no meane caſe of diſpleaſure, that Almaroll their friend was ſo departed frō them, contrary to the order giuen them by the Emperour: but knowing not howe to helpe it, they went on quietly with the Armie, and were aboue an hundred leagues and more from Constantinople, without encountring any thing to be their hinderance: ſo the Knight that had parted Leonato and Tarnaes, immediatly left them, departing whether his owne occaſions guided him.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXXIII. Howe the Armie of the Chriſtians met with Tamerco and his power, where hee was taken, and his men ioyned with the Chriſtian forces.
               
                  
                     TAmerco, after yt 
                  Polinarda was taken from him by the Knight of the Sun, remained in no meane greefe for the loſſe of ſuch a beautie, but yet aſhamed withall, becauſe his ſiſter Auriana was left in the Chriſtians handes, whom nowe he practiſed howe to get againe by ſubtiltie, ſince all his ſtrength would prooue to no purpoſe, and thereupon made ready twenty ſayle of Shippes, with men ſufficient for the burden, hauing likewiſe two of his Brethren in his company, men of great vallour and approoued hardiment, the one named Torneo, the other Sacro, and thus hee woulde Pirate like proule on the Seas, watching occaſion to take ſome Knight of eſteeme of the Grecian Court, for whoſe exchange hee might recouer his Siſter.
               This Armie was deſcried a farre off by the Chriſtian Fléete, and becauſe they ſailed ſcatteringly abroade, they ſeemed to be farre more then they were. Platir gaue order that his Nauie ſhould draw together in a narrowe ſtraite, where hardly two Shyps ſhould front each other, appointing the choyceſt of his Souldiers to be formoſt, onelie for preſeruation of his men: for any Captaine that is deſirous to paſſe through enterpriſes of perrill, will vſe all his beſt meanes for ſafetie of his men, becauſe they are to ſticke to it in the heate of the triall.
               The enemies Armie came with full ſaile againſt the Chriſtians, and ſéeing into what a narrow courſe they had

drawne themſelues, that they could by no meanes get into the midſt among them, beganne to take aduantage as beſt they might: Tamerco and Torneo faſtning on two Chriſtian Shyps, in one of which was Platir and Oliuanto with two hundred of the beſt tryed Souldiers in all the Band, in the other Dragonalte & olde Almaroll, with ſo many more, and ſeeing themſelues at handy gripes with ſuch a puiſſant ſtrength, ſtoode vpon their defence with no meane reſolution: yet got the Pagans into the Chriſtian Shipps, and all the valour in the other not able to withſtand thē, where Tamerco fighting with Platir, expreſſed rather a dallying of the time, then any rough haſt to ouercome him, the like did Torneo with Dragonalte, for the Pagans béeing thirty thouſand in number, made full aſſurance of vanquiſhing the Chriſtians.
               
                  Oliuanto made admirable proofe of his vallour, ſlycing men downe right thorow the midſt, which with ſuch terror amated the Heathen, that falling on euery ſide ſlaine about him, the reſt ſtroue who ſhould ſtill kéepe himſelfe the hindmoſt. Old Almaroll béeing in one of the other Shyps, and ſeeing the Pagans there to preuaile extraordinarilie, gathered together the better of the men that were in the other Shipps, and came to aſſiſt where the heate of the battaile was.
               
                  Torneo, who could not temporize ſo well with Dragonalte, as Tamerco did with his aduerſarie, beganne to ſet him ſo hard, that Dragonalte loth to perriſh cowardly, began to aunſwere him againe in warres rough language, which ſpeaking ye reſolued courage of eithers hart by theyr keene edged weapons, at laſt Torneo was ſore wounded in the head, whereon he would haue drawne back, but Sacro ſeconded him, and made ſo ſternely at the King of Nauarre, as he had enough to doo to defend himſelfe. Yet nothing daunted with diſmay (though he ſawe theyr Shipps ſo ouer-burdened with Pagans, as in very deede they ſeemed likelier to ſincke then otherwiſe) hee ſo aſtonied Sacro with a violent ſtroke, that ſéeing him fall as hee had beene

dead, he catched at him by the Helmet, then by the armes, thinking to haue tumbled him into the Sea, but others oppoſin
                     •
                   themſelues to his reſk
                     •
                  e, hee threwe th
                     •
                  m into the Sea ſo faſt as they came: and no man durſt put forth himſelfe againſt the King, but preſently hee was ouerturned headlong into the Sea, ſo that a number to eſcape this perill, fell downe before they would come neere him, for ſafetie of their liues.
               This ſtrange kinde of ſucceſſe in fight ſtill vſed by the Knig, gaue no meane encouragement to the Chriſtians, when they ſaw him drowne ſo many, and ſo expeditiouſ
                     •
                  ie withall, and terrified the Pagans in ſuch ſort, that they ſeuerally cried out: I thinke this deuill heere wil drowne vs all. Oliuanto beholding this ſtratageme vſed by Dragonalte, followed his example in the ſame kinde, which prooued the onely meanes of diſcomfort to the Heathen, for Sacro and Tamerco béeing left alone on the Chriſtian Shyp, ſaw thēſelues in deſperate eſtate, yet had Tamerco wounded Platir vpon the eye-brow, which Oliuanto perceiuing, and that his vnekles ſight was much hindered by effuſion of his blood, he ſtept in before him, where he brought Tamerco into ſo weake caſe, by reaſon of wearines and much expence of blood, that he fell downe at his feete, and Platir offered to ſmite off his head, but Oliuanto would not permit it, for feare of offending his beloued Auriana, whoſe excellent perfections euen then ſurprizing his thoughts, for her ſake, and becauſe ſhe had entiteled him her Knight, hée holpe vp Tamerco, and taking both his Sword and Helmet from him, committed him priſoner vnder ſafe cuſtodie.
               
                  Sacro, who was now come to cope againe with Dragonalte, when he ſaw his brother led away as priſoner, at one leape he caſt himſelfe out of the Ship, as willing rather to drowne himſelfe in the Sea, then to remaine a priſoner among the Chriſtians: but his good hap was to light into a Foyſte, where likewiſe was his brother Torneo, and ſeeing all hope fruſtrate of recouering their brother, determined

to prepare for their owne beſt ſafetie, and ſailed away with ſuch extraordinarie ſpéede, as it was impoſſible to ouertake them.
               Thus theſe two Brethren, though ſadde that Tamerco remained priſoner, hauing (to their coſt) made proofe of the Chriſtians vallour, thought this courſe beſt in ſuch an extreamitie, and ſo ſailed away towards India, leauing theyr Armie to the Chriſtians curteſie: and they on the contrary part, beholding their Leaders conquered and fled, without any great loſſe on their owne behalfe, cauſed it publiquelie to be proclaimed among the Pagans, that free libertie of departure was graunted to them all, but ſuch as would ſerue the Chriſtians, ſhould haue kinde entertainement, without any compulſion of denying theyr faith: Neuertheleſſe, if any one among them would become a Chriſtian, he ſhould haue no meane degrée among the Grecian Caualierie.
               The Pagans, who before were poſſeſſed with a generall feare, that they ſhould all be caſt ouer-boord and drowned, as they had ſeene Dragonalte and Oliuanto vſe manie of their companie, hearing ſo liberall and kinde an offer, with-drew to counſell, and electing a Coſin to Tamerco, (named Oltrando) as theyr Captaine, concluded to follow the Chriſtian forces, becauſe indeede they verilie doubted, that if they ſhould haue made choyce of departure, the conquerours (in whoſe power it conſiſted) woulde not haue graunted it.
               So Oltrando, with two hundred of the woorthieſt men amongſt them, came to the cheefe Shippe, where by our Knights they were embraced and welcommed as freends: and ſo much wrought this curteſie in the minde of the Indians, neuer vſed to ſée men ſo ſterne in time of warre, and yet ſo affable now in peace, as all of them deſired to be baptized, the like afterward did the reſt by their example. Thus vniting both the Armies together, they ſ
                     •
                  iled on toward Turkie, where leaue we them, and returne we nowe to the Knight of Fortune.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXXIIII. How the Knight of Fortune chaunced on a ſtrange aduenture, and what enſued to him thereon.
               
                  THe Knight of Fortune, who departed with Dorina, to ſeeke aduentures in the Ile of Fortune, ridde on with her diuers dayes together, vntil at laſt they came to an vncouth coaſt of the Sea, and there Dorina (as euer ſhee was wont to doe, when ſhée brought him where any aduenture was to be attempted) vaniſhed out of ſight, when the Knight looking on the water, to ſée what there was likelieſt to become of him, eſpyed a ſhip a farre off riding at Anker, but yet beheld no perſon in her. Whereupon he called thereto ſo loude as he could, to try if any would make him aunſwere, and hauing called thriſe without any reply, hee beheld two Lyons come vp on the fore-decke of the Ship, and two other on the poope behind, and deſcending into the boate that was faſtned to the Ship, looſed it, and ſet onward to him.
               His Squire began to quake and tremble, when he ſawe the Lyons draw ſo neere his Lord, wherefore he ſaid, Alas Sir, let vs not abide the cōming of theſe rauenous beaſtes, for doubtleſſe they wil teare vs in péeces. I will not boudge a foote, aunſwered the Knight of Fortune, but ſée the vtmoſt end of this aduenture, and conquer theſe Lyons, were they as many more: but I aduiſe thee to goe hide thy ſelfe in yonder wood, and doubt not but I ſhall returne to thee well enough: ſo lacing on his Helmet, he ſtoode looking on the boate, which ioyned cloſe to the ſhoare, and the Lyons without making any motion of aſſailing him, ſtoode verie ſtill and gently.
               
                  When the Knight noted this, hée imagined that the Lyons looked he ſhould enter the boate, and they would be his conduct to the Shippe, which made him preſently mount vpon his horſe, whom he could hardly gouerne through his feare of the Lyons: but hauing at laſt got him into ye boate, the Lyons made it returne backe againe, and brought it cloſe vnto the Shippes ſide, where they mounting vp firſt, made ſignes to the Knight that hee ſhoulde come vp after them. He that held himſelfe not meanely fauoured by Fortune, without any regard what perrill might befall him, mounted vp preſently, when the Lyons immediatly riſing vp on their hindmoſt feete, caught him vp in their clawes, as if they would haue deuoured him, & carried him ſo ſuddainly vnder the hatches, that hee had not the verie leaſt meanes offered how to defend himſelfe, and there leauing him, they returned vp to the decke againe.
               
                  Primaleon conſidering with himſelfe, that there might happen ſome matter well worth the noting, went on feeling for his way, thorow a darke paſſage, and came at laſt into a faire Cabbin or Chamber, the walls whereof was richly hung round about with cloth of golde, & all the roofe or vpper part, was of Crimoſin ſilke, very curiouſly embroydered with ſiluer Starres, and the Sunne and the Moone therein wrought ſo artificially, as they gaue a ſhyning ſplendour to all the Chamber.
               In one part of the roome ſtoode a goodly bed, hung round with purfled curtaines of gold and ſilke, wherto preſuming to aduaunce his ſteppes, and drawing one Curtaine ſomewhat aſide with his hand, he ſaw there lie ſleeping a Lady of ſuch wonderfull beautie, that albeit his loue was deuoted to Victoria, yet this faire face ſéemed ſo highly pleaſing to him, as if they both had ſtoode in perſon before him, hée could hardly determine where he ſhould place his election. Standing thus tranſported in his ſences for a long ſpace, he grew ſo deſirous to behold her bright eyes open, as touching lightly her ſnowie breaſts with one of his hands, hée made her to ſtart & awaken: but then her heauenly lookes

did ſo mightily preuaile with him, as hardly could hee abſtaine from that which honour forbad him, till remembring himſelfe, that thether he was brought about ſome aduenture of moment, which made him modeſtly refraine: and lending her his hand to helpe her riſe, thus he ſpake to her.
               Beautifull Lady, I wonder as much at your rare perfections, as the ſtrangeneſſe of my aduenturing hether: therefore, (ſo pleaſed you) I would gladly know of whence and what you are, and why among Lyons you haue made choyſe of dwelling thus on the Sea? The Lady ſeeming no way diſcontented with his demaund, replyed in this manner. Aduenturous Knight, whoſe vallour hath ledde thée to what others durſt neuer attempt, but when they haue ſeene the Lyons bring the boate to the ſhoare, would cowardlie flie away into the Woods: I account you the onely man, who dreadleſſe of any perrill whatſoeuer in the aduenture, are deſirous to vnderſtand the full nature thereof, wherefore, if Fortune be ſo gracious a Miſtreſſe vnto you, you ſhall finiſh the onely aduenture of regard, that euer anie Knight alone accompliſhed.
               Know then faire Knight, that I am the daughter to king Fryſoll, who ſometime gouerned the Morning Ilands, til age ſetting heauie foote vppon his backe, made him elect a ſeruaunt of his owne education, whom he had made Lord of the Flowrie Ile, and in whom hee repoſed ſpeciall truſt and confidence: to his care and cuſtodie was I and my brother committed, with ſuch allowance of ſubiects homage, and other dignities beſide, as might well ſuffiſe to haue made him very reſpectful of vs. All matters beeing ſo eſtabliſhed, that when death was controuler of the King our Father, my brother ſhould remaine vnder his protection, till ſuch time as by benefite of yéeres hee coulde lay claime to his kingdome, and then hee ſhould haue it honourably reſigned to him.
               
                  Garnides, (for ſo was ye Knight put in truſt called) promiſed much more then our dying father could vrge: ſo giuing

him the Ring and Staffe of Protectorſhip, the King (our Father) cloſed his eyes and died. Nowe was Garnides in full poſſeſſion of the gouernment, hauing at his commaund all the Forts, Caſtels, Treaſuries, and euery thing, there wanted nothing but the title royall, and thereto ambitiouſlie he began to aſpire. My Brother, being the maine ſ
                     •
                  umbling blocke in his way, within few dayes hee was bereft of life, and then in all the haſt he would call himſelfe king: but ſéeing things not ſuccéede yet to populare ſatiſ-faction, but that more eyes and tongues went on his procéedings then he willingly would haue: then woulde hee haue mee (ouer-young in yeeres as then) to be his Wife, to ſette a more ſubſtantiall ground on his tirannous vſurpation, yet happily (when time ſerued) to rid the world of me to.
               An Earle named Bernuccio, in whoſe Caſtle I was at that time kept by the vſurpers appointment, whē he heard that Garnides laboured to make himſelfe King, and knew himſelfe ouer-weake to vſe any reſiſtance, he béeing a meruailous expert Magitian, thought yt the beſt way to keepe me from the Tyrant: wherefore he brought me hether in this Shyppe, enchaunting héere likewiſe the foure Lyons which conducted you aboard, limitting his Arte to ſuch proportion, that none ſhould be ſo bold as to come to this ſhip, except his courage ſerued him to vndertake a great aduenture, vntill which be ended, I cannot be married, and Bernuccio, fearing leaſt Garnides (for this) would put him to death, enchaunted himſelfe in his Caſtell in a very ſtrange manner, and he muſt combate with variable ſhapes, that ſhall be his deliuerance.
               At this inſtant (Sir) there remaineth nothing elſe for you to doo, but to fight with thoſe two Lyons on the prowe of the Shyp: nor is there any neceſſity of their death, but onely to binde them faſt, which perhaps will appeare ſo toyleſome a taſke vnto you, as may make you repent the vnderſtanding of the enterpriſe. But that once doone, the other two Lyons will be obedient vnto you, and keepe yée company thorow a Wood which we are to paſſe, and they

will ſtand vs in very great ſted, kéeping vs from being deuoured of ſtrange wilde beaſts, whereof you ſhall ſee there ſuch aboundance, as els it were impoſſible to eſcape with life.
               The Knight of Fortune, ſtoode with great pleaſure to heare this ſtrange aduenture, and was on fire till he came to try his vallour in it, wherefore, ſéeing the Lady in that ſort to pauſe, he ſaid. Procure (ſwéete Lady) that we may be ſet an ſhoare againe, if I binde the Lyons: for I know not how my ſtrength ſhall preuaile beeing thus on the water. Doe (aunſwered the Lady) that which appertaineth to you, and leaue the reſt to my direction.
               Hée hearing this reply, went vpon the decke, and ere he was halfe mounted, the Lyons on the prow beganne to aſſaile him, one of them catching holde with his teeth on his armes, the other graſping his Helmet with his clawes, but Primaleon got one of them faſt by the legge, and puld him in ſuch ſort, as he made him tumble ouer backward, and to the other he gaue ſuch a blow with his left hand, as one of his eyes fell out of his head. Yet for all this, when hee would haue ſtept vppon the decke, where hee was to binde the Lyons, one of them caught him faſt by the thigh, and griped him ſo hard, as the Armour which he wore on that part for his defence, was rent in péeces, and the paine of the gripe entred to the very bone: but to auoyde further oppreſſion by theſe beaſts, he caught one of them by the ſhag-hairde maine, and the other by the taile, wherein appeared his admirable ſtrength, for lifting them both thus from the ground, he ſtept vp with them vppon the hatches, and there would haue throwne them into the Sea, till remembring himſelfe, that hee was but to binde them, and not to kill them, hee ſtoode there ſtill, holding them faſt in that manner, in deſpight of all the reſiſtance they could vſe, till the Lyon which had loſt his eye, fell downe vpon the deck, and if the Knight had béene prouided of any thing wherewith to haue bound him, the fight betwéene them, had then béene concluded, but while he looſed the corde that bounde

the boate to the Ship, the Lyon recouering himſelfe, made at him againe in farre fiercer manner then before, that hée was glad to ſnatch vp a club which lay on the ſterne of the ſhip, yet therwith he had care how he fought, leaſt he ſhould chaunce to kill them, lamming them both on the backe and ſides with ſuch blowes, as made them keep back from comming néere him, yet had they wounded him on the ſhoulder and on the breaſt, and torne his Armour very ſhrewdlie, which enforced him diuers times to ye greater furie againſt them, and many times he could haue caſt them into the ſea, but he onely deſirous to conquer with the leaſt harme, ſo handled the fight, as he got bound the beaſts feete that moſt annoyed him. All which while, the other bit and ſcratcht him in ſuch ſort, as the leathers of his Cuiraſſe was broken, and he receiued a hurt in the flanck, whereof he made no reckoning at all, but ſéeing he had but that one beaſt to binde, made at him with ſuch extraordinary courage, as the Lyon ſeeing he wanted his companion, became quite out of hart, and ſo he bound his legges with ſuch facilitie, as the Lady admired it very much, albeit at the beginning of the fight ſhe ſhed many teares, as fearing leaſt ſo good a Knight ſhould miſcarry. But now when ſhee ſaw both the Lyons faſt bound, ſhée grew thorowly confident, that there was no enterpriſe (howe dangerous ſoeuer) but by his vertue and vallour it would be accompliſhed: where-vppon ſhee ſaid.
               Truſt mée Sir Knight, you haue gone greatlie beyond mine expectation, becauſe I helde it as a matter moſt certaine, that it was poſſible for no one man alone to binde theſe two Lyons: but ſince you haue ſo wel therein preuailed, the other two wil be obedient to you. As ſhe ſpake theſe wordes, the other two Lyons came from the poope of the Ship, and falling downe at the féete of the Knight of Fortune, permitted him gentlie to binde them both likewiſe, which pleaſed him not a little to beholde: So returned hée with the Lady into her chamber, where with precious vnguents ſhe dreſſed his wounds.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXXV. How the Ship went to the ſhoare, and how the Knight of Fortune, accompanied with the Lady & the Lyons, departed thence to the aduenture of the Caſtell, and what chaunced vnto them by the way.
               
                  THe next day following, the Ladie béeing very deſirous to goe on ſhoare, and perhaps the rather for haſte of her marriage: made certaine Carracters, which the County Bernuccio in ſecrete had taught her, whereby the Shyp had power to ſtirre and mooue, when ſuddainly one of the Lions (creeping along to the ſterne) as if he had béene a ſkilfull Marriner, gouernd it very orderly, while another of them ſpred the ſaile, and in this ſort they ſailed onward, and came to the ſhoare, when one of the Lyons leaping foorth on land, held faſt in his mouth the Cable that was tied to the Ship: another of them ſhaking off his bands, tooke vp ye Lady lightly betwéen his pawes, and in that manner carried her eaſily on Land, then followed the Knight after, gladde that he had ſo well recouered the ſhoare againe, where taking his horſe out of the boate, he began to looke about him for his Squire, & at laſt eſpied him come forth of the Wood, running toward his Lord verie iocondly, the rather becauſe he ſaw the Lyons ſo obedient, whom now he had the leſſe reaſon to feare, in that hée beheld how gently they were ruled.
               Some little diſcourſe paſſed betwéene Primaleon & his Squire, of thoſe occaſions which had befalne him, then mounting on horſebacke, they rode on towards the Earles Caſtell, beeing called Traſino, and built in a place of verie

great ſtrength. There was another noble Countie, who neuer ſhewed any willing obedience to Garnides, but alwayes continued loyall to his deceaſſed Lord King Fryſoll, and was now become ſo poore, by the long and tedious war of the Tyrant againſt him, that oftentimes he determined to flie from thence, and implore aſſiſtance in the Court of Constantinople. But as he ſtoode one day looking foorth at a window of his Caſtell, he eſpied the Knight, the Lady, and the two Lyons comming thetherward, wherein hee knew conſiſted ſome great miſterie, eſpecially becauſe for twenty dayes ſpace together before that inſtant, a walking fire had likewiſe gone round about the Caſtell, which witneſſed ſome apparant ſigne of enſuing good ſucceſſe.
               Héere-uppon arming himſelfe, leaſt it might be ſome traine of the Kings to entrap him withall, hee purpoſed to ſée the effect of this meruaile, and going downe to the gate let fall the drawe bridge, whereon the Knight approching with his horſe, and geſſing him to be the Lord of the place, he curteouſly ſaluted, deſiring that hee might haue lodging in the Caſtell, becauſe hee was wounded, and ſome-what ſicklie. The Lord of the Caſtell ſeeing him ſo young, and the Lyons to walke ſo gently by him, ſawe no reaſon why he ſhould be afraid, but guided them into his Caſtell, where after ſome little conference together, & the Knight of Fortunes woundes viewed and bound vp, they ſate downe to meate there prepared for them.
               The Lord of the place, muſing in his minde what Ladie that ſhould be, carrying noate of high and honourable diſcent, marking her aduiſedly, eſpyed betwéene her locks of haire a little roſie cullord ſpot, wherwith ſhe was borne, and which was well knowne to all that inhabited the Ile, whereon he knew for certaine, that this was the daughter to his deceaſſed Knig, and Maiſter. The dinner béeing ended, and all the ſeruaunts commaunded thence, falling humbly on his knée before her, he thus began.
               Gracious Princeſſe Filena, your hap and mine I account moſt fortunate, that your firſt arriuall héere ſhould be thus

in my Caſtell, which I haue euer defended againſt the tyrant Garnides, as the true loyall Standard bearer to the King your Father, which yet you may behold diſplaied vppon my Caſtell. I am verily perſwaded, that this Knight hath deliuered you from the enchauntment in the Shippe, and now goes with you to the Caſtell of Bernuccio, therefore let me tell you, that you can hardly paſſe thether but by mine aduiſe: for the Tyrant Garnides, hauing vnderſtoode by his Soothſayers, that the aduenture once finiſhed at Bernuccioes Caſtell, hee foorth-with ſhall be diſpoſſeſt of the kingdom, hath cauſed to be brought into a Forreſt (through which you muſt paſſe if you goe thether) ſuch aboundance of Lyons, Beares, Tygars, Leopards, Panthers, & other wilde beaſts, as a huge mighty Armie is not able to withſtand them, therefore if you would paſſe in ſafetie, it behooues you to defend your ſelues with theſe Lyons, as I wil direct you.
               You ſhall méete ſome pretty diſtance hence, with aboue an hundred Lyons, & as many other beaſts, againſt which you haue no other defence, but to make an Armour both for your ſelfe and horſe, all thicke ſette with ſharpe ſteele poynts a handfull long round about, which couering your body, you ſhall paſſe by them ſafely, for when the beaſts feele themſelues hurt, eyther in the mouth or pawe, without daring to endure any other wounds, they will preſently with-draw from further offending you.
               This counſell ſeemed ſcant pleaſing to the Knight, for he held it baſe and vile to proceede by pollicie, in any action where vallour farre better beſeemed it: but cōſidering that he could conduct the Lady in no other manner, and her preſence muſt needes be had, elſe Bernuccios enchauntment was not to be ended, hee gaue order for making him ſuch a kinde of Armour, and in meane while attended the healing of his wounds.
               Within eyght dayes the Armour was finiſhed, according to the forme deliuered by the Lord of the Caſtell, and the Knight béeing thus armed, and the Lady and Squire

alſo after the ſame manner, the Lyons were brought forthwith armed to them, who ſéeing that ſtrange kinde of Armour vpon them, began to roare with ſuch extremitie and furie, as all the people in the Caſtell were greatlie afraide of them.
               The Lord of the Caſtell ſéeing euery one prepared, was readie himſelfe likewiſe at the ſtaires foote, both he and his horſe armed according to the reſt, and thus rid they on toward the Forreſt: whereinto they were no ſooner entred, but they preſently beheld infinite numbers of wild beaſts, that without any ſhewe of feare at all, immediatly ſet vppon them, & doubtleſſe they could not by any meanes haue eſcaped, but onely through that ſtrange inuented kinde of Armour, which neuertheleſſe grewe yokeſome and burdenous to them, both by the weight and labour of making reſiſtance.
               And albeit the beaſts founde by very good proofe, that their beſt ſafetie conſiſted in kéeping furtheſt off from theſe paſſengers, yet ſuch as had not made this experience, in heate and rage would needes runne vppon them, although they ſawe theyr fellowes ſore wounded, and themſelues to ſpéede no better as faſt as they came.
               The Knight of Fortune hauing his Sworde drawne, layd fiercely about him vpon the wilde beaſts, and the Lyons that attended on them, ſéeing their Maiſter beſtir himſelfe in ſuch ſort, ranne likewiſe vpon the beaſts, but could not teare many of them, by reaſon the Armour they had on was a let to their nimblenes, onely they went ſecure from hurting, & beſides did wound as many as came néere them. So béeing rid of theſe, they rode on very quietly together, and at laſt deſcried ſuch a huge troope of beaſts before them, as they imagined the number to excéede twenty thouſand, which made them doubtfull how to eſcape from all theſe, where-vppon, riding cloſe with the Lorde of the Caſtell, while the Lyons made way for thē among the beaſts, they found themſelues much troubled and tormented by them: for the Lady beeing falne from her horſe among the heard,

thought verily now to be bereft of life, for two Lyons had caught her faſt by the feete, and dragger her along after them vpon the grounde, but the Knight with his waiting Lyons tooke to her in time, for the beaſts had got open the ſight of her Helmet, and had they not come to ayde her at the very inſtant, no meanes was left for her to eſcape with life.
               Now beganne the Knight ſo to beſtirre himſelfe among theſe wilde beaſts, that the Lyons left the Lady, and made directly at him: but ſee a ſtrange accident happening in nature, and for their great good in this extremitie, for the Lyons ſeeing themſelues ſo wounded by the others of theyr owne kinde, they began to be fearefull and timerous one of another, ſo that they refrained to come néere each other, as thinking they receiued no greater harme then frō themſelues. By which ſucceſſefull chaunce, they rode on freelie without their diſturbance, yet fought they with diuers Serpents by the way, which by reaſon their ſkinns were hard and impiercible, their poynted Armour did them but ſlender ſeruice: and here were they now in moſt danger of all, for when their owne Lyons ſaw that Armour auayled thē not, as it had doone before againſt the other beaſtes, they held backward as fearefull of the Serpents poyſon, and their horſes were ſo affrighted with the fire & ſmoulder, as (doo what they could) they would no further onward.
               This made them more diſmaide then all the reſt had doone, in which deſperate caſe, the Lady (by good hap) remembred herſelfe of a Ring, which the Countie Bernuccio in former time had giuen her, to ſtedde her in a dangerous and doubtfull extreamitie: no ſooner had ſhee put it vppon her finger, but the Serpents (beeing not naturally bred in that place, but onely brought thether by the force of enchauntment,) came all gently to her hand, and grewe in ſuch ſtrife who ſhould be formoſt, that they fell vpon one an other with wonderfull violence, and had ſo torne each other in peeces, that in very ſhort while not one of them remained aliue.
               
                  This fell out to no meane aduauntage of the Knight, who queſtionleſſe elſe had neuer eſcaped with life, for an hundred as valiant men as himſelfe, were not ſufficient to haue vndertaken this dangerous paſſage. The way thus well cleered, they allighted at a fountaine to refreſh themſelues awhile, and hauing fed on ſuch viands as they brought thether with them, lay downe on the moſſe and leaues to take a little ſleepe.
               
                  Bernuccio, who from his Caſtell ſaw the Knight of Fortune firſt binde the Lyons, and afterward how he had come along with the Lady euen to that very Fountaine, turning himſelfe into the ſhape of a Satyre, came thether ſuddenlie vpon them, and taking the Lady vp vnder his arme, ſhée béeing in a ſwéet and pleaſant ſléepe, carried her ſomewhat further of, and then with his ſhoutes and cryes made her to awake: which the Knight hearing, and by caſting his head vp ſuddainly eſpying, albeit hee ſlept with his Helmet on, leaſt any Serpent in ſléepe might offend him, mounting preſently on horſe-back, purſued the Satyre, who (as if he made a ſcorne of him) one while ran, another while leapt, then would he ſtand ſtill till he were ſom-what neere him, and ſuddainly with a ſkyp be a great way from him.
               Thus the Satyre flying with her, and all the other following him, they came at laſt within ſight of the Caſtell, whereinto entred the Satyre with the Lady in his armes, wherat the Knight of Fortune was ſo diſpleaſed, that ſtepping on the Bridge, with iniurious ſpéeches he challenged the fight, threatning to ruinate all ye whole Caſtell, except hee might haue the Lady deliuerd him againe: ſuch is the humour of a minde enraged, to ſpeake often-times beyond the bounds of reaſon.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXXVI. How the Chriſtian Armie, before they could take landing in Turkie, were conſtrained to deliuer Oliuanto to a Dwarffe, that came and demaunded him at theyr hands.
               
                  ON ſayled ye Chriſtian Armie, with a proſperous winde, and thoſe that belonged to Tamerco in their cō
                  panie, when entring into the Turkiſh Seas, a ſtrange vnlookt for tempeſt ſuddainly aroſe, which moſt of all wrought vpon the Admirall Ship, wherein the Lordes and chiefeſt princes were, bearing it ſo farre off from the reſt, that a little more it had quite loſt the ſight of all the Nauie, there were they in danger euery minute to be loſt, for the Shyp ranne twiſe or thriſe againſt a Rocke, and ſtill they feared to be bruiſed in péeces.
               Béeing in this perrill, there ſuddainly ioyned with them a little Barque, wherein was the moſt ill ſhapen Dwarffe that euer had béene ſéene, who ſtepping aboord the Chriſtian Ship, cloſely put a Letter into Oliuantos hand, ſaying he muſt performe what therein was cōtained, the contents of the Letter was as followeth.
               
                  
                     
                     The Letter which was brought by the Dwarffe, to the young aduenturous Knight Oliuanto.
                     
                     The Superſcription. ¶To the onely, and faire flower of Chiualrie.
                     
                        YOung bud of honour, a nameleſſe friend is bold to ſalute thee, and beleeue it as infallible, that in vaine thou thinkeſt to enioy the Lady, whom thou haſt elected as patroneſſe of thine affections, till firſt thou hazard thy life in an honourable aduenture, which renewes his owne worth whereſoeuer it is noyſed: Aduertiſing thee moreouer withall, that he which loues the Lady with as endeared regard, will make like war againſt thee at all times. And ſo fare-well.
                     
                        Thy friend, the vnknowne.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Platir, who had promiſed Miragarda to bring backe her Sonne with him, by no meanes would conſent yt he ſhould leaue them: but the Dwarffe vrging important ſpéeches, and threatning their preſent miſcarying except they conſented, made Oliuanto to arme himſelfe, and entreating licence of his vnckle, without more adoe leapt into ye Barque with the Dwarffe, who immediatly vaniſhed, & the tempeſt ceaſſed about the Chriſtian Shippe, but continued ſtill violent with the little Barque, ſo that Oliuanto ſéeing no other likelihood but imminent death, knew not how to behaue himſelfe, and ſo mainely was hee carried along the Ocean, as he thought he ſhould be borne to the Antipodes.
               
               
                  Platir was ſo full of griefe, to ſée him carried thus away, as oftentimes hee woulde haue throwne himſelfe into the Sea, but béeing comforted and perſwaded by Dragonalte,
                  
they ſhaped their courſe to their intended Turkiſh voyage, and gathering the diſperſed fleete together, without any other hinderance they came to the Port of Tubant: where they landed, to the great contentment of the Knights, that daily expected the cōming of this ſupply, for their ſpeedie departure to the conqueſt of Niquea, but eſpecially Blandidon, as well in hope of regaining his kingdome, as for the great eſteeme he apparantly perceiued, which the Emperor Primaleon made of him, whereupon he made prouiſion for the warre, where now a while we meane to leaue them.
               
                  Oliuanto, perceiuing he ſuffered no other diſaduantage, but onely that he was carried he knew not whether, began to be of the better comfort, and before night drewe on, hee ſaw himſelfe in the view of an Iland, which ſéemed to him in ſhape of a Theater, thruſting two armes forth into the Sea, with ſuch an admirable conſtructure and building, as the like was neuer ſéene before. The Barque put it ſelfe into this Iland, & béeing faſtned to the ſhoare, the Dwarffe (who all this while had béene inuiſible in the Ship) appeared in his former likenes, ſaying: Nowe is to be manifeſted the reaſon of the name that was giuen you, at the inſtant when you receiued your Knight-hood, which though then perhaps you tooke no notice of, yet now vnderſtand it for your further benefite. You are entiteled the Knight of the Lyon, and muſt now oppoſe your ſelfe to ſuch an enterpriſe, which if you preuaile in, you ſhall haue your deſire, but failing in it, neuer ſhall further tydings bee hearde of you: goe then accompanied with your owne vallour, and I (if Fortune ſo much fauour you) ſhall be better knowne to you.
               
                  Oliuanto, dreadleſſe of any perrill whatſoeuer, which by the hand of man was to be vndertaken, when hée ſawe himſelfe ſo well on Land, and freed from the bluſtering hazards on the Seas, began to climbe vp the bancke, where (the way of paſſage béeing very ſteepie and narrow) before hee could come to the ſight of any houſe, hee was enforced oftentimes to ſit downe and reſt himſelfe.
               
                  Hauing recouered the height of all, he ſaw himſelfe encompaſſed with ſo many faire Pallaces, as humane eye had neuer beheld any comparable to them, and the more did he admire them, becauſe he diſcerned no inhabitants in them: yet heard he peoples whiſperings, and ſaw the tract of their footing, euen as in a frequented and populous Cittie was to be noted. Beſide, he heard ye knocking at doores, as if ſome were incloſed that would bee at liberty, and was diuers times ſhouldered as he went along, as if the ſtréete had béene full of people to hinder his way, yet could he not ſée any liuing creature.
               Paſſing thus on thorow the very chéefe ſtréete, he came to a ſumptuous Pallace, which ſtoode very ſolitarie to his eye, yet heard he much muttering & whiſpering of people, and ſome that were indifferent plaine to bee vnderſtoode. Standing ſtill awhile to liſten what he could heare, he ſaw the Pallace gate open, before which was a long payre of ſtayres, and a huge Lyon came foorth, as high in ſtature as a great tall Cammell, the beaſt grumming and grinning at the Knight, began to menace him with his pawe. Oliuanto remembring the Dwarffes wordes, that the reaſon of his knighted name was now to be manifeſted, imagined that he was to combate with this Lyon, wherefore mounting vp the ſtepps, and béeing vnſkild in the nature of the enchauntment, neuer ſtayed to try whether the Lyon would aſſaile him or no: but hauing his ſword drawne in his hand, ſtept by the beaſt and entred the gate, where, in the midſt of a goodly Hall hee beheld a bright ſhining Piller, with a faire Idoll on the top thereof, holding an engrauen labell in his hand, containing this inſcription.
Such as ſeeke honour heere, are ſure of death.
And another whereon was written thus.
               Vertue may conquer mee, but force will faile.
               The Knight, making no account at all of theſe two inſcriptions, paſſed on further, and ſawe in a high mounted chaire of eſtate a very aged King, who ſeemed as if hee ſate

and ſlept, and the Knight not knowing of whō to demaund the qualitie of the place, meant to awake him for further reſolution. But as hee aduaunced his foote vppon the firſt ſtep, ſuddainly ruſhed foorth at a doore ſtanding halfe open by the King, the Lyon, and caught hold of him ſo vnprouided for reſiſtance, that at one thruſt hee ouerthrewe him a long on the grounde, and then walked ouer him twiſe or thriſe, that he thought he ſhould die with the weight of the beaſt: but remembring himſelfe howe cowardly it were to die in that manner, he leapt vp on his feete, & brandiſhing his ſword againſt the Lyon, the beaſt declared no feare at all of him, becauſe hee could not thus preuaile againſt the enchauntment, and out of the Hall al his blowes were beſtowed but in vaine.
               The young Knight ſéeing his ſword thus ſtill to rebound backe, without any offence doone to the Lyon, beganne to grow doubtfull of his fights ſucceſſe, wherefore, ſhifting his ſteps from place to place, to auoyde the gripes and pawes of the beaſt, he gaue backward in ground the value of ſome tenne paces, ſo as he was come iuſt before the doore where the ſtaires deſcended. There aroſe the Lyon vp on his two hindmoſt feete, & with both his pawes gaue him two ſuch blowes on the breaſt, as made him tumble backward about nine or tenne ſtepps, when if the Lyon had followed vpon that aduantage, the ſtrife betweene them had ſoone beene concluded. But the Lyon returned backe againe into the Chamber, and the Knight (béeing in open ayre) recouered freſh vigour, ſeeming to himſelfe ſo freely diſpoſed, as if hee were now but to begin an encounter.
               So entring into the Hall where the aged King ſ
                     •
                  ept, hée ſawe he was turned now vpon his right ſide, which gaue him encouragement of better ſpeede then before, and recommending himſelfe to God, in whoſe feare & reuerence he purpoſed to hazard his life, he ſet his foote againe vppon the nethermoſt ſtep, and as he would haue aſcended the ſecond, the Lyon ruſhed foorth againe, but the Knight nowe experienced by his former aſſault, knew the better how to

preuent him, and caſting a full thruſt at his hindmoſt part, the Lyon nimbly turned, and with his taile beate by the blow, without receiuing any danger at all, ſo did he twiſe or thriſe award his ſtrokes, and made all his labour be but beſtowed in vaine.
               
                  Oliuanto, labouring in his thoughts very buſily, which way he might ſooneſt attaine to wound the Lyon, thought if he could hurt him in the ſide, then hee ſhould eaſily compaſſe the victory, which made him beſtowe his ſtrokes in that manner: but the Lyon perceiuing the Knights intent, was ſo ready in his turnings and windings, that he could by no meanes preuaile in his purpoſe, for one while with his pawes, another while with his teeth & taile hee ſo ouer-laboured the Knight, that he felt himſelfe in great extremitie, whereupon, he drew backe toward the doore againe, to reſt himſelfe awhile, béeing vnable to giue one ſtroke more he was ſo wearie: but the Lyon, vnwilling he ſhould haue ſo much as a breathing ſpace, ſtoode ouerthwart the doore, ſtill laying mainely at him with his feete and taile, hauing now brought the Knight into ſuch weakenes and debilitie, as it was very doubtfull what ſhould become of him. Notwithſtanding, he intended, ſince he muſt needes die there, yet to die valiantly, & caſting a manly thruſt at the beaſtes ſide, he could not ſo well award it, but that thereby he receiued a ſmall hurt, which making him ſtagger halfe out of the doore, and the ſworde continuing ſtill within the wound, ſtriking with his foote to get out the weapon, the beaſt threw himſelfe quite out of the doore, whereby he loſt all the power of the enchauntment.
               
                  Oliuanto, glad that hee had found the wayes to preuaile againſt the Lyon, ſtept forth of the gate, where hée founde himſelfe ſo refreſhed, as if he had not combatted at all with the beaſt, & becauſe he ſaw the night approching on, which hee knewe not how dangerous it might prooue to him, hee went into the Hall againe, and going toward the King, hee found that he remained ſtill faſt a ſléepe, but had lift vp his head, & leaned it vpright, backward to the Chayre wherein

he ſate. Oliuanto béeing ignorant howe to interprete thys meruaile, would now needs mount vpon the third ſteppe, when ſuddainly hee was againe aſſailed by the Lyon, who caught him ſo furiouſly by the ſhoulder plate, as the buckles breaking in ſunder, that part was quite diſarmed.
               Euen in this inſtant the ſleeping King awaked, and albeit his white beard declared him to be very aged, yet ſtarted he vp ſo lightly and nimbly, and wounded the Knight ſo often with his royall Scepter, as he now thought himſelfe quite loſt for euer, the Lyon one way aſſailing him, and the King another, his caſe was very dangerous and deſperate: at laſt, giuing a full blow at the Kings Scepter, it preſentlie fell out of his hand, and hee diſtreſſed of further force, with eaſie ſteps departed thence into a chamber adioyning. The Lyon feeling more and more the griefe of his wound, as béeing in the place moſt offenſiue vnto him, went away lamely, and becauſe he had hurt the Knight ſore vpon the ſhoulder diſarmed, it made him reach another ſtroke at him in his departing, which made the Lyon fall downe to the ground, deliuering ſuch a fearefull cry in his fall, that hée made other Lyons that were in the Pallace, roare to him againe: which when the Knight heard, and doubting leaſt he ſhould be newly aſſaulted in that wearie eſtate, he ſtept out againe at the gate, and preſently returned as cheereful as at firſt, yet coulde not put on his Pouldron, which lay there before him.
               As he ſtoode awhile deuiſing with himſelfe what were beſt to be done, he heard his name called by a woman, at which voyce hee ſuddainly ſtarted, becauſe it ſeemed as if ſhe had beene violenced, and paſſing through the Hall, hee ſawe there a goodly Lady, who at firſt ſight hee tooke to be the beautifull Auriana, but when hée came a little neerer her, he perceiued his error, and refuſed to accoſt her: becauſe whoſoeuer loueth a Lady intirely in his hart, is not eaſily carried away with the pleaſing baites of any other new intiſing beautie. The Lady (with very chéerful countenaunce) tooke him by the hande, and led him into a very

rich Chamber, whereas a ſumptuous table was prepared, and ſitting downe, they feaſted very kindly together. Supper beeing ended, he ſawe enter at the doore the aged King with his Scepter in his hand, accompanied likewiſe with a Giant, the King vſing theſe ſpeeches following.
               Knight, well maiſt thou boaſt of thy good fortune, that thou haſt combatted in this houſe in the night time: but if thou dooſt not fulfill whatſoeuer this Lady giues thée counſell in, to morrow morning thou ſhalt looſe thy life by thys Mace, poynting to that which the Giant carried in his hand, and ſo they departed againe.
               
                  Oliuanto was ſome-what abaſhed at their firſt appearance, but hearing that he ſhould not fight in the darke, hée was the better pleaſed: then the Lady ſhewing him a very rich bed prepared for him, departed thence very pleaſantly, though much ſuſpected by the young Knight, who feared he ſhould be further aſſailed by her, for her lookes ſéemed to him ſomewhat wanton and laſciuious.
            
            
               CHAP. XXXVII. Of whence and what this King was, and what paſſed betweene Oliuanto & the Lady, likewiſe how he accompliſhed the aduenture.
               
                  THe Indian Hiſtories doo report, that a King, the graund-father to Tamerco, hauing a daughter of excéeding beautie, he did not reſpect her with that care and diligence, as was neceſſary to be vſed to a Lady of ſuch merit: and her ſelfe beeing likewiſe leſſe mindful of her owne reputation, then became thoſe perfections wherewith ſhe was endued, grewe amorous of a Prince, (yet a ſubiect to her father) and permitted the follies of idle

loue to procéede ſo farre, that the key of virginity being loſt, ſhée grew with childe by him: but when ſhe could conceale her ſhame no longer, by reaſon of the apparant witnes deliuered by her groſſenes, ſhée concluded to truſt a Nurſſe of hers with this ſecrete, who as ſhee was willing to pleaſure her Lady in ſuch an vrgent neceſſitie, yet ſhee handled the matter with ſuch indiſcretion, that when the very exigent came of beſt ſtedding the poore Princeſſe, it fell out to be her greateſt hurt, for the childe beeing heard to cry, onelie through the Nurſſes negligence, from diuers parts of the Pallace the Ladies and Gentlewomen (not accuſtomed to heare ſo vnlookt for an accident,) came running to the chamber, and chaunced to méete the King by the way, who demanding the reaſon of their running ſo amazedly, though they were in a manner much daunted with his preſence, yet they told him what a cry they had heard, whereat hee not a little meruailing, offred to enter the chamber where his daughter was, yet modeſtly ſtaying till the Women were entred: and ſtanding where he was not eaſily diſcerned, he heard the Nurſſe ſpeake, (as ſtanding nowe vppon her owne iuſtification) & theſe or the like were the wordes ſhe vſed.
               Alas Madame, what haue you doone? haue you had no more regard of your honour, but thus to ſhame your father, and ſtaine your owne credite for euer? Hath your priuate conferences with Rouino, (for ſo was the other partie offendour called) ſorted to this ende? Why then you may boldly make this concluſion, that his ſhame and lyfe ſhall end together, and your blame and life depend vpon the king your Fathers ſentence.
               The King (vppon theſe ſpéeches vttered by the Nurſſe) became acquainted not onely with his daughters offence, but likewiſe with the man that had ſo heauily treſpaſſed, which made him enter the Chamber with more then common rage, and catching her faſt by the haire of the heade, drew her from off the bead along vppon the ground, and ſo would haue ſtrangled her with her owne locks, but that

the Ladies by, ſéeing the young Princeſſe in ſuch a dangerous caſe, cryed all out ſo loude, as their noyſe was eaſilie heard through the Pallace.
               This cry brought the Quéene with all ſpéede thether, where hearing the wretched eſtate of her daughter, ſhe fell into ſuch extremitie of paſſion, knowing well how implacable the King her huſband was, and pittying the ſeuere caſtigation he would inflict vpon his daughter, as the verie conceit heereof rent her hart ſtrings in ſunder, and ſo ſhee fell downe, and preſently died. The King confounded with this lamentable ſpectacle, left his daughter, and ran to embrace his Quéene & comfort her, but finding life gone, and no hope of recouerie, hee appointed his daughter to be preſently impriſoned.
               Newes heereof was preſently carried to Rouino, who béeing in ſuſpect of ſome ſtrange diſaſter, that might be inflicted on his elected Princeſſe: in rage and mad fury went directly to the Court, where beeing foorth-with apprehended, he was cōmitted vnto another cloſe priſon. The next day following, the Nurſſe was brought face to face before the Princeſſe, where ſhée remaining as the ſole accuſer, at length Rouino was ſent for, who ſtoutly denying all matters alleaged, was enforced afterward by torments to confeſſe, and the childe béeing brought in publique preſence, reſembled the true father in all ſuch euident manner, that as the fault cauſed in ſort a iuſt deteſtation, yet ye childs goodlie forme, and the parents kinde loue, pleaded on the other ſide as much compaſſion.
               Neuertheleſſe, the King ouerſwayed by too much furie, taking the infant by both the feete, made it be cleft through the midſt before the Father and Mothers face, whereon, forgetting all dutie of a daughter, in heate of blood ſhee vſed theſe ſpeeches to her Father. Thou monſter and murderer of thine owne fleſh & blood, why with life didſt thou let me ſee ſo inhumane a ſpectacle? In iuſtice of the cauſe, thou ſhouldſt firſt haue ſlaine me, rather then after ye death of my infant to leaue me perpetually tormented.
               
                  
                  Rouino likewiſe, ſéeing his childe thus bloodily diſſeuered, dreadleſſe of any extremitie, (for hee knew ſome violent 
                     •
                  nd was intended him) gaue all the iniurious ſpéeches he could imagine to the King, that hee might 
                     •
                  aſhly in his mad moode f
                     ••
                  e vppon him, & murder him to with the weapon which he held in his hand. But the King, who coulde not be contented with ſo ſpeedy a diſpatch of them, committed them both againe to priſon, and ſent for a ſkilfull Negromancer, which dwelt in a vaſt place of old ruined Babilon, where, though hee was enuironed with numberleſſe wilde beaſts, yet liued he ſecurely among them all.
               The Wizard vnderſtanding the minde of the King, that theſe two Louers were to ſuffer a lingering kind of death, to ye end they ſhould not endure ſuch implacable torments, went thether with the Meſſenger, where béeing by the King entertained with great honour, and very ſerious diſcourſe paſt betweene thē vpon the matter already reported, the Sorcerers aduiſe was required concerning the offenders, and in his aunſwere replied as followeth. My Lord, if you would puniſh this offence according as it deſerueth, yet not to kéep from your ſight their bodies in affliction, becauſe your ſpleene will hardly be ſatiſ-fied with tormenting them, I will enchaunt them in ſuch ſort, that you ſhal euer behold them before any puniſhment be impoſed, and yet to eithers greefe be with violence endured.
               Your Maieſtie is now ſo aged, that I gather by the celeſtiall aſpect at your natiuitie, you cannot liue aboue the ſpace of two yéeres, yet will I make you ſuruiue an hundred yéeres by an enchauntment which I will order in maner following. Rouino will I firſt tranſ-forme into a moſt fierce Lyon, of whom the Princeſſe your daughter ſhall euer liue in feare, and when time comes that he ſhalbe vanquiſhed by a Knight, then ſhall he aſſume the ſhape of a Giant, and the Lady be changed into a V
                     •
                  per or Serpent, by which meanes they ſhal neuer haue any kinde community together: for altering their ſhapes ſo often, and then ouercome by that warriour himſelfe, they ſhall alwayes liue in

ſuch diſſimilitude, as the one ſhall euer abhorre the other. As for your ſelfe, becauſe you haue no hande in this tranſgreſſion, you ſhall ſpend your dayes in this Pallace and in the Garden: but when any one comes to combate with the Lyon, you ſhal be faſt a ſleepe in your Chayre of eſtate, and the Knight whoſe fortune ſhall fauour him ſo much as to mount the third degree of your throne, that man ſhall giue end to the whole aduenture.
               The King, deſirous to ſée Rouino and his daughter in continuall torment, yeelded the more willingly to be thus enchaunted, taking hold of his former promiſe withall, to enioy the benefite of life for ſo long ſpace: and leauing the kingdome to a Nephew of his, the Graund-father to the Princeſſe Auriana, came thus into the Caſtel. But by reaſon this aduenture continued long time, and fewe Knights were ſo hardie as to vndertake it, he would needes haue all the people of the Caſtell enchaunted to in ſuch ſort, that they might ſée and negotiate their affaires among themſelues, yet not to be ſeene or heard of any, but onely by ſoft murmurings and whiſperings: which ſtrange kinde of inuiſible noyſe, made many ſo timerous, as when they were engirt with theſe audible whiſperers, they would preſentlie turne backe againe, without attempting the aduenture.
               The Lady that was daughter to the fore-named King, endued with exquiſite beauty and behauiour, hauing ſeene (for many yeeres together) no other liuing perſon but her aged offended Father, who alwayes vſed threatnings of worſe and worſe extremities to her, and the fierce Lyon, of whom ſhée liued in continuall feare: durſt neuer be ſo aduenturous as to walke about the Caſtell, onely to auoyde the cauſes of her terror, and yet Rouino, albeit he was thus tranſ-formed into a Lyon, loued the Lady ſtill exceedingly, offering diuers times to ſport and play with her, but ſhee would flie from him in regard of feare: ſo much to acquaint you with the whole courſe of the hiſtorie, now returne wée to the place where we left before.
               
                  When the Lady had well noted this gallant young Knight, ſeeing him to be of ſuch vertue and admired valour, ſhée grew greatly enamoured of him, hoping by his means to get out of that enchauntment: wherfore, about the midnight houre ſhée went to the bed where he ſlept, and laying her hand gently vpon his breaſt, awaked him, and then vſed theſe ſpéeches. I come to doo kinde offices to thee fayre Knight, whoſe good ſtarres haue béene thy guide to ſo high an aduenture, which when thou haſt finiſhed, thy recompence is to enioy me in mariage, being daughter to a king, and onely heire vnto the Crowne of India.
               
               
                  Oliuanto, who neuer let ſlippe the leaſt minutes ſpace, without continuall remembrance of his beauteous Auriana, perceiuing this Lady ſo much to reſemble her, grewe halfe perſwaded that it might be ſhée indéede, till viewing her more aduiſedly, and checking his owne error, he thruſt her aſide from him, which ſhée taking very vncurteouſlie, and hardly reſtraining her womanniſh furie, beeing likewiſe now vpon the inſtant of her tranſ-formation, (becauſe Rouino was already become a Giant, & ſhée to alter within certaine houres after) which happened euen then in this diſcontented moode, for ſhée felt her necke to ſhoote foorth in length, and her parts to change in aunſwerable proportion, ſo that ſuddainly ſhée was become a very fierce Serpent, when without any intermiſſion of time, ſhee leapt vppon the Knight, and doubtleſſe had ſtaine him, but that by good hap he quickly drew his ſword, wherewith he deliuered ſo many ſtrokes at her, as ſhee was glad to ſhift for her owne ſafetie, without any further damage to the Knight, then immediatly hee armed him, as expecting to be further aſſailed.
               The old King and the Giant came running thether vpon this tumult, and finding the Knight armed, the King ſtood and leaned himſelfe againſt the doore, but the Giant entred with his Mace, yet otherwiſe quite diſarmed, wherat Oliuanto meruailed not a little, but when he came to belabor him with his ſword, he found his body impenetrable,

and himſelfe very ſtrangely beaten with his Mace, becauſe he had not in the beginning well lookt to himſelfe.
               Heereon, growing ſome-what doubtfull of his life, hée leapt forth of the Chamber, to try if in larger compaſſe hee could better reſiſt his enemie: at which inſtant he bagan to imagine in his thoughts, that the Lyon had thus aſſumed the ſhape of a Giant, which made him ye more diligent and reſpectiue, in what part of his body he might ſooneſt attaine to wound him, as not doubting but ſome place or other was to be offended: but the blowes of the Mace ſo ſhowred vppon him, that he needed Argos eyes in attendance to auoid them.
               The fight continued betwéene them about two houres, and Oliuanto finding his breath to faile him, remembred his former helpe in that caſe, which was, to get foorth at the Hall gate, & then he ſhould be as freſh as euer hee was, whereupon, he laboured thether ſo much as he might: but the Giant perceiuing it, hindered him from it ſo much as poſſibly hee could: neuertheleſſe, Oliuanto caſting a full thruſt at the Giants face, by good hap ſore wounded him, which put him in good hope that the aduenture was finiſhed, for the Giant did nothing nowe but ſtand wiping away his blood, which gaue Oliuanto the better meanes to get out of the Hall, where hee felt his courage in ſuch ſort reſtored, that he thought himſelfe able to conquer two Giants.
               Béeing entred the Hall againe, hee met the olde King comming towards him with his Scepter, and the Viper or Serpent with him, which diuers times offered to wind her ſelfe about him, whereby ſhe did endanger him very often, but ſtill the young Knight preuented her valiantly, and albeit the King gaue many maine ſtrokes, yet by his dexteritie he ſtill ſo auoyded them, that hee coulde not faſten one ſtroke vpon him. The Serpent, notwithſtanding all her ſubtile ſlights, was yet glad to kéepe off from the kéene edged ſword, and one blowe happening to ſtrike the Scepter out of the Kings hand, he preſently vaniſhed: whereupon,

becauſe he would looſe ſo little time as might be, he made at the Serpent very reſolutely: but ſhe leaping vp ſuddenly at his Helmet, byting the laces thereof in ſunder, grypt him ſo violently by the throate, as his immediat death was much to be doubted.
               
                  Oliuanto, ſeeing himſelfe in ſuch extremitie, ſo ſtronglie gryped her about the necke with his hand, that the Viper in humane voyce thus cryed out: Put me to no more paine, for indeede thou canſt not kill me, but if thou giue ouer and let me goe, the aduenture for this time is concluded. By the voyce, Oliuanto knew the Serpent was the Lady, that was before ſo enamoured of him, wherefore, pittying her hard fortune, he let her goe: when preſently the King came with the Giant into the Hall, and mounting both vpon the Viper, flew altogether foorth of the window, but the King firſt vſed theſe ſpeeches to him.
               Thinke not (Sir Knight) that thou haſt fully finiſhed with vs, nor that our patience can permit, that Auriana, diſcended of our Indian blood, ſhall euer be thine, if wee can hinder it. So fled they thence to another enchaunted Caſtell, where Oliuanto had afterward toyle enough with them, as in his owne hiſtory is more at large declared.
               Great comfort in minde brought theſe words to Oliuanto, yt yet hee might hope to enioy Auriana at length, though ſome difficulties might long time be his hinderance. Now began the Caſtell to ſhake and tremble, yea, and ye whole Iland likewiſe, as if it woulde haue ſuncke into ſome bottomleſſe depth, and within leſſe then an howres ſpace, hee might ſée out at the windowes the people of the Ile, walking and talking vpon the Market-place, & heare the noyſe of diuers artificers at theyr handy trades, whereby it appeared manifeſtly vnto him, that the enchauntment there was fully ended.
               So deſcending downe the ſtayres, he met the Dwarffe which had béene his conducter thether, who vſing great reuerence to the Knight, guided him backe againe to the Barque, whereinto they were no ſooner entred, but the

Dwarffe vaniſhed as before, and in one night the Barque arriued at the Porte of Tubante, among the Chriſtian Armie, and béeing come on Land, by Platir and the Chriſtian Princes he was moſt kindly entertained, and they deſirous to know the reaſon of his abſence all this while, at large he diſcourſed to them the whole aduenture: ſo entred they the Citty together, and then tooke order for the warres preparation.
            
            
               CHAP. XXXVIII. How Leonato cauſed the wheele to be carried to Conſtantinople, and afterward went to the Ile of Carderia, where hee remained enchaunted for defence of the place.
               
                  THe wiſe and learned Aliart, of whom much is chronicled, which in this Hiſtory is omitted, when he perceiued that his Arte had ſo outſtript him, as many thinges fayled of his expectation: hée grew into ſuch diſlike of his own iudgement, that hee would by no meanes nowe goe to Constantinople, fearing leaſt his ignoraunce ſhould be obiected to him, which made him oftentimes readie to burne all his bookes, but that Argentao diſſwaded him to the contrary, ſo there they continued in the Perillous Ile, expecting the paſſage of ſome enuious and ill oppoſed influence of the heauens, wherby the ſkilfull man was much croſt and encountred, and hoping one day to worke the aduauncement of the Grecian Empire againe.
               But leaue we him to his ſtudies, and returne we nowe to Leonato, who béeing departed from Tarnaes, commaunded

the Giants to carry the whéele to Constantinople, with charge that it ſhould be preſented to the Emperour, and afterward, that the Giants (as conquered by him) ſhould humble themſelues before fayre Candida, and there remaine at her further appointment.
               Great ioy was thorow the Court at the arriuall of thys wheele, eſpecially Polinarda his mother was not meanelie pleaſed, and ye young Lady Candida, who ſéeing ſuch a preſent come from her Louer, could not conceale with all her cunning, but plainly expreſſed how enamoured ſhe was of him: but the Emperor not reſpecting his owne aged eſtate, affecting this Lady very intirely, ſhewed ſlender acceptance of the preſent.
               
                  Leonato, with Don Roſuell, Almaroll, Caro, and Eſtrellant, taking leaue of the Giant and the Lady, rode towarde the Ile of Carderia, where (as it was famed abroade) they ſhould finde diuers Knights of the Grecian Court impriſoned. And it ſo came to paſſe, that Tarnaes likewiſe comming thether, after hee had expreſſed great vallour in the fight, was by the enchaunted Knight carried alſo in as priſoner: this hapned before the other Knights arriuall there, Tarnaes thinking to foreſtall them in the honour of the aduenture, but ſpeeding as you haue heard, and the Knight returning to looke for more freſh cuſtomers, eſpyed all the other making toward the bridge, and Caro béeing the foremoſt, alighted from his horſe, becauſe he ſaw that the other was on foote.
               When they buckled together, and that Caro (as others had doone before) thought one of his ſides to be quite parted from him, though indeede he receiued no wound at all: his hart began to faile him, and not able any longer to weilde his ſword, was caught vp by the Knight, and carried into priſon. He ſtayed not long but returned againe, and comming hand to hand with Eſtrellant, ſo confounded his ſences with his blowes and gripes, that hee knowing no way how to auoyde them, was likewiſe carried into the Iland. When Don Roſuell ſawe his ſonne ſo borne away, ouercome

with griefe, he ranne to aſſiſt him, and paſſing quite ouer the bridge, entred the Iland, where he was ſuddainly taken of his horſe: but by reaſon he was taken perforce as the others were, hee was not carried to priſon, but remained there neere to the bridge, which indéede proued a great helpe to the finiſhing of the aduenture, as you ſhal perceiue in place conuenient.
               
                  Almaroll preſuming of himſelfe, would néeds gallop ouer the bridge, where looſing all vnderſtanding, entred of his voluntarie accord into the Ile, and was there found on foote where Don Roſuell abode: ſo did Orino enter after the very ſame manner. Leonato nowe onely remained, with whom the Knight of the Iland comming to handie grypes, and he feeling (as the others had doone) a kinde of tearing his body in diuers parts: Neuertheleſſe, it was giuen him as a naturall inſtinct at his knight-hoode, that his hart ſhould no way be daunted with feare, and béeing of ſuch inuincible courage, he buckled with the Knight in ſuch honourable manner, as he made him glad to ſhunne and auoyde him, for his good ſword had pierced through his Armour, and wounded his body in diuers places, whereby he ſéeing himſelfe ouer-come by this Knight, ſaid. It is ill for thée that thou art of ſuch vallour, becauſe the nature of the enchauntment is ſuch, as whoſoeuer hath ye power to vanquiſh mee, muſt remaine héere enchaunted for the Ilands defence.
               Much diſpleaſed was the Knight of the Sworde with theſe words, as gathering by them, that hee ſhould not accompliſh this aduenture: whereupon, he ſtroue with himſelfe not to conquer the Knight, becauſe hee would not remaine there enchaunted: yet giuing a ſtroke (againſt his will) at the Knights head, it ſéemed to him as if he had cleft it in twaine, whereby he fell backward vppon the bridge, and ſuddainly was carried away hee knew not by whom. Now began the Knight of the Sword to grow forgetfull of the cauſe why hee came thether, and deſired that Knights good ſtore and numberleſſe would come to the Ile, that hee

might hinder them all frō concluding the aduenture. Suddainly he beheld a goodly Tent erected for him at the foote of the bridge, with all things neceſſary and behooueful in it, whereinto beeing entred, great ſtore of Launces were reared vp by him againſt trees: then went he to ſearch further into the Iland, but he coulde not paſſe any diſtance of grounde, becauſe the enchauntment fild his minde full of doubt, leaſt any ſhould come to end the aduenture. Diuers Knights came thether in ſhort while after, among whom were none of noate or name materiall to our hiſtory, yet all detained among the reſt as priſoners. But leaue we Leonato héere for the Ilands defence, and returne wee to the Knight of Fortune, whom wee left before the Caſtell of Bernuccio, deſirous of recouering the Lady againe.
            
            
               CHAP. XXXIX. How the Knight of Fortune entred the Caſtell, where, by aduiſe of the Lady, he accompliſhed the aduenture.
               
                  
                     BErnuccio, after he had carried the Lady into his Caſtell, returned to his former ſhape, to comfort the Lady in her extreame feare, where he let her behold, that hée coulde change himſelfe into infinite formes, by meanes whereof the Knight ſhould neuer ouercome him. Then told he her, that hee would firſt ſend a defiance to Garnides, and when he had ſlaine him, he would make ſuch ſcorne of the Knight of Fortune, (béeing ſo aſſiſted by his varietie of ſhapes) that he (voyde of all hope to finiſh the aduenture) ſhould depart thence againe with loſſe of his labour:

then would he enioy her quietly in marriage, and ſo come to the abſolute gouernment of the kingdome.
               The Lady, who intirely affected the Knight of Fortune, and was in good hope to poſſeſſe him as her huſband, diſſembled to be well contented with all his ſpéeches, & cunningly obtained this ſecrete of him, that whenſoeuer hee ſhould be wounded in ye right eye, he had no further power of tranſ-formation.
               The Knight of Fortune ſtoode calling without the Caſtell, to haue the gate opened, and entrance admitted, which he vrged with many threatning ſpéeches, and Bernuccio craftily intending his death, by ſending him vnarmed to Garnides, let him enter the Caſtell: where taking him verie kindly by the hand, he brought him vp into the Pallace to the Lady, where he was very ioyfull to behold her, but much more was ſhe contented with the ſight of him. Bernuccio perceiuing it, grew greatly diſpleaſed there-with, and but that he could not make himſelfe King before Garnides were dead, he would there haue murdered the Knight in the night time.
               But to preuent them of any ſuſpition, hee left the Ladie there with him, where ſhee acquainted him with Bernuccios intent, and what multitudes of ſhapes hee could tranſforme himſelfe into: the helpe whereof onely conſiſted in wounding him in the right eye, whereby the enchauntment would fully be concluded, and no other meanes left of affecting the aduenture, becauſe the Magitian coulde aſſume ſo many ſhapes, and was not to be wounded, but in the eye onely.
               
                  Bernuccio, in the meane while cauſed a ſumptuous ſupper to be prepared, and hauing gathered by his Arte, that the Knight was Nephew to the Emperour of Constantinople, he thereby ſtoode in the greater feare of him: but Supper béeing ended, after much table talke and familiar diſcourſe, he ſpake in this maner. Sir Knight, you may now (ſo pleaſe you) goe take your reſt, and call vp all your manlie ſpirits together, for to morrowe you are to vndertake

ſuch an enterpriſe, as if Fortune fauour you with accompliſhing thereof, then ſhall you eaſily conclude this aduenture.
               
                  Primaleon, béeing by the Lady fore-warned of all, aunſwered: that he was ready to vndergoe any labour whatſoeuer, where (honour beeing the obiect) he ſhould find employment. So departed he to reſt, but the Lady, imagining herſelfe right kindly affected, by him who expreſſed ſuch affabilitie to euery one, when ſhee perceiued that all in the Caſtell could not but be faſt aſleepe, ſhe went to ye Knights chamber, where diſrobing herſelfe of all her garments, ſhe lay downe by him, and with her ſoft hand gently awaked him.
               Now, whether the heate of youth, or her ſwéet intiſings moſt preuailed in this amourous ſkirmiſh, I knowe not, but ſhe quickly was tranſ-formed from a mayde to a fayre young woman: belike with no great vnwillingnes in her ſelfe, receiuing this fauour as an earneſt of further hope, that hauing beene ſo liberall of this kindneſſe to her, hee would not refuſe to accept her in marriage. But herein ſhe deceiued herſelfe, not knowing how deerely he loued Victoria, the daughter to Don Florian, and Leonarda the fayre Queene of Thrace: whereof the Knight likewiſe remembring himſelfe, became ſo penitent for his paſſed follie, that willing to haue the Lady ſtay there no longer, he ſayd. Be wiſe, fayre Lady, and returne to your Chamber, leaſt any ſuſpitious eye ſhould beholde you, and ſo I be the cauſe of your ſcandle and infamie.
               The Lady, ouer-ſwaied with her owne imaginations, after many ſwéete kiſſes and kinde embracings, departed from him, and the Knight thus left alone, beganne in this manner to chyde with himſelfe. Oh diuine Victoria, with what face can I craue pardon of thee for this offence, which indeede dooth merrite no forgiuenes at all? Sentence mee therefore in the ſeueritie of thy iuſtice, deny mee thy loue, and hide from me thy heauenly beautie, which is the ſureſt and readieſt way to my death: for what can I otherwiſe

iuſtly expect at thy hande, but the rightfull doome & award of death, for this treaſon to thy beautie, & trecherie in mine obliged faith?
               In theſe and ſuch like paſſions hee ſpent the reſt of the night, euen as if his Lady had béene there preſent with him, but when the morning appeared, he aroſe and armed himſelfe, expecting whē the time of his imployment ſhould come: and Bernuccio entring the place where hee was, ſaid: Sir Knight, you can neuer attaine the height of thys aduenture, till firſt you haue ſlaine the Tyrant Garnides, for he remaining aliue, little ſhall it auaile the Ladie, if you could diſinchaunt this Caſtell: therefore prepare your ſelfe to goe thether, in ſuch ſecrete manner as I will aduiſe you.
               
                  Primaleon knowing how the enchauntment was to be ended, thus aunſwered: I had rather firſt conclude thys perrillous enterpriſe, and afterward let mee alone for killing Garnides. Bernuccio ſuſpecting by theſe wordes, that the Lady had inſtructed him for his carriage in the aduenture, grew timorous of his owne ſucceſſe, and willinglie would haue beene rid of his company: wherefore ruſhing forth of the roome, before a man could thinke the very leaſt thought, he was in the broade Court beneath in the ſhape of a Satyre, with two drawne Rapiers in his hand.
               The Knight, not a little ioyfull héereof, becauſe he earneſtly deſired to try his fortune in the fight, that hee might ſet free the Lady, enſtall her in her kingdome, & ſo auoyde all further dallying with her: deſcended the ſtaires, and comming againſt the beaſt, he found him to leape ſo lightly heere and there about him, as hee could not deuiſe howe to faſten a blow vppon him, for knightly courage and ſkill in weapon, ſéemed nothing to him, wherefore, all hee coulde doo, was to ſhunne the ſlights and tricks of his ſeueral ſubtile offers, which ſeemed indeede very meruailous to him. The Satire hauing the aduauntage of his two long Rapiers, let flie his thruſts ſo quick at the Sheeld of Fortune, as all the Knight could doo would hardly award them: whervpon,

hee ſéeing that the fight might thus continue all day, and yet no benefit to him thereby, marking withall, howe the beaſt ſtill defended his face with one of the weapons, with a maine ſtroke he cut one of the Rapiers through the midſt, and ſo it fell out of his hand to the ground: ſo ye the Satyre beeing now very fearefull of his face, and not daring to fight any longer with one weapon, turned his back and fled.
               Soone after he returned in a contrary ſhape, ſéeming a very ſtrange deformed Giant, with a huge broade hande which ſerued him as a Sworde, and a mightie Club in the other, both ſeeming incorporate, as growing naturally out of his body. Hee was all naked, which Primaleon ſhamed very much to behold, and thought it ſmall manhood in him, if he ſhould fight with him vpon this aduantage, and therfore made offer of diſarming himſelfe, to the end hee might not be diſparaged by any inequalitie: but the Lady, ſtanding in a window aboue to behold the fights ſucceſſe, aduiſed him to the contrary. The Giant ſeemed thereat to be very wroth and angry, & albeit he ſeemed naked, yet was his fleſh ſo hard and impenetrable, as the Knights Sword rebounded ſtill backe againe, as if it had falne on Armour or ſtéele: but Primaleon héedfull of the Giants defence, ſtill noted that hee beſt garded the right ſide of his face.
               For more then halfe an howre the fight endured, and the Knight had ſo well awarded the ſtrokes of his enemie, as hee felt very little endamagement by them, wherefore giuing a ſuddaine thruſt very néere his right eye, the Giant ſéemed ſo amazed thereat, that Primaleon aduantageouſly running vppon him, forcibly wreſted the Club quite from him: then had he nothing but his broade hand left, to make reſiſtance withall, which hee likewiſe ſtriking at with the Club, thought he had ſmit it quite off, when finding himſelfe deceaued, hee gaue a ſnatch at it with his Gauntlet, and pulling it ſtrongly frō the body, founde that he had it faſt in his hand. Now the Giant hauing nothing to defend himſelfe withall, turnd and fled againe, & ſtayed

not ſo long as one would goe twentie paces, but he heard a doore ſuddainly ruſh open, and ſawe a Collomne therein with an Idoll vppon it, holding a labell with this inſcription.
               Except thou cast mee downe, thou art but dead.
               Preſently came foorth a huge beaſt like an Elephant, but farre more agill and nimble in ſhew, with ten ſwords by his ſides, which were helde directly out by certaine hands, turning and winding euery way with meruailous facilitie, as if they had naturall vſe and motion, and the beaſts body had certaine bones reſembling ſcales, faſhioned after the manner of an Armour. This beaſt went diuers times about the Piller, appearing to be the Gardian thereof, & handled the ſwords euery way with ſuch admirable dexteritie, as Primaleon could not deuiſe where beſt to offend him: but remembring his right eye was the place of certaintie, as hee made his ayme thereat, hee foorth-with ſawe two ſwords ſuddainly ſhoote out of his fore-head, and two other out of his temples on each ſide, hauing like agilitie and motion as the other ſwords had.
               Notwithſtanding all this, commending himſelfe to God, couragiouſly he went and aſſailed the Monſter, and it was his good hap, that at the very firſt ſtroke hee ſmote off two ſwords, of thoſe which were vpon ye beaſts ſide, which gaue him ſome hope of victory in the end. But yet it ſtoode him on to be very heedfull, otherwiſe by thoſe ſwordes his death was threatned, for ſhould he haue ſtept betwéene the Collomne and the beaſt, both thoſe ſtarting vp, and the other making directly at him, it had béene impoſſible for him to haue eſcaped with life: therefore, euer as he came neere the Piller, he felt himſelfe thruſt backe hee knewe not by whom, and when he made at the beaſt, then all the ſwords were oppoſed againſt him: ſo that at one inſtant hée was brought to ſuch diſtreſſe, that he thought the huge Monſter would haue falne vpon him, and ſo haue nailde him to the earth with the ſwords: which to auoyde, and loth to be ſo violently murdred, by vertue of his generous and vnconquerable

ſpirit, hee threw himſelfe at one leape vppon the necke of the beaſt, and was ſo ſuddenly prepared withall, that with a ſlicing blow hee cut off the ſwordes that ſerued as a defence to his temples, and to his right eye.
               Now began cheerefull comfort to ſeaze vpon his ſoule, which made him ſend ſtab after ſtab directly to ye part, but the beaſt nothing oppreſſed with his burden, turnd the left ſide of his head with mad furie toward him, and there hée ſaw two other ſwords newly ſtarted foorth, which put the Knight to worſe perrill then the other before had doone: nay more, the beaſt began nowe to take the aduantage of his backe, ſo that Primaleon was enforced to get away frō him, leaſt with his fall vppon him, hee ſhould be preſt to death, yet forgot he not ſtill to ayme at his eye, which the beaſt well perceiuing, vſed the more circumſpection.
               Notwithſtanding, hauing but thrée ſwords now left to make reſiſtance withall, he got néere to the Piller, and ſetting his head cloſe to it, put out his hinderpart to be his defence, whereon Primaleon layd innumerable ſtrokes, but all to no purpoſe: which when hee plainly perceiued, and that he might hold on ſo God knowes how long, yet reape no benefite by all his endeuour, he purpoſed now to hazard life, or winne the victorie, and taking another leape, caſt himſelfe vpon the right ſhoulder of the beaſt, & as hee made an offer to fall that way on the ground, to the end he might ſo get the Knight vnder him, he hapt to turne his head toward him, which opportunitie not neglecting, as being the eſpeciall occaſion he had ſo long ſtriuen for, he ſtabt him in the right eye, and the huge beaſt ſtaggering forward and backward, had falne with the Knight vnder him, but that he gaue a ſudden leape toward the Piller, and ran againſt it ſo mainely with recouering of himſelfe, as hee fell quite ouer backward, where lying in ſome little quandarie for a prettie while, had not the beaſt béene manfully diſpatched before, his life had perriſhed at that inſtant.
               But comming to himſelfe againe, hee went to the Piller, with intent to hewe it downe in peece, but the Ladie

cryed to him that hee ſhould forbeare, becauſe the Piller was to be kept whole and ſound: onely hee ſhould bring it into the Pallace, and ſet it on a goodly baſe, where a thouſand before it had béene ſet by a King of that Iland, who was a meruailous ſkilfull Nigromancer, then would enſue out of the place a furious mad dog, whoſe nailes would pierce his Armour as eaſily as woode, and if ouer him hee could get the victory, then the aduenture was fully accompliſhed.
               The Knight without more adoo went ſtraite to the Piller, and taking it vpon his ſhoulder, it ſéemed as if hee had béene loden with a Mountaine: notwithſtanding, to perfect the glorie of ſo great an enterpriſe, hee luſtily aſcended the ſtaires, but before he was halfe way vp, he was met by a man in the likenes of death, who caught hold on the Piller behind, and held it ſo ſtrongly, as had hee not béene endued with extraordinarie vallour, hee had béene tumbled ouer backward with it. But becauſe hee would conquer all impediments whatſoeuer, hee layd about him cheerefullie with his ſword, that the fleſhleſſe bones flew all in ſquanders diuers wayes, and beeing ſo ridde of that diſturbance, he went vp the ſtaires, where iuſt at the doore as he would haue entred, he met with a furious dog of wondrous hugeneſſe, which ſnarled at his legs, tore and rent his armour, and would not let him ſet a foote forward: all this beeing doone to make him let fall the Piller, which when he could not compaſſe, he leapt vpon his ſhoulder and got vpon the Piller, where ſtanding vpon the head of the Image, hee counterpoizde it in ſuch ſort, as himſelfe could hold no longer footing.
               Then ranne he to the baſe where the Collomne ſhould be ſet, where, when all his labour prooued to no purpoſe, the dogge leapt out at a window of the Pallace, and fell downe broken all in péeces. So ſet he vp the Piller, and ſo ended the enchauntment, whereat the Knight receiued ſuch excéeding contentment, as it ſeemed to him that he had endured not trauaile at all.
               
                  The Lady very ioyfully came running to embrace him, but he (not vnmindfull of the former wrong he had offered his owne Miſtreſſe, repulſed her ſo diſdainfully, that ſhee, who was in hope before to enioy him as her huſband, began to conceiue ſuch hatred againſt him, as her vehement affection toward him, was now quite forgotten, and changed to a plotted peece of treaſon, to haue him murdered by the Tyrant Garnides: for women loath extreamely, where they loued extraordinarily, eſpecially when no more fruite followes their amourous purpoſes.
            
            
               CHAP. XL. How as the Chriſtian Knights at Tubante were ſetting forward to the conqueſt of Niquea, Florendos deſpayring becauſe hee coulde haue no cure for his lamenes, departed away with a Damoſell, and what he vnderſtoode by her.
               
                  
                     FLoraman beeing confirmed Generall of the whole Army, which ſhould goe to the conqueſt of Niquea, prepared all his forces in readines that were to accompanie him thether, appointing euerie Officer his charge and limitation, according as he thought it moſt conuenient. But Florendos, to whō his impediment of lamenes ſéemed very offenſiue, could giue no patience to his diſturbed thoughts, becauſe whenſoeuer he ran at ye Launce, hee founde his right knée ſo to faile and deceiue him, that withdrawing himſelfe from the others company, as intending to vnder-goe no charge at all, hee purpoſed priuately to depart and leaue them. But euen in the heate of his determination,

there ſuddainly entred the Pallace gate a Damoſell Dwarffe, hauing two men Dwarffes with her that were her Bretheren, and dooing a duteous reuerence to all there preſent, thus ſhee began.
               I (a poore and wretched Lady) doo bring hether no tydings of any aduenture to be accompliſhed, but ſéek means to be reuenged on the very ſtrangeſt iniurie, that euer was offered to any Lady. The Knights beholding her to be of moſt admirable beautie, although in ſtature ſo low & little, had the more compaſſion of her cauſe: and Oliuanto, béeing the youngeſt Knight of all, made tender of his ſeruice on her behalfe: but his father deliuering a diſcontented countenaunce thereat, cauſed him to ſit downe againe, and returned this aunſwere to the Lady. I take it as moſt agréeable with reaſon, that my ſelfe, béeing the onely vnfortunate man in this aſſembly, ſhould bee your companion in this cauſe, either that wée may both remaine in equall miſery together, or both be fréed at once of ſo inſupportable a burthen.
               The other Knights, who had long noted the diſcontented ſtate of Florendos, thought it ill-beſeeming courtſhip to croſſe and diſſwade him: whereuppon, the Knight arming himſelfe immediatly, tooke leaue of them all, hauing firſt in ſecrete aduiſed Oliuanto, to ſette his eye on the admired chiualrie of Palmerin, and Don Florian his brother, whereby they had attained to ſuch a height of reputation. The Lady not a litle pleaſed that ſhe had ſuch a Knight of worth in her company, embarqued her ſelfe with him and his attendants, and ſayled thence with ſuch ſwiftnes, as in ſhort while, they which ſtayed had loſt the ſight of thē. And floating on the billowes of the maine Sea, the Lady imagined in her owne thoughts, that the Knight could not chuſe but be very deſirous, to know whether ſhe intended to conduct him: whereupon, ſitting downe very modeſtly by him, ſhe began to deliuer her minde in this manner.
               Sir Knight, that you may vnderſtand the iniurious diſgrace doone to me, firſt let me tell you, that I am daughter

to a King of India, and that part of the country which is vnder his gouernment, is peopled with none other then Dwarffes, ſuch as we are. Long time did peace liue and floriſh among vs, without any wrong offered to a nation of ſuch weakenes: till another Indian King of great ſtature, deſcended (as he vaunts himſelfe to be) from that king Porus, which was conquered in battaile by great Alexander, hearing ſome fame ſpred abroade of my beautie, made meanes to enioy me in marriage, promiſing to make mee Queene of his Land. The King my Father, diuining before hand what might enſue heereon, and perceiuing more perrill therein, then my ſhallow diſcretion could reach vnto, in ſilence ſhewed himſelfe vnwilling of ſuch an alliance: yet was hee loth to withſtand what-ſoeuer pleaſed me, becauſe I (as all women are wont to doo) could not cō
                  tent my ſelfe with one of mine owne condition, but thirſting after change, contrarie kinde and noueltie, thought euery howre a yéere till I was with him.
               Oh how can mens golden promiſes beguile weake women? My poore ſelfe, crediting too much his liberall proteſtations, in no place could enioy any quiet of minde, vntill the match were thorowly concluded: then ſollemnelie hee came (with thirtie of his chéefe attendants) to eſpouſe me, a thing vnlikely in my ſimple opinion, that with ſo fewe people he aymed at vſurpation of a kingdome, which hee ſhadowed with all ſmooth ſemblances that might be, and had continually twentie of them about him, armed after their cuſtome in platted coates of ſhells. The wedding was ſollemnized, and hee ſo full of humanitie and curteſie, that my Father began to repent his former hard cō
                  
                     •
                  ecture, and thought it a happy and fortunate marriage, no way to be doubted or feared afterward.
               After wee had ſpent ſome two monthes in feaſting and delights, to generall contentment, but eſpeciallie mine, fiue hundred of his people, armed after the ſame manner as the other were, entred my Fathers kingdome, pretending that they came to waite on him home, becauſe ſome diſſention

had hapned among his ſubiects during his abſence, and could hardly be pacified but by his preſence.
               
                  Saboco, for ſo was this Indian King my huſband named, when hee ſaw that he had men ſufficient there to kill vs all, (for I was the talleſt in ſtature in all our Country, beeing a cubit and a halfe in height, and euery one feared me in regard of my greatnes) he laboured to haue mee home to his owne kingdome, whether (God knowes) I went with no little willingnes, little ſuſpecting any trecherie towarde me: and this he haſtened with the more ſpéede, becauſe hée had gotten intelligence, that my Father (by theſe armed troupes growne ſuſpitious of his ſonne in law,) had helde conference with a neighbour Nation confining vppon vs, requeſting aſſiſtance if occaſion ſhould vrge it.
               Our departure was celebrated with all poſſible ioy and triumphs, and béeing come to his kingdome, I was receiued with exceeding honour, and all maieſticall dignities beſéeming a Quéene. But eyght daies were not fully paſt, till I beheld my huſbands countenaunce ſtrangely changed, which pierced my hart with ſuch inward affliction, that in his lookes I might reade the preſage of my ruine. Within ſome fewe dayes following, I ſitting alone with him in his Chamber, and doubtfull of ſome imminent ill fortune, he ſuddainly caught mee by the haire of the head, and pulling me from my ſeate, after he had ſhaken & tugde me as himſelfe pleaſed, he threw me againſt the grounde, giuing me ſo many ſpurnes with his féete, as the breath was readie to flie out of my body. When hee ſawe mee in ſuch an affrighted & diſtracted eſtate, as hee iudged I durſt not denie what ſoeuer he demaunded, with wordes full of furie and bitter deſpight, he ſpake to me in manner following.
               
                  Iſota, (for ſo am I called) looke what I enioyne thee, performe vpon thy life, as thou will auoyde worſe torture then I haue yet inflicted on thée. Write to thy Father, after thine accuſtomed courſe of enditing, and tell him thou lyeſt ſickly at the very poynt of death: in regarde whereof

this is thy deſire, that accompanied with thy eyght Brethren and foure Siſters, he would come and ſée thée before thy death. And becauſe thine owne attending Dwarffe, who (in reſpect of his credite with the King thy father) ſhal carry the Letter, may the better aſſure him by worde of mouth likewiſe, that he ſaw thée very ſick: when thou haſt written and ſealed the Letter, thou ſhalt betake thee to thy bed, feigning and diſſembling extreame ſickneſſe indéed. I perceiuing at what marke Saboco made his leuell, though I was ſhrewdly ſhaken, and very ſore with ſtripes, tolde him, that the vnnaturall dealing he had vſed toward mee, might well enough ſuffiſe his vnkind inclination, without making mee the meanes to betray mine owne kinred and Father.
               Then like a mad man, he flew into a more violent fury, excéeding the former crueltie extended to me, and haled me by the hayre along the ground ſo outragiouſly, treading on me, and beating me ſo vnreaſonably, as hee brake diuers vaines in my body and armes: and bringing mee in his armes to a great bay window, proffered to caſt mee headlong out thereat, ſaying: Thus dieſt thou, if thou yéeld not to what I haue enioyned thee. So much preuailed with me the feare of death, yt I cryed out to him, ſaying: Deere Lord, ſaue my life, and I will performe what ſoeuer you would haue me.
               Héereuppon, ſetting me on my feete againe, he ſhewed himſelfe to be highly contented, and with a countenaunce pleaſing, and words moſt perſwaſiue, he brought mee pen and incke: then on ſuch a leafe as the Indians vſe to write, I ſet downe the purpoſe of what ſoeuer he willed mée: and the Letter beeing cloſed vp, I was conuaied to my bedde, where I needed not to counterfet or diſſemble ſicknes, his rough vſage had brought mee into extreame ſufficiencie, both in bodies debilitie, & affliction of minde. Then bringing the Dwarffe to me, in whom I repoſed no meane confidence, I gaue him the Letter, with ſpeeches ſutable to my preſent eſtate and his appointment, deſiring him beſide, to

be very earneſt with my Father, to delay no time, leaſt I dyed before his comming.
               The King my Father, beléeuing the Letter, and the meſſengers teſtimonie that brought the ſame, within ten dayes ſpace was come vnto mee, and finding mee in that weake eſtate, expreſſed a kinde Fathers true ſorrowe for his childe. Saboco diſſemblingly entertained him with great honour, till ſo many dayes were out-worne as his furie could allow, in which time, diuers Lords that came in company with my Father, by his direction were returned to theyr owne houſes, (becauſe my Father would attende my death or recouery) and the Lordes fayled not to report theyr royall vſage by Saboco, which made euery one free from miſtruſting his trecherous intention.
               When hee ſawe time fitting with his long expectation, he cauſed my Father, with ſixe of my brothers to be layde hold on, and likewiſe my foure ſiſters: but theſe two, forewarned by me at that inſtant to reſpect themſelues, and labouring to aduertiſe the other, but coulde not compaſſe it, whereupon they fledde with all poſſible ſpéede, not a little gréeued to leaue theyr Father & brethren in a tyrants curteſie. Saboco, bringing my Father and Bretheren to my beds ſide, with menaces & torments did enforce them, that my Father ſhould write to the chiefeſt in his kingdome, to deliuer the Caſtels of defence, treaſuries, and what ſoeuer elſe him pleaſed, to ſuch as Saboco ſhould ſend to demaund them.
               Now, becauſe the Indians neuer vſed to contradict anie thing theyr King commaunded, all that the Letter imported, was forthwith performed, and thoſe Princes who before were our confederates, by this meanes remained deſperate of theyr owne iuriſdictions. Newes being brought to Saboco, that euery thing ſorted to his owne direction, hée brought my Father and his ſixe ſonnes into my Chamber, where before my face he firſt murdered the aged King, and afterward his ſonnes without any compaſſion: then cauſing my Siſters to be ſeuerally brought thether likewiſe,

he deflowred them one after another in my fight, and my ſelfe, which had deliuered ſuch a wealthy Kingdome into his hands, he deliuered ouer to ye raſcalitie of his Court, to diſhonour me firſt with abhorred luxurie, and afterward with wilde beaſts to be torne in peeces.
               But heauen beholding my intollerable iniuries, exceeding the abilitie of any liuing creature to endure, raiſed me vp one friende among ſo many monſtrous inhumaine villaines, a Gentleman of his Chamber, who ſéeing mée left to violent proſtitution, pittying a Kings daughter ſhoulde be ſo brutiſhly diſgraced, conſidering my beautie pleaded for farre better reſpect, deuiſed this ſhift in hope to doo mée good: that (to auoyde contention who ſhoulde enioy mee) fortune ſhould be deſcided by lotterie, and lots beeing caſt, his was the honour firſt to poſſeſſe me, which hee (crauing that the eye of day might not looke on an act ſo deteſtable) purpoſed to performe me (as he ſaid) the night enſuing: but indeede he promiſed me to conuay me thence, and ſette me ſafe with ſome tryed friende in my Fathers kingdome.
               But Fortune yet not ſatiſ-fied with my ſo many iniuries, croſt vs againe in this determination, for by the way as we rode (with all circumſpection wee could deuiſe) wee met with certaine of Sabocos friendes, returning from taking poſſeſſion of my fathers Realme in his behalfe. They knowing me, and out-facing mee that I laciuiouſly fledde from my huſband with the Gentleman of his Chamber, who (for my defence) had brought twentie friendes along with him, fell to ſuch diſcention with vs, that in the fight few on either part were left aliue, and I beeing mounted on a tame Hart, (according as the Queenes vſe to ride in thoſe Countries) doubtfull how the iſſue of the fight would prooue, fled into a wood not farre diſtant, for I had no reaſon to expect good of Sabocos followers.
               As I rode on ſtill, looking where I might moſt conueniently hide my ſelfe, it was my good happe to meete with theſe my two brethren, that by my meanes had eſcaped with ſafetie of life: they eſpying me a fa
                     •
                  re off, & knowing

mée to be their poore diſtreſſed Siſter, met mee with the greateſt ioy that among ſo many miſeries coulde be expreſſed, eſpecially, by my wretched and deſpiſed ſelfe, who neuer thought (after our parting) to ſee them any more, and the like oppinion held they of mee, imagining I coulde no way eſcape with life.
               They mounting vpon the Hart behind mee, becauſe in ſuch neede no time was to be loſt, wee gallopped away amaine thorow the wood, and came at length to a certaine Cittie of my Fathers kingdome, where Sabocos people, as yet had taken no poſſeſſion. There wee aſſured our ſelues of ſome ſecuritie, for when wee had aduertiſed the people, what had happened to the King and his ſonnes, we founde them ſo loyall, ready, and diligent, that they made liberall offer of theyr owne liues, for preſeruation of ours.
               The newes of our arriuall there, was ſoone ſpred thorow the kingdome, which was extreamely ruined by Sabocos followers, yet in mightie troopes (abandoning theyr goods and houſes) they flocked to vs daily, with mindes reſolued to maintaine vs in the iuſtice of our cauſe. Certaine Lords belonging to Saboco, who held the royall Citty and forces thereto belonging, in ſhort time gaue intelligence to their King heereof: and he falling to his wonted mad furie, ſlew thrée of my Siſters vpon report of the newes, but the fourth, beeing the fayreſt, he kept ſtill with him as his Concubine, and leuied tenne thouſand of his ſubiects, to get vs againe once more into his poſſeſſion.
               All which notwithſtanding, our people continued theyr faythfull reſolution, deſiring rather a thouſand times their vndooing and deaths, then that we ſhould fall againe into the Tyrants hands. Yet we, perceiuing our ſtrength to be ſmall, and doubtfull beſide leaſt any treaſon might bee wrought, in conference with ye chiefeſt of the Cittie where we were: wee thought it moſt conuenient for vs to eſcape thence, ſo might they finde grace and fauour of Saboco, but detayning vs, and fighting for vs, endanger both the Citties ruine and their owne deſtruction.
               
                  Vpon this conſultation, the next night enſuing, diſguiſing our ſelues in garments for our purpoſe, and mounted all three vpon my Hart, wée tooke our leaue, departing whether good fortune might guide vs. The Hart, who naturally ſhunnes the haunt of men, eſpecially thoſe of great ſtature, becauſe hée had béene bred and made tame among our little race, brought vs ſafely through whole Armies of our owne Nation, but auoided all reſort of greater people. In this manner we eſcaped ſafely, and comming to ye Seaſide, turned off our Hart into a wood adioyning, and hitting by good hap on this little Barke, directed our courſe thether where we foūd you, vnderſtanding that the flower of the Grecian Knights were then in Turkie.
               
               This moſt diſhonourable iniur
                     •
                  e, kindled ſuch a deſire in Florendos to reuenge ye Ladies wrongs, that he thought he ſhould neuer get ſoone enough into India: but after they had ſailed diuers dayes together, at laſt they put to ſhoare, where ſhée with her brethren firſt tooke ſhipping, and looking awhile about them, they ſawe the Hart to come againe to them out of the wood: which they taking as an argument of ſome good ſucceſſe to enſue, mounted on the beaſtes backe as before they had doone, and ſo ſet forward with the Knight on their iourney.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XLI. Howe Florendos met with a ſtrange enchauntment, and afterward ouer-came Saboco, with great perrill of his owne life.
               
                  
                     SAboco, hauing doone diuers odious and barbarous trecheries to the Indians, grewe to be ſo generally hated of euery one, that for getting an others kingdome in ſuch bloody manner, hee was now in good forwardnes to looſe his owne. Wherefore, hearing how the Lady was ſo ſecretly departed, to prouide her ſelfe of ſome Knight that might puniſh his villanies, growing ſuſpitious withall of the Grecian Caualierie, whoſe fame was diſperſed quite thorow the world: fearing to enter combate in ſo vniuſt a cauſe, hée went to a Magitian of an hundred and foure-ſcore yeeres old, liuing there in his kingdome with good eſtéeme and fauour, and held with ye beſt as a man of great experience, to him he imparted his minde, ſetting this downe as a full reſt and concluſion, that who ſoeuer ſhould come to combat in the Ladies defence, muſt by his ſkill be kept backe and impeached.
               The olde Wizard, who knewe that no enchauntment could continually endure, but that iuſtice will preuaile againſt all ſorcery whatſoeuer, aduiſed Saboco to reſtore the Lady to her kingdome, and flie all occaſion of reſiſting againſt right: but hee, more reſpecting worldly authoritie and pompe, then the puniſhment due to deedes of iniuſtice, with a ſterne countenaunce returned him this aunſwere. I come not to demaunde any counſell of thée, but helpe, therefore ſpéedily determine with thy ſelfe, that leaſt anie

Knight ſhould come to check my hopes, that thou hinder his paſſage by ſome powerfull incantations: and becauſe I ſee thee ſcant willing to pleaſure mée, I will not let thée depart, vntill I ſee my ſelfe free from all dread of danger.
               The old Magitian, ſéeing himſelfe in power of the Tyrant, performed ſuch an enchauntment as ſhall héereafter bée declared, but with ſmall hope of life, becauſe he knewe it by ſound experience, that againſt the progenie of worthie Palmerin, the greateſt enchauntment would prooue of no force: thus much as an inducement to that which followeth.
               
                  Florendos béeing mounted armed vppon his Courſer, and the Lady with her Brethren vppon the Hart, which they found by chaunce there attending for them, rode directly toward the kingdome of Saboco, and ſcarely had they ridden the length of two leagues, but they beheld before them a farre off, a Mountaine ſo ſhining, as if it had beene of the pureſt ſiluer: whereat the Lady not a little meruailing, becauſe ſhée ſawe none ſuch in the time of her flight, deſired the Knights oppinion thereon, who béeing well acquainted with Magicall illuſions, immediatly geſſed what it ſhould be, and ſaid. Faire not Lady, Knights haue many times met with ſuch enchauntments, and they are borne to conclude farre greater aduentures.
               The Lady perceiuing him to make no more reckoning thereof, beganne to forſake her former diſmaied countenaunce, ſo rode they on ſtill, vntill they came to the foote of that glittering Mountaine, where Florendos ſaw about ſome halfe a miles diſtance aboue him, a woman, that ſeemed of thirtie yeeres in age, and a young mayden of fiftéene whom ſhee held by the hand, both of them crying out aloude to him for help. The Knight noting them very aduiſedlie, thought the one to be Miragarda his wife, & the other Victoria, daughter to Prince Florian, going along together hand in hand.
               
                  Florendos could no longer containe himſelfe, but diſmounting from his horſe, prepared to climbe vp the mountaine

after them: but by reaſon it was of fine polliſhed ſiluer, when hée ſeemed to haue attained the height of tenne paces, he ſlid downe againe to the foote where he aſcended. Yet ſtill he heard the voyces call vnto him, the one of them hee tooke aſſuredly to be his wiues: and ſo ſtanding deuiſing how he might get vp, hee eſpied a poore fellowe with ſuch ſhooes as they vſed in that Country, hauing diuers ſharpe poynted ſtéeles faſtned to the ſoles, which would pierce into ſtones, or any thing whatſoeuer. Taking holde on that benefit, hee preſently prouided himſelfe a payre of the like, and ſo clambred vp much better then before, albeit oftentimes with very great perrill: and cōming néere the place where he heard the voices call him, he felt the mountaine to tremble vnder him, and the ſiluer to breake in péeces, as though it would haue opened to ſwallow him.
               The ſight heereof made Iſotas hart to diſmay, fearing leaſt the Knight ſhould there perriſh: but Florendos truſting in GOD, who neuer forſakes him that vndertakes a cauſe of iuſtice, ſtill held on his way, & comming to a fayre plaine, he could not ſée the women whom he hoped to finde there, but there onely ſtoode a goodly Collomne or Piller, with this inſcription grauen vpon it.
               Heere, death for honour maist thou ſoone exchange.
               
                  Florendos reading this bréefe, and ſcorning all friuolous threats of Magicall charmes, ſate downe on the baſes that ſupported the Piller, to reſt himſelfe awhile, and to try if he could get a ſight of the women once more or no. He had not ſitten there halfe a quarter of an howre, conſidering with himſelfe what he was to doo, but hee felt himſelfe puld backward, as if ſome mans hand had ſhot forth of the Piller and doone it: and ſtarting vp to ſee the reaſon thereof, hee beheld that the great Collomne was changed into a Giant of like height in ſtature, leading two Griffons in a leaſh, as if he had béene a Hunter.
               This Giant flew vppon him ſo fiercelie, as the Knight reputed himſelfe but a dead man, but yet to looſe nothing of what was in him, hee purpoſed to ſell his life at a verie

déere rate: one while deliuering ſome aſſurance of his vallour to the Giant, and then ſeuerally to the Griffons, who much annoyed him with theyr ſharpe gryping tallents, yet ſuch was his ſtrength and nimble dexteritie, as hee got frō them ſtill, though they held him nere ſo ſtrongly. The Giant followed him ſo eagerly with his Club, that hée knew not how to ſhunne his manifold heauie ſtroakes, til watching fit aduantage, ſtriking by a blowe meant very dangerouſly at him, he got within him, & gaue him ſuch a wound in the throate, that he fell downe there-with, as if hée had béene ſlaine. When the Griffons ſaw the Giant fall, and themſelues gotten at libertie out of the leaſh, they ſeazed vpon the Knight with ſuch rauenous furie, as if they meant to teare him in péeces.
               But he, perceiuing himſelfe in ſuch extreame perrill, by good hap ſmote off the right wing of one of them, and wounded the other vpon the legge, as they could no longer keepe aloft vppon him: ſo the one béeing vnapt to flie, and the other to hold footing vpon the ground, hee was in good hope he had gotten the victory. But ſuddainly hee heard a great doore open, which ſéemed to ſhut vp the mouth of a huge deepe cauerne, and the Griffons entring thereat, hée beh
                     •
                  ld the Giants body likewiſe taken vp, and carried into the ſelfe ſame place.
               Then ſetting him downe vppon a great ſtone there lying, to marke the end of ſo ſtrange a meruaile, as he looked round about him, there ruſhed foorth a cōtrary way a great wilde Boare, with two doggs eagerly purſuing him: the Boare running mainly at the Knight, rent a peece of his Armour off, and hurt him in the ſide, and one of the dogges catching hold with his foote on his Shield, brake it off frō his necke, by reaſon the buckled leathers had no ſtrength 
                     ••
                  hold, the other dog caught faſt his Sword with his teeth, and h
                     •
                  ld him from vſing it with wonderfull might.
               
                  Florendos, ſeeing himſelfe in this deſperate eſtate, perforce got looſe his ſword from the dog, but the Boare comming fiercely vpon him againe, ſo labourd him with his

ſharpe clawes and tuſkes, that he was conſtrained to fall downe, and the dog got the Sword againe, tugging it ſo violently, that the chaine which helde it faſtned about his arme, brake in twaine, and ſo hee was forced to let it goe out of his hand. The Boare trampled vpon him, euen as he pleaſed, and one of the dogs getting faſt hold on his foote, trayled him vp and downe along on the ground whether he liſted: in which extremitie, albeit Florendos could haue but little hope of life, yet did not his courage faile him a iote, and getting the Boare by one of his tuſkes, by meere ſtrength pluckt it out of his head, which made the beaſt, ſeeing himſelfe diſarmed in that part, to bee leſſe extreame then before he had béene, & to keepe a little further off from the Knight.
               Nor ſtept hee vppon this fortunate aduantage, but faſtning holde with his hand vpon one of the dogges legges, it prooued to him very ſucceſſefull: for the dogge pulling and tugging to get his legge looſe, by that meanes pluckt the Knight vp on his feete againe, where looking for ſomwhat to defend himſelfe withall, hee eſpyed the Giants Club lying on the ground, which as hee ſtooped to take vp, the other dogge got hold vpon his Helmet, and the laces breaking through the violent pulling, doo what he could it fell off his head.
               This needes muſt be very diſpleaſing to the Knight, to be thus diſarmed where was moſt danger, but hope of victorie ſtill comforted him, and the Giants Club at libertie in his hand, he firſt layd at one dogge, and then at ye other, with ſuch maine ſtrokes, that they ranne toward the Cauerne ſo faſt as they could. Florendos looking in at ye Caues mouth, eſpyed there his Sword and Helmet, which he béeing deſirous to enioy againe, without more adooe ſtept in to fetch them, when preſently the doore ſhut, and encloſed him within it.
               As hee went groping in the darke to finde his way, hee heard great clattering of Armour, as if there were ſome multitude of armed men, and that hee ſhould bee there enforced

to fight with them: héereupon there hapned ſuddenlie a mightie earthquake, which made the Caue to open very wide behind him, where he did diſcerne twentie armed Knights, all prepared with their naked Swordes to come & aſſaile him, which hee awaiting when they would doo it, and they not moouing at all, hee perceiued it was but a Magicall phantaſma, to terrifie ſuch as were not ſkilful in the like accidents.
               Now began he to imagine in his mind, that (ſince they ſtirred not any way to moleſt him) that aduenture was finiſhed, whereupon, ſtepping to them, they gaue him each one a light touch with their Swords, and preſently vaniſhed he knew not which way: when Florendos ſaw himſelfe off from the Mountaine, which ſéemed Siluer no longer as it had doone before, going on a little further, he found his Sword and Helmet lying together, as before he had taken them from the dog: then arming his head, and taking his Sword ready drawne in his hand, hee went about deuiſing with himſelfe, where Miragarda & Victoria might be, whom he thought to be the women whom he had ſeene before.
               As hée looked about him héere and there, he beheld tenne Knights vpon the plaine, and one who ſéemed as Lord and commaunder of them, all riding a pace toward the Mountaine. This was Saboco, who vnderſtanding by the aged Nigromancer, what Florendos did from time to time, and how he proceeded thorow the enchauntment, whē he heard that he had finiſhed the aduenture, in a mad rage hee kild the old Wizard, becauſe he did no better protect him by his ſkill. Then riding on toward the Mountaine, hee came thether euen as Florendos had newly diſcended, not knowing readily which way to take, but deſirous by all meanes he might to ſhunne the man, who had brought to end ſo ſtrange an aduenture.
               
                  Florendos, by reaſon of his late paſſed turmoiles, being wearie, went a ſoftly pace, and finding his horſe there at the Mountaine foote, and mounting on his backe, rode to

vnderſtand what Knights thoſe were, as alſo to enquire for his Wife and Niece, which very curteouſly hee enquired of Saboco himſelfe. But hée béeing very much troubled in his mind, as willing to auoyde all occaſions of danger, returned him this aunſwere. Thou ſhouldſt be ſome pretty youthfull Ganimede, that demaundeſt for women among Knights in Armes.
               Theſe ſcornefull words made Florendos check his horſe with the bridle, and giue the ſignall yt hee would iouſt with him, which Saboco made no refuſall of, thinking him to be a man of no merrite at all. But ſuch was the encounter, as Saboco bare away Florendos his Helmet, becauſe (the laces béeing broken) he could not well faſten it on, and he was run quite thorowe the arme with the others Launce. The other Knights wondred at this valiant courſe, & made offer of aſſiſtance to their Lord: but he, who imagined him ſelfe not meanely honored, if he could get the vpper hande of ſuch a braue gallant, cryed out to them to ſtay & not ſtir, and drawing his ſword, he went againſt Florendos, vſing theſe words. Thou ſhouldſt be hee that hath finiſhed mine enchauntment, if thou be the man, before wee part, Ile make thée to repent it.
               
                  Florendos would returne him no aunſwere, but deliuering a downe right blow at him, cleft his Shield, & wounded him a little in the breaſt, and immediatly after in the ſide. Theſe two hurts comming ſo together, made Saboco vſe all his cunning at the head of Florendos, which beeing vnarmed, he defended with his Shield & his ſword thwart ouer it, becauſe hee perceiued Saboco had vallour in him: Neuertheleſſe, the ſtroke giuen was ſuch, as cut quite thorow his Sword, pierced part of the Shéelde, and hurt him a little vpon the head.
               When Florendos felt himſelfe wounded, and but halfe a ſword left him, he perceiued death apparantly before his eyes, if ſlothfully hee neglected to make concluſion of the fight: wherefore, giuing the ſpurres to his horſe, hee got hold of Saboco in his armes, & Saboco did the like by him,

ſo tugging and pulling by very meere ſtrength, they fell beſide their horſes to the ground, where Saboco falling with his wounded arme againſt a great ſtone, brake it in ſhiuers, by meanes whereof, Florendos got aboue him, and in vnlacing his Helmet, was hurt by him in ye throat. whereon, lifting vp his dagger to haue ſtabb him, the Pagan humbly entreated for life, which Florendos (beeing much offended at his laſt hurt) had not graunted, but that he ſaw the other tenne Knights preparing themſelues to reſkue their Lorde in ſuch a neceſſity. And as they were going toward him, Saboco (ſore greeued that he had loſt the honour of the day,) taking holde on his coate of Maile, ſaid.
               Ah worthy Knight, I repent nowe my baſe begging of life, therefore I pray thee kill mee, ſince thou art the firſt that haſt obſcured all my paſſed glory. Florendos, who was glad of any occaſion to pardon him, aunſwered. I will neuer kill the man that is deſirous of death, as wel to ſhunne infamie, as to let him beholde the miſerie of his owne condition, and what it is for men to doo ſuch things as are vnbeſeeming them.
               When the Indian ſaw hée would not kill him, hee diſp
                     •
                  
                  ſed himſelfe to doo whatſoeuer the Knight pleaſed, and ſubmitting to his mercie, they all mounted on horſebacke, ryding to haue their wounds bounde vp and cured: where a while let vs leaue them, and nowe returne to the Knight of Fortune.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XLII. How the Knight of Fortune went to combate Garnides, and being taken of him, was by one of his Daughters ſet at libertie againe.
               
                  
                     PRimaleon, after he had ouercome Bernuccio, and fully ended the enchauntment, prepared himſelfe ſuddenly to depart thence, becauſe he would offer no more iniurie to his Miſtreſſe: and hauing reſted him ſufficientlie, without returning vp the ſtaires any more, he had fare-well vnto the Lady, who ſtoode beholding him with very diſdainfull lookes. So parting thence with Traſino, Lord of the Caſtell where hee was firſt entertayned, and accompanied with his Squire onely, he purpoſed to goe finde out Garnides: and make him reſtore the kingdome to Filenia, béeing the true and rightfull heyre thereof, and comming to a Fountaine, he allighted from his horſe, to féede on ſuch prouiſion as his Squire had brought with him.
               Héere he felt himſelfe ſo weary with his paſſed trauaile, as béeing vnable to keepe open his eyes, he layd him downe to ſléepe: which aptly fitted the purpoſe of diſcontented Filenia, who hauing conuerted her former affection to vnappeaſed hatred, intended to fore-warne Garnides of the Knights comming, that hee might haue the more time to prouide for himſelfe, whereupon ſhee wrote to him in manner following.
               
                  
                     
                     The Letter of Filenia the diſpleaſed Princeſſe, to Garnides, for betraying the Knight of Fortune to him.
                     ¶ The ſuperſcription. To her royall and kingly friend, Garnides.
                     
                     
                        WEll may I curſe that Traytor Bernuccio, (high, mightie, and moſt honourable Lord) who ſo long hath beene the hinderer of my happie fortunes, ſhutting me vp in his deuilliſh and damnable enchauntment: wheras els I might haue beene your Queene diuers yeeres ſince, and wee two haue ſwayed the Kingdome in peace and tranquilitie. But nowe there is come a Knight inuinſible, who hath finiſhed the magicall charmes of Bernuccio, and comes by force of Armes to compell you, (as at his commaund) to deliuer mee my Kingdome, which I had rather ioyntly enioy with you, making you Lord both of it and mee. Hazard not your ſelfe in a ſingle fight with him, but promiſe him whatſoeuer he ſhall demaund of you, to the end you may the better get poſſeſſion of him, which beeing cunningly compaſſed, you ſhall afterward heare more from me.
                     
                        
                           Yours
                           ▪ Filenia the Princeſſe.
                        
                     
                  
               
               This Letter was conuaied to Garnides, two dayes before Primaleon could get thether, and not a little welcome to him I warrant yée, but when the Knight came, kéeping off from his Caſtell a bow ſhoote and more, hee ſent his faithfull Squire to challenge him the fight. Garnides diſſembling, as if hée had receiued no former intelligence, armed himſelfe onely, and comming into the field, gaue faire ſalutations to Primaleon, whoſe errand béeing other matters

then bare talke onely, ſome-what roughly thus hee ſpake to Garnides.
               
               I know not Sir, what reaſon you haue, to vſurpe anothers Kingdome, without any intent (me thinks) of reſtoring it againe: I am therefore come to tell you, that eyther you muſt winne it, or die, iuſtice ſits on my ſword, intending to reſtore right, and puniſh wrong.
               
                  Garnides pulling off his Gauntlet, ſhewed his naked hand, which was a ſigne that he would peaceably conferre with Primaleon, and Primaleon perceiuing it, dreadleſſe drew néere, when Garnides returned him this aunſwere. With patience (Sir Knight) I hope you will heare me, I haue held the kingdome belonging to Filenia, by ſuch order as the King her Father appointed me, becauſe her brother dyed by a fatall accident, which Bernuccio falſely and maliciouſly imputing to me, as if that I had either done or procured it, got hence the Princeſſe, then but very young, and enchaunted her in a Ship with certaine Lyons, which (it ſhould appeare) you haue by your vallour ended. If then I haue not doone what you déeme expedient, herſelfe béeing now at liberty, I will performe what ſoeuer you woulde haue mée: for by no meanes will I aduenture the combate with you, both in regard of your renowned vertues, as alſo becauſe no good ſucceſſe attends on ill actions.
               Theſe ſpéeches deliuered with very good lookes & calmelie, ſo preuailed in the minde of Primaleon, that beléeuing faithfully what he ſaid, he went very kindly with him into his Caſtle, though much againſt Lord Traſinos mind that was there with him: neuertheleſſe, he was very graciouſly entertained, and the Knight expreſſed equall curteſie, beeing glad Filenia ſhould haue her kingdom quietly reſtored, without combatting with a man ſo ful of affability, as Garnides outwardly declared himſelfe to be.
               The dinner was ſerued in moſt ſumptuouſly, and the more to ſecure him from any imagination of ill meaning, hee ſent for a Lady his Daughter of very exquiſite beautie, commaunding her to ſit right before Primaleon, which ſo

highly pleaſed him, ſéeing her ſo beautifull and vertuouſlie modeſt withall, as ſuddainly he became much enamoured of her.
               Dinner beeing ended, a fayre Violl de gamba was brought her, whereon the Lady ſo rarely and cunninglie playd, and ſung thereto with a voyce ſo ſweet and heauenlie, that Primaleon, though his thoughts forbad him to affect her, yet was hee well contented to heare her, & the better to hold out conference with her, oft would hee vrge her to play ſome leſſons twiſe or thriſe ouer, and to ſing againe diuers of her ditties, eſpecially theſe two following, wherin he very much delighted.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           ¶ The firſt Dittie of Laurea, daughter to Garnides, ſweetlie ſung to her Violl de gamba, in the preſence of the Knight of Fortune.
                           
                              In loue there is no greater bliſſe,
                              Then when deſires doe kindly kiſſe.
                              EYes and thoughts, why doe yee gad
                              From the bounds are you aſſignde?
                              You that made your Miſtreſſe glad,
                              Will you now peruert her minde?
                              Then my mothers words be true,
                              Greater foes are none then you.
                              In loue there is no greater bliſſe,
                              Then when deſires doe kindly kiſſe.
                           
                           
                              Eyes, you firſt did tell my minde,
                              There could come no harme by gazing;
                              That my thoughts too falſe doth finde,
                              Madly now they runne amazing.
                              Neuer felt I this before,
                              Ile neuer truſt a lyer more.
                              In loue there is no greater bliſſe,
                              Then when deſires doe kindly kiſſe.
                           
                           
                              
                              Make amends for eithers wrong,
                              Eyes, when as my thoughts doe ſterue,
                              Feede your ſelues with looking long,
                              Lend them hope, they may deſerue.
                              So eyther ſhall prooue others friend:
                              And in peace this warre ſhall end.
                              In loue there is no greater bliſſe,
                              Then when deſires doe ſweetly kiſſe▪
                              
                           
                           FINIS.
                        
                        
                           ❀ Her ſecond Dittie to the Knight.
                           
                              LOue of late lay all alone,
                              begging almes at Beauties gate:
                              Hee was aunſwerd: There was none,
                              all was gone, he came too late.
                           
                           
                              Yet hee would not from the doore,
                              begging ſtill for pitties ſake:
                              But the rich vpon the poore,
                              would but little pitty take.
                           
                           
                              Yet would Loue not ſo leaue off,
                              hoping pitty still to moue:
                              Then he aunſwerd was in ſcoffe,
                              Beautie had no looke for loue.
                           
                           
                              And ſhee cast him ſuch a frowne,
                              as did ſuch a fixing proue her:
                              That hee fell in ſuch a ſwoune,
                              as hee neuer could recouer.
                           
                           
                              While in ſilence ſorrow cryes,
                              in behalfe of his behoue:
                              Curſſed be thoſe cruell eyes,
                              that will hide a looke from loue▪
                              
                           
                           FINIS.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  With theſe, and ſundry other well compoſed Ditties, did the Ladie both pleaſe her owne thoughts, & the Knights attention, béeing not onely very ſkilfull in hand, but as excellent and delicate in her voyce: and theſe ſongs agréeing with her owne conceits, ſoupled alſo with ſome perſwaſion of the Knights affable nature, that hee was not made of Adamant, but by ſuch allurements might bee drawne to loue, cauſed her to ſpende the whole day in thoſe amourous deuiſes, hoping to enioy him as her huſband. At night, Garnides, (leſſe aduiſed then he was aware off) ſuffered his daughter to come againe into the Hall, when among other paſſages betweene her and Primaleon, not béeing heard by any, ſhe ſaid thus to him. If any diſaſter doo happen to you by my Fathers meanes, it ſhall coſt my life before you be iniuried.
               Theſe words mooued ſome ſuſpition in the Knight, that doubted no inconuenience or trechery at all, vntil he heard theſe ſpéeches from the Lady. Supper was prepared with moſt royall pompe, which béeing paſt ouer, and ſome prettie ſpace ſpent in Muſique, ſongs, and other pleaſing paſtimes, Primaleon was afterward conducted to a princelie Chamber, where the King, purpoſing to be ſurely poſſeſſed of the Knight, ſtayed holding diſcourſe till he ſawe him in bed, and then with a diſſembled conge departed.
               
                  Primaleon, bethinking himſelfe of the Ladies wordes, lay awake till paſt midnight to ſée what might enſue: but not hearing the very leaſt noyſe or ſtirring at all, diſpoſed himſelfe to reſt, and ſlept ſo ſoundly, that the doore was opened, and fiftie men entred encompaſſing his bed, before hee knew any way howe to defend himſelfe, and there menacing him with their drawne weapons, they tooke him, and bringing him before Garnides, he was threatned with many iniurious ſpeeches, and cōmitted thence to a cloſe ſtrong Chamber, where hee purpoſed to haue him ſecretely murdered, becauſe he would not looſe his kingdome, nor be puniſhed by the Emperour of Constantinople for ſo great an offence.
               
                  That day, and the two next enſuing, hée ſpent in conſideration, which was the ſafeſt way for him to take, & Laurea, for ſo was his Daughter named, hearing that her Louer was impriſoned, was ready to die with very conceit of gréefe: but ſetting a ſmooth brow vpon her ſad ſorrow, the beſt way to labour for him and further her owne loue, ſhée began to ſtudie how he might be deliuered. So calling one of her ſeruaunts to her, ſhée ſent her for Traſino the Lord of the Caſtell, which had accompanied Primaleon thether, but by no meanes would come into the ſight of Garnides, by reaſon he ſtoode doubtfull of his life. Shée aduiſed him, that he ſhould ſuddenly get the horſes into a woode néere adioyning, becauſe ſhée intended to flie thence with the Knight, whom her Father ſo trecherouſly had made his priſoner.
               Afterward, getting vnſeene into her Fathers ſtudy, ſhée found a Letter lying open which had lately béene ſent him, wherein ſhe read theſe words: Primaleon, Nephewe to the Emperour of Constantinople.
                   Then her thoughts diuined, that this was the name of the Knight whom ſhee loued, ſo taking it with her into her chamber, ſhee read it at large, and found it was written by Filenia, the Daughter to King Friſoll, who layd the platforme of the treaſon whereby the Knight was taken.
               Now began a certaine kinde of iealouſie to apprehende her thoughts, afflicting her beyond all ſufferable courſe, ſuſpecting that Filenia affected her Louer, becauſe hee had done ſo much in her deliuerance, and perhaps through denying her kinde ſolicitations, ſhee entred into this diſpleaſure againſt him, which made her now the more earneſt in procuring his libertie.
               Héere-uppon, ſhée called a truſtie Coſin vnto her, who waited on her as her neereſt gentlewoman, and promiſing her rich and ſtately aduauncement, if things might ſort to her expectation, they both became confederate in this enterpriſe. So the night following, they went to a windowe but of ſlender ſtrength, whereof her Father (it ſéemed) had no knowledge, yet it abutted vppon his daughters lodging,

and therein was Primaleon encloſed as a priſoner: where knocking ſoftly on the glaſſe, Primaleon beeing awake, and remembring the promiſe which Laurea had made him, ſtarted vp to ſée who it was that knocked, and ſtepping vpon a table before the window, layd his head cloſe to the glaſſe, when the Lady (without holding him in any tedious ſuſpence) ſaid.
               Behold my Lord, now am I as good as my word, heere am I ready to die for your deliuerance, take this Pikaxe, and imploying it as by your ſtrength you very wel can, get forth of this ill harbour, & for the reſt leaue mee to prouide. Primaleon, beholding the Lady before him, and ſo happie a meanes to free him from death which he hourelie expected, was both glad and ſad: glad of his owne ſafetie, but ſadde withall, when he conſidered, that when he was eſcaped, he could not requite the Lady to her expectation, hazarding her fame and life ſo prodigally for him. Notwithſtanding, béeing bound to the beſt aduantage in a caſe ſo deſperate, hee tooke the inſtrument, and wreſted out the yron barres in ſuch ſort, as hee made a faire large wide window, & thereout came foorth. So all thrée together getting vp on the Caſtell wall, by the helpe of certaine cordes faſtned together, which purpoſely had béene left there by the King himſelfe, if a dangerous hazard ſhould betide him, ſo to eſcape away vnſéene of any.
               The Women diſcended with very great difficultie, and mounted the déepe ditch againe with as much labour, but hauing with ſafetie paſſed both, they entred ye wood, where they founde Traſino attending with the horſes, and to preuent all loſſe of time, away they galloped toward his Caſtell.
               Now it came to paſſe, that Garnides (conſidering what a great perſon hee had ſeazed on) all the next day was ſo doubtfull in his minde, as hee forgot to giue the key as hee was wont to doe, for carriage of foode to the priſoner: beſide, Laureas waiting woman, ſéeing her Chamber ſhutte that was gone with her Lady, imagined her Miſtreſſe to

be there with her Coſin, about a curious péece of embroiderie whereon they wrought, and often vſed to be thereabout ſo alone by themſelues.
               All things thus continued on till dinner time, when ſéeing they came not forth, neither made aunſwere to ſuch as knockt, vpon a ſudden an out-cry was made, which calling the King thether, the doore béeing opened with certaine engines, no body there founde, and the chamber windowe (though cunningly cloſed againe) yet appearing to be broken, the Pikaxe there lying, and the barres of yron that had béene wreſted out, thē he perceiued, that by his daughters meanes the Knight was deliuered. Nowe was hee in more extreame ſuſpition then before, not knowing what courſe was now beſt to be taken, yet at laſt hee concluded, that he would not ſend after them, but thus diſcourſed with his thoughts: Since Laurea had doone ſo much for a Knight of ſuch nobilitie, it ſéemed likely, that doubtleſſe hee would accept her as his wife, and ſo in marriage ſhée ſhoulde be highlie aduaunced: then flying from this conceite, by craft hee would make out to catch him if hee coulde, ſo was hee blinded with feare of looſing his kingdome.
               
                  Primaleon, with a company thought conuenient, purpoſed to returne and ambuſh themſelues in the Woode, to take Garnides if hee ſhould ſtirre out of the Caſtell: ſo leauing Laurea ſafely in the Pallace, he cauſed Traſino to ſelect twenty valiant Knights, euery one béeing allied to him in blood, and ſo they parted thence into a wood, which was foure miles diſtant from where the King lay. Not fullie two dayes had they there remained, but they tooke a Spy that affirmed to them, that Garnides was not diſpleaſed at the Knights loſſe or his Daughters, but prepared his men to depart from thence.
               
                  Primaleon fore-thinking what the King ſhoulde intend thereby, kept it to himſelfe, and about ſome two houres after, hee beheld an hundred Knights, which deuided themſelues into thrée parts or companies, becauſe Garnides (not knowing that Primaleon had recouered Traſinos Caſtell)

imagined, hee had hid himſelfe in thoſe woods adioyning, and beeing vnarmed, he might there the eaſier be once more poſſeſſed of him.
               Theſe three bands of Knights, hauing diuers houndes attending on them, ſearched all about, diſperſing themſelues ſo farre each from other, as they coulde heare what was doone by the noyſe they made. The Kings companie hearing the hounds at a bay, made haſt to the place, where Primaleon couching his Launce againſt Garnides, who knew not him, pierced quite through his Armour into his ſhoulder, and caſt him quite beſide his horſe.
               The King thus wounded and layd on the ground, ſo amazed all his other followers, that ſéeing Traſino come vppon them with his twentie Knights, they betooke themſelues to flight, leauing their King behinde them: who béeing taken by Traſino, and bound vpon his owne horſe, they conducted him ſafely to his Caſtell, where béeing committed to his daughters cuſtodie, for care and dreſſing of the hurt hee had receiued, they would afterward determine what was to be done with him.
            
            
               CHAP. XLIII. Howe Primaleon cauſed Laurea to be married to Traſino, making him King of the Morning Ilands, & gaue Filenia likewiſe to Garnides.
               
               
                  
                     GArnides, ſéeing hee ſhould be detained as a priſoner in Traſinos Caſtell, to whom he had doone innumerable iniuries, thought verily nowe there was no way but death with him: but when hee was committed to his daughters cuſtodie, hée conceiued the better hope of life, importuning her verie often & earneſtlie, to intreate

the Knight for ſafetie of his life. The Lady, deſirous to ſhielde her Father from death, albeit he had moſt worthily deſerued it, at night firſt ſhewed Filenias Letter to Primaleon, wherein was ſet downe all the treaſon deuiſed by her againſt him, and afterward ſollicited him very inſtantlie, to ſpare the life of the King her Father.
               This Letter was highly welcommed to Primaleon, as béeing an eſpeciall meanes to further his purpoſe, and to quittance both the Traytors in theyr due kinde, euen with ſuch chaſtiſement as hee déemed moſt conuenient: Neuertheleſſe, hee cauſed Laurea to diſſemble with her Father, that he muſt ſuffer death according to his treaſons deſerts. The next morning, he wrote vnto Filenia, that ſhe ſhoulde come to Traſinos, where he held Garnides as a Traytour: theſe newes were nothing pleaſing to the Ladie, yet imagining that Primaleon knewe nothing of her plotted trecherie, and hoping to repoſſeſſe her Kingdome againe, ſhée iournied thether, ſecuring herſelfe with her Lyons: but they were no ſooner out of ye Caſtel, when preſently the Lyons forſooke and left her, in regard ſhee was become a traytreſſe, and broken her princely faith, and like entertainement found ſhe there at her arriuall, béeing ſhutte vp like an offendour in a cloſe Chamber, and vſed as if ſhe had beene a priſoner.
               Now in the time of ordering theſe occaſions, and the Ladies expectation for repoſſeſſion of her kingdome, when Garnides was indifferently recouered, Primaleon taking Traſino with him, and Laurea with Filenia, who gaue the other many a ſcornfull and iealous looke, in regarde of her former loue to the Knight of Fortune: they all entred the Chamber of Garnides, where ſuddenly he became ſo full of gréefe to beholde them, in that all his cruell hopes were ſo croſt and ouerthrowne, as his ſences failing him, hee fell downe in a ſwoune.
               
                  Laurea beeing preſent at this gréeuous ſpectacle, moued with naturall compaſſion of her Father, went & recouered him, preuailing ſo well with diuerſitie of good arguments,

as ſhée pacified his perturbations in very reaſonable manner, when Primaleon taking Garnides by the boſome, and Filenia by the hand, thus ſpake.
               Let me now tell yee, that like two Traytors you ought to be diſmembred aliue, which the rather I ſhould conſent vnto, more for obſeruation of iuſtice then any reuenge of mine owne iniuries: but confeſſing my ſelfe in ſome ſorte obliged to Filenia, for her good aduiſe in the enchaunted Caſtell of Bernuccio, makes me the more willing to ſaue her life, and the debt I confeſſe as due to Laurea, for ſo kind deliuering me from impriſonment, commaunds that I likewiſe pardon her Fathers life. Neuertheleſſe, becauſe neither of the trecheries may paſſe without ſome puniſhment, this is the ſentence that I impoſe on Garnides: heere doe I diſgrade him of his title and kingdome, becauſe hee neuer held poſſeſſion thereof by any iuſt claime or right, and the like award ſet I downe for Filenia, for in practiſing to deſtroy his life, who with no meane perrill thereof laboured to regaine it for her, ſhee hath made herſelfe vtterly vnworthy of any ſuch dignitie. But becauſe in her Letter (which he then tooke foorth and openly read) ſhee hath elected Garnides to be her huſband, ſhée ſhall haue her deſire, and both of them enioy the Caſtell which was enchaunted by Bernuccio, paying yéerely homage to the King of the Morning Ilands.
               
               
                  Filenia was hardly contented with this deuiſion, but ſéeing how her liues perrill ſtoode on vrging the contrarie, ſhe willingly condiſcended: the like did Garnides, who thought his deſperate aduenture had made a happy returne, in gaining faire Filenia whom he déerely loued. Héereupon, they were immediatly eſpouſed together, and ſent to the Caſtell which he had aſſigned them, all which beeing finiſhed, hée called Laurea to him, ſaying: I will neuer deny, but that my life is a due debter to you in any occurrences whatſoeuer, but becauſe I cannot ſatiſ-fie your harts deſire, which (in plainer termes) is to be your huſband, and a reaſon of importance doth directly ſtand againſt it, namely, my bounden

and dutiful ſeruice to a Lady long ſince engaged, wherin, though hetherto my deſerts haue beene ſlender, yet ſince my fortune is no better, I muſt reſt content there-with. Notwithſtanding, becauſe I would acknowledge in part, though vtterly vnable to come néere your merrit, my forward readines to doe you ſeruice, let me intreat you to accept a perſon more worthy then my ſelfe, the noble Countie Traſino, diſcended of the royall progenie, and for his loyall fayth kept to King Friſoll his Lorde, farre better beſeeming you then any other: with him ſhall you enioy the faire kingdome of the Morning Ilands, and holde me in dutious ſeruice euer as your Knight, ſo farre as I offende not my gracious Lady and Miſtreſſe.
               
                  Laurea, who little expected ſuch an aunſwere, with the teares in her eyes, ſaid. My Lorde, you haue ſuch power and ſoueraigntie ouer mee, as not daring to deny whatſoeuer you commaunde, I reſt ſatiſ-fied with your appoyntment: and albeit your promiſe gaue me greater hope, I will burie all in ſilence. For I know by experience of my owne loues fire, that you cannot eaſily giue ouer affection, where the chaine of eſpeciall liking hath intirely lincked you: keepe this then in memory, that héereafter I may boldly call you my Knight.
               
                  Primaleon was exceedingly contented, hearing the Ladie ſo kindlie to accept his offer, becauſe he ſhould now wel reward the Countie Traſino, (to whom as yet hee had not made this knowne) for all the fauour and good wil he had found by him: and hauing Garnides his Ring, wherby all the Forts ſhould bee ſurrendred vp, they leuied two thouſand men, with whom they went from Iland to Iland, hauing Laurea likewiſe in their company, the people dooing great honours to her, becauſe there was neither Citty, nor Caſtell, but helde firme remembrance of ſome benefite or other, which by meanes of her interceſſions they had before receiued.
               Hauing thus the full ſtate in their owne power, and béeing entred into the cheefe royall Citty, ye night they lodged

in the Pallace, where Primaleon lying that night with the Countie Traſino, none béeing neere but themſelues alone, he thus ſpake. I haue daily labored in my thoughts, which way to requite ſo honourable loue and kindnes, as to me a poore vnknowne Knight you haue extended: wherein yet at length the heauens haue fauoured mee, and though it reach not to your woorthy deſeruings, yet accept it as an earneſt of a greater good will. You ſée how Madame Laurea is beloued of theſe people, who notwithſtanding can neuer rule them well without a huſband, therefore will I beſtow her on you in marriage, and the kingdome likewiſe with her as her dowrie.
               
                  Traſino hearing ſuch an offer made him, whereof hee neuer had hope or expectation, ſuddenly fell on his knee, and kiſſing his hand, ſaid: Nowe is it ſeene for an euident truth, that the famous race of Palmerin d'Oliua, is not only powerfull in gaining kingdoms, but euen as prompt in giuing them: it were diſhonour in mee to refuſe the gyft, comming from ſo royall a hand, enioying thereby ſo fayre a Lady, and a kingdome ſo wealthy and populous.
               
                  Primaleon béeing well pleaſed with this aunſwere, the next morning wrought ſo with Laurea, that ſhee cauſed to aſſemble there many armed Knights, thoſe in whoſe truſt ſhée might beſt relye, leaſt the people ſhould enter into any commotion, and in two dayes they had gathered in one cō
                  panie aboue two thouſand, who ioyning with them belonging to Traſino, caſt themſelues in a Ring about a Scaffold erected before the Pallace, whereon Primaleon ſoone after ſhewed himſelfe, hauing the Ladie Laurea and Traſino in his company, with more then twenty of the chiefeſt Lords in the kingdome, who were well contented to haue ſuch a King, beeing familiarly acquainted with his fayth and honourable diſpoſition, as alſo that he was deſcended of the progenie royall.
               The people there in this manner aſſembled, and Primaleon commaunding ſilence by a ſigne made with his hand, he thus began. You haue already found by very good proofe,

what difference is betwéene a good King & a Tyrant, and albeit I could acquaint yée with the benefits enſuing by the one, and ſad deſaſters attending on the other, yet doo I not now hold it ſo neceſſary, becauſe your owne laſt tryal of eyther is ſufficient. It is enough for mee to tell yée, that the Tyrant is chaſed hence, and ſhée to whom the Kingdome in right appertained, turning Traytreſſe to her owne iuſt title, and her defenders damage, ſtands likewiſe depriued of her prerogatiue: and that you néede make no doubt of Filenias treaſon, héere is the Letter written to Garnides vnder her owne hand, which whoſoeuer ſhall make any ſcrupulous queſtion of, at any time the ſight thereof ſhall more at large reſolue him.
               Nowe, in regard I would not leaue you ſubiected to anie other Kingdoms emperie, though partly by deſert, but moſt of all by iuſtice, the diſpoſing of this eſtate conſiſteth in mee: I commit both it and you to the noble Countie Traſino, whom you all know to be a man of eſpeciall merrit, fauoured and eſtéemed by this Lady, wel loued of you all, and theſe doo I appoynt to be your King and Quéene.
               No ſooner had he thus ſpoken, but the Crowne of leaues and flowers (vſed of long antiquitie in thoſe part) was brought vnto him, where-with hauing firſt dignified the King, he afterward placed it on the Lady Laureas head: to the no little contentment of all the people, right glad to ſée themſelues ſo freed from the Tyrant, and likely now to enioy much peace and tranquilitie, ſo with loud ſhoutes they celebrated the names of their King and Quéene.
               This was as pleaſing to Primaleon, becauſe his minde ranne ſtill on the aduenture of Fortune, which Dorina was to conduct him vnto: wherefore, he would needs haue them immediatly married, and paſſing on royally to the cheefe Church, after a ſolemne Maſſe ſung by an Arch-biſhoppe of very holy life, the marriage was performed, with greater content of the King then the Quéene, who with much better will would haue had Primaleon. But after better conſideration, that ſhe could not enioy him whom ſhe ſo deerelie

affected, Traſino, béeing the very nobleſt and moſt eſtéemed Knight of the Kingdome, ſhe beganne to reſpect him with a more regardfull eye, and in their returne backe to the Pallace, ſhe ſhewed him ſuch gracious and delightſome lookes, that Traſino (doubtfull before of her grace and fauour, beholding an alteration ſo ſtrange yet pleaſing) accounted his happines beyond compariſon. The feaſting was ſollemnly performed at the expence of the treaſure royall, euen that which Garnides had (with mighty taxations) gotten together: for hee beeing ſtill doubtfull what ſhould befall him, made prouiſion of treaſure to carry with him when neede ſhold require, euermore thinking to eſcape thence by flight, but it ſorted not to his expectation.
               The feaſt continued for eyght dayes together, and longer the King would haue had it in the honour of Primaleon, but he whoſe minde was labouring elſe where, ful of heate and haſtie expectation, that he might the ſooner ſée his Victoria, firſt made the King and Queene ſwear to execute iuſtice, and that Garnides nor Filenia ſhould raiſe any more commotions, but iuſtly and truly performe theyr homage, likewiſe, all the people vowing to doo their loyall allegeance, he prepared to depart on his iourney.
               Many meanes were made for his longer detayning, yet all would not ſerue to hinder his determination: but ye next morning following, taking the King by the hand, and kiſſing the Quéenes fore-head, as the cuſtome there is, ſhee ſhewed herſelfe much diſpleaſed for his departure: Which ſhe perceiuing the King to noate, turned backe to him with theſe ſpeeches.
               Be not ſuſpitious my Lorde, if at the departure of thys Knight, (whom indeede I once loued farre better then you) I expreſſe ſome outward diſcōtentment, becauſe I thought to haue enioyed him as my huſband: but my fortune therein failing me, by reaſon of his loue elſe where addicted, giue me leaue a while to grow forgetful of him, which by little and little I ſhall eaſily attaine vnto, & then let this be your ſetled perſwaſion, that I ſhall affect you as intirely, as I doted

on him fondly. Theſe words were deliuered with ſuch geſture and maieſtie, that the King both admired and highly commended her: ſo, after ſome ſmall diſcourſe concerning ſtate affaires, he deſcended with Primaleon downe the ſtayres, where after an honourable kinde embracing, hee mounted on horſebacke, and ſo departed.
            
            
               CHAP. LXIIII. Of that which Florendos did with Saboco & Iſota, and how after he had ſubdued a Serpent, hee returned to Tubante, euen as the Chriſtian Army was preparing to depart.
               
                  
                     FLorendos and Saboco had theyr wounds well looked vnto, and the danger of life on neither ſide now to be doubted, whereuppon, Iſota was ſent for and her Brother, who came together, yet verie fearefully, as timerous of Sabocos cruell handling: but when they came to the chamber where they both lay wounded, Saboco ſhewed ſuch affable ſignes of loue and kindnes, as the Ladie grewe into good ſecuritie of her ſelfe, hearing that hee would fulfill what-ſoeuer was enioyned him, and reſtore the Kingdom of Dwarffes to her elder brother named Pigmeo, the other to haue honourable reſpect beſide.
               While thus they attended theyr hurts recouery, Florendos was very deſirous to know, whether any Ladies were hidden in the Mountaine or no, becauſe that two had there appeared to him, whom he thought to be his wife Miragarda and the young Lady Victoria: but béeing reſolued by the Lords there preſent, that all thoſe illuſions were doone by the Magicall wizzard, he forbare to queſtion any further in the matter.
               
                  Before ten dayes were fully paſſed, by good care and dilligence they were thorowly recouered, then were diuers Chariots of Ladies prepared, onely to accompany and attend on Iſota: ſo rode they honourably to the chiefe Citty of the Kingdome, where their feaſting and entertainement was beyond compariſon, and Florendos (as a man going beyond all other in famous deſerts) welcommed, and very honourably reſpected. Thence departed they to the Kingdome of the Dwarffes, where Pigmeo was created King, and there they gaue themſelues to all kind of pleaſures, but moſt of all they delighted in hunting: wherein Florendos ſtill bore the chiefeſt praiſe, for killing the fierceſt and wildeſt beaſts.
               One day among the reſt, when they were preparing to goe to the woods, Pigmeo ordained that euery man ſhould arme himſelfe, becauſe there liued a Serpent ſo bloody and cruell, as of whole multitudes that had gone to encounter him, not one could be known to returne back againe. That morning, Florendos, being deſirous to deliuer the Country of ſuch a deuouring Monſter, ſent for an yron maule that Saboco had, with certaine pykes extended out at the clubbe end, about ſome foure yards long, and making it faſt at his ſaddle pommell, on he rode with them towardes the place: huge numbers of people following very ioyfully, not a little proude of hauing the Knight in their company, by whoſe valour they had good hope to be fréed from the Serpent. Diſperſing themſelues ſeuerally thorow the woods, it was Pigmeos hap to meete firſt with the Serpent, from whom he prepared himſelfe ſpéedily to flie, for he was mounted on the Hart he had vſed to ride on: but by ouer-much haſt hee fell beſide his beaſt, and ſo the Serpent got him vp in his mouth, till perceiuing he was a man of ſo little ſtature, as ſcorning a pray of no bigger moment, hee threw him from him againe, ſo that what with feare and force of the fall, he lay ſtill as quite bereft of ſence, beeing hardly able to recouer him ſelfe againe. When the Dwarffes at firſt ſawe theyr King in the Serpents mouth, they gaue ſuch a lamentable

out-cry, that Florendos and the reſt preſently gallopped thether: where the Serpent came very proudly againſt them, all the Indians not daring abide to behold him, but onely Saboco and a Coſin of his, who were gotten vp into a high ſtanding, to ſée how Florendos ſhould ſpeed againſt the Serpent.
               Hee, hauing the fore-named Maule in his hand, and the Serpent making furiouſly at him, ſcaped the Monſters firſt proffer, and wounded him in the left wing, ſtriking off diuers of his hard ſcailes: whereat the Serpent grew ſo angry, that ſuddainly fetching his taile about, he got ye Knight faſt by the Helmet there-with, & making him turne round giddily three times together, ſmit him down at laſt againſt a great ſtone on the Mountaines ſide, and ſuch was the vnhappines of the ſtroke, that hee fell downe backward, and the Serpent (as vaunting of already gotten victory) paſſed quite ouer him, thinking (as others had ſped before) that he had giuen him his lateſt payment. But the Knight, nimbly recouering footing againe, nothing at all diſmayed with the ſtroke he had receiued, made out into a more ſpacious part of the wood, where by his actiue dexteritie, he might the better helpe himſelfe.
               The Serpent perceiuing his labour not ended, followed him with exceeding rage and furie, where the Knight ſo plyed him with the poynted Maule, that ſtrewing ye ground plentifully with his hard ſcailes, he gaue him diuers little hurts and wounds, albeit the Monſter helde out ſo againſt him, that he would not permit him the very leaſt breathing while. At length, by ouer-much labour & expence of blood, Florendos perceiued the Monſter to waxe weary, whereon, hee aduaunced himſelfe the boldlier before him, and gaue him a very ſhrewde wound in the face: whereat he ſhewed himſelfe ſo enraged, that whéeling againe his long taile about, he got the Knight faſt by the midſt, and throwing him on his backe betwixt his winges, ranne ſo away with him. Saboco béeing much grieued to behold him in this danger, prepared to follow him, but it auailed nothing, for the Serpent

ranne excéeding ſwiftly, leaping ouer buſhes, rocks and hillockes, where a horſe had not the power to purſue.
               
                  Florendos, feeling no other diſcommoditie, but that hee was thus borne from the ground, after he had with much adoe vnwound himſelfe out of the Serpents tayle, leapt valiantly on his feete, and gaue ye Monſter ſuch a ſtroke with his Maule on the head, as, though it ſlaunted ſome-what aſide, yet it ſmitte him to the grounde: and thinking then to ſteppe vpon him and diſpatch him, the Maule fell out of his hand ſo neere the Monſter, that hee coulde not recouer it without manifeſt perrill, which made him then to vſe the benefite of his ſword: and comming therewith againſt the Serpent, he 
                     •
                  ound him riſen vp ſo madde and furious, as had not the Knight ſtood well vppon his guard, his caſe had then béene very deſperate: For the Monſter (making no reckoning at all of his ſword) caught him with his teeth about the head, and much did the goodneſſe of his Helmet ſteede him, for elſe he had vndoubtedly bitten his head quite off. Florendos féeling this gripe to be (in a maner) mortall, floriſhed about with his ſword he could not tell how, but by good hap it lighted vpon the Monſters throate, where the ſkinne was ſome-what tender & voyde of ſcailes, and paſſing quite thorow it, they both fell downe together, the one ſtarke dead, the other in a traunce or ſwoune.
               
                  Saboco, who with his Coſin had followed the poyſoning ſmoulder of the Serpent, came at the inſtant, when a farre off hee ſawe the Monſter fall, but not ſéeing Florendos, his hart became ſo full of griefe, that mending his pace with greater haſt, he came and found him lying like a man dead. Taking off his Helmet, and perceiuing that hee breathed not, he gaue forth many dolorous complaints: whereat his Coſin breaking forth into a laughter, ſayd. Now dooſt thou euidently prooue thy ſelfe to be a foole, in bemoaning his death, that depriued thee of all thy former honor: me thinks thou ſhouldeſt rather draw forth thy weapon, and ſmite off his head, then abuſe time thus with childiſh lamentations: if I were as thou, I would do it immediatly. And ſo would

I, (ſaid Saboco) if I were as thou art, a man of no honour nor reſpect at all: canſt thou imagine it any way reſonable, that I ſhould vanquiſh him by villanie, who ouercame mée by manly valour? and once more looſe my good name by breach of fayth, in murdring an honourable man alreadie murdred?
               During theſe ſpéeches, Florendos recouered, and Iſota with the other Ladies were likewiſe aſſembled, whence they parted with Florendos in a royall Litter to the Cittie, where Iſota vſed many comfortable ſpéeches to him, ſuch as indeede did well content him: and Saboco cauſed the Serpent to be brought thether, and the ſkinne to be taken off, that Florendos might ſende it to Constantinople, as a monument of his perpetuall honour, and the body beeing deuided into ſeuerall parts, was hanged vp in diuers eſpeciall places of the Cittie.
               
                  Iſota, who till this time was very doubtfull, leaſt her huſband ſhould faile in his promiſes to Florendos, when ſhe ſaw, with how much loue hee ſhewed the care of the others life and honour, ſhe caſt off all ſuſpition, and the day following they had another kind of diſporting, wherat Florendos (being not wounded ouer-dangerouſly) was likewiſe preſent, the Dwarffes ſhewing all the delights they could deuiſe after their manner. Some few dayes being ſpent in theſe contentments, a booke was ſtrangely brought into the Court, by a Nephew to the olde Nigromancer yt was ſlaine by Saboco, & making a preſent therof to Florendos, told him that he muſt not read therein, vnleſſe vpon ſome important occaſion, whereof hee could not otherwiſe reſolue himſelfe. Now Florendos, whoſe lamenes was not a little diſpleaſing to him, & being minded neuer to ſée Chriſtendom again, vntil he found ſome meanes for his recouery, would needs ſée how he ſhould gaine the happines to become wel again, and finding his own name in the Booke, read vnder it written theſe words.
               
                  Knight, all thy ſearching is in vaine,
                  For (who most ought) ſhall eaſe thy paine.
               
               
                  This miſterie wrought ſo in the minde of Florendos, that preſently hee concluded on his departing, and cauſing the Serpents ſkinne to be ſtuffed full of ſtrawe, commaunded that it ſhould be brought to the Sea ſide, where (with teares trickling downe the chéekes of euery one preſent) he went aboorde a man of warre belonging to Saboco, and hoyſed ſaile, hauing the Dragon ſo ſtuft, lying on the prow of the Shippe, which ſtrooke terrour in all they met by Sea, for the dead ſhape ſhewed as fearefull, as if hee had béene ſtill lyuing, ſo ſayled they on with a proſperous gale of winde. Now the wiſe Aliarte, who had a long time kept him ſelfe in ſilence, vntill a croſſe encounter of the ſtarres ſhould be paſt ouer, which he found very contrary to his great knowledge, and had made him varie in diuers rules and principles: would once more yet haue an eye to the Chriſtians ſafety, and reuoluing ouer both precedent and the preſent occaſions, & finding the newes were already come to Conſtantinople, how Florendos (in a deſperate humour) was gone to India, ſince when no other tidings could be heard of him, which made the Emperour and all the whole Court very malecontent, but moſt of all Miragarda was depriued of all comfort, hearing no newes of her ſonne Primaleon, and now likewiſe all hope loſt of euer ſéeing her huſband again, the teares ſtreaming aboundantly downe her faire chéeks, ſhe could doo nothing but ſwéetly embrace her yong daughter Concordia, ſpeaking wordes of extraordinarie paſſion and affection to her, whereat all the hearers were much moued to compaſſionate her caſe.
               The wizzard perceyuing them in this confuſed alteration, purpoſed to ſend the Serpent to the Grecian Court, without imparting any knowledge thereof to Florendos, who intended to bring it thether in manner of triumph: and framing a Letter, which euery one that knewe the writing of Florendos, ſhould abſolutely reſt perſwaded to be by his owne hand done, then ſnatching the Serpent from off the Shippe, without perceauing by whom it was taken thence, and tying the Letter faſt about the necke thereof, he cauſed

to be carried thorowe the ayre in ſuch ſort, that it appeared to euery eye as if it had flowne.
               I leaue to your conceites, to thinke with what admiration it was ſéene to paſſe ouer the walls of Constantinople, and what amazement the people were in, beholding the winges to flap together, in all reſpects as if it had béene lyuing, iudge then the feare and diſmay that was ſuddainly among them. And more to augment this terrour, they beheld it to direct his full courſe to the ſteppes aſcending the Pallace, where it ſquatted downe with an vnexpreſſable noiſe, which made many Knights come foorth to vnderſtand the occaſion, where (at firſt ſight) they were reſolued that it wanted life, ſo, ſome returning to aduertiſe the Emperour thereof, he came immediatly thether, accompanied with the young Emperour Trineus, (whom as yet he held in kind aſſociation in his Court, till certaine diſordered commotions in Allemaigne were qualified) and all the faire young Queenes and Princeſſes: where beholding how ſtrange an accident had happened, the Letter was firſt taken off that hung at the Serpents neck, and being commaunded to be publiquely read, the ſum thereof in briefe thus followeth.
               
                  
                     The Letter ſent from the wiſe Aliarte, as if it had come from the royall Florendos.
                     
                        
                           To the high and mighty Emperour Primaleon, at Conſtantinople, &c.
                        
                     
                     SAcred Maieſtie, and you moſt gracious endeared Empreſſe, with her that is my lyfes and loues intireſt companion, receaue in your royall acceptance this infallible intelligence, that in my going to Tubante, I was otherwiſe drawne to a part of India, where in the ſeruice of an iniuried Lady, I haue accompliſhed a very important aduenture of a

ſiluer mountaine: and afterward preuailing in fight againſt this Serpent, as a witneſſe of my labour. I ſend you his caſe. But becauſe I am preſently to prepare for Tubante, let me entreate you to expect thence, more certaine and aſſured tidings of me.
                     
                        
                           Yours onely, Florendos.
                     
                  
               
               The Emperour, who well knewe his ſonne to be more ready, in vnder-going the very greateſt enterpriſes, then publique report or talke to be made of them: gaue no credite to this Letter, but ſilently ſate quiet. Miragarda, who expected ſome other intelligence of her huſband, taking the Letter into her owne hand, read it to her ſelfe very conſiderately, which being done, ſhe ſpake thus openly. Florendos my huſband is either dead, or in ſuch eſtate that he cannot write, and this Letter is ſent but onely to comfort vs in the caſe, elſe why ſhould this dead Serpent be brought hether, no one being able to render a reaſon for it? thus was the Court in a farre greater confuſion then before.
               
                  Trineus ſéeing that there was now in the Court none of the young Knights, that might haue vndertaken to cleare this doubt, crauing licence of the Emperour, went preſentlie and armed him ſelfe, becauſe he was enamoured of faire Argentina the Infant of Spaine, and returning againe to them, after he had taken farewell of all the other Princeſſes and Ladies, he came and fell on his knee before her, and requeſting her hand to kiſſe, ſpake in this manner. Madame, my ſpéeches to you muſt be after the blunt Allmaigne faſhion, ſuch is your beauty, as it giues mee courage, to maintaine againſt any that dare denie it, that you are the very faireſt Lady this day liuing, and worthy the ſeruice of all other whatſoeuer: grace me then with ſo much fauour, that I may entitle my ſelfe by the name of your Knight, onlie to add luſter to the firſt enterpriſe that I ſhall vndertake, wherein I doubt not, but being armed with your gracious regard, I ſhall gaine immortall renowne, all which

you may iuſtly claime as your owne, becauſe it was atchieued vnder the vertue of your name.
               The Infant, in the déepe reach of her owne diſcretion, perceauing the young Emperour to eye her with affectionate regarding, began to diſpoſe her thoughts to the like, as well in reſpect of his faire and gentle demeanour, as alſo to reach the height of an Empreſſe: for women are ambitious by nature, and often times doo ſtriue to out-goe others in beauty and rich ornaments, rather then in diſcréete and vertuous reputation, but returning to Argentina, thus ſhee replied.
               My Lord Trineus, vnwoorthy is my beauty, to be reſpected, and by ſo great a perſonage as your ſelfe, but ſéeing you pleaſe to confeſſe it of ſuch eſtéeme, as it merrits in your eye an affectionate opinion, and in your ſelfe more then any other: I were no Lady of ciuill demeanour, if I ſhould not accept you as my Knight, whereof that you may haue the more chearefull aſſurance (taking a Diamond that hung bound in her treſſes, with foure great pearles thereto pendant) I giue you this iewell. But thus farre vnderſtand me, that I will not endanger any iote of mine honour, by whatſoeuer courteſie I vſe to you at this inſtant: for all my fortune remaines in the hands of the Emperour Primaleon, and the ſacred maieſtie of the King my Father. This her moſt honeſt and courteous behauiour, was generally commended, and the other Ladyes, who had expreſſed little kindneſſe to their amourous ſeruants, diſpoſed them ſelues to a more gentle humour after this, eſpecially reſpecting the care of their honours.
               
                  Trineus departed highly pleaſed, and embarqued him ſelfe with a thouſand followers, men ready to aduenture on any occaſion: but leaue we him to his iourney, and returne to Florendos, who after he ſaw the Serpent was caried away, grewe full of doubtfull ſuſpitions, but not knowing what to think of it, followed his voyage, and arriued ſoone after in the port at Tubante.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XLV. How the Chriſtian Armie departed from Tubante, and what happened to them by the way, in their going toward the Kingdome of Niquea.
               
               
                  
                     DIrdan, otherwiſe named Eduardan, (for the loue which Maiortes the graund Cane alwayes bare to the Prince Don Edward,) after hee fled from Tubante, went firſt of all to his Kingdome of Paraz, where (in the place of his father) hee was created the great Cane, a title onely belonging to thoſe Kings, and ſetting the ſtate in firme condition, hee muſtered together fiftéene thouſand men, and had likewiſe a younger brother of his with him, named Cagnino. With theſe men he ariued in the Realme of Niquea, where by Tirrena (who had the generall fauour of the people) he was receaued into the Citty: which kindneſſe was the ſooner affoorded him, becauſe he had renounced his Chriſtian faith, a Religion which in all thoſe parts was greatly abhorred.
               So Dirdan eſpouſing the Lady, and ruling ouer the whole ſtate, enioyed the ſame peaceably for two moneths ſpace, albeit he daily expected warre, for reſiſtance whereof, hee made all prouiſion poſſible. And that he might haue ſome other good Knights in his company, hee wrote to a Gyant called Palurdan, who was King of Turben and his Coſen, ſonne to Brondione the Giant, that was brother to his father Maiortes: entreating him to come in his aſſiſtance, remembring him beſide, what ſlauerie his kindred had endured by the Grecian Empire, and that now in recompence of their blood ſhed, as alſo his owne father ſlaine in their ſeruice, the very chéefeſt of the Empires Caualierie was comming

vpon him, to depriue him of a Kingdome, which not onely his good fortune, but likewiſe the loue of a beautifull Lady had enriched him withall.
               Further aduertiſements he thereto annexed, as to be forward in his ayde to his vttermoſt, leaſt him ſelfe ſhould chaunce to repent it, for if they ouercame him, meaning him ſelfe, yet could they not but account him alſo as their enemie, becauſe he ſtoode as a neuter, and leaned to neither ſide in aſſiſtance: which yet would returne him but ſlender aduantage, becauſe the Chriſtians being naturally foes to Pagans, if they ſhould once be poſſeſt of Paraz, they would hardly be drawne to pardon Turben.
               
               
                  Palurdan, who was further entred into yéeres then Dirdan, conſidered with him ſelfe iudicially on this motion: but the true kindneſſe of the Chriſtians, more preuailing with him then the alliance of Dirdan, made him reſolue to ſend him no ayde at all. Notwithſtanding, by reaſon hee kept the Letter in no greater ſecrecie, two ſtearne and moodie Giants his ſonnes, the one named Lanfranco, the other Broco, all on fire in their thoughts till they were ſéene in armes: whether their father would or no, prouided them ſelues of ten thouſand Souldiours, & all in haſt they would goe ayde their Vnckle. But firſt they aduertiſed a baſtard ſonne of the Giant Gataru, called Gargante, who tooke poſſeſſion of his fathers Signeuries, after that Cardigea was married to Almaroll. Hee and three thouſand of his followers, ioyned with them, and with this ſtrength they came to Niquea, where Dirdan very gladly entertained them, not doubting but by the valour of theſe thrée Giants, boldly to withſtand the Chriſtian forces.
               Neuertheleſſe, remembring that there was Palmerin, Florian, Florendos, and Dramuſiande, of eſpeciall courage among the other braue gallants, hee thought it requiſite to be fore-guarded by a ſtrong enchauntment, wherein if they found ſome intricate labour, he might finiſh his hopes with the leſſe contention. Héere-vpon, bethinking him ſelfe of Druſa Velonna, (the ſame Enchauntreſſe that ſet the magicall

ſpells, for carrying away the Princeſſe Leonard
                        •
                     , where Florian (notwithſtanding the wiſe Aliarts helpe) ſweated ſufficiently ere he could get her thence, as is declared in the ſecond part of this Hiſtory:) he wrought ſuch meanes, as he preuailed for her comming to Niquea.
               
               Now, becauſe it was a fruitleſſe labour to offer her riches or treaſure, in regard ſhée made no reckoning thereof, as beeing able by her Arte to ſtore herſelfe ſufficiently when ſhe pleaſed, he promiſed her what ſhe much more eſtéemed, to wit, to keepe her in his Court ſecure from all perrill, ſo that ſhee would prouide him of ſuch an enchauntment, as ſhould hinder thoſe ſo farre-famed Knights from dooing him iniury. Druſa, béeing a deadly enemy to the Chriſtians, anſwered, that ſhe would fit his turne in ſuch manner, as him ſelfe ſhould reſt contented therewith: but ſhee knew very well, that all oppoſed reſiſtances whatſoeuer, coulde not keepe the Grecian Knights from ſucceſſe in the end.
               
                  Dyrdan replyed, that hee would reſt ſatiſ-fied with her vtmoſt imployment of Arte: ſo without any more wordes, Druſa departed thence, and in the mid-way betweene Tubante and Niquea, ſhe wrought the ſtrangeſt enchauntment that euer was heard of.
               The Chriſtian forces, that daily thirſted after the warre at Niquea, ſéeing Florendos returned to them againe, became ſo deſirous of their departure, as no other voice could be heard, but away to Niquea. Wherefore Floraman commaunded, that the very next enſuing morning, the Armie ſhould ſet forward, and leauing Dragonalte King of Nauara to gouerne and take charge of the Cittie with Targiana, they muſtered in open field thirtie thouſand in Armes together, and ſo trauailed on ſixe dayes in martiall equipage, without any occaſion worthy rehearſall. Vpon the ſeauenth day, they might diſcerne a farre off, a thing like a greene Curtaine, ſéeming to be two hundred paces in length, and thrée hundred in height, which beganne in ſuch ſort to raiſe and ſpread it ſelfe, as the light of the Sun could not be perceiued, by reaſon of the obſcuritie this Curtaine made.
               
                  
                  Oliuanto, who ſtroue to make himſelfe famous, by any aduenturous attempt whatſoeuer, imagined (as well he might) that this would proue to be ſome ſtrange enchauntment: whereupon, with-drawing aſide on the left hand of the Armie, hee aduaunced himſelfe forward beyond all the reſt, and then he might diſcerne it like the ſhape of a Tent, wherof none of the Chriſtian Knights but himſelfe (as yet) had any ſuch ſight.
               When he had ſtrayed from the reſt about a bowe-ſhoote, he gaue his horſe the ſpurres, & riding all night very hard, the next day by noone hee came neere to the Tent, where beholding nothing but certaine poynts of Launces, which were thruſt thorow a doore that ſéemed faſt ſhut, hee would needes yet venture ſo neere to ye Tent, that he might heare (as to him it ſeemed) the ruſtling of men at Armes beyond it ſome ſmall diſtance. Héereupon he ſtoode ſtill, and called out aloude, but neither ſeeing any body, nor hearing anie aunſwere returned, hee could no longer containe himſelfe, but coueting to end this aduenture before the other Knights arriuall, he knocked hard at the doore, which preſently hée beheld to open, and with-draw the Launces backe in ſuch ſort, that his entrance was very eaſily admitted.
               No ſooner had he ſtept into the Tent, but he felt himſelfe changed by force of the enchauntment, and nothing elſe could enter into his thoughts, but that the onely reaſon of his cōming thether, was to kéepe the paſſage there, againſt all commers, and to try theyr valour by iouſting, whatſoeuer they were. And ſuch indéed was the intent of Velonna, to prooue if theſe Knights (whom none els could ouercome) would héere worke the wrong one of another: and God knowes how earneſtly Oliuanto thirſted, yea, and thought euery howre a long yeere, till he might méete with any one, whoſe valiant courage durſt offer to deale with him in this action.
               The next day following, as hée ſtood armed in the doore of the Tent, hée might a farre off, eaſily behold the Armies Launces, before whom (ſome pretty diſtaunce) brauely

managing his horſe, came Berolde, King of Spayne, & drawing néere the Tent, he knewe Oliuanto, by the Lyon in his naturall collour figured on his Shéeld, wherby he was called the Knight of the Lyon: but hee was nowe growne forgetfull of his friend, ſuch was the nature of the enchauntment, to bereaue a man quite of his former knowledge, eſpecially, ſuch as came the way from Tubante.
               
               
                  Berolde, riding toward him with his Launce in his hand, caſt it from him on the ground, as thinking it no curteſie to violence his friend: but Oliuanto drewe his ſworde vpon him, as intending to kill him except he yéelded, which indeede the other in méere kindneſſe did, and was no ſooner entred the doore with him, but he became altered in minde like to Oliuanto, ſtriuing to be the firſt, that ſhould defende the Tent againſt the Chriſtian Armie. Forth came hee againe gallantly, as the other before had doone, and meeting Pompides at the Launces ful carriere, both were diſmounted, and Pompides beeing offended at this iniurie, drewe forth his ſword, and beganne to lay about him ſo furiouſly, that Berolde was quickly drawne backe by the enchauntment, wherein the death of any Knight was not purpoſed: for ſuch incantations haue not the power to kill any man, but onely to aſtoniſh, and take them pryſoners, as was the Sorcereſſe drift in this: ſo Pompides ſéeing the other to retire ſo faſt, would needes purſue him into the Tent, & there became as forward as the other, to maintaine the iouſt for defence thereof.
               By this time the whole Army was there arriued, which (by reaſon of the haſtie approche of the night) lodged themſelues very neere to the place enchaunted: but Dramuſiande going forth vnarmed to behold the Tent, knewe Oliuanto, and the other two in his company: who taking no knowledgement of his nakednes without Armes, made all very furiouſly againſt him, euen with as great violence as if they would haue ſlaine him. But he would not abide them with ſo great diſaduauntage, but retired backe from them, and they, as 
                     •
                  earing leaſt any other ſhould take guardance

of the Tent, betooke themſelues likewiſe to their vndertaken labour.
               
                  Dramuſiande gathering by apparant likelihood, that theſe Knights (béeing his true affected & endeared friendes) were depriued of all knowledge of him, by the force of enchauntment: was glad that he went forth ſo vnprouided of armes, & returned againe in ſuch ſafety, without any preiudice either to his or their honour. And being come backe to the royall Pauillion, where Floraman (their chiefe Captaine generall) had conuocated all the Princes together, as holding a ſollemne councell about the view of this ſtrange Tent: he found Florendos to be much troubled in minde againſt Oliuanto, fearing leaſt he had ſtrayed abroad to take notice of the Tent, and ſo vnhappily remained therein enchaunted. In the depth of their weightie and ſerious reaſonings, Dramuſiande diſcourſed all concerning the three Knights, and how hardly hee had eſcaped with life, by reaſon he was vnarmed.
               This ſtrange and vnaccuſtomed kind of enchauntment, gaue all the Princes matter of déepe and ponderous conſideration, wherein they coulde not ſet downe any certaine reſolution. As for Florendos himſelfe, this was his grounded and ſetled opinion, that his owne ſonne would neuer dare to come againſt him, whereon hee determined to goe forth the next morning.
               No ſooner did bright day péepe her fayre fore-head foorth, but beeing armed by his Squire, he mounted on horſeback, and trotting brauely before the Tent, Oliuanto with his other two companions (enforced thereto by the enchauntments vigour) all thrée together encountred him with their Launces, ſo that he fell on the ground vnder his horſe bellie, and before he could frée himſelfe out of their power, hée was carried in priſoner, and poſſeſſed with the ſelfe ſame humour as they were, yet none of them there all this while knowing one another.
               Our braue reſolutes amongſt the Chriſtians, were not a little offended, when they vnderſtoode that Florendos was

taken priſoner, but much more it diſpleaſed them, whē they beheld each one to ſtand amazedly looking vpon another, as ſtrayning curteſie, who ſhould next aduenture the combate at the Tent: and albeit theſe accidents ſéemed ſo ſtrange and vnaccuſtomed to them, yet the chiefeſt diſtraction amongſt the Chriſtians, was the generall care they had of their Army, which being bereft of all their chiefeſt knights, might ſo much the ſooner be endangered by Dyrdan.
               
               
                  Blandidon, perceiuing ſo faire an Armie in ſuch hazard for his cauſe, deſired licence, that hee might vndertake the Iouſt: but Floraman would not conſent thereto, but gently returned him this aunſwere. My Lord Blandidon, I am perſwaded that this enchauntment is onely deuiſed for the ſpéedier and ſafer apprehenſion of your perſon, and wee hauing commiſſion to ſeate you in your right, what aunſwer can we honeſtly goe backe withall, ſuffering you to fall into Dirdans power? Let mee therefore intreate you to reſt pacified, for I (as being Generall of the Armie) will hold ye more ſtrictly to mine owne companie.
               
                  Dramuſiande who could not endure to ſtand ſo long idle, obtained licence to goe thether, where hee found himſelfe ſmitten with foure ſeuerall Launces, and in ſo ſtrange a manner beſide, as he beganne to repent his ouer-much forwardneſſe: but he had vnhorſſed Oliuanto, by ſhouldring in ſo rudely ouerthwart amongſt them, and no ſooner was he falne to the ground, ſome prettie diſtance out of the Tent, but the enchauntment had left him, where knowing his father, Dramuſiande and the reſt cryed out aloude to Florendos, that hee ſhould forbeare to hurt him, but all was to no purpoſe, his rage was great, becauſe they thrée had wounded Dramuſiande, ſo they returned back againe toward the Tent, and Oliuanto with them, vſing mighty perſwaſions to his Father: So all fiue entring the doore of the Tent together, they became all of one minde, reſolued to ſtay there in defence of the Tent.
               
                  Palmerin and Florian would very gladly haue gone thether likewiſe, but that they were loth to incurre the diſpleaſure

of Floraman their Commaunder, who pauſed thereon very aduiſedly, for better apprehenſion of this enchantmēts danger: and ſo much the rather, becauſe if they two ſhould oppoſe themſelues againſt Florendos, Dramuſiande, Oliuanto and the other twaine, nothing elſe could be expected, but that ſome one either part were ſure to miſcarie, and of ſuch a perrill it behooued him to haue no meane care.
               This day paſſed on without any more combatting, and Florendos (with the reſt of his company) would often come to challenge the chiefe of the Armie: but they neuer went further then a ſmall trench which was but a little diſtance from the Tent, whereat our hardie Caualiers did verie much meruaile, but returne we now to the wiſe Aliarte.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XLVI. How Palmerin & Florian would needes goe combate with them of the Tent, and how the enchauntment was concluded: Alſo of a ſtrange accident that ſuddenly happened.
               
                  THe learned wizzard Aliarte, ſearching by his ſkill into the nature of this enchantment, found hardly any immediate remedie for it: becauſe Druſa Velonna well remembred, that the ſpells wherewith ſhe had before exorcized the Princeſſe Leonarda, was diſappointed and defeated only by his arte, which made her now to order this Magicke in ſuch manner, that except he could find out an abſolute remedie in déede, his vttermoſt endeuour would ſerue him to no purpoſe. Wherefore, finding himſelfe this extraordinarily hindred, he grewe into great impatience,

vntill at length hee happened to remember thoſe Bookes, which he found hidden in the garden of his Iland, and going to the place, where with no meane care hee kept them, turning them ouer one after another, he chaunced at laſt to light on this very ſame enchauntment, receiuing thence ſuch rules and directions in the caſe, as were ſufficient to make it of no account, whereof thus prouided, he departed well pleaſed.
               Nowe come we againe to Prince Palmerin, who could not beare ſo many challengings and prouocations to the fight, but (fired with vexation) would needs goe arme himſelfe, the like did noble Florian his brother, both earneſtlie ſtriuing which ſhould be the formoſt, not dreading any danger that might befall them from the other, and when they were armed, Floraman, Gratian, Blandidon, and Francian, came to diſſwade them, vſing theſe or the like ſpéeches.
               My Lords, doo ye not account it as a matter wel worthy blame, for you two to goe hazard the combate againſt ſo many hardie Knights? And looke you with no more iudgement into this enchauntment, which differs from all other in ſo ſtrange a qualitie, that it requires as many reſiſters, as ſhall be found defenders of the Tent? Be better aduiſed wee intreate yée, and let vs take this courſe: Lord Blandidon, whom we ought moſt eſpecially to preſerue from this Magick, hee ſhall abide heere for Commaunder of the Armie, and we thrée (béeing armed) will goe along with you to the Tent, ſo ſhall wee be ſure to equall our friendly aduerſaries in number.
               This counſell, as beeing indeede very diſcréete and reſonable, was by euery one commended, and when they had put on their Armour, they went toward the Tent, beſeeching God to guard them all from perrill. Florendos and the other with him (without giuing any attention to Palmerin, who wafted them towards him with his hand vnarmed, as deſirous firſt to haue ſome ſpeech with them) placed theyr Launces in their reſts, and ran againſt the other with the very ſwifteſt carriere of their horſes, when Palmerin, hauing

no reſpite at all to receiue a Launce, was taken tardie by Florendos thus vnprouided, and looſing his ſtirrops, lacked but little of being diſmounted. Florian encountred with Dramuſiande, and lay both along on the ground, with their ſaddles betwéene their thighes: Floraman with Oliuanto, receiuing by him ſome ſmall diſaduantage: Gracian with Berolde blowe for blowe, but meeting very roughly with theyr Shieldes, both horſes & men tumbled all on a heape, and recouering footing againe very hardly, prepared to combate with theyr ſwords: Francian and Pompides brake their Launces, and drew their weapons for further tryall of manhood.
               The fight grew to ſuch tearmes on either ſide, as the death of ſome of them muſt needes enſue, yet Palmerin and his company, remembring that they fought againſt theyr blood and friendes, vſed the more milde and gentle reſpect: but the Knights enchaunted, grew to all extremitie, ſo that euill ſucceſſe muſt one way needes be expected. For, Florendos, cutting in ſunder ye bridle of Palmerins horſe, wounded him alſo on the left hand very ſhrewdly: which making him forgetfull of his former patience, returned ſuch angry ſtrokes backe againe in requitall, as Florendos was ſore hurt on one ſhoulder, and likewiſe on the left ſide. The like hurts paſſed betweene Florian and Dramuſiande, ſo was Floraman wounded in the right arme, and Oliuanto in the face, and as much miſhap befell the other foure: the fielde beeing indifferently dyed with their blood, and prettily ſpred with the peeces of broken ſhieldes and mayles of theyr Armour.
               
                  Floraman ſtill cryed to thoſe on his part, that they ſhould but onely award theyr aduerſaries ſtrokes, as hoping of help from ſome one quarter or another, that would diſturbe and breake of this fierce conflict: albeit it was nowe an houre and more paſt noone, in all which time they had neuer reſpited, ſo that eyther ſide was growne ſo wearie and ouer-laboured, as hardlie could they weild theyr weapons with any diſpoſition.
               
                  As thus the caſe continued, ſuddenly at the doore of the Tent, appeared an armed Knight, hauing the beuer of his Helmet lifted vp, who was no ſooner eſpied by the Knights enchaunted, but they made furiouſly toward him, as hoping right ſpeedily to be his death: but herein they found themſelues much diſappointed, for the nature of the incantation was ſuch, as it wrought not againſt them that came from Niquea, but onely ſtoode in force for ſuch as came toward it, for otherwiſe it might haue offended as wel friends as enemies. When Florendos and his conſorts had better knowledge of their friend, they ranne and embraced him, which Palmerin with his part perceiuing, and knowing him for his noble brother and friende, they followed the other in kindnes and embraces, the like did more then an hundred of the chiefeſt Knights in the Armie, who had ſtood all this while beholding the combate.
               
                  Florendos and his crew (who firſt ſawe him enter out of the Tent doore) would haue returned in againe with him: but Aliarte calling to Floraman, willed him, that hee, and the hundred Knights there with him, ſhould ſeaze on the Knights which were enchaunted, to preuent what elſe might happen worſe to them, and afterward he would find the meanes to frée them from the enchauntment. So cirkling them round as in a Ring, they tooke and vnarmed them, dreſſing theyr wounds, which being ſomewhat dangerous and chilled with cold, made them ſcarce able to ſtir themſelues, and nowe they ſéemed as if they had no knowlede one of another.
               
                  Palmerin and his companions, had their hurts likewiſe lookt to, for they knew not how ſoone they ſhould haue néed of employment, then cauſed they the Armie to paſſe on by the aduiſe of Aliarte, leaſt Druſa Velonna ſhoulde worke ſome worſe impeachment, and hinder them from paſſing any further.
               That night, Aliarte by certaine of his carracters and ſpells, wrought ſo ſtudiouſly, as hee founde wherein the ſtrength of the enchauntment conſiſted: Whereupon, the

next day, as Knights came ſtill toward the Tent, and were enchaunted for defence thereof againſt all other commers, he cauſed them to be taken and bound, then did he make the earth to be digged in the ſame place, ſo deepe as it might cō
                  taine the ſtature of a man, when ſuddenly there ſtarted forth an huge angry Beare, which immediatly had there rent Aliarte in péeces, but that by good hap Blandidon ſtoode armed by, who onely of all the chiefe Lordes had not beene wounded. He interpoſing himſelfe with his ſword drawne, had a very ſtrange kinde of fight with the beaſt: for diuers times he was faſt betweene his pawes, and griped with ſuch ſtrong and intollerable pinches, that well might hee doubt the iſſue of his bold enterpriſe.
               In this time, Aliarte brake certaine glaſſes, which fuming there continually, maintained the enchauntment, but leauing to fume or ſmoulder any more, the Tent vaniſhed, ſo did not the Beare, but onely grewe by the exorciſmes weakening, to be ſpent and wearied with contending againſt the Knight: and being vnable to vſe any longer reſiſtance, Blandidon thruſt his ſword thorow his belly, which made him forth-with fall dead at his foote.
               No ſooner was the Beare dead, but Florendos and the reſt enchaunted with him, recouered their former ſences, and knewe their kinde friends, who praiſing greatlie the wiſedome of Aliarte, grewe carefull now of their hurts recouerie: and this they found by good experience, that if Aliarts comming thether had béene deferred but two houres longer, Druſa Velonna might ſafely haue vaunted, to haue vtterly ruined the Court of Constantinople.
               
               Before foure daies were fully paſſed, by Aliarts diligence and ſkill they were ſoundly recouered: whereupon hee aduiſed them, with all ſpéede now to ſet on toward Niquea, before Druſa Velonna ſhould cōpaſſe a worſe enchauntment then the former, whereto alreadie ſhe had giuen an indifferent aſſay and beginning.
               
                  Floraman chiefe Captaine of the forces, the next morning commaunded the Armie to march on, and (by Aliarts
                  
counſell) kept in ſo narrow a compaſſe together as poſſibly they coulde, becauſe Velonna practiſed by her vttermoſt meanes to molleſt the Chriſtians: and béeing able to ſted them no further by his arte, Aliarte departed home to his Iland.
               But Druſa Velonna perceiuing hee was gone, wrought a very rare and admirable ſtratageme: for Miragarda béeing ridden abroade from the Courte to ſolace herſelfe, with Victoria and Argentina in her companie, in the night time as they ſlept, ſhe tooke them ſo ſoftly out of their beddes, as neither was ſhee diſcerned by any, nor had they the power to awake. Hether ſhe brought them, where Palmerin was with the Armie, and ſette them downe before him in ſuch apparant manner, as they were ſeene and knowne of al the Princes, but immediatly rapt out of ſight, & carried away againe.
               
                  Florendos, Florian and Berolde, beholding them thus borne thence, the firſt his Wife, and the other two theyr Daughters, became incenſed with ſuch rage, as taking their Armes, but aſking no licence, becauſe ſo ſhort time would not admit it, they purſued the Enchauntreſſe, who conuaied the Ladies to ye abyding of Quéene Melia, where the Princeſſe Leonarda had béene before enchaunted. But let that matter paſſe for thys time, and returne wee to our Armie, riding on in good order toward Niquea, and Oliuanto waiting for apt occaſion to followe his Father, that the one or other might be ſo happy, as to regaine his Mother and the Ladies.
               
                  Floraman fearing, leaſt the principall Knights of the Armie would purſue this aduenture, as a matter importing no meane queſt of honour, cauſed it publiquelie to be proclaimed, that no man (on paine of his heads loſſe) ſhould preſume to depart without his licence. So became they the better quieted, that in theyr thoughts had before purpoſed ſpeedie departure: and then came they within two myles diſtance of Niquea, where as yet they intended to lodge themſelues.
               
                  
                  Gargante of whom we ſpake before, a deadly enemie to the Chriſtians, ſuddenly ruſhed foorth of a wood where hée lay ambuſhed, and foure thouſand hardie followers at his héeles: where, had not our principall Leaders béen armed, and two thouſand of their boldeſt ſpirits well appointed ſtil in the vaw-ward, all the whole Armie had beene in a confuſion. For Gargante, in regard of his great ſtature, and waight of the Armour he daily wore, finding no horſe able enough to beare him, rode vppon a fierce angry Beare, where-with he ranne vp and downe among the ſquadrons, none beeing able to hinder his way, but throwing both men and horſe to the ground, and meeting at laſt with Palmerin, gaue him ſuch a rude ouerthwart encounter, that hee and his horſe tumbled ouer quite backward, and ſoone after hée did the like to Pompides and Oliuanto.
               
               
                  Floraman beholding ſuch a diſordered procéeding, made forward with a ſquadron of well appointed Pikemen, who placing themſelues in due order of reſiſtance, abated the furie of the Giants forwardnes, which gaue the diſmounted frée libertie of horſing themſelues againe. Palmerin full of anger and high diſdaine, went vp and downe ſeeking the Giant Gargante, to pay him ſome recompence for his former fall: but Dramuſiande beeing of higher ſtature, ſooner (then hée) got eye of the Gyant, and making foorth manfullie to encounter him, gaue a full proffer of reſiſtance, adding for further teſtimonie thereof, a verie furious & ſtrong thruſt directly at his breaſt: but the Cuiraſſe falſing the expectation, though not ſo much as the other wiſhed, yet was hée in two places indifferently wounded.
               
                  Gargante, who (till this inſtant) had neuer beene ſo prodigall of his blood, came ſpeedilie againſt his aduerſarie with ſuch fell and impatient outrage, that aduauncing his huge vnweldie Clubbe of Leade, hée ſmote therewith Dramuſiande full on the Helmet, forcing him with the blowes ſtrength ſo to wheele about and ſtagger, as verie hardlie coulde hee defende himſelfe from falling. This ſet ſuch a ſcarlet ſhame on Dramuſiandes chéekes, that how he grew

to a reſolued ſpleene, eyther to die with more diſgrace, or at leaſt to be the death of his enemie: but at this verie inſtant the bridge of the Cittie was let downe, and thence iſſued forth the Gyant Lanfranco, with fiue thouſand ſtrong and able fighting men in his company, who béeing all freſh and vnwearied gallants, ſpared not to ſette cheerefully on the ouer-laboured ſquadrons.
               
                  Dramuſiande perceiuing thys vnexpected ſupply, and willing (as much as in him lay) to imbolden the courage of his followers, gaue ſuddenly a maime to the Giant Lanfrancos horſe: whereby he was driuen of neceſſity to make vſe of his feete, and could not gadde ſo dangerouſlie about the fielde, nor vrge ſuch diſaduantage to the Chriſtians as when hee was mounted. But Lanfranco was ſo ſpéedie on foote, that notwithſtanding all ye haſt Dramuſiande made, he recouered him, and got his horſe faſt by the bridle, forcing him to kicke and fling with ſuch vnrulines, that Dramuſiande (not to be controuled by his horſſes ſtubbornnes,) threw himſelfe quite beſide him, and then beganne a hardie battaile between the two Giants, with no ſpare of Armor, fleſh and all.
               
                  Blandidon, who ſtoode like a prouident Sentinell, to preuent the large extent of this warre, got to him foure thouſand of his owne natiue Countrimen of Niquea, who béeing all faythfull and endeared to theyr Lorde, vpon this his perſonall appearance before the Cittie, came and ſubmitted themſelues to him: and hée ioyning them immediatlie to ſixe thouſand of the Armie, went with them to the guardance of a gate, which becauſe it allowed the road-way to Paraz, had ſlender eye of watch (or none at all) vpon it, and ſo much the rather, becauſe cōtinually came that way, ſuch people as were ayders and aſſiſters to Dirdan.
               
               Hauing made themſelues thus Maiſters of that bridge, Gorgoneo King of Romata, the Nephew to Tomano, who was with Palmerin in the war againſt the Soldane: came that way marching onward with his men, and making paſſage for his troupes as he went along, perforce he would

thorowe their ſtrength that kept the Bridge, and beeing come hand to hand with Blandidon, cried out to his Souldiours, there to kill him, vſing theſe perſwaſions to this end: that if he were ſlaine who pretended this right to Niquea, this trouble and warre would ſoone be finiſhed. Theſe ſpéeches ſo preuailed in the ready yéelding minds of the Pagans, that Blandidon (beeing ſuddainly engirt with two hundred good bold Knights) had there inſtantly periſhed, if Pompides, Gracian, and Francian, had not immediatly ioyned with him, who compelling the hardieſt withſtanders to giue them way, ſtept cloſe to Blandidon, cirkled in (as yee haue heard) with Gorgoneo and his men, and where he had breathd his laſt, but for the ſhowers of blowes their ſwords rayned downe on them.
               
                  Pompides, who was formoſt with his ſhéeld well aduanced, awarded the ſharp thruſts of many Launces, and ſlew Knights euery way round about him, or made them tumble headlong from off the bridge. Francian ſided him with like valour and performance, and Gracian on the other wing kept euen courſe with them both, all of them bearing ſuch a breadth with their manly blowes, that but for ſome immediate freſh reſiſters, they had cut the laces of Gorgoneos helmet: which (in deſpight of all contrary oppoſition) at laſt they performed, and one of them had ſtabd him to the hart with his dagger, but that he entreated his life for Palmerin d'Oliuaes ſake, for whoſe honour and his friends, the Kingdome of Romata was euer to be commaunded.
               When Blandidon heard that name, as yet ſo gratefull to all the Grecian band of Knights: he let him liue, and aduauncing him ſelfe to further imployment, entred vpon a fourth part of the Citty, which ſtoode deuided as into foure ſeuerall Citties, with walls, bulwarks, and ditches, and therefore required time to take the whole, part after part. Gargante and Lanfranco, perceauing the maine aime to be now at the Citty, began to ſhift for them ſelues, both being ſore wounded, for Palmerin would neuer ſuffer Gargante to be out of his ſight, but turnd and winded him many times

together: till at laſt Palmerin was ſhrewdly aſtonied with the Giants huge Club, and Gargante dangerouſly hurt in the right hand with his ſword, which wound then holpe to ſaue Palmerins life, for the blowes with the Club had ſo amazed him, as Gargante might haue ſlaine him at his owne pleaſure, but that haſt to be gone, but more eſpecially his hurt in the hand, made him ſaue him ſelfe with the reſt that retired into the Citty. And the like did Lanfranco, albeit Dramuſiande was euermore at his héeles, yet now he tooke this opportunity of ſafety.
               
                  Floraman withdrew the Armie, to that part of the Citty which Blandidon had before ſurprized, where the people (in great triumph) elected him their King, & gaue entrance to the Chriſtian Armie: for which, no mans life whatſoeuer was called in queſtion, eyther for former diſobedience, or reuolt to the aduerſarie, and this prooued to be the vtter ruine of Dirdans cauſe, for he had there born him ſelfe with extreameſt cruelty, to ſuch as he knew any way did fauour Blandidon.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XLVII. Howe Oltrando and his men of India, came and ioyned with the Chriſtian forces: how Niquea was beſieged and Tirrena taken.
               
                  
                     OLtrando, who was vanquiſhed by Platir and his power in the warre at Tubante, did not come thence along with Floraman, becauſe hee ſtayed in expectation of more ayde, which ſhould haue com from thoſe parts of India, where him ſelfe cō
                  maunded: but when he ſawe that his ſtay was fruitleſſe, with thoſe forces hee had, hee departed from

                  Tubante, and arriued at the Chriſtian Armie, euen as the Giants were newly entred the Citty.
               Héere-vpon the ſiege began at three ſeuerall places, making ſtill their entraunce on the quarter where Blandidon had preuailed: which (by aduiſe of all the Princes) was daily ſupplied and ſtronger fortified, becauſe Dirdan held it as the place of weakeſt ability, and that there hee could controle euen as him ſelfe pleaſed. The next day following, Broco, the other ſonne of Palurdan, came foorth verie néere to the Chriſtian campe, in an Armour of Aſh-colour, without any baſes, and the deuiſe in his ſhéeld, was a Giant ſtrangling a Serpent, becauſe him ſelfe being aſſailed by a Serpent, ſtrangled it. Hée excéeded his brother in mightines of ſtature, and becauſe there could be found no Horſe to beare him, he vſed continually to fight on foote.
               The newes of this wondrous Giants approach, was quickly ſpread through all the campe, and Dramuſiande (beeing one of the firſt that heard it) preſently armed him ſelfe, and by lycence obtained of his Captaine, ranne valiantly againſt him: but when he perceaued the Giant was on foote, and a huge ſtrong Halberd in his hand, turning back his Horſe, he entred his Tent againe, where taking a kéene battell-axe, which hee vſed to beare euer when hee hunted, being diſmounted from his Horſe, he turned couragiouſly toward his enemie, and without any other Drum or warlike noyſe then their owne blowes, they began to hack and hewe one another, ſlicing their Armour off in ſuch large ſcantlings, as their fleſh felt the temper of their kéene edged weapons.
               After that Dramuſiande had taſted two of Brocos ſtrokes, which made him ſtagger giddily here and there, he purpoſed to ſhunne them as much as he might, for Broco deliuered the heauieſt ſtrokes, that any Giant in thoſe times was able to doo: marie hee was more ſurly minded then Dramuſiande, and alſo by nature much more chollericke, for when ſo euer he faild a blow at his enemie, he would bite his hands with rage and anger.
               
                  
                  Dramuſiande taking aduiſed note of this his furious diſpoſition, receaued thereby the better hope of good ſucceſſe, and therefore helde him play with tracings about, managing his Axe ſtill with ſuch ſleights & dexterity, that euermore he put by or rebated his blowes, and hauing a ſharpe long pike in the head of his Axe, by vnexpected doubled ſtroakes, often wounded the Giant, renting the Cuiraſſe and fleſh in many places on his left ſide. All which Broco ſéemed to make no reckoning of at all, but continued his furious and madde manner of fight, till at laſt it was Dramuſiandes ill hap, in auoyding a very dangerous blowe of his aduerſarie, to haue the ſtaffe cut in two péeces by the Halberd, ſo that now (perforce) he muſt ſtand breſt to breſt with a deuilliſh enemie, a miſhap which would haue daunted a very reſolute ſpirit: but hee chearing his hopes with this comfort, that Chriſtian Knights are moſt admired in extremities, bated not an inch of courage, but kept Broco off ſo valiantly with the pike of his Axe, that at length it was his good hap, to ſtab it into the ſight of his helmet, and wounded him iuſt betwéene both the eyes: nowe as great an inconuenience followed this ſucceſſe, for he could not recouer his Axe backe againe, but was conſtrained, to leaue it there ſticking in his helmet, which loſſe of his weapon did much diſpleaſe him.
               Notwithſtanding, to make vſe of time (as he thought for his beſt aduantage,) he ranne and caught the Giant about the midſt, of which boldnes he had but little cauſe to boaſt, for Broco, whoſe embrace was larger then his by a whole armes length, gaue him ſuch knocks on the helmet with the pommell of his Halberd, as but that it was of excéeding pure temper in déede, he had cleft it, and then you may geſſe the others danger: for with theſe blowes he was ſo giddied and amazed, that if the Giant had had the reaſon but to haue perceaued it, Dramuſiande had falne, but that his aduerſarie onely ſupported him. Neuertheleſſe, recouering him ſelfe ſo well as he could, while thus the Giant had him within his encloſure, he gaue him ſo many ſtabs with his

dagger in the left flanke, that he was glad to let him goe at liberty: and beſide, he recouered his Axe againe, wherewith hee once more wounded him in the very ſame place, that the iſſue of blood blinding his ſight, made him raue with madneſſe, and runne vp and downe ſtamping like a deſperate lunaticke. Then drew he forth his ſword, becauſe in this raging he had loſt his Halberd, and his ſword excéeded Dramuſiandes a full yard in meaſure, whereof it ſtoode the other vpon to be wary and circumſpect, becauſe ſuch an ods was beyond all indifferencie: notwithſtanding, Dramuſiande auoyded all perrill with good diſcretion, and for anie one wound receaued, returned his enemie thrée.
               
                  Lanfranco ſtanding on the Citties battlements, and perceauing his brother to be in very deſperate hazard, ſtaggering, and almoſt vnable to ſtand, but that by ſetting his ſwords poynt to the ground, hee made thereof often vſe as his beſt ſupporter: with an hundred bolde Knights iſſued foorth of the Citty, to recouer him backe againe leaſt there he ſhould periſh. At which very inſtant, Oliuanto fell on his knée before Palmerin, who was preſſing forward to be gone, but that the young Knight ſtayed him, ſaying.
               Moſt honourable Lorde and Vnkle, ſuffer me to gaine that glory, which you now goe for, and are certaine to enioy: as euer you reſpected chiualrie, or will further the deſires of a hopefull ſpirit. Palmerin, who knew not wel how to gaine-ſay him, graunted his requeſt, ſo trotted hee foorth with his Launce to méete Lanfranco, whoſe Beare caried him with ſuch wilde and giddie trauerſes, that the Chriſtian Knights Horſe ſtartling at ſight of him, caried his Maiſter amazedly quite thwart the Beares paſſage, whereof Lanfranco taking the aduantage, with a croſſe thruſt wounded him a little, beſide diſmounted him from his Horſe. But the young Knight was ſo aſhamed of this fall, that quickly recouering footing againe, with bolde courage he turned to the Giant againe, who ſtill imagined to affright him with his Beare: and making him to raiſe his former paws, as coueting to ſeaze faſt hold on the Knight, Oliuanto
                  
with his kéene edgde ſword, wounded the beaſt in both the féete at once, ſo that as the Giant would haue turned him in haſt for better opportunitie, he fell downe on a heape and his Maiſter vnder him, which good hap admitted ye Knight to reuenge his former fall, and to quittance the Giant beſide with two hurts, one on the ſhoulder, and the other vnder his right arme, albeit they were wounds of ſlender importance, in regard of his mightie ſtature and corpulence of body.
               After that Lanfranco had got on foote againe, he layde about him with his long ſworde, that Oliuanto had worke enough to doo, by nimble turnings & ſleights to award and defend them: till at length, the Giant beeing a huge bodie, and very vnweldie, found himſelfe ſo ouer-wearied with the Knights actiue windings and abouts, that indeed it turned to his great diſaduantage, for Oliuanto by his agil dexteritie, gaue him woundes in ſixe ſeuerall places, though not ſo deepe and mortall as had béene more neceſſary, and his hurts prooued the ſlighter in giuing, becauſe the Knight had care to ſhun the Giants long heauie ſword, the proofe whereof had beene ſo dangerous to him, that it had robbed him of the better part of his Shield, and giuen him (beſide) a wound in the right thigh.
               
                  Dramuſiande alſo on the other ſide, intreated Broco in ſuch ſort, as the victorie twixt them, was moſt apparant on the Chriſtians ſide: but they were both ſo ouer-wearied with fighting, as little harme could they doo to one another with theyr ſwords. Gargante, with two noated Knights of the Kingdome of Paraz, who were Coſins by affinitie to the reuolted Dirdan, came foorth of the Cittie, and grewe ſo forward in theyr bold enterpriſe, that at length they were in hand with Palmerin himſelfe, little thinking to be ſo roughly encountred: for the Knight with his Launce, had pierced quite through Gargantes armour, & wounded him ſome-what though little to effect, and contrariwiſe, himſelfe was well aſtonied with the ſhocke, albeit, by reaſon of his admired valour, he quickly recouered his ſences again.
               
                  
                  Gracian iouſted with one of thoſe Knights named Mameo, & Francian with the other, called Treſino, but Francian was diſmounted, & ſo was Mameo by his horſes fault, the other, paſſing the encounter with equall ſucceſſe, with theyr Swordes fell to the combate very ſtoutly hande to hand.
               Nowe was the battaile betweene fiue and fiue, and continued with ſuch eager violence, that they of the Cittie, (finding themſelues not handled to their liking) withdrew (as it were) with one conſent together, the better to ſhéeld themſelues from our hardy Knights: and ſpeaking in their owne language, concluded to retire into the Cittie, wherevpon they reſiſted very ſparingly, euer-more giuing backward, as theyr beſt aduantage.
               
                  Floraman, perceiuing our Knights thus to purſue theyr enemies, and doubting leaſt theyr retire intended ſome trecherie, cauſed Pompides to make forward with tenne thouſand in theyr rancks, and part of them grewe ſo hardie in theyr procéeding, that they came to the bridge foote, whereon the Pagans ſtood proudly aduauncing themſelues. Our Knights likewiſe would needes vp on the bridge, and beeing thus ſeconded by Pompides and his men, ſtroue to enter the gate, where Dirdan with diuers hardie gallants ſtoode to make reſiſtance.
               Now heere you muſt thinke was worke enough to doe on all ſides, for Dirdan conſidering with himſelfe, that already the fourth part of the Cittie was ſurprized, had made a ſtrong Baſtione within the Cittie, which reached in a roundure as a forefence to the gate: and this was the onely hinderaunce to our men, that they could not goe onward as before they purpoſed, but were there compelled to fight confuſedly. Palmerin knew Dirdan by his impreſe of the Dog, whereon he cryed out to him, ſaying: Ah trayterous Renegado, & gaue him ſuch a ſtroke vppon the Helmet, as tumbled him to the earth in great amazement.
               A Knight of Niquea, who before had béene a ſeruaunt to Tirrena, beholding him fall, ran preſently with the report

thereof to his Lady, who as one newly falne beſide herſelfe, went with him to ſée where her Louer lay, and not knowing then whether to betake her courſe, becauſe Dirdan (before her comming) was recouered, and with-drawne for new prouiſion, to keepe the Chriſtians from entrance: ſhe happened into the hands of Floraman, who faſtning hold on her diſheueld haire, which in her madding moode herſelfe had ſo diſperſed, threatned her with immediate death, except ſhe forth-with declared of whence and what ſhee was. I am (quoth ſhe) the infortunate Tirrena, which Floraman hearing, and perceiuing it was a thing impoſſible to take the Cittie, being defended by ſuch multitudes of people, and night now drawing on, the enemy would worke to fortefie his ſtrength: cauſed retreate to be ſounded, and then withdrawing toward the Caſtell, tooke Tirrena with him to his Pauillion, where leauing her vnder aſſured guarde, hee went backe to call in his men together.
               There found he Palmerin, Oliuanto and Francian (wearie and wel neere ſpent with trauaile) ſhouldred off from the Bridge by the as wearied enemies, Pompides and Gracian ſtill backing them onward, which doubtleſſe had enſued to their great daunger, if Dirdan (fearing that part where Blandidon kept, to whoſe ayde was Oltrando newly come) had not retired to make that ſure. Which béeing doone, and he come thether againe ere this contention was ended, the taking of Tirrena was reported to him, whereof hee ſéemed to make but ſlender account: not vnlike that man, who taking a wife for her worth and dignitie, enioying what he would haue, cares not how quicklie he is ridde of her againe.
               So he, eyther in this reſpect, or perhaps reputing it as a matter impoſſible, to recouer her backe from ſo many hardie Knights, becauſe indeed he wanted his Giants & kinſemen, who in this laſt conflict were all ſore woūded: would venture no further vppon the Bridge, but turned backe againe like one deſpayring. Our Knights, ſo manie of them as were wounded, tooke the beſt order they could for the

more ſpeedy recuring of themſelues, and Dirdan (to withſtand further danger) ſhut himſelfe vp within the Cittie.
            
            
               CHAP. XLVIII. Howe Primaleon went to the aduenture of Fortune, and what happened in the firſt dayes attempt.
               
                  
                     PRimaleon deſirous to ſée Dorina, for conducting him to the aduenture of Fortune whereof ſhée had made him promiſe: tooke his farewell of King Traſino & Laurea his Quéene, leauing them much diſcomforted by his departure. And comming to the Seaſide with his Squire, hee found there the Shyp, wherein Filenia had beene before enchaunted, and going aboorde, Dorina, who had there a whole day awaited his preſence, forbare to chide him, but entertained him in this manner.
               Fayre and right fortunate Knight, on whom good hap giues attendance as a ſeruaunt, thys Ship hath héere waited in expectation of your arriuall, to carry you to that part of the world, where your company wil be very welcome: for which, my ſelfe haue heare attended, to guide you to the aduenture of Fortune, whence you ſhal eyther depart with honour, or perriſhing in the enterpriſe, liue for euer eternized. No ſooner had ſhe thus ſpoken, and hee returned her kinde gratulations, but ſtriking the Maſt of the Ship with her wand, the ſailes were ſpred immediatly, and they rid at pleaſure cutting through the waues, without any interruption for two dayes together.
               
                  Dorina at laſt looking vppe into the ayre, beheld it with ſome ſhew of admiration, and vſed theſe ſpeeches to Primaleon. Young Prince, now ſhalt thou diſcerne the ſtrength of incantations, for thrée great Ladies of royall parentage,

are by a Sorcereſſe ſhut vp in the ſtrangeſt enchauntment, that at any time hetherto hath euer been heard of: and one of them ſhall be releaſed by you, but it will be long firſt, therefore you muſt expect the helpe of the wizzard Aliarte, which at this preſent you cannot haue.
               Theſe Ladies, were they of whom we ſpake before, that were carried away by Druſa Velonna: but ſhe would not impart ſo much to the Knight, who ſo déerely affected the faire Infant Victoria, that ſhould he haue had knowledge of her impriſonment in ſuch ſort: he would haue put off all hope of this enterprized aduenture, and immediatly haue followed the recouerie of his loue: wherefore being aſked of him what Ladies they were, ſhee was glad to aunſwere him, that ſhe could not tell. So ſailed they on ſtill with a proſperous wind, and it happened one day, euen in the very bluſh of the mornings ariſe, the Ship cloſed with the Iſle of Fortune, which preſently he knew, and (not a little 
                     •
                  ocond thereat) leapt foorth vpon the land neuer dreaming what dangers were there prepared for him.
               After they had likewiſe brought their Horſes on ſhoare, they mounted, and rode on thorowe the wood, vntill they came to the ſelfe ſame place, where Primaleon firſt beheld the Trée changed into the forme of a Theater: which as he nowe looked for to finde againe, hee eſpied there a very fearefull grotte or vault, for Fortune was departed from that place, and had made this Cauerne before the track of her foote-ſteps, to ſée who durſt be ſo bold as to follow her. When he came to the mouth of this frightfull hollowe, he felt himſelfe ſuddainly diſpoiled of his Armour, & left there in his doublet with his ſword onely, whereat he grew very highly offended, and ſéeing no way to get thence againe, he beheld a famiſhed Lyon ſtart out of the vaute, the beaſt (lifting vp his foote to a piller ſtanding there by) ſhewed him this briefe fixed there-vpon.
               Seeke not thy death in this vnhaunted Wood.
               
                  Primaleon knowing how eaſily he could conquer a Lyon, becauſe as he vſually hunted, he euermore killed and ouercame

them, ſtepping boldly to the beaſt, gaue him an angry ſtroke with his ſword on the head, which rebounded back againe as lightly to him, as if he had ſmitten on a rock of marble, whereat the Knight began to meruaile not a little. The Lyon caught hold of him about the middle, and caried him ſo ſwiftly into the vault, that the Squire ſtanding by, (fearing when the Lyon had deuoured his maiſter, hee would returne againe and fetch him too:) foorth-with fled thence, leading along with him his Lords horſe, and ſo rode he directly to Constantinople, as in more méet place ſhall at large be declared.
               
                  Primaleon, who for all this ſtrange rapture of the beaſt, failed not in the very leaſt iote of his courage, hauing drawn his dagger, thought there-with to wound the Lyon in the throat, but the beaſt (like one poſſeſſed of a reaſonable ſoule) in the voyce of a man thus ſpake vnto him. My death will be thy deſtruction, becauſe of my blood ſhall ariſe ſo many Lyons more, as thou canſt not defend thy ſelfe againſt them: Permit me then to carry thee to the place, where thy loſt Armes ſhall be reſtored againe vnto thee.
               
               It ſeemed a matter of no ſlender moment to the Knight, to heare a Lyon ſpeake in this manner, but yet hee helde it much more ſtrange, that he ſhould ſuffer himſelfe to be carried away in this ſort: neuertheleſſe, not dreading the imputation of any vile eſteeme, either by neglect of courage, or other behauiour beſt beſeeming a man, hee thus replyed. Carrie me whether thou wilt, for in all occaſions whatſoeuer that may happen to me, faire Fortune and mine own valour ſhall ſufficiently defend me.
               The Lyon holding him faſt betwéene his fore-pawes, bare him aboue a miles length through a mightie darknes, vntill at laſt they came to a goodly large plaine, ſo thicke beſet with high ſpreading trées, that they hindred ye ſight of a round bright-ſhining Tower neere adioyning, to which the Lyon brought him ſo neere, that he wondred he had no ſooner eſpied it, there did the Lyon ſet him downe, and ſuddenly departed.
               
                  The Knight not ſéeing any bodie, by whom he might be informed what was there to doe for him, ſtoode ſadly pondering to himſelfe, and hauing ſo continued for a good halfe houres ſpace, yet neuer the neerer of his expectation, hee coaſted about to come to the Caſtell, and more then an hundred paces had he ſpent about it, yet could not diſcerne any gate for entrance, but onely diuers high-built windowes, out of which he ſeemed to heare a diſordered noiſe of people, reſembling rather to be of Giants, then ſuch as were of his owne ſtature or proportion.
               Standing doubtfull awhile what hee ſhould doe, two Siluane young men, cirkled and wrethed with Iuie both alike, came ſuddenly before him, and one of them ſpake in manner following. Indiſcréete & ouer-audacious Knight, know that Fortune hath conducted thée hether to thy death. This which thou ſeeſt, is called the Dreadfull Tower, for the faire Quéene Melia, Siſter to the King Armato, who in his ſoule abhorred Chriſtians, and contended in the Magicall Sciences with the wiſe Vrgando, erected this tower where thou ſéeſt it ſtand, the place all ſolitary and vnfrequented, and circkled with ſuch a powerful enchauntment, that whatſoeuer Chriſtian dares to enter it, immediatly he falls downe dead, except hee firſt be poſſeſſed of the meanes, to make voyde and of none account this incantation, which wee eſtéeme to be impoſſible, becauſe many Knights haue alreadie come hether, and ſuffered themſelues to be carried into the Tower, (as annon thou ſhalt ſée by vs the maner how) and died ſo ſoone as they ſet foote within it, whereof leaſt thou ſhouldeſt make any doubting, looke in that large ditch vpon thy left hand, and ſee the bones of the dead that héere haue perriſhed.
               No ſooner had hee thus ſpoken, but a ſtrange kinde of Tunne or Dryfat deſcended downe the Tower, whereon the two Siluanes preſently mounted, and in a trice were rapt vppe immediatly. This meruaile made Primaleon to ſtudie a little one it, but yet feareleſſe of it, or any thing els whatſoeuer, he walked on againe about the Tower, to try

if hee could finde any helpe for the finiſhing of this aduenture. As thus he went on, hee heard the treading of a man directly before him, yet could diſcerne nothing at all, but a great yron Sledge lying iuſt in his way, which he helde to be very conuenient for his purpoſe, either for compaſſing his entrance into the Tower, or for expelling ſuch as hee ſhould finde within it.
               So taking vp the hammer, which ſéemed to him to be very weightie, he beganne to knock there-with againſt the wall, with as loude ſtrokes as a Smith vppon his Anuile, and the wall being of bright ſhining mettall, deliuered ſuch a ſtrange high kind of ſound, that the beaſts which were in the wood néere adioyning, hearing ye noiſe, fled thence with feare.
               The wall (with his long battering vpon it) began to open a little, but not to any purpoſe for entrance, albeit (by the rift) it appeared not aboue a fingers bredth in thicknes: nor could he make any larger rupture, notwithſtanding he vſed his very vtmoſt ſtrength, and laboured till he was all on a ſweate, when ſuddainly he ſaw the Tunne deſcend againe, and out of it ſtarted a huge Giant, with his face like a dogges, and of horrible ſtature, not hauing any vſe of ſpéech, therefore his language was barking onely. As hee was going toward him, one of the young Siluanes deſcended againe, crying aloude to the Giant, that he ſhould ſtay, whereon he preſently ſtoode ſtill, and the young man being come to the ground, went to the Knight with theſe ſpéeches. Sir, the feare of your perrill by this monſter, dooth much afflict me, for this is a Caniball, a people of that part of the world, where the Antipodes are, and fifty ſuch as he is, are within the Tower, with all which you muſt hazard your ſelfe, if you abide there.
               Quéene Melia fetcht them from that Countrey to this place, enchaunting them in ſuch a ſort, as they cannot die till the Tower be taken: all which may ſéeme no more then a ieſt in the eye of your valour, but farre greater dangers will aſſaile ye, then you are aware of. This ſpake the

young man, as thinking with great wordes to ſende him thence: but euer when the Knight ſtrooke on the wall, the Siluane trembled, doubting leaſt ye aduenture would now he concluded.
               
                  Primaleon remembring he was vnarmed, conſulted awhile with his thoughts, whether he ſhould deale with this ſtrange creature thus hand to hand, or ſtay in expectation of his Armour, which (as you haue heard before) was promiſed him againe. As thus hee ſtoode muſing, there came forth of the woode a Knight in yellowe coloured Armour, with a border or liſt or blacke about it, in his Shielde was a hammer or ſledge as his deuiſe, and Primaleons Armour he bare vpon a Launce, in manner as Trophies are borne before Conquerours, and beeing come to him, hee ſaid. Heere Knight, take your Armour, and this young man ſhall helpe to arme yée: as for my ſelfe, expect no fauour at my hands, but fierceſt hatred. Neuertheleſſe, I will not ſee you in any ſuch perrill, that you may haue any iuſt excuſe to colour your vanquiſhing, and hauing thus ſaide, he parted thence againe.
               The young man (with lookes full of gréefe) foorth-with armed him, & then was quickly drawne vp into the tower. When Primaleon ſaw himſelfe armed ſo ſoone, hee wiſhed to haue preſent dealing with the Caniballs, rather then to looſe time againſt that one, and aduauncing his weapon, went to aſſaile him, thinking to kil him at the very firſt encounter: but he found himſelfe deceiued, for the Giant, albeit he was vnarmed, had ſuch a maſſie Clubbe, as would endure againſt the keeneſt edgde ſword, without any harming: beſide, hee was ſo quicke and nimble, yt the Knight ſpent many ſtroakes in vaine, before he could wound him. Which when he perceiued, he began to make better vſe of his labour, and watching apt occaſion for his owne aduantage, ſtriking at the vpper hand that held the Club, cut it quite off: ſo the Giant was nowe both without hande and Clubbe, which made him runne rauingly vpon the Knight, and thinking to murder him, bit gréedily his Armour, but

to little purpoſe, for Primaleon gaue him ſo many ſtabs, that at laſt he fell downe for dead at his foote, and then he tooke vp the hammer againe, beating therewith on the wall, as he did before, which ſéemed to open wider then it did, although indeed it was very little, neuertheleſſe it ſomewhat increaſed his comfort.
               While thus hee ſtood beating againſt the wall, two Giants were let downe together out of the Tower, and they came very ſuddenly vpon the Knight, who was ſo extreamlie wearied with lifting the hammer, that one would haue thought he had beene dead: for the one gaue him a mightie ſtroke vpon the Helmet, and the other ſmote him ſo ſoundly vpon the right ſhoulder, that he ſtaggerd and réeled from thē aboue twenty paces. But recouering his ſpirits quicklie, and perceiuing two ſuch fierce enemies vpon him at once, he brauely buckled to them, and ran one of them with his ſword through the right ſide: at the other hee reached a ſlaunting ſtroke, which hee very well auoyded with his Club, and returned him ſuch a requitall vpon his Shield, as if it had not béene that belonging to Fortune, it would haue béene ſquandred in many péeces.
               Now was he beſet with much extremitie, and indéed had falne into vnreſiſtable perrill, but that good hap ſo well befriended him, as from the one hee ſmote of his doggs head, and the other (béeing wounded before) had little abilitie of defending himſelfe, but fell downe dead after his fellowe. This ſucceſſe made him ſo deſirous of entrance into the Towre, that againe he ran to his hammer, and charging the wall with no ſimple ſtrokes, beheld a farre larger opening of the breach: but he ſaw it defended by thrée furious Caniballs, which from the Towers toppe were let downe on the other ſide, and they with huge Maces ſtood rayſing vp the wall againſt him.
               But he whoſe deſire was on nothing but victory, ſeeing them to be vnarmed as the other were before, threwe his hammer at one of them, which breaking his bulke, made him fall downe dead: then with his ſword he recouered the

ſledge againe, and ſpurned it by him, not willing to be diſpoſſeſt thereof as yet, becauſe he expected good ſucceſſe therby, he cleft another of them from the ſhoulder to the bellie, and he fell downe as ſpred in two part. The third ſhewed himſelfe ſo gallantly diſpoſed, that Primaleon (beholding the night to haſt vpon him) doubted leaſt he ſhould be moſt troubled with this Caniball: and looking vp to the toppe of the Tower, hee ſawe a number of them ſtand barking at him, which made him the leſſe reckon what his enemie could doe, but doubling his ſtroakes couragiouſly vpon him, at laſt he fell downe dead among the other.
               Nowe began all the Caniballs aloft on the Tower, to howle and cry in very fearefull manner, becauſe this laſt Caniball which Primaleon had ſlaine, had there his Wife and eyghteene children, who would all haue deſcended ſnarling together to reuenge their Fathers death in theyr doggiſh furie: but the Knight before ſpoken of, who (albeit inuiſibly) brought him the hammer, came againe out of the wood, and made ſuch a ſigne to the Giants aboue, that they left whyning, and with-drew themſelues, then ſtepping to Primaleon, thus hee ſpake. Although the nature of the enchauntment be ſuch, that no kindnes or curteſie ſhould bee ſhewne vnto you, neuertheleſſe, Fortune reſeruing you to more glorious enterpriſes, commaunds me to bridle all diſpleaſure, and not to vſe you as in iuſt rage I might: withdraw your ſelfe therefore into that little Cottage, and there you ſhall finde what is conuenient for you.
               
                  Primaleon feeling the laſt Caniballs blowes moſt offenſiue to him, the more gladlie yéelded to this inuiting, and being entred the Cottage, hee found there a table daintilie furniſhed, and a goodly bed for him to reſt in: there ſupt he without any dread of ſuſpition, and ſeeing none to hinder him, went afterward to bed, and there ſlept ſoundly.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XLIX. Howe Primaleons Squire arriued at Conſtantinople with his horſe, and there witneſſed, that a Lyon had deuoured his Lord in his preſence: and of another ſad newes there happening alſo.
               
                  THE Court of Constantinople was full repleate with gréefe, for Miragardaes loſſe, and the two fayre young Ladies that were with her: the Emperour beſide was much malecontent, becauſe hee could haue no vſe of his Armour, onely through the lameneſſe of his right arme, which thus (on meere conſtraint) kept him in Constantinople, quite contrary to his knightly reſolutions and deſires, albeit both the wiſe Aliarte and Dorina, had giuen him hope of recouerie, and ſtill hee remained in expectation of that promiſed good fortune, nor did any imbecilitie or age abate one iote of his courage, but continuing his former youthfull diſpoſition, often wiſhed himſelfe in the fierceſt and bloodieſt battailes.
               Now in this idle loytering from the exerciſe of military imployment, a ſofter temper had beleagerd his affections, and carrying them in doating errour toward fayre Candida the Daughter of Beliſart, prouoked him to diuers priuate viſitations of her: all which notwithſtanding, the diſcréete and fayre natured Empreſſe Grydonia, (neuer minding the becks, nodds, and other ceremonies of an olde enamoured huſband,) deliuered apparantly that ſhee diſcerned nothing, whereat the Emperour was not a little contented, albeit he would not for all his Empire, yt the world knew his vaine deſires, as his in very deede Empreſſe did.
               
                  Time paſſing on in theſe and ſuch like occaſions, the Knight of Fortunes Squire happened to arriue at the Court, leading in his hand his Maiſters Courſer, and tydings he brought of certaintie withall, that he ſawe when a Lyon deuoured his Lorde. Theſe heauie newes flewe quickly through the Court, and the Empreſſe, with the fayre young Lady Concordia, (who duly kept within her lo
                     •
                  ging, euer ſince the loſſe of Miragarda her Mother) ran as bereft of theyr wits about the Pallace, finding the Emperour (in like manner) neerer death then life. But the Empreſſe Grydonia, beeing of great ſpirit & womanly diſcretion, weighing in the equall ballance of her thoughts, what greefe a man might take for loſſe of ſuch a Nephew, kindly embracing the Emperour, ſpake vnto him in thys manner.
               Right royall and my moſt eſteemed Lord, by the vertue of that loue which you truly declared, when deliuering mée your ſword, and laying your head on my lappe, you proſtrated your ſelfe to death, and bad me reuenge my wrongs for Perequin of Durace: let me intreate you to forget theſe paſſions, and liue with me in honours league as you ought to doe. Admit you haue loſt a noble Nephew, yet comfort your ſelfe in Oliuanto his brother, & doubtleſſe his Mother will alſo be well recouered againe: for aſſurance whereof, take this as a teſtimonie, that in the heauieſt and moſt diſconſolate afflictions of all, the Diuine fauour preſerued and reſtored you to your Empire.
               The Emperour beeing come to better patience, was ſo inwardly comforted with theſe pleaſing ſpeeches, that folding her in his armes, hee declared himſelfe to be contentedly ſatiſ-fied: commaunding all the other Ladies and young Princeſſes to his preſence, with whom hee ſate diſcourſing on matters beſeeming theyr aſſembly, the better to expell theſe ſad tydings which ſo much afflicted him, yet the death of his déere Nephew often interpoſing it ſelfe, cō
                  pelled many broken (yet well ſhadowed ſighes) which (neuertheleſſe) the Empreſſe with heedfull eye obſerued, and

made her very hardly to refraine from teares. But nowe the houre of dinner beeing come, a generall feaſting together in the hall was commaunded: whereto the Emperour was the rather induced, becauſe hee helde it as a matter woorth generall reſpect, that a Knight ſo fauoured of Fortune, and ſo full of fayre hopes, ſhould ſo vntimely be tane away, euen in the freſheſt flouring of his youth.
               This dinner was very ſumptuous, and honourably performed, in which time, many iocond humours and fantaſies ranne in the Emperours thoughts, that he could hardly beleeue his Nephew was dead: and dinner beeing ended, hee called to him ſundry Princes of good yeeres, to whom he imparted his priuate oppinion, which ſauouring as likely in their coniectures as his, they fell to this concluſion, that the Squire ſhould be deliuered ouer to torments, thereby to vnderſtand the truth of his Maiſters death.
               So without any long delaying, hee was taken and tormented in ſuch ſort, that hee confeſſed the reaſon of his ſaying ſo, was, becauſe hee thought him for certaintie to be dead, and in excuſe of his owne returning thether without him: for how could it be otherwiſe? his eyes were witneſſes, how a Lyon carried him into a deepe vaulte, againſt which beaſt he could not well defend himſelfe, his Armour being before taken from him at the Tree of Fortune. The Emperour aduertiſed the Empreſſe heereof, and ſending kindly to entreate her company, ſo ſoone as ſhe came, thus he began.
               Madame, cherriſh your good hopes, for queſtionleſſe my Nephew is liuing: for I dare affirme (according to ſome Magicall incantations, which I haue both ſeene and heard of,) that the Lyon is ſo friendly a beaſt to the progenie of Palmerin, that this carriage away of our Nephew by a Lion, will ſort in the end to his fame and glory.
               Now began all former ſad oppinions to be quite baniſhed, and nothing but courtly pleaſures onely proſecuted: but ſée a ſuddaine vnexpected change againe, Franardos
                  
Squire (whoſe Lord neuer parted from the Ile of Carderia, ſince his ſurpriſing there by the Knight) awaiting his fréedome by ſome other man of merrit, and perceiuing Almaroll with the other Knights there to be taken likewiſe, and Leonato enchaunted for defence of the place, the Squire (bereft of all hope that any one nowe could deliuer them:) returned alſo to Constantinople, and there reported how many Knights were there thus ſtrangely retained in the Ile of Carderia.
               
               This freſh allarum of vnfortunate tydings, raiſed ſuch a new diſcontent in the Court, that nowe they began to credite the former report, comparing preſent ſucceſſes with paſſed accidents: that Fortune now ſtroue to weaken the Court of Constantinople, and reduce it into the like deſperate eſtate, as when Don Edward the Prince of England was impriſoned: but this new croſſe ſtoode on farre worſe conditions, by reaſon theſe Knights could not be deliuered, without the intended death of Leonato, which admitted no hope in ſo hard an extremitie, but rather cauſed a more confuſion in griefe generally thorow the Court.
               The Empreſſe outſtanding the firſt affliction, with more then manly courage, being aſſaulted now againe with ſuch a waightie oppreſſion, could no longer containe her former diſpoſition, but lauiſhly ſent foorth a whole Sea of teares, and the Emperour likewiſe fell downe halfe deade with griefe: ſo that the Cittie was in ſuch a ſad turbulence, for the loſſe of ſo many famous Princes, as it neere hand now reſembled an vnfrequented deſert place, all bemoaning intirely Trineus the Emperour of Allmaignes departure, and the wanting of the other flouriſhing companie, for if nowe an Armie had ſet vpon Constantinople, it had béen no matter of difficultie to take it, beeing thus diſpoſſeſſed of all her defenders.
               Theſe gréefes growing to more diſcréete moderation, and the Emperour (making a better recollection of his thoughts) beganne to conſider, that the ſtrongeſt inchauntments which in thoſe times could happen, did but giue apparant

inſtances of ſuch Knights future valour, as ſhould (by them) eternize their names to poſteritie: which might ſort out as well to his Courts honour, as any other, and make it as much feared, as euer it had beene before, therefore he beganne to be of better comfort, knowing that true noble Knights would not fayle in execution of their duties, as for all care elſe, he referred it to heauen.
               In which reſolution, hée chéered vp the Ladyes young and olde, but Polinarda the mother of Leonato, and fayre Candida, (who was deepely enamoured of him,) they could take little truce with theyr teares, and the heauier was this croſſe to the other Princeſſes, who albeit theyr ſonnes were priſoners, and nature made them as deſirous of their libertie, yet none of them woulde purchaſe the ſame at ſo deere a rate, as to buy her ſonnes life with Lenatos death. The Emperour ſéeing himſelfe thus left alone, and the Empire ſtanding on tearmes of hazard, if any hoſtile enemies ſhould ariſe againſt it: wrote to Don Edward then King of England, that hée ſhould bring what power he could with him to Constantinople, for the better withſtanding all dangers what-ſoeuer: but he did not acquaint him with the caſe of Primaleon, neyther the diſaſter allotted to Leonato, becauſe hée might iourney the more contentedly.
               And till the time of his arriuall, he gaue order for the fortifying of ſuch places as were weakeſt in ſtrength, ſo that (in a maner) the walls were newly reedified: but returne wee nowe to Tubante, to declare a moleſtation that there chaunced to happen.
            
            
               
               CHAP. L. How the Monſter releaſed himſelfe and Ristorano in Tubante, after that Tirrena was ſent to Constantinople.
               
               
                  
                     FLoraman, after that the whole Army was drawne back to their place of lodging, appointing a prouident and carefull watch, commaunded euery man to his reſt: but the next morning hee called the Princes to counſell with him, & Blandidon alſo, who leauing Oltrando to his charge in the Citty, came to conſult on theſe affaires with the reſt, where euery man ſhould fréely deliuer his minde, what was to be done with the impriſoned Tirrena.
               
               
                  Blandidon, whō this caſe did moſt of all concerne, would haue his Siſter put into the hand of iuſtice, and puniſhed as her offence had worthily deſerued: vpon which opinion he ſtoode ſo peremptorily, that Palmerin grew ſome-what diſpleaſed thereat, but Floraman being diſcréete and wiſe, returned Blandidon this aunſwer. I muſt confeſſe my Lord, that a iuſt cauſe of griefe mooues you to the chaſtiſement of your Siſter: but let me entreate you to remember, that the Lady is become priſoner to the Emperour of Constantinople, not to you or me, and I being by him and you deputed as generall commaunder, (ſurprizing her my ſelfe) doo hold it moſt conuenient, that ſhee be ſent hence to Constantinople, there to endure what ſhall pleaſe his Maieſtie to appoint her.
               
                  Blandidon knew not howe to aunſwere this ſentence, perceauing how euery one leaned to that courſe, therefore it being thus concluded on, and wanting but execution, ſo

ſoone as Pompides was well of his hurts receaued, with two hundred for her guard, they were diſpatched thence to Tubante, where afterwarde they ſhould embarque themſelues for Constantinople. In their marching, they were diſcerned farre off from the Citty, and Dragonalte (being on the chiefeſt Turret) not well acquainted with the Scottiſh Armes they beare, armed him ſelfe to preuent the woorſt, going more then halfe a mile out of the Citty to méet them, where knowing each other, and kindly embracing, as they walked on, Pompides reported the whole ſucceſſe of the warre, as alſo the preſent caſe concerning Tirrena, and how ſhe ſhould be ſent to Constantinople.
               
               Thus paſſed they along into the Citty, where Targiana awayted their comming, with longing deſire, to heare tydinges of the Chriſtian Princes, but moſt of all of noble Florian. Pompides in his ſerious & well couched diſcourſe, came at length to tell her, howe Victoria, with two other Ladies, were caried away to be enchaunted, & that Prince Florian followed for their recouerie. So full of gréefe did theſe newes make Targiana, that ſhee was ready to fall downe dead, but bearing it out (with a good ſpirit) ſo long as ſhee could, at laſt ſhee tooke leaue of the Knights, withdrawing into her priuate chamber, where giuing more ſcope to her hearts oppreſſion, ſhee remembred the hatred which Druſa Velonna bare to ye Chriſtians, holding it now for moſt certaine, that ſhe had thus caried away thoſe Ladies, to endaunger the Knights by ſome helliſh enchauntment, and knew not héerein how to comfort her ſelfe.
               
                  Dragonalte and Pompides, not knowing Targianaes inward agonies, gaue them ſelues to reſt, and ſo did the other that came with them, becauſe there appeared no perrill to be ſuſpected. But Fortune, the daily enemie to the very leaſt quietnes, wrought in ſuch ſort, yt the Monſter (which was taken before by our Knights, when they combatted the Kings that came with Riſtorano) had laboured ſo ſucceſſefully with his ſharpe nailes, that the ſtrong giues were broken which bound him faſt by the féete: beſide, he had

wrenched out the yrons which grated the window, where Riſtorano was kept priſoner with too much courteſie, for he was neither manackled on hands nor féete: and then paſſing ſo on together, thorow doore and doore, they came at laſt to the vttermoſt, which (by good hap) they found open, and not guarded at all, where Riſtorano aſſuring him ſelfe now on liberty, gaue ſignes to the Monſter to be very quiet. So eſcaped they thence to a kindſman of his, whom he before had acquainted with his meanes of fréedome, hoping that but fewe Chriſtians were as then in Tubante, (for hee knew nothing of Pompides arriuall) and now was the time for the deliuerance of his Countrey.
               But his kindſman, hauing already ſéene the two hundred valiant Souldiours when they came, and a Captaine of ſo woorthy reputation withall, ſtoode a while doubtfull what were beſt to be done: but being ouer-weyed with Riſtoranos bold ſpéeches, he would néedes make venter of his fortune, and dealing cloſely with tenne other of principall reckoning (ſecret ſworne enemies to the Chriſtians) they wrought with ſuch politique ſubtilty, that they were aſſured of two thouſand Turkes in their aſſiſtaunce, making this courſe their hope, that if a tumult were ſuddainly raiſed, they ſhould want no harts nor hands to help them.
               
                  Riſtorano (with his elected company) went to the place where he had left the Monſter, and engirting the Pallace where the Chriſtian Caualierie were, (onely ſuch excepted as guarded the gates and kept the Caſtell) crying out, murder, murder, murder the falſe Chriſtians: they forcibly brake through the doores where the Knights lodged, and there had ſuddainly murdered them all, but that the Monſter (ouer-gréedy in his forwardnes) ſhooke the doore of the roome where Dragonalte & Pompides ſlept. Now was there heard ſuch a terrible noiſe, as if the Pallace had béen ſhattering in péeces, ſo that the Princes awaking, & their Armour euermore by them, they were immediatly armed: Targiana likewiſe armed her ſelfe, & perceauing ſhee could repoſe no truſt in her Turkes, hence-forth would ſecure her ſelfe among

the Chriſtians. Thirty of the beſt knights in the Pallace were ſpéedily in a readines, & fifty more came by a ſecret vault vnder the Caſtel to them: Dragonalte with theſe foureſcore reſolutes, hauing left Targiana in Pompides charge, with twelue of her beſt affected ſeruants in companie, all vowing to looſe their liues in her defence: went on to the gate, where néeded no labour to open it, for the Monſter had made ſo large an entrance, that our men might eaſily ruſh forth vpon them, but the Monſter could not get in thereat, being only hindered by his huge greatnes. When Dragonalte beheld ſuch a wide rupture, which (though the night was dark) he too plainly perceaued, he imagined ſuch a breache could not poſſibly be made, but doubtleſſe it was the Monſter that did it, wherefore, holding it not requiſite, to reſpect a beaſt with manly curteſie, he cauſed thrée Launces to be bounde together, becauſe the Monſter had ſuch ſtrength in his hands, as with eaſe he could cracke one in péeces: and as the beaſt ſtoode crouding for entrance, he ran with the Launces againſt his ſide ſo ſtrongly, yt gaſhing his ribs, it rent away a good deale of his fleſh. This wound was ſo full of paine to the Monſter, that he forſook the dore, & running down ye ſtaires, ouerthrew euery one he met withall. Dragonalte with his followers iſſued foorth on the ſtaires, and here he found work enough to doo, for Riſtorano had ſet down his reſt on death, rather then longer to liue in priſon: therfore (well armed) he was amongſt the formoſt, & defended ye paſſage with ſuch bold reſiſtance, that Dragonalte by no meanes could deſcend the ſtaires, albeit hee heard the Chriſtians pittifull ſhriekes, who were mercileſly ſlaine beneath by the Turkes. Pompides regarding the liues of his Souldiours, left Targiana with her truſty ſeruants, and went to company him ſelfe with Dragonalte, where in litle while they made ſuch a lauiſh ſlaughter, as ye enemies were glad to giue them away, and there did Pompides wound Riſtorano in the ſword hand, yet neuertheleſſe the fight was fiercely continued, for foure thouſand Turks more were raiſed in his aid, & ioyned there with ye reſt euen at that inſtant.
               
                  Our Caualieres with their handy blows had ſo diſhartened the formoſt rancks, that with very good will they gaue them paſſage, and (thereby) releaſt their paſſage into the open Court, where being ſeconded with new ſupplies of freſh friends, and comfort of others which were in readines preparing, the enemy made a preſent recuile out again, ſo that there might be eaſily numbred two thouſand ſlaine, euen in this forcible retire of the enemie and his troups.
               The Monſter being ſtarke mad with the wound he had receaued, ranne thorowe the Citty, ouerthrowing and killing all that he met withall, making ſuch a confuſion among them which fauoured Riſtoranos procéedings, as verie many of them (growing doubtfull what ſucceſſe would enſue) drew back cloſely into their houſes, as fearing now to be held rebellious, by reaſon wherof, Riſtorano made not his part ſo good as before he hoped of: neuertheleſſe, very fiercely and deſperatly he maintained ſtill the fight, and the Monſter returning againe where he was, crowde
                     •
                   in ſo furiouſly among our troupes, that before he could be withſtoode, he was in the midſt of all the Horſe-men, where hee did miſchiefe enough, beating men and horſes on euery ſide to the ground, but hee was wounded in many places with their ſharpe pointed Launces, whereof ſtill he ſeemed to make no reckoning, but procéeded in as much outrage as euer he did.
               
                  Pompides ſéeing ſuch damage done to his men, came in perſon to encounter him, but the Monſter running at him with all his might, thwarted his paſſage ſo vnluckily, that tumbling his Horſe and him quite ouer backward, the beaſt fell likewiſe vppon him, and there (with his huge waight) he had béene preſſed to death, but the Monſter (hauing loſt much blood out of his ſide and other hurts) fell faintly beſide him, when Pompides, hauing quickly recouered footing againe, commaunded him to be taken by méere ſtrength. While thus the heate of the broile continued, Riſtorano remembred Carino King of Illium, who was cloſe detayned in an other priſon: his company he thought would now greatlie

ſted him, where-vpon he cauſed him to be fetcht from priſon, and armed with as much ſpéede as poſſibly could be. Now began the ſkirmiſh in farre fiercer manner then before, for Carino was a bold hardy Knight, and many well-willers of his dwelled in Tubante, obtayning ſuch fauour in the time of his impriſonment, onely to waite opportunity for his deliuerance.
               
                  Pompides being very weary, and ſomewhat ſore with his vnhappy fall, meeting with Carino, had there by him beene ſlaine, if Targianaes good hap had not conducted her thether, attended by her twelue faithfull followers: where beholding her ſtate and rule in a very deſperate hazard, if our Knights of repute ſhould ſo be diſcomfited, both ſhe and they fought ſo gallantly, clearing their way with ſuch valour before them, as they ſaued Pompides life, euen in the narroweſt perill, and brought him where he might breathe and reſt him ſelfe.
               
                  Dragonalte (on the other ſide) labourd with ſuch ſucceſſe, that whereſoeuer he ſmote about him, at euery ſtroke it coſt a life: neuertheleſſe, the enemie came ſtill ſo freſhly vpon them, that euery moment their ruine was expected. But Targiana, like an aduiſed and prouident Princeſſe, helping where moſt néede required with new ſupplies, cried out all the way as ſhe went with her troupes, that who ſo euer had taken Armes againſt her in the fauour of Riſtorano, if now they would forſake him, and witneſſe true duty to their lawfull Princeſſe, frée pardon was graunted, without any after remembrance of their paſſed offences, ſo that euery one might ſafely betake him to his abiding.
               And Targiana was reputed ſo faithfull of her promiſe (as indéede it becommeth any Prince to be,) as therefore ſhée deſerued highly to be reuerenced: and (except the kindred or néere friends of Riſtorano and Carino) all the reſt departed preſently to their habitations, ſo that thoſe two Princes were there left nowe, with not aboue an hundred men to helpe them. When Dragonalte ſaw the people part thence in ſuch ſort, he ſpent no time in vaine againſt the ſmall remainder,

yet Riſtorano and Carino were withdrawne together, and ſtoode vpon their owne guard with very ſprightly courage: but when Pompides and Targiana came with freſh enforcement vpon them, then they began to think the day loſt, and Carino, who meaned to be impriſoned no more, leaping foorth of the circkle wherein he was round engirt, ranne into the thickeſt of the Chriſtian ſquadron, calling with loude voyce for Dragonalte and Pompides, that hee might die by the hand of one of them. But becauſe a Traytour deſerues no honourable end, ſuch was the loude clattering of ſwords vpon Armour, and the out-cries of them which were doone round about him to death, as he was not heard at all, but falling downe among an hundred Launces, was there very cruelly ſlaine by them.
               
                  Riſtorano defended him ſelfe ſo well as he could, hauing no more then twelue men now left with him, for the reſt were departed to their houſes, as loath to looſe their liues and poſſeſſions: but Targiana hauing round ringd him with her power, conſidered with her ſelfe, that if he ſhould yéeld, and be ſent thence to Constantinople, the Emperour was ſo benigne and full of clemencie, that (in time) his life and liberty might be graunted, whereof would ariſe a following affliction to the Turkiſh eſtate: therefore, to preuent ſuch an after daunger, ſhee ſet vpon him with forty of her beſt Souldiours, and there cut him in an hundred péeces, with all the other that ſtoode in his defence, and thus the hurley burley was concluded.
               
                  Dragonalte and Pompides ſummoning their troupes together, found that they had loſt three hundred men, which could not but be ſome gréefe vnto them: neuertheleſſe, they were content that the rebels ſhould be pardoned, for otherwiſe there was no aſſurance in holding of the Kingdome. So order being giuen for regard of the wounded, and good watch appointed for the Citties ſafety, the Captaines and Commaunders went to haue their hurtes dreſt: the like did Targiana, who albeit ſhe were wounded, yet grew ſhe ſo affectionate to the following of Armes, as quite giuing

ouer the néedle and diſtaffe, ſhee would trie the fortune of ſword and Launce like a warrionneſſe, and became famous for chiualry, as héereafter ſhall be ſhewne.
               The next day following, the Princes held a counſell together, to ſend Tirrena and the Monſter to Constantinople, and prouiding a Shippe ready for ſuch a ſeruice, ſent them a boorde, committing the truſt thereof to Mirante, the Nephewe of Maulerino, who went the more willingly, becauſe he would make him ſelfe knowne to the Emperour. The Ship ſet ſaile, hauing therein Letters from Floraman the Generall, with others from the Princes and Targiana, which gaue intelligence of all ſucceſſes and occaſions, euen to that inſtant.
               Nowe began no little ioy thorowe the whole Court, eſpecially for ſo happy an attayning to knowledge, in whoſe cuſtodie Miragarda, Victoria, and Argentina were, whereat Oniſtalda her mother much reioyced. The Monſter was generally beheld with wonder, becauſe no ſuch ſight had beene vſuall to them, and Mirante had royall welcome of the Emperour, remembring what his Graundſire had doone in fauour of his Father, and this ioy qualified the gréefe for the former ill tidings.
               
                  Tirrena was deliuered to the change of the Empreſſe, who kept kinde company with her in her owne lodging, without her enduring any other diſcontentment, but that ſhe might not part thence at her owne pleaſure.
            
            
               
               CHAP. LI. How Trineus arriued (by chaunce) with his Ship on a ſtrange Iland, where hee found labour enough to doo: And how his Armie ſayled on to Niquea.
               
               
                  
                     TRineus the Allmaigne Emperour, who parted with the Armie from Constantinople, to goe for Tubante, when he had ſailed diuers dayes with contrary windes, there aroſe at laſt ſuch a furious tempeſt, that the Shippes (for feare of breaking one againſt another,) were glad to make way as beſt they could. Trineus ſorry to ſée the Seas diſtemper, was ſuddainly caried farre off from the Fléete, and borne away with ſuch celerity, that a quarrie neuer did flie ſwifter from a bowe, ſéeming to him, as if he had in ſhort while diſpatched ſixe dayes ſayling together. At length the Shippe entred a port made onely by nature, and caſting Anker where moſt conueniently they might, Trineus was the firſt that would ſtep a ſhoare, being followed by three other Knights of his owne Nation.
               Paſſing on long, there was neyther trée, hearbe, nor plant to be ſéene, but onely vaſt and naked grauell, which led on directly to a great water, wherein there appeared to be both men and women, who ſeemed as if they knewe not how to liue vpon land, and on the bancks that encloſed this water, grew certaine little grafts or trées, the fruite whereof was like to Quinces, but much leſſe and very little indéede, yet paſſing pleaſant and nouriſhing in taſt.
               This Countrey ſéemed to Trineus commodious enough, and dreadleſſe of any harme to harbour there, he put off his helmet, ſo did the other that were with him, to refreſh them ſelues with the ſwéet ayre. Standing to ſolace them ſelues

by this water, there ſuddainly came on the further ſide a huge number of wilde beaſts, as Lyons, Beares, wolues, Tygers, Panthers, and other ſuch like: and becauſe there was no other water in the Iland for them to drinke of, thether they came alwaies to quench their thirſt. Trineus was not tardy in clapping on his Helmet, nor ye other Knights neither, to defend themſelues from violence, but ſuch reſiſtance was of no reckoning, for there were aboue thirtie thouſand of the beaſts.
               
                  Trineus béeing of an vndaunted courage, made little care of ſo imminent a perril: but ſuch was the ſubtile quality of the enchauntment, conſiſting on the other ſide of the riuer, that a little boate came floating toward him, guided by a goodly Damoſell, who ſpake vnto him in this manner. My Lady and Miſtreſſe, beholding (a farre off) your comming hether, intreates you to come and ſée her, that ſhe may giue you ſuch inſtructions, as may make your vertues for euer immortall.
               Theſe laſt wordes carried ſuch weight in the thoughts of young Trineus, that without returning any aunſwere, both hee and the other Knights ſtept into the boate, béeing conuaied thence with vnſpeakable ſpéede: and they beheld the men and women in the water, expreſſing very paſſionate and mournfull geſtures, as ſignifying that they were carried to ſome fatall miſery. Trineus, not regarding theſe ſignes of gréefe at all, ſtept foorth on the other ſhoare, and preſently was ſurprized with ſuch paſſion, that hee muſt néedes caſt himſelfe headlong into the water: and indeede he had doone, but for a Iewell he had about him, giuen him by his Aunte Bazilia, which defended him from the force of the enchauntment: but the other thrée Knights that went with him, threw themſelues into the water, where they ſtoode diſpoiled of their Armour.
               
                  Trineus much lamented the loſſe of his companions, but remembring the vertue of his Iewell, comforted himſelfe thereby: becauſe (it fréeing him from any magicall oppreſſion) chéered his hopes with likely perſwaſions, that hee

might accompliſh this ſtrange aduenture. So going onward, he came where the Sorcereſſe had taken out of the water two fayre young women, to traine him (as was her cuſtome) to luſt and dalliance, then ſhould they tumble into the flood againe: where looſing all former remembrance (of what-ſoeuer they had knowledge of) to that inſtant, they could not declare what had happened to them by the Enchauntreſſe.
               This comming thether of Trineus, was ſo diſpleaſing to the Witch, that ſhee ſtarted vp on foote, and forgetting to caſt the young Women into the water againe, ſhe came to Trineus with theſe words. Thou raſh and too bolde aduenterous Knight, ouer-late wilt thou repent this foole-hardie enterpriſe: then ſuddainly with-drawing herſelfe into a Tower, ſhée ſo plyed her ſpells and helliſh exorciſmes, that immediatly all the ayre was couered with darknes, with ſuch terrible breakes of thunder and flaſhes of lightning, as if the whole world ſhould foorth-with haue béene ruined. At the firſt, Trineus began to be a little daunted, but when hée called to minde, howe the Emperour Primaleon had often told him, that enchauntments (in their firſt apparition) deliuered foorth ſeares, but afterward would ſort meerely to nothing, hee concluded to ſee the end of what-ſoeuer might happen.
               The two young Women, who had recouered theyr former vnderſtanding, by reaſon the Witch forgot to throwe them into the water againe, accoſted Trineus, reporting to him the baſe laſciuious life, wherein the Sorcereſſe ſpent all her daies, ſhée being deſcēded of Malfada the Enchauntreſſe, that was ſlaine by nob
                     •
                   
                  Palmerin, when ſhee had conuerted his men into diuers ſkapes of beaſts, as in the ſtorie is at large ſette downe: be
                     •
                  de, they told him manie ſtrange perrils, depending on the finiſhing of the aduenture. Come what may (replyed Trineus) for the exerciſe of a dreadleſſe courage, I ſhall be readie (through Diuine aſſiſtance) to award the very vttermoſt, therefore I care not, come what can.
               
                  Now beganne the ayre to cléere it ſelfe againe, and the ſtorme and rough winde was more mildly calmed, when the Damoſell, which before receiued Trineus into the boat, comming once more to him, thus ſpake. The powerfull Lady Dircea my gracious Miſtreſſe, taking kinde compaſſion on thy towardly youth, giues thée to vnderſtand by mee, that if thou wilt depart hence with thy company, thou ſhalt be ſafely brought to thy ſcattered Nauie: ſo ſhalt thou fréely eſcape the ineuitable daungers, included in thys paſt-compare enchauntment, which to bring to a full period or concluſion, the whole race of Palmerin are not ſuffiicient.
               
                  Trineus gathering by theſe ſpéeches, that the Hag grew fearefull of her enchauntments ending, boldly thus aunſwered. Signifie from me to thy Lady and Miſtreſſe, that I haue ſet downe my lifes reſt and final determination, but I will breake through her deuilliſh charmes and coniurations, detaining ſo many Knights and Ladies in ſo wretched a ſtate of life, onely to pleaſe and glut there-with her owne ſenſuall appetite.
               No ſooner was the Damoſell returned backe to the Tower, but a mightie yron doore was heard to open, and that with ſuch a dreadfull roaring, as if it had béene a long rowle of thunder, after which, iſſued foorth of the Tower the ſtrangeſt miſhapen Monſter, that euer any eye before had beheld: for to the girdle-ſted he ſéemed like a man, but in ſuch wondrous ſort altered and deformed, as no wilde beaſt could be more fierce and hideous: his téeth ſtoode out like the tuſhes of a ſaluage Boare, but much more ſtretched foorth in length, and backe turning againe at the ends thereof: his armes verie huge, and extreamely ſtrong, bearing for his weapon, a long ſharpe poynted Forke made of yron on one of his ſhoulders: and his féete were armed with ſuch horrible crooked bending tallents, as they could little he differed from thoſe of a Griffon: beyond all this, hee appeared to be very ſpéedy of foote, and moſt agile and readie to performe the intended combate.
               
                  
                  Trineus beholding a ſhape of ſuch ſtrangeneſſe, making the ſigne of the Croſſe on his breaſt, and aduauncing his Shield for his defence, ſtoode to defend what this deformed Monſter durſt doe: who lifting vppe his tridented forke, ſtrooke it quite thorow his Shielde, and the blowe falſing along his pouldrone, wounded him a little in the arme.
               The Knight learning heerby the Monſters fortitude and ſtrength, purpoſed to ward his charges with nimble ſlights of defence, ſo that hauing a more heedfull eye to his blows, hee breathed him well about with ſhifts and eſcapes: yet could he not auoyde a hurt now and then: for the Monſter was ſo readie in his turnes euery way, and ſo ſkilfull in handling of his Forke, as it ſtoode the Knight vpon to bee very circumſpect, if he meant to preſerue both his life and honour, neuertheleſſe, hee gaue the Monſter a ſhrewd wound in the left hand. Whereat he waxing very ſpleenefull, ſtabbing the fangges of the forke into the earth, hee grapled and caught Trineus by the ſhoulder, griping him ſo ſtrongly with his ſharpe tallents, that bruſing his Armour very much, hee made him feele extreame affliction, both with his huge weight and forcible pinching, for eaſe whereof, the Knight thruſt his ſword at him, but the monſter graſping faſt holde vppon it, leaping lightly off from him, bare away the ſword with him.
               
                  Trineus hauing thus loſt his weapon, caught vp the Forke to guarde himſelfe there-with, ſo that theyr former manner of fight was now quite changed: for the Monſter layde luſtilie about him with the ſworde, which Trineus ſtill well awarded with the Forke, the length whereof did greatly auaile him, and hee gaue the Monſter there-with ſuch a ſtabbe in the bellie, that hardly could hee make any more reſiſtance.
               The Witch (ſtanding all this while at a window, to ſée what ſucceſſe this combate would ſort to) had in ſuch ſumptuous ornaments attired herſelfe, that ſhée ſéemed a verie goodly and beautifull creature: aloude ſhee cried out vnto the Knight, not to kill the Monſter in any caſe, promiſing

in recompence of ſparing his life, that ſhe would deliuer to him all the men and women which ſhee there detained in the enchauntment.
               
                  Trineus beeing moued both with her beautie and pleaſing ſpéeches, ſtoode ſtill to condiſcend to her requeſt: but one of the young women thus cryed to him. Faire Knight, giue no credite to the fained gloſings of this damned Hagg, for ſhée will not performe whatſoeuer ſhe promiſes, but only delude you with friuolous deuiſes, to hinder yée from finiſhing ſo important an aduenture.
               Theſe words made Trineus ſtep againe to the Monſter, hoping by his foyle to conclude the enchauntment, but hee caught the Knight ſo ſtrongly within his armes, that hee had much adoe to fetch his breath: and in this manner hee ranne with him toward the water, as purpoſing there to throw him in, to the end he might be bereft of all vnderſtanding. But the Knight ſtrugling mainely with him, gotte at laſt out his dagger, where-with he gaue him ſo many ſtabs, that he was glad to let him goe, & then the Monſter made offer of caſting himſelfe into the Lake, but Trineus miſtruſting no good meaning therein toward himſelfe, caught him faſt by one legge, and held him ſo violently, that downe fel the beaſt and he together: then did the Monſter catch him faſt by the Helmet, and had ſo bruſed him with the fall, as alſo with his heauie burden lying vpon him, that hee was well néere paſt all remembrance of himſelfe, and with his ſharpe tuſhes he ſo beate him about the Helmet, that hee ſhiuerd it in very many places.
               At laſt, recouering his ſences againe, by méere extremitie of anguiſh hée felt in his head, hée gotte the Monſter ſo ſtiffely by the throate, that hée compeld him to tumble beſide him, and then with his dagger hee quickly diſpatcht him: When ſuddenly the earth beganne to tremble verie ſtrangely, and opening with a wide gaping rift, immediatly ſwallowed the Monſter and his Forke, nor could the leaſt droppe of blood be diſcerned, but it was likewiſe deuoured in this opening of the ground.
               
                  
                  Trineus béeing ſore laboured and ſpent with trauaile, ſought for ſome conuenient place where he might ſit to reſt himſelfe, and eſpying a lowe ſeate a pretty way from the Lake, went preſently thether: where hee beheld the garments and Armes of ſuch, as had béene before deſpoiled thereof, and afterward were throwne into the flood. There did he put off his owne Helmet, becauſe it was bruſed and battered with many ſore blowes, and taking vp an other, made proofe thereof, by diuers ſtrokes giuen with his daggers pommell, and not knowing where to prouide himſelfe better of a ſword, tooke vp a goodly one, which indéede belonged before to one of his owne Knights.
               No ſooner was hée in this manner prepared, but hée ſawe comming againſt him, a Beaſt of an vnaccuſtomed ſtrangeneſſe, béeing in ſtature as great as a Camell, with two hornes, which hée turned euery way at his owne pleaſure: his feete and clawes were like to a Lyons, his tayle aboue foure times the length of ones arme, and faſhioned round like vnto a roape, where-with it ſéemed hee made good vſe of ſeruice, by binding ſuch Knights as ſhould enter combate with him.
               
                  Trineus ſtoode awhile conſidering with himſelfe, more doubtfull of the beaſts tayle then of his hornes, though indeede both gaue matter enough of admiration: but becauſe that was no place for fruitleſſe expence of time, hee prepared himſelfe in action for ſafeguarde of his life, practiſing which way victory was likelieſt to be obtained.
               The beaſt made at him furiouſly with his hornes, and perceiuing hee could not catch him within compaſſe of his tayle, becauſe by his heedfull eye-ſight and nimble leaping off he very well preuented it, hee turned aſide at him with his left horne, and ſmote him ſo forcibly there-with on one ſide of his head, that he tumbled quite ouer and ouer on the ground: and ſurely if the Beaſt had had ſo much power as then to haue ſtayed himſelfe, the fight had there béen ended on Trineus behalfe, but holding on his courſe, as vnable to ſtay ſo ſuddainly, returning backe againe, hee founde the

Knight gotten vp on his féete, but yet ſo greatly aſtonied with the ſtroake and fall, as if the Beaſts capacitie coulde haue reached to the vnderſtanding thereof, the caſe had ſtoode very hard with the Knight.
               But Trineus, perceiuing (by this former triall) the Beaſtes aſſaults to be very dangerous, with moſt circumſpect and watchfull care ſtood well vpon his guarde, that by no meanes hee ſhould come to cloſe with him: and as the Beaſt had knit round his taile, thinking to catch him faſt there-with about the necke, the Knight intercepted it with a reuerſſe blowe, that cutte it off aboue an armes length. Nowe was Trineus in greater perrill then before, for the Beaſt béeing mightily enraged through the anguiſh of this wounde, beganne to flie aloft aboue the Knights height, as ſéeking that way to ſeaze vppon, and gette him faſt bounde within his taile, ſo that nowe if he had not a very prouident fore-ſight and héedfull reſpect to him, there was no remedie but he muſt be ſlaine.
               Aloft therefore aboue his head did Trineus wheele his ſworde, with many ſharpe thruſts amongſt his flouriſhes, which wounded the Beaſt often as hee ſoared aboue him: yet ſtill he perſeuerd on craftie aduantages, and chaunced to fling his tayle ſo vnluckilie, that hee bound the Knights legges ſo faſt there-with as he could not ſtirre, and mounting vp ſo aloft with him, gaue his head diuers dangerous blowes againſt the ground: but the extreame payne hee felt by loſſe of part of his tayle, made him not able to holde him long in that ſort, and Trineus féeling himſelfe at libertie, quickly recouered his footing, following the Beaſt at ſo apt an opportunitie, that hee quite cut off one of his hinder legges, and (hoping of further ſucceſſe) ſtill followed vppon him, but the Beaſt hurt him in the breaſt with his horne, and vnder the ribbes with one of his pawes, where he had rent his Cuiraſſe open, but the wounds were not of any great validitie.
               The Knight giuing the beaſt as little reſpite as might be, gaue him a great hurt in the head, which hee awarded

indifferently with one of his hornes, and with the other wounded Trineus againe in the breaſt, racing the Armour with ſuch a terrible graſpe, as if he had rent it quite off from his body, and indeede very much indangered the Knight thereby, who neuertheleſſe helde out with inuinſible courage.
               Now the Monſter perceiuing his death to be néere, roſe vp on his thrée féete, and leaping vpon the backe of Trineus, got him faſt within his leggs, & writhde his tayle ſo ſtrongly about him, as hee could deuiſe by no meanes to get from him: where-upon hee was compeld to take holde on his hornes, which hee held with ſuch a violent power, as both grewe wearie of continuing in that grapling: beſide, the beaſt lacking one of his legges, could not ſo well guide his footing as before, but béeing drawne euery way by the hornes, at laſt tumbled backward, falling with Trineus directly vnder him, where, though he oppreſt him mightily with his huge weight, yet gained the Knight ſo fayre an occaſion, that hee lay ſtabbing his dagger into his belly, making a prettie large entrance into it, in agony whereof, he gaue him ſuch a blow with his paw on the Helmet, that bruſing it to his head, he made him lie ſtill as if he had béen ſlaine, and the Monſter (albeit his death haſtened on) ſo dragde and halde him along on the ground, as this verie tugging had beene ſufficient to kill him, but yt the Knights valour béeing beyond compare, gathering his better ſpirits to him, and beholding in what extreame perrill hee was, got from the beaſt againe vp on his feete.
               And nowe beganne the ayre to be ſo obſcured againe, as nothing at all could be there diſcerned, which darknes continued the ſpace of an houre, and then recouered the former brightneſſe: but no where was the Monſter to bee ſéene, then turning himſelfe about, hée ſawe the people which were in the Lake, to ariſe out of the water ſo high as theyr breaſts, deliuering outwarde ſignes of inwarde reioycing. Trineus gathered by this alteration in them, that the aduenture now was néere concluſion, and hoping ſtill of full

effecting it, the Enchauntreſſe Dircea came royally toward him, with ſuch a gariſh and glittering pompe, as it might be wel reckoned for a miracle, that ſo young a Prince could bridle looſe wanton thoughts, and (as one quite forgetfull of honour) not make eſtéeme of ſuch beauty and woorth, as in outward appearance was there preſented to him, which ouer many doo ſéeke with too much earneſtnes, and afterward pay the price of it with yeres of repentance: ſhe being thus come to him, fell on her knées at his féete, deliuering theſe ſpéeches.
               Thou perfect Idea of honour and chiualry, beholde me héere obedient to thy diſpoſing, without any further oppoſing thy life to perill. But he who had written on the table of his hart, the graue aduertiſements of the Emperour Primaleon, in ſuch caſes of allurements by magicall phantaſmaes, ſtearnely returned her this aunſwere. Labour not ſo artificially, in making me a witneſſe of your counterfaited beauty, for I know you haue no reall perfections in you, or any thing worthy the reſpecting: but admit you had, yet were there no reaſon why I ſhould make any eſteeme of you, that detaine ſo many héere captiue in moſt wretched condition, declaring your ſelfe therein a vile deteſtable woman. Dircea, who made full account to enthrall ye thoughts of Trineus, by ſhewing her ſelfe ſo beautifull and tractable, when ſhe found him ſo farre off from amorous perſwaſions: ſwolne big with ſpléene and diſdaine, ſhe aroſe on her féete, ſaying. Thou baſe and villainous Knight, knéele I at thy féete to be ſo ſlaue-like ſcorned? ſoone ſhalt thou repent thy vnmanly behauiour: then graſping her curled locks angerlie with her hands, ſuddainly it began to raine down ſtones of ſuch hugenes, as there had braind him, but that he quicklie ſtept into the houſe where the Armour was kept. No ſooner had this ſtorme of ſtones giuen ouer, but all the men and women came forth of the water, and ranne to the place where their Armour and apparrell was reſerued: which Trineus beholding, he went foorth leaſt he ſhould be ſmothered with their multitude. And ſurely it was a wonder to

behold, with what ſpéede they were all cloathed and armed, and how quickly in warlike maner they iſſued forth again, as if they meant to aſſaile ſome aduerſary.
               
                  Trineus being ſore wounded and weary, when he ſaw ſo many returne like enemies, (for they were aboue ten thouſand in number,) he reckoned him ſelfe as a dead man: but not to looſe his life fondly and raſhly, he ſtood prepared what euer might happen, a teſtimonie of his vnconquerable ſpirit. The armed Knights, prouoked by the enchauntment, went on againſt him, but he mooued not from his place, and when they came néere him, they ſtood all ſtill, as if they had not the power to hurt him.
               The Witch, thinking verily to murder him among ſuch a multitude, when ſhee ſawe not one of them ſtirre to ſtrike him, ſhee ranne to her ſpelles, and finding that he had a Iewell, which defended him from her charmes, contriued another ſtratagem to endaunger him withall, and made a large bridge appeare ouer the water, whereon the wilde beaſtes on the further ſide of the lake, might haue liberty of paſſage whether they would. No ſooner was this bridge to bee ſéene, but the wilde beaſtes (roaring and crying through extremity of hunger) eſpying ſo many people together, ranne a maine ouer the bridge toward them, and the Hagge ſtepping for her owne ſafety into her Tower, (neuer remembring to warrant the armed men againſt the beaſtes, nor them againſt the violence of their weapons) they beeing thus mette together, euerie man ſtoode on his beſt defence againſt them, and Trineus ſtoode ſecurely as a méere looker on, till beholding the beaſtes to haue torne ſome fewe in péeces, hee came to their aſſiſtance, aduauncing him ſelfe formoſt as their Captaine, and there hee made ſ
                     •
                  ch a bloodie ſlaughter, that the beaſtes began to kéepe more backward, the whole band of men meruailing at his gallant behauiour, and beeing mightily encouraged by ſo valiant a Leader, they kild ſuch a mighty multitude of them, as by good happe all the reſt were forced to flight. The beaſts beeing driuen away, nothing nowe remained,

but onely his entraunce into the Tower, which was all of fine Marble, and ſo ſmooth, as no holde might any way be faſtened on it.
               The men, who by the Witches commiſſion came out of the lake, and receaued their Armes for her defence: by this foyle of the beaſts, were fréed from enchauntment, and nowe deſired to be reuenged on her, who had helde them ſo long in ſuch a wretched ſtate of life: and electing Trineus as their Generall, went on toward the Tower, but Dircea, perceauing her imminent caſe of perrill, threwe a deuilliſh ſpell abroade, that euery one of them were ſtrucken blinde, ſight remayning onely but to Trineus, by the Iewells vertue which ſafely defended him. Where-vpon, hee ſtudying howe he might ſooneſt vnenchaunt this place, and driue the Witch thence to ſome other helliſh habitation: eſpyed on a Trée hard by him, a horne hanging ſo low, as verie eaſily he might take it downe, which when he had done and put about his necke, he began to winde it ſo loude as he could.
               Nowe was this the laſt and moſt dangerous acte of the enchauntment, becauſe (ſoone after) iſſued foorth of the rockie Tower, a Knight hauing the ſtature of a Giant, his Armour beeing blacke, his Shielde without any impreſe, and mounted on a darke bay Courſer, with a Dwarffe following him, and armed in all reſpectes like him. This Knight, without vſing any other courteſie to Trineus (who was one foote) ranne proudly at him with his Launce, offering many thruſtes and blowes at him, but none came néere him: for our gallant Champion, deſirous to conquer nowe or neuer, auoyded all his attempts with nimble dexteritie, deliuering diuers fierce ſtrokes at the Horſes legs, to the ende he might fall downe with his Maiſter, but euerie blowe ſeemed as ſmitten vpon braſſe, rebounding backe without any other ſucceſſe, which made him growe doubtfull of the aduentures concluſion, becauſe he felt him ſelfe excéedingly wearied, and the wounds in his breaſt did very much annoy him.
               
                  As thus he ſtood wayting ſome better opportunity, for his readieſt departure thence with honour, the Horſe paſſing ſomewhat néere him, he caught faſt hold on his bridle, and turning him often about, gaue ſo many ſtabbs at the mounted Knight, that hee made him fall beſide his backe to the ground, caſting him ſelfe vp preſently into the ſaddle, but had no Launce to helpe him withall.
               The Dwarffe, who all this while ſtoode beholding this battaile, when hee ſawe the Giant on the ground, and the Knight ſeated in the ſaddle: hee leapt vp on the crouper of the Horſe, & troubled Trineus about his neck very ſtrangelie, and hee (to rid him ſelfe of this apiſh burden) made diuers proffers with his hands to take holde of him, but the Dwarffe was ſo ſkittiſh euery where about him, that hee did nothing but hold him daliance, till the Giant had got vp on foote againe, and came a freſh to charge him with his Launce, which euermore as hee made a thruſt forwarde, withall with a quicke hand, he ſtill drewe it back againe, whereat Trineus began not a little to meruaile, procéeding on to this coniecture, that therein the force of the incantation conſiſted, and making no reſpect of any trauaile whatſoeuer, hee oppoſed him ſelfe to the Dwarffes ſhiftes and ſleights, the rather becauſe hee had no weapon to defende him, and being watchfull withall of the Giants Launce, as he thruſt it at him and puld it back againe, he made vpon him with the Horſe, and by good hap caught hold of it with his right hand, when preſently the Dwarffe ſkipt iuſt before him, onely to impeach his hold of the Launce, and with the other hand hee faſtened on him alſo: but the Giants ſtrength was ſo powerfull in drawing back the Launce, as he felt great paine in the with-holding it: neuertheleſſe, he purpoſed rather to forgoe his life, then leaue his hold of the Launce, and (catching the Dwarffe at an aduantage, betwéene his arme and his body) hee faſtned his left hand on the Launce likewiſe, and ſo haling it to him with both his handes, ſtill looke howe much the Knight recouered of the Launce, ſo much did the Giant looſe of his magicall ſtrength

giuen him by the Witch, ſo that forgoing it all at laſt, he fell downe backward along on the ground, & the Dwarffe then getting looſe from Trineus, ranne a pace toward the Tower, which began to ſmoulder and ſmoke in ſuch manner, as if it burned, and getting entrance, the Dwarffe was neuer after ſéene.
               
                  Trineus leauing the Giant there lying, went néerer to the Tower, where beholding the windowes and gate to be open, he imagined that the Enchauntreſſe was fled: the rather, becauſe all the people which before were ſmitten blind, had now recouered their ſight againe, and came running altogether to the Tower, but being vnable to enter, by reaſon of the ſmoke, ſome of them returned back where the Giant lay, and ſtabbing at him with their Launces, leaſt hee ſhould ariſe againe, found nothing there but the empty Armour. Within an houre after, the Tower fell, and the ſmoke ceaſed, to the no little ioy of Trineus, when he perceaued the aduenture to be finiſhed, ſo (with-drawing him ſelfe to bind vp his wounds) Dircea the Witch, flying aloft in the ayre ouer his head, ſtayed her haſt a while, and thus ſpake to him. I am not willing Trineus, to tarry any longer in this Iland, which thou haſt gotten badly from me: but hold it for moſt certaine, that to whatſoeuer place thou ſhalt betake thy ſelfe, I will ſtill be by thée to hinder thy deſſeignes: but eſpecially I will ſo plague the courſe of thy loue, as thou ſhalt neuer quietly enioy it: and hauing thus ſaid, away ſhe fled.
               
                  Trineus made no account of all theſe threatnings, but calling ſome of them, who had beene held by the Witch in ſuch a wretched kinde of life, enquired further of their condition, but could learne no otherwiſe of them then he had done before. So remaining a while there vnder cure, thoſe Knights and their aſſociates which had ſo long béen there, were very deſirous of viſiting their own natiue Countries: and ſtanding on the Sea ſhoare, they diſcerned farre off diuers ſpread ſailes, which (on their call) comming thether to them, thanking Trineus and taking leaue of him, many

of them parted thence, ſo that in foure dayes ſpace, all the Mahumetiſts were euery one gone: two hundred Chriſtians remaining there with him, ſome belonging to the Empire of Constantinople, others to Rome, and moſt of Italie. About ten dayes after, albeit Trineus was not thorowly recouered, yet went he aboord with theſe people into his own Shippe, which all this while had ſaild about the Iland, the Mariners meruailing what was become of their Lord and Maiſter.
            
            
               CHAP. LII. How Trineus found his Armie in the port of Niquea, and how they gaue battaile to the Citty.
               
                  THe Fléete and Armie belonging to Trineus, after the rough tempeſt was more mildly becalmed, not ſéeing their Admirall with their chiefe Commaunder, hulled vp and downe two dayes in expectation of him, and neyther farre nor néere diſcerning any ſayle, prepared for departure thence, becauſe other windes threatned more ſtormes were toward, and ſhaping their courſe directly for Niquea, in foure dayes ſpace they put into the Port. Floraman hauing beheld a farre off on the Sea, a Fléet of ſo many Shippes together, began to grow doubtfull, that they were people of Perſia or India, and came in ayde of trecherous Dirdan: wherefore to impeach their landing, the Armie was preſently put in readines, & commaunded to méete place for ſuch imployment, leauing Oltrando with his Indians, and Blandidon with foure thouſand hardy men at Armes, to hold the Citty enemie play, while the reſt of the Armie went to withſtand theſe freſh commers, as prouidence and policy neceſſarily required.
               
                  
                  Dirdan being on the toppe of a Turret, and beléeuing that theſe Shippes were come in his defence, gaue order for his peoples preſent readines, to trouble our forces with ſome light ſkirmiſhes, while his ſuppoſed friends might the better be landed: which charge being referd to Mameo and Treſino his Coſin, they iſſued foorth with the thrée Giants, and a baſtard ſonne to the Souldane of Perſia, named Leouino, who was come thether without his fathers commiſſion, with two thouſand bolde Knights in Dirdans fauour, and to approoue his chiualrie vppon the Chriſtians. Hee would néedes be the firſt that ſhould ſet vppon our Campe, and méeting with Blandidon, gaue him ſuch a hurt in the right arme, as he could fight no longer that day, but withdrew him ſelfe for cure into that part of the Citty which he held.
               
                  Leouino vnhorſed Oltrando, and dealt very ſtearnely with his Indians, where-vpon Oliuanto, Gracian, and Pompides came to ſuccour him with their troupes, in which time Gargante and Broco were entred the vaw-ward. Oliuanto encountred the Giant Broco, and they met with ſuch fury, that they were both diſmounted together, but quickly they recouered them ſelues againe. Pompides had ſuch a ſhock giuen him by Gargante, that hee fell from his Horſe vpon his backe, where he had béene trodden to death among the Horſes féete, but that Francian ſtept in with fiftie men in his ayde, and got him ſpéedily mounted againe: Gracian came hand to hand with Leouino, and kept very euen quarter with him.
               By this time the Fléete was come ſo forward, as Floraman and the reſt could diſcerne the Croſſe in their banners, and the Armes imperiall of Almaigne, diuers noble Barons likewiſe making out in a Foyſt, who were well knowne vnto our company. Now Palmerin and Dramuſiande, fearing leaſt ſome diſaſter might befall thoſe troupes, which were in hotte encounter with Dirdans men, among whom were three ſuch mighty Giants, drew backe with a fewe followers to helpe their friends.
               
                  
                  Dirdan by his farre diſtance vpon the Turret, being not able to diſcerne whether this ſupply was of friends or enemies, when he beheld Palmerin & Dramuſiande make forward with their wing: ſent Lanfranco in their reſiſtance, who did much iniurie among our men with his Beare, vntill he came face to face with Dramuſiande, where hee was compeld to abide his blowes, and Palmerin ſingling foorth Leouino, (who already had wounded Gracian, and made way to méete a man of greater valour,) at his very firſt ſtroke hurt him with his ſword, and ſo cleft his helmet, that he was ready to fall downe in a traunce: nor did Palmerin eſcape a light hurt in the arme, and being on both ſides ſundred by their people, drew backe to breath a while, which reſpite prooued well for Leouino, who hauing felt ſuch ſturdie blowes, began to credite for certaine, that the fame of the Grecian Knights valour was not cauſeleſſe reported, and finding his helmet quite cleft, with-drew for another. Dirdan perceauing no reſiſtance at the Port, but that the Fléet had mildly ſtrooke ſaile, began to imagine that they were Chriſtians, and fearing leaſt by them he might be ſurprized, or his forces in fight ſuddainly diſaduantaged, hee ſent to aduertiſe Gargante and the reſt thereof, willing them to get into the Citty againe, till better opportunity might befriend them: but he being incredulous that dealt with Oliuanto, and hauing receaued by him a ſhrewd wound in the ſide, would lend no eare to Dirdans aduiſe.
               
                  Lanfranco and Broco began to retire with their men, but Palmerin and Dramuſiande ſo néerely purſued them, as they could get their troupes into no order, for Gracian, Francian, and Pompides were on the one ſide, and Palmerin with Dramuſiande on the other, making ſuch hauock and ſlaughter as was ſtrange to behold: at which very inſtant, Trineus forces came and ioyned with them. Floraman beeing their leader, and thinking the game ſtoode nowe vpon the winning or looſing, made vp with this new ſupply againſt the Citty, to try if he could kéepe the two Giants from paſſing the bridge: but Gargante, who by no meanes would

retire, was ſo beaten about the head by Oliuanto, that falling in a ſwoune, he was taken priſoner.
               
                  Dirdan with a thouſand of his valianteſt Knights, among whom were Mameo and Treſino, ſtoode for defence of the Bridge, for the better retiring of his troupes: but on the arriuall of Dramuſiande, who nowe was on foote, with a great battaile-axe in his hand, there was found buſie work enough to doe, becauſe on the other ſide did thruſt in Palmerin, Oliuanto and Oltrando, who now to recompence the blame of his fall, ſtept boldlie on the Bridge, dealing hand to hand with Mameo, as Pompides did the like with Treſino.
               
               When Floraman ſaw theſe two Knights on the bridge, and in ſuch preſent dangerous perrill, hee gaue a ſ
                     •
                  ddaine ſummons with a trumpet, wheron all the reſt of his Souldiours immediatly made forward. Lanfranco ſtood at the bridge-foote with a huge yron ſhielde, awarding the mightie ſtrokes which Dramuſiande gaue him with his Axe, the like play did Palmerin hold his brother Broco: but Oliuanto hauing his eye ſtill fixed on Dirdan, when he beheld him giue backe toward the Cittie, ſtept reſolutely more forward vppon the Bridge, and béeing hindered by Mameo, with his ſword he cleft his head to the téeth, and Oltrando béeing there wounded, preſently retired.
               When Lanfranco and Broco ſaw the people ruſh in ſuch heapes vppon them, fearing to be ouer-borne by their multitude, they gaue ſomewhat backward on the Bridge, and defending the paſſage ſo well as they could, ſtill withdrew by little and little into the Cittie, béeing cloſely purſued by Oliuanto, who in the heate of a youthfull ſpirit, preſumed on more forwardneſſe then wiſedome required, and (in a vaine oppinion) thought himſelfe able to ſurprize the Citty. No ſooner was he entred, but immediatly the Bridge was drawne vp, and there (as he with his enemie) ſo was Pompides fighting with Treſino, where the Giants and Dirdan making fiercely vpon them, they were conſtrained to yéeld themſelues.
               
                  
                  Palmerin, who by reaſon of the peoples vnrepellable croude, could neuer get footing vpon the Bridge, when hée heard that Oliuanto and Pompides were taken priſoners, doubting leaſt Dirdan would bloodilie diſpatch their liues, drew on the freſheſt troupes of the Armie, and being quartered in ſuch order as beſéemed, hee ſent Francian and Oltrando (who came both but newly from the Chirurgians hands) to beleager that part of the Cittie next to Blandidons poſſeſſion, and then himſelfe with the reſt of the Armie, (commaunding S
                     •
                  aling-ladders and other engines of warre to be brought) gaue a ſtrong and valiant aſſault vppon the Cittie.
               
                  Dirdan, not miſſing Gargante tell nowe, fell into ſuch an impatient furie, that hée would needes procéede with violence aganſt Oliuanto and Pompides: but perceiuing that the Citties defence ſtoode him vpon, the Giants were commaunded ſo mount the walls, where caſting downe great ſtones and logges of timber, they calmed the ouer-forward approche of their enemies. Notwithſtanding, Dramuſiande, taking a great Ladder, & aduauncing a large ſhielde aboue his head, mounted vp the wall ſo haſtilie, that Lanfranco eſpying him, was once in minde to meddle no more with him: yet hee cauſed ſo many huge ſtones to bee caſt downe vpon him, that euen as hee thought to get vpon the wall, by his maine ſtrugling & ſtriuing, the ladder brake, and Dramuſiande hanging by one hand vppon the battlement, might there haue perriſhed, but that he gotte footing in a rift of the wall, and there defended himſelfe ſo well as he could.
               All the Chriſtian Armie, ſéeing Dramuſiande in ſuch danger, gaue a meruailous loude out-cry, which mooued Palmerin foorth-with to catch at another Ladder, and hee aſcended the wall with ſuch ſpéedineſſe, that hee ſéemed to ſome as if he had flowne vp, and finding he was reſiſted by Broco, thought yet to make his part good enough, but then he was in perrill to be caſt downe with diuers Launces, which out at the loope-holes were bent againſt him: Neuertheleſſe,

hée layde ſo valiantly about him with his weapon, that hee ſliced the Launces in ſunder as faſt as they came néere him, and getting vp at the laſt hard by Dramuſiande, defended him from the danger of his enemies, with incomparable courage.
               Now indéed, becauſe the wall was well furniſhed with men, which came ſtill in freſh ſupplies, to preuent our Souldiours from their entraunce: the multitude of Launces darted at them, and ſhowers of ſtones falling euerie way on them, had queſtionleſſe there concluded their liues, but that it fell out ſo well and luckilie, that Blandidon had begunne a freſh charge in his quarter, whereto Francian and Oltrando (neighbouring with their forces) raiſed an vnexpected aſſault on thoſe parts of the Cittie. This ſuddaine allarum ſo amazed Dirdan and his men, that they were conſtrained to ſeeke helpe for them, which there laboured to maintaine reſiſtance, by meanes whereof, Gracian, (with aboue fiftie Knights) mounted on the wall, which they the more eaſily compaſſed, becauſe Lanfranco and Broco, were very greatly buſied with Palmerin and Dramuſiande, and in ſome good hope there to haue ſlaine them both. Dirdan accompanied with Leouino & others, were gone in ſuccour of the place where Blandidon aſſayled, as ſtriuing that way to conquer the thrée other parts of the Cittie.
               Nowe beganne the rumour and noyſe to waxe verie great, and euery way came the enemies troupes violently vppon our forces, ſo that (deſpight theyr harts) they were ſtill kept backe: but ſée how graciouſly Fortune fauoured them, euen in this heate of trouble and perrill, Trineus with his Ship was arriued in the Port, where without any trifling or vaine expence of time, both hee & his Knights marched toward the Armie, which he beheld had beſieged the Cittie on each ſide, and iudging it to ſmall purpoſe to mount the wall, went directly to Floraman, who by reaſon he was the generall Commaunder, did not himſelfe intermeddle in the ſkirmiſh, but (to auoyde all diſorder that

might happen,) gaue directions ſtill to ſupply with freſh power where moſt neede required.
               Vpon ſome conference had betwéen them together, Trineus vſed theſe ſpéeches to Floraman. My Lord, vnder controule of better aduiſe, I am of this minde, that héere wee may make a breach thorow the wall, and gaine our entraunce with ſecuritie, conſidering ſo many of our men are alreadie aſcended, and none of them as yet diſmounted againe, it is a ſigne no doubt of theyr good ſucceſſe, and wée are much too blame if we no way ſecond them.
               
                  Floraman, not diſliking this aduiſe, cauſed certaine Rammes and other engines to be brought, which béeing imployed againſt the wall, with ſuch ſufficient ſtrength as was requiſite, in a little while they made ſo large a breach, that the Pagans in the Citty (béeing no way able to hinder them) the Chriſtians forcibly entred like to a maine current.
               
                  Lanfranco and Broco, ſéeing they were thus entred the Citty, leauing the former taſke they had in hand, preſently forſooke the Wall, beginning to make ſpoyle among our people: but Floraman and Trineus ſo valiantly withſtoode them, that Palmerin, Dramuſiande, and Gracian, had leiſure to deſcend, and came to aſſiſt them with their friendly ſuccour.
               When Dirdan had gotten intelligence héereof, leauing Leouino and Treſino to defend theyr quarter, hee haſtened to helpe where was more neede, and ſeeking for Palmerin to die by his hand, he ranne like a furious mad man vp and and downe, till at length méeting with him, he thus ſpake. Thou cruell enemy, I come to die on the poynt of thy weapon: but firſt, I purpoſe to let thee know, how much I hate both thée and thy race: with which words, he began to lay furiouſly at him.
               
                  Palmerin béeing willing to ſaue his life, becauſe Primaleon had ſo requeſted him, vſing no other reſiſtance but defence of his ſtrokes, deliuered many gentle ſpéeches to quiet him withall: but perceiuing his kind labour was ſpent all

in vaine, and furie getting the vpper hand of longer forbearaunce, ſtriking a maine blowe at him, hee cleft him from the ſhoulder downe to the breaſt, which grieued Palmerin more for ſo dooing, then it did Dirdan in the ſuffering, condemning greatly his own raſhnes in the act, knowing that the Emperour would much bemoane the death of Dirdan, becauſe his Father Maiortes, died in ſeruice of the Grecian Empire: but who would take it more grieuouſly then hys Father Don Edward, who had ſo well knowne the fidelity of Maiortes, ſince hee went vnder the ſhape of a dogge, but ſeeing now it could be no otherwiſe, he ſuffered his Souldiours to carry him into one of theyr Moſcheaes, where verie ſoone after he gaue vp the ghoſt.
               When the Warriours for the Cittie ſawe the death of their Lord, and that Blandidon had gotten entraunce likewiſe in the quarter which he held, they would very gladly haue deſired mercie: But Lanfranco, Broco, and Leouino, cruelly menacing ſuch as offered to yéeld themſelues, made forward among the thickeſt, béeing lothe to fall into the the Chriſtians power, as knowing that they iuſtly merrited the names of Traytours, becauſe theyr Father Palurdan, held his Kingdome by fauour of the Grecian Empire, all which they now made no account of, but hartened on the Souldiours that were vnder theyr charge, and continued the fight with vndaunted reſolution.
               
                  Gargante, hauing béene all this while bound in the Generalls Pauillion, by a Pagan Page, (of whom no man had any ſuſpition, watching his apt and conuenient opportunitie) was ſuddenly let looſe, and ſpéedily armed, then came he running along through the Cittie, and entring among the thickeſt of the Chriſtians, made hauocke of them in pittifull manner, which Trineus with griefe beholding, albeit he was ſo weary with fighting, that hardly he could ſtand vppon his legges, yet would he needes ſteppe foorth againſt him, but he had ſuch a ſtroke with the Giants huge Mace, that he fell downe aſtonied, and Gargante made forward, to encounter with a ſtronger enemy.
               
                  
                  Lanfranco hauing a farre of diſcerned him, beganne to buckle cloſe to Palmerin, becauſe (indéed) he knew not wel howe to gette from him, and the Knight knowing what a tough companion he had, gaue with all his might ſuch a ful blow at his enemie, that ſeuering his ſhield in two parts, it did likewiſe quite cut off his right arme. This maime was ſo full of anguiſh to the Giant, that making now no more reckoning of his life, with his other hand hee got Palmerin faſt by the Helmet, ſhaking him forward and backward in ſuch rude manner, as by no meanes hee could gette looſe from him, but there had had his breath ſhaken out of his body: for the Giant (féeling ſharpe death approching) ſo boyſtrouſly flung and threw him about, as if Francian by good hap had not béene neere, who gaue him a ſpéeding ſtab in the flancke, (which wounde comming altogether vnlooked for) made him leaue Palmerin, and vſe what extremitie he could to Francian, when grapling faſt with him, his weakeneſſe (with expence of blood) did quite ouer-beare him, ſo that downe fell Francian and the Giant vpon him, where hée had vndoubtedly died vnder his heauie weight, but that certaine Knights being by, and eſpying the danger wherein he was, did quickly recouer him.
               
                  Broco, combatting this while with Dramuſiande, yet ſéeing when his Brother fell downe, ſpake as followeth: Braue Knight, if thou be as curteous as valourous, permit me to goe and comfort my Brother, whom thou ſeeſt yonder falne to the grounde, and wounded (to death I thinke) by one of thy company.
               
                  Dramuſiande, béeing euer of a gentle nature, ſtepping backe from him, ſayd: Goe, and (if thou canſt ſaue thy brothers life) doe, thou ſhalt not ſay, but thy foe can affoorde thée that honeſt curteſie.
               This kinde aunſwere, did Broco as kindly commend in his hart, and kneeling downe by his Brother, founde hée was dead: whereupon, knowing that was no place for fruitleſſe lamentation, hee returned backe againe to Dramuſiande, & thus ſpake to him. I féele not my ſelfe to ſpent

or wearied, but that I can ſtand boldly breaſt to breaſt with thée, and hard it is to geſſe, which of vs two ſhall be victor: notwithſtanding, ſo highly doe I prize thy kindnes ſhewne mee, that I am enforced to loue and honour thée, offering thée my company, and very beſt abilitie of ſeruice, ſo that my brothers dead body may be no further mangled.
               At theſe ſpéeches Dramuſiande threw by his ſword, and catching him faſt in his armes, accepted him as his louing Brother, agreeing thence-forward to holde conſtant amitie together.
               By this time was Palmerin face to face with Gargante, betwéene whom grewe ſuch a fierce battaile as the like was neuer ſéene, and Leouino, (after he forſooke the wall towards Blandidons quarter) came and met with Dramuſiande, againſt whom a while hée bare himſelfe valiantlie, but in the end, hee was ſo ouer-laboured with the Giants ſturdie blowes, and ſo faint with long continuaunce of the fight, beeing alſo wounded vnder the ſhort ribbes, that hee fell to the earth, when Dramuſiande (quickly vnlacing his Helmet) had ſmitten off his head, but that hee cryed out: Sir Knight, for Gods ſake ſpare my life, (and kill me not) doe with mee otherwiſe whatſoeuer ſéemeth good in your owne liking.
               The Giant tooke from him his ſword and Shielde, ordaining that hée ſhould be carried thence to Broco, and then afterward they went together to the place, where Oliuanto and Pompides were detained as priſoners, where the doore of the Chamber béeing opened vnto them, they were both foorth-with armed as before. So returning backe againe to the fight, making paſſage with theyr ſwordes along as they went: the already diſhartened enemie, beholding Lanfranco lie there ſlaine, and Broco with Leouino yéelded to the Chriſtians, held vp theyr vnarmed handes in ſigne of ſubmiſſion, ſo ceaſed the battaile, onely Palmerin and Gargante excepted. For Palmerin hauing fought from Sunne-riſing, til now the néere approch of the euening, and ſo wearied withall, that he could hardly regard the Giants

blowes, his Horſe and he falling downe backward, one of his hind legs by miſhap trode vpon him, whereof Gargante taking the aduantage, deliuered a very fierce ſtroke at him, thinking to make him ſure from riſing any more, but Oliuanto perceauing ſuch a diſcourteous part, receaued the blow vpon his Shield, ſaying Well dooſt thou ſhewe thy ſelfe to be a baſtard and a vn
                     ••
                  ine, that wouldſt harme ſo good a Knight at ſo apt an aduantage: leaue him, and turne to me, and thou ſhalt finde that I am not faint or wearie. Gargante returned no aunſwere, but fetching a furious reuerſe ſtroke, had feaſted Oliuanto but little to his liking, had not the Knights knowledge in Armes right héedefully preuented it, and turning with a chéerefull ſpirit on his aduerſarie, requited his offer with ſo ſound a gréeting on the helmet, that hee batterd it cloſe vnto his head. But Gargante, being altogether gouerned by his great valour, without any ſight or iudgement in euident perrill, continued his fierce rage of laying about him, till in deede he was ſo farre ouer-gone with trauaile, that whatſoeuer blowes he ſmote, could doo no more domage.
               
                  Oliuanto (all this while) making vſe of the others fury, and knowing aſſuredly what it would ſort to at laſt, ſpared his owne labour till occaſion better ſerued: and then his blowes (like thunder) fell on his enemie, that making him to réele and ſtagger round about the place, at laſt hee fell backward, when Oliuanto, taking off his helmet, and demaunding whether he would yeelde or no, perceauing no aunſwere was returned, preſently he parted his head from his body. And thus was the battaile fully concluded, with abſolute poſſeſſion taken of the Citty, which being performed with the nights arriuall, each man (as néede required) betooke him ſelfe to reſt. Floraman hauing firſt viſited the wounded Princes, and tooke good order for their quick recouerie.
            
            
               
               CHAP. LIII. Howe Tarnaes combatted with Leonato, and remained there priſoner, and how many other Knights were taken, and of a diſgrace which happened to the wiſe Aliarte.
               
               
                  THe next day following, Floraman created Blandidon King of Niquea, in name of the Emperour Primaleon, but bound him not to pay anie homage, becauſe the Emperours of Constantinople, deſired not to haue Princes to be as theyr vaſſailes, but rather their louing friendes and familiars, binding them rather by gifts and kindneſſes, to all kingly entercourſe of league and amitie. All things being ordered to the benefit of the Kingdom, and Blandidon ſeated in quiet poſſeſſion, the reſt returned thence to Tubante, where they found, that Dragonalte had reduced the ſtate of Turkie, vnder the quiet obeyſance of Targiana, with pardon and fauour to ſuch former enemies, as had béene drawne to riſe with Riſtorano.
               
               When Gracian ſaw the warrs were thus ended, he tooke his farewell of the other Knights, ſaying, he would nowe returne home to Fraunce, and ſo parted thence with a Foiſt, which was giuen him there by Tarneus. Pompides would likewiſe ſet thence for Scotland, and ſo would Francian, Palmerin, and Dramuſiande, euen whether their owne affections beſt guided them: but Dragonalte, his minde was moſt to Constantinople, to be in company of the faire Quéene Arnalte, which made him the gladlier ſtay with Floraman, who gréeued not a little, that hee might not goe thether, where (as his thoughts diuined) the others mindes were addicted. Therefore he would haue ſent home Oltrando to

                  India, promiſing him, when the Emperour had conquered thoſe Kingdomes, he ſhould be made chiefe Ruler of them: but he, eyther to ſee the maieſtie of the Greekes Empire, or elſe to free his Coſin Tamerco from impriſonment, (as afterward the ſucceſſe manifeſtly witneſſed) would needes goe along to Constantinople, ſo, taking two thouſand of his worthieſt men with him, he ſent the reſt back againe into India, to thoſe places which were vnder his iuriſdiction, and putting to Sea with the Armie, they had ſo proſperous a wind, as brought them within ſight of Constantinople, where Trineus (ſuſpecting that the Emperour would kéepe him, in regard of the great loue he euer bare vnto him) ſuddainlie turned his Galley toward Macedonia.
               
               But leaue we them, and come to other, who haue béene ſomewhat ouer-long omitted, namely Tarnaes, who after he departed from Leonato, paſſed by an aduenture of two villainous Knights, that had taken a Horſe well munited from a Damoſell, and diſſembling as if they meant to reſtore it againe, conducted Tarnaes to a fountaine, where ſitting downe and putting off their helmets, they gaue ſuch words of aſſurance to Tarnaes, as he made no doubt of their formall promiſes. So ſpending a little while in pleaſant diſcourſing, and ſome pretty quips ſlighted toward the Damoſell, who remained nowe more then halfe perſwaded, that ſhe ſhould haue her Horſe deliuered her againe: one of the Knights (drawing from his ſide a long Poniard) thought to ſtab it into Tarnaes head, which very eaſily he might haue performed, becauſe the man that is ignorant in complots of treaſon, is farre from the thought of any treaſonable action. But the Damoſell perceauing the villaines intent, cryed out aloude: Beware Sir Knight, whereat Tarnaes ſtarting a ſide, receaued the ſtab on his right arme ſo violently, that he could ſcarſely tell how to ſtir it. Wherefore ſtepping vp vpon his féete, and getting his ſword forth with his left hand, couering his head with his other wounded arme, ſtoode boldly againſt them vpon his defence. One of theſe falſe Knights (being the valianteſt of them both,) buckled

againſt him with ſuch fierce following, that hee had good reaſon to ſtand in doubt of his life, & albeit the paine of his arme much hindred him, yet was hee forced to ſhift hands with his ſword, and (forgetting his wounds anguiſh) ſtept iuſt betwéene them, where thruſting one of them thorowe the ſide, he rent his ſword forth with ſide and all, ſo that falling downe along on the ground, his companion was now left to looke to him ſelfe: who being daunted with the bad ſucceſſe of his fellow, deſired pardon of Tarnaes, but he eyther not hearing him, or reputing ſo vile a perſon vnwoorthie of life, that made no more reputation of honour and Armes, ſtabbing him quite thorowe, there left him alſo dead. Afterward, taking his Horſe by the bridle, he mounted vp into the ſaddle, helping the Damoſell vp behind him, giuing her the reines of her owne Palfray in her hand, and then he deſired her to tell him, her cauſe of her trauaile thorowe thoſe Woods, with a Horſe ſo coſtly and ritchly furniſhed.
               The Damoſell, who began to wexe amourous of the Knight, with a cheerefull countenaunce thus replied. Honourable Sir, I am Siſter to a youthfull Knight, Lord of a Caſtell, which anone you ſhall ſee, who being diſpoſed to combate with theſe Knights which you haue ſlaine, ſent me to a Caſtell of mine Aunts, to fetch this Horſe of excéeding rare proofe, and they moſt diſcourteouſly tooke the ſame from me. When ſhe had thus ſpoken, ſhe vſed diuers affectinate ſignes to the Knight, who hauing directed his fancie to a place of more height, meant quickly to leaue her, when he had brought her into better ſecurity: beſide, his Squires Horſe had ſtarted aſtray, at the firſt affrighting of the garboyle, and hee was not yet returned with him: moreouer, his arme beginning to wexe colde, the anguiſh of the wound the more did paine him, ſo that hee was compeld to goe with her to her brothers Caſtell, where hee was with great honour entertayned, but indéede his welcome the more excéeded, when hee vnderſtoode how he had ſlaine the Knights in his Siſters defence. Being vnarmed, the beſt

experienced Chirurgians were ſent for, who applied ſuch precious vnguents to his arme, that within thrée dayes he could weare his Armour, and then he tooke leaue of the Damoſell and her brother: who held it as a matter almoſt incredible, that hee alone coulde vanquiſh two ſuch hardie Knights, for reſolution whereof, him ſelfe would néedes approoue him, limitting his intent to apt time and place. His amourous Siſter, perceauing the purpoſe he went about, would needes behold the iſſue of this attempt, and fearing by waſt of time to be preuented, her brother taking the further way about, ſhe made a néerer cut for her way, to be betwéene them when they ſhould meete together.
               Encountring at laſt vpon a croſſe way, the young Knight cried to Tarnaes, that he ſhould ſtay, thē taking his Launce, which he had reared vp againſt a tree, he came toward him vſing theſe ſpéeches. Sir Knight, whoſoeuer paſſeth this way, muſt pay a tribute, and yéeld contentedly to theſe conditions, either to leaue héere his Sheeld and name, or that which he more dearer prizeth, I meane his life and honour. Theſe prouoking words of the Knight, ſo fired the generous thoughts of the braue Lacedemonian, that without ſhaping any aunſwere at all, giuing the ſpurre to his Horſe, he gallantly ranne to méete his enemie, who making no refuſall, as gallantly encountred him, breaking his Launce on Tarnaes Shéelde, without ſtirring him a iote: but the young Knights hard aduenture was ſuch, that falling backward from his Horſe, he vnfortunatly brake one of his ſhoulders. The Siſter to the Knight, bearing mighty hatred to Tarnaes, for reiecting her earneſt proffered loue, ſtepping forth of a little thicket where all this while ſhe had hid her ſelfe, began to crie out againſt him in this manner. Thou vil
                  
                     •
                  aine, and no Knight, ſhameſt thou not ſo vnkindly to entreate thy friendly Hoſt, who gaue thee ſo honorable entertainment in his houſe? my tongue ſhall not let to report thy villanie, and acquaint the world with ſo inhumaine a diſcourteſie, exciting all Knights errant whatſoeuer, to reuenge ſuch an important caſe of iuſtice.
               
                  
                  Tarnaes would haue defended him ſelfe, by allegation of not knowing him, and that her brother had highly wronged him, in aſſayling him without any cauſe of offence: but the Damoſell, whoſe tongue ranne a little at too much randome, multiplied her iniurious ſpéeches in ſuch ſort, and went ſo farre in womanniſh weakenes, that he (not to be ſeene in ſo ſhameleſſe a contention,) turning his Horſe, left her there rayling at her owne pleaſure. The Damoſell, being named Pandina, cauſing her brother to be caried to curing, mounted on her Palfray and purſued Tarnaes, arriuing before him at the Ile of Carderia, whereas ſhe fell in arguing with Leonato, and boldly deſired him to reuenge her on a Knight, that bare for his deuiſe a mans head in his Sheeld, declaring withall, that he wanted an eye, and ſhaped ſuch a ſound tale to him, as Leonato verily beleeued it for an vndoubted truth, and there-vpon grew ſo encenſed againſt Tarnaes, as nothing but death was his determination, and (within leſſe then an houre after the Damoſels departure) Tarnaes came trotting his Courſer thether.
               
                  Leonato ſeeing him make toward the Iland, being ready armed for all commers whatſoeuer, rode forth to meet him, ſaying. Knight, it was ill done of thee, to offer wrong and gréeuance to a harmeleſſe Lady. Tarnaes, who vnderſtoode not this word gréeuance, declaring the bolde ſpirit he euer caried about him, replied. I come to vndergoe the aduenture of this Iland, and to conquer thée, except thou knoweſt how better to forbid me.
               I can and will forbid thée, aunſwered Leonato, and ſo (without any more words) they fell to the encounter, finding little difference in the vertue of eithers ſtrength, ſaue onely Tarnaes appeared to haue the moſt diſaduantage, by a ſlight hurt receaued on the ſhoulder, which onely happened by power of the enchauntment: which he neuer minding, came to try his enemie at the ſwords point, ſaluting him ſo ſoundly on the helmet, that it ſeemed as if he had cleft it in twaine. Nowe albeit his ſtrokes were giuen with great manhood, and able enough to ſtagger a ſetled iudgement:

yet the falſe appearance of beléeuing thēſelues to be wounded, grew to ſuch a perturbation of minde betwéene them, that eyther fell into a mighty ſuſpition, which way the victorie was likelieſt to encline.
               Heere-vpon, Leonato gaue back ſtill toward the Iland, and Tarnaes with vndaunted courage followed, ſo that before he was halfe aware of it, he found him ſelfe to be vpon the Bridge, and there he was ſurprized with a ſuddaine violent winde, which caried him to the abiding of Don Roſuell and Almaroll, where changing his former thoughts to a contrary alteration, with the reſt, hee gaue him ſelfe to ſolace and paſtimes. Scarſely was Leonato returned to his Tent, but Gracian was come thether, and required the combate, when the other (leauing his Pauillion) ran preſently againſt him: but Gracian, who had more néede to let his Horſe haue reſted, then in ſuch haſt betake him to the Iouſt, at the Launces encounter fell to the earth, and Leonato ſtept vpon him, where threatning him with death except he yéelded: hée (which could doo no otherwiſe by the force of the enchauntment,) gaue him ſelfe as priſoner, and ſo by the other was led into the Iland. Euen in that inſtant Pompides arriued there, and very ſoone after him did Francian alſo, both beeing conquered by Leonato, and both led priſoners in to the other.
               Many Knights came thether from diuers Prouinces, ſuſtayning the like fortune at Leonatoes hands, and caried by him into the Iland. So farre ſpread the fame of this aduenture, that from all Countries came gallants to combate Leonato, who maintayned his vndertaken charge with ſuch hardy valour, as whoſoeuer hazarded his fortune, hee remained ſtill the conquerour.
               But leaue we him thus buſied in this bold imployment, comming now to noble Florendos and Berolde, who hauing beheld Miragarda, Victoria, and Argentina led away, followed in their reſcue, and were aduertiſed by the wiſe Aliarte, that their endeuour was ſpent in vain, becauſe the concluſion of ſo high a labour, was onely reſerued for him, who

ſhould enioy Victoria as his wife. So promiſing them no further aſſiſtaunce, hee returned backe to the Perillous Ile, where hee bent his care againſt the ſo-ſuddaine Druſa Velonnaes drifts: who awayted but oportunity to be reuenged on him, becauſe he gaue ſuch ayde to Prince Florian, in ending the dangerous enchauntment of the Princeſſe Leonarda.
               
               One day as he was riding about his Iland, ſhe had made ready a Cage of yron, and ſeeing his comming, hid her ſelfe cloſely, and raiſed ſuch a ſuddaine dark cloud, as he (being vnable to ſée which way he rid) was glad to alight, as fearing leaſt his Horſe ſhould cary him into ſome ſteepe downfall. Héereat began Druſa Velonna to chéere her ſpirits, and glad of this good hap, iſſued foorth of the thicket where ſhe had hid her ſelfe, and taking him by the hand, ſhaping her voyce man-like, thus ſhee ſpake. Goe with me courteous Knight, and I will bring thee to reſt vnder a faire Pine trée, till this muddy darke receaue cléereneſſe againe. Aliarte who nowe began to diſtruſt him ſelfe, becauſe hee remembred how his ſkill was croſt, in the bloodie warre at Constantinople, as at large is declared in the end of the ſecond volume of this Hiſtory: permitted her to guide him, and ſhe led him to the Cage of yron, locking him vp ſo faſt with carracters and charmes, as he ſhould neuer get out againe but by force of armes, and none but the beſt Knight that euer guirded on ſword, could be the meanes of his deliuerance. Then faſtened ſhee the Cage to a huge high Rocke, and ſo leauing him hanging there in hourely dread, leaſt the Cage and he ſhould fall together into the Sea, ſhe parted thence about her other ſerious affaires.
            
            
               
               CHAP. LIIII. How Florian, Florendos, & Berolde ſundered them ſelues, for better recouerie of the Ladies, and how (thinking he had found the Pallace of Queene Melia) Berolde arriued at the Ile of Carderia: And how Florian finiſhed a ſtrange enchauntment,
               
                  
                     FLorendos, Florian, and Berolde, when they had loſt the ſight of the Ladies, followed their purſuite two dayes in vaine: becauſe Druſa Velonna, (after ſhee had let the Knights once haue but a ſight of them,) engirt them with ſuch a coale-blacke cloude, as it was impoſſible any more to beholde them, vntill the Witches pleaſure were woone thereto. So ſeating them ſelues all thrée by a Fountaines ſide, vpon an aduiſed conſultation, they concluded each man ſhould trauaile alone, not doubting but it might fall to one of their haps, to finde the place where the Ladies were enchaunted: ſo, hauing well refreſhed themſelues, with ſuch prouiſion as their Squires could get, friendly they tooke farewell one of another.
               
                  Berolde not knowing in what Countrey he was, tooke (by chaunce) the way toward Macedon, and in very fewe dayes (without any queſtioning after the ſoile, becauſe hee rode on ſad and melancholly) he arriued at the Ile of Carderia: where ſuddainly beholding a goodly Pallace, and an armed Knight prepared to the Iouſt, hee thought hee had found the enchauntment of Velonna, ſo riding to the man, to be reſolued in his hope, he thus ſpake. Sir Knight, let it ſéeme no matter offenſiue to you, to let me vnderſtand the quality of this place, and whether any paſſage muſt be bought by the perrill of your power, or no.
               
                  The qualitie of the place (aunſwered Leonato) you may not know, but concerning the danger of your paſſage, that conſiſts in your ſelfe: either by turning backe againe, or leauing (as vanquiſhed) your Shield and name. Neither of theſe conditions (ſaid Berolde) can I accept of, except my hands were bound behind mee, and with theſe wordes, hee turnd his horſe for the tryall.
               The encounter was ſharpe and furious, Leonato looſing his ſtirrops, but Berolde was diſmounted, imagining that hée receiued a hurt in his ſide, and béeing on foote againe, prepared to enter combate with the ſword, but a violent winde carried him into the Pallace, and there ſtaied he priſoner in Carderia.
               
               
                  Florian tooke toward the Mountaine of Stéele, onelie through the bruited fame of that enchaunted place, where looke howe many hapned thether, were tranſ-formed into Stéele, yet kéeping the ſhape and forme of men, and al ſuch Knights as coaſted this Country, remained there in like ſort enchaunted. The difficultie of this hazardous aduenture, ſo laboured the forward deſires of Florian, that hoping to finde his daughter there, hee went to the Sea-ſide, and finding conuenient paſſage, hee ſhould be brought within a miles diſtance of the Mountaine, but further they durſt not bring him, as dreading (if they went neerer) to be changed into ſtéelie ſhapes.
               Two dayes they ſayled, beholding the Mountaine to glitter where the Sun-beames touched, and the next day in the morning, they found themſelues ſo néere, that the Marriners cryed out with feare, doubting they ſhould neuer more part thence againe, and therefore by no meanes would put to ſhoare: but Florian, not willing to be thwarted in his deſſeignes, ſéeing they would beare him backe againe whether hee would or no, drewe foorth his Sworde, threatning the Marriners with immediate death, except they landed him where he appointed thē. The Marriners little dreading with whō they contended, prepared to ſtand vpon their owne defence, but a Turke of Tubante béeing in

company, that very well knew Florian, and (for his owne ſafetie) had helde his peace: aduertiſed the Marriners, that this was one of the high eſtéemed Knights of the Grecian Court, and there was no wiſedome in medling with him, except they were all a-wearie of their liues.
               This counſell preuailed in ſuch white-liuerd fellowes, ſo that (in great terrour) they put to the ſhoare, where hée with his horſe and Squire went quickly a-land, preparing toward the foote of the Mountaine: but the Ship foorthwith departed, and the Turke wrought ſo aduiſedly, yt he ſtoode ſtill vpon the Anchor, to ſée what would become of Florian, that he might giue intelligence thereof to Targiana his Lady, who he knew had accepted him for her huſband. Florian, who tooke no héede of ſuch idle matters, leauing his Squire ſome-what ſhort of the Mountaine, where was no danger of alteration, went on about his buſines, and as hee ſet foote vpon the Mount, all thoſe Knights, (which had been there before metamorphoſed to ſtéelie ſhapes) began to ſtir theyr armes, as if they purpoſed to oppoſe themſelues againſt him: but when he perceiued they mooued not out of theyr places, hee ſmilde at ſo vaine and cauſeleſſe a feare, hoping all the reſt would prooue no otherwiſe, wherein hee ſoone founde himſelfe deceiued, for hee had not gone vp the quantitie of halfe a mile, but he came to a quadrant plaine, of thirty paces euery way, where before his face he beheld a doore of Steele, which ſeemed to belong vnto a Caue, and ouer it was a Tombe of the ſelfe-ſame mettall.
               Standing ſtill to regard a matter of ſuch admiration, as that hollowe vaſt place appeared to be, the couerture of the Tombe was ſuddainly lifted vp, and throwne to ye ground, when preſently aroſe vppon her feete, a Lady with diſheueled hayre and moodie lookes, hauing a Sworde thruſt thorow her necke, tearing a wounde that ſeemed freſhlie to bléede, and ſhée leaping foorth vppon the ground before Florian, began to vtter theſe ſpeeches.
               Foole-hardie Knight, right ill for thée is this thy b
                     •
                  lde comming hether, except thy valour be equall to thy preſumption:

Know that thou art to combate with mée, and vntill I am vanquiſhed, make thou full account to enioy no reſt. So concluding her ſpéeches, ſhee drew another ſword from her ſide, and beganne there-with luſtily to lay at Florian, who (bluſhing as aſhamed of ſo infamous a conflict) awarded her ſtrokes with his Shielde, not drawing foorth his ſword to ſtrike againe: but one blowe béeing giuen by her at his knée, hee felt it to cut quite through his Armour, whereon hée imagining her to be no Woman, but rather ſome infernall Hagge or Furie, drewe likewiſe his weapon, and gaue the Lady ſuch a ſtroke vppon the ſhoulder, as might eaſily haue entred thoſe men of Stéele, yet made no ſigne at all of hurting her, whereat the Knight meruailed not a little, feeling his body in many places payned, where the Ladies blowes had lighted on him, and when theyr ſwordes chaunced to méete together, he feared leaſt his own would fall out of his hand.
               Greatly did it abaſh and diſgrace Florian (in his owne thoughts) to holde this kinde of difference with a Lady ſo long, yet ſince his wonderment in bootleſſe reſiſtance, and alſo her weighty ſtrokes in ſufferance, perforce conſtrained him ſo to doo: hee ſhaped an aduantageable blowe at the wound in her necke, which the Lady with agile and right ſpéedie defence auoyded, whereupon, the Knight in preſent iudgement gathered, yt in her necke lay the hidden meanes of her conuincing, which made him ayme euery ſtroake directly at that part, forcing thereby the Lady to cunning retires, which Florian ouer-ſlipped not, but with heedfull care and dilligence followed, vntill hee had driuen her to the doore before remembred, which (ſuddenly of it ſelfe) opened, and the Lady catching Florian faſt about the middle, carried him with her into the Caue, and preſently the doore cloſed againe.
               When Florian ſaw himſelfe in ſuch a helliſh darkneſſe, and on euery ſide ſmitten all the way he went, he began to flouriſh his ſword about him, yet féeling nere a ſtroke of his to light on any thing: but ſtill the more hee went forward,

the more it ſéemed to him he deſcended, and ſtill the Ladie layd on him, whom in this darknes he could by no meanes diſcerne, yet at laſt, his fayre ſtarres ſo fauouringly ſmilde on him, that his weapon happened into the wound in her necke, and hearing her fall, at the inſtant he heard theſe ſpeeches deliuered: Fortune hath fauoured thee, but Arte ſhall ouer-come thee.
               
               
                  Florian, whoſe high ſpirit aymed onely at victorie, ſpurnd at theſe threatnings, as matter of no moment, but paſſing on ſtill, and ſtill deſcending, he beganne to diſcerne a great light, which very much comforted him in this obſcuritie, hoping now to be deliuered frō ſo long a ſtay vnder-ground: but his apprehenſion was erronious, for it was a Baſiliſke which thwarted his way, and came mainly againſt him beating his winges, flying round about him with ſuch celeritie, as Florian could faſten no blow to offend him, yet did the Baſiliſke ſwéepe at him in ſuch ſort, as hee was enforced to fall downe back-ward, when houering ſtil euer him, and flapping him with his winges, hee tumbled him ſtill downe and downe, aboue fiftie ſteppes in eſtimation. All which not diminiſhing a iote of his valour, at laſt hee gotte footing, and awayted the Baſiliſke, that came with a freſh intent to ouerthrow him againe, but the Knight ſtanding aduiſedly on his guard, ſcaunced aſide, and (in his paſſage by) gaue him ſuch a ſtroke, as ſeuerd from his bodie one of his winges: which maime was ſo gréeuous to the Baſiliſke that turning furiouſly vpon him againe, hee gotte faſt hold on him betwéene his feete, and terribly cut his Helmet with his ſharpe beake, though that was nothing (in reſpect) to the venim that came foorth of his eyes.
               
                  Florian well perceiuing, that except hee beſtird himſelfe the ſpéedier, he muſt néedes end his life betwéene the Monſters féete, whéeled his ſword about with all the nimblenes he could vſe, & chaunced to giue a blow at the bright ſtone, which the Baſiliſke bare on his head in ſtedde of a creaſt, which falling downe on one ſide of him, ſo did the Baſiliſke on the other, quite bereft of all ſence and power of further

offending. Florian caught vp the ſtone, and placing it in the fore-part of his Helmet, procéeded onward, beeing no more impeached by the dim darknes.
               The way euer-more deſcending by degrées, made him grow ſuſpicious, that he ſhould at length goe downe to hel, but ſuddenly hee eſpied a Chamber doore open, whereinto boldly entring, he ſaw that it was hung round with black, and in the midſt thereof a couerd Tombe, out of which appeared the handle of a Sword: there ſtood like-wiſe beſide it a goodly bedde, with Curtaines drawne round about it of black Veluet, which he preſuming to open a little, beheld the Lady there lying, with whom he had fought before, hauing the ſword ſtill thruſt thorow her necke, which vrging him to excéeding compaſſion, made him deliuer foorth theſe ſpéeches.
               Alas ſwéete Lady, if there be any thing, that may redéeme you from this wretched condition, doe but declare it, and reſt vndoubtedly aſſured of it. Sir aunſwered the Ladie, it is in you onely to eaſe my miſerie, now you haue obtayned that rich Stone frō the Baſiliſke, and if your fayre ſeeming courage aunſwere but the ſhape, to imbolden you againſt a Monſter which will appeare to you, you ſhall deliuer from vnexpreſſable affliction, the two moſt loyall Louers that euer liued: to wit, a curteous & faithfull Knight, encloſed in that Sepulcher, with a ſword ſtabd through his breaſt, the handle whereof preſents it ſelfe to eye, and my ſelfe am the other, whoſe drieriment more at large you ſhal then heare diſcourſed.
               
                  Florian defying all daunger what-ſoeuer, oppoſing his life to the very vttermoſt perrils, for fréedome of any that ſuffered diſtreſſe, as hée ſtoode leaning himſelfe againſt the bedde, there entred with a dreadfull noyſe into the Chamber, a Monſter hauing the face of a man, his armes and breaſt like to a Lyon, but his clawes much longer then that beaſtes, then (in all reſpects like to a Griffon) was his body couered ouer with great broade ſcailes, ſurpaſſing any Stéele in hardneſſe, his legges were longer then anie

mans, but in like manner armed as his body, and a huge taile he had, which euer (as he mooued it) flung forth ſmoke: but farre worſe then all this, he ledde a dogge in a leaſhe, of ſtrange forme and ſtature, the moſt miſhapen and ilfauouredſt Curre that euer was ſeene.
               The Lady ſéeing the Monſter, beganne to tremble, entreating the Knight to defend her from the dogge, as béeing the deadlieſt enemie ſhe had. Florian kéeping them both off at his ſwords poynt, went firſt to the dogge (béeing the formoſt) and ſmiting him on the heade at his owne pleaſure, made him giue backe, but did him no hurt, whereat he began to meruaile not a little. The Monſter leapt vpon Florian, and hitting him with one foote iuſt on the breaſt, made him ſtagger ſo ſtrangely backe to the Tombe, that the couerture thereof fell quite beſide it, where he might beholde the ſword fixed in a Knights breaſt, which had ſo continued the ſpace of thirtie yeeres, and he ſtill breathing forth moſt doleful lamentations.
               
                  Florian bluſhing to be ſo weakely thruſt backe, deliuered many ſounde ſtrokes on the Monſters ſcailes, but coulde make no entrance whereby to wound him: and the dogge riſing vp vppon his hinder féete, caught holde with the formoſt on the Knights Helmet, byting him by the ſhoulder, then ſnarling at his legges, and racing his Armour with his horrible pawes, that it pained him very much to endure it.
               Much trouble did he endure in this fierce fight, and ſaw no likelihood of any good ſucceſſe to enſue, for the fierce rage of ye Monſter was ſuch, as no humane ſtrength could haue conquered him, if the meanes wherein the enchauntments force conſiſted, were not by good hap firſt found out. Therfore hauing made proofe of many ſtroakes, but all to no purpoſe, he now would doo nothing elſe, but onely giue thruſts and foynes at him, whereof both the dogge and Monſter ſéemed to be fearefull: which Florian well noating, gathered that this might be the way to ouer-come them, wherefore continuing his foynes and thruſts ſtill, hee found himſelfe

not ſo ſharply aſſayled by them as before. The Lady ſeeing the Knight to take ſo good a courſe, ſayd: Holde on ſo ſtill, thou honourable ſpirit.
               The Monſter hearing theſe wordes, let looſe the dogge out of his leaſh, which preſently catching the Ladie by the foote, drew her beſide the bedde, and dragd her along with him foorth of the Chamber, the Monſter likewiſe ſtepping to the Tombe, tooke the Knight vp on his ſhoulder, and went away with him.
               
                  Florian ſéeing them both borne thus away, whom he had ſo reſolutely purpoſed to defend, prepared to follow them, and the bright ſtone ſtill guiding him the way, brought him where the dogge and Monſter were in a Meadow, which had but one onely entrance into it, and was ſo rounded with ſtéepe hills on euery ſide, as whoſoeuer was once entred, could not get foorth againe but by the ſame entrance. Florian made little account of this paſſage, but entring the Meadow, went toward the dogge and the Monſter, who had put the Knight and Lady into a corner of the Fielde, where they ſtoode wayling for the grieuous hurts they had receiued.
               The fight began nowe againe more dreadfull then before, Florian perſwading himſelfe, that his ſtrength was redoubled, and defending himſelfe couragiouſly both againſt the one and other, remembred his former aduantage of thruſting, whereby his enemies gaue backe to the Mountaines, but turnd againe vppon him more freſhly then before: therefore when he likewiſe wexed wearie, as he ſaw the dogge and Monſter leane againſt the rampirde hills, euen ſo did hee, and founde his courage much thereby increaſed.
               Thus came he to be acquainted with the meanes, how the Monſter and dogge renewed their violence, ſo the fight holding on ſtill in this manner, his Armour was ſo bruſed about him, what with the Monſters pawes and the dogges ſharpe téeth, that hee felt himſelfe much afflicted thereby. Wherefore, vpon a breathing aduantage againſt ye hill, not

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
regarding the dogge, hee went againſt the Monſter, and it was his good hap to hurt him in the throate, and the ſworde paſſing quite thorow, made him fal along backward, when Florian made offer to ſmite off his head, but the Lady cried to him, not to doe ſo: and preſently the ſword fel out of her necke, where nowe no hurt or wound could be diſcerned, but ſhe appeared right iocond and ioyfull, hoping to ſée her Knight likewiſe deliuered.
               Vpon the Monſters fall, the dogge began to flie ſo furiouſly on the Knight, that hee thought the ſtrength (of both together) was now in the dogge, but ſeruing his neceſſitie with ſtoute thruſts and foynes, and reſting him ſtill as occaſion gaue libertie: at laſt, (reſolued to liue or die) after a conflict of ſome long continuance, the dogge riſing vp to catch him by the Helmet, and biting him in diuers places as before he had doone, the Knight eſpying apt aduantage, made a full ſtabbe at the dogs breaſt, which pierced quite thorow on the other ſide, whereon the ſword fell out of the Knights breaſt, and hée was then in as good eſtate as euer he was before.
               The Lady beholding Florian full of painfull appearances, by the oppreſſing blowes and gripes of two ſuch enemies, conducted him thence into a Chamber, where ſtoode thrée ſumptuous beddes, the Curtaines of Crimoſine Veluet frindged with gold, and ſuch were the hangings about the Chamber, in ſigne of chéerefull ioy and gladnes. Into the richeſt bedde was Florian layde, and his wounds right carefully dreſt by the Lady, who was ſtrangely altered frō her former condition, when at firſt ſhee fought againſt the Prince, for ſhe appeared now to be of incomparable beautie, and alſo of right royall behauiour.
               Soone after, were the dog and Monſter, brought likewiſe into the ſame chamber, where (before theyr eyes) they both ſuddenly changed, the Monſter to a man of forty yeres age, and the dogge to a youthfull gallant, about foure and twentie, the one wounded in the throate, the other in the breaſt, and both ſo féeble, that they began to lye downe.
               
                  The Lady expreſſed no pitty at all toward them, albeit the olde man called her Daughter, and the youth Louer: but bending all her care to the cure of Florian, cheered him kindly with hope of his health, and made no account of the two other at all.
            
            
               CHAP. LV. VVhat and who the Monſter, the dogge, the wounded Knight and Lady were, and how the enchauntment was fully concluded.
               
                  THE day enſuing, Florian felt his hurts leſſe painfull to him, and the Lady with the Knight, ſtanding by his bed, holding familiar diſcourſe with him: hee earneſtly entreated them, that they would tell him of whence they were, and the reaſon of the ſtrange eſtate wherein he found them. The Lady, béeing deſirous to doo him any honourable ſeruice, ſaide: Stay my Lord a little. And going to a corner of the Chamber, opened there a little doore, out of which came a Serpent ſome fiue foote long, of a very freſh gréene colour, and when it drew nere the bedde it leapt vpon it, putting the head therof néere to Florians face, thinking to terrifie & affright him: but hée who was neuer capable of feare, mooued not at it, but taking it to be ſome houſe Serpent, began to ſtroke it with his hand, and looke where his hand had toucht, the Serpents ſkinne immediatly fell off, and humane fleſh beganne to appeare, ſo that by paſſing all thorowe his hand, the Serpent altered to a very beautifull Lady, but younger then the other, yet very like in countenaunce to her.
               No ſooner was this ſtrange mutation made, but the firſt Lady thus beganne. Underſtand (thou perfect mirrour of

honour and Armes) that I and this my Siſter, are daughters to the King of Carpatia, which is the olde man that lieth there, and by our guilty deſtenie it was appointed, that we ſhould both become enamoured, my ſelfe, of this Knight named Cauno, and my Siſter, of him lying by my father, called Spinalo: folly, loue, and ignorance ſo farre preuailing with vs, that to them wee were not ſparing of our honour and perſons.
               Two yéeres together our practiſe continued, but with ſuch ſecrecie, as no eye could blab our ſweete felicity, till Fortune, the common enemie to happy quiet, made Spinalo grow regardleſſe of my Siſter, and with ſuch fierie temper become affected to me, that he ſought all meanes poſſible to compaſſe his deſires. I, who had dedicated my whole loue to Cauno, and held it as woorſe then abhorred ſacriledge, that one man ſhould haue knowledge of two naturall Siſters: with diſcontented lookes, and thoughts as ſpléenfull, thus aunſwered him. Thou ſhouldſt (Spinalo) remember, how furtherous I haue beene vnto thée, in the ſilent poſſeſſion of my Siſters loue, of whom (beyonde opinion) thou didſt ſéeme enamoured: but now I ſee thée ſo farre different from thy ſelfe, that contrary to all law of honour and reſpect, thou laboureſt, to make me turne traytour, to mine owne déere-reckoned delight: diſtaſt not thy (reputed good iudgement) with ſuch inciuilitie, nor ſuffer thy earſt-moderate temper, to be ſwayed by ſo baſe and vnmanlike behauiour: but kéepe thy faith vnſtaind to my Siſter Silinga, whoſe eſteeme of thée, is beyond my weake ability to expreſſe: ſo ſhalt thou iuſtly performe the office of manhood, & we (without impeach) ſtill enioy the benefits, of that which Fortune priuately hath enriched vs withall.
               Theſe honeſt and effectuall perſwaſions, might haue remooued him from ſo vile a ſinne, if but with diſcretion hee had ballaunced his owne woorth or ours: but they rather ſpurd him on to a more violent proſecution, exceeding the limits of any reſpect at all, ſo that turning to me (with an ill-appearing countenance) he ſayde. Imagine not, that

thou canſt eſcape me ſo, or that my deſſeignes will brooke this anticipation: rather will I aduenture the King thy fathers indignation, by beeing the trumpet of our ſecret ſtolne pleaſures, to inflict the heauier puniſhment on thee and Cauno.
               
               Now thinke (gentle Knight) what extreames aſſayled me, eyther I muſt doo a déede of damnation, or looſe louer, life, and honour together: héere-vpon I flung from him, and went to acquaint Silingo with theſe vnwelcom newes, appoynting time, place, and apt conuenience, when her owne eares (twixt him and me) ſhould drinke this balefull potion. When ſhee (too euidently) perceaued, howe farre Spinalo was become eſtraunged from her, hauing hid her ſelfe in a litle thicket, while thus the traytor aſſaild my cō
                  ſtancie: he gone, ſhe iſſued forth, and came vnto me with a minde ſo ſhaken, as very little differd ſhe from the pale Image of death.
               One concluſion was, to aduertiſe Cauno thereof, that hee might the better foreſtall his perill: but this courſe of ours prooued, as (for the moſt part) womens counſels doo, woorſe and woorſe, for Cauno, who in his Loues priuation could cary no patience, made his iuſtly-conceaued diſpleaſure knowne to Spinalo, charging him to deſiſt from ſo vnhonourable a purſuite. But he who aymed ſtill at his purpoſe with me, made no outward note of any ſuch prohibitiō, but goes and works with my Siſter Silinga, that ſhe ſhould labour me on his behalfe, vowing neuer to forget ſo great a kindneſſe: proteſting withall, it was but a capricious humour that thus ouer-ruled him, which if (but for once onely) hee might enioy, he would neuer mooue it after any more: where contrariwiſe, if ſhee could not winne me to affoorde him this grace, he would publiſh our ſtolne ſports to the King our father.
               The miſerable young Mayden, beſet on each ſide with ſuch weighty oppreſſion, promiſed to vndergoe ſo vnkinde an office, and awayting fit opportunity, prooued ſo preuayling an Oratour, alleadging the vnauoydable perill, wherin

we both ſtoode, that (as heauen knowes) with mighty vnwillingnes, I yéelded to her importunate perſwaſions. Behold into what ſtate looſe loue now brought me, my Siſter gaue intelligence to Spinalo, that (at her entreates) I had condiſcended, and he (not a little proud thereof) thought euery minute a moneth till the time, which was concluded to be the morning following, when Cauno had appointed to ride on hunting. The houre being come, a moſt vnhappy houre for vs, ſhe brought Spinalo by an vnuſuall paſſage, being a priuate way thorowe my Garden, and then Silinga (whoſe loue I know not how iuſtly to tearme, that (for his ſake) would ſo highly thus offend her ſelfe) hauing likewiſe accompanied me to the place: without vſing any wordes, with-drewe into her owne adioyning lodging, to bemoane her owne hard hap and my diſgrace.
               
                  Spinalo hauing ſhut the doore, enioyed of me what he moſt deſired, and as I lay by him vpon the bed, he loath to leaue my company ſo ſoone: Cauno, who had purpoſely ſtaid from hunting, to awaite an occaſion ſo hatefull and accurſed, hauing a key, which euermore brought him to me, without the knowledge of any one, ſuddainly ruſht in vpon vs. How pleaſingly he tooke it, to finde me in that ſort, you can better imagine then I expreſſe, but I leaping from the bed, and he ayming all his mallice at me, ranne his Rapier through my neck, as your ſelfe lately beheld: and Spinalo, hauing likewiſe his weapon drawne, with enraged fury paſt it through his breaſt. My Siſter (whoſe ſorrowing thoughts fore-told her ſome fatall miſhap,) vpon my crie, came running into the chamber, and ſéeing the ſword ſo thorowe my necke, lamenting my hard lot, cried out aloude: Oh come and helpe vs miſerable wretches. This noiſe drew preſent concourſe to vs, firſt our wayting Gentlemen, and afterward the Guard of the Court, who foorth-with layd hands on the vnfortunate young Lords. And the King being called thether by ſo great a rumour, beholding an accident ſo vnexpected and vnpleaſing, would néedes be immediatly ſatiſfied therein: when, euery one being ſilent, I like one

deſperate, from the very originall declared the whole diſcourſe, whereat the King grewe ſo diſpleaſed, that (for a while) he ſéemd like one diſtraught of his ſences: but recouering better iudgement, breathing foorth a ſigh (as if his hart had broken,) he began in this maner. I will not with preſent death finiſh your offences, but inflict more paine for a further puniſhment, vntill ſuch a Knight of valour may be found, as dare to vndertake and accompliſh the ending of a fierce enchauntment, which ſhal be right ſuddainly and ſtrangely deuiſed: then turning him ſelfe to me, he ſayde. Thou that art falne in the very greateſt offence, which no ſhames bluſh can ſerue for, nor wil euer be forgotten: ſhalt haue that weapon ſo thruſt through thy necke, vntill my magick ſpells can be confounded. And thou Cauno, for offending againſt thine owne honour, and concealing the vile purpoſe of Spinalo from me: ſhalt likewiſe haue that ſword abiding in thy breaſt, till like date of time may expire thy puniſhment, then calling Silinga, he ſayde. As for thee Silinga, reaping the iuſt harueſt of thy fonde ſowne folly, and wounding thy Siſters ſoule, to ſheeld thy ſelfe from thy idle fancies reiection: ſhalt become a Serpent, but ſo timorous and hurtleſſe, as thou ſhalt ſhunne euery ones ſight, and deſire to approach néere none, yet ſhall the Knight be of vnequalled courage, that ſhall dare to touch thée with his hands, and thereby make thée receaue thy womans ſhape againe. For thée Spinalo (whom he could not beholde but very impatiently) that according to the brutiſh nature of a dogge, haſt made no diſtinguiſhing of humaine ſociety, but had the knowledge of two royall borne Siſters: I will haue thée tranſ-formed into the ſhape of a foule ill-proportioned dogge, but to with-hold thée from ſo brutiſh ſtraying, reſtraine thy liberty vnder check of a leaſh.
               Now come I to my ſelfe, to whom I will not be partiall, in a caſe ſo mightily and mainely importing: but for my too-much neglecting the office of a father, not carying a ſtricter eye on my daughters looſenes, I will metamorphiſe my ſelfe to an vgly Monſter, for the ſafer defence of mine

owne enchauntment, and haue the charge of thée Spinalo in my leaſh.
               No ſooner had hee ſpoke theſe wordes, but making certaine ſignes and carracters about vs by his Arte, he cauſed this mountaine to appeare as couered with ſtéele, bringing hether the Baſiliſque which you haue ſlaine, and carying vs all in an obſcure cloude, brought vs to our ſeuerall places, me into the Toombe before the gate: Cauno in the other Sepulcher in the chamber: Silinga in the little encloſure where ſhee came foorth: him ſelfe and Spinalo in thoſe other monſtrous ſhapes, to the place where they aſſaulted and ſet on you: and ſo for many yéeres haue wee continued, in which time ſundry woorthy Knights haue heere arriued, but beeing vnable to accompliſh the aduenture, haue béene changed into the forme of Stéelie men, but yet may recouer their former ſhapes againe, if you will binde my father to breake the force of the enchauntment. More then an houres ſpace, laſted the diſcourſing of this Hiſtorie to Florian, who when he ſawe the Lady had fullie concluded, roſe out of his bed, and taking the aged King by the beard, ſayde. How farre haſt thou ſwarued from a fathers diſcretion, in puniſhing thine owne children to the hurt of others? thou mightſt haue chaſtiſed them in other maner, then by the ouerthrow of ſo many valiant Knights: but end all now, and let them be deliuered, or (deſpight thy deuils) I wil be ſoundly reuenged on thée.
               
                  Solco, for ſo was the King named, ſéeing he grew ſo haſtie with him, replied thus. Thinke not Sir Knight, that albeit (by mine Arte) I haue wrought ſo rare an enchauntment, I can therefore finiſh it at mine owne pleaſure. No Sir, your valour as much as my ſkill is required therein: for there are two fierce Lyons, which guard a little Turret, where they kéepe a Glaſſe continually ſmoaking, and thereby is the enchauntment maintayned: you muſt firſt conquer thoſe Lyons, and afterward doo ſomewhat elſe beſide, which perhaps will be troubleſome enough vnto ye. A Gods name, ſaid Florian, let vs goe to it when thou wilt,

and likewiſe (to him) commit our whole ſucceſſe: héerevpon the Lady ſayd to Florian. Oh my Lord, giue no beleefe to this ſpéenfull olde man, who would haue vs (poore ſoules) continue ſtill in this his helliſh enchauntment: beſide, be be very carefull of your ſelfe, that you part not with the Baſiliſkes bright ſtone, for then we are all in danger of deſtruction. Florian tooke the leaſh, wherewith before Spinalo was led bound, & faſtened the one end about the Kings neck, reſeruing the holde of the other part to him ſelfe, ſo did hee driue him along before him, commanding Spinalo likewiſe to follow iuſt behind him, who (alas) did ſo, but with no little gréefe, as knowing the fatall houre drew néere, when hee muſt (for euer) be tranſ-formed to a continuall Statue of Stéele. Hauing thus left the chamber, they went vp on the very higheſt of all the Mountaine, where (a far off) they diſcerned the little Turret, & drawing néere vnto it, the other two began to ſtay, and Florian now went formoſt him ſelfe, but could not perceaue the Lyons to ſtir, vntill he had attained a little neerer them. Forth-with (together) they ſet violently vpon him, one of them catching ſuch holde with his pawes on the Knights ſhéeld, that he rent it from about his neck, & the other diſarmd one of his ſhoulders with his téeth: this fierce aſſault damped Florian a little, yet knowing that death could but be the woorſt, would ſet ſome deere price on it ere he parted with his life, returning ſuch a manly ſtroke to the firſt beaſt, that he gaue him a déepe wound on ye ſhoulder, and beſtowed the like hurt on the other in his flanke. Theſe two wounds did put him in preſent perill of his life, for (at one inſtant) both the Lyons ſo graſpt him about the legges, that down he fell whether he would or no, and then they ſo trode and ſcratcht him with their pawes, as the like was neuer ſéene before: but he beholding him ſelfe in ſuch danger, gaue ſuch a glenting blow with his ſword, that (frō the angrieſt beaſt) he cut off one of his féet, then holding vp his leg, as expreſſing his ſore paine, he gaue back & ran into the Turret. The other Lyon caught the Knight faſt by one of his feete, & dragd him ſo violently along vpon the ground,

as his ſword could doo him now but ſlender ſeruice, he found ſuch mighty inconuenience by the beaſts haling him.
               In this wonderfull perill, occaſion yet ſo fauoured Florian, that he caught holde about the ſtump of an olde Trée, whereto kéeping faſt with all his ſtrength, he ſuffered much diſtreſſe and anguiſh, by the Lyons ſtretching him forth to his vtmoſt length, as if hee had béene drawne out vpon a Rack: yet hoping this way to preſerue his life, ſo long hee held, till the Lyon growing weary of his ſtrong tugging, let goe his gripe, to get ſome better hold of him, when preſently the Knight leapt vp vpon his féete, and gaue ſo valiant a ſtroke at the beaſt, that it pared away a good part of his head, and queſtionleſſe had foorth-with ſlaine him, but that he ranne backe and got into the Turret. Beholding now none other to gaine-ſay his paſſage, he went on to the Turret, where he found the Lyons grinning and murmuring at him, but ſéeing they were ſo hurt, as they could doo him litle harme, he began to enter: where-vpon, the beaſts (hauing loſt all power and vertue of the enchauntment, euen at the Knights ſetting foote on the Turrets foundation) ran away with all poſſible haſt vpon the mountaine.
               
                  Florian hauing broken the bolts and locks of the Turret, opened the doore, and as hee put foorth his hand to take the Glaſſe which hee ſawe ſmouldring, there appeared a man with a huge Axe in his hand, who when Florian made offer to lay holde on the Glaſſe, ſmote ſuch blowes at him with the Axe, as not onely had béen ſufficient to cut off his arme, but likewiſe to cleaue him quite thorowe the midſt. Then heard he Solco (being behind him) ſhut the doore of the Turret, locking him in, in ſuch a manner, as he was not to get out againe during the enchauntment.
               Now was the Knight very hardly beſted, when he knew neither how to come by the Glaſſe, nor how to recouer his Sheelde for his defence, for ſtill as hee profferd to take the Glaſſe, he with the axe boldly reſiſted him: and there might he haue ſo continued for many yeeres together, but that (by good hap) he remembred him ſelfe, that he which thus withſtoode

him, might be a liuing man, and ſubiect to the danger of his weapon, defending the Glaſſe by treaſon and deceite. As this happy thought had thus poſſeſt him, taking his ſworde in the one hand, and making offer as before with the other to the Glaſſe, when the man made reſiſtance, hée gaue him a ſtabbe directly in the forehead, that the blood iſſued forth and blinded his ſight: by meanes whereof he had libertie to ſeaze the Glaſſe, and giuing him other ſtabbes in the meane ſpace, made him fall downe along at his foote.
               Nowe were Solco and Spinalo come to the grated window of the Turret, where with cunning ſpéeches they laboured him, that by no meanes he ſhould breake the glaſſe, aſſuring him that if the glaſſe were broken, there was no way for him to get out of the Turret. Florian taking vp the huge great Axe, aunſwered: Then this ſhall ſerue mee as a key, and make an end of the enchauntment, which hee had no ſooner ſaid, but hee daſht the glaſſe in péeces againſt the yron grate, when ſuddenly was felt ſuch a terrible Earth-quake, as if all the Mountaine had ſplit in ſunder, which béeing ceaſſed, all the Knights (before tranſ-formed into Steelie-ſhapes) returned againe to their former condition: but Spinalo, as one well woorthy of all ſeuere chaſtiſement, was preſently ſet on a piller of the Mountaine, and there conuerted into a Stéelie ſubſtaunce, with a ſpacious briefe fixed ouer his heade, declaring the whole hiſtorie at large of his lewdneſſe, as a méete example for all wicked men, forewarning them thereby to abſtaine frem ſuch baſe and luxurious deſires.
               Theſe thinges béeing thus doone, and none remaining there now but Solco, reioycing at the metamorphoſing of falſe Spinalo, Florian tooke the great Axe, and began to lay ſuch loade there-with vpon the grate, as (in little while) he made a window large enough to get out at, and béeing not ſo warie of Solco as the caſe required, (who diſſembled abſolute contentment at all which had hapned) he ſnatcht frō him ſuddenly the Baſiliſks ſtone, and ran away ſo ſpéedily there-with, that Florian (little inured to ſwiftnes of footemanſhip)

ſcant knew how or which way to follow him.
               
                  Solco ſtayed not till hee came where the Baſiliſke lay, vpon whoſe head he firſt placed ye creaſt, and then alſo fixed the ſtone therein, where-upon it returned to life againe, but much more furious then it was before. The Lady with Cauno & Silinga, quickly came thether, and knowing that this would prooue a harder conflict, then any that ye Knight had yet endured, they ſtoode all very penſiue, neuertheleſſe, Silinga ſaid: Now my Lord, raiſe vp your very ſprightfull valour, for this is the laſt action of the enchauntment.
               When Florian heard thoſe words, he felt ſuch a chéerfull vigour diſperſe it ſelfe through his veines, as if (before) hée had not trauailed at all, and aſſayling the Baſiliſke in deſpight of all his furie and fiercenes, he made him giue back aboue twentie paces: for hauing made triall before ſufficiently of the Knights vertue, hee betooke him to his wonted flying aloft, and ſwéeping often ouer him, at laſt, ſmote him in the Helmet with his tallents in ſuch ſort, that hee fell downe groueling vppon the ground, and but that his flight carried him away ſo ſwiftly, as he could not turne quicklie to ſeaze vppon the Knight, hée muſt néedes haue kild him, ere he could haue riſen vp.
               The qualitie of theſe flights altred the condition of the battaile, the Knight béeing ſtill belowe, and the Baſiliſke aloft, whereby Florian ſuſtained many diſaduantages, and loſt diuers good blowes deliuered to no purpoſe: notwithſtanding, lothe to leaue a labour (of ſuch conſequence) vnperfect, and hauing runne through the maine, it were endleſſe ſhame to ſhrink now in the rere, he began now to caſt a warie eye on all opportunities, ſuffering the Baſiliſke to beate out his furie, whereof hee had ſo emptied himſelfe in leſſe then an houre, and ſo lagd his wings with ouer tedious labour, that very often hee was readie to fall downe flat.
               
                  Florian (not héedleſſe of ſo faire an occaſion) perceiuing him not to bounde aloft with his wonted violence, nor his winges to beare him with ſo ready a flight, purſued euerie

aduantage, ſtill as it was offered, and (in his turnings) ſo ſliced away his hard ſcailes, that the ſworde made inciſion through fleſh and all.
               When the Baſiliſke felt himſelfe mortally wounded, and that his former ſtrength was much impaired, he would now part with his life at a very diſperate aduenture, and flewe againſt the Knight with ſo maine a vigour, as if the blow had hit him, it could not be otherwiſe but he had béene ſlaine: but he auoyding it very dexteriouſly, and ſéeing the Baſiliſke falne to the ground, gaue a ſpéedy ſtroake at his creaſt, and downe fell the ſtone againe, whereupon, as hée made offer to flie away thence, Florian intercepting him, ſeuerd one of his wings from the body, and likewiſe ſmote off one of his legges, whereat Solco growing deſperate to ſee his enchauntment fully concluded, fell downe and dyed with extremitie of gréefe.
               
                  Daria, for ſo was the eldeſt Siſter named, with Cauno and Silinga, were greatly agréeued, to ſée Solco theyr Father die ſo ſuddenlie, but ioy, for ſafe poſſeſſion of their own libertie, excéeded the impreſſure of griefe & paſſion. Gladly would they haue had Florian gone with them to the Kingdome of Carpatia, but he, after he had repoſed himſelfe there foure dayes ſpace, and queſtioned with the Knights reſtored to their right ſhapes, who (admiring his memorable vertues) were not ſparing of thankes for ſo ineſtimable a benefit receiued: departed thence in ſearch of his daughter, and not knowing which way he rode, tooke directly toward the Ile of Carderia, where he remained priſoner among the reſt, onely by the force of the enchauntment.
            
            
               
               CHAP. LVI. Howe Florendos combatting with Leonato, was carried captiue into the Ile of Carderia.
               
               
                  
                     FLorendos, who ſtil followed that way which his mind perſwaded him his Wife was ledde before, trauailed in vain for many daies together, lighting ſtill on ſome aduentures, but none of noateworthy marke or qualitie: and finding himſelfe at length to bee in Macedonia, he remembred the ſo far-famed aduenture of Carderiaes Ile, and to try if he could giue end thereto or no, hée ſhaped his courſe that way.
               Nowe it happened, that his Sonne Oliuanto, whoſe minde ranne on the accompliſhment, of all occaſions whatſoeuer the worlde yeelded, or dye with diſgrace in fayling thereof, chaunced likewiſe to iourney that way: but without any enſigne or impreſe, becauſe hee would paſſe as one vnknowne, as in like manner did his Father Florendos, and ſo they met both together at the entrance of a Woode, where curteouſly they ſaluted one another. Oliuanto, who knew his father to be a good Knight, albeit he little thought that this was he, doubted of this mans going to the Ile of Carderia, yet deſirous therein to be reſolued, entring into diſcourſe with him, ſayd.
               You (Sir Knight) that beare ſo faire a preſence, what, are ye trauailing to the Ile of Carderia? Yea marie am I Sir, aunſwered Florendos: whereupon, Oliuanto (ſuddenly laying hold on his arme) ſayd. Then Knight you verie much erre and miſtake your ſelfe, if you thinke to be there before me. Florendos, not wonted to be ſo iniuried, foorthwith gaue back, ſaying: Thou ſheweſt thy ſelfe a villaine,

and no Knight of gentle bloode, in offering to fore-ſtall the forwardnes of any mans vertue, but I will ſo chaſtiſe thys preſumption in thee, as thou hadſt béene better (with quietnes) to haue ſuffered me paſſe from thée. So turning quicklie his horſe, he ranne againſt his ſonne, but yet with a ſuddaine inward attaindour of griefe, fore-telling ſome future ſadnes to enſue.
               
                  Oliuanto, by béeing more furious then néeded, fayled in the encounter, but receiued ſuch a welcome, as made him forgoe his ſtirrops, and ſet him in a pretty forwardneſſe of falling: but courage quickning his ſpirits in the ſhocke, kept him ſtill in the ſaddle, and turning gallantly with his ſword drawne, made him giue his Father a wound verie ſhrewdlie, which afterward he not a little lamented, when he came to knowledge of whom he fought withall, for the blow entred ſome-what déepe into his arme, yet he eſcaped not without a iuſt requitall, himſelfe receiuing as much in the right ſide. For two houres ſpace the combate continued, both theyr horſſes being ſo wearied, as they could hardly ſtirre vp and downe, and Florendos horſe had receiued a hurt in the head, ſo that both were glad to alight, and ſettle themſelues to theyr beſt behauiour.
               Now began they to hacke and hewe their Armour, often catching each other faſt about the middle, to try whethers ſtrength could caſt his enemy: in all which appeared no other difference, but that Florendos had his arme moſt hurt, and by reaſon of his lameneſſe, he ſéemed to treade a little more ſtiffely. Notwithſtanding, both theyr liues had queſtionleſſe there perriſhed, but that the Enchauntreſſe, who ſupported the miſticall ſpell of Carderiaes Ile, made an irruption in this hote ſkirmiſh, ſending Leonato to the place where the Knights fought, who ſtepping betweene them, ſaid.
               Lords, it neyther agrées with honour nor armes, that Father and Sonne ſhould ſley each other, therefore all this toyle of yours is fruitleſly beſtowed: for eyther of you is to combate me, who doe guarde the paſſage, where none muſt

obtaine what is onely due to me.
               
                  Oliuanto, béeing vnable to make any euaſion, from the fault which he had ſo peremptorily committed, perceiuing his aduerſary altered to a Father, and compaſſion (for his hurts) to flowe aboundantly from him: ſuppreſt with natures inward touch, & true feeling of ſo manifeſt a diſgrace, he threw his ſword from him, and proſtrately offered to kiſſe his Fathers foote. But he who was double wounded, both in body & affection, the one not ſtreaming more blood, then ye other the intire pitty of a Father: chaining him faſt in his armes, deſired reference for ſuch accomplement till ſitter leyſure, and their Seruaunts (hauing prepared two knightly Béeres) carried them along into Leonatos Tent, where the Sorcereſſe cauſed them with all dilligence to be cured, becauſe ſhe would haue none to miſcarry in this aduenture.
               Eyght daies were ſcarcely paſt, but theyr loſt blood was thorowly recouered, and they found themſelues in ful ſtate of health, ſo that now they began to caſt lotts, whether of them firſt ſhould combate Leonato: it fell to Florendos, who béeing ſoone armed, came foorth in hope to finiſh the aduenture, and paſſing the Iouſt with Leonato, both were diſmounted: then going to the tryall of the ſwordes fight, they hurt one another without regard, which outward appearance of wounding, at length ſo mooued Florendos to diſtraction, that (coueting onely the aduentures concluſion) hee ſéemed then to fight with much more diſcretion. And becauſe he would hazard his hopes together, hee caught his aduerſarie about the middle, and carrying him about without any prouident reſpect, they fell both together (beſide the Bridge) into the Riuer, where Leonato getting looſe from him, ſuffered him to be carried into the Iland, and hee returned againe, ſwimming to Land: where hardly had hee gotte on ſhoare, but Oliuanto, gréeuing that his father was ſurprized by the enchauntment, with his ſword ſette vppon Leonato, where now happened as firce a battaile between them two, as euer had beene ſéene before.
               
                  And although it appeared to Oliuantos iudgement, that euery ſtroke of his enemy right ſharply wounded him, yet reſolute courage made him careleſſe thereof, becauſe he felt not his breath to faile him: but earneſtnes ſwaying him more then heedfulnes, and his aduerſary ſtill driuing him toward the Ile, no ſooner ſet he footing vpon the Bridge, but the wonted violent winde ſeazed vppon him, and quicklie conueied him into the Iland, where ſeeing himſelfe among ſo many good Knights together, hee coulde not deuiſe what was beſt for him to thinke of it, albeit this was the general ſuppoſition and doubt among them, that this impriſonment of theyrs, would prooue the ruine of the whole Grecian Empire.
               The Squires that attended on Florendos and Oliuanto, noating ſuch ſucceſſe as others before in theyr Maiſters had ſéene, returned to Constantinople, where they declared the miſhaps befalne to theyr Lords, which cauſed ſuch diſquiet thorow the whole Court, that the Emperour Primaleon was readie to die with conceite of griefe, ſéeing he had ſo loſt his Sonne and his two Nephewes. But thys ſad ſtorme was indifferently ouer-blowne, when the Armie from Turkie arriued there, with Floraman and Dragonalte, who firſt of all aduertiſed the Emperour, of the warres ſucceſſe at the ſiedge of Niquea, the death of Dirdan, and pacification of all troubles in Turkie: letting him vnderſtande withall, the departure of Florendos, Florian, and Berolde, for regaining of Miragarda, Victoria, and Argentina, who were ſtrangely ſhewne to them, by an Enchauntreſſe called Druſa Velonna, according as the wiſe Aliarte before had told them.
               Then did the Emperour requite their ſad diſcourſe, with report of his Nephewe Primaleons reputed death, as alſo ſuch Knights, as were before impriſoned there, among whom Florendos and Oliuanto now holpe to make vp the number. Oltrando of India was brought to the Emperour, and kiſſing his hand, ſware loyall alleagiance to the Empire of Constantinople.
               
               
                  During the time of theſe ſo little pleaſing reports, there arriued from the Perrillous Ile a Sonne of Argentaoes, named Saraſto, and hee gaue addition of the heauie tydings, howe the wizzard Aliarte, was by a Witch ſhutte vp in an yron Cage, and faſtened to a Mountaine hanging ouer the Sea, whereas no other Land could be diſcerned: and when any Shyppe came to ſuccour him, if they drew within leſſe then halfe a miles diſtance of him, ſuddainly hee would be ſnatcht away in ſuch ſtrange manner, as no way could be imagined howe to come at him.
               Theſe newes toucht neerer then all the other, and made his Maieſtie readie to droope downe dead: nor could the Empreſſe and the Ladies conceale theyr paſſions, hauing loſt the onely anchor-hold of their comfort: and doubtleſſe ſome ſtrange inconuenience had happened in ye Court, but that at thys very inſtant (as good happe would haue it) a Letter was ſéene come floating on the Sea into the Port, which béeing directed to the Emperour, was (by the finder of it) brought ſtraite to his Maieſtie, who knowing it to be the wiſe Aliartes hande writing, right ioyfully opened it, the contents whereof in order followeth.
               
                  
                     
                     The Letter that came floating on the Sea, from the wiſe Aliarte, into the Port of Constantinople. THE DIRECTION. To the high and mightie Monarch Primaleon, Emperour of Conſtantinople.
                     
                     ❀ The Contents.
                     TRouble not your Princely thoughts (moſt powerfull Emperour) for mine impriſonment, which can laſt no longer, then the expiation of certaine maleuolent aſpects, which a while will ecclipſe the faces of my fayrer-ſhining ſtarres. Your Nephew Primaleon liues, and is he that ſhall enritch you with future ioyes and felicities. But as for the Ladies, their recouerie cannot ſo expeditiouſly be performed, becauſe my aſſiſtaunce will greatly be wanting: hauing heare ſuch a powerfull ſpell ſet vpon me, as no humaine might can preuaile againſt it, without enforcing Druſa Ʋelonna her ſelfe firſt to vndoo it, or awayting her more ſerious imployment, all which will be accompliſhed in time. The aduenture of Carderiaes Ile, is full of perill: but he onely muſt finiſh it, for whom it is reſerued. So humbly kiſſing your royall hand, I take my leaue.
                     
                        Yours euer, Aliarte.
                        
                     
                  
               
               This Letter cauſed ſuch a generall comfort through the Court, that all gréefe and melanchollie was quite abandoned, euen as if (the promiſes in writing) had béene already performed, when the Armie, being for a reſpite diſcharged, they had leaſure nowe to meditate on good happes enſuing. Floraman being greatly enamoured of Clariana, the beautifull

widdowe ſo deceaſed Dramian, was ouer-ſwayed by the extreameſt folly which lightly hath beene ſéene, equalling his cariage 
                     〈◊〉
                   this new affection, as when hee deſpiſed all loue and 
                     〈…〉
                   vpon his dead Altea, which you may reade 
                     〈◊〉
                   at large in the firſt part of this Hiſtorie. 
                     
                        •
                     agonalte alſo grewe as affectionate 
                     〈◊〉
                   his fa
                     •
                  re Arnalte, 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   ten dayes being now already paſt, & his owne thoughts 
                     〈◊〉
                   his honour in queſtion, ta
                     •
                  ing it with loſſe of time and ſlothfull negligence, in omitting his vtmoſt imployment for their releaſe, that were detained in the Ile of Car
                     
                        •
                     , or (at leaſt) to ſuffer impriſonment with them: 
                     ••
                  a
                  
                     •
                  ing licence together of the Emperour, likewiſe of the Empreſſe, the other Princeſſes, & their harts-deuoted Ladies, they purpoſed their iourney toward Macedonia. But when Floraman tooke his farewell of Clariana, entreating that ſhe would terme him her Knight: he was publiquely by her ſo ſcornfully reiected, that (caſting by all hope of euer compaſſing her loue,) he departed with this reſolution, to ſeeke ſome ſuch way of death for his fruitleſſe loue, as his memorie (thereby) might neuer be forgotten. But come we now againe vnto Primaleon, whom we left at the Tower of the Caniballs.
            
            
               CHAP. LVII. How Prim
                        •
                     leon, otherwiſe called, the Knight of 
                     •
                  ortune, accompliſhed in two dayes the aduenture of the Tower.
               
                  SCarſe was the morning wedded to the worlde, when Primaleon heard ſuch a barking and howling from the Tower, as would quite haue diſmayed any heart but his: notwithſtanding, he whoſe courage was altogether enclind to conqueſt, began to meditate with his thoughts, by

what meanes hee might vanquiſh ſo many Monſters, and gaine his entrance into the Tower. As thus he ſtoode pondering on the likelieſt perſwaſions, the Knight how the Wood came to him againe vnto him, ſaying. Prepare your ſelfe Sir, in regard you are forth-with to be aſſayled: and becauſe your life is not to miſcarie in this enterpriſe, take this direction from me: theſe Caniballs defence conſiſts onlie of their faces, therefore make thereat your marke and ayme, and ſo be aſſured to part with victorie.
               
                  Primaleon preſently armed him ſelfe, & taking his hammer, went forth of the Cottage, where beholding not any one to offer him reſiſtance, hee ſtoode beating againſt that part of the wall, where before hee had made ſome ſlender rupture, and ſuch were the blowes he gaue, that the fracture extended it ſelfe now aboue an hand breadth, more then before it had done, from which labour he was quickly countermaunded, by ſixe Caniball brethren, who were come to reuenge the death of their father: wherefore bethinking him ſelfe of the Knights former aduiſe, he made a thruſt full at the noſe of one them, paſſing the ſword quite vp into his braine, whereby he fell downe dead at his foote. The other peſtered about him terribly with their Clubbes, but ſtill as they were hurt in the face, they fled away from him toward the Wood, where turning back at the very entraunce, they did nothing but ſtand barking at him, ſo that there he ſlew two of them, and the reſt ran away wounded.
               Soone after were deſcended aboue twenty Caniballs together, which ſet all vppon him at once, offering to engirt him round as in a circkle: but he ſetting his backe againſt the wall, defended him ſelfe ſtill with ſpeedy thruſts, whereof they expreſſed feare, and kept off from him, neuertheleſſe his labour tooke ſo good ſucceſſe, that tenne of them he had wounded in their faces, all which retired, and would no more come néere him. In little while after, the reſt were glad to flie with bloody faces, and he remaining now alone, leaning to breath him ſelfe againſt the wall, was 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſnatcht into the Tower, but by whom he knew not, and the

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
the whole ſhape being ſcattered on the floore, each part (of it ſelfe) went thether whence it came. Not long had he ſtoode ſtill, but (from vnder the Toombe) came creeping foorth a very long Serpent, ſo fierce and furious in aſſayling him, as his lofty leapes and ſnatches at him, made him ſcarſe quick enough in his owne defence: and ſtill the Serpent 
                     〈◊〉
                  , to winde his taile about the Knights legges, which 
                     •
                  o well auoyded by his manly ſtrokes, for the Serpents in
                  
                     •
                  nt was to make him fall, which if it could haue done, the 
                     •
                  night had immediatly béene there enchaunted, and thereof was he forewarned by the Lady, during this ſharp conflict, Fortune (euermore fauourable to Primaleons enterpriſes, 
                     •
                  nd willing to make him generally famous,) cauſed him to giue ſuch a ſtroke on the Serpents head, that it réeling fell downe, when paſſing his weapon quite through the paunch thereof, it ſuddainly vaniſhed out of his ſight.
               As hee ſtoode leaning a while to reſt him ſelfe, the doore opened, and the Lady taking him by the hand, went forth with him, but there came a huge beaſt againſt him, little leſſe then an Elephant, which hee hardly knew how to reſiſt, becauſe he could ſcarſe reach his belly with his ſword, Then he bethought himſelfe of the great Partezane, which he fetching in haſt, came againe toward the beaſt: who had two hornes, each of them aboue three yards in length, as 
                     〈◊〉
                   as braſſe, and very ſharpe, with one of them he hurt 
                     〈…〉
                   in the ſhoulder, forcing him to ſtagger, and very 
                     〈…〉
                  , but ſupporting him ſelfe with the Partezane, 
                     〈…〉
                   it as he could, in regard of the weightines, 
                     〈◊〉
                   blow he ſmote there-with, the beaſt ſtil rebated with his long hornes, often making the Partezane ready to fall out of his hands.
               
                  Primaleon wel perceauing the beaſts fury and ſtrength, thought it beſt to temporize his owne reſiſtance, till he could 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſome place of this Monſter apte
                     •
                  t for wounding: ſo keeping him off as conueniently he might, till his vnweldi
                  
                     •
                  es and violence ſooneſt ſhould wearie him: at length, be
                  
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  ſed face to face with the beaſt, he gaue ſuch a thruſt

at his browes betwéene the hornes, that blood iſſued foorth in great aboundance. This gladded him (not a little) that he had wounded the beaſt, hauing giuen aboue twenty other ſtrokes at him, yet could by no meanes enter his ſkin, which putting him now in ſome hope of victory, made him watchfull of like aduantage, for his further hurting: but by reaſon his hornes were ſtill dangerous to him, he was conſtraind to keepe off, and ſpend many a ſtroke in vaine, till more auayling ſucceſſe might better ſted him.
               Now grew the battaile to ſuch deſperate condition, that Primaleon (like one prodigall of life and honour) ſet downe his reſt on the vtmoſt hazard, and holding his Partezanes ſtaffe on the ground, with good regard to the beaſts fury, his minde halfe perſwaded him, that good hap would direct his ſwords point, to the very tendreſt part of the Monſters ſkin, as in deede it followed in the proofe: for the weapon entred vnder the blade of the ſhoulder, and paſſed along to his very heart, whereon the beaſt ſtaggerd toward him, which the knight perceauing, leapt off from him, elſe had he falne full vpon him, and ſo might haue endangerd him by his huge weight: the Lady not a little glad of ſuch ſucceſſe, ſayde. Sir Knight, let vs returne the ſame way we entred, ſo ſhall we get forth of the Tower, otherwiſe, there is no place for reſting you, but the Caniballs wil fiercely againe ſet on ye. Primaleon followed her direction, and then they beheld the Tower to open, iuſt on the ſame ſide where he had entred, ſo they iſſued forth, and went into the afore-ſaid Cabben or Cottage, euen as the Sunne was at his deſcending: finding there the table ready furniſhed, and two goodly beds ſeuerally to reſt in, which (to him) ſeemed highly pleaſing. Then entred hee into conſideration of the Lady, reputing her to be of quality and greatnes, by making ſuch eſteeme of him in this enchauntment: but hee might not knowe of whence or what ſhe was▪ becauſe the force of the Magicke would not admit it: notwithſtanding, among ſome other gentle conference, ſhe ſpake to the Knight in this manner. Moſt euident and apparant is it, what happy fortune Palmerin

d' Oliua left to his of-ſpring, in that your gracious ſtarres pleaſed to guide your hand, to the onely direct place for confounding the beaſt, which elſe, all the ſtrength in the worlde could not haue conquered. But to morrowe, there remaines a farre greater aduenture for ye, as neuer could you deſire a matter of more eſteeme: thereby may you gaine an vnguent, which can cure the Emperour Primaleon, Don Edward of England, and your father Florendos, marie the purchaſe of it, will coſt you much labour and perill, & perhaps will make you repent, that euer you vndertooke it. So excéeded Primaleons ioy, that theſe Princes (by his meanes) might be recouered, as he thought euery houre a yéere till the next day came, and hauing ſupped, he went to his reſt, vntill the bright morning early ſaluted him, when beeing riſen, hee found the Lady in deuoute prayer for his ſafety. Nowe began he to conſider with him ſelfe, that the Sledge or Hammer might ſtand him in ſome ſted, wherefore taking it vp on his neck, he went to the place where he iſſued foorth, which he found to be open, and (dreadleſſe of any perill) he entred with the Lady, who (for her ſecurity) kept ſtill by his ſide.
               No ſooner were they entred, but the wide-open rift cloſed againe, and then began the terribleſt noyſe that euer was heard, which all the remayning Caniballs made together, as they came deſcending downe the ſtaires: but Primaleon, to kéepe ſo many brutiſh ſauages off him, laid at them with his Partezane, oppoſing him ſelfe at the foote of the ſtaires, where making his ayme ſtill at their faces, at laſt he wounded the oldeſt of them, vpon whoſe life depended the enchauntment of the Tower, and the weapon paſſing quite thorowe his braines, immediatly he fell downe dead, where preſently the wall of mettall ſunke déepe vnder the ground, and Primaleon ſtoode with the Lady on the lowe pauement, ſome-what abaſhed, becauſe they behelde ſuch a ſtrange alteration. As they ſtaide there ſtill to ſee what would enſue, they ſawe the top of a goodly houſe ariſe out of the earth, and afterward the walls & gate appeared,

ouer which was written in golden Letters as followeth: The houſe of the fayre princeſſe Melia, wher-into whoſoeuer enters, looſeth his life.
               
               
                  Primaleon ſmyled at this ſeuere threatning, and taking vp his great hammer, went to beate againſt the gate therewith, whē pauſing a little, he heard a noyſe of people within, as if it were of ſuch as meant to defend it: neuertheleſſe, the ſtrength of the blowes he layd on it were ſuch, that the gate ſhaking and tottering euery way, at laſt fell downe, and Primaleon receiued ſuch a ſounde gréeting on the head, as (if he had not ſuddenly ſet the hammer to the ground, for his ſupport) he had lyen along, but ſtout courage neuer forſaking him, boldly made him leape forward in at the gate, where he was immediatly ſnatcht vp in the armes of two Giants, who carried him by méere ſtrength to an Altare, which ſtood not farre off from the entrance, and then one of them ſayd. Let vs ſacrifice this man héere, to the ſoule of the Princeſſe Melia.
               
               Agréed (quoth the other) and his hammer that lyes yonder, will greatly ſtedde vs, to breake his bones in péeces at a blow. Thou ſaiſt true (quoth the firſt Giant) therefore goe fetch it, and leaue the Knight alone to mée. Primaleon perceiuing in what danger he was, drawing ſuddenly his dagger, gaue the Giant (that held him) a ſtabbe in the ſide, which made him let goe his holde, and Primaleon recouering his feete, got foorth his ſword, and layd about him ſo furiouſly there-with, that the Giant found hee had no idle labour in hand.
               By this time was the other come with the hammer, which ſéemed of no poyſe or weight in his hand, ſo hée with that, and the other with his huge Club, layd at the Knight with ſuch furie and violence, as neuer before was he in the like perrill: for he beheld it moſt euidently, that if he auoyded not the blowes of the hammer, his life muſt there immediatly perriſh, beſide, the other ſo canuaſt him with his Clubbe, that hee ſtaggard héere and there like a drunkenman: and ſcarce knowing in this extremitie howe to behaue

himſelfe, he ſet his backe againſt the Altare, to kéepe both his enemies directly before him, when calling to remembraunce, howe much héere-to-fore thruſts and foynes had befriended him, hee did nothing elſe but giue out-right thruſts and ſtabbes, which made the Giants kéepe the farther off from him, but hee was ſo ſpent and ouer-laboured in this combate, that the end of the fight ſéemed doubtful vnto him.
               The Giant that fought with the hammer, grewe ſo outragious and tranſported with violence, that his blowes flew about without any diſcretion, beating the ground, and dooing no harme elſe, till meere furie made the hammer ſlippe ſuddenly out of his hande, ſo that then hee was conſtrained to be-take himſelfe to his Clubbe again: in which ſmall opportunitie, Primaleon (with a thruſt) had hurt the other Giant in the face, where-uppon hee retired backe to the Altare, and vaniſhed preſently out of ſight.
               Then to kéepe play with the other, leaſt by breathing he ſhould grow freſh and luſtie, he followed him cloſe euerie way about: but he ſéeing his companion was gone, and that the Knight very hardly ſet him, did what hee could to with-ſtand his enemie, till receiuing likewiſe a maine thruſt in the face, he quickly fled after his fellow.
               Nowe went Primaleon (as glad of a little reſt) to leane awhile againſt the Altare, but thereof hee was preuented, for he ſawe come foorth from vnder the Altare, two Serpents hiſſing, appearing as if they were knit together. Primaleon conſidered with himſelfe, that as the one Giant fledde, ſo the other fayled in his ſtrength, therfore he would fight with one of the Serpents firſt, hoping his ſucceſſe that way would prooue the like: but they were ſo cloſely combined together, as he knewe not by what meanes to compaſſe his intent, whereupon, hée aymed with thruſts at them both, which with theyr winges they ſtill put by, and gaue him many a violent ſtroke.
               While this fight thus continued, he heard the clattering of Armour, as if he were to be aſſailed by an hoſte of men,

a matter wrought by force of the enchauntment, onelie to diſmay and terrifie his thoughts: but hee made no reckoning of all this terrour, becauſe he was prepared for anie danger whatſoeuer, ſéeking firſt to end the taſke he had in hand, and deliuered ſuch a ſtroke at the one Serpent, as (lighting where the winges were ioyned to the bodie,) did cutte them quite off, and then redoubling the blowe with a thruſt, ranne him quite through the head, whereby hee fell downe, paſt all abilitie of harming any more: which did ſo lagge and wearie the other yet liuing, to defend himſelfe, and dragge the other Serpent about to, as the Knight (taking aduantage offered) diſpatcht him after his fellow for company.
               Nowe thought Primaleon that his labour was concluded, and going to the Altare, he eſpied (in an yron Cheſt) a Boxe of ſtone, preſerued there from the knowledge of any one, which (when he had broken the yron Cheſt) he purpoſed to beare thence away with him: and as hee procéeded with this intent, hee beheld the figure of a Woman vppon the Altare, whoſe yéeres of age ſéemed to be about fiftie, which as he ſtoode awhile beholding, the figure beganne to ſpeake to him in this manner.
               Perhaps thou thinkeſt (Sir Knight) to carry hence this vnguent, which I neuer made for any Chriſtians helpe, but for the race of Armato, King of Perſia, and my brother: if ſuch be thy perſwaſion, it is méerely in vaine. At which words, ſuddenly aroſe a Table before the Altare, where vnder (as in a déepe Cauerne) were to be ſeene Beares, Lions, Wolues, Tygers, Panthers, & diuers wilde beaſts, then ſpake the Image againe, ſaying: Thou muſt firſt fight with theſe and ouer-come them, before thou canſt obtaine thy deſire.
               When Primaleon perceiued ſuch an ineuitable danger, he conferred with his thoughts, which way were the likelieſt to compaſſe victory, then did the Table on a ſuddaine deſcend againe, and he beheld there a locke with a key, and a Trumpet hanging by it: Héere-vpon came the Ladie to

him, who had learned many particularities (concerning the enchauntment) of two young Ladies ſhee met withall in the Tower, and therefore ſpake thus to him againe.
               Locke downe the Table with that key Sir Knight, becauſe it onely is the doore of the Cauerne: then ſound the Trumpet, for therein conſiſts the meanes of ending the enchauntment. Primaleon was not ſlowe in locking it downe with the key, and taking the Trumpet in his hand, meant to ſound it: but a Spirit excéeding any humane ſtature, came and caught hold of him, and a very ſtrange kinde of wraſtling grew betweene them, for Primaleon could faſten no hold on the Spirit, but was ſo violently hurld about euerie way by this phantaſma, as very hardly could he keepe himſelfe on his féete, but ſupporting himſelfe ſo well as hée could, he ſounded the Trumpet, and then the Spirit vaniſhed in a ſmoake, likewiſe all the wilde beaſtes beneath in the vault, breaking a doore on the Mountaines ſide, ranne altogether mainly thence, to be out of the trumpets dreadfull noyſe.
               Nowe remained the Altare without any defender, and Primaleon turning to thanke the Lady for her good aduiſe, preſently knew her to be his Mother Miragarda, whom the enchauntments force would not let him know till now, and ſhee not a little ioyfull of his preſence, ſayd. Moſt honourable and aduenturous Sonne, heauen and thy faire fortune hath highly bleſſed thée, how many times did I feare to ſée thée dead, when (albeit I knew thée not) yet had I a Mothers compaſſion on thee: nowe maiſt thou ſafely take the vnguent, and afterward I will acquaint thee with ye eſtate of my fortunes.
               
                  Primaleon layd his hand on the Cheſt, but could not finde the way how to open it, whereat wexing ſom-what angry, he would haue broken it with the great hammer: but Dorina and the two young Ladies of the Tower, came preſently to him, ſaying: Hold your hand Sir, and breake not the Cheſt, for then you will ſincke downe whether the Towre is falne.
               
                  The one of the young Ladies ſtept vnto him, and ſhewed him how he ſhould vndoe (by ſtrength) an yron barre, that was faſtened a hand breadth aboue the Cheſt, and there he ſhould find the key to open it. Primaleon, though he thought it vnpoſſible by might to vndoo it, yet becauſe he was thereto thus aduiſed, kneeling downe cloſe to it, hee beganne to pull thereat with ſuch force, as was fore-graunted to the race of great Palmerin, euen as if his veines and ſinnewes had crackt in ſunder, and getting off the barre, a little key ſtarted foorth, which Dorina tooke to her, becauſe Primaleon was falne into a ſwoune, by the extreame labour of opening the barre.
               When Miragarda ſaw her Sonne in ſuch a traunce, ſhée was readie to die with conceite of griefe, curſing the vnguent to be bought ſo déerely: but beeing in ſhort while come againe to himſelfe, he called for the key, which was no ſooner put into the little lock, but it immediatly opened, and eaſily he tooke foorth the boxe of oyntment, whereupon the Altare and all things elſe vaniſhed, except the old Pallace. So Primaleon with his Mother, the two young Damoſells, and Dorina, went forth againe to the Cottage, becauſe it was late, where they founde the Knight that firſt gaue him directions, who in regard of ſome enmitie betwéene him and the Princeſſe Melia, made his continuall aboade there in the Wood, vntill ſuch time as the onelie knight ſhould come, (deſcended of Palmerins noble race) to make a finall end of that enchauntment: the Knight (béeing now without his Helmet) they perceiued him to be very aged, there hee inuited them to a ſumptuous ſupper, and afterward hee prepared ſeuerall beddes for them, whereto each one went and quietly repoſed.
            
            
               
               CHAP. LVIII. How Primaleon vnderſtood that the faire Ladie Victoria was kept in an enchauntment. And howe (vpon the arriuall of Trineus,) Primaleon preuailed ſo much with him by perſwaſion, that hee graunted to turne backe to Conſtantinople, for the conuoy of his Mother, and the precious vnguent.
               
                  FAire Aurora, beeing fréed from the murkie mantle of the ſadde and ſullen Night, raiſed the olde Knight, and guiding him to the lodging of Primaleon, Miragarda, Dorina, and the reſt, after a kinde mornings ſalutations, hée ſate down by them, and thus began. Sir Knight, I knowe that your deſires are boundleſſe, and carrie you to ſearch of matters which no limits can contrarie: therefore (though not to whet the Raſor, already kéene enough) vouchſafe attention to what I ſhal tell yeu.
               Know then, if you would finde the faire Lady Victoria, ſhee remaines enchaunted in the Pallace of the Princeſſe Melia, euen there, where the Lady Leonarda was ſo long detained: but if you would (you cannot) be her deliuerance, till firſt you haue fréed frō impriſonment, almoſt the whole band of the Grecian Knights, as alſo ye wizzart Aliarte, who is kept in ſuch a hard and narrow ſtraite, as except he be ſette at libertie, and his ayde mightily aſſiſting you, no humane power can compaſſe what you are to paſſe thorowe. And becauſe occaſion is offered of your returne to Constantinople, in regard of this Ladies happie deliuery, know likewiſe, that a Knight wil ere long arriue here, of whom when you haue begd the grant of one boone, you ſhall ſend him backe againe to Constantinople, and with him your Mother

and the precious oyntment.
               It grieued Primaleon not a little, to heare his beloued Victoria was enchaunted, and that her deliuerance might not foorth-with be vndertaken, wherfore, when the houre of dinner was come, they feaſted againe merily together, and no ſooner were they riſen from the Table, but they eſpied a Knight come riding vnder the wood ſide, whom Primaleon (vnarmed) went forth to méet: the Knight béeing Trineus, when Primaleon drew néerer him, he preſently knew him, and raiſing vp his beuer, alighted frō his horſe, enterchanging kind embraces and ſalutations together. Primaleon remembring the olde Knights wordes, and couetous to attaine the height of his diſſeignes, ſaid: Moſt honoured Trineus, if euer you loued me, expreſſe it now, in granting me one requeſt, which not onely will much enlarge your reputation, but likewiſe redound to my Lord the Emperours eſpeciall contentment.
               
                  Trineus, not knowing what hee would enioyne him to, without any exception, franckly graunted it: whereupon, Primaleon taking him by the hand, walked on with him to the Cottage, where hee greatly meruailed to behold Miragarda, but beeing reſolued in all the paſſed accidents, Primaleon thus procéeded. My Lord Trineus, be not diſpleaſed with me, if I binde you to the performance of your promiſe: becauſe I ſtand in ſome right of dutie obliged, to goe & frée our déere friend the learned Aliarte, out of an yron Cage wherein he is impriſoned, the truſt then impoſed on you, is to conduct the Princeſſe my Mother to Constantinople, and likewiſe to take with ye this precious oyntment, the vertue whereof is, to cure my Lord the Emperour, Don Edward of England, and my Father Florendos.
               
               This ſo ſpéedie returne, greatly diſcontented Trineus, becauſe his thoughts laboured on the aduenture in the Ile of Carderia: but reſpect of honor ſtrictly tied him to his promiſe, whereupon the old Knight made ready two faire Litters, placing the Princeſſe Miragarda in one of them, and the two Ladies in ye other, himſelfe likewiſe mounted on a

milk-white Palfrey, to accompany Trineus in his iourney. Thus Miragarda (ſhowring downe teares, to part in this ſort with her ſonne Primaleon,) cōmended him to the guard of Dorina, and ſollemne leaue being ſeuerally taken, they heauily parted, holding on two daies trauaile by Land, till the old Knight had prepared a good Foiſt, well ſtored with victuals & all things neceſſary, whereinto they were no ſooner entred, but of it ſelfe it put frō ſhoare, and in foure daies ſpace arriued at the Port of Constantinople, where right ſoone was bruted abroad the newes of Tri
                        •
                     eus and Miragardaes landing, which prooued ſo highly pleaſing to the Emperour and the whole Court, as without any ſcrupulous obſeruation of ſtate order, they ran on heapes to méete them, the Emperor himſelfe being the firſt that came thether, where méeting with his deere eſteemed daughter in law, right ioyfully he tooke her by ye hand, ſaying. Heauen be praiſed (faire Daughter) that I ſee thée in ſafety, nowe hope I that my Court ſhall recouer her former floure and maieſtie.
               By this time Don Edward was come likewiſe to them, who (not a month before) arriued there from England, and Trineus ſtepping forward to ſalute his moſt eſtéemed friends, taking either of them by the hand, thus ſpake to the Emperour. Be of good comfort (moſt ſacred Maieſtie,) for your Nephew Primaleon is in good eſtate of health, and hath ſent vnto ye the ſoueraigne vnguent, which the fayre Princeſſe Melia her ſelfe did make, for the cure of her brother Armato King of Perſia and his race: and hath wone it by no meane hazards and endeuour, wherefore he ſends it, to heale Prince Edward and your ſelfe, of thoſe vnrecured hurts which doe yet annoy you. Theſe ſpéeches (beyond meaſure) cōtented the great Lords, but eſpecially the Empreſſe Grydonia, Polinarda, Arnalte, & the other Princeſſes, who cirkling Miragarda in the midſt of them, could neuer be ſatiſ-fied with kiſſing and embracing her, and ſo walking along into the Cittie, ſhée declared to them, howe the young Ladyes Victoria and Argentina, were enchaunted in the place where Leonarda was ſo long time detained.
               
                  Neuertheleſſe (quoth ſhée) beleeue it as a matter moſt certaine, that they ſhall both be ſet at liberty: the one by Primaleon, after he hath giuen end vnto two great enterpriſes, and the other, by the noble Prince Florian. Then preſented they to his Highnes the auncient Knight, whoſe name was Helizabat, ſometime the huſband to the wiſe Enchauntreſſe Vrganda, and now ſo aged, that his yéeres amounted to aboue two hundred: as he made offer of knéeling to the Emperour, his Maieſtie (mooued by ſo reuerend an aſpect) helde him vp in his armes, deſirous to knowe of whence and what he was, wherein him ſelfe ſo diſcréetly reſolued him, as both he and Don Edward were highly pleaſed, vnderſtanding by him ſo many ſtrange matters paſt, as alſo diuers other that were to enſue.
               Theſe and ſuch like diſcourſings beguiled the time, vntill they were arriued at the Pallace, where the Emperour and Don Edward, to honour the reuerend age of olde Helizabat, would néedes (by each hand) guide him vp the ſteps, when happened (by the vnguent) a matter almoſt miraculous: for within leſſe then an houres ſpace, the Emperour ſtird at pleaſure his ſtiffe benummed arme, féeling it in as good eſtate as euer, and Don Edward turning to ſee the Emperours happy recouerie, felt his head (leaning before a ſide vpon his ſhoulder) to ſtand vp right and mooue as readily, as if it had neuer beene in any ſuch condition, to the wonder and amazement of all the beholders.
               Now to expreſſe the feaſting and reuelling thorowe the Citty, for ioy of theſe ſo happy euents, is a thing whereof I am no way capable: but let it ſuffiſe, that Princes (ruling by iuſtice and humanity) doo reach ſo far into their ſubiects harty affections, as continually they receaue from them the tribute of ſo gracious deſeruing, yea, ſometimes with an ouer-flowing largeſſe and bounty, as people right proude of their Soueraignes loue and kindnes. Such was the generall ioy in Constantinople at this time, man, woman, and child applauding Trineus, for bringing thether that vertuous oyntment: but much more they extolled the Knight of

Fortune, whoſe honourable labours had obtayned it. Trineus, whoſe deſire was after ſtrange aduentures, the next day conferred with Bazillia, concerning the gouernment of Allmaigne, and taking leaue of her, without vſing a word to any other, being armed, he departed from the Citty, carying no deuiſe or impreſe, becauſe hee purpoſed to trauaile vnknowne: ſo rode hee toward the Ile of Carderia, where hee arriued within fewe dayes after, ioyfull and glad beyond conceite, that Primaleon was not come thether before him, making no doubt of finiſhing the aduenture, by helpe of the Iewell he bare about him, which kept him ſafe from all enchauntments.
               Staying ſome little while a-loofe from the place, to eaſe his Horſe (well néere ſpent with trauaile) at length when he ſawe time beſt befitting him, he went toward Leonatos pauillion, euen as he had newly vanquiſhed a ſtrange errant Knight. Without any idle or talking daliance, they made triall of the Iouſt, and ſuch was the encounter, as Leonato loſt his ſtirrops, and Trineus was lifted out of his ſaddle on the trooper of his Horſe, very hardly kéeping him ſelfe from falling: but recouering his ſeate againe quickly, he came againſt his enemie with his ſword drawne, who entertayned him with as chéerefull a ſpirit, Trineus hauing this aduantage in the fight (beyonde all the reſt) that no hurts or wounds appeared to him, as to the former aduenturers they vſually did, which onely was cauſed by the vertue of his Iewell. The combate continued aboue two houres, and there might they haue fought two dayes together, or elſe haue miſcaried by wearines, their equality of valour was ſo correſpondent, and their knowledge in fight ſo aunſwerable, as (albeit they did little harme to each other) yet grew they breathleſſe and quite tired.
               Now the Sorcereſſe, not coueting the death of any knight in this aduenture, knowing no other meanes to appeaſe this contention, ſent forth a Damoſell heauily countenanced, wrapt in a mantle of white Satten, ritchly fringed with gold, ſitting in a ſaddle of gréene veluet, on a very gallant

Palfray ſumptuouſly capariſoned, and comming to them with mournfull deiected lookes, ſhe ſpoke in this manner. Which of you (faire Lords) will take pitty on an vnfortunate Lady, to whom hath happened a diſgrace beyond compariſon, and onely through the fault of a falſe and moſt diſloyall Knight.
               
                  Leonato, being tied by the enchauntments power to that place, leaſt any ſhould come to end the aduenture, tooke no héede of her wordes: but Trineus, (exempt from ſuch an ouer-ruling oppreſſion) taking compaſſion on the Damoſels teares, ſaid. Sir Knight, ſince I perceaue no ſuch readines in you, I will goe reuenge the wrong of this iniuried Lady. Thats nothing to me (aunſwered Leonato) nor will I be offended whether you goe or ſtay: onely the charge impoſed on me, is to kéepe any man whatſoeuer from concluding this aduenture. Vpon this reply, Trineus turnd his Horſe, and rode thence with the Damoſell, of whom he could neuer learne whether ſhe would conduct him, but ſtill ſhe enticed him on a whole moneth together, and ſo farre from the Ile of Carderia, as he could not returne thether againe, before the expiration of the aduenture.
               But come wee nowe to Primaleon, who parting with his Mother, as you haue already heard, entred conference with Dorina, concerning his beſt meanes, for arriuing at the Ile of Carderia: ſhee (as one well acquainted with the nature of the enchauntment) tolde him, that hee ſhoulde haue néede of the great Hammer, which taking with them, and entering afterwarde into their little Barque, they ſayled thence away, and came to the Riuer which engirted the Ile of Carderia. But before theyr departure, Primaleon well liking Dorinaes aduiſe, made a déepe ſearch before the Pallace, and founde there a huge wide Caue or pitte, wherein hee behelde a number of the dead Caniballes, as alſo a Golgatha of dead mens bones: by it lay the great Hammer, which hee caſting on hys ſhoulder, went aboorde with Dorina, launching out thence into the maine Sea, with earneſt deſire to reach the Ile of Carderia:
                  
and ſcarſely were they entred the Barque, but the waters grew ſo outragious and turbulent, as Dorina knew not by her Arte the reaſon thereof: yet more and more the tempeſt encreaſed, the Shippe often times ready to ſplit in ſunder. At length, drawing néere vnto the Iland, where Primaleon reputing more ſafety to be on land then on the water, hee ſuddainly leapt out on the ſhoare, the Barque putting off againe very expeditiouſly, and he eſpying a goodly Tower in the midſt of the Ile, walked on thether-ward: but remembring he had left the great Hammer behinde him, and that Dorina tolde him he ſhould haue néede of it, he turned back to goe fetch it. As thus he walked on, Leonato eſpied him, who meruailing to ſée him paſſe thus a-long the Iland, contrarie to any of the other before enchaunted, began to thinke with him ſelfe, that this man was likely to finiſh the aduenture, where-vpon, he began to giue him very iniurious ſpéeches, challenging him to the triall of the combate. For all this, Primaleon was not offended, but comming to the Bridge, tolde him his name and cauſe of comming thether: for he ſo déerely affected Leonato, as he was loath to enter the fight with him, where-vpon they concluded not to combate at all. But the Enchauntreſſe, perceauing the finiſhing of her Magick ſpells ſo néere at hand, to preuent the ſame as long as ſhe could, ſhée came in perſon betwéene them, ſaying. Knights, farre off are you from the valour of Polendos King of Theſſalie, who made no exception of any perſon whatſoeuer, to attaine the height of his owne diſſeignes.
               Theſe prouoking wordes ſtirred a deſire in eyther of the Knights, preſently to vndertake the combate, and it had likewiſe followed in action, but that Dorina, being acquainted with the mighty ſpléenes of them both, which might ſo farre endanger their lyues, as the aduenture thereby would remaine vnperfected, ſuddainly raiſed the Iland water ſo high, as all the bridge was couered there-with, ſo that they had no place for their difference, when the Enchauntreſſe (thus ouer-taken in her owne intent) grewe ſo diſpleaſed

thereat, as ſhee could not deuiſe what to doo or ſay. The Knights were very willing to haue come together, & practiſed all the wayes which poſſibly they could: but ſeeing the high water woulde not permit them, Primaleon went toward the Iland, and Leonato held it now for certaine, that Primaleon was ſo reſpected by Fortune, as he onely ſhould extirpate the enchauntment, for this enchauntment of Dorinaes (fore-ſtalling the other) gaue him good reaſon ſo to imagine, ſo went he to his Tent againe.
            
            
               CHAP. LIX. How Primaleon ſlew the ſauage wilde Beare, and finiſhing the aduenture, ſet all the famous Knights at libertie.
               
                  
                     PRimaleon perceauing there was no paſſage for him, and that Leonato returned back as one malecontent, becauſe hee coulde not procéede to the combate: it greatlie contented him, to haue ſo wel auoided the peril of his very deere friend, ſo taking the way toward the goodly Tower, the Enchauntreſſe ſmilingly met him, accompanied with the Knight that combated Leonato firſt of all, who was his ſonne, that Polendos left there as Lord of the Iland, when he deliuered the faire Francelina frō enchauntment, and walking along with Primaleon, ſhe thus began. Think not Sir Knight, that this great enchauntment was made to ruinate the Court of Constantinople, but this is the reaſon of it: the laſt of thoſe thrée Fairies, which holy great Palmerin to the precious water, kept on the mountaine Artiferia, was our Aunt, and left héere as ſtrange an enchauntment as euer was heard of, yet with ſuch a condition, that it ſhould be concluded by one of Palmerins progenie, and

there are other aduentures beſide left by that Fairie, which will renowne that family to all poſterities.
               After our aboade was appointed in this Iland, we ſtroue to get hether ſo many Knights as poſſibly we could, becauſe it appeared by manifeſt proofe, that no one man was ſufficient for ſo important an enterprize: and wee expected the comming of Palmerin of England, with Don Florian his brother, the Knight of the ſauage man, the Emperour Primaleon and Don Edward, who are recouered to their former condition, hoping that one of them would ceaſe this long dated trouble. But ſéeing you are ſo happily come hether, if you purpoſe to vnder-take a matter of ſuch moment, it were good that you tooke your reſt this night, and to morrow morning begin an attempt of great honour, wherein wee will giue ye no diſcouragement, but wiſh that all good ſucceſſe may attend ye.
               
                  Primaleon ſeeing that night drew on a-pace, the gladlier yeelded to take his reſt, and entring with them into the Tower, they brought him to a ready prepared table, placed by the goodly ſumptuous Fountaine, where Polendos firſt had a ſight of Francelina: there was he ſerued very royallie, and when hee deſired to knowe ſomewhat concerning the enchauntment, ſhee aunſwered him that hee might not, for (quoth ſhe) ſuch is the nature and quality of it, as no man muſt be acquainted with the eſtate of his perill, but at all aduentures muſt vnder goe it.
               Supper beeing ended, they betooke them ſelues to reſt, and Primaleon riſing early the next morning, remembred what Dorina had ſayde vnto him, concerning his imployment of the great Hammer, wherefore going for it, he found it lying vppon the ſhoare ſide, and returning with it on his necke, he was forth-with armed. Then did the Enchauntreſſe and the Knight guide him from the Tower, to a certaine quarter of the Iland, where (without bidding him adiew) they ſuddainly left him, as fearefull of a ſauage wilde Beare, which kept in a Wood very néere adioyning. Primaleon helde on his way into the Wood, which he found to

be maze-like and full of turnings, thicke ſette with great Oakes, broade ſpreading Elmes, and other goodly trées, as if no Axe had euer come neere them: and becauſe their thick braunches hindered his paſſage, he beate them downe before him with his Hammer, ſo that his blowes were eaſily heard quite through the Iland, and when (by much labour) he had gone about halfe a mile by eſtimation, he came forth into a faire plaine, about forty paces euery way in largenes, where ſtanding to beholde a curious Fountaine, ſuddainly ruſhed foorth the ſauage Beare, which hee neyther hearing nor perceauing, the beaſt reard vp vpon his ſhoulders, & gript him ſo ſtrongly about the midſt, as he thought there was no way now to eſcape with life, becauſe he could not turne to hurt the beaſt in any place, he held him ſo forcibly betwéene his huge pawes.
               As hee ſtrugled and ſtroue to get looſe from the Beare, by chaunce he got vp one of his armes, and catching one of the beaſts eares faſt in his hand, he hung thereon ſo mainelie, as willingly the Beare let goe his holde: but he had ſo ſoyled and anoyed the Knight with his frothy foame & ſlauering, that he was ouercome with the foule ſent and dampe thereof, falling to the ground bereft of his ſences. But Fortune protecting him as her déere eſtéemed fouorite, made the Beare drag him along to the Fountaine, and tumbling him into it, ſuch was the vertue of the water, as the filth being waſhed off him, hee found him ſelfe very freſh and luſty, whereby hee gathered, that this water would ſted him againſt the Beare, whenſoeuer he ſought in that manner to ſtifle him again. So leaping out of the Fountaine, he made toward the Beare, which now held off, and would not come néere the water, then aſſayling him with his ſworde, the beaſt ranne at him on ſuch an aduantage, that paſſing betweene his legs, he once more ouer-threw him, giuing him many violent ſtrokes with his pawes, & foaming vpon him as he did before, had almoſt choakt his ſences again, but that recouering vpon his féet, he threw himſelfe quickly into the water, & becam quite altered from his ſenceleſſe ſurprizing.
               
                  This ſtrife thus continuing the ſpace of two houres, the Knight grew doubtfull of his ſucceſſe, becauſe he could giue no wound to the Beare, his courſe of aduantage preuailed ſo ſtill againſt him: at length, he deuiſed howe to caſt the beaſt into the water, thinking that way to rid him of his ſo noyſome foaming, and determining héere-vpon reſolutely, he trauerſed about, awayting opportunity, till the Beare was reard vp againe on his hindmoſt legges, when taking him at that aduantage about the middle, the beaſt likewiſe caught him faſt about the neck. Heere found he now work enough to doo, and neuer in all his life did hee endure like trauaile, for the Beare vſed all his might not to come néere the Fountaine, and Primaleon ſtroue as ſtifly to bring him thether. Aboue halfe an houre this kinde of wraſtling laſted, and Primaleon being face to face with the Beare, his breath and filthy driuell entred through the ſight of his helmet, making him almoſt as mad and furious as the beaſt, which prooued the onely way for him to gaine the victorie: for ſeeming nowe rather like a franticke body, then a man poſſeſſed of any ciuill parts, he tooke vp the Beare by very méere ſtrength, and carying him forcibly to the Fountaine, they both fell together into the water, where each of them forſaking his former hold, the water caried them one from another, and tooke away all their fury and madnes. The Beare was the firſt that got out of the Fountaine, reſting him ſelfe vpon the bank ſide, but with ſuch a milde and gentle look, as witneſſed his ſauage nature to be quite changed. Primaleon came out of the water farre off from the Beare, and prepared once againe to aſſaile him, but beholding him to ſ
                     •
                  and ſo ſtill and quiet, he drew the néerer him, when he might perceaue the beaſt to beckon him with his pawe, as ſeeming that hee would haue the Knight to followe him, which he not refuſing to doo, tooke vp his Hammer vpon his ſhoulder, and the Beare (leading him a narrowe crooked path) brought him at length to an auncient building, which ſeemed to haue beene ſometime a goodly Tower or Caſtell, but it was now déepe ſunke into the earth, ſo that not aboue

the ground was to be ſéene of it, the quantitie of more then ſixe foote in height. Paſſing round about it, he eſpied a doore made all of Glaſſe, with a key ready placed in the lock, by the tranſparance whereof, they diſcerned within, a Chappell furniſhed round with Idols, in the midſt of it ſtood the ſtatue of a Giant, with a mightie Axe in his hand, and ſéemed to menace ſuch as durſt offer to enter at the doore.
               
                  Primaleon being thorowly perſwaded in his minde, that he ſhould abſolutely finiſh the aduenture, ſince hee had ſo well ridde the Beare of his wilde ſaluage nature: went to the doore and tooke downe the key, and ſcarce had hee halfe turnd it in the locke, but the doore opened, & he felt a beaſt to glide in betweene his legges, but ſaw not what it was, wherefore he went toward the Image with the Axe, which at the firſt ſight ſeemed to be immooueable, neuertheleſſe, it ſtirrd and came againſt him, and ſmiting with the Axe vppon his Shield, brake his impreſe of Fortune quite thorow the midſt, which Primaleon tooke as a bad preſage or augurie, imagining thereby that Fortune had forſaken him, whereas (indeede) the reaſon of it was, that he ſhould now ſtand vpon his valour and manhoode, without expecting any fauour from Fortune, who (notwithſtanding) left him no more now, then before ſhée had doone in his very greateſt perrils.
               This blow ſhewed him how he ſhould gouerne himſelfe againſt the Idole, wherefore beſtirring himſelfe rounde about as occaſion beſt ſerued, and deliuering diuers ſtroakes at the Idoll, the ſword ſtill rebounded backe, and did no other harme, albeit the Image was vnarmed: but hee perceiuing the Axe had too much aduantage againſt his ſword, began to awaite ſome apter meanes of help, doing nothing in meane while but defend the Idols maine ſtrokes, and when the fight had continued aboue an houres ſpace, and no more benefite receiued by his labour, then he had at the firſt, he found himſelfe to be ſo ouer-trauailed, yt hee could not ſhunne a blow which ſmote him on the head, and made him fall backward in a ſwoune.
               
                  Vpon this aduantage, the Idoll caught him vp in his armes, and ran a pace with him behind an Altare, where was a great fire readie prepared, and there the Idol ſtroue to caſt him in: but by this time his ſences were wel againe reſtored, and his good happe was ſuch, that (in the fall) he lighted on his feete, and leaping quickly out of the fire, layd about him luſtily vppon the Idoll, who wanting the Axe, ſtoode ſtill and ſtirrd not, like an Image of ſtone.
               The Knight hauing beſtowed many blowes and thruſts, and ſéeing all his endeuour prooued but in vaine, he went toward the Altare, where, as hee offered to aſcend vp the riſing ſteps, he ſaw a fierce dog come foorth from vnder it, and after him another of like reſemblance, but both of them were armed all ouer. At one inſtant they flew very eagerly vppon him, and ſought to gnaw in ſunder the buckles of his Armour, which he preuented ſo well as he could, though euer-more one of them was vppon his backe, and theyr Armour appeared to be ſtronger then ſtéele. He ſawe that his ſword now ſerued him to ſmall vſe, the dogges did cling ſo neere about him, wherefore he fought with his dagger only, which hee could by no meanes pierce thorow theyr Armour: but one of them rauenouſly gaping before him, hee ſtabd him in at the mouth, and the weapon paſſing through his hart, made him fall downe dead at his feete, and the other dogge by béeing thus alone, wanted the ſtrength of the enchauntment, which made him draw backe to the great Idoll, as accounting there his place of ſafely.
               
                  Primaleon againe began to mount the ſteps, and when he came néere the Altare, hee beheld a Knight to lie there wounded, humbly deſiring mercy at his hands, and he not thinking it to be a phantaſma, gaue forth his hand to raiſe him on his feete, and bring him neerer to the Altare: but as he ſtoode vpon the pauement, his former weake eſtate was ſuddenly changed, and he getting vp the Axe in his hand, began to lay luſtilie at the Knight, with quicker ſpéed and greater cunning, then any the Idoll before had vſed. It much diſpleaſed Primaleon, that he had raiſed vp ſo fierce an

enemie, but ſéeing his owne folly iuſtly ſcourged, he muſt amend it as he can or may, till ſome better occaſion might happen to end all this labour.
               The Knight with the Axe was ſo wondrous ready, that Primaleons ſkil very hardly could auoide his ſtrokes, which (albeit they entred not but ſlightly) yet did they paine him very gréeuouſly, and perceiuing he could not get the Knight from the Altare, but when himſelfe retired, the other refuſed to follow, and the fight (this way) would neuer be concluded, he (at laſt) ſo doubled and trebled his blowes on the Knight, that hee conſtrained him to mooue from his place, purſuing him ſtill with ſuch ſprightly courage, that the Knight (ayming a dangerous ſtroke at Primaleon) ye blow glaunced by in vaine, and the Knights legs ſlipt vnder him, by reaſon the pauement was very ſlippery, ſo fel he downe the ſteppes, and the Axe tumbling out of his handes, he lay there depriued of all further power.
               
                  Primaleon aduaunced his foote vppon him, with full intent to ſmite off his head: but he crauing mercy once more, ſaid: Sir Knight, if (with life) you meane to eſcape this enchauntment, take vp the Axe, which was made to be the ruine of this place, for by no meanes elſe can it be compaſſed. Primaleon taking the Axe in his hand, felt himſelfe ſo ſuddenly fréed from his former wearines, as if he had not combatted at all, and paſſing through the Temple or Chappell, without any other offence or reſiſtance, hee went behinde the Altare to the fire, where-into the Idoll ſo faine would haue caſt him: there hee beheld it gather it ſelfe together, and (by little and little) receiue the ſhape of a Lady, the ſaddeſt in countenaunce that euer was ſeene, ſhée falling on her knées before him, ſaid.
               Moſt euident it is (right woorthy Knight) that in you is contained the whole worlds vertue, for the Enchauntreſſe would not permit till this inſtant, that any of Palmerin d' Oliuaes race ſhould come to this aduenture: yet would you haue found toyle enough to vnder-goe it, if you had not béen poſſeſſed of that Axe, which will be ye meanes of your happy

victory. While thus ſhee ſpake, the Beare (which loſt his former wildnes) ſtanding vp on his hindermoſt feete, was changed to a Knight, who taking vp a batte of wood which leaued behind the doore, it altered likewiſe to a fayre long ſword, and the humbled Knight (that twiſe before had craued mercy) became more fierce and violent then euer hée was: with theſe came alſo the dogge and Idoll, and ſet altogether very furiouſly vppon Primaleon, who vſing one while his Axe, another while his great hammer, kept indifferent good play with them, enforcing them to kéep faire and farre off him, till hitting the dogge on the head with his hammer, he tumbled backward and ſtird no more, heereby hee gathered, that all the reſt muſt be wounded in theyr heads, (which he perceiued them to defend with very ſpeciall care) or elſe he ſhould neuer compaſſe his intent.
               But the firſt Knight was ſmote on the head ere he was aware, and preſently hee fell downe bereft of his ſences, now the Idoll, in regard of his great ſtature, had the better meanes for his defence, the other Knight alſo held out as furiouſly, as when he was before in the ſhape of a Beare, till Primaleon ſtriking at him with the Axe, by good hap ſmote the ſword out of his hand, which he ſtooping to recouer, another blow lighted vppon his head, which made him fall downe as if he had béen dead. Now none remained but the Idoll onely, who made the readieſt turnings and windings, that euer in any fight had beene diſcerned, cunningly auoyding euery blow that made any proffer at his head.
               The battaile betwéen them laſted til the euening, when Primaleon (perceiuing the Sunne was neere ſetting, and doubtfull leaſt Leonato ſhould come thether, and robbe him of ſome part of the honour) hee beganne to labour the more earneſtly, and plyed the Idoll with ſo many quicke doubled ſtrokes, that hitting (at length) where he moſt deſired, hee ſtaggerd diuers wayes, and falling, ſmote Primaleon on the ſhoulder, as if a huge Collomne or Coloſſus had light vpon him, ſo that very hardly he kept on his féete, but réeled about as if hee were ſenceleſſe, when the Lady (ioyfullie

running vnto him, and opening his beuer to giue him aire) ſpake thus cheerefully to him: Nowe Knight take courage, for the aduenture is accompliſhed.
               
               Theſe wordes reuiued him, and as they were going toward the Altare, they ſaw it was vaniſhed, & after it ſunck downe the Idoll, whereuppon, the two Knights came to theyr ſences againe, and perceiuing the vaile of the Temple fall toward the Tower, they knew that Primaleon had ended the enchauntment, wherefore comming to him with great humanitie, they kindly embraced him, and guiding him forth, commended his rare vertues as they woorthilie merrited.
               Béeing come neere the Tower, all the impriſoned Knights right ioyfully met him, onely Arguto excepted, who had rather haue ended his life there in priſon, then to acknowledge any ſuch benefite at the hand of his enemie: therefore very ſadly he kept behind the reſt, and while they were buſie in their ſalutations and embraces, hee ſlipt by ouer the Bridge, and ſo departed thence.
               Theſe newes were highly diſpleaſing to Primaleon, and in all haſt he would haue followed him, but for his Father Florendos, and his Brother Oliuanto, who forcibly kept him backe with mightie perſwaſions. Florian, Forzato, Franardo, Almaroll and the reſt, could neuer enough expreſſe theyr kindneſſe to him, but béeing all conducted to a ready prepared Table, Don Roſuell, who was next in yeeres to Florendos, deſired the Enchauntreſſe to acquaint them with the originall of this enchauntment, which had ſo diſtracted the Emperour Primaleons thoughts, and left his Court emptie of ſo many gallants: to which requeſt ſhe aunſwered as followeth héereafter.
            
            
               
               CHAP. LX. The reaſon why this enchauntment was firſt framed. And how Primaleon (going to ſet the VVizzard Aliarte at libertie) entred the combate with Palmerin of England, and howe they were parted by Dramuſiande.
               
                  THE Enchauntreſſe hauing aſſumed her Fayerie ſhape againe, abandoning nowe her ſpells and exorciſmes, turning to her knight (who was Lorde of the Iland) ſaid. Let it not ſéeme offenſiue to you, if I diſcouer the ſecretes of this ſoyle to this Knight, whoſe honour and vertue ſo woorthily deſerues it, beyond all other that yet haue come hether: ſo ſitting downe with the two young Ladies, ſhée commaunded the elder of them to tell ye whole ſtorie, whereto ſhe obeying, began in this manner.
               Sir Knight, the hard allotted deſtenie to this Damoſell my Siſter, whom you deliuered out of the Temple, hath beene the cauſe of your ſo late-paſſed trauaile, to frée her frō the Ile of Francelina, which albeit (in ſome ſort) it was wel procéeded in, when Polendos gaue beginning to the enterpriſe: yet neither did his worth extend ſo farre, nor her fortune merrite ſo much happines, as that all his paines could conclude a matter ſo important, ſuch was the weight of her tranſgreſſion, and ſuch the penaltie thereon impoſed. For her ouer-fond tranſgreſſion in neglect of her honour, firſt gaue beginning to the enchauntment, as briefely I wil tel you the manner how.
               The Knight whom you beheld in the ſhape of a Beare, became ſo deepely enamoured of her, that (in hope of friendlie

aduiſe and furtherance) he diſcloſed his affection to another Knight, béeing the ſame with whom you lately combatted. During the progreſſe of this amourous purpoſe, wherto my Siſter gaue kind cōſenting, the ſecond Knight (that knew his friends election in loue) neuer minding the faith and obliged dutie in ſuch a caſe required: became himſelfe extreamely affected toward my Siſter, and becauſe he was better practiſed in loues negotiations, and could handle queint dalliances with more pregnancie then his friende, he preuailed ſo farre, that ſhée, like a light-headed wench, (as for the moſt part young Damoſells are no other, wanting the experience in ſo dangerous a kind of traffique) left off her firſt Louer, and gaue entertainement to the ſecond.
               Héere now (Sir) is a little leyſure admitted ye, to ſpend ſome ſmal yet néedfull conſideration, in imagining the iuſt griefe of the Knight reiected, (hauing before receiued ſo manie faire promiſes, and goodly inſtances of her loyall meaning, that now the day of marriage beeing appointed, for farre were his thoughts from any other baſe purpoſe:) to behold his hopes ſo apparantly abuſed, his intire affect deſpiſed, his true meaning bafled, and his choyce now ſo readie at anothers commaund, euen his, in whoſe truſt he had repoſed his loue and life, geſſe (I ſay) but the ſorrow of ſo highly a wrongd ſoule. Yet neuertheleſſe, bearing all this with more then manly patience, he diſſembled his diſtemper, and kept outward appearance of his loue as earneſt as euer, onely to ſée what it would ſort vnto.
               The other falſe and periurd Knight, his ayme was onely at baſe lubricitie, contaminating the fayre and ſpotleſſe chéeke of chaſtitie, without regard of my Siſters honour, or any due reſpect to his owne life. Shee continuing in this hapleſſe kinde of courſe, affecting earneſtly the one, and feigning cunningly with the other, vppon a certaine day, when the Enchauntreſſe had betooke herſelfe to repoſed thoughts, after ſome former ſerious imployment: my Siſter went with her Louer into a little thicket, where being

ſet downe together, and ſhee crowning his temples with a flourie chaplet, they fell to amourous purpoſes & purſuites, and (enterchange of faith beeing equally plighted, action confirming theyr former arguing,) the firſt Knight chaunced to ſteale vpon them, where ſeeing his ſimplicity ſo haynouſly iniuried, in a violent fury he would haue ſlaine them both, but the falſe Knight eſcaped, with a hurt in his breaſt onely, and ſhe making away ſo faſt as ſhe could, was narrowly purſued by him with his Rapier drawne. The people knowing her to be their liedge Lords Daughter, aroſe in her defence, and while they layd hold on the Knight, ſhe got with ſafety into the Caſtell.
               Now did the rude multitude ſo threaten the Knight with death, yt he (more ouer-come with true ſence of his wrong, then any terrour of theirs could any way elſe mooue him:) fell mad and franticke, byting euery one that held hand vpon him, and they likewiſe became mad by ranckling of his byting. The rumour of my Siſters feare, and the Knights madnes, awaked the ſléeping Sorcereſſe, and ſhe comming foorth at the gate of the Caſtell, euen as my Siſter was paſſing by, commaunding her to ſtay, woulde néedes know of her the cauſe why ſhe fledde: which ſhe either could not, or would not manifeſt, as lothe to blabbe her owne ſhame, or elſe ouer-poyſed with ſo deſperate an affrightment.
               Whereupon, the Enchauntreſſe going in with her, cauſed the frantique Knight to be brought before her, beeing ſtrongly fettered with cordes & manacles, leaſt any more ſhould be bitten by him: there did hee reueale his true loue to my Siſter, and how immodeſtly hee found her with the falſe Knight, to whom hee had imparted his affection, and ſaid, though not ſo ſufficiently reuenged, as he could haue wiſhed himſelfe, yet had hee left him wounded to death in the Garden.
               No ſooner had hee thus ſpoken, but the wounded falſe Knight was brought before the Sorcereſſe, and to appeaſe the confuſion of iudgements in this caſe, to three diſtinct ſeperate places the offenders were appointed, vntil the morning

of the next day enſuing, which beeing come, the Enchauntreſſe pronounced this ſentence folowing. Firſt, that my Siſter, for hauing no more reſpect to her female dignitie, ſhould be confined to burne in a quenchleſſe fire, as a iuſt puniſhment to the heate of her looſenes: and her wounded falſe Louer, ſhould ſo continue without any cure. As for the poore wronged and diſtracted Knight, who (mooued by the méere iuſtice of his loyaltie) was falne into this miſerable frenzie, paſt any preſent recouerie, becauſe his madnes had aſſumed the very height of violence: he ſhould be tranſformed into a wilde Beare, whoſe nature leanes much to furious madnes. So the Wood and Temple were his aſſigned haunts, and the Fountaine (in compaſſion of him) was there erected, to frée him frō that furious frenzie, when ſuch a Knight ſhould happen to come thether, whoſe valour would embolden him, to drag the beaſt into the water.
               Now as concerning the huge Idoll of ſtone, the ſpell allotted thereto, was in this manner, that whenſoeuer any one came thether to end this enchauntment, it ſhould haue the motion of a lyuing man, and the ſtrength of a Gyant. Thus were the Knights aſſigned a lingering death in life, the one by his mortall wound, the other in his tranſ-formed madnes, and my Siſter (who indéede ſhould iuſtly ſuffer for them both) had continually remayned in that fire, except your vertue had allayed the vigour thereof, which ceaſed ſo ſoone as you tooke her foorth of it. Thus haue you briefely heard the ſum of this aduenture, after which, may it pleaſe you to goe take your reſt, becauſe you muſt returne to comfort the Emperour Primaleon.
               
               Euery one tooke great pleaſure in the Ladies report, vnderſtanding thereby the ſcope of the aduenture: ſo ſupper being ended, they ſeuerally went to take their reſt. In the morning, euery man armed him ſelfe to depart thence, and the Knight of the Iland (knéeling before Florendos) would be inſtituted by him (who was ſonne to the Emperour) a Deputie gouernour of the Iland, which was performed on both ſides with great loue and kindnes.
               
                  
                  Primaleon, dreaming ſtill on the wizzard Aliartes deliuerance, to ſerue him ſelfe with his ayde in enfranchizing Victoria, eſpecially in ſuch occaſions appertayning to the enchauntment, as his courage and valour would but little ſted him in: after that he had aduertiſed his Father, how he had ſet frée his Mother from an enchauntment, and ſent her by Trineus to Constantinople, taking his gentle farewell of them all, he parted thence, and arriuing where Dorina expected him, he entreated her to leaue him a while to him ſelfe, and meete him at the Perillous Ile, if he ſhould ſtand in neede of her helpe concerning the enchauntment.
               The reaſon why he would not now haue her companie, was becauſe he hoped to méete with Arguto againe, to reconcile him from his péeuiſh obſtinacie, but he found a quite contrary hinderance in his way: for Palmerin of England, whom Fortune had conducted to Constantinople, entred there vnknowne to any but his Lady Polinarda, and ſhée perceauing his cloſe intent, was as ſecret to him as his part deſired. There heard he of the Grecian Knights impriſonment, alſo the miſhappe and diſgrace befalne the wiſe Aliarte, his brother, and hauing ſtayed eight dayes thus ſecretly with his wife: he determined firſt to deliuer his brother, and afterward goe to the Ile of Carderia, holding it for moſt certaine and aſſured, that all theſe things happened but by enchauntment, wherein his brother Aliarte would highly ſted him: ſo, cauſing his Horſe and Armes to be cloſely caried out of the Citty gates, he proceeded according to his reſolued purpoſe.
               
                  Druſa Velonna, who ſtill awayted miſhap toward the Court of Constantinople, and to further it by her vttermoſt endeuour, ſo croſt this intended courſe, that Palmerin being tranſported quite from his determination, vnwittinglie, came firſt of all into the Realme of Macedon: where ſhunning all walled townes or places of acceſſe, one day (about three a clock in the after noone) he ſaw a Knight come riding toward him, bearing (as he did) the impreſe of Fortune in his Sheeld, but figured after a ſtranger faſhion.
               
                  Hée meruailing who durſt be ſo bolde as to cary his deuiſe, when he was come néerer him, ſpake in this manner. Doo ye heare me Sir? What, are you of my blood or alliaunce? or holde you ſome inward reſpect to me, that you are ſo familiar with my Enſigne of Fortune? Primaleon, who had approoued his valour ſo often, and againſt ſo many in other occaſions, thought if he could nowe well cary the caſe with Palmerin, he néeded to dread no paſſage whatſoeuer: and diſſembling as if he knew him not, returned this reply. You ſhould Sir, be but ſimply ſéene in the profeſſion of chiualrie, that you dare offer to forbid any man the bearing of your deuiſe, I neuer yet combatted with any that caried this impreſe, nor will I be ſo arrogant, to impeach any mans frée liberty in ſuch a caſe: notwithſtanding, ſéeing your ſo vnciuill and apparant diſcourteſie, I haue a will to trie, whether I can take that Enſigne of Fortune from you or no, to the ende you may liue afterward out of her fauour.
               Theſe wordes incenſed Palmerin beyond all meanes of ſufferance, and becauſe (for very anger) hee could returne him no aunſwere, he gaue preſent way to his Horſe for the Iouſt. Primaleon repented, that he had ſo furiouſly prouoked him, as well in regarde of his great valour, which he had neuer approoued, as alſo becauſe he was his Vnckle, toward whom (indéede) hee ought to haue béene ſomewhat more dutifull: but being vnable now to ſhunne the tryall, without blame and diſgrace, committing him ſelfe to his euer-fauouring Miſtreſſe, he gaue the ſpurres to his Courſer to méete him valiantly.
               In the encounter, the earth trembled as if it had opened, and the Horſes met with ſuch violence together, that they both were ſet on their buttockes on the ground, and riſing againe by the quickning of the ſpurre, the Knights Launces beeing ſhiuerd in péeces to their hands, they were both mightily aſtonned, Palmerin réeling twiſe, as if he would haue falne beſide his Horſe, and Primaleon ſo ſhaken, as if his ſences were quite bereft him.
               
                  In this amazement they continued a quarter of an houre, and recouering againe both at one inſtant, that it coulde not be iudgd which was the firſt, they came againſt each other with their ſwords drawne, giuing blow for blow, and hurt for hurt. Palmerins firſt ſtroke was vpon the helmet, which being of approoued very good temper, was notwithſtanding cleft a little: and Primaleon had a blowe on the right ſide, which pierced quite through the Armour, and wounded him ſomewhat. Thus continued the combate aboue two houres ſpace, and by reaſon eyther of them ſtoode vpon his ſkill and experience, the blowes did enter the ſharper where they lighted.
               
                  Palmerin conceiting inwardly with him ſelfe, what hee might be that ſet him thus hardly, could not thinke it to be Don Florian his brother, nor yet Florendos, becauſe he caried no ſuch corpulence of body: where-vpon, he grew into ſuch fury, that croſſing his ſworde arme ouer Primaleons back, & thwarting the other directly before him, he thought ſo to get him forth of the ſaddle. But when Primaleon perceaued the perill, and what ſhrewde girdes his aduerſarie gaue him, he caught faſt hold about him likewiſe, their Horſes waxing ſo ſpent and wearie, as hardly could they lift a foote from the ground, but réeled euery way, as their Maiſters ſtrength drew them, till at laſt they fell on a heape together: when either (being carefull of his beſt aduantage) recouered footing quickly againe, and fell to the combate as freſhly as before, making the fielde to ecchoe with the clanching of their weapons, and both of them were wounded very dangerouſly, ſorting néere to Velonnaes damnable intent, that they ſhould haue bereft each other of life, but that (by good hap) it came to paſſe, when they were able to welde their ſwords no longer, a friend came and kindly parted them.
               
                  Dramufiande beeing the man, (who after his departure from Tubante, to goe for the aduenture of Carderiaes Iland, where he heard ſo many famous Knights were impriſoned, Franardo his ſonne being one among them:) hearing the

noiſe of this fight a farre off, followed the weapons ſound, till hee came to the place where hee found the Knights at handie gripes together, vſing all their ſkill and ſtrength to ouerthrow each other, and ſeeing in eythers Shéelde the deuiſe of Fortune, albeit with the blowes they were pittifullie mangled: hee preſently knew Palmerin, but hauing no gueſſe or apprehenſion of the other, he ſpake thus aloude to him. Beleeue me Sir Knight, you may well preſume on Fortunes kinde inclination toward ye, that ye haue outſtoode the valour of noble Palmerin of England.
               
               
                  Primaleon, who could not denie within his own thoughts, but that he knew his Vnckle well enough, hearing the Giant thus to name him, let fall his ſword, and offering to kneele, humbly deſired pardon for his ouer-bolde tranſgreſſion: but Palmerin ſuſtayned him in his armes, and as they grew lauiſh in complement and courteſie, they felt themſelues ſo faint and weake, by the ouer-prodigall expence of their blood, that they were conſtrayned to ſit downe together, Palmerin falling into a ſtraunge ſwound or traunce. Dramufiande with his owne Squire, and the other twaine belonging to the Knights, had quickly got ready two comlie Beeres, whereon (very ſoftly) they laide the wounded Knights, and hauing bound vp their hurts ſo well as they could, guided them to the neereſt hoſpitable part of Macedon, where they remayned aboue twenty dayes, before they could be able to beare Armes againe.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. LXI. How Florendos with Oliuato returned to Constantinople, where hee found remedy for his lameneſſe. And how the other Knights betooke them ſelues to ſeuerall parts, finiſhing diuers ſtrange and memorable aduentures: among vvhich is expreſſed, vvhat happened to Arguto in his trauaile.
               
                  AFter Primaleon was departed from the Ile of Carderia, his Father Florendos hauing heard (by him) of the ſoueraigne oyle or vnguent, would néedes returne to Constantinople, to recouer his 
                     •
                  amenes, Oliuanto was deſirous to beare him company, not altogether ſo much for his ſake, but rather to ſee faire Auriana, to tell her the ſucceſſefull aduenture of the King and the Lady, whereby he ſhould be the more welcome to her. Franardo with Forzato and Almaroll, would néedes iourney toward the bottomleſſe Lake, to conquer that Iland, becauſe his father Dramufiande could not compaſſe it, being interrupted by Palmerin of England, who made an end of the aduenture. Don Roſuell, Florian, and the reſt, went whether themſelues pleaſed, and Dramufiande, after he had accompanied the Knights foure dayes together, in which time he ſawe the dread of perill to be paſt, he iourneyed thence to ſee his ſonne, and kéepe him company along in this conqueſt, becauſe his deſires were thereto inuited.
               Thus ſo many Knights ſtrayed after aduentures, encountring with diuers Ladies and Knights, that endured wrongs in many ſeuerall kindes, and were by their proweſſe right happily deliuered. But as the thrée Giants rode

thorow a Forreſt, they held an earneſt diſcourſe to each other, about a noyſe of hammers which they heard, and laboured (by ſeparating themſelues) to finde out the reaſon thereof: but all their endeuour was to no purpoſe, becauſe this aduenture appertained to neither of them.
               
                  Franardo not knowing whether he went, turned directly backe the ſame way he came, and meeting with his Father, the ſudden ioy in either at their encounter, ſmothered ſpéech a while in dumbe embraces: and riding to meet their other companions, to take the courſe before concluded on, they chaunced to heare the voyce of Almaroll, and ſo in ſhort while met altogether. But ſpeake we now of Florendos againe, who méeting by the way with no notable aduenture, arriued in a morning with his ſonne Oliuanto at Constantinople, where the Emperour, Don Edward, and diuers Knights being in company, welcomd them with no meane ioy and feaſting.
               
                  Florendos, perceiuing the Emperour his Father, and Don Edward of England to be both in ſound eſtate, was exceeding glad, in regard of the loue he bare to them, & good hope he had of his owne recouery.
               Paſſing on along the Pallace, his Mother Grydonia the Empreſſe, Miragarda his wife, and fayre Polynarda his ſiſter, came all and embraced him, each contending who ſhoulde expreſſe moſt affection in theyr kinde embraces. Theſe curteſies being growne to a milder kindnes, Florendos entreated the Empreſſe his Mother, that ſhee would vouchſafe to annoint the place, where the nerues of his leg were contracted numly together: which was no ſooner bathed with the oyntment, but his legge became as nimble as euer, each one reioycing at ſo pleaſing an accident.
               After that Oliuanto had taſted the kindnes of his grandmother, and the other Quéenes, hee went and fell on his knee before Auriana, who nothing aſhamed of the honeſt loue ſhe bare him, made the leſſe outward ſpare of her inward affection. When he had tolde her his mighty labour at the enchaunted Pallace, ſhe fetched a déepe inward ſigh,

as knowing that ſuch an enchauntment was neuer begun, (the King beeing a Magitian of ſo great experience, and able ſtill to renew it at his owne pleaſure) but that hee purpoſed ſeuere reuenge vpon Oliuanto.
               
               Nowe come we to Arguto, who was ready to die with very enuie, becauſe ſo many famous occaſions fell to Primaleon, and ſtil were concluded by his princely valour, hée happened into the Woode, ſo ſoone as the thrée (before named Giants) were departed thence on theyr iourney, and hearing what a noyſe the hammers made, drew directly toward the place: but euer as he attained neerer and néerer, ſo much the louder and more violent he heard the noiſe, making the very earth to tremble vnder him, yet his bold courage could not be diſmaied, but ſtill guided him onward, til hee came where hee might beholde a goodly Sepulcher or Tombe, which appeared by the principall image or figure made in the midſt thereof, to be prepared for ſome King, there to enioy his royall enterment.
               Now by reaſon the hammers noiſe exceeded in violence, his horſe (by no meanes) would endure it, whereby he was conſtrained to allight, and going néerer, found the place hemd in with a wall thrée pearches high, but not any doore to be diſcerned: as he ſtoode muſing heereon a while to himſelfe, vppon a ſuddaine a great gate opened in the Wall, whence iſſued foorth a Knight, armed from heade to foote in blacke Armour, with a ſhort Arming ſword in his hande, who ſpake to Arguto in this manner. Proud Knight, hard is thy hap in ſeeking this Sepulcher, which was made for Alexander the great, though hée dying ſoone after in Perſia, could not héere receiue his buriall. Neuertheleſſe, the wiſe Magitian that builded this place, was willing that no eye ſhould beholde it, as aſhamed of his owne mightie errour, that hee ſhould be croſt in the buriall of Alexander: therefore I ſée no other remedy, but thou muſt needes venture the combate with mee, and if it be thy happe to ouercome mee, thou wilt afterward wiſh that thy ſelfe had been vanquiſhed.
               
                  Theſe words daunted not the hart of Arguto, where valour and arrogancie ſhooke friendly handes together, but drawing forth his ſword, aſſailed the Knight, to get within the gate, leaſt it ſhould be ſhutte againſt him when hee had conquered his enemie, and many blowes he deliuered, but the other Knight was ſo quick and expeditious, as he could not faſten one ſtroke vppon him: neuertheleſſe, ſo manie thruſts were returned vppon him, as if hee had not broken them readily with his Shield of the Sun, the leaſt of them had béene of force to haue paſt quite thorow him.
               
                  Arguto could not deuiſe what to thinke of the Knights agilitie, which made all his labour ſort to no effect when he ſmote at him, nor did he deliuer any downe-right or ſiding blowes, but onely foynes and thruſts, which ſtill hée drew backe againe ſo farre as hee could, by reaſon they ſtoode ſo cloſe to each other, which prooued but little aduantageable to the ſtrange Knight, for now when he ſaw he could make no more thruſts, he was glad to ſmite any way as beſt hée might: whereof Arguto made no reckoning at all, becauſe his aduerſaries foynes had not hurt him, and theſe other ſtrokes fell ſo lightly on him, as if they had béen the blowes of a child, whereupon, letting fall his weapon, hee caught Arguto faſt about the middle, and drew him into the gate, where the Knight vaniſhing, left him ſhutte vp within the wall, and nowe no gate nor ſigne thereof, was any more to be ſéene.
               This rayſed ſome ſuſpition in Arguto, that there he was encloſed to be famiſhed to death, and walking about to ſee what might betide him, hee beheld a great yron doore to lift it ſelfe vp, which couered a déepe hollowe vaulte that went vnder the Tombe, and he looking into it, ſawe that it was full of rauenous Serpents, lifting vp theyr heads, as if they would preſently haue deuoured the Knight: hee not knowing in this caſe what was beſt to be done, a Lady appeared to him, looking foorth at a little window in the Sepulchers ſide, and thus ſhe ſpake. Sir Knight, héere art thou like to die with famine, except thou caſt thy ſelfe into this hollow

vault, where (except heauen be the more propitious to thée) thou art aſſured likewiſe to be eaten vp of Serpents.
               Theſe two extreame choiſes ſéemed ſomewhat difficult, a preſent diſpatch by gréedy Serpents, or a lingering death by hunger-ſtarued famiſhment, nor blame him, to conſider a while on ſo hard an election: to yeeld to famine, beſide the ſhame and infamie of the death, it would bereaue him of chriſtian and charitable patience, which is a mans chiefeſt glory in ſo fierce an agony: to caſt him ſelfe downe among the Serpents, therein appeared a manly reſolution, and the diſpatch of life would be immediate, but how reported of afterward, there the queſtion remained.
               Hauing thus conſulted with his ſilent thoughts, which were guilty rather of too much forwardnes, then any baſe feare or ſléepy cowardiſe, the ſelfe ſame courage ſeazed on his ſpirits, which neuer left his Graundfather Fryſoll, and without any dread of the very greateſt danger, he caſt him ſelfe at one leape into the Caue: No ſooner had hee thus done, but he found him ſelfe ſo writhd about with the Serpents, as he could ſtirre no part of him but his hands only, wherefore in ſuch a ſtrict diſtreſſe, he truſted onely to God and his manuall ſtrength, catching the Serpents faſt by the neckes, and wroong them about with ſuch facility and eaſe, as he had kild aboue an hundred of them very quickly, which could not but be great comfort to him, ſéeing his labour thriue ſo ſucceſſefully, and him ſelfe not ſo much moleſted as at his firſt entraunce: notwithſtanding, there was one Serpent excéeding ye reſt in greatnes, that had a crowne vpon his head, and he held the Knight to ſo buſie a taſke, as by no meanes he could get from him, yet did he often catch hand faſt on the Serpents necke, but all his ſtrength was not able enough to hold him.
               While this buſie conflict thus continued, the Knight which before had vaniſhed from his ſight, appeared now againe aboue at the mouth of ye Caue, hauing a goodly Launce in his hand, and there-with he gaue ſo many thruſts at our Champion, as he would not affoord him the very leaſt breathing

while. Nowe began Arguto to deſpaire of his life, thinking no meanes were left for him to eſcape, for ſtill as he turned to reſiſt the Serpent, that he ſhould not writhe his taile about his legges to ouerthrow him: the Knight aboue moleſted him mightily with the Launce, putting him often times to very hard extremities. The great Serpent holding out ſtil fiercely againſt him, at laſt caught the Knights head (helmet and all) in his mouth, ſo that Arguto was readie to fall: and had he not ſtifly graſpt the Serpents necke, whoſe filthy breath & ſauour well-neere choakt him, he had preſently falne down dead, but this gripe made the Serpent let goe his hold, & flying off from him to recouer breathing, the Knight aboue then layd at him with the Launce, ſo that he could ſtir no way without intricate trouble. At laſt, he thought it his beſt courſe to cloſe with the Serpent, and try if by méere ſtrength he could ouercome him, but ſoone did he repent ſo fond an opinion: for the Serpent ſuddainly ſpread out his wings, and wroong him ſo painfully betwéene their gripe, that he neuer felt the like agonie before.
               Neuertheleſſe, Arguto well remembring with himſelfe, that his life & honour ſtood now on the very laſt caſt, caught once more the Serpents neck betwéen his hands, & griping it with like ſtrength as he had done before, he quickly got looſe forth of his wings, which prooued no great aduantage to him, for the Knight with ye Launce as cruelly vexed him, and made him endure a miſerable torment, wherof to be rid one way or another, & either end his life or the aduenture, he got faſt hold of the Launce, which he puld vnto him with ſo maine violence, as (being wholy poſſeſſed of it) the Knight was gone againe, & not to be ſéene. When he ſaw ye Launce thus in his owne cuſtody, by which he had ſuffered ſo much paine & trauaile, his mind halfe perſwaded him, that in it remained ſome ſecret vertue▪ wherby ye enchauntment might be brought to concluſion, & beginning to ſmite the Serpents with the Launce which nowe came about him more furiouſly then before, ſo many of them as the Launce lighted vppon, preſently turned about and fell downe dead.

But the great crowned Serpent, making no account at all of his ſtrokes, put him to more perillous trouble then all the reſt did, therefore he was glad to wayte opportunities, and by many leapes and turnes to keepe ſtill aloofe, defending him ſelfe ſo well as hee coulde with the Launce, the length whereof was diuers times diſcommodious to him. At laſt, watching aduantage that might prooue to ſome purpoſe, euen when him ſelfe leaſt expected ſuch good luck, the Serpent (waxing weary of the blowes he receaued by the enchaunted Launce) giuing back a pretty diſtance from the Knight, made proffer of a ſuddaine leape vpon him, to catch his head once more in his mouth, & ſhooting forth his necke, lay gaping to expreſſe what he intended.
               
                  Arguto (loath to looſe time ſo apparantly offered) thruſt his Launce into the Serpents throate, and driuing it onward to his hart, tumbled him ouer and ouer ſtarke dead, which good occaſion (had it not thus happened,) hee might ſooner there haue loſt his owne life, then gained the victory againſt the Serpent.
               Being now ſore laboured and very weary, he ſate down and reſted him ſelfe vpon the dead Serpents, and not dreaming of any further danger to enſue, ſuddainly a Serpent gript him by the belly, and dragging him along downe a paire of ſtaires, his head hung ſtill vpward, receauing manie knockes and thumps all the way hee was thus caried. When he was come to the hethermoſt ſtep of all, he would haue riſen vp, but he could not deuiſe how, when preſently there came a ſauage man, with a ſtrange faſhioned ſword, ready drawne in his hand, and ſmiting a mighty blowe a thwart the Serpent, ſeuerd it in ſunder iuſt in the midſt: but Arguto was almoſt dead with his dragging downe the ſtaires, and doubtleſſe had periſhed, but that his good Armour did very much ſted him, but being deliuered from ſo painfull a griping, he ſtarted vp on his féete, preparing his ſworde to encounter with the ſauage man, who vſing no words at all, but making ſignes to haue him ſtand on his beſt guard, they buckled cloſe together, Arguto wounding

the ſauage man in many parts of his body, becauſe he had no ſkill in defending him ſelfe, nor diuers times could hardlie kéepe vp on his féete, which made Arguto the more hopefull of victory, and ſtepping vpon him at an aduantage, offered to haue ſlaine him: but that the firſt Knight came again crying to him, that he ſhould hold his hand and not kill him, becauſe of his blood would ariſe vp more Serpents, then all thoſe he had ſlaine before in the vault.
               
                  Arguto preſently drew back his ſword, & deuiſing how he might otherwiſe ouercome him, ſaw fixed in the marble wall of the Caue, a great Ring of yron, with a long chaine hanging downe and faſtened thereto, which he immediatly imagined, was purpoſely kept there to binde this furie. With much a-doe he haled him to it, where at length hee bound him very ſtrongly, & finding no other encombrance to hinder him, he came forth of the Caue, on the other ſide of the Sepulcher, which he perceaued to be fairer and richer then that he had firſt ſéene.
               Héere began he now to glut his gréedy eye, with ſight of the ſeuerall ſtatues in order, which declared the admirable deedes of Alexander: firſt, how he fought with Darius King of Perſia, and ouercame him: next, his battaile with King Porus of India: as alſo his artificiall paſſage of the Riuer Indus. And as hee ſtoode noting a very dangerous hazard, which happened to him at a Caſtell where he fought: hee heard him ſelfe called by his name, and turning to ſee who was ſo familiar with him, hee eſpied cloſe by him two ſtrange Monſters, hauing the heads and breaſts of a Viper, and all their other parts like to a Lyon, except the clawes, which rather ſéemed like the tallants of a Griffen. Theſe two catching faſt holde with their téeth on his arme, gript him ſo ſtrictly, as for a good while he could hardly ſtir himſelfe: but when they ſaw that he ſhrunk no more, neither fell downe (as they expected) they let goe their hold, and he recouering quickly the Launce, accounting it his beſt weapon to fight with againſt them, layde at each of them with ſuch ſkill & readines, as if he had not that day béene wearied

at all. In ſhort time he had ſo wounded both the Monſters, that they (as their lateſt refuge and helpe) got on each ſide ſo néere him, that riſing together on their hinder féete, they faſtened their former fangs about him, and their tallants ſo pierced through the cloſing of his Armour, as thereby he receaued ſixe little hurts, and loſt the benefit of his Launce, wherefore a while he muſt make vſe of his hands, catching either of them ſo ſtrongly by the legges, and bending them violently (as if he meant to breake them) made them at laſt to giue him liberty, when perceauing he could not regaine his Launce, he drew forth his ſword, where-with defending him ſelfe, more then offending the Monſters, he trauerſed about a while, as ayming at the likelieſt means for victory. Suddainly he apprehended this reſolution, eyther to make a ſpéedy diſpatch of his life, or by one way or another conclude his enterpriſe, where-vpon, he fell downe flat on his back, with his ſword in the one hand, and his dagger in the other, that the Monſters might imagine him to be fully vanquiſhed. Which ſorting to his expectation, & they ſtepping ouer him to teare him with their tallants, he found his hope almoſt quite fruſtrated, for ſtabbing at their bellies, which he ſuppoſed to be tender, he found that their ſkinnes were of exceeding ſound proofe, till chauncing at laſt vpon the nauell, he made ſuch a large inciſion with his ſword, as the bowels of one of them dropt out on the ground, and the other ſled away he could not tell whether.
               So ſoone as the Monſter was thus fied and gone, all the ſeuerall Statues began to mooue and ſtir, eſpecially that of Alexander the great, framing ſuch actions and comely ieſtures, cach after his Countrie quality and faſhion, as if they expreſſed ſignes of thankfulnes to him, which (deſpight the Magitians vtmoſt malice) they ſtill continued, to his no 
                     〈◊〉
                   wonder and admiration.
               Heereby Arguto vnderſtood, that the aduenture was now fully concluded, whereof his thoughts growing greatlie proud, he thus reſolued, that this his conqueſt was of as much fame and glory, as Primaleons was at the Ile of Carderia:
                  
then turning him about, the Knight that was the Magitian, and could not die while the enchauntment endured, appeared before him very ſadly, & in regard of the immediate death he now expected, he ſpake vnto him in this manner. Sir Knight, well mayſt thou vaunt of the worthieſt enterpriſe, that any Knight errant durſt euer vndertake, yet nowe by thée right nobly accompliſhed: for I am the man that made this Sepulcher, hoping to haue had ye whole world wonder at it, but errour beguild me, and baffuld the height of my chiefeſt hopes, for Alexander dying ſo farre hence, and his abſolute rule deuided into foure faire Monarchies, I forthwith framed this enchauntment, to the end no mortall eye might euer behold it. But thou art come, and haſt diſappointed my determination, which, as it cuts the threed of my life, ſo ſhall it inflict this puniſhment vpon thée, that thou ſhalt neuer haue her whom thy heart longs moſt after. And this (beſide) I tell thée that all my deſſignment is not fruſtrated by thée, for in this Tombe ſhall be buried the only vertuous and renowmed Emperour, that euer the future ages ſhall affoord: hauing thus ſpoken, he died, and immediatly the noiſe of Hammers ceaſed.
               
                  Arguto was diſpleaſed at this ſad prognoſtication concerning his Loue, but ſuch was his preſent ioy for his victorie, as hee ſuffered other thoughts the eaſier to paſſe his remembrance: and ſearching further about the Sepulcher, at laſt he eſpied two huge Giants of yron, with each a mightie Hammer in his hand, whereby he gathered, that their knocking had maintained the enchauntment. So finding nothing elſe there to doo for him, he prepared to part thence, when preſently he beheld his Squire to enter bringing him ſuch prouiſion as he could get, becauſe he thought his Lord had neede of refreſhing: when the Squire had bound vp his wounds receaued in the fight, they ſate downe to eate, and afterward betooke them ſelues to reſt, where a while wee muſt leaue them, returning nowe to Palmerin and Primaleon.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. LXII. Howe Palmerin (ſo ſoone as his hurts were healed) went ſtraite to Constantinople: And howe Primaleon went to the Perillous Ile, and what happed afterward, for deliuerie of the wizzard Aliarte.
               
               
                  
                     PAlmerin, hauing recouered his health in ſuch manner, that hee was well able to weare his Armour, tooke a kinde fare-well of his Nephew Primaleon, and parted alone from him, very much diſcontented in his minde, to ſée the only palme of valour (which hee ſuppoſed to be borne by none but himſelfe) tranſ-ferred nowe vnto another, which made him deſirous once more to approoue his Nephew, for a more abſolute and cléere diſtinguiſhment, which of them was moſt to be eſtéemed in chiualrie: for the Knights (in thoſe times) were ſo addicted to fame and reputation, that (for purchaſe thereof,) they reſpected neither parentage, friendſhip, nor ought elſe whatſoeuer.
               In theſe diſtempred thoughts, he iournied toward Constantinople, where béeing arriued, he was by the Emperour, and all the other great Lords and Princeſſes ſo louinglie welcommed, as his noble vertues right worthily merrited: but more eſpecially, and indeede (as it ought to be) his wife entertained him with all gracious kindneſſe, acquainting him now with an important matter, which (at his late ſecrete being there) was thought meete to be concealed, I meane the trechery of Tamerco, and how far hee preuailed in her carriage thence, which raiſed ſuch a wrathful ſpleene in Palmerin, as preſentlie he determined Tamercoes death.

And ſéeing him by chaunce paſſe thorow the Hall, he ranne vpon him with his weapon drawne, where (but that his Coſin Oltrando ſtept ſuddenly betwéene them, of whoſe well-deſeruing Palmerin made great regard,) Tamercoes life had there perriſhed: and this happened to be the occaſion, that mooued theſe two Indians to practiſe theyr flight thence, as héereafter more at large ſhall be declared.
               Leaue wee Palmerin awhile héere to eaſe and reſt himſelfe, and let vs ſpeake now of Primaleon, who iournying toward the Perillous Ile, and riding the way which to himſelfe ſéemed moſt conuenient, at the entrance of a Wood he eſpied Dorina, as attending there for him, whereof he was not a little ioyfull, becauſe by her he might compaſſe the better meanes, in vnderſtanding what appertained to the enchauntment, wherein the wiſe Aliarte was detained, which indéede was of ſuch powerfull ſtrength, as (without her helpe) he could neuer haue compaſſed the end thereof.
               
                  Dorina riding along with him, fell into this diſcourſing, that it beſt became him now, to omit all other néedleſſe occaſions, and ride directly to the Ile whereas Aliarte was impriſoned, to ioyne there with happy opportunitie, while Druſa Velonna, (beeing now elſe-where very ſeriouſly buſied,) could not interpoſe herſelfe to croſſe his purpoſe. So riding on along the Sea-coaſt, they came at laſt to a Caſtell there builded on the ſhoare, where they made a newe deuiſed kinde of boate, with a broade bottome, two large paces in widenes, the ſides very low, for ſuch imployment as ſhall be reported: then prouiding himſelfe of hammers, and grapling yrons to open the ſtrong made Cage, as alſo certaine great ſharpe hookes, made after no common or ordinarie manner, with great ſtrong ropes faſt knit 
                     〈◊〉
                   them, hauing put all his prouiſion aboard, and leau
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     
                        •
                     
                     rina at the Caſtell, away hee went in his boa
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   his no little wonder) did cut through the 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  
                  ding ſwiftnes, Primaleon béeing ſo 
                     〈…〉
                   hardly could he containe himſel
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   euen as if he had already ſet 
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               
                  The learned Wizzard, knowing by vertue of his ſkill, how neere the houre of his deliuerance drewe, had (in this time of his aboade there) called vnto ye people of the Iland, and giuen them aduiſe to build a little Tower, neere to the rockie cliffe where the yron Cage hung, in expectation of ſome ſucceſſe that was to enſue, whereto they yéelded, and accordingly performd it.
               
                  Primaleon, who thought hee ſhould neuer come ſoone enough to this labour, when (a farre off) he had a ſight of the Cage, went on the merrier, and being come within a bowſhoote of it, hee ſuddenly felt vnderneath his boate, ſomewhat reſembling a huge great Fiſh, that earneſtly laboured to ouer-turne it: and ſome-time he ſaw it lifted ſo high on the one ſide, that he verily thought it would haue ſuncke to the bottome, neuertheleſſe, his minde ſtill continued inuinſible, and onward went the boate, vntill it attained ſo neere to the Cage, that hee caſting foorth one of his corded hookes, by good hap it faſtened & caught hold on the Cage, whereat Aliarte became a little diſcomforted, fearing leaſt the violent current of the water, would driue the boate away ſo mainely in the ſtreame, yt the Cage thereby might be drawne into the Sea, and ſo they both be drowned together.
               
                  Primaleon, whoſe braine was ſome-what giddied, and his ſtomack likewiſe ſickiſhly altered, with the fogge and damp of this troubled water, ſitting downe to reſt himſelfe awhile, ſuddenly beheld in the ſtearne of his boate, an olde aged man, ſo weake and féeble in outward appearance, as if each minute he ſhould giue vp the ghoſt: he ſate & laughed a pretty while at Primaleon, who (though with kind cō
                  
                  
                     •
                   of his yeeres) did the like at him, ſaying within him 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  t if there came no greater reſiſtance, right ſoone 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  he ſet at libertie. Scorning to offer iniury to 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  we the ſtearne of the boate (as if the old 
                     〈…〉
                   extremitie of weight) to ſinck vn
                  
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  ereof prouoking his patience, 
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               
                  What wilt thou doo, thou fooliſh olde man? Forbeare to ſinck my boate, leaſt I take thée by the beard, and caſt thee head-long into the Iland. This beard of mine, (anſwered the olde man) ſhall put thée to more paine then thou art aware of, and riſing vp againſt him, he ſpredde his beard abroade in ſuch a large compaſſe, that twiſe the length of a mans arme it equalled euery way, and looke whereſoeuer it toucht Primaleon, it ſette his Armour on fire in the ſame place, which fire hauing continued ſome little ſpace, would then againe extinguiſh of it ſelfe.
               The Knight heereat grew greatly diſpleaſed, yet reputed it no leſſe then baſeſt villanie, to draw his ſword on an aged man, and flight (on the contrary) was as ſhameful: wherfore taking vp a little club that lay by him, and there-with bearing backe his beard when he offerd it toward him, the old man at length was ſo mad angry, that leaping vppon Primaleons backe, he wound his long beard about his neck, and ſet ſuch a flame about his head, that the olde man ſtarting from him for ſafetie of himſelfe, left the Knight in ſuch a wonderfull perrill, as Aliarte himſelfe was fearefull of his death. But the flame being extinct, and Primaleon wel perceiuing that all the olde mans power conſiſted in his beard, he drew his ſword, and there-with cut it cloſe by his chinne, where-upon the olde man fell downe bereft of his ſences, and ye fire (which in this bickering had caught hold on his Armour) immediatly vaniſhed.
               Beeing thus at libertie from any impeachment, he caſt out another corded hooke, which likewiſe linckt faſt about abarre of the Cage, ſo that now by helpe of both the ropes, hee could drawe himſelfe the néerer to it: but as hee buſily thus beſtowed his time, the great Fiſh, which at firſt made proffer of ouer-turning the boate, leapt now into it, lading it with ſuch an incredible poyſe, that euery minute it ſtoode vpon the ſincking. The Fiſh opening a wide huge mouth, ſwallowed vp the old man aliue & luſtie, which ſome-what terrifying the thoughts of Primaleon, (ſéeing himſelfe in ſo helpleſſe a place, where hee knew not how to imploy his

paines, but either he muſt ouercome that monſtrous Fiſh, or ſerue for foode to his vnſatiable mawe, or elſe be drowned by his boates ſinking) made him ſtep forward with his prepared weapon, deliuering many ſharpe ſtrokes at the Fiſhes mouth, which ſtill kept wide open as ready to deuoure him, and albeit he vſed his vttermoſt force, yet ſuch was the Fiſhes ſtrong preſſure vpon him, that (in deſpight of what ſoeuer he could doo) he ſwallowed him vp, as before he did the old man, and he felt ſuch pinching gripes in his throats paſſage, as now he could build on no aſſurance of life. Neuertheleſſe, by the Knights mighty ſtirring and ſtriking about him, at laſt he grapled holde on the olde mans chinne againe, which lay againſt the very tendreſt part of the Fiſhes belly, and there the Knight ſo labourd with his dagger, that at laſt he made a large wide paſſage, out at which hee ſlipt very eaſily, and after him came foorth a Beaſt ſomewhat bigger then a dogge, but of ſuch a ſtrange deformed ſhape, as he could not imagine of what kinde he was: this beaſt caught the great Fiſh by one of his finnes, and caſt him out of the Boate into the water, but ſuch was the danger of the Boate in the Fiſhes turning ouer, that the Boate was ready to ſinke flat downe.
               This feare beeing ouer-blowne, and the Boate in better eſtate of ſtayedneſſe, the beaſt began proudly to walke vp and downe, and Primaleon ſtill expecting when he ſhould be aſſayled, was not vnready in the like to the beaſt, and blowes he felt to light vppon him ſelfe, but euer when hee returned requitall, he ſawe the beaſt to leape euery where about him, but no ſtroke of his to faſten vppon him: ſo that Primaleon (very much wearied with labouring thus in vaine) the more willingly deſired to ſitte downe and reſt him, but then the beaſt leapt very ſwiftly about him, and the beaſt hauing the pawes of a Lyon, as alſo the tuſhes of a wilde Boare, had rent off ſome part of his Armour beneath, and with his téeth hurt him vppon the right thigh. The ſtrife thus continued betwéene them for two houres ſpace, with no meane vexation and trouble to Primaleon,
                  
who perceauing the beaſt to offende him ſo harmfully with his teeth and pawes: concluded vpon a quick ſpeedy diſpatch of life, or elſe to break through the Ice of the dangerous enterpriſe. Which he could not accompliſh while he kept vppon his féet, wherefore he fell flat on his back all a-long, expecting when the beaſt ſhould offer to make his ſeazure to kill him. As he thus lay awayting his aduantage, with no ſilly care to auoyde the beaſts dangerous proffers, he gaue a foorth-right thruſt with his ſword, which happening full into the beaſts mouth, cutte quite in ſunder his longeſt teeth, and many of the other beſide, ſo that they falling out of his mouth on the ground, and the beaſt thus deſpoyled of his chiefeſt Armour, with his feet kept a treading on the throat of Primaleon, wounding him in diuers places very daungerouſly. But becauſe hee ſcorned to be ſlaine in ſo ſeruile a manner (his hopes thereby ayming at much better ſucceſſe) he recouered footing againe, making many gallant aſſaults for diſpatch of ye beaſt, who being defeated of his teeth, could not annoy him ſo much as he did before: for nowe his beſt fight conſiſted in his formoſt feete, which the beaſt lifting vp both together, to ſeaze on the Knight withall, with a glenting ſtroke he ſmote them off both together, which making the body to réele about confuſedly, at laſt it tumbled into the water. Now began the Sea to ſwell in ſuch ſort, that the boat was driuen neere to the Rock, and was iuſt vnder the Cage of Aliarte.
               
               Heere giue me leaue to tell you, that the wizzard himſelfe ſtood now doubtfull of two apparant perils, one of them, leaſt the rough winds agitation ſhould breake the Cage againſt the Rock, mooued by the continuall force vpon the water: the other, leaſt the boate ſhould ſtrike ſo ſtrongly againſt it, as (driuing it from the fixed hold) might preſently drown it: whereupon, Aliarte cried out to Primaleon, with his hooks & ropes to hold off a while, becauſe the laſt proof remained yet vnattempted, & that (perhaps) wold fal out to be ye worſt of al. Primaleon, who could not but be wondrouſly weary with ſo long labour, being now ſcarſe able to fetch his breath, ſate

downe to reſt himſelfe a little: but fearing leaſt his wounds would grow ſtarke and chillie, he iudgd it better for him to walke vp and downe the boate, his minde ſtill ſeriouſly labourd & buſied, how he ſhould get the Cage from the cliffe. So long his thoughts were thus imployed, till (had not Aliarte cryed out the ſooner to him, to beware of a Monſter of the Sea, which ſoftly had ſtolne vp into the boate) he had beene pluckt backward into the water: but turning himſelfe vpon this warning, he beheld the ſtrangeſt forme and ſhape, that euer any man had ſeene before: nor was this any faigned Monſter, but a meere abortiue of ye Sea, which Druſa Velonna (by her arte) had brought out of the wideſt Seas, to prohibite the freedome of Aliarte by any man.
               This ſtrange Sea-monſter, béeing indeede called a Tritone, to wit, a man (after the Sea-kinde) compoſed of fleſh and fiſh in his ſeuerall ſubſtances, came ſternely vpon him, graſping him ſo ſtrongly betweene his armes, with flings and wreſtlings euery way, that Primaleon hardlie knewe howe to helpe him ſelfe, the Monſter ſtill dragging him to the boates ſide, ſtrugling very hardly to throw him ouerboorde, and the boate kept ſuch a dauncing on euery ſide, as Primaleon could hardly ſtand vpon his féete.
               Hée not knowing in this extremitie what was beſt to be done, perceiued the long beard which he cut from the olde man, to grow vppon the chinne of the Monſter, wheron he tooke faſt hold, and dragd him about the boate after him in ſuch manner, that ſeeing he vſed no furder contention, hee caſt off the Monſter to his owne libertie: whereuppon, becauſe he would come no more in ſo ſtrict handling, hee lay ſtill a while very ſeruilely, but ſtarted vp afterward verie quicke and ſprightly, and leaping about him, to catch him within the cōpaſſe of his beard, the Knight as nimbly kept aloofe off from him, ſo that all the Monſters ſlights prooued but in vaine.
               Now becauſe this conflict ſhewed not as yet, on which ſide the victory was likelieſt to fall, a crimo
                     •
                   bluſh of ſhame dyed Primaleons chéekes, yt his labour prooued fruitleſſe,

when his hart aſſured him of happy ſucceſſe: for hee had wounded the Triton in diuers parts of his body, which made his furie to raiſe it ſelfe with the greater violence, being nothing elſe indeede, but the meere induction to his death enſuing. And let me tell ye withall, that our Champions lauiſh expence of his blood, abated his courage and very much weakened him, ſo that while the Monſter drew backe to breathe, he (as gladly) leaned on his ſword to enioy a little reſt.
               As thus he ſtoode, a ſudden flawe of the Sea ſmote the boate againſt the rocke, and made the ſterne end to ſplit a little, which ruſh of the boate caſting Primaleon backward, the Monſter caught him by the feete, dragging him along ſo rudely and ſpéedily, that hauing gotten him halfe out of the boate, the Monſter leapt into the water, ſtill holding him faſt by the feete, but the weight of his body ſo counterpo
                     •
                  zd the Monſters tugging, that he could not hale him out into the Sea. Primaleon, beholding the extremitie of his perrill, ſtrugled toward the ropes that held the hookes faſt in the Cage, and catching holde of them, one of them (to which hee moſt of all truſted) looſed in the knot, and ſo caſt him quite out of the boate into the Sea, where beeing heauily loaden with his Armour, he would not forgoe the cord, but kept it ſtill in his hand: for a man when hee is in the greateſt perrill, will neuer faile in ſome part of hope, hauing any thing that may but appeare to ſted him.
               When the Monſter ſaw him thus in the water, he came violently vppon him, & caſting his armes about him, ſtroue (all hee might) to diue and drowne him: but men (neereſt death) being moſt couetous of life, make what meanes they may to auoyde the detriment, ſo did Primaleon in this deſperate agonie, for ſuddenly hee tooke the Monſter by the beard, and getting aloft vppon him, kept him ſtrongly vnderneath him, then faſtening the cord about his girdle, and afterward to the ſide of the boate, hee drew foorth hi
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  
                  ger, and wounded the Monſter in ſo many ſeuerall p
                     •
                  , that there he quite kild him.
               
                  But nowe came the greateſt danger of all, for the Monſter dying, gript him the more ſtrongly betwéen his armes, and as he ſuncke, he drewe him downe likewiſe, where it had béene impoſſible for him to haue eſcapt, but by the cord at hs girdle faſtened to the boate, whereby (with much adoe) he got vp againe, and then the Boate proued his greateſt enemie, for his owne weight had almoſt ouer-turnd it vppon him, beſide, his wounds wexed ſtiffe and feſtering, when, euen as (by méere weaknes) his hold was like to deceiue him, there came a mightie billow of the Sea, which ſkanſing the heauier ſide of the boate, threw him the eaſier iuſt into the midſt of it, where finding himſelfe frée from any perrill, he prayſed God on his knees, for deliuering him out of ſo manifeſt a danger.
               No ſooner was the Monſter ſuncke into the Sea, and he vppon his feete within the boate, but the ſtorme and tempeſt immediatly ceaſſed, and the enchauntment béeing ended, the wiſe Aliarte (by his ſkill) cauſed a great fire to flame in the boate, which ſeruing as a warning to Dorina that now the aduenture was accompliſhed, ſhee came preſently in a little Skiffe, and in ſhort while was with Primaleon, where binding vp the wounds he had receiued, and pouring in oyles of precious ſoueraigntie, they ſate downe and reſted after this long labour.
            
            
               CHAP. LXIII. Heere followeth the deliuerance of the wiſe Aliarte, and vvhat Druſa Velonna did in hinderaunce thereof.
               
                  THE people of the Iland, hauing noated the angry rough windes, and mightie tempeſt on the Sea, remained in hourely expectation, what would enſue concerning Aliarte: and albeit he had cauſed them to build the tower,

aſſured them of his ſpéedie deliuerance, yet not one of them durſt enter into ſuch hardines, as to come and beholde the proſecution of the act. But when they ſawe the ayre more mildly calmed, and no rough ſtormes were ſtirring abroad, then they ranne forth vppon the Rocke, and others of them came thether with a faire goodly Shippe, to try if now they could attaine to the Cage. The Ship aroſe in ſuch a height, that her ſides came cloſe to the Cage, whereby Primaleon the eaſier compaſſed, to looſe the holde that faſtned it to the Rocke, labouring with his hookes and hammers, till at laſt it was at perfect libertie: to the no little ioy of the people, which they expreſſed by loude ſhoutes and chéerefull acclamations, then went they all vpon the ſhoare, carrying (by Aliarts direction) the Cage along with them.
               
                  Druſa Velonna, was all this while very buſily imploied, in recouering Tirrena by enchauntment from Constantinople, for ſhe being now growne great with child, the Sorcereſſe intended, to beſtowe the Kingdome of Paraz vppon the infant, as in right diſcent from his Father Dirdan, and therby to bring a freſh affliction vpon the Chriſtians. This made her ye leſſe reſpectiue of Aliarts impriſonment, which queſtionleſſe ſhe had elſe further prolonged, if not hindered Dorina in the déede dooing. But when by her Arte ſhe was informed, that her enemy enioyed his full fréedome and libertie, in leſſe then foure houres ſhee conuayed herſelfe to the Perillous Ile, where ſhée beheld him to be newly arriued with Primaleon, who hauing put off his Armour, becauſe his hurts were greatly offenſiue to him, by Aliarte hée was layd in a ſumptuous Litter, and ſo carried along toward the Citty.
               
                  Velonna, to croſſe them in theyr courſe, and to kéepe Aliarte from comming where his bookes were, wrought a very ſtrange ſtratageme: for ſhee ſlung a certaine powder among the people, which droue them into an immediat error of oppinion, that Aliarte and Primaleon were two huge fierce Giants, and came trechorouſly to take ſeazure on the Iland, which made them fall to furious reſiſtance, & there

they had béene murthered among them, but that Seraſto the Sonne of Argentao, who (with diuers other that had felt none of this helliſh powder, and therefore were frée from ſo groſſe a conceit) came and appeaſed theyr violence, ſhutting vp many of them in a new erected Tower, and ſafelie conuaying the other from them.
               When Druſa Velonna ſawe her laſt hope thus fruſtrated, fearing leaſt Aliarte ſhould ſeaze vpon her, ſhée ſpeedily fledde thence to Paraz, where ſhée attended for the Childes creation in the Kingdome: & ſhee béeing thus gone thence, the enchauntment of the powder ceaſſed, and the people plainly perceiuing theyr errour, humbly deſired pardon of theyr Lord, who well vnderſtanding what had béene done, could not but hold them iuſtly excuſed.
               
                  Primaleon béeing brought to the Cittie, ſuch ſoueraigne medicines were applyed to his woundes, as within tenne dayes he was perfectly cured, in all which time, Aliarte intreated him right nobly and kindly, knowing how helpfull his valour would prooue to all Chriſtendome.
               During theſe dayes of theyr repoſe, Aliarte peruſing his Bookes of arte, vſed a little more circumſpection then before hée had doone, and perceiuing that Primaleon deſired nothing more, then his help in the fréedome of his faire loue Victoria, hee reſolued to aſſiſt him: but hée did not remember, that the time yet was contrary to ſuch an attempt, which ſhould with greater care haue béene reſpected. But leaue we them awhile, and come nowe to Floraman, who intending to worke wonders for the loue of Clariana, became on a ſudden quite changed and altered.
            
            
               
               CHAP. LXIIII. Howe Floraman ſeeing himſelfe but ſlenderly regarded by Clariana, became enamoured of the fayre Princeſſe Victoria, concluding to goe & deliuer her out of the enchaunted Pallace.
               
                  
                     FLoraman, hauing recouered at one inſtant, both his hurts receiued in the fore-remembred battailes, and alſo forgetfulnes of his fruitleſſe loue to Altea, perceiuing him-ſelfe to be deſpiſed by Clariana, who was alreadie married to Guarino: became as a man méerly deſperate, and ſuddenly departed with Dragonalte from Constantinople, but vſed not one word all the way as he rode, whereat Dragonalte meruailing not a little, and wearie of ſo vnſociable a companion, letting him alone (for the firſt day) in this ſullen humour, the next morning he began with him in this manner.
               Lord Floraman, what the reaſon may be of your mindes moleſtation, I can neither geſſe, nor doo couet to knowe, onely this I am certaine of, that if any amourous paſſion haue ſurprizde yée, another mans company will ſcarce be pleaſing to yee, therefore, when it ſhall ſeeme good to you to trauaile alone, I will ſhape my courſe ſome other way, as lothe to impeach your amourous priuacies.
               
                  Floraman, becauſe he would not be offenſiue to his friend, hauing (vnwillingly) endured the King of Nauaraes companie ſo long, returned him this aunſwere. Royall Lord, my hard fortune is ſuch, as I cannot kéepe euen quarter of kindneſſe with my friendes, onely through an inward ſecrete vexation: therefore, not to be burdenous to you or my ſelfe, you may (at your pleaſure) diſpoſe of your owne trauaile,

and let me and melancholly wander alone together. Dragonalte being of good apprehenſion, quickly conceaued the intent of Floraman, where-vpon, turning his Horſe, and bidding him very kindly adiewe, he rode away from him, croſſing many Countries and Prouinces, without any accident worthy rehearſall, till at length he came home to his owne Kingdome of Nauara.
               
               
                  Floraman ſeeing him ſelfe left thus alone, alighted from his Horſe, and ſitting downe vnder a faire ſpreading Oake, commaunding his Squire to walke aloofe off: he began to meditate with him ſelfe, by what meanes he might ſooneſt compaſſe his owne death, but with ſome high and apparant example, that his fatall hap grewe onely by loue. Among infinite various diſcourſings with him ſelfe, at laſt his capricious humour thus reſolued, to become enamoured of the faire young Lady Victoria: not with any hope of euer compaſſing his affection, but to haſten the ſpéedier occaſion of his death. For right well he knew, how déerely the ſecond Primaleon loued her, and Arguto likewiſe as vehement in his choiſe: both of which beeing ſo famous for Armes, hee might the ſooner be ſlaine by one of them. Vpon this determination, he returned ſecretly to Constantinople, where (in the Garden belonging to the Princeſſe Flerida) hung the liuely counterfeite of Victoria: which he earneſtly gazing vpon, grew ſo déepely enamoured of, as his former intent of death was quite abandoned, and his loue to her ſo addicted, that now (in hope of enioying her) he more eſpecially deſired to liue. Thus turmoyld in loues labourinth, he cloſely departed the Citty againe, and riding along through vnfrequented Plaines and Forreſts: at laſt he came to the Sea ſide, where he eſpied a ſmall Barque dauncing on the billowes, as if it purpoſely ſtayed there in expectation of him. His melancholly thoughts ſtill guiding him on, hee ſawe a Lady ſtanding on the Ships beake head, whoſe lookes much reſembled his Altea: but hee hauing nowe let paſſe her remembrance, ſéeing her wafting him toward her with her hand, made what haſt he could thether, which ſhée beholding,

immediatlie vaniſhed. Floraman ſomewhat abaſhed at this ſtrange augurie, began to imagine, that he was called thether to die: but his amorous paſſions, tranſporting him with deſire to finde out Victoria, quickly rid his braine of this ſuſpition. Where vpon, aduauncing him ſelfe néerer to the Barque, he ſtept into it, when preſently it launched off from the ſhoare, with an eaſie gentle gale of winde, and ſo ſtruck vp into the maine Sea.
               Then ſuddainely happened a violent tempeſt, which made him euery minute in daunger of periſhing: but his minde deſpiſing all perill whatſoeuer, cheared his hope in the very ſharpeſt agony, and the Barque ioyned at length cloſe to a vaſt mountaine. Where ſtepping forth armed as he was, he went on foote vp ſuch an high aſcending hill, that ſlipping oftentimes vpon the ſmooth ſtones, hee ſlid downe often backward, & made very ſlender riddance of his way. This kind of labour laſted him all that day, with much vexation, & but to little purpoſe, as ſéeming that he ſhould neuer attaine the height of the hill: ſo, night ouer-taking him, he made a better ſupper of ſad conceites, then any other viands which could content him: his mind ſtill ayming at nothing elſe, but how he might ſooneſt finde the faire Lady, and then (if ſhe likewiſe diſdained to loue him) to practiſe ſome preſent diſpatch of his life, but with a memorable teſtimonie, that he died for loue. The morning ſhaking off his dumpiſh cogitations, he coaſted along the ſide of the mountaine, and came at laſt to a pretty large Plaine, which round was engirt with big riſing hils, & in the midſt thereof ſtoode a wonderfull goodly Pallace. Now albeit he had neuer ſéene this place before, yet he called to remembrance, ſome former report of ye Princeſſe Leonarda, & that (in all reſpects like this) ſuch another was the Pallace belonging to Quéene Melia: heereupon, his hart began to leape with conceite of ioy, & he held it as a matter moſt certaine, that here the Lady Victoria was enchaunted.
               As he directed his courſe on toward ye Pallace, he beheld a Knight, with two goodly blood-hounds walking by him,

come (as it were) with intent to méete him, and ſuddainly the Hounds began to runne toward him, where doubtleſſe (being hunger-ſtarued & gréedy) they had torne him in péeces: but that the Knight, (who indéede was Druſa Velonna thus tranſ-formed, to guide Floraman into ye Pallace without any combate,) reclaimed them back, and then ſtepping to him, he vſed theſe or the very like ſpéeches. Sir Knight, I ſée that you are a ſtraunger in theſe parts, wherefore, if loue haue béen your conducter hether, eſpecially to the Lady encloſed in this Pallace: you may account it as no meane fortune, yt it is your good hap to méete with me, who bids you boldly to reſt aſſured, that here is ye choiſeſt beauty enchaunted, which euer mortall eye as yet hath lookt vpon, therfore, if it pleaſe you to goe along with me, your owne eyes ſhall be apparant witneſſes, that the world containes not a comparable beauty.
               
                  Floraman being fully confirmed in opinion, that it was the faire Lady Victoria, without any further protracting of time, followed the guidance of the Knight, & he was no ſooner entred the Pallace, but hauing a ſight of Victoriaes perſon, he became (by power of the enchauntment) ſo iealous of her, as he would néeds vndertake ye Iouſt, againſt any that durſt preſume to come thether. But quickly was ſhe rapt againe from his ſight, which enflamed his deſire with ye greater vehemencie, & bound him moſt officiouſly to her ſeruice. But leaue we him, and come againe vnto Arguto, who hauing vnderſtood in his trauaile, of diuers matters cōcerning Druſa Velonna, & that the beautifull Lady Victoria remained enchaunted, where the Princeſſe Leonardo had béene before impriſoned, hearing alſo, that Primaleon had deliuered Aliarte out of the yron Cage, & fearing leaſt by the helpe a counſell of him, he would likewiſe enfranchiſe the Lady Victoria: he purpoſed to iourney thether before him, hoping that Fortune would be as furtherous to him in his loue, as ſhe was renowned by moſt part of his enterpriſes. Being thus reſolued, he trauailed (according to ſuch informations as were giuen him) for his ſpéedier attaining to the Pallace of Quéene Melia.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. LXV. How Arguto arriued by ſtrange occaſion, at the Pallace belonging to the faire Queene Melia, & how he remained there enchaunted.
               
                  
                     DRuſa Velonna, awayting all poſſible meanes ſtill to diſturbe the Chriſtians, wrought (by her Art) this trauaile of Arguto into thoſe parts, to the end that when Primaleon ſhoulde happen thether, they might be the death of one another: for Arguto was of ſuch dauntleſſe valour, that if he might compaſſe the death of Primaleon, he cared not on what deſperate termes his owne life ſtoode. Being then thus ſummoned to the ſearch of Victoria, and he loath to looſe any time in vaine, directed his courſe as before you haue heard, and riding through a queachie thicke Wood, an angry wilde Beare came mainely againſt him, as meaning to ſtaunch his hunger vpon him: but he hauing his Launce ſtill ready charged, defended him ſelfe with ſuch ſkill and manhoode, as the Beare (not daring to endure his blowes) began to runne from him a ſoftly pace, euen as if (through méere wearineſſe) hee coulde ſpéede no faſter. Arguto purſued the track of the Beare, till it brought him directly to the Sea ſide, where the beaſt ſtill holding his courſe a-long, met by chaunce with a Damoſell vppon the way, whom hee catching vp betwéene his pawes, ranne with her into a little Pynace, which lay at Ankor there hard by the riuage.
               No ſooner had the Beare caried his pray a boord, but the Pynace launched (of it ſelfe) into the water, Arguto riding his Horſe ſtill after, where ſuddainly he eſpied the Beare on the hindeck of the Pynace, and the Damoſell ſitting downe cloſe by him, without any touch or offer of violence. This gaue the Knight a preſent apprehenſion, that héerein

conſiſted ſome ſtrange aduenture, wherefore, riding néerer to the Pynace ſide, he gaue his Horſe the ſpurre, and mounted into it: the veſſell putting off immediatly from the ſhoare, before the Squire could gaine his entrance, and ſo it rode out into the maine déepe, hauing neither the helpe of Oares or ſailes.
               Hauing (by his owne eſtimation) gone aboue a thouſand miles, at length the Pinace drew néere to a ſtéepy mountaine, whoſe diſcent fell downe into the Sea, affording no eaſie place for landing: which he not regarding, at all aduenture mounted forth on ſhoare, & the Pinace ſtrooke back againe into the Sea. Being thus alone there by him ſelfe, he happened vpon a narrow path, which guided him along the ſide of the mountain, where riding on with what haſt he beſt could, he came at laſt to the quadrant plaine, where he ſoone had a ſight of the fore-mentioned Pallace: there met he alſo the Knight, & his two rauenous blood-hounds, one of them flying ſo fiercely vpon him, that he caught his Horſe by the noſthrill, and made him fling about very diſtemperatly, which Arguto perceauing, & loath to be ouerthrowne by his Horſe, leapt out of the ſaddle, oppoſing him ſelfe againſt the Hounds & the Knight, who hauing a kéene edged Axe in his hand, deliuered thrée or foure ſuch rude ſtrokes there-with, as Arguto réeld about twiſe or thriſe, & (at laſt) was glad to leane himſelf againſt a trée. The blood-hounds ſtill made violently at him, & faſtning holde vpon one of his legs, dragd him along as purpoſing to kill him: but his courage contemning all dangers whatſoeuer, & ſcorning to die in ſo vile a maner, being got vpon his féet, he drew forth his ſword, & aiming a maine ſtroke at the Hounds, they flew off from him, & then the Knight ſet to him with his Axe, which in ſhort while after ſlipt out of his hand, & Arguto doubling ſtroke vpon ſtroke, had brought ye Knight into weak eſtate, but that the blood-hounds leapt vpon his backe, and (by ill hap) rent in ſunder the laces of his helmet, which falling off his head to the ground, and he (ſtill fiercely ſet vpon by them) began to imagine his caſe ſomewhat deſperate.
               
                  Now, albeit he would more gladly haue parted with his life, then vſe any baſe meanes for ſafetie thereof: yet ſéeing his head in this ſort diſarmed, it coulde not but make him the more warie of himſelfe: wherefore, auoyding the blood-houndes ſo well as he could, and the Knights aſſaults which grew troubleſome to him, hee found that he had no loytering worke in hand. For ſuch was the agilitie both of the houndes and the Knight, as they got aduantage ſtill on him, but he could not faſten a blow vppon them: yet grew they (at length) to retire from his ſtrokes, and hee (ſhunning a dangerous proffer of the Axe) followed the houndes as they tooke toward the Pallace, intending to accompliſh ſome noble act, or elſe to die in the height of his preſumption.
               And as the Knight came vppon him with the Axe, with a full intent to haue cleft his head, the hounds caught holde on the lappets of his Armour, and hald him forward ſo confuſedly, as at laſt he was drawne within ye Pallace, wherof the Knight beeing very ioyfull, that he had him within compaſſe of the enchauntment, hee came to Arguto with theſe ſpeeches. Be not offended Sir Knight, that thou art thus brought into this Pallace: for héere thou ſhalt ſée the richeſt beauty of the world, and it may be thy good happe to be poſſeſſor thereof.
               
                  Arguto perſwading himſelfe, that he meant the beautifull Victoria, tooke this as a happy welcome to him, and anſwered. To me (Sir) can come no greater good fortune, then ſo rare a beautie as you haue ſpoken of: which I am the more deſirous to behold, to know whether it be ſhée or no, that is the onely cauſe of my trauaile. Euen ſhee it is, (replied the Knight) and for your better aſſurance héerein, goe along with me, and you ſhall ſée her. So walking onward into a Chamber, hee there beheld the faire Victoria, and as he offered amourous parlance and ſeruice to her, ſhe vaniſhed from him, leauing him ſo full of paſſionate tormentings, that now hee wiſht himſelfe hand to hand with Primaleon, to try which of them could beſt deſerue her.
               
                  In that very inſtant came Floraman to him, who (by meanes of the enchauntment) had no knowledge of him, neither Arguto had any of him: and thus wrought Velonna, becauſe they ſhould not combate together, by reaſon the nature of the enchauntment was ſuch, that ſo ſoone as any mans blood was ſpilt in the Pallace, immediatly the enchauntment ceaſſed. So fell they into kinde communication, each of them ſo déepely affected to the Ladie, that they thought each houre a yeere till ſome errant Knight came, to contend with them for ſo rich a Iewell: eyther of them accounting her abſolutely his owne, & in this oppinion there let vs leaue them.
            
            
               CHAP. LXVI. Howe Florian ſtill purſuing in queſt of his daughter, was (vnwittingly) brought to the pallace of Queene Melia.
               
               
                  AFter Florian was departed (among the reſt) from the Ile of Carderia, in ſearch of his Daughter, he came one morning earlie to the Sea-coaſt, where hée eſpied a great Fiſh halfe way vppon the grauell: and drawing néerer to beholde it more perfectly, hee was ſuddenly caught vp betwéen a griping paire of tallants, which (in the water) ſerued the Fiſhe as finnes to ſwim withall, and (on Land) for legges and feete to goe vppon.
               This ſtrange Fiſhe, (caſting Florian vppon his broade backe) ranne ſwiftlie with him into the Sea, to his no little amazement at the firſt: but when hee ſaw the Fiſhe to beare him aboue the water, hee grewe the leſſe doubtfull, but expected what might be the end of this aduenture. The Fiſh floating on, with the ſwifteſt ſpeed that euer was ſéen,

hee beheld a Griffon come flying from a Mountaine, that houered aboue him a little while, and ſnatching him vp at laſt in her tallants, carried and ſette him vppon the firme land.
               Walking on muſing alone by himſelfe, at laſt he came in fight of the Marble Pallace, which yet was perfect in his remembrance, and ſhaping his courſe toward it, Arguto was the firſt that eſpyed him, who beeing wondrous ioyfull to ſee his Ladies Father, went foorth to meete him, hoping (by his meanes) to compaſſe his earneſt deſire. Being come together, Florian demaunded of him, what he did there, whereto Arguto returning no aunſwere, conducted him onward to the Pallace, telling him that the Lady Victoria was there: which reuiued Florians ſpirits ſo cheerfully, that he mended his pace to come where ſhee was, and entring into a Chamber, did there behold her, but when (as a Father) he would haue embraced her, the enchauntment altered his minde in ſuch manner, that hee would permit no man to come thether, to carry his Daughter from that place. Paſſing the time in this determination, with much entercourſe of kindnes betwixt him, Arguto and Florian: at laſt Oliuanto hapned thether, who albeit he was not enamoured of Victoria, yet (to finiſh an aduenture of ſo high eſtéeme,) his forwarde deſires had drawne him into thoſe parts.
               But here you muſt remember the aged King, where he vndertooke his painfull enterpriſe, by him (indeed) he was guided to this Iland: for (if you remember) hee then foretold him, that hee ſhould ſuffer diuers diſaſtrous chaunces by him, before he could compaſſe his faire Auriana. He being entred into the Pallace, m
                     •
                  t firſt with Floraman, who knowing Oliuanto to be no riuall of his, right curteouſlie welcomd him, and brought him where he beheld Victoria: but by reaſon his affection was elſwhere ſetled, he made no ceremonious regard of her, only the enchauntment reſtrained him from parting thence, with this perſwaſion, that there he ſhould accompliſh ſome weightie enterpriſe.
               
                  Not many houres had paſt through Times ſandie glaſſe, but Tarnaes of Lacedemonia chaunced thether, he being likewiſe frée from any affection to Victoria. And becauſe Druſa Velonna verily intended, the vtter ruine of the Grecian Monarchie, in ſhort while ſhee drewe thether all the gallant young Knights, and would haue preuailed in like manner vppon Florendos, the Emperour Primaleon, Don Edwarde and the reſt, but that the wizzard Aliarte (finding the heauens now more auſpicious to him, and his arte to apprehend directer courſe then before) thwarted her diſſeignes, by interpoſing the young and hardie Primaleon, whom (in deſpight of all that euer ſhee could doo) hee directed to that courſe.
               Which the Witch perceiuing, and that he onely would finiſh the aduenture, ſhee ſtroue to ſend him into the remoteſt parts of the world, till ſhe had gotten into her cuſtodie, the chiefe warriours & defenders of Chriſtendome, which then might fall the eaſier into the Pagans poſſeſſion. And ſhee grounded this purpoſe of her on the ſonne of Albayzar, who (as you haue heard before) was cloſely carried away from the Princeſſe Targiana, and béeing nowe growne a good hardie Knight, was created and enſtalled Soldane of Babilon: and youthfull courage daily prouokte him, to compaſſe reuenge for his Fathers death, with mighty hatred to his Mother, for marrying him that ſlew her huſband, and confidently he builded on Velonnaes promiſes, by whoſe direction he was altogether guided.
               But (as we ſaid before) Aliarte hauing an eye vppon all her procéedings, ſent firſt aduertiſement thereof to the Emperour, and afterward ordained, that the Knight of Fortune ſhould haue newe Armes made him, wrought all of Diamonds, with ſharpe Ponyards ſticking foorth quite ouer it, the better to breake the Knights blowes when they came to combate, and that the Griffon (which we ſpake of before) being naturall and not magicall, might not ſo eaſilie ſeaze vppon him. And becauſe by ſubtile meanes they muſt enter the Iland, where all the worlds ſtrength would

nothing auaile them, they made a little Barque, ſéeming to be one whole peece of wood, and cloſed ouer in ſuch ſort, that Primaleon being in it, could no way be offended by the water, and when it was lanched into the Sea, it appeared not like to the forme of a Barque, but rather like a huge vnweldie péece of Timber, béeing driuen by the waues violently vpon the Iland, where ſuddenly it opened, and Primaleon ſtept foorth vppon the ſhoare, armed as hath béen alreadie declared, and with a kéene edgd Axe in his hand.
               
                  Druſa Velonna hauing eſpied him, imagined herſelfe now quite vndone, but to let nothing lack of what ſhe could doe, ſhe ranne to her ſpells, and raiſed ſuch a helliſh miſt or fogge, as the Pallace by no meanes could be diſcerned: in which time, ſhee cauſed the Knights to arme themſelues, and ſent them forth againſt him, perſwading them that hee was no man, but a huge monſtrous enchaunted Hedg-hog. Whē 
                  Primaleon ſaw ſo many armed Knight come againſt him, and all of them well knowne to him by their impreſes, he grew doubtfull what his ſucceſſe would ſort vnto, yet prepared neuertheleſſe to aſſaile them.
            
            
               CHAP. LXVII. How, and what the wizzard Aliarte wrought, againſt the enchauntment of Druſa Velonna, and what enſued to Primaleon.
               
               
                  THe learned Aliarte, ſtanding inuiſible on the ſhore of the Iland, and perceiuing that theſe valiant Knights knew not Primaleon, whereby might enſue the death of one another, threw likewiſe a Magicall fume vppon the Ile, which béeing carried by the wind vppon the Knights faces, wrought this effect, that they diſcerned

him to be a man, and not a Hedg-hogge, as before he ſéemed, where-upon they went toward him with theyr ſwordes drawne.
               But Arguto, Floraman, and Florian, ſuſpecting that hee came for the rape of Victoria, as (by the enchauntments force) they were verily perſwaded, beganne furiouſly to aſſaile him: and hee well auoyding their blowes with his Axe, returned them ſuch ſharpe repayments, that they finding theyr ſwords ouer-weake for reſiſtance, vſed what ſkill they could for theyr owne defence.
               Now it happened, that Arguto (ſhunning a blow of the Axe) ranne vpon Primaleon, and giuing him a thruſt ful in the ſight of his Helmet, made it flie open that his face was ſeene: whereupon, Florian knowing the Prince, and howe déerelie he affected his Daughter, deſiring to make her his wife in mariage, gaue backe, & offered no more reſiſtance. But Arguto and Floraman, reſpecting him as theyr riuall in loue, ranne both very violently vpon him, and had handled him hardly, but that Primaleon paſſing his ſword quite through Floramans Beuer, wounded him in the fore-head, and the blood running downe into his eyes, ſo hindered his ſight, as he was conſtrained to retire, and leaue Arguto alone with him, hand to hand.
               The battaile betwéene them laſted aboue-two houres, with very great diſaduantage to Arguto, becauſe Primaleon ſhrewdly mangled his Armour with his Axe, and in the end had ſtaine him, but that Oliuanto, Florian and the reſt, ſtept between them, cauſing them to giue ouer the combate, when preſently they felt themſelues freed frō the enchantment, which before had reſtrained them to ye place. Whervpon the wiſe Aliarte (beeing ſtill inuiſible) wrought ſo by his learned ſkill, that diuers Ships cloſed immediatly on the Iland, and Arguto ſuddenly would haue ſtept into one of them, in rage & ſpléene to haue parted thence, as hee did before at the Ile of Carderia: but Aliarte perceiuing his enuious intent, ſhewed himſelfe to him, and ſuddenly ſt
                     •
                  yed him, when taking him aſide from the reſt, he thus ſpake to

him. My Lord, you are too froward and malicious, and hether am I come onely for your good, for by mine Arte I fore-ſaw that Primaleon would giue end to this aduenture, as in right and reaſon it belongs beſt to him, and that Victoria ſhould loue him beyond all other, by whom ſhe enioyeth the benefit of libertie: wherfore neuer purſue that obſtinately, whereto the heauens are no way agréeable. B
                     •
                  t becauſe your loue ſhall receiue ſome anſwerable requitall, and to continue kindnes between men of ſo high deſeruing, Primaleon hath a ſiſter named Concordia, of no leſſe beautie then her Mother Miragarda, whom (leaguing your ſelfe in loue and friendſhip with Primaleon,) you may the eaſier obtaine in mariage.
               
                  Arguto being both wiſe and valiant, and no fault in him, but only emulation in matter of honour, tooke no little pleaſure in Aliartes friendly aduiſe: and albeit his loue to Victoria preſently ceaſed, as reaſon & reſpect thought it moſt conuenient, quickning his deſires to ſee faire Concordia, yet prizing his Knightly repute before the weight of affection, he returnd him this aunſwere. Diſcreete & learned father, it can be no diſparagement to me, to accept Primaleons faire ſiſter as my wife, but rather therby my ſtate ſhalbe aduanced, in being thought worthy of ſo rich a beauty. Neuerthetheleſſe, becauſe Fryſoll my grand-father, would neuer giue ſuperiority to Palmerin d' Oliua, vntil he had made proofe by chiualry, which of them deſerued to be accoūted worthieſt: I ſée no reaſon, why I may not hold the ſame opinion, concerning him whom I hold as my honorable enemy. Therfore graue father, vntill I haue tried by euident proofe, whether he or I am the ableſt man at armes, I will not graunt to loue his faire Siſter, or any other Lady whatſoeuer: in which humor I am determined to part hence, to expect apt occaſion for the combat betwéen vs, ſince Fortune hath fauoured him with the end of this aduenture. Aliarte perceiuing the ſcope of his purpoſe, accompanied him to the Barque, where commending him to God, Arguto departed much troubled in his minde: For albeit hée would not

as yet reſolue to affect the fayre Concordia, yet her beautie and honour caried ſo generall commendation, as he iudgd it no meane grace for him to enioy her in marriage, and theſe thoughts wrought more and more with his ſtronger purpoſes, in which humour let vs leaue him to his trauaile, till more needfull time require to remember him againe.
               The other Knights (Florian onely excepted) beeing deuoted in their loues to diuers Ladies, finding themſelues fréed frō the force of the enchauntment, (after kind thanks to Primaleon & Aliarte,) departed whether themſelues beſt pleaſed, Primaleon ſtaying (as reaſon required) behind thē, to performe a further ſeruice depending on the aduenture. Druſa Velonna, to ſupply the caſt ſo much as in her lay, not knowing certainly whether Aliarte was departed thence or no, made a great fire to appeare before the Pallace gate: but as great a ſtorme of raine (raiſed by the ſkill of Aliarte) as ſuddenly did extinguiſh it, ſo that Primaleon going néerer the gate, and offering to enter, it cloſed and opened againe ſo ſuddenly, that if hee had raſhlie ſtept into the paſſage, he might haue beene caught betwéene the gates, and ſo his life very greatly endangered, it opened and cloſed ſo many ſeuerall times together.
               At laſt, when it ſtoode open and not cloſed againe ſo faſt as before, he beheld a Griffon and a Lyon, which ſeemed as if they would iſſue foorth vppon him: when muſing a little with himſelfe, what was beſt to be doone, the wiſe Aliarte came to him, and ſpake in his eare as ſhall héereafter more at large be declared.
            
            
               
               CHAP. LXVIII. How Primaleon entred into the Pallace, and accompliſhed a great part of the aduenture.
               
                  
                     PRimaleon, or our famous knight of Fortune, perceiuing his entraunce into the Pallace almoſt impoſſible, beganne to be much troubled in his minde, when Aliarte ſtepping inuiſibly to him, whiſpered him thus in the eare: that if he ſmote with his Axe at a certaine parte of the gates, his ſtrength would be ſuch, as hee ſhould eaſily keepe them both open, and hinder them from cloſing againe. Primaleon, not a little longing to ſee his Victoria, ſtrooke foorth-right at one of the gates, which did ſhutte with the other ſo ſtrongly and violently, as it made him ſtagger backward aboue ſixe paces, and tumbled him into a pit of ſuch clammie mudde, as very hardly did he get out againe: but hauing recouered footing, and ſtriking againſt the other gate, he had falne backward as before, but that his Axe head ſtaied him vp againſt a great ſtone, which ſtoode vpright on one ſide of the gate, and hee being glad of ſo good ſucceſſe, went forward to enter: but the Lyon and Griffon came ſo furiouſly vpon him, and aſſailed him with ſuch eager violence, that he ſcarce knew how to defend him ſelfe againſt them. But hee ſcorning to ſerue for foode to two ſuch rauenous Beaſts, layde at them chesrefully with his ſword, albeit the nimblenes of the beaſts was ſuch, as doubtleſſe they had ſlaine him, but that the ſharp ponyar
                     •
                  s in his Armour did highly ſted him: for the Lyon graſping with one of his pawes at the Beuer of his Helmet, one of the ponyards paſt quite thorow it, his other pawe (ſoone after) ſuſtaining the like hurt, which made the beaſt hold off

the furder from him, and be leſſe troubleſome to him then before. The Griffon likewiſe houering aboue him, made many proffers at him with her ſharp tallents, and ſtriuing to gripe him thorow the Armour, wounded her ſelfe in many parts vpon the ponyards, ſo that ſhe was conſtrained to let him fall, hauing him aloft, as intending to flie thence away with him, and in the fall, Primaleon hit his head againſt the great ſtone, ſo that he lay there ſtil in a traunce, and might right eaſily haue beene depriued of his life, but that the Lyon and the Griffon were both ſore wounded. So ſoone as he was vpon his feete againe, (ſomewhat aſhamed of his fall) he layd about him ſo couragiouſly with his weapon, that both the beaſts whoſe hurts grew num and ſtiffe with cold, lagd about very lazilie, and ſtill receiued wound after wound.
               The Griffon, to make her vttermoſt aduantage, mounted once more aloft, and ſoaring about as waiting opportunitie, though ſhe durſt faſten no more hold vppon him, yet ſhe compeld him to waſte time in ſéeking to ſhun her: and often did ſhe beate her wings about his head, till at laſt ſhée ouerthrew him, when ſuddenly the Lyon catching him by the legge, where none of the poynted ponyards were placed, dragd him along vppon the grounde, making him to féele extreame affliction, but freeing himſelfe at laſt by his thicke doubled ſtroakes, and preparing to auoyde a dangerous proffer of the Griffon, his blow hapned iuſt betweene the cloſing of her wings, cutting one of them quite from the body, whereby ſhe being diſabled from mounting aloft any more, made what haſt ſhee coulde to gette away from the Knight, the like did the Lyon, (hauing laboured ſo long in vaine, and receiued many hurts) kept backe, as willing to come no more neere him.
               So Primaleon, going on to the Pallace gate, and finding no other contradiction to his paſſage, he holdly went in, and becauſe he knew not how he might be encountred, or what dangers might aſſaile him within the Pallace, hee tooke his Axe with him, when preſently the gates clapt together

behind him, and he was in ſuch a helliſh darkneſſe, that he knew not how to direct his footing, and there did hée heare ſuch cryes and mournings, as if many ſoules were in that place moſt cruelly tormented. Yet (for all this) he ſtil went onward, knocking his heade oftentimes againſt the walls, as if hee deſcended downe into ſome vaulte or Cauerne, till at laſt he ſaw a light a farre off from him, and it ſéemed as if a torch were cōming toward him, which ſomewhat chéering his ſpirits, hee made the more haſt to come neerer to the light. Being come to it, he ſaw that it ſtoode ouer the doore of a Chamber, wherein hee beheld a beautifull young Ladie, euery way reſembling his fayre Victoria.
               
               This Lady was dragd along deſpightfully by a rude vnciuill villaine, and ſhe (with loude exclaimes) cryed out in this manner: Helpe me (for Gods ſake) any man that can, and let mee not be violenced by this diſcourteous Knight. Primaleon perſwading himſelfe, that this was his Ladie, would haue ſtept into the Chamber: but as hee toucht the torch, he ſawe a great fire ſuddenly flaming before ye chamber doore, by the light whereof he beheld the Lady cruellie beaten, becauſe ſhe would not yéeld to the Knights perſwaſions.
               This yrkeſome ſpectacle, ſo offended him to ſée it, that (dreadleſſe of the fire) hee leapt quite through it into the Chamber, where he could diſcerne neither the Knight nor the Ladie: but looking round about him, hee eſpied an Adder of huge greatnes craule along vppon the floore, contayning ſome ſixe foote in length, & hauing two heads, caſting foorth a redde poyſon at the eyes and mouth, which ſtil was kindled by the Adders breath, ſo that fire flew euery where round about the Chamber. This ſight was ſo hideous and dreadful to behold, that it would haue daunted any gallant ſpirit whatſoeuer, Primaleon onely excepted, who (beeing Fortunes darling) made no regarde at all of the fire, but went on along through it, and neuer was hurt or offended by it: ſo, comming to the Adder, and lifting vp his ſworde

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
to ſmite off one of the heades, it ſpake aloude to him in this manner. Ah gentle Knight, doe not kill mee that neuer offended thée, but go
                     •
                   a long with me, and I will ſhewe thee the faire young Lady Victoria, whō thou (and none other) muſt frée from this enchauntment.
               
                  Primaleon preparing himſelfe to follow the Adder, ſtood awhile pondering to himſelfe, that this might be but ſome cunning deceit, as indeede it was: for Druſa Velonna had aſſumed this ſhape, with intent to guide him to a ſtéepie downe-fall, where ſhee (acquainted well enough with the meanes for her owne ſafety) would no way be endangered, but he (ſuddenly falling downe) ſhould be ſquandred into numberleſſe péeces, according to the nature of the place. Béeing thus doubtfull of trecherous dealing, hee profferd once more to kill the Adder, but ſhe (perceiuing that he verily purpoſed her death) glided ſo ſwiftly from him, as hee could not faſten a ſtroake vpon her: and now his thoughts became ſome-what diſtracted, becauſe the fire beeing quite extinguiſhed, he remained in the like darknes as he did before.
               Neuertheleſſe, to ſée what this aduenture would ſort vnto, he went on ſo well as he could, cōming at laſt to a place, where (by diuers little windowes) he diſcerned ſome light, which guiding his ſtepps with better ſecuritie, hee heard a Lady call behind him, ſaying: Suffer mee not to die, kinde curteous Knight. As hee turned to ſée who called thus to him, he beheld a great doore to open, which guided his way into a goodly Hall, where he found ye great Serpent, wherin the Princeſſe Leonarda was ſometime enchaūted. This Serpents ſtatue had an opening in his ſide, where he might behold a Knight that held a liuing Serpent by the taile, and ſpake vnto him in this manner. Knight, if thou repent not thy comming into a place of ſuch daunger, lende mee thy hand, for by no meanes elſe can I gette foorth of this huge Serpent, then wilt thou and I try our valour together.
               
                  Primaleon dreadleſſe of any danger whatſoeuer, without any further pauſing, gaue him his armed hand, and pulling

with all the ſtrength he could vſe, at laſt the Knight iſſued foorth vppon him, & then the opening in the great Serpents ſide cloſed againe.
            
            
               CHAP. LXIX. Of the dangerous fight, which Primaleon had with the Knight of the Serpent, and how he accompliſhed the whole aduenture afterward.
               
                  THe Knight which came foorth of the Serpent, and therefore was called the Knight of ye Serpent, walking on his feete along the great Hall, managed the liuing Serpent which hee helde in his hand, with ſuch extraordinary facilitie & nimbleneſſe, as nothing can be imagined more quick and agill. Nowe albeit hee gaue our Champion many cruel ſtrokes therewith, yet this was nothing, in regarde of the Serpents ſharpe teeth and clawes, which often-times faſtened on the bucklings of his Armor, and made it hang very looſely vpon him, ſo that he ſeeking to ſhunne theſe aſſaults of the Serpent, the Knight flung it faſt about his Helmet, whence writing it ſelfe down along his breaſt, he found his body to be quite diſarmed, and his Helmet to fall beſide his head.
               This perrill did put newe life into all his ſpirits, and lifting his Axe vp with both his handes, hee gaue a mighty ſtroake ouerthwart the Serpent, whereby it fell downe dead out of the Knights handes: and hee (hauing no other weapon for his owne defence) the doore opening againe in the brazen Serpents ſide, he ran preſently in thereat with no meane haſt, and there ſtoode vpright, as quite bereft of all his ſences.
               
                  
                  Primaleon taking vp his Armour & Helmet, went foorth of the Pallace, where Florian holpe to arme him againe, earneſtly intreating to returne in with him: but the youthfull gallant, to haue the honour alone of ſo great an enterpriſe, deſired that he would not be ſo much his hinderance, the rather, in regard the aduenture was deſtenied for him onely, and by no man elſe could be concluded. So Primaleon departing from the Prince, came againe to the Hall where he had left the Serpent, and finding there no further reſiſtance, hee went through a doore into another goodlie roome, where ſtoode the armed ſtatues of many Pagane Princes, and huge great cheſtes, wherein the ineſtimable treaſure was contained, whereof we haue briefely ſpoken in the ſecond part of this Hiſtorie, but more at large to be diſcourſed on, both whoſe they were, and for whom reſerued, either in the end of this booke, or ſome tractate thereon depending.
               Finding there likewiſe no deniall of his paſſage, as hee profferd to enter a little doore directly before him, looking in thereat, he beheld two angry Lyons, each ſtanding reared vp on his hinder feete, and placing theyr formoſt on the young Lady Victorias ſhoulders: whereupon, ſuch was his feare leaſt the Lady ſhould be endangered, that (neuer remembring his Axe) he ſtept boldly in at the doore, and drawing forth his ſword, went to one of the Lyons, which ſtoode ſtill and ſtird not, as if it had béene an Image of ſtone, but onely ſtoode as admiring the Ladies beautie, and expreſſing a kinde of feare, leaſt ſhee ſhould by the Knight be taken from him, the other Lyon dooing the like in all reſpects.
               But that which made him moſt of all to meruaile, was the faire Victoria, ſtanding as if ſhee were immooueable, vſing no word at all, or any ſigne of knowledge of him: this ſight afflicted him more then all the reſt, and made him euen ready to ſinke downe dead with gréefe, till going ſomwhat neerer, and offering his hand to leade her thence, both the Lyons ſuddainly leapt vpon him, and catching him vp betwéen

their pawes, caried him forth of the chamber, where with their teeth and clawes they cruelly graſpt him, battering and bruſing all his Armour, yet he could not faſten one blow vpon them, but fought as if it had beene with the ayre, till he wexed ſo wearie, that he could very hardly fetch his breath. Notwithſtanding the very vttermoſt of this extreame agonie, his minde held out couragiouſly, and laboured on the likelieſt courſes to be taken, for ſpéedieſt gayning the glory of this enterpriſe, and fréedome of the faire young Lady his Miſtris: in which meditation, he remembred his Axe, which hee ſawe leaning againſt the chamber doore, whereas him ſelfe before had left it, & catching it vp quicklie, ſmote one of the Lyons there-with vppon the ſhoulder, cleauing him down to the very entrailes, which the Knight reioyced not a little to behold, hoping now of good ſucceſſe in the reſt of his labour. And turning to the other Lyon, deſirous to ſpéed as well with him, becauſe he grew the fiercer vpon him, as hauing (by vertue of the enchauntment) his owne ſtrength redoubled, and the force of his wounded fellowes likewiſe infuſed: hee found his hope mightily diſappointed, for the Lyon catching holde with his teeth on the Axe, wroong it out of his hands, ſo that now he was glad to make vſe of his ſword againe, where-with he could defend him ſelfe but very ſlenderly, becauſe all his blowes were ſtill ſpent in vaine.
               Hauing thus fought a long while together, yet all his labour fruitleſſe and to no purpoſe, his owne life alwayes in greateſt hazard, and no likelyhoode of preuailing in the end: hée ſawe the beaſt riſe vp on his hinder legges, when ſuddainly he ranne and caught him in his armes, but thereby he endured the extreameſt paine and turmoile, as in all his life time he neuer felt the like, for the Lyons ſtrength was ſtill doubled againſt him: neuertheleſſe, Primaleon helde out ſo currantly, making vſe of cunning ſleights and witty preuentions, that the beaſt got little aduauntage of him. The woorſt that befell Primaleon in this dangerous fight, was the beaſts continuall gripes vppon his armes, which

hindered him from getting his dagger foorth, albeit he had made many faire offers at it: but at length, the Lyon wexing almoſt as wearie as he, and ſtarke mad with rage, becauſe hee could not ouerthrowe the Knight, letting goe his hold, drew back to watch ſome better aduantage.
               Now had Primaleon liberty to recouer his dagger, wherwith (as the Lyon came fiercely againe vpon him) he ſtabd it into the beaſts right ſhoulder, that it paſt quite thorowe on the other ſide, and there he left the dagger ſtill ſticking. This wound made the beaſt ſo fell & outragious, that graſping Primaleon once more betwéene his pawes, he threw him violently againſt the ground, and went ouer him twiſe or thriſe, as ſéeking the readieſt way to kill him. But as Primaleon lay vpon his backe, turning aſide his head to auoide the beaſts foote, hee had a ſuddaine ſight of the young Lady Victoria, who (in his eye) ſéemed dead, albeit ſhe ſtood vpright on her féet: whereat he was ſo affrighted, that ſtarting quickly vp, he gaue another thruſt at the Lyon, which made the beaſt to tumble along, and beating him ſelfe a while againſt the ground, at laſt he was quite depriued of life.
               Then went Primaleon into the chamber where the Ladie was, and going reuerently neere her, tooke her by the hand, which he felt to be ſo cold, as if it had beene a hand of marble, in all which time ſhe moued not a iote, but ſtoode ſo ſtill as if ſhe were dead. Such was his greefe to ſee her in this ſort, as he grew into a great impatience, and profferd to carry her out of that chamber, to try if any where elſe he could be better comforted: but as hee laide holde on her to beare her thence, there ſuddainly ſtarted vp from vnder a great ſtone, two wild Saluage men, with clubs of yron in theyr hands, and at each clubbe hung foure great chaines, with bigge yron balls faſtned to them: very furiouſly ſmote they at Primaleon, and beate him ſo about the head with the balls of yron, that he fell downe on the floore, when the Saluage men taking him vp betweene them, intended to 
                     •
                  ary him vnder the ſtone, from whence themſelues appeared

firſt to him: but although theyr blowes had ſhrewdly aſtonned him, yet when he felt himſelfe thus carried along, he gaue one of the Saluages ſuch a blow with his gauntlet vppon the heade, that the bloode trickled downe about his ſhoulders, and giuing the other a ſpurne with his foote full on the mouth, hee made foure of his teeth to fall out of his head▪ in rage and anger whereof they let him fall, but ſuch was his good hap, that he ſtood vpright vpon his feete. The Saluages to reuenge this iniurie receiued, turned againe to him with their clubs ſo furiouſly, that Primaleo
                        •
                     , (not hauing forgotten the weight of theyr ſtrokes, and willing to auoyde them ſo much as hee might) by his often ſleights and ſlippes aſide from them, made indifferent meanes to kéepe them off him, and with his ſword he had cut in ſunder thrée chaines from one of the clubbes, and two from the other, whereby hee was not ſo beaten with the 
                     •
                  alls as before, nor they ſo bolde as at firſt they were, but receiuing ſundry hurts by his weapon, ſhrunke ſeuerall wayes aſide as deſirous of breathing: but hee maintayning ſo good an aduantage, followed them the more cloſely, leauing one club quite without chaines and balls, & the other but with one onely, ſo that the Saluages found their ſtrength verie much impayred.
               During this fierce and dangerous combate, the concluſion whereof as yet ſéemed doubtfull, by chance as hee turned his heade aſide toward the doore, he
                     •
                   beheld two men farre ſpent in yeeres, carrying the faire Victoria between them, and laying her as dead in a goodly Tombe, cloſed againe the couerture vppon it. This ſpectakle was ſo offenſiue both to his eyes and hart, that hee became like a man frantique or deſperate, and at two ſtrokes recouered the clubbes from the Saluages, who hauing loſt all ſtrength of the enchauntment, which they had by meanes of ye clubs onely, ranne againe vnder the ſtone from whence they iſſued forth, and Primaleon going toward the Tombe, heard a voyce ſpeake in manner following. Lay hold on this raſh & ouer-bold Knight, and encloſe him in this Tombe with his

enamoured Lady, ſo let him enioy her in eternall darkneſſe, ſince he is ſo deſperate as to die for her ſake.
               
               
                  Primaleon expreſſed no care at all of theſe threatning words, but going on forward, ye two old men came againſt him, to with-hold him from opening of the Tombe, and becauſe their age made him the leſſe heedfull of thē, they ſuddenly ſeazed on him, & held him ſo ſtrongly betwéene theyr hands, that albeit he ſtroue ſo much as hee could, yet was he forcibly taken vp by them, and brought cloſe vnto the Tombes ſide, which preſently opened of it ſelfe, and as they put his féete firſt into it, one of the old men thus ſpake. Take heere thy pleaſure ſo long as thou thinkeſt good, ſince thou wilt needs haue thy Victoria. Primaleon, perceiuing he had no dallying worke in hand, ſtrugled with them ſo ſtoutly, that he caught one of thē by the long dangling haire, which being the meanes of depriuing ye olde mans ſtrength, made him forſake his hold, whereby Primaleon the eaſier faſtned his hand on the vpper-part of the Tombe, when the other old man (being vnable to hold him of himſelfe) let him goe likewiſe, where-uppon immediatly hee leapt foorth of the Tombe, which quickly cloſed againe, and then both the old men vaniſhed out of ſight.
               When Primaleon ſaw himſelfe thus left there alone, vnlikely to be informed by any one, howe or by what meanes he might open the Tombe, he ſtoode a while as one diſcontented: but afterward he walked round about it, and héedfully noated euery place, if there were any way whereby to open it, & making many aſſaies to lift vp the couerture, all the ſtrength hee could vſe would neuer ſtirre it, and as thus he ſtroue with it, but to no purpoſe, about ye brim edge of the Tombe, he read theſe engrauen lines.
               
                  The Lady thou deſir'eſt is dead,
                  Heere haue the wormes vpon her fed.
                  And entring heere, thy ſelfe muſt die:
                  Deſpight all Arte and Chiualrie.
               
               
                  This inſcription made Primaleon ſome-what ſuſpitious of his owne abilitie, which ſtretched his patience beyonde the limits of ſufferance, ſo that tugging at one end of the Tombe with incredible ſtrength, it ſéemed to him as if it ſhooke, and then he heard a voice within it, ſpeaking vnto him after this manner. Alas Sir Knight, what meane you thus to diſquiet my reſt? Depart hence I beſeech you, becauſe all your labour will prooue but in vaine. Theſe words made ſuch a wide breach in the former hopes of Primaleon, as if he had not ſet downe his ſword for ſpéedie ſtay to him, he had ſuncke downe and falne on the ground: but as hee ſtoode thus right ſad and penſiue, hee ſaw the wiſe Aliarte enter the Chamber, who comming to him, ſaid. Bee not diſmaied faire Knight, for the young Lady Victoria is not dead, nor yet encloſed within this Tombe, yet muſt this Tombe (of neceſſitie) be opened, becauſe you can neuer recouer her frō this enchauntment, while her ſtatue of Marble remaines héere encloſed, but all the ſtrength in the world auailes not to open the Tombe, without mine Arte, after ſome vſe whereof performed by mee, then muſt your vertue conclude the reſt.
               So he entring into a little ſtudie, (wherein Prince Florian neuer came, at ſuch time as he deliuered the Princeſſe Leonarda,) there he found a little booke of ſtrange written Carracters, which ſome-time belonged to Quéene Melia, and onely ſerued to finiſh the enchauntment. Not long had he read vppon the booke, but all the roome began to tremble, and the ayre became ſo wondrous darke, as they (not ſéeing one another) heard diuers horrid voyces, which gaue a ſigne of very ſerious imployment. And as it thus continued the ſpace of halfe an houre, from the roofe of the chamber fell downe a great ſtone, which lighting vppon the couering of the Tombe, brake it through the midſt, when preſently the day wexing cleere againe, they might ſee in the Tombe the faire young Lady Victorias ſtatue, whereupon Primaleon immediatly coniectured, that the enchauntment now was fully accompliſhed. But ſuddenly aroſe from vnderneath

the Tombe, a Centaure all armed, holding in either hand a greate Mace, where-with hee floriſhed about him ſo ſwiftly and nimbly, as it dazzeld the eyes of them to looke on him.
               My Lord (quoth Aliarte) haue what care you can to this Centaures Maces, for hee muſt and will ſmite you with them, and if you meane to kill him, it muſt be with your hand without any weapon: which wordes were no ſooner ſpoken, but Aliarte vaniſhed againe. Primaleon ſéeing himſelfe in the very procinct of recouering his Lady, thought now (if he were naked) yet he was able to accompliſh a far more difficult enterpriſe, & caſting by his Gauntlets, went toward the Centaure with his ſword prepared, onely to beare off the blowes of his Maces, whereof at firſt hee failed, and was ſhrewdly ſmitten with them both at once: but he ſtepping back for a more ample opportunitie, ſmote with ſuch fiercenes at both the Maces, that one of them preſently fell to the ground, and ſo did the other in ſhort while after.
               Now began the Centaure to be more violent, and leaping vppon Primaleon, had almoſt preſt him to the earth with his heauie weight, but hee catching him faſt by the legge, threw him mainly againſt the ground, and then ſetting his foote vpon him, quickly 
                     •
                  ntied his arming girdle, purpoſing to binde faſt his hands there-with, but the Centaure was ſo quicke and readie with them, that hee coulde lay no hold vpon them, til at laſt he gaue him thrée or foure good buffets on the face, which tamed him in ſuch ſort, as firſt he bound the one arme, and afterward ye other, though with much adoe before hee could compaſſe it: and as hee ſtroue to raiſe the Centaure vpon his feete, he ſuddenly died, and as ſuddenly did the whole Pallace vaniſh, with whatſoeuer hee had beheld in it: except the Images of the Pagane Princes, the huge mettall Serpent, and the faire Lady Victoria, who ſtood as amazed at ſo ſtrange an accident. Then came Florian and the wiſe Aliarte to Primaleon, who was nowe with Victoria, to comfort her in her wandering

oppinions, and Aliarte ſpake 
                     〈◊〉
                   him in this maner. Braue Knight, well maiſt thou be called the darling of Fortune, in receiuing from her ſuch inexpreſſable fauours: but leaſt we be further troubled by Velonna before our departure, let mee aduiſe you, to prepare preſently for Constantinople. So leaue we them to their intended iourney, and nowe let vs ſpeake of a dangerous combate, which happened betweene Leonato and Tarnaes, as they and the reſt returned from this Iland.
            
            
               CHAP. LXX. How Leonato and Tarnaes came to combate together, for the loue of faire Candida, and vppon what condition they were parted by Palmerin of England.
               
                  HEeretofore hath béene tolde you, how Leonato and Tarnaes were both enamoured of faire Candida, ye daughter to noble Belyfart, yet neither of them knowing the others affection: and being both among others entred a Barque together, Leonato, dreadleſſe of any danger whatſoeuer, declared to Tarnaes, that hee woulde nowe ſaile home to Constantinople, onely to compaſſe his loue to faire Candida. Tarnaes looking ſternly vpon him, ſaide: Thou canſt not goe thether for that occaſion, ſo long as this weapon will hold in my hand. Leonato was as ready with his ſword, and preſently they would there haue falne to the combate: but Oliuanto and Floraman (being in companie) ſtept betweene them with theſe ſpéeches. This is no place (Gentlemen) for quarrell & contention, forbeare then (wée pray you) till wee come to Land, where either of you may maintaine his argument of loue and valour.
               Theſe reaſonable ſpéeches pacified the Knights, but for no longer time then they ſhould be landed: ſo the Barque

ſayling on as wind and weather pleaſed, at laſt it brought them into Macedonia, where Oliuanto and Floraman earneſtly laboured to appeaſe them, but all was to no end: for they had coniurd them to graunt them one requeſt, & they (not remembring their ſterne reſolution) conſented vnto it whatſoeuer it were. The boone (quoth Tarnaes) which we vrge yée to grant, is, that (now wee are héere landed) you would folow your beſt intended courſes, and leaue vs to try the effect of our contention. Greatly it diſpleaſed Oliuanto and Floraman, that they had ſo raſhly paſſed ſuch a promiſe, but becauſe honour tyed them ſtrictly to their word, they left them, and parted toward Constantinople, Oliuanto
                   to ſee his Auriana, and Floraman to expect the wiſhed arriuall of Victoria.
               
               
                  Leonato and Tarnaes thus left by themſelues, with their ſwords ready drawne, and couered with theyr Shieldes, they fought together with ſuch arte & ſkilfulnes, as aboue two houres were ſpent, and yet they had not wounded one another: but when their Shields were ſliced in péeces, that they were faine to receiue the ſtrokes vppon their armes, and whereſoeuer els they lighted on their bodies, then was true manhood indeed to be plainly diſcerned, for after many breathings and reenforcements of the fight, they ſtoode ſtill ſo boldly againſt each other, as either of them was reſolued to die or be a conquerour.
               This equalitie in courage ſo long continued, that wound for wound was readily deliuered, their bodies and Armour pittifully mangled, but yet the hurts not déeply entring, by reaſon their dexteritie and ſkill much holpe them, which is a matter of great conſequence in a combate triall, where both parts are of equall valour, and knowledge. Til about mid-day thus laſted the difference, their bloode (in manie places) altering the cullour of their Armour, when at laſt Tarnaes thus ſpake to Leonato. You ſee (Sir) in what eſtate we are both brought, yet neither of vs certaine who ſhall haue the victory, therefore (ſo pleaſe you) wéele pauſe awhile, and putting off our Armour, wee ſhall ſoone make

proofe of the worthier perſon, and let him be renowned according to his merrit. Leonato, who neuer was capable of any feare or diſmay, quickly replied that he was well contented with this motion: ſo either of them ſtepping aſide to his Squire, in very ſhort while they were both diſarmed. Then, after they had walked and breathed a ſpace, they came againe together, but in a contrary maner from their firſt kinde of fight: for each oppoſing the right ſide of his bodie to his aduerſary, made defence of his left ſide, breaking many deſperate blowes & thruſts, according as they were diuers times dangerouſly offered.
               When the Squires beheld their Lordes in ſo apparant perrill of their liues, they intended to make out vnto the roade wayes, in hope to find ſome Knight that might come to pacifie them: and purſuing their purpoſe, they were no ſooner entred vpon the high-way, but they ſawe a Knight come riding toward them, ſeeming anſwerable in courage to either of theyr Maiſters, to him thus ſpake one of the Squires. Neuer was a Knight met in a more needfull time, vouchſafe Sir to goe with vs, & helpe to ſaue the liues of two honourable Knights, then whom there liues none better in the worlde. The Knight (who was Palmerin of England) imagining that they belonged to the Court of Constantinople, went haſtily with them, and beeing come to the Combattants, lifting vp the 
                     •
                  euer of his Helmet, hee ſtept betwéene them, ſaying. What fury (faire Knights) hath made you ſo cruell and vnkinde to one another, let me intreate ye to hold awhile and anſwere me.
               
                  Leonato, knowing it was his Father that ſpake, retired backe, and ſo did Tarnaes, where-vpon, Palmerin thus began againe. Tell me Leonato the cauſe of your quarrell, which I am much afrayde is grounded vpon loue: if ſo, or howſoeuer elſe it be, ſo pleaſe you to referre it to my iudgement, I doubt not but to ſatiſ-fie you both right nobly. Leonato declared to his Father, that their ſtrife was for the loue they both bare to faire Candida, and Tarnaes likewiſe confirmed the ſame, whereto Palmerin thus preſently replied.

Why my friends, you knowe it is a matter meerelie impoſſible, that the Lady ſhould be wife to you both: let me then ſo farre preuaile in your patience, that I may nominate wiues for you both, ſuch as I dare warrant to eyther of your contentment.
               
                  Palmerin was of ſuch honour & eſtéeme, among all ſuch Knights as had knowledge of him, as theſe young gallants could not well gain-ſay his noble offer, but referring themſelues to his diſcretion, he thus procéeded. My Lord Tarnaes, if your thoughts were as agréeable as mine, there is a Lady that I could wiſh to be your wife, namely my daughter called Fior-nouel
                        •
                     a, who although ſhe be ouer-young as yet for marriage, yet goes ſhe
                     •
                   beyond Miragarda in beautie: the reaſon why I vſe theſe ſpéeches, is, that I wiſh you a wife of greater degrée, then ſhee i
                     •
                   whom my ſo
                     •
                  ee▪ 
                  Leonato affects, therefore becauſe ſhe is leſſe worthy then your ſelfe, let him enioy Candida of mean
                     •
                   qualitie, repayring that want onely by your kinde brother-hoode.
               
                  Tarnaes perceiuing the honourable minde of Palmerin, though it much diſpleaſed him to alter his affection, yet cō
                  ſidering hee impaired not, but rather augmented his reputation, eſpecially in regard of Fior-nouellas beautie, beſide great hopes of further aduauncement, accepted Palmerins gentle offer, and ſo did Leonato, who loued Candida with ſuch intire zeale, as her pouertie coulde▪ not be any hinderance thereof, her birth and faire vertues onely made his election of her. Vpon this agreement, Palmerin and they mounted preſently on horſebacke, and he conducted them to a neere adioyning village, where their hurts 
                     •
                  ere well regarded, and ſo ſoone as they were thorowly recouered, they iournied all thrée to Constantinople.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. LXXI. How Primaleon and Arguto fought together neere to Constantinople, and how no man could part them but the Emperour Primaleon.
               
               
                  AFter that the learned Aliarte had prepared all things in readines, hee called Primaleon aſide, and ſpake thus to him. Thou truly valiant, and worthily renowned Knight of Fortune, right well I wote, that your heart nowe trauailes with no other thoughts, but onely how to eſpouſe the faire Victoria, whom you haue with ſuch honour and déere paines deſerued: Yet fauour me to tell you, that in reſpect you are Nephewe to my Lord the Emperour, it is neceſſary that he ſhould beſtow ſo great a gift on you, for neither dare her Father nor I deale in the matrimoniall contract, before his highnes pleaſure be firſt vnderſtood. Neuertheleſſe, aſſure your ſelfe, that no Knight (but you onely) ſhall enioy her, albeit ſhe will coſt you dearer then as yet ſhe hath done, in a matter which you can by no meanes eſcape: wherefore let me perſwade ye, that hauing taken leaue of her and her father, you trauaile alone to Constantinople, where it ſhall not be long before we will méete you, & there performe your long deſired nuptiall.
               
                  Primaleon, though but young, yet being wiſe & diſcreete, allowed the wizzards counſaile to be ſound and good, and therefore without dwelling vpon any other doubts, he went to the Prince Florian, (who was reaſoning with his daughter, concerning Primaleons valour and vertues, to tempt and try her diſpoſition toward him, becauſe already he had determined in his owne minde, frankly to beſtow her vpon him in marriage,) Primaleon being come to him, ſpake in

this manner. My Lord Florian, I am deſirous to followe ſome priuate intent of mine owne, which (happily) may guide me I know not whether, but gladly would I encounter ſome aduenture of woorth, before I would be ſeene in the Emperours preſence, for hee in his youth ranne through many rare fortunes, enough for me to admire at, without any vaine opinion of equalling: therefore I craue your fauour for my departure, and commend all my higheſt hopes, to the gracious regard of this beautifull Princeſſe.
               When the Lady Victoria heard his kinde ſpéeches, a crimſon bluſh leapt vp into her chéekes, and ſo well as ſhee could, (her affliction of mind held excuſed for his ſo ſuddaine departure) ſhe formed a pretty kind of wandring diſcourſe, intermedled with broken ſighes and faint ſmiles, the raine in her eyes being readier then her tongue: yet forgot ſhee not to thanke him for deliuering her from that helliſh enchauntment, promiſing to be as mindfull therof, as ſo great a benefit did iuſtly deſerue.
               So Primaleon leauing them, went aboorde a little Pynace, which (by Aliartes appointment) ſet ſaile for Conſtantinople, and in fewe dayes he came within foure miles of the Citty, when (becauſe it was night) he tooke vp his lodging in the neighbouring village. Arguto making certaine account, that Primaleon would come with Florian and Victoria, vſed often to ſtray abroad from Constantinople, hauing ſtill a care what Shippes tooke landing, becauſe he longed to encounter Primaleon, for the vtmoſt proofe of his ability in Armes. So it happened, that as Primaleon came from his Inne in the morning, Arguto met him, and knowing him, by reaſon he wore not his helmet, he ſpake as followeth. Sir Knight, put on your helmet, and that ſpeedily, for I am to try the combate with you.
               
                  Primaleon muſed a little to himſelfe, returning no aunſwere, becauſe he knew not the man that challenged him, for Arguto had couered his Shéelde of the Sunne, becauſe hee would by no meanes be knowne: but at laſt, without ſpeaking any word at all, hauing laced on his helmet, hee

turned his horſe for the courſe, ſo did Arguto, with a minde full of furious deſire to wound his contrary, the other being nothing ſo much mooued, becauſe he knew not with whom hee ſhould encounter, which made Arguto to receaue the greater aduantage in the ſhock, in being not ſtird a iote by his aduerſaries Launce, but Primaleon loſt one of his ſtirropes. This ſéemed ſomewhat ſtrange to him, and made him forgetfull of his former patience, his imagination preſently apprehending, that doubtleſſe his enemie was Arguto, whoſe enuious nature (toward him) excéeded all manlie compaſſe, wherefore now he purpoſed verily his death, to be rid of ſuch a riuall both in his loue and honour, and taking another Launce, prepared to the ſecond encounter, whereof Arguto made no refuſall, but met him with ſuch a furious diſdaine, that he was caſt out of his ſaddle on the crooper of his Horſe, very hardly eſcaping the fall, and Primaleon was ſet vpon his Horſe buttocks, but not in perrill of any fall: ſo, both recouering their ſeates againe, they charged a freſh for the third triall.
               Now met they together with ſuch maine violence, that the girtes of Argutoes ſaddle breaking, hee tumbled backward to the ground, being ſhrewdly bruſed with the fall: but Primaleons Horſe (by ouer-great miſhap) brake his two fore legges, and falling to the earth, chaunced to ſtampe one of his hinde féete vppon his Maiſters foote, ſo that both were faine to lie a while and reſt them ſelues. But hauing recouered footing, they came together with their ſwordes drawne, Primaleon féeling his foote ſomewhat ſtonned, with the tread which his Horſe had giuen him vpon it, yet did he carrie him ſelfe with ſuch ſprightly agilitie, that his enemie diſcerned not any impediment at all. Now flew their weapons ſo nimbly about them, that in their careleſſe regard of defence, they were both wounded, Arguto in the right ſide, and Primaleon vppon the left legge: neuertheleſſe the battaile endured in ſuch ſort, as if they had but inſtantly begun the ſame, and they that came to be beholders thereof, iudged Arguto to be the fiercer, becauſe Primaleon
                  
ſéemed to limpe a little, onely by the paine he felt of his foot. So long laſted this combate, that their armour beeing hewen in peeces from about them, and their bodies wounded in many places, a multitude of people flocking thether to ſée the ouent, and admiring the ſtearne reſolution in eyther: coniectured (as well they might) that if they were not the ſooner ſundered, the liues of them both perforce muſt miſcarie, where-vpon diuers ranne and galloped to Conſtantinople, carrying ſuch newes héereof to the Pallace, that Palmerin, Florendos, Floraman, Leonato, Tarnaes, (who were all there the day before arriued) preſently armed them ſelues, and departed thence with all poſſible ſpeede, to ſaue the liues of two ſuch hardy Knights.
               No ſooner were they come thether, but they vnderſtoode immediatly, that one of them was Primaleon, the ſonne of Florendos, and to know the other, Palmerin called vnto Argutoes Squire, and prayed him (for ſafety of his Maiſters life) to let him vnderſtand of whence he was. The Squire beeing honeſt and wiſe, knowing hee would haue intelligence of his Lord, though not by him, tolde him, that his Maiſters name was Arguto. Greatly did it gréeue both him and the reſt, to ſée Lords (of one Court) in ſuch furie thus hand to hand, ſo that they ſtept betwéene and laboured to appeaſe them: but they (without any reſpect to the others friendly endeuour) by no meanes would be pacified, but ſtriking at them, to get foorth from amongſt them, ſéemed tenne times more violent againſt each other then before, and all the others honeſt labour prooued but in vaine. When they perceaued that they might not preuaile with them, and their lauiſh expence of blood, deliuered apparant daunger of their liues: they concluded, that Leonato ſhould poaſt to the Emperour, to entreate him (for ſafety of Arguto and his Nephewe Primaleons life) he would come thether with all haſt poſſible.
               When the Emperour heard theſe tidings, immediatly he deſcended the ſteps of the Pallace, and mounting vpon an eaſie Ambler, in leſſe then halfe an houre he came to the

Combattants: whoſe extremitie of fury was indifferently qualified, becauſe both wearineſſe and loſſe of blood had ſo weakened them, as their blowes nowe did but very little harme. The Emperour riding in betwéene them, ſpake in this manner. I halfe perſwaded my ſelfe, that you young Knights, woulde maintaine the royall reputation of my Court: but nowe I ſee, that you rather endeuour to ouerthrow it, in ſéeking ſo cruelly to violence one another. Let me vnderſtand the cauſe of your contention, and I will ſo order and accomodate the caſe, as neither of your honours ſhall thereby be impaired.
               
                  Primaleon hearing his Grandfather ſpeake, reuerently gaue backe, ſaying. Truſt me my Lord, I know not the leaſt particle of any cauſe, wherefore this Knight ſhould thus combate with me, for I am vtterly ignorant what he is: onely it pleaſed him to take knowledge of me, and prouoke me to the fight with chalenging tearmes, neuer yeelding me any reaſon of his diſcontentment, or how, or wherin I haue offended him. Then the Emperour turned to Arguto, to knowe whence the cauſe of this preſumptuous quarrell grew: when he (more in reuerence to ſo great a commaund, then otherwiſe) declared all at large, howe in reſpect of the loue he bare to the faire Lady Victoria, he had borne a long enuious ſpléen to Primaleon: but more eſpecially, how duly he had awaited this opportunity, to try which of them two was the ableſt man at Armes. The Emperour, (loth to hold them there in ſuch euident perill,) promiſed to carrie ſuch an euen hand in this cauſe of their difference, as each of them ſhould be wel ſatiſfied therewith, both in enioying wiues to eithers good liking, & alſo in this ſcrupulous caſe of their valour, wherein, neither was reputed inferiour to the other, by their late ouer-bold and hazardous triall. But (quoth he) I am lately informed of an intended war, leueyed by Corcuto the ſonne of Albayzar, & now enſtalled Souldane of Babilon, prepared only againſt Chriſtians: there wil be a better triall of manhood vpon Gods enemie and ours, then thus one friend to miſentreate another.
               
                  Vppon theſe ſpéeches the Knights were pacified, and preſently two ſumptuous Litters were brought from the Court, where-into (after by the Emperours commaund, the Knights had embraced each other, and ſolemnly proteſted a league of friendſhip) they were ſoftly laide, and being brought to Constantinople, were lodged in one goodlie chamber, wherein two beds were purpoſely placed. Now ranne a certaine muttering among the other Lords, which of theſe two Knights might bee reckoned as the hardieſt warriour, in regard they were both ſore wounded, and eythers eſtate was cenſured vpon, Primaleons greateſt harme being thought the bruſe of his foote, but Arguto had receaued moſt hurts, and his armour was battered farre woorſe then Primaleons.
               
               The Emperour and the other Princes, came daily to viſite theſe wounded Knights, of whoſe liues the Chirurgions as yet ſtoode in doubt, eſpecially of Arguto, becauſe hee had a daungerous hurt in his throate: to them likewiſe reſorted all the Princeſſes in the Court, of whom, the moſt impatient in gréefe, was the Empreſſe Gridonia and the Princeſſe Miragarda, in their iuſt compaſſion of Primaleons perill. Notwithſtanding, they failed not in kinde affabilitie to Arguto likewiſe, who lay for diuers dayes together, by no meanes able to mooue him ſelfe, to the great diſcontent of all the Lordes and Ladies, beeing very doubtfull of his recouery: but leaue we them in hope of better health, and returne we now to the wizzard Aliarte.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. LXXII. Howe the wiſe Aliarte and Prince Florian, with the faire young Lady Victoria, ſet forward in theyr iourney to Constantinople, and of a daunger which happened to Aliarte, from which he was reſcued by the valour of Prince Florian: Alſo, howe Floraman deſperately ſlew him ſelfe.
               
                  YOu remember, that when Primaleon ſet away for Constantinople, we left Aliarte, Florian, and Victoria ſtil at the Iland, where the wizzard diſcourſing with the Prince, about giuing his daughter Victoria in marriage to the Knight, who (ending the enchauntment) had ſo highly deſerued her: and he found him thereto right willingly addicted, prouided, that the Emperour miſliked not thereof. So taking with him the booke before remembred, which ſometime belonged to Quéene Melia, they entred into a veſſell of larger fruite, then the other which he had ſent away before, as being iealous of ſome diſaſter, which Druſa Velonna might worke againſt them. Sayling with proſperous winde and weather the firſt day and night, Aliarte (ſomewhat ouer-wearied with watching) fell into a ſound ſléepe, as in like manner did the Lady Victoria: but Florians thoughts were ſeriouſly buſied, what his wife Targiana might conceaue of his ſo long abſence, as thereby no ſléepe could faſten on him, albeit he was as glad on the contrary part, as this amourous affliction made him ſad in minde, that hee had ſo happily recouered his daughter.
               As thus he ſate tranſported with varietie of paſſions, he ſawe a darke cloud ſuddainly to engirt the Shippe, and out

of it dropt a mighty Serpent, with a long taile faſhioned like a Gable rope, which wrapping it ſelfe about the ſleeping wizzard, the Serpent had preſently caried him away: but that Florian quickly ſnatching foorth his ſword, ranne ſpeedily to the Monſter, and ſmiting a maine ſtroke cloſe to his rumpe, cut the taile quite off, ſo that Aliarte falling, awaked there-with, and beholding the Serpent, knew immediatly this was doone by Druſa Velonna, and looking more aduiſedly thereon, perceaued that it was Velonna her ſelfe: wherefore, becauſe ſhe ſhould not eaſily eſcape him, he drew foorth Queene Meliaes booke, & wrought ſo by reading thereon, that the Serpent could neither mount vp to the ayre, nor diue into the water, but houering a little aboue it, changed into her owne naturall ſhape: for all her ſkill failed in the preſence of this booke, ſo that Aliarte ſtepping to her, caught her faſt by the arme, and drew her perforce into the Shippe, where ſo ſoone as ſhee was entred, he bound her very ſtrongly, and clapt her cloſe vnder the hatches, becauſe ſhee ſhould compaſſe no more trecherie againſt them, and highly glad were they, that ſo wiſe, politique, and deadly an enemie to Chriſtendome, was in this manner become their priſoner.
               Without any more encombrances they ſailed on merily, and in ſhort while arriued at Constantinople, euen when Primaleon and Arguto were (by reaſon of their hurts) in greateſt daunger, which made the whole Court right ſad and penſiue. But when they heard that Aliarte was come, euerie one reioyced, hoping the wounded Knights would now be quickly cured, and much more encreaſed this ioy, when they knew he had brought faire Victoria, and Druſa Ve
                     
                        •
                     onna as his priſoner: as for the Prince Don Florian, hee would not as yet haue him ſeene there, becauſe he was to vndergoe a tedious trauaile, for deliuery of the Princeſſe Argentina daughter to Berolde King of Spayne, who (as he vnderſtoode by Druſa Velonna) was detayned in the Caſtell of 
                     •
                  amant in Perſia. Heere-vpon, deſirous alſo to ſee his wife T
                        •
                     rgiana, he made the more haſt in this iourney, leauing

abſolute order with the learned Aliarte, concerning the marriage of his daughter to Primaleon, committing all to the good liking of my Lord the Emperour.
               The Wizzard Aliarte, hauing brought faire Victoria a ſhoare, eſpied firſt the Princeſſe Polinarda, and with her was Floraman come to ſée the young Lady, ſo mounting on horſebacke, they rode into the Citty, and being alighted at the Pallace, all the Princeſſes and Ladies deſcended the ſteppes, to entertaine the beautifull Victoria, where paſt ſuch kiſſes and kinde embraces, as truly reported the affection they bare her. Aliarte hauing kiſſed the Emperours hand, was loth to ſlack time ouer-long for helpe of ye wounded Knights, wherefore, being deſirous to ſée them, Florendos and Palmerin taking him by each hand, they brought him to the Chamber where they languiſhed in paine, onely through the ſmall hope they had of amendment, but when they beheld the wizzard Aliarte, their former doubts were remooued, and nowe (by his meanes) they were halfe perſwaded of immediate recouery. He going ſeuerally to the bed of either Knight, whiſpered thus in their eares: I am come to helpe your greateſt extreamitie, & to procure your harts long wiſhed contentment.
               This promiſe ſo cheered their former drooping mindes, that he applying his precious oyles and vnguents to theyr woundes, made them expreſſe the next morning, manifeſt ſignes of a much better condition, and within eyght dayes they were ſo well amended, that they were able to goe kiſſe the Emperours hand, who welcommed them with a chéerfull countenaunce, not vnmindfull of the honourable promiſe he had made them. After ſome priuate conference had with Aliarte, his Maieſtie ſent for Florendos, Palmerin, Floraman and the reſt, whom he acquainted with his determination, and found each man thereto agréeable, except vnfortunate Floraman: who perceiuing that his own tongue muſt confirme her marriage to another, whom hee beyond all women in ye world moſt déerely affected, when his turne came to ſpeake, hee ſtoode awhile ſilent, as inwardly confounded

with extremity of paſſion. Neuertheleſſe, after ſome better ſuruay of his cogitations, to witnes yt hee more eſtéemed his fidelitie to the Emperour, then any care or reſpect of his owne life, he anſwered, that a more honourable match in marriage could not be made, then that thoſe two Knights ſhould enioy Victoria and Concordia, and ſo it paſt on in generall oppinion, which his Maieſtie fully ratified and appointed, to be ſollemnized ſo ſoone as ye Knights were thorowly cured.
               
                  Floraman, hearing the diſmall ſentence againſt his ioyes for euer, ſtepping forth before them in the midſt of the hall, thus began. Moſt mighty Emperour, I haue found by true experience, that to be a louer, hath béen the onely infelicity awayting on my life. Firſt I loued Altea, and by her death my loue proued fruitleſſe, after which, long time I liued diſconſolate, till vainly dreaming, that better happe might betide me, I became enamoured of Clariana, who reiected me with a ſcornfull diſdaine, as iuſtly my breach of faith deſerued, vowed to the ghoſt of my deceaſed Altea. But then a worſe affliction befell me, and a third amourous humour enthralled my ſences, namely, to the faire Lady Victoria, whoſe mariage now being likewiſe agréed vpon, giues me yet this benefit, that I may liue heereafter among poore deſpiſed Louers, performing ſome rare and memorable acte, that may regiſter the fame of her beautie to all poſterities.
               No ſooner had he thus ſpoken, but ſetting the pommell of his ſword againſt the ground, hee fell ſuddenly vppon the poynt thereof, which paſt quite thorow his body, before any Knight could lay hand vpon him, albeit they ranne to ſtay him as ſpéedily as they could. This deſperate miſhappe of Floraman was generally lamented, and the Emperor him ſelfe tooke it very grieuouſly, becauſe Floraman had béene a Knight of good eſtéeme, and euer-more faithfull to the Emperour: notwithſtanding, ſeeing ſadneſſe and ſorrow could not nowe redreſſe it, they concluded to honour him with a royall buriall.
            
            
               
               CHAP. LXXIII. How as they were conſulting in the Court, about the marriages of Primaleon and Arguto, with the faire young Ladies Victoria & Concordia: the two Knights were ſummoned thence to a very ſtrange aduenture.
               
                  SOone after the ſadde funerall of loue-forſaken Floraman, the Emperour, beeing very reſpectiue of his paſſed promiſe, ſending for the Empreſſe and Miragarda, imparted to them his priuate thoughts, about the marriages before concluded on, and found them thereto very tractable: ſauing yt 
                  Miragarda expreſſed ſome vnwillingneſſe, to haue Concordia wedded ſo young, ſhe hauing as yet ſcarce attained to fourteene yéeres of age, neuertheleſſe, ſhe yéelded to the order agréed vpon, and then they determined, that the next day they ſhould acquaint the young Ladies there-with, to the end, that vpon the feaſt day of Pentecoſt, which was within leſſe then a moneth enſuing, the marriages might be publiquely ſollemnized.
               So departed the Empreſſe and Miragarda to their chambers, where the day following, they conferred with the two young Ladies, telling them how the Emperour had intended, and their Fathers likewiſe thereto conſented. Victoria, expecting daily to heare theſe tydings, could not diſſemble the matter ſo cunningly, but that the quicke-conceited Empreſſe plainly perceiued, ſhee no way miſliked ſo gracious an offer: but as for Concordia, ſhe rather deſired ſportfull ſocietie, with ſuch young Damoſels as were her playmates and equalls, then as yet to be burdened with the cares of marriage, whereof her gréene yéeres were yet ſo vncapable, as ſhe knew not how to ſhape an aunſwere.
               
                  But when her Mother at large declared, the honourable worth & valour of Arguto, as alſo what a perpetuall league of amitie, by this meanes would be lincked betwéene him and her brother, ſhe was the eaſier won to conſent. Thus were the mariages fully concluded on, and the day of Pentecoſt abſolutely appointed, for the publique ſolemnization of them both: wherof the two Knights hauing likewiſe intelligence, how ioyfully they tooke it I refer to your iudgement.
               Vpon the Sonday following, as the Knights ſate pleaſantly diſpoſed in the Hall after dinner, entercourſing ſuch deuiſes as themſelues thought meeteſt, they heard a great noyſe in the ayre ouer the Pallace, and ſtarting vp to be further reſolued thereof, they ſawe an armed Knight enter at one of ye windowes, with a huge crooked bill in his hand, which (clapping to the ground before the Emperour and them all) he thus began. Inuinſible Monarche, I am the moſt vnfortunate Knight, which liues at this day in the world: but not to make ſad this mirthfull Court with my miſhaps, I wil conceale my diſgraces, & acquaint ye onely with the cauſe of my cōming hether. Briefely then (dread Lord) to finde ſome eaſe for my inſupportable miſerie, I néede the ayde of ſome valiant Knight héere in your Court: hauing thus ſpoken, he ſtoode ſilent, as expecting an aunſwere.
               The Emperour, although hee deſired that his Court might be famous, yet in regarde ſo many gallant bloods were there preſent, he ſtoode in doubt whom he ſhould elect for this enterpriſe, without giuing offence to all the reſt: and (indéede) a great murmuring aroſe in the Hall, becauſe euery man expreſt himſelfe ready, and it was doubtful leaſt ſome diſcord would ariſe among them, which nothing but the Emperours preſence did hinder, for Florendos and his ſonne Primaleon fell to thwarting ſpéeches, either ſcorning to giue the other place in matter of honour.
               While the Court continued in this ſpléenefull humour, the Knight well perceiuing it, and fearing if any diſorder

enſued, he might depart thence without any aſſiſtance, requeſting to be heard, he thus procéeded. Great Emperour, let me intreate this gracious fauour, that I may my ſelfe make choiſe of the Knight, whom I ſhal imagine as méeteſt for my purpoſe. With all my hart, replied the Emperour: as iudging this the likelieſt way to auoyde all partialitie, and qualifie the diſcord among his Knights. Firſt, (quoth the Knight) I deſire to knowe the Emperours Nephew, named Primaleon, and becauſe not farre from the place of my torments, there liues in the like miſery a noble Ladie, the onely woman that euer made proofe of her loyaltie: I would likewiſe haue another Knight, called Arguto, who I am aſſured will as honourably end this aduenture, as he effected that of the enchaunted Sepulcher.
               Theſe two young gallants, who had almoſt renewed their auncient enmitie, as couetous of this honourable imployment, when they ſaw this election made of thē twaine, before all the other great ſpirits of the Court, they were highly pleaſed: and becauſe the Knight was vppon his departure, they craued licence of the Emperour and all the other Princes, then knéeling before their affianced Ladies, they deſired to kiſſe their hands, and bare the title of theyr Knights. Victoria, knowing how long time Primaleon had loued her, moſt kindly embraced him, ſaying: Seeing it pleaſeth my Lord the Emperor, and my noble Father, that hereafter I muſt be yours in marriage, I accept you, not ſo much for my Knight, as for my Lorde and chiefe Commaunder. But Concordia, béeing ſlenderly ſkild in loues affaires, knew not what to anſwere, but that ſhe was contented, and if her worth might make him glorious, ſhe told him plainly he ſhould one day haue it.
               Now becauſe theſe young and amourous bloods, thought time neuer long enough in theſe kind of purpoſes, ye Knight with whom they were to depart, clapping each of them vppon the ſhoulder, ſaid. Young Lords, ſo important is the buſines which I muſt bring you to, that it will put yée paſt the remembrance of theſe faire Ladies. The Knights thus awaked

from their louely traunce, preſently aroſe, and taking their leaue, went to put on their Armour, returning in ſhort while right gallantly appointed. Then did ye Knight cauſe a Ship of Chriſtall to floate about the Hall, whereinto he conducted ſeuerally the Knights, & preſently it mounted vp into the ayre, fléeting away with ſuch wonderfull ſwiftnes, as all of them had quickly left the ſight of it: to the great admiration of the Emperour, and extreame griefe of poore Victoria, who rather could haue wiſhed with al her hart, that her Knight had ſtaied to effect her marriage.
               The Ship in two houres ſpace was gone ſo farre, that the Knights thought they were brought to the furtheſt part of the worlde, when ſuddenly the Ship falling downe on a great ſtone, ſéemed as if it was ſhiuerd all in peeces, and they thought themſelues likewiſe to be broken in the ſame manner, whereat the ſtrange Knight laughed hartilie, becauſe he knew it was but a vaine apparition. So mightie was the fall of the Ship on the ſtone, as if it had béen made of the hardeſt yron, it had béen ſufficient to haue broken it, but the enchauntment beeing of greater power, made it ſtand whole and ſound vpright on the ſtone: when they iſſuing foorth, followed the Knight, and he being theyr guide ſome ſmall diſtance thence, went downe into a Caue that ſéemed very darke, beckning to Primaleon that he ſhould follow him, and Arguto to ſtay till he returned. It was not long before he came backe againe, and then went toward a huge thicke Wood, whereinto hee wafted him with his hand to enter, and ſo Arguto very reſolutely did.
            
            
               
               CHAP. LXXIIII. Of a ſtrange aduenture which hapned to Primaleon in the Caue vnder ground, whereinto the ſtrange Knight had conducted him.
               
                  
                     PRimaleon being thus within the Caue, went downward aboue a mile by eſtimation, not diſcerning any light all the way hee had gone, till at laſt hee came to certaine high windowes, whereby ſome ſmall glimmering entred into the Caue. Still paſt he on along, till at length hee eſpied a Wall, which was built with the bones of dead men and beaſts, and therein was a gate made all with the heads of men, ſerpents, horſes and Griffons, in a cunning diuerſitie mingled together, whereby he gathered, that it had béen the handy-worke of men.
               Boldly ſtept Primaleon in at this gate, but afterward he was ſorry he had aduentured ſo farre, for hee ſaw it was a ſpacious ſquare plot, being round about encloſed with that wall, at the further ſide whereof hee ſawe a higher gate, where there ſtoode a beaſt greater then any Elephant, putting his head directly toward him, and feeding on diuers mangled bodies, which were ſliced into ſo many péeces, that he could not geſſe whether they were men or beaſtes. No ſooner had hee ſtept a little forward, but this hideous beaſt, as if he were extremely hunger-ſtarued, came mainly againſt him, when Primaleon (as loth to be deuoured by ſo rauenous a Monſter) hauing his ſworde ready drawne, gaue him a mightie blow vppon the head, but the ſword rebounded back againe vnto him, as if he had ſmitten vppon a hard ſtone. Then lifted ye beaſt vp ſuddenly one of his forefeete, before Primaleon had ſufficiently retired, and faſtning hold vpon his pouldron, rent it quite away, & miſt verie little, of wreſting the ſword from forth of his hand.
               
                  This graſpe of the Monſter, gaue him plainly to vnderſtand, that hee muſt not receiue ſuch another gripe from him, except hee meant to part with life and all, wherefore, keeping him off with his weapon ſo well as he could, he gaue the Monſter diuers wounds in the midſt of his body, and albeit the hurts were ſoundly giuen indeede, yet was the beaſt of ſuch a wonderful groſſenes, as they pierced not into any of the vitall parts. While the battaile thus continued, he noated a matter moſt admirable to be reported, for of the blood which iſſued foorth of the Monſters woundes, aroſe vp ſundry ſtrange miſhapen beaſts, beeing ſome of them which he had before deuoured, and they went aſide into an angle of the roome, menacing Primaleon with their lookes and howlings, as if they intended ſome miſchiefe toward him.
               By this time was our Champion ſo ouer-toyled, that being almoſt out of breath, he was glad to ſhift from place to place, yet with a héedfull eye to the Monſter, inuoking inwardly the helpe of heauen, to ſtrengthen him in ſo great an extreamitie: in which meditation of minde, hee beheld the Knight which had cōducted him thether, enter in at the gate with the hooked Bill on his back, and oppoſed himſelfe againſt the Monſter, which preſently left Primaleon, & (as bearing deadly hatred to the Knight) turned furiouſly vpon him. So dexteriouſly did the Knight handle his bill, that he wounded the Monſter in many places therwith, and ſtil as blood ſtreamed from him, aroſe ſundry kindes of ſtrange beaſts, all which (at one loude groane giuen by ye Monſter) ran furiouſly vpon the Knight, & rent him in innumerable péeces, which were al afterward ſuddenly ſwalowed by the monſter himſelfe, the bil only left lying on the groūd. This ſudden death & deuouring of the Knight, droue Primaleon to ſome little amazement, and perceiuing the monſter, now to make a freſh toward him, bethought him of the bill, wherewith the Knight had fought ſo nimbly, and giuen diuers ſhrewd hurts to the beaſt, that ſome vertue (touching the enchauntment) might remaine in it.
               
                  Quickly he caught it vp in his hand, and although he had no great ſkill in the vſe of ſuch a weapon, becauſe it nothing appertained to Knighthoode, yet hee made it to ſerue his turne in ſuch ſort, as at euery blow he drew blood from the beaſt: and happening at laſt to wounde him in the bellie, he perceaued the hurt to open ſo wide, that the Knight leapt foorth vpon his féete aliue and well, and hee wreſting again forcibly the Bill from Primaleon, gaue a freſh charge vppon the Monſter, whoſe belly immediatly was become whole and ſound. The other beaſts, which ſtill roſe vp out of the Monſters blood, as they had done before, tore him againe in péeces, and the Monſter quickly ſwallowed him vp, when Primaleon recouering the Bill once more, defended him ſelfe there-with againſt the huge beaſt, who now (by reaſon of his many woundes and loſſe of much blood) went ſomewhat faintly vp and downe.
               
                  Primaleon taking good notice thereof, conceaued in his minde, that if he could diſpatch the other leſſer beaſts, the Knight ſhould no more be torne in péeces: where-vpon he fiercely made againſt them, cutting a many of them off by the legges, whereby they being abandoned of the enchauntment, could riſe no more, their legges in this manner being parted from their bodies. Hée made ſuch a ſlaughter of theſe beaſts, that but very fewe of them remained aliue, all which ranne ſpéedily behinde the great Monſter, where in a moment they had bound vp his woundes, as hee ſéemed now as able as euer.
               When Primaleon ſaw the Monſter ſo ſtrangely recouered, hee had good cauſe to doubt the iſſue of his enterpriſe, notwithſtanding, he gaue the beaſt ſharper wounds then he had doone before, with a ſetled reſolution to die or conquer: and caſting his head aſide, he behelde the Knight to ſtand hard by him, who taking the Bill againe from Primaleon, with very great courage aſſayled the Monſter. Right quickly did the beaſt catch him by the arme, & flinging him aloft, caſt him quite ouer beyond the wall, ſo that Primaleon knew not what was become of him, and hauing

now no other defence then his ſword only, he much miſtruſted what might happen to him: but turning aſide, he eſpied the Bill throwne back againe ouer the wall, which (with no little ioy) he tooke vp, and la
                     •
                  d
                     •
                   there-with chéerefully at the Monſters legges, ſo that in ſhort time he had cut off two of them, the far legge behinde, & the néereſt before, when his vnweldy body falling on ye earth, made the ground to tremble and quake in ſuch manner, as the wall of dead mens bones was altogether ruined, and then the Knight came againe to him, ſaying. Neuer waſt time (Sir) in killing of this Monſter, but goe you onward, and you ſhall behold me in ſuch mercileſſe torments, as are to continue many hundreds of yeares, except by your vertue onely I may be deliuered. No ſooner had he thus ſpoken, but Primaleon ſawe him diue into a deepe water, whereon he had not looked very long, but ſuddainly there aroſe vp a goodly Tower, engirt round about with the water that ran very ſwiftly, & two ſauage Beares he ſawe running about the Tower, purſuing the Knight who fled before them, & euer as they caught hold of him, they bit him moſt cruelly, ſo ran they with him into the Tower, where (out of a window) he heaued vp his hands to Primaleon, deſiring him to take pitty & come to help him, which mooued his minde to ſuch compaſſion, as hee would gladly haue paſt through a thouſand waters to yéelde him ſuccour. After he had walked on the bancks a while about the water, to ſee if he could finde any place for paſſage, he beheld from a window a great Baſket let downe, which the two Beares droue toward him from the Rock, as deſirous to haue him leape into it, & they would thereby conuay him to the Tower: but the Knight cried to him out at another window, that by no meanes he ſhould accept their ſubtill offer, but ſtay, and awaite a better meanes of bringing him to the Rock, where-vpon, the Beares more and more laboured toward him with the Baſket, making ſignes, as if hee could haue no other paſſage. Primaleon ſtill thruſt away the Baſket from him, & perceauing no liuely way to helpe him to the Tower, in the ſelfe ſame place where he ſaw the

Knight diue, there did he likewiſe boldly caſt in him ſelfe, and aroſe at the Tower againe, as the Knight before did: but as he offered to mount ye ſteps to enter, the Beares flew vpon him with ſuch maine violence, that one of them griped him ſo ſtrongly by the head, as he had almoſt falne downe in a ſwoune. But his dauntleſſe ſpirit ſcorning all ſeruile feare, quickly ſhook off this paſſion, & hauing the Bill in his hand, which he would not willingly part withall, he gaue one of the Beares ſuch a blow therewith on the head, that a great part of it fell on the ground: in this while, the other Beare ſo gript him about the body with his pawes, as hee was no way able to ſtir him ſelfe, & the wounded Beare got ſo ſtrong hold of his leg, (being furiouſly mad with his neere approching death) that bruſing in péeces his armed greaues or gamaſhes, made him to féele intollerable paine. But now did Primaleon moſt manifeſtly declare, that his equall (for chiualry and valour) liued not in the world, for he catching the Beare faſt by the throate, to make him looſe his horrible gripes, tweakt his weazand with ſuch ſtrength, that he well-néere ſtrangled him, when ſéeing him ſelfe at liberty, he ſtill held his holde with one hand, and drawing forth his dagger with the other, gaue ſo many ſtabs vpon the beaſts throat, that he fell downe dead, and both the Beares bodies immediatly vaniſhed, to the no little admiration of Primaleon.
               
               Then aſcended he the ſteppes, thinking he had alreadie concluded the aduenture, but the Knight, for whoſe deliuerance he had thus dangerouſly aduentured, ſnatcht the Bill out of his hand, as before hee had doone, in the perilous fight betweene him and the Monſter, whereof Primaleon making no reckoning, nor miſtruſting any ill intent in him, thought hee might with more ſafety mount vp the ſtaires. But the Knight oppoſed the Bill to his breaſt, as if hee meant to kill him there-with, which vngentle act in him, greeued Primaleon more then all his paines had doone, in that hee rather expected aſſiſtaunce at his hand, then thus to threaten his life, as ſtill hee did: where-vpon, his

pacience conuerting to angry choller, he made an offer to ſmite at the Knight with his ſword, but then was hee ſuddainly metamorphozed to a Leopard, and aſſayled Primaleon ſo cruelly with his téeth and nailes, as hee was diuers times in very deſperate hazards.
               Nowe would he either be a conquerour, or elſe Deaths captiue, and perceauing the beaſt to ſtande vpright on his hinder féete, he threw by his ſword, and cloſed with him as if they would wraſtle: but Primaleons armes excéeding the beaſts legges in length, gaue him ſuch a graſpe vpon an aduantage, that the beaſt was almoſt thratled, and fearing leaſt he ſhould die in that manner, he called thus to him in his manly voyce. Alas Sir Knight, the continuall torment I haue ſuffered ſo many yeares already, me thinkes your ſelfe might account ſufficient, and not paine me more betwéene your ſtrong armes. But notwithſtanding theſe ſpeeches, and diuers other entreates deliuered like a man, Primaleon would not let him at liberty, but held him ſtifly ſtill, (by what meanes I knowe not) from the forme of a Leopard, he changed again to the ſelfe ſame ſhape, as when he firſt conducted him into the Caue, when expreſſing ioyfull lookes, hee thus ſpake to Primaleon. Well maiſt thou vaunt thy ſelfe to be the beſt Knight in the world, in being able to accompliſh ſo dreadfull an aduenture.
               When Primaleon heard him ſpeake ſo humanely, he let goe his holde, and ſuddainly appeared to them an auncient Knight, who was Lord of the Tower, and an expert Nigromancer, being father to the Lady, which was to be enfranchiſed from her thraldome by Arguto, with very ſad looks he began in this maner. It greeues me (Sir Knight) that it is your fortune to ſet at liberty, this wretched man and diſloyall Louer, from the enchauntment wherein I had confinde him, as purpoſing to haue his ſinne ſufficiently puniſhed: and much more it offendes mee, that the other Knight which came with you, ſhall likewiſe ende the enchauntment of the indiſcréet Girle my daughter, the whole ſtate whereof I wil more at large acquaint you with, when

ſhe is at liberty, if ſuch be her good hap. So deſcending the ſtaires together, they came to a gate of the Tower, where w
                     •
                  s a Bridge for them to paſſe ouer on, and being come into the open field, they ſaw the Wood whereto Arguto went, ſuddaine burſt foorth on a flaming fire, which greatly gréeued Primaleon, as fearing leaſt his deare friend ſhould ſo cruelly periſh, of whom his Siſter had giuen him ſuch eſpeciall charge, before their ſetting forth from Constantinople, that he ſhould by no meanes forſake his company, wherefore he would haue gone to helpe him. But the graue Magitian, commanded him in no wiſe to ſtirre thence, becauſe his vtmoſt power was not ſufficient, to end the labour alotted to Arguto: ſo diuers diſcourſes paſſing betwéene them, they ſtayed to expect the iſſue of the aduenture.
            
            
               CHAP. LXXV. How Arguto (with great perill of his life) brought to end the aduenture of the enchaunted Lady, and receaued freedome of his ſuſpition, that Fortune was not fauourable vnto him.
               
                  
                     ARguto, after he was entred into the Wood, ſaw the boughes knit faſt together behinde him all the way he went, in ſuch an intricate and indiſſoluable manner, as all his labour was in vaine in offering to returne backe, therefore of neceſſity hee muſt goe onward ſtill, reſolued for what ſo euer might happen vnto him. Hee had not gone aboue the ſpace of halfe a mile, but hee came to a Knightly Tent, where-into as he would haue entred, he beheld a cruell villaine, who with his knife had cut the throate of a beautifull Lady, & ſo left her on the ground to bléede to death.
               
                  
                  Arguto was ſo moued with this inhumaine act, eſpeciallie to ſee how pittifully ſhe lay panting, that boldly he ruſht into the Tent to kill the villaine, if he gaue him not the better reaſon for what he had done: but the villaine ſcorning to aunſwer him, and expreſſing no baſe feare or cowardiſe, coming ſtoutly to the Knight, holding his long knife cloſely hid in his hand, ſtabd Arguto through the Armour very eaſilie, wounding him a little vpon the breaſt, and doubtleſſe had ſlaine him with the blow, but that he drew back when he felt the hurt.
               Héereby he gathered, that except he were more héedefull of this villaines hand, he might ſoone there be murdered, a matter more hatefull to a generous nature, to periſh by the trecherie of ſuch a villaine, then the cruelleſt death he could receaue from the weapon of a Knight, where-vpon, drawing forth his ſword, which all this while he refuſed to doo, becauſe the villaine had no other weapon then a knife, hee ſpake to him thus. I will be more reſpectiue, as becomes a Knight toward any ſuch as thou art, for ſéeing thou haſt ſo villainouſly wounded me, without any weapon in my hand to withſtand thée, defend thy ſelfe ſo well as thou canſt againſt mee, for I ſhall right my wrong as I can or may. I will vſe thee worſe (ſaid the villaine) if I come but néere thée, therefore it were wiſedome for thée to get thée gone, that I may execute what this Ladies father hath commanded me. Well may he be tearmed a cruell father (quoth Arguto) that giues direction for ſo bloody vſage of his owne childe, therefore although it coſt me my life, I will doo my beſt to frée her from thée.
               Hauing thus ſpoken, he deliuered a very fierce ſtroke at the villaine, which cunningly hee receaued vpon his long knife, and helde out againſt Arguto with ſuch dauntleſſe courage, that albeit he was vnarmed, he was ſo ready euerie way with his knife, as, doo what the Knight could, againſt euery ſtroke it was ſtill his defence, and no where could they light but only on the knife. Aboue an houre and more the fight thus continued, in which time, Arguto conceited

with him ſelfe, in what part of him the force of the enchauntment lay, whereby the villaine was able to ſtand ſo long againſt him, and yet all his paines no more to endamage him. At laſt, by wary obſeruation he perceaued, that he defended himſelfe onely with his right hand, managing his knife there-with as him ſelfe pleaſed, and helde his left hand directly behinde him, neuer offering it forward, either to breake, awarde, or put by any blow: héere-vpon he apprehended this imagination, that if hee could compaſſe to hurt him in the left hand, hee might the ſooner preuaile againſt him.
               Now began he to make all his ayme that way, and the villaine well perceauing it, was the more diligent to preuent him with his knife, and defended his left hand with meruailous carefulnes, ſo that neuer a thruſt or blow could once come néere it. Neuertheleſſe, among the multitude of mighty maine ſtrokes, one (by good hap) miſt the villaines knife, and lighting betwéene his arme and body, did quite cut off his left hand: but the villaine catching it vp quickly with the other hand, ranne away from him ſo ſpéedily, that he could ſcarce diſcerne which way he tooke, and the Lady likewiſe, lying all this while as quite bereft of life, ſtarting ſuddainly vp on her feete, fled away from him he knew not how. To ſee them both gone in this ſtraunge order, made him wonder thereat not a little in his minde, and entring the Tent to reſt him ſelfe a while, he was ſcarſly ſet down, but a Satire all couered with long ſhaggie haire, holding a young trée in his hand as his weapon, came in vpon him, ſaying with a loude and hollow voyce. Miſchaunce (and not good fortune) brought thee into this Wood, where who ſoeuer enters, muſt die the death.
               As he had ſpoken theſe words, he gaue him ſuch a cruell blow with his bat, that bruſing his helmet very ſhrewdly, made him ſo aſtonned, that as he thought to riſe, he ſtaggerd to and fro: where-vpon, the Satire ſeeing him in ſuch an amazement, caught him vp in his armes, and ranne away with him toward a Fountaine, meaning to make him drink

more then he ſtood in néede of. He had not gone aboue halfe a bowe-ſhoote, but Arguto recouering his former ſpirits, puld the Satire ſo ſtrongly by the long haire, that the Monſter (growing angry to be haled in ſuch rude ſort) threwe Arguto with ſuch violence againſt a huge flint, as he made him lie ſtill enough from ſtirring in haſt, and but that the Satire had not his trée there with him, our Knight had neuer gone thence to ſée his Concordia. While the Monſter ranne backe to the Tent to fetch his trée, Arguto (being of an high and heroyick ſpirit) was gotten vp on his féete, purpoſing to defend him ſelfe from any more ſuch blowes, and the Satire being returned to him, layd ſuch thicke and furious ſtrokes at him, that he could not retort one back againe at the Satire, but onely had worke enough to doo, to defend and beare off his angry blowes: for in regard of the Monſters nakednes, one blowe or thruſt of the Knights, (in his owne conceite) might eaſily haue ſped him. The battaile continuing in this manner, he ſaw the Lady come running toward him, with a naked Rapier in her throate, and pittifully deſiring helpe at his hand.
               
                  Arguto, who albeit he deſired the death of this Satire, hauing twiſe offended him in ſuch dangerous ſort, yet imminent & extraordinary perill of ye Lady, made him forſake the Satire, and follow her, who guided him to a goodly plaine, where ſtoode ready armed thirty valiant Knights, all which engirt him preſently in a ring, and euery man had a maine ſtroke at him: but he (by good hap) ſtriking at one of them, his ſword lighted on the creſt of his helmet, where-vpon the Knight immediatly drew backe, as if he could endure the fight no longer.
               Heereby he halfe perſwaded him ſelfe, that the enchantment conſiſted in the creſts of their helmets, and therefore ſhe ſhaped his ayme accordingly, whereby he quickly made many of them retire, when ſtepping foorth from amongſt them, he ſet his backe againſt a broad leaued Béech, where he both ſtoutly defended, and wel breathed him ſelfe. As he ſtoode thus oppreſt by the multitude of their blowes, fréely

deliuered on euery ſide, he eſpied the Satire come running thether, who laying hande on the Rapier in the Ladies throate, hurld her vppon his ſhoulder, and away he ranne againe with no meane haſt.
               
                  Arguto was greatly grieued, to ſée her thus violentlie hurried thence, wherefore, in hope of recouering her, hee ventured to make his way through the Knights, and handled his weapon with ſuch ſucceſſe among them, that by the blowes he gaue them on the Helmets, thrée onely of them remained to confront him, which thrée, either becauſe they durſt not contende any longer, or whether the enchauntment would not permit them, they likewiſe right gladlie retired. This ſucceſſe was no little comfort to Arguto, and added a chéerefull perſwaſion of finiſhing the aduenture, ſo that neuer minding how weary he was, he went to purſue the Satire which had carried away the Lady, and the ſubtill Monſter, making a mock at Argutos great labour, ran in and out leaping, ſkipping, and dauncing, neuer ſtraying farre, but keeping ſtill néere him, the Lady continually crying to the Knight for helpe.
               
                  Arguto melted with meere compaſſion, & was extreamly tired with following the Satire, for the ſwifteſt Harior in the world could not haue out-ſtript him, much leſſe a man armed, and ouer-wearied with ſo long combatting. All which notwithſtanding, he would not as yet giue ouer his purſute, but noated ſtill the Satires friſkes and gambaldings, often looking backe with mocks and gires at the Knight, till hee was ouer-reached in his owne folly, for dauncing careleſly, and looking backe at the very ſame inſtant, he chaunced to ſtumble at the roote of a trée, and falling downe, the Lady eſcaped from him, running with open armes vnto Arguto, and embraced him in ſuch forcible manner, as he could not deuiſe which way to ſtay himſelfe, which the Satire perceiuing, came backe againe toward him.
               
                  Arguto, béeing helde in this ſort by the Lady, and her leggs likewiſe faſt twined about his, he gathered héereby,

that albeit it was to his mightie encombrance, yet ſhee did it as loth the Satire ſhould ſeaze on her againe, nor coulde he ſhunne a dangerous blow which the Monſter gaue him with his tree, ſo that now hee was in two mightie extremities, one, right fearefull of the Ladies iniurie, the other, that he had no meanes howe to helpe himſelfe, but doubtleſſe his life muſt there needes miſcarie. But ſée how it fortuned, the Satires tree ſmiting Arguto on the Helmet, deſcended vpon the Ladies ſhoulder, and ſuch was the vehemence of the blow, that ſhee (looſing her holde) tumbled downe backward.
               When Arguto ſawe himſelfe fréed from his former oppreſſion, he ſtept boldly to the Satire, & giuing a full blow at the hand wherein he held the trée, cut it quite off, ſo that the Monſter roaring with ſence of his paine, fledde away from him ſo faſt as he could runne. The Lady lying all this while in a dead traunce, ſtarting vp on her féete, ſaid. Sir Knight, if thy hart ſerue thée ſo well, as that thou dareſt vndertake an attempt which I ſhall ſhewe thée, my hopes will then aſſuredly perſwade me, that not onely my ſelfe ſhall be freed frō this enchauntment, but diuers other beautifull Ladies beſide. Guide mee whether thou wilt, quoth Arguto, for a Knight ought not to queſtion after any caſe of perrill, but boldly aduenture on any enterpriſe of honour, whatſoeuer.
               So following the Lady, ſhee led him along a very narrow crooked cauſey, till at length hee behelde a Tower, which ſeemed as if it were made of Siluer, and being come neere it, they ſaw an high engine of warre like a Ramme, made with a deuiſe to let vp and downe, ſuch as were vſed in elder times, before they had any knowledge of Ordinance, to hurle great ſtones, or any other annoyance therwith into a Towne or Caſtell. By this engine, quoth the Lady, muſt you gaine your entrance, and ſuffer your ſelfe to be throwne aloft vppon the Tower, becauſe there is no other paſſage admitted. Arguto tooke it very ſtrangelie, that he ſhould oppoſe his life to ſuch manifeſt perrill, but

his great courage, treading all feare vnder-foote, he boldly entred into the cradle fixed on the maine beame, being the receptacle for whatſoeuer ſhould paſſe into the Tower.
               No ſooner ſtoode he vpright in this conueyance, but he heard moſt delicate Muſique ſound within the Tower, as it ſéemed for ioy of libertie and fréedome, which the people there impriſoned hoped for by this Knight, who durſt ſo aduenturouſly put himſelfe into the carriage, which no man (till now) was ſo hardie as to offer it. The engine ſuddenly mounting it ſelfe vp, in a moment hee was lifted aloft vpon the Tower, without any other harme or perrill at all, where-vpon the Muſique preſently ceaſſed, & a great noyſe of Armour-clattering was heard, whereby hee expected ſome rough encounter. Then beheld he a wilde Beaſt ſo ſtrangely miſhapen, as he could not comprehend his true naturall forme: for he had the head of a Beare, the téeth and tuſhes of a Boare, the necke and breaſt of a Lyon, the tallants of a Griffon, and his taile deuided in two parts, hauing at each end a hooke of ſtéele, with the poynts thereof ſo ſharpe and piercing, as they were able to enter the very ſoundeſt proofe.
               
                  Arguto beeing well ſkild in ſuch matters of enchauntment, perſwaded himſelfe, that with this Beaſt was the lateſt trouble he ſhould finde there, and therefore reſolued to ſhew his vttermoſt vallour. The Monſter was not ſlow in aſſayling him with ſuch fury, as would haue diſmaied any hart to behold it, hauing neuer ſeene ſo eugly a Monſter, but Arguto, purpoſing to kéepe off from his tallants and teeth, made many faire proffers to cut his leggs in ſunder, which the Monſter ſtill right cunningly auoyding, ſmote one of his long tuſhes into his Shield, and rent it from about his necke ſo forcibly, that he made him fall downe flat vppon his face, where he might haue béene preſt to death with the Monſters huge weight, but that right quickly he recouered footing againe, but he could not ſhunne a ſudden gripe with his tallants, which piercing through the cloſing of his Armour, wounded him a little in the left flanck.
               
                  This hurt ſo much diſpleaſed Arguto, that ſtriking couragiouſly at the Monſter, he gaue him a great wound full in the breaſt, for which he receiued an immediate caſtiſement, by being ſmitten into the ſight of his Caſke with the Monſters tuſhe, which tearing downe the whole Beuer, gript his head with ſuch extreame anguiſh, that hee was conſtrained to cut the laces of his Helmet, and let it in that ſort be taken from him. Being thus without both Shielde and Helmet, his life ſtood on ſhrewd termes of hazard, and doubtleſſe had miſcaried, if he had not laboured to end the battaile in this manner.
               Feigning as if he could hold out no longer, he fell downe flat againe vppon his face, and the beaſt intending to teare him in peeces, ſtoode ſtradling ouer him, when ſtabbing his ſword vp into the Monſters belly, he made ſo large an incition, that his bowels dropt out vpon the ground, and then Arguto crept from vnder him, leaſt with his huge weight he ſhould haue queld him. Now heard hee the Muſique againe, but with farre louder and ſwéeter ſtraines then before, as ſéeming that the aduenture was almoſt concluded, and nowe came the Lady againe vnto him, with tenne other faire beauties attending on her, all of them together ioyfully ſaying: Welcome the braueſt Knight that euer bare Armes.
               
               So taking him by the hand, they guided him thence, and brought him downe into a faire ſquare Court, where no doore could be diſcerned for paſſage out of ye Towre, which made him awhile to ſtand as abaſhed, doubting leaſt the Ladies intended ſome trecherie toward him, but one of them ſpake to him in this manner. Sir Knight, doe but lift vp this ſtone, and preſently the Towre will vaniſh, and the enchauntment ceaſe.
               
                  Arguto, thinking nothing impoſſible for him to performe, went to the ſtone, and putting his hand into a great yron ring, which was faſtened directly in the midſt of the ſtone, he lifted vp the huge ſtone, and threw it a pretty way from him, albeit it was ſo great and weightie, that tenne

ordinary men could hardly mooue it. Out of the place which the ſtone had couered, ſtarted vp the leaſt Dwarffe that euer was ſéene, who ſkipping about very pleaſantly, tooke vp certaine glaſſes out of the vaulte, and breaking them in péeces one againſt another, vaniſhed out of ſight ſuddenly, and with him the Tower and the Wood likewiſe, ſo that Arguto and the eleuen Ladies, found themſelues at libertie in a large ſpacious Fielde. There found he the aged Nigromancer, and Primaleon, calling vnto him with a loude voyce, and the Lady knowing her old angry Father, durſt not approche néere him, fearing leaſt he would againe encloſe her in the enchauntment, as hauing already taſted his cruell ſeueritie.
               But Arguto ſecuring her, went chéerefully to méet them, when being come together, the aged Father could not forbeare but very louingly embraced his Daughter, the like did Primaleon and Arguto. So going along with the olde man to his abyding, it drew to Supper time, where ſitting downe at a Table right ſumptuouſly prepared, all the ſupper while, the olde mans Daughter did nothing elſe, but earneſtly looke vppon the deliuered Knight, and breathed forth many broken ſighes, whereby Primaleon and Arguto coniectured, that the young Lady was enamoured of the Knight, ſo paſt they the ſupper time in mirthfull talke, and pleaſant diſcourſings.
            
            
               
               CHAP. LXXVI. How the aged Magitian ſhewed the cauſe, wherfore hee had enchaunted the Knight and his daughter, confining them to ſo long a date of puniſhment.
               
                  QVickly after the Tables were with-drawne, the old man commaunded the Squires to walke aſide, and then turning towarde the Knights, he thus began. Honourable and vertuous Lords, I am vndoubtedly perſwaded, that you repute mee as a cruell & vnkinde Father, beeing bleſſed but with one Daughter onely, I ſhould be ſo tranſported with furie and paſſion, to cenſure her with ſo ſeuere a puniſhment: but if I tell you the ſtrangeſt caſe that euer you heard, I doubt not but your oppinion will bee ſo altered, as you will wonder I ſhould be ſo humane and gentle, in inflicting no heauier a iudgement on her: albeit in the end, each fault ſhould merritoriouſly haue béene doubled on this diſloyall Knight, well woorthy to endure vnconfined torments, ſo long as this ſpacious rounde hath continuance.
               Know then (faire Lords) that this enfranchaſed Knight named Brunoro, redéemed by your manly paines and trauaile, was Lorde of a Caſtell ſome ſixe leagues diſtance hence, who being enriched with countleſſe treaſure, would make no ſpare of large and liberall ſummes, to haue at his pleaſure, the faireſt maidens dwelling in theſe parts. Hée hearing that my Daughter was ranckt & reckoned among thoſe of choiſeſt beautie, attempted not by coyne or rich promiſes to win her to his purpoſe, becauſe he well knew,

ſuch courſes were ſillie and very vnſauourie, to preuaile with a Ladie of high blood & reſolution: wherfore he practiſed by more facill and tractable meanes, and which much more eaſilier preuaileth with light-headed Damoſels, to wit, patheticall ſpéeches, quick and queintly couched, ſealed with ſad ſighes, vowes, & diſſembled atteſtations, that he was truly and ſincerely deuoted to her in affection.
               The young virgine, altogether vnacquainted with loues idle dalliances, caſting a raſh inconſiderate eye vpon him, apprehended (ouer-haſtilie) that hee was a man of comlie perſonage, debonaire, well qualitied, rich, and ſo worthie in loue to be reſpected, that ſhe gaue him ſo franck a poſſeſſion of her hart, as there wanted nothing but apt meanes to conſort herſelfe with him. He perceiuing this too ſuddaine inclination of the Damoſell, purpoſed onely to ſerue his luſtful appetite with her, & then afterward to caſt her off, as he had in like manner dealt by diuers other: and procuring to haue ſecrete conference with her, he compaſt it ſo cloſely, as no eye in my houſe could be guiltie of it. At which inſtant, it was my miſhap, to be farre off from my Country, in ſeruice of the young Soldane of Babylon, who gathered together his martiall forces, to reuenge the death of Albayzer his Father: by meanes whereof he had the apter opportunitie, to obtaine of my vnhappy childe Roſella, euen what his looſe deſires beſt pleaſed him to vrge. But yet her diſcretion gouernd her thus farre, that before her maiden continence ſhould forſake her, an honourable promiſe of marriage paſt betweene them, to be performed in a Woode verie neere adioyning, where hee would loially combine the matrimoniall knot, neuer to be diſſolued but by death onelie.
               And his alleaged reaſon, why it ſhould be there thus cloſely conſumated, was, becauſe his Parents & Friendes ſhould be no hinderance, to his quiet enioying her in that ſacred eſtate: for (in nobilitie and wealth) he ſomewhat excéeded her, and therefore, (as he ſaid) he was the more vnwilling, to be iniured in this ſollemne determination.
               
                  The ſillie Damoſell, too full of credulitie, ſtretched her well-meaning thoughts no further then his promiſes, and therefore iumpt with Brunoro, both for place and appointment, without conceiting, that an honourable mind, which ſhe (till this miſhap) continually carried, would euer giue entertainement to ſuch degenerate baſenes, as his hollow hart right cunningly cloaked. The next night following, without coyne, iewels, or ought elſe of eſtéeme, ſhe ſecretly got foorth at the Garden-gate, where Brunoro diligently awaited her comming, and this was done with ſuch warie héed and circumſpection, that not any in my Caſtell did ſo much as ſuſpect it: there did ſhe louingly embrace her Brunoro, and he (the better to couller his vntruth) expreſſed as kinde a welcome to her.
               Away they went to the afore-ſaid Wood, where with kiſſes, coyings, and ſuch like flatteries, but no act at all performed of marriage, he cropt ye faireſt flower that beautified her boſome. Then cauſing a Tent to be brought thether, with all neceſſaries fit for his noble ſtate and condition, fifteene dayes they ſpent there in wanton iouiſſaunce, and ſo pleaſing ſéemed this to the poore beguiled Damoſell, that (in her minde) ſhée was more then halfe an Empreſſe, perſwading her ſelfe, that hee as truly loued her, as (in her very ſoule) ſhee intirely loued him. But, as the daintieſt delights in time grow yrkeſome, ſo, Brunoro wexing wearie of my Daughters company, concluding the ni
                     •
                  ht enſuing to leaue her, cauſed Wine (mingled with ſléepie drugs) to be cloſely brought thether, and gaue her to drinke thereof, ſhe neuer dreaming on any ſuch vile treaſon.
               About two houres after ſupper, the wine began to worke his effect, and ſhée ſitting leaning againſt a table, ſlept ſo ſoundly, that the loudeſt thunder coulde not awake her. The deceitfull wretch, to leaue no wicked acte vndoone, that might bring the greater ſhame & contempt to her, who (by ouer-much loue) fell thus into his power, cauſed her to be ſtript ſtarke naked, and then layd in a bedde, where him ſelfe companying with her, like a monſter and no man,

glutted his libidinous and inſatiate deſire, as (almoſt) it excéedeth modeſty to report it. Which being done, he cauſed the bed and Tent to be caried away, with whatſoeuer elſe he had brought thether, not leauing her owne wearing garments behinde him, no, not her very néereſt, to couer nakednes, but (vnmanlike) thus left there lying on the bare ground: all which he did to this end, that when in the morning ſhee ſhould finde her ſelfe naked, ſhee might die or deſtroy her ſelfe there in the Wood, rather then for ſhame to let any one ſée her, I cannot tell yée the inward conceite of gréefe, which (poore deſpiſed ſoule) ſurprized her at her waking, ſéeing all thinges ſo altered from her laſt beholding them, for they were but inſtances of her further woe and extremitie. The next morning after this heauy accident, it was my hap to come home againe, where I found a ſtrange and vncouth confuſion, becauſe my Roſella was no where to be heard of.
               Héere-vpon, I betooke my ſelfe preſently to mine Arte, thereby to be reſolued what was become of her, but my ill hap chaunced to be ſuch, that a certaine wizzard among you Chriſtians, had gone beyond me in mine owne experience, and taken the matter out of my hand, ſo that this way I could learne nothing of her. Then ſhaped I my courſe by another progreſſion, & taking two Knights with me, mounted forth-with on horſe-backe, purpoſing by diligent ſearch to finde her againe, riding directly toward Brunoroes Caſtell, becauſe that very day I vnderſtoode, how he had béen often ſéene paſſing to and fro from my dwelling, and by diuers meanes had ſaluted my daughter, declaring euident ſignes of loue to her: at which report, my hopes wexing more chéerefull, I was halfe perſwaded to finde her linckt with him in mariage.
               As we rode along through that vnhappy Wood, (the cloſe betrayer both of my daughters ioyes and mine) by what chaunce I know not, we miſtooke our way, and happened into the very thickeſt of all the Wood, where gazing vp and downe for a more eaſie paſſage: my daughter, ſhunning all

places where ſhe might likelieſt be ſéene, had hid her ſelfe behind a thick leafie brake, yet not with ſuch ſkill, but that her ſnow-white ſkinne ſhot a lightſome radiaunce through the twiſted braunches. Now, albeit I little thought what this bright appearance might be, yet the minde (euermore the Augure and preſager of harmes) ſtrooke this harſh diuination on the vntunde ſtrings of my ſoule, that this ſhadowed Alablaſter brightnes was my daughter. And making toward the place, when ſhe perceaued that ſhee could no longer conceale her ſelfe, ſhe came vnto me, veyled before with an apron of thick-wrought leaues, which the ſight of her owne ſhame had inſtructed her to make, and falling ſubmiſſiuely vpon her knées, ſpake in this manner. Beholde (deere Father) thy vnfortunate daughter, and kill me not, though (in iuſtice) I haue deſerued no leſſe.
               I (inly toucht with the true ſence both of ſhame & gréefe) was ſo furiouſly tranſported, that neither pitty or patience preuailing againſt rage, I tooke her by the long treſſes of her haire, & lifting her thereby violently from the ground, would with my dagger haue ſtabd her to the heart: but the Knights in my company, forcibly reſtrained me, and counſailed me like friends, to take her home with me to my Caſtell, where (vpon more deliberate conſideration of the caſe) I might further determine of her as I found occaſion. Verie thankfully I tooke their kinde aduiſe, becauſe I iudged it an ouer-light puniſhment, to let her eſcape with ſo ſpeedy a diſpatch of life, rather (me thought) the caſe might apprehend ſuch merit, that tenne thouſand ſeuere caſtigations would ſéeme inſufficient: wherefore, cloathing her in the garment of my Page, becauſe that was the neereſt and readieſt helpe, I brought her to my Caſtell, where impriſoning her in a remote chamber of my houſe, for two dayes together I gaue her nothing to féede on.
               The two Knights my friendly companions, knowing for certainty, that the death of her would be mine owne diſpatch alſo, right kindly comming to me, tolde me in graue and ſenſible ſort, how highly it would redound to mine own

ſhame, when her death ſhould be reported to happen, by my meanes, & the nature of her offence neuer heard or known. They hauing certaine precious confectious about them, and wine of rich and ſoueraigne power, by my conſent went to her chamber, where firſt cheriſhing her faintnes with thoſe neceſſary helpes, and addition of apparant likelihoode, that my grace and fauour might againe be recouered: they won from her the ſum of all, both by what meanes ſhe came into the Wood, and how (in that ſort) ſhe was left there naked, which they perceauing, to happen onely through fond loues ſimplicity, returned againe to me, and tolde me the whole ſtorie of my daughters miſ-fortune.
               Then grew I incenſed againſt this trothleſſe man, calming my kindled rage (ſomewhat) toward my daughter, conſidering, that a young Ladies firſt offence, ſhould not be ſo ſeuerely chaſtiſed, eſpecially when earneſtly one was the cauſe of her treſpaſſe: where-vpon I faithfully promiſed the Knights, that I would not procéede in any further rigour againſt her. But ſitting all alone by my ſelfe, I began to practiſe, how I might be ſufficiently reuenged on the Knight, by whoſe villanie I was ſo hainouſly iniuried, and making many plat-formes in my braine, thus I concluded: that Roſella (by writing) ſhould certifie Brunoro, howe I lay ſicke at the point of death, ſo that if he would then come to her, he ſhould enioy my money and goods, and likewiſe be poſſeſſour of all my bookes, whereof (a long while) he had béene very deſirous, and offered large ſummes of money to haue them: as for his leauing her ſo vnkindly naked, in the depth of her loue ſhe had buried that blame, & by no meanes tooke it as any fact of his, but rather of ſome ſlauiſh vnciuill ſeruant, who vpon a malicious inclination toward her, had (contrary to his knowledge) ſo miſ-entreated her, and hee (no doubt) in great heauines for lack of her company.
               My purpoſe heerein was, that (vppon his comming) I might be poſſeſt of him, and afterward to vſe him as I ſaw occaſion: ſo, with a Letter or tranſcript drawne to this effect, I entred into my daughters chamber, where giuing

her good lookes, and taking her by the hand, thus I began. Although the iniurie I haue receaued by thée, hath made a large paſſage thorow my hart: yet am I willing to forgiue and forget it, ſo thou wilt pleaſure me but in one only matter, which ſhall yeelde contentment both to thée and mee. I will doe (quoth ſhe) whatſoeuer it ſhall pleaſe you to commaund, in recompence of the great grace I receaue from you ſo vnworthily.
               My will is, quoth I, that thou write this Letter vnto Brunoro: and there-vpon I gaue it her to reade. The ſhalow witted Girle, whoſe doating affection would not let her looke into the vnrepairable wrong ſhee had receaued by Brunoro, ſuddainly thus replied. Oh God forbid (déere father) that I ſhould prooue ſuch a traytreſſe to him, whom (more then mine owne ſoule) I loue and eſtéeme: and no ſooner had ſhe thus ſaide, but ſuddainly would haue caſt her ſelfe out at the caſement of her window, becauſe ſhe would not be guilty of writing ſuch a Letter.
               I, who knew too well her firme reſolution, immediatly became ſo furiouſly diſcontented, as had not the Knights ſtept in ſuddainly vpon me, queſtionleſſe ſhe had there periſhed by my hand: but beeing by them with-helde from my purpoſe, I tolde them the wilfull folly of the wench, and how fooliſh loue quite blinded her iudgement, and made her ſtill doat on him that had ſo vilely abuſed her. The Knights ſpent ſome little while, in perſwading me to more moderation, becauſe ſhee had confidently aunſwered, that ſhee woulde endure all tormentes whatſoeuer, rather then bee wone to betray Brunoro: and they well noting her ſetled purpoſe, held it neceſſary, that ſhee ſhould haue her minde, I to pardon her, cloathe her againe in her owne habite, and let her goe at liberty, but with a farre ſtricter eye of care of her, then before had béene vſed. All which I yéelded to, and ſhe (as impiercible as the diamond) could be drawne to no other beléefe, but that Brunoro right déerely affected her, whereon ſhe compaſt the meanes, to acquaint him with my determination, writing vnto him what I had entended:

and (which was moſt to my preiudice,) that my Art failed me, and could at this inſtant doo me no ſeruice.
               
                  Brunoro, being (at that time) the very arroganteſt Knight in all this Countrey, grew proude and diſdainfull againſt me, and hearing that I practiſed his death, did not determine the like by me, but how to bring me into a moſt wretched condition of life: and perceauing it was publiquely bruted abroad, what wrong he had done to me & my daughter, he deuiſed with him ſelfe, to lay a freſh affliction on me, and (by trayning her once againe from my houſe) to abuſe her more villainouſly then hee had done before: neuer remembring, that ſo rare loue and fidelity in a woman, deſerued to be matcht with the greateſt Prince in the worlde. Vpon this vile determination both againſt her and me, hee wrote to Roſella, that the third night following hee would come and confer with her in the garden, and at the appointed houre, the vnfortunate Damoſell perceauing him there, went ſimply to him, where taking her vp againe behinde him on his Horſe, vnſéene of any one, he caried her away. They had not ridden aboue two leagues, but (like a cunning traytour) faigning that hee would make amendes for his paſſed diſcourteſie, he cauſed her to diſmount: then giuing her counterfaited kinde kiſſes and embraces, and glutting his luſt againe with her diſhonour, his brutiſh heate was no ſooner alayed, but then he manifeſted his damnable purpoſe, and dragging her along by the haire of the head, ſayd, that he purpoſed there to kill her.
               Shée (ſilly ſoule) ruing too late her fond credulity, entreated him (for Gods ſake) to ſpare her life, whereto he yéelded on this condition, that ſhe would procure his entraunce into my Caſtell, and make him Lord of all that was mine. The miſerable Lady, not knowing how otherwiſe to ranſome her life, made him promiſe to performe it, and returning with him back to my Caſtell, with thirty attendants all well prouided: through the Garden ſhe conducted them into my great Hall, where making their paſſage forward with engines of yron, the noyſe quickly awaking me, I preſently

conceited who they were, and ſtepping immediatly into my ſtudy, I found, that a Chriſtian wizzard, called the Sage Aliarte of the obſcure valley, had all this while béene the hinderer of my Magick ſpelles, but hauing done what him pleaſed, I was now againe at liberty.
               Héere-vpon, out of my chamber window I threw a certaine powder, which ſmote Brunoro blinde, & all that were with him, ſo that except I pleaſed to releaſe them, they could neuer haue the benefit of ſight any more. Then ſtepping downe my ſelfe among them, in a diſſembled voyce I tolde them how eaſily they might come by my treaſure, and opening a doore fit for my purpoſe, I ſayde: Followe mee Gentlemen, and I will make you all rich for euer, they entring where I bad them, were all by me lockt vp in a cloſe priſon, but my daughter I conuayed to her former place of reſtraint.
               Early the next morning, I ſent for my friends, the two fore-remembred Knights, ſhewing them howe well I had hunted, and what a booty I had caught, yet neuer iſſued forth of my Caſtell: whereat a while they ſtood ſomewhat amazed, but moſt of all, at the mad and inconſiderate loue, which my daughter ſtill bare to ſo falſe a tretcher. I vrged their aduiſe, whether thus blinde they ſhould die there in priſon, or haue their heads ſmitten off for ſo manifeſt villanie. The Knights ſtudying how to ſaue Roſellaes life, in regard of her wonderfull error in loue, after ſome little conference had together, one of them thus ſpake. In our opinion Sir, you ſhould not put them to death thus blinde in priſon, for wanting the ſight of their owne miſery, they ſhall alſo giue no example, of ſo monſtrous an ingratitude toward a true louing Lady: beſide, they ſhould not eſcape with loſſe of their heads onely, becauſe a fault of ſuch great quality, iuſtlie deſerues an aunſwerable puniſhment. Wee rather déeme it more conuenient, that (diſcharging all the reſt) you enchaunt Brunoro and your daughter in two ſeuerall places, with ſuch varietie of chaſtiſements inflicted vpon them, as ſhould neuer ceaſe or they be frée from, till two of the

beſt Knights in the worlde wrought theyr deliueraunce. This ſentence pleaſed me excéedingly, ſo that ſetting all the reſt at liberty, I cauſed Brunoro to be brought bound before me, where reſtoring his ſight againe, and reproouing his baſe ingratitude to ſo loyall a Lady, I adiudged him to remaine within the Tower, vntill ſuch a Knight ſhould come to redéeme him, and there ſhould he continually be hunted by two ſhée Beares, and my ſelfe (to féede mine eyes ſufficiently with his affliction) enchaunted my owne abiding in the ſame Tower, where you my Lord Primaleon happened to finde me.
               My daughters doome was within the Wood, where ſhee loſt the bright beauty of her virgine honour, there ſhould a murderous villaine daily cut her throate, and afterward ſhe was to liue in the vncouered Tower, feeding onely vppon the bounty of the ayre, aunſwerable to her miſerie in the Wood, where ſhe was rauiſhed and left ſo inhumanely naked.
               At theſe words he began to looke about him, and perceauing it wexed late, hee would not trouble them with anie further diſcourſe: ſo the Knights prepared to take their reſt, with intent to pacifie this diſcontentment, and procuring the olde man to be more friendly to the Knight Brunoro.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. LXXVII. How Primaleon and Arguto, cauſed the mariage to be ſollemnized betweene Brunoro and Roſella, and afterward iourneyed toward Babylon.
               
               
                  NExt morning enſuing, Primaleon and Arguto hauing cōcluded, to quallifie this heauie caſe of diſcord, came downe into the Hall, where they founde the auncient Magitian holding his daughter by the hand, and chyding Brunoro for his rigorous crueltie: So the Knights giuing them all the mornings ſalutation, tooke Brunoro aſide with them, and plainly told him, that he had verie highly wronged the young Lady, knowing her loue ſo truly addicted to him, & therefore if he would make amends for his paſſed tranſgreſſions, hee muſt accept her in marriage, for her vertues did merrit one of greater woorth then hee.
               
                  Brunoro, who (by this long time of chaſtiſement) had alayed his proud ſtomack, ſayde. That it was in vaine for him to offer any ſuch attonement, when her diſcontented Father would no way be wonne thereto. Then the two Knights tooke the olde man betwéene them, ſhewing him, how hee might (in one inſtant) make firme his daughters loſt honour and his owne, by graunting to a conuenable marriage betwéene her and Brunoro, who had now entertained a more milde and obedient ſpirit, and by the feeling ſence of his paſſed miſeries, had hūbled his proud thoughts to a more gentle temper.
               The aged Magitian, confidently crediting what they ſaid, and that they would not report it, except it were ſo indeede, was contented to giue his daughter in marriage to

                  Brunoro: but firſt he deſired to ſee ſome proofe of him, for the better clearing of all doubtes to come, where-with the Knights could finde no miſlike, wherefore they called him before the olde man, and thus Primaleon ſpake in the preſence of Roſella.
               
               
                  Brunoro, this auncient Lord is very well pleaſed, that this faithfull Lady his daughter ſhall be your wife: prouided you doo vndertake ſome glorious enterpriſe, which may wipe out the ſcandale of your paſſed offences. I will performe (quoth Brunoro) what ſoeuer it ſhall pleaſe him or you to commaund me, although I were aſſured to looſe my life, which truely (in iuſtice) I haue woorthily deſerued. This aunſwere was of ſuch powerfull efficacie, that the aged Magitian (as one ſufficiently perſwaded already) would haue him to aduenture on no further perill, but Brunoro, to let the Knights ſée his forwardnes and valour, would néeds performe what he had intended.
               When he was armed and mounted on horſe-backe, Primaleon, loth to make any longer aboade there, cauſed him to be called, when, to the good liking of the aged man, but much more of Roſella, they aſcended the ſtaires, and Primaleon, holding the Lady by one hand, and Brunoro by the other, crauing fauour of the Magitian, began as followeth. Your preſent behauiour Sir Brunoro, with no doubt of your after progreſſion in all honour, hath made Roſellaes father to forget all former diſlikes, & giues you his deareſt daughter as your wife, with abſolute promiſe, that after his death, his wealth and poſſeſſions remaine wholy yours, as a dowrie in mariage with his beloued child. Then cauſing a religious Prieſt to bee called, which liued ſecretly among ſome fewe Chriſtians in that Countrey, he prayed the olde man, that Roſella and Brunoro might be baptized as Chriſtians, according as he promiſed him, when he brought him forth of the Tower.
               The Nigromancer beeing ſomewhat obſtinate in his owne errour, would gladly haue denied it, but not daring to contradict Primaleon in any thing, expreſſed an outward

willingnes: ſo being baptized, they were then eſpouſed together, and ſollemne feaſting was there performed, ſuch as the time and place could affoord.
               When our Knights had remained there two whole daies, they called the old Magitian aſide, and demaunded of him a plaine information, concerning the procéedings of Albayzars ſonne, that they might the better prouide for any harme to enſue. Of him they vnderſtood, how this Prince had ſtird vp the Soldane of Perſia, ſonne to him that dyed before Constantinople, with the Kings of Tartaria and Armenia, the Emperour of Trebiſonde, and other Princes, with them alſo was a younger Brother of Riſtoranoes. The reaſon why hee gathered ſuch a puiſſant ſtrength together, was, to be poſſeſſed of ſo many of the beſt Chriſtian Knights as he could come by, not to put them to death, but as hoping to draw them to his blind ſect and error, or at leaſt ſo to hinder them, that they might not beare any armes againſt him: for the young Soldane was of ſuch a generous ſpirit, as hee would not reuenge his Fathers death on any man, that by deceipt ſhould fall into his power, but openly & honourably in a pitcht field of battaile.
               The Knights being thus farre acquainted with the caſe, tooke their leaue of the old Wizzard, Brunoro and Roſella, as if they went for Constantinople, not reuealing their cloſe purpoſe to viſite Babylon, yet did the Magitian plainly perceiue it, that their determination was abſolutely thether, wherefore when they were gone, hee went to his ſtudie, doubting 
                     •
                  me miſhap that might befall them, therefore he would ha
                     •
                   daily eye to their proceedings.
            
            
               
               CHAP. LXXVIII. Howe Primaleon and Arguto were taken by Corcuto the Soldane of Babylon, and ſet at libertie againe by the aged Magitian, Father to Roſella, returning afterward to Conſtantinople.
               
               
                  
                     PRimaleon and Arguto, deſirous to ſée what preparation Corcuto had leueyed, made ſuch diſpatch of their daily iourneyes, without any hinderance or contradiction, that they came at laſt to great Babylon, and hauing very readily the language of the Country, as Knights errant (in thoſe times) were quick and readie in the ſeuerall tongues, they abode there certaine daies, without being knowne to any one whence and what they were: for Knights had frée acceſſe to all parts of the world, and theyr profeſſion allowed them to go alwaies armed, which made them ye more boldly preſume to ſuch publique places, where tryumphs and tourneyes were cuſtomably held.
               Now becauſe Primaleon coueted not to be knowne, hée came to the liſts very badly horſed, ſéeming but as a looker on & no otherwiſe, which made very many to ſcorne & deride him, ſaying: Belike this is ſome doubtie man at armes, and méeter to beſtride an aſſe then a horſe: But eſpeciallie one cock-braind knight of Babylon, being a man of more outward ſhew and appearance, then any inward vertue or diſcretion, would needes play with Primaleon in ieſting manner, daring him to triall of the Iouſt, and hoping very readily to vnhorſe him. Primaleon not willing to be diſcouered, feigned him-ſelfe ſimple and ſilly in his aunſwers, which prouoked the Knight againſt him in much more deriſion, and without anie longer ſtay, catching faſt hold on his arme, hée drew him (as it were) perforce into the midſt

of the Liſtes, and betaking himſelfe to his owne quarter, gaue him the ſigne that he muſt needes meete him.
               
                  Primaleon, finding his greateſt inſufficiencie to conſiſt in his Horſe, and the worſt that could happen to him, would be but a diſmounting, when hee ſaw he muſt needes Iouſt whether hee would or no, hee ſetled himſelfe in his ſaddle, and went to his place with ſo rough a ſemblance, that they which had mockt and ſcorned him before, began with much better regard to reſpect him.
               The Knight encountred Primaleon in the midſt of his Shielde, and brake his Launce vppon it, as if it had beene againſt a wall: but Primaleon (forgetting his former purpoſed ſecrecie) met his aduerſary ſo ſtrongly, as lifting him aboue ſixe handfulls from his ſaddle, he had ſuch a violent fall againſt the ground, that he lay a good while as if he had beene dead, and comming to his ſences againe, hee grew excéedingly grieued, that he had ſo vnmannerly prouoked the ſtranger to the Iouſt, buying his folly with ſo deere repentance.
               And as hee was going to excuſe his offence, another Knight, one of them that was a challenger in this tournament, (held there at this inſtant on ſome eſpeciall occaſion) to the end the Stranger ſhould not part thence with ſuch honour, he would reuenge the others ill fortune, and encountring with Primaleon, he was ſo lightly layd along on the ground, as if he had neuer béene toucht at all, and ſo we
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  re others after him, the laſt of them being carried by the hea
                     •
                   and heeles forth of the Liſts, as if he had beene quite depriued of his life.
               The Princes there preſent, beholding theſe ſtrange accidents, grewe all to a priuate murmuring among themſelues, of whence and what this Stranger might be, and Corcuto the Soldane, halfe ſuſpecting that this was ſome Knight of Constantinople Court, went and put on his Armour, meaning to approoue his owne valour againſt him, returning againe very ſumptuouſly accouſtred, but yet vnknowne to any what he was.
               
                  
                  Primaleon (by the muttering & priuie whiſpering which he perceiued to be among the people,) iudged verily, that this was ſome valiant Pagane, and ſéeing his owne ſillie Iade, by reaſon of his running ſo many courſes, to be very weake and almoſt vtterly tyred, ſent this meſſage to Corcuto: that if he would haue the honour of vnhorſing him, he ſhould not preſume on ſo apparant an aduantage, but commaund him a better horſe, more apt for the encounter, to the end (he being a Stranger there) if he had the fal, yet he might not lay the blame on his horſe. Corcuto, hearing a demaund ſo reaſonable, preſently ſent him a gallant Courſer, right richly capariſond, whereon Primaleon luſtilie mounting, trotted him brauely to his place, and managed him ſo loftilie at the ſounde of the Trumpets, that the Babylonians at the ſight thereof, beganne to miſtruſt theyr owne partaker.
               The encounter betwéene them was with terrible fury, expreſſing dreadleſſe ſpirits in both the Champions, Corcuto looſing one of his ſtirrops, but recouering it very quickly againe, and Primaleon glentring a little aſide, but ſate vpright immediatly on it. At the ſecond courſe, Corcuto was caſt on the crupper of his horſe, but preſently leapt into his ſeate againe, Primaleon onely miſſing one ſtirrop, and both growing angry at theſe diſgraces, beganne to make choyſe of farre ſtronger Launces: in which encounter, Primaleon (to ſcape the fall) caught hold on his horſes maine, but Corcuto fell in a ſwoune on the earth, and was preſently carried away by his Squires, becauſe no man ſhould haue knowledge of him.
               
                  Primaleon, leaſt as a tryumpher he ſhould be conducted to the Pallace, ſhruncke ſuddenly away among the croude, and went to his lodging, where being vnarmed, his friend and he fell to pleaſant conference. Corcuto being perfectly recouered, and feigning to haue béen abſent about ſome vrgent buſines, came downe into ye great Hall, where he foūd his Barons and diuers ſtrange Kings, who hauing ſéene the ſport to end, with the fall of the Pagane Knight that

was vnknowne, returned backe to the Pallace, and ſitting with Corcuto, told him the whole ſucceſſe of the Iouſt, ſeeming very deſirous to know the ſtranger Knight, whoſe faire fortune had graced him with the victorie.
               
                  Corcuto, béeing as couetous thereof as they, cauſed a Proclamation to be made, that whoſoeuer could manifeſt, what and who the ſtrange Knight was, which had ſo highly deſerued in the tournament, ſhould haue a very large and royall reward. The fame of this bounteous offer, comming to the Hoſtes eare where Primaleon and Arguto lay, and he beeing aſſured that this was the Iouſter which his King enquired for: to enrich himſelfe with the promiſed reward, hee went and declared to the Soldane, that the Knight after whom his highneſſe ſought, lodged as a gueſt within his houſe.
               
                  Corcuto, not a little iocond at this good happe, gaue the Hoſt what was promiſed by Proclamation, and conſulting of this matter among his Barons, the concluſion was this, that certaine Spies ſhould be ſent thether, and finding him to be a Chriſtian, immediatly to ſurprize him, thereby to weaken the glory of the Chriſtian Court, but beeing a Saracen, then highly to honour him, and giue him the rich prizes ordained for the tournament. Election was made of ſuch men to be ſent thether, as had béene diuers time at Constantinople, and other places of great concourſe in Chriſtendome, among whom was a wealthy Merchant, that had often ſold Iewels to the Empreſſe Grydonia, and likewiſe to the Princeſſe Miragarda, by meanes whereof, he had diuers times ſéene both Primaleon and Arguto: and remembring them very perfectly, hee quickly returned to the Soldane and tolde him: that theſe were two of the moſt eſteemed Knights among the Chriſtians, and making ſeazure on them, he might the eaſier reuenge his iniuries ſuſtained. Corcuto calling the Kinges and Barons to councell, ſhewed them what a good beginning had happened to theyr proceedings, whereby they might the more aſſuredly perſwade themſelues of victorie: and among the diuerſitie

of oppinions, it was thus determined, that they ſhould be peaceably taken, to returne in exchange for ſome of them, if any ſhould happen to be taken as priſoners, becauſe there were many other worthy Knights in the Chriſtian band, at whoſe hands they expected ſcarce kinde entertainment. This being reſolued on, Corcuto gaue ye Hoſte in charge, to ſerue them at Supper with a commixed Wine, purpoſelie prepared to cauſe heauineſſe of ſleepe, ſo to be poſſeſſed of them without any furder danger: which beeing accordingly put in execution, in the night time they were taken and ſtrongly bound, without any further knowledge in the Cittie.
               On the next morrow, when they ſawe themſelues thus taken priſoners, they made vndoubted account to looſe their liues: but when they were brought before Corcuto, who (with a chéerfull countenaunce) embraced Primaleon, their hopes were ſome-what better reuiued, and Corcuto, being of a very honorable reſpectiue nature, ſpake to them in this manner. Albeit I haue iuſt reaſon to hate you, as the enemies to my blood and fayth, yet am I not any way cruellie enclined toward yée: wherefore let me tell yée, that you muſt remaine with mee, ſo long as I thinke it conuenient, and you ſhall be ſerued as in your owne Chriſtian Kingdomes, wanting nothing elſe, but libertie of departing hence at your owne pleaſure.
               Our Knights, who lookt for far worſe entertainement, right humbly thanked him for this royall kindnes: wherevppon they were diſcharged of their bands, and permitted to walke about the Cittie and Pallace, but alwayes with a good guarde attending on them, whereby theyr hopes grew deſperate of euer parting thence.
               Now come we to the aged Nigromancer againe, who (as hath béene already declared) had a daily reſpect to what they did, as fearing leaſt ſome diſaſter might befall them, when he found by his Arte that they were impriſoned: hée preſently purpoſed to ſet them at libertie, in reſpect of the honourable benefit, which he had receiued onely by them,

but yet hee intended to doe it ſo ſecretly, that the Soldane ſhould not at any time impute it to him, ſo, without imparting his purpoſe to his Daughter, nor yet to his Sonne in Law, hauing prepared two excellent Armours, and two gallant Courſers, he departed toward Babylon. There hee arriued at the inſtant time, when Albayzars ſonne the Soldane of Babylon, had ſecretly determined the death of our Knights, in reuenge of his Fathers death among the Chriſtians, beeing thereto prouoked by the importunitie of his Barons, which greatly repined at the fauour hee ſhewed them, and therefore, though they had wone him to it, yet they meant to performe it when he leaſt dreampt of it.
               The Magitian perceiuing their imminent perrill, that very night entred into the Cittie, and going to the Chamber where they were ſafely guarded, hee awaked them out of a very ſound ſléepe, & making himſelfe knowne to them, told all the treaſon intended againſt them: then gaue hee them a certaine roote, where-with rubbing theyr faces, they ſhould be altered in ſo ſtrange a maner, as no man poſſibly could haue knowledge of them. Then did he appoynt a place for their meeting, where he would prouide them of horſe and Armour, and afterward guide them til they were in ſound aſſurance: they thankfull for ſo great a courteſie, and loth to be murdered there ſo inhumanely, made vſe of this good hap in ſuch an vrgent neceſſitie.
               The Magitian beeing gone very early in the morning, Primaleon and Arguto feigning an accuſtomed ſléeping, much longer then before they had beene wont to doe, ſéeing the Guard and ſeruaunts with-drawne to theyr breakefaſt, put on nothing but theyr ſhirts, and cullouring theyr faces with the roote, they became all black as any Negro, which changing them ſtrangely from their former appearance, they wondred at one another, and aſſured themſelues that no man could know thē: So paſſed they out of their chamber, and by the Guard, being taken by them verily for Indians, whereof there vſed many to the houſe, that attended on the ſtrange Kings then there being.
               
                  In this ſort paſſed they by the Pallace gate, and walked vnſuſpected forth at the Citty port, reputed ſtill to be Indian noble men, and ſuch as were alied to thoſe black Princes. Being come to the place aſſigned by the Nigromancer, he was right ioyfull of their ſo ſafe eſcape, and waſhing them with a water which hee had brought for the purpoſe, their countenances receaued their true complexion. When they were armed, and had thanked the Magitian for his faithfull kindnes, with promiſe neuer to forget ſo great a benefit: they rode on a while together, and when they were far enough from the Citty, he tooke his farewell of them, and they rode away as beſt them ſelues pleaſed: leauing no little noiſe and diſquiet in the Citty, when it was known that the two Chriſtian Knights were eſcaped, and no man could imagine how or in what manner, or whom to holde guilty of their cloſe departure.
            
            
               CHAP. LXXIX. How the mariages of Candida with Leonato, and of Tarnaes with Fior-nouella, being further conferred on in the Court of Constantinople, there happened a ſuddaine and vnexpectrd alteration.
               
                  
                     VIctoria and the young Concordia, expreſſed by ſad lookes their hearts diſcontentment, for the ſuddaine departure of their eſtéemed fauourites, neuertheleſſe, hope gaue them comfort, that promiſes would one day be performed: the like was elſe-where expected, concerning Palmerins paſſed worde, for his ſonne Leonato, and Tarnaes of Lacedemonia, to enioy the ſeuerall Ladies where-with he had agréed them. But Palmerin began to repent his promiſe, becauſe him ſelfe doated extreamely

in affection, and intirely loued the faire Lady Candida, yet to keepe his honour from noted touch thereof, hee couerd it very cunningly, and ſeeing that his ſonne muſt néedes enioy her in mariage, to croſſe the match, and compaſſe his owne hopes in after time, hee practiſed how to hinder their proceeding.
               The Emperour Primaleon in like manner, without any regard of his age and imbecilities, hee was alſo ouercome with ſuch amorous paſſions, and ſo enflamed with loue to Candida, that it was hell to him to heare talke of her mariage: but Leonato and Tarnaes, relying wholy on Palmerins promiſe, were the bolder to breake their minds to the Emperour, finding him accompanied with Florendos and the wizzard Aliarte, who likewiſe made loue to the ſame Candida. By the Emperours aunſweres it plainly appeared, that he was not willing ſhe ſhould be ſo maried, but ſaid, he had purpoſed in his priuate thoughts, to beſtow her on Oliuanto young Primaleons brother, which he vrged the rather, becauſe Oliuanto was not at that preſent in the Court, ſo the more ſurely to deferre off the mariage: but Leonatoes reſolution continued in ſuch ſort, as the Emperour (not knowing eaſily howe to get him out of Constantinople) was enforced to ſay, that it was not meete time to marry ſo worthie a Lady, without performance of ſome higher attempts for her ſake, then (as yet) he or any elſe had vnder-taken. When Leonato ſaw his hopes fruſtrated with ſuch peremptorie ſpeeches, he ſtept boldly before the Emperour, ſaying. Since I ſee your highneſſe is my onely hinderer, in the long expected felicity of my deſires, which (but for you) I might now freely enioy: were you as other men are, I would then tell yée, that age will not let you performe the office of a Knight, and I will maintaine, againſt him whoſoeuer dare combate in your cauſe, that you doo me moſt vnkingly iniurie.
               
                  Palmerin hearing theſe proud ſpéeches of his ſonne, ſtept forth, and checkt him with a ſharpe reprehenſion, for being ſo careleſſe of his duty: but Leonato, ſcorning to be baffuld

by any man in his loue, or that the greateſt Monarch on the earth ſhould intercept his deſſeignes, drewe foorth his ſword, ſaying. Whoſoeuer dare denie, that beautious Candida ſhall not be my wife, let him come forth of Constantinople, there (like a Knight) will I expect him, and there let him try, whether I be worthy of her or no.
               
                  Palmerin called preſently for his armour, to defend (as he ſaide) the honour of the Emperour, but indeede hee rather ſought to diſappoint his ſonne, and compaſſe the meanes of his owne fond deſires. The Emperour, who was not wont to beare ſuch an iniurie, cauſed his Armes to be brought, with intent to aduenture the combate with his Nephew: but Aliarte, as forwarde in affection to Candida as any of them, albeit he gouernd it with greater modeſty, falling on his knée before the Emperour, tolde him, that he ought by no meanes, to hazard his perſon in fight againſt Leonato, becauſe to whatſoeuer iſſue the combate ſorted, he could not but repent it: beſide, he would neuer preſume ſo raſhly on ſuch an enterpriſe, but that in generall opinion it would paſſe for currant, that he was growne amorous of the faire young Lady, which would be a great diſgrace to his reuerend yeeres.
               When the Emperour found his gréefe toucht, where it pained him indeede, he ſtayed his haſtines, yet to ſhew that he was mooude with the zeale of his owne honour, he intended to baniſh Leonato frō 
                  Constantinople, holding it as great grace, in that hee proceeded with no other ſeueritie againſt him: yet he determined within a while to repeale his baniſhment, vpon ſome earneſt entreatie of his father Palmerin, who verily entended nothing leſſe, or declared himſelfe offended a iote at his ſonnes exile, but rather was highly contented there-with, hoping by meanes of his abſence, the eaſier to proceede in his amourous purpoſe.
               When Leonato heard that the Emperour had baniſhed him, he cloſely went to the lodging of the Princeſſe Polynarda, where he thought him ſelfe ſafe, albeit the Emperour ſhould vnderſtand of his being there: and ſuch ſpeeches paſt

betwéene him and his mother, (who already was iealous enough of her huſband,) that ſhee hauing ſent for Candida into her chamber, fell into queſtioning with her concerning Leonato, onely to heare how ſhe ſtoode affected toward him, he ſtanding cloſe hid all the while behind the Arras.
               The young Lady being in his mothers preſence, whom in her ſoule ſhe moſt intirely loued, ſtood not on nice termes or coying ceremonies, but plainly declared, that none but Leonato was Lord of her deſires, him had ſhe elected as her harts beſt choiſe, albeit her hopes ſtoode nowe on deſperate hazards, deliuering no likelyhoode that ſhe ſhould euer enioy him, becauſe the Emperour had pronounced his baniſhment, euen at the inſtant when their mariage ſhould haue béene confirmed. Polynarda ſeeing the Lady ſo firmely minded, and that in ſuch diſcréete modeſt manner, ſhe had imparted her true affection toward her ſonne Leonato, ſhe ſaid. Swéete Lady, if I worke the meanes that Leonato ſhall be your huſband, and him ſelfe as ready as you to accompliſh it, tell me (faire ſoule) what will ye ſay then? When Candida heard the Princeſſe vſe theſe ſpéeches, a flood of ioying teares ſtreamed downe her faire chéekes, and reuerently taking the Princeſſe by the hand, ſpake in this manner. I know that your highneſſe, beeing ſo néere allyed to my Lord the Emperour, will not determine any thing, that ſhall returne to my blame or diſparagement: therefore (if it pleaſe you) I will aſſure my ſelfe in your preſence to my Lord Leonato your ſonne, and confeſſe my ſelfe to be his troth-plighted wife, committing all my for
                     •
                  unes afterward to your gracious direction.
               
                  Polynarda making a ſigne to Leonato, he came foorth to her, where after ſome duty done to his mother, falling on his knée at Candidaes foote, he caught her hand in his, and ſweetly kiſſing it, was ſo ſtrangely tranſported with an amourous paſſion, as he knéeled there ſilently a pretty while together: but ſhe remembring at laſt his ouer-fond errour, rayſing him in her armes, ſaid. My noble Lord, doo not ſo much wrong your worth and reputation, that I being your

humble and obedient ſpouſe, you ſhould thus humiliate your ſelfe to me: riſe therefore I beſeech you, and doo as your princely mother ſhall aduiſe yée.
               
                  Polynarda ſeeing matters in ſo good a forwardnes, ſayde. Since you hold both one ſolemne purpoſe, and that I haue no doubt of my ſonne, but his behauiour ſhall be as become a loyall Knight: by your hands plight your harts in a religious contract, and afterward we will take order for other kinde of proceeding. So ioyned they hand and harts mutually together, nothing wanting but the ceremonie of the Church to confirme them. Such was Leonatoes ioy for this high good hap, that ſpeaking ſomewhat louder then needed, he was ouer-heard by one of his fathers followers, who preſently aduertiſed his Lord therof: which Polynarda perceauing, ſhifted Leonato away, into the lodging of Lucilla her wayting Gentlewoman, and kept him there ſo cloſely, that Palmerin ſuppoſed he was gone on his baniſhment.
               But matters falling out beyonde expectation, and that Leonato might no longer (with ſafety) abide in Constantinople: he ſo ordered the caſe with his Lady Candida, as ſhe ſhould goe thence with him into England, whereto he found her very tractable. And preparing all thinges for their departure, without acquainting his mother Polynarda therewith, one night, when Candida ſhould haue betaken her ſelfe to reſt, commaunding her wayting Damoſels to bed, ſhe attired her ſelfe like a comly young Gentleman, and in the company of an Engliſh Squire, who was moſt loyall and firme to Leonato: they cloſely eſcaped vnſeene out of the Emperours Pallace, going to the place where her huſband attended her, and with like ſafety they paſt forth of the Citty, ſhaping their courſe directly for England, where on their iourney we will leaue them, till time ſerue more neceſſarily to report, what miſhappes they endured vpon the way.
            
            
               
               CHAP. LXXX. Howe Florian trauailing to the faire Argentina, came to the Citty of Tubante, where with exceeding loue he was entertained by his wife Targiana, and leauing order how ſhe ſhould be defended againſt her ſonne Corcuto, he iourneyed thence to the Adamant Caſtell.
               
                  
                     FLorian, who (as you haue heard already) came with Victoria to Constantinople, not ſuffering him ſelfe to be ſeene by the Emperour or any other: returned towarde Turkie, reſolued to trauaile to the Adamant Caſtell, and hauing ſailed very proſperouſly, within few dayes he arriued at Tubante, where Targiana welcomde him with ſuch ſincere loue, as he could not but make moſt choiſe account of her.
               Hauing aboade ſome fewe dayes with her, tidings came thether, that Corcuto intended his firſt expedition againſt her, as gréeuing that his mother had ſo forſaken him, and maried the man that ſlew his father: ſo that to make prouiſion for this purpoſed inuaſion, a proclamation was generally ſent abroade, that all thoſe Turkes, who were wont to giue attendance on the great Turkes perſon, for vniuerſall maintenance of the ſtate, ſhould make their repaire to Tubante, where they ſhould receaue directions for their further ſeruice. Aboue forty thouſand horſe-men with ſpéede came thether, and an honourable Turke was ſent to Constantinople, to entreate the Emperour, that he would ſend a generall commaunder for the Armie, becauſe they expected warre from the Souldane of Babilon: and among the reſt,

Letters were directed to Blandidon Souldane of Niquea, to be readily prepared, for the aſſiſtaunce of Targiana when neede required.
               All thinges thus ſetled in very good ſort, Florian tooke a kinde farewell of his wife, and trauailed toward the Adamant Caſtell, where he had arriued in leſſe then ten dayes: but that Druſa Velonna, who (by ouer-much kindnes and humanity, daily vſed toward her by the Emperour, in hope to reclaime her ſtubborne nature) ſuddainly got away from Constantinople, and thwarted Florian in his purpoſe. For ſhe appearing to him in the likenes of a Light-horſe-man, and beeing demaunded by Florian for the way, which ſooneſt would conduct him to the Adamant Caſtell: ſhée told him, that hee ſhould followe the path vpon his left hand, which within two dayes would bring him thether, ſo bidding him adiew, ſhee tooke the right hand way, and rode away from him.
               
                  Florian giuing credite to the horſe-mans words, did as he was directed, and hauing ridden till about mid-noone, hee happened vpon a Fountaine of very black water, and about it were tyed in chaines two Beares and foure Lyons, ſéeming to be as guardians thereof, that no man ſhould preſume to taſt of the water. In the midſt of the water ſtoode a Collomne of red ſtone, and vppon it a figure of meruailous blacke Marble, hauing a breefe on it, containing theſe words.
               
                  He that takes a taſt of me,
                  Looſeth his life, what ere he be.
               
               
                  Florian hauing read this threatning inſcription, ſmiling thereat, procéeded onward, and his paſſage being through the midſt of ye Lyons, they all foure roſe vp furiouſly againſt him, and becauſe the chaines where-with they were tyed, gaue thē ouer
                     •
                  large ſcope, they were all vpon him at once: yet did Florian wound the two firſt that came before him, and the reſt ſtoode ſo ſtoutly to him, as being all vp reared on their hinder feete, they gript him terribly about the helmet,

and graſpt him ſo ſtrongly in diuers parts of his body, as he could by no meanes get looſe from them. Then they which had felt the kéene edge of his weapon, aſſayled him againe, but ſomewhat more fearfully, and hauing got him ſelfe frée from the other, hee ſet the ſtoutlier againſt the wounded beaſts, which gladly drew back to their ſeuerall places, where-vpon, oppoſing his valour to the other reſiſters, his blowes flew ſo thick euery way about them, that the beaſts (albeit they were moſt wilde and furious) helde deſpairingly off, and durſt not come néere him, by meanes wherof he came the cloſer to ye fountaine. But the Beares, whoſe office (as it ſéemed) was the guardance of the water, when Florian had attained ſo néere within their reach, that they might worke their malice againſt him: they ſtoode vpright ſo fiercely againſt him, as Florian began to be ſomewhat abaſhed thereat, but checking his thoughts preſently for ſo weake an humour, he made couragiouſly many ſtout ſtrokes at them, and had they not béene by Art enchaunted, they could not haue endured againſt his leaſt blow.
               Hee wexing weary with ſo much labour ſpent in vaine, and almoſt driuen quite out of breath, the Beares hauing likewiſe in diuers places diſarmde him, ſo as he might wel thinke he had no eaſie taſke in hand, when his minde had halfe perſwaded him, that there might be ſome other means then by this ſworde, to compaſſe the height of this daungerous enterpriſe: he ſuddenly layd hold on the chayne wherwith they were tyed, and puld at it with ſuch ſtrength, that the knot of the chaine (beeing faſtened onely by a ryding wier, which would ſlip vp and downe, according to ye force applyed againſt it) ranne cloſe to the Beares throates, and they béeing well neere ſtrangled thereby, made many light bounds and mountings aloft, onely to be rid of ſo mightie an oppreſſion.
               But the Knight, reſoluing either on death or victorie, maintayned his pulling with the greater violence, till they were able to breathe no longer, and then the chayne breaking, they ranne away ſpéedily into a Wood neere adioyning,

and the kingly Lyons, ſeeing the Beares ſkud away in ſuch ſort, began to expreſſe apparant ſignes of gladneſſe, as if they had beene poſſeſt of humaine intellection. So that now he might ſafely goe neerer the water, and taking off his Helmet to drinke therein, he perceiued the water to be wondrous blacke, which made him a little to deliberate thereon: but to ſhew himſelfe not fearefull thereof, lifting his Helmet vp to drinke of the water, hee ſuddenly heard a voyce, crying aloude to him in this manner.
               Drinke not Sir Knight, for if thou doost, thou diest.
               At this voyce, Florian turned himſelfe about, as ſéeming to haue ſome knowledge thereof, & perceiued it was Dorina, who came running toward him very ſwiftly, & ſtaying his purpoſe till ſhee was come to him, hee then thus ſpake. You haue doone well (faire Ladie Dorina) in fore-warning me of ſo great a perrill, although ſuch gentlenes hath béene by mee but vnkindly requited: but blame ye enchauntment of the Ring, which tooke from mee the freedome of iudgement, when (for my loue) you receiued that wound, which appeares as yet not perfectly healed.
               Forbeare ſuch talke at this time, quoth Dorina, and prouide for your preſent going to the Adamant Caſtell, which Druſa Velonna cauſed her deuils to make in the night, cutting it out of an Adamant Mountaine in ſuch ſtrange manner, that the ſide toward the Eaſt, drawes all kind of yron to it, but then the Weſt ſide parts againe with it: So that either you muſt purpoſe to abide there for euer, or elſe goe thether without your Armour, and what can any Knight performe without his Armour, eſpecially where Armes muſt be his beſt defence? But I haue found out a helpe for this hinderance, you ſhall couer your Armour with a boyld Harts ſkinne, and ſo the vertue of the Adamant, ſhall not be able to attract or pierce it, for the reſt I referre it to your manly valour.
               
                  Florian thus aduiſed, tooke his leaue of Dorina, and rode away with no meane haſt, fearing leaſt ſome other ſhould

chaunce thether before him, and ſet frée the young Ladie: then returning the way againe, which Druſa Velonna had falſely directed, hee rode according to Dorinaes appointment, and hauing ridden a whole day, about ſunne-ſetting he came to a part of that Countrey, where he vnderſtoode, how ye Adamant Caſtel was within leſſe then fiue leagues. There made he his couerture of the Harts ſkinne, ſpreading it ouer his Armour as Dorina had inſtructed him, and beeing furniſhed with whatſoeuer elſe he had néede of, the next day, hee ſet toward the Caſtell, arriuing there ſomewhat after noone: and becauſe it was then no fit time to begin ſuch an enterpriſe, hee ſate him downe vnder a fewe neighbouring trées, & tooke his reſt there for all that night.
            
            
               CHAP. LXXXI. How Florian (with ſome difficultie) concluded the aduenture of the Adamant Caſtell, and ſet faire Argentina at libertie.
               
                  THe chéerefull morning, hauing chaced away ſadde melanchollie night, and ye veyled eyes of mortalls, enricht with the golden Sunnes vp-riſing, Florian béeing all Hart both without and within, went toward the Adamant Tower, and cōming within leſſe then a ſtones caſt of it, he met an aged Knight, and two Squires with him, one of them carrying a ſword in his hand, and the other a great Baſon, when they came neerer together, the aged man thus ſpake to Florian. Diſmount as quickly as thou canſt, thou Knight vnwoorthy of any welcome hether, to the end I may preſent thy head, to the powerfull Lady Enchauntreſſe of this Caſtell: otherwiſe, in

ſted of thine, I muſt deliuer her the head of the faire young Lady Argentina, and thou ſhalt likewiſe die at ye ſelfe ſame inſtant.
               
                  Florian ſmiling at his fooliſh ſpéeches, ſaid. Returne (good father) to thy Lady, and tell her I haue but one poore head, which I cannot part withall vpon ſo eaſie an iniunction: bid her rather haue care of her owne head and thine, for I come hether to maiſter her enchauntment, and to ſet the iniuried Lady at libertie. The old Knight, without returning him any aunſwere, went backe againe to the Caſtell, and Florian ſtaying to ſée what would enſue héereon, beheld a large table thruſt out at a window, vpon ye which was brought forth the young Lady Argentina, by the two Squires and the auncient Knight, where they cauſing her to fall downe vppon her knees, the olde man, with a loude voyce, ſpake as followeth.
               Knight, lay violent hands vppon thine owne life, or preſently ſée this Lady perriſh. Florian, ſéeing his comming thether ſhould cauſe the death of Argentina, whereas his intent was to ſet her at libertie: became ſo troubled in his thoughts, as he rather choſe to die himſelfe, then to be the occaſion of her murdering, and therefore hee called to the old man, ſaying. I pray thée good Father, put not to death an innocent Lady, but rather come worke thy will on mée, ſince I am come hether to procure her perrill. And doubtleſſe it had ſorted to that iſſue, for Florian at the old Knights comming, would more willingly haue ſent his head to the Sorcereſſe, then there to haue beheld ye death of Argentina.
               
               But Dorina, who had followed him thether inuiſible, as being greatly afraide of Druſa Velonna, cauſed a Knight to ſteale vppon him, and ſmiting him trecherouſly with a Launce, fledde backe againe to the wood: and Florian offended at ſuch a diſcourteſie, purſued him very angerly, till béeing farre enough from the Caſtell, the Knight ſhewed himſelfe to be Dorina, and ſpake vnto him in this manner. Vnderſtand (thou worthy-bearer of Armes,) that whatſoeuer thou beholdeſt at the Caſtel, are nothing els but méere

illuſions, purpoſely doone to feare and diſmay thée. Shee whom thou ſaweſt ready to looſe her head, is not Argentina, but a counterfeit Image in her ſhape, therefore returne againe before the Caſtell, and ſhewe thy ſelfe ſo inly toucht with griefe, at beholding a ſpectacle ſo ſad and moouing, as if very conceit thereof were ready to kill thee. Then when the old man comes to haue thy head, diſſemble cunningly, as if thou couldeſt not readily vndooe the laces of thy Helmet, that he may drawe neere to lend thee his helpe: then quickly catch him faſt by the long beard, becauſe therin remaines the ſtrength of the enchauntment. Nowe knowe withall, that the olde Knight is Druſa Velonna ſo metamorphoſed, of whom be ſure to haue an eſpeciall care, for feare ſhe get againe at libertie: becauſe I (hauing told the way to ſurpriſe her) ſhall be moſt cruelly handled by her, if euer ſhe get looſe and eſcape from thee.
               
                  Florian right ioyfull of this good aduiſe, returned ſpéedilie to the Caſtell, where the old Knight ſeeing him come againe, continued his former menacing of the Lady, whereat Florian expreſſed ſuch extraordinarie paſſions, as he ſeemed ready to ſinck into the ground with griefe, offering if he had tenne thouſand liues, to looſe them all ere Argentina ſhould miſcarie. The old Knight, not a little proude hereof, came foorth of the Caſtell, (as before he had doone) with the two Squires, and comming to Florian, found his lookes ſo ſad and penſiuely deiected, with a willing preparation to his death, that the inward ioy of the Knight for this good fortune, made him the leſſe héedfull to that which followed.
               
                  Florian kept a fumbling about his Helmet, as not able to vntie the laces thereof, where-vppon the olde Knight iocondly offered his aſſiſtaunce, when he preſently faſtening hold on his heard, ſawe him immediatly altered to Druſa Velonna, whom (by reaſon he had ſeene before elſe-where) he very well knewe, and ſpake to her thus.
               Thou wicked woman, I haue thée now at ſome aduantage, quickly conduct me into the Caſtell, that I may ſette the young Lady Argentina at libertie. Velonna fearefullie

trembling, by teares and intreates laboured to haue him kiſſe her, promiſing then to performe whatſoeuer hee commaunded: but Dorina comming at the inſtant, cryed out vnto him. Kiſſe her not Knight, for then ſhe kills thee, neyther truſt any of the damned Witches promiſes, beware (beſide) thou goe not into the Caſtell, for then thou canſt neuer returne backe againe: but commaund her that Argentina, and ſome other Ladies encloſed with her, may be brought foorth hether, then take the chayne-girdle from about her, and binde her hands ſtrongly therewith, that ſhe be not able to get away from thée.
               
                  Florian commaunded her, to haue Argentina and the other Ladies brought foorth, which Velonna in very humble manner performed: then iſſued faire Argentina out of the Caſtell, and diuers other Ladies in company with her, on whom ſhe had wrought her damnable trecherie, & they beeing come before the Prince, Dorina put her hand into Velonnas boſome, and tooke out a booke, which was the very deereſt iewell for maintenaunce of her Arte, wherat ſhe was euen readie to die with ſorrow. And becauſe this dangerous Caſtell might be guiltie of no more harme, Florian entreated Dorina, by helpe of the Booke ſhe had taken from Velonna, to confound it in ſuch ſort, as no other Nigromancer euer after ſhould be poſſeſſed thereof. Which beeing doone accordingly, hee deſired Dorina, that ſhee would goe and aduertiſe Targiana of his fortunate ſucceſſe, in gayning the libertie of faire Argentina, and to certifie her withall, that he was gone in companie of the young Lady to Constantinople: ſo taking his leaue of her, he went to a neere adioyning port of the Sea, where finding a Shippe ready for his purpoſe, both he, Argentina, and Velonna went preſentlie aboord.
            
            
               
               CHAP. LXXXII. VVhat the Emperour, Palmerin, and the other Knights did, when they founde that Candida was gone away with Leonato.
               
               
                  ON the next morrowe, when Candida was not ſéene in the Court, on whom the Emperor & Palmerin hetherto had helde a ſtrict eye, now doubting ſome deceit, and ſhe being laſt ſéene in Leonatoes companie, as alſo now generally noiſed abroade, how déerely ſhe affected Leonato, they muſt needes gather, that ſhee was gone away with him. Hereat ye Emperour ſhewed himſelfe to be highly offended, and culloured this diſcontentment, to be in regard of the true zeale he euer bare her Father and Mother, and his paſſions grew to ſuch extremitie, as (in all haſt) he called for his Armour, and he would follow to recouer her againe.
               But Palmerin, no leſſe fired with rage, though more cunning in kéeping it from publique note, being come into the Emperours preſence, ſaid. It is not méet (dread Lord) that you in perſon ſhould purſue ſuch an enterpriſe, leaſt giddie-headed cenſurers thereby coniecture, that rather wanton follie induced you thereto, then the awfull reſpect which ought to be in an Emperour. This hee ſpake, becauſe himſelfe intended to follow them, and recouer the young Ladie from Leonato: neuer remembring, that a Father (in ſuch a caſe) ſhould be more mindfull both of his owne honor and his ſonnes, but it is no rare noueltie, when the very wiſeſt men are thus tranſported with amourous paſſions.
               
                  Tarnaes, perceiuing Palmerin made no haſt in giuing him his daughter Fior-nouella, thought with himſelfe that his

beſt meanes for ſooneſt obtayning her, was to hinder Leonato from paſſing into England: whether likewiſe if Palmerin and his daughter ſhould poſt after, then his loues hope might be vtterly fruſtrate, wherefore very ſecretely he armed himſelfe, & tooke the way that directed to England. Palmerin
                   alſo purpoſing to ride after his ſonne, went and put on his Armour: but beeing prettily quipt and taunted by his wife, for ſo manifeſt appearance of vnmanly behauiour, not knowing with what modeſtie well to excuſe it, he was not ouer-haſtie in arming himſelfe.
               
                  Aliarte, who likewiſe was enamoured of faire Candida, but made no outward publication thereof, beeing alone in the Emperours preſence, priuately told him: that the Empreſſe Grydonia full well perceiued, his fond loue to Candida in theſe decrepite yéeres, when a ſhéete for the graue were more néedfull to be thought on, then ſuch ill-ſéeming young deſires in ſo olde a body, yet had ſhee borne it with more patience, then a womans heated blood is commonlie capable of, ſo that except ſhee were the ſooner viſited & comforted, ye danger of her life ſtood deſperately vpon it. Theſe ſpéeches made the Emperor in a very ſtrange taking, whē he heard the weake eſtate of his Empreſſe, and contrariwiſe, his loue did mightilie torment him: but becauſe Aliarte ſhould not repute him as a man quite reaſonleſſe, hee went preſently to her chamber, and finding her in a verie contagious agonie, hee ſpake to her meruailous kindly, when ſhe (opening her eyes, and looking right ſadly vppon him) ſaid. Goe, goe, (my Lord) to the young beautie that hath bewitched your age, and leaue mee poore old Woman here drownde in mine owne teares: yet you might remember ſome of your knightly deedes done for my ſake, when you made me (fond credulous foole) to beléeue, that neuer could any other Lady haue power of your thoughts.
               Theſe words made ſuch a deepe impreſſion in his mind, as he preſently reſolued to ſhake off this vnbeſéeming humour, and embraced the Empreſſe with ſuch ſignes of true affection, that her former diſpayring thoughts were confidently

reuocated, with abſolute perſwaſion, that henceforth all ſuch folly in him would be quite abandoned. Nor did hee hold any longer ſpleene againſt Leonato, but the very next day repealed his baniſhment, vnder this promiſe, that hee had doone no act of villanie to Candida. When Aliart ſawe the Emperours doating loue ſo well reclaimed, he immediatly prouided, that Palmerin ſhould no further purſue Leonato, and cauſed a Poſt to bring a Letter, as if it had been written by Leonato himſelfe, the ſumme whereof in briefe thus followeth.
               
                  
                     The Letter brought by the ſuppoſed Poaſt to Constantinople, as written from Leonato, to his Father Palmerin.
                     
                     ¶The ſuperſcription. To his moſt noble Lord and Father, Palmerin, the right royall Prince of England, at Constantinople, or whereſoeuer.
                     GRacious Lord and Father, your wonted kind and honorable fauour, standing betweene me and my loue-fault committed, in the true duty of a ſonne, I humbly ſalute you. Giuing you to vnderſtand, that (in a mutuall ſimpathy of our ſoules deſires) I haue eſpouſed the beautiful Lady Candida, whoſe loue before I leaue, or can endure any riuall in, I haue rated it at the deerest droppe of my blood. I humbly craue pardon of my Lord the Emperour, in my ſo bold neglect of his ſacred worth: and pleaſe his Highneſſe but to remember, that it was loues raſh preſumption, and no vnciuill rudenes in Leonato, his wrong will the eaſier be repayred, and my treſpaſſe pardoned. I am now bound for England, to viſite my royall Grand-father King Edward, and in his Court to celebrate my marriage: So with my loue and dutie generally to all, I end.
                     
                        
                           Your louing Sonne, Leonato.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Aliarte managed this buſines ſo cunningly, that the Letter was deliuered, the Princeſſe Polynarda being by, who hearing this Letter to come from her ſonne, was the more deſirous to reade it, and hauing thorowly peruſed it, ſhe ſaid. My Lord and huſband, I pray yee, much rather for faire Candidaes ſake, then for our noble ſonnes, that you would forbeare to follow him, to the end no greater diſaſter may betide the ſilly Lady: but if you will needes be ſo forward, then I pray yée take me along with yée, that I may be reſpectiue of the Ladies honour, whatſoeuer happen to our ſonne Leonato. When Palmerin ſaw he could by no means recouer Candida, without manifeſt note of being enamoured of her, he would giue his Lady no aunſwere, but a meſſenger comming for him, he went preſently to the Emperour: and Polynarda, not knowing her fathers change from his former affection, went after her huſband, onely to be the hinderance of his iourney. Being come into his preſence, the graue olde Emperour with a ſmiling countenance ſpake as followeth,
               Lord Palmerin, if both you and I had not committed ſome errour in our loue, I would haue appointed, a very ſeuere proſecution againſt Leonato: but when I call to minde, how many ſeuerall dangers I oppoſed my ſelfe againſt, to gaine the loue of my Empreſſe Grydonia, I can but count it iuſtice, hauing (my ſelfe) wrongd the péereleſſe vertue of her loue, to pardon the light tranſgreſſion of an amourous young man. Therefore I will that our ſentence of baniſhment ſtand no longer vpon Leonato, or any of our Court to follow in purſute of him: only let it be thus, if he demeane not him ſelfe like an honourable Knight to the Lady, a puniſhment accordingly ſhal be inflicted on him, forbeare then to vndertake ſuch needeleſſe trauaile, and let vs ſende for Tarnaes, to beſtow on him (according to our paſſed promiſe) the beautifull Fior-nouella in mariage. Theſe words did wound Palmerin to the very hart, eſpecially being ſpoken in the preſence of his wife, who marked well his alteration of countenance, and there-with gaue Leonatoes Letter to the

Emperour, which when he had reade, and perceaued that Leonato had eſpouſed the Lady, he wexed very ioyfull, ſéeing his idle deſſeigne in loue ſo well diſappointed, and his thoughts quite diſcharged of their former tormentes, for ſhould his vaine opinion ſtill haue continued, hee ſawe no meanes left of euer attaining it.
               When Aliarte behelde all thinges in ſo good an order for Leonato, he purpoſed to let his owne fond loue neuer be diſcouered, & brake off all fruitleſſe expectation that way, ſince two ſo great Princes had brideled their affections. And for the more certainty, that no miſhap might befall faire Candida, he wrought in ſuch manner by his Arte, that a Squire ouer-tooke Tarnaes in his trauaile, and riding a while with him, told him, that Leonato was returned to Constantinople, where by the honourable meanes of Polynarda his mother, he had eſpouſed Candida: beſide (quoth he) I heard the Emperour make earneſt enquirie, for a Nephewe of his, who was ſonne to king Platir of Lacedemonia, on whom he meant to beſtowe in mariage, the daughter of noble Palmerin of England, but the Knights name I doo not well remember.
               
                  Tarnaes highly ioyed with theſe ſo pleaſing and happy newes, began to conceaue, that if he returnd not the ſooner to Constantinople, ſome ſuſpect might be gathered, that hee was not willing to accept the Lady as his wife: wherefore parting from the Squire, pretending to him a very farre iourney, he repaired ſpeedily to Constantinople, and no ſooner was he entred the Pallace, but he met with the Princeſſe Polynarda, who taking him very kindly by the hand, ſayde. My Lord Tarnaes, your preſence hath greatly beene deſired in this Court, that a royall promiſe made you might be accompliſhed. Madame, quoth Tarnaes, I am héere ready at your highnes ſeruice: and ſome other ſpeeches of courteſie paſſing betweene them, Tarnaes priuatly went to his chamber, right glad of the newes he heard by the Princeſſe Polynarda.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. LXXXIII. Howe Prince Florian arriued at Constantinople, with the faire Lady Argentina, and the ſubtill Enchauntreſſe Druſa Velonna: Heere likewiſe is declared, how Leonato loſt his beloued Candida, and afterward by what meanes he recouered her againe.
               
                  
                     PAlmerin hauing intelligence that Tarnaes was returned to Court againe, hee obtayned a ſolemne conference with the Emperour Primaleon and his wife Polynarda, about the beſtowing of Fior-nouella on him in mariage, and the eſpouſall beeing fully agréed vppon, the learned Aliarte came into the Emperors preſence, ſaying. Great Maieſtie, and you the reſt héere graciouſly aſſembled, in performing your paſſed promiſes, concerning Tarnaes and the faire Fior-nouella, it is a caſe both iuſt and honourable: yet let me tell yée, there ought to be no ſuch ceremonious rites performed, till firſt thoſe weightier eſpouſalls be finiſhed, of Primaleon with Victoria, and Arguto with the ſwéete young Lady Concordia, which once accompliſhed, there are other inamoratoes of this Court, that look to haue like grace extended them.
               Theſe ſpéeches were very pleaſing to the Emperour, and all the reſt in preſence, and as they further diſcourſed thereon, tidings entred the Hall, that Florian was arriued in the Port, with faire Argentina, and Druſa Velonna as his priſoner, which newes were gracde with a generall welcom, for all the Lords & Ladies gaue a preſent teſtimony therof, by being at an inſtant mounted on their Palfrayes, & riding in comly equipage down to the Port, where they found Argentina newly come forth of the Ship, whom after they had ſeuerally kiſt and embraced, ſhe was ſeated likewiſe on a

gallant proude Iennet, and Druſa Velonna (bound to her good behauiour) vpon an other. Thus with Prince Florian rode they along in great ſtate to the Court, where being alighted and aſcended the great Hall, the Emperour gaue them moſt royall entertainment: but when he vnderſtood, how Velonna had behaued her ſelfe toward Prince Florian, with a frowning countenance he ſaide vnto her. Thou ill naturde woman, could not thy ſecret eſcape ſuffice thée, in contempt of all our gracious fauours toward thée, but ſtill thou muſt aime thy malice at vs and our Court? a more warie reſpect héereafter ſhall attend thée: and becauſe his words ſhould be ſealed with déedes, he preſently commaunded, that ſhe ſhould be encloſed in ye ſame yron Cage, which Palmerin d'Oliua kept his witching enemie in. Which being done, they ſate pleaſantly conferring in other matters, the Emperour holding Florian by one hand, and Argentina by an other, highly extolling the Prince for his magnanimous ſpirit, and the woorthy aduentures by him performed.
               But leaue we them in Court thus gladly diſpoſed, and come againe to Leonato, who hauing trauailed ten dayes together, came at laſt into an euen champaigne ſoyle, very much heated and ſcorched by the Sunnes power: there met he neither with man or woman, nor could happen on any water to coole his thirſt. Thus rode he on till halfe the day was ſpent, till at length he came among certaine ſtraunge ſhapen trées, with ſuch little leaues as he had neuer ſeene the like, vnder them he purpoſed to reſt a while, feeding on ſuch thinges as his Squire had brought with him, which hardly aunſwered his preſent extremity. And much more were his thoughts afflicted, in regard of his deare eſtéemed Candida, neuer vſed to taſt of ſuch diſaſters, and therefore the more vnapt for her tender nature: but to rid themſelues from ſo vaſt and a deſert place, they tooke horſe againe, and rode till euening, yet could not out-ſtrip this deſolate Countrey. Looking (with a gréeued minde) round about him, to ſée if comfort might any where be expected, vpon his left

hand he diſcerned a little light, and thether he went, hoping to gaine there (by force or faire meanes) ſome ſuch neceſſaries as they ſtoode in néede of.
               Beeing come to the place where he eſpied the light, hee found it to be a narrow houſe of thatch, but built ſomewhat high, where a man and woman of a Giant-like ſtature, came to vnderſtand the cauſe of his comming thether: but being vnacquainted with ſuch ſalutations as Leonato gaue them, they had him in their language, and witneſſed the ſame by outward ſignes, that he ſhould enter into their cottage. Which when he had done, he ſaw a ſonne of theirs, turning on a ſpit a whole Boare at the fire, and beeing by becks and nods bidden to ſit downe, the woman Giant kindled certaine ſticks of wood, which burnt as light as anie candles: then couerd ſhee a great table, and ſet the whole Boare vppon it, as wee doo vſually any diſh for ſeruice. By this time had Leonato ſtept forth, and (vpon this courteous entertainment) brought thether his faire Lady Candida, and although he nor ſhe vnderſtoode theſe Giants language, yet by ſuch ſignes as they made to them, they ſate downe with them at the table, and fed very hungerly vpon the meate, by reaſon their appetite very well ſerude them, and their drink was cleare fountaine water, whereof they had plenty néere to that cottage. The Giant well noting the beauty of Candida, became ſurprized there-with in ſuch vehement manner, as diuers times he would gladly haue embraced her: but that he behelde, how Leonato fed with his armour on, & his ſword hanging ſtill by his ſide, wherefore he determined, to diſpoſſeſſe him of the Lady while he ſhould ſléepe.
               So, without any euident appearance of loue to her, ſupper being ended, he ſhewed them a pallet of leaues, whereon they ſhould reſt ſo well as they could: now by reaſon the night before, and all the whole day had béene very moleſtuous to them, they ſlept ſo ſoundly, that the Giant might the more eaſily carrie thence Candida, as indéede he did, without any knowledge of the Lady her ſelfe. Into a néere adioyning

thicket he caried her, which him ſelfe had planted with his owne hands, where hee found the Ladies beauty ſo piercing to him, as he durſt not awake her: by which happy meanes, Candida was preſerued from diſhonour, for otherwiſe this ſhameleſſe man, making no account of humane behauiour, if he could not by faire meanes haue compaſſed his deſire, in brutiſh manner he would haue rauiſht her.
               
                  Leonato ſléeping ſtill profoundly, dreamed that a great Serpent would haue deuourde him aliue, hauing gotten his foote already in his mouth, at which very inſtant, the Gianteſſe (full of iealous fury) hauing noated the vnmanlie acte of her huſband, came and wakened Leonato, ſaying. Ariſe Sir Knight, or elſe thy Lady will be diſhonoured.
               
                  Leonato ſtarted vp like one halfe franticke, & miſſing his Candida, perceaued by ſignes which the Gianteſſe made, that her huſband had caried her into a Cops hard by: and lacing his helmet ſuddainly on, hee went according as the Gianteſſe directed him, and hauing gone about halfe a mile in the thicket, hee heard the voyce of his Candida, ſaying: Help me O heauen, that I be not diſhonoured by this beaſtlie man.
               Theſe words added ſuch wings to his haſt, that he came quickly to them, and found the Giant on his knees before Candida, vſing infinite perſwaſions to obtaine his purpoſe. Leonato ſtept vppon him in ſuch fury, without giuing any warning for the defence of him ſelfe, (as the duty of Knighthoode partly commaundeth) he lifted vp his ſword to ſmite off his head: and doubtleſſe had done it, but that the Gianteſſe (repenting ſhe had guided thether the Knight) cried out. Oh holde your hand Sir, and doo not depriue my huſband of his life, albeit in iuſtice his merit is no leſſe.
               Now although he vnderſtoode not what ſhe ſaide, yet he perceaued, that ſhee was loath to haue her huſband ſlaine, wherefore he helde his hand, and ſpared the Giant: who riſing vp in an extreame rage, and purpoſing to be reuenged

on the Knight, ranne preſently to his Cottage, where he buckled on a great Shéelde, and a mighty long ſworde, and lacing on his helmet, which after the auncient faſhion was without any beauer, he returned to Leonato, who held faire Candida by the hand, right kindly appeaſing her former gréefe and feare.
               Fond Knight (quoth the Giant) Ile teach thée the price of hindering my pleaſure, and drawing his ſworde, ſmote firſt at the Lady, who fearefully fell backward, which fall ſo outragiouſly madded Leonato, that deliuering a maine full ſtroke at the Giant, he cleft his Shéelde quite through the middeſt, the one halfe falling downe on the ground, and the blow ſliding downe with no meane force, pierced quite through the armour vnder his ſide, and gaue the Giant two little hurts. But he returned a ſhrewde requitall with his heauie long ſworde, which lighting rudely on his helmet, ſmote him downe in a traunce, and the Giant making vſe of that aduantage, caught him vp on his necke, intending to drowne him in the neere adioyning Fountaine: yet as he went along, hee looked on bright Candida, who (fearing now to be rauiſhed indeede) ſeeing her Knight in ſuch a deſperate caſe, fled a pace from the Giant, hoping in ſhort while to get out of his ſight.
               Hée purpoſing at one inſtant to ridde him ſelfe of the Knight, and haue the Lady in his owne poſſeſſion, threwe Leonato againſt the ground ſo cruelly, as the very fall had béene ſufficient to haue ſlaine him: but by great good fortune, the Gianteſſe hauing layd together, boughs, leaues, and little ſhrubbes in diuers parts of the Wood, to ſerue them for fewell in the Winter ſeaſon: it was his chaunce to light on one of thoſe heapes, ſo that he had no great harme by the fall, albeit the Giant hoped the contrary, who purſuing Candida, had ſoone ouer-taken her, but that the hurts in his ſide were ſome hinderance to him.
               The Lady poſting on the wings of her ſtrong feare, gayned a good diſtaunce of ground, in which ſpace, Leonato being of a very great ſpirit, recouered againe, yet ouercome

with extreamity of gréefe, leaſt Candida (whom he could no where behold) was become a pray to the Giants baſe luſt. As he gazed round about him onely to eſpie her, he ſaw her come running mainly toward him, and the Giant following, but ſomewhat further off: with exceeding ioy he ranne to meete her, and taking her by the hand, oppoſed him ſelfe to defend her againſt the Giant, who came with an abſolute intent to haue ſlaine him: but hee hauing felt the Giants ſtearne force, auoyded his ſtrokes cunningly, and ſcaping one blow made ſo mainly at him, as the point of the Giants ſword ſtabd farre into the earth, he followed this opportunity, and ſmote the helmet quite off from his head, though it coſt him a wound in the flanke for his labour, ſo ſoone as the Giant had fréed his ſworde againe, and afterward another vpon his left ſhoulder, from both which hurts the blood iſſued forth very liberally.
               
                  Leonato tooke this ſomewhat ſtraungely, and began to conſider with him ſelfe, that all this was too little for his Ladies ſafety: yet if in this conflict he ſhould looſe his life, and ſhee afterward be by him brutiſhly abuſed, his ſoule could endure no greater a torment. Where-vpon, trauerſing light about from place to place, and temporizing his owne trauaile, to kéepe him ſelfe ſtill in ſome ſtate of ability, that the Giant (by the liberall expence of his blood, which drild downe his armour a pace from his woundes) might haue the leſſe meanes to hold out againſt him, he found this his likelieſt courſe of preuailing: but the Giant feeling his ſtrength to weaken more and more, leapt vpon Leonatoes backe, and catching him faſt about the neck, ſtrugled very hard to ouer-throw him, but then he graſping the Giant about the body, wroong him ſtrongly by very meere force, that they both fell together vpon the ground, yet Leonatoes good hap was to be vppermoſt. Now was he in greater perill then before, for the Gianteſſe, ſeeing her huſband ready to be ſlaine, caught vp a great braunch of a tree lying by her, & running to Leonato triumphing ouer the Giant, thought to beate out his braines there-with, that he might not ſtab

her huſband with his dagger, which hee held ready for the purpoſe in his hand. When Candida ſaw the deſperate hazard of her Louer, ſhe cryed out aloude, that he ſhould take héede of that bloodie minded Woman, and Leonato perceiuing his imminent perrill, ſpurning her backward with his foote, ordered the matter in ſuch ſort with the Giant, that he ſtabd his weapon quite thorow his hart: and turning afterward to the Gianteſſe, had giuen her ſuch correction as her trecherie deſerued, but that ſhe ran behind Candida, and falling on her knées to her, entreated her to begge pardon for her of her Knight.
               The pittifull-minded Lady, perceiuing how Leonato intended to kill her, deſired him to remit her treſpaſſe, cō
                  mitted but in the defence of her huſbands life: which prooued to be the ſafety of the Gianteſſe, for Leonato hearing himſelfe intreated by her, who might cōmaund him to venture through any danger whatſoeuer, ſaid, hee would willingly ſaue her life, but ſhee ſhould goe along with him to England. So, binding her hands, they went with her to the Cottage, where finding her young ſonne, he bound him by the féete alſo, leaſt he ſhould ſcape from him, then made hée ſignes to the Gianteſſe, that ſhe ſhould prepare ſome-what for them to eate: ſhe ſtepping preſently to a ſafe, wherein ſhe vſed to kéepe her prouiſion, brought forth a yoūg Fawne and two little Boares, which the young Giant & his Mother dreſt in ſuch manner, as they were quickly prouided of a dinner. Hauing fed thereon ſo long as they pleaſed, they reſted themſelues there for all that day, and at the entreaty of the Gianteſſe and her ſonne, they gaue buriall to her huſbands dead body, finding them likewiſe ready and willing to depart thence with them and goe for England.
               
               At night they ſupt againe with ſuch prouiſion as they had, and early in the morning ſet onward on their way, the Gianteſſe and her ſonne ſtill going before them, loden with freſh water and other neceſſaries for trauaile: ſo comming at laſt by eaſie iourneyes to Cales, they there tooke ſhipping, and ſayled toward England.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. LXXXIIII. Howe Leonato (with his faire Candida) arriued in England, where their marriage was ſollemnized with very great royaltie. Alſo how the young trauayling Knights, with them of greater yeeres & experience, returned (the moſt part of them) to the Emperours Court at Conſtantinople.
               
               
                  
                     LEonato had ſuch proſperous wind and weather, that in fewe dayes hee landed on the Coaſt of England, where beeing knowne for grand-child to the King their Soueraigne: through all places as he paſt, hee was entertained with excéeding great honor, and (for his ſake) his beauteous Candida, to whō he ſhewed the brauerie of his Country. When theſe newes were brought to the King Don Edward, hee acquainted faire Flerida his Quéene there-with, and appointed that moſt part of the Engliſh Nobilitie, ſhould ride to meete them tenne miles from the Citty of London: himſelfe accompanied with his greateſt Lords & Barons, rode out of the Cittie aboue two miles, where méeting with his graund-ſonne, and bright Candida riding hand in hand, hee wondred to behold two ſuch goodly creatures, but eſpecially, faire Candidaes beautie amazed him, ſo that he began (almoſt) to be ſicke of the Emperour Primaleons doating diſeaſe. But his minde béeing enriched with extraordinary vertues, hee checkt ſuch lawleſſe laſciuious deſires, and hauing doone royall ſalutations to either, would by no meanes ſuffer thē to diſmount, but turning his horſe, with Leonato on his right hand, and Candida on the left, ſo rode hee backe to the Cittie of London: where, at theyr entrance into ye gate, they met Quéene

                  Flerida and her traine of Ladies, ſhe hauing long deſired to ſée Leonato, becauſe it was often told her, that he much reſembled her Father, Palmerin d' Oliua, his perfect Image appearing ſo liuely in this young Prince, as if himſelfe had at that inſtant béene liuing.
               So rode they thorow the Cittie (with much ioy and delight) toward the Pallace, the people expreſſing all ſubiect-like loue and reioycing: for ſince the returne of King Edward into England, after his recouery by ye precous oyntment, there was no other talke but of mirth & iouiſſaunce. Many gallant ſhewes and deuiſes were performed in the ſtréetes, ſo that it was long before they came to ye Pallace, where King Edward (taking Candida by the hand) conducted her vp into the Preſence, ſpending the reſt of this day in courtly reuelling and pleaſure.
               The King perceiuing Leonatoes earneſt deſire, to haue the marriage ſollemnized betwéene him and Candida, called his Lords to councell, to vnderſtand their oppinions in the caſe: where it was concluded, that the next Sonday enſuing, it ſhould be performed, with the greateſt ſollemnitie that could be deuiſed. As it was appointed, ſo was it accō
                  pliſhed, for I purpoſe not to tell yee perticulerly the whole royaltie of the marriage: becauſe the other young Knights errant, being likewiſe enamoured of beautifull Ladies, for whoſe ſakes they haue paſt through many perrillous aduentures, calls me to diſcourſe of them awhile.
               
                  Oliuanto who left Constantinople, when his Father Florendos and he ſeuerally intended, to trauaile in the recouerie of the faire Argentina, trauailed through diuers ſtrange Countries, without ſtay or contradiction in any part, til at length he happened to the place where the Adamant Caſtle ſome-time ſtoode, and becauſe that Field was vnfurniſhed of trées, the Sunne at mid-day ſhone ſo hotely on him, as it ſcalded him through his Armour. Heereupon hee alighted from his horſe, and ſhadowing himſelfe among the ſtones of the ruined Caſtell, hee found himſelfe drawne and knit thereto with ſuch violence, as hee could by no meanes get

from thence: whereat he meruailing not a little, ſtroue to créepe from the ſtones by his vtmoſt ſtrength, but he found himſelfe bound thereto the faſter.
               Béeing vexed in minde at this ſtrange accident, and ſtudying how he ſhould accompliſh the reſt of his intended trauaile, a Swaine of the country paſſing that way, when he ſawe the Knight faſtened to the ſtones in ſuch ſort, with his Mattocke on his necke hee came to him, ſaying: Sir Knight, you can neuer part hence, except yee put off your Armour, for this is the Adamant ſtone, which drawes all kinde of yron to it.
               Now was his griefe far greater then before, when hée heard that he muſt needes leaue his Armour behind him, which was to ſted him in all perrils, whatſoeuer: and looking better on the place, he perceiued that the ſame tower or Caſtell had ſtoode there, wherein deſiring the Peazant further to reſolue him, he told him: Howe Druſa Velonna by magicall arte, had built a Caſtell there on a Rocke of Adamant, and kept therein a Lady of the Grecian Court, whom a Knight of the ſame Court had deliuered and borne thence.
               Héereby Oliuanto conceiued, that doubtleſſe the Ladie was Argentina, for he knew of the fréedom of the other two before, but he could not imagine who the Knight ſhould be: and ſéeing he muſt néedes part with the loſſe of his armour, he aſked the Country-man, if there were no way to gette looſe without loſſe of his Armes. At that very inſtant, one of the Ladies, who had beene priſoner in the Caſtell with Argentina, riding by the place, and ſéeing the Knight ſo faſtened by his Armour, trotted her Palfrey thether, ſaying. The curteſie of Prince Florian, in fréeing me and other Ladies out of this ruined Tower, where wee were enchaunted with faire Argentina, bindes mee to lend yee ſuch aſſiſtance, as you ſhall follow your knightly affaires, and yet not leaue your Armour héere. So, alighting frō her horſe, ſhee tooke a Crimoſine Mantle which was wrapt about her, and ſpreading it ouer Oliuanto and his Squire, the

Adamant immediatly yéelded and loſt his vertue, whereby they were at their former libertie.
               As they rode thence in company of the Lady, ſhee told Oliuanto at large, in what manner Florian had ended the aduenture, and becauſe his thoughts were altogether addicted to ſée his déere affected Auriana, (who gladly would haue ſtayed him from purſuing this aduenture, but that hée preſently told her, how a Knight ſhould ſhunne no occaſion whatſoeuer, whereby to rancke him-ſelfe among thoſe of greateſt merrit) ſéeing the Lady ready to ride from him at a croſſe-parting way, right curteouſly he tooke his farewel of her, with hartie thanks for ſtedding him in ſo vrgent an neceſſitie.
               And béeing come to the Sea-ſide, he was ſoone prouided of ſhipping, ſayling in ſhort while to Constantinople, where he was honourably welcommed: eſpecially by his Ladie Auriana, as one right ioyfull of his high good fortunes, and hoping of ſpéedie attainement of their long deſired ioyes.
               In this time of generall contentation, the Emperor had ſent tidings through moſt parts of the world, to aduertiſe his Knights, that the thrée Ladies (ſtolne from the Courte by Druſa Velonna,) were againe recouered: and therefore they ſhould repayre to his Court, becauſe hee would haue none abſent at ſuch a meete time of ioying, wherby it happened, that many were come in againe in very ſhort while. The firſt was Berolde, King of Spayne, who hearing of his Daughters deliuerance, poaſted with ſpéede toward Constantinople, meeting by the way with Caro and Armindo, who had loſt much labour in ſearch of the Princeſſe, & hearing now ſuch gladſome tydings, returned with Berolde, without ſtaying any where till they came at Constantinople, Berolde
                   reioycing not a little at the ſight of his Daughter. Soone after came newes, how in one Ship were come together, Don Roſuell, Francian, Fortenbracio, and Orino: but becauſe Don Roſuell was of eſpeciall eſtéeme in the Court, many Lords & Knights rode to welcome him, bringing him to the Pallace very honorably.
               
                  As they were entring the gate, they beheld a Knight who had come by Land, and ſtaying to be further reſolued who he was, when he came neerer them, his Caſke being open, they knew him to be Forcino, the ſonne of Dragonalte, who by his owne guiltie deſtenie, was the amourous ſeruaunt to faire Spina of Fraunce: but ſhee beeing proude and curious, would neuer acknowledge any of his knightly ſeruices, wherefore he liued in very deſperate eſtate for her loue. Theſe youthful gallants being thus come to ye Court, the Emperours ioyes excéedingly encreaſed, to ſée them in this noble manner about him, whom they loued as if hee had beene their Father.
               While the Court was in this ouer-flow of pleaſure, one day as they ſate in the Hall together, there entred a Damoſell, attended on by two comely Squires, who hauing doone dutious reuerence to the Emperour, deliuered him a Letter, which beeing read by Palmerin, appeared to come from Don Edward the King of England, & importing a further meſſage to be deliuered by the Damoſell, the Emperour commaunded her to ſpeake her minde, where-vppon ſhe began in this manner.
               High and mightie Lord, King Edward of England in loue ſalutes yée, with all this gallant and knightly aſſembly: entreating your Maieſtie, to pardon the offence of his graund-ſonne Leonato, in preſuming to beare hence the beautifull Candida, toward whom he hath demeaned himſelfe like a vertuous Knight, & married her in the preſence of King Edward and his Quéene. The Emperour, who ſince the comming of Aliarts Letter, had heard no other tydings of this matter, but doubted leaſt ſome miſhap might betide Candida, though not by Leonato, (of whoſe honour and good cariage he neuer doubted) yet by ſome other ſiniſter meanes: when he heard of their happy beeing in England, and that King Edward ſpake in theyr behalfe, whom he could not (with honour) any way contradict, he thus replied. Say to our louing Lord & friend, that Leonato may returne to Constantinople ſafely at his good pleaſure, ſince

his behauiour hath béen ſo noble and knightly, aſſuring him we are no way diſpleaſed with him: wherefore we commit you Lady to your good reſt, allowing your returne to England when it ſhall pleaſe your ſelfe.
               I deſire no reſt at all (quoth the Damoſell) till I haue deliuered in your preſence Lord Leonato, and his vertuous wife the Princeſſe Candida: ſo deſcending the ſteppes, and paſſing forth of the Citty, in leſſe then two houres ſhee returned againe, accompanied with Leonato and his Ladie, who entring hand in hand into the Hall, each one with chéerefull countenaunce entertained them: onely his Father Palmerin excepted, who had not yet forgot the iniurious ſpéeches, which his ſonne had ſo raſhly giuen the Emperor. But Leonato, feigning as if he diſcerned it not, ſtept before the Emperour, who taking both him and Candida vp from off their knees, kiſſed both their fore-heads: marie he beſtowed two kiſſes on Candida, in remembrance of the loue he ſome-time bare her, whereat there grew a generall ſmiling, in regard that his minde ſtill ſerued him to be enamoured, though all the powers elſe of his bodie denied it.
               The elder Knights betooke themſelues to reſt, but the younger delicate bloods, whoſe ſoules did liue in the fayre eyes of theyr Miſtreſſes, they ſtroue by all poſſible meanes to purchaſe theyr fauours, hoping one day, (with the Emperours gracious conſent) to enioy them in mariage. But leaue we this iocond Court in the height of felicitie, and let vs ſpeake now of Franardo and ye other Giants, that went to conquer the Ile of the bottomleſſe Lake, tearmed in the former parts of this Hiſtorie, the Profound Ile.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. LXXXV. Howe Dramuſiande, Franardo, Almaroll, and Forzato, trauailed to conquer the Iland of the bottomleſſe Lake, and what happened to them in the attempt.
               
                  
                     DRamuſiande, beeing firſt accompanied with his ſonne, and afterward happening on Almaroll & Forzato, according as hath béene alreadie declared, when they had acquainted him with theyr intention, of going to conquere the fore-named Iland, hee ſaid: That theyr hap was very good to meete with him, becauſe if they would goe to the Ile of the bottomleſſe Lake, hee could enforme them of a place there, which was onely manifeſted to him by his Aunt Eutropa. For there was a water, which might not be paſſed with any boate or veſſell made of wood, but it muſt be hewen out of a ſtone which is lighter then wood, and was made onely by his Aunt herſelfe, and kept with great circumſpection in his Caſtell: and (the reaſon hereof was) becauſe they were to paſſe a certaine water, which (cōtrary to the nature of all other waters) ſent forth continuall flames of fire, and preſently conſumed any boate of wood.
               Hee tolde them beſide, that this Iland was poſſeſt by a progenie of ſterne bloody Giants, who had forcibly taken it from his father Frenaque: but that which moſt of all imported their paynes, was the horrid and ſtrange enchauntments in the Ile, which his Aunte Eutropa had not the power to finiſh, but had left certaine aduertiſements with him in writing, which being coupled with theyr valour, would

giue them the greater hope of victory, and the booke of theſe aduertiſements he kept in his owne Caſtell.
               Theſe outward appearances of ſo great difficulty, kindled ſuch forward deſires in the Giants, that they could not be quiet till they came thether: wherefore they earneſtly entreated Dramuſiande, not to ſlowe time in haſtening to the Ile, leaſt ſome other might rob them of the honour of this aduenture. Franardo would gladly haue ſtolne thether alone, to diſpoſſeſſe the reſt of ſo much honour, as in ſuch an high enterpriſe might well be expected: but hearing that the glory deuided among foure, in conquering ſo many Giants and dangerous perrills, was as great as if one man ſhould end an enchauntment, he yéelded the more willinglie to trauaile altogether. So in leſſe then foure dayes they came to Dramuſiandes Caſtell, where reſting them ſelues one day, the boate was made ready for their paſſage on the fierie water, and conuayed to ſuch a place, as without any contradiction they might ſet thence: and hauing put vp the booke in his boſome, they furniſhed them ſelues with the beſt armour which was to be had, becauſe they ſhould ſtand in great néed thereof. The boat being brought to the mouth of the Lake, they as yet rode all along by the waters ſide, becauſe them ſelues being weighty, would not endanger it againſt the craggie rockes, which riſing ſomewhat high in the Riuer, might the ſooner breake it.
               Hauing ridden ſo farre as they thought conuenient, they left their Horſes with their Squires, and went aboord without any Mariners: for the boate only mooued by the words (which Dramuſiande reade in the booke) and flew with ſuch ſwiftnes, as if it had béene an arrowe through the ayre. When it came to the flaming Lake, the very ſtouteſt among them began to be aſtonned, for the flames did folde about them in ſuch ſtrange manner, as if they felt their armour on fire about them, and the boate it ſelfe was ſo extreamely hot, that they could abide by no means to touch it. So that they had béene in moſt miſerable eſtate, if the boat had not made ſuch extraordinarie expedition, and floating

along ſtill through the fierie flames, at laſt it came to a very coole water, which was no meane comfort in quallifying their long heate: there did they diſcerne the Iland not farre off, and Dramuſiande reading in other places of the booke, cauſed the boate to ſtay a while, as meaning not to paſſe to the Iland till the next morning, becauſe being ignorant of the créekes and reaches, the Giants might worke ſome treacherie to them in the night time.
               Abiding there vpon this determination, they ſpent the time in conferring with Dramuſiande, how they ſhould ſort them ſelues together for the combates, becauſe they knew not how many Giants they were to fight withall: wherein Dramuſiande reſolude them ſo farre as he could, ſaying (as he had learned by his Aunt) that they vſed not to weare anie ſtrong Armour, ſo reſted they for this night, without any treacherie or inconuenience. In the morning they awaked very early, and went towarde the Iland, Dramuſiande reading ſuch words of Arte, as made the boate goe merily thether, and there they entended to be the ſooner, becauſe the Giants might not lay their traynes abroade, to endanger their lyues before their landing, but rather that they might ſteale vpon them vnſéene. At Sunne riſing, the b
                     •
                  ate ſhot into a little bay of the Ile, and our foure Giants, armed at all points for their purpoſe, with their Shéeldes ſtrongly faſtened on, and very ponderous Axes in theyr hands, went foorth vppon the ſhoare, and eſpying a great Tower in the midſt of the Iland, thether they ſhaped their courſe directly. Not farre had they gone, but they were eſpied by two young Giants, who were thus early going on hunting, and imagining they would offer them no reſiſtaunce, they perceaued preſentlie they came to aſſayle them.
               
                  Franardo deſirous to cope with them firſt, ſtept formoſt to méete them, and receaued two arrowes vpon his Armour, which being of ſound proofe, withſtoode their entrance, albeit they made an inward denting, as if they had beene the puſhes of two Launces: héereby he perceaued the ſtrength

of thoſe people, and how induſtrious they were in the feate of ſhooting. Boldly he ſtept to them, and lifting his Axe againſt the formoſt, who had nockt another arrowe ready in his bowe, by reaſon he was vnarmed, he cleft him from the left ſhoulder downe to the flancke, ſo that immediatly hee tumbled downe dead: and the other (hauing neuer ſéene ſuch a ſtroke before) was abaſhed when he beheld his companion dead, and becauſe he deſired not the like ſalutation, he began to ſpéede away, but Franardo, (leaſt he ſhould giue warning to the reſt in the Iland) followed, and gaue him ſuch a cut in the head, as he was not able to runne any further.
               By this time, Dramuſiande and the reſt were come to him, all now going together toward the Tower, and there had they arriued without any hinderance: but that a Gianteſſe (mother to the two young Giants ſlaine, ſtanding in the doore of an olde ruinous houſe, made of twigges and rafters knit together,) eſpied this their miſhap, and therefore cried out aloude: Oh helpe, helpe, helpe, for our enemies are entred into the Iland. At this lamentable crie, the Giants awaked, and making certaine openings in their houſes, which ſerued them as windowes, they no ſooner beheld theſe foure armed Giants, but they preſently coniectured (as indéede it was) that theſe were ſome friends of Dramuſiandes, of whom they liued in hourely feare, becauſe they tooke this Iland from his Father, where-vpon they tooke vp their ſwords and ſhéeldes, and eight of them went foorth to make reſiſtaunce, while the reſt had leaſure to arme them ſelues.
               When our Giants ſawe theſe come againſt them, that ſo wondrouſly excéeded thē in ſtature, they diſmayed not a iote, but albeit they were ſomewhat weary, with running after the yong Giant, that would haue ſau'd his own life by flight, yet did they couragiouſly ſet vpon them, & with their kéene Axes ſliced the others ſhéelds in péeces: receauing frō them again ſuch puiſſant ſtroks, as they were hardly able to ſtand vnder thē, for ſuch was their ſtrength, as eaſily they might

haue daſht them in péeces, if they had béene poſſeſt of ſkill and agility in Armes, or could haue borne them ſelues with prouidence againſt their enemies. But being almoſt ſpent with rage and fury, thrée of them was ſlaine, and the reſt ſo ſore wounded, as they were not able to reſiſt any longer, and then came forth the fiercer Giants, armed onely with a Gant-plate and their helmets, but no defence at all vpon their backs, becauſe they had neuer ſeene any ſuch armour. When theſe beheld the large expence of blood, of their neere alliance and reſpected friends, they were ſo outragiouſly incenſed, that they coulde not expect their enemies as they ſhould haue done, which they likewiſe well noting, left the other fiue, and preparing to entertaine theſe fierie fellowes, the greateſt Giant ſet vpon Franardo, another ſmote Almaroll ſo ſtoutly on the helmet, that he fell downe backward in a ſwound.
               
                  Dramuſiande ſéeing the ſtearne power of the Giants, could hardly gueſſe what their attempt would ſort vnto, and ſtepping before Almaroll, to ſheelde him from beeing thus ſlaine on the ground, he gaue ſuch a ſiding ſtroke with his Axe, as cut off one of the Giants legges, in which while Almaroll recouered, and being ſomwhat aſhamed of his fall, began to lay about him in ſuch ſort with his Axe, that hee wounded one of them very ſhrewdly on the arme, albeit he was ſo mighty of ſtature, that Almaroll ſeemed but like a Dwarffe to him. Forzato laboured earneſtly againſt one of them, and Franardo was twiſe in very great danger, but that his ſkill and dexterity very much holpe him, whereby he eſcaped many a pezant ſtroke, which falling on ye ground, ſeemed as they had lighted on a mountaine.
               
                  Dramuſiande ſeeing Franardo in great perill of his life, ſmote mainly at his aduerſaries head, who to ſhun the blow of the Axe, receaude it on his Sheelde, but then Franardo giuing a thruſt at his enemies belly, made ſo large a paſſage through the Cuiraſſe, as his bowels were ready to fall out, and he glad to ſtay him ſelfe on his ſword from falling. Nowe would Dramuſiande needes rid him altogether, in

ſuccour of his ſonne, who was extreamely wearied, wherefore ſtepping to him, he ſaide: Get thee away on thy iourney, ſince thou art ſo forward, for thou art but an hinderance to my ſonne, who is a coward if he ſend not another ſoone after thee.
               Theſe words ſo ſtird vp the ſpirit of Franardo, that laying on loade with dauntleſſe reſolution, he quickly diſpatcht an other after his fellow, and Dramuſiande added a third to the number: ſo that the fight being now growne equall, foure to foure, our Giants being the better armed, and of more cunning in mannaging their weapons, had the greater aduantage againſt the other, and brought it to ſuch effect, as quickly had this battaile béen concluded: but that ten other Giants of leſſer ſtature, came freſhly vpon them, being little inferiour to the other in valour, and they with theyr Boare-ſpeares and hunting Iauelings, ſo ſharpely beſet them on euery ſide, as now they iudged them ſelues to be in great danger.
               
                  Franardo hauing ſlaine his Giant of the foure, was round beſet by foure more of theſe other, ſo that now if he not beſtird him ſelfe nimbly indeede, there was no remedy but he muſt needes periſh. Almaroll being likewiſe rid of his Giant, though he was wounded in the arme, yet two of theſe freſh commers in aſſaulted him, who queſtionleſſe had ſlain him, if they had béene armed. Forzato hauing left his Giant but with one legge, buckled the readier with another of theſe ten, who had growne too ſtrong for him, but that Almaroll cleauing one of his cuſtomers downe the head, and making the other almoſt in as able a caſe, ſuccourd him a while, and then ranne to Dramuſiande, who had but three at once vpon him, broaching and goaring him with theyr Launces: but he which moſt moleſted him, was ſoone made quiet enough, and the haſtines of the other indifferently calmed, by meanes whereof he went to aſſiſt Forzato at a very narrow ſtrait, for his helmet was ſo batterd and bruſed, that it pincht his head in ſo many ſeuerall places, as hee was conſtrained to take it quite off. One of thoſe that

fought with Franardo, ſéeing a fellow of his ſomewhat oppreſſed by two of our Giants, ranne ſpéedily to helpe him, and then flew vpon Forzato, whom he ſawe without a helmet. The fight continuing a long while in this manner, thoſe thrée that oppoſed themſelues againſt Franardo, ſéeing him (through ouer-much labour) to be very weary, not ſhifting from place to place as before he had doone: they ringd them ſelues about him, and lifting him from the ground by theyr ſtrength, meant to cary him away with them.
               But Dramuſiande, who all the fight time had an eye to his ſonne, when hee ſawe him in ſuch a deſperate eſtate: gaue one of his enemies ſuch a furious ſtroke, as cutting quite through his Sheelde, entred into his belly, and his entrayles falling foorth, him ſelfe tumbled deade after. To another, whoſe left arme he had pittifully mangled, he gaue ſuch a ſuddaine fierce blowe, as cutting his Iaueling in the midſt, wounded him likewiſe aboue the eye, whence the blood ſtreaming forth aboundantly, he could not diſcerne which way he went.
               Being thus fréed of them, he ranne to ſtay thoſe Giants that caried his Sonne away, who ſéeing him comming, threw Franardo againſt the ground, and turning vpon Dramuſiande, he gaue them ſuch a gentle welcome, that he cut off the formoſt mans left arme, and afterward ranne his ſword quite through his breaſt. The other two affrighted at this accident, ſetting both their Boare-ſpeares rudely againſt his breaſt, caſt him along on his back, and aſſuredly had there ſlaine him, but that Almaroll and Forzato (hauing each ſlaine one of their oppoſed enemies, and left the reſt in ſo weake diſpoſition, as they were able to endure no longer againſt them,) came ſpéedily to his helpe, endangering greatly their owne liues thereby, in regarde of their former wounds, fainting and wearines, whereof the other Giants not a little triumphed.
               But Dramuſiande and Franardo recouering at one inſtant, though both were ſore bruſed by their falls, yet did they aſſaile them with ſuch courage, as (after ſome fewe

blowes) they fell dead at their féete: and hauing there now no more to withſtand them, they entred a houſe neere adioyning, appearing to be more honourable then the other, there to binde vp their wounds, and reſt them ſelues.
            
            
               CHAP. LXXXVI. How two young Ladies being Gianteſſes, declared to our wounded Knights, by what meanes they ſhould enter into the Profound Tower, and finiſh the enchauntment.
               
                  IN the houſe which our wounded Giants had entred, were many young Gianteſſes, two whereof ſéemed to be of farre greater reſpect then the reſt, who perceauing our Knights to be gentle, diſcréetly gouernd and ciuilly attired, though the large effuſion of their blood much altered their countenances, yet had they great compaſſion of them. Almaroll well noting this, and looking aduiſedly on them, becauſe their lookes likewiſe were modeſt and womanlie: went vnto them, and with gentle language entreated them that they would helpe to binde vp their wounds, which appeared to be very daungerous. The young Ladies, deſirous to doo them any honourable pleaſure, ſecretly ſayde: that they were very ready to cure their hurtes, prouided (for ſafety of their owne innocent lyues,) they would but ſay, that they had enforced them to this fauour.
               
                  Almaroll turning backe to Dramuſiande, who as yet ſtayed without, and entred not the houſe, tolde him what the Ladies had ſayde vnto him, and hee entring the roome where the Ladies were, with a ſtearne countenaunce ſaide vnto them: Come quickly and helpe to dreſſe our wounds, for no iniurie ſhall be offered to your honours.
               
                  The Ladies diſſembling before the reſt, as if they ſtoode greatly in feare of them, came preſently to them, and they (beeing diſarmed) had very ſoueraigne oyles and emplaiſters applied to their hurts, beeing handled very tenderly and with choiſe regarde, with promiſe of ſpéedy recouerie, becauſe their wounds were not mortall.
               
                  Dramuſiande afterward ſitting downe by them, demaunded if there were any other Giants in the Iland, and why ſo many women liued together in that one houſe. The eldeſt of the two Ladies, ſhowring downe teares from her eyes in great aboundance, began in this manner. Faire Sir, we two are Nieces to the Lord of this Iland, who is gone to a Caſtell called the Profound Tower, intending to bring hether two ſonnes of his, to whom (againſt our wils) he will giue vs in mariage, they being the moſt brutiſh and vnciuill men, liuing at this day in any part of the worlde: and his reaſon héerein is, to depriue vs this way of our inheritance, and make his ſonnes abſolute poſſeſſours thereof. This vniuſt act in him, is the cauſe why we would otherwayes elſe diſpoſe of our ſelues, rather then to liue with ſuch as are loathſome to vs: wherefore if there bee any Knights among you, that are ſingle and vnmaried, as we are, wee will yeelde our perſons and honours into their power, and kindly accept them as our huſbands.
               When Dramuſiande had heard the Ladies iuſt cauſe of gréefe, and the liberall offer they tendered withall, he turned to Franardo, ſaying: You ſonne ſhall take one of theſe Ladies to wife, & on Almaroll I meane to beſtow the other. Forzato beeing the youngeſt, was in hope ſome remembrance would haue beene had of him: but Franardo, who loued Grando
                        •
                     ya, Farzatoes Siſter, as hath already been before declared, ſtoode very ſilent, to the no little meruaile of his Father, and inward greefe of the young Lady, whom Franardo being loath to hold in any further ſuſpence, ſayde. My Lord and Father, I humbly entreate your pardon and the Ladies, that I haue béene ſo ſlacke in returning mine aunſwere: for my thoughts being long ſince obliged to an

other Ladie, whoſe loue I can no way iuſtly refuſe, hath béene the reaſon of my ſo long ſilence: but becauſe this Ladie ſhall not be wrongd in her deſires, I will exchange one kindneſſe with Forzato, for receipt of another. I loue his faire and vertuous Siſter, and that he may with the better will beſtow her on mee in marriage, I am content to reſigne my right héere to him, in enioying one of theſe woorthy Ladies.
               
                  Forzato being greatly enamoured of the eldeſt Ladie, falling ſuddenly on his knee before Dramuſiande, ſaid. My Lord, I may with iuſt reaſon account my ſelfe fortunate, that your ſonne Franardo ſo long hath accepted mee as his kinde companion, on whom I fréely beſtow my Siſter for mariage, without expectation of ſo gracious a requitall, which makes me to glory the more, that it was my good hap to promiſe him my Siſter. Hauing thus ſpoken, he roſe vp, and very louingly embraced his Brother: which Dramuſiande perceiuing, and noating withall what ſpeeches had béene paſt, appointed that Amaroll and Forzato ſhould eſpouſe the two Ladies, who béeing likewiſe pleaſed to their owne harts contentment, returned backe to theyr Chamber, to certefie vnto the reſt of the Gianteſſes, that they had no other conference, but of curing the Knights wounds.
               Soone after, our Knights ſent for them againe, to gather ſome enſtructions from them, how they ſhould beare themſelues againſt the Lord of the Iland, and compaſſe the ending of the enchauntment: but ſtill the caſe was cunningly couered, & Dramuſiande ſent twiſe imperiouſly for them, whereby the reſt coniectured, that they were forcibly conſtrained to come to them, which the Ladies as queintly fitting by their behauiour, gaue them to vnderſtand. That a Giant, ſometime a ſeruant to their Father, but now attending on the Lord of the Iland, as being his Nephew, was newly there arriued, and told them, that his vnckle would not returne backe till tenne dayes were expired: But becauſe the ſlaughter of the Giants was reuealed to him, that

night he would carrie newes thereof to his vnckle. Wherfore the Ladies aduiſed them to lay hold on him, that hee might not be the meſſenger of ſuch tidings to his Lord, ſo ſhould they haue the more time for curing their hurts: and hee returning without intelligence of his loſſe, could make the leſſe prouiſion for his miſhap, becauſe any aduantage againſt him was held for good, in regard hee was of ſuch incomparable valour, that tenne other of his greateſt Giants could not ſtand againſt him, and his ſonnes likewiſe were very valiant, beſide diuers other in his company of ſinguler proweſſe.
               Concerning the enchauntment, they muſt preſerue the Vnckles life, who onely knewe the meanes howe to confound it, albeit his taking would be ſomewhat troubleſome to them, and hardly ſhould they make him confeſſe, how the enchauntment was to be concluded. Then calling Franardo, forth at the window they ſhewed him the houſe, where the late-come Giant had hidden himſelfe, and kiſſing theyr eſpouſed Lordes, tooke their leaue againe to auoyde ſuſpition. Our Knights, after they had dined, with theyr ſwordes and Shieldes they went forth of the roome, demaunding of all the women they met, if there were any more Giants in the Iland, and they made aunſwere ſtill that there were none.
               
                  Dramuſiande, feigning as if hee beléeued them not, went ſtraite to the houſe which ye Ladies had ſhewed him, where ſuddainly entring, he found the Giant, who (being wearie with his iourney) ſlept very ſoundly: without making any noiſe they bound him hands and feete, that when hee awaked, they might menace him with death if hee kept not ſilence. So laid they him aſide in another Chamber, where none of the women ſhould come to him, & at night brought him into their owne lodging, where they attended the healing of their hurts, being daily viſited by the Ladies diuers times, giuing them further inſtructions from time to time, how with honour they might reach ye height of their deſires.
            
            
               
               CHAP. LXXXVII. How the Lord of the Iland came thether, and of the victory which our Knights obtained againſt him and his.
               
                  OVr high reſolued Knights, had their hurts no ſooner healed, but a Barque put into the port, hauing in it the ſonnes of the Lordly Giant, who came to delight themſelues with the Ladies, that the more contentedly they might accept them in marriage. But Forzato, who alwayes ſtoode as Centinell for the ſpeedier arming of themſelues vppon the Giants arriuall, hauing eſpyed the Barque a farre off, gaue the reſt of his friendes warning to prepare themſelues: then going all cloſely downe ye Port, they ſtoode behind a ruined Cottage, onely to haue them come on land, leaſt by ſight of them they ſhould turne back againe, and thereby haue falne into ſuch manifeſt danger, as (with life) they could neuer haue departed thence.
               The two young Giants being landed, with tenne other in their company, hauing no other defence then their Shieldes, and huge long ſwords, they tooke toward the houſe where the Ladies were, which our Knights perceiuing, boldly ſtept forth before them, ſaying. Friends, whether goe ye? We goe (quoth one of them) to our owne abyding: but bolde theeues, what make you heere in our countrey? That ye ſhall ſoone know, replied Dramuſiande, and all (with their weapons drawne) went preſently againſt them.
               When the Giants ſawe themſelues ſo fiercely aſſailed, they ſtoode vppon their owne guarde, and deliuered ſuch ſtroakes, that our Knights hauing had good experience of

them before, right cunningly auoided them, and wounded them at their owne pleaſure, they hauing no ſkill in the vſe of their weapons. But yet our Knights were ſorry, for not bringing theyr Axes with them, which they had left aboue at their lodging, and might cauſe the Ladies thereby to be ſuſpected, if any one ſhould eſcape and get thether: but the reaſon why they brought them not along with them, was, that the other women in the houſe, imagining they went abroad but to walk, ſhould not looke forth to eſpy ye Barque, and by their out-cryes haue hindered theſe other Giants from landing. Neuertheleſſe, ſo well they handled the matter with their ſwords, that they wounded ſixe of theſe new come Giants, and they would haue fled, but that the two young Lordes cheerely encouraged them, with vndoubted hope of vanquiſhing their enemies.
               The battaile thus continuing, one of the bretheren, béeing runne by Franardo quite through the face, fell downe dead, and brake Franardos ſword hard at the handle, as hée fell mainly vppon his weapon: whereat the other Brother growing mad & deſperate, caught Franardo in his armes, and by reaſon hee excéeded him in ſtrength, hee gotte him downe vnder him, and ſtriuing to open his Helmet, purpoſed to kill him. Franardo beholding his owne extreame perill, gript his enemie ſo ſtrongly by the bottome of his bellie, as he (féeling his breath to faile him) let goe his holde, whereby Franardo tumbled him on his backe, and getting aloft vppon him, meant preſently to diſpatch him: but now hee was in greater hazzard then before, for two other Giants, who had dealt with Dramuſiande very ſhrewdly, came running in reſ
                     •
                  ew of their Lorde, and Franardo perceiuing they purpoſed to help him, ſlew him out right with his dagger, being ſcarcely vpon his féete when the two Giants ſet mainly on him, the one before, the other behinde him, forcing him to fall along on the ground, where they had forth-with ſlaine him, but ye 
                  Dramuſiande came quickly to aſſiſt him, who ſtepping betwéene them and his ſonne, receiued their furious blowes vppon himſelfe, till hee was

got vp againe, and beeing more offended with ſhame of his diſgrace, then any paine he felt by their ſtrokes, beganne to buckle the cloſer to his enemies. And nowe the fight bewraied an other kind of courſe, for Franardo ſmiting downe one of them dead at a blowe, left his Father hand to hand with the other, running to ayde Forzato, who contended with two, and was almoſt driuen quite out of breath: but he entring among them, gaue one of them ſuch a ſalutation on the Helmet, as cleauing it thorow, the weapon entred a pretty way into his head, albeit himſelfe was ſoone chaſtiſed for it, for the Giant (being of greateſt courage among them all) feeling that he muſt needes fall downe to ye earth, in his ſincking, caught Franardo by one legge, and lyfted him vp ſo powerfully, that hee had daſht out his braines againſt a great Béech-tree: but more by great good hap then otherwiſe, Franardo catcht holde with his handes on the boughes of the tree, and ſmote the Giant with his foote ſo mainely on the breaſt, as made him to ſtagger back aboue ſixe paces, in which while, he leapt downe light on his féet, nothing frighted or amazed, with this terible ſwindge. His aduerſary meruailing hereat not a little, & reckoning himſelfe paſt hope of life, beckned with his hand to Franardo, as deſirous to ſpeake with him: ſo ceaſſed the battaile, for thrée other of the Giants remaining aliue, hauing likewiſe noated this admirable act, ſtept backe and held theyr handes, they being kinſmen to the Lord of the Ile.
               
                  Dramuſiande going to the Giant that requeſted parley, ſpake thus vnto him. Know that I am Dramuſiande, ſonne to the deceaſſed great Lord Frenaque, from whom you tooke this Iland trayterouſly, and nowe I am come to claime it as my right, beeing conſtrained to recouer it by force of armes, whē gentle perſwaſions would not ſerue to obtaine it. Foſco, for ſo was the Giant named, conſidering that of tenne there nowe remained but foure aliue, and they alſo could expect nothing elſe but death, replyed: that hee was ready in aſſiſting him to recouer his owne, but Tirſo (beeing Lord of the Ile) was ſo proude and valiant, as by no

meanes he would yéeld to anothers poſſeſſion. It ſhal ſuffiſe me (quoth Dramuſiande) yt you binde your ſelues to me by faith and knighthood, to ſtand no further on his part againſt me. We will not meddle any more againſt you, replied the Giant, and made him ſollemne promiſe to keepe theyr word. Why then (quoth Dramuſiande) will I in ſuch ſort commend you to the great Emperour of Constantinople, as hee ſhall enrich you with larger poſſeſſions, then euer Tirſo could beſtowe on yée. The Giant proteſted, that as they woulde not pertake againſt Tirſo, ſo they woulde not impeache any courſe he could take, where by to compaſſe his owne determination.
               
                  Dramuſiande and his friendes were well pleaſed with this contract, to declare that they ſtoode in neede of no other helpe, ſo leauing theyr weapons with them, the Giants went to a place of theyr owne abiding, ſo farre remote from the lodging of our Knights, as they could not diſcerne when the young Ladies came to viſite theyr Lords. After this accord, they likewiſe returned to reſt themſelues, hauing vnderſtoode by theſe Giants, that it would be tenne daies before the arriuall of Tirſo, whereof they were very highly contented: not in regard of any dangerous hurts receiued, but becauſe they were much trauailed & wearie, for which quiet reſt was the onely remedie.
               The Ladies ſtill prouided them of all neceſſaries, often accompanying them to theyr contentment, whereby the other Gianteſſes ſuſpitiouſly gathered, that they bore ſome fauouring inclination to theſe ſtrangers, expreſſing no ſorrow or griefe at all, for the ſlaughter of theyr friendes and kindred, but rather ſeemed enamoured of our Knights, which cloſely they concealed to themſelues, expecting daily the comming of theyr Lord.
               Our Knights hauing recouered their former alacritie of ſpirit, kept hourely watch on the Port, that when Tirſo came, he might not get to the Tower: becauſe the Ladies had enformed them, howe there was no poſſibilitie of euer ſurpriſing, or finiſhing the enchauntment, if hee in perſon

came to the defence of it.
               
                  Almaroll being the firſt that ſhooke off his diſtemper, the night enſuing was watch-man of the Port, and on the morrowe by three a clocke, he eſpied a ſpread ſayle making toward the Iland, whereof giuing his aſſociates immediate warning, they comforted themſelues with precious confections and other good meates, that they might with better ablenes hold out the fight, arming themſelues nowe for all aduantages, not forgetting theyr kéene Axes, and other yron engines which they founde in the Giants Armorie, where-with they went downe to the Port, ſtanding cloſely ambuſhed as they did before, that the Giant might not deſcry them before his landing.
               No ſooner was Tirſo (and ſeauen Giants more with him) come on ſhoare, but our reſolued Knights ſtept foorth againſt him, and without vſing any words at all, oppoſed theyr weapons boldly to withſtand him. Tirſo, who neuer was bard of his paſſage till this inſtant, angerly drew his weapon vpon our Knights, and lighting firſt vpon Forzato, made him tumble backward ouer and ouer. Dramuſiande would next haue dealt with Triſo, but his ſonne Franardo, doubting leaſt his Father (being weakened with the imbecilitie of age) could not ſtand againſt this luſtie, ſtrong, and ſterne Giant, vndertooke his place, beeing roughly welcommed for his preſumption with ſo rude a ſtroake, as almoſt had ſmitten him quite out of breath, whereby hée ſoone perceiued, that if hee became the buckler but to fewe ſuch blowes, his life muſt be the concluſion of the bargaine.
               Héere-vppon, he ſmote at him ſtoutly with his Axe, and his Armour being but a weake defence againſt the blowe, hee gaue him a déepe wound, and made him ſtand off from approching ſo neere him, albeit whenſoeuer Tirſo aunſwered any ſtroake againe, he found it layd on with no meane proofe. Dramuſiande had thrée of the other Giants confronting him, and reſiſted them but with ſlender ſufficiencie: Almaroll and Forzato vndertooke the other foure, and well found that they had no loytering labour in hand.
               
                  The Ladies looking foorth, & ſéeing our Knights ſo hardly matched, began to growe iealous of theyr owne ſafetie, if Tirſo in the end ſhould gaine the victory, wherefore they ranne to the thrée other Giants, which had yéelded before to our Champions, who beholding the manifeſt perill they were in, knew not how to conceiue of their owne ſecurity, but held it for moſt certaine, that Tirſo woulde be moſt rigorous to them, becauſe they had not yet ſtept foorth in his aſſiſtance. This terror in the Ladies much more augmented, by alleaging the paſſed cruelties of Tirſo, and how tyrannouſly he maintayned his gouernment ouer thē: which the ſooner incited them to ayde our Knights, to whom they came at a very narrowe ſtraite, for Dramuſiande was in ſuch extreamitie, that hardly he could ſupport himſelfe from falling, which Foſco perceiuing, cryed out aloude to him: Feare not my Lord Dramuſiande, for I will be better then my promiſe which I made to ye.
               Thus came the battaile to an equalitie againe, no doubt to the great vexation of Tirſo, ſéeing his owne ſubiects to pertake againſt him: but now was no time for threates or ſtearne ſpeeches, which made him therefore to fight ye more furiouſly, bringing Franardo to ſo many hazzards, as hee was very often in danger of miſcarrying, yet this impacience of his prooued his owne hurt, for ſpending his vigour in furie and madnes, without any intermiſſion or reſpite for breathing, his blowes began to fall the more faintly, which Franardo making very good vſe of, and cherriſhing his own ſtrength by the others weakening, purſued him ſtill vppon ſo many aduantages, as the Giant beganne to deſpaire of victory.
               By this time had Dramuſiande ſo wounded his enemie in the breſt, that it was too late to call for a Chirurgion, and Foſco likewiſe hauing ſlaine his encoūtrer, they came both to Tirſo ſighting with Franardo, to whom Dramuſiande ſpake in the Gréek tongue, that hee ſhould not at any hand kill the Giant, but practiſe howe to ſurpriſe him aliue, otherwiſe, they ſhould neuer gaine the rule of the Iland.
               
                  So, they thrée cirkling him round about, ſeuerally laide hand on him, and binding him faſt with two long chaines, which the Ladies had ſent them, made him paſt ability of any further reſiſtance. When the two Giants that fought with Forzato and Almaroll, ſaw the ſurprizing of their Lord, they fell to a very deſperate courſe of fight, becauſe they ſtoode hopeleſſe of any mercy, but Foſco ſpake in this manner to them. Forbeare my brethren this angry violence, and entertaine the kindneſſe of theſe Knights, which you ſhall finde euery way to your owne contentment.
               The Giants being ſore wounded and weary, vpon condition of pardon, threw by their weapons and yéelded them ſelues: being receiued by our knights as reconciled friends, after which they led Tirſo to the Ladies lodging, where their wounds were reſpected with all helpfull meanes poſſible, & Dramuſiande had the charge of looking to Tirſo.
               
            
            
               CHAP. LXXXVIII. Howe our Knights went to the aduenture of the Tower, & of the ſeuerall occaſions that befell them, vntill they found the Serpent of the Sunne.
               
               
                  BEfore tenne dayes were fully expired, ſince the dangerous combate of our Knights with the Giants, they were very well and ſoundly recouered, when Dramuſiande, cauſing Tirſo to bee brought before him, thus ſpake vnto him. If thou be dreadleſſe of death, which I am determined thou ſhalt endure, mittigate the ſharpnes thereof by thine owne meanes, and tell me truly, how the enchauntment of the Tower may ſooneſt be concluded. Tirſo, who well knew, that while the enchauntment laſted, he could not be depriued of the dominion of the

Iland, aunſwered: that hee was vtterly ignorant thereof, and maintained his ſpéeches very conſtantly.
               
                  Dramuſiande preſently called for a fire, and commaunding certaine Tanackles or Pincers for torment to be put therein, threatned him with death in that manner, except he reuealed the enchauntment to him. The Giant, albeit he was of wondrous courage, yet when he ſaw ſuch ſharpe torments prepared, he began to grow fearefull, and ſayde. Now doo I well perceaue, that I muſt iuſtly reſtore what I haue wrongfully with-held: knowe then, there are two ſeuerall enchauntments belonging to the Tower, and they muſt be vnder-taken by two of you, wherein you will finde ſo hard a labour, as will coſt yée much ſweat before yée end it: yet when yée haue gone through all manifeſt perils, they are to no purpoſe, except ye can paſſe thorow the mouth of a Serpent, and iſſuing foorth at his vent againe, goe into a Garden of frightfull terrour, where obtayning the conqueſt of that place, both the enchauntments are fully concluded.
               When Dramuſiande perceaued, that Tirſo knew no further of the incantation, he tooke the booke out of his boſome, which his Aunt Eutropa the Enchauntreſſe had left him, and calling Franardo along with him, they went together toward the Tower. Being come thether, they behelde diuers Monſters looking through the battlements, and out at the gate iſſued a 
                     •
                  eaſt of ſo many ſtrange formes, where into ſtill he changed with ſuch ſwiftnes, as they could not perceaue him to holde any certaine ſhape. After this beaſt came forth a Knight with two heads, turning readily to one another euery way, ſo that without any vſe or winding of his body, they guided him whether ſo euer he pleaſed: foure armes had he beſide, and in each hand a very long ſworde. 2Franardo aduaunced him ſelfe againſt the Monſter, which one while ſmote him with his horne, and then againe ſo readily with his pawes, as he could not deuiſe how to auoide the blowes: and his ſword ſerued him but to ſmall purpoſe, for hee ſmote as if it had béene on a flint wall, without any

appearance of the beaſts féeling the ſtrokes. Dramuſiande buckled with the Knight, beeing ſtill ſmitten with two ſwords at once, and as he ſought to ſhunne the other two, the Monſter gaue him ſuch a blowe on the backe with his foote, as made him reele ſtaggeringly betwéene the Knights armes, and he being but of common ſtature, caught him vp from the ground, running ſo lightly with him into the Tower, as if his cariage had béene of an Infant. Franardo ſéeing his Father thus caried away, purſued him preſently, and notwithſtanding the Monſters reſiſtaunces, followed the Knight into the Tower, which cloſed againe in ſuch ſtraunge manner, as there appeared no gate at all for paſſage.
               When Franardo ſawe him ſelfe thus encloſed, he ſmote at one of the Knights ſwords, where-with hee laboured to wound his Father, and immediatly it fell out of his hand, whereby he perceaued, that the power of the Knight conſiſted in his ſwordes, becauſe by beeing diſpoſſeſſed of this one, hee was not ſo furious as before, and beſide, Dramuſiande was againe at liberty, fighting couragiouſlie with the beaſt, yet ſéeing no likely meanes howe to ouercome him.
               Wherefore hee turned vppon the Knight, and in little while depriued him of two more of his ſwordes, whereby his vigour was much enféebled, and beeing ſoone after robd of his laſt weapon, the Monſter wexed in like ſort diſabled, becauſe they helde a ſimpathie of courage, and as the one weakened, ſo the other in like manner followed, both running away into an obſcure place, where our Knightes would not purſue them, leaſt therein conſiſted ſome ſecret trecherie. Standing ſtill to ſee what would enſue héereon, they ſawe a great Barrell come tumbling downe a payre of ſtaires, ſéeming by the ſounde to be full of armed men, and ſo ſoone as it was on the grounde, it preſentlie opened, where-out there iſſued tenne Huntſ-men, with as manie Houndes in ſeuerall leaſhes, and rounding our two Giants as in a ring, they let ſlip their dogs all at once,

then drew foorth ſhort ſwords hanging by their ſides, and ſmote ſo fiercely at Dramuſiande, as hee was in very great hazard of his life: for beſide the hard vſage of theſe Hunters, two of the doggs had got him faſt by the arme, and another had bit in ſunder the laces of his helmet, ſo that his helmet totterd looſely vppon his head. But hauing recourſe to his wonted valour, he behaued him ſelfe in ſuch maner, as ſhaking his arme, hee threw off the two dogges againſt the wall, and the other ſtanding vpright againſt his breaſt, he caught him faſt by the throate, and had quickly ſtrangled him, if two of the Hunters and the other doggs had not hindered him, for they comming fiercely againe vpon him, ſet him very hardly, and both the men and dogges were ſo readie about him, as he could not faſten one ſtroke vpon them. Franardo hauing all the reſt on him, had hardly eſcapt them, but giuing a thruſt by chaunce at one of the doggs mouthes, he perceaued him to giue backe and meddle no more with him, where-vpon, ayming his ſtrokes in like manner at the other doggs, they ſtill fell off from him, as expreſſing where their cheefeſt power conſiſted.
               But now the Hunters did him the greateſt iniurie, and as yet he had not found the meanes to endamage them, nor how the enchauntment ſerued to defend them: yet at laſt, ſmiting one of their Hattes beſide his head, hee ſawe him ſtagger backward, and declared no willingnes to aſſayle him againe. Theſe ſo fortunate accidents, did highly aduantage both the father and the ſonne, ſo that by wounding the dogges in the mouthes, and vnhatting the fierce Hunters one after another, they were in the end depriued of any further reſiſting, and ſwallowed vp in a wide opening of the ground: out of which gulffe there preſently came foorth, a beaſt hauing two Serpents bodies vnited together, from the very loweſt parts vp to the heads.
               This Monſter leapt betwéene the two Giants, & mounting vp toward their faces, breathed foorth ſuch an horrible ſmell, as they by no meanes could endure it: and although they laid on the beaſt luſtily with their ſwords, yet all their

labour was ſpent but in vaine, and ſo they might haue continued God knowes how long, without any better ſucceſſe of their paines: had not Dramuſiande ſuddainly puld the booke out of his boſome, where he ſaw the ſame Monſter figured with two Giants, who hauing the two heads in their hands, ſéemed eaſily to wreſt them euery way, where-vpon he ſtept to his ſonne Franardo, and ſhewing him the figure, they gaue ouer further contention, awayting opportunity to get néere the Monſter, which when they had compaſſed, each of them caught a head in his hand, and writhed it as the picture had directed them.
               Vpon this good hap, they felt an earthquake ſo ſuddaine and terrible, as they diuers times imagined the Tower would haue falne flat vpon them, for all which terrour they would not let looſe the Monſter, but held faſt to try the end of this meruaile. Then ſawe they the earth to open where they ſtoode, and after thrée or foure mighty blaſts of winde, a huge Dragon came vp out of the ground, which cloſing quickly againe vnder it, the Dragon caried them into a déepe darknes, where they felt them ſelues in a ready beaten way, whereof the booke had before giuen them ſome enſtructions, & that it would guide them to a Pallace, where they ſhould perfectly conclude the aduenture.
               Going on ſtill in this comfortleſſe darknes, they often ſmote their heads & ſhoulders againſt a ſtonie wall, which made them to hold their hands before them, for feare of bruſing or hurting their faces, and hauing béen aboue an houre in this obſcurity, at laſt they beheld a glimmering of light, but could not diſcerne from whence it procéeded, albeit ſtill the further they went on, the light encreaſed & grew greater. At laſt they came to an open dore, wherein they beheld a very ſplendant light, which ſéemed to them as if it were the Sunne: but a wondrous great Serpent obſcurde the beames thereof with his wings, which extended forth in a meruailous breadth, and by their often moouing vp and downe, they cauſed the twinckling light which at firſt they beheld.
               
                  This Dragon was of ſuch wonderfull highnes, as tenne great Giants might eaſily ſtand vpright in his belly: his mouth he held continually gaping, and thence iſſued foorth likewiſe a ſhining brightnes, and in faire large letters was engrauen on his head theſe words, THE SERPENT OF THE SVNNE.
               
            
            
               CHAP. LXXXIX. Howe Dramuſiande and Franardo went into the Serpent, and afterward finiſhed the whole aduenture.
               
                  
                     DRamuſiande ſéeing the Serpents mouth to gape ſo wide, hee remembred the former ſpéeches of of Tirſo, and ſayde to Franardo, In ſooth it is a very ſtrange caſe, for vs to aduenture through this horrible paſſage, being counſaild thereto by my deadly enemie, perhappes to remaine héere embowelled for euer. Then looking behinde him, hee ſawe the way which they had come to bee quite dammed vp, ſo that there was no turning backe againe, then onwarde they muſt there was no remedie: wherefore without any more a-doo, he ſtept into the mouth of the great Serpent, and his Sonne Franardo boldly followed.
               Not long had they ſtayed within the Serpent, but at his vent they iſſued foorth againe, without any danger or hurt at all, more then of the darkneſſe through which they had paſt. Then found they them ſelues before a Garden gate, where-into when they entred, they behelde the ſtrangeſt grafts and plants that euer were ſeene: for the trées were

great Giants, ſome planted with their heads downwarde, ſome vpon one foote, others vpon an arme, and ſome grafted one vpon another, the very leaſt grafts or plants of all, being men of middle or common ſtature, and the hearbs were ſwords, daggers, and other bloodie weapons. When Dramuſiande had well noted the manner of this Garden, hee reade theſe lines written ouer the gate.
               
                  Into my Garden who dares to enter,
                  Shall heere be planted for his bolde venter.
               
               Theſe bug-beare threates did nothing at all diſcourage our Knights, who without any regarde héereof walked along by theſe ſtrange appearances, which moouing ſtill toward them, made an horrid noyſe with their hitting one againſt another, and ſtill ſéemed to menace them, but did no action at all againſt them. Then came they to the ſtraungeſt Fountaine which euer was ſéene, for the water was of réeking blood, running ſwiftlie in a round compaſſe, and the banckes about it was the fleſh of men, diuers Woolues, Beares, and other beaſts came running to this Fountaine, where ſlaking their thirſt with drinking the blood, they went and fed on humaine bodies, which were round planted about the place.
               As Dramuſiande and his Sonne ſtoode beholding this admirable ſpectacle, they ſawe the earth ſuddainly open, and out of it came the Serpent which had two bodies, accompanied with an armed Lyon, which immediatly without anie ſtaying, flewe vpon Franardo, who as yet had not vnſheathed his weapon, when ſéeing him ſelfe in ſuch perill, ſnatcht out his dagger, where-with he gaue manie ſtabbes at the beaſt, but yet not one of them could wound him: and very much had he béene endangered, but that by a grype he gaue the Lyon, the beaſt was enforced to flie off frō him, by meanes whereof he had the liberty to draw forth his ſword, wherwith he both defended himſelfe, & offended his enemie, but the Lyon very nimbly auoyded his blowes, and gaue

ſuch ſpurnes with his feete to Franardo, as diuers times he reeled againſt the ſtrange trées, which he ſuddenly heard to ſpeake, ſaying: Repent thy ſelfe at leyſure, for heere muſt thou bide and keepe vs companie.
               
               The Serpent had ſo roughly dealt with Dramuſiande, as hee was ſcant able to hold out any longer, for twiſe hee had beene ſmitten downe to the ground, and ſo trampled on, that ſéeing no other likely way howe to beare off this turmoyle, he drew foorth his booke againe, and finding there the platforme of this Garden, he ſaw that he muſt ſtrangle the Serpent with his handes, and then binde the Lyon: which was the Enchaunter himſelfe, and if he were ſlaine, there was no poſſible meanes for concluſion of ye enchauntment, for the Serpent was the Magitians ſonne, whom he had metamorphoſed into that ſhape, for a great offence which he had committed.
               
                  Dramuſiande gaue his ſonne aduertiſement hereof, and caſting by theyr weapons, they ran on the Lyon and Serpent with ſuch courage, as they beganne to be greatly affrighted, in ſéeing them take the onely way to ende the enchauntment by the Serpents death. Franardo held the Lyon hard tacke, catching him in his armes to ouerthrowe him, for elſe he ſhould neuer compaſſe the meanes to binde him, and graſping him very hard by the throate, hee thratled him in ſuch ſort, as the Lyon beeing vnable to breathe, began to ſhrincke backward. Franardo purſuing this good aduantage, tripping with his foote the Lyons hinder féete, he fell flat on his backe, and Franardo vppon him, and getting looſe his arming girdle, the Lyon beeing much aſtonned with the fall, he bound one of his legges, which ere hée had fully doone, the Lyon getting looſe his other pawe, and madly raging to be bound in that ſort, hee rent the Armour off from his ſide: whereupon, Franardo ſeeing in what perrill he was, ſet his knée ſuddenly on the Lyons breaſt, and getting holde on the other legge, with much adoe bound it faſt too, ſo did hee his other legges afterward, that he was not able to ſtirre any way.
               
                  In this while, Dramuſiande had ſtrangled one of the Serpents neckes, but with ſuch difficultie, as hee was greatly annoyed by the other, and ſcantly could ſtirre with extreame wearines: wherefore Franardo being as valiant a Giant as any then liuing, caught the Serpent by the other neck, and held him ſo ſtrongly, that preſentlie he died. Then was ſuch a terrible thunder and earthquake, and the ayre ſo wondrouſly darke on a ſudden, as they were not able to diſcerne one another, but when the darkeneſſe was vaniſhed away, they ſawe the Lyon changed to a man of foureſcore yéeres old, but bounde both by the armes & legs, humbly entreating the Giant to vnbinde him, promiſing him to finiſh the enchauntment: but Dramuſiande willing to be altogether directed by his booke, found, that hee muſt not vnbinde the old man, vntill the ſtrange Garden were firſt quite ruined, wherefore ſtepping angerly to the olde man, he tooke him by the boſome, threatning to ſtab him with his dagger, whereat the Wizzard wexing ſomewhat fearefull, ſayde. Saue my life (Sir Knight) and doe not kill mee, and I will willingly fulfill whatſoeuer you commaund me.
               Then praying him to let looſe one of his hands, he drewe a little booke out of his pocket, whereon hauing read a while to himſelfe, he ſawe the men and Giants planted in Garden, run and caſt themſelues headlong into the Fountaine of blood, ſo that there remained not one body, but all were ſwallowed vp in the blood, which immediatly was couered with freſh earth, with a piller or Collomne of red ſtone aduaunced vppon it, and an Idoll ſtanding vppon the piller, which helde a little briefe of letters in his hand, ſo ſhadowed ouer with a veile, as eaſily they could not be read, then ſaid the Nigromancer: Nowe you muſt vnderſtand that the enchauntment is concluded, eſpecially ſo much thereof as to you appertaineth, now may you ſafely enioy your owne Iland: But the Idoll which holdeth the ſcedule in his hande, the reading whereof you cannot attaine to, muſt ſtand heere ſtill, vntill a Knight as yet vnborne, and

ſonne to the moſt valiant Prince this day liuing, do chaunce to come hether, to end the higheſt & moſt perrillous aduenture that euer was heard of.
               Hauing thus ſpoken, they founde themſelues preſently to be in the Tower, out of which they went at theyr owne pleaſure: but the old man vaniſhed from them, of whom ye ſhall heare more in the following hiſtory.
            
            
               CHAP. XC. How Dramuſiande made his ſonne Franardo Lord of the Iland, aſsigning the Caſtells belonging to the Ladies, to theyr Husbands, Almaroll and Forzato, Franardo purpoſing his departure thence, to take Grandonya Forzatoes Siſter to wife, and howe afterward they arriued at Constantinople with they Ladies.
               
                  
                     ALmaroll and Forzato, who all this while doubted ſome diſaſter, which might happen, to Dramuſiande and his Sonne Franardo, though they had bound Tirſo and the two other Giants that yeelded themſelues: when they ſaw them returne frō the Tower in ſo good diſpoſition, they ran cheerfully to meete them, and kindly embraced each other. Then did Dramuſiande vnbind Tirſo
                  ▪ and the other, promiſing (on their good behauiour) to vſe them honourablie, ſo they would be loyall and faithfull to him.
               On the next morning, hee cauſed a banquet to be prepared, for eſpouſing the young Gianteſſe Ladies to theyr Louers, that they might the ſooner ſet for Constantinople: whether all the chiefe Knights of that Court now repaired, to

determine a reſiſtance of the purpoſed warre, which they daily expected frō 
                  Corcuto the Soldane of Babylon. When the Giants and ye reſt of the Iland were there thus aſſembled, Dramuſiande ſaid, that he would giue the Ile to Franardo, as his lawfull inheritance, and then calling the Ladies, they were there publiquely affianced to Almaroll and Forzato, and two Caſtels belonging to the Ladies as theyr dowries, were appointed to theyr troth-plighted huſbands, the eldeſt Lady béeing named Ferea, and the other Albana. Franardo likewiſe taking his oath, for their quiet enioying of theſe their ſeuerall Caſtells, with all the rights and priuiledged to them appertaining.
               This beeing doone, hee appointed that Foſco ſhould goe with his Ring and a Letter to the Caſtel of the Vale, there to commaund a Nephew of his named Oralio, to bring his Souldiours with theyr wiues & children, and poſſeſſe theyr dwelling in that Iland, aſſigning them the goods and lands of the deceaſſed Giants. Afterward, he wrote to King Edward of England, and acquainted him with the whole courſe of this victory, entreating him withall, to hold his Sonne Franardo as his obedient ſubiect, and to affoord him all honourable aſſiſtance, for the better performance of his loyall vaſſailage in right of the Iland.
               Theſe orders thus eſtabliſhed, hee cauſed the Ladies to prepare themſelues in readines, becauſe they ſhould goe along with him to Constantinople, whereof they were not a little ioyfull, in regard of theyr deſire to ſée ye Court, where the Ladies & Princeſſes were ſo renowned for their beauties, as the fame thereof was noiſed thorow the world. In fewe daies after, Ora
                        •
                     o came thether, and thinges beeing confirmed in all méete order, they ſet away thence, taking all the Giants along with them, becauſe no newe ſtirres ſhould ariſe by theyr meanes.
               Thence went they firſt to Forzatoes Caſtell, without any accident in theyr iourney worth the rehearſall, ſauing it was their hap to ſée vpon the way, the goodly Tombe or Sepulcher, the aduenture whereof was ended by Arguto,
                  
the Knight of the Sunne. Comming to the Tombe, they found it open, and in it lay the ſhape of an Emperour, but couered with ſuch an arteficiall veyle, as they could not perfectly diſcerne his face. But Dramuſiande well noating the forme of his body, imagined it to be the Emperour Primaleon, as indeede it was: for the ſkilful Magitian, when he ſaw the aduenture was accompliſhed, to ſhun his owne ſhame, conuayed thence the Image of Alexander ye great, and placed this other in ſtedde thereof, but couered in this manner, as lothe to haue it eaſily knowne. Dramuſiande and the reſt, grew very penſiue, that the death of the Emperour was ſo neere, as by a manifeſt ſigne they perceiued, namely the vncouering of the Tombe, being hourely readie to receiue him.
               In this griefe they parted thence, and within foure daies arriued at Forzatoes Caſtell, wherof he hauing before ſent his Siſter warning, found her moſt rich and gallantly accouſtred, entertayning them with the greateſt honour that could be deuiſed: and taking Franardo by the hand, right friendly kiſſed & embraced him, but with ſuch a reuerend modeſt baſhfulneſſe, as added an admirable luſter to her beautie, whereupon Forzato ſaide vnto her. Neuer bluſh (ſwéete Siſter) at welcomming of your Louer, who comes now to make you his Wife in marriage. Aſcending the ſtaires, they found the Tables ready furniſhed, and hauing dined, Dramuſiande perceiuing his ſonnes earneſt deſire, as alſo the diſpoſition of the Lady herſelfe, ſent for a Prieſt (of moſt ſacred life) neere adioyning, who in preſence of all the Giants and the reſt, performed the rites of mariage betwéene them, to ſuch high liking of both the parties, as the beholders might apparantly perceaue it, Forzato renouncing his right to the Caſtell, and giuing it as his Siſters dowrie.
               The next day following, Dramuſiande thinking each houre a yéere till he were at Constantinople, would needs ſet onward, Franardo taking Grandonya along in his companie, which ſhee earneſtly laboured, as willing to goe with

him through any perrils whatſoeuer, and very glad alſo of the other Gianteſſes company, becauſe ſhee ſhould haue others of her ſtature, to aſſociate her in the Grecian Court. No ſooner was dinner doone, but they mounted on horſeback, and pleaſantly rode toward Constantinople, beguiling the time with much delightfull conference, and ouertaking Fortenbracio by the way, they iournied together the more merily.
               Now it fortuned, that the Giants of the Iland, whom Franardo led as priſoners to Constantinople, had ſecrete talke together, & intended to murder our Knights in their ſléepe, which when they ſhould haue cōpaſſed, they meant to put on theyr Armour, becauſe themſelues had none, and afterward to doe what other miſchiefe they might. And this vile intent had taken effect, but that Dorina happened among them, ſhee trauailing likewiſe to Constantinople, to be at the marriage of young Primaleon. Shée riding awhile along with them, and ſtedfaſtly looking vpon thoſe Giants, found by her Arte the trechery of theyr thoughts, and feigning as if ſhee would talke with Dramuſiande concerning Primaleon, bad him haue an eſpeciall care of the Giants his priſoners, becauſe they purpoſed treaſon againſt him and his cōpany. Then Dorina cauſed two angry Lyons to appeare before them, againſt which beaſtes as thoſe Giants ſtroue to defend themſelues, they were preſently torne in péeces, without any preiudice or offence at all to any of the other, and thus was the damnable drift of the Giants vtterly diſappointed, the Lyons ſpéedily vaniſhing no man wiſt whether.
               No ſooner was this ſtorme thus paſt, but onward they gallopped, vntill they came ſome-what néerer to Constantinople, where a far off they were deſcried by theyr huge ſtature, eſpecially Franardo, who excéeded his father in height aboue thrée foote: wherupon, diuers ran haſtily to the Pallace, ſaying, that a ſquadron of Giants were comming againſt them, which made euery man preſently to arme him ſelfe, and make out for reſiſtance of theſe Giants. Arguto
                  
béeing firſt in readines, becauſe hee was newly returned from hunting, was the formoſt man that left the Citty, and meeting with Franardo, who wore an embroidered garment ouer his Armour, which his wife had giuen him as a loue-token, & made him the more vnknowne to the Knight of the Sunne: But Franardo, albeit he knew him well enough, was diſpoſed to breake a Launce with him, the rather to make ſome proofe of himſelfe, with what abilitie he could endure the ſhocke of this braue gallant, who was reckoned among the very choiſeſt Knights of the Grecian court. When hee behold Arguto to giue ſignall of the Iouſt, hee gaue forth to méete him, and the encounter was ſo violently performed, as both of them loſt their ſtirrops, Franardo catching hold by the maine of his horſe, to ſheeld him from falling, and Arguto ſome-what diſorderly ſhouldred aſide: but, which moſt diſpleaſed him, beeing vnable to rule his horſe, he ranne with him till he came to Dramuſiande, who perfectly knowing him, receiued him in his open armes, ſaying: My Lorde Arguto, you come againſt your louers and friends.
               
                  Arguto knewe Dramuſiande and Almaroll as they embraced him, at which inſtant came thether Palmerin and Florian, who turning to the other with Franardo, after ſome ceremonious complement, Franardo ſayde. I am taught (my Lord Arguto) how to iouſt with any man that I haue no knowledge of. Nay, quoth Arguto, I may much rather ſay ſo my ſelfe, as knowing the ſufficiencie of your high merrit. Salutations and curteſies beeing ended betweene the Knights, they then affoorded like kindnes to the young Gianteſſes, whoſe beauties were aunſwerable to theyr greatneſſe in ſtature, and riding on to the Citty, the Emperour had tidings of theyr arriuall, who albeit he was much crazed in body, yet would hee needes be carried along in a Horſe-litter, and meeting with the Giants, very ſollemne reſpects of affabilitie paſſed betwéene them, eſpeciallie to Dramuſiande, whoſe faith and loue to the race of Palmerin, had beene truly approoued.
               
                  Afterward, he embraced his ſonne Franardo, beeing at large acquainted with his worth and valour, whereof had been ſo late a tryall, in his hardie meeting with the Knight of the Sunne. The Emperour next gaue welcome to the Ladies, and like one that had wiſhed well to ſuch beauties in his daies, kiſſed theyr fore-heads, cauſing them to ride on each ſide his Litter, taking them ſeuerally by the fayre hand, and vſing ſpéeches of much gentlenes to them: but to Grandonya (exceeding the reſt in comely features) he expreſſed very princely kindnes, all the Ladies highly extolling their fortunes, to be ſo graciouſly entertained by the Emperour, of whom they ſtoode before in great awe and terrour.
               In this ſollemne ioy they entred Constantinople, and beeing come to the Pallace, they were roially welcommed by the Empreſſe and the other Princeſſes, all ſhewing great ioy for the health of Dramuſiande, but Arlencea taking her huſband and Franardo by the hand, went into the midſt of the Hall, where kiſſing them ſeuerally very often together, all the reſt laughed hartily at them, the like did Cardigea to Almaroll and his Lady. Within few dayes after, the Emperour helde a ſollemne feſtiuall, the eſpouſed Ladies ſitting at the Table with theyr deere affected Lordes, and the other young inamoratoes, praying for the like ſucceſſe in their loues: all eyes beeing bent on the delicate demeanour, of Primaleon toward his Victoria, Arguto to Concordia, Tarnaes to Fior-nouella, Oliuanto to Auriana, and the reſt of the ſweete conſorted couples, whereof wee will ſpeake more in the enſuing ſtory.
               Dinner beeing ended, a dauncing was cōmaunded, onely for the newe married and enamoured, wherein all the Court tooke very great contentment: the Gianteſſes declaring as much ciuilitie, as if they had beene there trained vp all theyr life time, and the Emperour ſent for very coſtly Iewels he had, which he beſtowed on the Ladies of the Profound Ile, becauſe they were not acquainted with ſuch courtly deckings.
               
                  Now did his Maieſtie thinke it very neceſſary, to make a publique ſollemnitie for all theſe mariages together, that his Court might be the more renowned therby: but Aliart, to whoſe iudgement theſe occaſions were moſt of all referred, told his Highneſſe, that they muſt ſtay the comming of the Princeſſe Targiana, as alſo of King Edward of England, who were in good forwardneſſe on their iourney thether: which newes were not a little pleaſing to ye whole Court, but eſpecially to Prince Florian, who ſtoode in doubt leaſt Corcuto had commenced his warre, and thereby endangered his beloued Ladie. According as Aliarte had before promiſed, ſo within foure daies after, newes came from the Hauen to the Pallace, that Ships of ſundry Nations were put into the Port: and a ſecond meſſenger openly deliuered, the landing of the Princeſſe Targiana and King Edward of England, both of them riding in royall manner toward the Citty.
               The young Prince Primaleon, becauſe the Emperour was weake and aged, cauſed all the Lordes and Ladies of the Court to mount themſelues, that ſo great ſtates might haue ſome entertainement aunſwerable to their high merrit, and ſo they rode in royall equipage to meet them, where Florian encountring his faire wife Targiana, gaue her moſt gracious and louing welcome, as all the Lords and Princeſſes in like manner did, reioycing greatly in her noble preſence. Then went they to King Edward of England, and did him ſuch dutie as his woorth deſerued, in regard of the great eſteeme he bare among them, and eſpeciall fauours heeretofore from him receiued: hee not a little glad at the ſight of his ſonnes, and they as iocond to behold their kinglie Father.
               Béeing alighted at the Pallace, the olde Emperour, for ioy of his youths-partner in Armes, ſwounded twiſe or thriſe downe right, and much a-doe had they to kéepe life in him: ſo that betweene theſe two extreames, gladneſſe for the view of ſo long abſent friendes, and ſadneſſe for feare of looſing the Emperour, they could ſcarce containe any indifferent

meaſure, till the heate of either was more moderatelie appeaſed, and the violence of ſuch paſſions in better ſort calmed. Within few dayes after, a Councell was called, to deliberate on matters concerning Targiana, who hauing ſeene into the practiſes of her Sonne, was come thether to prouide for future dangers of warre, not doubting but to finde her huſband in the Court of Constantinople.
               
               The Barons and Lords of the Kingdome being aſſembled together, Targiana declared before them, that all heatheneſſe drew to the faction of Corcuto, becauſe he had ſubborned many princes of Turkie, to beleeue his right claime to that gouernment: which ſince hee could not with quietneſſe compaſſe, hee meant to ouer-runne it with warlike troupes, not doubting but his owne people woulde cleaue vnto him, and iuſtly beare Armes againſt his Mother, for marrying the murderer of her huſband, and receiuing baptiſme among the Chriſtians, then which (in his mind) ſhée could not haue doone a déede of more indignitie, whereof he would be reuenged euen to the vttermoſt.
               She told them beſide, that hee was backt by a mightie troupe of Giants, deriued from the progenie of Darmaco, who was ſlaine by the valiant Palmerin d' Oliua, and they were very bloodily minded, hating all the iſſue and friends to the ſaid Palmerin. Héereupon he had prepared the greateſt Fleete that euer was ſeene at Sea, with reſolute determination, that if any man amongſt them ſhoulde but talke of turning backe, till they had vtterly rooted out the name of Chriſtians, hee ſhould ſuffer the extreameſt death that could poſſibly be deuiſed: and what Prince ſoeuer, being entred with him into this confederacie, that offered to ſhrinke from the courſe intended, all the reſt were to holde him as a hatefull enemy, and immediatly to turne theyr weapons vpon him, puniſhing him all one as if hee were a Chriſtian.
               When Targiana had at large deliuered her minde, with no little admiration of the Emperour and all els preſent: euerie man was entreated to ſpeake his oppinion, and to

helpe this dangerous caſe with the beſt aduiſe hee could. Florendos perſwaded them by many good reaſons, to leuey an Armie ſpéedilie, and aſſaile the enemy at home in his owne prouinces: all the young Knights iumpt with his oppinion, but Palmerin, Florian and Aliarte held the contrary, alleaging, that an Armie of ſuch ſufficiencie would not be eaſily gathered, as might ſerue to beate the Pagans within their owne dominions. Then Aliarte turning to his Father King Edward, deſired him to ſpeake what hee thought moſt expedient, becauſe his long practiſe in war, and graue experience, could not but yéeld them the pregnanteſt courſe héerein to be taken.
               King Edward replyed, that the counſell of Florendos was ſo good, as it no way deſerued checke or reprehenſion, and that of Palmerin was very expedient, from both which grounds, there might be an abſolute courſe determined on. But firſt of all hee aduiſed, to prouide for Florians beſt ſecuritie of the ſtate, who with his people of Thrace, and ye ayde of Blandidon, Soldane of Niquea, might well maintaine that part of Turkie. And, quoth hee, this Court (God be thanked) affoordes young gallants enowe, to vnder-goe a farre heauier burthen then this, Oliuanto and Fortenbracio, they may haue the managing of theſe affaires. Héere are beſide of our déere louers and friends, the Giants ſo latelie come from the Ile of the bottomleſſe Lake, let them foure be imployed in ſome other méete place, with promiſe of honourable recompence for theyr paines, giuing each of them a Citty in the Kingdome of Paraz, falne now to the Empire, by the reuolt and death of Dyrdan, alwayes prouided, that no iniury be any way offered to Blandidon, but vppon his good ſucceſſe in this glorious enterpriſe, to haue the reſt of that Kingdome vnder his commaund.
               When things are thus eſtabliſhed abroade, then may ye leuey an Armie, according as your prouiſion by Sea ſhall require, and though not conſiſting of multitudes, yet furniſhed with ſo many generous & dauntleſſe ſpirits, as may cope with an Armie of farre greater ſhow: and thereof let

Lord Florendos be Generall, chooſing to him ſuch graue conſorts, as himſelfe ſhall thinke beſt of, and may fitteſt be ſpared from my Lord the Emperour. And ſuch an Armie, when the enemies of Greece ſhall weene to come hether, will force them (deſpight their harts) to be more carefull of home, leaſt looſing Citties and Fortreſſes there, they be not ouer-haſtily recouered againe. Then may a freſh ſupply be ſent after, according as intelligences ſhall be deliuered, that if a generall battaile be proffered, ſlight ſkirmiſhes, ſallyes or combats of man to man, ſuch good order may be taken in the election, as it ſhall euery wa
                     •
                   ſtill redound to our benefit. And Palmerin my ſonne gaue good direction, in aduiſing, that as occaſion ſhall néede, ſo the Cittie heere be ſtill ſtored with able men at Armes, to be euer in a readines, leaſt the worſt ſhoulde happen. But by no meanes may we ſpare young Primaleon from this ſeruice, being ſo highly fauoured by Fortune as he is, and let him ſtill be ſtored with the water of the Mountaine Arteferia, whoſe vertue ſtrengthens Armour in ſuch ſort, as the keeneſt edgd weapon can hardly enter it, the reſt I refer to his owne diſcretion.
               This counſell of King Edward was generally allowed of, ſo that with the Emperours conſent, and all the Princes, it was fully ratified and agreed vpon. No ſooner were they riſen from theſe weightie buſineſſes, but Aliarte beeing diſpoſed to ſet all the Court on a iocond meriment, euen as they iſſued foorth of ye Counſell-chamber, cauſed ſtrange varieties of Muſique to be heard, and the young Ladies taking theyr Louers by the handes, as alſo the grauer ſort theyr honoured Princeſſes, they daunced gallantly thorow the Hall, the olde Emperour firſt with the Empreſſe Grydonia, King Edward and his fayre Quéene Flerida, Miragarda with Florendos, Palmerin with Polinarda, and ſo the reſt in order followed, Aliarte being highly commended by thē all, for fitting the time with ſo generall a contentment.
               After the daunce was ended, a more martiall noiſe was heard, of Drommes, Fifes, Clarions, & Trompets, when

                  Aliarte commaunding a way for paſſage, the reſemblance of Corcuto the young Soldane of Babilon, with his confederated Kings and Princes attending on him, all beeing bare-headed, carried couered banquetting diſhes, and vppon each mans diſh ſtoode his owne Crowne: thus paſſed they into the Emperours Gallerie, where a faire Table béeing ready couered, with great reuerence they placed their diſhes thereon, which béeing doone, they vaniſhed againe, and the Emperour with his Lords and Princeſſes, ſate downe to the banquet, gathering héereby, that the war againſt Corcuto, would prooue ſucceſſeful: at which banquet we muſt leaue them, as hauing yet no inſtructions what further befell them.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               ❧ The Concluſion.
            
               HEere Gentlemen, fully ends the Hiſtory of Palmerin of England, and Don Florian his Brother, without expectation of any other part concerning them, albeit this third Booke breake of imperfectly, and referres the vvarre and other matters to an after diſcourſe. Such a following Hiſtory indeed my Authour ſpeakes of, but tearmes it, The Knightly deedes of Prince Pagmalion, whereof as yet I can compaſſe no intelligence, neither in the Spaniſh, Italian, or French: but it is very likely, that if any ſuch Hiſtory were written & imprinted, it will in time happen to my hands, and then your kindnes to this will commaund it the ſooner.
            In meane while let me intreate your fauour, becauſe ſome fewe faults haue eſcaped in this Booke, both by reaſon of the crabbed Coppie, not euerie where very leageable, and by wordes miſtaken, that quite alter the ſence, which ſuch as knowe mee, I doubt not but wil ſufficiently excuſe me of, as being ſubiect (I thanke God) to no ſuch ſillineſſe, nor willinglie (I dare preſume) committed by the Printer.
            
               As for my laſt part of Primaleon of Greece, and the third and laſt part of Palmerin d' Oliua, both them I confeſſe to haue in mine owne cuſtodie, and as I perceiue your willingneſſe to entertaine, ſo ſhall I bee ready to haſten them for you: but if my paines in this laſt part of Palmerin purchaſe your diſlike, Ile keepe the reſt to my ſelfe, and offend yee no furder.
            
               Yours euer, A. Mundy.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A Table, for the readier finding of euery Chapter contained in this booke, guiding the Reader according to number of the Chapters and Pages.
            
               HOw the bodies aliue and dead, of the Princes, Dramuſiande, and others (ſuppoſed ſlaine) were conuaied vnto the Perillous Ile. Chap. 1. Folio. 1.
               What Targiana did, after the Campe was diſſolued, and the Soldane Albayzar her husband dead. Cap. 2. fol. 3.
               What they did in Constantinople, after the departure of the ſage Aliarte. Cap. 3. fol. 5.
               How the Princes that were in the Perillous Ile, were nowe recouered paſt any danger: And what happened to Madame Leonarda in child trauaile. Howe the other Princeſſes in like manner were deliuered of children, and how Prince Florian of the Forreſt departed thence. Cap. 4, fol. 6.
               What happened for the buriall of the dead Princes bodies. Cap. 5. fol. 8.
               Howe the ſeuerall Tombes were made manifeſt, with the Epitaphes belonging to each of them. cap, 6. fol, 9.
               How Pandritia hauing hid herſelfe in the Chamber among the Tombes, was found dead by her husband Bellagris. cap. 7. folio. 11.
               How the other Princes were buried the day following. cap. 8. folio. eodem
               How the Knight of the Sauage man following aduentures, there happened to his hand a Letter & a Ring. cap, 9. fol. 14.
               What Florian did after his departure from Dorina. cap. 10. fol. 15.
               How Ristorano returning to Tubante, prouided good guardance for Targiana, deliuering the Armenian Princeſſe to Sucuſano, and what Florian did for Targiana. cap. 11. fol. 16.
               What Sucuſano did, when he heard that the Armenian Princeſſe was forcibly reſcued from them, which had charge of conducting her to him: And further concerning the Prince Florian. cap. 12. fol. 18.
               
                  Howe the Princes in the Perillous Ile, beeing recouered to their former health, would haue returned thence to theyr ſeuerall eſtates, but they were ſtaied there for a while: And of a new accident that ſuddenly happened. cap. 13, fol. 21
               How Sucuſano became enamoured of Targiana, and knowing Florian to be Nephewe to the Emperor Primaleon, layde hold on him, ſuſpecting likewiſe euill betweene him & Targiana. cap. 14, fol, 24
               How Dorina, with the foure Knights and Dramuſiande, arriued at the Cittie of Tubante, and deliuered Targiana, with whom they entred the Forreſt. cap, 15, fol. 27.
               Howe the Emperour Primaleon returned to Constantinople with Don Roſuell, and what happened to the reſt. Likewiſe, how the wiſe Aliarte aduertiſed Palmerin, Florendos, & other more, of Prince Florians caſe, who needes would depart to giue him ſuccour. cap. 16, fol. 30
               What happened in Turkie, when the priſoner diſſembled in the ſted of Florian was led to death. cap, 17. fol. 32
               How Sucuſano raiſed his Campe to be gone, and being followed by the Chriſtian Knights with their power, yeelded Florian. cap. 18. fol. 35
               How Dorina left off her loue to the Prince Florian, with intent to aduaunce the honour of Primaleon the ſecond, ſonne to Florendos: not becauſe ſhe bare any immodeſt affection to him, but onely to make him famous through the world. cap. 19. fol. 38
               Howe the young Princes arriued at Constantinople, where they receiued the order of Knight-hood, and how preparation was made for a Tournament. cap. 20. fol. 41.
               How they proceeded to the Tournament, wherein Arguto would haue ſlaine an vnknowne Knight, becauſe hee could not endure his company. cap. 21. fol. 45.
               Howe the Knights of Tubante combatted againſt the Pagane Kings, and how the Citty was neere-hand looſing, by a trecherous deuiſe that Ristorano wrought. cap. 22. fol. 49
               What followed vpon the war at Tubante, & how the Monſter was ouer-come. cap. 23. fol. 57
               
                  How Dorina preſented her Monſter in the Liſtes at Conſtantinople, and how Tamerco caried away the faire Polynarda. cap. 24, fol. 61
               How Dorina caried away with her the Knight of Fortune, and howe Polynarda was recouered againe by the valour of Arguto. cap. 25. fol. 64
               How Arguto was aſſailed by three Giants, which tooke the faire Princeſſe Polynarda from him. How ſhe was afterward recouered by the Knight of Fortune, and giuen by him to Leonato, that hee might goe onward to the Ile of Fortune. cap. 26, fol. 67
               Of the fight that chaunced at Sea, betweene theſe guides to the Princeſſe, and an vnknowne Knight. cap. 27, fol. 71
               Howe Franardo found Belcar, Fortenbracio, and Forcino, hand to hand with three Giants, that dwelt at the foote of the mountaine Arteferia in Macedonia, and hauing ſlaine two of them, they went toward the Iland of Carderia. cap. 28, fo. 75
               How Arguto arriued at the Ile of Carderia, and combatted with Franardo, and how they were ſeazed on by an enchaunted Knight. cap. 29. fol. 77
               How the Knight of the Sword vanquiſhed a ſauage Monſter, and afterward found Caro and Estrellant combatting together: likewiſe what happened to them, and diuers other Knights. cap. 30, fol. 79
               How the Knight of the Sword vndertooke the aduenture of the vault. cap. 31, fol. 82
               How Tarnaes comming to trie his fortune in the aduenture of the wheele, combatted with Leonato, and howe by Orino they were friendly pacified. cap. 32, fol. 87
               How the Armie of the Chriſtians met with Tamerco and his power, where he was taken, and his men ioyned with the Chriſtian forces. cap. 33, fol. 88
               How the Knight of Fortune chaunced on a ſtrange aduenture, and what enſued to him thereon. cap. 34, fol. 90
               How the Ship went to the ſhoare, and how the Knight of Fortune, accompanied with the Lady and the Lyons, departed thence to the aduenture of the Caſtell, and what chaunced

vnto them by the way. cap. 35, fol. 93
               How the Chriſtian Armie, before they could take landing in Turkie, were conſtrained to deliuer Oliuanto to a Dwarffe, that came and demaunded him at their hands. cap. 36, fol. 96
               Of whence and what this King was, and what paſſed betweene Oliuanto and the Lady, likewiſe how he accompliſhed the aduenture. cap, 37. fol. 100
               How Leonato cauſed the wheele to be caried to Constantinople, and afterward went to the Ile of Carderia, where he remained enchaunted for defence of the place. cap. 38, fol. 104
               How the Knight of Fortune entred the Caſtell, where by aduiſe of the Lady, he accompliſhed the aduenture. cap. 39, folio, 108
               How as the Chriſtian Knights at Tubante, were ſetting forward to the conqueſt of Niquea, Florendos deſpairing, becauſe he could haue no cure for his lameneſſe, departed away with a Damoſell, and what he vnderſtoode by her. cap. 40, fol. 109
               How Florendos met with a ſtrange enchauntment, and afterward ouercame Saboco, with great perill of his owne life. cap. 41. fol. 114
               Howe the Knight of Fortune went to combate Garnides, and being taken of him, was by one of his daughters ſet at liberty againe. cap. 42, fol. 118
               Howe Primaleon cauſed Laurea to be maried to Traſino, making him King of the Morning Ilands, and gaue Filenia likewiſe to Garnides. cap. 43, fol. 122
               Of that which Florendos did with Saboco and Iſota, and how after he had ſubdued a Serpent, he returned to Tubante, euen as the Chriſtian Armie was preparing to depart. cap. 44, fol. 126
               How the Chriſtian Armie departed from Tubante, & what happened to them by the way, in theyr going toward the Kingdome of Niquea. cap. 45. fol. 130
               How Palmerin and Florian would needs goe combate with them of the Tent, and howe the enchauntment was concluded: Alſo of a ſtraunge accident that ſuddainly happened. cap. 46. fol. 134
               How Oltrando and his men of India, came and ioyned with the Chriſtian forces: and how Niquea was beſieged, & Tirrena taken. cap. 47, fol. 138
               How Primaleon went the aduenture of Fortune, and what happened in the firſt dayes attempt. cap. 48, fol. 142
               Howe Primaleons Squire arriued at Constantinople with his Horſe, and there witneſſed, that a Lyon had deuoured his Lord in his preſence: and of an other ſad newes there happening alſo. cap. 49. fol. 146
               How the Monſter releaſed him ſelfe and Ristorano in Tubante, after that Tirrena was ſent to Constantinople. cap. 50. fol. 148
               Howe Trineus arriued (by chaunce) with his Shippe on a ſtrange Iland, where he found labour enough to doo: And how his Armie ſayled on to Niquea. cap. 51, fol. 152
               How Trineus found his Armie in the Port of Niquea: and how they gaue battaile to the Citty. cap. 52. fol. 159
               How Tarnaes combatted with Leonato, and remained there priſoner, and how many other Knights were taken: and of a diſgrace which happened to the wiſe Aliarte. cap. 53. fol. 165
               How Florian, Florendos, and Berolde ſundered them ſelues, for better recouerie of the Ladies: And howe (thinking he had found the Pallace of Queene Melia) Berolde arriued at the Ile of Carderia: And how Florian finiſhed a ſtrange aduenture. cap. 54, fol. 168
               What, and who the Monſter, the dogge, the wounded Knight & Lady were: And how the enchauntment was fully concluded. cap. 55, fol. 173
               How Florendos combatting with Leonato, was caried captiue into the Ile of Carderia. cap. 56, fol. 176
               How Primaleon, otherwiſe called the Knight of Fortune, accompliſhed in two dayes the aduenture of the Tower. cap. 57. fol. 181
               How Primaleon vnderſtoode, that the faire Lady Victoria was kept in an enchauntment. And how (vpon the arriuall of Trineus) Primaleon preuailed ſo much with him by perſwaſion,

that hee graunted to turne backe to Constantinople, for the conuay of his Mother, and the precious vnguent. cap. 58, fol. 187
               How Primaleon ſlew the ſauage wilde Beare, and finiſhing the aduenture, ſet all the famous Knights at libertie. cap. 59. fol. 191
               The reaſon why the enchauntment was firſt framed. And how Primaleon (going to ſet the wizzard Aliarte at libertie) entred the combate with Palmerin of England, and how they were parted by Dramuſiande. cap. 60. fol. 195
               Howe Florendos with Oliuanto returned to Constantinople, where he found remedy for his lamenes. And how the other Knights betooke them ſelues to ſeuerall parts, finiſhing diuers ſtraunge and memorable aduentures: among which is expreſſed, what happened to Arguto in his trauaile. cap. 61, fol. 199
               Howe Palmerin (ſo ſoone as his hurts were healed) went ſtraight to Constantinople: And howe Primaleon went to the Perillous Ile, and what happened afterward, for deliuerie of the wizzard Aliarte. cap. 62, fol, 204
               Heere followeth the deliuerance of the wiſe Aliarte, and what Druſa Ʋelonna did in hinderance thereof. cap. 63, fol. 208
               How Floraman ſeeing him ſelfe but ſlenderly regarded by Clariana, became enamoured of the faire Princeſſe Victoria, concluding to goe and deliuer her out of the enchaunted Pallace. cap, 64, fol, 210
               How Arguto arriued by ſtrange occaſion, at the Pallace belonging to the faire Queene Melia, and howe he remained there enchaunted. cap. 65, fol. 212
               Howe Florian ſtill purſuing in queſt of his daughter, was (vnwittingly) brought to the Pallace of Queene Melia. cap. 66, fol. 213
               How, and what the wizzard Aliarte wrought, againſt the enchauntment of Druſa Velonna, and what enſued to Primaleon. cap, 67, fol. 215
               How Primaleon entred into the Pallace, and accompliſhed a

great part of the aduenture. cap. 68, fol. 217
               Of the daungerous fight, which Primaleon had with the Knight of the Serpent, and how he accompliſhed the whole aduenture afterward. cap. 69, fol. 219
               How Leonato and Tarnaes came to combate together, for the loue of faire Candida, & vpon what conditions they were parted by Palmerin of England. cap, 70, fol. 223
               How Primaleon and Arguto fought together neere to Conſtantinople, and how no man could part them but the Emperour Primaleon. cap. 71. fol, 225
               How the wiſe Aliarte and Prince Florian, with the fayre young Lady 
                     Ʋictoria, ſet forward on theyr iourney to Conſtantinople, and of a danger which happened to Aliarte, from which he was reſcued by the valour of Prince Florian: Alſo, how Floraman deſperatly ſlew him ſelfe. cap. 72, fol. 228
               How as they were conſulting in the Court, about the mariages of Primaleon and Arguto, with the faire young Ladies 
                     Ʋictoria and Concordia, the two young Knights were ſummoned thence to a ſtrange aduenture. cap, 73, fol, 230
               Of a ſtrange aduenture which happened to Primaleon in the Caue vnder ground, where-into the ſtrange Knight had conducted him. cap. 74, fol, 235
               Howe Arguto (with great perill of his life) brought to end the aduenture of the enchaunted Lady, and receaued freedome of his ſuſpition, that Fortune was not fauourable vnto him. cap. 75, fol. 235
               How the aged Magitian ſhewed the cauſe, wherefore hee had enchaunted the Knight & his daughter, confining them to ſo long a date of puniſhment. cap. 76, fol. 239
               Howe Primaleon and Arguto cauſed the mariage to be ſolemnized betweene Brunoro and Roſella, and afterward iourneyed toward Babylon. cap. 77, fol. 244
               Howe Primaleon and Arguto were taken by Corcuto the Souldane of Babylon, & ſet at liberty againe by the aged Magitian, Father to Roſella, returning afterward to Constantinople. cap. 78, fol. 246
               How the mariages of Candida with Leonato, and of Tarnaes
                  
with Fior-nouella, being further conferred on in the Court of Constantinople, there happened a ſuddaine and vnexpected alteration, cap. 79, fol, 249
               How Florian trauailing to the faire Argentina, came to the Citty of Tubante, where with exceeding loue he was entertained by his wife Targiana, and leauing order how ſhe ſhould be defended againſt her ſonne Corcuto, he iourneyed thence to the Adamant Caſtell. cap, 80, fol, 251
               How Florian (with ſome difficulty) concluded the aduenture of the Adamant Caſtell, and ſet faire Argentina at liberty. cap. 81, fol. 253
               What the Emperour, Palmerin, and the other Knights did, when they found that Candida was gone away with Leonato. cap, 82, fol, 255
               How Prince Florian arriued at Constantinople, with the faire Lady Argentina, and the ſubtill Enchauntreſſe Druſa Ʋelonna: Heere likewiſe is declared, how Leonato loſt his beloued Candida, and aftervvard by vvhat meanes hee recouered her againe. cap. 83, fol. 158
               Howe Leonato (with his faire Candida) arriued in England, where their mariage was ſolemnized vvith great royaltie. Alſo hovv the young trauailing Knights, vvith them of greater yeares and experience, returned (the moſt part of them) to the Emperours Court at Constantinople. cap, 84. fol, 261
               Hovv Dramuſiande, Franardo, Almaroll, and Forzato, trauailed to conquer the Iland of the bottomleſſe Lake, & what happened to them in the attempt. cap, 85. fol. 264
               How two young Ladies being Gianteſſes, declared to our wounded Knights, by what meanes they ſhould enter into the Profound Tower, and finiſh the enchauntment. cap. 86, fol. 268
               How the Lord of the Iland came thether, and of the victorie which our Knights obtayned againſt him and his. cap. 87, fol. 270
               Howe our Knights went to the aduenture of the Tower, & of the ſeuerall occaſions that befell them, vntill they found the Serpent of the Sunne. cap. 88. fol. 273
               
                  Howe Dramuſiande and Franardo went into the Serpent, and afterward finiſhed the vvhole aduenture. cap. 89, fol. 275
               Howe Dramuſiande made his ſonne Franardo Lord of the Iland, aſsigning the Caſtels belonging to the Ladies, to theyr Husbands, Almaroll and Forzato, Franardo purpoſing his departure thence, to take Grandonia Forzatoes Siſter to vvife, and hovv aftervvard they arriued at Constantinople vvith their Ladies. cap. 90. fol. 277
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   