
      
         
            
            
            AN ITALIANS dead bodie, Stucke with Engliſh Flowers. Elegies, On the death of Sir Oratio Pallauicino.
            
            
            LONDON Printee by Thomas Creede, for Andrew Wiſe, and are to be ſold at his ſhop in Powles Church-yard. 1600.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPfull and vertuous, his ſingular good Lady, the Lady Pallauicino. Theophilus Feild, her deuote ſeruant, dedicateth theſe mourning weedes.
            
               RIght vertuous, and fayre Lady, may it pleaſe
               Your faire, now ſlubbred eyes, with weeping long,
               To take a truce with teares, that whilſt you ceaſe
               To mourne, with which you do your beauty wrong,
               There may be time for me, for to expreſſe
               My loſſe, which by your loſſe is comfortleſſe,
               Some comfort may from hence to you ariſe,
               (If it be comfort not to weepe alone)
               Oh giue me leaue to ſpeake, that which mine eyes
               Haue writ in teares, with which my heart doth grone
               To be deliuered. Loe this child of griefe
               Seekes vnto you as Nurſe for ſome reliefe:
               Be a dry Nurſe to it, let it not draw
               From nipples of your eyes one pretious teare,
               You need not giue it ſuck, for it can chaw,
               And what it chawes, his ſtomacke well will beare:
               Vphold it not with helping it to mone,
               'Tis big enough, and now can goe alone.
               This Infant new borne of my moyſter braine,
               I cloath'd in black, expoſing it to view
               Of many witneſſes, ſome of their traine
               Not well train'd vp, but of the ruder crew
               
                  Diſroab'd it, robd me, without priuiledge
               To touch a holy thing is ſacriledge.
               No leſſe was this, nay more (o foule diſgrace)
               They did not onely touch, but tooke away
               A holy Poeme from a holy place
               Vpon a birth, and on a buriall day
               A mourning, weeping birth day to my vearſe,
               A day of buriall to Horatios hearſe.
               Hence you prophane, what had you there to doo?
               Lady my babe was on your alter plac'd,
               Sacred, deuote, and conſecrate to you
               By your eyes gracious aſpect to be grac'd,
               They were Church robbers who did dare to ſpoyle
               The holy labors of an others toyle:
               After long ſearch and much enquiry made,
               The loſt child by his mother found againe,
               Who trauailing a new on childbed laide,
               Seekes vnto you as Nurſe to eaſe her paine,
               After your cloudes of griefe be ouer blowne,
               Deſires you to adopt him for your owne:
               His father would be yours, (for yours he was)
               Whilſt he belongd to your deceaſed mate
               No patron of his poems now he has,
               And therefore doth them to you dedicate:
               Loue them for his ſake, from whoſe ſorrowed death
               Halfe dead for ſorrow, they haue borrowed breath.
            
         
      
      
         
            An Italians dead bodie, ſtucke with Engliſh Flowers.
         
            
               The Heraulds office, Ile aſſume to mee,
               Forward my Muſe, chiefe mourner thou ſhalt bee:
               Impute it not to pride I for moſt goe,
               Tis a poore pride, to be the chiefe in woe.
            
         
         
            
               Vpon the death of the Right Worſhipfull Knight, his very honourable Patron, Sir Horatio Pallauicino. 
               Ʋerſes thruſt out by force when teares fell, and followed of their owne accord.
            
               NAy ſpare not Enuy, malice ſpit thy gall,
               Say what you can gainſt my Horatio,
               
               Gainſt my Maecenas: be not partiall,
               Vertue, nor dead, nor liuing, wants a foe.
               Him liuing, gainſt you both I haue defended,
               He dead, in ſpight of ſpight ſhalbe commended:
               Enuy layes hand on mouth, nay ſheare thy teeth,
               O art thou toothleſſe? ſhe points to the graue,
               And ſaith ſhe is buried with him. Dead▪ and ſeeth▪
               
               She win-kes. Nay that is not that we would haue.
               There needs no winking where there is no error:
               Looke on this ſight, thy ſight confounding mirror.
               Put on thy ſpectacles and throughly view,
               We craue no fauour: ſtill ſhe will be blinde,
               Becauſe that vertue ſhall not haue her dew,
               She can no fault, ſhe will nought praiſe-worth finde.
               I could ſaith ſhe, ſay then and ſay but ſooth,
               Enuy ſtill hath, though ſhe doth hide her tooth:
               
                  I for Horatio held my hand at barre,
               Of what ſmall blemiſh canſt thou him endite?
               I haue withdrawne my action, dead men are
               Dead to the law, who bites that cannot bite?
               A dogge.
               Such is that many headed Cerberus▪
                  
               
               The common people, whom Horatio fed:
               Yet could not ſtop their mouthes. Now woe to vs
               They cry, and to our ſtaruelings. He is dead
               Who when with hunger we were all nigh dead,
               Refreſhed and reuiued vs with bread.
               And yet (oh how far enuy carrieth men?)
               He carried and tranſported, ſtop toong there,
               Recant a lye, thy words call backe agen.
               He did tranſport corne. When? when corne was deare?
               Whither? to heauen: euen corne of life the ſtaffe,
               Which when God winowed, he found no chaffe:
               And for he found no chaffe, he ſtor'd it vp
               In his owne garner.
            
            
               
                  Liuor poſt fata quieſcit
               
               
                  Virtutem incolumem odimus
               
               
                  Sublatam ex oculis quaerimus inuidi.
               
            
            
               Theophil. Feild.
            
         
         
            
               Ʋpon the ſame.
            
               PAtrons and Poets haue bene alwaies ſcant,
               Is now there number then encreaſed▪ no▪
               
               Shall dead Augustus then a Virgil want▪
               
               Oh for a Horace for Horatio,
               
               
                  Horatio, Maecaenas call him rather,
               Or if ye will, the Muſes foſter father.
               
                  Rimesters, enough, enough can make a ſong,
               A Ballot, or ſuch like, and thereunto
               Annex a wofull tune: they do thee wrong
               
                  Apollo, and thy true borne ſonnes vndo.
               
                  For why are Poets clogd with pouertie▪
               
               Becauſe theſe baſtards imbaſe poeſie.
               
                  Auguſtus nor Maecaenas nere till now
               Were miſſ'd and wiſh'd till Horatio dide,
               In him they died both: the lawrell bough
               Did wither, as his bodie putrifide.
               Hence neither Horace, nor a Maro liues,
               Since Poets are their Patrons relatiues.
               Deceaſ'd Auguſtus liues by liuely vearſe
               Of Maro, Maro liued by his purſe:
               
                  Horace reuiueth his Maecaenas hearſe,
               Whoſe bountie had bene erſt his Muſes Nurſe.
               Life giuen for liuing, and bread giuen for breath,
               
                  Virgil giues moſt, he giues life after death.
               How can you ſpend your treaſure better then
               Then treaſuring vp eternall memorie?
               (You muck-wormes of the world, the ſcorne of men)
               This gift is in the gift of poetrie.
               My Patron was a patterne for you all,
               Whoſe fames life is his bodies funerall.
               
                  Virgil and Horace, I enuy you not
               For hauing ſo great Patrons as you had:
               In poetrie you had a greater lot,
               
                  Auguſtus for bad ware ſo much nere bad,
               Nere gaue ſo much. He gaue to Publius
               
               A Bakers dole, a boxe to Chaerilus.
               
               Bread, bare allowance for lifes ſuſtenance,
               Dry morſell beggers almes (neceſſitie
               Did aske no more) more royall maintenance
               Gaue my Auguſtus. Superfluitie
               So thinkes the baſer clowne, what's giuen to vs
               I meane to Schollers, is ſuperfluous.
               I Chaerilus, or Poet worſe then hee,
               Had royall Phillips for my quarters pay:
               
                  Virgil and Horace did deſerue their fee,
               To giue them, is to ſell, not giue away.
               
                  No gift (to ſell for gaine) but greedineſſe,
               The leſſe my worth, the more my worthineſſe.
               I Chaerilus, do pittie Chaerilus,
               
               No verſe did ſound ill to Auguſtus eare,
               But Charilus his eare muſt ſtrait vntruſſe
               Like ſchoole boy, and his fiſts correction beare.
               Are not ſuch Patrons rife? ſay Satyriſt
               Who beare in ope hand bread, a ſtone in fiſt.
               
                  Maro be ſilent in thy Patrons praiſe,
               Let Chaerilus Auguſtus dead fame reare,
               Commend him for his fiſt, thy Muſe vpraiſe:
               As high, as he is arme: a box on the eare,
               A pox vpon his hand, much kinder they,
               Who with a flea in eare do ſend away:
               It bites not halfe ſo much, who lookes for more
               Then flap with Foxe-taile? nay tis well if ſo
               We ſcape: yet make a croſſe vpon his dore,
               Nere beg more there: O my Horatio!
               
               My patron when I view theſe Carles in groſſe,
               Thy death preſents to me a greater loſſe:
               I was a deare, deare plot of ground to thee,
               I was waſte ground, till in a barren field
               Made fruitfull by thy liberalitie:
               You ſowed and planted, yet I nere did yeeld
               Better then flowers: in them thou lookeſt delight
               Liuing, with them thy deads corpes ſhall be dight.
               Sixe winters did thy bountie raine on mee:
               Sixe ſommers with thy Sun-beames ouerſplead,
               So many ſommers brought not into thee
               One harueſt: I ſtill green, thou withered
               Before my fruite be ripe, for I could pay
               Tithe of thy April ſhewres, in flowres of May.
               Would thou hadſt liu'd till Pan the ſhepheards god
               Had entertained me into his rout,
               I might haue charm'd mens eares with Arons rod,
               
                  Shimey his railing toong haue pulled out.
               
                  Giue vertue her due praiſe: which neuer liues,
               Till death to enuy, death and honour giues.
               Would thou hadſt liued till then, and then thy field,
               For all thy coſt and labour would haue paide
               Some better vſe, now onely it doth yeeld
               Tenne in the hundred, being ouerlaide
               With too much ſeed. If teares were ſpent and all,
               My Land-lord might haue loſt his principall:
               But I am rich in teares, oh that they could
               Supple thy withered rootes, reduce thy ſpring,
               My earth ſhould turne to water, and I would
               Weepe Oceans: when I could no longer wring
               One poore teares ſap from fountain of my eies,
               My heart ſhould be thy tombe, I here he lies.
            
            
               Nam
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   prius timidi paſcenter in aethere Cerui
               Et freta destituent nudos in littore piſces,
               Ante perratis amborum finibus exul,
               Aut Ararim Parthus bibet, aut Germania Tigrim
               Quam nostro illius labatur pectore vultus.
            
         
         
            Vpon the ſame.
            
               Death went a rouing for to finde a marke,
               His day is night, his white is blacke and darke:
               At laſt by chaunce a paire of Doues he ſpide,
               Who had three louely Pidgions by their ſide.
               Fiue louely birds in all, all full of life,
               Too faire a bootie for ſo foule a thiefe:
               His arrow to his bowſtring he did fit,
               And ſo the biggeſt and the faireſt hit
               But in the foote, who could not runne away,
               The other fled, ſo he ſeiz'd on his pray:
               And well they did to flie, for ſure he ment
               T'haue kill'd them all, but miſſing his intent,
               He doth excuſe his fact, and ſayth that hee
               Meant to kill none, but skare the yoonger three.
               
                  How comes it then, this faire Doue loſt her mate?
               He kild him ſure for loue and not for hate:
               For Death indeed with Cupids arrowes dight,
               Sought the loue ſhaft, on deadly ſhaft did light.
               Why ſhot he not at her? He oft did trye,
               Shee was too glorious obiect for his eye:
               Had he kild both, I would haue ſurely thought,
               That Venus for her chariot had them bought.
               Yet ſee not how of price they could agree,
               Since the two Doues could no way valued bee.
               Why kild he not the yoong ones? Oh quoth he,
               They ſmil▪d vpon me, 'thad bene crueltie.
               Beſides ripe fruit▪ fed foule make death beſt cheare,
               As yet yong Pigens out of ſeaſon were:
               Tis well thou ſlew'ſt not them, for on their death,
               Did hang a fiuefold threed of vitall breath.
               Tis well thou ſlew'ſt not her▪ for had ſhe dy'de,
               None but death ſhould haue bene his ſecond bryde:
               And mother to his young ones. So in this
               Death hath bene mercifull, our comfort is
               He liues, and ſtill ſhall liue in his, whom wee
               Murdred by deaths dead hand ſuppoſe to bee.
               And yet then ſo liues better, for indeed
               The cauſe why this my Doue to heauen did ſpeed,
               Was this: Ioues Eagle was in ſome diſgrace:
               This Doue made Eagle does ſupply his place.
            
            
               The ſame.
            
         
         
            An other.
            
               Dead doubtleſſe death thinkes Sir Horatio is,
               But death, deceiu'd, he tooke his markes amis:
               Two yoong Horatios he hath left behinde,
               The liuely Image of the fathers minde.
               In them Horatio liues in ſpight of death,
               And ſhall ſo long as they on earth draw breath.
               Good lucke it was: doubtleſſe had death them ſeene,
               Theſe two fine boyes now liuing had not beene.
               
                  Your Ladiſhip he ſaw: but thought you might
               Be kild with griefe for your deceaſed Knight.
               Deceiue wiſe Ladie his expectation,
               In making mone and lamentation.
               Cheare vp your heart: yet looke ſtill as you cried,
               And ſee your pretie ſweetings be not ſpied.
            
            
               The ſame.
            
         
         
            An other.
            
               Once Sir Horatio from the Pope did ſteale,
               He ſtole away into our Common-weale:
               But well and wiſely from hence he ſtole,
               Where ſtill he liued in perill of his ſoule.
               But ill thou didſt to ſteale the ſecond time
               Away from vs, that was no veniall crime:
               True it was mortall: death was is in the faut,
               That ſtole him hence: for ſome lookt on & ſaw't,
               Who did their part in making hue and cry,
               Which forc't the theefe the while forgoe his booty:
               Yet afterwards he ſpied his time and ſped,
               Doo what they could that ſtood then by his bed.
               I rather thinke he got himſelfe away,
               At leaſt conſented to his dying day:
               Nor can I iuſtly blame him for his deed,
               What brought him hither made him hence to ſpeed,
               His ſoules eſtate, which was not at the beſt,
               Vntill it came to euerlaſting reſt.
            
            
               The ſame.
            
         
         
            An other.
            
               If when the partie hath penance done,
               And in a white ſheete ſtood his time,
               For him that lawe and penaltie will ſhunne,
               It is not good once 
                     •
                  o obiect the crime.
               Deſerue not they be taught to rule their tongue,
               That now he lies lapt in his winding-ſheet,
               Stick not to do that noble Knight ſuch wrong,
               In ſaying ſtill (their doue will with them meet.)
               
                  He robd the Pope, did other things beſide,
               Wherein he was the while he liued belide.
            
            
               The ſame.
            
         
         
            Another.
            
               A wandring Knight was Sir Horatio,
               
               In this, the lowe, and other Countreys mo:
               He liued and died a ſtraunger with vs here,
               Why name I where? that's neither here nor there.
               All men on earth they runne a ſtraungers race,
               Paſſe on along and haue no biding place.
               Wherefore Horatio died not for age,
               He died, becauſe our life's a Pilgrimage.
            
            
               The ſame.
            
         
         
            
               An Engliſh man Italionate,
               Becomes a diuell incarnate:
               But an Italian Anglyfide,
               Becomes a Saint Angelifide.
            
            
               Ed. Ma▪ Pemb▪ Hall.
            
         
         
            To the right vertuous▪ his much honoured Lady, the Lady Pallauicino.
            
            
               THus haue I cloath'd my childe the ſecond time,
               Becauſe I had no flowers, in mourning weed:
               Both fields and flowers, and weeds are paſt their prime,
               Doo on them all a charitable deed.
               It lyeth in the flagges expoſde, reiected,
               Vnleſſe by your faire hand it be protected.
               Like Pharo's daughter take it into grace,
               Though meanly borne, yet brought vp by your hand▪
               
               It may in time aſpire to higher place,
               And effect wonders by enchaunting wand.
               It hath alreadie turned earth to water,
               It may drie vp your ſea of teares hereafter.
               This colour ſuting to the time I choſe,
               Hoping it might be pretious in your eyes▪
               
               
                  This blacke, thoſe faire, and that it would expoſe
               By foule your fairneſſe, as two contraries
               (Let them be white and black) together placed,
               Are by their oppoſition ioyntly graced.
               My book's a perfect mourner, ſee it weares
               Your liuery, and mourneth for your Lord
               His patron, drops of Inke in ſteed of teares
               Haue blubbred his leaues. His ſtrings accord
               Vnto the mourners faſhion, all in all,
               It goes as they went to the funerall.
               In this reſpect you ought to welcome it,
               That it will be copartner of your griefe:
               Nor ſuffer you alone lamenting ſit,
               But mourning with you, giue ſome reliefe.
               'Twill tell you, he you mourne for is not dead,
               But from this country to a better fled.
               My child I cald it for his infancie,
               Becauſe it cannot tell his tale of wo
               As it conceaues: but onely yet can crie,
               And ſound the name of dead Horatio.
               
               When it growes troubleſome, do you but will it
               It ſoone will ceaſe, ceaſe crying and you ſtill it.
               It onely yet can cry, but when tis growne
               Able to tell his mind in better words:
               If you meane while vouchſafe it for to owne,
               It then ſhall giue you what his skill affords.
               Then ſhall you gather for theſe weeds I yeeld,
               A Coal-wort at the hardeſt in your field.
            
            
               Your Ladiſhips bounden in all dutie and ſeruice. Theophilus Feild.
            
         
         
            
               
                  Horatio's departed, ſo men do ſay:
               Great pittie he could here no longer ſtay.
               
                  Say hee's departed, ſay not hee's dead:
               Nor as of others, let of him be ſed.
               He was not quelde, nor conquered of death:
               But him did combat while he was in breath.
               His breath him failing, cauſe he would not fite,
               He challeng'd death; and for he has his rite,
               His body challendg'd: as a challenge gloue
               He gaue his body: plighting faith to proue,
               Death in a deadly combat and affray,
               When the laſt ſound ſhall call all men away.
               Till then his ſoule, aboue, doth heauenly pleaſures gaine,
               Then will his bodie win from death, for aie to raigne.
            
            
               T. S. Pemb.
            
         
         
            
               
                  Horatio's departed, ſo I heard them ſay:
               Pittie he could here no longer ſtay.
               Say hee's departed ſay not he is dead:
               But from one place vnto an other ſped.
               Say not of him that he is dead and gone,
               Say onely he is gone. With company or alone?
               His wife and children he hath left behind,
               Though to haue borne him company was their mind.
               But thus he thought: a long dead way and ill
               For them poore ſoules to go, it would them kill.
            
            
               Alter Idem.
            
         
         
            Another.
            
               Who ſayes Horatio died in his bed
               He lyes: he died like a dubbed head,
               He di'd I ſay like knighthood in the field,
               Encountring death, which forc't him not to yeeld.
               I ſaw the fight: the knight nere ſhrunk for death,
               But ſtoutly ſtood too't while he was in breath:
               When breath him failed, his foe him did cōfound,
               With deadly blow he feld him to the ground.
               
                  A cowards part. Might he haue tooke his winde
               The knight had liu'd, yea kild I beare the minde:
               Who dying mindfull of his honor, graſpt
               And held his armes (men dying vſe hold faſt)
               Nor did his foe out of the field them carry,
               You ſaw the Herauld did them with him bury.
            
            
               The ſame.
            
         
         
            Another.
            
               A Knight of late death challen'd into field,
               To fight a combat at ſword and ſhield:
               The Knight him anſwer'd as did become,
               And when they met as I haue heard by ſome,
               He felly fought, and ſtood to't to the death,
               He tride it out till he was out of breath.
               A noble knight, death did him valiant finde,
               And had the worſt while he might fetch his winde.
               Pittie our life's no better then a blaſt,
               And braueſt mind ſhould ſo be ſpent at laſt:
               When breath him faild, that day was at an end,
               He ceas'd hi
                     •
                   ſword againſt his foe to bend:
               And giuing death the glory of that fray,
               Dar'd him to try▪t againe another day:
               Withall▪ his corps his challenge for to proue,
               He caſt in ſteed of gantlet or of gloue,
               And ſwore by th'honour of his head he would,
               Againe recouer what was caſt on mould.
               Death tooke vp one, and vndertooke the other,
               And bids him poynt both place and places brother:
               He points the Church-yard, and the latter day,
               When ſound of Trumpe ſhall batle bid array.
            
            
               The ſame.
            
         
         
            
               What iſt thus many eyes one obiect haue?
               And all are bended to yon new made graue.
               O tis on yonder Corſe their eyes are fixt,
               It ſor to ſee, thus people here are mixt.
               
                  And as the twinckling diamonds of heauen,
               When all thing
                     •
                   are of Phaebus light bereuen,
               B
                     •
                   ſpred the heauens appearing to our ſight,
               And lend the earth their litle borrowed light:
               So they all deeming this thriſe worthy Knight,
               Worthy more dayes, his day now turn'd to night▪
               
               Endeuour to illuſtrate with their light,
               In ſpight of clowdie death to make him bright:
               They do not looke vpon the fatall bere
               As moſt of them afore accuſtom'd were.
               His body hauing loſt his ſoule and breath,
               They ſay's become a ſoule vnto the earth:
               His Coffin is a Coffer as they ſay,
               Wherein this wary world thought good to lay
               This pretious Iewel brought from farther parts,
               An ornament to Schollers and the Arts.
            
            
               T. S. Pemb.
            
         
         
            
               
                  Horatios Coffin no more it call,
               Death's Coffin call't, if ye call't at all:
               Wherein he hath laid vp a pretious Pearle,
               A Noble man, though neither Lord nor Earle.
               Muſe you on earth death would not let him tarrie,
               Men in the earth their Treaſure vſe to burie.
            
            
               Alter Idem.
            
         
         
            The conqueſt of two Traitors, Enuie and Death, by the worthy Knight, Sir Horatio Pallauicino.
            
            
               ENuy and Death conſpired both togeather,
               Gainſt Sir Horatio, two leane-fac'd fiends,
               Which euer haunt the beſt, birds of one feather,
               Voyd of all loue, that pray vpon their friends.
               Both qualifi'd alike, both treacherous,
               Enuy is deadly, death is enuious.
            
            
               
               Th'one to the body mortall wounds doth giue▪
               
               The other doth impeach a mans good name:
               Th'one pines, the other liues by them that liue,
               Yet fretteth at the liuings liuing fame.
               Th'one is (like Sagittarius) with ſhafts dight,
               Th'other (like Scorpio's venomd teeth) doth bite.
            
            
               This the conſpiracie was which they wrought,
               That Enuy for his lifes vncertaine leaſe
               Should wrack his fame, whoſe ouerthrow ſhe ſought▪
               
               When death ſhould warning giue, then to ſurceaſe▪
               
               Death vowed not to haſten till that houre,
               When Enuy on his name ſhould haue no pow're▪
               
            
            
               Enuy who neuer lookt with cheerfull eye,
               Was glad at this, wiſhing no longer date
               Her malice all-bewitching force to try,
               And exerciſe her inward-boyling hate.
               Thinking that ſooner heate would fire faile,
               Then any thing her force abate or quaile.
            
            
               Eftſoones ſhe as impatient of delay,
               With tooth and nayle endeuor'd to outrace
               His riſing fame; taking the cauſe away,
               Vertue I meane, and good deeds which win grace.
               Which buildeth vp more high admired fame,
               Then the Pyramides skye▪ climing frame.
            
            
               At firſt an ill opinion ſhe raiſ'd,
               (Oh how much firſt opinions preuaile!)
               She rent her haire when once ſhe heard him praiſ'd,
               And for ones praiſe, ſhe made a thouſand raile.
               He ſtole from Rome, he for no goodneſſe fled,
               Cooſned the Pope, tranſported Englands bread.
            
            
               
               Theſe falſly-bred and miſconceiued tayles,
               Feeble at firſt, grew too head-ſtrong at length:
               And flew about more ſwift then ſhips full ſayles,
               And by their farther flying got more ſtrength.
               Thus Enuy had his name in credit plac'd,
               With others helping mouths well nigh defac'd▪
               
            
            
               But his true vertues beames obſcur'd before,
               In ſpight of Enuies teeth at laſt appear'd:
               And could not be by Enuy hidden more,
               But his decayed fame againe vprear'd.
               This ſight aſtonied Enuy, like that head
               Of Gorgon, cauſ'd men downe to fall ſtone-dead.
            
            
               Who to her ſelfe reuiuing came againe,
               And ſeeing his good deeds the more encreaſt,
               (The more his goods deeds, the more Enuies paine)
               Could not ſuppreſſe them, yet ſhe would not reſt
               But ſought alwaies to hinder his intent,
               Hindring his fame, hindring the good he ment.
            
            
               At laſt ſhe ſaid, ſithence I ſpent my pow're
               And can preuaile no more, ere all his fame
               He do againe recouer in happie howre,
               Or altogether cleare his blemiſht name,
               Death (that I cannot) ſhorten thou his daies,
               Leaſt he in time exceed his former praiſe.
            
            
               Short after, came th'appointed houre by death,
               When Enuy no more bitter gall could ſpit:
               Till then he graunted Sir Horatio breath,
               Till then he vow'd his body not to hit.
               Then death approching neare, ſawe Enuy ſtand
               Stopping his ſilent mouth with open hand.
            
            
               
               Has Enuy parbrackt all her poyſon than
               (Quoth Death) and caſt her tongues three-forked ſting?
               Vpon no obiect can Detraction ſcan?
               Can Slaunder no more loathſome venome fling?
               Enuy repli'd, what I can doe's in vaine,
               Yet ſee, by me inflicted ſcarres remaine.
            
            
               Then ô, then quickly cut him off in time,
               Ere he can heale ſcarres vnto his name:
               Nor let his fame flouriſh againe in prime,
               Since I haue labour'd long to ſtaine the ſame.
               Still while we talke, his good name doth encreaſe,
               And though I ceaſe, his good deeds neuer ceaſe.
            
            
               Death enuious himſelfe, by Enuy mou'd
               Soone condeſcends, not brooking liuing name:
               And on his Enuies obiect his force prou'd,
               Thinking t'haue alſo nipt his riſing fame.
               Death is deceiu'd; his riſing fame not dies,
               As he to heauen his riſing fame ſhall riſe.
            
            
               P. P. P.
            
         
         
            
               Come dolefull Muſe
               My ſoule infuſe
               With that death-ſounding ſtraine:
               Which Orpheus playd
               When he aſſayd
               To win his ſpouſe againe.
            
            
               Or let me ſing
               Tun'd to that ſtring
               Which mournfully he ſtrooke
               When helliſh Ioue
               
               Recall'd his loue,
               As he on her did looke.
            
            
               
               With Cypreſſe bowe
               Engirt thy browe,
               Thou queene of angry mood▪
               
               That with thy quill
               Doeſt volumes fill
               Of murders, death, and blood▪
               
            
            
               Thou troope diuine
               Of virgins nine,
               Which ſing on Parnaſſe hill:
               If Castaly
               
               With drought be dry,
               With teares the fountaine fill.
            
            
               Fallen is your ſtarre,
               Surpaſſing farre
               That glorious lampe of light,
               Whoſe golden raye
               Makes brightſome day,
               Whoſe frown makes dusky night.
            
            
               Where ſhall ye finde
               
                  Mecaenas kinde,
               To cure poore Horace wo?
               
                  Horace muſt want,
               (Sith ſuch be ſcant
               As was Horatio.)
            
            
               This Phaenix-doue
               Religions loue
               Made flie from Italy:
               
               And did enſtall
               By Latium's fall,
               
                  Alba in Albany.
               
            
            
               
               (As Troy being wonne,
               Faire 
                     Ʋenus ſonne
               In ſpight of deſteny,
               With daunger brought
               (Through daunger ſought)
               
                  Ilium to Italy.
               
            
            
               Then ſilent ſpirit
               Vnto thy merit
               Giue leaue this dirge to ſing:
               Whoſe worthy name,
               Outſtrips bright fame,
               And tires her flitting wing.
            
            
               Since Caeſar dide
               In height of pride,
               Whom guiltie hands did wound:
               A fairer flower
               In Latium's bower
               Then thee was neuer found.
            
            
               Since Venus ſonne
               Did Carthage ſhunne
               Bent to the Rutiles land
               A worthier knight
               Did neuer pight
               His tent on forraine ſand▪
               
            
            
               Sith then by thee
               Faire Britany
               
               The name of Rome ſhall haue:
               Shee giues thee roome
               Within her wombe,
               And makes her breſt thy graue.
            
            
               
               Thee Italy
               
               Did once deny,
               
                  Albion a friend doth mone
               Now not with men
               A Citizen
               Enſtall'd in heau'ns throne.
            
            
               Han. Pemb.
            
         
         
            Certaine verſes written and ſent in way of comfort▪ to her Ladiſhip.
            
               IF thoſe ſalt ſhowers that your ſad eyes haue ſhed
               Haue quencht the flame your griefe hath kindled.
               Madame my words ſhall not be ſpent in vaine,
               To ſerue for winde to chaſe that mournfull raine.
               Thus farre your loſſe hath ſtriuen with your griefe,
               Whether each piteous eye ſhould deeme the chiefe.
               Whiles both your griefe doth make your loſſe the more,
               And your great loſſe doth cauſe you grieue ſo ſore.
               Both griefe and loſſe doo willing partners finde,
               In euery eye, and euery feeling minde.
               So haue I ſeene the ſilly Turtle Doue,
               The patterne of your griefe and chaſter loue,
               Sitting vpon a bared bough alone:
               Her deareſt mates vntimely loſſe bemone.
               Whiles ſhe denies all cares of due repaſt,
               And mourning thus, her weary dayes doth waſt.
               Thus natures ſelfe doth teach vs to lament,
               And reaſons light our ſorrowes doth augment.
               Yet reaſon can it ſelfe this leſſon teach,
               Our reaſon ſhould ſurpaſſe their ſences reach.
               Reaſon our ſence, and Grace ſhould reaſon ſway,
               That ſence and reaſon both might Grace obay.
               Thoſe ſilly birds whom nature hope denies,
               May die for griefe becauſe their fellow dies.
               But on this hope our drouping hart ſhould reſt,
               That maugre death their parted ſoules are bleſt.
               
                  That their ſwift courſe, that Gole doth ſooner gaine,
               Whereto ere long, our ſlow ſteps ſhall attaine.
               Some fewe ſhort yeares your following race ſhall ſpend,
               Then ſhall you both meete in a happie end.
               But you meane while all in a ſtraunger coaſt,
               Are left alone, as one whoſe guide is loſt.
               Madame what ere your grieued thought applies,
               We are all Pilgrims to our commons skies.
               And who is neareſt to this home of clay
               May find the worſer ſpeed and further way.
               And as I geſſe, vnleſſe our Artiſts faine,
               England is nearer heauen of the twaine.
               There is your home, where now your Knight doth bide,
               Reſting by many a Saint and Angels ſide.
               Walke on in Grace, and grieue your ſelfe no more,
               That your ſo loued mate is gone before.
            
            
               Io. Hall. Imman. Coll.
            
         
         
            An Epitaph.
            
               Some leaue their home for priuate diſcontent,
               Some forced by compulſed baniſhment.
               Some for an itching luſt of nouell fight,
               Some one for gaine, ſome other for delight.
               Thus whilſt ſome force, ſome other hope bereaues,
               Some leaue their country, ſome their country leaues.
               But thee no griefe, force, luſt, gaine or delight,
               Exiled from thy home (thrice worthy Knight)
               Saue that griefe, force, that gaine, delight alone,
               Which was thy good, and true religion.
            
            
               Io. Hall. idem. Imman. Col.
            
         
         
            
               You Nymphs that in the meadowes keepe,
               And midſt the ſmiling Daſies ſleepe,
               Your Odours powre
               On this dead flowre:
               Whoſe loſſe doth make Aurora weepe.
               A flowre he was, then crowne his tombe
               With flowers ſprung from his mothers wombe.
               
                  But if the modeſt Roſes want,
               Or maiden Lillies waxen ſcant:
               Watch where Horatia weepes her ſhewers▪
               
               And you ſhall finde a bed of flowers.
               Like as of Helens teares once came,
               The hearbe which Emila we name.
               A floure he was, and as a floure he died,
               But now to ſtars as fairer flowers is hied:
               There to behold the chiefe roſe of the field,
               The faireſt Lilly that the vallies yeild.
               Sweet flowre of peace, & loue both red & white,
               That God and man together doth vnite.
            
            
               R. S. Coll. Iohan.
            
         
         
            
               Two Countries do contend for me,
               Faire Albion, and Italie:
               
               To both I owe my ſelfe at once,
               There was I borne, here lye my bones.
               There did I riſe, here do I fall:
               That gaue me birth, this buriall.
               That was my cradle, this my graue,
               There had I life, here death I haue.
               But that gaue life which now is runne,
               This life which neuer ſhall be done.
            
            
               R. F. Pemb▪ H.
            
         
         
            
               Admired Maro let me vſe thy name,
               To proue Aeneas to Italia came:
               Italian Knight, if I ſhould dare define
               That thou art come of this Aeneas line,
               How ere perhaps ſome Critick wil ſay no,
               Yet will thy life and likeneſſe proue 'tis ſo.
               And yet me thinkes Vliſſes though a Greeke,
               Was like Horatio too, ſince both did ſeeke
               A toong of eloquence, ſo by a chaſt wiſe
               Each of them had three children in his life.
               And now to trauell is Horatio gone,
               Leauing his Penelope to mourne alone.
               
                  Now doth ſhe tell her ſelfe, how he doth liue,
               And to her thread of life, that doth length giue:
               Now doth ſhe thinke hee's dead, and gins lament,
               And wiſh her thread of life were alſo ſpent,
               Thus like Penelopes lingring web of paine,
               She weaues her life, and it vnweaues againe.
               But it may be when twentie yeares are paſt,
               That thy Vlyſſes will returne at laſt:
               A ye if he were on earth: but hee's too wiſe.
               For earth to leaue the heauens faire Paradiſe.
            
            
               R. Sen. Coll. Iohn.
            
         
         
            
               See here lie Myrmidons, more hard then ſteele,
               That no remorſe, nor woe could euer feele,
               This deare deare tombe that doth Horatio keepe,
               And learne of this moiſt marble how to weepe.
            
            
               Idem.
            
         
         
            
               The Elements that when he was a liue,
               Conſpired in one to giue Horatio breath:
               Are ſince he dy'd deuided and do ſtriue
               Which ſhall be kindeſt to him after death.
               The earth doth promiſe gently to enfolde
               His tender body in her colde embrace:
               And for he ſoftly trode commaunds the molde,
               Softly to he vpon his louely face.
               The water for his ſake to teares will turne,
               And drowne all eyes in neuer ceaſing woe,
               That where Horatio they gin to mourne,
               Whole ſtreams may from the ſwelling circles floe▪
               
               The ayre will through his lightſome Regions ſound,
               In doubled ecchoes great Horatios fame:
               That through the world no Kingdome may be found,
               Whoſe vtmoſt ſhore haue not receiu'd the ſame.
               The fire no more will burne his Pictures frame,
               But gliding from his natiue ſeate aboue,
               Will henceforth vſe the vertue of his flame,
               In kindling hearts with dead Horatios loue.
            
            
               N. F. Reg. Coll.
            
         
         
            
            
               
                  England lament, thus of thy neighbours checkt,
               A ſtraunger came thy fruitfull wombe to cheriſh,
               But him thou ſuffereſt without due reſpect,
               Vngratefully within thy wombe to periſh.
               For ſuch a one within thee is inſhrinde,
               As of thy owne ſcarce one is left behinde.
            
            
               S. H.
            
         
         
            
               The fates are Queenes, they cannot be controld,
               This obiect proues it, who can it denie?
               Their law is oſtraciſme mongſt yoong and old,
               They expulſe the beſt, for ſtill the beſt doth die.
               But A eacus is iuſt what ere betides,
               At Plutoes Court Ile ſue theſe homicides.
            
            
               I. Cecill. S. Iohns Coll.
            
         
         
            To the ſuruiuing Lady of the deceaſed Knight.
            
               WAſt 
                     Ʋenus? no. The fates haue ſtolne your loue,
               Oh cut-throat queans, (I hope they heare me not)
               This yeare for-ſoothe they ſpunne tiſſue for loue
               To gaine a thread, they'le ſpoyle a true-loue knot.
               Let not his abſence (Lady) be your dome,
               
                  Phaebe ſhines moſt, when Phaebus is from home.
            
            
               Idem▪
               
            
         
         
            
               Noctuluctus, or his Night-mourning.
            
               1
               RIch tapird-Sanctuarie of the bleſt,
               Pallace of Ruth, made all of teares and reſt;
               Day of deepe Students▪ dead Night, nurſe of death,
               Who breathleſſe ſeed'ſt on nothing but our breath,
               To thy deepe ſhades, and deſolatione,
               I conſecrate my dying liuing mone.
            
            
               2
               You dreadfull Furies▪ viſions of the night,
               With ghaſtly howling, all approach my ſight:
               And paliſh Ghoſts, with ſable Tapers ſtand,
               To lend ſad lights to my more ſadder hand.
               
                  Foxes come barke, and Night-Rauens belch in grones,
               And Screetch-owles hollowe times confuſiones.
            
            
               3
               Or I will furniſh vp a Funerall bed,
               Strew'd with the bones and reli
                     •
                  ques of the dead:
               Redoubling Ecchoes ſhall like paſſing bells,
               Chiming the diſmall accent▪ of their knells,
               Reuiue the dead, or make the liuing die,
               In Ruth, and terror of deathes torturie.
            
            
               4
               Here liues impriſoned ſorrow, cloath'd in blacke,
               A dolefull hearſe, fit for a dead mans backe:
               Natures faire red, clad in pale ſheetes of Ruth,
               Expreſſing in dumbe ſhew, a ſerious truth.
               A Funerall ſolemniz'd in ſad cheere,
               Where eies be mourners, and where legs the beere.
            
            
               5
               But ah my Muſe, my Muſe can but lament,
               With haire diſheueld, words, and teares half ſpent,
               This dead quick-ſpirit, wits ſtrange Cameleon,
               Which any authors colour could put on,
               And not in one ſole tongue his thoughts diſſūder.
               But like to Scaliger our ages woonder,
               The learneds Sun, wrapt in whoſe admiration,
               The rareſt wits are fir'd in euery Nation,
            
            
               6
               Whoſe happie wit with gracious iudgemēt ioyn'd,
               Could giue a paſport unto words new coynd:
               In his owne ſhop, who could adopt the ſtrange:
               Engraft the wilde, enrich with mutuall change
               His powerfull ſtile▪ yet ſanz reſpect of ſweetes,
               Death folded vp his earth in earthen ſheetes.
            
            
               7
               O had I eyes to weepe griefes great'ſt exceſſe,
               Or words expreſſing more then words expreſſe,
               
                  Each line ſhould be a Hiſtorie of woe,
               And euery accent as a dead mans throe.
            
            
               8
               But teares ſhall ſerue for Inke, for paper ſtones,
               Eyes pens, for letters drops, for ſubiect mones,
               For Epitaph theſe Threnes. Entomb'd here lies,
               
               (In graue of memorie digd with weeding eies)
               
                  Wits ſtrange Cameleon, dead quick-ſprited Roman,
               
               
                  Moſt like himſelfe, elſe almoſt like to no man:
               
               
                  Arts various-varniſh, enricht ſo with th' Italian,
               
               
                  French, Latine, Spaniſh, Dutch, and Nubian
               
               
                  That Rome, Rheyn, Rhone, Greece, Spain, & Italy
               
                  May all plead right in his Natiuity.
               
            
            
               9
               Ye liuing ſpirits then, if any liue,
               Whom like extreames, do like affections giue,
               Shun, ſhun this cruell light, and end your thrall,
               In theſe ſoft ſhades of ſable Funerall.
            
            
               
                  Omnis vt vmbra. Io: May:
            
         
         
            An other.
            
               Muſes loſſe lamenting treaſure,
               Deſt'nies croſſe-tormenting pleaſure,
               Wiſedome wayling, honour crying,
               Vertue weeping▪ Iudgement dying.
               
                  Altogether all betoken,
               
               
                  Griefes-griefe, not without griefe ſpoken.
               
            
            
               Learnings Legend, Phyſicks Phuſicke,
               Sence of Science, Muſes muſicke,
               
                  Pandoraes Dowry, Graces Glory,
               Sad Melpomines ſad Story.
               
                  Write in teares▪ and in teares read,
               
               
                  Natures grace, Horatio dead.
               
            
            
               Dead not dead in heauen he raines▪
               
               Dying life ſuch liuing gaines:
               
                  Liuing-dying was his ſtate,
               Now dying liuing ſpite of Fate
               Rais'd from earth to heauen, where liuing,
               Liues concent, concent life-giuing.
            
            
               Though bodies life here dead do lie,
               Life of his ſoule liues ne're to die.
            
            
               The ſame.
            
         
         
            Idem Lectori In Funera Pallauicinaea.
            
               ASpice quot vates Pallauicinaea crearint
               Funera, quos nunquam vates potuêre Magiſtri
               Reddere; noctem vnam magnos feciſſe Poetas
               Fama eſt, extempſo velut olim Perſeus inter
               Enituit ſummos vates, Helicone relicto.
               Tu modo (ſi quis aues) fueris cona
                     •
                  ine tanto
               Verſifices inter▪ ſi non potes eſſe Poeta.
            
            
               Eia age ſis, delubra Deum, delubra Dearum
               Sedulus implora, totum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Helicona duobus
               Hauſtibus epotans, ingentem imitare furorem,
               At
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   altum quiddam spira, dignum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   cothurno:
               Ad fingendum audax: ſic nostri ex tempore facti
               Grandiloqui vates, ſic tu, plaudente popello,
            
            
               (Si nihil eſt aliud) dic occubuiſſe Mineruae
               Aonidum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   decus, dic interijſſe decorem
               Pol Latij▪ et qui omnes paenè praedatus Honores
               Dic obijſſe diem, dic inuida Fata, coloſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
               
               Detestare nigras, nenteſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ex ordine Parcas
               Exagita diris, Muſaſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   & Apollina, quoquo
               
                  Ʋerſu itera, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   illas vitam attribuiſſe perennem
               Defuncto exclama, mortem nos viuere▪ vitam
               Illum perpetuam▪ vateſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   videbere tandem
               (Dum nulla occurret melior, via trita terenda'st.)
            
         
         
            
            Idem Pictoribus, 
                  •
               
               
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                Poëtis.
            
               SIvspiam vapulet Priſcianus (Bone)
               Scia
                     •
                   (Lector) vapular
                     •
                   a Typographo.
               Si verbum, ſyllaba, vel deſit litera,
               Ve
                     •
                   punctum, ſcias, culpa eſt Typographi.
               Est primum tempus parce, nunquam prius,
               Latinas literas impreſſit hic Typographus:
               Si non parces, nunquam imprimet imposterum.
            
            
               Io: May: Ce
                  •
                potius alter Idem, Ignotus.
         
         FINIS.
      
   