
      
         
            
            
            A
nevve order
for Banqueroupts.
            
            Imprinted at London at
the three Cranes in the
Vinetree by Thomas Dawſon,
for Thomas Charde.
            
            1582.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A notable decree of the
Lordes of the Parliament
houſe of Paris, bearing date the 26.
of Iune, 1582. Pronounced againſt
William Buhigue, containing a puniſhment
for Banquerouptes,
namely the wearing of a
greene Cappe or
Hatte.
            
               
                  BEfore I come to the
ſetting down of the ſentence
pronounced by the
Lieutenāt of La val, one
of the iuriſdiction of the
preſidentall ſeat of Poytow▪
               
eyther of the confirmatiue decree of
the Parliament houſe of Paris, ratifiyng
the ſaid ſentence, I thought it good (gentle
reader) in fewe wordes, to deſcribe the
part of a creditor towardes his debtor, as
alſo the charge of a debtor towards him
that haue been beneficiall vnto him by
relieuing his want with his goods, whether

goulde, ſiluer, or other commoditie,
to the ende, by this briefe collection and
aduertiſement, each party may conſider
his office and duetie, and ſo, better late
then neuer, reconcile himſelf to God and
his neighbour, during his pilgrimage in
this vayne and tranſitorie life, which being
ended, our God will (as all men
knowe) require an accompt howe euery
one hath delt in his vocation and office,
howe ſimple ſo euer it hath been, and in
the latter day of iudgement, yeelde the
rewarde due to his deſertes, except by
ſpeedy repentance before the ſaide iudgement
hee reconcile himſelfe. For God
being iuſt and perfect goodneſſe, extendeth
his mercie vpon thouſande generations
of thoſe that vnfeinedly do loue him
and obey his commaundements which he
hath left, and willed his faithful ſeruants
and Apoſtles to preach vnto vs, and puniſheth
only to the fourth generatiō ſuch
as of ſet purpoſe do diſobey & tranſgreſſe
his precepts, for more acceptable is obedience
then ſacrifice, & better it is to obey
God then man. The part therefore of a

creditor towarde his debtor, conſiſteth in
lending vnto him that thing whereof hee
ſtandeth in neede, and which the creditor
may wt leaſt loſſe beſt ſpare, without looking
for any amends, or requiring any reward
for the time of the lone therof, therin
putting in practiſe that Chriſtian charitie,
whiche by God and his Churche is
taught in theſe wordes, Mutuum dantes,
nihil inde ſperantes, lend looking for nothing
againe,
                together with many other
places of the olde & new Teſtament, and
Canonical & Apoſtolicall epiſtles, continued
in the doctrine of many learned fathers
of the Chriſtian Church, both olde
and newe, wherunto euery man is bound
to conforme himſelfe, in caſe he bee indued
with any iot of iudgemēt, or beareth any
dutifull affection vnto his ſaluation.
            But ſuch is ye malice of our dayes, yt creditors
in their lending, will ſo greatly regard
their owne commoditie, that if they
lende, it ſhalbe to the ende, of their debtor
to receiue double the value, as in deliuering
but mean commodities, & to receiue
again ye beſt: In deliuering of rie, oats, or

barley, to claime againe pure and cleane
wheat: either to deliuer their olde wines
full of all ſorts of dregs, yea for the moſt
part ſoure or foyſtie, and agayne, to require
that whiche ſhall bee newe and of a
perfect good vintage.
            They ſel their clothes and other wares
at a high and deere price, when in troth
they be but litle worth, giuing their debtors
ſo ſhort dayes, as to their vndooing,
they be forced agayne to ſell them, yea for
the moſt part by brokers to thoſe of whō
they firſt bought them, for little or nothing.
            Others there are that deliuer foorth
money, or other commodities from faire
to fayre, from 3. monethes to three monethes,
after ten in the hundred or more,
to the vtter empoueriſhing of their debtors.
To be briefe, the Diuell and his
ſuppoſſes in the ſhape of men, haue by
their ſubtiltie inuented infinite kindes of
vſury: wherewith like rauening wolues
they ſtill deuoure their poore debtors,
that are driuen to ſubmitte themſelues to
their faith and charitable courteſies, who

in the ende are thereby brought to vtter
beggerie, and vndoing without redemption,
whiche is a wofull and lamentable
cace. Yea, in the good townes and other
places, eache one maintayneth thoſe
people, and cloke theyr offences, or at
the leaſt dare not ſpeake of them for feare
of being ſtunge by the like villanous vipers
wherof the world is ful: for vſually
thoſe be the ſooneſt preferred to honors
and dignities whereof in trueth they bee
vtterly vnworthy: therefore for thoſe
that are manifeſtly knowne to bee
ſuch letters forth of goodes, there were
no reaſon theyr debtors ſhoulde incurre
the ſentence and decree hereafter rehearſed,
eſpecially when it is euident wherein
the debtors haue by ſuch rauening
wolues and theyr deteſtable broode been
circumuented, deceiued and entangled
with debt vpon debt vnto the full valewe
and extent of all theyr goodes. Oh poore,
miſerable, and wretched ſheepe, who hauinge
yelded fleze, ſkinne and fleſhe, doe
hardly reſerue the bare bones, which rattle
vp and downe the Cities, Townes,

and villages, where they remayne within
the reach of ſuch wild & cruell beaſtes,
as encroch vp the whole worlde.
            Howebeit as ſuche debtors are by iuſtice,
to be relieued and defended agaynſt
that kinde of people, who in euery Citie
and towne do beare the whole ſway both
in wealth, honour, and dignitie, ſo muſte
we not therefore maintayne a number of
ſubtill ſhifters, which vſing all fayre pretences
& colourable flattering ſpeeches,
doe abuſe and deceiue both here and elswhere,
many well meaning marchantes,
ſuch as being of a franck, good, & vpright
diſpoſition do thinke that all others doe
reſemble them. Theſe craftie conueyars
by borowings reiterated and renewed
ofter then neede requireth, and
that in ſundry places, and of diuers perſons
for feare of diſcrying, yea & in greater
ſums then their power or habilitie
wil beare, one creditor nothing knowing
of another, whē ye dayes of payment draw
on, will not find wherwith to ſatiſfie euē
ſhe ſmaleſt ſum wherewith they haue bin
holpen: but then to auoyde empriſonmēt,

(therein counterfeiting the glutted and
drunken Ape, which after drinke hoppeth
vp & down) do leape from place to place,
and according to the prouerb, come to ſet
their tayles vpon the ſtone, which by law
& iuſtice is appointed for the ceſſion & deliuery
of al their goods to their creditors,
whom to the ſame intent, they cauſe to be
ſummoned to the ſight of that their miſerable
benefite: which interdiction of law,
tending to the reliefe of the good & not
to the boulſtering vp of ſuch fraudulent
debtors, as are laſt mentioned, is founded
vpō the edict of Orleance, though in that
reſpect but ſimply executed throughout
moſt part of this lande, where euery one
indifferently, whiche ſeeketh to deceiue
his creditor, is vpon his owne onely petition,
admitted to the benefite of ceſſion of
goods, bringing in for the true value therof,
no other witneſſe thē himſelf can chuſe
among his friendes or fauourable neighbours,
without other circumſtaunce or ſolemmity,
then during the ſitting to aſſiſt &
houlde plea barehead vppon the ſayde
ſtone.
            
               
Hereunto hath this court at this time
had great & diligent reſpect, to the ende,
hereafter to cutt off ſuch ſhiftes and wicked
dealings, for the reliefe of honeſt, and
in deed charitable creditors, and therefore
in confirmation of the ſentence of the ordinarie
iudge of Laual, haue decreed yt frō
henceforth, euery one that will ſue for
ye admiſſion, to the benefite of ceſſion of
goods, ſhall weare a greene Cap or Hat,
which his creditors ſhall buy him.
            And for this time, William Buhigue
to beginne with the wearing of the ſame,
which ſhall bee prouided him, by Marin
the Monke, defendent and withſtander
of the ſaide ceſſion of goods, to the ende,
as well the ſaide Buhigue, as all other of
his profeſſion may be knowne, and the
worlde thereby warned of his or their
ſaide ceſſion, which by the wiſe aduice of
the chiefe preſident Thow, together with
the graue, learned, & experimented Senators,
his aſſiſtantes in the great chamber,
who are not to ſeeke in the like caſes
practized among the Romans, and
conteyned in their hiſtories and ſecretes

of lawe, is commaunded to be put in execution.
This decree is taken a ſimili,
namely of the auncient maner of the Romanes,
practiſed vpon ſuch as had incurred
any great loſſe by lād or by water, as
piracie, drowning, fire, or robbery, or any
ſuch like, as we may in theſe dayes terme
thoſe extremities, whereto our Maſter
vſurers by meanes and diuiſes aforeſaid,
together with infinite others, enow, if a
man ſhoulde ſtande vpon them all, to repleniſhe
hole vollumes, doe reduce and
driue the poore: whoſe practiſe at this
time is ſo manifeſt, that there needeth no
more but the princes commiſſion, directed
to faithfull officers, to make generall enquirie
thereof, leaſt they doe hereafter as
horſeleaches, euen ſucke vp the marowe
of the poore, and be drunken with their
blood, yea the prince muſt vſe them according
to the ſence of the Embleme, where
ſtanding with a ſponge in his hande, and
wringing out of euery drop of ye water
therein, he giueth to vnderſtand, that in
like maner he is to vſe al ſuch as fil & enriche
themſelues with his treaſure, or the

ſubſtaunce of his poore commons, whom
with their ſubtill ſlightes and practiſes,
catching at their goodes, they wring as
drye as a bone.
            The Romanes I ſay, vſed playnely
and at large to paint and ſet out the miſeries,
and inconueniences or loſſes, which
ſuch men had any way ſuſteined, and thē
to cauſe the party endamaged, to carry
vp and downe this table, wherin his loſſe
was portrayed vpō his ſhouldiers, wherby
euery man might knowe his loſſe, and
conſider of his deſert, and ſo if need were
to relieue him, or otherwiſe to beware of
committing to his hand that thing which
he was not able to keepe or make accōpt
of, as the ſatirical Poet Perſius, and after
him more at large his expoſitor Murmelius
do rehearſe. Vpon this ground haue
this court at this preſent, in confirmation
of this ſentence of the aforeſaide Iudge
of La Vall of the iuriſdiction of the ſeat of
Poitow, determined and decreed that the
Banquerupte William Buhigue ſhall
from henceforth weare a green Cappe or
Hat, at the coſt of Marin the Monke defendant,

vpon the alowance of his letters
of ceſſion, and that onely to the ende, the
ſaide Banqueroupt may in all places be
known, as were thoſe mē at Rome, whiche
carried vpon their ſhouldiers the picture
of their miſhap, whereby the people
might afterward know thē: Such therfore
is the excellencie of this ſentence,
that it deſerueth confirmation throughout
all this lande, againſt ſuche Banquerupts,
as forcing them to weare a green
cap or hatte, as a badge of their diſorders,
yea and to be for perpetuitie inſerted into
the very heart of the ciuill & canon lawe,
alſo by vertue of the princes perpetual &
irreuocable edict, for euer to bee ratified
word for word, after ye order & forme of ye
ſaid decree and ſentence, as followeth.
            
               
                  
                     
                        An abſtract out of the recordes and ordinarie
regiſter of the court & Iuriſdiction
of La Vall.
                        BEtweene William Bughigue, priſoner
in the caſtle of La Val, chalenger of the

fite of ceſſion of goods at this preſent, by
his Atturney M. Francis Belangier Licentiate
in the laws on the one part: and
Marin ye 
                           Monke appealāt there againſt,
perſonally and by his Atturney M. Iohn
Sercoul, likewiſe licenciat in the lawes
on the other part.
                        The parties heard, & the ſaid appealant
by his declaration, not able to proue any
concealement of goods, as by him hath
been into this court intimated, wee doe
debarre and condemne in coſtes and
damages, and in reſpect thereof, haue a
merced him at fourtie ſhillinges tournois.
                        Moreouer, in as much as the ſayde
appealant, cānot produce ſufficient cauſe
why the ſaide Buhigue ſhoulde not be admitted
to the ſaid benefite of ceſſion, our
ſentence is, that preſently hee be diſmiſſed
out of priſon, and ſo brought into this
court perſonally to receiue the ſaide benefite.
Herevpon the ſaide Buhigue,
being come into the face of this courte▪
hath wholy reſigned and made ceſſion of
all his goodes to his creditors, and acknowledgeth

the whole ſūme by this appealant
demaunded, faithfully promiſing
vpon the bettering of his eſtate, to ſatiſfie
all his creditors, and affirming that hee
hath not any other goodes whatſoeuer,
then what preſently hee beareth about
him. Alſo that fraudulently he hath not
made conueyaunce of any away. In
conſideration therefore of the premiſſes
wee haue, and by theſe preſentes do grant
the ſaid benefite of ceſſion vnto the aforenamed
William Buhigue, as well for all
ſummes demaunded, as for his lodging
and fees.
                        Wee do alſo at the inſtance of the appealant,
the Monke aforeſaid, decree and
ordeyne, that for the manifeſt knowledge
hereof, the ſaide William Buhigue ſhall
from henceforth in all places, and at all
times weare a greene Cappe or hatte,
whiche the ſayd the Monke ſhall prouid
                              •
                           
for him. Alſo that when, or whereſoeuer
the ſaide Buhigue ſhalbe found without
the ſayde Cap or Hat, after that the
aforeſaide, the Monke ſhall haue made
deliuerie thereof to him, it ſhall bee laweful

for ye ſaid the Monke, or any other his
creditors to commit him to priſon, commaunding
our chiefe vſher, vpon reaſonable
requeſte to ſee this our decree
fully and in all parts executed according
as is moſt requiſite, and thereto do giue
him full power and authoritie.
                        
                           Giuen at La Val, in the preſence of vs,
Francis Tartrous, Licentiat in the laws,
and Lieutenant generall in the iuriſdiction
of the ſayde place,this 9.
of September.
1580.
                           
                           Thus ſigned. Morayne.
                        
                        
                           FInally, this court by decree hath diſanulled
al appeales here againſt, without
coſts or damages, and do ordaine that
notwithſtanding whatſoeuer appeale, the
ſaid ſentence ſhall ſtande in full force and
power.
                           
                              Giuen in full plea the 26. of Iune.
1582.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
            Hereby it is euident that Annuells,
               Annuells & Quinquenelles are yeerely, and fiue yeerely protections for debts.
               Quinquennells, and ceſſions of goods
ought not ſlightly to be graunted, or permitted
to euery one that will ſue for the
ſame before a iudge, for the cauſes and
conſiderations before mentioned: for
Annuels and Quinquennels, are no other
but the two ſteppes whereby debtors doe
clyme to Banqerouptſhippe, or ceſſion of
goodes; endeuouring by ſuch deuiſes and
priuiledges to defeat their wretched creditors
of ſuch commodities, as ſimply
and on good faith they haue lent them.
Alſo vnder ſuche clokes, ſhadowing
their falſe intentes, and mayntayning
their credites to the vttermoſt: which is
an eaſie matter to doe, vnleſſe the greene
Cappe or Hatte bee to the ſame conioyned,
as an euident token thereof, according
as by the ſentence is prouided, whiche
together with the decree, confirmatiue
thereof, deſerueth perpetuall remembrance
and honour, as the meane
whereby the poſteritie may knowe ſuch
as looke ſo ſimply to their affaires, or
fraudulently ſeeke to defeate their creditors

of their right, that they be forced to
ſubmitte them ſelues to the diſhonourable
wearing of a greene Cappe or Hatte
vnder paine of impriſonment on the behalfe
of their creditors, ſo often as they
bee founde deſtitute thereof.
            Which neuertheleſſe is not ment to
tend to any ſuch note of infamie as thereby
to be debarred or reiected from lawful
witneſſing, or bearing ſuch office or autoritie,
as otherwiſe they might bee capable
of, in cace all other their behauiour
were correſpondence. Neyther
ought any Annuels, Quinquenelles, or
ceſſion of goodes to bee otherwiſe taken,
tollerated and allowed, then for miſchances
happening through fire, water, wars,
or ſuch like, when without doubt, by
ſome ineuitable inconuenience, the loſſe
of all or moſt parte of a mans goods doe
thereto driue and enforce the petitioner,
not his owne manifeſt negligence or wilful
waſt, and ſo to haue recourſe to thoſe
meanes, yea ſometimes before that debt
bee due, for the whiche they ſue out the
ſayde Annuells, Quinquenelles, reſpits,

or ceſſions of goods: during the allowance
of which ſuites, they ſhall not be forced
to put into the officers handes thoſe
ſumms of money which they owe, except
the ſaid ſuite be compaſſed after condemnation.
Neyther is the ſuiter to be empriſoned,
after hee hath procured his creditors
to be ſummoned to appeare at the
admiſſion of the ſayde Annuells, and
Quinquenelles, but beeing ſo empriſoned,
is to be releaſed and ſet at lebertie.
            Father, a man condemned for treſpaſſe
in amendes, is not receiuable to the
Ceſſion of goodes. Many other things
are alſo to be cōſidered before any be forced
to the ſaid ceſſion in reſpect of the intereſt
that ſundry creditors haue thereto:
and therfore it is meete that any appeare
at the ſuite commenced and proſecuted againſt
the debtor for deteyning his perſon,
by reaſon hee hath no goods (as is
to be preſuppoſed) wherewith to pay: but
if he haue any, thē he ought to cōfeſſe thē
to his creditor, to the ende, bee may therewith
be ſatiſfied according to reaſon. All
which notwithſtanding, it is to bee noted,

that a man giuing vp his goodes in maner
aforeſayde, can not be taxed with any
ſpotte of infamie, reiected from witneſſing
on any behalfe, or made incapable
of bearing ſuche office as otherwiſe hee
might, or by right ought to enioy.
            For ceſſion of goods ſimply, is a fauour
to the poore, and by lawe admitted
for ſundry commendable reſpectes, and
therefore is not to breede contempt againſt
thoſe that by pouertie, or other inconuenience
are forced to ſubmitt themſelues
to ſuch extremitie of lawe.
            This therefore may be a ſufficient
warning to all creditors, wiſely and chriſtianlike,
to vſe their duetie as is before
ſpecified: alſo to ſuch needy debtors, that
in time they haue recourſe to others according
to reaſon, before they be compelled
to weare a greene Cappe or Hatte at
their creditors coſtes, as by this former
decree, confirmatiue of the ſentence
of the abouenamed ordinarie iudge
of La Vall, the day and yeere aforeſayde,
it is both learnedly, circumſpectly,
and wiſely ordeyned.
            
               
Let this therefore ſerue as an example
to all wiſ
                  •
               , diſcreete, and wary perſons
in euery common wealth.
Farewell friendly reader, and
take in good woorth this
ſimple diſcourſe: groū
               ded
vpon the ſaide
ſentence and
decree.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            Imprinted at London at
the three Cranes in the
Vinetree by Thomas Dawſon,
for Thomas Charde.
1582.
            
         
      
   