
      
         
            
            
            AN ACT OR DECREE OF THE COVRT OF PARLIAMENT OF PARIS, made the 26. and executed the 27. of IVNE. 1614.
            Againſt a Booke printed at Cologne this preſent yeere, intituled FRANCISCI SVARES Granatenſis è SOCIETATE IESV Doctoris Theologi, Defenſio fidei Catholicae & Apoſtolicae, aduerſus Anglicanae ſectae errores: containing diuers Principles and Propoſitions repugnant to the ſoueraigne power of Kings, ordayned and eſtabliſhed by God, the ſafetie of their Perſons, and the peace and tranquilitie of their States.
            
            Tranſlated out of the French Copie, printed at Paris, by F. MOREL and PETER METTAYER, the Kings Printers and Stationers in Ordinary, with his Maieſties priuiledge, 1614.
            
            
               LONDON: Printed for Iohn Barnes, and are to be ſould at his Shop, vnder the ſigne of the Cardinals-hat without New-gate, 1614.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
            
               THou haſt here (gentle Reader) an Edict and Cenſure, publiſhed by the State of France, againſt the Booke of FRANCIS SVARES, intended for anſwere to his MAIESTIE; which as it is not the firſt taſte they haue giuen to the world of their miſlike of ſundry Poſitions maintayned and defended by the Ieſuites; ſo neyther is this the firſt borne of my Labours, which thy courteous acceptance hath entreated from mee, of expoſing to thy view in thy natiue language, ſundry narrations and learned Treatiſes ſet forth in French. The printed Copie hereof as it came to my hands, I haue ſubioyned; that thou maiſt ſee this Spaniſh Goliah, or Popiſh Champion, inuading the King of England, Armado-like, brought to confuſion before hee commeth to grapple with his enemie. This is hee who neyther daunted to ſee LESSIVS beaten, nor BECANVS caſt into the fire of Purgatorie, lifteth vp his arme againſt the Lords Annoynted.
            Now to thee, Romiſh-affected whoſoeuer thou art, behold your SVARES, Sidus Hiſpanicum, imò & Ieſuiticum;
               
               The Load-ſtarre of Spaine, and glory of his Order, cenſured, not for his priuate opinion, but for a common tenent of the Ieſuites: ſome there are, who through fauour to the Man and his Order, haue not feared to incurre the diſpleaſure of his Maieſtie, cenſure of our State, and danger of the Lawes and Statutes of this Land, in maintaining the doctrine of this Booke: but of the meliora ſpero, I am better conceited: aſſuring my ſelfe that ſeeing theſe and the like Doctrines finde no better entertainment with theſe learned French-men (as zealous for the Catholike Faith as thy ſelfe) neyther the report of their learning, the high commendations of their zeale and grauitie, nor the vſurped title of the Catholike Faith, ſhall henceforth lull thee aſleepe to forget thy duty to thy King and Country; but reddere quae ſunt Caeſaris Caeſari, & quae ſunt Dei Deo, teach thee to giue vnto Caeſar thoſe things which are Caeſars, and vnto God thoſe things which are Gods: and ſtop thine eares againſt the Circean Language of this late-ſprung-vp Impoſters; And in admiration as heretofore ſome certaine Catholikes haue done, cry out, Good God, that ſuch a Societie of men, after ſo many ſcandals and foule deſerts of theirs in FRANCE, and elſe-where, for PRINCE-KILLING SEDITION, &c. can thus be of credit in ENGLAND? A. C. to his diſ-Ieſuited Kinſman, pag. 72. And ſo I leaue this and the reſt, commended to thy beſt acceptance.
            Farewell.
Thine I. B.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            AN ACT OR DECREE OF THE COVRT OF Parliament of PARIS, made the 26. and executed the 27. of Iune. 1614.
            
               THE Court of the great Chamber, Tournelle, and of the Edict aſſembled, hauing viewed the Booke printed at Cologne this preſent yeere, entituled, FRANCISCI SVARES Granatenſis, è Societate IESV, Doctoris Theologi, Defenſio Fidei Catholicae & Apoſtolicae, aduerſus Anglicanae ſectae errores, contayning in the third Booke, Chapter 23. pages 376. 79. 80. 82. Chapter 29.

               pages 410. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. Chapt. 6. page 834. Chapt. 8. page 484. and in other places, many Propoſitions contrary to the ſoueraigne power of Kings, ordayned and eſtabliſhed by GOD, the peace and tranquilitie of their States; and that it is lawfull for their Subiects, and Strangers, to attempt againſt their Perſons.
            
               
                  Concluſions of the Kings Attorney Generall. The whole duely conſidered,
               THE ſaid Court hath declared, and doth declare, the Propoſitions and Principles contayned in the ſaid Booke, to be ſcandalous and ſedicious, tending to the ſubuerſion of States, and to induce the Subiects of Kings, and Soueraigne Princes, and others, to attempt againſt their ſacred perſons: and the ſpeeches mentioning the Kings Chlowis and Phillip the faire, to be falſe and ſlanderous: hath alſo ordayned, and doth ordaine, that the ſaid Booke of Suares be burned in the Court of the Pallace, by the Executioner of high Iuſtice.
               
                  Furthermore, it hath and doth inhibite and forbid all ſellers of Bookes and Printers, to print, ſell, or diſperſe any of the ſaid bookes: as alſo, all other perſons of whatſoeuer calling or condition, to tranſcribe, haue, to write out, or to retaine, or to teach in Schooles or elſe-where; or elſe to diſpute vpon the ſaid Principles or Propoſitions.
               It alſo ordaineth according to the decree of the 8. of Iune 1610. that the Decree of the facultie of Diuinitie, made vpon the fourth of Iune in the ſame yeere, concerning the renewing of the doctrinall cenſure of the ſaid facultie, bearing date the yeere 1408. and confirmed by the Councell of Conſtance, together with this preſent Act, as alſo thoſe of the yeeres 1578. and 95. ſhall yeerely be read the fourth day of Iune, as well in the ſaid facultie, as in the Colledge of the Prieſts and Schollers of the Colledge of Clermont, and of the foure Orders of begging Fryers. Alſo, that at the requeſt of the Kings Atturney Generall, Informations ſhall be taken of the contrauentions againſt the ſaid Decrees,

and Prohibitions made againſt writing, hauing or detayning the like Bookes. Giuen in Parliament the twentie ſixt day of Iune, 1614.
               Signed
Voiſin.
               
            
            
               FVrthermore, it is decreed that the Fathers, Ignace Armand, Rector in this Citie, Cotton, Fronton, and Sirmund, ſhall be ſummoned the firſt day to this Court, and to them ſhall be ſhewed, that contrary to their declaration and the Decree of their Generall of the yeere 1610. the Booke of Suares hath beene printed and brought into this Citie, a Booke impugning the authoritie of the King, and the ſafetie of his Perſon and State: and they ſhall be enioyned to cauſe their Generall to renew the ſaid Decree; and to publiſh it, and to bring in an Act thereof within theſe ſixe Moneths, and to prouide that no ſuch damnable and pernitious Propoſitions be made or publiſhed by any of their Companie: as alſo, they ſhall be enioyned in their Sermons to exhort the people to the doctrine contrary to the ſaid Propoſitions; otherwiſe the Court will proceede

againſt the tranſgreſſors, as men guiltie of Treaſon and diſturbers of the publike quietnes.
               
                  This aboue-ſaid Decree, and the decreed, were pronounced in the preſence of the Fathers Ignace Armand, Charles de la Tour, in the abſence of Peter Cotton, Fronton du Duc, and Iames Sirmund. And the Decree was put in execution before the great Stayres of the Pallace, the 27. of June. 1614.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   