
      
         
            
            
            A TRVE and plaine declaration of the horrible Treasons, practised by William Parry the Traitor, against the Queenes Maiestie. The maner of his Arraignment, Conuiction and execution, together with the copies of sundry letters of his and others, tending to diuers purposes, for the proofes of his Treasons.
            Also an addition not impertinent thereunto, containing a short collection of his birth, education and course of life.
            Moreouer, a fewe obseruations gathered of his owne wordes and wrytings, for the farther manifestation of his most disloyal, deuilish and desperate purpose.
            At London by C.B.
            Cum priuilegio.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A true and plaine declaration of the horrible Treasons practised by William Parry against the Queenes Maiestie, & of his conuiction and execution for the same. The second of March 1584. according to the account of England.
            
               THIS William Parry, being a man of very meane and base parentage, but of a most proude and insolent spirite, bearing himselfe alwaies farre aboue the measure of his fortune, after hee had long led a wastefull and dissolute life, and had committed a great outrage against one Hugh Hare, a gentleman of the Inner Temple, with an intent to haue murthered him in his owne Chamber, for the which he was most iustly conuicted, seeing himselfe generally condemned with all good men for the same and other his misdemeanours, hee left his naturall Country, & gaue himselfe to trauaile into forraine partes beyonde the seas. In the course of this his trauaile, he forsooke his allegiance and duetifull obedience to her Maiestie, and was reconciled, and subiected himselfe to the Pope. After which, vpon conference with certain Iesuites and others of like qualitie, hee first conceiued his most detestable Treason to kill the Queene (whose life God long preserue:) whiche hee bounde himselfe by promise, letters, and vowes, to perfourme and execute, and so with this intent hee retourned into Englande in Ianuarie 1583, and sithens that did practise at sundrie times to haue executed his most deuilish purpose and determination:

yet couering the same so much as in him lay with a vaile & pretence of great loyaltie to her Maiestie.
            Immediately vpon his retourne into Englande, hee sought to haue secret accesse to her Maiestie, pretending to haue some matter of great importance to reueale vnto her: which obtained, & the same so priuately in her Highnes pallace at Whitehal, as her Maiestie had but one only Coūseller wt her at the time of his accesse, in a remote place, who was so farre distant, as he could not heare his speach. And there thē he discouered vnto her Maiesty (but shadowed with all craftie & traiterous skill he had) some part of the conference & proceeding as well with the saide Iesuites, and other ministers of the Popes, as especially with one Thomas Morgan a fugitiue, residing at Paris, who aboue all others did perswade him to proceede in that most deuilish attempt, (as is set downe in his voluntarie confession following,) bearing her Maiestie notwithstanding in hand, that his onely intent of proceeding so farre with the saide Iesuites, and the Popes ministers, tended to no other ende, but to discouer the daungerous practises deuised and attempted against her Maiestie by her disloyall subiects and other malicious persons in forraine parts: albeit it hath since appeared most manifestly, as well by his said Confession, as by his dealing with one Edmond Neuil Esquire, that his onely intent of discouering the same in sort as hee craftily and traiterously did, tended to no other end, but to make the way the easier to accomplish his most deuilish and wicked purpose.
            And although any other Prince but her Maiestie (who is lothe to put on a harde censure of those that protest to be loyal, as Parry did,) would rather haue proceeded to the punishment of a subiect that had waded so farre, as by othe and vowe to promise the taking away of her life (as hee to her Maiesties selfe did confesse:) yet such was her goodnes, as in steade of punishing, she did deale so gratiously with him, as she suffered him not onely to haue accesse

vnto her presence: but also many times to haue priuate conference with her, and did offer vnto him vpon opinion once conceiued of his fidelitie towardes her, (as though his wicked pretence had bene as he protested, for her seruice) a most liberall pension.
            Besides, to the ende that he might not growe hatefull to the good and well-affected subiectes of the Realme, (from whome he could in no sorte haue escaped with safetie of his life, if his deuilish purpose had bene reuealed) her Maiestie did conceale the same, without communicating it to any creature, vntill such time as he him selfe had opened the same vnto certaine of her counsell, and that it was also discouered, that he sought to drawe the saide Neuill to haue bene a partie in his deuilish and most wicked purpose.
            A verie rare example, and such as doeth more set forth the singular goodnesse and bountie of her Maiesties princely nature, then commend (if it be lawfull for a subiecte to censure his Soueraigne) her prouidence such as ought to be in a Prince and person of her Maiesties wisdome and qualitie. And as the goodnesse of her Maiesties nature, did hereby most manifestly shew itselfe to be rare in so extraordinarie a case, and in a matter of so great perill vnto her owne royall person: so did the malice of Parry most euidently appeare to be in the highest and extremest degree, who notwithstanding the said extraordinarie grace and fauour extended towardes him, did not onely perswade the saide Neuill to be an associate in the said wicked enterprise: but did also very vehemently (as Neuill confesseth) importune him therein as an action lawfull, honourable, and meritorious, omitting nothing that might prouoke him to assent thereunto.
            But such was the singular goodnesse of Almightie God, (who euen from her Maiesties cradle by many euident arguments hath shewed him selfe her onely and especiall protectour) that he so wrought in Neuils heart, as

he was mooued to reueale the same vnto her Maiestie, and for that purpose made choyse of a faithfull Gentleman and of good qualitie in the Court, vnto whome vpon Munday the eight of Februarie last, he discouered at large all that had passed betweene Parry and him, who immediately made it knowen to her Maiestie: whereupon her Highnesse pleasure was, that Neuill should be examined by the Earle of Leycester, and Sir Christopher Hatton: who in the euening of the same day did examine him, and he affirmed constantly all which he had before declared to the said Gentleman.
            In the meane time, her Maiestie continued her singular and most Princely magnanimitie, neither dismayd with the rarenes of the accident, nor appauled with the horror of so villanous an enterprise, tending euen to the taking away of her most gratious life, (a matter especially obserued by the Counseller that was present at such time as Parry after his returne did first discouer vnto her Maiestie his wicked purpose, who found no other alteration in her countenance, then if he had imparted vnto her some matter of contentment,) which sheweth manifestly how she reposeth her confidence wholly in the defence of the Almightie. And so her Maiestie, folowing the wonted course of her singular clemencie, gaue order that Parry the same Monday in the euening (though not so knowen to him) should bee sent to Master Secretaries house in London, he being then there, who according vnto such direction as he receiued from her Maiestie, did let him vnderstand, that her highnes (in respect of the good will shee knew he bare vnto the sayd Parry, and of the trust that Parry did outwardly professe to repose in Master Secretarie,) had made especiall choyse of him to deale with him in a matter that concerned her highly, and that she doubted not, but that he would discharge his duetie towardes her, according vnto that extraordinarie deuotion that hee professed to beare vnto her.
            
               And thereupon told him yt her Maiesty had ben aduertised that there was somewhat intended presently against her owne person, wherewith she thought he could not but hee made acquainted, considering the great trust that some of her worst affected subiects reposed in him: And that her pleasure therefore was, that hee shoulde declare vnto him his knowledge therein: and whether the saide Parry himselfe had let fall any speach vnto any person (though with an intent only to haue discouered his disposition) that might drawe him in suspition, as though hee himselfe had any such wicked intent. But Parry with great and vehement protestations denied it vtterly, wherupon Master Secretarie, the rather to induce him to deale more plainely in a matter so important, declared vnto him, that there was a gentlemā of qualitie euery way as good or better then himselfe, and rather his friend then enemie, that would auouch it to his face: yet Parry persisted stubburnly in his former denial & iustification of his owne innocēcie, & would not in any respect yeeld that he was partie or priuie to any such motiō enterprise or intent. And being lodged yt night at Master Secretaries house, the next morning he desired earnestly to haue some further speache with Master Secretarie: which graunted, Parry declared to him that he had called to remembrance that hee had once some speach with one Neuil a kinsman of his (so he called him) touching a point of doctrine conteined in ye answere made to the booke, entituled, The Execution of Iustice in England, by which booke it was resolued, that it was lawfull to take away the life of a prince, in furtherance of the Catholique religion: but he protested that they neuer had any speach at all of any attempt intended against her Maiesties person. Which deniall of his (at two sundrie times after so much light giuen him) doeth set foorth most apparantly both the iustice and prouidence of God: His Iustice, for that (though hee was one of a sharpe conceipt) he had no power to take holde of this ouerture, thereby to

haue auoyded the danger that Neuils accusation might bring him into by confessing the same, as a thing propoū
               ded only to feele Neuils minde, whome before hee had reported vnto Master Secretarie he found a person discontented, and therefore his confession might to very great purpose haue serued to haue cleared him selfe touching the intent: his prouidence, for that of his great mercie he would not suffer so dangerous and wicked a member to escape and to liue to her Maiesties perill.
            The same day at night, Parry was brought to the Earle of Leycesters house, and there eftsoones examined before the sayd Earle of Leycester, Master Uicechamberlaine, & Master Secretarie: he persisted still in his deniall of all that hee was charged with. Whereupon, Neuil being brought before him face to face, iustified his accusation against him. He notwithstanding would not yet yeelde to confesse it, but very proudly and insolently opposed his credit against the credit of Neuil, affirming that his No was as good as Neuills Yea, and as by way of recrimination obiected the crime to Neuil himselfe. On the other side, Neuil did with great constancie affirme all that hee had before sayde, & did set downe many probable circumstances of the times, places, and maners of their sundrie conferences, and of such other accidents as had happened betweene them in the course of that action: whereupon Parry was then committed to the Tower, and Neuil commanded by their honours, to set downe in writing vnder his hand, al that which before he had deliuered by wordes: which he did with his owne hand, as followeth.
            
               
                  
                  Edmund Neuil his declaration the x. of Februarie▪ 1584. subscribed with his owne hand.
                  
                     
                        WIlliam Parry the last summer, soone after his repulse in his suite for ye Mastership of S. Katherines, repaired to my lodging in ye white Fryers, where he shewed him selfe a person greatly discontented, and vehemently inueighed against her Maiestie, and willed me to assure my selfe, that during this time and state, I shoulde neuer receiue contentment. But sith, said he, I knowe you to be honourably descended, and a man of resolution, if you will giue me assurance, either to ioyne with me, or not to discouer me, I will deliuer vnto you the onely meanes to doe your selfe good. Which when I had promised him, he appointed me to come the next day to his house in Feuter Lane: and repairing thither accordingly, I founde him in his bed, whereupon he commaunded his men foorth, and began with me in this order. My lorde, saide he, (for so he called me) I protest before God, that three reasons principally doe induce me to enter into this action which I intende to discouer vnto you: The replanting of religion, The preferring of the Scottish Title, and The aduauncement of Iustice, wonderfully corrupted in this Cōmon welth. And thereupon entred into some discourses, what places were fit to be takē to giue entrāce to such forrein forces as should be best liked of for the furtherance of such enterprises as were to be vndertaken. And with these discourses, he passed the time vntill he went to dinner: after which, the companie being retired, he entred into his former discourses. And if I be not deceiued, (said he) by taking of Quinborough Castell, we shall hinder the passage of the Queenes ships foorth of the Riuer. Whereunto when he sawe me vse no contradiction, he shooke me by the hande, Tush, saide he, this is nothing: If men were resolute, there is an enterprise

of much more moment, and much easier to perfourme: An Acte honourable, and meritorious to God & the world. Which seeing me desirous to knowe, he was not ashamed to vtter in plaine termes, to consist in killing of her Maiestie: wherein, saith he, if you will goe with me, I will loose my life, or deliuer my Countrey from her badde and tyrannous gouernment. At which speaches finding me discontented, he asked me if I had read Doctor Allens booke, out of which he alledged an authoritie for it. I answered, No, and that I did not beleeue that authoritie. Well said he, what will you say, if I shew further authoritie then this, euen from Rome it selfe, a plaine dispensation for the killing of her, wherein you shall finde it (as I said before) meritorious. Good cousin, said I, when you shall shewe it me, I shal thinke it very strange, when I shall see one to holde that for meritorious, which another holdeth for damnable. Well, saide Parry, doe me but the fauour to thinke vpon it till to morowe: and if one man be in the towne, I will not faile to shewe you the thing it selfe: and if he be not, he will be within these v. or sixe dayes, at which time if it please you to meete me at Chanon Rowe, we may there receiue the Sacrament to bee true eche to other, and then I will discouer vnto you both the partie, and the thing it selfe. Whereupon I praied Parry to thinke better vpon it, as a matter of great charge both of soule and body. I would to God, sayde Parry, you were as perfectly perswaded in it as I am, for then vndoubtedly you should doe God great seruice.
                  Not long after viii. or x. dayes, (as I remember) Parry comming to visit me at my lodging in Herns rents in Holborne, as he often vsed, we walked foorth into the fields, where he renewed againe his determination to kil her Maiestie, whome he saide he thought most vnworthie to liue, and that he wondred I was so scrupulous therein. She hath sought, said he, your ruine and ouerthrow,

why shoulde you not then seeke to reuenge it? I confesse, quoth I, that my case is harde, but yet am I not so desperate as to reuenge it vpon my selfe, which must needes be the euent of so vnhonest and vnpossible an enterprise. Unpossible, said Parry, I wonder at you, for in trueth there is not any thing more easie: you are no Courtier, and therefore knowe not her customes of walking with small traine, and often in the garden very priuately, at which time my selfe may easily haue accesse vnto her, and you also when you are knowen in Courte. Upō the fact we must haue a barge ready to cary vs with speede downe the riuer, where we wil haue a shippe ready to transport vs if it be needefull: but vpon my head, wee shall neuer be followed so farre. I asked him, Howe will you escape foorth of the garden? for you shall not be permitted to carie any men with you, and the gates will then be locked, neither can you carie a Dagge without suspition. As for a Dagge, said Parry, I care not: my Dagger is enough. And as for my escaping, those that shalbe with her, will be so busie about her, as I shall finde opportunitie enough to escape, if you be there ready with the Barge to receiue me. But if this seeme daungerous in respect of your reason before shewed, let it then rest till her comming to S. Iames, and let vs furnish our selues in the meane time with men and horse fitte for the purpose: we may eache of vs keepe eight or ten men without suspition. And for my part, saide he, I shal finde good fellowes that will followe me without suspecting mine intent. It is much, said hee, that so many resolute men may doe vpon the sudaine, being well appoynted with eache his Case of Dagges: if they were an hundreth wayting vpon her, they were not able to saue her, you comming of the one side, and I on the other, and discharging our Dagges vpon her, it were vnhappie if we shoulde both misse her. But if our Dagges faile, I shall bestirre mee well with a sworde ere shee escape me. Whereunto I

saide, Good Doctour giue ouer this odious enterprise, and trouble me no more with the hearing of that, which in heart I lothe so much. I woulde to God the enterprise were honest, that I might make knowen vnto thee whether I want resolution. And not long after, her Maiestie came to S. Iames, after which, one morning (the day certaine I remember not,) Parry reuiued againe his former discourse of killing her Maiestie, with great earnestnesse and importunity perswading me to ioyne therein: saying he thought me the onely man of Englande like to performe it, in respect of my valure, as he termed it.
                  Whereupon, I made semblance as if I had bene more willing to heare him then before, hoping by that meanes to cause him to deliuer his minde to some other yt might be witnes therof with me, wherein neuerthelesse I failed. After al this, on Saturday last, being the sixt of Februarie, betweene the houres of fiue and sixe in the after noone, Parry came to my chamber, and desired to talke with me a part, wherevpon we drew our selues to a window. And where I had tolde Parry before, that a learned man whō I met by chaunce in the fieldes, vnto whome I proponed the question touching her Maiestie, had answered mee that it was an enterprise most villanous and damnable, willing me to discharge my selfe of it: Parry then desired to knowe that learned mans name, and what was become of him, saying after a scornefull manner, No doubt he was a very wise man, and you wiser in beleeuing him: and said further, I hope you tolde him not that I had any thing from Rome. Yes in trueth, saide I. Whereunto Parry saide, I would you had not named me, nor spoken of any thing I had from Rome. And thereupon hee earnestly perswaded mee eftsoones to depart beyonde the seas, promising to procure me safe passage into Wales, and from thence into Britaine, whereat we ended. But I then resolued not to do so, but to discharge my conscience, and lay open this his most traiterous and abhominable

intention against her Maiestie: which I reuealed in sorte as is before set downe.
                  
                     Edmund Neuil.
                  
               
            
            AFter this cōfession of Edmund Neuil, William Parry the 11. day of Febr. last, being examined in ye Tower of London, by the Lorde Hunsdon, Lorde Gouernour of Barwicke, Sir Christopher Hatton knight, Uicechamberlaine to her Maiestie, & Sir Francis Walsingham Knight, principal Secretarie to her Maiestie, did voluntarie and without any constraint by woorde of mouth make confession of his saide Treason, and after, set it downe in writing all with his owne hande in his lodging in ye Tower, and sent it to the Court the 13. of the same, by the Lieutenant of the Tower. The partes whereof cōcerning his maner of doing the same, and the treasons wherewith he was iustly charged are here set downe, word for word as they are written and signed with his owne hand & name, the 11. of Februarie. 1584.
            
               
                  
                     
                        ¶ The voluntarie confession of William Parry, in wryting all with his owne hand.
                        The voluntarie confession of William Parry, Doctor of the Lawes (now prisoner in the Tower) and accused of Treason by Edmund Neuil Esquier, promised by him (with al faith & humillitie) to the Queenes Maiestie, in discharge of his conscience and duetie towardes God and her. Before The Lorde Hunsdon, L. Gouernour of Barwicke, Sir Christopher Hatton knight, Vicechamberlain, Sir Francis Walsingham knight, principal secretarie, the 13. of Februarie. 1584. Parry.
                        
                           IN the yeere 1570▪ I was sworne her Maiesties seruant, from which time vntill the yere 1580. I serued, honoured, & loued her with as great readinesse, deuotion & assurance as any poore subiect in England. In the end of that yere, and

vntill Midsomer 1582. I had some trouble for the hurting of a Gentleman of the Temple. In which action I was so disgraced and oppressed by two great men (to whome I haue of late beene beholden) that I neuer had contented thought since. There began my misfortune, & here followeth my wofull fall.
                        In Iulie after, I laboured for licence to trauaile for three yeeres, which (vpon some consideration) was easily obtained. And so in August, I went ouer with doubtfull minde of returne, for that being suspected in religion, and not hauing receiued the Communion in 22. yeeres, I began to mistrust my aduauncement in England. In September I came to Paris, where I was reconciled to the Church, and aduised to liue without scandale, the rather for that it was mistrusted by the English Catholiques, that I had intelligence with the greatest counsellour of Englande. I stayed not long there, but remooued to Lyons (a place of great traffique) where, because it was the ordinarie passage of our nation to and fro betweene Paris and Rome, I was also suspected.
                        To put all men out of doubt of me, and for some other cause, I went to Millaine, from whence as a place of some daunger (though I founde fauour there) after I had cleared my conscience, and iustified my selfe in religion before ye Inquisitour, I wēt to Uenice. There I came acquainted with father Benedicto Palmio, a graue & a learned Iesuite. By conference with him of the hard state of the Catholiques in England, and by reading of the Booke De persecutione Anglicana, and other discourses of like argument,  
                           I conceiued a possible meane to relieue the afflicted state of our Catholiques, if the same might be wel warranted in religion and conscience by the Pope, or some learned diuines. I asked his opinion, hee made it cleare, commended my deuotion, comforted mee in it, and after a while made me knowen to the Nuntio Campeggio, there resident for his holinesse. By his meanes I

wrote to the Pope, presented the seruice, and fued for a Pasport to goe to Rome, & to returne safely into France. Answere came from Cardinal Como, that I might come, and should be welcome. I misliked the warrant, sued for a better, which I was promised: but it came not before my departure to Lyons, where I promised to stay some time for it. And being in deede desirous to goe to Rome, and lothe to goe without countenaunce, I desired Christofero de Salazar, Secretarie to the king Catholique in Venice, who had some vnderstanding by conference, of my deuotion to the afflicted Catholiques at home and abroad, to commende me to the Duke di Noua terra, Gouernour of Millan, and to the Countie of Oliuaris Embi, then resident for the king his master in Rome: which he promised to do effectually for the one, and did for the other. And so I toke my iourney towards Lyons, whither came for me an ample Passeport (but somewhat too late,) that I might come and goe in verbo pontificis per omnes iurisdictiones ecclesiasticas, absque impedimento. I acquainted some good fathers there, of my necessitie to depart towardes Paris by promise, and praied their aduises vpon diuers poyntes, wherein I was well satisfied. And so assuring them that his holinesse shoulde heare from me shortly, it was vndertaken, that I shoulde bee excused for that time.
                        In October I came to Paris, where (vppon better opinion conceiued of mee amongst my Catholike countrie men) I founde my credit wel setled, and such as mistrusted me before, readie to trust and imbrace me. And being one day at the chamber of Thomas Morgan a Catholike Gentleman (greatly beloued and trusted on that side) amongest other gentlemen, talking (but in very good sort) of Englande, I was desired by Morgan to goe vp with him to another chamber, where he brake with me, and told mee that it was hoped and looked for, that I shoulde doe some seruice for God and his Church. I answered him I

would do it, if it were to kill the greatest subiect in England: whome I named, and in trueth then hated. No no, said he, let him liue to his greater fal & ruine of his house:
                        
                            
                           It is the Queene I meane. I had him as I wished, and tolde him it were soone done, if it might be lawfully done, and warranted in the opinion of some learned diuines. And so the doubt once resolued (though as you haue heard I was before reasonably well satisfied) I vowed to vndertake the enterprise, for the restitution of England to the auncient obedience of the Sea Apostolique. Diuers diuines were named. Doctor Alleine I desired, Persons I refused. And by chance came Maister Wattes a learned Priest, with whō I conferred, and was ouerruled.
                        
                            3 For he plainly pronounced (the case only altered in name) yt it was vtterly vnlawfull: with whō many English priestes did agree as I haue heard, if it be not altered since the booke made in answere of The executiō of the English Iustice was published, which I must cōfesse hath taken hard hold in me, and (I feare me) wil do in others, if it be not preuēted by more gracious handling of the quiet & obedient Catholique subiects, whereof there is good and greater store in Englād, then this age wil extinguish. Wel, notwithstanding all these doubts, I was gone so farre by letters and conference in Italie, that I coulde not goe backe, but promised faithfully to performe the enterprise, if his holinesse vpon my offer and letters would allowe it, and grant me ful remission of my sinnes. 
                           
                           I wrote my letters the first of Ianuarie 1584. by their computation, tooke aduise vpon them in confession of Father Aniball a Codreto a learned Iesuite in Paris, was louingly embraced, commended, confessed, and communicated at the Iesuites at one altar with the Cardinalles of Vandosmi, and Narbone, whereof I prayed certificate, and enclosed the same in my letter to his holinesse, to leade him the rather to absolue me, which I required by my letters, in consideration of so great an enterprise vndertaken without

promise or reward. 
                            
                           I went with Morgan to the Nuntio Ragazzoni, to whome I read the letter and certificate enclosed, sealed it, and left it with him to send to Rome: hee promised great care of it, and to procure answere: And so louingly imbraced me, wished mee good speede, and promised that I should be remembred at ye altar. 
                            
                           After this I desired Morgan, that some special man might be made priuie to this matter, lest hee dying, and I miscarying in the execution, and my entent neuer truely discouered, it might sticke for an euerlasting spot in my race. Diuers were named, but none agreed vpon for feare of bewraying. 7 This being done, Morgan assured me, yt shortly after my departure, the L. Fernehurst (then in Paris) should goe into Scotland, and bee readie vpon the first newes of the Queenes fal, to enter into England with 20. or 30000. men to defend the Queene of Scotland, (whome, and the king her sonne, I doe in my conscience acquite of any priuitie, liking, or consent to this, or any other bad action, for any thing that euer I did knowe.) I shortly departed for Englād, & arriued at Rie in Ianuarie 1583. from whence I wrote to the Court, aduertised some, that I had a special seruice to discouer to ye Queens Maiestie, 8 which I did more to prepare accesse & credit, then for any care I had of her person, though I were fully resolued neuer to touch her (notwithstanding any warrant) if by any deuise, persuasion, or policie shee might bee wrought to deale more graciously with the Catholiques then she doeth, or by our maner of proceeding in parliamēt meaneth to doe, for any thing yet seene. I came to the Court, (thē at Whitehal,) praied audience, had it at large, and very priuately discouered to her Maiestie this conspiracie, much to this effect, though couered with all the skil I had: she tooke it doubtfully, I departed with feare. And amōgst other things, I cannot forget her Maiesties gracious speech then vttered touching the Catholiques, which of late, after a sort I auowed in parliament: she said to mee

that neuer a Catholique should be troubled for religion or supremacie, so lōg as they liued like good subiects. Wherby I mistrusted that her Maiestie is borne in hande, that none is troubled for the one or the other. It may be truely said that it is better then it hath bene, though it be not yet as it should be.
                        In March last, while I was at Greenewich (as I remember) suing for S. Katherines, came letters to mee from Cardinall Como, dated at Rome the last of Ianuarie before, whereby I found the enterprise commended, and allowed, and my selfe absolued (in his holines name) of all my sinnes, and willed to go forward in the name of God. That letter I shewed to some in Court, who imparted it to the Queene: what it wrought, or may worke in her Maiestie, God knoweth: only this I know, 9 yt 
                           it cōfirmed my resolution to kill her, and made it cleare in my conscience, that it was lawfull and meritorious. And yet was I determined neuer to doe it, if either pollicie, practise, persuasion, or motion in parliament could preuayle. I feared to be tēpted, & therefore alwayes when I came neere her, I left my dagger at home. 10 When I looked vpon her Maiestie, and remembred her many excellencies, I was greatly troubled: And yet I sawe no remedie, for my vowes were in heauen, my letters and promises in earth, and the case of ye Catholique recusaunts, and others little bettered. Some times I said to my selfe, Why should I care for her? what hath shee done for me? haue I not spent 10000. markes since I knew her seruice, and neuer had penie by her? It may be said, she gaue me my life. But I say (as my case stoode) it had bene tyranny to take it: And I feare me it is litle lesse yet. If it please her graciously to looke into my discontentments, I would to Iesus Christ she had it, for I am weary of it. And nowe to come to an end of this tragical discourse: In Iuly I left ye Court, vtterly reiected, discontented, and as her Maiestie might perceiue by my passionate letters, carelesse of my selfe. I

came to Londō: Doctor Alleins booke was sent me out of Fraunce: 11 it redoubled my former conceites: Euery word in it was a warrant to a prepared mind: It taught that Kings may be excōmunicated, depriued, & violently handled: It proueth that al warres ciuill or forraine vndertaken for Religion, is honourable. Her Maiestie may do wel to reade it, & to be out of doubt (if things be not amended) that it is a warning, & a doctrine ful dangerous. This is the booke I shewed, in some places read, and lent to my cousin Neuil (the accuser) who came often to mine house, put his finger in my dish, his hande in my purse, and the night wherein he accused me, was wrapped in my gowne, sixe moneths at least after wee had entred into this conspiracie: In which space her Maiestie, and 10. Princes in seueral prouinces might haue bene killed. God blesse her Maiestie from him: for before Almightie God I ioy and am glad in my soule, that it was his hap to discouer me in time, though there were no danger neere.
                        And nowe to the maner of our meetings. He came to me in the beginning of August, and spake to me in this or like sorte. Cousin, let vs doe somewhat, sithens we can haue nothing. I offered to ioyne with him, and gladly heard him, hoping because I knewe him to be a Catholique, that he woulde hit vpon that I had in my head: but it fell not out so. He thought the deliuerie of the Queene of Scotlande easie, presuming vpon his credit and kinred in the North: I thought it daungerous to her, and impossible to men of our fortunes: He fell from that to the taking of Barwicke: I spake of Quinborough and the Nauie, rather to entertaine him with discourse, then that I cared for those motions, my head being full of a greater matter: 12 I told him that I had another maner of enterprise, more honourable and profitable to vs, and the Catholiques common wealth, then all these, if he woulde ioyne in it with me, as he presently vowed to do: He pressed to knowe it, I willed him to sleepe vpon the

motion: He did so, (and belike ouertaken) came to me the next morning to my lodging in London, offered to ioyne with me, and tooke his othe vpon a Bible, to conceale and constantly to pursue the enterprise for the aduancement of religion, which I also did, and meant to perfourme: the killing of the Queene was the matter.
                        
                        The maner and place, to be on horsebacke, with eight or tenne horses, when shee shoulde ryde abroade about S. Iames, or some other like place. It was once thought fit in a Garden, & that the escape woulde be easiest by water into Shepey, or some other part: but wee resolued vpon the first.
                        
                           This continued as agreed vpon many moneths, vntill he heard of the death of Westmerland, whose land and dignitie (wherof he assured himselfe) bread belike this conscience in him to discouer a Treason in Februarie, contriued and agreed vpon in August. If it cost him not an ambitious head at last, let him neuer trust me. He brought a tall gentleman (whom he commended for an excellent Pistolier) to me to Chanon Rowe, to make one in the matche: but I refused to deale with him, being loth to laye my head vpon so many hands.
                        Master Neuil hath (I thinke) forgotten, that hee did sweare to me at diuers times, that all thaduancement she coulde giue, shoulde serue but for her scourge, if euer time and occasion shoulde serue: And that though hee woulde not lay hand vpon her in a corner, his hart serued him to strike off her head in the fielde. Nowe leauing him to himselfe, this much (to make an ende) I must confesse of my self, I did meane to trie what might be done in Parliament, to doe my best to hinder all hard courses, to haue prayed hearing of the Queenes Maiestie, to moue her (if I coulde) to take compassion vpon her Catholique subiectes, and when all had fayled, to doe as I entended. If her Maiestie by this course would haue eased thē, though she had neuer preferred me, I had with all comfort and

patience borne it: 13 but if she had preferred me without ease or care of them, thenterprise had held.
                        
                           Parry. 
                           GOd preserue the Queene, and encline her mercifull heart to forgiue me this desperate purpose, and to take my head (with all my heart) for her better satisfaction.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            AFter which,
                  Febru. 14. for the better manifesting of his Treasons, on the xiiii. of Februarie last, there was a letter written by him to her Maiestie, very voluntarily, al of his owne hand, without any motion made to him. The tenor whereof, for that which concerneth these his traiterous dealings, is as followeth.
            
               
                  A Letter written by Parry to her Maiestie.
                  
                     YOur Maiestie may see by my voluntarie confession, the dangerous fruites of a discontented minde: and howe constantly I pursued my first conceiued purpose in Venice, for the reliefe of the afflicted Catholiques, continued it in Lions, and resolued in Paris, to put it in aduenture, for the restitution of England, to the auncient obedience of the Sea Apostolique. You may see withall howe it is commended, allowed, and warranted in conscience, diuinitie, and pollicie, by the Pope and some great Diuines: though it be true or likely, that most of our English Diuines (lesse practised in matters of this weight) doe vtterly mislike and condemne it.
                  
                     The enterprise is preuented, and conspiracie discouered, by an honorable Gentleman my kinsman, and late familiar friend, Master Edmund Neuill, priuie and by solemne othe (taken vpon the Bible) partie to the matter, whereof I am hardly glad, but nowe sorie (in my very soule) that euer I conceiued or intended it, howe commendable or meritorious so euer I thought it. God thanke him, and forgiue me, who woulde not nowe (before God) attempt it (if I had libertie and oportunitie to doe it) to gaine your kingdome. I beseeche Christ that my death and example may aswell satisfie your Maiestie, and the worlde, as it shall glad and content me.
                  The Queene of Scotland is your prisoner, let her be honorably entreated, but yet surely garded.
                  The French King is French, you knowe it well ynough, you will finde him occupied when he should doe you good, he will not loose a Pilgrimage to saue you a crowne. I haue no more to say at this time, but that with my hart and soule, I doe now honor and loue you, am inwardly sorie for mine offence, and ready to make you amends by my death and patience. Discharge me A culpa, but not A paena, good Ladie. And so farewell, most gracious, and the best natured and qualified Queene, that euer liued in England. From the Towre, the 14. of Februarie. 1584.
                  
                     W. Parry.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Febru. 18.AFter which, to wit, the xviii. of February last past, Parry, in further acknowledging his wicked and intended Treasons, wrote a letter all of his owne hande in like voluntarie maner to the Lorde Treasourer of England, and the Earle of Leicester, Lord Steward of her Maiesties house, the Tenor whereof is as followeth.
            
            
               
                  William Parrys Letter to the Lord Treasourer, and the Earle of Leycester.
                  
                     MY Lordes, nowe that the conspiracie is discouered, the fault confessed, my conscience cleared, and minde prepared patiently to suffer the paines due for so hainous a crime: I hope it shall not offende you, if crying Miserere with the poore Publicane, I leaue to despaire with cursed Caine. My case is rare and strange, and, for any thing I can remember, singular: a naturall subiect solemnely to vowe the death of his naturall Queene, (so borne, so knowen, and so taken by all men) for the reliefe of the afflicted Catholiques, and restitution of religion. The matter first conceiued in Venice, the seruice, (in generall wordes) presented to the Pope, continued and vndertaken in Paris, and lastly commended, and warranted by his holinesse, digested & resolued in England, if it had not bene preuented by accusation, or by her Maiesties greater lenitie and more gracious vsage of her Catholique subiectes. This is my first and last offence conceiued against my Prince or Countrey, and doeth (I cannot denie) conteyne all other faults whatsoeuer. It is nowe to be punished by death, or most graciously (beyonde all common expectation) to be pardoned. Death I doe confesse to haue deserued: life I doe (with all humilitie) craue, if it may stand with the Queenes honour, and policie of the time. To leaue so great a treason vnpunished, were strange: To drawe it by my death in example, were dangerous: A sworne seruāt to take vpon him such an enterprise vpon such a ground, and by such a warrant, hath not bin seene in England: To indict him, arraigne him, bring him to the Scaffolde, and to publish his offence, can doe no good: To hope that he hath more to discouer then is confessed, or that at his execution he will vnsay any thing he hath written, is in

vaine: To conclude, that it is impossible for him in time to make some part of amēdes, were very hard, & against former experiences. The question then is, whether it be better to kill him, or (least the matter be mistakē) vpon hope of his amendment to pardon him. For mine own opinion (though partial) I will deliuer you my conscience. The case is good Queene Elizabeths, the offence is committed against her sacred person, and she may (of her mercie) pardon it without preiudice to any. Then this I say, in fewe wordes, as a man more desirous to discharge his troubled conscience, then to liue. Pardon poore Parry, and relieue him: for life without liuing is not fit for him. If this may not be, or be thought dangerous, or dishonourable to the Queenes Maiestie (as by your fauours, I thinke it full of honour and mercie) then I beseeche your Lordships (and no other) once to heare me before I be indicted, and afterwards (if I must dye) humbly to intreate the Queenes Maiestie to hasten my tryall and execution, which I pray God (with all my heart) may prooue as honourable to her, as I hope it shall be happie to me, who will, while I liue, (as I haue done alwayes) pray to Iesus Christ for her Maiesties long and prosperous reigne. From the Towre the 18. of Februarie. 1584.
                  
                     W. Parry.
                  
               
            
            ANd where in this meane time Sir Frauncis Walsingham Secretarie to her Maiestie, had dealt with one William Creichton, a Scot for his birth, and a Iesuite by his profession, nowe prisoner also in the Tower, for that he was apprehended with diuers Plots for inuasions of this Realme, to vnderstand of him, if the sayde Parry had euer dealt with him in the parties beyonde the Seas touching that question, whether it were lawful to kill her Maiestie, or not: the which at that time the sayd Creichton called not to his remembrance: yet after vpon better calling it to minde, vpon the xx. day of February last past, he wrote to Master Secretarie Walsingham thereof voluntary, all of his owne hand, to the effect following.
            
            
               
                  W. Creichtons letter. Febr. 20.
                  
                     RIght honourable Sir, when your Honour demaunded mee if M. Parry did aske mee, If it was leason to kill the Queene, in deede and veritie, then I had no remembrance at all therof. But since, thinking on the matter, I haue called to minde the whole fashion of his dealing with me, and some of his Arguments: for hee dealt very craftily with mee, I dare not say maliciously. For I did in no waies thinke of any such deseine of his, or of any other, and did answere him simplie after my conscience and knowledge to the veritie of the question. For after that I had answered him twise before, Quòd omnino non liceret, hee returned late at Euen by reason I was to depart early in the next morning towarde Chamberie in Sauoye where I did remaine, and beeing returned out of the Closse within one of the classes of the Colledge, hee proponed to me of new the matter, with his reasons and arguments. First he alledged the vtilitie of the deed for deliuering of so many Catholiques out of miserie, and restitution of the Catholique religion. I answered, that the Scripture aunswereth thereto, saying, Non sunt facienda mala, vt veniant bona. So that for no good, howe great that euer it be, may be wrought any euill, howe little that euer it be. Hee replyed that it was not euill to take away so great euil, and induce so great good. I answered, That all good is not to be done, but that onely, Quod bene & legitime fieri potest. And therefore, Dixi, Deum magis amare aduerbia quàm nomina. Quia in actionibus magis e
                           •
                         placent bene & legitime, quam bonum. Ita vt nullum bonum liceat facere, nisi bene & legitimè fieri possit. Quod in hoc casu fieri non potest. Yet saide he, that seuerall learned men were of the opinion, Quod liceret. I answered, that they

men perhappes were of the opinion, that for the safetie of many in soule and bodie, they would permit a particular to his daunger, and to the occult iudgement of God: Or perhappes saide so, mooued rather by some compassion and cōmiseration of the miserable estate of the Catholiques, not for any such doctrine that they did finde in their bookes. For it is certain, that such a thing is not licit to a particular, without speciall reuelation diuine, which exceedeth our learning and doctrine. And so he departed from me.
                  
                     Out of the prison in the Tower, the xx. of Februarie.
                      
                     Your Honours poore seruitour in Christ Iesu. Wil. Creichton prisoner.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Februa. 20.ANd where also the same Parry was on the same xx. day of Februarie examined by Sir Frauncis Walsingham knight, what was become of the letter conteined in his confession to be written vnto him by the Cardinall de Como, he then answered, that it was consumed and burnt: and yet after,
                  Februa. 21. the next day folowing, being more vehemently vrged vpon that point in examination (because it was knowne that it was not burnt) he confessed where he had left it in the Towne: whereupon, by Parrys direction it was sent for where it had bene lapped vp together with other friuolous papers, and written vpon the one side of it, The last will of William Parry, the which letter was in the Italian tongue as hereafter followeth, with the same in English accordingly translated.
            
               
                  
                  Amon Signore, Mon signor Guglielmo Parri.
                  
                     MOn Signore la Santita di N.S. ha veduto le lettere di V.S. del primo con la fede inclusa, & non può se non laudare la buona disposittione & risolutione che scriue di tenere verso il seruitiò & beneficio publico, nel che la Santita sua lessorta di perseuerare, con farne riuscire li effetti che V.S. promette: Et accioche tanto maggiormente V.S. sia aiutata da quel buon spirito che l'ha mosso, le cōcede sua Beneditione, plenaria Indulgenza & remissione di tutti li peccati, secondo che V. S. ha chiesto, assicurandossi che oltre il merito, che n'hauera in cielo, vuole anco sua Santita constituirsi debitore a riconoscere li meriti di V.S. in ogni miglior modo che potra, & cio tanto piu, quanto che V.S. vsa maggior modestia in non pretender niente. Metta dun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad effetto li suoì santi & honorati pensieri, & attenda a star sano. Che per fine io me le offero di core, & le desidero ogni buono & felice successo.
                  
                     Di Roma a .xxx. di Gennaro. M.D.Lxxxiiij.
                      
                     Alpiacer di V. S. N. Cardinale di Como. Al Sig. Guglielmo Parri.
               
            
            
               
                  Cardinall de Comos letter to Wil. Parry, 30. Ianu. 1584. by accompt of Rome.
                  
                     MOnsignor, the Holines of our Lord hath seene the letter of your Signorie of the first with the assurance included, and cannot but commende the good disposition and resolution which you write to holde towards the seruice and benefite publique:

wherein his Holines doeth exhort you to perseuere, with causing to bring foorth the effects which your Signorie promiseth. And to the ende you may bee so much the more holpen by that good spirit which hath mooued you thereunto, his Blessednes doeth graunt to you plenarie indulgence and remission of all your sinnes, according to your request. Assuring you, that besides the merite that you shall receiue therefore in heauen, his holynesse will further make himselfe debtour to reknowledge the deseruings of your Signorie in the best maner that he can. And that so much the more, in that your Signorie vseth the greater modestie in not pretending any thing. Put therefore to effect your holy and honourable thoughts, and attend your health. And to conclude, I offer my selfe vnto you heartily, and do desire all good and happie successe.
                  
                     From Rome the xxx. of Ianuarie 1584.
                     
                     At the pleasure of your Signorie, N. Card. of Como.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Febr. 22.VPon al which former accusation, declaration, confessions & proofes, vpon Munday the xxii. day of February last past, at Westminster Hall, before Sir Christopher Wray knight, chiefe Iustice of England, Sir Gilbert Gerrard knight, Master of the Rolles, Sir Edmund Anderson knight, Chiefe Iustice of ye common plees, Sir Roger Manwood knight, Chiefe Baron of the Exchequer, Sir Thomas Gawdy knight, one of the Iustices of ye plees before her Maiestie to be holden, and Wil. Perriam, one of the Iustices of the common plees, by vertue of her Maiesties Commission to them & others in that behalf directed: the same Parry was indicted of high Treason, for intending and practising the death and destruction of her Maiestie, whom God long prosper, & preserue frō all such wicked attempts. The tenor of which indictment, appeareth more particularly in the course of his Arraignment folowing.
            
               
               The maner of the Arraignement of William Parry the xxv. of Februarie, 1584. at Westminster, in the place where the courte commonly called the Kings Bench, is vsually kept by vertue of her Maiesties Commission of Oyer & Terminer, before Henrie L. Hunsdon gouernour of Barwicke, Sir Francis Knolles Knight, Treasorer of the Queenes Maiesties housholde, Sir Iames Croft Knight, Comptroller of the same houshold, Sir Christopher Hatton Knight, Vicechamberlaine to her Maiestie, Sir Christopher Wray Knight, Chiefe Iustice of Englande, Sir Gilberte Gerrard Knight, master of the Rolles, Sir Edmund Anderson Knight, chiefe Iustice of the Common Plees, Sir Roger Manwood Knight, chiefe Barron of the Eschequer, and Sir Thomas Hennage Knight, Treasorer of the Chamber.
               
                  FIrst, three Proclamations for silence were made according to the vsuall course in such cases. Then the Lieutenant was commaunded to returne his precept, which did so, and brought the prysoner to the Barre, to whom Miles Sandes Esquire, Clerke of the Crowne sayde, William Parrie, hold vp thy hand, and he did so. Then said ye Clerke of the crowne, Thou art here indicted by the othes of xii. good and lawful men of the Countie of Middlesex, before Sir Christopher Wray Knight, and others which tooke the Indictment by the name of William Parry late of London Gentleman,
                     The Indictment.
                   otherwise called William Parry, late of London Doctor of the lawe, for yt thou as a false traitor against the most noble and Christian Prince, Queene Elizabeth thy most gracious Soueraigne and liege Ladie, not hauing the feare of God before thine eyes, nor regarding thy due allegiance, but being seduced by the instigation

of the deuill, and intending to withdrawe and extinguish the heartie loue and due obedience, which true and faithfull Subiectes shoulde beare vnto the same our Soueraigne Ladie, diddest at Westminster in the Countie of Middlesex on the first day of Februarie, in the xxvi. yeere of her Highnesse raigne, and at diuers other times and places in the same Countie, maliciously, and trayterously conspire and compasse, not onely to depriue and depose the same our Soueraigne Ladie of her Royall estate, title and dignitie, but also to bring her highnesse to death and finall destruction, and sedition in the Realme to make, and the gouernement thereof to subuert, and the sincere religion of God established in her highnesse dominions to alter & subuert. And that, whereas thou William Parry, by thy letters sent vnto Gregorie Bishoppe of Rome, diddest signifie vnto the same Bishoppe thy purposes and intentions aforesayde, and thereby diddest pray and require the same Bishoppe to giue thee absolution, that thou afterwards, that is to say, the last day of March in the xxvi. yeere aforesayde, diddest trayterously receiue letters frō one called Cardinall de Como, directed vnto thee William Parry, whereby the same Cardinall did signifie vnto thee, that the Bishoppe of Rome had perused thy letters, and allowed of thine intent, and that to that ende hee had absolued thee of all thy sinnes, and by the same letter did animate and stirre thee to proceede with thine enterprise, and that therupon, thou, the last day of August in the xxvi. yeere aforesaide, at Saint Giles in the fieldes, in ye same Countie of Middlesex, diddest trayterously conferre with one Edmunde Neuill Esquire, vttering to him all thy wicked and trayterous deuises, and then and there diddest moue him to assist thee therin, & to ioyne with thee in those wicked treasons aforesayd, against ye peace of our sayd Soueraigne Ladie the Queene, her Crowne & dignity: What sayest thou William Parry, art thou guilty of these treasons whereof thou standest here indicted, or not

guiltie?
               Then Parry sayde,
                     Parries answere to the indictment,
                   Before I pleade not guiltie, or confesse my selfe guiltie, I pray you giue me leaue to speake a fewe words: and with humbling himselfe, began in this maner. God saue Queene Elizabeth, and God sende mee grace to discharge my duetie to her, and to send you home in charitie. But touching the matters that I am indicted of, some were in one place, and some in another, and done so secretely, as none can see into them, except yt they had eyes like vnto God, wherefore I will not lay my blood vpon the Iurie, but doe minde to confesse the indictment. It containeth but the parts that haue bene openly redde, I pray you tel me? Whereunto it was answered, that the Indictment conteined the partes he had heard redde, and no other: whereupon the Clarke of the Crowne saide vnto Parry, Parry, thou must answere directly to the indictment, whether thou be guiltie or not.
               Then sayde Parry,
                  
                     Parrie confesseth that he is guilty of all things conteyned in the indictment.
                   I doe confesse that I am guiltie of al that is therein cōtained: And further too, I desire not life, but desire to die. Unto which the clarke of ye Crowne sayd, If you confesse it, you must confesse it in maner and fourme as it is comprised in the Iudictment. Whereunto he sayd, I doe confesse it in maner and fourme as the same is set downe, and all the circumstances thereof. Then the confession being recorded, the Queenes learned counsel being readie to pray iudgement vpon the same confession, Master Vicechamberlaine sayde, These matters contained in this indictment, and confessed by this man, are of great importance: they touch the person of the Queenes most excellent Maiestie in the highest degree, the very state and weldoing of the whole common wealth, and the trueth of Gods worde established in these her Maiesties dominions, and the open demonstration of that capitall enuie of the man of Rome, that hath set him selfe against God and all godlinesse, all good Princes and good gouernment, and against good men. Wherefore, I pray

you, for the satisfaction of this great multitude, let the whole matter appeare, that euery one may see that the matter of it selfe is as bad as ye indictment purporteth, & as he hath confessed. Wherto in respect yt the Iustice of ye Realme hath bin of late very impudētly slaūdered, al yeelded as a thing necessarie to satisfie the world in particular, of yt which was but summarily comprised in ye indictmēt, though in the lawe, his confession serued sufficiently to haue proceeded thereupon vnto iudgement. Whereupon the Lordes and others the Commissioners, her Maiesties learned Counsel, and Parry him self agreed, that Parrys confession (taken the xi. and xiii. of Februarie 1584. before the Lord of Hunsdon, master Vicechamberlaine, and master Secretarie,) and Cardinall de Como his letters, and Parrys letters to the Lorde Treasourer and Lorde Stewarde, should be openly read.
               And Parry, for the better satisfying of the people and standers by, offered to reade them him selfe: but being tolde that the order was, the Clerke of the Crowne should reade them, it was so resolued of all partes. And then master Vicechamberlaine caused to be shewed to Parry his sayde confession, the Cardinals letter, and his owne letter aforesayde, which after hee had particularly viewed euery leafe thereof, he confessed, and sayde openly they were the same.
               Then sayde master Vicechamberlaine, Before we proceede to shewe what he hath confessed, what say you, sayd he to Parry, is that which you haue confessed here true, and did you confesse it freely and willingly of your selfe, or was then any extort meanes vsed to drawe it from you?
               Surely sayde Parry, I made that confession freely without any constraint, and that is all true, and more too: for there is no treason that hath bene sithens the first yeere of the Queene any way touching religion, sauing receipt of Agnus dei, and perswading of others, wherein I haue

not much dealt, but I haue offended in it. And I haue also deliuered mine opinion in writing, who ought to bee successor to the crowne, which he sayde to be treason also.
               Then his confession of the eleuenth and thirteenth of Februarie,
                     Parrys confession of his treasons was red by his owne assent.
                   all of his owne hand writing, & before particularly sette downe, was openly, and distinctly red by the Clarke of the crowne. And yt done, ye Cardinall di Como his letter in Italian was deliuered vnto Parrys hande, by the direction of Master Vicechamberlayne, which Parry there perused,
                     A letter of Cardinall di Como to Parry, also red.
                   and openly affirmed to bee wholy of ye Cardinals owne hand writing, and the seale to bee his owne also, and to bee with a Cardinals hat on it: And himselfe did openly read it in Italian, as before is set downe. And the wordes bearing sence as it were written to a Bishop or to a man of such degree, it was demaunded of him by Master Vicechamberlayne, whether he had not taken the degree of a Bishoppe? He said, No: But said at first, those termes were proper to the degree hee had taken: and after saide that the Cardinall did vouchsafe as of a fauour to write so to him. Then the coppie of that letter in English as before is also set downe, was in like maner openly red by the Clarke of the Crowne, which Parry then acknowledged to be truely translated.
               And thereupon was shewed vnto Parry his letter of ye xviii. of Februarie,
                     Parrys letter of the 18. of Febru. to the L. Treaso. and the Earle of Leycester red.
                   written to the Lord Treasorer, and the Lord Steward: which he confessed to bee all of his owne hand writing and was as before is set downe.
               These matters being redde openly for manifestation of the matter, Parry prayed leaue to speake: whereto Master Vicechamberlayne sayde, If you will say any thing for the better opening to the worlde of those your foule & horrible facts, speake on: but if you meane to make any excuse of that which you haue confessed, which els would haue bene and do stand proued against you, for my part, I will not sit to heare you.
               Then her Maiesties Attourney general stood vp & said,

It appeareth before you my Lords, yt this man hath bene indicted & arraigned of seuerall most haynous and horrible treasons, and hath confessed them, which is before you of recorde: wherefore there resteth no more to be done, but for the Court to giue iudgement accordingly,
                     The Queenes Attourney requireth Iudgement.
                   which here I require in the behalfe of the Queenes Maiestie.
               Then said Parry, I pray you heare me for discharging of my conscience. I will not goe about to excuse my selfe, nor to seeke to saue my life, I care not for it, you haue my confession of recorde, that is enough for my life: And I meane to vtter more, for which I were worthie to die. And sayde, I pray you heere mee, in that I am to speake to discharge my conscience.
               Then said Master Vicechamberlayne, Parry, then doe thy duetie according to conscience, and vtter all that thou canst say concerning those thy most wicked facts.
               Then said Parry, My cause is rare, singular & vnnaturall, conceyued at Venice, presented in generall wordes to the Pope, vndertaken at Paris, commended & allowed of by his Holines, and was to haue bene executed in England, if it had not bene preuented. Yea, I haue committed many treasons, for I haue committed treason in being reconciled, and treason in taking absolution.
                     Parry had for his credit afore time said very secretly, that he had bene solicited beyond the seas to commit the fact, but he would not do it, wherewith he craftily abused both ye Queenes Maiesty, & those two Counsellers whereof he now woulde helpe himselfe with these false speeches against most manifest proofes.
                   There hath bene no Treason sithens the first yeere of the Queenes reigne touching religion, but that I am guiltie of (except for receiuing of Agnus Dei, and perswading as I haue said:) And yet neuer intended to kil Queene Elizabeth. I appeale to her owne knowledge and to my Lorde Treasorers and Master Secretaries.
               Then said my Lord Hunsdon, Hast thou acknowledged it so often, and so plainly in writing vnder thy hande, and heere of recorde: and nowe, when thou shouldest haue thy iudgement according to that which thou hast confessed thy selfe guiltie of, doest thou goe backe againe, and deny the effect of all? Howe can wee beleeue that thou nowe fayest?
               
                  Then said Master Vicechamberlaine,
                     M. Vicechamberlaines speaches, prouing manifestly Parrys traiterous intentions.
                   This is absued. Thou hast not onely confessed generally, that thou wert guilty according to the indicemēt, which summarily, and yet in expresse woordes doeth conteyne that thou haddest trayterously compassed & intended the death and destruction of her Maiestie: but thou also saydest particularly that thou wert guilty of euery of the Treasons conteined therein, whereof the same was one in playne and expresse letter set downe, and red vnto thee. Yea, thou saydest that thou were guilty of moe Treasons too besides these. And diddest thou not vpon thy examination voluntaryly confesse, howe thou wast moued first thereunto by mislike of thy state after thy departure out of the Realme, And that thou diddest mislike her Maiestie for that shee had done nothing for thee, Howe by wicked Papistes and Popish bookes, thou wert perswaded that it was lawfull to kill her Maiestie, Howe thou wert by reconciliation become one of that wicked sort, that helde her Maiestie for neyther lawfull Queene, nor Christian, And yt it was meritorious to kill her? And diddest thou not signifie that thy purpose to the Pope by letters, and receiuedst letters frō the Cardinall, howe he allowed of thyne intent, & excited thee to perfourme it, and thereupon diddest receiue absolution? And diddest thou not conceyue it, promise it, vow it, sweare it, and receyue the Sacrament that thou wouldest doe it? And diddest not thou thereupon affirme, that thy vowes were in heauen, and thy letters and promyses on earth to bynde thee to doe it? And that whatsoeuer her Maiestie would haue done for thee, coulde not haue remoued thee from that intention or purpose, vnlesse she would haue desisted from dealing as shee hath done with the Catholiques, as thou callest them? All this thou hast plainely confessed: and I protest before this great assembly, thou hast confessed it more playnely and in better sort, then my memory will serue me to vtter: And sayest thou now, that thou neuer mentest it?
               
                  Ah sayde Parry, your honours knowe, howe my Confession vpon myne examination was extorted.
               Then both the Lord Hunsdon and Master Vicechamberlayne affirmed, that there was no torture or threatning wordes offered him.
               But Parry then sayde, that they tolde him, that if hee would not confesse willingly, he should haue torture: wherunto their honours answered, that they vsed not any spech or worde of torture to him.
               You sayde, sayd Parry, that you would proceede with rigour against me, if I would not confesse it of my selfe.
               But their honours expresly affirmed, that they vsed no such words. But I will tell thee, sayd Master Vicechamberlayne, what we saide. I spake these words, If you will willingly vtter the truth of your selfe, it may do you good, and I wish you to doe so: If you will not, wee must then proceede in ordinary course to take your examination. Whereunto you answered, that you would tell the trueth of your selfe.
                     Parry reproued of false speaches, and so by himselfe also confessed.
                   Was not this true? which then hee yeelded vnto.
               And hereunto, her Maiesties Attourney generall put Parry in remembraunce what speeches hee vsed to the Lieutenant of the Tower, the Queenes Maiesties Seriant at Lawe, Master Gaudie, and the same Attourney on Satterday ye twentieth of February last, at ye Tower, vpon that hee was by them then examined by order from ye Lords: which was, that he acknowledged he was most myldely and fauourably dealt with, in all his examinations, which he also at the Barre then acknowledged to be true.
               Then Master Vicechamberlayne sayde, that it was wonder to see the magnanymitie of her Maiestie, which after that thou haddest opened those trayterous practises in sort as thou hast layd it downe in thy confession, was neuerthelesse such, and so farre from all feare, as that shee woulde not so much as acquaint any one of her highnes

priuie Counsel with it, to his knowledge, no not vntil after this thine enterprise discouered & made manifest. And besides that which thou hast set downe vnder thine owne hande, thou diddest confesse, that thou haddest prepared two Scottish Daggers, fit for such a purpose: and those being disposed away by thee, thou diddest say that an other would serue thy turne. And with all, Parry, diddest thou not also confesse before vs howe wonderfully thou wert appauled and perplexed vpon a suddaine at the presence of her Maiestie at Hampton Court this last Sommer, saying that thou diddest thinke thou then sawest in her, the very likenes & image of king Henry the seuenth? And that therewith, and vpon some speeches vsed by her Maiestie, thou diddest turne about and weepe bitterly to thy selfe? And yet diddest call to mynde that thy vowes were in heauen, thy letters and promises on earth, and that therefore thou diddest say with thy selfe, that there was no remedy but to do it? diddest thou not confesse this? the which he acknowledged.
               Then saide the lorde Hunsdon,
                  
                     The L. of Hunsdons speaches conuincing Parry manifestly of his treason.
                   Sayest thou nowe, that thou diddest neuer meane to kill the Queene? diddest thou not confesse, that when thou diddest vtter this practise of trecherie to her Maiestie, that thou diddest couer it with al the skill thou haddest, and that it was done by thee, rather to get credite and accesse thereby, then for any regard thou haddest of her person? but in trueth thou diddest it, that thereby thou mightest haue better oportunitie to performe thy wicked enterprise. And wouldest thou haue runne into such feare as thou diddest confesse that thou wert in, when thou diddest vtter it, if thou haddest neuer meant it? what reason canst thou shewe for thy selfe? With that he cryed out in a furious maner, I neuer meant to kill her: I will lay my blood vpon Queene Elizabeth and you, before God and the worlde: and thereupon fell into a rage and euill wordes with the Queenes Maiesties Attourney generall.
               Then said the lord Hunsdon, This is but thy popish pride

and ostentation, which thou wouldest haue to be told to thy fellowes of that faction, to make them belieue that thou diest for poperie, when thou diest for most horrible and dangerous treasons against her Maiestie, and thy whole countrey. For thy laying of thy blood, it must lye on thine owne head, as a iust reward of thy wickednesse. The lawes of the Realme most iustly condemne thee to die out of thine owne mouth for the conspiring the destruction both of her Maiestie, and of vs all: therefore thy blood be vpon thee, neither her Maiestie, nor we at any time sought it, thy selfe hast spilt it.
               Then he was asked what he coulde say, why iudgemēt of death ought not to be awarded against him.
               Whereto he said, he did see that he must die, because he was not setled.
               What meanest thou by that, said master Vicechamberlaine. Said he, looke into your studie, and into your newe bookes, and you shall finde what I meane.
               I protest (said his honour) I knowe not what thou meanest: thou doest not well to vse such darke speaches, vnlesse thou wouldest plainely vtter what thou meanest thereby. But he saide, he cared not for death, and that hee would laye his blood amongst them.
               
                  
                     The L. chiefe Iustices speache to Parry.
                  Then spake the lorde chiefe Iustice of England, being required to giue the iudgement, and saide, Parry, you haue bene much heard, and what you meane by being setled, I knowe not, but I see you are so setled in poperie, that you cannot settle your selfe to be a good subiect. But touching that you should say to stay iudgement from being giuen against you, your speaches must be of one of these kindes, 
                     ••
                  ther to proue the Inditement (which you haue confessed to be true) to be insufficient in lawe, or els to pleade somewhat touching her Maiesties mercie, why Iustice should not be 
                     •••
                  e of you. All other speaches wherein you haue vsed great libertie, is more then by lawe you can aske. These be the matters you must looke to, what say you to

them? whereto he said nothing.
               Then said the lord chiefe Iustice, Parry, thou hast bene before this time indited of diuers most horrible and hatefull treasons, cōmitted against thy most gratious Soueraigne, and natiue countrey: the matter most detestable, the maner most subtile and dangerous, and the occasions and meanes that led thee thereunto, most vngodly and villanous. That thou diddest intende it, it is most euident by thy selfe. The matter was the destruction of a most sacred and an anoynted Queene thy soueraigne & mystresse, who hath shewed thee such fauour, as some thy betters haue not obteined: yea, the ouerthrowe of thy countrey wherein thou wert borne, and of a most happie common wealth whereof thou art a member, and of such a Queene, as hath bestowed on thee the benefite of all benefites in this worlde, that is, thy life, heretofore graunted thee by her mercie when thou haddest lost it by Iustice and desert. Yet thou her seruant, sworne to defende her, mentest with thy bloodie hande to haue taken away her life, that mercifully gaue thee thine when it was yeelded into her handes. This is the matter wherein thou hast offended. The maner was most subtile and dangerous beyonde all that before thee haue committed any wickednes against her Maiestie: For thou making shewe as if thou wouldest simplie haue vttered for her safetie the euill that others had contriued, diddest but seeke thereby credite & accesse, that thou mightest take the apter opportunitie for her destruction. And for the occasions and meanes that drewe thee on, they were most vngodly and villanous, As the perswasions of the Pope, of Papists and Popish bookes. The Pope pretendeth that hee is a pastour, when as in trueth hee is farre from feeding of the flocke of Christ, but rather as a woolfe seeketh but to feede on and to sucke out the blood of true Christians, and as it were thirsteth after the blood of our most gracious and Christian Queene. And these Papists and Popish bookes, while they pretende to set foorth diuinitie, they doe in deede

most vngodly teach and perswade that which is quite contrarie both to God and his worde. For the word teacheth obedience of subiectes towardes Princes, and forbiddeth any priuate man to kill: but they teache subiectes to disobey Princes, and that a priuate wicked person may kill. Yea, and whom? a most godly Queene, and their owne naturall and most gracious soueraigne. Let all men therefore take heede how they receiue any thing frō him, heare or reade any of their bookes, and howe they conferre with any Papists. God graunt her Maiestie, that she may know by thee, howe euer shee trust such like to come so neere her person. But see the ende, and why thou diddest it, and it will appeare to bee a most miserable, fearefull and foolish thing: For thou diddest imagine, that it was to relieue those that thou callest Catholiques, who were most likely amongst all others to haue felt the worst of it, if thy deuilish practise had taken effect. But sith thou hast bene indited of the treasons comprised in ye inditement, and thereupon arraigned, and hast confessed thy selfe guiltie of them, the Court doth award,
                     The fourme of the iudgement against the traytour.
                   that thou shalt be had from hence to the place whence thou diddest come, and so drawne through the open citie of Londō vpon an hurdle to the place of execution, and there to bee hanged and let downe aliue, and thy priuie partes cutte off, and thy entrals taken out and burnt in thy sight, then thy head to be cut off, and thy body to be deuided in foure partes, and to be disposed at her Maiesties pleasure: And God haue mercie on thy soule.
               
                  Parry neuerthelesse persisted still in his rage and fonde speach, and ragingly there sayd, he there sūmoned Queene Elizabeth to answere for his blood before God: wherwith, the Lieutenant of the Tower was cōmaunded to take him from the barre: and so he did. And vpon his departure, the people striken as it were at heart with the horrour of his intended enterprise, ceased not, but pursued him with outcryes, as, Away with the Traitour, away with him, & such like: whereupon he was conueyed to the Barge, to passe

to the Tower againe by water: and the Court was adiorned.
               After which,2. Martii. W. Parry the traitour executed.
                   vpon the second day of this instant March, William Parry was by vertue of processe in that behalfe awarded from the same Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, deliuered by the Lieutenant of the Tower early in the morning, vnto the Sheriffes of London and Middlesex, who receiued him at the Tower hill, and thereupon, according to the iudgement, caused him there to be foorthwith set on the hurdell. From whence hee was drawen thereupon through the middest of the Citie of London, vnto the place for his execution in the Pallace at Westminster: where, hauing long time of stay admitted vnto him before his execution, he most maliciously and impudently, after some other vayne discourses eftsoones and often deliuered in speach, that he was neuer gyltie of any intention to kill Queene Elizabeth, and so (without any request made by him to the people to pray to God for him, or prayer publiquely vsed by himselfe for ought that appeared: but such as he vsed, if he vsed any, was priuate to himselfe) he was executed according to the iudgement. And nowe for his intent, howe so euer hee pretended the contrary in words, yet by these his owne writings, confessions, letters, and many other proofes afore here expressed, it is most manifest to all persons, howe horrible his intentions and Treasons were, and how iustly he suffered for the same: and thereby greatly to be doubted, that as he had liued a long time vainely and vngodly, and like an Atheist and godlesse man, so hee continued the same course till his death to the outwarde sight of men.
               Here endeth the true and playne course and processe of the Treasons, arrest, arraignement, and execution of William Parry the Traitour.
            
            
               
               An addition not vnnecessarie for this purpose.
               
                  FOrasmuch as Parry in the abundance of his proude and arrogāt humour, hath often both in his confession, and letters, pretended some great and grieuous causes of discontentment against her Maiestie, and the present state: It shall not bee impertinent, for better satisfaction of al persons, to set forth simplie and truely, the condition and qualitie of the man, what he was by birth and education, and in what course of life he had liued.
               This vile and trayterous wretch was one of the yonger sonnes of a poore man, called Harry ap Dauid: hee dwelled in Northwales in a litle village called Northoppe, in the Coūty of Flint: there he kept a common ale house, which was the best and greatest stay of his liuing. In that house was this Traytour borne, his mother was the reputed daughter of one Conway a Priest, Parson of a poore Parish called Halkyn in the same countie of Flint: his eldest brother dwelleth at this present in the same house, and there keepeth an ale house as his father did before him. This traytour in his childehood so soone as hee had learned a litle to write and read, was put to serue a poore man dwelling in Chester, named Iohn Fisher, who professed to haue some small skill & vnderstanding in the law. With him he continued diuers yeres, and serued as a Clerke, to write such things, as in that trade which his mastervsed, he was appoynted. During this time, he learned the English tongue, and at such times of leasure, as the poore man his master had no occasion otherwise to

vse him, he was suffered to goe to the grammer Schole, where he got some litle vnderstanding in ye Latin tongue. In this his childhood, he was noted by such as best knew him, to be of a most villanous & dangerous nature and disposition. He did often runne away from his master, and was often taken & brought to him againe. His master, to correct his peruerse and frowarde conditions, did many times shut him as prysoner in some close place of his house, & many times caused him to be chayned, locked, & clogged, to stay his running away. Yet all was in vayne: for about the thirde yeere of her Maiesties raigne, for his last farewel to his poore master: he ranne away from him, and came to London to seeke his aduentures. Hee was then constrayned to seeke what trade he coulde to liue by, and to get meate and drinke for his bellie, and clothes for his backe. His good happe in the ende was to be entertained in place of seruice aboue his desert, where hee stayed not long, but shifted himselfe diuers times from seruice to seruice, and from one master to another. Nowe he began to forget his olde home, his birth, his education, his parents, his friendes, his owne name, and what he was. He aspired to greater matters, he challenged the name & title of a great gentleman, he vanted himselfe to be of kin and alied to noble and worshipfull, hee left his olde name which he did beare, & was cōmonly called by in his childhood, and during all the time of his aboad in the countrey, which was William ap Harry (as the maner in Wales is.) And because he would seeme to be in deede the man which he pretended, hee tooke vpon him the name of Parry, being the syrname of diuers gentlemen of great worship, and hauiour. And because his mothers name by her father a simple priest, was Conway: He pretended kinred to the familie of Sir Iohn Conway, & so therby made himselfe of kin to Edmund Neuil. Being thus set forth with his new name and newe title of gentleman, and commended by some of his good fauourers, he matched himselfe in mariage with

a widowe in Southwales, who brought him some reasonable portion of wealth. She liued with him but a short time, and the wealth he had with her lasted not long: it was soone consumed with his dissolute and wastfull maner of life. He was then driuen to his wonted shifts, his creditors were many, the debt which he owed, great, he had nothing wherewith to make payment, he was continually pursued by Serieants and Officers to arrest him, he did often by sleightes and shiftes escape from them. In this his needy and poore estate, he sought to repaire himselfe againe by a newe match in mariage with another widowe, which before was the wife of one Richard Heywood. This matter was so earnestly followed by himselfe, and so effectually commended by his friends and fauourers, that the sisly woman yeelded to take him to husband: a match in euery respect very vnequall and vnfit: her wealth and yeerely liuelihood was very great, his poore and base estate worse then nothing, he very yong, she of such age, as for yeeres she might haue bene his mother. When hee had thus possessed himselfe of his newe wiues wealth, he omitted nothing that might serue for a prodigall, dissolute, and most vngodly course of life. His ryot and excesse was vnmeasurable, hee did most wickedly defloure his wiues owne daughter, and sundry wayes pitifully abuse the olde mother: He caried himselfe for his outwarde port and countenance (so long as his olde wiues bagges lasted) in such sort, as might well haue suffised for a man of very good hauiour and degree. But this lasted not long, his proude heart and wastfull hande had soone powred out olde Heywoods wealth. He then fell againe to his wonted shiftes, borowed where he could finde any to lend, and ingaged his credit so farre as any would trust him. Amongst others, he became greatly indebted to Hugh Hare, the gentleman before named. Who after long forbearing of his money, sought to recouer it by ordinarie meanes of Lawe. For this cause Parry conceiued great displeasure against him,

which hee pursued with all malice, euen to the seeking of his life. In this murtherous intent, hee came in the night time to M. Hares chamber in the Temple, broke open the doore, assaulted him, and wounded him grieuously, and so left him in great danger of life. For this offence he was apprehended, committed to Newgate, indicted of burgularie, arraigned, and founde guiltie by a very substanciall Iurie,
                     Party condemned for burgularie, pardoned of the Queene.
                   
                  and condemned to be hanged, as the Law in that case requireth. He standing thus conuicted, her Maiestie of her most gracious clemencie, and pitifull disposition, tooke compassion vpon him, pardoned his offence, and gaue him his life, which by the Lawe and due course of Iustice hee ought then to haue lost. After this hee taried not long, but pretending some causes of discontentment, departed the Realme, and traueiled beyonde the seas. Howe hee demeaned himselfe there from time to time, and with whom he conuersed, is partly in his owne confession touched before. This is the man, this is his race, which hee feared should be spotted if he miscaried in thexecution of his traiterous enterprise, this hath bene the course of his life, these are the great causes of his discontentment.
               And whereas at his arraignement and execution, hee pretended great care of the disobedient popish subiectes of this Realme, whom he called Catholiques, and in very insolent sort seemed to glory greatly in the profession of his pretensed Catholique religion: The whole course and action of his life sheweth plainely, how prophanely and irreligiously he did alwayes beare himselfe. He vaunted, that for these two and twentie yeeres past he had bene a Catholique, and during all that time neuer receiued the Communion: yet before he traueyled beyond the Seas, at three seuerall times within the compasse of those two and twentie yeeres, he did voluntarily take the othe of obedience to the Queenes Maiestie, set downe in ye statute made in the first yere of her highnesse reigne, by which, amongst other things, he did testifie and declare in his conscience, that no

forraigne prince, person, prelate, state, or potentate, hath or ought to haue any iurisdiction, power, preeminence, or authoritie, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, within this Realme, and therefore did vtterly renounce and forsake all foraine iurisdictions, powers, and authorities, and did promise to beare faith and true allegiance to the Queenes highnesse, her heires and lawfull successours.
               With what conscience or religion, he tooke that othe so often, if he were then a Papist in deede, as sithence the discouerie of his treasons he pretended, let his best friends the Papists themselues iudge. But perhaps it may be saide, that he repented those his offences past: that since those three othes so taken by him, he was twise reconciled to the Pope, and so his conscience cleared, and he become a newe man, and (which is more) that in the time of his last trauel, he cast away all his former lewde maners: that he changed his degree and habite, and bought or begged the graue title of a Doctor of lawe, for which hee was well qualified with a litle grammer schoole latine: that he had plenary indulgence, and remission of all his sinnes, in consideration of his vndertaking of so holy an enterprise as to kill Queene Elizabeth, a sacred anoynted Queene, his natural and Soueraigne Ladie: that he promised to the Pope, and vowed to God to perfourme it: that he confirmed the same by receiuing the Sacrament at the Iesuites, at one Altar with his two beaupeeres, the Cardinalles of Vandosme and Narbone: and that since his last returne into England, he did take his othe vpon the Bible to execute it. These reasons may seeme to beare some weight in deede amongst his friendes the Iesuites, and other Papistes of state, who haue speciall skill in matters of such importance.
               But nowe lately in the beginning of this Parliament in Nouember last, hee did eftsones solemnely in publique place take the othe before mentioned, of obedience to her Maiestie. Howe that may stande with his reconciliations

to the Pope, and with his promises, vowes, and othe to kill the Queene, it is a thing can hardly bee warranted, vnlesse it bee by some speciall priuiledge of the Popes omnipotencie.
               But let him haue the glorie hee desired, to liue and die a Papist. Hee deserued it, it is fit for him, his death was correspondent to the course of his life, which was disloyall, periured, and traiterous towardes her Maiestie, and false and perfidious towardes the Pope himselfe, and his Catholiques, if they will beleeue his solemne protestations which he made at his arraignement and execution, that he neuer ment nor intended any hurt to her Highnes person. For if that be true, where are then his vowes which he said were in heauen, his letters & promises vpon earth? Why hath he stollen out of the Popes shoppe so large an Indulgence and plenarie remission of all his sinnes, and meant to perfourme nothing that hee promised? Why was his deuotion and zeale so highly commended? Why was hee so specially prayed for and remembred at the Altar? All these great fauours were then bestowed vpon him without cause or desert: for hee deceiued the Pope, he deceiued the Cardinals, and Iesuites, with a false semblance, and pretence to do that thing which he neuer meant.
               But the matter is cleare, the conspiracie, and his traiterous intent is too plaine and euident: it is the Lorde that reuealed it in time, and preuented their malice: there lacked no wil, or readinesse in him to execute that horrible fact. It is the Lorde that hath preserued her Maiestie from all the wicked practises and conspiracies of that hellish rable: it is hee that hath most graciously deliuered her from the hands of this traiterous miscreant. The Lord is her onely defence in whome shee hath alwayes trusted.
            
            
               
               The Printer to the Reader.
               
                  WHEN I had taken in hande, and beganne the printing of this treatise or declaration aforesaide, a gentleman of good vnderstanding and learning, came to me, and being made acquainted by mee with the former treatise, hee saide, that hee had by conference with diuers that were at the araignement of this traytor, where also he himselfe was present, collected together the whole proceeding against him, and had also attained to the viewe of all his cōfessions, his letters, and other writings there published against him: by all which, hee had gathered into a shorte Treatise most manifest proofes of the horrible treason intended by the Traytor against her Maiestie.
               And although the former treatise doeth at length manifestly declare the same, yet I required this Gentleman my friende, to graunt mee the copying of his collections, which hee was willing to doe: And so I haue bene bolde, for the more ample satisfaction of euery reader, to adde the same hereunto. Wherein also (gentle Reader) thou shalt finde inserted these Figures, 1.2.3.4. &c. till 13. And the like in the Traitors owne Confession, by which is noted the principall pointes of the drift of this most horrible Treason.
            
            
               
               A fewe obseruations gathered out of the very wordes and writings of William Parry the traytour, applied to proue his trayterous coniuration, with a resolute intent, imagination, purpose, and obstinate determination to haue killed her Maiestie, our most gratious soueraigne: whome the Lorde hath saued, and euer may he saue by his mercy.
               
                  THis W. Parry the traytor, 1. cō
                     fesseth to haue conceiued the treason at Venice, by conference with Ben. Palmio, of whom he still thinketh so well, as he can not but speake of him with reuerent mention, whereas, if he had neuer thought, or did nowe forethinke the Treason, hee would rather curse the time that euer hee met with such a bloody and treacherous ghostly father. Well, this graue and learned Frier Palmio (saith he) made the matter cleare in religion & conscience, and commended the Traytours deuotion. This treason Parry so apprehended, as he wrote presently to the Pope, presenting the seruice. 2 Returned to Paris, hee conferred with Morgan, vowed to performe it for restitution of England, &c. 3 Being disswaded (as the credible man writeth) by Wats, he replied that he was gone so farre, as he could not go backe, but promised faithfully to perfourme thenterprise, if ye Pope woulde vpon his offers and letters allowe it, and graunt remission, &c. Where this by the way is to be noted, that if the opinions of these English Priests (as he will needes make vs belieue) were differing from the Pope, and our English Iesuites, varying from Iesuite Palmio and other beyonde sea Iesuites, in the question of murdering a Prince: some of them at least would haue giuen loyall intelligence

of such a treason conceiued & nourished in that man, who had made so many priuie both beyonde and on this side the sea, and coulde not be disswaded from his purpose, but euer departed with a resolution contrary to these colde disswaders. It were no good pollicie to trust this popish Traytour, but rather to suspect all Pope-created Priestes to be of the same mind with their supreme head, and all English Iesuites to consent with forreyne Iesuites their fellowe members. They be all of one order and vowe, they haue one superiour, and if they had detested this fact in deede, some of them, seeing the wretch to persist, must needes haue bewrayed it, & not to suffer him to go on headlong in such a sinne, leauing her royal person to the will and malice (as much as in them lay) of a murthering Ruffian. But to proue his intent with continuance & growing of the same, 4 againe he writeth letters to the Pope, in Ianu. 1584. by that account, tooke aduise vpon them in confession of An. Codreto, was cōmended, againe confessed, tooke the Sacrament (verely cruentum sacramentum, & sacrificium cruoris) at the Iesuites, at one altar, with the Cardinales of Vandosmi and of Narbone. Hereof he had certificate to the Pope, which he sent enclosed in his letters to his Holinesse, to leade him to absolue him, which he required in consideration of so great an enterprise vndertaken without reward. 5 The letter and certificat he read to Ragazzoni, and left with him to be sent to the Pope, who wished him good speede, promising he should be remembred at the altar. 6 He doubteth, least if Morgan died, and he miscaried in thexecution (as he did, God be thanked, and choked in the halter, notwithstanding their remembrance at the altar) and his intent neuer truely discouered, that is to say, that he did it for the Catholikes, it might be a spot in his race. Marke here the very worde intent in his owne confession.  
                  Morgan assureth him, that the lord Fernehurst should go into Scotlād, & be ready to enter vpō the first newes of our Queenes fall. Thus much for his intent

beyonde Sea, and before his coniuration discouered.
               Upon his arriual in England, he wrote to Court, that he had a speciall seruice of discouerie to the Queene: but with what intent, let his owne words speake,  
                  more to prepare accesse and credite, then for any care had of her person. Admitted to her gracious audience, he discouered the coniuration, yet in what maner? let him selfe say, euen couered with all the skill he had. This intent was with deepe Treason: for as he sayth, so he did, he disclosed onely so much as hee thought good and necessary to grounde in her highnesse a setled confidence towards him, whereby he might effect his trayterous intent with better oportunitie, and his owne safetie. He be 
                     ••
                  ayed himselfe so farre as he might couer his chiefe drift, many principall things concealed, nothing of lord Fernehurst with 
                     〈◊〉
                   Scottish forces, &c.  
                  Receiuing from the Pope himse
                        ••••
                     
                   commendation and allowance of his enterprise, of encouragement & plenarie indulgence by no meaner 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     
                        ••
                     rdinal di Como, though he shewed the letter to 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  aiestie, not for any care of her person, but for his better a
                     ••
                  esse and credit, as the rest, yet let his owne wordes tell what his intent was at the very receiuing and shewing the 
                     •
                  ame setter: Forsooth (saith he) this letter confirmed 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     esolution to kill the Queene, making it cleere in his 
                        〈◊〉
                      science, as a thing lawfull and meritorious.
               
               Now is his intent growen a resolution, not doubtful, but cleare in conscience, not alone lawfull, but meritorious▪ Papa dixit, a Cardinall is Nuncio: Wh
                     ••
                   other thing is this, then for ye Pope & his Cardinals, like another Antoninus Commodus, to make one Inter sicarios 
                        •
                      glaediatores? The deuill enforcing thi
                     •
                   traytours heart 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  xecute his intent,  
                  he was troubled looking vpon the 
                        •
                     ueene, and remembring her excellencies, yet he saw no remedie, his vowes were in heauen, his letters and promises on earth. Yea, he stroue to cloze his 
                     〈◊〉
                   at these excellencies, and obstinated his heart by seeking reasons to quenche all

sparkes of humanitie & allegiance arising in his thoughts. For thus reasoneth he against his cōscience, Why shouldst thou care for her? what hath she done for thee? hast thou not spent tenne thousand markes, &c. What more deuilish intent coulde possesse a traytour, then to labour to suppresse a smal remaine of conscience abhorring to kill so excellent a personage, which God stirred vp in his thoughtes to his iuster condēnation?  
                  D. Allens booke redoubled his former conceites, euery word was a warrant to a prepared mind. See how the smoothe words of that Catholique booke are enterpreted and conceiued. One spirite occupieth the Catholique reader with the Catholique writer, and therefore can best expound the writers sence in his readers mouth, euen to bee a booke fraught with emphaticall speaches of energeticall perswasion to kill and depose her Maiestie, and yet doeth the hypocrite writer, that traitour Catholique, dissemble and protest otherwise.  
                  Parry suffering repulse in a suite for S. Katherins, communeth with M. Neuill, recommendeth the enterprise as honourable and profitable to the Catholique common weale. Being preiudiced in opinion of Allens booke (as before) hee commendeth it, and deliuereth it to Neuill, thereby to worke the same vile intent in him which it had alreadie confirmed in himselfe. He tooke nowe an other othe vpon the Bible, after the maner of a Protestant, to pursue thenterprise, and meant (he saith) to perfourme it, so farre forth as the place and maner of doing was appointed. This second coniuration he neuer bewrayed in sixe moneths, till accused by Neuill, and then at first denied it. 
                  Finally to declare his height of malice, hee saith, if the Queene had preferred him neuer so greatly, yet must this bloodie enterprise haue holden, except shee had relieued the Catholiques. Was this no intent, which neyther benefite nor bountie coulde stay? which neither feare of God, nor reuerence of excellencie coulde repell? which neither dread of punishment, nor tract of time could remooue? Did he conceiue it,

conferre and aduise of it, vowe himselfe to the execrable seruice, present & offer it, harden his heart against others disswasions, beate backe contrarie motions of his owne conscience, goe so farre as hee coulde not goe backe, promise it faithfully, receiue a Church Sacrament thereupon, make certificat thereof, propound himselfe the ende and reason of his intent, discourse vpon the contingent sequele, preuenting the spot of his race, receiue letters of allowance, commendation, encouragement, and absolution, could he vowe in heauen, and promise on earth, coulde hee doe all this in a thing which he meant not? Could he resolue and confirme his resolution of a thing which he intended not, yea, coulde hee intende and meane (for all these be his owne wordes) that which he neuer meant nor intended? could he redouble his conceits, and haue a prepared minde for that hee intended not? would such a craftie traitour practise with others by perswasiue speach, and trayterous booke, in such a matter, as the onely broching thereof must capitally endamage his kinseman and friende, and withall lay his owne head in his friendes hand? and yet notwithstanding, either he ment this treasō, either els he litle loued his friend, to tempt him so dangerously, whom yet, he saith, hee loued so, as to suffer his finger in his dish, and his hand in his purse. But, which is aboue all, would any man sweare againe on the Bible, appoint time and place, conceale it with as much perill as if hee had done it, would hee denie it, would so ambitious a man discontent himselfe with all preferment, for that chieuing of that which hee meant not? was this mischieuous course begunne and continued, a long time, at home and abroade, in many kingdomes, communicated with many persons, of seuerall nation and qualitie, as Pope, Cardinall, Nuntio, Frier, Priest, Kings Secretarie and Ambassadours, all this while not meant? Was it frankly and voluntarily confessed meant, finally, recorded by pleading guiltie in maner and fourme with all circumstance, and yet could hee dye an innocent for intent? All

this falling vpon no simple man, but vpon one, not nowe the first time holding vp his hande at barre, and vpon a Doctour of lawe, the very hoode whereof is able to giue a man more iudgement, then to slip without light in all these things. I knowe not howe he may be excused, without strong suspition of the excuser. And yf a Prince may not iudge a wicked seruant out of his owne mouth, nor determine an offence by two or three mouthes, it were a notable world for Traitors and murderers, thus to haue all proceedings set loose, as well of our common Lawes, which condemne vpon all euidences, as of ye ciuill lawes, which giue capitall sentence vpon confession onely: yea, Moses wisedome is ouerreached, and Christes equitie in his Euangelicall parable against the lewde seruant not vsing his talent is eluded. All this is also ratified by voluntarie letters of his to her Maiestie apart, & to her honorable Counsell. And if any Italianate Papist, neuerthelesse will needes beleeue this repugnancie of his last speaches, let him yet take this one note of him, whereby to consider howe credible a man he crediteth. Either Parry meant this monstrous murder according to his vowes in heauen, and sworne promises in earth, and so dyed a desperate Traitour, protesting the contrary in his last wordes vpon his soule and damnation: or els was he periured, to the foule abuse of Pope and all poperie, most execrably prophaning Gods name by promising, swearing, vowing, &c. that which he meant not. Necessarily therefore must he perish vpon periured treason, or wrecke vpon desperate deieratiō. Nothing auoydes this Dilemma, but a Popish Bull of Dispensation, which if he had, I knowe not howe Princes may not as safely suffer Woolues and Beares come to their presence, as such Papists. And very like it is that Parry had a speciall Bull, either els was it comprehended in his Indulgence, that hee might take othes contrary to his Catholique conscience, as he did the othe of Supremacy in beginning of the last Parliament.

Which, if his coniuratours had not bin priuy with what intention he did sweare, he neuer durst haue taken it, least they should haue nowe bewrayed him as a man sworne against the Pope, therefore not to be trusted. But the trueth is, this Papist Parry was both a Traytor, and a manifoldly periured Traitor, &c.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London by C. B.
            Cum priuilegio.
         
         
            
            
            ¶A prayer for all Kings, Princes, Countreyes and people, which doe professe the Gospel: And especially for our soueraigne Lady Queene Elizabeth, vsed in her Maiesties Chappell, and meete to bee vsed of all persons within her Maiesties Dominions.
            
               O Lord God of hostes, most louing and mercifull father, whose power no creature is able to resist, who of thy great goodnesse hast promised to graunt the petitions of such as aske in thy sonnes name: we most humbly beseech thee to saue and defend all Princes, Magistrates, kingdomes, countreyes & people, which haue receiued and doe professe thy holy word and Gospel, and namely this Realme of Englande, and thy seruant Elizabeth our Queene, whome thou hast hitherto wonderfully preserued from manifolde perils and sundry dangers, and of late reuealed and frustrated the trayterous

practises and conspiracies of diuers against her: for the which, and all other thy great goodnesse towardes vs, wee giue thee most humble and heartie thankes, beseeching thee in the name of thy deare sonne Iesus Christ, and for his sake, still to preserue and continue her vnto vs, and to giue her long life & many yeeres to rule ouer this lande. O heauenly father, the practises of our enemies, and the enemies of thy worde and trueth, against her and vs, are manifest and knowen vnto thee. Turne them, O Lord, if it be thy blessed will, or ouerthrowe and confounde them for thy names sake: suffer them not to preuaile: take them, O Lord, in their craftie wilinesse that they haue inuented, and let them fall into the pit which they haue digged for others. Permitte them not vngodly to triumph ouer vs: discomfort them, discomfort them, O Lorde, which trust in their owne multitude, and please themselues in their subtill deuices, and wicked conspiracies. O louing Father, wee haue not deserued the least of these thy mercies which we craue: for we haue sinned and grieuously offended thee, we are not worthy to bee called thy sonnes: we haue not bene so thankefull vnto thee as we shoulde, for thy vnspeakeable benefits powred vpon vs: we haue abused this long time of peace and prosperitie: we haue not obeyed thy worde: we haue had it in mouth, but not in heart: in

outward appearance, but not in deede: wee haue liued carelessely: Wee haue not knowen the time of our visitation: we haue deserued vtter destruction. But thou, O Lorde, art mercifull, and ready to forgiue. Therefore wee come to thy throne of grace, confessing and acknowledging thee to be our onely refuge in all times of perill and daunger: and by the meanes of thy Sonne wee most heartily pray thee to forgiue vs our vnthankefulnesse, disobedience, hypocrisie & all other our sinnes, to turne from vs thy heauie wrath and displeasure, which wee haue iustly deserued, and to turne our hearts truely vnto thee, that dayly we may encrease in all goodnesse, and continually more and more feare thy holy name: so shall we glorifie thy name, and sing vnto thee in Psalmes and Hymnes, and spirituall songs: and thy enemies and ours, shall knowe themselues to be but men, and not able by any meanes to withstande thee, nor to hurt those whome thou hast receiued into thy protection and defence. Graunt these thinges, O Lorde of power, and Father of mercy, for thy Christes sake, to whome with thee and thy holy spirite, bee all honour and glory for euer and euer. Amen.
         
         
            
            ¶A prayer and thankesgiuing for the Queene, vsed of all the Knights and Burgesses in the High Court of Parliament, and very requisite to bee vsed and continued of all her Maiesties louing subiectes.
            
               O Almightie and most mercifull God, which dost pitch thy tents round about thy people, to deliuer them from the handes of their enemies, we thy humble seruants which haue euer of olde seene thy saluation, doe fall downe and prostrate our selues with praise and thankesgiuing to thy glorious name, who hast in thy tender mercies from time to time saued and defended thy seruant Elizabeth our most gracious Queene, not only from the hands of strange children, but also of late reuealed and made frustrate his bloody & most barbarous treason, who being her natural subiect, most vnnaturally violating thy diuine ordinance, hath secretly sought to shed her blood, to the great disquiet of thy Church, and vtter discomfort of our soules: his snare is hewen in pieces, but vpon thy seruant doeth the crowne florish. The wicked and blood thirstie

men thinke to deuoure Iacob, and to lay waste his dwelling place: But thou, (O God) which rulest in Iacob, and vnto the endes of the worlde, doest dayly teach vs still to trust in thee for all thy great mercies, and not to forget thy mercifull kindnes shewed to her, that feareth thy name. O Lorde wee confesse to thy glory & praise, that thou only hast saued vs from destruction, because thou hast not giuen her ouer for a pray to the wicked: her soule is deliuered, & wee are escaped. Heare vs now we pray thee, (O most mercifull father) and continue foorth thy louing kindnesse towards thy seruant, and euermore to thy glorie and our comfort, keepe her in health, with long life, and prosperitie, whose rest and only refuge is in thee, O God of her saluation. Preserue her, as thou art wont, preserue her from the snare of the enemie, from the gathering together of the froward, from the insurrection of wicked doers, and from all the traiterous conspiracies of those which priuily lay waite for her life. Grant this, O heauēly father, for Iesus Christs sake, our onely mediatour and aduocate, Amen.
            
               Io. Th.
            
         
         
            
            A Prayer vsed in the Parliament onely.
            
               O Mercifull God and Father, forasmuch as no counsell can stande, nor any can prosper, but onely such as are humbly gathered in thy name, to feele the sweete taste of thy holy spirite, we gladly acknowledge, that by thy fauour standeth the peaceable protection of our Queene and Realme, and likewise this fauorable libertie graunted vnto vs at this time to make our meeting together: Which thy bountifull goodnes we most thankefully acknowledging, doe withall earnestly pray thy diuine Maiestie so to incline our hearts, as our coū
               sels may be subiect in true obedience to thy holy worde and will. And sithe it hath pleased thee to gouerne this Realme by ordinary assembling the three estates of the same: our humble prayer is, that thou wilt graffe in vs good mindes to conceiue, free libertie to speake, and on all sides a ready and quiet consent to such wholesome lawes & Statutes, as may declare vs to be thy people, and this

Realme to be prosperously ruled by thy good guyding and defence: so that we & our posteritie may with chearefull hearts wayte for thy appearance in iudgement, that art onely able to present vs faultlesse before God our heauenly Father: to whome with thee our Sauiour Christ, and the holy Spirit, bee all glory both nowe and euer. Amen.
         
         
            Imprinted at London by C. B.
            Cum priuilegio.
         
      
   