
      
         
            
            
               
EPIGRAMS.
            by H. P.
            
            Mortui non mordent.
            
            Imprinted at London by R. B. and are to be soulde by Iohn Helme at his shoppe in S. Dunstans Church-yarde, 1608.
         
         
            
            
            Ad Candidum Lectorem.
            DIues Arabs aurum, gemmas dat laetior orbis,
            Et queis confines Indus et Americus:
            Terra benigna quibus Thesauros diuite vena
            Effundit; larga dant opulenta manu.
            At storilis Gens ista mea est, fulgentis Eoi
            Lumina, quam solis nulla beare solent.
            Quae tamen indigno concessit Iupiter almus,
            (Nulla licet tanto Iudice digna), dabit.
         
         
            To the vngentilized Censurer.
            IF my ill-tuned Rimes content the wise,
            Whose deeper iudgements I desire to please:
            Let not the ruder sort be so precise,
            That (Critticke seeming) cannot censure these.
            I write not to the rusticke rablement,
            Nor fawne vpon the curious kinde of men,
            But hold it more then bootlesse labour spent
            To begge their poore applause: nor care I then
            If such repine, whose enuy cannot hurt,
            Though like a raging sea they foame their durt.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            EPIGRAMS.
            
               1 Et manibus pedibus
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   leuis.
               
                  LAys of lighter mettall is compos'd
               Then hath her lightnes till of late disclos'd,
               For lighting where shee little comfort feeles,
               Her fingers there proue lighter then her heeles.
            
            
               2 Sic vos non vobis vellera fertis oues.
               Heard you with what surpassing rich aray,
               
                  Rutellus ruffled on S. Georges day?
               Twas pitty, more then spite it should be knowne,
               That none of all those garments were his owne:
               So that in stead of what reporte did scatter,
               He simply was non-suted on the matter.
            
            
               3 Virescit vulnere Venus.
               
               
                  Susan's well sped, and wears a velvet hood,
               Why not? more like, her breeding hath ben good:
               It's reason she should rise once in her life,
               That fell so oft before shee was a wife
            
            
               
               4 Qui quondam Lixa, Lanista.
               T'is said that Whittington was rais'd of nought,
               And by a Cathath many wonders wrought:
               But Fortune (not his Cat) makes it appeare,
               Hee may dispend a thousand markes a yeare.
            
            
               5 Sic ars diluditur arte.
               Marke but the semblance of Fucatas face,
               How to the life her picture doth excell:
               For louely feature, sweete and comely grace,
               (Surely the Painter hath done wondrous well):
               But heer's the doubt, (both faces made by Art)
               Which you would choose to be of best desert.
            
            
               6 Quam Partus Ventrem sequitur.
               
                  Ralph hath an Office in reuertion bought,
               But rues the time that yet no wit hath wrought:
               Content thee (Ralph) for wealth to let it passe,
               Thou art no worse foole then thy father was.
            
            
               
               7 Qualis vita, finis ita.
               
                  Leno lies sicke and to the Doctor sends,
               who bids him looke for what he least intends:
               And being oft to make his will requested,
               Refuseth, saying, he will die detested.
            
            
               8 Grata superueniet quae non sperabitur hora.
               Perswade not Romulus to take a wife,
               That is to wedlocke sworne an enemy:
               And euer vowes to leade a single life,
               Which he accounts most honest purity.
               Besides a thousand reasons that constraines him,
               Amongst the rest t'is known whose wife maintains him.
            
            
               9 Iuueni quid curua senectus?
               
                  Silla hath got a wife that's wondrous old,
               T'is true: he woo'd her only for her gold:
               I hope her maides are young and serue for hire,
               Which is asmuch as Silla doth desire.
            
            
               
               11 Quisquis sibi quaerit Egenus.
               This obseruation seemes (quoth Fisco) strange,
               Why marchāts walk in Pauls & knights th'exchāge:
               Belike the one seeks those their debts should pay,
               Whiles th'other goes to craue a longer day.
            
            
               12 Spoliatis arma supersunt.
               Graund Captain Cosmo liues of coine bereft,
               Whose Page was wont his purse & coine to carry:
               Now neither Page, purse, coine, nor ought is left,
               Saue what hee's forc'r to pawne at th'ordinary.
               Thus squint-eyde fortune partiall in her gifts,
               Puts men of note sometimes to needy shifts.
            
            
               13 Nec vultus indicat illum.
               
                  Dicke in a raging deepe discourtisie,
               Called a lawyer Meere Necessitie
               
               The more knaue hee? admit he had no law,
               Must hee be flouted at by euery daw?
            
            
               〈1 page missing〉
            
            
               
               14 Plus Moechus omnis amat.
               Peace, weepe no more (sweete Sisse) and all is well,
               Say I had found thee false thinkst thou ile tell?
               No by this iron and steel, (which plainly showes it,)
               An honest Wit-all is no Gull that knowes it.
            
            
               15 Latet anguis in herba.
               
                  Hilus hath hid himselfe this year and more,
               Not in respect of feare to shewe his face:
               But for herashly in his humour swore,
               The Sessions-house should no more sift his case:
               Would you the trueth more plainly vnderstand,
               He hath ben twice before burnt in the hand.
            
            
               16 Habet et musca splenem.
               
                  Mopsus maintaines that banckruptship lesse mooues him,
               Then such a slaue as for his wiues sake loues him:
               Though well the weazill woteth to his griefe,
               He cannot liue without her friends reliefe.
            
            
               
               17 Fallentem fama fesellit.
               
                  Priscus gaue out he went to Prester Iohn,
               
               Presuming to haue purchast three for one:
               But see what lucke his trauailes did beguile,
               
                  Priscus hath tane the diet all this while.
            
            
               18 Sictandem vincit inermis.
               Fell-foughten Furio hath now met his match,
               And is seuerely sent vnto the gayle,
               For blurting at Mas-Constable and his watch,
               Who bids away with him, admits no baile:
               As who shal know hee's now the kings Peace-maker
               That was the last yeare but a kennell-raker.
            
            
               61—habet sua Castra Cupido.
               
                  Faedus hath got his neighbours wife with childe,
               And yet hath not her husbands bed defil'd:
               For why, the plot within Moore-fields was wrought,
               From whence a place was for that purpose sought.
            
            
               
               20 Sapiat qui vendit oportet.
               
                  Ianus doth iesting vse Equinocation
               
               Alluding it, as doubtfull words of Art,
               To hide the couller of his occupation,
               But to the deuill he bears an honest hart.
            
            
               21 Est mollis flamma medullas.
               
                  Cucullus hath disguis'd his former feature,
               And like Pithagoras transformed shape,
               Is now (me thinkes) become another creature,
               Halfe french, halfe english, (pox on such an Ape
               That imitates all fashions far and neere)
               Though 'gainst the haire he buies them ne're so deer.
            
            
               22 Parturiunt Montes Murem.
               
                  Dego will drawe and stoutly stand vnto it,
               Vpon the vtmost of his words brauado:
               But being vrg'd on equall termes to do it,
               He basely pockets vp the bastynado.
            
            
               
               23. Non omnia possumus omnes
               Who saies Alcides hath more beard then wit?
               Whose place and countenance controlleth it:
               Pish 'twas not meant he should more vnderstand,
               Then might concerne him to subscribe his hand.
            
            
               24 Nimium ne crede colori.
               
                  Battus beleeued for a simple truth,
               That yonder gilt-spur spruce and veluet youth
               Was some great personage or worthy wight,
               Vntill one told him he was but a knight,
               A knight (quoth Battus) vaith I chud a zworne,
               He had at least been zum gud gen-man borne.
            
            
               25 Qui, modo Rusticus, olim.
               
                  Po-lo peckes vppe a pretty prolling trade,
               That hath him prouder then his master made:
               But yet when all is done, the world mistakes him,
               For not his mony, but the Tailor makes him.
            
            
               
               26 Furor arma ministrat.
               
                  Magus hath studied long to breake a iest
               Vpon these rimes he doth somuch detest,
               And can you blame him? well he may be chiding
               That hath so often spurgald been with riding.
            
            
               27 Qui fuit ante Pedes.
               The case is alterd with Mercutio,
               
               Since his preferment to that noble man:
               What erst he hath been, boots not now to know,
               Those times are chāg'd with him, what's thē was thā
               
               I dare presume Mercutio doth forget,
               That euer he a Bill in Pauls did set.
            
            
               28 Mortalia cuncta caduca.
               
                  Stella the starre that whilome shinde so bright,
               Is now eclipsed and hath lost her light:
               'Twas pitty (Stella) that thy starres were such,
               Better for thee they had not shinde so much.
            
            
               
               29 Hic laqueos tendit qui laqueo moritur.
               Who euer held Mendoza halfe so wise,
               To haue attempted such an enterprize?
               As had not Tyburne soone preuented it,
               
                  Mendoza would haue learnd but too much wit.
            
            
               30 Nocet empta dolore voluptas.
               What cause had Liuia to leaue the Cittie,
               Where she so florisht vntill now of late,
               Oh ther's a fault escapt (the more's the pittie),
               Which the Church-wardens would not tollerate,
               And yet the yeare before, they could dispence,
               Taking no knowledge of the like offence.
            
            
               31 Fas est, quod Foemina fingit.
               Maddam Ventoza can no longer frollicke,
               For she is troubled with a sore wind-chollicke,
               Which to the standers by may lesse appeare,
               Because her fyesting-Curre is still so neare.
            
            
               
               32 Quàm bene notus amor.
               Should Spruso leaue the wearing of his muffe,
               His golden night-cap and his double ruffe:
               Yet, manning still one mistrisse, makes him noted
               Whether to loue or lust hees more deuoted.
            
            
               33 Castus erat vultu, monstrat quem facta Cynaedum.
               Know you not Criticus, our Citties mule,
               That haunts the harbors of iniquitie?
               Yet like a Beadle of disorderd rule,
               Lasheth at lust to cloake his villanie:
               
                  Critick 'tis not your lookes (I can assure you)
               Shall feare the Surgeon that of late did cure you.
            
            
               34 Trahit sua quemque voluptas.
               
                  Wat wills you know how much he skorneth it,
               To be a pick-purse of anothers wit:
               But in a pocket bids you vnderstand,
               He hath a borrowing, deep, and diuing hand.
            
            
               
               35 Quid non speramus amantes.
               
                  Peirce was espoused ere he went a wooing,
               What should such fooles as he belong a dooing?
               His wife (the wiser) thought to saue that paine,
               By getting her a cloake fit for the raine.
            
            
               36 Faeminae ludificantur viros.
               
                  Luce had a secret longing to go see
               Her childe at nurse: for that she dreamt twas sicke,
               And would by no meanes pacified be,
               Till she had seene her yongest little Dicke:
               Full little knowes her husband (silly groome)
               Who by this match ere midnight takes his roome.
            
            
               37 Omnibus hoc vitium.
               
                  Pru that had patience to haue borne with any,
               And lou'd plain dealing, (witnes all that knows her,)
               Is now vndone by bearing one too many,
               So that you see plain-dealing ouerthrowes her.
            
            
               
               38 Senibus voluisse satis.
               
                  AEsop must yeeld when Rodope will ryde,
               And take no knowledge where, nor who's her guide,
               Yet could the wizard wish her still in sight,
               Since she at Braynford log'd this other night.
            
            
               39 Turpe est hoc foenore, lucrum.
               
                  Lanus hath liu'd this last vacation
               Vpon his wiues bare Charge without all reason
               Who since she knew at first her occupation
               Nere saw worse takings in a Lenten season:
               Fy Lanus rather shouldst thou her beshrow
               That would so many burdens vndergoe.
            
            
               40 Linguam vis nulla domabit.
               
                  Muns skill in horses doth so much excell,
               As no man liuing breaks them halfe so well
               But see, one sillie shrow controls his Art:
               And worse then all those horses, breaks his hart.
            
            
               
               41 Roganti dabitur.
               
                  Marcus stood musing maugre all his might,
               Where he should go to lodge this other night:
               At length the Marshall vnawares comes on him,
               And volens nolens thrusts a bed vpon him.
            
            
               42—Ortus nouus vrbe Britannus.
               Who braues it now as doth yong Hystrio,
               
               Walking in Paules like to some Potentate,
               Richly replenisht from the top toth' toe,
               As if he were deriu'd from high estate?
               Alas ther's not a man but may discrie,
               His begging trade and bastard facultie.
            
            
               43 Hoc aliquid nihil.
               
                  Guido hath gained very goodly sutes,
               That of his labours are the onely fruites:
               I meane no other sutes then those he weares,
               Which how to compasse is that Guido feares.
            
            
               
               44 Sat saltem sic habeatur.
               Some say this rabblement of new-made knights,
               Makes Coaches deere, and chandlers sell their lights:
               But scarce a Seruingman the more is fed,
               For foot-boyes onely bring their Sirs to bed.
            
            
               45 Sequitur inuidia famam.
               Two Madams once were striuing for the wall,
               Each standing much on termes of worthines,
               The one but yong (howbeit rich withall)
               The other auncient, though of substance lesse
               Said, soft and faire, till time hath tane fruition,
               Your Ladyship is of the last edition.
            
            
               46 Sic nunquam cessat quo perdat perdere lusor.
               Aske Ficus how his luck at Dicing goes,
               Like to the Tide (saith he) it ebbes and flowes:
               Then I suppose his chance cannot be good,
               For all men knowe, tis longer ebbe then flood.
            
            
               
               46 Errantes errare licet.
               
                  Pandorus spends the day by telling newes
               Of such his trauails as will make you muse,
               Nay Sir beleeue it, hee'l discourse at large.
               How should he els be fed at others charge.
            
            
               47 Dant otia iocum.
               Young master Newcome late of thin's of Court
               Hath newlie laide aside his Littleton
               
               And for his pleasure deignes no other sport,
               Then these vnsauored rimes to seaze vpon:
               Which hauing read hee coments on the weather,
               How iump his law and learning met together.
            
            
               48 Sequitur vestigia Matris.
               
                  Maud being mou'd at fourteen yeares to mary,
               Wisht (were she tall enough), she need not tary:
               I would her Sister but so wise had been
               That had a Bastard ere she was fifteene.
            
            
               
               49 Duibtat mens conscia recti.
               
                  Vulcanus wiselie doth himselfe perswade,
               Some of these Epigrams by him were made:
               But dares not tell you wherein for his life
               Least men should play on him, as on his wife,
            
            
               50 Quem suspicaueris, ipse.
               
                  Fuco is fled more for his credit sake,
               Then to be burdened with so base a deede:
               Would hee think you such trifles vndertake:
               Hauing that kindred and so little need?
               Damn'd might he be, that euer ment to do it
               Had not his whore or something vrdgd him to it.
            
            
               51 Confuetudo est altera natura.
               Mat in the mood of his distemp'rature,
               Sweares he must fight to keep his hands in vre.
               For being wearie of his theeuing trade:
               VVhat should he do but exercise his blade?
            
            
               
               52 Ingenio pollet cui vim natura negauit.
               If Nanus had but common guifts of nature,
               And no arts cunning to his cubit-stature:
               He neuer could with Ladies come so neere,
               Nor get his victuals gratis all the yeere.
            
            
               53 Non caret effectu quod voluére duo.
               Constant Renaldo who can but commend thee.
               That still one mistrisse in Reuersion seruest?
               She could do little, if not least befriend thee,
               With gleaning licence for so long a haruest:
               Gleaning said I? nay more, to mowe her corne,
               And catch the Hare, whiles others blow the horne▪
               
            
            
               54 Volucrem sic decipit Auceps.
               
                  Hydrus the horse-courser (that cunning mate)
               Doth with the buyers thus Equiuocate:
               
               Claps on his hand and prayes he might not thriue,
               If that his Gelding be not vnder fiue.
            
            
               
               55 Perdat qui caueat Emptor.
               Nor lesse meant Promus when that vow he made,
               Then to giue ore his cousening Tapsters trade:
               Who checkt for short and frothy measure, swore,
               He neuer would from thence forth fill pot more.
            
            
               56 Quod mora tardat abest.
               See how Silenus walkes accomplished,
               With due performance of his fathers Page,
               Looks back of purpose to be honoured,
               And on each slight occasion gins to rage:
               You villaine, dog, where hath your stay been such,
               Quoth he, The Broker would not lend so much.
               
            
            
               57—Latuit benè qui male vixit.
               
                  Francisco flies, not daring once come neare,
               Making th'infection to be most his feare:
               But his Arch-creditor that least beleeues him,
               Knows t'is his debts more then the deu'll that driues him.
            
            
               
               58 Indomitae tandem veniunt ad aratra Inuenca.
               
                  Lesbia the faire that would be wood of none
               Hath since been wone by many more then one
               And like a flower (whose coullour soone doth fade)
               With often wearing prooues a hackney Iade.
            
            
               59 Probitas laudatur et alget.
               Say that Caryna keepe a vitling house
               I hope tis for no vulgar base or meane resort
               That onely will a Cast of Canns carowse,
               Or at some game at Cards but idely sport
               Tis knowne her weekly risings and downe-fallings,
               Equalls her state with some of higher callings.
            
            
               60 Sequitur post gaudia luctus.
               Aye me (quoth Amy) who would ere haue thought
               So great a mischiese should arise of nought,
               Which had she knowne ere she began to swell:
               Each yard of pleasure should haue prou'd an ell.
            
            
               
               61 Tremuit sub pondere Cymba.
               Had not Formosa verie foule ill luck
               Who stooping simply but a rose to pluck,
               Made to the hearers that so loudly knowne,
               Which neuer yet report before had blown?
            
            
               62 Pulchra Semyramidis facies imitata Sepulchrum.
               Fine Mistris Foetida perfumes her selfe
               With sweetest odours that she can deuise,
               More deare and pretious then all worldly pelfe,
               That nought auaileth when her bewty dies:
               But this dispaire is very death in thinking
               That one so faire should haue a breath so stinking.
            
            
               63 Post dulcia finis amarus.
               What griefe it was Grace had no better fortune,
               But that Bridewel must her disgrace importune:
               And which is worse, if worse it might perplex her;
               The Beadle comes behinde her back to vexe her.
            
            
               
               64 Par pari reserre decet.
               
                  Caluus (to blame) runs in his Laundresse score
               And will not pay her scarcely once a yeare:
               But then his shame is twise so much the more
               For she hath truely paid him to a hayre.
            
            
               65 Non omnibus Omphida dormit.
               What reason is it Omphida should yeeld
               To any man that's but a stranger to her?
               Thinks he at first assault to win the field?
               Tutlet him doe his worst that worst can do her,
               Had there but cullour beene for such intent,
               She could allow your weakest argument.
            
            
               66 Naturā expellere durum.
               
                  Parcus not sparing cost sweres heele begin,
               To enter Commons, in some Chancery Inn,
               And will no longer once a day be fedde:
               Thatstill before went supperles to bed.
            
            
               
               67 Coitum, non oscula laudat.
               When Kester courted Kate but for a kisse,
               She coyly told him that he aimd amisse:
               Thou maist beleeue her (Kester) what she said:
               For halfe the parish knowes shee is no maid.
            
            
               68 Tunc tua res agitur &c.
               A iellious Marchant that a Saylor met,
               askt him the reason why he ment to mary
               Knowing what ill their absence might beget,
               That still at sea constrayned are to tary?
               Sir (quoth the Saylor) make you that so strange,
               Tis done the time whiles you but walk the'xchange.
            
            
               69 Impar aetas, impares
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   mores.
               It could not be (me thinks) imagined
               That Iulia should haue lost her maydenhead
               Being so young but that her selfe first told it,
               to whome and where shee this last lent had solde it.
            
            
               
               70 Timidos fortuna repellit.
               When Miles the seruingman my Lady kist
               She knew him not (though scarcely could resist
               So sweet a youth and well apparelled)
               Had not the Dunce himselfe discouered:
               For this (quoth he), my master bad me say—
               Which hearing made her frowne and fling awaie:
               Why thus it is, when fooles must make it knowne,
               They come on others busines, not their owne.
            
            
               71 Si nihil attuleris, ibis &c.
               
                  Planus an honest Swain, but monylesse,
               Besought a lawyer to be good vnto him:
               Who either (gratis) must his cause redresse,
               Or promise what he neuer meant to do him,
               Being asked why he careles lingred it,
               Made this replie, ex nihilo nihil fit.
               
            
            
               
               72 Similis doctrina libello.
               
                  Craesus of all things loueth not to buy
               So many books of such diuersitie:
               Your Almanacke (saies hee) yeelds all the sence,
               Of times best profit and experience.
            
            
               73 Frustra, qui sero consulit.
               Aske not Vincentio now when things are past,
               Why hee so often sported with his Punck,
               Or wherfore so much hath bene spent in wast,
               (As good you told it to a man thats drunck)
               Let it suffice he hath consum'd it all,
               And (as you see) walks like the Prodigall.
            
            
               74 Non patitur res seria iocū.
               
                  TIB tooke an oath that Tomisin was no maid,
               VVho angry bad beare record what she said,
               As good haue publisht it with trumpets blowne,
               As call for witnesse in a case so knowne.
            
            
               
               76 Semel & semper.
               
                  Celso but newly wedded doth repent,
               and meanes to be diuorc't incontinent
               Alas (poore Celso) knewst thou not before,
               She was, and is and will be still a (—)
            
            
               77 Mole ruit sua.
               
                  Questo that quaint and brisk Italian
               when first his trade for merchandize began,
               Would so much vndertake more then his owne.
               (I thinke of purpose to be ouerthrowne,)
               For when twas thought his fulnesse did abound,
               Euen then he brake for seauenty thousand pound.
            
            
               78 Satis est ditescere fama.
               
                  Clitus with Clients is well customed,
               That hath the lawes but little studied:
               No matter Clitus, so they bring thee fees)
               how ill the Case, and thy aduise agrees.
            
            
               
               79 Incidit in Syllam cupiens vitare charibdim.
               
                  Marcellus museth how to spend that day,
               Wherein it likes him not to see a play:
               But then he falls into some place (I doubt,)
               And staies so long till he be fired out.
            
            
               80 Male parta male dilabuntur.
               Old Colins sonne is newlie come to age,
               And may dispend fiue hundred marks a year,
               But wants the wit to hold his heritage,
               Which hath been euer yet his Vncles fear:
               For that his Father got it by extortion:
               And therfore ill to be a woodcocks, portion.
            
            
               81 Quid queat esse diu?
               
                  Signior Fantasmos ne'r such pleasure found
               In any thing, as in a deepe mouth'd hound:
               Small was that pleasure, when vpon one day,
               He lost his hayre, and hunted all away.
            
            
               
               82 Sors vniuersa rotat.
               
                  Sam swore an oth that those late Lotteries,
               were meere deceits, and idle mockeries:
               For of a hundred, if he two did pluck,
               The standers-by would say twas Cuckolds luck.
            
            
               83 Olim haec meminisse iuuabit.
               
                  Grunto lies groaning of a grieuous gout,
               And would giue thousands to be soundly cured:
               But all the cunning that his coyne findes out,
               Cannot expell his paines so long endured:
               Oh Grunto thou hast liu'd so vnrepenting
               As scarce two helles sufficeth thy tormenting.
            
            
               84 Ignoti nulla cupido.
               
                  Castus of all sinnes makes most conscience,
               That men should thus with chastity dispence:
               She that weds him, must haue his maidenhead,
               At least may chance to bring a foole to bed.
            
            
               
               85 Sero sapiunt Phryges.
               
                  Festus who feasted long on delicates,
               Now such fantastick fulsome dyet hates:
               Is it not reason he should spare at last,
               That hath consumed more then all in waste?
            
            
               86 Labor improbus omnia vincit.
               Now yea and nay quoth mistris Temperance
               
               You are to blame to be so vainely giuen,
               Cannot your eyes vpon a woman glaunce,
               But they must couet? sooth you should be shriuen:
               Fye that you'l sweare so rashly by your troth,
               Thinke you Ile doo't wer't not to saue your oath?
            
            
               87 Fouent periuria furtum.
               
                  Piso hath stolne a siluer boul in iest,
               For which (suspected onely) not confest:
               Rather then Piso will restore the boull,
               Bouldly aduentureth to damn his soule.
            
            
               
               88 Ne Sutor vltra Crepidam.
               
                  Philippus flouteth at such ragged rimes,
               That much distasting, taxe not these his times:
               Indeed I iudge him much more better seene,
               In other trades that he hath trayned beene.
            
            
               89 Aliud simulat aliud agit.
               Young Mistresse Ioyce her husband doth solicit,
               To hire a garden-house neere to the fields:
               Which with her gossip she might weekely visit,
               (For something must she haue that comfort yeelds)
               I feare this Bower for common recreation,
               Will proue a place of priuate occupation.
            
            
               90 Similes habent labra lactucas.
               
                  Dick Swash (or Swaggering Dick) through Fleetstreet reeles
               With Sis & Bettrice waiting at his heels,
               To one that would haue tane the wall, he swore,
               zounds dost not see my punck and Paramout?
            
            
               
               91 Cito parata Venus.
               Let Mistris Su be stirring ne'r so soone
               Shee'l not be readie vntil afternoone,
               Nor scarcely then: for why this sommer season,
               The least Thing makes her sweat beyond all reason.
            
            
               92 Maxima Tobacchi, maior vis nulla veneni.
               
                  Cuthbert our Cobler can no more forbeare,
               To take Tobacco, then to liue vnknowne:
               He drinkes all whiffes at least, and learnes to sweare
               By Heauens: his oathes and humors are his owne.
               But adding hereunto a pot or more,
               He stands to nothing which he spake before.
            
            
               93 Enecat amplexu nimio sic Simia foetum.
               Call Dauus knaue, he straight way drawes his sword,
               And makes you proue as much or eate your word,
               But if you call him honest Rogue or Iew,
               He hugges you then for giuing him his dew.
            
            
               
               94 Mala crescunt deteriora.
               
                  Soto is lately gone to Sturbridge faire,
               Whose little takings makes him halfe dispaire:
               Twere good some friend of his would tel the Mome
               His wife hath had takings inough at home.
            
            
               95 Vwlle placere sat est.
               Mistrisse Parnella hold's it requisite
               To keep more maids at home then need requires
               Aswell to please her husbands appetite,
               As for a broad she like exchange desires.
               Thus doe they absent best content each other:
               That els should be but Baudes to one another.
            
            
               96 Vilescit diues auarus.
               
                  Rusus is wondrous rich, but what of that?
               He liues obscurely like a water-Rat:
               And his apparell, which he seldome buyes,
               Are such as Houns-dich and Long-lane supplies.
            
            
               
               97 Nocet empta dolore voluptas.
               
                  Sisley and Kate are gone to frollick it,
               Late in the euening with their Tom and Kit,
               
               What luck had they to buy their sport so deere,
               That in the morning must haue whipping cheere.
            
            
               98 AEger, cui chara libertas.
               
                  Briseo that gallant yongster keepes his bed,
               As faining to be sick, but wot you why?
               Not of an ague, nor an aking head,
               No burning feauer, or French maladie:
               Tush, none of these can halfe so much molest him,
               As yonder flat-cap foole that would arest him.
            
            
               99 Quae placuit Domino nupta est Ancilla sodali.
               Madam Rugosa knowes not where to finde,
               One chamber-mayde often to please her minde:
               But yet my Lord so likes their comely car'adge,
               As he prefers them to his men in mar'adge.
            
            
               
               100 Quàm sumus ergo pares.
               
                  Damon his Dick had not these three yeeres seene,
               But rather thinks he hath concealed beene:
               Was it not strange that they so iump should meete,
               Both at a bawdy house in Turnebull street?
            
            
               101 Non est iocosapudica.
               Mistresse Finetta, for her ready witte,
               Is much admired and belou'd of many:
               But this one fault of hers confoundeth it,
               She will deride, and iesting scoffe at any.
               Which by an ill accustom'd vse comes on her,
               Yet there is one that playes as much vpon her.
            
            
               102 Diuitijs durant firmae pereuntibus Artes.
               
                  Silus hath sold his Crimson satten sute,
               And needs would learne to play vpon the Lute,
               Tis well done (Silus) for such sutes soone wast,
               Whereas thy skill in Lutes will euer last:
            
            
               
               103 Asperius nihil est humili cum surgat in altum.
               The world is well amended with Sir Hugh,
               
               Since from the time he was a Shepherd swain,
               And little dreamed then (I may tell you)
               He should be made one of the knightly traine:
               But (for his substance answeres not his will)
               As good haue dreamt, or been a Shepheard still.
            
            
               104 Multorum vulnera vincunt.
               Much moues not Mal: but let the queane bee mou'd,
               Heel swear shee's hot that hath her next approu'd.
            
            
               105 Frustra sapit qui sibi non sapit.
               
                  Zant hus that wise and cunning Sophister,
               Lyes now in Limbo for a small offence:
               VVho when he came before the officer,
               Had not one word of wit to free him thence:
               VVhy thus it fares, when he should best dispute,
               The Deuill or some ill planet strikes him mute.
            
            
               
               106 Aurum volat ocyus Eur
                     •
                  .
               
                  Mounsier Flemingo, fraught with Angels store,
               Would see faire London, neuer seene before:
               Where (lodging with his mistres but one night,)
               Had (ere he parted) put them all to flight.
            
            
               107 Humilis prostrata quadrante.
               Fine Mistresse Delia defies the man,
               That proffers lesse to her then golden fees:
               What think you her some cōmon Curtizan,
               That will her credit or her custome leese?
               In faith sir no: But ere you shall goe hence,
               Shee will for once accept of eighteene pence.
            
            
               108 Ingentes vastant coniugia gazas.
               
                  Musco, that alwayes kept with pollicy,
               What he had scraped since his infancie:
               Scarce one year wedded (for he needs would marry)
               Hath taken Ludgate to his Sanctuarie.
            
            
               
               109 Cucullus non facit Monachum.
               
                  Siluanus is become so pure and holy
               As he accounts all mirth but idle folly,
               Aske him wherefore, he giues you ghostly reason,
               But then his whore comes neuer out of season.
            
            
               110 O infelicaes quos fata sequntur iniqua.
               
                  Pontus is posting hitherwards apace,
               To dine with diuers that in Fleetstreet meets him.
               But see the lucklesse chance of such a cafe,
               Assoon as he alights the Sergeant greets him,
               So that the burthen he should haue de fraid,
               Was wholly now vpon his Hostesse laide.
            
            
               111 Vsus promptos facit.
               This makes Menalcas muze aboue the rest,
               To see how qnaint my Lady is adrest:
               For from the girdle vpwards (durst he sweare,)
               She doth the shape of very man appeare.
            
            
               
               112 Musae spernuntur egenae.
               
                  Faunus for feates of fencing beares the Bell.
               For skill in musick on each instrument,
               For dancing, caruing, and discoursing wel
               With other sundry gifts more excellent▪
               
               But striuing still to make his credit stronger,
               The Taylor will not trust him any longer.
            
            
               113 Sic transit gloria mundi.
               I Pray Sir, did you note on Sunday last,
               How richly Rubin was apparrelled?
               Well may he be compared to a blast,
               or lik'd to one that's metamorphosed.
               For the next morning ere the day did dawne,
               All that he wore, and more, was laid to pawne.
            
            
               
               114 Nocte latent mendae.
               What meaneth Rosamond to walke so late,
               When no man can discerne her face or feature:
               (But by her habit may preiudicate,
               She is some faire, or rather famous Creature:)
               Oh good Sir vnderstand thatin the darke,
               One man of twenty may mistake the marke.
            
            
               115 Crede quod habes & habes.
               
                  Lorellos wife is lately brought to bed,
               (as luck would haue it, of a goodly boy,
               The hopefull issue of her maiden head,
               And onely Iewell of the fathers ioy:
               Then who would doubt the tyme or once but note it
               When tis as like him as himselfe had got it
            
            
               
               118 Crescit amor precio.
               How like you Darkis in her deepest Ruffe?
               Seemes she not now as propper as the best?
               You thinke you may commaund her, marry muffe?
               Shee scornes the motion, fough, that were a iest:
               Because she sold her wares so cheape of late,
               Must they be alwaies prised at one rate?
            
            
               119 Fronti nulla fides.
               
                  Gallus that greatest Roost-cock in the rout,
               Swels now as big as Bacchus did with Wine:
               Like to a Hulke, he beares himselfe about,
               And bristles as a Boare or Porpentine.
               Tis not his locks that makes him looke so big,
               For all men knowes he weares a periwig.
            
            
               
               120 Fortuna multis nimium dedit.
               Now fie vpon thee Coward Nemius,
               
               That oft hast puld thy Ladies slippers on:
               Yet still wert bashfull, not so venturous
               As once so much her leg to looke vpon.
               Were I thy father and thou heyre to mee,
               I should for certaine disinherit thee.
            
            
               121 Degeneres animos timor arguit.
               
                  Mounsier Montanus is no little man,
               Of vnapprooued valour to his foe:
               Perswade, or wooe him with what words you can,
               Heele be reuenged all the world must know.
               But when he found one with his wife in bed,
               For feare or shame he durst not shew his head.
            
            
               
               122 Cri
                     ••
                  ibus coelare studet sua crimina Maechus.
               When Cacus was accused of a rape,
               For stealing secretly to his maids bed:
               He hardly could the doome of law escape,
               Had hee not thus the matter couloured,
               That tooke his oath (nor did he sweare amisse,)
               He went not into hir bed, for 'twas his.
            
            
               123 Redit orbis in orbem.
               Young Codrus Land-lord to his fathers rents,
               Which happy time (long lookt for) did expire,
               Addresseth him with those habiliments,
               As least beseemes the son of such a Sire.
               And thus he gallants it some yeare and more,
               Vntill his Tenants thrust him out of doore.
            
            
               
               124 Male parta peribunt.
               
                  Brutus, that braue and compleat Caualier,
               Who thus of late in Fleetstreet florished:
               Thought then no pleasure or expence too deare:
               But see how soone the case is altered:
               As that constrained to forsake the streete,
               He now betakes himselfe vnto the Fleete.
            
            
               125 Noctes atque dies patet atri Ianua Ditis.
               The times are waxen dead with Dalila,
               
               Who since the Terme hath felt but little sturring,
               Then was she sought-to more then Helena,
               
               When Gallāts gallopt with their Coaches hurring:
               But now she speakes with all that please to call,
               Loe thus her trade doth Termely rise and fall.
            
            
               
               126 Sine fuco pulchra venustas.
               Mistris Morinda is more coy then wise,
               But faire she is, and that most richly faire:
               Her husband beares it out (let that suffice)
               And all defects is able to repaire.
               But yet I wonder they should so excell,
               That haue been bankrout, all the world can tell.
            
            
               127 Negat ofcula gratarogata.
               
                  Priscilla proues most dainty of a kisse,
               When she intreated, woo'd, and courted is:
               Lord how she simpring sits, and minceth it!
               In very deed Sir, sheele not eate a bit.
               As full of manners as of modestie,
               True, if her vertue be hypocrisie.
            
            
               
               128 Prodit se lumine Luscus.
               
                  Luscus that once lay with his Mistresse maide,
               And (fearing much to haue the matter knowne)
               Went to his fellow, whome he friendly praide,
               To counsell him as were the case his owne:
               He that (more cunning) knew what should be done,
               Tooke this aduantage for his better speede,
               To finish that which th'other had begun:
               But then alas she prou'd with child indeed:
               And made the Woodcock (who did first bewray it)
               Stand to the reckning, that could better pay it.
            
            
               129 Se fugit Adulter a custam.
               
                  Nisa, who from her window glaunst her eies,
               Saw Mopsus come, as fast as foot could trot:
               For ioy whereof, vpon her bed shee lies,
               As who should think, she slept and saw him not.
               Twas very strange, vnlesse shee meant herein,
               Her eyes should not be open to her sinne.
            
            
               
               130 Ostendit hadera vinum.
               A scoffing mate, passing along Cheap-side,
               Incontinent a gallant Lasse espied:
               Whose tempting brests (as to the sale laid out,)
               Incites this youngster thus to gin to flout,
               Lady (quoth he) is this flesh to be sould?
               No Lord (quoth she) for siluer nor for gold,
               But wherefore aske you? (and there made a stop)
               To buy (quoth he) if not, shut vp your shop.
            
            
               131 Caelum non animum mutat, quae trans mare curr
                     •
                  ,
               Naye fie how strange you make it mistris Iane,
               
               Will you not know your quondam tried friends?
               Remember since you lodg'd in Cart-her lane
               Shall former kindnesse merit no amends?
               I say no more: well may you change your name:
               But once a whore, you should be still the same.
            
            
               
               114 Spernit gens rustica Musas.
               What tell you me of Porcus Pesant Groome,
               That scrapeth vp together so much thrift,
               VVhich he obscures within some desart roome,
               And basely liues vnknowne by any shift.
               His lookes are Characters of his discent,
               Sprung from the loynes of some mechanick Syre,
               That neuer knew what ciuill vsagement,
               But to be onely rich doth still aspire:
               Spurre such a one in ought but in his trade,
               And you shall see how soone he'le proue a Iade.
            
            
               115 Nemo omni parts Beatus.
               Tis plainly known that our yoūg knight Sir Adam.
               
               had his beginning from an auncient name.
               Who (though not rich) may make his wife a Madā
               
               that brings hir dowrie to maintaine the same.
               Say that the Herrald cannot blaze him forth:
               Must knight-ship therfore be of no more worth?
            
            
               
               134 Pari Iugo dulcis tractus.
               When Caecus had been wedded now three daies,
               And all his neighbours bad, God giue him ioy.
               This strange conclusion with his wife assayes,
               Why till her marriage dâye shee proou'd so coy:
               (Quoth he) we man and wife in manner were,
               a month before: then could we haue repented?
               Alas (quoth she) had I not cause to feare,
               How you might conster it, had I consented?
               Fore God (quoth lie) twas well thou didst not yeeld.
               For doubtlesse then my purpose was to leaue thee.
               Oh Sir (quoth she) I once was so beguild,
               And thought the next mā should not so deceiue me
               Now out alas (quoth he) thou breedst my woe:
               Why man (quoth she) I speake but quid pro que,
               
            
            
               135 I ndor est sua damna referre.
               
                  Peter hath lost his purse but will conceale it,
               Least she that stole it, to his shame-reueale it.
            
            
               
               139 Quos ego? sed motos praestat &c.
               
                  Flaccus giues out (because the world shall knowe it)
               How bitter shortly he intends to write
               Threatning therein to firk his fellow Poet,
               Gainst whome he beareth such reuenging spite:
               But soft (quoth Flaccus) should I say hees poore?
               Oh no: least others talke as much of me,
               Or shall I tell him that he loues a whoore?
               Tush therein likewise we both iump agree.
               Faith, Flaccus doubtles will his spleene recall:
               As good bee friends and neuer write at all.
            
            
               140 Diues quis stultus habetur?
               Tis true that Symon (simple though you think him)
               Knowes how to execute his fathers trade,
               Which (no disprayse) may with that substance linck him,
               As quickly shall amend what nature made,
               Do not your most fooles thriue exceeding well,
               That haue but wit inough to buy and sell?
            
            
               
               138 Cupit meretrix pudibunda videri.
               Who brutes it, Mistresse Parnell is no maide,
               and will not answer such discourtesie:
               She scornes the very worst that can be said,
               And stands so much on her virginity.
               As flatly to their teeth she doth retort it,
               Presuming none so vile that will report it.
            
            
               139 Impar Impares odit.
               
                  Sotus hates wise-men, for himselfe is none:
               And fooles he hates because himselfe is one.
            
            
               140 De
                     ••
                  rare est periurare.
               
                  Dacus hath damn'd himselfe on due regard,
               From Tauernes, plaies, Tobacco, and from wine,
               Swearing hele liue like Iohn of Paules church yaard,
               At least will sometimes with Duke Humfrye dine.
               Twere well done (Dacus) had'st thou power to do it.
               But Dice and Drabs (I feare) will hold thee to it.
            
            
               
               141 Frustra times qui sperat nihil.
               Tush hang it: haue at all (sayes Curio)
               
               Comes not deuze ace, assoone as six & three?
               Who would not rather halfe his lands forgo,
               Then be out dar'd by such a one as he.
               Damne me Ile venture all vpon a cast,
               Wert not as good turne Rogue at first as last.
            
            
               142 Poculo iunguntur Amici.
               A health (saith Lucas) to his loues bright eye,
               Which not to pledge, were much indignity.
               You cannot do him greater curtesie,
               Then to be drunke and damn'd for companie.
            
            
               143 Clero struit impia fraudes,
               When Rose had reck'ned her ful time at large,
               She then bethinketh whom to nominate,
               That might partake with hir insuing charge,
               At length with wisedome more considerate,
               She gesseth none mongst all the rest so fit,
               As is the parish priest to father it.
            
            
               
               143 Sapiat, qui Diues, oportes.
               Tis knowne how well I liue, sayes Romeo,
               
               And whom I list Ile loue, or will dispise:
               Indeed it's reason good it should be so,
               For they that wealthy are, musts needs be wise:
               But truly to describe and set thee foorth,
               Thou ow'st thy belly more then thou art worth.
            
            
               144 Natura paucis contenta.
               
                  Mecus is now become a frugall Syre,
               That spends no more then nature doth require:
               And yet his wife will prooue a Traueller,
               Although but once a yeere he lye with her.
            
            
               145 Nil gratum, ratione carens.
               
                  Paulus a Pamphlet doth in prose present,
               Vnto his Lord (The fruites of idle time:)
               
               Who farre more carelesse, then therewith content
               Wished it were conuerted into rime,
               Which done and brought him at an other season,
               Said, now'tis rime, before nor rime nor reason.
            
            
               
               146 Haesitat in dubijs ars stupefacta malis.
               
                  Vrbanus that committed an offence
               With a young country lasse (poore silly foole)
               To salue his credit, soone conueyes her hence,
               Vnto a Garden-house, or vaulting-schoole.
               Where now (vnloaden of that lucklesse ill,)
               And all dispatched (saue the houshold charge:)
               The goodman-Bawd, or Pander, (which you will)
               Brings him no Ticket but a bil at large.
               
                  Item for Pipkins pap & other things,
               Amounting all to twentie marke or more:
               And this alowd into his eares he rings,
               pay Sir (quoth he) for shame discharge your score,
               
                  Vrbanus loth to be proclaim'd a gull,
               Was willing to compound in any wise:
               But yet not tendring his demaund at full,
               Said he had seene the Lyons once or twise.
               The Lyons (answers he,? that may be true,
               But think you thence to meritany prayse?
               Each Lobcock may those Lyons dayly view,
               Haue you not seene the Dragons in your dayes?
               No (quoth Vrbanus) that I must confesse,
               Then (said the Pander) you must pay no lesse.
            
            
               
               147 Meretrix inimica quieti-
               
                  Philo is wondrous iealous of his wife,
               And vrgeth termes of shrewd suspition:
               But knowes not him the cause of this his strife,
               Yet will hee yeeld to no condition.
               For more he vexed is that knowes it not,
               Then if you horn him to his face God wot.
            
            
               148 Vinitur ex rapto &c.
               Lieftenant Lentulus liues discontent,
               And much repineth at the want of warres:
               For when his credit, coyne, and all is spent,
               What should he do, but idly curse the starres?
               Content thee Lentulus with thine estate,
               That wert not idle when thou sto'lst the plate.
            
            
               
               149 Turpe se
                     •
                  ilis amor.
               Old doting Claudus doth in hast desire,
               With beautious young Penelope to wed,
               Whose frozen appetite is set on fire,
               Vntill the match be throughly finished.
               Indeed as good dispatch, as make delay,
               That must be horned on his wedding day.
            
            
               150 Laesus amor in surorem vertitur.
               Where hath Sir Iohn so long beene resident,
               Leauing his pensiue Lady all amort?
               
               Who will not say (woe worth the time mispent)
               For griefe where of she hath no list to sport.
               But leaue her not againe in such a plight,
               Least (out of mind) she proue more out of sight,
            
            
               
               151 Nullus ad amissas ibit amicus opes.
               Heard you not yet of Captaine Ferdinand,
               
               That was so wont to swagger and carowse?
               He lodgeth now no longer in the Strand,
               
               But is remoued thence to such a house:
               Where all his best acquaintance that he knowes,
               Will not redeem th'one halfe of what he owes,
            
            
               152 Ingenium natura dedit queis non dedit vti.
               Nay see if Momus yet can ceasse to flout,
               How should he choose? his meere conceits are such:
               Tis good sir: Ile not say you are a lout,
               But may not one presume to think as much?
               I feare when we haue both done all we can,
               The best will scarce proue good Gramarian.
            
            
               
               153 Patria est vbicunque.
               Braue minded Medon can no more endure,
               To liue in England then to brooke the lye:
               Tut your temptations cannot him allure,
               He scornes them as an idle mockerie-
               Vrge him no more, I tell you twill but grieue him.
               For heere his meanes no longer may relieue him.
            
            
               154 Hoc tibi sorte datum.
               Nay (good Sir) giue vs leaue at least to know you,
               Was not your father once a man of trade?
               You now are riche: I know, who may. beshrow you,
               That for your sake, were yonger brothers made,
               Hearke in your eare, tis not the wealth you haue,
               Can shield you from the scandall of a—
            
            
               
               155 Alea nil moderabile suadet.
               When Milo meanes to spare, then spends he most:
               Let him but come where sport or gaming is,
               His humor cannot hold till all be lost,
               And neuer thinketh he hath done amisse.
               For thus resolued, Milo cares not whether
               He pay th'one halfe, or lye for all together.
            
            
               156 Velle placere sat est.
               Fie, would you offer Winifride that wrong,
               Thus to attempt her Virgin chastitie?
               Well wotteth she, you cannot loue her long,
               And (which is worse) the world maye it espie.
               Which is the thing that makes vs looke into it
               Or els (you know) how easie twer to do it:
            
            
               157 Et genus et pr
                     •
                  auos iactant ignobile vulgus,
               Sir, can you tell where young Pandorus liues,
               That was surnamed here the Prodigall?
               He that so much for his silke-Stockings giues,
               Till nought is left him to buy bootes withal.
               Oh blame him not to make what shew he can:
               How should he else be thought a Gentleman.
            
            
               
               158 Auro cedit honos.
               
                  Bindo hath lost his Bess
                        •
                     
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  nowes not where,
               And (frantick) seekes her all the streete throughout:
               Take courage Bindo, and be of good cheere,
               Tomorrow shalt thou finde her, ther's no doubt.
               Tomorrow came: deseru'd she to be shent,
               That brought him home inough to pay his rent?
            
            
               159 Magni constabit parlla voluptas.
               Hand off sir Sauce-box, shee's no meat for Grooms
               Or common wights of base-borne parentage
               Alas, your leane expence fits Ale-house roomes,
               That with Maid-Malkin holdeth equipage,
               Because Sir Tristram late intreated me,
               You therefore think to doe as much as he.
            
            
               160 Sapiunt quaecunque probantur.
               
                  
                     •
                  e make our Epigrams, as men taste Cheese,
               
                  
                     •
                  hich hath his rellish in the last farewell:
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   as the purest liquor hath his leeze,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   may you harshly end the tale you tell,
               
                  The Tayle (of all things) some men ayme at most,
               Those that had rather fast, may kisse the post
               And thers an end.
            
            
               
                  
THus haue I waded through a worthlesse taske,
               Wherto (I trust) ther's no exceptions tane:
               For (meant to none) I answere such as aske,
               'tis like apparrell made in Birchin Lane:
               
               If any please to suite themselues and weare it,
               The blame's not mine but theires that needs will beare
            
            
               Abijcis ista ferus? moritur mea Musa dolendo:
               Accipis ista libens? Illa quod optat habet.
               
            
         
      
   