
      
         
            
            
            THE Seconde parte of the Booke of Christian exercise, appertayning to RESOLVTION.
            Or a Christian directorie, guiding all men to their saluation.
            Written by the former Authour. R. P.
            
            PSAL. 62. ver. 4. One thing haue I requested at Gods hands, & that wil I demaund stil: which is, to dwel in his house all the dayes of my life: to the ende I may know and doe his will.
            AT LONDON, Printed by Iohn Charlwoode and Simon Waterson. Anno. 1590.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir Thomas Heneage, Knight: vize Chamberlaine to her excellent Maiestie, Treasurer of her royall Chamber, and one of her Highnesse most honourable priuie Councell: All happinesse in this life, and in the life to come hartilie wished.
         
         
            
            
            To the Christian Reader, health.
            GEntle Reader, not manie yeeres since, a booke was published of Christian exercise, appertaining to Resolution: written by a Iesuit beyonde the Seas, yet an English-man, named Ma. Robert Parsons, which Booke, Ma. Edm. Bunney hauing dilligently perused, committed to the publique viewe of all indifferent iudgements: as glad that so good matter proceeded from such infected people, and that good might arise thereby to the benefite of others. Since the manifestation of that booke, the first Author thereof, named Ma. Parsons, hath enlarged the same Booke, with a second part and new additions, wherein hee hath concluded and

finished his whole intent of the Resolution, and that vppon some speciall causes, as himselfe setteth downe. For hauing enlarged diuers poynts, which before he omitted, and comming to the reasons of this newe supply, in his Praeface he saith in this manner.
            
               Beeing admonished by the writings of diuers, that since the publishing of my first booke, it hath beene misliked in two principall poynts. First, that I speake so much of good works, and so little of faith. Secondly, that I talked so largely of Gods iustice, and so breefely of his mercie. Beside, conceiuing by the information of many, that diuers persons, hauing a desire in themselues to read the former Booke, but yet beeing weake and fearfull to be touched so neere in conscience, as they imagined that booke did: durst neuer intermedle therewith, beeing informed there was nothing in the same wherewith to entertaine themselues, but onely such vehement matter of perswasion, as would greatly trouble and afflict them. For remedie of which inconueniencie, I haue framed this second part of that worke, and therein inserted diuers Chapters and discourses of matters more plausible, and of themselues more indifferent: wherewith the Reader may sollace hys minde, at such times as he findeth the same not willing, to feele the spurre of more earnest motion to perfection.
            
            Heereupon grewe the cause of his framing this seconde Booke, which performeth

what you haue reade in his owne wryting. And considering howe diuers were desirous to haue thys latter part, because they had thorowlie read the other: after passage the perusing of sundrie learned men, who haue thought it as worthy to be seene as the first, it is (gentle Reader) presented to thy viewe, reade it indifferentlie, and iudge therof as thou findest occasion.
         
         
            
            
            A necessarie Table, guiding the Reader to euery Chapter in thys Booke, as also to euery particuler argument handled in each Chapter.
            
               The first Chapter. Of the manifold perils that ensue to the world by inconsideration: and how necessarie it is for euerie man to enter into cogitation of his owne estate.
               
                  The seuerall matters handled in thys Chapter.
                  THE charitable proceeding of GOD by his Prophets, in fore-telling men of their wickednesse, and reuealing the causes thereof.
                  Page. 1.
                  The danger of inconsideration, declared in two speciall causes.
                  page. 2.
                  The complaint of the Prophet Ieremie, for inconsideration.
                  page. 4.
                  The misterie and sealed secrete of inconsideration.
                  page. 5.
                  Lack of consideration, cause of eternall destruction: a poynt that fooles wil not consider.
                  page. 7.
                  Inconsideration, the cause of so much sinne at thys day.
                  page. 8.
                  Wilfull mallice, obstinate corruption in the vanities of thys life, and idle negligence: three speciall causes of inconsideration.
                  10, 11, 12.
                  
                     How we must stand vpon our watch: that consideration is the onely doore to our watch: with the many commodities and effects therof.
                  14,15,16.
                  That all vertues are stirred vp and quickned by consideration.
                  17.
                  How holy men exercised themselues in consideration: namely the three first Patriarches. Moses, Iosua, King Dauid, king Salomon, and king Ezechias: as also what fruite holy Iob gathered by consideration: and two principall effects ensuing thereon.
                  18. 19. 20.
                  The importaunce of consideration breefelie described.
                  page, 22.
               
            
            
               The second Chapter. That there is a God, which rewardeth good and euill: against all the Atheists of olde, and of our time. With the proofes alleaged for the same, both by Iewe and Gentile.
               The matters handled in thys Chapter, are deuided into foure Sections.
               
                  The first Section.
                  If there be a God, he is a iust rewarder.
                  31.
                  The works of the world declare the workman.
                  31.
                  How the miracles of heauen doe teach to know GOD.
                  33.
                  In what manner the earth teacheth vs there is a God.
                  34.
                  
                     Howe the Sea dooth wonderfully shewe there is a God.
                  35.
                  The parts of man in body and soule, doe amply declare GOD.
                  36.
               
               
                  The second Section.
                  Howe the Heathen prooued there was a God by theyr Phylosophie.
                  38.
                  The three argumēts of the natural Philosopher, Ex motu, ex fine, & Ex causa efficiente.
                  
                  39,40,41,42.
                  The foure arguments of the Metaphisicke or supernatural Phylosopher. The first, ens finitū.
                  
                  44.
                  The second, that euery multitude or distinction of things, proceedeth from some vnitie as from hys fountaine.
                  46.
                  The thyrde, subordination of creatures in thys worlde.
                  47.
                  The fourth, prouidence in making the verie least creature in the world.
                  49.
                  The fift, immortalitie of the soule of man.
                  52.
                  And the meaning of olde Phylosophers touching Anima mundi.
                  
                  53.
               
               
                  The three Arguments of the Morrall Phylosopher.
                  1. How in the naturall inclination of man, there is a dispositiō to cōfesse som God or Deitie.
                  54.
                  The reason why there can be but one God.
                  56.
                  All olde Phylosophers acknowledged one God.
                  59.
                  Cicero his opinion of the Panime Gods, how

they were made.
                  60.
                  2. The second argument of Morrall Phylosophie, de vltimo fine, et summo hominis bono.
                  
                  61
                  Euery thing in this worlde hath a naturall desire to his ende.
                  61.
                  The contention of Phylosophers about the felicitie of man.
                  63.
                  Howe nothing in this life can be our felicitie.
                  page. 64.
                  Howe farre Morrall Phylosophie teacheth, in determining mans felicitie.
                  65.
                  3. The thyrd argument, touching reward and punishment.
                  66.
               
               
                  The third Section.
                  How the Iewes were able to prooue God.
                  68.
                  Theyr first proofe of Scripture, is antiquitie.
                  70.
                  The manner of writing, authorising, and conseruing the Scriptures, the second proofe.
                  72.
                  Consideration of the particuler men that wrote them, and their sinceritie: the thyrd proofe.
                  75.
                  Consent and approbation of all later writers of the Bible, that ensued after Moses: the fourth proofe.
                  page, 81.
                  The subiect handled in the Scriptures, with the ende whereto thy leuell: the fift proofe.
                  82.
                  The peculier stile and phrase which they vse
                        •
                      the sixt proofe.
                  85.
                  The contents of the Scriptures: the seauenth proofe.
                  90.
                  The circumstaunces of prophecies set down in

the Scriptures.
                  page. 94.
               
               
                  1. The prophecie to Abrahā for his posteritie.
                  95.
                  2. The prophecie for the gouernment of Iuda
                  96.
                  3. The prophecie for the greatnesse of Ephraim aboue Manasses.
                  99.
                  4. The fore-sight of Moses.
                  101.
                  5. The prophecie for the perpetuall desolation of Iericho.
                  101.
                  6. The prophecie for the byrth and acts of King Iosias.
                  page, 102.
                  7. The prophecie for the destruction of Ierusalem and Babilon.
                  105.
                  8. The wonderfull prophecie for Cyrus King of Persia.
                  106.
                  9. The prophecies and dooings of Ieremie in the siege of Ierusalem.
                  108.
               
               
                  Approbation of Heathen Writers: the eyght proofe.
                  114
                  1. The creation of the world.
                  115
                  2. The floode of Noe.
                  115.
                  3. The long life of the first fathers.
                  116.
                  4. Of the Tower of Babilon.
                  117.
                  5. Of Abraham and his affayres.
                  117
                  6. Of Isaac, Iacob, Ioseph, Iob, &c.
                  118.
                  7. Of Moses and his acts.
                  119.
                  8. The story of Iosua, the Iudges, & the kings.
                  120
                  9. The thinges that ensued after King Salomons dayes.
                  121.
               
               
                  The fourth Section.
                  The conclusion of the Chapter, with the application.
                  page, 122,
                  
                     No excuse can auaile of the ignoraunce of God.
                  page, 123,
                  The applycation to our selues of the premisses.
                  page, 125.
               
            
            
               The third Chapter. Of the finall end and cause why man was created by God, and placed in this world. And of the obligation he hath thereby, to attende to the affaire for which he came hether.
               
                  The matters handled in thys Chapter.
                  Howe man was made to serue God, & therefore cannot be free, or at his own appointment.
                  128,
                  Man shall be accountant of euery idle worde he vttereth.
                  129,
                  Profitable demaundes and considerations for a man to thinke vppon.
                  130,
                  How a man may take a scantling of his owne estate with God: by following the right course for which he was sent, and shunning the wrong and daungerous course.
                  132,
                  The reason why so fewe are saued.
                  133,
                  A perfect example of a good conuersion.
                  134,
                  The complaint of worldlings in the end of their lyfe.
                  page, 138
                  A comparison expressing our greefe in the ende for running a wrong course.
                  page, 140
                  The misery of a soule that hath gone awry, at

the last day.
                  140
                  Two rare examples of humane felicitie, in Herode the first, and Agrippa, with their seuerall, strange, and wonderfull ends,
                  142, 143, 144,
                  Errour in our course of life, is not pardoned.
                  146,
                  A rare chaunce that happened to Baltasar king of Babilon.
                  page, 148,
                  If God examin straightly the actions of Infidels, much more wyll he doe of careles Christians.
                  148,
                  The daungerous and most dreadfull deuision from God, our Sauiour, and the Communion of Saints.
                  page, 149.
               
            
            
               The fourth Chapter. That the seruice which God requireth of man in thys present life, is Religion: with the particuler confirmations of Christian Religion, aboue all other in the worlde.
               
                  What speciall poynts are handled in thys Chapter, and first for the formost part.
                  An aunswer to the demaund, what seruice God requireth of vs, concerning religion, pietie, and obseruaunce, wyth theyr differences.
                  151,152,
                  The internall and externall acts and operations of Religion.
                  page, 152
                  No way left to obtaine this seruice, but the light and instruction of Christian Religion.
                  153,
                  Howe men in olde time were saued wythout

Christian Religion.
                  154,
                  The difference betweene our beleefe and the olde Fathers.
                  155,
                  Diuers testimonies from GOD, of the thinges that we beleeue.
                  
                  The principall heads of thys Chapter, deuided into three parts, and handled in foure Sections.
                  
                     
                        1. The things that past before the natiuitie & incarnation of Christ.
                        160.
                        2. The thinges doone and verified from that time, vntill his ascention.
                        160.
                        3. Such euents as happened for confirmation of his Deitie, after his departure.
                        page, 160,
                     
                  
               
               
                  The first Section.
                  Howe Christ was foretold both to Iewe & Gentile, declared in foure considerations.
                  161.
                  The first consideration, touching the Messias promised.
                  161

                        The first couenaunt to Adam in Paradise.
                        162,
                        The same promise to Abraham and Isaac.
                        163,
                        Iacobs prophecie of the comming of Christ.
                        164,
                        Moses prophecie of Christ, liuing in the wildern
                              •
                           sse with the people, &c.
                        page, 166,
                        Dauids prophecie of Christ, foure hundred yeeres after.
                        page, 167,
                        Ieremies prophecie of Christ, four hundred yeeres after Dauid.
                        page, 169,
                        Ezechiels prophecie of Christ, wherein hee is called by the name of Dauid.
                        170
                        The prophecies of Esay, touching Christ, wyth

hys wonderfull properties.
                        171, 172,
                        Daniels prophecie of Christ, in the ende of Babilons captiuitie.
                        page, 173,
                     
                  
                  The seconde Consideration: that Christ should be both God and man, sixe waies prooued.
                  page, 176,

                        1. That he should crush the deuill, and breake his heade.
                        page, 177,
                        2. That hee shoulde be a Ruler in Israell, and hys name God.
                        page, 178,
                        3. That he should be called Iehoua, wyth the interpretation of the Rabbines.
                        179,
                        4. That hee shoulde be called the very Sonne of God.
                        page, 182,
                        5. That he should be the word of the father.
                        183,
                        6. Learned Philo his discourse for the returne home of the banished Iewes.
                        page, 185,
                     
                  
                  The thyrd consideration: whether Christ shold chaunge the law of Moses or no.
                  187,

                        Moses Law was an imperfect Law, bringing nothing to perfection.
                        page, 187,
                        The newe Lawe of Christ, and the perfections thereof.
                        page, 189,
                        The reprobation of the olde Lawe, with a promise of a newe.
                        191,
                     
                  
                  The fourth consideration: wherin all particulers are fore-tolde of Christ, for his incarnation, birth, life, death, and resurrection.
                  193, 194,
                  The fift consideration: touching manifestation of Christ to the Gentiles.
                  195,
                  
                     Three particuler waies, whereby the Gentiles myght heare of Christ.
                  page, 197,
                  Prophecies touching Christ, among the Gentiles by the Sibyls.
                  200,
                  Of what importaunce & authoritie, the Greeke verses of the Sibyls were.
                  page, 201,
                  Foure seuerall proofes for credite of the Sibyls verses.
                  202, 203, 205,
                  Of the confession of Oracles, concerning Christes comming.
                  page, 209, 210,
               
               
                  The second Section.
                  Howe the former predections were fulfilled in our Sauiour Christ, at his beeing vpon earth.
                  212,
                  The first consideration: of the appointed tyme for Christes byrth.
                  215,

                        1. proofe. The generall state of the worlde at Christes natiuitie: the three Monarchies of the Assirians, Persians, & Grecians beeing ended, and the Romaines entered into the fourth.
                        page, 216,
                        2. proofe. The peace of all the world at his comming.
                        page, 217,
                        3. proofe. The Scepter of Iuda, & most horrible murders committed by Herod.
                        218, 219,
                        The prophecie of Iacob touching the Scepter of Iuda.
                        page, 221,
                        That the Scepter neuer fayled in Iuda, vntill Herods time.
                        page, 221,
                        4. proofe. The destruction of the seconde Temple.
                        page, 222,
                        
                           The building of the seconde Temple, lesse gorgeous then the first.
                        page, 223
                        Fiue speciall prerogatiues of the first Temple.
                        page, 225,
                        The seconde Temple to be destroyed, presently after Christes passion.
                        226,
                        5. proofe. The seauentie-two Hebdomades prophecied by Daniell.
                        page, 227,
                        Why the Angell named seauentie Hebdomades in thys place.
                        228,
                        The exact number of weekes, from the building of the second Temple, to the death of Christ, sixtie-two.
                        229,
                        6. proofe. The traditions and obseruations of the olde Iewes themselues.
                        page, 230,
                        Christ hydeth himselfe in the Sea.
                        233,
                        7. proofe. That out of Iurie should ryse a generall Lord of the vniuersall world.
                        233.
                        8. proofe. The generall expectation of the people.
                        page, 234,
                     
                  
                  The seconde Consideration: concerning the byrth of Christ, &c.
                  page, 237,

                        Iesus lyne and stocke, directly of the Trybe of Iuda, and lineally by hys mother of the peculiar house of Dauid.
                        page, 237,
                        The manner of his conception, and the message made by the Angell, &c.
                        238,
                        Iesus natiuitie, and in what manner.
                        page, 239,
                        The place appointed for the byrth of the Messias.
                        page, 241,
                        The singing of the Angels, and of the name of

Iesus.
                        page, 243,
                        The comming of the three Magi, or wyse men of the East.
                        page, 244
                        Prophecies of thinges that shoulde fall out in Bethleem.
                        246.
                        Heathen testimonies for the starre which guided the wyse men.
                        247,
                        The presentation of Iesus in Ierusalem.
                        248,
                        Christes flight into Egypt for feare of Herode.
                        page, 249,
                        The benefit that Egypt receiued, by Christes flight vnto it.
                        page, 250,
                     
                  
                  The thyrd consideration, shewing the lyfe, conuersation, doctrine, and miracles of Iesus.
                  page, 251.

                        Saint Iohn Baptist the Messenger of the Testament.
                        page, 252
                        The order of Iesus preaching & doctrine.
                        253,
                        The comparison of Christes Lawe wyth that of Moses.
                        page, 254,
                        The meaning & effect of Christes doctrine.
                        255
                        The life & conuersation of Iesus, testified by his greatest aduersaries.
                        page, 256,
                        Of Iesus miracles: and of the predictions of the Messias hys miracles.
                        257,
                        The confession of Iesus myracles, by his verie enemies.
                        page, 259
                        The calling of hys Apostles and other folowers.
                        page, 260,
                        Externall miracles done by Iesus, aboue all power of humaine capacitie.
                        page, 261,
                     
                  
                  
                     The fourth consideration: deliuering the passion, resurrection and ascention of Iesus.
                  page, 264,

                        Christes ascending to Ierusalem to reciue hys passion.
                        265.
                        Hys barbarous abusage fore-told by prophecie, as also his death most plainely.
                        266,
                        The wonderfull prediction of hys passion, sette downe by the Prophet Esay, &c.
                        267,
                        The particulers of hys passion, fore-tolde by Sibylla.
                        268,
                        Of the miracles that fell out in his death and passion.
                        page, 269,
                        Hys resurrection exactly fore-told both to Iewe and Gentile.
                        271
                        The appearings which Iesus made after his resurrection.
                        page, 273.
                        Circumstaunces confirming the true resurrection of Iesus.
                        275.
                        The great chaunge in hys Disciples by his Resurrection.
                        276,
                        The examination of the matter by Pilate.
                        277
                        Pilats Letters to Tyberius, and hys proceeding thereupon.
                        278.
                        The opinion of the wiser sort of Iewes, touching Iesus resurrection in that tyme.
                        279,
                        Likeli-hoodes of trueth, concerning Iesus ascention.
                        page, 280.
                     
                  
               
               
                  The thyrd Section.
                  How Iesus prooued his Deitie after his departure to heauen.
                  282.
                  
                     The first consideration: declaring the sustentation, protection, increase, and continuation of Christes little Church & kingdome, that hymselfe first planted, and left vpon earth.
                  page, 283,

                        The state of Christes first Church in persecution.
                        284,
                        The comming of the holy Ghost, and what comforts he brought wyth hym.
                        285,
                        The wonderfull quicke increase of Christ hys Church.
                        287.
                        The increase of Christians against nature.
                        288.
                     
                  
                  The second consideration: concerning the Apostles of Christ.
                  290.

                        The miracles reported of the Apostles could not be feigned, neither durst any impugne theyr myracles, but by calumniation.
                        292, 293.
                        The successe of the Apostles.
                        295,
                        The assuraunce and ioyfull ending of the Apostles.
                        296.
                     
                  
                  The thyrd consideration: treating of the Euangelists.
                  297.

                        The dyfferent qualities and circumstaunces of the foure Euangelists.
                        298.
                        Circumstances of trueth in the Euangelists.
                        299,
                        The publishing of the Gospels: and the manner of stile vsed by the Euangelists.
                        300.
                        A speciall poynt to be obserued in the Euangelists.
                        301.
                        No doubt but we haue the true writings of the Euangelists.
                        page, 303.
                     
                  
                  
                     The fourth consideration: of Martyrs, that by theyr blood should confirme thys doctrine.
                  page, 304

                        Three poynts to be considered in our Martyrs, and the singuler alacritie of Christians in their sufferings.
                        page, 305.
                        Iesus assistance to hys Martyrs.
                        page, 306,
                     
                  
                  The fift consideration: concerning the subiection of the infernall spyrits.
                  307

                        Of the myraculous ceassing of Oracles, at Christes appearing.
                        309,
                        The wonderfull authoritie of Christians ouer spyrits.
                        page, 312,
                     
                  
                  The sixt consideration: of the punishment of Christes enemies here on earth.
                  315,

                        Herod Ascolonita: Archelaus: Herode Antipas: Herodias daughter: Herode Agrippa: and the stocke of Herode soone extinguished.
                        316,317,
                        The punishment of the Romaines.
                        318,
                        The chastisement of Ierusalem, & of the Iewish people.
                        320,
                        Wyth what circumstaunces Christes death was punished vpon the Iewes.
                        321,
                        A meruailous prouidence of GOD, for deliuering the Christians that were in Ierusalem, at the tyme of the destruction thereof.
                        323.
                        The Iewish miserie after the destruction of Ierusalem.
                        page, 324.
                        The finall desolation of the Iewish Nation.
                        325.
                     
                  
                  The seauenth consideration; the fulfilling of such speeches and prophecies, as Iesus

vttered on earth.
                  page, 326.

                        The circumstaunces of the tyme when Iesus spake hys words, and when they were written.
                        328.
                        The testimonie of a Heathen, for the fulfilling of Christes prophecies.
                        329.
                        Other prophecies of Iesus, fulfilled to his Disciples.
                        329,
                        Prophecies fulfilled in the sight of Gentiles.
                        331.
                     
                  
               
               
                  The fourth Section.
                  The summe of the three former Sections, wyth eyght demonstratiue reasons for better satis-factiō.
                  332. 333. 334. 335. 336. 337.
                  The conclusion of the Chapter, with an admonishment.
                  338.
                  An illation vppon the premisses, with an exhortation.
                  340.
               
            
            
               The fift Chapter. Howe a man may iudge or discerne of himselfe, whether he be a true Christian or not: with a declaration of the two parts belonging to that profession: which are, beleefe and life.
               
                  The matters handled in thys Chapter.
                  The first part, concerning our beleefe, howe to examine the trueth thereof.
                  page, 345.
                  The matters of fayth and beleefe, easie among Christians.
                  page. 346.
                  
                     The direct holie way of Christians vnder the Gospell.
                  page, 347.
                  No heresie finally preuailed against the Sciptures.
                  page, 352.
                  The spirituall sworde, wherewith our Sauiour Christ preuailed against Sathan, the head Lorde and master of all heretiques.
                  353.
                  What the diligent reading of the Scriptures leadeth vs vnto, forsaking the by pathes of mens inuentions, and traditions.
                  355.
                  A discription of the forme, force, and nature of fayth.
                  356.
                  The fulnes of fayth, conteyneth in it three especiall thinges
                  358.
                  That which is meat to the flesh, that is faith to the soule.
                  359.
                  A conclusion of this first parte, according to Saint Ierome.
                  360.
                  The second part of this Chapter, concerning life and manners.
                  362.
                  Two causes of heresie, according to the opinion of the holie Fathers, of Christes primatiue Church.
                  363.
                  The doings of Precismatiques, in handling the Scriptures.
                  363.
                  The obseruation of S. Cyprian, concerning the originall causes of heretiques.
                  364.
                  Many causes of euil life, as erring in beleefe.
                  364.
                  The effect of Christes most excellent Sermon on the Mountaine.
                  365.
                  A similitude touching faith and workes.
                  367.
                  
                     The summe of faith and workes, according to Iames.
                  page. 369.
                  What we promise in our Baptisme.
                  373.
               
            
            
               The sixt Chapter. Of the onely impediment, which is wont to let sinners from resolution: which is, the mistrust and diffidence in Gods mercie, through the multitude and greeuousnesse of their offences.
               
                  Dispaire an ordinarie temptation to the greatest sinners.
                  page. 377.
                  The shipwrack of soules ouerloden with sin.
                  378.
                  The wofull miserie of desperation.
                  page. 379
                  The thing wherein GOD most delighteth, is mercie.
                  380.
                  A merueylous example of GODS Clemencie.
                  page. 381.
                  An other example of Gods wonderfull mercie.
                  382.
                  Iudgment and Iustice, to be vsed in true repentaunce: that is, Iudgement vpon our selues, and iustice towards others.
                  383.
                  The deuision of this Chapter, into four especiall partes.
                  384.
                  The first part touching the loue that God beareth towards man.
                  384.

                        The first cause why God loueth vs: for that he is our Creatour, and we are his own workes.
                        385.
                        Euery mā is giuen by nature to loue his own.
                        386.
                        The confidence of Iob, in that GOD made him.
                        386.
                        
                           The assured hope Dauid had, in that hee was Gods wormanshippe.
                        387,
                        The second reason of assuraunce of Gods loue, for that he is our Father,
                        388.
                        What a Father God is.
                        390.
                        Christes most comfortable embassage.
                        390.
                        Howe greatly the respect of a Father mooueth GOD.
                        391.
                        The Fathers liberall harte to the prodigall sonne.
                        392.
                        What the name of Father doth importe.
                        393.
                        The third argument of Gods loue: the giueing of his Sonne for vs.
                        394.
                        The conclusion of this pointe made by Saint Paule.
                        395.
                     
                  
                  The second part: how God expresseth his loue towards sinners.
                  396.

                        Two rare pointes of clemencie in God.
                        397.
                        God that is offended, seeketh attonement with vs.
                        398.
                        Gods wooing of Ierusalem: his protestation: his cunctation: his chiding: his fayre speech: his complaynt: his kinde speech: his conference: his sweete conclusion.
                        398. 399. 400.
                        A consideration, vppon the former treatie of God with Ierusalem.
                        400.
                        Gods tender loue to Ierusalen, when he was to destroy it.
                        401.
                        A pitifull complaint vsed by God, for the wilfulnes of his people.
                        402.
                        The wonderfull proceding of God with Ierusalem.
                        
                           403.
                        The obstinacie of the Iewish nation
                        404.
                        Epithetons giuen by God to the people of Israell.
                        404.
                        A wounderfull poin includedt in Gods promise to a sinner.
                        405.
                        What ioy there is made at a sinners conuersion.
                        405.
                     
                  
                  The third part: what assuraunce GOD giueth to them that repent.
                  406.

                        The promises of GOD to sinners that repent.
                        407.
                        Foure vniuersalities, in Gods promises to sinners.
                        409.
                        Three especiall pointes of great comfort.
                        409.
                        How God hath performed his promises, to sinners that haue repented.
                        410.
                        Neuer sinner repented, that was not pardoned.
                        411.
                        The reiection of Caine, and Esau.
                        412.
                        The infinite sinnes of the Iewish people, and their infinit pardons, receiued at gods handes.
                        412.
                        The examples of Manasses and the Niniuites
                        413.
                        A speech of GOD, to be heedefully considered.
                        415.
                        Examples of mercies in the new Testament.
                        page. 416.
                        The wonderfull clemencie of Iesus our Sauiour.
                        417.
                        Great and many causes of assured hope in

Christ.
                        418.
                     
                  
               
               
                  The fourth part: being the aplication of all that hath beene said before.
                  420.
                  Saint Paules exhortation to confidence.
                  420.
                  An excellent discourse, and exhortation of Saint Chrisostome.
                  421.
                  The speach of the deuill to a soule loden with sinne.
                  422,
                  Saint Chrisostomes counsaile, against the Deuilles temptation.
                  423
                  No time to late to repent.
                  424.
                  An exhortation and admonition of Saint Augustine.
                  425.
                  A similitude of the bodie, to expresse the miserie of the soule by multiplying sinne.
                  426.
                  Godly mens wordes ought to mooue vs greatlie.
                  427.
                  A notable ciscourse of S. Augustine, touching our conuersion.
                  428.
                  Hell was not made for man, but for the Deuilll.
                  429.
                  In this life repentaunce is auaileable, but not after.
                  429.
               
               FINIS.
               
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            OF THE MANIFOLD PERILS THAT ENSVE TO THE WORLDE by inconsideration.
            And howe necessarie it is for euerie man to enter into cogitation of his owne estate.
            
               CHAP. I.
               THE Prophets and Saints of GOD,The charitable proceeding of GOD by his Prophets. who frō time to time haue been sent by his mercifull prouidence, to aduertise and warne sinners of their perilous estate & condition for sin; haue not onely foretold them of their wickednes and imminent dangers for the same, but also haue reuealed the causes thereof, whereby they might the easier prouide remedie for the inconueniences to come.
               Such is the charitable proceedings of our most mercifull Lord with the children of

men. And among other causes, none is more generall or more often alledged, then the lacke of consideration,The danger of inconsideratiō. by which, as by a cō
                  mon snare & deceipt of our aduersarie, most men fall into sinne, and are holden also perpetually in the same, to their finall destruction and eternall perdition. So Esay the Prophet, speaking of the carelesse nobilitie and gentrie of Iurie, that gaue thēselues to banquetting and disport, without consideration of their duties towards God; repeateth often the threat of woe against them, and then putteth downe the cause in these words:Esay. 5. 
                  The lute, and harpe, and tymprel, and shalme, & good wine, aboundeth in your banquets, but the works of God you respect not, nor haue you consideration of his doings. And then ensueth:The sensuall life of the Iewish gentrie. 
                  Therefore hath hell enlarged his soule, & opened his mouth without all measure or limitation, and the stout, and high, and glorious of this people shall discend into it.
               
               Heere are two causes as (ye see) & two effects lincked together, of these Iewes damnation, the one depending of the other. For as good cheere and sensualitie brought these men to inconsideration of Gods workes and proceedings towards sinners: so inconsideration brought them to the mouth and pits brimme of hell. I say, that inconsideration of Gods works towards sinners, brought them

to this perrill, for that it followeth in the verie same place: And the Lord of hostes shall be exalted in iudgement, and our holy God shall be sanctified in iustice: as if he had said, that albeit you will not consider now Gods iudgments and iustice, amidst the heate and pleasure of your feastings: yet shall he by excercising the same vppon you heereafter, be known, exalted, and sanctified throughout the world. The like discourse maketh God himselfe by the same Prophet, to the daughter of Babilon, and by her, to euery sinful and sensuall soule figured by that name.Esay. 47.
                  Come downe (saith he) and sitte in the duste thou daughter of Babilon:The daughter of Babilon, forgetteth her ende. thou hast said, I shall be a Ladie for euer, and hast not put vppon thy hart the things thou shouldest, nor hast thou had remembraunce of thy last end &c. Now therfore harken thou delicate (daughter) which dwellest so confidently: there shall come vpon thee an euill, whereof thou shalt not know the of-spring, and a calamitie shall rush vpon thee, from which thou shalt not be able to deliuer thee. A miserie shall ouertake thee vpon the suddain, which thou shalt not knowe, &c.
               
               Holie Ieremie, after hee had weighed with himselfe vvhat miseries for sinne the Prophets Esay, Amos, Osee, Ioel, Abdias, Micheas, Nahum, Sophonias, and himselfe,

(all which Prophets liued within the compasse of one hundred yeeres) had foretolde to be imminent vpon the worlde: not onely to Samaria and the ten Trybes of Israell,4. Regum. 15. et 17. which were now alreadie carried into banishment to the furthest parts of the East: but also to the states & Countries that most florished at that time, (as by name to Babilon, Egipt, Damasco, Tyrus, Sidon, Moab, and finallie to Ierusalem and Iudea it selfe, which he foresawe should soone after most pittifully be destroyed,) when hee sawe also by long experience, that neither his words, nor the wordes and cryes of the other forenamed Prophets,The cōplaint of Ieremie for inconsideratiō. could any thing moue the harts of wicked men: hee brake foorth into this most lamentable complaint;Ieremie. 12.
                  
                     Desolatione desolata est omnis terra, quia nullus est qui recogitet corde. The whole earth falleth into extreame ruine and desolation, for that there is no man which considereth deeplie in his hart.
               
               This complaint made good Ieremie in his daies for compassion of his people, that ran miserablie to perdition for want of consideration. And the same complaint with much more reason, may euery good Christian make at this time, for the infinit soules of such as perish dailie by inconsideration. Whereby, as by a generall and remedilesse

enchauntment, many thousande soules are brought a sleepe, and doe finde themselues within the gates of hell, before they mysdoubt any such inconuenience, beeing ledde through the vale of this present life as it were blindfolded, with the veile of carelesse negligence (like beastes to the slaughter house) & neuer permitted to see theyr owne danger, vntill it be too late to remedie the same.
               
                  Propterea captiuus ductus est populus meus, quia non habuit scientiam,
                  Esay, 5. saith GOD by the mouth of Esay.
Therefore, and for thys cause, is my people ledde away captiue in al bondage and slauerie to perdition, for that they haue no knowledge, no vnderstanding of their own estate, no foresight of the times to come, no consideration of their danger. Heerehence floweth all the miserie of my people, and yet this is a misterie that all men will not know.
               
               Will you see what a misterie and sealed secret this is? harken then howe one describeth the same,The misterie of inconsideration. and with what circumstaunces.
Furthermore (saith he) a certain hidden word was spoken vnto me,Iob. 4. and mine eare, as it were by stealth, receiued the veines of his whyspering: it was in the horror of a vision by night, when deade sleepe is wont to possesse men. Feare came vppon me and trembling, and all my bones were extremelie terrified.

At length a spirit past by, in my presence, whereat the hayres of my flesh stoode vppe in horrour. There stood before me one whose face I knew not. His image was before mine eyes, and I hearde his voice as the sound of a soft ayre.
               
               Hetherto is described in what manner and order this secrete was reuealed: but nowe what said this vision or spirit (thinke you) at the last? truelie, he made a short discourse, to proue by the fall of the Angels for their sin,Iob. 4. that much more,
qui habitant domos luteas, et terrenum habent fundamentum, consumētur velut atinea, et de mane vsque ad vesperam succidentur.
                  A collection to be noted. 
                  They who dwel in houses of morter, (as all men doe, whose bodies are of flesh) and they which haue their 
                        •
                     oundation of earth, (as most folke of this world haue, that put their confidence in things of this life,) they must all consume by little and little, as the cloth doth by the Mothe, and at length they must vpon the suddaine, (within lesse space perhaps then is from morning to night) be cut downe and dispatched when they think least of it.
               
               And to shewe that herein standeth a point of high secrecie (I meane to consider & ponder well this discourse) hee maketh his conclusion in these words immediatly folowing;
et quia nullus intelligit, in aeternum peribunt.
               
               
                  
                  And for that fewe or none of these men before mentioned, who haue such earthly foundations, doe vnderstande this point aright,Lack of consideration, cause of eternall destruction. (I meane of their suddaine death, & cutting off frō this world) therfore must they perish eternally, and this is a secret which fewe men will beleeue. Vir insipiens non cognoscet, (saith Dauid) et stultus non intelliget haec:
                     Psalme. 91. A point that fooles wil not consider. an vnaduised man will not learne these thinges, nor will a foole vnderstande them: but what things? it ensueth in the same place: howe wonderfull the works of God, & how deepe his cogitations are about sinners, who spring vp as grasse (and florish in this world) vt intereant in seculum seculi, to the ende they may perish for euer and euer.
               
               The Prophet Daniell had many visions, and strange reuelations of great & high misteries: but one amongst all other (and this the least) of the most dreadfull iudgments of God vpon sinners in the ende of the world. The vision was by the great riuer Tygris:Daniel. 10. where, as diuers Angels were attending about the bankes: so vpon the water it selfe stood one in the likenes of a man, of exceeding dreadfull maiestie; his apparrel beeing onelie lynnen, through which his body shyned like precious stone:A most terrible vision of Daniell, wherin hee sawe Christ. his eyes like burning lamps: his face like flashing lightning: his armes & legges like brasse inflamed, and

his voyce as the shoute of a whole multitude of people that should speake together.
               This was Christ by all interpretation, at whose terrible presence when Daniell fell downe deade, hee was erected againe by an Angell, and made strong to abide the vision, and so hauing heard & seene the most wonderfull things that in his booke hee recounteth, he was bold to aske a question or two, for better vnderstanding therof, and his first question was,Daniell. 12. 
                  howe long it shoulde be, ere these wonderfull things tooke their ende? whereunto the man vppon the water aunswered, by stretching out both his brasen armes to heauen, and swearing strangly by him that liued for euer and euer; that it shoulde be a time, and times, and halfe a time. Which aunswere, Daniell not vnderstanding, began to question further, but he was cut of with this dyspatch:A secret. 
                  Goe thy way. Daniell, for these speeches are shut vp & sealed vntil the time preordained. And yet for his further instruction, it was added in the same place;Daniell. 12. 
                  Impie agent impii, nec intelligent: wicked men will alwaies doe wickedlie,Wilfull ignoraunce. and will not vnderstande these misteries, albeit we shold neuer so much expound them.
               Whereby, as by all the rest that hetherto hath beene alledged, is made apparent, that inconsideration, negligence, carelesse ignoraunce,

and lacke of vnderstanding in our owne estates, and in Gods iudgments & proceedings with iniquitie and sinne, hath been a bane, & a common perdition of retchlesse men from time to time.
               And if we will turne our eyes to thys our age,The cause of so much sinne at thys day. much more shall we see the same to be true. For what is the cause (thinke you) why at this day we haue so many of those people, whom holy Iob doth call abhominable, that drinke vp iniquitie as beastes doe water,
                  Iob. 15. that, commit all sinne, all iniustice, all turpitude, without remorse or scruple of conscience? what is the cause of this (I say) but lacke of consideration, lacke of vnderstanding, lacke of knowledge? For as Christ said to Ierusalem touching her destruction,Luke. 19. 
                  si cognouisses et tu, &c. If thou also (ô sinfull soule) diddest know, what hangeth ouer thy heade for this carelesse life of thine: if thou (daughter of Babilon) wouldest remember and ponder in thy hart, what shalbe the end of thy delights, thou wouldest not liue so pleasantly as thou dost,Luke. 9. 
                  Nunc autem abscondita sunt ab occulis tuis. But now (saith Christ) these things are hidden from thine eyes.
               Not, but that thou maist haue knowne them if thou wouldest, but for that thou art one of them, who say to God,Voluntary inconsideration. 
                  scientiam viarum tuarum nolumus, wee will not haue vnderstanding

of thy waies; one of them,Iob. 21. 
                  qui sunt rebelles lumini, that are rebellious against the light, & illumination of Gods grace, one of them,Iob. 23. 
                  qui nolunt intelligere vt bene agant: that will not vnderstande to doe well. And finally, one of them,Prouerb. 28. 
                  qui declinant aures ne audiant legem, that turn away their eares to the end they may not heare Gods lawe;Ibidem. 
                  quorum oratio est execrabilis, whose not onely life, but also prayer is execrable and detestable in the sight of their maker.
               Truelie, nothing in reason can be lesse tollerable in the presence of Gods maiestie, then whereas he hath published a lawe vnto vs with so great charge to beare it in minde, to ponder in hart,Deu. 6. et 11. Iosua. 1. Psalm. 118. to studie & meditate vppon it both day & night, at home & abroad, at our vprising & our downe lying, to make it our cogitation, our discourse, our talk, our exercise, our rumination,Eccle. 6. et 22. and our delight; that wee should notwithstanding contemne the same, as to make it no part of our thought but rather to flee the knowledge thereof, as wee see most men of the world doe, for not troubling theyr consciences.
               But the holie Ghost hath layd down the reason hereof long agoe in these words:Eccle. 17. The first cause why men flie cōsideration. 
                  Cum sit timida nequitia testimonium condemnationis. For that wickednes in it selfe is alwaies fearfull, it giueth witnes against it selfe of damnation,

whensoeuer it thinketh of the Lawe of God, or of honestie. So Felix the Gouernour of Iurie, when S. Paule began to talke of iustice, chastitie, and Gods iudgements before him:Acts. 24. he was wonderfully afearde, and said to Paule, that hee shoulde depart for that time, and that he would call for him afterwarde, when occasion shold require. But he neuer did, and what was the cause? for that (as Iosephus testifieth) hee was a wicked man,
                     Ioseph. li. 20. antiq. cap. 5. and Drusilla his faire Ladie that was with him at Saint Paules speech, was not his true Wife, but taken by allurement and violence from another, and therefore it offended thē both to heare preaching of chastitie.
               This then is one principall cause, why men of this world wil not enter into consideration of their own estate, and of Gods commaundements, least they shoulde reade and see their owne faultes, and beare witnesse against themselues of theyr own condemnation. Whereunto the Scripture annexeth another cause, not farre vnlike to this,The second cause why mē flie consideration. which is, that worldly men doe so drowne themselues in the cares and cogitations of this life, as they leaue in their minds no place to thinke vppon Gods affayres, which are the busines of theyr owne soules. This expresseth Ieremie the Prophet most effectually,Ieremie. 7. when hauing made his complaint, that notwithstanding

his preaching & crying in the Temple gate, for long time together, where all the people passed by him and heard him; yet no man (saith he) would enter into consideration, or say with himselfe, what haue I doone? and reason:Ieremie. 8.
                  Omnes enim conuersi sunt ad cursum suum, quasi equus impetu vadens ad praelium. 
                  All men are sette vpon theyr own courses and waies, and doe run in the same with as great vehemencie and fearce obstination, as a furious armed horse, when hee heareth the Trumpet in the beginning of a battaile.
By which comparison, the holy Ghost expresseth very liuelie, the irrecouerable state of a setled worldlie man, that followeth greedilie his owne designments in the negotiation of earth.
               These are two of the cheefe causes of inconsideration, I meane wilfull mallice, & obstinate corruption in the vanities of this life. And yet mentioneth the Scripture, a thyrde sort also of inconsiderate men,The thyrde cause of incō
                     sideration. who neither of direct mallice, nor yet of great occupation in worldly affaires, doe neglect consideration, but rather of a certaine lightnesse & idle negligence, for that they will not trouble their heads with any thing but disport and recreation, of whom it is written:Wisdom. 15. 
                  aestimanerunt lusum esse vitam nostram. They esteeme this life of ours to be but a play-game. And

in another place of the same men:Ecclesi. 
                        •
                     . 
                  Ita securi viuunt quasi iustorum facta habeant. They liue as securelie & confidently without care and cogitation, as if they had the good workes of iust men to stand for them. But as the holie Ghost pronounceth in the same place; hoc vanissimum, this is vanitie and follie in the highest degree.
               For as in things of this life, he were but a foolish Merchant,A comparison. that for quietnesse sake would neuer looke into his account Booke, whether he were behind hand or before: and as that Shyppe-maister were greatly to be laughed at, that for auoiding of care, woulde sitte downe and make good cheere, and let the shyp goe whether shee would: so much more in the busines of our soule, it is madnes and follie, to flie consideration for eschewing of trouble, seeing in the ende this negligence must needes turne vpon vs more trouble & and irremediable calamitie.
               For as Ieremie sayth to all such men,Ierem. 30.23. 
                  in nouissimo die intelligitis ea, in the ende of your dayes, you shall not choose but knowe, and see and vnderstand these things, which now for delicacie you wyll not take the paynes to thinke of. But when shall this be trow you? he telleth plainly in the same place:In the ende euill men shall vnderstande, whether they wyll or no. 
                  whē the furie of our Lorde shall come foorth as a whirle-wind, and shall rush and rest vpon your heades

as a tempest: then shall you know and vnderstand these things.
               
                  The example of the Babylonians.It seemeth that the Babylonians were a people verie faultie in this point of consideration (as all wealthie people are) not onelie by that which before hath beene touched of the daughter of Babylon, that woulde not consider her ending daies; but also, for that not long before the most terrible destruction of that great Cittie by the Medes & Persians, God cryed vnto her in these wordes,Esay, 21.
                  My deerely beloued Babylon, put aside the table and stand vpon thy watch: ryse vp you Princes from eating & drinking: take your Targets in your hands; goe, and set a watchman vpon the walles, & whatsoeuer he seeeth, let him tell you.
               
               And then was there a watchman set vpon the walles, and a Lyon to denounce wyth open mouth, whatsoeuer daunger hee sawe comming towards them.
And GOD taught the Prophet to cry in this sort to their Sentinell or watchman; 
                     Custos quid de nocte? custos quid de nocte? Thou watchman, what seest thou comming towards thee by night? what espiest thou (ô Sentinell) drawing on vs in the darknesse?
               
               By all which circumstaunce, what els is insinuated, but that God wold haue vs stand vpon our watch,We must stand vpō our watch. for that his iudgments are

to come vpon the world by night,Luke. 12. when men least thinke thereof? they are to come as a theefe at midnight, as also in another place we are admonished: and therefore happy is the man that shall be founde watchfull. But nowe the doore and sole entraunce into thys watch,Consideration the only dore to our watch. whereof the securitie of our eternall life dependeth, can be nothing els but consideration, for that where no consideration is, there can be no watch, nor fore-sight, nor knowledge of our estate; and consequentlie no hope of saluation, as holy S. Bernard holdeth;
                     Bern. lib. 1. de consid.
                   which thing caused that blessed man to wryte fiue whole Bookes of consideration to Eugenius.
               Consideration is the thing that bringeth vs to know GOD and our selues. And touching God, it layeth before vs his Maiestie, his mercie, his iudgments, his commaundements, his promises, his threatnings, his proceeding with other men before vs, whereby wee may gather, what wee also in time must expect at his hands.
               And for our selues,The many cō
                     modities of consideration. consideration the key that openeth the doore to the closet of our hart, wher al our bookes of account doe lye: it is the looking glasse, or rather the very eye of our soule, wherby she taketh the view of herself, & looketh into all her whole estate; into her riches, her debts, her dueties,

her negligēces, her good gifts, hir defects, her safety, hir danger, hir way she walketh in, her course she followeth, her pace she holdeth, and finally the place & ende whereunto she draweth. And without this cōsideration she runneth on headlong into a thousand brakes and bryers, stumbling at euery steppe into some one inconuenience or other, and continually in perrill of some great & deadly mischiefe.
               And wonderfull (truely) it is, that in all other busines of this life, men can see and confesse, that nothing may be begunne, prosecuted, or well ended without consideration, & yet in this great affayre, of winning heauen, or falling into hell, fewe thinke consideration greatly necessarie to be vsed.
               I might stand heere to shew the infinite other effects and commodities of consideration,Effects of consideration. as that it is the watch or larum bel, that stirreth vppe and awaketh all the powers of our minde: the match or tynder, that conceiueth and nourisheth the fire of deuotion: the bellowes that enkindeleth and inflameth the same, the spurre that pricketh forwarde to all vertuous, zealous, and heroycall actes; and the thing indeed, that giueth both light, life, and motion to our soule.
               Our fayth is confirmed and increased by consideration of Gods workes and miracles;

our hope by consideration of his promises, & of the true performaunce thereof to all them that euer trusted in him:How all vertues are stirred vp and quickened by consideration. our charitie or loue to God, by consideration of his benefits and innumerable deserts towards vs: our humilitie by consideration of his greatnes & of our owne infirmitie: our courage and fortitude, by contemplation of his assistaunce in al causes for his honor: our contempt of the world by consideration of the ioyes of heauen eternall: and so all other vertues both morrall and diuine, doe take their heate, quickning, and vitall spirit from consideration.
               By the exercise of consideration and meditation, holy Dauid saith,Psalm. 38. that he felt a burning fire to flame within his breast; that is, the fire of zeale, the fire of feruour in Religion, the fire of deuotion, the fire of loue towards God and his neighbour. And in anoplace he saith,Psalm. 76. that by the same exercise hee swept and purged his owne spirit: which is to be vnderstoode, from the duste of this world, from the dregges of sinne, from the contamination and coinquination of humaine creatures, for that consideration indeed, is the verie fan that seuereth and driueth awaie the chaffe from the corne.
               For which cause wee shall neuer reade of any holy man from the beginning of the worlde, neyther before Christ nor after, who

vsed not much & familiarlie this most blessed exercise of consideration & pondering.The exercise of holie men touching consideration. And for the first three Patriarches, it shall be sufficient to remēber the custome of young Isaac recorded in Genesis. Which was to goe forth towards night into the fieldes,Genesis. 24. The first three Patriarches. 
                  ad meditandum, that is, to meditate, consider and ponder, vppon the workes, iudgments, and commaundements of GOD. And thys hee did beeing yet but a childe and vnmarried, (farre different from the custome of young Gentlemen nowe adaies, who frequent the fieldes to follow their vanities:) and as lyttle Isaac could not haue this custome but from his Father Abraham, so (no doubt) but hee taught the same to his sonne Iacob, & Iacob againe to his posteritie.
               
                  Moses and Iosua.And as for Moses and his successor Iosua, it may easilie be imagined howe they vsed this exercise, by the most earnest exhortations, which they made thereof to others, in their speech and wrytings.Deu. 6. et 11. The good kings of Iuda also, notwithstanding their manie great temporall a
                     •
                  faires,Iosua 1. do testifie of themselues concerning this exercise; as Dauid almost euery where,K. Dauid. that the commaundements of God were his dailie meditation, not onely by day, and that tota die all the day,Psal 38. 62. and 118. 
                  et per singulos dies, euery day, & in matutino, in the morning, et septies in die, seauen times a

day: but also hee insinnuateth this custome by night:Psalm. 76. 
                  meditatus sum nocte cum corde meo, I doe meditate by night in my hart vpon thy commaundements ô Lord; signifying here by, both his watchfulnesse by night, when other men were a sleepe, and the hartie care that he had of this exercise which we esteem so little.
               Salomon also King Dauids sonne, so long as hee liued in the grace and fauour of God,K. Salomon. obserued this exercise of his Father, and exhorteth other men,Eccle. 6. 
                  to haue continuall & daily cogitation in this affaire. Which if himselfe had continued still, it is likely hee had neuer fallen from God by women as he did. The good King Ezechias,K. Ezechias. is reported to haue meditated like a Doue, that is, in silence & solitarinesse with himselfe alone, which is the true way of profitable meditation.Esay. 58. Esay testifieth of his own watching by night in this exercise,Esay. 26. and howe he did the same with his spirit alone, in the very bowels of his hart.
               Holie Iob maketh mention, not onelie of his manner of considering,The consideration that Iob vsed, and the fruites thereof. but what also hee considered, and what effect he found in him selfe by the same.
First hee considered (as I sayde) the wayes, foote-steppes, and commaundements of GOD, & then his dreadfull power: to wit, howe no man was able to auert or turne away his cogitation, but that

his soule did what it pleased, & by this (saith he) cōsiderans eum timore sollicitor:
                     Iob. cap. 23. I am made sollicitous or watchfull with feare: vvhen I doe consider him.
In which wordes hee insinuateth two most excellent effects of consideration;Two effects of consideration. First, the feare of God, of which it is written, salutis thesaurus timor Domini,
                  Esay. 32. the feare of God is the treasure of saluation; and the seconde, that by this feare hee was made sollicitous, watchfull, and dilligent in Gods seruice, of which the Prophet Micheas saith thus.Miche. 6. 
                  I will tell thee (O man) what is good, & what our Lord requireth at thy hands: to wit, to doe iudgment and loue mercie, and to walke sollicitous and watchfull with thy God.
               
               But thou ô holie and blessed man Iob, did this exercise of consideration,A consideration vpon the dooings of Iob. Iob. cap. 9. bring forth in thee so great feare and terror of God? and so carefull watchfulnesse for obseruing hys commaundements?
nowe I see wel the cause why thou writest of thy selfe: that thou diddest doubt and feare all thy workes and actions, were they neuer so circumspect.
But what shall wee say nowe adayes (most happie Saint) who doe not doubt so much as our owne disolute, carelesse, and immoderate actions, who feele no terror of God at all, nor doe vse any one iote of watchfulnesse in obseruing his commaundements? truelie, thys proceedeth of nothing else but of inconsideration:

it proceedeth of lacke of knowledge both of God and of our selues. For (doubtlesse) if we knowe either of these two things aright, (as indeede neither of them can bee well vnderstood without the other) it could not be, but that many of vs wold change our wrong courses.
               O mercifull Lord, what sinfull man in the world would liue as he doth, if he knew eyther thee or himselfe as hee shoulde doe? I meane, if hee considered what thou art: and what thou hast beene to other that liued and continued in sinne as he doth? Not without great cause, cryed so often and earnestlie to thee, that holy Doctor of thy Church, for obtayning of these two poynts at thy hands:
                     Augustin, in lib. confess.
                   
                  vt cognoscam te, vt cognoscam me: that I may knowe thee, and that I may knowe my selfe, sayth he, that is, that I may consider, & feele the true knowledge heereof, for manie men doe know, but with little commoditie.
               We knowe and beleeue in grosse the misteries of our fayth,Knowledge & beleefe in grosse. that there is a God which rewardeth good and euill, that hee is terrible in his counsels vpon the sonnes of men: that there is a hell for sinners, a heauen for good liuers, a most dreadfull day of iudgment to come, a strayte account to be demaunded, & the like. All this wee knowe and beleeue in generall, as merchandise wrapped vppe together

in a bundle. But for that wee vnfolde not these thinges, nor rest vpon them in particuler: for that we let them not downe into our hearts, nor doe ruminate on them with leysure and attention: for that we chew thē not well in mind by deepe consideration, nor doe digest them in hart, by the heate of meditation: they remaine with vs as a sword in hys scaberde, and doe helpe vs as little vnto good life,A similitude. (for which they were reuealed) as a preseruatiue in our pocket neuer aplyed, can helpe our health. We beare the generall knowledge of these misteries locked vppe in our breastes, as sealed bagges of treasure that we neuer tolde nor opened: and consequentlie, we haue neither feeling, sence, or motion thereby, euen as a man may carrie fire about hym in a flynt stone without heate, and perfumes in a pommander without smel, except the one be beaten, and the other chafed.
               
                  The importance of consideration.All standeth then (good Reader) in thys one poynt, for direction of our selues in this life, & for reaping benefite by the misteries of our fayth and Religion; that wee alot our selues time to meditate, ponder, and consider what these things doe teach vs. For as the sicke man, that had most excellent remedies and precious potions sette before him, could expect no profit or ease thereby, if he onely did looke vppon them, or smelled thē,

or tooke them into his mouth alone, or shold cast them foorth of his stomacke againe, before they were setled, or had time to worke theyr operation: euen so is it in thys case of ours. And therefore with great reason sayde Saint Paule to Timothie, after he had taught him a long lesson,1. Tim. 4. 
                  Haec meditare, meditate, consider, and ponder vppon these thinges which I haue shewed you, as if in other speeches hee had sayde:
all that hetherto I haue tolde you, or wrytten for your instruction, and all that euer you haue hearde or learned besides, will auaile you nothing for your saluation, except you meditate and ponder vppon the same, and doe sucke out the iuyce thereof, by often consideration.
               
               Wherefore to conclude this chapter,The conclusion of the Chapter. my deere and welbeloued brother, for that consideration is so precious and profitable, so needeful and necessarie a thing as hath been declared; I thought it conuenient in thys first fronte and enteraunce of my Booke, to place the mention and dilligent recommendation thereof, as a thing most requisite for all that ensueth. For without consideration, neyther this that I haue sayd already, nor any thing els that shall or may be sayd hereafter, can yeeld thee profit, as by most lamentable experience we see daily in the worlde, where many millions of mē passe ouer their whole

age without taking profit of so manie good Bookes,The misery of the worlde. so many preachings, so many vertuous examples, so many terrible chastisemēts of GOD vpon sinners; which euery where they see before theyr face. But yet for that they wyl not, or haue not leisure, or dare not, or haue no grace to enter into consideration thereof: they passe ouer all, as sicke men doe pylles, diuerting as much as they may, bothe theyr eyes & cogitations, from all such matters as are vngratefull vnto them.
               
                  Ieremie. 30. and 23.But as good Ieremie saith, the tyme wyll come, when they shall be enforced to see & knowe, and consider these things, when perhaps it will be too late to reape any comfort or consolation therby. Wherfore (deere brother) that which perforce thou must doe in time to come) and that perchaunce to thy greater damnation, (I meane to enter into consideration of thyne owne estate) doe that nowe willingly to thy comfort and consolation, for preparing the way to thy saluation. Preuent the day and redeeme the time,Ephesians. 5. according to S. Paules wyse counsell: run not headlong wyth the world to perdition: stay som time as holy Ieremie admonisheth thee, and say to thy selfe,Ieremie. 7. 
                  what doe I? whether doe I goe? what course hold I? what shal be my ende? Take some time from thy pleasures, & from the company of thy pleasant friends,

to doe this, although it be with losse of some pastime and recreation: for I assure thee, it wyll recompence it selfe in the ende, and make thee merry when thy laughing friends shall weepe.
               The effect of all the considerations that ensue, is, rightly to knowe GOD,The effect of all the chapters folowing. for by knowing him, we shall know our selues, and all thinges els which are necessray for vs to know: and without knowing him, al knowledge in the world is vanitie, and meere follie.Iohn. 17.
                  Haec est vita aeterna (sayth Christ to hys Father) vt te cognoscant solum Deum verum: et quem misisti Iesum Christum.
Thys is lyfe euerlasting, that men knowe thee which art onely true God, and Iesus Christ whō thou hast sent.
               Gods nature and essence we cannot know in this life; but the onely meane to knowe God in this worlde,The way to know GOD in thys life. is, to knowe his Maiestie, to know his mercie, to know his iustice, to know his iudgments; to know his hatred to sinne, his fauour to the good, his benefits, and promises to all: his grace, his threates, his wayes, his commandements, his dealings towardes other men before vs; all which things the considerations following do sette before our eyes, and consequently they doe teach vs to knowe God aright. Reade then therefore (deere brother) with attention, and

remember the wordes that God vseth to vs all;Psalme. 45. 
                  vacate & videte quoniam ego sum Deus. Take leysure, and consider that I am a God. It must not be doone in haste, nor (as the fashion is) for curiositie onelie, to reade three or foure leaues in one place, and so in another: but it must be doone with such serious attention, as appertaineth to so great a businesse, which (in trueth) is the weightiest that possible vnder heauen may be taken in hand. It is the busines whereof Christ meant especiallie, when he sayde,Luke. 10. 
                  vnum est necessarium, one onely thing is necessarie. For that all other things in this worlde, are but tryfles to this, and this alone of it selfe, of more importance then they all.
            
            
               
               THAT THERE IS A GOD, VVHICH REVVARDETH GOOD AND euill, against all Atheists of old, and of our tyme.
               With the proofes alledged for the same, both by Iewe and Gentile.
               CHAP. II.
               IT is a thing both cō
                  mon and ordinary in sciences & arts,A common custome in sciences to suppose principles. whē they are learned or deliuered by other, to suppose dyuers poynts & p
                     •
                  inciples, and to passe them ouer without proofe, as eyther knowne before to the learner, or els so manifest, easie, and euident of themselues, as they neede no other proofe, but onely declaration.
               So when wee take in hande to instruct a man in chyualrie,An example in chiualrie. or feates of armes, we doe

suppose that hee knoweth before (were hee neuer so rude,) what a man, what a horse, what armour, what fighting meaneth: as also that warre is lawfull and expedient in diuers causes; that Princes of the worlde may wage the same; that souldiers haue to liue in order and dyscipline vnder theyr regiment; and that Kings for this cause doe holde their Generals, Lieutenants, Coronels, Captaines, and other like officers, in theyr bandes, garrisons, campes, and armies.
               
                  In handycraftes.In manuall artes and occupations likewise, it is euident, that diuers thinges must be presupposed to be foreknowne by the learner, as in husbandry or agriculture; in building, in painting, and other such exercises, when a man is to be taught or instructed, it were not conuenient for the teacher, to stand vppon euerie poynt or matter that appertayneth to the same, but must leaue & passe ouer many things as apparent of them selues, or easily to be discerned of euery learner by nature, sence, reason, or common experience.
               
                  In liberall sciences.But yet in liberall sciences and professions of learning, is this more apparent, where not onely such common and vulgare poynts are to be presumed, without proofe or dyscourse;Grounds to be graunted in sciences. but also certaine propositions are to be graunted in the beginning, as groundes

whereupon to builde all the rest that ensueth. So the Logitian (for example) wil haue you yeelde ere hee enter with you;In Logicke. 
                  that contradictorie propositions cannot be together either false or true, neyther, that one thing may be affirmed and denied of another in one and the selfe same respect and time.
               
               The Morall Phylosopher will haue you graunt at the beginning,In Morrall phylosophie. 
                  that there is both good and euill in mens actions: and that the one is to be followed, and the other refused. The Naturall Phylosopher wil haue you confesse,In Naturall phylosophie. that all physicall bodies which depende of nature, haue motion in themselues, and are subiect to alterations, and what soeuer is mooued, is mooued of another. The Mathematique at his first enterance,In the Mathematickes. will demaund your assent, that euerie whole, is bigger then his parts: as also, the Metaphysique or supernaturall Phylosopher,The Metaphysicke. 
                  that nothing can be and not be, at one time. And so other such like principles and common groundes, in these and al other sciences are to be demaunded, graunted, and agreed vpon at the beginning, for the better pursute & establishment of that which hath to followe, beeing thinges in themselues (as you see) eyther by nature, common sence, or experience, most cleere and manifest.
               And is not this also in Diuinitie (trowe you) and in the affayres that we haue now inIn Diuinitie.
                  
hande? yes truelie, if wee beleeue S. Paul
                     •
                   who wryteth thus to the Hebrues:Hebrues. 11.
                  Cred
                        ••
                      oportet accedentem ad Deum, quia est, et inqu
                        •
                     rentibus se remunerator sit.
He that is in comming towards God, must beleeue that then is a GOD, and that he is a rewarder of suc
                     •
                   as seeke him. Beholde heere two principles wherein a man must be resolued before he
                     •
                   can seeke or draw neere vnto God.Two principles in Diuinitie. The one 
                  that there is a GOD: and the other, that th
                        •
                      
                      same God is iust, to rewarde euerie man according to his deserts.
               
               Which two principles or general ground are so euident indeede of their own natures and so ingraffed by Gods own hand, into the minde and vnderstanding of euerie perticuler man, at his natiuitie, (according to the saying of the Prophet: the light of thy count
                        •
                     
                     naunce is sealed vpon vs O Lorde,
                  Psalme. 4.) that were not the tymes we liue in, too-too wicked, & the shamelesse induration of sinners intollerable: we should not neede to stande vppo
                     •
                   the proofe of these poynts, for confirmatio
                     •
                   of our cause that wee nowe intreate, of resolution; but rather supposing and assuring our selues, that no reasonable creature liuing could doubt of these principles; should pursue onely the consideration of other things that might stir vp our wils to performanc
                     •
                   of our dueties towardes this God that hath

created vs, and remaineth to pay our reward at the ende.
               But for so much as iniquitie hath so aduaunced her selfe at this daie in the harts of manie,The cause of this Chapter. as not onely to contemne and offend their maker, but also to denie him, for patronage of their euill life, and for extinguishing the worme of their owne afflicted and most miserable consciences: I am enforced before all other things, to discouer this fond and foule error of theirs, and to remooue also this refuge of desperate iniquity, by shewing the inuincible veritie of these two principles, the one depending of the other, in such sorte, as the first beeing proued, the second hath of necessitie to follow. For if once it be manifest, that there is a GOD,If there be a God, he is a iust rewarder. which hath care and prouidence of all those, whom hee hath created and gouerneth; then must it ensue by force of all consequence, that he is also to rewarde the same men according to theyr good liuing, and deserts of thys life.
               Fyrst then to prooue this principle, that there is a GOD: I neede vse no other argument or reason in the world, but onely to referre each man to his own See Lactantius at large, in his booke of the workmanshippe of the worlde. sence, in beholding the world, wherof euery part and portion is a most cleere glasse, representing God vnto vs, or rather a fayre Table,The workes of the world doe declare the worke-man. wherin God hath drawne and imprinted himselfe, in so

manifest charecters and legible Letters: as the symplest man liuing, may reade and vnderstand the same.
               In respect heere of saide the wise man so long agoe. That vaine and foolish were all those, who considering the workes that are seene in this worlde, could not thereby ryse to vnderstande the worke-man.
And hee giueth this reason,Sapiens. 3. 
                  a magnitudine enim spec
                        •••
                      creaturae, cognoscibiliter poterit Creator horu
                        •
                      videri. For that by the greatnes of beautie in the creature, may the Creator thereof be seene and knowne. Which Saint Paule confirmeth, when hee saith:Romans. 1. that the inuisible things of God, may be seene and knowne by the visible creatures of thys world. Which is to be vnderstoode in this sence, that as a prisoner in a dungion, may easilie by a lyttle beame that shyneth in at a chynck, conceiue there is a Sunne, from whence that beame descendeth: and as a trauayler in the wyldernesse that falleth vppon some channell or brooke, may ascende by the same to the well or Fountaine: euen so he, that beholdeth & considereth the wonderfull workes of thys worlde, may thereby conceiue also, the wonderfull Artificer or worke-man that made them.
               
                  A similitude.If a man shoulde passe by sea into some forraine, strange, or sauage Countrey, where

nothing els but byrdes and beastes doe appeare: yet if he should espie some exquisite building, or other worke of arte and reason in the place, he would presently assure himselfe, that some men dwelt or had beene in that Countrey, for that such thinges coulde not be doone by beastes or vnreasonable creatures: euen so in the viewe and consideration of thys world.
               If we cast our eyes vpon the heauens,The heauens teach God. we remaine astonished, with the miracles that we beholde: but who made them? wee see the skyes of exceeding great highnesse: dystinguished wyth colours, and beautie most admirable; adorned with starres & Plannets innumerable, and these so qualified wyth theyr diuers, different, and vnequal motions, as albeit they neuer mooue or goe together, yet doe they neuer giue let or hinderaunce the one to the other, nor change their course out of order or season.
               
                  Quis enarrabit caelorum rationem, & concentum caeli, quis dormire faciet?
                  Iob. 28.
                  Who is able to declare the reason of these heauens, or who can make cease or sleepe, the vniforme course of their motions, saith GOD to Iob?
As who woulde say, that because no man or mortall creature can doe this; therefore may wee imagine of what power and perfection theyr maker is.
Which K. Dauid had doone

when hee pronounced, caeli enarrant gloriam Dei, & opera manuum eius, annunciat firmamentum: 
                  the heauens declare the glorie of God, and the firmament dooth preache the workes of his hands vnto vs.
               
               If we pull downe our eyes from heauen to earth,The earth teacheth vs God. wee beholde the same of an infinite bignesse, distinguished with hils and dales, woodes and pastures, couered wyth all varietie of grasse, hearbes, flowers, and leaues; moystened wyth Riuers, as a bodie wyth veines, inhabited by creatures of innumerable kindes and qualities; inriched with inestimable and endlesse treasures: and yet it selfe standing, or hanging rather with all his weyght and poyse, in the midst of the ayre, as a little balle without proppe or pyller. At which deuise and most wonderfull miracle, God himselfe, as it were, glorying, said vnto Iob.Iob. cap. 38. 
                  Where wert thou, when I laid the foundations of the earth? Tell me if thou haue vnderstanding, who measured it out, or drew his lyne vpon the same? Whereupon are fastened the pillers of his foundation, or who laide the first corner stone thereof?
               
               
                  The sea sheweth GOD.If we looke neyther vppe nor downe, but cast our countenaunce onelie aside, we espie the Sea on each hande of vs, that enuironeth rounde about the land. A vaste creature, that containeth more wonders then mans tongue

can expresse. A bottomlesse gulfe, that with out running ouer, receiueth all Riuers which perpetuallie doe flow. A restlesse fight and turmoyle of waters, that neuer repose neyther day or night. A dreadfull, raging, and furious element, that swelleth and roareth, and threatneth the land, as though it would deuoure it all at once. And albeit in situation it be higher then the earth,
                     Arist. lib. de mirabilibus.
                   as the Phylosopher sheweth, and doe make assaults dailie towardes the same with most terrible cryes, and waues mounted euen to the skye; yet when it draweth neere to the land, and to his appointed borders: it stayeth vpon the suddaine, though nothing be there to let it, and is enforced to recoyle back againe, murmuring as it were, for that it is not permitted to passe any further.
               Of which restraint, God asketh Iob this question.Iob. 38. 
                  Who hath shut vppe the Sea vvith gates, when he breaketh foorth in rage as from his mothers, wombe? Whereunto no man being able to giue aunswere, God aunswereth himselfe in these wordes. I haue limitted him with my boundes, and I haue sette him both a doore and a barre, and haue said vnto him, hytherto shalt thou come, and shalt not passe further: heere shalt thou breake thy svvelling vvaues.
               
               This in summe, is of things without vs.

But if wee shoulde leaue these, and enter to seeke God within our selues,The things in man declare GOD. whether wee consider our bodies or our soules, or any one part thereof, we shall finde so many strange things, or rather so many seas of miracles and wonders, that preach and teach theyr maker vnto vs; as we shall not onely perceiue & see God most euidentlie,
                     Iamblicus de Mist. cap. 1. but rather (as a certain olde Heathen hath written) we shall feele & handle him in his workes.
Which kinde of speech also S. Paul himselfe doubteth not to vse, affirming that God hath giuen space to euerie man in this life to seeke him, si forte attractent eum aut inueniant,
                     Acts. cap. 17. if perhaps they would handle him, or finde him out.
Which manner of words doe signifie, that by consideration of Gods creatures, and especially of the wonders in man himselfe, we may come to see and perceiue the Creator so cleerelie, that in a sorte we may be said to feele & handle him. So ioyntlie doe all thinges concurre to the manifestation of theyr maker: so manifestlie and effectuallie doe they teach, demonstrate, and paint out God vnto vs; nothing being so little, that declareth not hys greatnes: nothing so great, which acknowledgeth not his soueraigntie: nothing so low, that leadeth vs not vp to beholde his Maiestie: nothing so high, that descendeth not to teach vs this veritie.
               
                  It were a labour without ende, to goe about in this place to alledge what might be be said in the proofe of this principle, that there is a GOD: seeing there was neuer yet learned man in the world, eyther Gentile or other, that acknowledged and confirmed not the same, beeing driuen thereunto by the manifest euidence of the trueth it selfe.
               If you obiect against me Diagoras, Protagoras, Theodorus Cyrenensis, Bion Borysthines, Epicurus,
                  Olde Atheists. and some fewe others, that were open Atheists & denied God:
                     Laertius. lib. 2. et 4. de vit. phylos.
                   I aunswere, that some of these were vtterly vnlearned, and rather sensual beastes then reasonable men; and consequently might denie any thing, according to the saying of holie Dauid: the foole saide in his hart, there is no God.
                  Psalme. 13. and 52. Others that had some smack of learning, rather iested at the falshoode of theyr owne Panisme idoles, then denied the being of one true God.
               But the most part of these men indeede, and such others as in olde time were accounted Atheists; denied not GOD so much in wordes, as in life and facts; such as S. Paule called Atheists in his daies,Romans. 1. Phillip. 3. that obeied their bellies, and followed their pleasures in sinne and sensualitie: not vouchsafing to think of God in this life, (such was the Epicure, and manie other are at this day of his profession)

but yet,
                     Lactant. lib. 3. institutio.
                   (as Lactantius well noteth) when the same men came to be sober, and speake of iudgment (as at theyr death, or other time of distresse and miserie,) they were as readie to confesse GOD, as any other whatsoeuer.
               But for learned men, and people of dyscretion, sobrietie, and iudgement, there was neuer yet any (were he Iewe or Gentile) that doubted in this veritie, but had meanes of probations to confirme the same, as more particulerlie in the rest of this Chapter shall be declared.
               
                  Howe the Heathen prooued there was a GOD. SECT. 2.
                  AMong the Gentiles or Heathen people, those men were alwaies of most credite and estimation, that professed the loue of wisedome, & for that respect were tearmed Phylosophers.Philosophers. Who being deuided into diuers sorts & sectes, had foure principal sciences, whereof they made profession, each one of these hauing other lower scien
                        •
                     es comprehended vnder it.
                  
                     Foure principall sciences.The first of these foure, is called Natural phylosophie; the second, Morral; the third, Supernatural, or Metaphysick; the fourth,

Mathematique. And for the first three, they haue each one theyr proper meanes and peculier proofes, whereby to conuince, that there is a GOD. The fourth, which is the Mathematique,The Mathematique proueth not God. for that it hath no consideration at all, of the efficient or finall cause of thinges, (vnder which two respects and consideration onely God may be knowne & declared to men in this world:) therefore this science hath no proper meane peculier to it selfe, for prouing this veritie, as the other sciences haue; but receiueth the same as borrowed of the former.
                  
                     THE NATVRAL PHYLOSOPHER.
                     THE Naturall Phylosopher among the Gentiles, had infinite argumēts to proue by the creatures that there was a God, but all he reduced to three principall and general heads, which he termed ex Motu, ex Fine, & ex Causa efficiente. That is, arguments drawn from the Motions, from the Endes, and from the Cause efficient of creatures that wee behold; which termes, the examples folowing shall make cleere and manifest.
                     The argument of Motion, standeth vpon this generall ground in phylosophie,The first argument in Naturall phylosophie. that

                        what soeuer is mooued, is mooued of another.
                        
                           Aristo. lib. 7. et 8. phy.
                         Wherein also is obserued, that in the motions of creatures, there is a subordination the one to the other. As for example; these inferiour bodies vpon earth, are mooued and altered by the ayre and other elements: and the elements are moued by the influence and motion of the Moone, Sunne, and other heauenly bodies; these Plannets againe are mooued from the highest Orbe or Sphere of all,
                           Primum mobile.
                         that is called the first moueable, aboue which wee can goe no further among creatures.
                     Nowe then asketh the Phylosopher here, who moueth this first moueable? for if you say that it mooueth it selfe, it is against our former ground, that nothing is mooued in nature, but of another. And if you say, that some other thing mooueth it; then is the question againe, who mooueth that other? and so from one to one, vntill you come to some thing that moueth, and is not mooued of an other, and that must be God, which is aboue all nature.
                     
                        
                           
                              Plato. lib. 10. de legib.
                           
                           
                              Aristo. lib. 8. phys. cap. 5.
                        This was the common argument of Plato, and of Aristotle, and of all the best Phylosophers. And they thought it a demōstration vnauoidable, and it seemeth they were admonished of this argument by consideraon of the clock,An argument taken from the Clocke. whose hammer when it striketh,

sheweth the next wheele whereby it is moued: and that wheele sheweth to another wheele; and so from one to one, vntill you come to him that was the first cause of motion to all the wheeles, that is, to the Clock-maker himselfe.
                     Aristotle, to King Alexander, vseth this pretie similitude.
                           Arist. libro. de mundo.
                         That as in a Quyar of singers, when the fore-man hath giuen the first tune or note, there insueth presently a sweet harmonie, and consent of all other voices, both great and small, sharpe and meane: so God in the creation of this worlde,A similitude. hauing giuen once the first pushe or motion to the highest heauen, called Primum mobile, there insueth vpon the same, all other motions of heauens, planets, elements, & other bodies, in most admirable order, concorde, and congruetie, for conseruation and gouernment of the whole. And thus is GOD prooued by the argument of motion.
                     The other two arguments of the End, and of the Cause efficient of creatures,
                        The second argument of Naturall phylosophie. are made euident in a certaine manner by this that hath beene spoken of motion. For seeing by experience, that euerie thing brought foorth in nature, hath a peculier ende appointed, whereto it is directed by the selfe same nature, (as we see the bird is directed to builde her nest by nature, the Foxe to make his

denne, and so the like in all other creatures:) the Phylosopher asketh heere, what thing is that, which directeth nature her selfe, seeing each thing must haue somewhat to direct it to his ende? And no aunswere can be made, but that the Director of Nature, must bee some thing aboue nature, which is God himselfe. This argument of the finall Ende, is most excellently handled, by Philo Iudeus,
                           Phylo. lib. de 
                                 •
                              pificio mundi.
                         in his learned treatise of the worke-manship of the world.
                     
                     
                        The third argument of Naturall phylosophie.From the Cause efficient, the Phylosopher disputeth thus. It is euident by all reason, in respect of the corruptions, alterations, & perpetuall motions of all creatures, that thys worlde had a beginning; and 
                           
                              vide Plutarch de placitis Phylos.
                           
                           
                              Arist. lib. 8. phys. et lib. de Gen. et corrup.
                           
                           
                              Arist. lib. de mundo. et vide Plotin. lib. de mundo.
                           
                         all excellent Phylosophers that euer were, haue agreed thereupon, except Aristotle for a time, who held a fantasie, that the world had no beginning; but was from all eternitie, albeit at last in his old age, he confessed the contrarie
                           •
                         in his booke to King Alexander.
                     This then beeing so, that this world had a beginning, it must needes followe also, that it had an efficient Cause. Now then is the questiō, who is that Efficient cause that made the world? if you say, that it made it selfe, it is absurd; for howe coulde it haue power to make it selfe, before it selfe was, & before it had any being at al? If you say that som thing

within the world, made the worlde: that is, that some one part of the worlde, made the whole: this is more absurde; for it is, as if a man should say, that the finger, (& this before it was a finger, or part of the bodie) dyd make the whole bodie.
                     Wherefore we must confesse by force of this argument, that a greater and more excellent thing, then is the whole worlde put together, or then any part thereof made the world, & was the Cause efficient of the frame that we see; and this can be nothing els but God that is aboue the world. So that heerby we see, howe many waies the Naturall Phylosopher is fraught with arguments, to proue there is a God, & that by reason onely, without all light or assistaunce of fayth.
                  
                  
                     THE METAPHISIQVE, AND HIS ARGVMENTS.
                     BVt the Metaphysicke, or Supernaturall Phylosopher among the Gentiles, as hee to whom it appertained most in speciall to handle these high and supernaturall affaires, had manie more arguments, and demonstrations, to proue & conuince the being of one God.
                     
                        And first of all he saide, that it could not stande with any possibilitie in his science,The first argument in Metaphysicke. that ens finitum, a thing finite, or closed with in boundes and limits, (as this worlde and euerie creature therin is,) could be, but from some Maker or Creator. For (saith hee) the thing that in it selfe is not infinite, hath hys boundes and limits, and consequentlie there must be some thing, that assigned these boundes & limits. And seeing in this world there is no creature so great, which hath not boundes and limits: wee must of necessitie imagine some infinite supreame Creator or Maker that limitted these creatures, euen as we see, that the Potter (at his pleasure) giueth boundes and limits to the potte that he frameth.
                     This argument the Metaphysicke confirmeth by a ruled principle in his science,A maximè in Metaphysick. 
                        that euerie thing which is by participation, must be reduced and referred to some other thing, that is not by participation, but of it selfe.
                        
                           Arist. lib. 2. metaphy. capit. 2. And he calleth a thing by participation, which is not in the fullest or highest degree of perfection in his kinde, but may haue addition made vnto it. As for example; water, or any thing else that is heated by the fire, is hote by participation, and not of it selfe, for that it may alwaies be hoter, and haue addition of heate made vnto it; But fire is ho
                           •
                        e of it selfe, and

not by participation, for that it hath heat in the highest degree, and in that kind can receaue no addition; wherefore the heate of all other thinges, which are hote by participation of fire, are reduced (concerning theyr heate) to the heate of fire, as to theyr originall.
                     Nowe then (saith the Metaphysick) wee see by experience, that all the creatures and parts of this world, are things by participation onely, for that they are infinite in nature, and haue limitations in all theyr perfections, and may receiue additions to the same,How all creatures are by participation of GOD. and consequentlie, they must of necessitie be referred to some higher cause that is infinite in perfection, and consisteth of it selfe alone, without participation from others: and this is God, who beeing absolute, endlesse, and without all limitation of perfection in himselfe, deriueth from his owne incomprehensible infinitnesse, certaine limitted natures & perfections to euerie creature; which perfections is creatures, are nothing els, but lyttle particles, and participations of the bottomlesse sea of perfections in the Creator, whervnto they are to be referred and reduced, as the beame to the Sunne, and the brooke to the Fountaine.
                     A seconde argument vseth the Metaphysicke,The seconde argument in Metaphysick. grounded vpon certain rules of vnitie,

whereof one principall is,Multitude. 
                        that euerie multitude or distinction of thinges, proceedeth from some vnitie, as frō his fountaine.
                        
                           Plato. in Parmen.
                         This he sheweth by many examples of thinges in thys worlde. For wee see by experience, that the diuers motions or moouing of the lower Spheres or bodies celestiall, doe proceede of the moouing of one highest sphere, and are to be referred to the same,
                           Primum mobile.
                         as to theyr fountaine. Many Riuers are reduced to one well or of-spring: innumerable beames to one Sunne: and all the boughes of a tree, to one stocke.
                     In the bodie of Man, which for his beautie and varietie is called, the little world,
                        MICROCOSMOS. the veines which are without number, haue all one beginning in the liuer, the arteres, in the hart, the sinnowes, in the braine. And that which is more, the infinite actions of life, sence,The infinite things that proceed from the soule. and reason in man, as generations, corruptions, nourishments, digestions, and alterations; feeling, smelling, tasting, seeing, hearing, moouing, speaking, thinking, remembring, discoursing, and tenne hundreth thousand particuler actions, operations, and motions besides, which are exercised in mans body, vnder these or other such names and appellations; all these (I say) beeing infinite in number, most admirable in order, and distinct in euerie theyr office and operation,

do receiue notwithstanding their beginning from one most simple vnitie, and indiuisible substaunce, called the soule, which produceth, gouerneth, and directeth them all, to so innumerable, different, and contrarie functions.
                     By this concludeth the Metaphysick, that as among the creatures, wee finde thys most excellent order and connexion of thinges, whereby one bringeth foorth manie, and euerie multitude is referred to his vnitie: so much more in all reason, must the whole frame of creatures contained in this worlde, (wherein there are so many millions of multitudes wyth their vnities,) be referred to one most simple and abstract vnitie, that gaue beginning to them all, and this is GOD.
                     A thirde argument vseth the Metaphysicke,The thyrd argument in Metaphysick. Subordinatiō. deriued from the subordination of creatures in this world; which subordination is such, and so wonderfull; as wee see no creature by nature serueth it selfe, but another, & altogether doe conspire in seruing the common.
                     Wee see the heauens doe mooue about continuallie without ceasing, and thys not to serue themselues, but inferiour creatures, lesse excellent then themselues. We see that water moysteneth the ground, the ayre cooleth, openeth, and cherisheth the same, the

Sunne heateth and quickeneth it, the Moone and Starres poure foorth theyr influence, the windes refresh it, and all thys not for themselues, but for other. The earth againe, that receiueth these seruices, vseth not the same for herselfe, or for her own commoditie, but to bring foorth grasse wherewith to feede Cattaile, and they feede not for themselues, but to giue nourishment vnto man.
                     
                        A similitude.Nowe then (sayth the Metaphysick) if a man that stoode a farre off vppon a mountaine, should see in a field vnder him, a great, huge, and mayne Armie of souldiers, most excellent well appointed; each one in order agreeing with the other; deuided into ranks, Squadrons, Companies, and offices; subordinate the one to the other by degrees; and yet all tending one way, all theyr faces bent vpon one place, all moouing, marching, and turning together: all endeuouring with alacritie towards the performance of one cō
                        mon seruice by mutuall assistance, wythout discention, discorde, difference, or clamour: he that shoulde see this (saith the Metaphysicke) as he could not but imagine some generall high Captaine to bee among these souldiers, whom all obeyed, and from whose supreame commaundement and order, thys most excellent subordination, agreement, & vnion proceeded; so much more, vpon consideration

of the former coherence, consent and miraculous subordination of creatures among themselues in theyr operations, must we inferre, that they haue som general commaunder ouer them all, by whose supreame disposition, each creature hath his charge & peculier taske appointed, which hee must performe, for the common and vniuersal seruice of the whole.
                     The fourth reason or argument alledged by the Supernaturall Phylosopher,The fourth argument in Metaphysick. is, of the meruailous prouidence,Prouidence. arte and wisedome, discouered in the making of euery least creature within the worlde. For seeing there is nothing so little, nothing so base or contemptible, within the compasse of this heauen that couereth vs, but if you consider it, you finde, both arte, order, proportion, beautie, & excellencie in the same: this cannot proceede of fortune, as foolish Lucretius made diuers bookes against the workmanship of the world. Lucretius and some other would haue it, for that fortune is casualtie without order, rule, or certaintie, and therefore needes it must come from the wisdome and prouidence of some omnipotent Creator.
                     If you take a flye, or a flea, or a leafe from a tree, or any other, the least creature that is extant in the worlde, and consider the same attentiuelie: you shall finde more miracles, then parts therein; you shall find such proportion

of members, such varietie of colours, such distinction of offices, such correspondence of instruments, and those so fit, so wel framed, so coherent, and so subordinate: as the more ye contemplate, the more yee shall meruaile, neyther is there any one thing in the world more effectuall, to draw a man to the loue and admiration of his Creator, then to exercise himselfe often in this contemplation, for if his heart be not of stone, thys will moue his affection.
                     
                        
                           Galen. lib. 5. de vsu part.
                        We read of Galen, a prophane & very irreligious Phisitian, who as himselfe cōfesseth in a certaine place, taking vpon him to consider of the parts of mans bodie; and finding much wisedome in the order, vse, and disposition of the same, sought first to gyue the prayse and glorie therof to nature, or to some other cause then to God. But in processe of tyme, beeing oppressed (as it were) with the exceeding great wysedom, cunning, and prouidence, which he discouered in euerie least parcell and particle of mans bodie, wherein nothing was redundant, nothing defectiue, nothing possible to be added, altered or better deuised: he b
                           •
                        ake forth into these words:
                           Lib. 3. de vsu part.
                        
                        
                           Compono hic profecto canticum in Creatoris nostri laudem, quod vltrares suas ornare voluit, melius quam vlla arte possent. Here truelie doe I make a song in the prayse of our Creator,

for that of his owne accorde, it hath pleased him to adorne and beautifie his thinges better, then by any arte possible it could be imagined.
                     
                     Heereby then doth the Metaphysick gather and conclude most euidently, that there is a GOD, a Creator, a most wise & powrful artificer that made all things: such a one, as exceedeth all boundes of nature, & of humaine habilitie. For if all the worlde shoulde ioyne together, they coulde not make the least creature which wee see in this worlde. He concludeth also, that the fore-sight and prouidence of this Creator is infinite, for things to come in all eternitie; & finally, that his wysedome and cogitations are inscrutable. And albeit sometime he reueale vnto vs some part thereof; yet often againe wee erre therein. For which cause, a wyse Heathen Platonick concludeth thus,A wonderfull speeche of a Heathen. after long search about these affayres. I will prayse God (saith he) in those things I vnderstand, and I wyll admyre him in those thinges which I vnderstand not.
For I see that my selfe oftentimes, doe things wherein my seruaunts are blinde and conceiue no reason;
                              Plotin. lib. de proui.
                            As also I haue seene little children, cast into the fire Iewels of great price, & their fathers writings of great learning and wysedome, for that they were not of capacitie to vnderstand the value, and

worthines of the thing.
                     
                     
                        The fift argument in Metaphysicke.One argument more will I alledge of the Metaphysicke, grounded vpon the immortalitie of mans soule;Immortalitie of the soule. which immortalitie, is proued with one consent of all learned men, (as Plato alledgeth) for that it is a spirit and immateriall substance,
                           Plato. lib. 10. de repub.
                         whose nature dependeth not of the state of our mortall bodie, for so by experience wee see dailie, that in olde men and wythered sickly bodies, the minde and soule is more quicke, cleere; pregnant, and liuely then it was in youth, when the bodie was most lustie.
                     The same is also proued by the vnquenchable desire which our minde hath of learning, knowledge, wysedome, and other such spirituall and immateriall things, wherin her thyrst by nature is so great, as it cannot be satis-fied in thys life, neyther can the obiects of sence and bodily pleasures, or any other cōmoditie or delight of this materiall world, content or satiate the restlesse desire of thys immateriall creature. Which is an euident argument to the Phylosopher, that some other obiect & contentation,When the desire of our soule shal be satis-fied. is prepared for her in another world, and that of such excellencie, and supereminent perfection, as it shall haue in it all wisedome, all learning, all knowledge, all beautie, and all other causes of loue, ioy, and contentation, wherein our

soule may rest for euer.
                     Thys beeing so (saith the Phylosopher) that the soule and minde of man is immortall, of necessitie it must insue, that an immortall Creator sent the same into our bodies, and that to him againe it must returne after her departure from this life here. Thys was the true meaning indeed (
                           Themist. in lib de anima.
                         how soeuer some later interpreters haue mis-understood the same) of that auncient doctrine of olde Phylosophers, which Plutarch alledgeth out of Pythagoras and Plato:
                           Plut. de placit. Philoso.
                         affirming, that all particuler soules of men, came sent from one generall & common soule of the whole worlde, as sparcles from the fire, and beames from the common Sunne: and that after theyr seperation from their bodies, they shal returne againe to that generall soule, called anima mundi,
                        The meaning of old Phylosophers, touching Anima mundj. the soule of the worlde, (for that it giueth life and beeing to the worlde) and so to remaine with that generall soule eternallie.
                     Thys was the doctrine of olde Phylosophers, which seemeth indeed, to haue beene nothing els, (though deliuered in other speeches) but that which Salomon himselfe affirmeth in plainer wordes,Eccle. 12. 
                        et spiritus redibit ad Deum, qui dedit illum: and our soule or spirit shall returne to God that gaue it vnto vs. And thys may suffise for a taste of that which

the Metaphysicke or Supernaturall Phylosopher can say for proofe, that there is a GOD.
                  
                  
                     THE MORRAL PHYLOSOPHER.
                     THere remaineth yet a thirde part of humaine wisedome or phylosophie, called Morrall, whose reasons and arguments for proofe of this veritie, I haue of purpose referred to the last place, for that they be more plaine and easie then the former, and more sensible to the capacitie of euery simple and vnlearned reader.
                     
                        The first argument of Morrall phylosophie.For first of all, hee obserueth in the verie naturall inclination of man, (be his manners otherwise neuer so euill) that there is a certaine propension and disposition to confesse some God or Deitie; as by example he proueth in all Nations, were they neuer so fierce or barbarous, yet alwayes cōfessed they som God by nature, though no man did teach or instruct them therein. The same is confirmed, by the common vse of all Heathens, in Tertullian handleth thys poynt excellently in Apolog. lyfting vp theyr eyes & hands to heauen, in any suddaine distresse that commeth vpon them. Which importeth that nature her selfe hath ingrafted this feeling, that there is

a God. Yea, further he alledgeth, that by experience of all ages, it hath beene proued, that Atheists themselues, that is, such men, as in theyr health and prosperitie, for more libertie of sinfull life, woulde striue against the beeing of any GOD; when they came to die, or fall into any great miserie, they of all other men, would shew themselues most fearefull of this God, as Seneca declareth,
                           Seneca. lib. 1. de ira.
                         & as Suetonius sheweth in the example of Caligula.
                           Sueton in Callig.
                         Which is a token, that theyr conscience inforced them to beleeue a God-head.
                     Nay, Zeno the Phylosopher was wont to say,The saying of Zeno touching the death of Atheists. that it seemed to him a more substantiall proofe of this veritie, to heare an Atheist at his dying day, preache God from a payre of gallowes, or rather such place of miserie, (when he asked God and nature forgiuenes) thē to hear al the Phylosophers in the world dispute the poynt; for that at this instant of death and miserie, it is like, that such good fellowes, doe speake in earnest and sobrietie of spirit, who before in theyr wantonnesse, impugned God, eyther of vanitie, ambition, sensualitie, or dissimulation.
                     Nowe then, when the Morrall Phylosopher hath proued by thys naturall inclination of man, that there is a God, which hath imprinted in vs such a feeling of himselfe, as no conscience can denie him, when it commeth

to speake sincerelie: then steppeth he a degree further, and proueth that this God which is acknowledged, can be but one;The reason why there can be but one GOD. for that, if he be God, he must be infinite: and if he be infinite, he can haue no companion, for that two infinite things cannot stand together, without impeachment the one of the others infinitie.
                     
                        
                           Lact. lib. 2. diui. instit cap. 2.Hee proueth the same by the custome of most Gentiles, who (as Lactantius well noted in his time) when they swore, or cursed, or prayed, or wished any thing hartilie, (especiallie in affliction, that lighteneth the vnderstanding:) their fashion was to say,
                           Deus, es non dij.
                         God, and not the Gods. And for the learneder sort of thē, how soeuer they dissembled, and applyed themselues outwardly to the errour of the common people: yet in earnest they neuer spake of more then of one God, as Plato signifieth of himselfe to Dionysius King of Sicilie, in a certaine Letter, wherin hee gaue him a signe when hee spake in earnest, and when in iest.
                           Plato. ep 13. ad Dionys.
                        
                        Hinc disces tu, scribam ego serio, nec ne: cum serio, ordior Epistolam ab vno Deo, cum secus, a pluribus. 
                        By thys signe shall ye know, whether I wryte in earnest or not: For when I wryte in earnest, I beginne my Letter with one God, and when I wryte not in earnest, I doe begin my Letter in the name of many gods.
                     
                     
                        Iulian the Apostata, in his three most scornefull bookes that hee wrote against vs Christians,
                           Cyrillus. lib. 2. contra Iulian.
                         (whom contemptuously he called Galileans) endeuouring by all his meanes to aduaunce and sette forth the honour of Paganisme, alledgeth this Plato for a cheefe pyller and father therof, and dareth preferre him before our Moses:
                           Plotinus Enne
                                 •
                              
                            1. lib. 8.1. 2. 
                              
                                 ••
                               Eu. 6. lib. 4. cap. 12.3.4. Porphy. lib. 2. de abst. et lib. de occa. cap. 21. & yet you see what he testifieth of himselfe. And that thys was his perpetuall opinion, three of hys most worthiest schollers, I mean, three of the most learned that euer professed the Platonicke sect, Plotinus, Porphyrius, and Proclus,
                           Procl. in theolo. Platon. et lib. de anima. et Daem. 1.31.42.53. all Heathens themselues, doe testifie and proue in diuers parts of theyr works, assuring, that both they and theyr Maister Plato, neuer beleeued in deede but onely one God. And as for Socrates that was Platos Maister,Socrates. and pronounced by the Oracle of Apollo, to be the wisest man in all Greece;
                           Apuleius, Alegus, et Laerti. in vita Socratis.
                         the worlde knoweth that he was put to death for iesting at the multitude of gods among the Gentiles.
                     Aristotle that ensued after Plato, began the sect of Peripatetickes,Aristotle, and the Peripatetickes. and was a man so much giuen to the search of Nature, as in many things hee forgat the Author of Nature, or at least wyse he treated little, and verie doubtfully thereof, yet in his olde age, when hee came to wryte the booke of the

worlde to King Alexander, (which Booke S. Iustine the Martyr esteemed greatly,
                           Iustin. in Apolo.
                         & called it the Epitome of all Aristotles true phylosophie;) hee resolueth the matter more cleerelie, saying thus of GOD:
                           Arist. lib. de. mundo.
                         
                        Hee is the father of gods and men; he is the maker and conseruer of all things that be in the world. And he addeth further in the selfe same place, that the multitude of many gods,
                           Theo. in metaph. Alex.
                         was inuented to expresse the power of this one God, by the multitude of his ministers:
                           Aphrod. lib. de prouident.
                         so that hee maketh all gods to be seruaunts besides onelie one. Which sentence of theyr Maister, Theophrastus and Aphrodiseus, two principall Peripatetickes, doe confirme at large.
                     
                        Zeno and the Stoickes.Zeno the cheefe and father of all the Stoickes was wont to say, as Aristotle reporteth, that, eyther one God, or no God. Which opinion is auerred euery where, by Plutarch and Seneca,
                           
                              Plut. de oracul. defect. de tranq. de quest. Plat. Seneca. de vita beat. de prouid. in epist.
                           
                           
                              Epict. apud Arrianum.
                           
                         two most excellent wryters, and great admirers of the Stoicke seueritie. And before them, by Epictetus, a man of singuler account in that secte, whose wordes were esteemed oracles. Dicendum ante omnia, vnum esse D
                              •
                           um, omnia regere, omnibus prouidere. Before all things (sayth he) we must affirme that there is one God, and that this God gouerneth all, and hath prouidence ouer all.
                     
                        The Academickes.As for the Academikes, who made the fourth diuision or secte of Phylosophers, it is

sufficient which I haue mētioned before, that Socrates theyr founder, was caused to die for hys opinion in thys matter; albeit it seeme, that such as insued in that secte, whose profession was to dyspute and doubt of euerie thing,So in thys time of varietie of sects. came at length, by their much iangling and dysputing, to beleeue and holde nothing. Whereof Cicero himselfe may bee an example, who in his bookes De natura Deorum, followeth so farre the Academical veine of doubtfull dysputing to and fro, about the nature of gods: as he may seeme, (& so did hee to diuers Christians of the Primatiue Church) to be very irresolute whether there were any God or no. Albeit in the ende, hee make shewe to conclude verie plainlie and peremptorilie with the Stoicks.
                           Arnob. contrae gentes.
                        
                     
                     All the foure sects of Phylosophers then,All old Phylosophers acknowledged one GOD. who in theyr tymes bare the credite of learning and wysedome, made profession of one GOD, when they came to speake as they thought. But if we ascend vp hygher to the dayes before these sectes beganne, that is, to 
                           Vide apud Plutarch. de placitis. Philos. Trismeg. in Paemand. et in Asclep.
                         Pythagoras, and Archytas Tarentinus, & before them againe, to Mercurius Trismegistus, that was the first parent of Phylosophie to the Egiptians: we shall find them so resolute and plaine in this poynt, as no Christian can be more. Wherefore hee that desyreth to see innumerable examples, as well of

these mens sayings, as of other learned Heathens of all ages: let him reade but S. Cyril
                           •
                         first booke against Iulian the Apostata, or Lactantius his first & second bookes against the Gentiles, and he shall remaine satis-fied.
                     
                        The recollection of the first argument in Morrall Phylosophie.Thys then is the Morrall Phylosophers first argument: the inclination of all people to beleeue a Godhead: the instinct of nature to confesse it, the force of mans conscience to feare it, the custome of all Nations to adore it. And finally, the consent & full agreement of all learned and wise men, in applying thys Godhead not to many, but to one onely, that made thys worlde, and gouerneth the same. Non hominibus, non daemonibus, non diis ipsis, quos non naturae ratione, sed honoris causa Deos nominamus.
                        
                           Trismeg. in P
                                 •
                              man. cap 2.3. 4.5.6. &c, In Asclep. cap. 1. 2. 6. &c.
                        
                        We doe not attribute the appellation of true God (saith Trismegistus) eyther vnto men, or vnto deuils, or vnto the multitude of other gods themselues, for that we call them gods, not in respect of theyr natures, but for honors sake.
That is, we call them gods, to honour them for theyr famous acts, and not for that we thinke them in nature true gods. Which Cicero confirmeth in these words;Cicero his opinion of the multitude of Panyme gods howe they were made. 
                        The life of man and common custome, hath nowe receiued, to lift vppe to heauen by fame and good wil, such men, as for their benefits are accounted excellent. And heerehence it commeth, that Hercules, Castor, Pollux,

AEsculapius, and Liber, are nowe become gods, and heauen almost is filled with man-kinde.
                     
                     The second argument of Morrall phylosophie,The seconde argument of Morrall phylosophie. is, de vltimo fine, & summo hominis bono: that is, cōcerning the last end of man, and of his highest or supreame felicitie, wher by the beeing of God is also confirmed. And albeit I haue sayde some-what of mans ende before: yet that which in thys place I am to adde, is more proper and peculier to Morral phylosophie. For as other sciences may and doe consider the finall endes of other creatures, which are diuers, and yet all concurre for the seruice of man: so thys science of Morrall phylosophie, dooth properly consider the finall ende of man himselfe, calling it, summum bonum, hys greatest and hyghest happinesse, whereunto he was created, and whereunto he tendeth in this life, and wherin hee resteth and reposeth without further motion or appetite, when he hath obtayned it.
                     For better vnderstanding whereof,Euery thing in this worlde hath a naturall desire to hys ende. it is to be considered, that euery thing in thys worlde hath some particuler ende, together wyth an appetite and desire ingrafted by nature to that ende: which desire ceaseth when the end is obtayned. As for example, a stone hath a naturall appetite to goe down-warde to the Centre or middle of the earth, and so it

resteth in no place, (except by violence it be stayde) vntill it come thether. On the contrary, fire, reposeth no where, (except it be restrayned) vntill it mount aboue the ayre to hys peculier & natural place of abode, wher, of it selfe it resteth. And so in other thinges that are wythout sence, there is a certain appetite and desire to theyr ende, which ende beeing once obtayned, that desire and appetite, of it selfe reposeth.
                     In beastes likewise we behold, that they haue a desire to fill theyr bellies, and to satisfie theyr other sences, which being satis-fied, they remaine contented, and desire nothing els, vntill the same appetite of sence want his obiect againe. Whereby wee perceiue, that sensualitie or contentation of the sences,The felicitie of beastes. is the finall ende desired of beastes, and theyr very summum bonum, or supreame felicitie.
                     But in man, albeit for maintenaunce of the body, there be thys appetite also to satis-fie hys sences, according to the lower proportion of hys minde, that is called sensatiue: yet according to the hygher part of hys minde, whose name is Reason, or the reasonable part, (which is the onely part indeede, that is peculier to man, and distinguisheth hym from vnreasonable beastes,) hee hath an appetite of some more highe & excellent obiect, then is the contentation of these sences:

for that by experience we see and feele, that oftentimes, when the sences be all satis-fyed, yet is the minde not quiet, which argueth, that sensualitie, or sensuall delectation, is not our summum bonum, wherin our mind must rest, and enioy her felicitie.
                     Heereupon haue Phylosophers and wise men fallen to dyspute in all ages, what shold be the finall felicitie and summum bonum of man-kind? And Cicero saith, that this point, is, cardo totius phylosophiae:
                        
                           Cic. lib. definib. bonorum et malorum.
                         the verie hooke or hindge whereupon all phylosophie hangeth. For that thys beeing once found out, cleere it is, that all other things and actions, are to to be referred to the obtayning of thys ende and happinesse. And therefore about thys poynt there hath beene meruailous contention and sight among Phylosophers;The contention of Phylosophers about the felicitie of man. the Stoickes refuting the Epicures, and the Peripateticks refuting againe the Stoicks, and the Platoniques, (who went nerest the truth) impugning and refuting both the one & the other: and thys dyssention went so far forth, the one part assigning one thing, and the other another, to be thys felicitie or summum bonum, that Marcus Varro, a most learned Romaine,
                           Aug. lib 19. de ciuit. cap. 1. gathered two hundreth fourescore and eyght dyfferent opinions (as S. Austine noteth) about thys matter.
                     And finally, when all was sayd and examined,

Plato founde, that nothing which myght be named or imagined in thys lyfe, coulde be the felicitie or summum bonum of man, for that it could not satis-fie the desire of our minde. And therefore hee pronounceth thys generall sentence. It is impossible that men should find their felicitie, (or summum bonum) in this life, seeke what waie they will, but in the next life without all doubt it must be founde.
                        The sentence of Plato in Phaedon. The reason of which sentence & determination was, for that Plato was able to refute any thing, that the other Phylosophers dyd or could name, to be our felicitie and finall ende in thys life; were it Riches, Honours, Pleasures, morral vertues, or other like, which each secte did assigne.
                     As for example, hee proued that ryches could not be our summum bonum or happynesse,How nothing in thys life can be our felicitie for that they are vncertain, vndurable, vayne, variable, and things that bring wyth them more danger oftentimes and trouble of minde, then pouertie doth. Honours hee refelled, for that besides theyr vanitie, they depend of the mouth & mindes of other men, who are changeable and inconstant. Pleasures of the body & voluptuousnes, for that they are common to vs with beastes, and alwayes haue annexed theyr sting, & dyscontentation, when they are past. Morrall vertues, for that they consist in a certaine perpetuall

fight and warre with our owne passions, which neuer giue vs reste or repose in thys life. Finally, whether soeuer wee turne our selues, or what soeuer we lay our hands vppon in this life, to make our felicitie or summum bonum, it faileth vs (saith Plato) neither giueth it any durable contentation to our minde, wherefore this felicitie is to bee sought and obtayned in the life to come.
                     Thus far
                           •
                         arryueth Morrall Phylosophie by reason,Howe farre Morrall phylosophie reacheth in determining mans felicitie. to proue, that mans felicitie or finall end, cannot be in any thing of thys lyfe or world. It proueth also by the same reason, (as in part it hath been touched before) that thys felicitie of our mind in the life to come, must be a spirituall and immateriall obiect, for that our minde and soule is a spirit: it must be immortall, for that our soule is immortall. But what? goeth yet humaine phylosophie any further? or can Plato assigne the particuler poynt wherein it standeth? Heare his words, and confesse, that not without reason he was called Diuine. In thys it co
                           ••
                        isteth (sayth he) vt coniungamur Deo qui omnis beatitudinis, fastigium, meta, finis.
                        
                           Plato in Phaed.
                         That we be ioyned to God, who is the toppe, the butte, and the end of all blessednes. And can any Christian (thinke you) say more then thys? Yet harken what a scholler of his saith, for explication of hys Maisters sentence.

                        Supremus hominis finis, supremum bonum, id est Deus.
                        
                           Plotinus. Enu. 1. lib. 4. cap. 1. The finall ende of man whereto hee tendeth, is a supreame or soueraigne good thing, and thys is God himselfe. By which wordes wee see, that these Heathens, by the ende of man, could finde out GOD, which was the seconde argument propounded in Morrall phylosophie.
                     
                        The thyrd argument in Morrall Phylosophie, touching reward & punishment.A third argument vseth the Morral phylosopher, for proofe of God, (which shal be the last I wyll alledge in thys place) deduced from consideration of good and euill, vice & vertue, & especially of the reward which by nature, reason and equitie, is due to the one; as also of the punishment belonging to the other. For (sayth he) as in all other thinges, creatures & actions of thys world, that passe from the Creator, we see proportion, order, iustice, wysedome, & prouidence obserued; so, much more must wee assure our selues, that the same is obserued in the same Creators actions and proceedings towardes man, that is the cheefe and principall of all other hys creatures.
                     Nowe then wee see and beholde, that all other creatures, are directed to theyr endes by nature, and doe receiue comfort and contentation so long as they holde that course: and losse, disease, and griefe, as soone as they breake and swarue from the same. Onelie

man, hath reason giuen him wherby to know and iudge of hys ende; and the holie Scriptures, whereby he may eyther direct his way to the same by vertue, or runne astray by folowing of wickednesse. Whereupon it ensueth, that in all equitie and iustice, there must remaine rewarde for such as doe well; and follow the right pathe assigned them to theyr ende & felicitie, which is by good life: and punishment for the other that abandoneth the same, for pleasure and sensualitie.
                     But we see in thys world (sayth the Phylosopher) that most wicked men doe receiue least punishment; and many there be, (as Princes & high Potentates) whose liues and actions, be they neuer so vicious, yet are they aboue the correction of mortall men: and many poore men in the contrarie part, vvho for theyr vertue, patience, and honestie, receiue nothing in thys life, but enuie, malice, contempt, reproche, despyte, and oppression. See of thys matter Sociates in apolog. Wherefore (saith hee) eyther wanteth there prouidence and equitie in the gouernment and dysposition of these great affaires, which we see not to want in thinges of lesser moment;
                           Plato in Cratill. et in Gorgia. et in phaed. et in li. 10. de legibus. Plut. de Sera numinis vindicta. & others.
                         or els must there be a place of punishment, and reward in the life to come, vppon the soules of such as passe from hence, and a iust and powerfull Iudge to make recompence of these inequalities & iniustices

permitted in thys world. Which Iudge can be none but the Creator himselfe.
                     And so hytherto haue I declared, howe euery particuler science among the Gentiles had particuler meanes and wayes to demonstrate GOD, by contemplation of his creatures, and by force of reason, which no man coulde denie. Nowe remaineth it to shewe, howe the Iewe or faithfull Israelite, before Christes appearaunce, was able to confirme thys veritie to a Heathen, which shal be the subiect of the section ensuing.
                  
               
               
                  Howe the Iewes were able to proue GOD. SECT. 3.
                  THE people of Israell, that for manie yeeres and ages, were the peculier people & partage of GOD;The people of Israell Gods partage. as they dwelt inuironed wyth Gentiles of each side, that impugned their Religion and worshippe of one God, and had many weak-lings among them selues, that were often tempted to doubt of the same Religion, by the example of so manie Nations and Countries about them, that made profession of a contrary Religion: so had the Diuines and learned men of thys people, diu
                        •
                     rs forcible proofes, & most reasonable

arguments peculier to themselues, (besides the gyft of faith or any other demō
                     stration that hetherto hath beene alledged) to confirme theyr bretheren in the beleefe of one God, & to conuince all Atheists or Infidels in the world.
                  And albeit these proofes which they vsed were many, as the Creation of the world by one God:Diuers things whereby the Iewes shewe GOD. the deuiding of the Hebrue Religion from the beginning: the conuersation of God wyth Abraham, of whom the Iewes descended: the miraculous deliuering of that nation from Egypt: the lawe receiued from Gods own mouth by Moses: the strange enteraunce of Iewes into the Land of promise: the extinguishing of the Gentiles which before inhabited there: the erection of the Iewish Monarchie, and protection thereof against al Nations: the miraculous deeds & sayings of Prophets: & a thousande reasons besides, which confirme most euidently, that the Iewes God, was the onely true God: yet for that all these things and sayings wyth an Infidell, had no more credite, then the wrytings or scriptures wherein they were recorded, heereby it came to passe, that all which a Iewe could say for proofe of GOD, more then a Gentile, depended onely vppon the authoritie of hys scriptures; & for this cause, he referred all hys proofes and arguments to

euident the truth & certaintie of these scriptures, which thing once performed, the beeing of one God cannot be called in controuersie: for that these scriptures are nothing els but a narratiō of the acts & gestes of that onelye God, which the Iewes professe.
                  We are nowe to see then, what the Iewe was able to say for proofe of hys scriptures, and consequently, for demonstration of God,Comfortable to heare the certaintie of Scriptures declared. and of his iudgemēts declared therin. Which discourse, as it was profitable in olde tyme, for stay and confirmation of all such, as were or might be tempted with infidelitie: so can it not be but verie comfortable to vs Christians of these dayes, to behold the certaintie of these scriptures layde open before vs, vpon which the foundation of our whole fayth dependeth.
                  
                     THE FIRST PROOFE OF SCRIPTVRES.
                     FIrst therefore, the Iewe for proofe of his Scriptures,Antiquitie. alledgeth the great and wonderfull antiquitie thereof. For as God (sayth he) was before Idols, and trueth before falshood: so was the Scripture (which is the storie of the true GOD) long before the wrytings of Panyms or Infidels. Iosephus lib. 10. contra Appion, handleth thys at large. Nay, further

he sheweth, that the most part of things recounted in the Bible, were done before most of the Panym gods were exstant, & that the very last VVryters of the Hebrue Canon, which are Esdras, Aggeus, Zacharias, and Malachie, (Eusebius assigneth them 570. in Chron. almost sixe hundreth yeeres before the comming of Christ, when the second Monarchie of Persians beganne) were before most of the Heathen auncient Hystoriographers; to wit, before Hellanicus, Herodotus, Pherecides, Thucydides, and Xenophon. And albeit the Gentiles had some Poets before, as Orpheus, Homer, Hesiodus, and Lycurgus the Law-maker, that lyued a good whyle after: yet the eldest of these, arriued no higher then the dayes of K. Salomon, which was fiue hundreth yeres after Moses, the first wryter of the Bible. After whose tyme, the most part of Heathen gods were long vnborne,
                           Euphemerus. Missen. in Genealo. Deorum.
                         as Ceres, Vulcan, Mercurie, Apollo, AEsculapius, Castor, Pollux, and Hercules, as the Gentiles them selues in theyr Genealogies do confesse. And as for Abraham, that lyued fiue hundered yeeres before Moses, he was not onely elder then these gods which I haue named, but also then Iupiter, Neptune, Pluto, and such other, who for dignities sake and antiquitie, are called by the Gentils Dii maiorum gentium,
                        
                           Cic. de nat
                                 ••
                              a Deorum.
                         the gods of greater Nations. And yet

before Abraham doe the scriptures containe the storie of two thousand yeeres or there abouts.
                     So that by thys it is euident, that the writing of Heathens, and the multitude of their gods, are but late fables in respect of the old and venerable antiquitie of Hebrue Scriptures, & consequently, the authority of these scriptures, must in reason be greater then of all other wrytings in the world besides, seeing they were extant before all others, in those first times of simplicitie and sinceritie, and were in part translated into dyuers languages before the Monarchie of the Persians, that is,
                           Euse. lib. 9. de praep. Euang. cap. 2.3.4 before any storie of the Gentiles were wrytten, as Eusebius out of many heathen Authors declareth.
                  
                  
                     THE SECOND PROOFE OF SCRIPTVRES.
                     
                        Theyr manner of writing and conseruing.NExt to the reason of antiquitie, is alledged the maner of wryting, authorysing, and cōseruing these scriptures, which is such, as greatly confirmeth the certaintie of things contained therein. For first what soeuer is sette downe in these wrytings, was either taken immediatly from the mouth of God, as were the propheci
                           •
                        s and bookes of the lawe:

or els collected from time to time by generall consent, according as matters & miracles fell out, as were the booke of Iudges, the bookes of Kinges and Chronicles, and some other that containe recordes and Hystories of tymes. Which bookes were not gathered by some one priuate man, vpon heare-say, or hys owne imagination, long after thinges doone, as Heathen hystories, and other prophane records and monuments are, but, they were written by generall agreement, in the selfe same dayes, when things were in sight and knowledge of all men, and so could not be feygned.
                     Secondly, when bookes were wrytten, they were not admitted into the common authoritie of scriptures,How scriptures were authorised. that is, of Gods word or diuine wrytings, but vpon great deliberation, and most euident proofe of theyr vndoubted veritie. For eyther the whole congregation or sinagogue, who had the approuing hereof, (and among whō commonlie were dyuers Prophets) did knowe most certainly the things and miracles to be true, (as did also the whole people) that were recorded in these writings, concerning Hystories or els they sawe the same confirmed from GOD, by signes and wonders, as in the bookes of the Prophets, & of their lawgyuer Moses it fell out.
                     
                        Thirdly, when any thing was written and admitted for scripture, the care of conseruation thereof was such,The care of conseruation. and the reuerence of Iewes thereunto so great: as may easily assure vs, that no corruption or alteration could happen vnto it. For first the thing was coppied out into twelue Autenticall copies, for all the twelue Tribes: & then again in euery Trybe there were so many copies made as were particuler Sinagogues within that Trybe. All was doone by speciall Notaries, Scribes, ouer-seers, and witnesses. The copies after diligent reviewe taken, were layde vp by the whole congregation, in the Treasure house of the Temple, vnder diuers locks and keyes, not to be touched, but by men appointed, not to be vsed but with singuler reuerence. To adde, diminish, corrupt, or alter, was present death by the lawes of the Nation. And then how was it possible (saith the Iewe) that among these wrytings, eyther falshoode should creepe in, or trueth once receiued, could afterwarde be corrupted?
                     It is not possible (saith he) in reason, and therefore obserueth he another thing in this case, which in trueth is of very great consideration: to witt, that no other Nation vnder heauen, did euer so much esteeme theyr owne wrytings, that they would offer to die

for the same, as the Iewes were ready to doe,The estimation that the Iewes had of theyr Scriptures. for euery sentence & syllable of theyr scriptures. Wherefore also it did proceed, that in all theyr miseries & afflictions (wherin they were a spectacle to all the world) in all theyr flights and banishments, to Egypt, Babilon, Persia, Media, & other corners of the earth, in all theyr spoyles, assaults, and deuastations at home: they yet euer had speciall care to conserue these wrytings, more then theyr own lyues, & so haue kept the same without mayme or corruption more ages together, then all Nations in the world haue doone anie other monuments.
                  
                  
                     THE THIRD PROOFE OF SCRIPTVRES.
                     THE thyrde perswasion which is vsed by the Iewe for the veritie of these Scriptures,The sinceritie of the writers. is, the consideration of the particuler men that wrote them: who were such, as in reason cannot be suspected of deceipt or falshood. For as I haue sayde, the stories of the Bible, were written frō time to time by publique authoritie, and by the testimonie of all men that sawe and knew the things that are rehearsed. The Bookes of the prophecies were indited by the Prophets themselues,

who were plaine, simple, & sincere men, authorised from God by continuall myracles, and yet so scrupulous and timerous of theyr own speeches, as they durst say nothing, but onelie, Our Lord saith this, the Lord of hostes commaundeth that, &c.
                     
                     And when they preached and read their wrytinges in the hearing of all the people, they protested that it was not mans worde, but Gods, and that for such they left it in the publique Treasurie of theyr Nation, vntyll by tract of tyme, the euent and fulfilling of theyr prophecies shoulde proue them true, (as alwayes it did) and theyr own both li
                           •
                        es and deathes declare,The liues and deathes of the Prophets. that they meant no falshood; their liues beeing such, as were not subiect to the corruption, pryde, vanitie, or ambition of this life (as other prophane and Heathen writers were) and theyr deathes for the most part, offered vppe in holy martyrdom, for defence of that truth which they had preached and wrytten: as appeareth in 
                           See Epiphan. de vitis propheta.
                         Esay, that was sawed in peeces by K. Manasses; in Ieremie, that was stoned to death by the common people; in Ezechiell, that was slayne by the Captaine of the Iewes at Babylon; in Amos, whose braines were beaten out by Amasias the wicked & idolatrous Priest in Bethel; in Micheas; whose necke was broken by Ioam, sonne to King Achab;

in Zacharias, that was slayne at the Altar, and the like.
                     And thys for the Prophets of later times among the Iewes.A peculier cō
                           sideration of Moses, first writer in the Bible. But nowe, if wee consider the first Prophet of all that wrote among that people, I meane Moses, that was not onlie a Prophet, but also an Hystoriographer a Law-gyuer, a Captaine and a Priest: the first that euer reduced that people to a common-wealth, and the first that put their acts and gestes in wryting, or rather the acts and gestes of the Almightie GOD towardes them: thys man (I say) if wee consider him onelie, (I meane the circumstaunces of hys person,) the Iewe thinketh thys a sufficient motiue to make any man of reason beleeue what soeuer hee hath left written in the Bible, without further confirmation.
                     And first for his antiquitie,
                           Euseb. lib. 9. et 10. de prep. Euang. Ioseph. lib. 1. de content. Appio. et L. 2. anti.
                         I haue spoken before, and the Heathens doe confesse: and for myracles doone by him, the greatest enemies that euer he had in the worlde, that is, Appion in hys fourth Booke against the Iewes, and Porphirie in his fourth booke against Christians, do acknowledge them; & Porphirie adioyneth more for proofe heereof, that he found the same confirmed by the storie of one Saconiathon a Gentile, who lyued (as he sayth) at the same tyme with Moses. But what? all those myracles (saie they)

were doone by Arte-magick, and not by the power of GOD, as Moses boasted.
                     But then asketh them the Iewe, where Moses a sheepehearde, could learne so much Magicke, or why coulde not the Magitians of Pharao,Exod. 3.4.8. whose studie was in that profession from theyr infancie, eyther doe the like, or at least wise deliuer themselues from the plagues of Egypt?The myraculous works of Moses. Exodus. 14. why did they cry out, the finger of God is heere? where did you euer heare of such workes doone by Magicke, as Moses did, when he deuided the redde Sea? when hee called into his Campe so manie Quayles vppon the suddaine,Exodus. 16. as suffised to feede sixe hundred thousande men, besides women & children?Numb. 11. When he made a rock to yeeld forth a fountaine? when he caused a dewe to fall from heauen,Iosua. 5. Psalme. 77. that nourished his whole Campe for fortie yeres together? whē he caused the ground to open and swallowe downe aliue,Numb. 16. three of the richest noble men of all hys Armie, together with their Tabernacles, and all other bagges and baggage? When he caused a fire to com from heauen,
                           Ioseph. lib. 4. antiq. cap. 2. 
                              
                                 •
                              t. 3. and consume fiftie Gentlemen of the former rebels and adherents, without hurting anie one that stood about them?
                     These things dyd Moses, and many other in the sight of all his Armie, that is, in the sight of many hundred thousande people,

among which, there were diuers his emulators and sworne enemies, as by the storie and scripture it selfe appeareth. Core, Dathan, and Abiron with theyr faction,Numb. 16. Deut. 11. Psalm. 1 25. sought in all things to dysgrace him, and to diminish hys credite: and therfore if any one poynt of the myracles had beene reproueable: Moses woulde neuer haue durst to put the same in wryting, nor would the people haue stoode with him, and much lesse haue receiued hys wrytinges for diuine, and for Gods owne wordes, (beeing solicited against him by so potent meanes,) had not they knowne all things to be most true therein contayned, & had seene his strange myracles, and familiaritie with God.
                     But he dealt plainely and simply in thys behalfe:The playne and sincere proceeding of Moses. hee wrote the thinges of his owne dooings, which euerie man present did know to be true: and of Gods speeches and communications to himselfe, he wrote so much as he was commaunded, whereof both God, and his conscience did beare him witnesse. Hee caused the whole to bee read vnto the people, and layde vppe in the sacred Arke and Tabernacle, as Gods owne wryting, and couenant with that Nation. He caused al the whole Armie to sweare and vowe the obseruaunce thereof.Numb. 20. and 17. Deut. 31. And then drawing towards his death, he made a most excellent exhortation

vnto them, perswading them sincerelie to the seruice of theyr God: and confessing his owne infirmities, and howe for hys offences he was to die, before theyr entrance into the Land of promise.Exodus. 32. Genesis. 49. Numb. 12. Deuter. 14. He concealed not the offence of hys Brother Aaron, of hys Graund-father Leuie, of hys Sister Marie, and other of hys kindred, (as worldly Princes for theyr honours are wont to doe,) neyther did he goe about to bring in gouernmēt after hys decease, any one of his owne sons, (which is greatly to be obserued) notwythstanding he left behinde him goodly Gentlemē fit for that roome,Numb. 27. Deute. 3. & himself of power to place them, if he had endeuoured: but he left the gouernment to a stranger, named Iosua, as God had commaunded him.
                     All which things (saith the Iew) do proue sufficientlie, that Moses was no man of ambition, or of worldly spirit, but a true Seruaunt of God, and consequentlie, that hee wrought not by Magicke or falshood, but by the onely power of hys Lorde and Maister, and that hys writinges are true, and of the same authoritie, that in hys life and death he affirmed them to bee, that is, the vndoubted worde of Almightie God.
                  
                  
                     
                     THE FOVRTH PROOFE OF SCRIPTVRES.
                     THys hee confirmeth yet further by a fourth reason, which is, the consent and approbation of all later writers of the Bible;Consent. that ensued after Moses. For as among prophane wryters of worldly spirite, it is a common fashion for hym that followeth, to reprehende the former, & to hunt after praise by hys auncetours disgrace: so in these writers of the Bible, it is a most certaine argument, that al were guided by one spirit from GOD, that in continuaunce of so many ages and thousand yeeres, no one yet euer impugned the other, but alwaies the later supposing and approouing the former for true; doth builde thereupon, as vpon a sure foundation. So the writings of Iosua, do confirme and approue the writings of Moses: and the recordes of the Iudges, doe reuerence & allowe the booke of Iosua. The storie of the Kings and Chronicles, dooth referre it selfe to the storie of Iudges. One Prophet confirmeth another. And finally, Christ approoueth them all, by the knowne diuision of the Lawe, Psalmes, and Prophets, which is a demonstration, that all their spirits agreed in

one. And thus hetherto hath been declared the foure considerations,Foure considerations externall. that are external or  without the Bible, to wit, the antiquitie and  continuaunce of the Scriptures; the maner  of their writing and preseruing from corruption;  the sinceritie, vertue, and simplicity of theyr writers; together with theyr agreemēt and coherence in one spirit. But now further (saith the learned Iewe) if you will but open the booke it selfe,Considerations internall. and looke into the Texte, and that which therin is contained: you shal see Gods owne hand, Gods owne charecters, Gods owne signe and seale, and subscription to the paper. You shall see Gods omnipotencie, Gods spirite, Gods prouidence, no lesse in these letters of his booke, then you beheld the same before, in the tables of hys creatures. Nay, much more, (sayth hee) for that these letters were deuised for declaration of those tables, to the end, that such as for theyr blindnesse could not see him in his creatures, might learne at least to reade him in hys scriptures.
                  
                  
                     THE FIFT PROOFE OF SCRIPTVRES.
                     
                        Their argument & end.COnsider then first (saith hee) the subiect or argument which the Scriptures doe

handle, together with theyr scope and ende, whereunto they doe leuell. You shal finde, that the first is nothing els, but the acts and gestes of one eternal God, as before hath been mentioned; and the second nothing els, but the onely glorie and exaltation of the same great GOD, together with the saluation of man-kinde vpon earth. And shall you finde any wrytings in the worlde besides, that haue so worthy an argument, or so high an ende? Reade all the volumes & monuments of the Pagans; turn ouer all theyr Authors, of what kinde, name, or profession so euer, and see what mētion they make of these two things, I meane, of the honour of God, and the saluation of man? Read theyr Phylosophers,Philosophers. & see, whether euer they name or pretende these things. Read theyr Historiographers,Hystoriographers. and marke how many battailes and victories they attribute vnto God? They wil describe to you often the perticuler commendation of euerie Captaine: they will defraude no one Souldiour of hys prayse in the victorie: they wyll attribute much to the wysedom of their Generall; much to his courage: much to 
                           ••
                        s watchfulnes: much to his fortune. They wyll attribute to the place, to the winde, to the wether, to the shyning of the Sunne, to the raysing of the duste in the enemies eyes, to the flying of some little byrde in the ayre,

and to a thousande such pettie obseruations besides; but to God nothing. Where as contrariwise in the scriptures, it is in euery battayle recorded. God deliuered them into theyr enemies handes: God ouerthrewe them: God gaue the victorie.
                     
                     Againe, consider the Lawes and Lawemakers among the Gentiles,Heathen Lawmakers. as Lycurgus, Solon, Draco, Numa, and the like, and see whether you may finde any one such Lawe, or tending to such an ende, as thys of the Iewes: Thou shalt loue the Lord thy God, with all thy hart, and with all thy soule: and shalt loue thy neighbour as thy selfe.
                        Deute. 6. Consider in all the South-sayers and Diuines among the Gentiles,Prophets and Soothsayers. whether they vsed to say in theyr predictions, as the Prophets of Israell did, Dominus dixit, the Lord hath spoken it, or els Ego dico, I doe speak it. Compare theyr versifyers and Poets with those of the scripture,Versifyers and Poets. and see, whether they haue laboured in the prayse of men, or of God. And whereas heathen Poets, haue filled vppe theyr Bookes (as also the most part of ours at thys daie,) wyth matter of carnall loue: marke where any of thē euer brake foorth into such pan
                           ••
                         of spirituall chaste loue, as holie Dauid did, when he said:Psalme. 17. I wyll loue thee my God, my strength, my firmament, my refuge, my deliuerer, my helper, my protector, & the horne

of my saluation. And again in another verse.The vehement loue of Dauid. Psalme. 72. What haue I desired vpō earth besides thee? my flesh and hart haue fainted for thee, thou God of my hart, thou GOD art my part and portion euerlasting?
                     By all which is euident, that as prophane wrytinges and writers,Prophane writers treat onely of men. which doe treate of men, extoll men, seeke the grace of men, referre all to the commoditie and good liking of men, doe proceede of the spirite of man, and are subiect to those infirmities of falsehoode, errour, and vanitie, wherewith man is intangled in thys life: so the Scriptures, which handle matters aboue the compasse of flesh and bloode; that referre all to God, and supernaturall endes; could not proceede of nature or of humaine spirit. For that by nature, the Iewes were men as the Gentiles were, and had theyr infirmities of fleshe and blood as the other had. And therfore it must needes be concluded, that these high and supernaturall writings among them, proceeded from God that specially directed them, and gaue them light of vnderstanding, aboue all other nations, and people in the world.
                  
                  
                     THE SIXT PROOFE OF SCRIPTVRES.
                     NExt after the argument and end of the Scriptures,Theyr style. the Iewe wylleth vs to consider

the peculier style & phrase which they vse; for that (saith he) it beeing different frō all manner of wrytings in the world, and vnimitable to man: it dooth dyscouer the finger of God by which it was framed. See S. Augustine of this at large, lib. 12. de ciuit. Dei. For wher as humaine writers doe labour much in adoring theyr stile, and in reducing their words to number, weight, measure and sound, with addition of many figures, and other ornaments, for allurement of the Reader: the Scripture taketh quite another course, and vseth a most meruailous simplicitie,Simplicitie. therby to accomodate it selfe to the capacitie of the weakest; but yet, alwaies carrying with it so great profunditie,Profunditie. as the best learned in the search thereof, shall confesse theyr owne ignoraunce. For examples sake, consider but the very first wordes of the Bible;Genesis. 1. 
                        In the beginning, God created heauen and earth: and the earth was emptie and voide, and darkenes was vpon the face of the depth: and the spirit of God was carried vpon the waters: and GOD saide, let light be made, & light was made, &c. What can be more plaine & simple, thē this narration, to instruct the most vnlearned about the beginning & creation of the world? and yet, when learned men come to examine euery point therof, how and what, & where, and in what manner, and when, things were doone; it astonisheth them all, to consider

the difficulties which they finde, and the depth of so infinite inscrutable misteries.
                     Besides thys, there goeth in the same simplicitie, a strange maiestie,The grauitie and maiestie of speech in the scriptures. and grauitie of speeche, declaring sufficiently from howe great and potent a Prince it proceedeth. For as great Monarches in theyr Edicts and proclamations, are wont to speak vnto their subiects, not in figures or rethoricall phrases, but plainly, breefelie, and peremptorilie to shewe theyr authoritie: so the scriptures, to declare whose Edicts they be, do vse the like manner of phrase and style to al the worlde, without alluring or flattering any man, and without respect of Monarche, Emperour, King, Prince, or PotentateDeut. 4. 16. and 22. 
                        Fac hoc et viues: doe thys, and thou shalt liue. Si peccaueris in me, morieris in aeternum: if thou sin against me, thou shalt die euerlastinglie.
                     And albeit (as I haue sayde) the Scriptures doe vse this simplicitie of speech, and doe not admitte that kind of paynted and artificiall stile, which humaine writers doe so much couet: yet in perswading, instructing, mouing of affections,The force of the scriptures, in moouing of affections. and all other effectes which speech or writing can worke: there is no comparison, (a thing most wonderfull) betweene any other wrytings in the worlde and these. Whereof I coulde alledge manie proofes and examples, but that it were too-long.

Let anie man reade attentiuelie, but the first Chapter of the prophecie of Esay, and compare it with anie one part or parcell of Tullies or Demostines orations, & see whether the difference of wordes, be as great as the differēce of motions? Let diuers hymnes and holy Psalmes of the scriptures, be conferred with the most patheticall poems, that mans wit hath inuented, and see whether there be any comparison in stirring and fiering of affections, or no?
                     This am I sure, that Iosephus the Iewe, who for glorie of his eloquence,
                           Flauius. Iosephus. de Antiq. Iudaic.
                         had his Image of mettall, erected by Titus the Emperour in the market-place of Rome, wrote the the same storie,See S. Ierom. lib. de scrip. Ecclesi. which the scriptures containe, and bestowed much labour & humane cunning therein. But yet euen in those places, where he endeuoured most to shew hys arte,Genesis. 22. as in the sacrifice of Isaac by his father, and in the meeting of Iephte with his onelie daughter,Iudges. 11. which by vowe he was constrained to put to death; the Scriptures are able to pearce the hart, and wring out teares of the reader, whome Iosephus will not greatlie mooue with his rethorical narration, though otherwise verie learned and arteficiallie penned.
                     
                        Two myracles reported by Aristaeus.Aristaeus that learned Gentile, of whom wee haue made mention before, who was

in speciall fauour with Ptolomie, the second great Monarche of Egipt, (about three hundred yeeres before our Sauiour Christ hys natiuitie, (and a cheefe dooer in procuring the translation of the Hebrue Bible into the Greeke language,
                           Aristaeus. libello de translat. Bibliorum, et apud Euse. lib. 8. d
                                 •
                               praep. euang. cap. 1. reported of his owne knowledge to the said King Ptolomie, two strange accidents which had happened in his time, and which hee had vnderstoode of the parties themselues, to whom they had happened. The first was, of Theopompus,Theopompus. an eloquent Hystoriographer, who hauing translated many things out of the Bible, and endeuouring to adorne the same wyth vaine colloures of eloquence; could not performe his desire, but was striken wyth a suddayne maze and giddines in the head, and was warned in hys sleepe, not to proceede anie further in that worke after that sorte, for that such maner of stile was too-base for so high matters, as the scriptures contained.
                     The other example was of one Theodectes a wryter of Tragaedies,Theodectes. who tolde Aristaeꝰ, that he once attempted to bring certaine matters out of the Iewes Bible, into a Pagan tragaedie, and that thereupon he was presentlie striken blind; where-with he beeing astonished, and falling to repentance for that he had doone, & desisting from the enterprise, (as also Theopompꝰ did) they were

both of them restored again to their former healthes. And thus much did these three Pagans confesse, of the authority, diuinitie, and peculier sacred stile of our scriptures.
                  
                  
                     THE SEVENTH PROOFE OF SCRIPTVRES.
                     BVT nowe further it insueth in order, that after the subiect & phrase, we shold consider a little the contents of these Scriptures,The Contents. which wyll perhaps, more cleerely direct vs to the viewe of theyr Authour, then any thing els that hetherto hath beene sayde. And for our present purpose, I wil note onlie two speciall thinges contained in the Bible. The first shall be certaine high and hidden doctrines,High doctrines. which are aboue the reache and capacitie of humaine reason, and consequently could neuer fall into mans braine to inuent them. As for example; that all thys wonderfull frame of the worlde, was created of nothing, whereas Phylosophie saith, that of nothing, nothing can be made. That Angels beeing created spirits, were damned eternally for theyr sinnes; that Adam by dysobedience in Paradise, drewe all hys posteritie into the obligation of that his sinne; & that, the womans seede shold deliuer vs from the

same. That God is one in substaunce, and three in person; that the second of these persons beeing God, shoulde become man, and die vpon a Crosse for the raunsome of mankinde; that after him, the way to all felicitie and honour, should be by contempt, suffering, and dyshonour. These doctrines (I say) and many more, contayned in the Bible, being thinges aboue mans capacitie to deuise, and nothing agreeing wyth humane reason: most euidentlie doe declare, that God vvas the Author and enditor of the scriptures, for that by him onely, and from no other, these high and secrete mysteries coulde be reuealed.
                     The second thing contained in the scriptures, that coulde not proceede but frō God alone, are certayne prophecies and foretellings of thinges to come.The prophecies in scripture doe declare theyr Authour. VVherein God hymselfe prouoketh the Idoles of the Gentiles, to make experience of theyr power, in these wordes:Esay. 41, 23. 
                        Declare vnto vs what shall ensue heereafter, and thereby we shall knowe that you are Gods indeede. Which is to be vnderstoode, if they coulde fore-tell particularlie and plainly, what is to come, in things meerlie contingent or depending of mans wyll: they should thereby declare theyr power to be diuine.
                     For albeit these Idoles of the Gentiles, as

Apollo, and other that gaue foorth Oracles, (which were nothing els indeede, but certaine wicked spyrits, that tooke vpon them these names,) did some-time happen vppon the trueth, and fore-tell thinges to come:Howe the deuils and other creatures may fore-tel things to come. as also some Astrologers, Sooth-sayers, & Magitians doe, eyther by fore-sight in the stars and other elements, or by the assistaunce of these wicked spirits and deuils: yet are the thinges which they pronosticate, eyther natural & not contingent: and so may be fore-seene and fore-told in theyr causes; (as raine, heate, colde, windes, and the like:) or els, if they be meere accidentall: these predictions of theyrs, are onelie coniectures, & so most incertaine, and subiect to errours.
                     
                        The opinion of a Heathē touching the prophecies of hys gods.Thys testifieth Porphirie the great Patrone of Paganisme, in a speciall booke of the aunswers of the gods, wherein he sweareth, that he hath gathered truely without addition or detraction, the Oracles that was most famous before his tyme, wyth the false and vncertaine euent therof; in consideration of which euent, he setteth downe his iudgment of theyr power in predictions, after this maner.
                           Porphy. lib. de resp. et oracu.
                         
                        The Gods doe fore-tell some naturall things to come, for that they doe obserue the order and coniūction of their naturall causes: but of things that are contingent, or doe depend of mans will, they haue but coniectures onely, in that by their

subtiltie and celeritie, they preuent vs. But yet they often-times doe lye, and deceiue vs in both kindes: for that, as naturall thinges are variable, so mans will is much more mutable.
                     
                     Thus farre Porphyrie of the prophecies of his gods, wherunto agreeth another Heathen, of great credite among the Gretians, named Oenomaus,
                           Oenomaus de falsitate oraculorum, et de artificibus maleficijs
                         who for that he had been much delighted with Oracles, and more deceiued: wrote a speciall booke in the end, of theyr falshoode and lyes; and yet shevveth, that in many things wherein they deceiued, it was not easie to conuince them of open falshoode, for that they would inuolue theyr aunswers (of purpose,) wyth such obscurities, generalities, equiuocations, and doubtfulnesse, as alwaies they would leaue themselues a corner wherein to saue their credits, when the euent shoulde prooue false. As for example, when Cresus that famous and rich Monarche of Lydia, consulted with the Oracle of Apollo,Deceitfull Oracles. whether he should make vvarre against the Persians, and thereby obtayne theyr Empyre, or no? Apollo; desirous of blood-shedde, (as all wycked spirits are) gaue hys oracle in these vvordes, for deceiuing of Cresus. If Craesus without feare, shall passe ouer Halys:
                        
                           Euseb. lib. 5. de praep. euange. capit. 10. (thys was a Ryuer that lay betweene him and Persia) hee shall bring to confusion a great rich kingdome. Vppon

which words, Cresus passed ouer his armie, in hope to gette Persia, but soone after hee lost Lydia, by euill vnderstanding of thys doubtfull prophecie.
                     
                        The circumstaunces of prophecies set downe in the scriptures.Thys then is the imbecilitie of both humaine and angelicall power, in pronosticating thinges to come, which are meere contingent. In which kinde, notwithstanding, seeing that the scriptures haue many, and almost infinite prophecies, fore-tolde manie yeeres, (and some-times ages) before they came to passe: sette downe in plaine, perticuler, and resolute speech: at such tyme as there was neither cause to coniecture them, nor probabilitie that euer they shoulde bee true; deliuered by simple & vnlearned persons, that coulde fore-see nothing by skill or arte; and yet that all these by their euents, haue prooued most true, and neuer any one iote in the same haue fayled: thys (I saie) alone, dooth conuince most apparentlie, (all proofes and reasons, & other arguments layde aside,) that these Scriptures are of GOD, and of hys eternall and infallible spyrite. And therefore of these prophecies, I wyll alledge in thys place, some fewe examples.
                     
                        
                        The prophecie to Abraham for his posteritie.
                        ABraham the first Father & speciall Patriarch of the Iewes, had many prophecies and predictions made vnto him, as of hys issue, when hee had yet none, nor euer like to haue: of hys inheriting the Lande of Canaan, and the like. But thys which followeth, is wonderfull, of his posterities discent into Egypt;Gene. 12. 13. 15. 17. 18. &c. of theyr time of seruitude, and manner of deliueraunce thence; the same beeing fore-told more then foure hundered yeeres before it was fulfilled:) and at that time when no likelihood therof in the world appeared. The words are these.Gene. 15. 
                           Knowe thou before hand, that thy issue shall be a stranger in a forraine Land, and they shall subiect them to seruitude, & shall afflict them for foure hundred yeres: but yet I will iudge the nation vnto whō they haue beene slaues, and after that, they shall depart thence with great riches. Thys is the prophecie, and howe exactlie it was afterwarde fulfilled, by the ruine of the Egyptians, and deliueraunce of the Israelites, euen at that tyme which is heere appointed: not onely the booke of Exodus dooth declare,Exodus. 1
                                 •
                              . Gala. 3. where the whole storie is layd down at large,

but also the consent of 
                              Porphy. lib. 4. contra Christia.
                            Heathen wryters, as before hath beene touched. And it is specially to be noted,
                              Appion. lib. 4. contra. Iudaeos.
                            that thys prophecie was so common and well knowne among all the Iewes, from Abrahams tyme downe vnto Moses, and so deliuered by tradition from fathers vnto their children: as it was the onlie comfort & stay, not onely of all that people in theyr seruitude of Egypt: but also of Moses and others, that gouerned the people afterwards, for forty yeeres together in the desert, and was the onely meane indeede, wherby to pacifie them in their distresses & myseries; and therefore Moses in euery exhortation almost, maketh mention of thys promise and prophecie, as of a thing well knowne vnto them all, and not deuised or inuented by himselfe or any other.
                     
                     
                        
                            The prophecie for the gouernment of Iuda.
                        LOng after thys, Iacob that was Abrahams Nephewe, beeing in Egypt, and making hys testament; said of hys fourth son Iuda. Iuda, thy brother shal praise thee, and the children of thy father shall bowe vnto thee, &c. The Scepter shall not be taken from Iuda, vntill he come that is to be sent, and he shall be the expectation

of Nations.
                           Genesis. 49. Which later part of the prophecie, all Hebrues doe expound that it was meant of the cōming of Messias, which was fulfilled almost two thousand yeeres after, at the comming of Christe, as shall bee shewed in another speciall Chapter.
                              Iosephus. de antiq. lib. 14. For at that time, King Herod a stranger, put out quite the line of Iuda, frō the gouernment of Iurie. But for the first part, touching Iudas Scepter, it is wonderfull to consider the circumstaunces of thys prophecie.
                        For first, when it was spoken and vttered by Iacob, there was no probabilitie of anie Scepter at al, to be among the Iewes, for that the Israelites or sonnes of Iacob at that day, were poore and fewe in number, and neuer like to be a distinct Nation of themselues, or to depart foorth of Egypt againe. And secondly, if any such thing shoulde come to passe, as they might be a people, and haue a Scepter of gouernment of theyr owne. Yet was it not likelie, that Iuda and hys posteritie should possesse the same,Vulikelihoods of this prophecie. for that he had three elder brothers, to wit, Ruben, Simeon, and Leui: who in all likeli-hoode were to goe before him. And thirdly, when Moses recorded and put in writing thys prophecie, (which was diuers hundred yeeres after Iacob had spoken it,) it was much lesse likelie, that euer it shoulde be true, for that Moses

then present in gouernment,Exodus, 2, Iosua, 19. was of the tribe of Leui, and Iosua designed by God for hys successor, was of the Tribe of Ephraim, and not of Iuda: which maketh greatly for the certaintie of thys recorde. For that it is most apparent, that Moses would neuer haue put such a prophecie in writing, to the dysgrace of hys owne Tribe, and to the preiudice and offence of Ruben, Simeon, Ephraim, and other Tribes; neyther would they euer haue suffered such a derogation, but that it was euident to thē by tradition, that theyr Grandsire Iacob had spoken it, albeit then presentlie there was no great likeli-hood, that euer after, it should come to be fulfilled.
                        And thys was for the time of Moses, but yet consider further, that from Moses to Samuell, (that was last of all the Iudges,) there passed foure hundred yeeres more,1, Regum, 1, and 8. and yet was there no appearaunce of fulfilling thys prophecie in Israell; for that the Trybe of Iuda was not established in that gouernmēt. At length they came to haue Kings to rule,1. Regum. 9. and then was there chosen one Saul to that place, not of the Trybe of Iuda, but of Beniamin, and hee indued with diuers children to succeede him. And who would then haue thought, that thys prophecie coulde euer haue beene fulfilled? but yet for that it was Gods word, it must needes take place: and

therefore when no man thought therof, there was a poore 
                              Dauid.
                            Sheepheard chosen out of the Trybe of Iuda, to be a King, and the regiment and Scepter so established in hys posteritie,1, Regum, 16 that albeit many of hys descendents offended God more greeuously thē euer did Saul, who was put out before:3, Regu, 12, 2. Para. 11. and albeit ten Trybes at once brake from Iuda, and neuer returned to obedience agayne, but conspired wyth the Gentiles and other enemies on euerie side, to extinguish the said kingdome & regimēt of Iuda:The wonderful prouidence of God towards the house of Iuda. yet for the fulfilling of this prophecie, the gouernment of Iuda held out styll, for more then a thousand & two hundred yeeres together, vntyll Herods tyme, (as I haue alreadie saide) which is more, then any one familie in the worlde besides,
                              Eusebius. in Chron.
                            can shew for his nobilitie or continuaunce in gouernment.
                     
                     
                        The prophecie for the greatnesse of Ephraim aboue Manasses.
                        
                        THE same Iacob, when he came to blesse hys little Nephewes Manasses & Ephraim, that were Iosephs children: though himselfe were nowe dimme of sight, and coulde not well discerne them, yet did hee put hys

right hande vpon the heade of the younger, and hys left hande vppon the elder, and that of purpose, as it prooued afterwarde. For when Ioseph theyr father misliked the placing of theyr Graund-fathers handes, and woulde haue remooued the right hand from Ephraim, & haue placed it vpon the head of Manasses, that was the elder brother, Iacob woulde not suffer him, but aunswered.Genesis. 48. 
                           I knowe my sonne, I knowe, that Manasses is the elder: & he shal be multiplied into many people, but yet his younger brother shall be greater then hee.
                           Iosua. 16. & 17. Which afterwarde was fulfilled, for that Ephraim was alwaies the greater & stronger Trybe, and in fine, became the heade of the kingdome of Israel, or of the ten Tribes, wherof there was no suspition or likelihood, when Iacob spake thys,Ecclesi. 47. Esay, 7. & 28. Ieremie. 31. Ezechiel. 37. Osee. 5. or when Moses recorded it. And howe then came Iacob to fore-see this, so many hundred yeres before? as also to fore-see and fore-tell the particuler places of his childrens habitations in the land of promise?Genesis. 49. as Zabulon at the sea side; Aser in the fertile pastures;Iosua. 14. Exod. 12. Gal
                                 •
                              . 3. Acts. 13. and other the lyke, that fell out by casting lots, after foure hundered yeeres and more. Wherehence had he thys (I say) to fore-tell what lots so long after should appoint, but onely from GOD, who gouerned theyr lots.
                     
                     
                        
                        The fore-sight of Moses.
                        
                        THE like may be asked concerning Moses, who before his death in the desert, deuided out the Lande of Canaan,Numb. 34. 35. 36. Iosua. 15.16.17 to euerie Tribe, euen as though he had beene in possession thereof, and as afterward it fell out by casting of lottes, as in the booke of Iosua it dooth appeare. And could any humaine wit or science (thinke you) fore-see, what eache Trybe shoulde attaine (after his death) by drawing of lottes? Againe, the same Moses fore-saw and fore-tolde in publique hearing of all the people, howe in times to com, long after hys death,Deut. 31. 32. the Iewes shoulde forsake God, and for theyr sinnes be cast into manie banishments, and finally be forsaken, and the Gentiles receiued in theyr roome,Deu. 32. v. 21 as indeede it came to passe. And whence (trowe you) could he learne thys, but from God alone?
                     
                     
                        The prophecie for the perpetuall desolation of Iericho.
                        
                        IN the Booke of Iosua, there is a curse laid vpon the place where Iericho stood, and vppon whatsoeuer person should goe about

to rebuilde the same, to wit,Iosua
                                 •
                               6, 
                           That in his eldest sonne he should lay the foundations, and in his youngest sonne should he build the gates therof: which is to say, that before the foundations were laide, and gates builded, he shold be punished with the death of all his chyldren. Which thing was fulfilled almost fiue hundered yeeres after, in one Hiel, who presumed vnder wicked King Achab, to rebuilde Iericho again, and was terrified from the same, by the suddaine death of Abiram and Segul his children, as the booke of kings reporteth,3, Reg. 16. 
                           according to the words of the Lord, which he had spoken in the hande of Iosua, the sonne of Nun. And since that time to thys, no man eyther Iewe or Gentile, hath taken vpon him to rayse againe the saide Cittie, albeit the situation be most pleasant, as by relation of stories & Geographers appeareth.
                     
                     
                        
                            The prophecie for the byrth and acts of Iosias.
                        
                           3, Regum. 12IN the thyrde Booke of Kings it is recorded, that when Ieroboam had withdrawn tenne Trybes from the obedience of Roboam, King of Iuda: to the end they might neuer haue occasion to reunite themselues againe to Iuda, by theyr going to sacrifice in

Ierusalem, (as by the Law they were appointed) he builded for them, a goodly gorgious high Altar in Bethel, and there commanded them to doe theyr deuotions. And when he was one day there present himselfe, and offering his incense vppon the said Altar, and all the people looking on: there came a man of God, (saith the scripture) and stoode before the Altar, & cryed out aloude, & spake these wordes:3, Reg. 13. 
                           O Altar, Altar, this sayth the Lord: behold a childe shall be borne of the house of Dauid, whose name shall be Iosias, and hee shall sa
                                 •
                              rifice vpon thee, these idolatrous priestes that nowe burne francumsense vpon thee, and he shall burne the bones of men vpon thee.
                        
                        Thus spake that man of God in the presence & hearing of all the people, more then three hundred yeres before Iosias was borne: and it was registred presently, according to the manner of that tyme, (which I haue noted before) & wyth the same were registred also, the miracles which happened about that fact: as that, the Altar cleft into vppon the mans words: and Ieroboam extending out hys hand to apprehende him, lost presentlie the vse and feeling therof, vntill it was restored againe by the sayde holy mans prayers: who notwithstanding, for that he disobeyed Gods commaundement in hys returne, and eate wyth a Prophet of Samaria, (which was

forbidden him:) he was slaine in hys vvaie home-warde by a Lyon,Disobedience punished greeuously in Gods deerest. and hys bodie vvas brought backe againe and buried in Bethel, nygh the said Altar, amongst the sepulchers of those Idolatrous Priests of that place, but yet with a superscription vpon hys Tombe, contayning his name, and what had happened.
                        There passed three hundred yeeres and Iosias was borne,4, Reg. 23 and came to raigne in Iuda, and one day comming to Bethell to ouerthrowe the Altar, and to destroy the sepulchers of those Idolatrous Priestes that had beene buried in that place: when hee began to break theyr Tombes: he found by chance the sepulcher of the sayd man of God, wyth the superscription vpon it. By which superscription and relation of the Cittizens of Bethell, when he perceiued that it was the Sepulcher of him that had foretolde hys byrth, his name, and his dooings, so many hundred yeeres before he was borne: he let the same stande vntouched,Chap. 23. as the fourth Booke of Kings dooth declare.
                        Now consider, whether among any people in the world, but only among the Iewes, there were euer any such prophecie, so certaine, so particuler, so long fore-tolde before the time, & so exactly fulfilled? But yet the holy scriptures are full of the like, and tyme

permitteth me onely to touch some fewe of the principall.
                     
                     
                        The prophecie for the destruction of  Ierusalem & Babilon.
                        ESay the Prophet, is wonderfull in foretelling the mysteries & acts of the Messias, hys natiuitie, his life, and all the perticulers that happened in his passion. In so much, that S. Ierome saith,
                              Hieron. in prolog. Galeat.
                            he may seeme rather to wryte a storie of deedes past, then a prophecie of euents to come. But yet among other things, it is to be noted, that hee liuing in a peaceable & prosperous time in Iuda, when the Iewes were in amitie and great securitie with the Babylonians, he fore-sawe and fore-told the destruction of Ierusalem by the said Babylonians, and the greeuous captiuitie of the Iewes vnder them;4. Reg. 20. verse. 17. Esay. 5. as also the destruction of Babylon againe by Cyrus King of Persia, whose expresse name and greatnesse, he published in writing almost two hundred yeeres before hee was borne: saying in the person of GOD; First, to Ezechias King of Iuda, that reioyced in the freendship hee had wyth Babylon:4. Reg. 20. 
                           behold, the dayes shal com, when all that thou and thy fathers haue layd vp, shall be carried awaie to Babylon, and thy children

shall be Eunuches in the King of Babilons Pallace. And next, to Babylon he sayd:Esay, 13. 
                           The destruction of Babylon, which Esay the sonne of Amos sawe, &c, houle and crie, for that the day of the Lord is at hand, &c.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                            The wonderfull prophecie for Cyrus King of Persia.
                        THyrdly vnto Cyrus (not yet borne) who was preordained to destroy the same, & to restore the people of Israell from banishment; to rebuilde the Temple in Ierusalem, he saith thus;Esay, 24. 
                           I say to Cyrus, thou art my sheepheard, and thou shalt fulfill all my will. I say to Ierusalem, thou shalt be builded againe. I saie to the Temple, thou shalt be founded againe. Thys saith the Lord, to my annointed Cyrus, I vvyll goe before thee,
                           Esay, 25. 
                           and will humble the glorious people of the earth, in thy presence: I wil break their brasen gates, and crush in peeces theyr yron bars, for my seruaunt Iacobs sake haue I called thee by thy Name, and haue armed thee, where as thou 
                           This he saith, for that Cyrus was an Infidel. 
                           knowest not me.
                        
                        Can any thing be more cleerely or myraculously spoken in the worlde, then to name a Heathen not yet borne, that shoulde conquer so strong a Monarchie as Babilon was, at thys time, and shoulde builde againe the

Temple of Ierusalem, which others of hys owne Religion had destroied before him? What cause, what reason, what likeli-hoode could be of this? yet Esay speaketh it so confidentlie, as he saith,Esay, 13. 
                           that he sawe it. And hee nameth two witnesses thereof, that is, Vrias and Zacharias, that were not borne in manie yeeres after, saying:Esay, 8, v. 2. 
                           and I tooke vnto mee two faithfull witnesses, Vrias the Priest, and Zacharias the sonne of Barachias.
                           Iere, 26, v. 20 Whereof the first was a Prophet in Ieremies time, a hundred yeeres after Esay, and the second lyued fourescore yeeres after that againe, in the dayes of Darius, as by the beginning of hys prophecie appeareth:Zach, 1, v. 1. and yet both (as you see) were distinctly named by Esay long time before.
                        And wheras this booke of Esay was pronoūced openlie to the people (as other prophecies were) & published into many thousand handes before the captiuitie of Babilon fell out,Circumstances of certaine trueth. and then carried also wyth the people, and dispersed in Chaldea, & other parts of the world: there can be no possible suspition of forgerie in this matter, for that all the worlde both sawe it, and red it, many yeeres before the thing came to passe: yea, when there was no opinion of any such possibilitie to come.
                     
                     
                        
                        
                            The prophecies and dooings of Ieremie, in the siedge of Ierusalem.
                        THE same captiuitie and destruction of Ierusalem by the Babylonians, was prophecied by Ieremie, a hundred yeeres after Esay, and a little before the matter came to passe: yea, whiles the Babylonians were about the walles of Ierusalem, and besiedged the same for two yeeres together, Ieremie was within, and tolde euery man that it was but in vaine to defende the Cittie, for that God had nowe deliuered it. And albeit hee were accounted a Traytor for so saying, (especially when by an Armie of Egypt, that came to the ayde of Ierusalem from Pharao, the siedge of the Babylonians was raysed for a certaine time,) yet Ieremie continued still in his asseueration, and said to Zedechias the King,Iere. 37. v. 16 
                           thou shalt be deliuered into the handes of the King of Babilon. And to the people:Iere. 38. v. 3. 
                           haec dicit Dominus, tradendo tradetur haec ciuitas, &c. This saith the Lord, this Cittie most certainlie shall be deliuered into the handes of the Babylonians. And so hee continued notwithstāding he were put in prison, & whipt, and threatned dailie to be hanged:Ieremie 39. vntill indeede the Cittie was taken, and Zedechias

eyes puld out, his children slaine before hys face, and all other things performed,4. Reg. 24.25. which Ieremie had prophecied and fore-told them before.
                        And which was yet more meruailous, Ieremie did not onelie fore-tell the perticulers of this captiuitie, but also the determinate time, howe long it shoulde endure, saying:Iere. 25. v. 11.
                           And all this land of Iurie, shall be into wildernesse, and astoniednesse: and all this people shall serue the King of Babilon for threescore and ten yeeres,The yeeres foretold of the captiuitie of Babylon. and when threescore and ten yeeres shall be complete, I will visite vppon the King of Babilon, and vpon that Nation saith the Lord, & I will lay the same into eternall desolation. But vppon Iuda will I cast my pleasant eyes, & will bring them backe to this lande againe. &c.
In which prophecie is contained,Iere, 24, v, 5, &c Iere, 29, v. 10 first the perticuler time howe long thys captiuity shold endure. Secondly, the destruction of Babylon, and of that Monarchie by the Persians. And thirdlie, the returning home of the Iewes againe; which three thinges to haue beene afterwarde fulfilled, not onelie Esdras that lyued at that time,1, Esdras. 1. 2. 3, Esdras, 2. and was an actor in performance of the last: but all other Heathen Wryters besides, doe recorde and testifie.
                        And this prophecie of Ieremie, was so famous and certainlie beleeued amongst all

the Iewes, in the time of their captiuitie: as when the daie of expiration drewe neere, Daniell writeth thus of himselfe.Daniell, 9. verse. 1, 
                           In the fyrst yeere of Darius, I Daniell, vnderstoode in the scriptures, the number of the seauentie yeeres whereof God spake to Ieremie, that they shoulde be fulfilled, touching the desolation of Ierusalem: and I turned my face to my Lord God, and besought him in fasting, & sackcloth, &c. Neither onelie the Iewes vnderstood & beleeued this prophecie, but euen Cyrus himselfe, that was a Gentile,Gentiles beleeued the Scripture. gaue full credite thereunto, & therby was induced to restore the Iewes: as appeareth both by his own words & proclamations, sette downe by Esdras that Executed the same:1. Esdras, 1. 3. Esdras, 2. and by his deedes also, in restoring home the Iewes, and rebuilding theyr Temple at his owne great charges, as all Historiographers of the Heathens doe confesse.
                        I might heere alledge infinite other examples, and make no ende, if I would follow the multitude of prophecies which are dyspersed throughout the whole scripture? I might shewe howe Daniell fore-told to Baltasar King of Babylon,The prophecies of Daniel. Daniell, 5. in the mydst of hys tryumph, and in the hearing of al his peeres, the destruction which insued vpon hym the verie same night after.
                        I might heere alledge howe the same

Daniell in the first yeere of Darius the Median,Daniell. 11. in the beginning of that seconde Monarchie of Medians and Persians, foretolde Behold, three Kings shal yet stand in Persia, and the fourth shall be rich aboue all the rest. how many Kings should raigne after hym in Persia, and howe the last (who vvas the fourth after hym, and hys name also Darius) should fight against the Grecians, and be ouercome by a Grecian King, (which was Alexander,) and howe that kingdome also of Greece,Daniell. 11. verse, 2. should be deuided & torne in peeces, after Alexanders death, and not passe to hys posterity,
                              Iustin. hist. lib. 12. et. 13. as Iustine and other Heathen Wryters doe testifie that it was, by Antigonus, Perdiccas, Seleuchus, Antiochus, Ptolomeus, and other Captaynes of Alexander, that deuided the same among themselues aboue a hundred yeres after Darius was dead.
                        I myght declare also, howe the same Daniell fore-sawe and fore-told, the four great Monarchies of the world,The four M
                                 •
                              
                              narchies of Assyrians, Persians, Grecians, and Romans. and described the same as distinctly, as if he had liued in them all, and as by experience wee find since to be true. I might alledge the particuler description, of the fight betwixt Darius and Alexander, set down by Daniell vnder the names of the great Ramme,Daniell, 2. Daniell, 8. and the fierce Goate wyth one horne, which Goate himselfe interpreteth it to be meant of a Grecian King,The fore-telling of great Alexander. that should conquer the Persians. And therfore Alexander (as Iosephꝰ9 reporteth) comming

to Ierusalem about a hundred yeeres after,
                              Iosephus. lib. 1. de antiq. Iudaic. capit. 8. and hearing thys prophecie of Daniel interpreted vnto him by Iaddus the High Priest, assured himselfe that he was the man therein signified, and so a
                              ••
                           er long sacrifice doone to the God of Israel, (of whom he affirmed, that hee had appeared vnto him in Macedon, & had exhorted hym to take this warre in hand,) and after hee had bestowed much honour and many benefites, vpon the high Priest, & Inhabitants of Ierusalem, he went forwarde in hys warre against Darius, with great alacritie, & had that famous victorie which all the world knoweth.
                        A hundred such prophecies more, which are as plaine, as euident, and as distinct as thys, I might alledge of Elias, Elizeus, Samuell, Dauid, Ezechiell, the twelue lesser Prophets, and of other which I haue not named. And in very trueth the whole Scripture is nothing els but a diuine kinde of bodie, replenished throughout wyth the vitall spirit of prophecie, and euery day some prophecie or other is fulfilled, (though we mark it not) and shall be vnto the worlds end.
                        And the myracle of thys matter is yet more increased, if we consider what manner of people they were for the most parte,What manner of persons our Prophets were. by whom these prophecies of hydden thinges were vttered: to wit, not such men as coulde

gather the fore-sight of thyngs by Astronomie or Astrologie, that is, by contemplation of the starres, as some fond Gentiles did pretend, (though Ptolomie denie that any such things can be fore-told but onely by inspiration from God:
                              Ptolom. in lib. de fructu.
                           ) neyther yet were they so sharpe witted, as to attaine to prophecie by strange imaginations, as most vainely Auerroes and his followers holde that some men may;
                              Moses. Narbon. in li. Abubacher. et Auampare.
                            nor finally, were they so delicatly fedde as by exact diet and rules of Alchimye, to com to prophecie, as Alchimists dreame that a man may doe, and that Appolonius Thyaneus dyd,
                              Roger. Baco. lib. de sex scient. experimentalib.
                            who by styllified meates (as they speake) came to be stillified hymselfe, and so by helpe of hys glasse called Alchimufi, to fore-tell some matters and affaires to come. Our Prophets (I say) knewe none of these fantasticall deuises, beeing for the most part poore, simple, and vnlearned men, as in particuler was recorded, that Dauid was a shepheard, and Amos was a keeper of Oxen,Amos, 1. yea, oftentimes they were women,Exod. 1
                                 •
                              . as Marie the sister of Aaron, called in the Scripture by the name of Prophetesse. Debora the wyfe of Lapidoth:Iudg. 5. 1, Reg, 2, Hanna the mother of Samuel, Elizabeth the mother of Iohn Baptist, Anna the daughter of Panuel: & finally, the most holy and blessed Virgine Marie,Luke, 1, & 2. with the daughters of Phillip, and many such other,

both in the olde and newe Testament, who prophecied strangely,Acts. 21. nor could possibly receiue such fore-knowledge of things to com, but onely from the spirit of the liuing God, and by inspiration of the holy Ghost, which is a manifest demonstration, of the excellencie of Holie writ, and of the certaintie contained therein.
                     
                  
                  
                     THE EYGHT PROOFE OF SCRIPTVRES.
                     
                        Approbation of Heathen wryters.AND nowe, albeit thys might seeme sufficient in the iudgment & conscience of euery reasonable man, (as the Iew supposeth) to prooue that the Scriptures be onely from God, and consequently by them, that there is a God; yet hath he one reason more to cō
                        firme theyr sinceritie, which I will alledge in thys place, and therewith make an end. Hys reason is, that although these holy writings, (which proceede of Gods spirite) doe not take theyr testimonie or confirmation from man: yet for more euidencie of the trueth, GOD hath so prouided, that al the principall, most strange and wonderfull things recounted in scripture, shold be reported also, and confirmed by Infidels, Pagans, Gentiles and Heathen writers themselues; albeit in

some points they differ from the Scripture, in the manner of theyr narration, for that they adioyne superstitions therunto. Which maketh the more for approbation of the things, for that heereby it appeareth, they tooke not their stories directlie from the Bible, but by tradition, and most auncient antiquities of theyr owne.
                     
                        The creation of the worlde.
                        
                        FIrst then he sheweth, that the creation of the worlde,Genesis, 1. and 2. which is the meruaile of all meruailes, wyth the infusion of mans soule frō God, is both graunted and agreed vpon, by all those Heathen Phylosophers which I haue cited before, (albeit the particularities be not so sette downe by them, as they are in Scriptures, and by all other, that doe see in reason, that of necessitie, there must be yeelded some Creator of these things.
                     
                     
                        The floude of Noe.
                        
                        NExt to thys,Gene. 6,7,8. the floude of Noe is mentioned by diuers most auncient heathen writers:
                              Ioseph. lib. 1, de antiq. Iudaic.
                            as by Baerosus Chaldeus, Ieronimꝰ, Egyptius, Nicholaus, Damascenus, Abydenus, and others, according as both Iosephus

and Eusebius doe prooue.
                              Eusebius. lib, 9. de praep. euang. capit. 4. And in Bresile, and other Countries dyscouered in our age, wher neuer teachers were knowne to bee before, they talk of a certain drowning of the world, which in time past happened: and doe saie, that thys was left vnto thē by tradition from tyme out of minde, by the first inhabitants of those places.
                     
                     
                        
                            The long life of the first Fathers.
                        
                           Genesis, 5, 10, and 11.OF the long life of the first Patriarches, according as the Scripture reporteth it, not onelie the former Authors, but also Manethus, that gathered the Hystorie of the Egyptians: Molus Hestiaeus, that wrote the acts of the Phaenicians, Hesiodus, Hecateus Abderida, Helanicus, Acusilaus, and Ephorus, doe testifie, that these first inhabitants of the worlde, liued commonly a thousande yeeres a-peece; and they alledge the reason thereof to be, both for the multiplication of people, and for bringing all Sciences to perfection, especiallie Astronomie and Astrologie, which, (as they write) coulde not be brought to sufficient perfection, by any one man that had lyued lesse then sixe hundred yeres, in which space, the great yere (as they call it) returneth about.
                     
                     
                        
                        Of the Tower of Babylon.
                        
                        OF the Tower of Babilon,Genesis, 11. and of the confusion of tongues at the same, Eusebius citeth the testimonies at large, both of Abydenus that lyued about King Alexanders tyme, and of Sibylla, as also the wordes of Hestiaeus concerning the Lande of Sennaar,
                              Eusebius. li. 9. de praepar. cap. 4. where it was builded. And these Gentiles do shewe by reason, that if there had not beene some such miracle in the diuision of tongues,Marke thys reason. no doubt but that all tongues being deriued of one, (as all men are of one father) the same tongues would haue retained the selfe same rootes and principles, as in all dialects or deriuation of tongues wee see that it commeth to passe. But now (say they) in many tongues at thys day, we see that there is no likelihood or affinitie among them, but all different the one from the other, and thereby it appeareth that they were made diuers & distinct euen from the beginning.
                     
                     
                        Of Abraham.
                        
                        OF Abraham and hys affayres, I haue alledged some Heathen wryters before,Genesis, 11, 12 13, 14, &c. as Berosus, Hecataeus, and Nicholaus Damascenus.

But of all other, Alexander Polyhistor alledgeth Eupolemus most at large,
                              Alexander Polyhist. lib. de Iudaic. historia.
                            of Abrahams beeing in Egypt, and of his teaching them Astronomie there: of his fight and victorie in the behalfe of Lot: of hys entertainment by King Melchisedech, of his wyfe and sister Sara, and of other his doings, especially of the sacrifice of hys sonne Isaac. To whom also agreeth Melo,
                              Melo, lib. de fraudibus Iudeorum.
                            in his bookes written against the Iewes, and Artabanus.
                              Artaban. in Iudeorum. hist.
                            And of the strange Lake whereinto Sodom and Gomorra were turned by theyr destruction, called Mare mortuum,
                           
                              Gal. de simplie. Pausan. in Eliae. Solin. in Polihist. Tacitus. lib. vlt. histo.
                            the deade Sea, wherein nothing can liue. Both Galen, Paufanius, Solinus, Tacitus, and Strabo, doe testify & shew, the perticuler wonders therof.
                     
                     
                        
                            Of Isaac, Iacob, Ioseph. Iob, &c.
                        FRom Abraham downe to Moses, writeth very particulerly the forenamed Alexander, albeit he mingle sometimes certaine fables, whereby appeareth that he tooke hys storie not out of the Bible wholie. And hee alledgeth one Leodemus,Genesis, 15, 16 17. 18. &c. who as he saith liued with Moses, and wrote the selfe same thyngs that Moses dyd: so that these writers agree almost in all thinges, touching Isaac, Iacob, Ioseph, and all theyr affaires, euen

vnto Moses: and vvith these doe concur also Theodotus a most auncient Poet, Artabanus & Phylon, Gentiles. Aristaeus in like maner about Aristotles tyme,
                              Aristeus. lib. de Iob.
                            wrote a booke of Iob.
                     
                     
                        Of Moses.
                        
                        OF Moses and hys actes, not onely the forenamed,Exodus. 2, 3. 4. 5, &c. (especially Artabanus in his Booke of the Iewes) doe make mention at large: but many other also, as namelie Eupolemus, out of whom Polyhistor reciteth very long narrations of the wonderfull and stupendious thinges doone by Moses in Egypt, for which he sayth, that in hys time, he was worshipped as a God in that Countrey, and called by many Mercurius. And that the Ethiopians learned circūcision of him, which afterwarde alwaies they retained, and so doe vnto this day. And as for his miracles doone in Egipt: his leading the people thence by the redde Sea: hys liuing with them fortie yeeres in the wildernesse: the Heathen writers agree in all thinges with the Scriptures, sauing onely that they recount diuers things to the prayse of Moses,The description of Moses person out of Heathen writers. which hee hath not written of hymselfe, adding also his description, to wyt, that he was a long tale man, with

a yellow beard, and long haire, wherwith also accordeth Numenius Pythagoricus, touching the acts of Moses, whose life hee sayth that he had read in the auncientest recordes that were to be had.
                     
                     
                        
                            The storie of Iosua, the Iudges, and the Kinges.
                        BVT the fore-named Eupolemus, goeth yet forwarde, and pursueth the storie of Iosua, of the Iudges, of Saul, Dauid, and of Salomon, euē vnto the building of the Temple, which he describeth at large, wyth the perticuler Letters written about that matter to the King of Tyrus, which Iosephus sayth were in hys daies kept in the recordes of the Tyrians.
                              Iosephus. lib. 8. de antiq. cap. 2. And with Eupolemus, agree Polyhistor, and Hecataeus Abderita, that liued & serued in warre with King Alexander the great, and they make mention among other things, of the inestimable riches of Salomon, and of the treasures which he had hid & buried,The treasures hidden in the Sepulcher of Dauid. (according to the fashion of that tyme) in the Sepulcher of his father Dauid: which to be no fable, (though not mentioned by the scripture) Iosephus well prooueth, for that Hircanus the high Priest and King of Iurie,
                              Iosephus. lib. 13. de antiq. cap. 16. beeing besieged in Ierusalem by Antiochus,

surnamed Pius, not many yeeres before our Sauiour Christ his natiuitie: to redeeme him selfe & the Cittie, and to pay for hys peace, The same thing attempted Herod in hys tyme, as Iosephus saith, lib. 18. antiq. opened the said sepulcher of Dauid, and fetcht out of one part thereof, three thousand Talents in ready money, which amount to sixe hundred thousand pounde English, if we account the Talents, but at the least size, of talentum Haebraicum.
                        
                     
                     
                        The things that ensued after King Salomons daies.
                        
                        AND as for the things that ensued after Salomon, as the diuision of the Trybes among themselues, and theyr diuers warres, afflictions, and transmigrations into other Countries: many Heathen writers do mention and recorde them, & among other, Herodotꝰ, & Diodorꝰ Siculus. And the foresayd Alexander Polyhistor, talking of the captitie of Babylon, saith, that Ieremie the Prophet tolde Ioachim hys King,Ieremie, 37. 4, Reg, 24. what woulde befall him, and that Nabuchodonoser hearing thereof, was mooued thereby to besiege Ierusalem.
                        Of the flight of Senacherib frō the siege of Ierusalem,Of Senacherib. and howe he was kylled at hys return home, by his own sons in the temple,

according to the prophecie of Esay,Esay, 31. and 33, and 36. 4, Reg, 9. and storie of the booke of Kings, for that hee had blasphemed the Lord God of Israell, Herodotus witnesseth:Hero. lib. 2. and that after his death he had a statue or Image of mettall erected in hys memorie, with this inscription in Greek. He that beholdeth me, let him learne to be godly. Confer Xenophon also in his se
                              •
                           enth booke De Cyropaedia, & you shal see him agree with Daniell in his narrations of Babylon.Daniell. 16.
                        
                        And finallie, I wyll conclude with Iosephus the learned Iewe, that wrote immediatly after Christes ascention, and protesteth, that the publique writinges of the Syrians,
                              Iosephu. lib. 1. de antiq. Iudaica.
                            Chaldeans, Phaenicians, and innumerable histories of the Grecians, are sufficient to testifie the antiquitie, truth, authoritie, & certaintie of the holie Scriptures, if there were no other proofe in the world besides.
                     
                  
               
               
                  The conclusion of thys Chapter, with the application. SECT. 4.
                  THus farre haue I treated of the vvayes and meanes, which haue beene left vnto the worlde from the beginning, thereby to know and vnderstand theyr Maker. In treating which poynt, I haue stayed my selfe the

longer, for that it is the ground and foundation of all that is, or may be saide heereafter. It is the first, finall, and cheefest principle, of all our eternall saluation or damnation, and the totall weale or woe that must befall vs, and possesse vs for euer. Which ground and veritie, if it be so certaine and euident as before hath beene shewed, by all reason and proofe, both diuine and humaine: and that the matter be so testified & proclaimed vnto vs, by all the creatures of heauen & earth, and by the mouth & writing of our Creator himselfe, as no ignoraunce or blindnesse can excuse the same,No excuse of the ignorance of GOD. no slothfulnesse dissemble it, no wickednesse denie it: what remaineth then, but to consider with our selues, what seruice thys GOD requireth at our hands? what gratitude, what duetie, what honour for our creation? to the end, that as we haue proued him a most bountifull Creator, so we may finde him a propitius Iudge, and munificent rewarder. For it is not probable, that his diuine Maiestie, which hath appointed euery other creature to some action for hys owne glorie, (as hath beene declared at large before) should leaue man-kind onely, which is the worthiest of all the rest, without obligation to his seruice.
                  In which one poynt notwithstanding, though neeuer so cleere, (such is the fondnes

of our corrupt nature without Gods holie grace:) fayled those auncient wise men of the worlde,The errour of the olde Phylosophers. of whom S. Paule speaketh so much in hys Epistle to the Romans,Romans, 1. and 2. taking compassion of theyr case, and calling them fooles, and all theyr great learning and Phylosophie meere fondnesse: for that, whereas (by the meanes before mentioned) they came to knowe God: they did not seeke to glorifie him, as appertained vnto God, nor yet did render him due thankes, but vanished awaie in their cogitations, &c.
                     Romans, 1. That is, they tooke no profite by thys knowledge of theyrs, but applied theyr cogitations vpon the vanities of thys world, more then vpon the honor & seruice of thys theyr God.Romans, 1. verse, 28.
For which cause, as S. Paule adioyneth presentlie in the same place, that for somuch as they did thus, and did not shewe foorth by theyr life and works, that they had the knowledge of God indeede: God deliuered them ouer to a reprobate sense, & suffered them to fall into horrible sinnes, which S. Paul doth name & detest in all that chapter: & finally concludeth, that their euerlasting perdition ensued principally vpon this one point:Romans, 1. verse, 32. that wheras, they knew the iustice of God, (by all the waies and arguments that before haue been declared:) yet woulde they not vnderstand (saith he) that death was due to all such, which liued wickedly as they did.
                  
                  
                     And the same Apostle, vpon consideration of these matters, wherein hee standeth long for the importaunce thereof, pronounceth in fine thys general sentence,A general sentence pronoū
                        ced by S. Paul. with great asseueration and vehemencie of spirit:Romans, 1. verse, 18. 
                     that the wrath of God is reuealed from heauen, vpon all impietie and iniustice of those men, who holde the knowledge of God in vnrighteousnesse. That is, who beeing indued with the knowledge of God, doe liue notwithstanding vnrighteouslie, or (as hee saide before) doe consume theyr daies in vanitie, nor making account of the seruice which they doe owe to that God for theyr creation and other benefits. Which thing, if S. Paule might truelie say to those Gentiles before hys time, who had onely natural knowledge and vnderstanding of God: that is, so much as by his creatures was to be gathered:The application to our selues. what may, or shall be said vnto vs, who haue not only that light of nature which they had, but also the wrytinges and lawe of God himselfe, communicated specially vnto the Iewes: and aboue that also, haue heard the voice of his onely sonne vpon earth, and haue receiued the doctrine of his most holie Gospell, & yet doe liue as negligentlie (manie of vs) as did the very Heathens, touching good life and vertue.
                  Surely in this case I must denounce against my selfe, that if it be true, (as it cannot bee

false,) which thys blessed Apostle affyrmeth here of these Heathen Phylosophers, that by that little knowledge they had of God,Romans. 1. verse, 20. 
                     they were made inexcusable, then by the most iust and certayne rule of Christ,
layde downe by S. Luke,Luke. 12. 
                     cui multum datum est, multum quaeretur ab eo, that of euery man which hath receiued much, a great account shall be taken for the same;
we are forced to infer, that our account shall be the greater, and our selues much more inexcusable before hys diuine maiestie, then the very Gentiles & Heathens are; if after all our knowledge and manifest vnderstanding of hys God-head and iustice, we vanish away in our cogitations, as they did, and as the most part of the world at this day are seene to doe: that is, if we apply our cogitations and cares, about the vaine affaires of this temporall life and transitorie commodities, which wee shoulde bestowe vppon the seruice and honour of thys our Lord and Creator.
               
            
            
               
               OF THE FINAL END AND CAVSE WHIE MAN WAS CREATED BY GOD, and placed in thys world.
               And of the obligation he hath therby, to attend to the affaire for which he came hether.
               CHAP. III.
               BY the Chapter precedent, I nothinge doubt (gentle Reader) but if thou haue seene & perused the same, thou remainest sufficiently informed of thy Creator. Now followeth it by order of good consequence, that we consider wyth some attention,A necessary consideration. (for that it standeth vs much vpon) what intent and purpose God had in creating vs, and thys world for our sakes: & in placing vs therein as Lordes of the same? By the former considerations wee haue learned, that as among other creatures, nothing

made it selfe: so nothing was made for it self, nor to serue it selfe. The heauens (wee see) do serue the ayre, the ayre serueth the earth, the earth serueth the beastes, the beasts serue man: & then is the question, who man was made to serue? for in him also holdeth the former reason, that seeing hee was not made by himselfe: it is not likely that he was made to serue himfelfe.
               If we cōsult with the scriptures heerin, we find a generall sentence layd down with out exception:Prouerb, 16. 
                  Vniuersa propter semetipsum operatus est Dominus, the lord hath made al things for himself.Man made to serue GOD. And if all, then man (no doubt:) who is not the least of the rest which hee hath made. And hereby it commeth to passe, that man cannot be said to be free, or at hys owne appointment or dysposition in thys worlde, but obliged to performe that thing, for which hee was sent into this habitation. Which poynt holy Iob declareth plainely, in a certaine inuectiue that he maketh against such men, as were carelesse and negligent in consideration of thys affayre.Iob, cap. 11. 
                  A vaine man, (saith he) is lifted vp in pride, & thinketh himself to be borne as free as the colt of a wild Asse. That is, he thinketh himselfe bounde to nothing, subiect to nothing, accountable for nothing that he doth in thys life: but onelie borne free, to passe hys time in disport and

pleasure, as a Colt in a desert, that hath no Maister to tame him. Which in other words the Wiseman vttereth thus:Wisdom, 15
                        •
                     
                   
                  Hee esteemeth this life of ours to be but a plai-game, and therfore careth not how he liueth, or wherein he spend and passe ouer the time. And thys of the man whom the scripture calleth vaine.
               But now for the sober, wise, and discreet, of whom it is written,Prouerb. 1
                        •
                     . 
                  The way of life is vpon the learned, to the end he may decline from the lowest hell: they are farre from so great folly, as to imagine that no account shalbe demaū
                  ded of our beeing in thys worlde: for that they haue read,Eccle, 11, & 12. 
                  that God shall bring into iudgment whatsoeuer is doone, for euerie faulte that is committed. And the Christian man knoweth further, by the mouth and asseueration of hys Sauiour and Redeemer,Math, 12. that he shall be accountant for euery idle worde that hee mys-vttereth; and finally, there is no man that is eyther of reason, or conuersant in the writings and Testament of his Creator,Account to be rendered. but remembreth well, that among all other irritations, whereby the wicked man is saide to prouoke Gods patience to indignatiō, none is more often repeated, or more greeuously taken, then,Psalm. 9,43. and 141. 
                  that he said in his hart, God will aske no account.
               
               With these men then alone shall be my speech in thys present Chapter, who haue a

desire to discharge well thys account. For attayning whereof (truelie) I can giue no better counsaile, instruction, or aduise, then to doe in this case, as a good Merchant-factor is wont to doe, when he arriueth in forraine Countries, or as a Souldiour or Captaine sent by his Prince to some great exployt, is accustomed, when he commeth to the place appointed:Profitable demaunds & cō
                     siderations. that is, to weigh & consider deeplie, for what cause he came thether? why he was sent? to what ende? what to attempt? what to prosecute? what to performe? what shall be expected and required at his hands (vpon his returne,) by him that sent him thether? For these cogitations (no doubt) shall styrre him vppe to attende to that, for which he came, and not to imploy hys tyme in impertinent affayres. The like woulde I counsayle a Christian to put in vre, concerning the case proposed, and to demaunde of himselfe, betweene God and his conscience, why, and wherefore, and to what ende, hee was created and sent hether into thys world? what to doe? wherein to bestowe hys daies? &c.
               And then shall he finde, that for no other cause, matter, or end, but only to serue God in thys life, and by that seruice to enioy heauen, and saluation in the life to come. This was the condition of our creation,Gene. 14. as Moses

well expresseth: and this was the consideration of our redeeming, fore-told by Zacharie, before we were yet redeemed:Luke, 1. 
                  that wee beeing deliuered from the hands of our enemies, should serue God, in holines and righteousnesse, all the daies of our liues.
               
               Of thys consideration doe ensue two consequents to be obserued.The first consequence vpon due consideration of our ende. Whereof the fyrst is, that seeing our ende and finall cause of being in thys worlde, is to serue God, and so to work our own saluation with feare & trembling: what soeuer thing we doe, or bestow our time in, which eyther is contrary or impertinent, or not profitable to thys ende, (though it were to gaine kingdoms, it is vanitie & lost labour, that will turne vs in time to greefe and repentaunce, (if we change not our course) for that it is not the matter for which we came into thys life, nor wherof we shall be demaunded an account, except it be to receiue iudgment & punishment for the same.
               Secondly it followeth of the same consideration,The second cō
                     sequence. that seeing our onely businesse and affayre in thys world, is to serue our Maker, and saue our owne soules: and that all other earthly creatures are put heere to serue our vses to that ende onely: we shoulde for our parts be indifferent to all these creatures, as to riches or pouertie: to health or sicknesse:

to honour or contempt: to little learning or much learning: and we should desire onely so much or little of eyther of them, as vvere best for vs, to the attainement of our sayde ende and Butte pretended; that is, to the seruice of GOD, and the weale of our soules. For who soeuer desireth, seeketh, loueth, or vseth these creatures, more then for thys, runneth from his end for which he came hether.
               
                  How each man may take a scantling of his owne estate.But thys then may a carefull Christian take some scantling of his owne estate with God, and make a coniecture whether he be in the right way, or no. For if hee attende onely or principallie to thys end, for which hee vvas sent hether; if his cares, cogitations, studies, endeuours, labours, talke, conuersation, and other his actions,A right course. doe runne vppon this matter, and that he careth no more for other creatures, as honours, riches, learning, and the like, then they are necessary vnto hym for thys end that he pretendeth: if hys daies and life be spent in thys studie of the seruice of God, and procuring his owne saluation, in carefulnesse, feare, and trembling, as the Apostle aduiseth him:Phillip. 2. then is he (doubtlesse) a most happy man, & shall at length attaine to the kingdome which he expecteth.
               
                  A wrong and daungerous course.But if he find himselfe in a contrary case and course: that is, not to attend indeede to

thys matter for which onely he was sent hether, nor to haue in hys hart and studie thys seruice of God, and enioying of heauen, but rather some other vanitie of the worlde, as promotion, wealth, pleasure, sumptuous apparrell, gorgious buildings, beautie, fauour of Princes, or any other thing els, that appertaineth not vnto thys end. If hee spende hys time about these trifles, hauing his cares and cogitations, his talke and delight, more in these things, then about the other great businesse of possessing Gods eternall kingdom, for which hee was made and placed in thys world: then is hee (I assure him) in a perrillous way, leading directly to perdition, except he alter and change his course. For, most certaine it is, that whosoeuer shall not attend vnto the seruice he came for: shall neuer attaine the rewarde assigned and promised to that seruice.
               And for that the most parte of all thys worlde, (not onely of Infidels, but also Christians) doe runne amisse in this pointe,The reason why so fewe are saued. and doe not take care of that affayre and busines, for which alone they were created & placed heere: hence is it, that Christ and his holie Saints, both before and after his appearance in flesh, haue spoken so hardly, and seuerely,Math, 7, 20, and 22. Luke, 1
                        •
                     . of the very small number that shall be saued, (euen among Christians) and haue vttered

certain speeches which seeme very rigorous to flesh and bloode, (and to such as are most touched therein,) scarce credible, albeit they must be fulfilled. As among other thinges, that a louer of thys worlde cannot be saued;Iames. 4, Math, 19, Marke, 10. that rich men doe enter as hardly into heauen, as a Camell through a needles eye, and the like. The reason of which manner of speeches doe stande in thys, that a rich man or worldling, attending with all his industrie to heape vppe riches (as the fashion is,) can not attende, (nor euer dooth) to that for which hee came into this worlde, and consequently, can neuer attaine heauen, except God worke a miracle, and therby doe cause him to spende out his riches to the benefit of his soule, (as sometimes he doth, and so doe lessen the Cammell in such sort, as hee may passe the needles eye.Luke, 19, Whereof wee haue a very rare example in the Gospell, of Zacheus, who beeing a very rich man, did presentlie vpō the entering of Christ into his house, (but much more as appeareth into hys heart by fayth) resolue himselfe to change his former course touching riches, and at one blow to beginne with-all, gaue away halfe of al he possessed to the poore;A perfect example of a good conuersion. & for the rest made proclamation that who soeuer had receiued any wrong at his hands, (as commonly many doe by them that are rich,) he shoulde come

and receiue foure times so much amends. By which almes and restitution, hee was deliuered from the Camels gibbe or bunche on his backe, that letted his passage through the needles eye. And thys extraordinary fauour and grace he receiued, by the fortunate presence, of his most blessed & bountiful guest, who had signified before in another place, that himselfe was able, so to drawe the Camell, as he should passe the needles eye,Math, 19. Marke, 10. for that the thinges which are vnpossible wyth man, are possible wyth God.
               But to leaue this, and to goe forwarde in our former purpose; no meruaile it is, if in the worlde abroade, so fewe be saued; seeing that of thousandes, scarce one doth account of that businesse, which of all other, is the cheefe and principall. Consider you the multitude of all sorts of people vpon earth, and see what theyr traffique and negotiation is? see whether they treate thys affayre or no? see wherein theyr care, studie, and cogitation consisteth?The wrong course of the worlde. Howe many thousands finde you in Christendome, who spende not one houre of foure and twentie, nor one halfe day in fortie, in the seruice of God, or businesse of theyr soule? How infinite haue you, that breake their braines about worldly commodities, & how fewe that are troubled wyth this other cogitation? How many find time

to eate, drinke, sleepe, disport, deck & trym themselues to the view of others, & yet haue no time to bestow in thys greatest businesse of all other businesse? Howe many passe ouer whole daies, weekes, monethes, & yeres, (and finally their whole liues) in hauking, hunting, and other pastimes, without regard of this important affaire? Howe many miserable women haue you in the worlde, that spende more daies in one yeere, in pricking vppe their apparrell and adorning their carcasse, then they doe houres in prayer for the space of all theyr life? And what (alas) shall become of this people in the end? what wyll they doe or say at the day of account? what excuse will they alleage? what way wil they turne them?
               
                  A comparison expressing the vanitie of our occupations.If the Merchant-factor which I mentioned before, after many yeeres spent in forraine Countries vppon his Maisters expences, should returne at length and giue vppe his accounts, of so much time & mony spent in singing; so much in dauncing; so much in fencing; so much in courting, and the like; who woulde not laugh at so fonde a reckoning? but beeing further demaunded of his Maister, what time he had bestowed vppon the Merchandize and affayres for which he was sent; if the man should aunswere, that he had no leysure to thinke vpon that thing, for

the great occupation which he had in the other: who woulde not esteeme him worthie of all punishment & confusion? And much more shame and confusion (no doubt) shall they sustaine at the last dreadfull day,Math, 16. in the face and presence of God and all his Angels, who beeing sent into thys world, to traffique so rich a Merchandize as is the kingdome of heauen: haue neglected the same, and haue bestowed theyr studies, vpon the most vaine tryfles and follies of thys worlde, without cogitation, or care of the other.
               
                  O yee children of Adam (saith the spirit of God) why loue you so vanitie,Psalm, 4. Ieremie, 2. and seeke after lyes? why leaue you the fountaine and seeke after Cesternes? If a golden game of inestimable value, shoulde be proposed for such as would runne & could win the same;A comparison.
and when the course or race were begunne, if some should steppe aside, and follow flyes or fethers that passed in the ayre, without anie regarde of the prize and gole proposed: who woulde not meruaile and take pittie of theyr follie? Euen so is it with men of thys world, if we beleeue Saint Paule, who affirmeth,1, Cor. 9. that wee are all placed together in a course or race, and that the kingdom of heauen is propounded vnto vs for the Game or Prize; but euery man (saith he) arriueth not thether: & why? for that most men do step

aside, & leaue the marke. Most men do run awrie, and doe follow fethers vp and downe in the ayre; most men doe pursue vanities, and do wearie themselues out in the pursute thereof, vntill they can neither run nor goe, nor moue theyr lims any further: and then, for the most part it is too-late to amend their follie. Will you heare the lamentations of such vnfortunate men? these are theyr owne words recorded by scripture. We are wearied out in the way of iniquitie and perdition, and the way of God haue wee not knowne.Wisdom, 5. The cōplaint of worldlings in the ende of theyr lyfe.
What profite haue wee receiued of all our pompe and pryde, & vaunting riches? what good haue they doone vs? They are nowe past away as a shadowe, and as a Messenger that rydeth in post, and we are consumed in our owne iniquities.
               
               Thys is the lamentable complaint of such men, as ranne awrie, and followed a wrong course in theyr actions of thys life. These are they, who pursued riches, honour, pompe, and such like vanities, and forgate the great and weightie businesse for which they vvere sent. These are they, who were esteemed happy men in this world, and thought to run a most fortunate course, in that they heaped much riches together; aduaunced thēselues and theyr families to great dignities: becam gorgious, glorious, and dreadfull to others:

and finallie, obtayned what soeuer their lust and concupiscence desired. This made them seeme blessed to worldly cogitations,The fonde iudgment of the world. & the way wherein they ranne, to be most prosperous and happie. And I make no doubt, (by experience of these our times) but they had admirours & enuiours in great aboundance, who burned in desire to obtaine the same course. And yet whē I heare their complaint in thys place, & theyr owne confession wherin they say expresly,Wisdom, 5. 
                  we sencelesse men did erre from the waie of trueth:
when I consider also the addition of scripture, Talia dixerunt in inferno, 
                  they spake these thinges when they were in hel: I cannot but esteem their course for most miserable, & condemne wholy the iudgment of flesh in this affaire.
               Wherfore (my deere brother) if thou be wise, yeelde not to thys deceite of worldlie lyppes & tongues,Psalm, 10. that vse to blesse & sanctifie such, as are in most danger & neerest to perdition. Leane rather to the sincere counsaile of S. Paul, who willeth thee to examine vprightly thyne owne works and waies,Gala, 6. and so to iudge of thy self without deceit. If thou walk the way of Babylon, most certaine it is, that thou shalt neuer arriue at the gates of Ierusalem, except thou change thy course. Oh (my brother) what a greefe will it be vnto thee, when after long labour and much

toyle, thou shalt finde thy selfe to haue gone awrie?A comparison expressing our greefe in the ende, for running a wrong course. If a man had trauailed but one whole day, and thereby made wearie, shoulde vnderstand at night, that all his labour were lost, and that his whole iourney was out of the way: it would be a meruailous affliction vnto him (no doubt) albeit no other inconuenience were therin, but onely the losse of that dayes trauaile, which might be recouered & recōpenced in the next. But if besides thys, his busines were great, if it lay vppon hys life to be at the place whether he goeth; at a certaine houre: if the losse of hys vvaie were irrecouerable: if the punishment of his error, must be death and confusion: & himselfe were so wearie, that he coulde stirre no one foote further: imagine then what a greeuous message thys woulde be vnto him, to heare one say: Syr, you are amisse, your labour is lost, and you haue ridden wholy besides your way?
               
                  The misery of a soule yt hath gone a wrie, at the last day.So then will it be vnto thee, (my soule) at the day of death, and seperation from my bodie, if in thys life, thou attende not to thy saluation for which thou wert created, but shall passe ouer thy daies in following of vanities. Thou shalt find thy selfe astray at the ende of thy iourney: thou shalt finde thy selfe wearie, and enforced to say with those myserable damned spirits,Wisdom. 5. 
                  I haue walked hard

and craggie waies, for that indeede the way of wickednes is ful of thornes & stones, though in shewe it be couered with faire grasse and many flowers. Thou shalt finde at that daie, that thou hast lost thy labour, lost thy time, lost all oportunitie of thyne owne commoditie. Thou shalt then finde thy errour to be vnrecouerable, thy danger vnauoidable, thy punishment insupportable, thy repentaunce vnprofitable, and thy greefe, sorrowe, and calamitie inconsolable.
               Oh, he that coulde beholde and feele the the inwarde cogitations of a worldly mans hart at that instant, after all his honours and pleasures were past; no doubt, but he should finde him of another iudgment and opinion in things, then he was in the ruffe and heate of his ioylitie. He dooth wel perceiue then, the fondnes of those trifles which hee folowed in thys life, albeit it were to make himselfe a Monarch. If a man did know the cogitations that king Alexander the great had,Alexanders death. when of poyson he came to die, after all hys victories and incredible prosperitie; if wee knewe the thoughts of Iulius Caesar,Iulius Caesars death. at the day of hys murther in the Senate house, after the conquest of all hys enemies, and subiection of the whole world, to his own onlie obedience: wee shoulde well perceiue, that they tooke little pleasure in the waies they

walked, notwithstanding they were esteemed most prosperous and happie, by men of thys world.
               
                  Two rare examples.Iosephus the Iewe, recounteth two verie rare examples of humaine felicitie in Herod the first, and Agryppa his Cosine, whereof the one by Anthonie the Triumuir,
                     Iosephus. lib. 14. 15. et 18. de antiq. Iudai. et de bello. Iud. lib. 2. and the other by Caligula the Emperour, (bothe of them beeing otherwise but priuate Gentlemen, and in great pouertie and misery when they fled to Rome,) were exalted vppon the suddaine, to vnexpected great fortune, and made rich Monarches and glorious Potentates. They were indued (at seuerall tymes) with the Kingdome and crowne of Iurie) & that in such ample sort, as neuer anie of that Nation after them had the like. For which cause they are called in the Hebrue story for distinction sake, Herode the great, and Agrippa the great. They ruled and commaunded all in theyr daies, they wanted neyther siluer nor Golde, neither pleasures nor pastimes, neither freendes nor flatterers. And besides al these gifts of fortune, they abounded also in ornaments and excellencie of bodie and wit. And all thys was increased and made the more admirable, by reason of their For enuie only of Agrippa his fortune, Herodias dyd ruine herselfe and her husband, as Iosephus sayth, lib. 18. antiq. cap. 8. 9. 15. Her husband was Herod Antipas, that slewe S. Iohn Baptist, & was sonne to Herod the first. Luke. 3. Math, 14. base & low estate before, in respect wherof, their present fortune was esteemed for a perfect patterne of most absolute felicitie.
               
                  Thys they enioyed for a certaine space, and to assure themselues of the continuance, they bent all theyr cares, cogitations, & studies, to please the humours of the Romaine Emperours, as theyr Gods, and Authors of all their prosperitie and felicitie vppon earth. In respect of whose fauours (as Iosephus noteth) they cared little to violate theyr owne Religion of the Iewes, or any thing els that was most sacred. And thys (forsooth) vvas esteemed of many, a most wise, politique, prosperous, & happie course. But what was the ende and consumation of thys their pleasant rase?
               Fyrst,Herods death. Herode fell sicke of an incurable and lothsome disease,
                     Iosephus. lib. 15. antiq.
                   and was tormented in the same with so manie terrorsThys Herod was called Ascolonita, and slewe the Infants in Bethlem. Math. 2. & horrible accusations of his conscience; as he pronoū
                  ced himselfe to be the most miserable afflicted creature, that euer liued; and so calling one day for a knyfe to pare an Apple, wold needes haue murthered himselfe wyth the same, if his arme had not beene stayed by thē that stoode by. And for Agrippa, Iosephus reporteth,The death of Agryppa. howe that vppon a certaine day which hee kept festiuall in Caesaria, for the honour of Claudius the Romaine Emperor, when he was in his most extreme pompe & iolitie,
                     Iosephus. lib. 19. capit. 7. in the middest of all his Peeres, Nobles, and Damosels, comming foorth at an

houre appointed, (all glittering in Gold, and Siluer) to make an Oration vnto the people: his voice, gesture, countenaunce, and apparell so pleased, as the people began to crie, (beeing solicited thereunto by some flatterers,) that it was the voice of GOD, and not of man: wherein Agrippa taking pleasure and delectation, S. Luke saith he was stroken by Gods Angel. Acts, 12. And consider how Iosephus agreeth with thys Narration. was stroken presently from heauen, with a most horrible putrifaction of all hys bodie, whereof he died, repeating onlie to his freends these words in the midst of his torments. Behold ye me, that doe seeme to you a God, howe miserablie I am enforced to depart from you all.
                  
                     Eusebius lib. 2. histo. capit. 9.
               
               Nowe then woulde I demaunde of these two fortunate men, who laying aside all care of God and Religion, did followe the preferments of this world so freshly, and obtayned the same so luckilie: how they liked of thys their course and race in the ende? Truelie I doubt not, but if they were here to aunswere for themselues, they would assure vs, that one houre bestowed in the seruice of God, & of their saluation: would more haue comforted them at the last instant, then all their labours and trauailes which they tooke in theyr liues for pleasing of Emperours, and gathering the grace and good lyking of mortall men.
               
                  Sincere and profitable counsayle.Vse then (ô Christian,) vse this experience to thy cōmoditie: vse it to thy instruction,

vse it to thy forewarning. That which they are nowe, thou shalt be shortly, and of all follies it is the greatest, not to profite or flee frō daungers by the example of others. The difference betweene a wise man and a foole, is, that the one prouideth for a myscheefe while time serueth, & the other wold doe when it is too-late. If thou mightest feele now, the state & case wherein thy poore hart shall be at the last day, for neglecting the thing that of all other it should haue studied and thought vpon most: thou wouldest take from thy meate, and sleepe, and other necessaries, to repayre that is past; Hetherto hast thou time to reform thy course of life if thou please, which is no small benefite, if all were knowne. For in this sence (no doubt,) it is most true, which the wise man saith; that better it is to be a liuing dogge, then a dead Lyon.Eccle, 4. For that, while the day time of this life endureth, all thinges amisse may easily be amended.Ioh. 9. But the dreadfull night of death wil ouer-take thee shortly, and then shall there be no more space of reformation.
               Oh that men woulde be wise,Deut, 32. and foresee things to come, sayth one prophet. The greatest wisedome in the worlde (deere brother) is to looke and attend to our saluation: for as the Scripture sayth most truelie:Eccle, 37. 
                  Hee is a wise man indeede; that is wise to hys ovvne

soule. And of this wisedome, it is written in the verie same booke, as spoken by herselfe. In me is the grace of all life and truth, and in me is the hope of all life and vertue.
                  Ecclesi. 24. In morral actions and humaine wisedome, we see that the first and cheefest circumstaunce is, to regard well and consider the ende. And howe then doe we omitte the same,Great folly & errour. in this great affaire of the Kingdome of heauen? If our ende be heauen, what meane wee so much to affect our selues to earth? If our end be God, why seeke we so greedilie the worldly fauour of men? If our ende be the saluation and eternitie of our soule, why doe we followe vanities and temporalities of thys life? Why spend yee your mony, and not in bread? saith God by the mouth of Esay,Esay, 55, Ephe. 1. 1, Thes. 2. 2. Peter, 1. 
                  why bestow ye your labour in thinges that will not yeelde you saturitie? If our inheritaunce be, that wee should raigne as Kings, why put we our selues in such slauerie of creatures?Luke, 15, If our byrth allowe vs to feede of breade in our fathers house, why delight we in huskes prouided for the swyne?
               But (alas) we may say with the wise man in the Scripture.Wisedom, 4.
                  
                     Fascinatio nugacitatis obscurat bona. The bewitching of worldly trifles, doe obscure and hide vs from the things that are good and behoouefull for our soules: ô most dangerous enchauntment.Errour in our course of life is not pardoned.
But what? shall this excuse vs? no truelie: for the same spirite

of God hath left recorded. Populus non intelligens vapulabit.
                  Ose, 4. The people that vnderstandeth not shall be beaten for it. And another Prophet to the same effect pronounceth:Esay, 28, 
                  This people is not wise, and therefore hee that made them shall not pardon them, neyther shall he that created thē, take mercie vpon thē. It is written of fooles: Ventum seminabunt & turbinem metent.
                  They shall sowe and cast theyr seede vppon the windes, and shall receiue for theyr haruest, nothing els but a storme or tempest. Wherby is signified, that they shall not onely cast away and leese their labours, but also be punished and chastened for the same.
               Consider then I beseech thee (my deere brother) attentiuelie,A profitable forewarning. what thou wilt doe or say, when thy Lord shall come at the last day and aske thee an account of all thy labours, actions, and time spent in thys lyfe:Math, 25, when he shall require a reckoning of his talents lent vnto thee: when he shal say, as he said to the Farmour or Steward in the Gospell:Luke, 16, 
                  Redde rationem villicationis tuae, giue account of thy stewardship & charge committed vnto thee. What wilt thou say, when he shal examine, and weigh and try thy doings, as gold is examined & tried in the fornace: that is, what ende they had? whereto they were applyed? to what glorie of God? to what profit of thy

soule? what measure, weight, and substance they beare? Baltasar King of Babylon, sitting at his banquet merrie vppon a tyme, espied suddainly certaine fingers without a hande,A rare chance that happened to Baltasar K. of Babilon. Daniell, 5. that wrote on the wall right ouer against his Table, these three Hebrue words, Mane, Thekel, Phares. Which words Daniel interpreted in three sentences vnto the King, in thys manner. Mane, GOD hath numbred thee (Baltasar) and thy kingdome. Thekel, hee hath weighed thee in the Gold-smithes ballance, and thou art founde too-light. Phares, for this cause hath he deuided thee from thy kingdome, & hath giuen the same to the Medes and Persians.
               Oh, that these three most golden and most significant words, engrauen by the Angel vpon Baltasars wall, were registred vpon euery doore and post in Christendome, or rather imprinted in the hart of each Christian, especially the two first, that import the numbering and weighing of all our actions, and that in the weights and ballance of the Gold-smith, where euery graine is espyed that wanteth.If God examin straightly the actions of Infidels, much more of Christians if they liue careles. And if Baltasars actions, that was a Gentile, wer to be examined in so nise and delicate a paire of ballance for their tryall; & if he had so seuere a sentence pronoū
                  ced vpon him, that hee shoulde be deuided from life and kingdome, (as he was the same

night folowing:) Quia inuentus est minus habens,
                  Daniel, 5. for that hee was founde to haue lesse weight in him then hee shoulde haue: what shall wee thinke of our selues that are Christians, of whom it is written aboue al others; I will search the sinnes of Ierusalem with a candle.
                  Sopho, 1. What shall wee expect, that haue not onely lesse weight then we should haue, but no weight at all, in the most of our actions? what may such men (I say) expect, but onely that most terrible threat of diuision made vnto Baltasar,A dreadfull diuision. (or rather worse, if worse may be) that is, to be deuided from God and hys Angels: from participation of God and our Sauiour: from communion of Saints: from hope of our inheritaunce: from our portion celestiall and life euerlasting; according to the expresse declaration, made heereof by Christ himselfe, in these words to the negligent seruaunt.Math, 24, 
                  The Lord of such a seruant, shall com at a day when he hopeth not, & at an houre that he knoweth not: and shall deuide him out, and assigne his part with hypocrites, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
               
               Wherefore (deere brother) to conclude thys Chapter,The conclusion. I can say nothing more in this dangerous case, wherein the worlde so runneth a wrie, but onely exhort thee (as the Apostle doth) not to conforme thy selfe to the common errour that leadeth to perdition.

Fall at length to some reckoning & accounte with thy lyfe, and see where thou standest, and whether thou goest. If hetherto thou haue wandered and gone astraie: be sorie for the tyme lost, but passe no further. If hetherto thou haue not considered the weightines of thys affayre: serue thy selfe of thys admonition, and remember that it is written:Prouerb, 9, that a wise man profiteth by euerie occasion. Esteeme thy resolution in thys one point, the cheefest menage that euer shall passe throgh thy hands in thys worlde, albeit thou wert a Monarch and Ruler of tenne worldes together. And finally, I will ende with the verie same wordes, where-with the wise man concludeth his whole booke.Ecclesi. 11. 
                  Feare God, and obserue his commandements, for this is euery man. That is, in this doth all and euerie man consist: his end, his beginning, his life and cause of beeing: that he feare God, and direct his actions to the obseruaunce of hys commaundements; for that without this, he is no man in effect, seeing that he looseth all benefit, both of his name, nature, redemption and creation.
            
            
               
               THAT THE SERVICE VVHICH GOD REQVIRETH OF MAN IN thys present life, is Religion.
               With the particuler confirmations of Christian religion, aboue all other in the worlde.
               CHAP. IIII.
               HAuing prooued in the former chapters that there is a God, which created man: and that man in respect thereof, and of other benefits receiued, is bounde to honor & serue the same God; the question may be made in this place, what seruice thys is that God requireth, and wherein it doth consist? Wherunto the aunswere is breefe and easie, that it is Religion;Of Religion. which is a vertue that containeth properlie, the worship and seruice that we owe vnto GOD: euen as Pietie is a vertu,Pietie.
                  
contayning the duetie that children do owe vnto their Parents; and Obseruance another vertue,Obseruaunce. that comprehendeth the regard, that schollers and seruants beare vnto their Maisters. In respect of which comparison and likenesse betweene these vertues, God sayth by a certaine Prophet;Mala. 1. 
                  The sonne honoureth his father, and the seruaunt his Maister, if then I be a Father, where is my honor? if I be a maister, where is my feare?
               
               The acts of Religion are diuers and different;The acts and operations of Religion. some internall, as deuotion and prayer: some other externall, as adoration, worship, sacrifice, oblations, and such like, that are declarations and protes
                     •
                  ations of the internall. It extendeth it selfe also, to stirre vp and put in vie, the acts and operations of other vertues for the seruice of God;Iames, 1
                        •
                     
                   in which sence S
                     •
                   Iames nameth it Pure and vnspotted Religion, to visite Orphanes and Widdowes in their tribulation, and to keepe our selues vndefiled from the wickednes of thys world. Finally, how soeuer some Heathens did vse this word Religion, to some other significations:
                     August. lib. 10 
                        
                           •
                        e ciuit. cap. 1. yet, (as S. Augustine wel noteth) the vse therof among the faithfull, hath alwaies beene, to signifie therby, the worship, honor and seruice, that is due vnto God;Howe much it importeth to be religious. so that if in one word you wil haue it declared, what God requireth of man in this life: it may be rightly said, that al

standeth in thys, that he be Religious.
               Heereof it proceedeth, that whatsoeuer sort or sect of people in the world, professed reuerence, honor, or worship, to God, or to gods, or to any diuine power, essence, or nature what soeuer; (were they Iewes, Heathens, Gentiles, Christians, Turks, Moores, Heretiques, or other:) they did alwaies call theyr said profession, by the name of theyr religion. In which sense also and signification of the word, I am to treate at this tyme of Christian Religion; that is, of the substance, forme, manner and way, reuealed by Christ and his Apostles vnto vs, of performing our duetie and true seruice towards God. Which seruice is the first point necessary to be resolued vpon, by him that seeketh his saluation, as in the Chapter that goeth before hath beene declared. And for obtayning thys seruice and the true knowledge therof,The necessitie of Christian Religion. no mean vppon earth is left vnto man, but onely the light and instruction of Christian Religion, according to the protestation of S. Peter vnto the Gouernours of the Iewes, when hee said;Acts. 4. 
                  There is no other name vnder heauen giuen vnto men whereby to be saued, but only this of Christ, and of his Religion.
               
               If you obiect against me, that in former tymes before Christes natiuitie, as vnder the Lawe of Moses for two thousand yeeres together,

there were many Saints, who without Christian Religion serued God vprightlie,How mē were saued in olde tyme, without Christian Religion. as the Prophets and other holie people, and before them again in the law of Nature, when neyther Christian nor Iewish Religion was yet heard of, for more then two thousand yeeres: there wanted not diuers that pleased God, and serued him truelie, as Enoch, Noe, Iob, Abraham, Iacob, & others. I aunswer, that albeit these men, (especiallie the former, that liued vnder the Law of nature,) had not so perticuler and expresse knowledge of Christ and of his misteries, as we haue nowe:Gal, 3, & 4, Ephesi, 3, Colos. 1. for thys was reserued to the tyme of grace, (as S. Paul in diuers places at large declareth:) that is, albeit they knewe not expresly, how & in what manner Christ should be borne:
                     See S. August. lib. 19. cont. Faust capit. 14. whether of a Virgine or no; or in what perticuler sort he should liue and die; what Sacraments he shoulde leaue; what way of publishing his Gospel he shold appoint, and the like; (wherof notwithstanding very many perticulers were reuealed to the Iewes from tyme to time, and the neerer they drewe to the time of Christes appearance, the more plaine reuelation was made of these mysteries:) yet (I say) all and euerie one of these holy Saints,All old Saints beleeued in Christ, & were saued by him. that liued from Adam vntil the comming of Christ, had knowledge ingenerall of Christian Religion, and

did beleeue the same; that is, they beleeued expresly, that there shoulde come a Sauiour and Redeemer of man-kind, to deliuer them from the bondage contracted by the sinne of Adam.
               Thys was reuealed (straight after their fal) to our first Parents and Progenitors in Paradise:Gene, 3, ver. 15 to wit, that by the womans seede, our redemption should be made. In respect wherof, it is sayd in the Reuelations,Reuela. 13. that Christ is the Lambe that hath beene slaine from the beginning of the world.Acts, 15. verse. 11, And S. Peter in the first generall Counsaile holden by the Apostles, affirmeth, that the old ancient Fathers before Christes natiuitie,Roma, 5. Ephe, 8. were saued by the grace of Christ, as we are now, which S. Paul confirmeth in diuers places. And finallie, the matter is so cleere in thys behalfe, that the whole 
                     Read S. Augu. lib. 18. de ciuit. 1 47. et epist. 49. & 157. et tract. 45. in Ioh. Cle. Alex. lib. 6. Strom. et Ierom in cap. 3 ad Calat.
                   Schoole of Diuines accordeth, that fayth and religion of the auncient Fathers, before Christes appearaunce: was the verie same in substaunce that ours is nowe, sauing onely, that it was more generall, obscure, and confuse then ours is, for that it was of things to come, as ours is nowe of things past and present.
               For example; they beleeued that a Redeemer shold come:The difference betweene our beleefe & the olde Fathers. and we beleeue that he is alreadie come. They said, Uirgo concipiet, a Vyrgine shall conceiue: and we say, Uirgo

                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
concepit, a Virgine hath conceiued. They had sacrifices and ceremonies that prefigured his comming for the time ensuing: we haue sacrifice and sacraments that represent his being for the time present. They called theyr Redeemer,Esay. 7. Genesis, 49. 
                  The expectation of Nations: and we call him nowe, The saluation of Nations. And finally, there was no other difference between the old fayth of good men from the beginning, & ours: but onely in the circumstaunces of tyme, cleerenes, perticularitie, and of the maner of protesting the same, by outward signes and ceremonies. For that in substaunce they beleeued the same Redeemer that we doe, and were saued by the same beleefe in his merits as we are. For which cause Eusebius 
                     Eusebius. handleth this matter at large lib 1. demon. euang. capit. 5. well noteth, that as we are called nowe Christians: so they were called then Christi. Psalm. 104. that is, annointed, in prefiguration of the true Christ in whom they beleeued, as the first and head of all other anointed, and who was the cause and authour of theyr anoynting.
               By thys then it is most manifest, that not onely now to vs that be Christians, but at all other tymes frō the beginning of the world, and to all other persons and people what soeuer, that desired to haue theyr soules saued, it was necessary to beleeue and loue Christ, and to professe in hart his Religion. For

which consideration, I thought it not amisse in thys place, after the former grounds laid, that there is a God; and that man was created and placed heere for his seruice:The causes of thys Chapter. to demonstrate and prooue also thys other principle, that the onely seruice of thys God, is by Christian Religion. Wherein, albeit I doe not doubt, but that I shall seeme to many, to take vpon me a superfluous labour, in proouing a veritie, which all men in Christendome doe confesse: yet, for the causes before alleaged in the second Chapter, which mooued me in that place to prooue, that there is a God: that is to say, first, for the comfort, strength, and confirmation of such, as eyther from the enemie may receiue temptations, or of themselues may desire to see a reason of theyr beleefe; and secondly, for awaking, stirring, or stinging of others, who eyther of malice, carelesnes, or sensualitie, are fallen a sleepe, and haue lost the feeling and sence of theyr beleefe, (for many such want not in these our myserable daies,) it shall not bee (perhaps) but to verie good purpose, to laie together in thys place, with the greatest breuitie that possibly may be, the most sure grounds and inuincible euidences, which we haue for declaration and confirmation of this matter.
               For albeit the Apostle S. Paul declareth,Hebru. 11.
                  
the things which we beleeue, be not such in themselues, as may be made apparent by reason of humaine arguments: yet such is the goodnes and most sweete proceeding of our mercifull God toward vs, as he wil not leaue himselfe without sufficient testimonie, both inward and outward,Acts, 14. as the same Apostle in another place doth testifie. For that inwardlie, hee testifieth the trueth of such things as we beleeue,The dyuers testimonies frō God. of the things that we beleeue. by giuing vs light & vnderstanding, with internall ioy and consolation in beleeuing them. And outwardly, hee giueth testimonie to the same, with so many conueniences, probabilities, and arguments of credibilitie, (as Diuines doe call them,) that albeit the very poynt of that which is beleeued, remaine styll with some obscuritie: yet are there so many circumstaunces of likelyhoods, to induce a man to the beleefe thereof, as in all reason it may seeme against reason to denie or mistrust them.
               Thys shall easily appeare by the treatise following of Christ and Christianitie, and of the foundations of our Religion, which shall be confirmed by so many pregnant reasons, and most manifest circumstaunces of euident probabilitie: as I doubt not, but the zealous Christian shal take exceeding comfort therein, and esteeme himselfe happie, to haue a lotte in that faith and Religion, where

he shall see and feele so much reason, proofe, and conueniencie to concurre and shewe it selfe, for hys satis-faction.
               And to thys effect, it shall be of no mean moment, that I haue prooued before, the certaintie, diuinitie, and infallible trueth of the Iewes Scriptures, or olde Testament; which writings we haue receiued from that Nation that doth (as it were) professe enmity against vs, and the same beeing written so many ages before the name of Christianitie vvas knowne in the worlde: it cannot be but of singuler authoritie, what soeuer shall be alleaged out of those records for our purpose. And therefore as before, in proouing our first principle, That there is a God, wee vsed onely the testimonie of such witnesses,The vndoubted witnesses to be alleaged in thys Chapter. as coulde not be partiall: so much more in this confirmation of Christian Religion, shall we stand onely, eyther vppon the confessions of such as are our enemies, or vpon the records of others, who must needes be indifferent in the cause, for that they liued before eyther cause or controuersie in Christianitie, vvas knowne or called in question.
               My whole purpose shall be then, to make manifest in thys Chapter,The dryft of thys Chapter. that Iesus Christ was the Sauiour & Redeemer of man-kind, fore-promised and expected from the beginning of the worlde; that he was the only

sonne of God, and God himselfe, and consequently, that what soeuer he hath left vs in hys doctrine and Religion, is true & sincere, and the onely way of saluation vppon earth. For cleerer proofe and declaration whereof, I will reduce what soeuer I haue to say herein, vnto three principall heads or braunches,The principall heades. according to the order of three distinct times wherein they fell out; That is to say, in the  first place shall be considered, the things that passed before the Natiuitie or incarnation of  Christ. In the second, the things doone and verified from that time vnto hys ascention, which is the space of hys abode vpon earth.  And in the thyrd place, such euents shall be considered, as ensued for confirmation of his Deitie, after hys departure.
               In declaration of which three generall points, I hope by the assistance of him whose cause we handle, that so many cleere demonstrations shall be dyscouered: as shall greatlie confirme thy fayth (gentle Reader) and remooue all occasions of temptation to infidelitie.
               
                  
                  Howe Christ was fore-tolde to Iewe and Gentile. SECT. I.
                  FIrst then, for such things as passed before Christ appeared in the flesh, & do make for proofe of our Christian Religion; it is to be noted, that they are of two sorts,The Iewe and Gentile. or at least wise, they are to be taken f
                        •
                     om two kindes of people, that is, partly from the Iewes, and partly from the Gentiles. For seeing that Christ was appointed from the beginning, yea, before the world was created,Ephe. 1. 1. Tim, 2. Titus, 1. 1, Peter. 1. (as Saint Paule affirmeth,) to worke the redemption both of Iewe and Gentile, and to make them both one people in the seruice of his Father: heere-hence it is, that hee was foretolde and prefigured to both these Nations,Esay, 2. 11. 19 Iere, 9, 12, 16. & diuers fore-warninges were left among them both, for styrring them vppe to expect his comming, as by the considerations folowing shal most euidently appeare.
                  
                     The first consideration.
                     AND to beginne wyth the Iewes,The Messias promised. no man can deny, but that throughout the whole

bodie and course of theyr Scriptures, that is, from the very beginning to the last ende of theyr olde Testament, they had promised vnto them a Messias, which is the very same that we call Christ, that is to say, a person annoynted and sent from God to be a Sauiour, a Redeemer, a Pacifier of Gods wrath, a Mediator betweene God and man, a Satis-fier for the sins and offences of the whole world, a Restorer of our innocencie lost in Paradise, a Maister, an Instructor, a Law-giuer, a Spirituall and eternall King, that shoulde sitte, and rule and raigne in our harts, to conquer the power and tyrannie of Satan, the enemie of man-kinde, who ouer-came our first Parents, and neuer ceaseth to assayle vs.
                     
                        THE FIRST COVENAVNT TO ADAM.
                        THIS is euident by the first couenaunt of al, that euer God did make with man, when he sayde to Adam our first Father in Paradise;Genesis. 2. 
                           In what day soeuer thou shalt eate of the tree that is forbidden, thou shalt die. Which couenaunt beeing after broken, on the part of our said Progenitor, he receiued his iudgment: but yet wyth a most benigne promise of redemption for the time to come: for

thus God sayde to the deuill or serpent that had deceiued him:Genesis. 3. 
                           The seede of the vvoman shall crushe thy head, and thou shalt lie in waite to hurt his heele. That is, one shall proceede in time of the seede of the woman, who shal conquer Death and Sinne (that are thy weapons,) and shal not care for thy temptations, but shall tread them vnder his feete, and this shall be Christ the Messias of the worlde.
                        Thus did not onely the 
                              Rabbi Mose. Benmaimon, in hunc locum.
                            eldest Iewes and Rabbines vnderstand this place, (what soeuer the latter haue dreamed, that their Messias should be onely a temporall King:) but also the olde Chaldie Paraphrase, (named Thargum Hierosolymitanum) expoundeth it plainely, in these words, applyed vnto the deuill that had deceiued Adam:
                              Tharg. Hieroso. in Gene. 3. 
                           They haue a certaine and present remedie against thee (O deuill,) for that the time shall come, when they shall treade thee downe with theyr heeles, by the helpe of Messias which shall be their King.
                        
                     
                     
                        TO ABRAHAM AND ISAAC.
                        THE same thing is confirmed by the verie same promise seauen times repeated and established vnto Abraham, that lyued very neere two thousand yeres after Adam:

and againe to Isaac hys sonne after him:Gene, 12. and 18, and 22. 
                           In semine tuo benedicentur omnes gentes terrae. All Nations of the earth shall be blessed in thy seede. Which had beene indeede, but a very small benediction to Abraham, or to the Iewes after him, (that neuer sawe their Messias actually) if hee had beene onely to be a temporall King; And much lesse blessing had it beene to the Gentiles & all other Nations, if this Messias of the Iewes, must haue beene a temporall and worldly Monarch, to destroy and subdue them to the seruitude of Iurie, as fondly these latter teachers of that Nation doe contend.
                     
                     
                        IACOBS PROPHECIE OF CHRIST.
                        THIS yet maketh the Patriarch Iacob more playne, who prophecying at hys death of the comming of Christ, hath these words:Gene, 49. 
                           The Scepter (or gouernment) shal not be taken from the house of Iuda, vntill hee come that is to be sent, and he shall be the expectation of Nations. Which latter words, the forenamed Chaldie Paraphrase,
                              Tharg. Hieroso. et Onkelos. in hunc locum.
                            as also great Onkelos, (both of singuler authoritie amongst the Iewes,) doe interpret thus:

                              Donec Christus seu Messias veniat, &c. Vntill Christ or

the Messias come, (which is the hope & expectation of all Nations, as well Gentiles, as of vs that are Iewes,) the gouernement shall not cease in the house or Trybe of Iuda. By which sentence of Scripture, and interpretation of the Iewes themselues, wee come to learne, (besides the promise of the Messias) two consequences in thys matter against the Iewes of later tymes.
First,The Messias must be a spyrituall and not a temporall King. that if their Messias must be the hope and expectation as wel of Gentiles as of Iewes: then can he not be a temporal King to destroy the Gentiles, (as the later Iewes would haue it,) but a spirituall King to raigne ouer them, and to bring in subiection theyr spirituall enemies for them, (I meane the flesh, the world, and the deuil,) as all true Christians doe beleeue. Secondly, if the temporall kingdome of the house of Iuda, (wherof Christ must come) shal cease and be destroyed at the comming of Messias, (as thys Scripture auoucheth:) how then can the Iewes expect yet a temporall King for theyr Messias, as most fondly they doe?
                        But to leaue thys controuersie wyth the later Rabines, and to goe forwarde in declaration of that which we tooke in hande, that is, to shewe howe Christ was fore-tolde and promised to the Iewes. It is to be noted, that after the death of Iacob last mentioned, there is a lyttle recorded in scripture of the doings

of hys people, during the space of foure hundred yeeres, beeing the tyme of theyr bondage in Egypt;The tradition of the Iewes in Misdrasch Thehilim. but yet the tradition of that Nation teacheth, that as soone as they were deliuered out of Egypt, and were in the desert towards the Land of promise: the three sonnes of Chore, called Aser, Eleana, and Abiasaphe, (of whom mention is made in the sixt Chapter of Exodus, and other places) made diuers songs and Psalmes, in the praise and expectation of the Messias to come, & that the holy men of that tyme, did solace themselues with singing the same: and that King Dauid afterward in the second part of hys Psalmes,See the tytles of these psalmes heere specified. beginning from the fortie one, vnto the eyghtie seauen, gathered the most part of these olde songs together, as yet they are to be seene in hys Psalter.
                     
                     
                        MOSES PROPHECIE OF CHRIST.
                        BVT Moses, who lyued with that people, and gouerned them in the wyldernesse, had a cleere reuelation from God of thys Messias, in these words.Deute. 18. 
                           I will raise vp a Prophet to this people from amongst their bretheren, euen as thy selfe: & I will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speake vnto them all

things which I shall ordaine vnto him: and hee that shal refuse to heare the words which he shal speake vnto them in my name: I will be reuenged vppon that man. Which wordes, that they cannot be vnderstood of any other Prophet that euer liued after Moses among the Iewes, but onely of Christ, it appeareth very plainly by thys testimonie of the holy Ghost,Deute. 34. 
                           And there arose not any other Prophet in Israel like vnto Moses. &c.
                        
                     
                     
                        DAVIDS PROPHECIE OF CHRIST.
                        AFter Moses about foure hundred yeres, ensued Dauid, who for that he was a holy man, and the first King of the house of Iuda, out of whose linage the Messias was to come: the perticulers of thys misterie, were more aboundantly and manifestly reuealed vnto hym, then vnto any other. And first, for assuraunce that Christ shoulde be borne of his stocke and linage, these are the words of God vnto him.Psalm, 88. 2, Reg, 7, 1, Chro. 22. 
                           I haue sworne to Dauid my seruaunt: I will prepare thy seede for eternitie, and will build vp thy seate to all generations. Which words, albeit the later Iewes wyll apply it to King Salomon, that was Dauids sonne, (and in some sense they may so be: for that King

Salomon was a figure of Christ to come,) yet properly these words,3. Reg. 5. 1, Chron, 22. 
                           and his kingdome shall stand for euer, and for all eternitie, which are so often repeated in this and other places of Scripture: cannot be verified in Salomon, whose earthly Kingdome was rent and torne in peeces straight way after his death,3, Reg, 12. by Ieroboam, and not long after, as it were extinguished
                              •
                            but they must needes be vnderstoode of an 
                              •
                           ternall king, which shold come of Dauids seede: as must also these other words of God in the Psalmes.Psalm, 2, 45. 47, 67, 72. 
                           Thou art my Sonne, thys daie haue I begotten thee, I wil giue vnto thee the Gentiles for thyne inheritaunce. Which was neuer fulfilled in Salomon, nor in any other temporall King in Iurie after hym. And much lesse these wordes which follow;Psalm, 71. 
                           He shall endure with the sunne, and before the moone, from generation to generation. There shall rise vppe in his daies peace, vntil the moone be taken awaie: he shall raigne from Sea to Sea, vnto the endes of the world: All Kings shall adore him, and all Nations shal serue him: for that hee shall deliuer the poore man that had no helper: he shall saue their soules, and delyuer them from vsurie, and from iniquitie: all trybes of the earth shal be bl
                                 •
                              ssed in him, and all Nations shall magnifie him.
                        
                        These words of Chris
                              •
                           es eternal kingdom: of hys enduring to the worldes end: of hys

vniuersall raigne ouer Iewe and Gentile: of hys adoration by all Nations: of hys deliuery of soules from bondage of iniquitie: and finally, of hys making blessed all Trybes of the earth: cannot possibly be applyed to any temporall King that euer was among the Iewes, or euer shall be vnto the worldes end, but onely Christ.
                     
                     
                        IEREMIES PROPHECIE OF CHRIST.
                        THIS promise made vnto Dauid, for Christ to come of hys seede, is repeated (after hys death,) by many Prophets, and confirmed by God, as in Ieremie, vvhere God vseth these wordes.Ieremie, 23, and 33. 
                           Beholde, the dayes come on, and I will raise vppe to Dauid a iust seede, and he shall raigne a King, and shall be wise, and shall doe iudgment and iustice vppon earth. And in his daies shall Iuda be saued, & Israel shal dwel considently, and this is the name that men shall call him: OVR IVST GOD. All this was spokē of Dauids seede, aboue foure hundred yeeres after Dauid was dead. Which proueth manifestly, that the former promises & speeches, were not made to King Dauid for Salomon hys sonne, or for any other temporall King of Dauids lyne:

but for Christ, who was called so perticulerlie The sonne and seede of Dauid, for that Dauid was the first King of the Trybe of Iuda, and not onely was Christes Progenitour in the fleshe, but also did beare his type and figure in many other things.
                     
                     
                        EZECHIELS PROPHECIE OF CHRIST.
                        FOR which cause likewise in the Prophet Ezechiell (who liued about the same time that Ieremie did,) the Messias is called by the name of Dauid himselfe; For thus God spake at that tyme vnto Ezechiell,Ezech. 34. 
                           I will saue my flocke: nor shall they be any longer left to the spoyle, &c. I wil raise ouer them, ONE PASTOR, which shall feede them: my seruant DAVID,Christ is called Dauid. 
                           he shall feede them: and hee shall be theyr Sheepehearde, and Prince, and I will be their God, and will make with them a couenaunt of peace, &c. In which words, not onely we that are called Christians, but the later Iewes also themselues, doe confesse in their Thalmud,
                           Thalm. tract. Sanch. ca. helec that theyr Messias is called by the name of Dauid, for that hee shall discend of the seede of Dauid; as by reason also it must needes be so, for that King Dauid beeing deade foure hundred yeeres before these

wordes were spoken, (as hath beene noted) coulde not now come againe, to feede Gods people or gouerne them himselfe.
                     
                     
                        THE PROPHECIES OF ESAY, TOVCHING CHRIST.
                        ESay the Prophet, who liued about a hundred yeeres before Ieremie and Ezechiel, had meruailous fore-knowledge of the Messias and hys affayres, and describeth him verie perticulerly, beginning in thys manner.Esay, 2. 
                           In the latter daies, the HILL of Gods house, shall be prepared vppon the toppe of mountaines, and all Nations (or Gentiles) shall flowe vnto him: And many people shall saie: come and let vs ascende vnto the HILL of our Lorde, and he shall teach vs his waies, and we shall walk in his pathes: he shall iudge Nations. &c. Which very words are also repeated in Micheas the Prophet,Miche. 4. & are applyed there (as also here,) vnto the Messias, & can haue no other meaning, by the iudgment of the Iewes and Hebrues themselues. And Esay doth prosecute the same matter afterwards in diuers Chapters. As for example in the fourth, talking of the same Messias, which before he called the HIL of Gods house, he addeth these words.Esay, 4. ver. 2. 
                           In that day, shal the issue of the Lord, be in magnificence

and glorie: and the fruite of the earth, in sublimitie and exultation, to all such as shall be saued of Israell. In which words, he calleth the Messias, bothe the issue of God, and the fruite of the earth: for that he should be both God and man. And in the ninth Chapter, he calleth him by these termes:Esay, 9, ver. 6 
                           Admirable: Couns
                                 •
                              llour: God: Strong: Father of the future world: and, Prince of Peace.
                        
                        In the eleuenth chapter, he describeth him most wonderfully, in these wordes:Esay, 11. ver. 1. 
                           There shall goe forth a braunche of the stocke of Iesse, (which Iesse was Dauids father;Psalm, 71. Eccle. 45.) and out of the roote of that braunch, ther
                                 •
                               shall mount vppe a flower, and the spirit of the Lord shall rest vppon him: the spirit of wisedome and of vnderstanding: the spirit of councell & fortitude: the spirit of knowledge and pietie:
                           Wonderfull properties of CHRIST. 
                           he shall not iudge according to the sight of (fleshly) eyes, nor yet condemne according to the hearing of (fleshlie) eares: but hee shall iudge poore men in iustice, and shall dispute in equitie for the mylde men of the earth. He shall strike the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the spirit of his lyps shall he sley the wicked man. Iustice shal be the girdle of his loynes, and faith shall be the bande of his reynes. &c. Hetherto are the wordes of the Prophet: wherin truely nothing can be more plaine and euident,Math, 1. Luke, 3. then that by the rodde or branche of I
                                 •
                              sse, is meant the Virgine Marie,

who directly discended of the linage of Iesse,Acts. 13. Romans. 15. and by the flower ascending frō this branch, must needes be vnderstood Christ, that was borne of her, and had all those excellencies and priuiledges aboue other men, which Esay in thys place assigneth vnto him.
                        Whose further graces yet, and speciall diuine properties,Other properties of Christ. the same Prophet expresseth more particulerly in the Chapters following, where he sayth;Esay, 25, ver. 8 
                           Hee shall for euer ouerthrowe and destroy death: he shall open the eyes of the blynde, and the eares of the deafe:
                           Esay, 35, ver. 5. Esay, 42, ver. 2
                                 •
                              
                            
                           he shall not cry nor cont
                                 •
                              nde, nor shall he accept the person of any man: but in trueth shall hée bring forth iudgement. He shall not be sorrowfull nor turbulent, &c. And finally, in the forty nine Chapter, he alleageth the words of God the Father vnto Christ, touching hys commission, in this sort;Esay, 49, ver, 6 Acts, 13, 47. 
                           It is too-little that thou be to me a seruaunt, to raise vp the Trybes of Iacob, and to conuert vnto me the dr
                                 •
                              gs of Israell.
                           The commission of Christ. 
                           Beholde, I haue appointed thee also 
                                 •
                              or a light vnto the Gentiles, that thou be my saluation vnto the vttermost parts of the earth.
                        
                     
                     
                        DANIELS PROPHECIE OF CHRIST.
                        AND to conclude thys matter, without alleaging more prophecies for the same,

(which in trueth are infinite throughout the Bible) Daniell that liued in the ende of the captiuitie of Babylon, a little before Aggaeus, Zacharias, and Malachias, (who were the last Prophets that euer florished among the Iewes, almost fiue hundred yeeres before the natiuitie of Christ:) thys Daniell (I say) reporteth of himselfe, that beeing in Babylon, and hauing fasted, worne sacke-cloth, and prayed long vnto God, there came the Angel Gabriell vnto him at the time of euening sacrifice, and fore-told him, not onely of the deliuerance of the people of Israell from the captiuitie of Babylon out of hande, for that the seauentie yeres of their punishment fore-told by Ieremie, were now expired) but also he tolde him further, that the time of the vniuersall deliueraunce of man-kind, from the bondage and captiuitie of sinne: was nowe shortened
                              •
                            and that after seuentie Hebdomades, (which, as shall be shewed after, make vppe iust the tyme that passed from the rebuilding of the Temple of Ierusalem after theyr deliueraunce from Babylon, vnto the byrth of Christ:) there should be borne the Sauiour of the world, and be put to death for the redemption of man-kinde.
                        
                           Daniel. 9. verse. 23.The Angels words are these. I am come to shewe vnto thee, O Daniell, for that thou art a man of good desires. And therefore doe thou

marke my speeche, and vnderstande thys vision. The seauentie hebdomades are shortened vppon thy people, and vpon thy holy Cittie: to the end preuarication may be consumed, and sin receiue an end: to the ende iniquitie may be blotted out, and eternall iustice brought in her place: and to the ende visions and prophecies may be fulfilled, and the SAINT OF SAINTS annoynted. Knowe thou therefore and marke, that from the end of the speech, for rebuilding of Ierusalem, vnto Christ the CAPTAINE, there shall be hebdomades seuen, and hebdomades sixtie two, and after sixtie two hebdomades, Christ shal be put to death, and the people which shall denie him, shall not be his people.
                        
                        I might passe on further to other Prophets, and make no ende, if I would alleage what might be sayde in thys behalfe; for that the whole Scripture runneth all to this one point:The Butte of all Scripture. to fore-tell and manifest Christ, by signes, figures, parables, & prophecies: and for thys cause was it principally written. But that which is already spoken, shall be sufficient for our first consideration, whereby is seene, that among the Iewes from age to age, Christ was prophecied and fore-tolde, together with the eternitie of hys kingdom, that shoulde be spirituall.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     The second consideration.
                     NOwe followeth there a second consideration of the qualitie of Christes person,That Christ should be God and man. of no lesse importaunce then the former, and wherein the later Iewes doe more dyscent from vs: & that is, of the God-head of the Messias promised. I say the later Iewes or Rabines, are different heerein from vs, as also they are in many other poynts and articles, wherein theyr auncestors (that were no Christians,) did fully agree. Euen as all Heretiques are wont to doe,The custome of Heretiques. that first breake in one point, and then in another, from the true Catholique fayth of Christ, to followe mens traditions; and so doe runne on, from one to one, making themselues in all thinges as dislike as they can, for hatred of that vnitie, whereunto theyr pryde wyll not suffer them to returne. So is it in the generation of this reprobate people, who first agreed wyth vs in all, or most pointes, touching Christ to come, and denyed onely the fulfilling or applycation thereof, in Iesus our Sauiour: but afterward, theyr vngracious of-spring, beeing not able to stand in that issue against vs, deuised a newe plea, and betooke themselues to a far higher degree of impietie, affirming,

that wee attribute many thinges vnto Iesus, that were not fore-tolde of the Messias to come; and among other, that he shoulde be God, and the sonne of God, and the second person in Triniti
                           •
                        , &c.
                     But heerein (no doubt) these obstinate and gracelesse men, doe shewe themselues both ignoraunt of theyr own Scriptures, and disagreeing from the wrytings of theyr own fore-fathers. For as for scriptures, it is 
                           •
                        uident by all, or most of the Prophets all
                           ••
                        ged before, that Christ (or the Messias) must be GOD, and the sonne of God, indued wyth mans nature; that is, both man and God.That Christ must be both God and man. Gene, 3, ver, 5. So in Genesis, where he is called the s
                              •
                           ede of the woman: it is apparent, that he shall be man; and in the same place,The first proofe. when hee is promised to crush the deuill, and breake his heade: vvho can do thys but onely God? Likewise, when he is called, Germen Iehouae,
                        Esay, 4. ver, 2. the seede of our Lord God; his God-head is signified: as is hys man-heade also, when in the same place he is named, the f
                              •
                           uite of the earth.
                        Esay, 9. Psalme, 71. Who can interprete these speeches; That his kingdom shall be euerlasting: That, he shall endure vntil the Moone be taken away, & after:
                        Psalm, 109
                              •
                           
                         That, God begate him before Lucifer was created: That, no man can tell or recounte his generation:
                        Esay, 53, Psalm, 96, Hebru, 1, Psalme, 110. That, all Nations and Angels must adore him: That, he must sitte at the right hande of God,
                        
and many other such speeches pronounced directly and expresly of the Messias; who (I say) can vnderstand or interprete them, but of God, seeing that in man they cannot be verified?
                     And as for the last of these testimonies, concerning Christes sitting at hys Fathers right hande:Math, 2. Mark, 12. Luke, 20. three of our Euangelists doe report, that Iesus did blanck diuers of the learnedest Pharisies with alleaging onelie these words of Dauid; The 
                        Iehoua in Hebrue. Psalm, 110. 
                        Lord said to my Lord, sitte at my right-hande, vntill I put thine enemies as thy foote-stoole. For, (saide Iesus,) yf Christ be Dauids sonne; howe did Dauid call hym hys Lord? signifying heereby, that albeit the Messias was to be Dauids Sonne, according to his man-head: yet was he to be Dauids Lorde, according to his God-heade. And so doe both Rabbi Ionathan,
                           Rab. Ionath. lib. collect. et Misdr
                                 •
                              s
                                 •
                              h. T
                                 •
                              hilli
                                 ••
                              . in Psal. 2. ver. 7. and the publique Commentaries of the Hebrues, interprete the place.
                     
                        The second proofe. Miche. 5.Micheas is plaine; And thou Bethleem: out of thee shall proceede a RVLER in Israel, and his going soorth, is from the beginning, and from the dayes of eternitie. This cannot be vnderstoode of any mortall man, that euer was or shall be. But yet Esay goeth further, when he sayth:Esay, 9. 
                        A little child is borne vnto vs, and a young sonne is giuen vnto vs, and his principalitie is vpon his owne shoulder, and his name shall

be GOD; the father of the future Worlde (So is it in the Hebrue. or of eternitie:) the Prince of Peace, &c.
In which wordes wee see that Christ is called God. But if the Iew doe cauil heare, and say, that El or Elohim the Hebrue wordes,An obiection answered. which we interprete God in thys place, may sometyme be applyed to a creature, as in Exodus once El signifieth an Angell,Exod, 10, ve. 11. and Elohim at other tymes, is applyed to Iudges: thē mark thys dyscourse of Dauid touching the Messias, to whom he sayth:
Thou art beautifull in forme aboue the children of men:Psalm, 44. grace is spred in thy lyps, and therefore hath God blessed thee for euer, &c. Thy seate O God, is for euer and euer: the rodde (or Scepter) of thy kingdome, is the rodde of direction: thou hast loued iustice & hated iniquitie: therefore O God, thy God hath annoynted thee with oyle of ioy aboue thy partners.
Heere the Messias is called God twyce by the same word Elohim, as God his father is: and therefore as the word signifieth twice God in the one, so must it also in the other.
                     But to remooue all ground of thys refuge touching El or Elohim,
                        The thyrde proofe. that are names of GOD, which may be communicated sometimes, and vppon some occasions to creatures; most apparent it is, that the name IEHOVA,Christ is called Iehoua. which is called, Tetagrammaton, and which is so peculier to God alone, as neuer it may be communicated to anie other:

this name (I say) which is of such reuerence among the Iewes, as they dare not pronoūce it, but in place therof doe reade Adonai, that signifieth Lorde: is euery where almost in Scripture, attributed to Christ, See Esay, cap. 18, ver, 7, and cap, 28, ver. 5, namelie wher the Latine interpreter hath translated, Lord: as for example, in two diuers places of Ieremie, after the long description of the Messias, which before I haue recited: he concludeth thus; Hoc est nomen quod vocabunt cum, Iehoua iustus noster,
                        Ier
                              •
                           . 23, ver. 7, and 33, ver, 16, thys is the name which they shall call him, OVR IVST IEHOVA, or as the Hebrue hath word for worde, Iehoua our iustice. And so doe the auncient Hebrue expositors confesse vppon thys place of Ieremie, namely, Rabbi Abba,
                           Rab. Abba com
                                 •
                              nt. in Thren. verse 16. who asketh the question what Messias shall be called? & then he aunswereth out of thys last place, he shall be called the eternal Iehoua.
                        
                           Misd. Thehilim. in Psal. 20. v. 1. The like doth Misdrasche gather vpon the first verse of the twentie psalme. And Rabbi Moses Hadarsan,
                           Rab. Mos. Hadars. in Gene. capit 41. expounding a place of the Prophet Sophonie, chapter 3, verse 9. concludeth thus: in this place Iehoua signifieth nothing els but the M
                              •
                           ssias.
                     
                     Whereby appeareth, that as well in scripture, as also in the opinion of olde Hebrue expositors, the Messias was to be true God and man. And I might alleage many other testimonies of auncient Rabbines, if it vvere

not too-long: especially, if I would enter among that kind of expositours, whom they call Cabalists, (who are more auncient and lesse brutish then are the other sorte, which are termed Thalmudistes,Two sorts of Hebrue expositors, Cabalistes & Thalmudistes.) I shoulde finde many cleere & manifest declarations agains
                           •
                         the Iewes doctrine and errour of later times. And among other, (for example only of Cabalisticall expositions,) I referre the Reader to the discourse of Rabbi Hacadosch (which in Hebrue signifieth the holy Rabine, & liued not long after Christ,) vpon the wordes of Ieremie before recited:Ieremie, 23. verse, 7. in which, for that hee findeth the Messias to be called Iehoua, which worde in the Hebrue is compounded of the three Letters, Iod, Vau, and He twise repeated: this Doctor maketh this discourse by arte Cabalist, in thys manner.
                     
                        Euen as (saith he) the Letter He in Iehoua,is compounded of two other Letters, named Daleth and Uau, (as appeareth by theyr forme) so shall the Messias,
                              Rab. Hacad
                                    •
                                 sch in Esay. cap. 9. (that is signified by thys word Iehoua) be made of two natures, the one diuine, and the other humaine. And as in Iehoua,
                           A Cabalisticall dyscourse. there is twyse He, and consequently two Daleths & two Uaus contained therein: so are there two byrthes, filiations, or chyld-hoods in Messias, the one, whereby he shall be the sonne of God, and the other, whereby he shall be the sonne

of a Virgine, which Esay calleth the Prophetise.
                           Esay, 8, And as in Iehoua, the Letter He is twyse put, and yet both H
                                 •
                              s doe make in effect but one Letter: so in Messias there shall be two distinct natures, and yet shal they make but one Christ.
                     
                     Thus playeth thys Cabalist vppon the Letters of Iehoua, (according to the manner of theyr diuinitie) and draweth great misteries (as ye see) from Letters ends. In which kinde of reasoning, albeit we put no ground of strength at all: yet is it sufficient to shew, that among the elder Iewes it was a knowne and confessed doctrine, that Christ shoulde be both God & man, and haue two natures conioyned d
                           •
                        stinctly in one person, which is the same that we Christians doe a
                           ••
                        i
                           •
                        me.
                     
                        The fourth proo
                              •
                           e.Nay, I wyll adde further, (and thys is greatly to be obserued,) that the selfe same auncient Iewes, (as some also of the later) do holde, and prooue by scripture: that Christ shal be, (for alwaies they speake of the Messias to come,) the very sonne of God.Christ called the sonne of God. 
                        Et verbum Dei incarn
                              •
                           uum, and the worde of God incarnate, or made fleshe. And for the fyrst, that he shall be the son of God: they proue it out of dyuers places alleaged by mee be
                        
                           •
                        ore: as for example, out of Genesis, where the Latine text hath:Genesis, 49. 
                        The scepter of Iuda sh
                              ••
                            not be tak
                              •
                           n away, vntill hee come that is to

sent. The Hebrue hath, vntil Silo come, which Silo, Rabbi Kimhi prooueth by a long dyscourse,
                           Rab. Dauid. Kimhi, in lib. radicum.
                         to signifie so much, as Filius eius, hys sonne, that is, the sonne of God. The same they prooue by the place of Esay, where the Messias is called, germen Iehouae,
                        Esay, 4, ver. 2. the seede or sonne of Iehoua. Which the Chaldie Paraphrase termeth, the Messias of Iehoua.
                        
                           Tharg. in hunc locum.
                         They prooue the same also, out of diuers Psalmes, where Christ is called plainly the sonne of God, as where it is said:Psalm, 49.
                        He shall say vnto me, thou art my father, &c. I will put him, mine eldest sonne, more higher then all the Kings of the earth, &c. Iehoua said vnto me, thou art my son, this day haue I begotten thee, &c.Psalme, 2. Kisse the Thys is according to the Hebrue text. son ye Kings and Iudges of the earth, & happy are al they that place theyr hope in him.
Which last words can no way be vnderstoode of the Son of any man, for that it is written, Cursed is the man, that putteth his trust in man.
                        Ierem. 17. Wherefore Rabbi Ionathan, Rabbi Selomoth, Aben Ezar, and others, doe conclude by these and other places which they alleage, that the Messias must be the verie sonne of God.
                     And for the seconde point,The fift profe. they goe yet further, affirming, thys sonne to be Verbum Patris, the worde of God the Father. Which the fore-sayde Ionathan in his Chaldy Paraphrase, dooth expresse in many translations: as for example; where Esay sayth, Israel shal

be saued in Iehoua with eternall saluation, (which Iehoua signifieth Christ, as all men do confesse,) In the Chaldie paraphrase. Ionathan turneth it thus: Israell shall be saued by Gods word. So againe, where God sayth by Ose, I will saue the house of Iuda by I
                              •
                           houa their God:
                        Hose, 1, (which is by Christ,) Ionathan translateth it thus: I wyll saue Iuda by the worde of their God. In lyke manner where Dauid wryteth, Iehoua saide to my Lorde, sitte at my right hande, &c.
                        Psalme, 110. Ionathan expresseth it thus: Iehoua saide vnto hys word, sitte at my right hand. So Rabbi Isaac Arama writing vpon Genesis,
                           Rab. Isaac. com. in cap. 47. Gene.
                         expoundeth thys verse of the Psalme:Psalm, 106. verse, 20. 
                        he sent his word & healed them, &c. to be meant of Messias that shall be Gods word. And Rabbi Simeon the cheefe of all the Cabalists,
                           Rab. Simeon. Ben Iahai. com. in ca. 10. Gene.
                         vpon those words of Iob, I shall see God in my flesh,
                        Iob. 19. ver, 26 gathereth, that the worde of God shall take fleshe in a womans wombe. So that thys doctrine was nothing strange among the auncient Rabbines.
                     For further confirmation whereof, (seeing the matter is of so great importance) cō
                        sider what is recorded in a Treatise called Zoar, of high authoritie among the Iewes, where Rabbi Simeon that was last before alleaged,
                           Rab. Simeon in Zoar.
                         citeth a place out of old Rabbi Ibba, vpon these words in Deuteronomie, Ieho
                              ••
                            our Lord, is one Iehoua:
                        Deuter. 6. verse, 4. which wordes the

said auncient Rabbi Ibba, interpreteth thus: by the first Iehoua in this sentence,The blessed Trinitie prooued by an auncient Rabbine. (being the incommunicable name of God,) is signified (sayth hee) GOD the father, Prince of all things.
By the next words (our Lord) is signified God the sonne, that is fountaine of all Sciences. And by the seconde Iehoua in the same sentence, is signified God the holy Ghost, proceeding of them bothe. To all which is there added the word (One,) to signifie that these three are indiuisible. But this secrete shall not be reuealed vntill the comming of Messias. Hetherto are the words of Rabbi Ibba, reported in Zoar by Rabbi Simeon, where also the sayd Rabbi Simeon interpreteth these words of Esay, Holy, Holie, Holie, Lord God of Sabaoth: in thys manner.
Esay by repeating three times holy (sayth he) doth as much as if he had sayd. Holy Father, holie Sonne, and holie Spirit: which three holies, doe make but one onely Lord God of Sabaoth.
                     
                     Finally,The sixt proofe. I wyll conclude thys controuersie betweene the later Iewes and vs, with the authoritie of learned Philo, who liued in the very same time wyth Christ,
                           Phi. lib. 2. legat Ruff. li. 1. hist. 1.6 Eusebius in Chron.
                         & was sent Embassadour twyse to Rome, in the behalfe of his Nation in Alexandria; that is, first in the fifteene yeere of Tyberius the Emperour, which was three yeeres before Christes passion,

and the very same yeere wherin he was baptised by S. Iohn: and the second tyme about eyght yeeres after, to witt, in the fyrst yeere of the raigne of Caligula. This man that was the learnedest that euer wrote among the Iewes, (after the wryters of holie Scripture ceased) made a speciall Booke of the banishment of his Countrimen, wher he hath this discourse ensuing.
                     
                        
                           
                              Philo. lib. de exulibus.
                           What time may be appointed (saith he) for the returne home of vs banished Iewes, it is harde to determine. For by tradition wee haue, that wee must expect the death of an High Priest. But of those, some die quickly, and some liue longer. But I am of opinion, that thys High Priest shal be, the very word of God. Which shall be voyde of all sinne, both voluntarie, and inuoluntarie: whose father shall be God, and this word shall be that fathers wisedome, by which all things in this world were created. Hys heade shall be annoynted with oyle, and his kingdome shall florish and shine for euer.
This wrote Philo at that time, when he little imagined, that the same High Priest, whom he so much expected, and the same worde of God, whose kingdome he describeth, was now alreadie come into the world. And this shall suffise for our second consideration, what manner of Messias the Iewes did expect.
                  
                  
                     
                     The thyrd consideration.
                     NOwe in the thyrd place commeth to be considered,Whether Christ should change the Law of Moses. what authoritie and power the Messias should haue at his appearaunce vpon earth, and whether he should chaunge and abrogate the Law of Moses, or no? wher in there is no lesse controuersie betweene vs and the later Iewes, then in the former point of his diuinitie. For we holde with S. Paule,Gala, 3, & 4. Hebru. 7. that the Lawe of Moses was giuen vnto the Iewes but for a time, to entertaine that people withall,1. Corin, 10. and by the outwarde signes and ceremonies which it had, (whereof the most part, or all, prefigured Christ to come:) to be theyr Schoole-maister & leader to the times of fayth, wherein it should be abrogated, and a farre more perfect Law set down by Christ in place thereof.
                     This we prooue first, for that the Lawe of Moses was an imperfect Lawe,The Lawe of Moses imperfect. bringing nothing to perfection, as S. Paule well noteth;Hebrues, 7. Acts, 15. It was (as S. Peter saith) a burden-som Lawe, which the Iewes themselues were not able to beare, for the multitude of ceremonies therein contained. It was a carnall and seruile Lawe, consisting most in the externall. It was a Law of terror and feare,Gala. 3. more

then of loue and libertie of the spirit. It was a Lawe (as I said before) of signes and figures for things to come, & consequently to cease, whē those things which it prefigured shold come to be present.Deut, 15. It was a Lawe peculiar and proper for the Iewes alone, without respect of all the rest of the world:Deut, 13, & 14 Leuit. 5, & 23, Exodus, 23. Deut, 27. and the exercise therof, was allowed onely in the Countrie of Iurie; and that which is more, it was not permitted but in one place only of that Countrey, that is, in Ierusalem, whether euery man was bound to repaire three tymes a yeere, to wit, at the Pasqua, at the Pentecoste, and at the feast of Tabernacles: and in that place alone to make theyr sacrifices, and in no other Countrey or place besides.
                     Nowe then reasoneth the learned Diuine,Good reasons. if thys Lawe of Moses were for the Iewes and Iurie onely: howe could it serue for the time of the Messias, who was to be King, as well of the Gentiles as of the Iewes: and to rule all people in the worlde,Psal, 2,21,26. Esay, 2,11, 19. that should beleeue in him vnder one Lawe. If the exercise of this Lawe were allowable onely, and lawfull in Ierusalem: how coulde it possiblie be fulfilled by Christians, that are dispersed ouer all the world? As for example, hovve coulde they repayre to Ierusalem thrise euerie yeere? howe shoulde euery woman that should dwell in England or India, repaire to

Ierusalem for her purification after euerie child-birth,Leuit. 12. Exod, 13. Numb. 8. as by the Law of Moses she was commanded? Most euident is it then, which we said before, that thys Law was giuen but to endure for a time. And to vse S. Pauls owne wordes,Hebrues, 7. it was but introductio melioris spei, an introduction to a better hope. It was but an entertainment to that people, (which by theyr beeing among the Egiptians, were prone to idolatrie,) vntill Christ shold come and ordaine a perfect Law.The new law of Christ, and the perfections thereof. That is, a Lawe of spirit and internall affection: a Lawe of loue and libertie: a Lawe that shoulde be common to all men: serue for al Countries, tymes, places and persons: a Law that shold be written in the bowels of our harts, a Law that should be tollerable, easie, sweet, plaine, light, breefe, & flexible as well to the poore as to the rich: a Lawe (to conclude) that should consist in charitie.
                     This signified Moses, when he said to his people, after hee had deliuered the former Lawe vnto them:Deut. 18. 
                        The Lorde shall rayse vnto you a Prophet of your owne Nation, and from among your owne bretheren, as my selfe: hym shall you heare. As though he had saide: you shall heare me vntill he come, that must be a Law-giuer as my self: but yet of a more perfect Lawe: and therefore more to be hearde and obeyed. And then he addeth, who soeuer

shall refuse to heare the words of this Prophet, I my selfe will reuenge it saith the Lorde GOD. Which wordes can not be verified in anie other Prophet after Moses vntill Christ: for that of those Prophets, the Scripture sayth,Deuter, 34. 
                        There arose no Prophet like vnto Moses in Israell. Which is to be vnderstood, that they had no authoritie to be Law-makers, as Moses had, but were all bounde to the obseruation of that Lawe onely which Moses left, vntyll Christ came, whom Moses heere calleth a Prophet as himselfe: that is, a Law-maker, & exhorteth all men to heare and obey him.
                     Thys yet is made more playne by the prophecie of Esay, who sayth:Esay, 2. 
                        Out of Sion shall come a Lawe, and the word of God out of Ierusalem: which cannot be vnderstoode of Moses Law that had been published eyght hundred yeeres before thys was spoken,A newe Lawe prophecied. & that from the Mount Sinai, and not from Sion; But Christes Lawe began from Sion and Ierusalem, and from thence was spred into all the worlde. Which the same Esay fore-sawe when talking of the comming of the Messias he sayth:
In that day there shall be an Altar to God, in the midst of the Land of Egipt. And the tytle of the Lorde at the ende thereof, &c. And God shall be knowne to the Egiptians at that daie, and they shall honour him with sacrifices and oblations.Esay, 19.
                        
Which words coulde not

be verified in the olde Lawe of Moses, for that by that Lawe the Egiptians coulde haue neither Aultar nor Sacrifice: but at Christes comming it was fulfilled, when the Egiptians were made Christians, and enioyed both the Aultars and sacrifices that Christians do vse.
                     The same thing was fore-told by God in Malachie, where hee sayth to the Iewes and of the Iewish sacrifices.Malach. 1. 
                        I haue no pleasure in you, neither will I rec
                              •
                           iue oblations at your handes. For that from the vprising of the sunne,
                        The reprobation of the old Lawe, with a promise of a nevve. 
                        vnto the going downe therof, my name is great among the Gentiles, and they doe sacrifice vnto me euerie where, and doe offer vnto my name a pure oblation, saith the Lorde God of hostes. In which words we see first, a reprobation of the Iewishe sacrifice, and consequently of the Lawe of Moses, which dependeth principallie of that sacrifice. Secondly wee see, that among the Gentiles, there should be a pure manner of sacrifice, more gratefull vnto GOD then the other was, and such, as might be performed in euery place of the worlde, and not to be tyed to one place onely, as the Moisaicall Law and sacrifice was. And finally I wil conclude thys whole matter, with the expresse wordes of God himselfe, concerning the ceremonies and precepts of the old Lawe.Ezech. 20. 
                        Dedi eis praecepta non bona, & iudicia in quibus

non viuent. I gaue vnto them precepts that were not good, and iudgements wherin they shall not lyue. That is, they were not good to continue perpetually, nor shall they lyue in them for euer, but vntill the time by mee appointed: of which time hee determineth more perticulerly by Ieremie the Prophet in these words;Ieremie. 3. 
                        Behold, the daies shal come, and I wil make a newe Couenaunt or Testament with the house of Israell and Iuda:
                        A newe T
                              •
                           stament promised. 
                        not according to that Couenaunt which I made with your Fath
                              •
                           rs, when I brought them forth of the Lande of Egipt.
Where you see, that at the cōming of Christ into thys world, (for of him & hys byrth, hee talketh at large in thys Chapter) there shall be a newe Testament, contayning a different Law from that of the olde Testament, which was giuen to the Iewes at their going forth of Egipt.
                     Thus much then hetherto hath beene shewed,The summe of that which hath been said. that Christ in all ages was fore-told and promised: that hee shoulde be GOD; and that hys authoritie should be to change the Lawe of Moses, (that was giuen but for a tyme,) and to establishe a newe Lawe and Couenaunt, and a newe Testament of hys owne, that shoulde endure and continue for euer.
                  
                  
                     
                     The fourth consideration.
                     AND albeit these thinges be very wonderfull,All particulers fore-told of Christ. and sufficient to establish anie mans beleefe in the world, when he shall see them fulfilled, (which shall be the argument of my seconde Section:) yet resteth not the Scripture heere, but passeth further, & fore-telleth euery perticuler acte, accident & circumstaunce, that shall fall out of importance about the Messias in his comming, incarnation, byrth, lyfe, death, and resurrection. As for example; at what perticuler time & season he should appeare. Genesis, 49. verse, 10. That he should be borne of a Virgine.Math, 1. 
                        Esay 7. ver. 14. That the place of hys birth should be the Towne of Bethleem.Luke, 2. 
                        Mich. 5, verse 1. That at hys byrth, all the Infants rounde about Bethleem should be slaine for his sake.Math, 2, 
                        Ieremie, 31, verse, 15. That the Kinges of the East shoulde come and adore him,Math, 2, and offer Gold and other gyfts vnto him. Psalme, 71. verse, 10. That hee shoulde be presented by hys Mother in the Temple of Ierusalem.Luke, 2, 
                        Malach, 3, verse, 1. That he should 
                           •
                        lee into Egipt, and be recalled thence againe. Ose, 11. verse, 2. Esay, 19, verse, 1. That Iohn Baptist shoulde goe before him, and crye in the

                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
Desert. Esay, 40, verse, 3. Malac. 3. ver. 1.
                     
                     
                        Math, 5.After thys, that he should begin his own preaching with all humilitie, quietnes, and clemencie of spirit.Math, 4, & 8. Marke, 8. 
                        Esay, 42, verse, 2. That he should doe strange miracles, and heale all diseases. Esay, 29, verse, 8. and 35, verse, 5, & 61, verse, 1. That hee should die for the sins of all the world.Math, 27, 
                        Esay, 53, Daniel, 26. That he should be betrayed by his owne Disciple. Psalme, 40, verse, 10, and 54, verse, 14, and 108, verse, 8. That hee shoulde be solde for thirtie peeces of siluer.Math, 16, & 27 
                        Zacharie, 11, verse, 12. That with those thirtie peeces, there should be bought afterward a Field of pot-shardes.Math, 21, 7. 
                        Ieremie, 30. That hee should ryde into Ierusalem vpon an Asse before his passion. Zacharie, 9, verse, 9. That the Iewes shoulde beate and buffet hys face,Math, 26,67. and defile the same with spitting vpon him. Esay, 50, ver. 6. That they shoulde whyppe, rent and teare his bodie before they put him to death. Esay, 53, verse, 2, Psal, 37, verse, 18. That they should put hym to death among theeues and malefactors.Luke, 22. 
                        Esay, 53, verse, 12. That they should giue him vineger to drinke, deuide his apparrell, and cast lottes for his vpper garment.Math, 27, 
                        Psalme, 68, verse, 22, and 21, verse, 19. That he should rise againe from death the thyrde day.Math, 28, 
                        Psal, 15, verse, 19. Ose, 6, ver, 3. That he should ascend to heauen, & sitte at the right

hand of God his father for euer.Luke, 24, Acts, 7. 
                        Psalme, 67, verse, 19, and 109, verse, 1.
                     
                     All these particularities & a number more, were reuealed in Scripture touching the Messias, some foure thousande yeeres, some two thousand, and some one thousande, and the last of all, aboue foure hundred yeres before Christ was borne. Which if wee lay together, and doe consider withall, hovve exactlie they were fulfilled afterwarde in the person of Christ, as in the next Section shal be declared: if we adde also to this, that wee haue receiued these prophecies & predictions from a Nation that most of al other doth hate vs, and that the same are to be seene and read in theyr Bibles, euen worde for word as they are in ours; if you hold in memorie also, what inuincible proofes wer alleaged before in the second chapter, for the infallible truth and certaintie of those Hebrue Scriptures: you shall finde, that hardly any thing can be imagined for manifestation of a truth, before it come to passe, which God hath not obserued in fore-shewing the Messias.
                  
                  
                     The fift Consideration.
                     AND all these considerations are touching the Iewes. There remaineth somewhat

to be saide of the Gentiles;Manifestation of Christ to the Gentiles. who albeit they were to receiue theyr principall knowledge in thys affayre from the Iewish Nation, to whom the Messias was first and principally promised, and from whom the Gentiles had to expect both theyr Sauiour and hys Apostles, as also the Scriptures for testimonie and witnesse of them both, and finally, all their certaine knowledge & sound vnderstanding in the mysteries of Christ: yet had they also among themselues, some kinde of notice and fore-warning in thys matter, which beeing ioyned with that which I haue sette downe before of the Iewes, and examined at the light of Gods diuine prophecies before alleaged: it will make very much for confirmation of our Christian veritie. And therefore thys last consideration, shall be of the fore-knowledge of Gentiles in thys behalfe.
                     For better vnderstanding whereof, it is to be noted, that besides al knowledge of the Messias, that diuers Gentiles might haue by the Hebrue Scriptures, which (Chap, 2. as I haue shewed before,) were in the Greek language diuers ages before Christ was borne, or by the instruction or conuersation of the Iewes, with whom many Pagans did liue familiarlie: there remained three waies peculier to the Gentiles, whereby they receiued some

vnderstanding & fore-warning of this great mysterie.Three particuler waies wher by the Gentiles myght heare of christ. The first was, by tradition & writings of theyr auncestours. The seconde, by prophecies of theyr owne. The thyrde, by admonishment of theyr Idols and Oracles, especially when the time of Christes appearaunce drew neere.
                     And for the first way,The first way. it is euident, that as the Iewes receiued diuers things by succession from theyr fore-fathers, and they againe from Moses; and Moses frō the Patriarches, Iacob, Isaac, and Abraham, (who was the first man from whô that whole Nation proceeded, and in whom they were distinguished from all other people in the world:) so had the Gentiles and other Nations theyr succession also of doctrine and monuments,Tradition of learning among Iewes and Gentiles. euen from the beginning; albeit the lower they went, the more corrupt they were, and more obscured in diuine knowledge, by their exercise in Idolatrie. So we knowe that the Romans had theyr learning from the Graecians: the Graecians from the Egyptians: and the Egiptians from the Chaldeans, who were the first people that receiued instruction in diuine matters from Adam, Methusalem, Noe, and others of those first and auncient Fathers.
                     Nowe then it is to be considered,
                           Eusebius in Chron.
                         that by consent of Writers, there were three famous

men that liued together in those auncient tymes; to wit, Abraham,Abraham. (who descending from HEBER, was the father and beginner of the Iewes or Hebrues:) and with him Iob, and one Zoroastres,Iob. Zoroastres. that were not of that linage of Heber, but as we call them for distinctions sake, either Heathens or Gentiles, albeit that difference was not thē in vre. And of Iob, wee knowe by the testimonie of hys Booke, that hee was a most holy and vertuous man. Of Zoroastres, we know only, that he was greatly learned, and left testimonies there
                           ••
                         vnto his posteritie.
                     This Zoroastres liuing in Abrahams time, might (by account of Scriptures) see or speak wyth Noe. For Abraham was borne threescore yeres before Noe deceassed. And Noe was borne aboue fiue hundred yeeres before Methusalem died, which Methusalem had liued two hundred and fortie yeres with our first Father Adam, that had enioyed conuersation both with GOD and Angels. And thereby (no doubt) could tell many high and secret misteries, especially touching Christ, in whom all his hope for redemption of hys posteritie did consist. Which misteries and hidden knowledge, it is not vnlike, but that Abraham, Iob, Zoroastres and others, who liued at that time with them, might receyue at the thyrde hand, by Noe and his children,

I meane The Iewes haue a tradition, that Abraham serued Sem fyfteene yeeres in Chaldaea. Sem, Cham, and Iaphet, who had lyued before the fludde, and had seene Methusalem, which Methusalem lyued (as I sayd before) so many yeeres with Adam.
                     Heerehence it is, that in the wrytings of Zoroastres which are yet extant, 
                           See Clem. Alex.. lib. 1. strom. et Orig. lib. 6. contra. Celsum. et Procl. lib. 2. et 3 in Parm. Plato.
                         or recorded by other Authors in hys name, there be found very many plaine speeches of the Son of God, whom he calleth, Secundam mentem, the second minde. And much more is to be seene in the wrytings of Hermes Trismegistus, (who liued after in Egypt, and receyued hys learning frō thys Zoroastres:Trismegistus.) that these first Heathen Philosophers had manifest vnderstanding of thys seconde person in Trinitie, whom Hermes calleth:
                           Mercurius. Herm. in Paemād cap. 1, et deincepi
                         
                        The first begotten sonne of God: his onely sonne: his deere, eternall, immutable, and incorruptible sonne: whose sacred name is ineffable: those are hys words. And after him again amōg the Graecians,Graecians. were Orpheus, Hesiodus, and others, that vttered the like speeches of the sonne of God; as also the Platonists, whose wordes and sentences were too-long to repeate in thys place. But hee that wyll see them gathered together at large, let him reade eyther Origen against Celsus the Heathen, or els S. Cyril in his first booke against Iulian the Apostata. And thys shall suffice for thys fyrst way, whereby the Gentiles had vnderstanding

of Christ.
                     
                        The prophecies touching Christ among the Gentiles.For the second thing which I mentioned, is to be vnderstood, that among the Gentiles there were certaine Prophetisses, or women Prophets, called Sibyllae, which in the Greek tongue (as Lactantius gathereth) may signifie so much, as eyther Counsellers to God, or Reuealers of Gods councell.
                        
                           Lactan. lib. 1. di
                              
                                 •
                              i. instit. cap. 6 And these women, beeing indued (as it seemeth) with a certain spirit of prophecie, did vtter frō time to time, (though in such termes as most Gentiles vnderstoode them not,) most wonderfull perticularities of Christ to come, agreeing (as it were) wholy with the Prophets of Israell, or rather setting downe many thinges in more plaine & euident speech then did the other,Of the Sibyls. the one of them beginning her Greek meeter in these very words. Know thy God, which is the sonne of God, &c. An other of them maketh a whole discourse of Christ in Greeke verses called Accrostichi:
                        
                           Lact. lib. 4. instit. cap. 6. for that the beginning of euerie verse, is by some Letter appointed in order, forth of some one sentence that runneth through the whole. As for example: the sentence that passed through the beginning of those verses which nowe vvee talke of, was thys 
                           S. Augu. translateth all the verses, lib. 18. de ciu. Dei. cap. 23. 
                        Iesus, Christ, Sonne of God, Sauiour, Crosse. And there were so many verses in the whole discourse, as there are Letters in thys sentence. The totall argument

beeing, of the incarnation, life, death, glorie, and iudgement of the Sonne of God. And the last two verses of all the meeter, are thus. He that hath beene heere described by our Accrostike verses: is an immortall Sauiour, and a King, that must suffer for our sinnes.
                     
                     And for that these prophecies of the Sibylls are of meruailous importaunce to confirme the veritie of our Christian Religion,The Greeke verses of the Sibyls, of what importance & authoritie. and are alleaged often for that purpose, by the most graue and learned Fathers of the primatiue Church: as for example, by Iustinꝰ the Martyr, in hys Apologie for Christians; by Origen against Celsus; by Arnobius, & his Scholler Lactantius, against Gentiles; by S. Cyril, against Iulian the Apostata; by S. Augustine in hys Cittie of God; by Eusebius, and Constantine the Emperor, and other: I will say som-what in this place, for the authoritie and credite of these verses, least any man perhaps might imagine (as some Gentiles in olde tyme would seeme to doe) that they were deuised or inuented by Christians. And the most of my proofes shal be out of a learned 
                           See this Oration in Eusebiu. lib. 4. cap. 32. de vita Constantini. a
                                 •
                               the ende.
                         Oration, written in Latine by the afore-said Emperour, to a Councell of Prelates in his daies: wherein hee endeuoureth to shew, the vndoubted authoritie of these Sibyll prophecies, which he esteemed so much (after dilligent searche made

for theyr credite & sinceritie,) as they seeme to haue beene a great cause of hys constant zeale and feruour in Christianitie.
                  
                  
                     The first proofe for credite of the Sibylls verses.
                     FYrst then he sheweth, that these predictions of the Sibylls, could not be deuised or fayned by Christians, or made after the tyme of Christes natiuitie; for that Marcus Varro,
                           Varro, lib. de rebus diui. ad C. Caesarem. pont. max.
                         a most learned Romaine, who lyued almost a hundred yeeres before Christ, maketh mention at large of the Sibylls, (who in number he saith were ten) and of theyr wrytings, Countries, & ages: as also of the wryters and Authors, that before his tyme had left memory of them. And both he and Fenestella,
                           Fenest. cap. de 15. viris.
                         (an other Heathen) doe affirme, that the wrytinges of these Sibylls, were gathered by the Romaines from all parts of the world, (where they might be heard of,) and layde vppe with dilligence and great reuerence in the Capitole, vnder the charge and custodie of the High Priest & other Officers, in such sorte, as no man might see or reade them, but onely certaine Magistrates, called the Fiftine, and much lesse might any man come to falsifie or corrupt them.
                  
                  
                     
                     The second proofe.
                     SEcondly he sheweth, that Sibylla Erithraea, who made the former Acrostike verses of Christ, testifieth of her selfe, that shee lyued about sixe hundred yeeres after the flud of Noe, and her Countriman Apollidorus Erithraeus and Varro doe report, that shee lyued before the warre of Troy, and prophecied to the Grecians that went to that warre, that Troy should be destroyed.
                           Lactant. lib, 1 insti
                                 •
                              . cap. 6. Which was more then a thousande yeeres before Christ was borne. Cicero also, that was slaine more then fortie yeeres before Christes natiuitie,
                           Cicero.
                         translated into Latine, the former 
                           See Cicero of this Acrostike verses of Sibylla, lib. 2. de diuinatione.
                         Acrostike verses, as Cōstantine saith, which translation was to be seene in his workes, when Constantine wrote thys Oration: so that by no meanes they could be deuised or brought in by Christians.
                  
                  
                     The thyrde proofe.
                     THyrdlie he sheweth, that the same Cicero, in dyuers places of his works, besides the mention of these Acrostike verses, insinuateth also an other prophecie of Sibylla,

touching a Kyng that should ryse ouer al the world, where-with hymselfe & the Romans were greatly troubled: and therefore in one place, after a long inuectiue against his enemie Anthonie, that wold seeme to giue credite to that Prophecie: or rather as Cicero doth vrge against him, would haue had the same fulfilled in Iulius Caesar, he concludeth thus:
                           Cicero, lib, 2, de diuin, paulo post medium.
                         
                        Let vs deale with the Prelates of our religion, to alleage anie one thing rather out of the Bookes of Sibylla, then a KING, whom neyther the Gods nor yet men, can suffer heereafter to be in Rome.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cicero lib, 1, ep, fam, ep, 1,2,3 4,5,6,The like prophecie of Sibylla touching a King, is insinuated by the same Cicero, in hys first booke of Epistles to Lentulus: to wit, that 
                           See lib, 2, Oraculorum Sibyl.
                         when the Romans should restore a Kyng in Egypt by force, then shoulde ensue the vniuersall Kyng, that shold be Lorde ouer Romans and all other. Which prophecie being much vrged by Cato the Tribune, Epist. 5. against the restoring of He was father to Cleopatra. Ptolomaeus Auletes late King of Egypt, that for hys euil gouernment was expulsed by hys subiects, the matter was thought of such weight by al the Roman Senate,The fear which the Romains had of the vniuersall King, prophecied by Sibylla. (
                           •
                         meane the sequell of thys prophecie,) that whereas otherwise for manie respects, they were greatly inclined to haue restored the sayde Ptolomie: yet in regard of thys Religion, (as they called it) they

changed theyr mindes. But what? coulde they alter by thys the determination of God? No truely; for soone after, Kyng Ptolomie perceiuing the Senatours mindes to be altered, fled secretlie from Rome to one Gabiniꝰ that was Gouernour of Syria,
                           Dion, libro 39 histor.
                         and for fyue Millions of Gold that he promised him, he was by the force of Gabinius restored: & not long after was Christ borne, according to the meaning of the Sibyll prophecie.
                  
                  
                     The fourth proofe.
                     FOurthly, the sayd Emperour Constantine prooueth the authoritie of these Sibylls verses, for that Augustus Caesar, before our Sauiour Christ was borne, had such regarde of them, that hee layde them vppe in more straighter order then before, (according as Suetonius a Heathen, in hys lyfe reporteth,) vnder the Aultar of Apollo,
                           Sueto. tranq, cap 3, de vit. Augu.
                         in the hyll Palatine: where no man might haue the sight of them but by speciall lycence; which lycence Constantine prooueth that Virgill the Poet had, for that he was in high fauour with Augustus.The prophecies of Sibylla alleaged by Virgil. And therefore in a certaine Eclogue or composition of verses, that hee made in prayse of a young chylde named Saloninus, newely borne to Asinius Pollio, Augustus

great freende, (or as other take it,) of Marcellus a little boy, that was Nephew to Augustus by his sister Octauia; or rather of thē both, for adulation of Augustus: hee applyeth (I say) to one or both of these young Infants, the whole prophecie, which hee had read in the verses of Sibylla, touching the birth of Christ, & of the peace, grace, & golden world that should come with him. Vpon which subiect he beginneth thus.
                     
                        
                           Virgil. Eclog. 4,Vltima Cumaei venit iam temporis aetas:
                     Magnus ab integro saeculorum nascitur ordo:
                     
                        Christes pre-ordination.Iam redit & virgo: rediunt Saturnia regna.
                     
                        That is, nowe is come the last age prophecied by Sibylla, called Cumaea: now cō
                           meth to be fulfilled the great ordinance and prouidence of God, appointed from the beginning of the worlde, (these were Sibylles words:) nowe commeth the Virgine, and the first golden daies of Saturnus shal return againe.
                     
                     Thus much translated Virgil out of Sibylla, touching the eternall determination of God, for Christes comming into this world: as also of hys Mother the Virgine: and of the infinite blessinges that shoulde appeare wyth him. Nowe ensueth in the same Poet, what Sibylla had sayde for Christes actuall natiuitie.
                     
                        
                        Iam noua progenies caelo dimittitur alto:Christes byrth.
                        
                        Chara Deum soboles. &c.
                     
                     
                        Now a newe progenie or of-spring is sent downe from Heauen: the dearely beloued issue or chylde of the Gods. And note here, that Sibylla sayd plainly:
Chara Dei soboles, the deerely beloued sonne of God, and not of Gods; but that Virgill would follow the style of hys time. And thirdly, hee setteth downe out of Sibylla, the effect and cause of thys sonne of Gods natiuitie, in these words.
                     
                        Te duce, si qua manent, sceleris vestigia nostri:Christes cause of comming.
                        
                        Irrita perpetua, soluent formidine terras.
                     
                     
                        That is, thou beeing our leader, or Captaine: the remnant of our sins shall be made voyde, or taken away, and shall deliuer the world for euer from feare for the same.
                     
                     These are Virgils wordes translated (as I sayd) out of Sibylla. And nowe consider you in reason, whether these prophecies might be applyed (as Virgil applyed thē) to those poore chyldren in Rome, or no, who dyed soone after thys flattery of Virgill, wythout dooing good, eyther to themselues or to others? Albeit (perhaps) in thys point, the Poet be to be excused, in that he beeing not able to imagine what the Sibyl should mean: made hys aduantage thereof in applying the same to the best pleasing of Augustus.
                     These then are the proofes, which Constantine

vsed for the credite and authoritie of the Sibyll verses. And of Sibylla Erithraea in perticuler, that made the Accrostike verses before mentioned, of Christes death & passion: he concludeth in these wordes;
                           Constantines opinion of the spirit of Sibylla. Erythraea, orat, ad caetum, Sanct, cap. 18 
                        These are the things which fell from heauen, into the minde of this Virgine to fore-tell. For which cause, I am induced to account her for blessed, whom our Sauiour did vouchsafe to chuse for a Prophet, to denounce vnto the worlde, his holie prouidence towardes vs. And we may consider in thys whole dyscourse of Constantine, for  authoritie of these verses. Fyrst, that he vseth onely the testimony of such wryters, as lyued before Christ was borne, or Christians once  thought vppon. Secondly, that hee vseth these proofes to no meaner audience, then to a Councell & congregation of learned men.  Thyrdly, that he was an Emperour which vseth them: that is, one that had meanes to see and examine the originall Copies in the Romaine  Treasury. Fourthly, for that hee had great learned men about him,
                           Lactantius.
                         who were skilfull, and would be diligent in the searche of such an antiquitie of importaunce: especially Lactantius, that was Maister to his sonne Crispus, and who most of any other Author, reciteth and confirmeth the sayd Sibyls verses: and Eusebius Caesariensis, that wrote the Ecclesiasticall hystorie and 
                           See Eusebi. lib. 4. cap. 32, de vita Constant. how this Oration was fi
                                 •
                              st written in latine and translated into Greeke.
                         recorded thys

Oration of Constantine therein. And finally we may consider, that Constantine was the first publique Christian Emperour, & liued within three hundred yeeres after Christ, when the Recordes of the Romans were yet whole to be seene. He was a religious, vvise, and graue Emperour: and therefore woulde neuer haue bestowed so much labor, to confirme such a thing, at such a time, to such an audience; had not the matter been of singuler importance. And thus much of the second point, touching Prophets among the Gentiles.
                  
                  
                     Of the confessyon of Oracles concerning Christes comming.
                     THere remaineth onely a word or two to be spoken of the thirde; which is, of the confession of deuils and Oracles, concerning Christes comming; especially when the time of hys appearance drew neere, and that they beganne to fore-tell his power and vertue. Wherin as I might alleage diuers examples, recorded by the Gentiles themselues: so for that I haue been some what long in the former points, and shall haue occasion to saie more of this matter in another place heereafter: I wyll touch onely heere two Oracles

of Apollo concerning thys matter. The one wherof, was to a Priest of his owne, that demaunded him of true Relgion, and of God; to whom he aunswered thus in Greeke.The fyrst Oracle. 
                        O thou vnhappie Priest, why doost thou aske mee of God, that is the father of all thinges: and of this most renoumed Kings deere & onely sonne, and of the spirit that containeth all &c. Alas,
                        
                           Suidas in Thulis. et Porphy. et Plutarch. de oracul.
                         
                        that spirit will enforce me shortly, to leaue thys habitation and place of Oracles.
                     
                     The other Oracle was to Augustus Caesar,The second Oracle. euen about the very time that Christ was ready to appeare in flesh. For whereas the sayd Emperor now drawing into age,
                           Suidas in vita August. Niceph. lib. 1. hist. cap. 17. would needes goe to Delphos, and there learne of Apollo, who should raigne after hym, and what should become of things when he was dead; to which demaund, Apollo for a great space wold make no aunswere, notwithstanding: Augustus had beene very liberall, in making the great sacrifice called Hecatombe. But in the ende, when the Emperour began to iterate hys sacrifice againe, and to be instant for an aunswer: Apollo, (as it were) inforced, vttered these strange words vnto him. An Hebrue childe, that ruleth ouer the blessed Gods, commaundeth me to leaue this habitation, and out of hand to gette me to hell. But yet doe you depart in silence from our Aultars. Thus much was Apollo inforced to vtter of hys

owne miserie, & of the comming of the Hebrue boy that shold put him to banishment. But yet the deceytfull spirit to holde stil hys credite, would not haue the matter reuealed to many. Whereupon, Augustus falling into a great musing with himselfe, what thys aunswere might import: returned to Rome, and builded there an Aultar in the Capitole,
                           Niceph. lib. 1. hist cap. 17. wyth thys Latine inscription (as Nicephorꝰ affirmeth) Ara primogeniti Dei: The Aultar of Gods first begotten Sonne.
                     Thus then haue I declared, howe that the comming of Gods sonne into the world,The conclusion of thys first Section. was fore-tolde both to Iewe and Gentile, by all meanes that possibly in reason myght be deuised; that is, by prophecies, signes, figures, ceremonies, tradition, and by the confession of the deuils themselues. Not onelie that hys comming was fore-tolde, but also, why, and for what cause he was for to come, that is, to be the onely Sauiour of the world: to die for the sinnes of all men: to ordayne a new Law, & more perfect Common-wealth. Howe also he was to come: to wit, in mans flesh: in likenes of sinne: in pouertie & humilitie. The time likewyse of his appearance was prefigured, together with the manner of hys byrth, life, actions, death, resurrection, and ascention. And finally, nothing can be more desired for the fore-knowledge of any

one thing to come: then was deliuered and vttered concerning the Messias, before that euer Christ or Christians were talked of in the world. Nowe then remaineth it to consider & examine,The argument of the two sections following. whether these particularities, fore-told so long agoe of the Messias to come, doe agree in Christ, whō we acknowledge for the true Messias. And thys shall be the subiect or argument of all the rest of our speech in thys Chapter.
                  
               
               
                  How the former predictions were fulfilled in our Sauiour Christ, at his being vpon earth. SECT. 2.
                  ALbeit in the points before recited, which are to be fulfilled in the Messias at hys comming, wee haue some controuersie and dysagreement with the Iewe, as hath beene shewed; yet our principal contention in thē all,Our controuersie wyth Gentiles. is wyth the Gentiles and Heathen, that beleeue no Scriptures. For that in dyuers of the former Articles, the Iewe standeth wyth vs, and for vs; and offereth hys life in defence thereof, as farre forth as if he were a Christian. In so much, that the Gentile oftentimes, is inforced to meruaile, when he seeth a people, so extreamely bent one against another,

as the Iewes are against Christians: and yet doe stande so peremptorilie in defence of those verie principles, which are the proper causes of theyr disagreement.
                  But hereunto the Iewe maketh aunswer,Our controuersie wyth the Iewes. that hys dysagreement from vs, is in the application of those principles. For that in no wise he will allowe, that they were, or may be verified in Iesus. And heerein he standeth against vs, much more obstinately then doth the Gentile. For that the Gentile, as soone as he commeth once to vnderstand and beleeue the prophecies of Scripture, hee maketh no doubt or difficultie in the application thereof: for that he seeth the same most euidently fulfilled in our Sauiour Christ. Which is the cause, that few or no Gentiles since Christes appearaunce, haue come to be Iewes, but that presently also they passed ouer to bee Christians.
                  But the Iewe by no meanes will be mooued to yeelde,The obstinacie of the Iewes. albeit hee haue neither scripture, nor reason, or probabilitie for hys defence. Which among other things, is a verie greate argument to proue, that Iesus was the true Messias indeede, seeing that among the markes of the true Messias sette downe by Gods Prophets, thys was one: that he shold be refused of the Iewish Nation. Heerehence a
                        •
                     e those wordes of the holy Ghost so long

before vttered;Psalm, 118. 
                     The stone which the 
                     The Iewes are the builders, who take vpon them to build Gods house. Math, 21. Esay, 6. Deute, 28, 
                     builders refused, is made the head stone of the corner, this is doone by God, and is meruailous in our eyes. Heerehence is that great complaint of Esay, touching the incredulitie and obstinacie of his people, against their Messias at his comming, which Moses also long before Esay expressed most effectually.
                  It maketh then, not a little for our cause (gentle Reader,The Iewes obstinacie against vs, a great argument for vs.) that the Iewish Nation is so wilfully bent against vs: and that they refused Christ so peremptorily at hys beeing among them. For whom soeuer that Nation should receiue and acknowledge: it were a great argument by scripture, that hee were not indeede the true Messias. But yet to demonstrate to the worlde what little shewe of reason they haue, in standing thus against theyr owne saluation, and in refusing Christ as they doe: I will in as great breuitie as I may, runne ouer the cheefe poynts that passed at hys beeing vpon earth, and therby examine by the testimonies of his greatest enemies, whether the fore-sayd prophecies and all other signes, which haue beene from the beginning, to fore-tell vnto vs the true Messias, were fulfilled in hym and his actions, or no.
                  And for that the matters are many and dyuers, that will come herei
                        •
                      to be handle
                        ••
                     
                     
I wyl for order sake,The deuision of thys section into foure cō
                        siderations. reduce all to foure considerations. Whereof the first shal be, touching the tyme fore-prophecied of the comming of Messias, & whether the same agreed with Christes natiuitie or no. The seconde shall be of diuers particulars that passed in Christes incarnation, byrth, circumcision, & other accidents, vntill the time that he began to preach. The third shall be of hys life, conuersation, myracles, & doctrine. The fourth and last, shall be of his passion, death, resurrection, and ascention. In all which (as I said before) I wyll vse no one Authour or testimonie of our owne side,The testimonies heer
                           •
                         vsed. for approouing any thing that is in controuersie between vs: but all shall passe by tryall, eyther of theyr owne scriptures, or of manifest force and consequence of reason, or els, by expresse recorde of our professed enemies.
                  
                     The fyrst Consideration.
                     FOR the first then concerning the tyme,The tyme appoynted. which is the principall and head of al the rest: it is to be noted, that by consent of all Writers, both Pagan, Iewish and Christian, IESVS, (whom we beleeue and confesse to be true CHRIST) was borne the twentie-fiue day of December, in the ende of the

fortie-one yeere of the raigne of the Emperour Augustus Caesar, which was fifteene yeeres before hys raigne ended. Also in the beginning of the thirtie-three yeere of Herods raigne in Iurie, which was foure yeeres and more before hys death. And from the beginning of the worlde, as 
                           See Eusebius in Chron.
                         some account, foure thousand, one hundred, & ninetie-nine. And as others doe account it, foure thousand, foure-score, and nyne, for that in thys poynt betweene the Hebrues and the Graecians, there is a difference of some litle more then a hundred yeeres, concerning theyr reckoning.
                     The state of the worlde at Christes natiuitie, was this.The generall state of the world at Christes comming. The three Monarchies of the Assyrians, Persians, and Graecians, were past ouer, and ended: & the Romains were entered into the fourth, that was greater then any of the rest, according to the prophecie of Daniell,Daniel, 2. fyue hundred yeeres before. Octauius Caesar, surnamed Augustus,
                           Sueton, tranq. et Aurel. victor. et ali
                                 •
                              . in vita Augusti.
                         after fiue ciuil warres by himselfe waged, and after infinite broyles and bloodshed in the worlde, raigned peaceably alone for many yeeres together: and in token of an vniuersall peace ouer all the earth, hee caused the Temple gates of Ianus to be shut, according to the custome of the Romans in such cases; albeit thys had happened but twice before, from

the building of Rome vnto that tyme. And the very same day that Christ was borne in Iurie, Augustus commaunded in Rome (
                           Oros. lib. 6. his.. cap. 22. as afterward was obserued) that no man shold call hym Lorde, thereby to signifie the free libertie, rest, ioy, and securitie wherein all men were after so long miseries, which by continuall warres the worlde had suffered.
                     By thys we gather first,The fyrst proofe. that thys tyme of Christes birth, agreed exactly with the prophecie so long before sette down in Daniell,The Romaine Monarchie. (who lyued in the first Monarchie,) that after hys tyme there shoulde be three Monarchies more,Daniel, 2. and the last biggest of all: at whose appearing the Messias shoulde come, and builde vppe Gods kingdome throughout all the world.
                     Secondly, we see that fulfilled,The seconde proofe. which Esay the Prophet, aboue a hundred yeeres before Daniell, fore-told that at the comming of Christ,The peace of all the world. Esay, 32, ver, 18. and 9. ver, 6,7. 
                        people shoulde sitte in the beautie in peace. And againe; there shoulde be no ende of peace. And yet further: hee shall bee Prince of peace. And King Dauid long before hym againe: In his daies there shal rise iustice, and aboundance of peace.
                        Psalm, 71. Which thing, though especially it be to be vnderstood, of the internall peace & tranquilitie of our mindes and soules: yet considering that externall peace also was necessary for a tyme, for the quiet

planting & publishing of Christes Gospell: & seeing that the same was brought to passe most miraculously vpon the suddaine, when in reason men might least expect the same, for the infinite warres wherein the worlde a lyttle before had beene: and by reason of the Romaine Monarchie so freshlie established, (which in theyr beginnings are wont to be troublesome:) thys peace (I say) can not be but a great argument, that thys was the proper tyme of the Messias hys comming. And thus much for the state of the worlde in generall.
                     
                        The thyrde proofe.And nowe for the perticuler state of Iurie at Iesus natiuitie, thus it was: according as Iosephus the Iew,The Scepter of Iuda. (who was borne wythin fiue yeeres after Christes passion) describeth the same. One Herod a stranger, whose Father called 
                           His Grandfather was a Sextane in Apollos temple, and his father was brought vppe among theeues in Idumaea.
                           
                              Eusebius. lib. 1. cap. 6. ex Aphricano. Ioseph. lib. 14. antiq. cap. 2.
                         Antipater, came out of Idumaea, was risen to acquaintaunce and fauour wyth the Romans, partly by hys said fathers meanes, who was, (as Iosephus wordes are) a well monied man, industrious, and factious: and partly by hys owne dilligence and ambition, beeing of himselfe, both wittie, beautifull, and of excellent rare qualities. By which commendations, he came at length to marry the Daughter of Hyrcanus King of Iurie, that was descended linially of the house of Dauid, and Trybe of Iuda. And by this mariage,

obtained of hys Father in Lawe to be Gouernour of the Prouince of Galilie, vnder hym. But Hyrcanus afterwardes falling into the hands of the Parthyans, that caryed him into 
                           ••
                        rthya: Herode ranne awaie to Rome,The first rising of Herode Ascolonita. and there by the speciall helpe & fauour of Anthony, that ruled in cōpany together with Octauiꝰ, he obtained to be created King of Iurie, without any tytle or interest in the world. For that not onely his sayd Father in Law Hyrcanus, was yet aliue in Parthia: but also his younger brother Aristobulus, and three of hys sonnes named Antigonus, Alexander, and Aristobulus, & dyuers others of the bloode royall in Iurie.
                     Herode then, hauing procured by these meanes to be King of Iurie:
                           Iosephus. lib. 15. antiq. cap. 9.11. procured fyrst to haue in hys hands the fore-said King Hyrcanꝰ, & so put him to death: he also brought to the same ende, hys younger brother Aristobulus, and hys three sonnes likewyse.The most horrible murders committed by Herode. He put to death also, hys owne Wife Mariamnes, that was King Hyrcanus Daughter, as also Alexandra her Mother: and soone after two of hys owne sonnes, which he had by the sayde Mariamnes, for that they were of the blood royall of Iuda.
                           Libr
                                 •
                              . 17. cap. 10. And a little after that againe, he put to death hys thyrd sonne named Antipater. He caused also to be slaine at one time,
                           Libro. 15. cap. 1 fortie of the cheefest noble men

of the Trybe of Iuda. And as Phylo the Iewe wryteth (that liued at the same time wyth hym) he put to death all the Sanhedrin,
                        
                           Philo lib. de tempore.
                         that is, the seauentie and two Senatours of the tribe of Iuda, that ruled the peo
                           •••
                        . He kylled the cheefe of the sect of the Pharisies. He burned the Genealogies of all the Kings and Princes of the house of Iuda:
                           Ioseph. lib, 14. cap. 2. & caused one Nicholaus Damascenus an Historiographer that was hys seruaunt, to drawe out a petidegree for hym and his lyne, as though he had descended from the auncient Kings of Iuda. He translated the High priest-hood & solde it to strangers.A patterne of an ambicious Tyrant. And finally, hee so rased, dyspersed, and mangled the house of Iuda: as no one iote of gouernment, dignitie, or principalitie remained therin. And when he had doone all thys, thē was IESVS of the same house and line of Iuda, borne in Bethleem, the proper Cittie of Dauid, which Dauid was the founder and first Authour of Regalitie in Iuda.
                     Nowe then, consider the prophecie of Iacob,The prophecie of Iacob touching the scepter of Iuda. concerning the perticuler tyme of Christes appearaunce, almost two thousand yeeres before these things fell out.Gene. 49, 
                        Come hether my children, (said he) that I may tell you the things which are to happē in the later daies. &c. The Scepter shall not be taken from Iuda, vntill he come, who is to be sent: and he shall be

the expectation of Nations. Which prophecie, that it was fulfilled nowe at Christes natiuitie, when Herode had extinguished all gouernment in Iuda, no man can denie, that wyll acknowledge the thinges sette downe before, which are recorded by Writers both of that tyme, and of the Iewish Nation and Religion themselues. And that it neuer was fulfilled from Dauids daies,That the scepter neuer failed in Iuda vntyll Herode came. (who began the gouernment of the house of Iuda) vntill thys tyme, appeareth plainely by all Hystories & Records, both diuine & prophane. For that from Dauid,1, Reg, 16. (who was the first King) vnto Zedechias that was the last, and died in the captiuitie of Babylon:4. Reg. 29. Ierem, 37. the Scripture sheweth howe all the Kinges descended of the house of Iuda. And during the time of theyr captiuitie in Babylon, (which was seauenty yeres) the Iewes were alwaies permitted to chuse themselues a Gouernour of the house of Iuda,
                           Thalm. in tract. Sanhed. ca. Dine
                                 •
                               Manmonoth. Rab. Moses Egip. in praesat.
                         whom they called RESCHGALVTA. And after theyr delyuerie from Babylon,
                           Maimonim. Esd. l. 1. ca. 1.2.3 Mach. lib. 1. ca
                                 •
                              
                            2.3. Zorobabel was theyr Captaine of the same Trybe: and so others after him, vntyll you come to the Macchabees, who vvere both Captaines and Priestes:
                           Rab. Kimhi. com. in Agg. Ioseph. lib. 13. 
                              
                                 ••
                              
                            14, antiq,
                         for that they were by the mothers side, of the Tribe of Iuda, and by the fathers side, of the Trybe of Leui, as Rabbi Kimhi holdeth. And from these men downe to Hyrcanꝰ & Aristobulus

whom Herod slew: there continued stil the same lyne, as Iosephus declareth. So that by thys prophecie it is euident, that Iesus was borne at the proper tyme appointed for the Messias, when there was neither Kyng nor Captaine, nor High Priest, nor Counsellour, nor any one Gouernour of the house & tribe of Iuda, left in Iurie.
                     
                        The fourth proofe.An other prophecie there is, no lesse euident then the former, wherein it is affirmed, that the Messias shold come before the second Temple of Ierusalem,The destruction of the second Temple. (that was builded by Zorobabel after the Iewes were returned from theyr captiuitie in Babylon,) shoulde be destroyed by the Romaines. For better vnderstanding whereof, it is to be noted, that the Temple of Ierusalem was builded twice;3, Reg, 6. & 7. 2, Chron 3. Eusebius in Chron. Clem. lib. 1. strom.
                         fyrst by Salomon, which lasted about foure hundred and fortie-two yeeres; and then it was burned & destroyed by Nabuchodonozor King of Babylon. Wherefore about seauentie yeeres after, it was builded again by Zorobabel,4, Reg, 25. 1. Esdras, 1, 3, 4. who reduced the Iewes from Babylon, and so it continued, vntill it was destroyed the second time by Tytus, son to Vespasian the Romaine Emperour, about fortie and sixe yeres after our Sauiour Christ his ascention. At what time it had lasted frō Zorobabel almost sixe hundred yeeres: and from Salomon, aboue a thousand.
                     
                        And as in the time of the seconde building, the people of Israell were poore,1. Esdras. 5. and 6. and much afflicted in respecte of theyr late banishment, (though much assisted to thys worke by the liberalitie and munificencie of Darius King of Babylon:The building of the second Temple, lesse gorgeous then the fyrst.) so was the building and workemanshyppe of thys seconde Temple, nothing comparable, for excellencie to the first, which was builded by Salomon,1. Esdras. 5. when the Iewes were in the flower of theyr glorie and riches. Thys testifieth Aggeus the Prophet, who was one of the builders, and he testified the same to Zorobabel and to the rest of those that were with hym, by Gods owne appointment, in these words,Agge. 2. 
                        The word of God was made to Aggeus the Prophet. Tell Zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel Captaine of Iuda, and Iesus the sonne of Iosedec high Priest, and the rest of the people. Who is there left of you, that sawe this Temple in his first glorie, (before our transmigration, and what saie you to this, which nowe we see? is it not in our eyes, as though it were not at all? That is, is it not as though it were a thing of nothing, in comparison of the former Temple, which Salomon builded?
                     Thus saide Aggeus by Gods commission, of the materiall building of thys seconde Temple. And yet to comfort the Iewes with all, he was cōmaunded presently in the same

Chapter to say thus.Agge. 2. 
                        Comfort thy selfe Zorobabel, & comfort thy self Iesu thou son of Iosedec high Priest, and comfort your selues all ye people of the earth, saith the Lorde God of hostes: doe yee the thinges which I couenaunted with you, when yee came forth of the Lande of Egipt, and feare not, for that my spirit shall be among you. Thus saith the Lorde God of hostes: 
                        This he sayd for that the three Monarchies ensued, wherin there was continuall warre and blood-shed. 
                        a little time yet remaineth, when I will moue both heauen and earth, both sea and land, with al Countries in the world. And then shall come the DESIRED OF ALL NATIONS; and I will fill his house (or Temple) with glory, sayth the Lord God of hostes. Siluer is mine, and golde is myne, saith the Lorde of hostes: great shal be the glory of this last house or temple, more then of the first, saith the Lorde God of hostes. Hetherto are the words of God by Aggeus, and the often repetition, of the Lorde God of hostes, is to signifie the certaintie and great weight of the matter promised.
                     Nowe consider then, that where as God had saide immediatly before, that this second Temple was nothing in respect of the fyrst, for pompe and riches of the materiall building, (which the olde men in the booke of Esdras do testifie by theyr weeping,1. Esdras. 3. (whē they sawe thys second and remembred the fyrst) yet nowe God sayth, that Gold and Siluer is his owne: (as though he made no account of

the aboundance thereof in the former Temple, or of the want of the same in thys,) and that notwithstanding the pouertie of the seconde building, yet, shall it be fylled and replenished with glorie: and that in such sort, as it shall farre passe in glorie the former: and that shall be, as both heere is expressed, & other where most plainlie,) by the comming of our Sauiour Thys was fulfilled when Christ was personally, and taught in the Temple. Luke, 1,2, 19. Math, 21, 26. &c. Christ into the second Temple, which shall be a greater dignitie, then anie dignitie whatsoeuer was founde in the fyrst building of Salomons Temple.
                     Concerning which poynt,
                           Prerogatiues of the first Temple.
                           
                              Rab Samuel tract. Sanhed. in Thalm. Heirosol. Rab. Aba in lib. dierum.
                           
                         it is to be considered, that the learned Iewes, besides the materiall difference of building before mentioned, doe note fiue things of great importaunce to haue beene wanting in the second Temple, which were in the first. To wit, the fire sent from heauen to burne to Holocaustes; The glory of God (or Angels) appearing  among the images of Cherubines  that stood in the Temple; The manifest inspiration  of Gods spirit vpon Prophets, (for that prophecie fayled in the seconde Temple;) The presence of the Arke; and last of  all Urim & Thumim. All which great wants  and differences, notwithstanding, God saith as you see, that the glory of thys second temple shall be much greater then the first, by the cōming of Christ into the same. Which

thing, Malachie that liued at the same time when the seconde Temple was in building confirmeth more expresly, in these wordes:Malachie. 3. 
                        Beholde, I send my 
                        Thys Christ interpreted of S. Iohn Baptist, Math, 11. 
                        Angel, and he shal prepare the way before my face. And straight after, shal come to this Temple, the Lorde or Ruler whom ye seeke, and the MESSENGER OF THE TESTAMENT whom you desire. Behold, he cōmeth saith the Lord of hostes, and who can imagine the day of his comming? or who can stand or abide to see him? for he shal be as a purging fire, &c.
                     
                     By all which is made euident, that Christ must come and appeare in the second Temple before it be destroyed, (as Iesus did,) and therefore he cannot be nowe to come, seeing the sayde Temple was destroyed aboue one thousand and fiue hundred yeeres past, by the Romaines, as hath beene saide. Which destruction and finall desolation, was prophecied by Daniel, to insue soone after the byrth and passion of Christ, in these wordes.D
                              •
                           niel. 9. The seconde Temple to be destroyed presently after Christes passion. 
                        After sixtie and two hebdomades, Christ shal be slaine: and a people with their Captaine to com, shall destroy the Cittie, and the Sanctuarie, and the ende thereof shall be vastitie or spoyle. And after the warre ended, there shall ensue the appointed desolation. Which prophecie to haue fallen out lytterally about fortie yeeres after Iesus was put to death, when Ierusalem was

destroyed, and the Temple ouerthrowne by Titus; the storie of Iosephꝰ the learned Iew,
                           Ioseph. de bello Iudaico lib. 6. who was Captain against Titus in that war, dooth manifestly and at large declare.
                     And for that we haue made mention here of Daniels prophecie,The fyft proofe. The 72. Hebdomades. cōcerning the particuler tyme of Christes cōming & of his death, which confirmeth the purpose wee treate of so perspicuously, as nothing can be said more euident: it shall not be amisse, to examine the same before we passe any further. For better conceiuing whereof, it is to be vnderstood, that this Greeke worde Hebdomada, (signifieng seauen) doth some-time import a weeke or seauen daies, according to our cō
                        mon vse,Two kindes of weekes. and then it is called in Scripture Hebdomada dierum, a weeke of daies: as in Daniel the tenth Chapter, and the seconde verse; where the Prophet sayth of himselfe, that he did mourne three weekes of dayes. But at other tymes, it signifieth the space of seauen yeeres, and is called in scripture Hebdomada annorum, a weeke of yeeres. As in Leuiticus where it is sayd;
                           Leui. 25. vide etiam cap. 23. et alibi passim.
                         
                        Thou shalt number vnto thee seauen weekes of yeres, that is, seauen times seauen, which make fortie and nyne yeeres.
                     
                     Nowe then it is certaine, that Daniell in the prophecie before alleaged, where he assigneth sixtie-two weekes to the tyme of

Christes death, could not meane vveekes of daies: for that hee appointeth onely seauen weekes, to the rebuilding of the Cittie of Ierusalem, of the Temple, and of the walles about; which were not ended but in fortie & nine yeeres after, as may be gathered by the bookes of Esdras: which fortie-nine weekes, doe make iust seauen weekes of yeeres.
                           Libro. 1. et 2. And therefore it is certaine, that such Hebdomades of yeeres, are meant heere by Daniell in all the prophecie.
                     Fyrst then, when the Angell came to comfort hym, and to open vnto him secrets for the time to come: he sayde these words;Daniel, 9. verse, 23. 
                        Marke my speeche and vnderstande the vision. The seauentie hebdomades, or we
                              •
                           kes, are shortned, (or hastened) vppon thy people, and vppon thy holy Cittie: to the 
                              •
                           nd all preuarication and sinne may take an ende, and iniquitie be blotted out, and euerlasting iustice be brought in place thereof: to the ende that visions and prophecies may be fulfilled,
                        Ieremie, 25. and 29. 
                        & the HOLY OF HOLIES, may be annointed. In which words, it seemeth that the Angell did allude by naming seauentie,Why the Angell named 70, Hebdomades in thys place. vnto the seauentie yeeres of captiuitie, prophecied by Ieremie: after which ended, the people shoulde be deliuered from theyr temporall bondage in Babylon. And therefore Daniell nowe beeing in that place, and perceiuing the same time to

be expired; prayed to GOD with great instance, to fulfill hys promise made by Ieremie. Whereto the Angel aunswered, that it should be doone. And as after the expiration of seauentie yeeres, God was nowe to deliuer them from the bodily captiuitie of Babylon: so was he also after seauentie Hebdomades more, to deliuer them from bondage of sinne and preuarication, and that by the annoynted MESSIAS, which is indeede the Holie of all Holies.
                     
                     Thys (I say) may be the reason of naming seauentie Hebdomades, thereby to allude to the number of the seauentie yeres of that Babylonicall seruitude. For that immediatly after, the Angell appointeth the whole exact number, to be threescore & nyne Hebdomades, that is, seauen to the building of the Cittie and Temple, and sixtie-two from that to the death of Christ, in these words.Daniell, 9. verse, 25. 
                        Know thou & marke, that from the end of this speech, to the time that Ierusalem shall be builded, and vnto Christ the Captaine, there shall bee hebdomades seauen, and hebdomades sixtie two:
                        The exact nū
                           ber of weekes from the building of the second Temple, to the death of Christ, 62. 
                        and the streetes and walles (of Ierusalem) shall bee builded againe, though with much difficultie of the times: and after sixtie and two Hebdomades, Christ shall be slaine. And the people that shal denie him, shal not be his. &c. And then vnto consummation & end, shal perseuer desolation.
                     
                     
                        Nowe then, if we put these yeeres together; which are heere mentioned by Daniell: that is, first the seauen Hebdomades
                           •
                         which make fortie and nyne yeeres, and then the threescore and two, from the restauration of Ierusalem,The account of Daniels weeks. which make foure hundred, thirty and foure more: wee shall finde the whole number to be foure hundred, and eyghtie three yeeres. Which beeing begunne from the first yeere of Cyrus
                           •
                         as some wil, (for that he first determined the Iewes reduction,) or from the second yeeres of Darius, as others wyll, (for that he confirmed & put the same in execution: (or from the twentie yeere of the sayde Darius, for that then, hee made a newe Edict in the fauour of Nehemias; and sent hym into Iurie: euery way they wil end in the raigne of Herod and Augustus, vnder whom Christ was borne, or in the raigne of Tyberius Caesar, vnder whom hee suffered. And by no interpretation in the worlde, can it be auoyded, but that thys time appointed by Daniell, is nowe out, aboue a thousande and fiue hundred yeeres past, whyle yet the Temple stood, and was not put to desolation. And therefore of necessitie, Christ must be come about that tyme, and neuer more heereafter to be looked for.
                     
                        The sixt proofe.The traditions and obseruations of the olde Iewes themselues, doe meruailouslie

confirme thys beliefe of ours,The traditions of Rabines. for that they all dyd runne to thys one poynt, that about the tyme of Augustus hys raigne, (wherein Iesus was borne) the Messias shold appeare. It is often repeated in the Thalmud:
                           Thalm. tract. Sandr. cap. helec. et alibi.
                         that one Elyas left thys tradition, that the worlde should endure sixe thousand yeeres; that is, two thousand before the Law of Moses, two thousande vnder the same Lawe, and two thousande after that, vnder the Messias. Which last two thousand yeeres; by al computation, could not beginne much from the birth of Iesus. And the Rabines a great while agone, complained in theyr Thalmud, that there seemed to them in those daies,
                           Thalm. in tract. Auodazara.
                         seauen hundred and foure-teene yeeres past, since Christ by the Scriptures, should haue appeared: and therefore they doe meruaile vvhy God so long deferreth the same.
                     An other obseruation they haue vppon the words of Esay;Esay, 9, ver, 6: An obseruation of the Cabalistes. 
                        Paruulus natus est nobis: a litle child is borne vnto vs. In which words, for that they finde the Hebrue Letter Mem, to be shut in the midst of a word; (which is strange in that tongue, for that Mem is wont to be open in the middest of words, and shut onely in the end:) they gather many secrets. And among other, that seeing Mem signifieth sixe hundred yeeres:
                           Thalm. in lib. Sabbath. et in tract. Sanhedrin.
                         so long it shoulde be after Esay, vntil the time of Christ. Which

account of theyrs falleth out so iust:Esay, 7. that if you reckon the yeeres from Achaz King of Iuda, in whose time Esay spake these words, vntill the tyme of King Herod,Math. 2. vnder whom Christ was borne: you shall perceiue the number to fayle in little or nothing.
                     A much like obseruation hath Rabbi Moses, the sonne of Maimon,The obseruation of Rabbi Moses. (whom the Iewes doe holde in extreame great reuerence, calling him, the Doctor of iustice,) in hys Epistle to hys Countrimen of Affrica,
                           Rab. Mos. Ben. Maimon. ep. ad Iudaeos African.
                         concerning the tyme of Christes appearaunce. Which he thinketh to be past, according to the Scriptures, aboue a thousande yeeres in his dayes; (he liued about the yere of Christ, one thousand, one hundred, and fortie,) but that GOD deferreth hys manifestation for theyr sinnes. To which purpose also, appertaineth the tradition of one Elias, (as Rabbi Iosue reporteth it in the Thalmud,
                           Rab. Ios
                                 ••
                              . Ben. Leui. in Thal. tract. Sanhed. cap. haelaec.
                        ) that the Messias was to be borne indeed, (according to the Scripture,) before the destruction of the seconde Temple; for that Esay sayth of the Sinagogue;Esay, 66. verse, 7. 
                        Before she was with child, she brought forth: and before the greefe of trauaile came, she was deliuered of a man child. That is, (saith he) before the Sinagogue was afflicted and put to desolation by the Romaines, shee brought forth the Messias. But yet (saith he) thys Messias for our sinnes, doth hyde hymselfe

for a time in the Sea and other desert places,Christ hydeth himselfe in the Sea. vntil we be worthie of hys comming.
                     To the lyke effect is the obseruation of the Thalmud it selfe,
                           The obseruation of the Thalmud.
                           
                              Thalm. tract. Sanhed. cap. hel
                                    ••
                                  Rab. Iohanan. Rab. Iudae. Rab. Nehorai. &c.
                           
                         & of diuers Rabbines therein, concerning the wicked manners of men that should be at Christes appearance vppon earth, of whom they doe pronounce these words; The wise men in Israell, shall be extinguished: the learning of our Scribes and Pharisies shall bee putrified: the schooles of Diuinitie shall bee stewes at that time. Which thing, Iosephus that lyued in the same age with Christ, affirmeth to be fulfilled in the tyme of Herod:
                           Ioseph. lib. 20. antiq. cap, 6. et 8. et lib. 6. de bello. Iud. 15. et lib, 7. cap. 9. in so much, that if the Romains had not destroyed thē, without doubt (saith he) eyther the earth woulde haue opened and swallowed them downe, or els fyre from heauen would haue consumed them.
                     All then runneth to thys ende,The seauenth proofe. Foreboding.
                         both by Scripture, tradition, obseruation, & instinct of God himselfe: that about Herods tyme the true Messias should be borne. And hereof came that common and publique fame, that is recorded by Tacitus, Suetonius, and Iosephus,
                           
                              Tacit, lib. 21. Sueton. in vita Vesp.
                           
                           
                              Ioseph de bello Iudai. lib. 7. cap. 12.
                         (which was also written in open sight, vppon the cheefest Tower of the Cittie of Ierusalem;) that out of Iurie shoulde ryse, A generall Lord of the vniuersall worlde. Which prophecie, as the Romans eyther cō
                        temned, or turned an other way, applying

the same afterwarde to the Emperor Vespasian: so the Iewes vnderstoode it of theyr Messias, and Herod feared the matter greatlie; and for that, was so watchfull to extinguish the lyne of Dauid as hath beene alreadie shewed.
                     
                        The eyght proofe.Heereof also it dyd proceede, that the Magi, or wyse men of the East, attended so dilligently about that tyme, to expect the starre that Balaam had promised at the comming of this King.The generall expectation of the people. Heere-hence also it was, that the whole people of Iurie, remained so attent at thys time, more then euer before or since, in expecting the Messias. Whervpon, as soone as euer they heard of I. Baptist in the Desert:Iohn, 1. they ran vnto him, asking if he were Christ? As afterward also they flocked to Iesus, demaunding; Art thou hee which is to come: or do we expect an other? which words import the great expectation wherein that people remained in those daies. Neyther wanted that expectation in the cheefe Gouernors themselues: as may appeare by that speech of theyrs to Iesus;Iohn, 10. 
                        How long wilt thou kill vs (with thys expectation?) if thou be Christ, tell vs plainelie.
                     
                     Of which fame, expectation, and greedie desire of the people,Dyuers false Christes did rise in Iurie. diuers deceiuers tooke occasion to call themselues the Messias in those daies: and the people followed

them presently: which thing had not happened in any age before. And among other, there is named one Iudas Gaulonites,Acts, 5. Ioseph. lib. 17. ca. 8. et lib. 18. cap. 1. et 2. et lib. 20. cap. 2. et 6. or Galilaeus (as S. Luke calleth him,) and an other Iudas, the sonne of Ezechias, bothe of them verie wicked & licentious fellowes. One also called Atonges, a Sheepeheard: and two other, named Theudas and Egyptius, most notable deceiuers. And aboue all, there was one Barcozbam,
                           Thalm. tract. Sanh. cap. helec. Rab
                                 •
                               Mos. Ben. Maim. in Sententiis.
                         (who as the Thalmud affinneth) for thirtie yeeres together was receiued for the Messias, by the Rabines them selues, vntill at last they slew him, for that he was not able to deliuer them from the Romains. Which facilitie in the people when Herode sawe:
                           Nicol. Damscenus. Ioseph. lib. 14. antiq. cap. 2. he caused Nicholaus Damascenus (as I noted before,) to deuise a petidegree for him, from the auncientest Kings of Iuda; and so he, as well as other, tooke vppon hym to be the Messias, whom dyuers carnall Iewes, that expected the Messias to be a magnificent King, (as Herod was) wold seeme to beleeue, and divulgate abroad, and thereof in the Gospell, they are thought to haue beene called Herodians: that is,Math, 22. Mark, 3. & 12. Herodians or followers of Herode, who came to tempt Christ, wyth the Scribes and Pharisies.
                     Wherefore to conclude at length,The conclusion of thys first cō
                           sideration of the tyme. thys weightie poynt of the time of Christes appearing;

seeing that about the birth of Iesus vnder Herods raigne, there cōcurred so many signes & arguments together: as the generall peace of the Romaine Empire; the defection of the lyne and regiment of Iuda
                           •
                         the open decay of the seconde Temple; the iust calculatiō of Daniels Hebdomades; the attestation of Oracles; the obseruation of Rabbines; the publique fame and expectation of all the Iewes; together wyth the palpable experience of more then fifteene hundred yeeres past, since Iesus appeared, wherin we see the Iewish people in vaine do expect an other Messias, they beeing dispersed ouer all the world, without Temple, Lawe, Sacrifice, Prophet, or promise for theyr redemption, (which neuer happened vnto them till after Iesus death, for that in al other theyr banishments, captiuities & afflictions, they had some prophecie, cōsolation, or promise for theyr deliuerie.) These things all (I say) considered and put together: wee may most vndoubtedly and assuredly conclude, that Iesus was borne at the iust time appointed, and foretold by the spirit of GOD; and consequently, that he only was the true Messias and Sauiour of the world, which yet shal better appeare, by examination of other things that are to follow.
                  
                  
                     
                     The second Consideration.
                     IN the seconde consideration, there come to bee weighed these poyntes following;Christ hys byrth. the lyne and stocke of Iesus; hys manner of conception; the place of hys byrth; his circumcision and name; hys adoration by the Magi; hys presentation in the Temple; and hys flight to Egipt.
                     For hys lyne and stocke,Iesus Lyne. there was neuer man denied or doubted, but that Iesus was directly of the Trybe of Iuda, and descended liniallie by hys Mother of the peculiar house of Dauid, (3, Reg, 7. Psalm, 80. Esay, 11. Math, 1. Luke, 3. according as it was fore-tolde that the Messias should doe;) which is proued most cleerely by the two Genealogies and petidegrees, sette downe by S. Matthew and S. Luke, of the blessed Virgins whole discent, from Dauid to Ioseph, that was of the same Trybe and kindred wyth her. And it is confirmed by theyr repayring to Bethleem; (when Proclamation was made by Cyrenius 
                           Of this matter writeth Iosephus li. 18. cap. 1. antiq
                         in Augustus name, that euery person should repaire to the head Cittie of their Trybe and familie, to be cessed for theyr tribute,) seeing that Bethleem was the proper Cittie onely of them, that were of the house and lyne of Dauid:1, Reg, 17. 2. Reg, 2. for that King Dauid was

borne therein. And finally, it is euident by that the Scribes and Pharisies, who obiected matters of much lesse importance then thys against Iesus, (as that hee was a Carpenters sonne,Math, 13. Luke, 6. thereby to debase him for his pouertie:) yet neuer obiected they against hym, that he was not of the house of Dauid, which they wold neuer haue omitted, if they might haue doone it wyth any colour: for that it would haue weighed more against him then all the rest, and would in one word haue dispatched the whole controuersie. Nay, I adde further, that it remaineth registred in the Iewes Thalmud it selfe,
                           Thalm. tract. Sanh. cap. Nig
                              
                                 •
                              ar had.
                         that Iesus of Nazareth Crucified, was of the blood Royall from Zorobabel of the house of Dauid.
                     
                     
                        The manner of hys conception. Luke, 1.For the manner of hys conception, and of the Message or annunciation made vnto hys Mother by the Angell: albeit it depend principally, vpon the relation and credite of the Virgine her selfe, who onely was priuie thereunto: and vpon the testimonie of Ioseph, to whom it was reuealed by the same Angell afterward; yet, he that shall consider the circumstaunces of the thing it selfe: as first, the simplicitie of bothe the reporters. Then, howe that it is not likelie, that Ioseph beeing iust,Math. 1. (as he is described) would haue concealed a thing so much against himselfe, and against the Law, if he had not some way

beene assured of the trueth. Thyrdly, the innocent age of the blessed Virgine, (who was not past foure-teene yeeres old at that time,
                           Augustin. lib. 4. de Trin. cap. 5. e
                                 •
                               li. contra Iudaeos. cap 5. as S. Augustine and other auncient Fathers doe prooue by manifest arguments.) All these things (I say) doe make it improbable, that she woulde inuent such a matter of her selfe.
                           Chrisost. in cap. 1. Luc.
                         And finally, the strange prophecie which she vttered in her Canticle of Magnificat, and which we see now fulfilled, (albeit at that time very vnlikelie,) to wit, That all generations should call her blessed. These circumstaunces, he that shall consider them, can not but see that the matter must needes bee true.
                     And as for the kinde and manner of his natiuitie:The manner of Iesus Natiuitie. Esay. 7. most manifest it is be scripture, that the Messias was appointed to by borne of a Uirgine, for so saith Esay plainelie: B
                              •
                           hold, a Uirgine shall conceiue, and bring foorth a son. And Esay appointeth this to K. Achaz for a wonderfull and strange signe from God, which he could not haue doone in reason, if the Hebrue word in that place, might haue signified a young woman onely (as some later Rabbines wyll affirme,) for that it is no signe or strange thing, but very common and ordinarie for young women to conceiue and bring foorth children. Wherefore the Septuagint doe very well translate it in Greeke,
                           Parthenos.
                         by

the proper name of Uirgine, and so did also the elder Iewes vnderstande it,
                           Rab. Sime
                                 •
                              n. Ben. Iohai. in cap. 2. Gen.
                         as Rabbi Simeon well noteth. And Rabbi Moses Hadarsan, of singuler credite with the Iewes, vpon these words of the Psalmes: Trueth shall bud foorth of the earth, &c. saith thus:
                           Rab. Mos. Hadar in Psal. 14. v. 12 heere Rabbi Ioden noteth, that it is not sayd, truth shall be ingendered of the earth. But, trueth shall bud foorth: to signifie thereby, that the Messias, (who is meant by the word Trueth,) shal not be begotten (as other men are) in carnall copulation. Thus farre Rabbi Moses: vvho in another place, that is, vppon the twentie and fiue Chapter of Genesis, alleageth Rabbi Berachias to be of the same opinion, and to prooue it out of the hundred and nyne Psalme, and fourth verse.
                     The same is prooued also, in the playne words of the Prophet Ieremie;Ieremie, 31, verse, 22. 
                        GOD hath created a newe thing vpon earth: a woman shal inuiron (or inclose) a man. That is, shee shall inclose him in her wombe, & bring him forth after a newe and strange manner, without generation of man. And finally,
                           Rab. Hacad. quest 3. in Ea. cap. 9. Rabbi Hacadosch proueth by Cabala out of many places of Scripture, not onely that the Mother of the Messias shall be a Virgine, but also that her name shall be Marie. All the tenne Sibyls in like manner,
                           Betulius in lib. de car. Sibyl.
                         (according as Betulius setteth out theyr prophecies,) doe make

speciall mention of the Mother of Messias, that she shall be a most pure and holy Virgine; so that thys matter was reuealed verie cleerely, both to Iewe and Gentile before it came to passe. And Clemens Alexandrinus writeth,
                           Clem. in recognit.
                         that Symon Magus, to the ende he might not seeme inferiour to Iesus in thys poynt, fayned, that hee was also borne of a Virgine, as Iesus was.
                     That Bethleem where Christ was borne, was the peculier place preordained by God for the byrth of the Messias:The place appointed for the byrth of the Messias. the Prophet Micheas fore-told plainely, when he vttered diuers ages before Christ was incarnate, these words;Miche. 5. 
                        And thou Bethleem Ephrata, art but a little one (in respect) of thousands in Iuda: (and yet) shall there come foorth of thee, one that shall be the RVLER of Israell: and his comming forth is from the beginning, and from THE DAIES OF ETERNITIE. By which words is plainely expressed, that albeit Bethleem were but a lyttle poore Towne, (as in deed it was) in comparison of many other in Iuda: yet therin shold be borne temporally that Gouernour of Israell, whose diuine byrth was before the worlds foundation, & from all eternitie. And so doe interprete thys place, both Ionathan Ben vziel the great Authour of the Chaldie Paraphrase, (who died twentie-eyght yeeres

before our Sauiour Christ was borne,) and also Rab. Selomoth and Hacadosch, in theyr Commentaries vpon thys place of Micheas.
                     The same thing fore-tolde Dauid of Ephrata, or Bethleem, (for bothe names doe signifie one thing, as appeareth by the former place of Micheas and Gene, 35. and 48. others,) when talking of the Messias, and being desirous to knowe where he should be borne, sayth;1. Chron, 2. Psalm, 131. 
                        I will not goe into the tabernacle of my house, nor into my bedde: nor will I giue myne eyes sleepe, or rest to the temples of my heade: vntill I finde out the place, that is appointed for my Lord: the tabernacle (or house) for the GOD of Iacob. And then, the misterie beeing reuealed vnto him: he saith presently; Beholde, wee haue heard of it (now) in Ephrata (or Bethleem:) we haue found it out in the fieldes 
                        Thys he said. for that in Dauids time Bethleē stoode nigh vnto woods. 
                        of woode Math, 2.. And to shew how hee reuerenced the place for that cause, hee addeth immediatly; Wee wil adore in the place where his feete haue stood. Wherby he fore-prophecieth, not onely the adoration vsed after in that place vnto Iesus by the Magi, or three Kings of the East, but also of all other adoration vsed in the same place in the memorie of Iesus, by other deuout Christians vntill thys day; for which cause Origen sayth, that the place of Bethleem, was most famous and renowned in his daies.
                           Orig. cont. Cels.
                        
                     
                     
                        For the Angels appearing to the Sheepheardes,The Angels singing. in the night of the Natiuitie: there can be no more said, but the credite, honesty, and simplicitie of them that reported it: and likely it is, they would neuer faigne a thing, that might haue beene refuted by testimony of the sheepheards themselues, if it had been false.
                     Of the name of IESVS, giuen to hym in hys circumcision:The name of Iesus. it was to be seene sette downe in a Booke, that howe so euer it were not scripture: yet was it extant in the world before Christ was borne. I meane the second booke of Esdras, which hath these words in the person of God the Father.2. Esdras. 7. 
                        Beholde, the time shall come, when the signes shal appeare that I haue tolde, &c. And my sonne IESVS shal be reuealed, with those who are with him. And after those yeeres my sonne CHRIST shall die, and the earth shall render those that sleepe therein.
                     
                     Rabbi Hacadosch also prooueth by arte Cabalist, out of many places and textes of scripture,
                           Rab. Hata. in Esay. 9. that the Messias name at his comming, shall be IESVS.Gene, 49. and Psal, 71. & 95. And among other, hee addeth thys reason; that as the name of him who first brought the Iewes out of bondage into the Land of promise, was Iesus, or Iosue, (which is all one,) so must his name be Iesus,Note thys reason. that shal the second time deliuer them

from the bondage wherein they are, and restore them to theyr olde and auncient possession of Iurie: which is the cheefe benefit they expect by the Messias.
                     Finally, it is not probable, that the Virgine Marie should feigne thys name of herselfe, for that among the Iewes there vvere many other names of more honour and estimation at that time; as Abraham, Isaac, Iacob, Moses, and Dauid. And therfore if she would haue feigned any: it is like she wold haue taken one of thē, as soone as this, which had not beene the name of any great Patriarche.
                     
                        The comming of the three Kinges. Math, 2.There followeth the comming of the three Magi or wise men from the Easte: of whom 
                           Cypr. ser. de Bapt. et idem Yert. lib. 3. cont. Marcion. in. hillaer. li. 4. de Trin. Iosua. 12. Cyprians words are these: It is an olde tradition of the Church, that the Magi of the East, were Kings, or rather little Lordes of particular places. Which is to be vnderstood, such little Kings as Iosue slew thirtie in one battaile. And it is to be noted, that S. Matthewe maketh mention of the comming of these Kings to Ierusalem, as of a knowne and publique matter, whereof all Ierusalem and Iurie were able to beare him witnesse. For hee talketh of theyr open comming to Ierusalem: and of the inquirie for the new borne King: of theyr speeche and conference had wyth Herod: as also of Herods consultation

with the Scribes & Pharisies about the place of the Messias byrth. And finally, he sheweth the most pittifull murder that insued, of almost14. Thousand, as saith the Lyturgie of the Aethiopians. and C
                                 •
                              lend. Grecorum.
                         infinite infants, in all the circuite of Bethleem for thys matter. Which could not be a thing vnknowne to all Iurie, and much lesse feygned by the holy Euangelist Saint Matthew; for that he should haue giuen his aduersaries the greatest aduauntage in the worlde; if he had begunne hys Gospell, with so notorious and open an vntrueth, which might haue been refuted by infinite persons that were yet aliue.
                     Epiphanius is of opinion, that the three Kings arriued in Ierusalem,
                           Epiph. haerit. 51. two yeeres after Christes Natiuitie: for that Herod slewe all infants of that age. But other hold more probablie, that the starre appeared vnto thē,
                           Amon. Alex. in Harm, Niceph. lib. 1. cap. 13. two yeeres before Christes Natiuitie, so that they came to Bethleem the thirteenth day after Christes birth, according as the Church doth celebrate the Epiphanie. Saint Basile thinketh that they were learned men,
                           Basil. ser. in nati. dom.
                         and myght by theyr learning and Arte Magick, (wherin those Countrimen at that time were very skilfull,) vnderstand and feele, that the power of their Heathen Gods, was greatlie diminished and broken. They might also be styrred vp wyth that common brute, and generall prophecie, spredde ouer all the Easte

in those daies, as both Suetonius & Iosephus doe recorde,
                           Sueto. in Vespos. cap 4. Iosephus. lib. 7. de bel. cap 12. Numb. 24. 
                        That out of Iurie should come an vniuersall King ouer all the world. By these meanes (I say) and by the prophecie of Balaam, left among thē from Moses time, (for he was a Gentile,) wherby was signified, that a starre should ryse, and declare a great and mightie King in Israell; they might be induced at the sight of this starre, to take so long a iourney as they did, towards Iurie.
                     
                        Prophecies of things that should fall out in Bethleem. Numb, 24. Psalm, 71.Thys starre (as I haue sayde) was foretolde by Balaam a Heathen Prophet, aboue one thousand and fiue hundred yeeres before it appeared. And after Balaam again, it was prophecied by Dauid, that Kings of Arabia, Saba, and other Easterne Countries shoulde come and adore Christ, and offer both gold and other gyfts vnto hym.Ieremie, 31. The murder also of those infants of Bethleem, was presignified by Ieremie, in the weeping of Rachell for the slaughter of her children:Genesis. 35. which Rachell was buried in Bethleem, and for that cause, those infants were called her children, albeit shee were dead aboue two thousande yeres before they were slaine, and aboue one thousand and fiue hundred yeeres before Ieremie wrote the prophecie. Amongst which infants, Herod also for more assurance, slewe an infant of hys owne.
                           Philo. lib. de temp.
                         For that (as Philo noteth) he was descended by hys mothers side,

of the lyne of Iuda. Which cruelty comming to Augustus eares, he sayde (as Macrobius reporteth,
                           Macrob. lib. 2. Saturnal. cap. 4.) that hee had rather bee Herods swyne then hys sonne, for that hee beeing a Iewe,Augustus speech of Herode. was forbidden by hys Religion to kyll hys swyne, though not ashamed to kyll hys sonne.
                     The same starre whereof we speake, is mentioned by diuers Heathen Writers:
                           Plin. li. 2. ca. 25, as by Plinie, vnder the name of a Comete, (for so they termed all extraordinarie Starres,Heathen testimonies for the starre which guided the wyse men.) which appeared in the later ende of Augustus daies, and were farre different from all other that euer appeared. And therfore contrary to the nature of those kind of Starres, it was adiudged by the whole Colledge of South-sayers, to portende vniuersall good vnto the earth; and for that cause, had an Image of mettall erected to it in Rome, and (as Plinies words are,) Is Cometa vnus, tota orbe colitur: that onely Comete, is worshipped throughout the whole world.
                     Origine also,
                           Orig. cont. Celsum
                         writeth of one Chaeremon a Stoike, that was much mooued with the consideration of thys Starre, and for that after the appearaunce thereof, hee perceiued the power of hys Gods decayed: tooke a iourney into Iurie, (in company of other Astronomers,) to informe himselfe further of the matter. Whereunto Chalcidius a Platonicke

dooth adde,
                           Chalcid. apud Marsil. Ficin. tract. de stella. Mag.
                         that the Chaldean Astronomers did gather by contemplation of thys Starre, that some God descended from heauen to the benefite of mankind. And finally, the Sibyls talking of the comming of Christ, affirmed plainlie:
                           Sybil. Saemia. apud. Betul.
                         
                        Rutilans eum sydus mon, strabit: a blazing starre shall declare his cō
                        ming. Which prophecie Virgill the Poet hauing reade in Augustus tyme, and soone after hauing seen the same fulfilled: applied it (as I haue shewed before of all the rest,) to the flattering of Caesar, and therefore he sayth in the place before alleaged.
                     
                        
                           
                              Eglog. 4.Ecce Dionaei, processit Caesaris astrum.
                     
                     
                        Behold the starre of Caesar (descended of Venus, hath nowe appeared.
Which starre indeede, was the starre of Caesars Lorde and Maister.
                     
                        Luke, 12.After fortie daies past ouer, Saint Luke reporteth, how Iesus by his mother was presented in the Temple of Ierusalem:The presentation of Iesus in Ierusalem. & therwithall recounteth two strange thinges that happened at the same time; to wit, that two graue and reuerend persons, Simeon surnamed Iust, and Anna the Prophetesse: (both of singuler sanctitie amongst the Iewes,) cō
                        ming into the Temple at the very same time when Iesus was there in hys Mothers armes: tooke notice of him, and acknowledged him publiquely for the Messias and Sauiour of

the world. Fore-telling also by the spyrite of prophecie, diuers perticuler things that wer to ensue, both to Christ and Christians, and especially to hys Mother the blessed virgine. Which things being published at that time, and confirmed afterwards by the euent, doe well declare, that thys narration of S. Luke could not be forged; as doe also the number of perticuler circumstaunces sette downe about the tyme, place, and persons, most notoriously knowne to all Ierusalem. For, as for Anna,Anna the Prophetesse. she had lyued from her youth vntyll foure-score yeeres of age in the Temple, and thereby was knowne to the most part of Iurie. And as for Symeon,Simeon. he was the Scholler of the most famous Hillel, and condisciple to Ionathan maker of the Chaldie Paraphrase,
                           Thalm. tract. pitkei. A
                                 ••
                              th.
                         of whō I spake before, and the Iewes Thalmud confesseth, that by the death of these two men,
                           Thal. tract. Ioma. cap. Tereph. Becalpi.
                         (especially of Simeon,) fayled the spyrit of the great Sinagogue, called Sanhedrin: which after the Captiuitie of Babylon vntyll Herods time, supplyed (in a sort) the spirit of prophecie, that was expresly in Israel before the sayd captiuitie.
                     Of Christes flight into Egipt for feare of Herode,Christes flight into Egypt. Luke, 2. Ose, 11. S. Luke wel noteth, that it was prophecied by Ose long before: that God would call his Sonne out of Egipt. And the Prophet Esay describeth the same very particularlie,

when he sayth;Esay, 19. 
                        Beholde, our Lord Iehoua shal ascend vp, (or ride) vpon a light cloude: (which was his flesh or humanitie,) & shall goe down into Egipt: and all the Idols of Egipt, shall shake at his presence. Which later point,
                           Euseb. lib. 6. dem. cap. 20. et lib. 9. cap. 2.3.4. Eusebius sheweth that it was fulfilled most euidentlie in the sight of all the world; for that no Nation came to Christian religion with so great celeritie or feruour, as did the Egyptians, who threw downe theyr Idols before any other heathen Nations. And as they had been the first in idolatry to other Countries: so were they the first (by Christes cōming vnto them,The benefite that Egypt receiued by Christes flight vnto it.) that afterwarde gaue example of true returne to theyr Creator. It followeth in Esay: And I will giue vp Egipt into the hands of cruell Lords: & a Potent King shall take dominion ouer them. Which was fulfilled about the very time wherein Christ was to come. For that then, after many spoyles & cruelties excercised vppon Egypt by the Romaine Lords and Princes, as Pompey, Caesar, Anthonie & others: in the end Cleopatra their Queene, (that was the last of all the bloode and lyne of the Ptolomi
                           •
                        s,) was inforced to sley her selfe: and so Augustus the Emperor tooke possession of all Egypt, and subiected it as a Prouince to the Romaines Empire.
                     But consider you, howe Esay concludeth the matter, after all these temporall afflictions

threatned against Egipt, & confesse, that such aduersitie, is no signe of Gods dys-fauour to them who receiue it. For thus sayth God after all hys cominations; In that daie, there shal be an Aultar of Iehoua in the middest of Egipt: they shall cry to God in their tribulation, and he shal send them a Sauiour, &c. Blessing shall be in the midst of that Land, to whom the Lorde God of hostes hath giuen his benediction, saying: Blessed is my people of Egipt. And heere we make an ende of our second consideration.
                  
                  
                     The thyrde consideration.
                     NOwe in the thyrd place there commeth to be considered,The lyfe and actions of Iesus. (according to our former dyuision,) the life, conuersation, doctrine, and myracles of Iesus. And first, touching things doone by him after his cōming out of Egypt which might be about the sixt or seauenth yeere of hys age,) vntil hys baptisme by S. Iohn, (which was the thyrtith,) there is little recorded,
                           Iust. in Tripho. Chrys. in Iohan. Aug. lib. 4. de Trinit. cap. 5. eyther in Prophane, or Ecclesiasticall Wryters. For that as Saint Iustine, S. Chrisostome, S. Augustine and others doe write, hee bestowed that time in the common exercise and labours of mans life: therby to shewe himselfe true man, and

gyue demonstration how much he hated and detested idlenes.
                     
                        Of Saint Iohn Baptist.Of Saint Iohn Baptist, all Hebrue wryters of that time doe make mention, with exceeding prayse and admiration of hys holinesse: especially Iosephus that liued immediatly after Christes daies,
                           Ioseph. lib. 18. an
                                 •
                              iq. cap. 7. sayth; he was, Vir optimus: Iudaeos excitans ad virtutum studia. A most excellent man, stirring vp the Iewes to the exercise of vertue. Hee addeth also, that partly for feare of the great concourse of people which flocked vnto him, and partlie by the solicitation of Herodias, concubine and brothers wyfe to Herode Antipas, the great Herods sonne: (for whose cause he had turned off hys owne Wife, daughter to Areta King of the Arabians:) hee was apprehended and imprisoned in the Castle of Acherun, and therein soone after put to death. Which murder, Iosephus esteemed to be the cause of al the misery which insued afterward to Herod and his whole familie.
                     Of thys man it was written by Malachie the Prophet:Malachie. 3. 
                        Behold, I send my messenger (or Angel) before me: & he shall prepare the way before my face: & presently shal com to his temple, the RVLER whom ye seeke, and the MESSENGER OF THE TESTAMENT, whom you desire. Which prophecie was fulfilled most euidently, vppon

the preaching of S. Iohn,S. Iohns behauiour towards Christ. when Christ came vnto him; and albeit S. Iohn had neuer seene him before, yet he acknowledged him for the Messias in the presence of infinite people, & hys acknowledgment was confirmed by the visible descending of a Doue & voice from heauen,Math, 3. Marke, 1. Luke, 3. in the sight & hearing of all the people present, according as three of our Euangelists doe report. Which they would neuer haue presumed to doe: had not the matter been most euident, and without al compasse of deniall or contradiction.
                     And truely, no one thing in all this storie of Iesus life, doth more establish the certaintie of hys beeing the true Messias: then that S. Iohn Baptist, (whose wisedome, learning, vertue and rare sanctitie, is confessed and recorded by the writings of all our aduersaries) should refuse the honour of the Messias offered vnto himselfe, and lay it vpon Iesus: as also, shoulde direct those Disciples that depended vpon him, to the onely folowing and embracing of Iesus doctrine. Which is most euidently prooued that hee did: for that so many folowers and disciples as himselfe had, not one appeared euer after, that was not a Christian.
                     When Iesus was baptised,The preaching and doctrine of Iesus. he began to preache, and his whole doctrine was directed to the manifestation of hys Fathers will, and

amendment of mans life. It tendeth all to thys one ground and principle.Deut. 6. Math, 2. 
                        Thou shalt loue the Lord thy God with all thy soule: & thy Neighbour as thy selfe. It was plaine, easie, perspicuous, and euident, though it treated of most high misteries.Heathen doctrine. It had neither pompe nor pryde of rethoricall words, nor flattering of mans wickednes, as the doctrine of manie Phylosophers had.Iewish Ceremonies. Neyther consisted it of vnprofitable externall ceremonies, (as the later obseruations of the Iewish Lawe dyd,) nor was it fraught wyth carnalitie and spirit of thys world; as the Turkish Alcoran,Turkish Alcoran. and other sectaries doctrine is. But all was simplicitie; all was spirit; all was trueth; al was honestie; all was humilitie; all was charitie.
                     It tooke away or dysanulled no one perfect or spirituall poynt of Moses Lawe,The comparison of Christes Law with that of Moses. Math, 5. but rather reuiued, interpreted, fulfilled, and made perfect the same. For whereas
                           •
                         that cō
                        maunded externall obseruaunce, this addeth also internall obedience. Whereas that sayd, loue your freendes: thys adioyneth, loue also your enemies. Whereas that commaunded we should not kyll: thys further commaundeth to speake no angry words. Wheras that prohibited to commit actuall adulterie: thys also forbiddeth to couet in minde. Whereas that sayd, take no interest or vsurie of a Iewe that is thy Countriman: thys fayth, take it of

no man whatsoeuer. Wheras that accounted euery Iewe onely to be thy neighbour: thys teacheth euery person liuing to be thy brother. Whereas that taught thee to offer vp a Calfe, a Sheepe, or an Oxe for thy sinnes: thys instructeth thee, to offer vp a contrite hart, by fayth in the bloode of hym that died for all, with a firme and resolute purpose of amendement of life.The effect of Christes doctrine. And finally, thys doctrine tendeth wholy to the true, sincere, and perfect seruice of GOD thy Lord, that made and redeemed thee, to the exaltation of hys onely name, power, goodnes, and glorie: to the depression of mans pryde by discouering his misery; to the contempt of this world & vaine pompe thereof; to the mortification and subduing of our sensual appetite: to the true loue & vnfayned charitie of our neighbour; to the styrring vppe of our spyrite to celestiall cogitations; to peace of conscience; tranquilitie of minde; puritie of body; consolation of our soule. And in one worde, to reduce man-kinde again to a certaine estate of innocencie, simplicitie, and Angelicall sanctitie vpon earth, wyth hys eye fixed onl
                           •
                        e in the eternall inheritance of Gods kingdome in heauen.
                     Thys was the doctrine deliuered by Iesus: which is the same that the Prophets of God fore-tolde shoulde be deliuered by the

Messias. And as for hys life and conuersation,The lyfe and conuersation of Iesus. by the testimonie of his greatest aduersaries, it was more admirable then hys doctrine, his lyfe beeing a most liuely table, wherein the perfection of all his doctrine was expressed. A man of such grauitie, as neuer in hys lyfe he was noted to laugh; of such humilitie, as beeing the sonne of God, hee scarse vsed in this world the dignitie of a seruaunt; of such sweet and milde behauiour, as al the iniuries of hys enemies, neuer wrested from him one angry worde. Finally, hee was such a one, as hee was described by Esay so many ages before he was borne, in these words;Esay, 42. 
                        Hee shall not crie nor contend, nor shall any man heare his voice in the streete: he shall not crush a broken reede, nor tread out a little flaxe that lyeth smoking on the grounde. &c. And another Prophet not long after hym, brake foorth into thys speech, vpon consideration of the behauiour that should be in the Messias,Zacha. 
                              •
                           . 
                        Reioyce thou daughter of Sion: tryumph thou daughter of Ierusalem: for behold thy King shal come vnto thee, thy iust Sauiour: hee is poore and humble, &c. And as these Prophets dyd fore-tell the vertue and sanctitie of the Messias, so the deuils themselues could not but confesse the same to haue beene fulfilled in the person of Iesus; as is most euident by the testimonie of Porphyrie, a professed enemie of the Christian

name. Who after consideration of dyuers Oracles vttered by hys Idols, touching Iesus, he breaketh forth into thys confession.
                           Porphyr. lib. de laud. Phyl
                                 •
                              s.
                         
                        It is exceeding wonderfull, what testimonie the Gods doe giue of the singuler pietie and sanctitie of Iesus: for which they auouch him rewarded with immortalitie: but yet these Christians are deceiued in calling him God. Thus much wryteth Porphyrie. And last of all Iosephus the Iew, that was borne immediatly after Iesus, wryteth of hym thus.
                           Ioseph. lib. 18. antiq. cap. 7. 
                        There was at thys time one Iesus, a wise man, if it be lawfull to call hym a man: a worker of most wonderfull myracles, and a Maister and Teacher of all such men, as willingly were content to embrace the trueth.
                     
                     In which testimony of Iosephus, wee see mention also of Iesus myracles,Of Iesus myracles. which is the next thyng whereof we are to consider. And as Iosephus in thys place, (being a Iew) beareth witnesse that Iesus performed manie strange myracles: so most apparently, and according to the interpretation of Iosephus in thys place, were the same myracles fore-told by the Prophets of God, that they shold be doone by the true Messias.Predictions of the Messias myracles. So Esay in hys thirtie-fiue Chapter describeth at large, how the Messias at hys comming, shal declare his commission, by giuing sight to the blinde, hearing to the deafe, speeche to the dumbe, and agilitie of body to the lame and cripple.

And that which is more; God reuealed thys poynt very particulerly to the Gentiles by the Sibyls, among whom, one of them wrote thus of Christ to come, as Lactantius recordeth;
                           Lact. lib. 4. diuina. Instit. cap. 15. 
                        He shall doe all by his onely word, he shal cure all infirmities: he shall raise the deade: hee shall make the lame to runne and skip: the deafe shall heare: the blinde shall see: and the dumbe shall speake. In fiue loaues and two fishes, fiue thousand persons shall be satis-fied: and the fragments shall fill twelue baskets, to the hope of manie. He shall commaund the windes, and walke vpon the furious Sea, with his feete of peace.
                     
                     And after dyuers other Greeke verses to thys purpose, she concludeth in these words; Men shall saie, that I am a mad and lying Prophetesse: but when all these things shall come to passe, then remember me: for then shall no man say more, that I was a lyar, but rather the Prophet of the great God.
                     
                     To these predictions of Prophets in Iurie and among the Gentiles, doe agree the Doctors of the Iewes themselues, in many places of theyr Thalmud:
                           Thal. tract. Beraco
                                 •
                              h. ea Mermathas. Colin.
                         to wit, that the Messias shall be most wonderfull in working myracles. And in theyr publique Commentarie vppon Ecclesiastes, they haue these wordes.
                           Misdrach. coheleth. cap. 1. 
                        All the former myracles of Prophets or Saints, shall be nothing to the myracles of the Messias, when he commeth. And thus much of the

fore-telling of Christes myracles. But novve for the fulfilling therof in Iesus; that is, how these predictions were performed in the stupendious workes and actions of our Sauiour Christ, there is no difficultie. For that besides the former testimonie of Iosephus,The confession of Iesus myracles by hys enemies. (which were sufficiēt in thys case,) the Iewes themselues doe graunt and record Iesus myracles, in diuers places of Treatises of theyr Thalmud;
                           Thalm. in tract. Auoda. Zara. Misdrasch. Coheleth Alcoran. Azoar. 1.4. 11.13. yea, they make mention of many wonderfull thyngs which Iesus did, that are not written by our Euangelists. The same dooth Mahomet in his Alcorane; affirming Iesus the son of Marie, to haue beene a great Prophet, and to haue wrought his miracles, by the onely power and spyrite of GOD; and that himselfe was sent to confirme Iesus doctrine, sauing onely in the poynt of hys God-head; wherin he sayth, that Iesus went too-farre, and had a checke for the same at Gods hande when hee returned to Heauen.
                     Thus much doe these enemies confesse of Iesus myracles. Which, as it is much, comming from such witnesses: so if they would eyther denie or dissemble the same, they might be prooued against them by most euident reasons: especially in two points, wherin there can be no probabilitie of any denyall.
                     The first is, the calling and retayning of

hys Apostles and other followers,The calling of the Apostles. (whereof Iosephus also in the place before alleaged, maketh mention,
                           Ioseph. lib. 18. antiq. cap. 4. as of a great miracle:) who were of diuers callings, states, conditions, trades, and occupations in the world. And yet all, vppon the suddaine, left both father, mother, wyfe, children, and other temporall respects, and followed him, who had nothing to giue or promise them in thys worlde. A man, that neuer spake them fayre, or vttered doctrine that was not repugnant to the sensualitie of thys life, as may appeare by theyr owne wrytings and testimonies of him. A man, that was contemned by the better sort, as then it might seeme: that is, by the wyse and learned of that Countrie, and especially disliked by them that were in gouernment, as a dangerous and troublesome man to the state. One, that had neyther freendes in the worlde to beare him out, nor a house to put his heade in. And yet, notwithstanding all thys,A great myracle. that worldly men and women, & some such also as were great sinners, and loose lyuers before, shoulde leaue all their worldlie hope, stay, and condition, to followe such a man, with so great inconueniences, losses, dangers, and dis-fauours as they did; and should continue with him in all hys afflictions, and be content to die & loose their liues rather then forsake him, or abandon his seruice;

this (I say) is such a miracle, as neuer in the worlde fell out the like, and must needes be graunted by the enemie, to be supernaturall.
                     The second poynt is,The miraculous facts of Iesus. of externall things and facts doone by Iesus, aboue all power of humaine abilitie, in the sight and knowledge of all the Iewes; which facts were published by our Euangelists, and especially by Saint Matthew, in the Hebrue tongue, while yet the persons were aliue vpon whō they were wrought, or infinite other that might be witnesses thereof. As for example, the raysing of Lazarus in Bethania, that was a Vyllage  but a mile or two distant from Ierusalem:Iohn. 11. at whose death and buriall, (beeing a Gentleman) many Scribes & Pharisies must needes be present, (according to the Iewish custom at that time, as is reported by Iosephus,
                           Ioseph. lib. 17. antiq. cap. 11.) and they sawe him both deceassed, interred, and the funerall feast obserued for him, as also raised againe from death by Iesus, after foure dayes of hys buriall. With whom they dyd both eate and drinke, and conuerse after hys returne to life, and euery day might behlode him walking vppe and downe openly in the streetes of Ierusalem. This storie (I say) how coulde it be feigned.
                     So in like manner, the raysing of the  Archisinagogues daughter,Matthew. 9. Marke. 5. whose name is

affirmed to be Iairus, wyth diuers other circumstaunces that doe make the thing most  notorious. The raising of the widdowes son, before the gate of the Cittie Naim,Luke, 7. in the presence of all the people that bare the saide corps, & stood about it. The healing of the Cripple in Ierusalem, that had layne thirtie  and eyght yeeres lame, at the Pooles side or Bath called Probatica:
                        Iohn, 5. which miracle was  done also in the sight of infinite people. The casting out of a Legion of deuils, frō a man that for many yeeres together was known to liue possessed in the Mountaines: which deuils by peculier lycence, obtayned of Iesus to enter into a hearde of Swyne,Math, 8. Marke, 5, and so presently carried two thousande of them away into the Sea, and drowned them. Whereuppon the whole Countrey about of the people called Gerasines, beeing striken with extreame feare vpon sight of the fact, besought Iesus most humbly to depart frō their borders.  The feeding and filling of fiue thousand men,Math. 14. Luke. 9. besides women and children, with fiue Barley loaues and two fishes onely. The  turning of water into wine, at a marriage in Cana, in the presence of all the Guestes.  The healing of hym by a worde onelie, that had an incurable dropsie,Luke. 14. and thys at the table of a principall Pharisie, and in the sight of all that sate at dynner wyth him.
                     
                        These (I say) and diuers other such myracles, which were done in the presence and sight of so infinite a number of people, and recorded by our Euangelists, at such tymes when many desired to discredite the same, & might haue doone easilie by many witnesses and authoritie, if any one part thereof had been subiect to calumniation: cannot in reason or probabilitie be doubted of.The conclusion of this consideration. And therfore I must conclude, that seeing these things are aboue all power of humaine nature, and coulde not be doone but by the finger and vertue of the liuing GOD himselfe: considering also that it is impossible, that God should assist or giue testimonie to any falsehoode, it must needes ensue, that al was true and sincere which Iesus affirmed: and consequently, seeing he affirmed himselfe to be the Sonne of God, and the true and onelie Messias, it must needes follow by these miracles, that hee was so indeede; which is the ground of that speech of hys to the faithlesse Pharisies,Iohn, 10. 
                        If you will not beleeue my words, beleeue my deedes. And thus much of Iesus life, doctrine, conuersation, and miracles.
                  
                  
                     
                     The fourth Consideration.
                     THere remaineth nowe onely, the fourth and last consideration of thys Section,The Passion & Resurrection. which is, the passion, resurrection & ascention of Iesus. And about his passion, there is little or no controuersie: for that all his enemies doe agree and graunt, that hee was betrayed by his owne disciple; apprehended, afflicted, and deliuered vppe by the Iewes, and finally put to death vppon a Crosse by the Gentiles. The testimonie of Iosephus may serue for all heerein, whose wordes are these;
                           Ioseph. lib. 18. antiq. cap. 4. 
                        That the principall Iewes of his Country, hauing accused and deliuered ouer Iesus to Pilate, (that was Gouernour of Iurie for the Romaine Emperor) he adiudged him to the Crosse. The same doe other Iewes and Gentiles record: and in thys they take great offence & scandale, that wee shoulde attibute diuinitie vnto a man that had suffered death vpon the Crosse.
                     But if wee shewe that this was the eternall preordination and appointment of God, for sauing of mankinde: and that the same was fore-tolde both to Iewe and Gentile from the beginning: and so vnderstood also by the Iewish Doctors thēselues of elder

times: then euery reasonable man (I trowe) will remaine satis-fied, and preferre Gods diuine wysedome before mans follie.
                     First then consider,Christes ascending to Ierusalem to receiue his passion. that when Christ had ended hys preaching, and wrought so many miracles as seemed sufficient to hys eternall wisedom;Math, 20. Marke, 8. and when the time was come pre-ordained for his passion, (whereof hee tolde publiquely his Disciples before:) hee went vppe to Ierusalem of purpose to receiue his death;Math, 21. and made a solemne entrie into that Cittie vppon an Asse, which was prophecied of him many yeres before;Zacharie, 9. 
                        Reioyce daughter of Sion. Behold thy IVST KING and SAVIOVR, shall come vnto thee vpon an Asse.
                     
                     And after hys aboade some dayes in that place,Math, 10, & 16, Psalme, 40. 54, & 108. he was betrayed and sold by his owne Disciple, as Dauid before hand in many places had fore-told shold come to passe. Then followed his apprehension, and most seruile abusage by the Iewes, whereof it was fore-prophecied in hys person by Esay;Esay, 50. 
                        I gaue my bodie to them that beate it: and my cheekes to them that buffeted the same. I did not turne my selfe away from them that reproched mee: nor yet from them that did spitte in my face.
                     
                     After this barbarous intreatie by the Iewes, they deliuered him ouer to Pilate a Gentile, and neuer ceassed to solicite and

pursue theyr vnquenchable hatred against him, vntill they sawe him on the Crosse,The barbarous abusage of Iesus, fore-told by prophecie. where also hee was vsed in the highest degree of spightfull dealing. Wherof likewise the Prophet Dauid, made mention long before in the person of the Messias, when hee sayd;Psalm. 21. 
                        They pearsed my handes and feete: they deuided among them my apparrell: and vppon my (vpper) garment they did cast lots. And againe of another crueltie hee complaineth, saying; they gaue me Gaule to eate, and in my thyrst they refreshed me with Vineger.
                     
                     And finally, that Christ shoulde die for the sinnes of mankinde,Christes death most plainelie fore-tolde. Gene, 21. 22. Numbers. 21. is a common principle both prefigured and fore-tolde throughout all the olde Scripture. Prefigured, by the sacrifice of Isaac: by the raysing vppe of the brasen Serpent, & by all other sacrifices that were in the Lawe.
Fore-told, not only by the Scriptures before alleaged, but also most plainely by Daniel, who was tolde by an Angel,Daniell, 9, that after a certain time by him there appointed: Ungetur Sanctus Sanctorum, the Saint of Saints shall be annointed, et occidetur Christus, & this annointed Saint or Christ shall be put to death.
Zacharie also about the same time, doth not onely foretell his death, but also the kind therof, and from what people he should receiue the same:Zacharie, 12. for thus he saith in the person of Christ himselfe. The

inhabitants of Ierusalem at that day shall looke vpon me, whom they haue Crucified.
                     
                     But if ye will reade the whole storie of Christes passion, sette downe at large sixe hundred yeeres before it fell out,The wonderfull prediction of Christ hys passion, sette downe by Esay. Esay. 57. I refer you to a narration of Esay, who to signifie the strangenes of the case, beginneth with thys Praeface; Who will giue credite to that we shall report, &c. And then a little after hee goeth on in these words; He shal mount vp as a twig from a drie earth. He hath no forme or beautie vppon him. Wee behelde him, and there was no countenance in him:
                        Christes deformitie vpon the Crosse. 
                        we saw him the most contemptible and dispised man in the worlde. A man full of paines, and experienced in infirmitie. His countenaunce was obscure and despicable, and wee made no account of him. Truely hee tooke vppon himselfe our greefes, and did beare our paines. We accounted him as a Leaper: and 
                              〈…〉
                            man striken and punished by God.
                        Christ appointed to die for our sinnes. 
                        But hee was wounded for our iniquities, and crushed in peeces for our wickednes. The discipline (or correction) of our peace lyeth vpon him: and by his woundes, we are made whole. We haue all erred, and gone astray like sheepe, euery man after hys 
                              •
                           wne waies: and God hath laide vpon him the iniquitie of vs all. Hee was offered vppe for vs, because he would so: he shal be led to his slaughter as a Sheepe: and as a Lambe he shal be silent befor his Sh
                              •
                           arours.
                     
                     
                        
                        For the sinnes of my people, haue I striken him, saith God. He hath doone no iniquitie, neither was there deceite founde in his mouth. Yet would the Lord crush him in infirmitie. But if he shall giue his life for sinne: then shall hee see a long seede (or generation,) and the will of the Lord shall be directed in his hand.
                        The increase of Christes kingdome after his resurrection. 
                        And for so much, as his soule hath sustained labour: it shall see and be filled. And this MY IVST SERVAVNT, That is, in making himselfe known, or reuealing the knowledge of himselfe to the world. 
                        in his knowledge, shall iustifie manie, and beare their iniquities. And I will allotte vnto him verie many people, and he shall deuide the spoyles of the stoute, for that hee hath deliuered his soule vnto death, and was accounted among the wicked, and prayed for hi
                              •
                            transgressours.
                     
                     Thus particularly (as ye see) was the death and passion of our Sauiour Christ fore-tolde by the Prophets of Israell, to that Nation. Nowe heare yee the prophecie of Sibylla
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         ye please,The particulers of Christes passion fore-tolde by Sibylla. wherein she fore-shewed the same to the Gentiles; These are her owne words, sette downe by Lactantius. Hee shall appeare miserable, ignominius and deformed, to the ende he may giue hope vnto the miserable.
                        
                           Lactant. lib. 4. diuin. instit. cap. 16. et 18. 
                        Afterward he shall come into the hands of most wicked and faithl
                              •
                           sse men: they shall buffette him with their sacriligious fistes, and shall spyt vpon him with their vncleane mouthes. He shal yeeld his innocent backe to the whippe, and shall saie

nothing while he receiueth the stripes, to the end he may speake to those that are dead. Hee shall beare a Crowne of thornes: and they shall giue him Gaule to eate, and Vinegar to drinke. And this shall be the hospitalitie he shall finde among them. What thing can be more plainely described then this?
                     Neither doe the auncient Rabines and Teachers among the Iewes discent frō thys.The consent of Rabbines. For that in theyr Thalmud,
                           Thal. tract. Sanhed. cap. helec. Misdraech. Ruth. Rab. Ioseph. in lib. Siph. Rab. Iacob. et R. Hanina. in cap. helec.
                         that was gathered aboue one thousande and two hundred yeeres agone, the plaine sentences of dyuers are sette downe: that their Messias at hys comming shall be put to death. And as for Rabbi Ionathan the Authour of the Chaldie Paraphrase, who died a little before our Sauiour Christ was borne: hee applyeth the whole narration of the Prophet Esay before recited,Esay, 53. (as needes hee must,) to the murther of the Messias by the Iewes. Whereuppon, Rabbi Simeon that liued the next age after him, wryteth these words following.
                           Rab. Simeō. Ben. Iohai. lib. de spe.
                         
                        Woe be to the men of Israell, for that they shall sley the Messias. God shall send his sonne in mans fleshe to wash them, and they shall murder him.
                     
                     Whereto agreeth Rabbi Hadarsan and others, and doe prooue further, out of the fore-alleaged prophecie of Daniell,
                           Rab. Hadars. in Dan.
                         Chapter 9. verse 27. that after Messias shal haue preached halfe seauen yeeres, he shall be slayne.

For that Daniel saith,Dani, 9. ver. 27 
                        In halfe of seauen yeeres; the Hoste and Sacrifice shall cease. Vpon which wordes, they comment thus: Three yeeres and a halfe, shall the presence of God in flesh, crie and preach vpon the Mount Oliuet; and then shall he be slaine. Which wordes the Iewes ordinarie 
                           Misdrasch. T
                                 •
                              helim.
                         Commentarie vppon the Psalmes, doe interpret to be meant of Christes preaching three yeres & an halfe before his passion. Which disagreeth very little or nothing from the account of vs Christians, and of our Euangelists.
                     
                        Of the myracles that fel out in Christ hys death and passion.And so wee see by all that hetherto hath beene said, that the very particulers of Christes whole death and passion, were foretolde most plainelie both to Iewe and Gentile, and acknowledged also by the auncient Doctors of the Iewish Nation, before the effectuation thereof came to passe. And Sibylla addeth further two perticuler miracles, that shold fall out in the sayd passion of the Messias, to wit:
                           Lact. lib. 4, diuin. Inst. ca. 19 
                        That the veile of the Iewes Temple should breake in two: and that at middaie; there should be darknes for three houres ouer all the world. Which thing to haue beene fulfilled at the death of Iesus, not only Saint Matthewe doth assure vs in his Gospell:Math, 27. but also Eusebius affirmeth, that hee had reade the same, word for word, recorded in diuers heathen wryters. And amongst other, he citeth

one Phlegon, an exact Chronicler, that reporteth the same in the fourth yeere of the two hundred and two Olympiad,
                           Euseb. in Chron. An Domin. 32. Phleg. Trallian. 11.14. Chron. An. 4. Olim 202. which agreeth iuste with the eyghteene yeere of Tyberius his raigne, which was the yeere wherein our Sauiour Christ suffered. And he goeth so nigh, as to name the very houres of the day, as our Euangelists doe. 
                           See Orig. cont. Cels. lib. 6. e
                                 •
                               Suid. in verbo Iesus. et Tere. in Apolog.
                         AEsculus an old Astronomer doth confirme the same, and proouoth more-ouer, by the scituation and constitution of the Sunne & Moone at that time, that no Eclipse coulde then be naturally. Which thing in like manner, Dyonisius Areopagita did obserue in the verie day of Christes passion,
                           Dionys. Areop. in ep.
                         beeing at that tyme but twentie and fiue yeeres olde, and yet well studied in Astronomie, as himselfe testifieth. And finally, Lucianus a Learned Prieste of Antioche,
                           Lucian. praes. apud Euseb.
                         was accustomed to prouoke the Gentiles to theyr owne Commentaries and Stories, for recorde and testimonie of those things.
                     There ensueth nowe, for ending and confirmation of all that hath been sayd and prooued before, to adde a worde or two of Iesus Resurrection.Of Iesus Resurrection. Which point, as of all other it is of most importance: so was it exactly fore-tolde both to Iewe and Gentile, and promised by Christ himselfe in all hys speeches whyle hee was vppon earth. And

among the Iewes, it was assured by all the prophecies before recited, which doe promise so great aboundance of glory, ioy, and tryumph to Christes Church after his passion. Which neuer possibly could be fulfilled, vnlesse he had risen from death againe. And therfore the said resurrectiō was prefigured in Ionas,Ionas, 2. together with the time of his abode in the Sepulcher. It was also expresly fore-shewed by Dauid, affirming:Psalme, 16. 
                        That GOD woulde not suffer his holy one to see corruption. And after him againe, more plainelie by the Prophet Ose;Ose, 6. 
                        He shall quicken vs againe after two daies, in the third day he shall rayse vs, and we shall liue in his sight. And to the Gentiles, Sibylla left written, not farre from the same time;
                           Lactant. lib. 4. instit. Diuin. cap. 19. 
                        He shal end the necessitie of death, by three daies sleepe: and then returning from death to light againe, hee shall be the first that shall shewe the beginning of Resurrection to his chosen: for that by conquering death, hee shall bring vs life.
                     
                     Thus much was promised by Prophets before Christes appearaunce.Math, 12, 16,17 Mark, 8,9. 10 Luke, 11, 18. Iohn, 2. And Iesus to comfort his Disciples and followers, reiterated this promise againe of himselfe in manie speeches, albeit oftentimes his meaning was not perceiued. Which promise of returne from death, if it had beene made for some long time to come, (as Mahomet promised

hys Sarasins after eyght hundred yeeres to reuisite them again,
                           Mahom. in Alcor. Azoar. 17.) albeit the performance were neuer meant: yet might the falsehood lurke in the length of time. But Iesus, assuring all men that he would rise againe within three daies, it cannot be imagined, but that hee sincerely purposed to performe his promise, for that otherwise the fraude must haue been discouered. Now then let vs consider what manner of performaunce Iesus made heereof.
                     And first the persons most interessed in the matter,The appearings which Iesus made after his resurrection. as they whose totall hope, stay, refuge and felicitie depended heereof: I mean his appaled, dismayed, and afflicted Disciples, doe recount twelue sundry apparisions which Iesus made vnto them in flesh, after hys Resurrection. The first was to Mary  Magdalen a part,Math, 16. when she with Solome and other women, went & remained with oyntments about the Sepulcher. The seconde, was to all the women together,Math. 28. as they returned homewardes, who also were permitted to embrace his feete. The thyrde, was to  Simon Peter alone.1. Corin. 15, Luke, 24. The fourth, to the two Disciples in their iourney to Emaus. The  fift was to all the Apostles, and other Disciples  together,Iohn. 20. when the doores were shut. The sixt, was to the same companie againe,
                        1. Cor, 15. Iohn, 20. after eyght dayes when Thomas was wyth

them, at what time also he did both eate and drink, and suffered his body also to be handled  among them. The seauenth, was to Saint Peter and S. Iohn,Iohn. 21. with fiue other disciples when they were in fishing; at what time also  he vouchsafed to eate with them: The eyght was to eleuen Disciples at one time,Math, 28. vpon the  Mount Thabor in Galiley.1. Corin. 15: The ninth was to more then fiue hundred bretheren at one  tyme, as Saint Paule testifieth. The tenth, was to S. Iames,Ibidem. as the same Apostle recordeth.  The eleuenth was to all his Apostles, Disciples and freendes together,Acts, 1. vppon the Mount Oliuet by Ierusalem, when in theyr  presence hee ascended vppe to heauen. The twelfth and last was after his ascention,1. Corin. 15. vnto Saint Paule, as himselfe beareth witnesse.
                     All these apparitions are recorded in Scripture, as made by Iesus after his Resurrection, to such as by his eternall wisedome, were preordained to be witnesses of so glorious a spectacle. To whom (as S. Luke affirmeth,Acts, 1. 
                        He showed himselfe aliue by manie arguments, for the space of fortie daies together, and reasoned with them of the kingdome of his Father. And why any man should mistrust the testimonie of those men which saw him, cō
                        uersed with him, eate with him, drank wyth him, touched him, and heard him speak, and whose entire estate and wel-fare depended

wholy of the certaintie heereof; I see no reason. For what comfort had it been or consolation to these men, to haue deuised of them selues these former apparitions? What encouragement might they haue taken, in those dolefull times of desolation and affliction,Circumstances that confirme the true resurrection of IESVS. to haue had among thē the deade body of him, on whose onely life, theyr vniuersall hope and confidence depended? The Scribes and Pharisies beeing astonished with the suddaine newes of his rysing againe, confirmed vnto them by their owne Souldiers that saw it, found no other way to resist the fame therof, but onely by saying, (as all theyr posteritie do vnto thys day) that his Disciples came by night and stole away his body whyle the Souldiours were a sleepe. But what likelihood or possibilitie can there be in thys? for first, it is euident to all the worlde; that hys Apostles themselues, (who were the heades of all the rest,) were so dismaied, discomforted, and deiected at that time, as they durst not once goe out of the doore, for which cause only those seelie women, who for their sexe esteemed themselues more free from violence: presumed alone to visite his Sepulcher, which no one man durst doe for feare of the Souldiours: vntill by those Women they were enformed, that the fore-said band of Souldiours, were terrified & put to flight

by Christes Resurrection.
                     
                        Great improbabilities.And then howe was it likely, that men so much amazed & ouercome with feare, shold aduenture to steale away a dead body from a Guard of Souldiers that kept it? or if theyr harts had serued them to aduenture so great a daunger: what hope or probabilitie had there beene of successe? especially, considering the sayde body lay in a newe Sepulcher of stone, shutte vppe, locked, and fast sealed by the Magistrate?
                     Howe was it possible (I say) that his dysciples should come thether? breake vp the Monument? take out his bodie? and carrie the same away, neuer after to be seene or founde, without espiall of some one amongst so many that attended there? Or if this were possible, (as in reason it is not) yet what profit, what pleasure, what comfort could they receiue hereby? We see that these Apostles and Disciples of his, who were so abandoned of lyfe and hart in his passion: after two daies onely they were so chaunged, as life & death can be no more contrarie.
                     For whereas before they kept home in all feare,The great change in Iesus Disciples by hys Resurrection. and durst appeare no where, except among theyr owne priuate freendes: nowe they came forth into the streetes & common places, and auouched with all alacritie, and irresistable constancie: euen in the faces and

hearing of theyr greatest enemies, that Iesus was risen from death to life; that they had seene him; and enioyed his presence. And that for testimonie and confirmation hereof, they were most ready to spend their liues. And could all thys (trow you) proceed onely of a dead bodie, which they had gotten by stealth into their possession? woulde not rather the presence and sight of such a bodie, so torne, mangled, and deformed, as Iesus bodie was, both vpon the Crosse and before: haue rather dismayed them more, then haue giuen them comfort? Yes truelie. And therfore Pilate the Gouernor,The examination of the matter by Pilate. considering these circumstaunces; and that it was vnlikelie, that eyther the body shoulde be stolne awaie without priuitie of the Souldiours, or if it had been, that it should yeeld such life, hart, consolation, & courage to the stealers: beganne to giue eare more diligentlie to the matter; and calling to him the Souldiers that kept the watch, vnderstood by thē the whole trueth of the accident, to wit, that in theyr sight and presence, Iesus was risen out of his Sepulcher to life, & that at hys rysing, there was so dreadfull an earthquake, with trembling and opening of Sepulchers rounde about; such skriches, cries, and commotion of all elements: as they durst not abide longer, but ran and told the Iewish Magistrates

thereof, who beeing greatly discontented (as it seemed) with the aduertisement: gaue thē money to say, that while they were sleeping, the body was stolne away from them by his Disciples.
                     
                        Pilats Letters to Tyberius, and hys proceeding therevppon.All thys wrote Pilate presently to hys Lorde Tyberius, who was then Emperor of Rome. And hee sent withall, the particular examinations & cōfessions of diuers others, that had seene and spoken with such as were rysen from death at that time, & had appeared to many of theyr acquaintance in Ierusalem, assuring them also of the resurrection of Iesus. Which informations when Tyberius the Emperor had cōsidered, he was greatly mooued therewith, and proposed to the Senate, that Iesus might be admitted among the rest of the Romaine Gods: offering hys owne consent, with the priuiledge of his supreame royall suffrage to that decree. But the Senate in no wise woulde agree thereunto. Whereupon, Tyberius beeing offended, gaue licence to all men to beleeue in Iesus that would: and forbid vpon pain of death, that any Officer or other, shoulde molest or trouble such as bare good affection, zeale, or reuerence to that name. Thus much testifieth Tertulian against the Gentiles,
                           Tertul. in apolo. pro Christian.
                         of hys own knowledge; who liuing in Rome a learned man, and pleader of causes, diuers yeeres

before he was a Christian: (which was about one hundred and foure-score yeres after our Sauiour Christes ascention,) had great abilitie by reason of the honour of his familie, learning, and place wherein he liued, to see and know the Records of the Romains. And the same doth affirme also Egisippus;
                           Egesip. lib. 1. hist. Eusebius libro 4. capit. 21. Ruffin lib. 1. cap. 22. an other auncient. Wryter of no lesse authoritie then Tertulian, before whom he liued.
                     Neither onely diuers Gentiles had thys opinion of Iesus Resurrection againe from death, but also sundry Iewes of great credit and wisedome,The opinion of the wiser sort of 
                              •
                           ewes, touching Iesus resurrection in that tyme. at that time were inforced to beleeue it; notwithstanding, it pleased not God to giue them so much grace, as to become Christians. Thys appeareth plainly by the learned Iosephus, who writing his storie not aboue fortie yeres after Christes passion, tooke occasion to speake of Iesus and of his Disciples. And after he had shewed how he was Crucified by Pilate, at the instance of the Iewes: and that for all thys, his disciples ceassed not to loue him styll: hee adioyneth forthwith these words;
                           I
                                 •
                              sephus lib. 14. antiq. cap. 4. 
                        
                           Idcirco illis tertio die vita resumpta, denuo apparuit.
That is, for this loue of his Disciples, he appeared vnto thē againe the third day, when hee had resumed life vnto him. Which expresse, plaine, and resolute words, we may in reason take, not as the confession onely of Iosephus, but as the

common iudgement, opinion and sentence, of all the discreete & sober men of that time; layde downe and recorded by thys Historiographer.
In whose dayes there were yet manie Christians aliue, that had seene & spoken with Iesus after hys Resurrection; and infinite Iewes, that had hearde the same protested by their fathers, bretheren, Kins-folke and freendes, who had beene themselues eye witnesses thereof.
                     And thus hauing declared and prooued the Resurrection of our Sauiour Iesus,Of Iesus Ascention. bothe howe it was fore-shewed, as also fulfilled: there remaineth nothing more of necessitie to be said in this Section. For that, who soeuer seeth and acknowledgeth, that Iesus being dead, could rayse himselfe againe to life, will easily beleeue also, that he was able likewise to ascende vppe to heauen. Whereof notwithstanding, Saint Luke alleageth one hundred and twentie witnesses at the least,Acts, 1. in whose presence he ascended from the top of the Mount Oliuet, after fortie daies space which he had spent with them frō the time of hys Resurrection.Likeli-hoodes of trueth. Hee alleageth also the appearing of two Angels among al the people for testimonie thereof. He nameth the day and place, when, & where it happened. Hee recounteth the very wordes that Iesus spake at his ascention. He telleth the manner

how he ascended, and howe a Clowde came downe, and receiued him into it out of their 
                           •
                        ight. He declareth what the multitude did, whether they went, and in what place they remained afer theyr departure thence. And finally, hee setteth downe so many perticulers, as it had beene the easiest matter in the worlde, for his enemies to haue refuted hys narration, if all had not been true. Neyther was there any to receiue more domage by the falshood thereof, then himselfe & those of hys profession, if the matter had beene feigned.
                     Wherefore to conclude at length thys treatise of the Byrth, Life, Doctrine, Actions, Death, Resurrection and Ascention of Iesus:The conclusion of thys second Section. seeing nothing hath happened in the same, which was not for
                           •
                        -told by the Prophets of God; nor any thing foreshewed by the same Prophets cōcerning the Messias, which was not fulfilled most exactly, within the compasse and course of Iesus abode vppon earth: we may most certainly assure our selues, that as God can neyther fore-tell an vntruth, nor yeelde testimonie to the same: so can it not be, but that these thinges which wee haue shewed to haue been so manifestly foreprophecied, & so euidently accomplished, must needes assure vs, that Iesus was the true Messias. Which thing shal yet more particularly

appeare by that which ensued by his power and vertue, after his ascention: which shall be the argument of the next Section which followeth.
                  
               
               
                  Howe Iesus prooued his Deitie, after his departure to heauen. SECT. 3.
                  AS by the deedes and actions of IESVS while he was vpon the earth, compared with the predictions of Gods Prophets from time to time: he hath beene declared in the former Sections, to be the true Messias and Sauiour of the worlde;The contents of thys thyrd Section. so in thys that nowe we take in hande, shall the same be shewed by such thinges as ensued after his ascention and departure from this world. Wherein his power and Deitie appeared more manifestlie, (if it may be so spoken,) then in other his workes which hee wrought in his life. In which kind, albeit I might treate of many & almost infinite braunches, yet for order and breuities sake, I meane onely to take in consideration these fewe that ensue. Wherin, not onely the power of Iesus, but also his loue, his care and prouidence, and most perfect accomplishment of all hys promises; and finally, the iustification of all his speeches,

prophecies, and doctrines vpon earth haue beene declared.
                  And to reduce what is to be said heerein to some order and methode, it is to be noted, that in the first place shall be considered the sustentation,The deuision of the particuler considerations ensuing. protection, increase, and continuation of Christes little Church and kingdome, that himselfe first planted and left vpon earth. The second consideration, shal be of hys Apostles and theyr Actions. The thyrde, of hys Euangelists. The fourth, of hys witnesses and Martyrs throughout the world. The fyft, shall treate of the kingdom of infernall powers beaten down by his vertue. The sixt, of the punishment & iust reuenge that lighted vppon hys enemies, who most impugned his diuine personne in the world. The seauenth and last, shall declare the fulfilling of all such prophecies and predictions, as proceeded frō his diuine mouth, while he was conuersant vpon earth.
                  
                     The first Consideration.
                     
                     NOwe then for the first, it is to be considered,Christes Church. that at Iesus departure out of thys world from the Mount Oliuet, S. Luke reporteth, that all the multitude of hys followers, which there had beheld his ascention

into heauen, returned backe together into the Cittie of Ierusalem, and there remained in one house together, continuing in prayer and expectation, what shoulde become of them. The whole Cittie was bent against them: themselues were poore and simple people: and diuers of them women: Lands or reuenewes they had none to maintayne them: nor freendes in Courte to giue them countenaunce against theyr enemies. The name of Iesus was most odious: and whosoeuer did fauour hym, was counted an enemy to the state. There wanted not (perhaps) among them, who considering the great multitude, would imagine with themselues, what should become of them:The state of Christes first Church. where they should finde to maintaine and sustaine them: what should be the ende of that feeble congregation? For abroad they durst not goe, for feare of persecution: and continue long together they might not, for want of necessaries. Besides that, euery houre they expected to be molested and drawne foorth by Catch-poles and other Officers. And albeit in these dystresses, the fresh memorie of Iesus, and hys sweete promises made vnto them at his departure: as also the delectable presence of hys blessed Mother, and her often exhortations and encouragements vnto them, dyd comfort them generally, as may be supposed:

yet to him that by humaine reason, shoulde ponder and weigh theyr present state & condition, it coulde not chuse but seeme harde and no waies durable.
                     But beholde vppon the suddaine,The comming of the holie Ghost, & what comforts hee brought with him. Acts. 2. when they had continued nowe tenne daies together, & might by all probabilitie find themselues in verie high degree of temporall distresses: Iesus performed his promise of sending them a COMFORTER, which was the holie Ghost. By whose comming, besides the internall ioy and incredible alacritie and exultation of minde, they receiued also fortitude and audacitie, to goe foorth into the worlde. They receiued the gyft of tongues, enabling them to conuerse & deale with all sorts of people. They receiued wisdome and learning, wyth most wonderfull illumination in highest mysteries, wherby to preach, to teach, & conuince their aduersaries. They receiued the gift of prophecie to fore-tell things to come, together wyth the power of working signes & myracles, wherby the whole world remained astonied. And for a taste or earnest pennie of that which shoulde ensue, concerning the infinite increase of that little Congregation: they sawe three thousand of theyr aduersaries conuerted to them in one daie, by a Sermon of S. Peter.
                     
                        Which increase went on so fast for the tyme that insued: that within fortie yeeres after, the Gentiles themselues confesse, that the braunches of thys Congregation, were spread ouer all the world,
                           Suetonius in vita Nero. Cor. Tacit. lib. 5. hist.
                         and began to put in feare the very Romaine Emperors themselues. Whereof not long after, a man that was as learned as euer was any, conuerted from Paganisme to Christianitie, beareth recorde in hys defence to an Emperour & hys Officers, who according to the nature of persecutors, accounted Christians for Traytors and enemies to his state and dignitie. Which vulgare obiection, thys foresaid learned man refuteth in these words.
                     
                        
                           Tertulian in apol. ad gentes.
                        
                        If we were enemies to your estate, you might well seeke new Citties & Counteries whereof to beare gouernment; for that you should haue in your Empire more enemies thē Cittizens. We haue filled your Townes, your Citties, your Prouinces, your Ilandes, your Castels, your Fortresses, your Tents, your Campes, your Courtes, your Palaces, your Senats, and your Market places. Onely we haue left your idolatrous Temples vnto your selues: all other places are full of Christians. If we were enemies, what dangerous warres might we make against you, (albeit our number were far lesse,) who esteeme so little of our liues, as to offer our selues

dailie to be slaine at your handes? This then is your safetie in verie deede, not your persecuting of vs, but that we are honest, patient, and obedient; and that it is more lawfull in Christian Religion, to be kylled, then to kil.
                     
                     By which wordes of Tertulian,The wonderfull quick increase of Christes Church. in thys first beginning and infancie (as it were) of Christian Religion (for hee liued in the second age after Christ,) we see how this ltitle flocke and kingdom of Iesus was increased, notwithstanding all the resistance and violence of the world against it
                           •
                         Which appeareth by the same Tertulian, to haue beene such:
                           In praefat. Apolog.
                         and was euen at that time when hee wrote those wordes (the fourth persecution beeing then in most furie:) as all the malefactors of the worlde together, had not so much rigour shewed against them: as had the most innocent Christian that liued, for confessing onely that name and Religion.
                     Thys then declared most apparentlie, that it could not proceed but of some diuine power and supernaturall assistance, that in so short a space, amidst the contradiction and opposition of so many aduersaries: among the whyppes, swords, & tortures of so great, potent, and violent persecutors: thys poore, simple, and feeble congregation shold pearse through, and augment it selfe so stronglie. Especially if we cōsider the outward meanes

of this increase;The increase of Christians against nature. wherein there was nothing to allure or content mans nature: nothing gorgious, nothing delectable, nothing to please or entertaine sensualitie.
                     
                        
                           Plutarch. in Apoth. Prisc. regū.
                        We reade of an Emperour, that taking in hand to conquer the worlde, made thys Proclamation for winning men vnto hys partie.The Proclamation of Cyrus, Monarche of Media. 
                        Who soeuer wyll come and bee my seruaunt: if he be a foote-man, I wyll make him a horse-man.
If hee be a horse-man, I wyll make hym ryde with Coches. If he be a Farmour, I will make him a Gentleman. If he possesse a cottage, I wyll giue him a Village. If he haue a Village, I wyll giue him a Cittie. If he be Lorde of a Cittie, I will make him Prince of a Region or Countrey. And as for gold, I wyll poure it foorth vnto them by heapes and weight, and not by number.
                     
                     Thys was the Proclamation and Edict of Cyrus to his followers: very glorious (as we see) in pompe of wordes and oftentation of style.Iesus Proclamation. Let vs nowe compare the Proclamation of Iesus, whose entraunce and Praeface was;Math, 3, 
                        Paenitentiam agite: Repent ye. And then it foloweth:Iohn, 16. 
                        In hoc mundo pressuram habebitis: in thys worlde you shall receiue affliction. And then after againe;Math, 10, 
                        They shall whippe and murder you. And yet further: You shal be hateful in the sight of all men, for my sake. Then is there adioyned:Luke, 9, 
                        He that loueth hys

life, shall loose his soule. After that ensueth: he that will follow me, must beare his Crosse. And finally the conclusion is:Luke, 14. 
                        He that commeth to me, and doth not hate his father, his mother, his wife, his children, his bretheren, his sisters, and also his owne life for my sake, he is not worthy to be my seruaunt.
                     
                     Thys was the entertainement proposed by Iesus, to such as woulde come and serue vnder his Banner; wyth expresse protestation, that himselfe was sent into the world, not to bring peace,Math, 5. rest, and ease to fleshe and blood, but rather to be the cause of sworde, fire, tribulation, combat, and enmitie. And yet, wyth these cold offers, presented to the world by poore, abiect, and most contemptible Officers; and by this doctrine, so crosse and opposite to mans nature, inclination and sensuall appetite: he gained more harts vnto him, within the space of fortie yeeres, as hath beene sayd: then euer did Monarche in the world possesse louing Subiects, by what soeuer temporall allurement they dyd or might propose. Which argueth most euidently, the omnipotent puissaunce of him, that contrary to mans reason, could bring to passe so miraculous a conquest.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                         The second Consideration.
                     THere followeth in order, the consideration of Christes Apostles;Of Christes Apostles. which in som respect, may be sayd more strange and wonderfull then the former, in that they beeing both rude, simple, and vnlearned men, (and for the most part of the baser sort,) should be chosen and assigned to so great a worke, as was the conuersion of all Countries and Nations, and to stand in combat with the power, learning and wisedome, of all the worlde. Neyther onely had they to contende & fight against theyr enemies, but also to direct, gouerne, and menage all those, who should be adioyned to theyr Maisters kingdome. To which charge they seemed so vntoward and insufficient, in all that time wherein they lyued with him heere vpon earth: as by they questions and demaundes made vnto hym a little before his passion, they might appeare to haue learned very little, in three whole yeeres conuersation and instruction: and in very deede, to be incapable of so hygh mysteries and functions.
                     Yet notwithstanding, these men, who of themselues were weake and impotent, after strength and confirmation receiued by the

descending of Gods holy Spirite into them: became so perfect, able, and most excellent men, as they brought the whole worlde in admiration of them. Not onely by the most exquisite perfectiō of their doctrine, (wherin on a suddaine, without studie they excelled, & conuinced the greatest Phylosophers then liuing,) but also, and that especially, by the rare and stupendious miracles, which they wrought in the sight of all men. The contemplation whereof, as S. Luke reporteth, droue the beholders not only into great meruaile,Acts. 2
                              •
                           
                         but also into feare and exceeding terrour.
                     And for example,The Apostles myracles. he recounteth the restoring of a lame man at the Temple gate of Ierusalem, which had been a Cripple for the space of fortie yeeres and more, and this miracle was doone and testified in the presence and knowledge of all the Cittie. Hee recordeth also,Acts, 3. the dreadfull death of Annanias and Saphira, by the onely speech and voyce of S. Peter: as in like manner, the healing of infinite sicke people,Acts, 5. by the presence & shadow of the same Apostle. He reporteth also the most wonderfull deliueraunce of the sayd S. Peter, out of the hands and prison of Herode by the Angell of GOD. The varietie of languages which all the Apostles spake. The visible descending of the holie

Ghost vppon all such, on whom the sayd Apostles did but lay theyr hands.1, Cor. 15. 2, Cor, 12. Act, 9, 22, 26 The miraculous conuersion of Saint Paule, by Christes appearing vnto him in the way, when hee went to persecute. Of which miracle, Saint Paule himselfe protesteth in euery place afterward, and once especially, in an open audience and iudgment, before King Agrippa, and Festus Gouernour of Iurie.
                     These myracles and many moe are recorded by Saint Luke: whereof some part were seene by himselfe, and the rest most euident to all the world, as doone in publique before infinite witnesses. Neyther is it possible they coulde be faigned, for that (as in the like I haue before noted,) it had beene most easie to haue refelled them, and thereby to haue discredited the whole proceedings of Christian Religion in those first beginnings.The myracles reported of the Apostles, could not be feigned. As for example; if the myracle of Saint Peter, beeing deliuered forth of the hands and pryson of Herode Agrippa, had any way beene to be touched with falsehood: howe manie would there haue beene of Herods Officers Courtiers, seruaunts and freendes, that for defence of their Princes honour, (so deeplie tainted by this narration of S. Luke, published not long after the thing was done,) how many (I say) would haue offered themselues to refute and disgrace the VVriter heereof,

hauing so pregnant meanes by publique record to doe the same; So againe, whereas the same S. Luke reporteth of hys owne knowledge, that in a Cittie of Macedonie, named Philippi, S. Paule and Silas after many myracles doone, were whypped and put in pryson, with a diligent guarde in the lowest prison of all: theyr feete locked fast in stockes of Tymber,Acts, 16. and that at midnight whē Paule and Silas beganne to pray, the whole pryson was shaken, and all the doores thrown open, as also the gyues, not onely of those two, but of all the other prysoners vppon a suddaine burst in sunder: and that thereupon, not onlie the Iaylor cast himselfe at the feete of S. Paule, but the Magistrates also, (who the day before had caused them to be whypt,) came and asked them pardon, and humblie intreated them to depart out of theyr Citty. Thys storie (I say) if it had been false, there needed no more for confutation thereof, but onely to haue examined the whole Cittie of Philippi, which coulde haue testified the contrarie.
                     And yet among so many aduersaries,None euer durst impugne the myracles of our Apostles, but by calumniation. and eager impugners of Christian Religion, as Gods enemie styrred vppe in the primatiue Church, of all sorts and sects of people: no one euer appeared, that durst attempt to take in hande, the particuler improuing of

these or the like miracles: but rather confessing the facts, sought alwaies to discredite them by other sinister calumniations: namelie and commonlie, that they were wrought by the deceits and sleights of Arte-Magick.Math, 12. Thus said the Iewes of the miracles of Iesus, and so sayd Iulian the Apostata,
                           Apud Cyril lib. 1. cont. Iulian. August. lib. de vera Relig.
                         of the wonderfull strange things doone by S. Peter and Saint Paule; affirming them to haue beene the most expert in Magick, of any that euer lyued: & that Christ wrote a special booke of that profession, and dedicated the same to Peter and Paule: whereas notwithstanding, it is most euident, that Paule was a persecutor diuers yeeres after Christ departed.
                     
                        
                           Eusebius lib. cont. Hiero.
                        One Hierocles also wrote a booke, wherin he feigned Appolonius Tyanaeus to haue doone the lyke myracles by Magicke, which Christ and hys Apostles did by diuine power. And finally, it is a generall opinion, 
                           ••
                        a
                           •
                         both Nero and Iulian, gaue themselues so extreamely to the studie of that vaine Science, as no men euer dyd the like; vppon emulation only of the miracles done in Rome by Peter and Paule when Nero liued, and by other Saints and Disciples in the tyme of Iulian.
                     
                        
                           Plin. lib. 30. Nat. hist. cap. 1.But what was the end? Plinie that was a Pagan, writeth thus of Nero; that as no man euer laboured more then he in that Science,

so no man euer left a more certaine testimonie of the meruailous exceeding vanitie thereof.
                           Zosimus, in vita Iulia.
                         The like in effect wryteth Zosimus of Iulian, albeit himselfe a malitious Heathen. And if it were not written, yet theyr seuerall extraordinarie calamities, and most miserable deathes, which by all their Magick they coulde not fore-see: doth sufficientlie testifie the same vnto vs; especially the last words of Iulian:
                           Niceph. lib. 10. cap. 35. hist.
                         
                        Uicisti Galilaee, vicisti. Thou hast wonne (ô Galilaean,) thou hast gotten the victorie. Acknowledging thereby, as wel the trueth of Christes myracles and of his folowers, as also the vanitie, follie and madnes of hys owne endeuours.
                     Thus then went forward Christes Apostles,The successe of the Apostles. & preached him euery where throughout the world;Marke, 16. 
                        Domino cooperante & sermonem confirmante, sequentibus signis: that is, (as S. Marke affirmeth,) the Lorde Iesus working with them, and confirming theyr preaching by signes and myracles. In respecte of which benigne assistance of Iesus in theyr actions: Saint Luke sayth further:Acts. 14. 
                        they dealt most confidently in the Lord: his word of grace giuing testimonie vnto their dooings, and shevving foorth signes and most prodigious wonders by their hands. No persecution, no terrour, no threates of enemies, no difficultie, or daunger that might occurre, coulde stay thē from

theyr course of setting foorth Christes name and glorie.The assurance of the Apostles. And they were so assured of the trueth, by the inwarde illuminations which they had, and by thys certaine testimonie of Gods fauour and assistance in dooing myracles: 
                           •
                        s one of them wryteth thus;1. Iohn. 1. 
                        That which wee haue hearde, which wee haue seene with our eyes, which we haue beheld, which our hands haue handled of the word of life: that we doe testifie & announce vnto you. And another who had S. Paule. beene a greeuous persecutor, and was conuerted wythout any conference with any Christian in the world; sayd, of Iesus that was dead, and risen againe: that, neither tribulation, nor distresse, nor famine, nor beggerie, nor danger, nor persecution, nor dint of sword,
                        Rom, 8. could daunt him from the seruice of such a Mayster. And in another place, he sayth, that hee esteemed all things of thys world, wherein a man might glorie,Phillip. 3. to be as very dounge and detriments, in respect of the eminent knowledge, (that is hys worde) of his Lorde Iesus Christ. In which very name he tooke so exceeding great delight: as in a fewe Epistles which he left written, he is obserued to haue vsed this sentence, Dominus noster Iesus Christus, aboue two hundred times.
                     
                        The ioyful ending of the Apostles.Neyther endured thys in these Apostles for a tyme onely, but all theyr liues, which as they spent the same with alacritie in the

seruice of Iesus: so in the ende they gaue vp the same most cheerefully, to what soeuer death presented it selfe, for confirmation & sealing of theyr former doctrine; neuer so full of confidence, courage, and consolation, as at that houre,2. Tim. 4. 1. Thess. 2. nor euer so boldly denouncing theyr Maister, or talking so ioyfully of rewards, Crownes and kingdomes, as at the very last instant & vpshotte of their worldly combat. Thys then declareth most manifestly, that the actions of these men, proceeded not of humaine spirit, nor could be performed by the power of man; but by the diuine force & supernaturall assistance of their Lord and God, whom they confessed.
                  
                  
                     The thyrd Consideration.
                     
                     AND thus much in breuitie of Christes Apostles.Of the Euangelists. There ensue next his Euangelists: that is, such men as haue left vnto vs written, hys byrth, life, doctrine, and death. Wherein is to be noted, that Iesus beeing God, tooke a different way frō the custome of man, in deliuering vnto vs his Lawes and precepts. For that men, who haue been lawmakers vnto the world, knewe no surer way of publishing theyr Lawe, and procuring authoritie to the same, then to write them with

their owne handes, and in theyr life time to establish theyr promulgation. So Lycurgus, Solon, & others among the Graecians: Numa to the Romaines: Mahomet to the Sarafins: and diuers other in like manner.Iesus left nothing written by himselfe. But Iesus to shew hys diuine power in directing the penne and style of his Euangelists, would not leaue any thing written by himselfe, but passed from thys world in simplicitie and silence, wythout any further shew or ostentation of hys owne doings: meaning notwithstanding by hys eternall wisedome, that the prophecie of Ezechiell shoulde be fulfilled,Ezechi. 1. which fore-signified the beeing of his foure irrefragable witnesses, which day & night without rest, shold preach, extoll, & magnifie theyr Lord & Maister to the worlds end.
                     
                        The different qualities and circumstaunces of the foure Euangelists.Foure then were fore-prophecied, and foure as wee see by Gods prouidence, were prouided to fulfill the same prophecie. The first and last are two Apostles, that wrote as they had seene. The two middle are two disciples, who registred things as they had vnderstoode by conference with the Apostles. The first Gospell was written by an Apostle, to giue light and open the way to al the rest. And the last in like manner was written by an Apostle, to giue authoritie and confirmation to all the former. The first was written in the Hebrue or Iewish tongue, for that

Iesus actions were done in that Countrie, to the ende that thereby, eyther the whole Nation might beleeue them, or the obstinate impugne them. The other three were wrytten in the publique tongues of all other Nations: that is, in the Greeke & Romaine languages, if it be true (
                           See Armacan. lib. 9. de qu
                                 •
                              est.
                         which diuers holde,) that S. Markes Gospell was first written in Latine.
                     They wrote theyr stories in diuers Countries,Circumstances of truth in our Euangelists. each one remaining farre distant from another, and yet agreed they all (as wee see) most exactlie, in the very same narration. They wrote in diuers times, the one after the other, and yet the latter did neyther correct nor reprehend any thing in the former. They published theyr stories, when infinite were aliue that knewe the facts, and manie more that desired to impugne them. They sette downe in most of theyr particuler narrations, the time, the day, the houre, the place, the Village, the house, the persons, the men, the women, and other the like. Which circumstaunces, the more they are in number, the more easie to be refuted if they were not true. Neyther dyd they in Iurie, write of things done in India, but in the same Countrie if selfe, in Townes and Cities that were publiquely knowne: in Bethania and Bethsaida, Villages harde by Ierusalem: in the

Suburbes and hyls about the Cittie, in such a streete, at such a gate, in such a porch of the Temple, at such a fish-poole, which al people in Ierusalem did euery day behold.
                     
                        The publishing of our Gospels.They published theyr wryting in their owne life time: and preached in worde, so much as in wryting they had recorded. They permitted the same to the iudgment and examination of all Christes Church, especiallie of the Apostles, who were able to discerne euery least thing therein contained. So Saint Marke set foorth his Gospell,
                           Hieron. in catalog script. Eccles.
                         by the instruction and approbation of S. Peter, as also dyd S. Luke, by the authoritie of S. Paule. They altered not theyr wrytings afterwarde, as other Authors are wont in theyr latter editions, nor euer corrected they one iote of that which they had first sette downe. And that which neuer happened in any other wrytings in the worlde besides, nor euer Prince or Monarch was able to bring to passe, for credite of hys Edicts or sanctions: they gaue theyr liues for defence and iustifying of that which they had written.
                     
                        The manner of style in our Euangelists.Their manner of wryting, is sincere and simple, without all arte, amplification, or rethoricall exhortation. They flatter none, no not Iesus himselfe, whō they most adore: nor in confessing him to be theyr God and Creator, doe they conceale his infirmities of

flesh, in that he was man:Math, 21. Marke. 2. Iohn, 7. Luke, 19. as hys hunger and thyrst: his beeing wearie: how he wept: his passions of feare, and the like. So likewise in the Apostles that were the Gouernours, superiours and heades of the rest: doe these Euangelists dissemble, hyde, or passe ouer no such things as were defects, & might seeme to worldly eyes to turne to theyr discredits. As for example, howe Christ rebuked them for theyr dulnes in vnderstanding:Marke, 15
                              •
                            Iohn, 10. 11, & 20. howe after long instruction, they proposed notwithstanding, very rude and impertinent questions vnto hym: howe Thomas woulde not beleeue the attestation of hys fellowes: how S. Iohn and S. Iames the sonnes of Zebedee, ambitiously solicited to haue the preheminence of sitting neerest to Christ in hys glorie: which latter clause, beeing sette downe cleerelie by Saint Marke,Marke, 10. whyle yet S. Iohn the Apostle was liuing, the same was neuer denyed, nor taken ill by the said Apostle, neither was saint Marks Gospell any thing the lesse approoued by him, albeit he liued longest, and wrote last of all the rest.
                     Nay, which is more,A special point to be obserued in our Euangelists. and greatlie (no doubt) to bee obserued; these Euangelists were so sincere and religious in theyr narrations, as they noted especially the imperfections of themselues, and of such other as they principally respected. So Saint Mathew nameth

himselfe Mathew the Publicane.
                        Math, 10. Marke, 14. And so S. Marke beeing Peters dysciple, recordeth particulerly, how S. Peter thrise denied hys Lord and Maister. Saint Luke that was scholler and dependent of S. Paule, maketh mention alone of the differences betweene Paule and Barnabas:Acts. 15. and in the Storie of S. Stephens death, after all hys narration ended, he addeth a clause that in humane iudgment might haue beene left out, to wit,Acts, 7. 
                        Saulus erat consentiens neci eius: Saule was consenting and culpable of Stephens death. Whereby wee may perceiue most perspicuously, that as these men were plaine, sincere and simple, and farre from presuming to deuise any thing of themselues, so were they religious, and had scruple to passe ouer, or leaue out any thing of the trueth, in fauour of themselues, or of any other whosoeuer.
                     These mens wrytings then, were published and receiued for vndoubted trueth, by all that liued in the verie same age, and were priuie to the perticulers therein contayned. They were copied and abroad into infinite mens hands, and so conserued wyth all care & reuerence, as holy and diuine scripture. They were read in Churches throughout al Coū
                        tries and Nations: expounded, preached, & taught by all Pastours, and commentaries made vppon them by holy Fathers frō tyme

to tyme. So that no doubt can be made,No doubt but that we haue the true wrytings of our Euangelists. but that we haue the very same wrytings incorrupt as the Authours left them: for that it was impossible for any enemie to corrupt so many copies ouer the world, without discouerie and resistaunce. And the same verie text, words, and sentences, which from age to age the learned Fathers doe alleage out of these Scriptures, we finde them now, as they had them at that time. As for example, S. Iohn that liued longest of al the Apostles & Euangelists, had among other Schollers and auditours, Papias, Ignatius, and Policarpus, all which agree of the foure Gospels and other writings left vnto vs in the newe Testament affirming S. Iohn to haue approoued the same. These men were Maisters againe to Iustinus Martyr, Ireneus & other, whose writings remaine vnto vs. And if they dyd not, yet their sayings and iudgments touching the Scriptures, are recorded vnto vs by Eusebius and other Fathers of the next age after,
                           Eusebius. lib. 5. hist. cap 15. and so from hande to hande vntill our dayes. So that of this, there can be no more doubt, then whether Rome, Constantinople, Ierusalem, and other such renouned Citties knowne to all the world at thys daie, be the very same wherof Authors haue treated so much in auncient times.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                         The fourth Consideration.
                     AND thus much of Christes Euangelists, for whose more credite, and for confirmation of things by them recorded:Of Martyrs. hys diuine prouidence preordained, that infinite witnesses, (whom we call Martyrs) shoulde offer vppe theyr bloode in the Primatiue Church and after. Wheras for no other doctrine, profession, or Religion in the worlde, the like was euer heard of; albeit among the Iewes in the tyme of the Machabees,
                           Macab. lib. 1. et 2. and at some other times also, when that Nation for their sinnes were afflicted by Heathen Princes, some fewe were tyrannized and iniuriously put to death; yet commonly, and for the most part, thys was rather of barbarous crueltie in the Pagans for theyr resistaunce, then directly for hatred of Iewish Religion. And for the number, there is no doubt, but that more Christians were put to death with in two monethes for theyr beleefe throughout the worlde, then were of Iewes for two thousand yeeres before Christes comming. Which is vndoubtedly a matter very wonderfull, considering, that the Iewish Religion impugned no lesse the Pagan Idolatrie, then dooth the doctrine of the Christians.

But this came to passe that Christes wordes might be fulfilled, who saide;Math, 5. 
                        I come not to bring peace but the sword. And againe, I sende you foorth as sheepe among wolues.
                        Math, 10. That is to say, to be torne and harried, and your blood to be deuoured.
                     In which extreame and most incredible sufferings of Christians,Three poynts to be considered in our Martyrs. three poynts are woorthy of great consideration. The first, what infinite multitudes of all states, conditions, sexe, qualities and age, did suffer dailie for testimonie of this trueth. The second, 
                           See the narration of Philaeas, bishop in Affrica touching this point, alleaged by Eusebius, lib. 8. hist. cap. 11. et 12. what intollerable and vnaccustomed torments, not hearde of in the worlde before, were deuised by Tyrants for afflicting thys kinde of people. The thyrde, what inuincible courage and vnspeakable alacritie, the Christians shewed, in bearing out these afflictions, which the enemies thēselues could not attribute, but to some diuine power and supernaturall assistance.
                     And for thys later poynt of comfort in theyr sufferings,The singuler alacritie of Christians in theyr sufferings. I wil alleage onely this testimonie of Tertulian against the Gentiles, who obiected, that wicked men suffered also as well as Christians; whereto thys learned Doctor made aunswere in these words.
Truth it is, that many men are prone to ill, and do suffer for the same: but yet dare they not defende theyr euill to be good, as Christians

doe theyr cause. For that euerie euill thing by nature, dooth bring wyth it eyther feare or shame:
                              Tertul. in. Apolog capit. 1. and therefore wee see, that malefactors, albeit they loue euill, yet would they not appeare so to the world, but desire rather to lye in couert. They tremble when they are taken, and when they are accused, they denie all, and doe scarse oftentimes confesse their dooings vpon torments. And finally, whē they are condemned, they lament, mone, and doe impute their hard fortune, to destinie, or to the Planets. But the Christian, what doth hee like to this? is there any man ashamed? or doth any man repent him whē he is taken, except it be for that hee was not taken rather? If hee be noted by the enemie for a Christian, hee glorieth in the same: yf he be accused, he defendeth not himselfe: if hee be asked the question, hee confesseth it willingly: if he be condemned, hee yeeldeth thanks. What euill is there then in the Christian cause, which lacketh the naturall sequel of euill? I meane feare, shame, tergiuersation, repentaunce, sorrowe, and deploration? What euil (I say) can this be deemed, whose guiltines is ioy? whose accusation is desire? whose punishment is happines?
                     
                     Hetherto are the words of learned Tertulian,Iesus assistance to his Martyrs. who was an eye witnesse of that hee wrote, and had no small part in the cause of

those that 
                           •
                        uffered, beeing himselfe in that place and state, as daily he might expect to taste of the same affliction. To which combat, howe readie he was, may appeare by diuers places of this his Apologie, wherein hee vttereth (besides hys zeale and feruour) a most confident securitie, and certaine assuraunce of Iesus assistaunce, by that which hee had seene performed to infinite other, in their greatest distresses, from the same Lord before. So that nothing doth more acertaine vs of the diuine power and omnipotencie of Iesus, then the fortitude inuinsible, which aboue all humane reason, force, and nature, he imparted to his Martyrs.
                  
                  
                     The fift Consideration.
                     
                     AFter which consideration,The subiection of spyrits. there commeth to be weighed, the fift poynt before mentioned, which is, of the same power and omnipotencie of Iesus, declared and exercised vpon the spirits infernall. Which thing, partly may appeare by the Oracles alleaged in the ende of the former Section, (wherein those spirits fore-told; that an Hebrue childe should be borne; to the vtter subuersion and ruine of theyr tyrannicall dominion:) and much more at large the same might bee declared,

by other aunswers and Oracles vttered after Christes natiuitie, and registred in the monuments euen of the Heathens themselues. Whereof he that desireth to see more ample mention, (especially out of Porphyrie who then was liuing,) let him read Eusebius sixt booke, De preparatione Euangelica, wher he shall finde store: and namely, that Apollo many times exclaimed, Hei mihi, congemiscite: Hei mihi: hei mihi:
                        Oraculorum defecit me claritas. 
                        Woe vnto me, lament yee wyth me; woe vnto me, woe vnto me: for that the honour of Oracles hath nowe forsaken mee.
Which complaints and lamentations, are nothing els but a plaine confession, that Iesus was he, of whom a Prophet saide diuers ages before:Sopho, 2.
                        Attenuabit omnes Deos terrae: 
                        hee shall weare out and bring to beggerie, al the Gods or Idols of the earth.
Thys confessed also the wicked spirits themselues, when a
                           •
                         Christes appearing in Iurie, they came vnto him diuers times and besought him, not to afflict or torment them, nor commaund thē presently to returne to hell, but rather, to permitte them some little time of entertainement, in the Sea, or Mountaines, or among heards of Swyne, or the like. Which confession they made in the sight of all the world, and declared the same afterwards by theyr facts and deedes.
                     
                        For presently vppon Iesus death, & vppon the preaching of hys name and Gospell throughout the worlde,Of the myraculous ceasing of Oracles at Christes appearing. the Oracles which before were aboundant in euerie Prouince and Countrey, were put to silence. Whereof I might alleage the testimonies of very many Gentiles themselues,
                           Iuuenal.
                         as that of Iuuenall.

                           Cessant Oracula Delphis.
                                 Saty. 6.
                           
                        
All Oracles at Delphos do now cease, &c.
                     That also of another Poet:

                           Excessere omnes adytis, arisque relictis
                           Dii, quibus imperium hoc steterat, &c.Lucan.
                           
                        
                     
                     That is, the Gods by whom this Empire stood, are all departed from theyr Temples, and haue abandoned theyr Altars and place of habitation. Strabo hath also these expresse words.
                           Strab. lib. Geograph.
                         
                        The Oracle of Delphos at this day, is to be seene in extreame beggerie and mendicitie.
                     
                     And finally,
                           Plutarch. de defectu oraculo.
                         Plutarch that liued within one hundred yeeres after Christ, made a speciall booke to search out the causes, why the Oracles of the Goddes were ceassed in hys tyme. And after much turning and winding many wayes, resolued vppon two principall points,Two insufficient causes. as causes thereof. The first, for that in his tyme there was more store of wise men then before, whose aunswers might stand in steede of Oracles: and the other, that peraduenture

the spirits which were accustomed to yeelde Oracles, were by length of tyme growne olde and dead. Both which reasons in the very common sence of all men, must needes be false; and by Plutarch himself, can not stand wyth probabilitie. For first, in his Bookes which he wrote of the liues of auncient famous men, he confesseth, that in such kind of wisedome, as he most esteemed, they had not theyr equals among their posterity. Secondly, in his Treatises of Phylosophy, he passeth it for a ground, that spyrits, nor depending of materiall bodies, cannot dye, or wexe olde; and therefore of necessitie hee must conclude, that some other cause is to be yeelded of the ceassing of these Oracles, which cannot be but the presence and commaundement of some higher power, according to the saying of S. Iohn,1. Iohn, 3. 
                        To this end appeared the sonne of GOD, that hee might dyssolue (or ouerthrow) the workes of the deuil.
                     
                     Neyther did Iesus thys alone in his own person, but gaue also power and authoritie to his dysciples and followers to do the like, according to theyr commission in Saint Mathewes Gospell:Math, 10. 
                        Super omnia Demonia et spiritus immundos &c. You shall haue authoritie ouer all deuils & vncleane spirits. Which commission, howe they afterwarde put it in execution, the whole worlde yeeldeth sufficient

testimonie. And for examples sake onlie, I will alleage in this place, an offer or challenge made for proofe thereof,
                           Tertul. in Apolog. ad gentes.
                         by Tertulian to the Heathen Magistrates and persecutors of hys time, his words are these.
Let there bee brought heere in presence before your tribunall seates, some person, who is certainly knowne to be possessed with a wicked spirit, and let that spirit be cōmaunded by a Christian to speake, & he shal as truelie confesse himselfe to be a deuill,A most confidēt offer made by Tertulian. as at other tymes to you, he wyll falsely say he is a God. Again, at the same time: let there be brought foorth one of these (your Priestes or Prophets) that will seeme to be possessed with a diuine spirite, I meane of those that speake gasping, &c. (in whom you imagine your Gods to talke, and except that spyrite also, (commaunded by vs,) doe confesse himselfe to be a deuill, (beeing affrayd indeede to lie vnto a Christian:) doe you shedde the blood of the Christians in that verie place. &c. None wyll lye to theyr owne shame, but rather for honour or aduantage: yet those spirits wyll not say to vs, that Christ was a Magitian, as you doe, nor that he was of the cō
                           mon condition of men. They wyll not say, he was stolne out of the Sepulcher, but they wyll confesse, that hee was the vertue, wisedome, and word of God; that he is in heauen,

and that he shall come againe to be our Iudge, &c. Neither will these deuils in our presence, denie themselues to be vncleane spirits, and damned for theyr wickednes, and that they expect his most horrible iudgement, professing also, that they doe feare Christ in God, and God in Christ: and that they are made subiect vnto hys seruaunts.
                     
                     Hetherto are the wordes of Tertulian, contayning (as I haue sayd) a most confident challenge, and that vppon the liues & blood of all Christians, to make triall of their power in controling those spirits, which the Romaines and other Gentiles adored as theyr Gods. Which offer, seeing it was made and exhibited to the persecutors thēselues, then liuing in Rome, well may we be assured, that the enemie wold neuer haue omitted so notorious an aduauntage, if by former experience hee had not beene perswaded, that the ioyning heerein would haue turned and redounded to hys owne confusion.
                     
                        The wonderfull authoritie of Christians ouer spirits.And this puissant authoritie of Iesus imparted to Christians, extended it selfe so far foorth: that not onely their words and commaundements, but euen their very presence did shutte the mouthes, and driue into feare the miserable spirits.
                           Lact. li. 2. diuin. Instit. cap. 16. So Lactantius sheweth that in his dayes, among many other examples of thys thing, a seelie seruing-man that

was a Christian, following hys Maister into a certaine Temple of Idoles, the Gods cryed out, that nothing could be well done, as long as that Christian was in presence. The like recordeth Eusebius of Dioclesian the Emperour, who going to Apollo for an Oracle, receiued aunswere,
                           Euseb. lib. 5. de prap. Euan.
                         
                        That the iust men were the cause that hee coulde say nothing. Which iust men, Apollos Priestes interpreted, to bee meant ironically of Christians: and theruppon Dioclesian began hys most fearce and cruell persecution in Eusebius daies. Sozomenus also writeth,
                           Sozom. lib. 3. hist, cap. 18. that Iulian the Apostata, endeuouring with many sacrifices and coniurations, to drawe an aunswer from Apollo Daphnaeus, in a famous place called Daphne, in the suburbes of Antioche: vnderstood at last by the Oracle, that the bones of Saint Babylas the Martyr, that lay neere to the place, were the impediment why that God could not speake. And thereuppon, Iulian caused the same body presently to be remoued. And finally, heereof it proceeded, that in all sacrifices, coniurations, and other mysteries of the Gentiles, there was brought in that phrase recorded by scoffing Lucian:
                           Lucian. in Alex.
                         
                        Extant Christiani, let Christians depart; for that while they were present, nothing coulde be well accomplished.
                     To conclude, the Pagan Porphyrie, that

of all other most earnestly endeuoured to impugne and dysgrace vs Christians,
                           Porph. li. 1. cont. Christ. apud. Euse. lib. 5. cap. 1. de prae. Euang.
                         and to hold vppe the honor of his enfeebled Idoles; yet discoursing of the great plague that raigned most furiously in the Cittie of Messina, in Cicilie where he dwelt: yeeldeth this reason, why AEsculapius the God of Physicke, (much adored in that place,) was not able to helpe them.A meruailous confession of Porphyrie. 
                        It is no meruaile (saith he) if this Cittie so many yeeres be vexed with the plague, seeing that both AEsculapius and all other Gods be nowe departed from it, by the comming of Christians. For since that men haue begunne to worship thys Iesus, we could neuer obtaine anie profite by our Gods.
                     
                     Thus much confessed thys Patrone of Paganisme, concerning the maime that hys Gods had receiued by Iesus honour. Which albeit he spake with a malicious minde, to bring Christians in hatred and persecution thereby, yet is the confession notable, & confirmeth that Storie which Plutarch in hys fore-named booke dooth report;A prety storie of Plutarch. that in the later yeeres of the raigne of the Emperour Tyberius,
                           Plutarch. de defectu oraculo.
                         a strange voyce, and exceeding horrible clamour, wyth hydeous cryes, skriches, and howlings, were heard by many in the Graecian sea, complaining that the great God Pan was nowe departed. And this Plutarch (that was a Gentile) affirmeth to haue

beene alleaged and approoued, before the Emperour Tyberius, who meruailed greatlie thereat, and could not by all his Diuiners and Southsayers, whom he called to that consultation, gather out any reasonable meaning of thys wonderfull accident. But we Christians, comparing the time wherein it happened, vnto the tyme of Iesus death & passion, and finding the same fully to agree, may more thē probably perswade our selues, that by the death of their great God Pan, (which signifieth all,) was imported the ruine and vtter ouerthrow of all the wicked spirits and Idoles vpon earth.
                  
                  
                     The sixt Consideration.
                     
                     AND thus hath the Deitie of Iesus beene declared and prooued by hys omnipotent power,The punishment of enemies. in subduing infernall enemies. Nowe resteth it for vs to make manifest the same, by hys like power and diuine iustice, shewed vpon diuers of hys enemies here on earth; whose greatest punishment, albeit for the most parte, hee reserueth for the life to com, yet som-times for manifestation of his omnipotencie, (as specially it was behouefull in those first dayes of hys appearaunce in the world) he chasteneth them also euen here

on earth in the eye and sight of all men. So wee reade of the most infamous and miserable death of Herod the first, surnamed Ascolonita,Herod Ascolonita. who after hys persecution of Christ in hys infancie, and the slaughter of the infants in Bethleem for hys sake:
                           Ioseph. lib. 17. antiq. cap. 10. et lib. 1. de bel. Iudai. cap. 21. was wearied out by a lothsome life, in feare and horrour of hys owne wyfe and chyldren: whom after he had most cruelly murthered, was enforced also by desperation, through his inspeakable greefes, vexations, and torments, to offer hys owne hand to his owne destruction, if hee had not beene stayed by hys freendes that stoode about him.
                     After him,Archilaus. Archelaus his eldest Sonne, that was a terror to Iesus at hys returne from Egipt, fell also by Gods iustice into meruailous calamities.
                           Ioseph. lib. 17. antiq. cap. 15. lib. 2. de bel. Iuda. cap. 6. For first, beeing left as king by hys father, Augustus woulde not allowe or ratifie that succession; but of a king made hym a Tetrarch, assigning vnto hym onelie the fourth part of that dominion which hys Father had before. And then again after nine yeeres space, tooke that away in like maner, wyth the greatest dishonour hee coulde deuise, seazing vpon all hys treasure and riches by way of confiscation, and condemning hys person to perpetuall banishment, wherein he died most miserably in Vienna in France.
                     
                        Herod Antipas.Not long after thys, the seconde sonne of

Herod the first, named Herod Antipas, Tetrarch of Galilie, who put S. Iohn Baptist to death, and scorned Iesus before hys passion, (whereat bothe hymselfe and Herodias hys Concubine were present:
                           Ioseph. lib. 18. antiq. cap. 9. lib. 2. de bel. cap. 8.) was deposed also by Caius the Emperour, (beeing accused by Agrippa hys neerest kinseman) & most con
                        
                           •
                        umeliously sent in exile; first, to Lyons in Fraunce, and after that, to the most deserte and inhabitable places in Spayne, where he wyth Herodias wandered vppe and downe in extreame calamitie so long as they liued, and finally, ended theyr dayes abandoned of all men. In which miserie also it is recorded, that the dauncing Daughter of Herodias,Herodias daughter. who had in her iolitie demaunded Iohn Baptists heade, beeing on a certaine time enforced to passe ouer a frozen Riuer,
                           Niceph. lib. 
                           
                              •
                           . cap. 20. suddainely the Ise brake, and shee in her fall, had her heade cut off by the same Ise, without hurting the rest of her bodie, to the great admiration of all the lookers on.
                     The like euent had another of Herods familie, named Herod Agrippa,Herod Agryppa. the accuser of the fore-named Herod the Tetrarch; who in hys great glory and tryumph hauing put to death S. Iames, the brother of S. Iohn Euangelist, & imprisoned S. Peter, was soone after in a publique assembly of Princes and Nobles at Caesaria, striken from heauen with

a most horrible disease, whereby hys bodie putrified, and was eaten wyth vermine,Acts. 12. Ioseph. lib. 19. antiq. cap. 7. as both S. Luke recordeth, and Iosephus affirmeth. And the same Iosephus, with no small meruaile in himselfe, declareth; that at the very same time when hee wrote hys storie,
                           Lib. 18. cap. 7. (which was about three-score and ten yeeres after the death of Herod the first,) the whole progenie and of-spring, kindred and familie of the sayd Herod,The stock of Herod soone extinguished. (which he sayth was exceeding great, by reason he had many wiues together, wyth many children, brothers and sisters, besides Nephewes and kinse-folke:) were al extinguished in most miserable sort, and gaue a testimonie (saith Iosephus) to the world, of the most vain confidence, that men doe put in humaine felicitie.
                     And as the punishments lighted openly vppon Iesus professed enemies in Iurie:The punishments of the Romaines. so escaped not all the Romaines theyr chastisement; I meane such, as especially had theyr hands in persecution of him, or of his folowers after him. For first,Pilate. of Pontius Pilate that gaue sentence of death against him, we read, that after great disgrace receiued in Iurie,
                           Eutrop. lib. 7. hist. Euseb. lib. 2. cap. 7. hist.
                         he was sent home into Italie, and there by manifest dis-fauours shewed vnto him by the Emperour his Maister, fell into such desperation, as he slew himselfe with his owne hands. And secondly of the very Emperours themselues,

who liued from Tyberius (vnder whō Iesus su
                           •
                        fered) vnto Constantine the great, vnder whom Christian Religion tooke dominion ouer the world, (which contained the space of three hundred yeeres,) very fewe or none escaped the manifest scourges of Gods dreadfull iustice, shewed vpon them at the knytting vppe of theyr dayes. For examples sake; Tyberius, that permitted Christians to liue freely,
                           Tertuli. in Apolog.
                         and made a Lawe against theyr molestation, (as before hath beene shewed,) died peaceably in his bedde.Caligula. But Caligula that followed him, for his contempt shewed against all diuine power, in making himselfe a God: was soone after murdered by the cō
                        sent of hys deerest freendes. Nero also,Nero. who first of all other beganne persecution against the Christians, wythin few moneths after he had put S. Peter & S. Paul to death in Rome, (hauing murthered in like manner, his owne Mother, Brother, Wife, and Maister,) was vpon the suddaine, from his glorious estate and maiestie, throwne downe into such horrible distresse and confusion in the sight of all men: as being condemned by the Senate, to haue hys head thrust into a Pyllerie, and there most ignominiously to be whypped to death: was constrained, for auoyding the execution of that terrible sentence, to massacre hymselfe with hys owne handes, by the

assistance of such as were dearest vnto him.
                     
                        Many Emperours that died myserably.The like may be shewed in the tragicall endes of Galba, Otho, Vitellius, Domitian, Commodus, Pertinax, Iulian, Marcinus, Antoninus, Alexander, Decius, Gallꝰ, Volutianus, AEmilianus, Valerianus, Galienus, Caius, Carinus, Maximianus, Maxentius, Lucinius and others. Whose miserable deathes, a Noble man & Councellour, (well neere one thousande yeeres past) did gather against Zosimus a Heathen writer,
                           E
                                 •
                              agrius Scolast. lib. 3. hist. cap. 41. to shewe thereby the power-full hand of Iesus vpon hys enemies: adding furthermore, that since the time of Constantine, (whiles Emperours haue beene Christians) fewe or no such examples can be shewed, except it bee vppon Iulian the Apostata, Valens the Arrian heretique, or some other of like detestable and notorious wickednesse. And thus much of particular men chastised by Iesus.
                     But if we desire to haue a full example of hys iustice vppon a whole Nation together;The chastisement of Ierusalem, and of the Iewish people. let vs consider what befell Ierusalem and the people of Iurie, for theyr barbarous crueltie practised vpon him, in hys death & passion. And truely, if we beleeue Iosephus & Philo the Iewish Historiographers, (who lyued eyther wyth Christ, or immediatly after hym,) it can hardly be expressed by the tongue or penne of man, what insufferable

calamities and miseries, were inflicted to that people (presently vpon the ascention of Iesus,) by Pilate theyr Gouernor;
                           Ioseph. lib. 19. an
                                 •
                              iq. li. 2. et. 3. de bel. Iudai. Philo. in Flacco et lib. 2. de leg. Cornel. Tac. lib. 12. vnder Tyberius the Emperour; and then againe by Petronius vnder Caligula, and after that, by Cumanus, vnder Claudius; and lastlie by Festus and Albinus, vnder Nero. Through whose cruelties; that Nation was enforced finally to rebell, and take Armes against the Romaine Empire, which was the cause of theyr vtter ruine and extirpation by Tytus and Vespasian. At what time besides the ouerthrow of their Cittie, burning of theyr Temple, and other infinite distresses, which Iosephus an eye-witnes protesteth, that no speeche or discourse humaine can declare. The same Authour likewise recordeth, eleuen hundred thousand persons to haue been slaine, and foure-score and seauenteen thousande taken aliue, who were eyther put to death afterward in publique tryumphes, or sold openly for bond-slaues into all parts of the world.
                     And in thys vniuersall calamitie of the Iewish Nation, beeing the most notorious and greeuous,How Christes death was punished wyth like circumstances vppon the Iewes. that euer happened to people or nation before or after them, (for the Romaines neuer practised the like vpon others) it is singulerly to be obserued, that in the same tyme and place, in which they had put

Iesus to death before: that is, in the feast of the Paschal, when theyr whole Nation was assembled at Ierusalem, from all parts, Prouinces, and Countries of the earth: they receiued thys theyr most pittifull subuersion, and that by the handes of the Romaine Caesar, to whom by publique crie, they had appealed from Iesus but a little before. Yea, further it is obserued and noted, that as they apprehended Iesus, and made the entrance to his passion vpō the Mount Oliuet: so Titus,
                           Ioseph. lib. 5. de bello cap. 8. (as Iosephꝰ wryteth) vpon the same Mount planted his first siege for their final destruction. And as they ledde Iesus from Caiphas to Pilate, afflicting him in theyr presence: so nowe were they themselues ledde vppe and downe from Iohn to Simon,Capit. 27. (two Tyrants that had vsurped dominion within the Cittie,) and were scourged and tormented before the tribunall seates. Againe, as they had caused Iesus to be scoffed, beaten, and villainously intreated by the Souldiers in Pilats Pallace: so were now theyr owne principall Rulers and Noble men, (as Iosephus wryteth,) most scornfully abused, beaten, and crucified by the same Souldiers. Which latter poynt of crucifying, or villainous putting to death vpon the Crosse, was begunne to be practised by the Romaines vpon the Iewish Gentrie, immediatly after Christes death &

not before. And now at thys tyme of the war Iosephus affirmeth, that in some one daie, fiue hundred of hys Nation were taken and put to thys opprobrius kind of punishment; in so much, that for the great multitude, hee sayth:
                           Lib. 5. de bello
                                 •
                               cap
                                 •
                              
                            28.
                        
                           Nec locus sufficeret Crucibus, nec Cruces corporibus: that is, neyther the place was sufficient to containe so many Crosses as the Romaines sette vppe, nor the Crosses sufficiēt to sustaine so many bodies as they murdered by that torment.
                     
                     Thys dreadfull and vnspeakeable miserie, fell vppon the Iewes about forty yeeres after Christes ascention,A meruailous prouidence of God for deliuering the Christians that were in Ierusalem at the time of destruction. whē they had shewed themselues most obstinate and obdurate against hys doctrine, deliuered vnto thē, not onely by hymselfe, but also by hys disciples; of which disciples they had now slaine Saint Stephen and S. Iames, and had driuen into banishment both S. Peter and S. Paule, and other that had preached vnto them.
                     To which later two Apostles, (I meane Saint Peter and Saint Paule,) our Sauiour Christ appeared a little before their martyrdomes in Rome, (as Lactantius writeth,) and shewed, that wythin three or foure yeres after their deathes, he was to take reuenge vppon theyr Nation, by the vtter destruction of Ierusalem and of that generation.
                           Lib. 4. diuin. Instit. cap. 2
                              •
                           . Which secret aduise, the sayd Lactantius affirmeth
                           •
                        
                        
that Peter & Paule reuealed to other Christians in Iurie; whereby it came to passe, (as Eusebius also and other Authors doe mention,
                           Eusebius lib, 3. hist. capit, 5. Niceph, cap, 3.) that all the Christians liuing in Ierusalem, departed thence, not long before the siege beganne, to a certaine Towne named Pella, beyond Iordan, which was assigned them for that purpose by Iesus hymselfe, for that it beeing in the dominion of Agryppa, (who stoode wyth the Romaines,) it remayned in peace and safetie, whyle all Iurie besides was brought to desolation.
                     
                        The Iewish miseries after the destruction of Ierusalem.Thys then was the prouidence of God for the punishmēt of the Iewes at that time. And euer after, theyr estate declined from worse to worse: and theyr myseries dailie multiplied throughout the world. Whereof he that wyll see a very lamentable narration, let hym reade but the last Booke onely of Iosephus historie De bello Iudaico, wherein is reported besides other things, that after the warre was ended, & all the publique slaughter ceassed, Tytus sent three-score thousand Iewes, as a present to hys Father to Rome, there to be put to death in diuers & sundrie manners. Others hee applyed to be spectacles for pastime to the Romaines that were present wyth him; whereof Iosephus sayth that he sawe wyth hys owne eyes, two thousande and fiue hundred murthered and consumed

in one day, by fight & combat among themselues,
                           Ioseph, lib, 7, de bel, cap, 20, et 21. and wyth wilde beastes at the Emperours appointment. Others were assigned in Antioche and other great Citties, to serue for fagottes in their famous bondfires at tymes of tryumph. Others were sold to be bond-slaues, others condemned to dyg and hew stones for euer. And thys was the ende of that warre and desolation.
                     After thys againe vnder Traiane the Emperour,The finall desolation of the Iewish Nation. there was so infinite a number of Iewes slaine, and made away by Marcus Turbo in Affrica, & Lucius Quintus in the East: (as all hystories agree) that it is impossible to expresse the multitude. But yet more wonderfull it is, which the same Hystorians report: that in the eyghteene yeere of Adrian the Emperour,
                           Oros
                                 •
                               li, 7, ca, 13, Ariston pellaeus in hist. Euseb, lib, 4, capit 8, Niceph, libro, 3, cap, 24, one Iulius Seuerus beeing sent to extinguish all the remnant of the Iewish generation: destroyed in small 
                           •
                        yme nine-tie and eyght Townes and Villages wythin that Countrie, and slew fiue hundred and four-score thousand of that bloode and Nation in one daie: at which time also he beate downe the Cittie of Ierusalem in such sorte, as hee left not one stone standing vpon another of theyr auncient buildings: but caused some part thereof to be reedified againe, and inhabited onely by Gentiles. He chaunged the name of the Cittie, and called

it The Emperours name was Aelius Adrianus. AELIA, after the Emperours name. He droue all the progenie and of-spring of the Iewes foorth of all those Countries, with a perpetuall Lawe confirmed by the Emperour, that they should neuer returne: no, nor so much as looke backe from any hygh or eminent place to that Countrey againe. And thys was doone to the Iewish Nation by the Romaine Emperors, for accomplishing that demaund, which theyr principall elders had made not long before to Pilate the Romaine Magistrate, concerning Iesus most iniurious death, crying out wyth one consent and voyce,Math, 25. to wit, Let his blood be vpon vs, and vpon our posteritie.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                         The seauenth Consideration.
                     AND heerein alfo,The fulfilling of Iesus prophecies. (I meane in the most wonderfull and notorious chastisement or rather reprobation of the Iewish people, which of all the worlde was Gods peculier before,) is sette out vnto vs, as it were in a glasse, the seauenth and last poynt, which we mentioned in the beginning of thys Section: to wit, the fulfilling of such speeches & prophecies, as Iesus vttered when he was vpon earth; as namely at one time, after a long and vehement commination made to the Scribes

and Pharisies, and principall men of that nation, (in which hee repeateth eyght seuerall tymes the dreadfull threat woe:) he concludeth finally, that al the iust blood, iniuriouslie shedde,Math, 23. from the first Martyr Abel, shold be reuenged very shortly vpon that generation. And in the same place, he menaceth the populus Cittie of Ierusalem, that it shoulde be made desert. And in another place hee assureth them,Luke, 21. that one stone should not be left standing thereof vpon another. And yet further he pronounced vpon the same Cittie these words:Luke, 19. 
                        The daies shall come vppon thee, and thyne enemies shall enuiron thee with a wal, and shall besiege thee: they shall straiten thee on euerie side, and shall beat thee to the ground, and thy children in thee. And yet more particulerlie, he fore-telleth the very signes,Iesus speeches of Ierusalem. whereby his disciples shoulde perceiue when the tyme indeede was come, vsing thys speeche vnto them.Luke, 21. 
                        When you shall see Ierusalem besieged with an Armie: then know ye that her desolation is at hand: for that these are the dayes of reuenge, to the ende all may be fulfilled which is written. Great distresse shall fall vppon thys earth, and vengeaunce vpon thys people. They shall be slaine by dint of the sworde, and shall bee ledde as slaues into all Countries. And Ierusalem shall be troden vnder feete by the Gentiles, vntill the times of Nations be accomplished.
                     
                     
                        Thys fore-tolde Iesus of the miserie that was to fall vpon Ierusalem,The circumstaunce of the time, when Iesus spake hys words, & when they were written. and vppon that people (by the Romaines and other Gentiles,) when the Iewes seemed to be in most securitie, and greatest amitie with the Romaines, (as also they were when the same things were wrytten,) and consequentlie at that tyme, they might seeme in all humaine reason, to haue lesse cause then euer before to misdoubt such calamities. And yet howe certaine & assured fore-knowledge, (and as it were most sensible feeling,) Iesus had of these miseries, he declared, not only by these expresse words, and by their euent:Luke. 19. but also by those pittifull teares hee shed vpon sight and consideration of Ierusalem, and by the lamentable speech he vsed to the women of that Cittie, who wept for him at his passion, perswading them to weepe rather for themselues and for their children,Luke, 23. (in respecte of the miseries to follow,) then for him.
                     Which wordes and predictions of Iesus, together wyth sundry other his speeches, fore-shewing so particularly the imminent calamities of that Nation, (& that, as I haue said, at such time, when in humaine discourse there could be no probabilitie therof;) when a certaine Hethen Chronicler & Mathematique, named Phlegon,
                           Phleg. Thral. lib. annal.
                         about a hundered yeres after Christes departure, had diligently

considered, hauing seene the same also in his daies most exactlie fulfilled, (for he was seruaunt to Adrianus the Emperour, by whose commaundement, as hath beene said before, the finall subuersion of that Iewish Nation was brought to passe:The testimony of a Heathen, for the fulfilling of Christes prophecies.) thys Phlegon (I say) though a Pagan, yet vpon consideration of these euents, and others that he sawe, (as the extreame persecution of Christians foretold by Christ and the like:) he pronounced, that neuer any man fore-told things so certainlie to come, or that so precisely were accomplished, as were the predictions and prophecies of Iesus. And this testimonie of Phlegon, was alleaged & vrged for Christians, against one Celsus a Heathen Phylosopher & Epicure, by the famous learned Origen,
                           Orig. lib. 2. con
                                 •
                              . Celsum, sub initium.
                         euen the verie next age after it was written by the Authour: so that of the trueth of thys allegation, there can be no doubt or question at all.
                     
                        Other prophecies of Iesus, fulfilled to his Disciples.
                        AND nowe albeit these predictions and prophecies, concerning the punishment and reprobation of the Iewes, fulfilled so euidently in the sight of all the worlde, might be a sufficient demonstration, of Iesus fore-knowledge

in affaires to come: yet are there many other thinges besides fore-shewed by him, which fell out as exactly as these dyd; notwithstanding that by no learning, mathematicall reason, humaine coniecture, they were or might be fore-seene. As for example: the fore-telling of hys owne death, the manner, time, and place thereof: as also the personne that should betray hym, together wyth his irrepentant ende. The flight, feare, and scandale of hys Disciples, albeit, they had promised and protested the contrarie. The three seuerall denials of Peter. The particuler time of hys owne resurrection, and ascention. The sending of the holie Ghost, and many other the like predictions, prophecies and promises, which to his Apostles, disciples, and followers that heard them vttered, and left them written before they fell out, & sawe them afterward accomplished: & who by the falshood therof should haue receiued greatest domage of all other men, if they had not beene true; to these men (I saie) they were most euident proofes of Iesus diuine prescience in matters that should ensue.
                     
                     
                        
                        Prophecies fulfilled in the sight of Gentiles.
                        BVT yet for that an Infidell, (with whom onely I suppose my selfe to deale in thys place,) may in these and the like things, find (perhaps) some matter of cauilation: & say, that these prophecies of Iesus were recorded by our Euangelists, after the particularities therein prophecied were effectuated & not before; and consequently, that they might be forged; I wil alleage certain other euents, both fore-told & registred before they came to passe: and divulged by publique writings in the face of all the worlde, when there was small semblance that euer the same shoulde take effect. Such were the particular fore-tellings  of the kinde and manner of S. Peters death, whiles hee liued. The peculier and  different manner of S. Iohn the Euangelists ending, from the rest of the Apostles. The  fore-shewing and describing to his disciples, the most extreame and cruell persecutions, that shoulde ensue vnto Christians for his sake, (a thing at that time not probable in reason, for that the Romaines permitted the exercise of all kindes of Religions:) and that  notwithstanding all these pressures and intollerable

afflictions, his faithfull followers should not shrinke, but hold out, and dailie increase in zeale, fortitude, and number, and finally, should atchiue the victorie and conquest of all the worlde: a thing much more vnlikelie at that day, and so farre passing all humaine probabilitie, as no capacitie, reason, or conceit of man, might reach or attain the fore-sight thereof. And wyth thys wil wee conclude our third and last part of the generall diuision sette downe in the beginning, concerning the groundes and proofes of Christian Religion.
                     
                  
               
               
                  The Conclusion. SECT. 4.
                  
                     The summe of the former three Sections.BY all that hetherto hath beene saide, wee haue declared and made manifest vnto thee (gentle Reader) three thinges of great  importaunce. First, that from the beginning and creation of the world, there hath beene promised in all times and ages, a Messias, or Sauiour of man-kind, in whom, & by whom, all Nations shoulde be blessed; as also, that the particuler time, maner, and circumstance of his comming, together with the qualitie of hys person, purpose, doctrine, life, death, resurrection, and ascention, were in like manner

by the Prophets of God, most euidently fore-shewed. Secondlie, that the verie same  perticulers and speciall points that were dissigned and sette down by the sayd Prophets, were also fulfilled most exactly with theyr circumstaunces, in the person and actions of Iesus Christ our Lord and Sauiour. Thyrdlie, that besides the accomplishment of all the fore-sayd prophecies, there were giuen by Iesus many signes, manifestations, and most infallible arguments of hys Deitie and omnipotent puissaunce, after his ascention or departure from all humaine and corporal conuersation in thys world.
                  By all which waies, meanes, arguments and proofes: and by tenne thousande more, which to the tongue or pen of man are inexplicable, the christian minde remaineth setled, and most firmely grounded in the vndoubted beleefe of his Religion: hauing besides all other things, euidences, certainties, and internall comforts and assurances which are infinite: these eyght demonstratiue reasons and perswasions which insue,Eyght reasons. for hys more ample and aboundant satis-faction therein.
                  Fyrst,The prophecies. that it was impossible that so manie things should be fore-tolde so preciselie, wyth so many particularities, in so manie ages, by so different persons of all sanctitie,

wyth so great concorde, consent, and vnitie; and that so long before hand, but by the spirite of God alone, that onely hath the fore-knowledge of future euents.
                  
                     The fulfilling.Secondly, that it could not possibly be, that so many things so difficult & strange, wyth all theyr particularities & circumstances, should be so exactly and precisely fulfilled, but in hym alone, of whom they were truely meant.
                  
                     Gods assistaunce.Thirdly, that it can no waies be imagined, that God woulde euer haue concurred with Iesus dooings, or assisted him, aboue all course of nature, wyth so aboundant myracles, as the Gentiles doe confesse that hee wrought, if he had beene a Seducer, or taken vppon him to sette foorth a false doctrine.
                  
                     Iesus doctrine.Fourthly, if Iesus had intended to deceiue and seduce the worlde: he would neuer haue proposed a doctrine so difficult & repugnaunt to all sensualitie: but rather would haue taught things pleasant & gratefull to mans voluptuous delight, as Mahomet did after hym. Neyther coulde the nature of man, haue euer affectuously embraced such austeritie, wythout the assistance of some diuine and supernaturall power.
                  
                     Iesus manner of teaching.Fiftlie, for that Iesus beeing poorelie borne and vnlettered, as by hys aduersaries

confession doth appeare, and that in such an age and time, when all worldly learning was in most flourishing estate: he coulde neuer possibly but by diuine power, haue attained to such exquisite knowledge in all kynde of learning, as to be able to decide al the doubts & controuersies of Philosophers before him, as he did, laying downe more plainelie, distinctly, and perspicuously, the pythe of all humaine and diuine learning, within the cō
                     passe of three yeeres teaching, (and that to auditours of so great simplicitie,) then dyd all the Sages of the world vnto that day: insomuch that euen then, the most vnlearned Christian at that time, coulde say more in certaintie of trueth, concerning the knowledge of God, the Creation of the worlde, the ende of man, the reward of vertue, the punishment of vice, the immortalitie and rest of our soule after thys life, and in other such high poynts and mysteries of true Phylosophy: then coulde the most famous and learned of all the Gentiles, that had for so many ages before, beaten theyr braynes in contention about the same.
                  Sixtlie,Iesus life, and maner of proceeding. if Iesus had not meant plainelie and sincerely in all hys dooings, according as he professed: he would neuer haue taken so seuere a course of life to himselfe, neyther would he haue refused all temporal dignities

and aduauncements as he did: he would neuer haue chosen to die so opprobriously in the sight of all men, nor made election of Apostles and disciples so poore and contemptible in the world: nor if he had, would euer worldly men haue followed him in so great multitudes, wyth so great feruour, zeale, constancie, and perseueraunce vnto death.
                  
                     The beginners and first publishers of christian religion.Seuenthly, wee see that the first begynners and founders of Christian Religion left by Iesus, were a multitude of simple and vnskilfull persons, vnapt to deceiue or deuise any thing of themselues. They beganne against all probabilitie of mans reason: they went forward against the stream & strength of the worlde: they continued and increased aboue humaine possibilitie: they perseuered in torments & afflictions insufferable: they wrought miracles aboue the reach and compasse of mans abilitie: they ouerthrew Idolatrie that then possessed the world, and confounded all powers infernall, by the onelie name and vertue of theyr Maister. They saw the prophecies of Iesus fulfilled, and all his diuine speeches and predictions come to passe. They sawe the punishment of theyr enemies and cheefe impugners, to fall vpon them in theyr dayes. They sawe euerie daie whole Prouinces, Countries, and kingdoms conuerted to theyr fayth. And finally, the

whole Romaine Empire and world besides, to subiect it selfe to the Law, obedience, and Gospell of theyr Maister.
                  Lastlie,The present state of Iewes. among all other reasons and arguments, this may be one most manifest vnto vs: that wheras by many testimonies and expresse prophecies of the olde Testament, it is affirmed, that the people of Israel should abandon, persecute and put to death, the true Messias at hys comming, as before hath beene shewed; and for that facte, shoulde it selfe be abandoned of God, and brought to ruine and dispersion ouer all the worlde: (wherein according to the wordes of Ose,Ose, 3. 
                     They shall sitte for a long time; without King, without Prince, without sacrifice, without Aultar, without Ephode, or Images: and after thys againe, the children of Israell shall returne
                           •
                         and seeke their God, in the last dayes.) Wee see in thys age the same particularities fulfilled in that Nation, and so haue continued now for these 
                        •
                     ifteene hundred yeeres: that is, we see the Iewish people abandoned and afflicted aboue all Nations of the world: dyspersed in seruilite throughout all corners of the earth: without dignitie or reputation: without King, Prince, or common-wealth of themselues; prohibited by all Princes, both Christian and other, to make their sacrifice where they inhabite; depriued of all meanes to attaine

to good knowledge in good litterature, whereby daily they fall into more grosse ignoraunce, and absurdities against common reason, in theyr later doctrine: then did the most barbarous Infidels that euer were, hauing lost all sence and feeling in spirituall affayres; all knowledge and vnderstanding in celestiall things for the life to come: hauing among them no Prophet: no graue teacher: no man directed by Gods holy spirite; and finally: as men forlorne and filled wyth all kinde of miserie, doe both by theyr inwarde and externall calamities, preach, denounce, and testifie to the worlde, that Iesus whom they crucified, was the onely true Messias & Sauiour of man-kinde, and that hys bloode, (as they themselues required,) lyeth heauily vppon theyr generation for euer.
                  
                     The conclusion of the Chapter, with an admonishment.Wherefore to conclude thys whole discourse and treatise of the proofes & euidences of our Christian Religion: seeing that by so manifold and inuincible demonstrations, it hath beene declared and layde before our eyes, that Iesus is the onely true sauiour and redeemer of the worlde: and consequentlie, that hys seruice and religion, is the onelie way & meane to please Almightie GOD, and to attaine euerlasting happinesse: there remaineth nowe to be considered, that the same Iesus, which by so many Prophets was

promised to be a Sauiour, was also foretolde by the selfe same Prophets, that he shoulde be a Iudge,Iesus shall be also a Iudge. and examiner of all our actions. Which latter poynt, no one Prophet that hath fore-shewed hys comming, hath omitted seriously to inculcate vnto vs. No not the Sibyls themselues, who in euery place where they describe the most gracious comming of the Virgins sonne, doe also annexe therunto hys dreadfull appearaunce at the daie of iudgment: especially, in those famous Acrostick verses wherof there hath been so much mention before; the whole dyscourse vppon the words Iesus Christ the Sonne of God,
                     
                        Apud Euse. lib. 4. in vit. Const. in 
                              •
                           i.
                      
                     Sauiour and Crosse, contayneth nothing els, but a large and ample description of hys most terrible comming in fire and flame, and conflagration of the world at that dreadfull day, to take account of all mens words, actions, and cogitations.
                  To which description of these Pagan Prophets
                        •
                      is consonant the whole tenor and context of the olde Byble,1. Reg, 2. Psalm, 95. Esa, 2. 13. 26, 27. 30. Ieremie. 30. Daniel, 7. Sopho, 1. Malac. 4. Math, 12. 13. 16, 14. 25. fore-shewing euery where, the dreadfull maiestie, terrour, and seueritie of the Messias at that day. The newe Testament also, which tendeth to cō
                     fort and solace man-kind, and hath the name of Euangile, in respect of the ioyfull newes which it brought to the world, omitteth not to put vs continually in mind of thys poynt.

And to that ende both Christ himselfe,Mark, 13. Luke. 17. Rom, 2, 14. 1, Cor, 15. 2, Cor, 5. 1. Thess, 4. 5. 2, Thes. 1. 1. Titus, 2. 2, Peter, 3. Hebr. 9. Iude. 4. Reuel. 1. amidst all hys sweete and comfortable speeches wyth his Disciples, did admonish them often of thys last daie, and hys Apostles Euangelists, and Disciples after him, repeated, itterated, and vrged thys important consideration, in all theyr wordes and writings.
                  Wherefore, as by the name and cogitation of a Sauiour, wee are greatly styrred vp to ioy, alacritie, confidence and consolation, so by thys admonishment of Gods Saints, and by the testimonie of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ hymselfe, that hee is to be our Iudge, and seuere examiner of all the minutes and moments of our lyfe: wee are to conceyue iust feare and dread, of thys hys second comming.
                  
                     An illatiō vpon the premisses with an exhortation.And as by the whole former treatise, wee haue beene instructed, that the onelie waie to saluation, is by the true profession of Christes Religion: so by thys accounte that shall be demaunded at our handes at the last day, by the Authour and first institutor of thys Religion; wee are taught that vnlesse we be true Christians indeede, and doe performe such dueties as thys Lawe and Religion prescribeth vnto vs, so farre off shal we be from receiuing any benefite by the name, as our iudgement shall be more greeuous,

and our finall calamitie more intollerable. For which cause I would in sincere charitie, exhort euerie man that by the former dyscourse hath receiued any light, and is tho
                     
                        •
                     owlie confirmed in hys iudgement concerning the manifest and vndoubted trueth of thys Christian Religion: to employ hys whole studie and indeuours for the attainment of the fruite & benefite therof, which is by beeing a true and faythfull Christian; for that our Sauiour Christ hymselfe fore-signified, that many shoulde take the name wythout benefit or commoditie of their profession.
                  And to the ende each man may the better knowe or coniecture of himselfe, whether he be in the right way or no, and whether he performe indeede the true duety belonging to a faithfull Christian; I haue thought conuenient, to adioyne thys Chapter next following of that matter, and therein to declare the particuler poynts belonging to that profession. Which being known, and thorowlie considered, it shall be easie for euery one that is not ouer partiall, or wylfully bent to deceiue hymselfe, to discerne cleerelie of his owne estate, and of the course and way that hee holdeth. Which is a high poynt of wysedome for all men to do whyle they haue tyme; least at the last daie, we hauing

passed ouer the whole course of our liues in the bare name onely of Christianitie, wythout the substance and true knowledge thereof: doe finde our selues in the number of those most miserable & vnfortunate people, who shall cry Lord, Lord, and receiue no comfort by that confession.
               
            
            
               
               HOWE A MAN MAY IVDGE OR DISCERNE OF HIM-SELFE, WHETHER HE BE a true Christian or not.
               With a declaration of the two parts belonging to that profession: which are, beleefe and life.
               CHAP. V.
               AS in humain learning and sciences of this world, after declaration made of the vtilitie, possibilitie, certaintie, conueniencie, and other qualities, cō
                  mendations, and properties therof: the next point is, to shew the meanes and waies whereby to attaine the same: so much more, in thys diuine & heauenly doctrine of Christian Religion, (which concerneth our soule and euerlasting saluation;) for that wee haue shewed before, not

onely the most vndoubted trueth whereuppon it standeth, but also that the knowledge thereof is so absolutely necessary, as there is no other name or profession vnder heauen, whereby mankinde may be saued, but onelie thys of Iesus:Acts, 4. it followeth by order of consequence, that we should treate in this place,The effect of thys Chapter. howe a man may attaine the fruite of thys doctrine: that is to say, how he may come to be a good Christian; or if hee already professe that name, howe hee may examine or make tryall of himselfe whether he be so indeede or not. Which examination (to speak in breefe) consisteth wholy in consideration  of these two points.Two poynts. First, whether he doe not onely, beleeue vnfainedly the totall sum of documents & misteries, left by Iesus and his Disciples to the Catholique Church, but also perswade and assure himselfe, of the forgiuenesse of all his sinnes, and of the fatherly loue & fauour of GOD towards him in Christ Iesus, wherby he is adopted to be the sonne of God, and an heyre of euerlasting  life. Secondly, whither hee conforme and frame hys lyfe, according to the precepts and doctrine of Christ Iesus. So that in these two poynts wee are to bestowe our whole speech in thys Chapter.
               
                  
                  The first part, concerning beleefe.
                  AND for the first, how to examine the trueth of our beleefe, it woulde be ouer tedious to laye downe euery particular waie that might be assigned for discussion thereof: for that it woulde bring in the contention of all times, as well auncient as present, about controuersies in Christian Fayth, which hath been impugned from age to age, by the seditious instruments of Christes infernall enemie. And therefore, as well in respect of the length, (whereof thys place is not capable,) as also for that of purpose I doe auoide all dealing wyth matters of controuersie wythin the compasse of thys work, I meane onelie at thys time, (for the comfort of such as are alreadie in the right waie, and for some light vnto others, who perhaps of simplicitie may walke awrie,) to sette downe with as great breuitie as possible may be, some fewe generall notes or obseruations, for their bethelpe in thys behalfe.
                  In which great affayre of our faith and beleefe, (wherin cōsisteth as well the ground and foundation of our eternall welfare, as also the fuite and entire vtilitie of Christes

comming into this world;) it is to be considered, that GOD coulde not of his infinite wisedome, (fore-seeing all things and times to come) nor euer woulde of his vnspeakeaable goodnesse, (desiring our saluation as he dooth) leaue vs in thys life, without most sure, certaine, and cleere euidence of thys matter; and consequentlie, we must imagine, that all our errors cōmitted herein (I meane in matters of fayth and beleefe among Christians,The matters of faith & beleefe easie among Christians.) doe proceede rather of sinne, negligence, wilfulnes, or inconsideration of our selues, then eyther of difficultie or doubtfulnes in the meanes left vnto vs for discerning of the same, or of the want of Gods holy assistance to that effect, if we would with humilitie accept thereof.
                  Thys Esay made plaine, when hee prophecied of thys perspicuitie; that is, of thys most excellent priuiledge in Christian Religion, so many hundred yeeres before Christ was borne. For after that in diuers Chapters hee had declared the glorious comming of Christ in signes & miracles, as also the multitude of Gentiles that shoulde embrace hys doctrine, together with the ioy and exultation of theyr conuersion: hee fore-sheweth presently, the wonderful prouidence of God also, in prouiding for Christians so manifest a way of direction for theyr faith & religion,

as the most simple and vnlearned man in the world, should not be able (but of wylfulnes) to goe astray therein. His wordes are these, directed to the Gentiles.Esay, 35. 
                     Take comforte and feare not. Behold, your God shall come and saue you. Then shall the eyes of the blinde be opened, and the eares of the deafe shall be restored. &c. And there shall be a pathe and a waie: which shall be called, 
                     The direct holy way of Christians vnder the Gospell. 
                     The holie waie: and it shall be vnto you so direct a way, as fooles shall not be able to erre therein. By which wordes wee see, that among other rare benefits that Christes people were to receiue by hys comming, thys should be one, and not the least, that after hys holie doctrine once published and receiued, it shoulde not be easie for the weakest in capacitie or learning that might bee, (whom Esay heere noteth by the name of fooles,) to runne awry in matters of their beleefe, so plaine, cleere, and euident, shoulde the way for tryall thereof be made.
                  God hath opened himselfe vnto vs in the holie Scriptures, the wrytings and doctrine of Moses and the Prophets, of Christ, and hys Apostles:Iohn, 20. 21. 2, Timo. 3. 14, 15, &c. Rom, 1. 20. wherin is contayned whatsoeuer is necessarie for our saluation. For although the inuisible thinges of God, that is, hys power and God-heade, may be seene by the workmanship and creation of the world, wherin, as in a booke written with the hand

of God,Psalm, 19, 1. and layde open to the eyes of men, the glorie of GOD and hys mightie power appeareth; Yet because, eyther we reade not thys Booke at all, or if wee doe, wee reade it careleslie,Abac, 2, 2. therefore it was necessarie that the Lord God should adde another Booke more plaine and easie to be read, so as he may run that readeth it,
                        August. in exposit. Psal. 96. et Serm. 56. ad Fratrem in Eremo.
                      and this is, (as hath been said) his holie wyll, reuealed vnto vs in his wrytten word. Which Saint Augustine therefore verie well, calleth the Letters or Epistle of God, sent vnto vs from our heauenly Countrey,Titus, 2. 12, to teach vs to liue godlie and righteouslie whilst wee soiurne heere in thys present worlde.
                  Thys is that Lanthorne wherby our feete may be directed,Psalm 119,105. and that light wherby our pathes may be guided vnto Christ: it is that most certaine & infallible rule and leuell of all our actions, wherby both our faith & lyfe are to be squared and framed. Yea, it is that holy and vndefiled way,Psalm, 19, 7. and with all, that plaine and easie way denoted by Esay, which euen in the very entraunce thereof, gyueth light & vnderstanding (as Dauid speaketh) vnto the simple.Psalm, 119.130 And although wee must confesse wyth S. Peter, that there are some thinges in the Scripture harde to be vnderstoode, yet wee may also say wyth the same Peter,
                        
                           •
                        , Peter, 3, 16 that they are harde to those that are

vnlearned and vnstable, which peruert and wrest them to theyr owne destruction.2, Cor, 4, 3,4 So that if the Gospell of Christ be yet hid, it is hid in them that perrish, whose sences sathan hath closed, that the light thereof should not shine vnto them. And heere-hence is it that the Apostle Saint Paul, pronounceth so peremptorilie of a contentious and hereticall man,Titus, 3, that he is damned by the testimonie of his owne iudgment or conscience, for that hee hath abandoned this common, direct, and publique way, which all men might see, & hath deuised particuler paths and turnings to him selfe. And heere-hence is it, that the auncient Fathers of Christes primatiue Church, dysputing against the same kind of people, defended alwaies, that theyr errour was of malice and wilfull blindnesse, and not of ignoraunce; applying these words of prophecie vnto them:Psalm, 31.11, 
                     They that sawe mee, ran out from mee.
                  
                  Thus then it appeareth, that the plaine and direct way mentioned by Esay, wherein no simple or ignoraunt man can erre, is the doctrine taught by the mouth of our Sauiour Christ and hys Apostles, which howsoeuer it seeme to be obscure and darksome to men of peruerse mindes, that are not exercised in it: yet to the godlie and studious readers and hearers, that haue theyr eyes opened,

and theyr mindes lightened to see the trueth,1. Peter, 1, 19 it is most plaine and easie to be vnderstood.
                  And thys is the cause, that those holie and sage Apostles of Christ, for the better preuenting of all bye-waies, crooked paths, and blinde lanes of errours that afterwardes might aryse, (as by reuelation from Iesus they vnderstoode there should doe manie,) so earnestly exhorted,1, Cor. 16. Gala. 5. 2. Thess. 2. 1. Tim, 6. 20 2, Tim, 1, Math, 7, Rom, 16, 2, Tim, 2. 3. Titus, 3. and so vehementlie called vpon the people, to stand fast in the documents then receiued, to holde firmelie the fayth and doctrine alreadie deliuered, as a Depositum and treasure committed, to be safelie kept vntill the last daie. And aboue all other things they most diligently fore-warned them, to beware of newe-fangled Teachers, whom they called Heretiques, who should breake from the vnitie of that bodie whereof Christ is the head, and shoulde deuise newe glosses, expositions, and interpretations of Scripture, bring in newe senses; doctrines, opinions, and diuisions, to the renting of Gods Church and Cittie nowe builded, & to the perdition of infinit soules.
                  The Apostle S. Paule, euen whylst hee liued, founde some of his Schollers to be remoued by new-fangled Teachers to another Gospell,Gala, 1. 11. 12. and the better to make them see theyr errour, hee appealeth to the Gospell

which he had taught them. The Gospell he preached, was not after man, neyther receiued he it of man, but by reuelation from Iesus Christ. He brought them no fancies, visions, dreames, interpretations of scripture hatched in hys owne braine,1. Cor, 1
                           •
                        . 23. but the pure & sincere doctrine, receiued by reuelation from God himselfe, and faithfully deliuered vnto them, without hacke or mayme as hee receiued it.
                  Therefore Saint Ierome vpon that place,Ierom. in epist. ad Gal. considering howe all Heretiques haue iugled wyth the Scriptures from time to tyme, sayth. That Marcion and Basilides, and other Heretiques, (the contagious botches & plague sores of the Church,) haue not the Gospell of God, because they haue not the spirit of God, without which, that which is taught, groweth to be mans Gospell. Thys maketh that learned Father to resolue vpon the matter, that it is a dangerous thing peruersly to expound the holy Scriptures, for by thys meanes, that is, by wrong and peruerse interpretation, that which is Gods gospell, is made mans Gospell, et quod peius est, and that which is worse (saith this holy Father,) it is made the deuils Gospell. For discerning therefore of this kinde of most pernicious people, and theyr deuilish dealing, and least we shoulde be carried awaie wyth

euery winde of doctrine by the wilinesse of men,Ephe. 4, 14. God hath ordained in his Church Apostles,1, Cor, 12, Doctors, Prophets, Pastors, and Interpreters, whom he hath so guided and gouerned from time to tyme with his holy spirit, that they haue beene able by the Scriptures to represse and beate downe whatsoeuer errours and heresies haue beene raysed vp by the enemies of Gods trueth, contrary to the analogie of fayth and rule of charitie: that is to say, beside the true sence and meaning of the Canonicall scripture.
                  
                     No heresie finally preuailed against the scriptures.When there rose vp certaine sedious fellowes among the Iewes in the primatiue Church, making som contention about their ceremonies, as did Simon Magus, Nicholaus Cerinthus, Ebion, and Menander that were heretiques; They were refelled and conuinced out of the scriptures by the Apostles and theyr schollers, Martialis, Dyonisius Areopagita, Ignatius, Policarpus, and others, who were no doubt directed & guided by the spirite of God. Afterward, when Basilides, Cerdon, Marcion, Valentinus, Tatianus, Apelles, Montanus, and diuers others, troubled the Church wyth monstrous heresie, they were cōfuted by Iustinius Martyr, Dionisius byshop of Corinth, Irenaeus, Clemens, Alexandrinus, Tertullian, & their equals, who in all theyr controuersies had

recourse vnto the scriptures, and beeing instructed and ledde by the spirit of trueth, preuailed mightily against their aduersaries. And so downward from age to age vnto our daies, whatsoeuer heresie or different opinion hath sprung vp contrary to the doctrine of Christ and hys Apostles, it hath beene checked and controlled by the watchmen, spirituall Pastours, and Gouernors of the Church, who alledged alway the consent of the scriptures for deciding of all doubts, and were most graciously guided by the spyrite of God in all their actions. And heereof it is that the word of God is called the sworde of the spirit:Ephe, 6, 17. because, as it was giuen by inspiration at the first, so being expounded by the direction of the same spirit, it is most liuely and mightie in operation:2, Tim. 3,16. Heb, 4, 12. sharper thē any two edged sword, and entering through, euen to the deuiding a sunder of the soule and the spirit, of the ioynts and the marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the hart.
                  Thys is that spirituall sworde wherwith our Sauiour Christ preuailed against sathan the head Lord & maister of all Heretiques,Math. 4. who notwithstanding pretended scriptures for his deuillish purposes. And the Apostle Paule,Acts, 9. being furnished wyth thys only weapon, disputed against the peruerse & ouerthwart

Iewes, which dwelt at Damascus, and confounded them, proouing by conference of Scriptures, that thys was very Christ.
                  Nowe as it was expedient that the Gospels should be written, that we learning the trueth foorth of them,Theophilactꝰ. should not be deceiued by the lyes of heresies; so was it necessary that the same Gospels shoulde be preached for the confirmation of fayth.Hieronimus. And heereof it is, that the Apostle S. Paule, Rom. 10. sayth,Rom, 10, 17, that fayth cōmeth by hearing the word of God,1. Peter, 1, 23 Ephe, 5, 26. because the word preached, is the ordinary meanes to beget and increase faith in vs, for the which cause also, it is called the incorruptible seede whereby we are borne a newe, and whereby the Church is sanctified vnto the Lord.
                  Wherefore to conclude thys poynt, seeing that the holy scriptures are that most infallible and secure way mentioned by Esay, seeing they are the rule & leuell both of our fayth and life, contayning in them sufficient matter to confute errour and confirme the trueth, able to make a man wise vnto saluation,2, Tim, 3, 15. 16, 17. & perfectly instructed vnto euery good worke:
                        Basil. moralium, Regula. 80. ca. 21. this ought to be the duetie of the faithfull, (that I may vse the words of Basil,) to be thorowly perswaded in his minde, that those thinges are true and effectuall, which are vttered in the Scripture, and to reiect nothing

thereof. For if whatsoeuer is not of fayth be sinne, (as saith the Apostle) and if fayth commeth by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, without doubt when anie thing is without the holy scripture, (which cannot be of faith,) it must needes be sinne. And therefore (to speake as S. Augustine speaketh,
                        August. cont literas. petil, lib. 3. cap. 6.) if any, I will not say if wee, but (which S. Paule addeth) if an Angell from heauen,Gala, 1, 8. shall preach eyther of Christ or of his Church, or of any other thing which pertaineth to faith, or to the leading of our life otherwise, then we haue receiued in the holy scriptures of the Law and the Gospel, let him be accursed.
                  Now if forsaking all bie-pathes of mens inuentions and traditions, we wyll search diligently in the scriptures wherein we thinke to haue eternall life,Iohn, 5. 39. wee shall see that they testifie of nothing so much, as of the promises of God in Christ Iesus; who as he is the ende of the Lawe for righteousnes to euery one that beleeueth,Rom, 10, 4, Gala, 3, 24. so doe they sende vs directly, and as it were leade vs by the hande like a careful Schoole-maister vnto him, teaching vs to apprehend and lay holde on him with the hand of fayth, and to apply hym wyth his gifts and graces vnto our selues, and our owne saluation. So that faith is made the meanes, and as it were the Conduit to

conuey Christ himselfe, hys death, burial, and resurrection, and all the rest of hys benefits vnto vs, which the Apostle witnesseth. Collos. 2. 12. Yee are buried (saith he) with him through Baptisme, in whom ye are also raised vp together,Coloss. 2,12. through the fayth of God effectually working, who raysed him from the deade. Whereof it ensueth, that all the faithfull, doe not onely obtaine the benefite of Christes death & buriall by their Baptisme, wherby they die vnto sinne: but also do receiue and enioy, the fruite and effect of his resurrection by a liuely fayth, whereby they are quickned and raysed vp vnto righteousnes in thys life, and are assertained of resurrection to glorie in the life to come,Phillip, 3,21. by hys mightie working that is able to subdue all things vnto himselfe.
                  Seeing therefore that the summe & substaunce of our whole Religion, and of our eternal saluation or damnation, consisteth in the knowledge of this one vertue, it shalbe worth the labour, breefely (but yet plainly) to describe the forme, force, & nature of this faith whereof we speake. Wherein you shall not looke for the diuers significatiōs, which that word receiueth in the Scripture, nor for any declaration of those vnprofitable faythes whereof S. Iames speaketh,Iames, 2, 19. which are common to the wicked, and to the deuils themselues,

wherby they beleeue that Iesus is that Christ;Marke, 1, 24. but heere my purpose is to entreate, of that liuely and sauing fayth, which is peculier and propper to the elect and chosen children of God, whereby they beleeue, that Christ is theyr Iesus,Math. 1, 21. by whom they are saued from theyr sinnes, and from the punishment due vnto them for the same, and by whom onely they are restored vnto the fauor of God,Rom, 8, 17. and made heyres with Christ of hys heauenlie kingdome.
                  In the Epistle to the Hebrues,Hebru, 11, 1. there is a notable description of that liuely fayth, wher it is said, to be the ground of things that are hoped for, & the euidence of things that are not seene. Of which description of the Apostle, we may make a plain definitiō after thys sort. Faith is an assured perswasion of our saluation by the meanes of Christ, which is grounded on the promises of God, & sealed in our harts by the holie Ghost. This definition is drawne frō the forme & proprietie of true faith, but the other, in the Epistle to the Hebrues, seemeth rather to be taken frō the substance of fayth, & speaketh of the obiect matter thereof. But both of them tend to one and the same thing, namely, to expresse the nature of true faith, to consist in the certaintie of that eternall life, which is purchased vnto vs by Christ Iesus, which although we

enioy not presently, yet by faith wee are as fully assured of it, as if we had possession and fruition thereof alreadi
                        •
                     . And heereof it is, that the Apostle calleth it 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,Colos, 2, 2, Heb, 10,22, fulnes or assuraunce of fayth, when we are perswaded that wee are so highlie in Gods fauour, that nothing is able to seperate or remooue vs frō the loue that GOD beareth vs in his Sonne and our Sauiour Christ Iesus. This fulnes of fayth, containeth in it these three thinges.
                  First, a notice or knowledge of the mercifull promises of God in Christ Iesus. Secondly, an vndoubted perswasiō of the truth of those promises. And thirdly, the applying of the same to the comfort of our soules and consciences, for our saluation. For as it is not enough for a man to haue meate, vnlesse he also eate it and digest it, so it is not enough for vs to know the promises of God, vnlesse we beleeue the same to be true,Hebru, 4,2. and applie them to our owne selues. And as it is not enough for a wounded man, to haue a soueraigne salue or Medicine in his window, vnlesse hee apply it to his wounde, so is it not sufficient for vs, to knowe that Christ is the Sauiour of the worlde, vnlesse also wee acknowledge him to be a Sauiour vnto vs, and lay holde on him by the hand of fayth.
                  Wherefore, this is the propertie & effect of a sauing fayth, euen to apply Christ wyth

his gifts vnto euery one of the faithfull, and to make all conclusions of Gods promises perticuler, that is, peculier to themselues & theyr owne saluation. And therfore it is that fayth is called the life of the soule,Habac, 2, Rom, 1, 17. Hebru, 10. 37. because it is the instrument, wherewith Christ the true life and foode of our soule is to be eaten. Yea it is the mouth, the tongue, the teeth, the stomacke, and that heate of our harts & soules, whereby Christ the worde of God, is spiritually taken, eaten, and digested of vs; wyth which worde, or rather with which Christ, our soules doe liue:Iohn, 6, 51. namely, with the fleshe and blood of Christ which we eate & drink, whilst we embrace and receiue Christ by a liuelie fayth. Whereupon S. Cyprian hath this sweete saying,
                        Cyprian. lib, de caena. domini.
                      
                     Quod est esca carni, hoc animae est fides, &c. That which meate is to the flesh, that is fayth to the soule. That which foode is to the bodie, that is the word to the spirit. So that faith is that bond, which dooth so straightly vnite and knitte vs vnto Christ, no otherwise then the members are vnited to the head, wherby wee pertake hys spiritual graces, as the members of mans bodie receiue nutriment from the head; and in a worde, what good things soeuer are necessarie for vs to eternall life, doe flowe and are deriued vnto vs from Christ, as from a most plentifull and wholesome fountaine, and are

conueied vnto vs by the instrument of faith, as by a strong and substantial Conduit pype.
                  It were too long, and not so pertinent to the purpose, to recite all the properties of this sauing fayth whereof we speake: it may suffise therefore to haue shewed you these fewe notes, and effects thereof, by the due consideration whereof, it shall be easie for anie to examine and try themselues,2, Cor, 13, 5. as the Apostle speaketh, whether they be in the faith or no, and consequently, whether they be true Christians for the first part of that profession: namely, for matters of beleefe, which consisteth (as hath beene shewed) not onelie in beleeuing whatsoeuer is propounded vnto vs in the holy Scripture, (although that also be a true faith,) but also in the assurance of Gods loue & fauour towards vs, wrought in our harts by the preaching of the Gospel, and sealed by the holy Ghost; whereby wee doe firmely perswade our selues, that our sinnes are as vtterly forgiuen vs for Christes sake, as if we neuer had committed any, and his righteousnes as perfectly imputed vnto vs, as if wee had performed the same in our owne persons.
                  Wherefore, to conclude this first part of our present speech,
                        Dial. contra. Lucifernanum.
                      he that not onely protesteth with Saint Ierome, that he dooth abhorre all sects and names of perticuler men,

as Marcionists, Montanists, Valentinians, and the like,Gene, 11, (which like the builders of Babell, haue built vp Churches, Sinagogues, and Conuenticles to gette thēselues a name, that men might be called after them, Marcionists, Montanists, and such others,) hee I say that loatheth and detesteth sects, and as he was not baptised in the name of Marcion, Montan, or Valentine, but in the name of Iesus Christ, so refuseth to be called a Marcionist, Montanist, or Valentinian, or by any name of any man vnder heauen: & therwithall reioyceth in the name of Christ to be called a Christian, and giuing all doctrines and gospels the slyppe, pitcheth him vpon the doctrine and Gospell of Iesus, taught by hys holy Apostles; he that can captiuate his vnderstanding to the obedience of Christ, to beleeue humbly such things as Christ by his Apostles proposeth to him,2, Cor, 10.5. albeit his reason or sence should stande against the same. And not onely so, but also perswadeth and assureth his owne hart and soule, that all the mercifull promises that God maketh in hys word, doe belong vnto him in especiall, and that he is one of that number which GOD hath elected to saluation, and for whose sins Christ Iesus the sonne of God was content to die, and to ryse againe for his iustification,Ephe, 3, 17. he that findeth himselfe to be in thys fayth,

or rather thys fayth to be in him, and feeleth the fruites and effects therof, that is, (as they are reckoned by the Apostle, Rom. 5.) to be at peace with God;Rom. 5, 12: to haue an entrance vnto grace; to haue spirituall ioy, not onely in prosperitie, but euen in tribulation and affliction; to haue hope that maketh not ashamed; and to haue the loue of God shed abroade in hys hart by the working of the holy Ghost, &c. Thys man, no doubt, is in a most sure case for matters of his faith, and cannot possibly walke awry therein, but may thinke himselfe a good Christian for thys first poynt, which is for matters of beleefe.
               
               
                  The seconde part of this Chapter.
                  THere followeth the second part of Christian profession, concerning life & manners; which is a matter of so much more difficultie then the former, by how many more waies a man may be ledde from vertuous life then from sincere fayth, wherein there can be no comparison at all, seeing the pathe of our beleefe is so manifest, (as hath beene shewed,) that no man can erre therein but of inexcusable wilfulnes. Which wilfulnesse of error,
                        See S. August. de vtil. cre cap. 1 Cyp. epist. 61. the holy Fathers of Christes primatiue

Church, did alwaies refer to two principall and originall causes, that is,The two causes of heresie. to pride & ouerweening in our owne conceits, and to malice against our Superiors, for not giuing our selues contentation in the thinges that we desire. Of the first doe proceede newe opinions, newe glosing, expounding,The dooings of Precismatiques. & applying, of the Scriptures, preferring our own iudgement before all other past or present; the contempt and debasing of holy Fathers and Councels, and whatsoeuer proofe standeth not with our owne liking and approbation.
                  Of the second fountaine are deriued other qualities conformable to that humor, as are the denying of iurisdiction and authoritie in our Superiours, the contempt of Prelates, the exaggeration of the faultes and defects of our Gouernours, the impugnation of all Bishoplike dignities or Ecclesiasticall eminencie, and especially of that rule whereunto appertaineth the correction of such lyke offenders: and finally, for satis-fying thys deuillish and pernicious venime of malice, those wicked reprobates doe incite and arme the people against theyr spirituall Pastors, they kindle factions against Gods faithfull Ministers, they deuise a new Church, a new forme of Gouernment, a new kingdom and Ecclesiasticall Hierarchie vpon earth, wherby

to bring mē in doubt or staggering what or whom to beleeue, or whereunto to haue recourse in such difficulties as doe arise.
                  These two maladies I say of pryde and malice, haue beene the cause of obstinate errour in all Heretiques frō the beginning, as full wel noted that holy & auncient Martyr Saint Cyprian,The obseruation of Saint Cyprian. when hee sayde so long a goe. These are the beginnings and originall causes of Heretiques and wicked Scismatiques, first to please & like well of thēselues,
                        Cyp. epist. 65. ad Rogatian.
                      and then, beeing puffed vp with the swelling of pride, to contemne theyr Gouernors and Superiors. Thus doe they abandon and forsake the Church, thus doe they erecte a prophane Aulter out of the Church against the Church. Thus doe they break the peace and vnitie of Christ, and doe rebell against Gods holy ordination.
                  
                     Many causes of euill lyfe.Nowe then, as these are the causes eyther onely or principally of erring in our beleefe, most facile and easie (as wee see) to be discerned, so of errour in lyfe and manners, there are many more occasions, causes, ofsprings, and fountaines to be found. That is to say, so many in number as wee haue euill passiōs, inordinate appetites, wicked desires, or vnlawfull inclinations within our minde, euery one whereof, is the cause oftentimes of dysordered life, and breach of Gods commaundements.

For which respect there is much more sette downe in Scripture for exhortation to good life, then to fayth, for that the errour heerein is more ordinary & easie, and more prouoked by our owne frailtie, as also by the multitude of infinite temptations. Wherefore we reade that our Sauiour Christ in the very beginning of his preaching, straight after hee was baptised, and had chosen vnto him S. Peter, and S. Andrewe, Iames and Iohn, and some other fewe Dysciples, went vp to the Mountaine, and there made hys most excellent, famous, and copious Sermon,The effect of Christ hys Sermon. recited by S. Matthew in three whole Chapters,Math. chap, 5, 6, and 7. wherein he talketh of nothing els but of vertuous life, pouertie, meekenes, iustice, puritie, sorrow for sinne, patience in suffering, contempt of riches, forgiuing of iniuries, fasting, prayer, repentance, entering by the straight gate: and finally, of perfection, holines, and integritie of conuersation, and of the exact fulfilling of euery iote of Gods Lawe and commaundements. He assured his Disciples with great asseueration, that he came not to breake the Law, but to fulfill the same: & consequentlie, whosoeuer should breake the least of his Commaundements, and should teache men so to doe, that is, shoulde perseuere therein without repentaunce, and so by his example

draw other men to doe the like, should haue no place in the kingdome of heauen. Again, he exhorted thē most earnestly to be lights, and to shine by good works to al the world,Math, 5,20 and that except theyr iustice did exceed the iustice of the Scribes and Pharises,Math, 6, 24, (which was but ordinarie and externall) they could not be saued. He tolde them plainelie they might not serue two maisters in thys life, but eyther they must forsake God, or abandon Mammon.Math. 7, 13. He cryed vnto them Attendite, stand attent, and consider well your state and condition, and then againe, seeke to enter by the straight gate. And lastly hee concludeth, that the onely tryall of a good Tree,Math, 7. 20 is the good fruite which it yeeldeth: wythout the which fruite, let the tree be neuer so fayre, or pleasant to the eye, yet is it to be cutte downe and burned. And that not euery one that shall cry or say vnto him Lorde, Lorde, at the last day, shall be saued,Math, 7, 25. or enter into the kingdome of heauen, but onely such as did execute in deedes, the wyll & commandements of his Father in thys lyfe. For want whereof, he assureth them, that many at that day,Math,7,22. who had not onely beleeued but also doone myracles in his name, should be denied, reiected, and abandoned by him.
                  Which long lesson of vertuous life, being the first that euer our Sauiour gaue in

publique to his Disciples then newly gathered together, (as Saint Matthewe noteth,) (hauing treated somewhat before of poynts of fayth, and by some miracles & preaching shewed himself to be the true Messias,) doth sufficiently teach vs, that we must not onely beleeue in his name and doctrine, but conforme our liues and actions also to the prescript rule of his commaundements.
                  For albeit in Christian Religion,A similitude touching faith and workes. faith be the first and principall foundation, wheruppon all the rest is to be stayed & grounded. Yet as in other materiall buildings, after the foundation is layd, there remaineth the greatest labour, time, cost, cunning, and dilligence to be bestowed vpon the framing, and furnishing of other parts that must ensue: euen so in thys celestial edifice or building of our soule, hauing layde on the foundation and grounde of true beleefe: the rest of all our life, tyme, labor and studies, is to be imployed in the perfecting of our life and actions, & as it were in raysing vppe the walles and other parts of our spirituall building by the exercise of all vertues, and diligent obseruation of Gods commandemēts, without the which, it will be to no more purpose for vs to bragge of our knowledge in the Scriptures, or to say wee haue fayth, and looke to be saued as well as other men: then it wyll

be to purpose to haue a foundation without a building vppon it, or a stocke or tree that beareth no fruite. Which thing S. Iames (speaking of that historicall and dead fayth, whereby the wicked & the very deuils thē
                     selues beleeue that there is one GOD,) expresseth most excellently in this fitte similitude:Iames,2. 26. 
                     As a bodie without a spirit is dead, euen so, (saith he) is fayth without workes.
                  
                  Thys poynt of doctrine of vertuous life and obseruing of Gods commaundements, not our Sauiour Christ alone in his Sermon, most earnestly vrged, (as hath beene sayde) but his fore-runner also Saint Iohn the Baptist, and hys followers the holie Apostles, whereof the one continually called vpon the people to bring foorth fruites meete for repentance;Math, 3, 8. the other in all theyr writings, & no doubt in all their Sermons after matter of doctrine and faith propounded,Roma. 12. 1. Ephe, 4, 1. do proceede to exhortation, and precepts of Christian life. In so much as Saint Augustine & other auncient Fathers, are of opinion, that the rest of the Apostles, S. Peter, S. Iames, S. Iohn, and S. Iude, perceiuing the loosenesse and securitie of the people in theyr tymes, directed theyr writinges, eyther onely or principally to this ende, euen to perswade and enforce the necessitie of good life and conuersation among Christians. Yea and that Saint

Paule himselfe, when hee concludeth that a man is iustified by faith without the workes of the Lawe,Rom,3,28, doth not exclude the works of charitie, as effects and fruites of fayth, which followe him that is alreadie iustified in the sight of God: but hee excludeth thē as causes of saluation, which goe before him that is to be iustified. Wherby it appeareth, that S. Paule handling the causes of our iustification in the sight of God, is not repugnant or contrary to S. Iames, speaking of the notes and signes whereby we are iustified: that is, (as the word is taken Math,12,37. els where,) declared or known to be iust or righteous before mē.
                  The sum is, that although good workes are not the causes of our saluation,Colos.1,10. yet they are the way as it were, and the path that leadeth thereunto: because by them, as by certaine markes, we perceiue our selues to haue entered, and to haue proceeded in the waie of eternall life. Yea, they are the fruites and effects,Iames,2,18. whereby we testifie and declare both vnto our selues and to others, the trueth of that faith which we professe. And therefore our Sauiour Christ willeth vs in the Gospel,Math,5,16, to let our light shine before men, that they seeing our good works, may take occasiō therby to glorifie our heauenly father.
                  And his holy Apostle Saint Iames,Iames,2,18. biddeth those carnall & sensuall Christians, that

stood so much vpon the only name of faith, to shewe him theyr fayth by their workes, as he would shew them his faith by his works
                        •
                      that is, they should declare and testifie vnto men (as I haue said) the fayth which they professed, by the fruites thereof. To men (I say) because men which iudge but by the outward appearaunce onely, cannot knowe the goodnes of a tree,Math, 7, 16, b
                        •
                     t by the good fruite which it yeeldeth; they cannot discerne the inwarde faith but by the outwarde workes. But as for God, that searcheth the secrets of the harts and reynes, it needeth not that wee shoulde shewe him our faith by our workes, nor may wee looke for iustification at his handes by the best of them:Rom, 4, 2. for then might wee haue whereof to boast, but there is no boasting with God, and therefore no iustifying by workes in his sight. Yet notwithstanding, the Lorde requireth good workes at our hands, to the end that himselfe might be 1, Pet, 2. 12. glorified, our needie bretheren releeued and 1, Cor,9.2,13 comforted, others gained & wonne by our example, to the embracing of the same faith and Religion which we professe: our owne faith exercised and strengthened, and our calling and election made sure and confirmed.2, Peter,1,10
                  
                  And it is very requisite that the children of GOD,1, Pet,1,18,19. which are bought with so high a

price, as with the blood of Iesus, should glorifie God both in soule & body, because they are redeemed both in soule and body, and not liue vnto thēselues,1, Cor, 6,20, 2, Cor,5,15, but vnto him which died and rose againe for them.
                  Thys is the ende of our election before the foundations of the world were layde, as the Apostle testifieth, Ephes. 1.4.Ephe, 1,4, euen that we should be holy and blameles before him in loue. Thys is the ende of our creation, as the same Apostle witnesseth, Ephesians, 2. 10.Ephe, 2,10. Where he saith that we are Gods workmanshyp created in Christ Iesus vnto good workes, wherein he hath ordained that wee shold walke. This is the end of our redemption, as olde Zacharie prophecied, Luke, 1. 74, 75.Luke. 1,74,75 that beeing redeemed and deliuered from all our spirituall enemies, and from eternall destruction whereunto we were subiect, we should serue God without feare, in holines and righteousnes before him all the daies of our life. Finally, this is the ende of our vocation. For God hath not called vs to vncleannesse, but vnto holinesse:1, Thes, 4,7. 1, Pet, 1,15. and as hee that hath called vs is holy, so must we be holie in all manner of conuersation. And it can not be that they which are truely iustified, that is to say, made righteous by a liuely fayth in Christ, should not also in some measure be sanctified, that is, made holie by a

faithfull lyfe in him.
                  Let not men therefore deceiue themselues with the onely name and shadowe of faith, without the nature & substance therof. Let them not promise vnto themselues euerlasting life, because they knowe the true God,Iohn, 17,3. and whom hee hath sent Iesus Christ: but let them remember howe Christes Apostle whō he deerely loued expoundeth that saying, when he writeth, By this wee knowe God (truely) if wee keepe his commaundements:1, Iohn, 2.3,4. and whosoeuer sayth that he knoweth him, and yet keepeth not his commaundements, is a lyer, and the trueth is not in him.1, Tim, 1,15, For as it is a true saying, and by all meanes woorthy to be receiued, that Christ Iesus came into the worlde to saue sinners: so is it as true a saying, and no lesse woorthie to be affirmed, that they which haue beleeued God,Titus, 3,8. should be carefull to shew foorth good works.
                  Saint Gregorie vpon the words of Christ to S. Thomas,
                        Greg. in hom. 29. in E
                              •
                           ang. Iohn 20. 
                     Blessed are they who haue not seene, and yet haue beleeued: hath a notable discourse to this purpose. If any (sayth hee) inferre heereof, I beleeue and therefore am blessed, and shall be saued, he saith truely, if his life be aunswerable to his beleefe: for that a true faith dooth not contradict in manners, the things which hee professeth in

words. For which cause, S. Paule accuseth certaine false Christians,Titus, 1,16. in whom he found not vertuous life aunswerable to theyr profession: that they confessed God in wordes, but denyed him in theyr deedes. And Saint Iohn auoucheth, that whosoeuer saith, hee knoweth GOD,1, Iohn, 2,4. and keepeth not his commandements, is a lyer. Which beeing so, we must examine the trueth of our fayth by cō
                     sideration of our life: for then & not otherwise are we true Christians, if wee fulfill in works, that whereof we haue made promise in words. That is, in the day of our Baptisme, we promised to renounce the pompe of this world,What we promised in our Baptisme. together with all the workes of iniquitie; which promise, if wee performe nowe after Baptisme, then are we true Christians, and may be ioyfull. But contrariwise, if our life be wicked, & contrary to our profession, it is saide by the voyce of trueth it selfe. Not euery one that shall say to mee Lord, Lord,Math, 7. shall enter into the kingdom of heauen. And againe, why doe yee call mee Lord, Lord, & doe not performe the things that I tell you.
                  Heer-hence is it, that God complained of his old people the Iewes, saying:Esay, 29,17. 
                     this people honoureth me with their lips, but their harts are farre off from me.
                     Psal, 78,36,37 And the Prophet Dauid of the same people. They loued him

with their mouth, and wyth their tongues they lyed vnto him. Wherefore let no man presume to say he shall be saued, if faith and good life be diuorced & put a sunder, which S. Chrisostome noteth, by the wofull and heauie chaunce & iudgment that happened vnto him, who in the Gospell was admitted to the feast of Christian faith & knowledge, but for lacke of the ornament or garment of good life, was most contumeliouslie depriued of his expectation. Of whom Saint Chrisostoms words are these.
                        Chrys. hom. 9. in Iohn.
                     
                     He was inuited to the feast, and brought vnto the Table, but for that by his foule garment he dishonored our Lord that had inuited him: he was not onely thrust from the Table & banquet, but also bounde hande and foote, and cast into vtter darknes, where there is eternall weeping and gnashing of teeth.
                  
                  Wherefore let vs not (deere bretheren) let vs not I say deceiue our selues, and imagine that our dead and vnfruitfull faith wyll saue vs at the last day: for except wee ioyne pure life to our beleefe, and in this heauenly vocation of ours, doe apparrell our selues with the worthy garmēts of vertuous deeds, whereby we may be admitted at the mariage day in heauen: nothing shall be able to deliuer vs from the damnation of this miserable man, that wanted his wedding weede.
                  
                     Which thing S. Paule well noteth, when hauing sayde,2, Cor,5,1,8. wee haue an euerlasting house in heauen, not made with mens handes, he addeth presentlie thys exception, Si tamen vestiti et non nudi inueniamur. That is, if wee be founde at that day well apparrelled and not naked. Would God euery Christian desirous of hys saluation, woulde ponder well thys discourse of S. Chrisostome.
                  And so wyth thys alone to conclude our speeche in thys Chapter,The conclusion of thys Chapter. without allegation of further matters or authorities, (which are infinite to thys effect,) it may appeare by that which hath alreadie beene sette downe, wherein the true profession of a Christian consisteth: and thereby each man that is not partiall, or blinded in his owne affection (as many are,) may take a viewe of his state and condition, and frame vnto himselfe a verie probable coniecture, how he is like to speed at the last accounting day. That is, what profite or damage hee may expect by hys knowledge and profession of Christian Religion. For as to him that beleeueth soundly, and walketh vprightly in his vocation, performing effectually euery way his professed duetie, there remaine both infinite and inestimable rewards prepared: so to hym that strayeth aside, and swerueth from the right path of fayth and life prescribed vnto hym,

there are no lesse paines and punishments reserued. For which cause, euery Christian that is carefull of his owne saluation, ought to sixe his eyes verie seriouslie vppon them both; and as in beleefe to shewe himselfe constant, firme, humble, and obedient: so in life & conuersation, to be honest, iust, pure, innocent and holie.
                  And for this seconde poynt concerning life and manners, hath been already handled in my former booke, (which as I vnderstand is imprinted in England:) I shall neede to wade the lesse in further discourse heereof. But for I haue beene admonished by the writinges of diuers, howe my former booke hath beene misliked in two speciall poynts; first, that I speake so much of good workes, and so little of faith: secondly, that I talke so largelie of Gods iustice, and so breefelie of his mercie, whereby the consciences of many haue beene offended: let the last Chapter going before of beleefe and life, aunswer the first, and that which immediatly followeth, serue for the latter obiection, and so I doubt not but a Christian man may be thorowlie resolued.
               
            
            
               
               OF THE ONLY IMPEDIMENT THAT IS WONT TO LET SINNERS FROM Resolution.
               Which is, the mistrust and diffidence in Gods mercy, through the multitude and greeuousnesse of their offences.
               CHAP. VI.
               AMong all other the moste greeuous and perrilous cogitations, which in thys worlde are accustomed to offer themselues to a minde intangled and loden wyth great sinnes: this vsually is the first,Dispaire, an ordinary temptation to the greatest sinners. (through the nature of sinne it selfe, and crafty suggestion of our ghostly enemie,) to fall into distrust and dyspaire of Gods mercie. Such was the cogitation of most vnhappie Caine,
                     Caine.
                   one of the first inhabitants of the earth, who after the murder of his owne onely brother,

and other sinnes by him committed, brake into that horrible and desperate speeche, so greatly offensiue vnto his Lorde & Maker,Gene, 4, 
                  Mine iniquitie is greater then that I may hope for pardon. Such was in like manner the desperate conceite of wicked Iudas, one of the first of thē that were chosen to the peculier seruice of our Redeemer;
                     Iudas.
                   who feeling hys conscience oppressed wyth manifolde iniquities, and most of all with the prodition of his owne Lord and Maister: tooke no other way of amendmēt or redresse, but to destroy himselfe both in bodie and soule, adioyning onoly these words, full of miserable distrust and desperation:Math, 27. 
                  I haue sinned in betraying the innocent and iust blood. By which wordes and most wretched ende, he more greeuouslie offended and iniured his most louing and mercifull Sauiour, then by all his former iniquities committed against him.
               This then (most louing brother) is the first and greatest rocke,The shipwrack of soules ouerloden wyth sinnes. wherat a sinful soule ouer burdened wyth the charge of her owne iniquities, and tossed in the waues of dreadfull cogitations, by the blastes & stormes of Gods threates against sinners, doth cōmonlie make her shypwracke. That is, that most horrible depth and dungion, wherof the holie scriptures saith:Prou, 18. 
                  The impious man, when he is come into the bottome and profunditie of

his sinnes, contemneth all. Thys is that remedilesse sore, and incurable wound, wherwith God himselfe charged Ierusalem, when hee sayd: Insanabilis fractura tua:
                  Ieremie. 3
                        •
                     
                   thy rupture is irremediable. And the Prophet Michaeas considering the same people, thorowe the multitude of their wickednes, to encline now to dispayre of Gods goodnes towards them; brake forth into thys most pittiful cōplaint.Mich, 3. 
                  For this will I weepe and lament extreamelie, I will strippe off my clothes and wander naked: I will rore like vnto Dragons, and sounde out my sorrowe as Struthious in the desert, for that the wounde and maladie of my people is desperate.
               
               Thys is that great and maine impediment,The misery of desperation. that stoppeth the conduits of Gods holy grace, from flowing into the soule of a sinfull man. This the knyfe that cutteth in sunder all those heauenly & blessed cordes, wherwith our sweete Lord and Sauiour endeuoureth to drawe vnto repentaunce the harts of sinners, saying by his Prophet,Hose. 11. 
                  I will pull them vnto me with the chaines of loue and charitie. For by this meanes euery sinful conscience commeth to aunswer almighty God, as did Ierusalem, when beeing admonished of her sinnes, and exhorted by his Prophet to amendement of life, she said:Ieremie, 2. 
                  Desperani, nequaquam faciam: I am become desperate, I will neuer thinke of any such thing. To

which lamentable estate when a sinfull man is once arriued: the next steppe he maketh, is, (for auoyding all remorse and trouble of conscience:) to engulfe himselfe into the depth of all detestable enormities, and to abandon his soule to the very sinck of all filth and abhominations: according as S. Paule said of the Gentiles in like case,Ephe, 4. 
                  That by despaire they deliuered themselues ouer to a dissolute life, thereby to commit all manner of vncleannesse.
               
               Which wicked resolution of the impious, is the thing, (as I haue noted before) that most of all other offences vpon earth, doth exasperate the ire of almightie God, depriuing hys diuine maiestie of that most excellent propertie,The thing wherein God most delighteth is mercy. wherein he cheefely delighteth and glorieth; which is, his infinite and vnspeakable mercie. Thys might be declared by diuers and sundry examples of holie writ, howe be it two onely shall suffise for thys present.
               The first is of the people of Israell, not long before theyr banishment into Babilon, who being threatned from God by the prophet Ieremie, that manifolde punishments were imminent ouer their heads, for theyr greeuous sinnes committed against his maiestie: began (in stedde of repentaunce) to fall to desperation: and consequentlie, resolued

to take that impious course of all desolute life, alleaged before out of Saint Paul; for thus they aunswered God exhorting thē by hys threates to reforme theyr wicked liues.A desperate resolution. 
                  We are nowe growne desperate: and therfore we will heereafter follow our owne cogitations, and euery one fulfill the wickednes of his owne conceit. Whereat God stormed infinitlie, and brake foorth into thys vehement interrogation:Ierem, 18. 
                  
                     Interrogate Gentes: quis audiuit talia horribilia?
Aske and enquire of the verie Gentiles, whether euer among thē were heard any such horrible blasphemies.
               
               And after this, for the more declaration of this intollerable iniurie heerein offered to hys Maiestie: he commanded the Prophet Ieremie to goe forth out of his owne house, and to gette him to a potters shoppe, which in the Village was framing his vessels vpon the wheele. Which Ieremie hauing doone, he sawe before his face a pot crushed & broken by the Potter all in peeces vppon the wheele, and thinking thereby that the vessell had been vtterly vnprofitable and to be cast away, hee sawe the same clay presently framed againe by the Potter, into a new vessell, more excellent then before.A meruailous example of Gods clemencie. Wherat he meruailing, God said vnto him;
Dost not thou thinke (Ieremie) that I can doe wyth the house of Israell, as this Potter hath doone

wyth hys vessell? or is not the house of Israell in my hands, as the clay in the handes of thys craftes-man? I will denounce vppon a suddaine against a Nation and Kingdome, that I wyll roote it vppe and destroy it, and if that Nation or Kingdom doe repent from their wickednes, I also will repent me of the punishment which I intended to lay vppon them.
And then he proceedeth forward, declaring vnto Ieremie the exceeding greefe and indignation which he conceiueth, that any sinner whatsoeuer, shoulde despayre of mercie and pardon at hys hands.
               The seconde example is, of the same people of Israell, during the tyme of theyr banishment in Babilon; at what tyme being afflicted wyth many myseries for their sins,Another example of Gods wonderfull mercy. and threatned wyth many more to come, for that they chaunged not the course of theyr former wicked conuersation: they began to despayre of Gods mercie, and to say to the Prophet Ezechiell that liued banished among them, and exhorted them to amendement, vppon assured hope of Gods fauoure towards them;Ezech. 33. 
                  Our iniquities and sins doe lye greeuously vppon vs, and wee languish in them: and what hope of life then may wee haue? At which cogitation and speech, God beeing greatly mooued: appeared presentlie to Ezechiell and said vnto him: Tell thys people, I

doe liue saith the Lord God of hostes, I wish not the death of the impious, but rather that hee should turne from his wicked waies and lyue. Why will the house of Israell die in their sinnes, rather then turne vnto me? And then hee maketh a large and vehement protestation, that how greeuously soeuer any person shold offende him, and how great punishments soeuer he shall denounce against him: yea, if he had giuen expresse sentence of death and damnation vpon him: yet, Si egerit paenitentiam a peccato suo, feceritque: iudicium & iustitiam: that is, if hee repent himselfe of hys sinne, & exercise Iudgment and iustice to be vsed in true repentance: that is, iudgment vpō our selues, and iustice towards others. iudgement & iustice for the time to come, all his sinnes that hee hath committed shall be forgiuen him (saith almightie God,) for that he hath doone iudgment and iustice.
               
               And thys now might be sufficient, (al
                     •
                   be it nothing els were spoken) for remoouing thys first obstacle and impediment of true resolution, which is the despayre of Gods infinite goodnes and mercie. Neuerthelesse, for more euident cleering and demonstration of this matter, and for the greater comfort of such as feele themselues burdened wyth the heauie weight of their iniquities committed against his diuine maiestie; I haue thought expedient in this place, to declare more at large, this aboūdant subiect

of endlesse mercie, towardes all such as wyll truely turne vnto him: in what tyme, state, condition, or age soeuer in thys life;Foure parts of this Chapter. which shall be shewed and sette downe by these foure poynts and parts that doe ensue.
               
                  The first part: touching the loue that God beareth towards man.
                  FIrst of all, by the infinite and incomprehensible loue that almighty God beareth vnto man: which loue is alwaies the mother of fauour, grace, and mercie. If you demand of me in what sort I doe proue that the loue of God is so exceeding great towards man, I answer as the Cosinographer is wont to doe, who by the greatnes and multitude of the streames and Riuers, dooth frame a coniecture of the fountaine from which they flow. The proper Riuers which are deriued and doe runne forth of loue, are good turnes and benefits; which seeing they are infinite, endlesse and inestimable, bestowed by God vpon man, (as in the place before hath been declared, and the whole vniuersall frame of this world dooth aboundantly beare witnesse,) it followeth most euidently, that the origine, fountaine, & wel-spring of all these fauours, graces, and good turnes, must needes be infinite,

immeasurable, and farre surpassing all compasse of mans vnderstanding.
                  If you require of me the cause and reason, why Almightie God should so wonderfullie be affected towards man, I can directlie yeelde you none at all, but rather meruaile thereat wyth holy Iob,Iob. 7. why so soueraigne a Maiestie shoulde sette hys hart vpon so base a subiect. Notwithstanding, the holy scripture seemeth to alleage one principal reason of thys loue, whē it saith;Wisdom, 11 
                     Nihil odisti eorum quae fecisti, & parcis omnibus, quia tua sunt, Domine, qui diligis animas.
That is,Thou (ô Lorde) which louest soules, canst not hate those things which thou hast made, but dost vse mercie towards all men, for that they are thyne. And the like manner of reasoning vseth God hymselfe, when hee sayth by hys Prophet Ezechiell;The first cause why God loueth vs, for that he is our Creator, and we are his own workes. Ezechiel, 18. 
                     Behold, all soules are mine, and heereuppon hee inferreth a little after; Numquid voluntatis meae est mors impii:
Can I haue the wyll to damne a wicked man, seeing that his soule is mine, created and redeemed by me? as who woulde say: thys were a case against all order and equitie. And the reason of this manner of speech and argument is, for that euery man naturally is enclined to loue the things that be of his owne making. So wee see, that if a man haue an Orcharde, wherein be great varietie of trees

and plants, yet if there be but one of his own peculier grafting that florisheth and prospereth well: he taketh more delight therein, then in any of the rest, for that it is hys owne workmanship. So in like manner, if a man haue a Vineyarde of his owne planting and trymming.Euery man giuen to loue his owne. For which respect the holie Prophet Dauid, finding himselfe and the whole kingdome of Iurie in great affliction and calamitie: thought no other meanes so forcible to drawe God to compassion and commiseration of their case, as to cry out to him in this maner;Psalm, 79. 
                     Thou which gouernest Israell, looke towards vs and be attent. Thou hast brought forth a vineyard out of Egipt, thou hast purged the same from Gentiles, and hast planted it. Thou O God of all power turne towardes vs, looke vpon vs from heauen, and visite thys thy vineyard which thine owne right hand hath planted. The like manner of perswasion vsed the holy Prophet Esay to moue God, when he sayd: Looke vpon vs I beseech thee (O lord) which are the worke of thine owne hands.
                  
                  But aboue all other, the blessed man Iob standeth,Iob, 1. as it were, in argument and dysputation wyth God about thys matter, saying:The confidēce of Iob, in that God bad made him. haue not thy handes made mee? haue they not framed me of clay and earth? hast not thou compacted me as cheese is made of milke? hast not thou knit my bones and sinowes

together, and couered my flesh wyth skyn? hast not thou giuen me life, & conserued my spirit with thy cōtinuall protection? howe soeuer thou seeme to dissemble these matters & hide them in thy hart, yet I know that thou remembrest them all, and art not vnmindfull of them. By which wordes thys holy man signified, that albeit God suffered him greatly to be tempted and afflicted in thys life, so farre forth as he might seeme to haue forgotten him: yet was he well assured that his diuine maiestie coulde not of hys goodnes forsake or despise him, for that hee was his creature and the proper workemanshyp of his own hands. In which very name of workemanshippe, holy Dauid tooke such great comfort, considering that the workeman cannot chuse but be louing and fauourable towards his owne work, (especiallie so excellent and bountifull a worke-man as is almightie GOD, towards a worke made as man is, to his own shape and likenes,) that in all his necessities, yea euen in his greatest infirmities of fleshe, and most greeuous offences committed against his Maiestie, he conceaueth most assured hope of mercy & pardon, vpon this consideration, that he was hys workmanship,The assured hope Dauid had, in that he was Gods workmanshyp. & cōsequently, wel known to his diuine wisdom, of how brickle & infirme a metal he was made. For thus at one tyme

among other, hee reasoneth of thys matter.
Looke how farre distant the East is from the West,Psalm, 102. so far off hath God remooued our iniquities from vs. Euen as a father doth take compassion of his owne children, so doth the Lord take mercy vpon vs: for that hee well knoweth the moulde whereof wee are made, and doth remember that wee are nothing els but dust.
                  
                  In which discourse, the holy Prophet maketh mention of two thinges that dyd assure him of Gods mercie; the one, that God was his Creator and maker, and therby priuie to the frailtie of hys constitution & nature: th'other, that he was his father, whose propertie is to haue compassion on his chyldren; & this is a second reason,The seconde reason of assurance of Gods loue, for that he is our Father. more strong and forcible perhaps then the former, why euery man may be most assured of pardon that hartilie turneth vnto almightie GOD; considering that it hath pleased his diuine Maiestie, not onelie to be vnto man a Creatour, (as he is to all other things,) but also a father, which is the title of the greatest loue and coniunction, that nature hath left to things in thys world. Wherof a certain Phylosopher said well: that no man coulde conceiue the loue of a Parents hart, but he onelie that had a childe of his owne. For which respect, our Sauior Christ to put vs in mind

of this most feruent loue; and thereby as it were, by one fire to enkindle another wythin our harts: did vse oftentimes and ordinarilie, to repeate thys sweete name of Father in hys speeches to his followers,Math, 5,6,8. &c. and theruppon founded diuers most excellent & comfortable discourses; as at one time when hee exhorted them from ouer-much care and worldly solicitude: hee addeth thys reason: Your father in heauen knoweth, that you haue neede of these thinges.
                     Math, 6. As who would say, hee knowing your wants, and beeing your Father, you shall not neede to trouble your selues wyth too great anxietie in these matters: for that a Fathers hart cannot but bee prouident & carefull for hys chyldren. The like deduction maketh he in the same place, to the same effect, by comparison of the byrdes of the ayre, and other irreasonable creatures: for which, if God doe make (saith hee) so aboundant prouision, as al the whole worlde may witnesse that hee dooth: much more carefull wyll he be to prouide for men that are his owne children, which are more deere vnto him then any other terrestiall thing created.
                  All which speeches and reasons of our Sauiour, are deriued from the nature and propertie of a Parent, which cannot but affecte and looue hys children; especiallie

such a Father whom Christ calleth celestiall who in thys perfection of true fatherly loue,What a father God is. so farre exceedeth al earthly Parents put together: as in power, clemencie & goodnes, almightie GOD surpasseth the infirmitie of hys feeble creatures. Such a father, as hath not onelie giuen lyfe and beeing vnto hys chyldren:Gala, 4. but also (as S. Paule saith,) hath poured into theyr harts the diuine spyrite of hys onelie eternall Sonne, styrring them vp to most assured confidence and inuincible hope, in hys fatherlie goodnes and protection. And vpon assuraunce of thys hope, haue as well sinners as Saints from the beginning, fledde vnto him confidently vnder this tytle of paternitie, and neuer were deceiued. So the Prophet Esay, as well in his owne name, as in the name of the sinfull people of Israel, doubted not to cry.Esay, 63. 
                     Thou art our father, Abraham hath not knowne vs, and Israell is ignorant of vs: Thou O Lorde, art our father, thou art our redeemer. And to confirme thys assuraunce vnto vs, Christ sent that most sweete and comfortable embassage vnto his Disciples,Christes comfortable embassage. presently vpon his resurrection:Iohn, 20. 
                     Goe & tel my brethrē, that I doe ascend vnto my father and vnto your father: vnto my God, and vnto your God. By which two wordes of Father and God, the one of loue, and the other of power: the one of will, the other of abilitie,

he tooke away all doubt of not speeding, frō each man that should make recourse to thys mercifull Lord & Father. God himselfe also, after many threates vsed by the Prophet Ieremie against the people of Israel for their sins, in the end, least they shoulde dyspaire, turneth about his talke,Howe greatly the respect of a father moueth God. and changeth hys style, assuring them of many graces and fauours, if they would returne vnto him: telling the house of Israel,Ieremie, 31. that hee had loued her from the beginning, and had sought to drawe her vnto him by threates, to the ende hee might take mercie vpon her: and that now he intended to builde her vp againe, to adorne her with ioy & exultation, to gather her children from all corners of the earth, to refresh them wyth the waters and riuers of life, and all thys (sayth he) Quia factus sunt Israeli Pater: for that I am become nowe a Father to Israel. And in the same place to wicked Ephraim (the heade Cittie of the rebellious kingdom of Samaria,) he saith:Ieremie. 31. 
                     Ephraim is becom my honorable son, my delight & deerely beloued child: therefore my bowels are moued with compassion vpon him, & in aboundance of mercy wil I take pitty of him. So much attributed God to this respect of being a father vnto Israel & Ephraim, & of theyr beeing his children: that for this cause only (notwithstanding their infinite enormous sinnes)

hys bowels of endlesse mercie were mooued wyth loue and compassion towardes them.
                  And these are those tender and mercifull bowels,Luke, 1, which holie Zacharie father to Saint Iohn Baptist, protesteth to be in almightie God towardes mankinde that had offended hym. These are those which were in that good olde father mentioned in the Gospell,Luke, 16. who beeing not onely offended but also abandoned by his younger sonne, yet after he sawe him returne home againe, notwithstanding he had wasted all his thrift and substaunce,The fathers liberall hart to the prodigall sonne. and had wearied out his bodie with wicked life: hee was so farre off from dysdaining to receiue him: as he came forth to meete with him, fell vpon his necke, and kyssed him for ioy: adorned him wyth newe apparrel & rich iewels: prouided a solemne banquet for him: inuited his freendes to bee merrie with him: and shewed more exultation and tryumph for hys returne, then if he had neuer departed from him.
                  By which parable our Sauiour Christ endeuoured to set forth vnto vs, the incomprehensible mercy of his heauenly father towards sinners: in which respect hee is trulie called by his Apostle Pater misericordiarum,
                     2, Cor, 1. Ber. ser. 5. de natal.
                      the father of mercies. For that (as Saint Bernard well noteth) thys sea and Ocean of

mercies, doth flowe peculiarly from the hart of a father, which cannot be said so properlie of the gulfe and depth of his iudgments. For which cause he is called in Scripture the God of iustice and reuenge,Psalm, 35
                           •
                        
                      and not the Father. And finally, thys blessed name of Father in God, dooth import vnto vs by Gods owne testimonie,What the name of Father dooth import. all sweetnesse, all loue, all freendshippe, all comfort, all fatherly prouidence, care, and protection; all certaintie of fauour, all assuraunce of grace, all securitie of mercie, pardon, and remission of our sinnes, whensoeuer vnfainedly we turne vnto him.
                  And in thys poynt his diuine Maiestie is so forward and vehement, to giue vs assurance, that beeing not content to sett foorth his loue vnto vs by the loue of a fathers hart; he goeth further & protesteth vnto vs, that hys hart is more tender towardes vs in thys behalfe, then the hart of any mother can bee to the onely childe and infant of her owne wombe. For thus he saith to Sion, which for her sinnes beganne to doubt least he had forsaken her:Esay, 49. 
                     Can the mother forget her owne infant, or can she not be mercifull to the childe of her owne wombe? if she could, yet can I not forget or reiect thee: beholde, I haue written thee in the flesh of mine owne hands. And thys, for so much as God is called our father.
                  
                     
                     The thyrd argumēt of Gods loue, the giuing hys sonne for vs.There remaineth yet a third consideration, which more setteth forth Gods inestimable loue, then any of the other demonstrations before handled. And that is, that he gaue the life and blood of his onely begotten and eternal sonne, for purchasing and redeeming vs when we were lost; a price so infinite and inexplicable, as (no doubt) his diuine wysedom wold neuer haue giuen, but for a thing which hee had loued aboue all measure. Which our Sauior himself that was to make the payment, doth plainly signifie, and therefore also seemeth as it were, to wonder at such a bargaine, when hee saith in the Gospell:Iohn. 3. 
                     So deerely hath God (my father) loued the world, that he hath giuen for it his only begotten sonne. In which wordes hee ascribeth this most wonderfull dealing of his Father, vnto the vehemencie and exceeding aboundance of loue: as dooth also his deerest disciple and Apostle S. Iohn, saying:1, Iohn, 4.
                     In thys appeareth the great loue & charitie of God towards vs, that he hath sent his only begotten sonne into the worlde, to purchase lyfe for vs. In thys (I say) is made euident his exceeding charitie, that we not louing him, he loued vs first: and gaue his own sonne to be a raunsome for our sinnes. Whereunto also the holy Apostle S. Paule agreeth,Christ was giuen for loue. admiring in like manner the excessiue loue of God in

these wordes;Rom. 5. 
                     God doth meruailously commend and set forth his great loue vnto vs, in that we beeing yet sinners, he gaue his sonne to the death for our redemption. And in an other place, framing out; as it were, a measure of Gods mercy by the abūdance of his loue:
saith thus;Ephe, 2.
                     God who is rich in mercie, thorowe the exceeding loue which he bore vnto vs, wee beeing deade in sinne, he reuiued vs in Christ, and raysed vs vppe euen vnto heauen, making vs to sitte downe there with him, to the ende he might declare to al ages and worlds ensuing, the most aboundant riches of hys grace and goodnesse towardes vs.
                  
                  Thys was the opinion of that noble Apostle S. Paule, and of all his coequals, Apostles, Euangelists, Disciples and Saints: that this work of our redemption, proceeded only frō the inflamed fornace of Gods immeasurable loue.
And therfore to make no other conclusion heereof, then that which S. Paule himselfe doth make:The conclusion of this point, made by S. Paule. Titus. 3. 
                     if God haue not spared his own propper & onely begotten son, but hath giuen him vp to death for gaining vs vnto him, howe can it be, that with him hee hath not giuē vnto vs al other things. If whē we were his enemies and thought not vpon him,Rom, 5. he sent to seeke vs so diligently, by such a messenger as he loued so deerely, allowing

him to lay downe a price for vs which he so infinitlie esteemed:
what shal we think that he will doe vnto vs nowe, (we beeing made hys owne by our redemption,) if we returne willingly vnto him: when our receauing shal cost him nothing els, but onely a merciful looke vpon vs: which is not so much frō the infinite bowels of his bottomlesse mercy, as is one drop of water from the most huge gulfe of the maine Ocean sea. And this shal suffise for the first poynt of Gods loue, declared vnto vs by the three most sweete and comfortable names and respects, of Creator, Father, and Redeemer.
               
               
                  The second part: howe God expresseth his loue towards sinners.
                  NExt after which, wee are to consider in what maner God is accustomed to expresse and declare thys loue of his, in hys dealings and proceedings towardes sinners. And first of all the wyse man (hauing had long experience of thys matter,) beginneth to describe and sette it forth in thys sort, saying vnto God himselfe:Wisd, 11, 
                     (Thou (O Lorde
                           •
                        ) dost dissemble the sinnes of men, to giue vnto them time of repentance. And then, when they wyll not vse this benefite of his forbearing,

but wyll needes enforce hym to punish and correct them: hee sayth further of thys correction:Wisdom, 12. 
                     Such as wilfully doe runne astray (O Lord) and will not turne vnto thee, thou doost correct them sweetly by little and little, admonishing and exhorting them to leaue their sinnes and to beleeue in thee.
                     Two rare poynts of clemencie in GOD. These two points then of exceeding clemencie, by the testimony of the wyse man, are founde in almighty God: first, to wincke at the wicked life of men, and to expect their cōuersion with inspeakable patience and longanimitie, according as also the Prophet Esay beareth witnesse, adioyning the cause thereof in these wordes:Esay, 30, 
                     The Lorde dooth attend your conuersion, to the ende he may take mercie on you, and thereby be exalted. And secondly, for the same respect when he is enforced by reason of his iustice to chastise them: yet doth he the same with such moderation and mildnesse, as alwayes in thys life he reserueth place of pardon.
                  And to these two wee may adioyne yet a third propertie of his mercie, more admirable (perhaps) then the former: which is, (as Tertullian excellently noteth,
                        Tertul. in Apolog. cap 2.) that hee beeing the partie offended, yet first & principally desireth reconsiliation: hee hauing receiued the wrong and iniurie, yet dooth he most busilie entreate for amitie and attonement. And whereas in all right and

equitie, hee might denie vs pardon, and for hys power take reuenge of vs at his pleasure:God that is offended, seeketh attonement with vs. yet doth he not onely offer vs peace of his own accord, but also sueth vnto vs by all meanes possible to accept thereof
                        •
                      humbling (in a certain manner) his diuine Maiestie to our basenes & vilitie: and behauing himselfe in thys respect, as a Prince that were enamored of hys bond-slaue and abiect seruaunt.
                  Thys might be declared by many of his owne speeches and dooinges in holie Scripture: but one place out of the Prophet Esay shall serue for all: where almightie GOD so earnestly wooeth the conuersion of Ierusalem, as no louer in the worlde coulde vtter more signes and testimonies of a hart inflamed and sette on fire with loue, then he doth towards that Cittie which so highly had offended him.
                        Gods wooing of Ierusalem.
                      For first, after many threates poured out against her, if she did not return, least she might perhaps fal into despayre, he maketh this protestation in the beginning of his speech,Esay, 27, 
                     Indignatio non est mihi, &c. Angry I am not (ô Ierusalem,) but whatsoeuer I haue spoken, I haue spoken of good wil and loue.
                        His protestation.
                      Secondly, he entreth into this dispute, and doubt with himselfe, about punishing her for her sinnes; what shall I doe?
                        His cunctation.
                      
                     Shall I treade her vnder my feete & put her to the fier? or els will she stay my puissant hande and make

peace with me, will she (I say) make attonement with me? After which doubt & cunctation, he resolueth himselfe to change his manner of style, and to fall a little to chide wyth her, and then he saith,
                        His chiding.
                      
                     Harken O ye deafe inhabitants of Ierusalem: looke about ye ye blind folke that wil not see: who is blind and deafe but my seruant, that will not regard or listen to the messengers which I send? O thou which hast open eares, wilt thou not heare? And then a little after he beginneth to smooth & speake faire againe, saying:
                        His faire speech.
                      
                     Euer since thou hast beene gracious & glorious in mine eyes, I haue loued thee, and for thy soule will I giue whole nations. Feare not, for that I am with thee. Wherewith shee being little or nothing moued, hee returneth to a sweet maner of complaint saying:
                        His complaint.
                      
                     Thou hast enthralled me by thy sins, & with thine iniquities thou hast greatly afflicted me. Which being sayd, and she somewhat moued therby to loue him as it seemeth, hee turneth vnto her wyth this most comfort
                        •
                     ble and kynde speeche:
                        His kinde speech.
                      
                     I am hee, I am hee, which cancelleth thine iniquities for mine owne sake, and will neuer thinke any more vpon thy sinnes.
                  
                  All which beeing doone, and they now reconciled, and made fast freendes together, hys diuine Maiestie beginneth a verie louing conference (as it vvere) and sweete expostulation with her, saying in these

words:
                        His conference.
                      
                     Call thou to memorie the things that are past, and let vs iudge our selues heere together. Tell me if thou haue any thing whereby thou maist be iustified. Thy first parent was a sinner, &c. Whereat she beeing ashamed, and hauing nothing in the worlde to aunswere for herselfe: almightie God comforteth her, and knitteth vp the whole matter in thys moste kynde and amiable sort.
                        His sweete conclusion.
                     
                     Feare not, for I wyll poure out my spirit vppon thee, and vppon thy seede, and my benediction shall be vpon thyne of-spring; thy children shall bud vp and florish as wylloes planted by the water side; Thus saith the Lord and king of Israel, the Lorde of hostes that is thy redeemer: I am the first and the last, & besides me there is no other GOD. Be mindfull of this thou house of Iacob, I haue dissolued and dissipated thy sinnes, as a cloude is dissolued in the ayre: be mindfull of this and haue an assured confidence.
Thus farre continueth the treatie betweene God and his Cittie of Ierusalem.
                  And nowe tell me (deere Christian brother) whether it be possible for any hart or tongue in the world,A consideration vpon the former treatie of God wyth Ierusalem. to cōceiue or expresse more waies or significations of most vehement good will and burning affection, then of Gods part in thys treatie hath beene declared? What louer or enamoured person

vpō earth, what passionate hart could wooe more earnestly, sue more diligently, sollicite more artificially, complaine more pittifully, expostulate more amiably, conferre more intrinsically, remit offences more readilie, offer benefits more aboundantly, conclude more sweetly, and giue more pregnant testimonie of vnfained loue, or more assured certaintie of eternal league and amitie, thē doth almightie GOD vnto this Nation that so greeuously had offended him? who will not confesse nowe with the Prophet Dauid,Psalm, 144. 
                     that sweet and mercifull is the Lord; and his miserations spread ouer all the rest of his most wonderfull workes. Who will meruaile if the same Prophet made a vowe,Psalm, 16. that his euerlasting song shoulde bee of the mercies of this hys Lord and maker?
                  But yet this thing is made much more apparant,Gods tender loue to Ierusalem when he was to destroy it. by that which his diuine Maiestie did afterwardes to the same people in the daies of Ieremie the Prophet (aboue an hundreth yeeres after this treatie in the tyme of Esay:) at what tyme God beeing resolued to destroy them and theyr Cittie, for theyr obduration in their sinnes: when the hower of execution drew neere, his bowels of mercie were so touched with commiseration towards them, as he called to Ieremie, & commaunded him once againe to goe vp to the

Temple gate where all the people did passe in and out, and there with a loude voyce to cry as followeth.Ierem, 7,
                     Heare ye the word of God, ô all you of Iuda, that doe passe in and out by these gates: thus faith the Lord of hostes the God of Israell: yet doe you amend your waies, and I will dwel in this place wyth you, &c.
And when this exhortation, and blessed indeuour of almightie God, could not moue or profit them any thing at all: then his vnspeakable goodnes began with sharp threats in this manner;Ierem. 7.
                     My furie and indignation is gathered together vpon this Cittie: & vpon the inhabitants, & vpon the very beastes and Cattel thereof, as also vppon the fruite and trees of thys Region. The carkases of thys people, shall be foode to the byrdes of the ayre, and to the beastes of the field, theyr enemies shall come and cast foorth of theyr sepulchers,Ierem, 8. the bones of the Kings and Princes of Iuda: the bones of their priestes, prophets and inhabitants; and shall dry them at the Sunne, and cast them out vnto the dunghill.
After all which long and dreadfull commination, hee altereth his speech presently againe, and sayth wyth a very lamentable and pittifull voyce.A pittifull complaint. 
                     And will not he that is fallen (notwithstanding all this) rise vp again? Wil not he that is departed from me, returne vnto me againe? O, why dooth my people

runne from me so obstinatlie? By which louing complaint,The wonderful proceeding of God with Ierusalem. and infinite other meanes of mercie that God vsed to that people, whē no amendment at all could be procured: hys diuine Maiestie was inforced to call Nabuchodonosor king of Babilon before the wals of Ierusalem, to destroy it. But euen nowe also consider the bowels of hys vnspeakeable mercie. For hoping that by thys terrour they might perchaunce be styrred vppe to conuersion; hee sent Ieremie the Prophet to them againe, wyth thys embassage:Iere. 35
                           •
                        
                      
                     Tell the inhabitants of Ierusalem: wil ye not yet receaue discipline and obey my wordes? Wherat those gracelesse people were so little mooued, as they tooke Ieremie and cast him into pryson for his message, & thereby exasperated most greeuously Gods further indignatiō against them. Notwithstanding all which, his incomprehensible clemencie woulde not thus abandon them:Iere, 3
                           ••
                        
                      but commaunded holy Ieremie to write out all his threates and promisses in a booke together, and to sende the same vnto them, foorth of the prison where he lay, by his seruant Baruch, to be reade in their hearing: and so he did. Whereof when Ioacim the King had vnderstanding: hee commaunded Baruch to be brought into his presence, and there to reade the Booke by the fyer syde, (as the Scripture noteth.)

And when he had heard but three or foure pages thereof,The obstinacie of the Iewish nation. he cut them out with a pen-knife, and threwe the whole booke into the fire, and so consumed it. At which obstinate and impious dealing, albeit almightie God were exceedingly offended, yet commaunded he the same booke to be indited & written againe, in much more ample manner then before, thereby (if it had been possible) to haue stirred vppe and gained that people vnto him. But when thys by no means in the world could be brought to passe: then permitted his diuine Maiestie, the whole Cittie to be destroyed, according to hys former threates, and that rebellious people to be led away captiue in bondage to Babilō. In which place and miserie (notwythstanding theyr demerits) hys infinite mercy could not forsake them, but sent hys Prophet Ezechiell, as also Baruch vnto them, with extreame cō
                     plaint of their obduration:Ezechi. 23. and yet offering vnto them mercie and pardon euen then, if they would repent.
                  And what more wonderfull clemencie then this, can possibly be imagined deere Christian brother?Ezech, 2. Epitheto
                           •
                        s giuen by God to the people of Israel. May in reason any man euer nowe enter into doubt or dispaire of Gods mercie, howe great and greeuous soeuer the burden of his sinnes be, whē he considereth this proceeding of his eternall Maiestie

wyth the people of Israell, for so manie yeeres and ages together: whom hymselfe calleth notwithstanding,

                        Gentem Apostatricem dura facie & indomabili corde: an apostaticall Nation, of a shameles countenance and incorrigible disposition? Can God deuise any more effectual and forcible meanes, to erect and animate a sinner confidently to returne vnto him, then a
                        •
                     e these?
And yet (gentle reader) for thy further comfort and encouragement in this behalfe, I wil adioyne one thing more, which dooth exceede and passe all reason and reach of humaine imagination: and this is,A wonderfull poynt. that God promiseth to a sinner that faithfully will returne vnto hym, not onely to forgette and vtterly extinguish all memorie of his former iniquities, but also to make more ioy and tryumph at his conuersion, and to loue and cherish him more tenderly at his returne, then if he had neuer fallen or departed from his seruice.
                  Thys God himselfe signifieth by the Prophet Esay,Esay, 40. when he saith, Call vnto Ierusalem, speake vnto her hart, (that is, comfortably,) for that her iniquitie is forgiuen, she hath receiued double at Gods hands for all her sinnes committed.
                     What ioy there is made at a sinners conuersion. And more plainely in an other place by the same Prophet.Esay, 30. 
                     The lyght of the Moone shalbe as the light of the Sun: and the light of the sunne shall be as the light of seauen

dayes, seauen times put together, when God shall binde vppe the woundes of his people and heale their sores. And to thys purpose doe appertaine directly those most wonderfull Parables of our Sauiour in the Gospell,Luke, 15, concerning the extraordinarie ioy & feasting that the careful woman made, when shee had found againe her grote that was lost, and the good sheephearde, when he brought backe the sheepe that was astray: and the mercifull father when he receiued home his sonne that before had abandoned him. And to the same purpose doth it also appertaine, that in the Prophet Dauid God glorieth especially in the seruice of those people,Psalm, 57. that before had not known him. And this shal suffise for thys second poynt, to shew what wonderfull meanes almightie God dooth vse, in setting forth his mercie, for allurement of sinners vnto repentaunce.
               
               
                  The third part: what assurance God giueth to them that repent.
                  AND so hauing declared what exceeding great loue and mercie GOD beareth towards man, & how effectually he expresseth the same by his suing vnto sinners for their conuersion: it followeth that we shold

in this third place, examine some what more in perticuler, what certaine assuraunce hys diuine Maiestie giueth, of vndoubted pardon and full remission of theyr sinnes, to all such as vnfainedly shall resolue themselues to make their refuge vnto him. Which thing albeit euery man by that which before hath beene treated, may sufficiently conceiue, yet for the importance of the matter, it shall not be amisse in thys place also, to adde a worde or two, for more plaine and euident demonstration thereof. And thys shall bee doone by setting downe both the wordes and deedes, that is, bothe the promisses and performance which almightie God hath vsed and exercised in this behalfe, to all such as haue offended him whatsoeuer.
                  And for the first, which are his promises;The promises of God to sinners that repent. most apparent it is, as well by the thinges which before haue beene discussed, as also by the whole course, body, and drift of holie scripture, that the promises of mercy & pardon which his diuine maiestie hath made to sinners, & whereunto by his sacred word, he hath (in a certain manner) obliged himselfe; are both manifold, vehement, absolute, resolute and vniuersal.Ezech, 18,33. 34, 37. 
                     Whosoeuer shall depart from his wicked waies, and turne vnto me, (saith almightie GOD) I will receiue him. Beholde the vniuersalitie of all people and persons,

without excluding any. And then further; At what time soeuer an impious man shall returne vnto mee from his impietie, his wickednes shall not hurt him, saith the same Lorde God of hostes: see the vniuersalitie of all tymes and seasons without exception. But yet harken what God addeth besides. Leaue of to do peruerselie, (saith he to the Iewes &c.) and then doe you come & finde fault with me, if you can. For if your sinnes were as redde as skarlet, they shall be made as white as snowe. &c.
                     Esay, 1, Consider the vniuersalitie of all kinde of sinnes, be they neuer so greeuous, so horrible, or heynous.
                  And finally, God talking to a soule that hath often times fallen and most infinitly offended him, hee sayth thus;Ierem, 3,
                     It is a common receiued speech, that if a woman depart frō her husband, and doe ioyne herselfe to another man, shee may not returne to her fyrst husband againe, for that shee is defiled and made contaminate. And yet whereas thou hast departed from me, and hast committed fornication wyth many other louers: doe thou returne vnto me againe, and I wyll receiue thee, saith almightie God.
                  
                  By which words is expressed the fourth vniuersalitie, contayning all states, qualities, and conditions of men; how many waies, or howe oftentimes, or howe contemptuouslie

soeuer, they haue committed sinnes against hys diuine Maiestie. And what may be added nowe more vnto thys? was there euer Prince that made so large an offer to his subiects? or was there euer father that gaue so ample and vniuersall promise of pardon vnto hys children?Foure vniuersalities in Gods promisses to sinners. Who can nowe mistrust himselfe to be excluded from this assurance of mercie, wherein all sorts of people, al kind of sinnes, all times and seasons, all states and qualities of sinners are comprehended? O most miserable & infortunate man that excludeth himselfe, whom God excludeth not. What is there in this generall and vniuersall promises, whereof any man in the worlde shoulde haue pretence, to make any leaste doubt or question? Of the meaning (perhaps) and intent of him that promiseth? O deere brother, it is onely loue and charitie; and consequently, can not deciue vs. Of the trueth and suretie of his promises? It is infallible; and more certaine then heauen and earth put together. Of the power that hee hath to performe his promisses?Three poynts of great comfort. It is infinit, and not restrained by any bounds or limitation: whereof then may wee doubt? or in which of these three poynts may we not cō
                     ceiue most singuler consolation? heare the comfortable meditation that blessed S. Bernard made vpō thes three particulers which

we haue now mentioned.
Tria considero (saith he) in quibus tota spes mea consistit: charitatem vocationis, veritatem promissionis, potestaetem redditionis. &c.
                           Bern. Ser. in ver. Psalm misericordia. Domini in aeter. C
                                 •
                              ntab.
                        
                     
That is, I doe consider three things (faith this holy man) wherin all my hope consisteth, & wherby it is made inuinsible. First the exceeding loue & charitie of him, that calleth me to him by repētance; secondly, the infallible truth and certainty of his promise which he maketh to me of pardon and mercie; thirdly, the endlesse power and abilitie he hath to performe whatsoeuer he promiseth. This is that triple or threefold rope and chaine,Eccl
                              ••
                            4. which holy scripture sayth is hardly broken: for that by this rope, lette downe vnto vs from heauen (which is our Countrey) into this world, that is our prison; we may ascend and mount vp (if we wyll) euen vnto the sight and possession of Gods eternall kingdome & heauenly glorie. Thus farre that blessed father.
                  
                  
                     How God hath performed hys promises to sinners that haue repented.But now to the second poynt, if we consider howe faithfullie almightie God hath put in execution those promisses of his frō tyme to tyme, and howe no one man vpon earth, (so many ages as the world hath continued) was euer yet frustrate of his hope, in making his conuersion vnto his Maiestie, if he made it from his hart: we shall finde further cause for vs to confide. For so much as

it is not probable, or in reason to be imagined, that he which neuer failed in times past, will breake his promise for the time to com; especially seeing now in Christianitie, when we haue this aduantage aboue other former times (as Saint Iohn doth also note) that he who was and is our iudge,1. Ioh, 2, is become also our aduocate to pleade our cause.
                  Cast backe thine eyes then my louing deere brother, and take a viewe of all ages, times and seasons past & gone. Begin from the first creation of the worlde, and come downeward euen vnto this day: & examine indifferently whether in all this wyde compasse of times, persons, places and most greeuous offences cōmitted against hys diuine Maiestie,Neuer sinner repented that was not pardoned. there were euer yet any one sinner vpon earth, that returned vnfainedly & was not receiued. The sinne of our first Parents,Adam & Eue. was presently forgiuen vnto them, vpō their first signification of greefe and sorrowe for the same. And not onelie thys,Gene, 3. but our Sauiour also Iesus Christ was promised to be sent, for restoring them and their posteritie to the glorie and felicitie which by their fall they had lost. After thys, vntill the tyme of Abraham and of the people of Israell, as some vvorkes of Gods iustice are recorded in holie writte, that were exercised vppon irrepentant offenders: so are there

many more celebrated of his mercie: & only two persons in particuler are mentioned, who notwithstanding some sorrowe which they seemed to haue of their offences, were yet reiected: the first whereof was the murderer Caine,The reiection of Caine and Esau. who at the beginning denyed hys wickednes vnto God, and then beeing conuicted, despayred of remission. The second was Esau, whom S. Paul calleth a prophane fornicator:Hebru, 12, who found no place of repentaunce, albeit with teares he sought the same. Whereof S. Chrisostome giueth the reason in these wordes:
                        Chrys. hom. 80. de paenit. ad pop. Ami
                              •
                           .
                      
                     For this cause Esau obtained not pardon, for that hee did not repent as hee should haue doone: his teares proceeding rather of anger and temptation, then of true sorowe.
                  
                  When the people of Israell came to be a distinct Nation, & to be gouerned at Gods appointment: how greeuously (trowe you) did they offende daily, and almost hourelie his diuine Maiestie? And howe graciouslie did his vnspeakable clemencie remit & pardon their manifolde and innumerable sinnes and trespasses doone against him? The whole Scripture (in truth) seemeth nothing els, but a perpetual narration of Gods incredible patience and infinite mercies towardes them.The infinit 
                           •
                        ins of the Iewish people, and their infinit pardons recei
                        
                           •
                        ed frō God. And if I woulde speake of perticuler persons among them, which he receiued to

his fauour after great and manifold offences committed: there would be no ende of that recitall.
                  Let Manasses that most impious and wicked king, be an example for al:The example of Manasses. of whose enormous life & most detestable acts, whole pages are replenished, both in the bookes of kings and Chronicles;4, Reg, 21. 2, Chro, 33, and yet afterwardes notwithstanding, the same man falling into miserie and calamitie among the Babilonians, (a fortunate schoole oftentimes for Princes, who in their prosperity are wont to contemne God,) he beganne to be sorrowful for hys former life and actions, and became repentant (as the Scripture saith) in the sight of God, for the same. Whereat his diuine & incomprehensible mercie was so much moued presently, as he receiued him to fauour, and brought him backe from his prison and fetters, to hys kingdome & imperial throne of Maiestie.
                  The example also of the Niniuites is very notable and singuler in this behalfe:The example of the Niniuites. against whom almighty God hauing decreed a sentence of death, to be executed within a certayne time;Ionas, 1,2,3,4. he commaunded Ionas the Prophet to goe and denounce that sentence vnto them. But Ionas well knowing the nature and disposition of God towardes mercie: fore-sawe (as afterwardes hee signifieth)

that if hee shoulde goe and beare that embassage vnto them, and they thereuppon make chaunge of theyr lyues: his Maiestie woulde presentlie pardon them, and so hee shoulde be taken for a false and lying Prophet. For auoiding which inconuenience, he chose rather to flee away by sea to the Cittie of Tharsis, & there to hide himselfe. But almightie God raised a tēpest in that iourney, and disposed in such sort, as Ion
                        •
                     s was cast into the sea, and there receiued and deuoured by a whale: frō whose belly he was commaunded afterwardes to repaire to Niniuie, and to doe his former message; which hee performed. And the tenour of his message was, that wythin f
                        •
                     rtie dayes that huge cittie of Niniuie should be destroyed. Whych hee hauing denounced vnto them: the sequel fell out, as Ionas before had suspected. For the Niniuites beleeuing the message, & betaking themselues to repentance, GOD forgaue them presently: whereat Ionas was exceedinglie greeued & offended, and complained sweetly to God of hys strange dealing herein, demaunding why he had enforced him to come & preach destruction vnto them, knowing before hand that hee would pardon them. But his mercifull Lorde aunswered him fully to this poynt, by a certaine accident that fell out, wherto Ionas was not

able to reply one word.
                  For so it chaunced, that Ionas sitting wythout the walles of the Cittie Niniuie, vnder an Iuie bushe, that in one night by Gods appointment was sprong vp to couer him from the sunne: the same Iuie by Gods ordinance perished vpon the suddaine, and was cōsumed by a worme, leauing the poore Prophet destitute of that cōsolation of shadow which he receiued by it.Consider thys speech of almighty God. Wherewyth he beeing not a little disquieted and afflicted, God said vnto him: thou (Ionas) art sorowful,Ionas. 4. and much greeued for losse of thine Iuie tree, which notwithstanding thou diddest not plant or make to growe, nor tookest any labour at all about it. But the same grew vp in one night, and in one night it perished againe. And shall not I then, be carefull to pardon my great Cittie of Niniuie, wherein there be aboue an hundred & twenty thousand innocent people, which cannot distinguish betweene their right hande and theyr left? This was the answer of almighty God to Ionas, for defence of his singuler inclination to mercy, in respect that the Niniuites were his owne creatures, his own workman
                     
                        •
                     hip, and the labours of his own hands, as all other people also are. Of which kynde of reason and consideration, there haue beene diuers thinges sayde and declared In the first part of thys booke. before,

for manifestations of Gods infinite mercie. And all thys that hetherto hath been spoken, is of things onely doone in time of the olde Testament, before the appearance of Christ our Sauiour in the flesh.
                  
                     Examples of mercy in the newe Testament.But nowe if wee looke into the tyme of grace, when God incarnate came himselfe in person, to shew the riches of hys endlesse mercie vnto mortall men vpon earth: wee shall see more examples without comparison, of his exceeding clemencie. For that nowe, our Creator and shepheard ouercome (as it were) with extreame compassion, came downe into the vale of our miserie, with resolution, not onely to offer pardon and forgiuenes to all his sheepe that were astray & would returne:Luke, 15, but also to follow and seeke them out: and beeing found, to lay them on his owne shoulders, and so to beare them back vnto the fold againe, and there to giue his life and bloode for theyr defence against the Wolfe.
                  
                     Iohn, 10,11,O sweete Lorde, what greater loue can be imagined then this? what more pregnant signification of inflamed charitie, can mans cogitation conceiue or apprehende? is it meruaile nowe if hee which descended vnto vs with his hart, and wyth these bowels of burning affection, did sette open the gates of all his treasures, fauours, and graces vnto

vs?
Is it meruaile if the holy Apostle Saint Paul doe say of this time 
                        Superabundauit gratia,
                        Rom, 5, that grace did ouer abound: and yet further in another place; that Christ being very God,Phillp. 2, did in a certaine sorte impoueri
                           •
                        h and emptie himselfe, with the most wonderfull effusion of mercies and hauocke of heauen, which at this time and euer since he hath made?
                  
                  Heerehence it proceeded that all his delight and pleasure vpon earth,The wonderfull clemencie of Iesus our Sauiour. was to conuerse with sinners, & to giue them comfort, courage, and confidence in him. Which hee did so manifestly in the sight of al the world as hee became very scandalous & offensiue thereby to the Scribes & Pharisies,Math, 9, & 11. Mark
                           •
                        , 2, Luke, 5, & other principall Rulers among the Iewish Nation. Heere-hence: also did proceede those his most meruailous speeches and strange inuitations of wicked men vnto him; as for example at one tyme among other, when hee cryed out in publique,Math, 11. 
                     Come vnto mee all yee that doe labour and be heauie loden, and I wyll refresh you. And at another time, going into the Temple of Ierusalem vpon a high festiuall day, when all the people were gathered together: he stoode vp in the midst of them all, and brake forth into thys vehement inuitation, wyth a loude voyce, as S. Iohn Euangelist recordeth:Iohn, 7, 
                     If any man among you bee

thirstie, let him come vnto me and he shal drink.
                     Iohn, 7. Heerby it came to passe, that his diuine maiestie was termed commonly, Publicanorum et p
                           •
                        ccatorum amicus:
                     Math, 11. the freende and familiar of wicked Publicans and sinners. And heereof finally it did proceede, that he receiued all, embraced all, and forgaue all that repaired vnto him: were they Scribes, Pharisies, Souldiours, Publicans, Vsurers, Harlots, Theeues, Persecutors, or whatsoeuer most greeuous offenders besides: (whereof particuler examples in each kinde might be alleaged:) assuring vs furthermore, that after hys resurrection and blessed a
                        •
                     cention to the right hande of hys father, he woulde be more bountifull yet in thys manner of proceeding,Iohn, 12, 
                     and dr
                           •
                        w all men vnto him: beeing at one tyme both our Iudge and Aduocate, our King and Mediatour, our God and Redeemer, our Father and Brother, our Priest and Sacrifice, and he that both pleadeth and determineth our cause together.
                  What then shoulde not we hope at thys tyme (deere Christian brother) at the hands of this our Lorde and Maister,Great & many 
                           ••
                        uses of assured hope in Christ. which hath left vnto vs such wordes, such deedes, such assured euidences of hys infallible loue and aboundant mercies towards vs? why shold not hys dealings wyth other men before vs, giue vs hart and courage to trust assuredlie

in him, for the time present and to come? why shoulde not his former most infinite mercies, be vnto vs odoriferous alluring sauors & oyntments, to make vs as the spouse did in the Canticles,Cant. 1. follow and runne after him?
                  Heare what deuout S. Bernarde dooth meditate vppon this passage of Christes fragrant oyntments.
                        Be
                              •
                           . Ser. 5. in Cantab.
                     
                     O sweete Iesus (saith hee) the fresh and odoriferous smell of thy wonderfull clemencie doth allure vs to runne after thee, when we heare say, that thou despisest not beggers, nor abhorrest sinners. Wee know right well (ô Lord) that thou diddest not reiect the theefe that confessed thee, nor the sinfull woman that wept vnto thee, nor the Chananaean that hūbled herselfe before thee, nor the wicked adultresse brought vnto thee, nor the touller or tribute gatherer that followed thee, nor the publican that repaired vnto thee, nor the disciple that denied thee, nor Saule that did persecute thee, nor thy tormenters that did naile thy sacred bodie to the Crosse. O Lorde, all these are fragrant smels and sauours of thy most sweet mercie: and at the sente of these thy oyntments, we doe followe and runne after thee.
Thus farre S. Bernard.
               
               
                  
                  The fourth part: The application of all that hath beene said.
                  AND so wyth this to come to the fourth and last part of thys Chapter, and to apply all that hath beene said of Gods mercie to our present purpose: What man is there liuing in the worlde, that reading and beleeuing these things, can doubt or mistrust to receiue pardon for hys sinnes?Rom, 8, 
                     If God be hee that iustifieth, who is able to condemne vs, saith the holy Apostle S Paul? If God be minded to deliuer vs, who can take vs out of his hands?Iohn, 10, If God protest that he wyll pardon vs, why should we make any doubt or question thereof at all? Why shoulde wee not ioyne rather wyth that confident and faithful seruaunt of his S. Paul, who saith vnto vs, and to all other sinners liuing, in his maisters name:Hebr, 10. 
                     Let vs repaire vnto him with a true hart in fulnesse of faith, hauing purged our harts from an euill conscience:
                     S. Pauls exhortation to confidence. 
                     let vs hold fast an immouable confession of our hope, seeing he is faithfull which hath giuen vnto vs his promise, and let vs consider howe one of vs may prouoke another to charitie and good workes. By which words, the holy Apostle signifieth, that what sinner soeuer shall resolue with himselfe to

purge his conscience from wickednesse for the tyme to come, and to employ the rest of his life in charitie and good works: he may confidently & boldly repayre vnto almightie God, wyth most certaine assuraunce to receiue pardon & remission. And alas (deere brother) why then should any man despaire? Wherefore shoulde any man cast awaie hys owne soule, that GOD so much desireth to saue? what a pittifull and lamentable case is it, to behold so many Christians in the world to goe languishing in their sinnes, & to giue themselues ouer to all kind of carelesse and dissolute sensualitie (which by God himselfe is called desperation,) vpon this conceit and wicked cogitation, that nowe they are gone so farre, and so deepely rooted and habituated in thys kinde of life, as eyther it is impossible or in vaine for them now, to thinke of change or amendment? O deere brother, let these men harken to thys excellent dyscourse of holy Chrisostome, which ensueth.
                  
                     If thou be a wicked man,An excellent discourse and exhortation of Saint Chrys. hom. 2 in Psal. 50. (saith he) thinke vpon the Publicane. If thou be vncleane of lyfe, consider the harlot. If thou be a murderer, remember the theefe. If thou be a swearer, call to minde the blasphemer.  Cast thyne eyes vpon Saul and Paul, first a persecutour, and then a preacher; first a violent robber, afterwarde a good steward and dyspenser.

First chaffe; afterward corne: first a woolfe, afterward a sheepheard: first lead, afterward gold: first a pirat, afterwards a good pilot: first a dispersor, afterwarde a gatherer together: first a breaker down of Gods vine yard, afterwarde a planter: first a destroyer, afterward a builder. Thou hast seene manifold wickednes, but nowe behold vnspeakable mercie. Thou hast heard the pride of the seruant, consider now the loue and clemencie of the Maister. I will not thou say to me, I am a blasphemer, I haue beene a persecutor, I haue led an vncleane and abhominable life, and therefore I doubt least I shal not be pardoned; Say not so vnto me, for here thou hast examples to the contrary, in euery of these and many other sinnes. Thou mayst safely flie to what port thou list, and that eyther in the old or new Testament. For in the old thou hast Dauid, in the newe thou hast Paul. I will not haue thee therefore alleage excuses vnto mee, for couering thyne owne cowardnes. Hast thou sinned, repent: hast thou sinned a thousand times, repent a thousand times vnfainedly. This is the only oyntment that may be poured into an afflicted conscience, the torment whereof I doe well knowe.The speech of the deuill to a soule loden with sinne. For the deuill standeth by, whetting his sword of desperation, & saying vnto thee; Thou hast liued wickedly all thy youth, and

thy former daies thou hast mispent: thou hast hanted playes & spectacles with thy cō
                        panions, and followed after loose and lasciuious women; thou hast taken other mens goods frō them wrongfully; thou hast been couetous, dissolute, & effeminate: thou hast forsworne thy selfe: thou hast blasphemed and committed many other hainous & wicked crimes, and therefore what hope canst thou haue of saluation? Truely none at all. Thou art a meere cast-away, and canst not nowe goe backe: and therfore my counsaile is, that now thou vse the pleasures and commodities of thys worlde, and passe ouer thy time in myrth of hart, without cogitation of other affaires.
                  
                  
                     These are the words of the deuil (louing brother:S. Chrisostoms counsayle against the deuils temptation. these are the counsailes and perswasions of our enemie. But mine are contrary. If thou haue fallen, thou maiest rise againe. If thou haue beene a lost cōpanion, yet thou maist be saued. If thou haue committed fornication and adulterie in time past, thou maist be continent for the time to come. If thou haue haunted playes and games, thou maist draw back thy foote from henceforth. If thou haue delighted in leud and euil company, thou maist hereafter acquaint thy selfe with good. Thys only is necessarie, that thou beginne thy conuersion out of hand, and that

thou repent and take in hande to reforme thy selfe, though it be at the first but a little. Let thyne eyes begin but to shed forth one teare: enter into thy conscience: consider thy selfe but indifferently: examine thyne actions and what they deserue: lay before thy face the day of iudgment with the torments of hell on the one side, and the ioyes of heauen on the other. Repent, confesse, amende thy life, seeke a medicine for thy wounde out of hande while thou art in thys lyfe, in what state or condition soeuer thou be.No tyme too late to repent. Yea if thou be vpon thy death-bed, and readie to breath out thy soule & spirit, feare not to repent, for that Gods mercie is not restrained by the shortnes of time. Which I speake vnto you (my deere brethren) not to make you hereby the more negligent, but onely to styrre you vp to the confidence of Gods mercie, and thereby to auoid the most daungerous gulfe of desperation.
Hetherto are the wordes of thys holy and learned Father.
                  In which long and large dyscourse of his, we are to note, that (together with most excellent encouragement which hee giueth to all sinners, of what state and condition soeuer they be, in all times and seasons to trust in Gods mercie, and neuer to despaire;) he giueth also an holesome admonishment, that

we shoulde not by thys confidence become more negligent in reforming our liues, but rather doe it out of hande, without all delay or procrastination. Whereunto in like manner the holy father S. Augustine in like exhortation against despaire,An exhortation and admonishion of S. Augustine. Ser. 58. de temp.
                      dooth endeuour most vehemently to stirre vs vppe in these words:
Let no man after a hundred sins, nor after a thousande, despaire of Gods mercie, but yet so let him not despaire, as hee seeke presently without all stay, to reconcile hymself to God by amendment of life: least perhaps after that by custome he hath gotten a habite of sinne, he be not able to deliuer him selfe from the snares of the deuill, albeit hee woulde.
                  
                  And in the very same sermon he discourseth yet further of the same matter in manner folowing.
Not euery man that hath sinned, but he that perseuereth in sinne, is hatefull and abhominable in the sight of GOD. For that no man must distrust of Gods mercie towards hym that wyl amende and leaue his sinnes. For that God himselfe as a most sweete comforter, hath sayd by his Prophet,Ezech, 11,33. 
                        That the impietie of a wicked man shal not hurt him, at what time soeuer he shall turne from the sam
                              •
                           
                         But yet this great mercy of the Lorde, is then onely profitable vnto vs: if we delay not our conuersion, nor doe multiply sinnes

vpon sins. Which I wil declare vnto you by the example of woundes & ruptures of our body, by which, the infirmities also of our minde and soule may be conceiued.
                  
                  
                     Thus then we see, if a mans foote, leg, or arme be broken,A similitude of the body, to expresse the misery of the soule, by multiplying sinne. with howe great paine the fame is restored to his accustomed strength. But if any member of our body shoulde be broken twise, or three times, or more often in one and the selfe same place: your charity can imagine, howe harde a thing it were for that part to recouer her perfit health againe. So fareth it (deere brethren) in the woundes and ruptures of our soul. If a man doe commit sin once or twise, & doe vnfainedly with out dissimulatiō make his refuge to the medicine of repentance, hee doth out of hande obtaine health again, & that somtimes without any skar or blemish of the disease past. But if he begin to adde sins vpon sins in such sort, that the woundes of his soule doe rather putrifie within him by couering and defending them, then heale by repentance & confession: it is to be feared, leaste that heuie speech of the Apostle be fulfilled in him, to whom he sayth:Rom, 2. 
                        Doost thou not know, that the benignitie of God is vsed to bring thee to repentaunce? but thou by thy obdurate and irrepentant hart, dost heape to thy self wrath, in the day of vengeance and of the reuelation of Gods iust

iudgement.
                     
Thus farre S. Augustine.
                  But now (deere christian brother) what can be spoken more effectuallie, either to erect vs to hope & cōfidence in Gods mercie, or to terrifie vs from presumption in delaying our amendment, then here hath been vttered by these noble pyllers and fathers of Christes Church, and most excellent instruments and temples of his holy spirit? The diuine wisedome of almightie God in a certaine place, saith:
                        Godly men
                              •
                            wordes ought to moue vs greatly.
                        Eccle, 12.
                      That the wordes of wyse men ought to be spurs vnto vs, and as it were nailes, dryuen into the depth of our hearts: meaning thereby that wee should be styrred vppe, and most vehementlie mooued, when we heare such wise men as the holie Ghost there meaneth (which in deed are only they that haue the knowledge and true feare of GOD,) make such exhortations vnto vs, and gyue vs such holesome admonishments, as these godly Fathers in this great affaire haue done. And howe is it then (deere brother) that we are nothing stirred vp therby, nothing quickned, nothing awaked? Well, I will conclude thys whole Chapter and treatise wyth an other exhortation and admonishion of S. Augustine, for that besides the graue authoritie of the man, (which ought to mooue vs much,) I thinke nothing can be spoken more excellently, or more

agreeing to our peculier purpose. Thus then he saith.
                  
                     A notable discourse of S. Augustine touching our conuersion. Ser. 181. de temp.
                     
                     Almightie God doth neuer despise the repentaunce of any man, if it be offered vnto him sincerely and simplie:
nay, he accepteth the same most willinglie, embraceth the penitent, and endeuoureth to reduce him to hys former state wherein hee was before hefell. And that which is yet more: if a man be not able to fulfill the whole order of his satis-faction, yet doth not God refuse the least repentance that is, though it be doone in neuer so short a space. Neither dooth he suffer the reward to perrish of any little conuersion.Esay, 54. And thys doth the Prophet Esay seeme to me to signifie, when he saith in Gods person to the people of Israel: I haue contristed thee a little for thy sinnes, I haue striken thee & turned my face from thee, thou hast beene sad and hast walked in sorrowe, and I haue comforted thee againe. These examples then of repentance (deere brethren) we hauing before our eyes, let vs not perseuere in our wickednes, nor despaire of reconciliation, but rather let vs say wyth a confident hart: we wyll turne home to our father, and present our selues vnto our God: for truely (my Bretheren) hee will neuer turne awaie from the man that turneth vnto hym.Esay, 
                              •
                           9. Hymsefe hath sayd that he is a God which draweth

neere vnto vs, were it not that our sinnes doe make a seperation betwixt him and vs. Let vs take away then the separation & obstacle, and so nothing shall let our coniunction wyth him, which hee greatly desireth. For to thys ende did hee create vs, that hee might bestowe vpon vs eternall blisse in the kingdome of heauen. Hee did not make vs for hell,Hel not made for man. but he made hys kingdome for vs, & hell for the deuill. So he saith in the Gospel;Math, 25
                              •
                           
                         
                        Come ye blessed of my father, enioy the kingdome prepared for you frō the beginning of the world. And to the damned: Depart from me yee accursed into euerlasting fire, which is prepared for the deuill and his angels.
                     
                  
                  
                     If then hell fire was prepared for the deuill, and the kingdome of heauen for man, from the beginning of the worlde: it remaineth onely that we prouide, not to loose our inheritance by persisting in sinne. So long as we are in this life, how many or great soeuer our sinnes may be,In thys lyfe repentance is auailable, but not after. it is possible to wash thē away by true and vnfained repentaunce, but when we shall once depart from this world, albeit then we doe repent, (as no doubt but we shall from the bottome of our harts,) yet shall it auaile vs nothing. And albeit our teeth doe gnash, our mouth cry out, our eyes gush foorth in teares, and our harts lament with innumerable complaints & supplications:

yet shal no man heare vs, no man assist vs, nor so much as with the tippe of his finger, giue vnto vs a droppe of water to coole our tongue amiddest her torments; but we shall receiue that lamentable aunswer which the rich glutton receiued at the mouth of Abraham: There is between vs & you a great distance, so that none may passe from vs to you, nor from you to vs.
                     
Hetherto lasteth S. Augustins exhortation. And ther-withall thinke I it good to conclude this treatise.
                  FINIS.
                  The ende of the second and last Booke, tending to Resolution.
               
            
         
      
   