
      
         
            
            
            A Funerall Sermon,
both Godlye, Learned and
comfortable, Preached at S. Maries in Cambridge,
Anno 1551. at the buriall of the Reuerend
Doctor, and faithfull Pastor of
the Churche of Christe,
Martin Bucer. By Matthew Parker Doctor in Diuinitie,
and since, Archbishoppe
of Canterburye.
            
               ¶Printed at London,
by Thomas Purfoote, and are
to be sold at his shop without
Newe-gate, ouer against S.
Sepulchers Church.
            
         
         
            
            
            To my very friends, M.
Iames Taylor & M. Ranulph Barlow.
            
               YOVR manifold curtesies towards
me, togither also with
the Reuerend account, that
you euer made of that late
worthy Archbishop, the Author hereof,
moued me to translate & dedicate vnto
you, this his godly and learned Sermon.
Receiue it therfore euen for the Authors
sake: embrace it for the matter therein
comprized: & let it remaine as a token
of the vnfeined goodwill of your olde
schoolefellow: & as a seale to confirme
that league which at home in our childhood,
30. yeares agoe, we entred into, in
our natiue countrey of Chesshire, vnder
that our graue, learned, zealous & painefull
Schoolemaister, M. Iohn Brownesworde.
Fare ye well. 
            
               At little Ilford in Essex the 24. of Februarie. 1587.
               
               Your assured wel willer. Thomas Newton.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The text
            
               Wisd. 4.
               
                  
                     Vers. 7. Althoughe the righteous bee preuented by death, yet shall he bee in reste.
                  10. He pleased God and was beloued of him, so that whereas hee liued among sinners, he translated him.
                  14. For his soule pleased God: therefore hasted hee to take him awaye from wickednesse.
                  15. Yet the people see, & vnderstand not, & consider no such things in their it hearts, how that grace & mercy is vpon his Sainctes, and his prouidence ouer the Elect.
                  16. Thus the righteous that is deade, condemneth the vngodly which are liuing: and the youthe that is soone broughte to an end; the longe life of the vnrighteous.
                  17. For they see the ende of the wise, but they vnderstande not what God hath deuised for him, & wherfore the  Lord hath preserued him in safety.
                  18. They see him & despise him, but the Lord will laugh them to scorne.
                  19. So that they shall fall heereafter without honour & shall haue a shame  among the deade for euermore.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               THE cause of this our present
assembly (brethren in
the Lorde and Sauiour
Iesus Christ most dearely
beloued) is alredye vnto
you so wel knowne, yt I shall not neede
therevpon to vse many wordes: but on
the other side, the speciall points hereby
offered to our considerations, and againe,
the iust cause that wee (euen we
Cambridge-men) haue to weepe and
waile, I feare that a greate sorce,
throughe want of skill, feele not, and
many moe, (blindely ledd with a certayne
peeuish rancour and festured malice)
throughly consider not.
            To mourne and weepe for the death
of a good and godly man, so far foorth
as concerneth him, we are flatly forbidden
both by reason and also by nature:
I meane, that reason which is right,
and that nature which is sinceare, not
corrupted. Yea, it is directly against
the rules both of Charity and Faith.
For, if Heathen Philosophers, (not
knowing god aright, & void of that hope
which wee dayly haue before our eyes,
and whiche, so manye of vs as liue

in Christ, doe earnestly thirst after, and
dayly long for) deemed by reason, that
death was not to be bewailed: and if
they could agree among themselues in
opinion, that nature might lawfully
call for, & redemaund that, whereof she
had graunted to vs, the vse, but for a
while: what an absurd thing were it,
if wee in this so great light of the Gospell,
beeing so vndoubtedly perswaded
of such sure and manifest promises of
most blessed state after this life by the
benefite of our Redeemer, should not
aswell as they, thinke it to stand with
reason and equitie? Yea, worthilye
were wee to be reprooued, if we should
but onely match them, and not rather
far surmount them in this point, and by
faith vnderstand how that we are so far
from hauing any cause of sorrowing,
that we rather ought more then can be
vttered, to reioyce for them, and to congratulate
cheir felicitie, whereunto we
hope also to come our selues, and for the
same ought dayly to pray.
            Now,Lone enuieth not. I pray you, what Ioue, or what
charity is this, to enuie our friendes

blessed hap, & to be sory for their felicitie
and welfare? To be agreeued & to
lament for their glorious exchaunge is
as though we repined, that after many
dangerous stormes and blustring tempests
in the Sea of this world, they be
at length gotten to a quiet har borough
and safely ariued at the hauen of rest: or
that after a sharpe conflict & long continued
warre, they bee nowe at length
safely returned home, with victory ouer
their enemies.
            What loue can this be, to bee sorye
that our friend hauing beene long pyned
with grieuous & languishing diseases
to haue now recouered his former
health? or to fret and greeue to heare
that hee whom we say we loue, is enlarged
and deliuered out of most loathsome
prison, where he had long lyne in
hunger and cold, fettered and chayned?
Is there any man, that can with anye
colour of reason say, that he loueth his
friend, being heire to some great lands,
if he mourne and be sory that the tyme
now approcheth, wherin his friend shal
possesse and receaue some huge summe

of money aud sewe out his liuerey for
the peaceable enioying of his great reuenewes
and enheritance? It is (I say)
against godly loue and against sinceare
affection, to bewaile our friends, when
they leaue the miseries of this wretched
lyfe, and goe to possesse a place of
rest and blisse, that shall continue for euer.
            Moreouer, it agreeth not with the
rules of faith, for a christian man to bewayle
the dead. For, who can deny that
to be against faith, which is flatly forbidden
by the scriptures? And how can
that be sayed to agree with the rule of
fayth, whiche the scriptures most euidentlye
prooue to be done by those that
haue no hope? There is such an indeuisible
agreement betweene Faythe and
Hope,
               Faith and hope inseparable companions. that the one is neuer seuered frō
the other, but wheresoeuer the one is,
the other is also, and where the one lacketh,
yt other wanteth likwise. Sorow ye
not (saith the blessed apostle Paule) ouer
thē that are a sleepe,
               1. Thes. 4. 13. 
               as others do which
haue no hope. &c. Yea such kind of sorrow
is most plainly by ye scriptures forbiddē.Eccle. 22. 11. 
               Make small weeping for the dead
               
(sayth the wise-man) for he is at rest. If
a man do but lightly & superficially consider
ye words of this scripture, & do not
diligently search the bottome & ground
of the true meaning & sence thereof, he
may (perhaps) thinke that it is thereby
permitted yea & after a sort commaunded
& enioyned to a man to mourne and
bewaile the dead, so that he do it moderatly
            But it shall plainely appeare to bee
otherwise, if a man will diligently consider
the cause whiche the Wise-man
there alledgeth, namelye, because hee
is at rest. In whiche wordes, he layeth
downe before our eyes, the verie cause,
for the which we should rather reioyce
and be glad. And therfore in this worde
(a little) hee hath consyderation vnto
oure weakenesse and infirmytie, in respecte
whereof hee yealdeth somewhat
vnto our frayltie, and tollerateth some
small sorrowe and little mournynge:
howebeit, if the wise-man had any hopefully
to perswade & effectuallye to obtaine
that which he was the willinger
of, no doubt, hee woulde rather haue

counsailed and aduised vs, vtterly to
put away and entirely to laye aside all
sorrow.
            Which thing we ought (doubtlesse)
to doe, if wee coulde in all our actions
haue that regard & alwayes keepe that
euen hand, which we should doe if our
nature were not so weake and naught:
or if the world were not pestered with
enuious spighters and quarellours,
wranglers in euery corner, that will
not sticke to call vs stonyharted creatures,
& such as haue no sparke of humaine
nature in vs, if they see that wee
make no lamentation for the death of
our friends. Construing the matter many
tymes to the worst, and sinesterlye
thereby gathering, that we doe rather
reioice in respect of some worldly gaine
or commoditie thereby growing to vs.
Wheras we by the rule of faith onely,
and in respect of that euerlasting blessednesse
which our friends haue attained,
doe shew our selues therein constantly
stayed in conscience for the departure
of our brethren, and altogether
renouncing such womannish wayling,

and childish infirmitie.
            And true it is, that Ieremie, (being
a witnesse in this case of far more credite
and authoritie,) alloweth nothing
at all to this our fraile infirmitie, but
in most plaine words flatly and in a generalitye
forbiddeth all weeping and
mourning for ye dead.Ier. 22. 10. 
               Weepe not (saith
he) for the dead, and be not mooued for
them. For, he had a greater consideration
of the blessed lyfe whereinto they
were entered: and he wisely weighed
that the sooner, they finisht the course &
end the race of this life, the sooner they
come to enioy their desyred rest & blisfull
state: and therefore he woulde not
at anye hande nozzle and feede a man in
folly, by allowing or yelding any thing
to him in this so vaine frailty. This did
he see in the spirite: and the very same
is lykewise by the same spirite reuealed
vnto Iohn, with commandement also
vnto him, to write it for an euerlasting
memory, as a voice not vttered by
the world or in the world, after the measure
of our humaine frailty and weakenesse,
but as a sentence descended from

heauen, deliuering a iust consideration
of the state & condition of those that bee
hence departed: which voyce did plainly
deliuer these words:Reue. 14. 13. 
               Blessed are the
dead, which dye in the Lord. May this
worde (Blessed) being pronounced by
the mouth of God himselfe, be thought
to be miserable, mournefull or lamentable?
Neyther doth the Spirite deliuer
& vtter these words absolutely without
any other addition, but withal he alleadgeth
the cause: For they henceforth (saith
the Spirite,) rest from their labours: &
moreouer, Their workes follow them.
            
            Let vs now therfore ponder and consider:
diligently the words of the Wyse
man, whereof mention was made a litle
afore, viz. Because he is at rest. Also of
an other wise man:Wised. 3. 2. 
               The soules of the
righteous are in the hands of God, and
they are in peace. Furthermore let vs
herevnto adde the words of the Apostle
S. Paule:
               
                  
                     •
                   Thes. 4. 14. 
               If we beleue that Iesus is dead
& is rysen againe; euen so them which
sleepe in Iesus, wil God bring with him.
Let vs consider what these wordes doe
signifie & meane, Blessed are they that
dye in the Lord, &c. And we shall easily

perceiue in what sense we ought to take
this (Little) which the wise man vseth:
yea we shal quickly see, what he would
rather haue aduised & vttered, if he had
not otherwise regarded & respected our
weaknes. Therefore I saye, when wee
haue respect & consideratiō of the party
that is dead and departed, it is both vnseemely
& wicked to vse any howling or
blubbering for him, vnlesse we desire to
be accounted creatures endued rather
with beastly nature then furnished with
the vse of reason: to be deemed Heathen
people rather then true Christians: enuious
caitiues then wel meaning friends:
void of hope & faith, not vnderstanding
our happy estate, & persons doubtful & vncertain
of their saluatiō, rather then cō
               stant
beleeuers vndoubtedly embracing
& crediting ye infallible worde of God,
therby as by a rule directing all & euery
our actions, thoughts & affections, &
valiantly subduing and entirely triumphing
ouer our imbecillity & weaknes.
            But howsoeuer some texts of scripture
seeme to confirm this opinion, & to proue
& allow some small mourning, & again,
some vtterly & altogither forbid weping

and lamenting, as we haue afore declared:
So in an other sence wee are not
onely allowed to mourne, but also are
admonished and directly commaunded
so to do. My sonne, powre foorth teares
ouer the dead,
               Eccle. 38. 16. 
               and begin to mourne as
if thou hadst suffered greate harme thy
selfe. Heere, the same wise man that a
little aforesaid, Make small weeping for
the deade, seemeth in this place to enioyne
vs to weepe, not a little, nor for a
while: but to continue lamentations,
and to powre foorth teares for a long
season. God forbid that we should think
so holy a man, (inuested with the tytle
of a wiseman) should in one & the selfe-same
booke disagree with himselfe in
opinions and sentences, (albeit they be
set downe in seuerall Chapters) and to
enioyne and commaund things contrary
and repugnant one to an other. We
must therefore assay and tyre, whether
we can find out his very meaning.
            But if he himselfe doe expound and
interpret his owne words, we may then
boldly and safely without danger sticke
to his iudgement. In this verye sentence,

where he thus writeth. Make
small weeping for the dead, for hee is at
rest,
               Eccle. 22. 11. he also saith, Weepe for the dead,
for he hath lost the light. To make him
therefore to agree with himselfe, this
must needes bee his meaning: that, as
in respect of the party deceased, it is not
lawfull to weepe and lament, for that,
he enioyeth blisse, and is at rest: so, on
the other side, namely in respecte of
our selues, that are berest the company,
sight and comfort of his vertuous maners,
godly life and excellent learning,
we haue most iust and vrgent cause not
onely to lament & bee sorie, but euen for
a long space to continue the same our
griefe and moane, as hauing receiued
some great losse & hinderance vnrecouerable.
And the brighter & clearer that
the light was, when it gaue shine, and
the neeedefuller & expedienter that the
same was for our behoofe and benefite,
so much the more cause and matter is
there ministred to our lamentation and
mourning, by the wofuller consideration
of the losse receaued.
            Such a kind of light is there nowe

quenched in this famous and reuerend
Doctor, renowmed aswell for his exquisite
knowledge and learning, as also
for his right christian maners and vertuouse
life: all whiche appeared in him
moste excellentlye, euen at the time of
his death and departure. What a burning
and shining lampe shewed he himselfe
in the Church of Christ, the space
of many yeares? And although Enuie
do leare and prie askewe and can not
wel abide the sight of the sunne: yet cannot
his verie enemies withoute greate
shame and infamie reproch him, or iustlye
open their mouthes againste him,
when as they shall see suche persons to
giue testimonye to his vertues, whiche
haue bene daylye conuersant with him,
and haue diligently obserued and marked
the continuall care and vehemente
studie, which he toke to further and aduaunce
such causes, as his trade of life
and function required.
            What maner of salt he shewed himselfe
in the mild deliuerie of his sounde
doctrine, vttered aswell by liuely voice,
as also otherwise testified and recorded

by his moste learned workes, & printed
bookes: againe, what exquisi
                  •
                learning
and (as I may say, almost singuler) harborowghed
in his breast, howe pithie &
sententious howe deepe & waightie his
arguments were, wherewithall he notablie
seasoned religion, and the same,
(being in these later ages of the worlde
pitifully many wayes mangled and dismembred)
reuiued and resorted to her
right auncienty & former strength and
authoritie: although herein spightfull
malice and cankered enuie will not lose
her olde wount,The nature & propertie of Enuy, towards worthy and excellent men. but still shewe her selfe
in her colours, what disposition she euer
carieth toward all such as in any singuler
gift excel others, yet shal our posterity
in time to come know and find, how
iuste cause there is why they shoulde
esteeme Enuie, as Enuie: and highlye
regard learning and vertue accordinge
to their due worthynes and dignitie.
            But before I enter into the examination,Vertuous lyfe and singuler learning in B
                     •
                  
                  cer. and discourse of these two rare and
singuler vertues in him, wherwith god
had wonderfullye beautified & enriched
him, & made him admirable, & reuerend

in the worlde, I would especially wishe
vs Vniuersity-men, for whose comfort &
consolatiō, Almighty God in his great
mercye and gracious fauour towardes
this Vniuersity, (being greately decayed
and almost vtterlye fallen downe to
the grounde,) ordeyned this worthy instrument
in his Church, tosoiourne and
dwell now in the ripenesse both of his
lyfe and doctrine heere among vs) with
a great deale the more care, & circumspect
diligence to consider the fearefull
iudgmēts of almighty god, who in this
purpose of his deuine wil, hath translated
& so soone taken him away from vs.
            Wherby it is most certaine that we
haue iust cause to bewaile his death, &
heauily to take his departure from vs:
howebeit not for his sake, but for our
owne: & greatly to feare & dread ye further
wrath & punishment of god his heauy
displeasure: a taste wherof we heere
now feele, in yt he hath quenched this so
notable & necessarye a light among vs.
The stroke & feeling wherof ought effectually
to driue vs to an humble & open
confessiō of our wicked & detestable
life, & prostratly with an earnest repentance

to craue pardon of the same at
his mercifull hands: beseeching him to
forgiue vs our grieuous offences, & to
haue compassion on vs. Otherwise, it is
to be feared, least some worse thing wil
ensue & follow afterward, God forbid, yt
we which heere professe the true & sinceare
word of God, should be so blockish
so dull & sencelesse, that we shoulde not
(euen heerein) perceaue the greeuous
displeasure of God, enkindled & conceaued
against vs: or that we should so pitifully
be ouer seene in our own cases, or
so far to be our own foes & backfriends,
that these things should not any whit at
all mooue vs.
            Then, might that iustly be obiected
& layd to our charge, which the prophet
Ieremy twitted ye men of his time withall,
for their malicious & manifest contempt
of God, & the careles regard that
they made of his scourges and punishments:Ierem. 5. 3. 
               Lorde, thou hast stroken them,
but they haue not sorrowed: thou hast
consumed them, but they haue refused
to receiue correction: they haue
made their faces harder then a stone,
and have refused to retourne.
            
            
               
               Should not we blush and be ashamed after
so many admonitions, to be like vnto
those stifnecked Iewes, and rebellious
persons, which saide vnto the Prophets
of God,
               Esai. 30. 
                     ••
                  
                prophecie not and to the
seers, see not, neither speak vnto vs right
thinges: but speake flattering things vnto
vs: prophecie errours. Departe out of
the way: goe aside out of the path: cause
the holy one of Israell to cease from vs.
And if our peeuish wilfulnes, impudencie
and hardnes doe thus continue with
increase among vs, are we not worthye
to heare this dreadful & heauie sentence
pronounced against vs.
               Matt. 23. 38. Behold your habitation
shalbe lefte vnto you desolate:
Behold the daies shall come vpon thee,
that thine enemies shall cast a trench about
thee,Luc. 
                     •
                  9. 43. and compasse thee rounde, &
keepe thee in on euery side, & shal make
thee euen with the ground, and thy children
which are in thee: & they shall not
leaue in thee a stone vpon a stone, because
thou knewest not the time of thy
visitation. God be mercifull vnto vs, and
blesse vs,Psal. 67. 1. and shewe vs the lighte of his
countinance, & be merciful vnto vs. &c.
            
               
The verye consideration of this one
kinde of God his punishment and correction,
to witte, the takinge awaye by
deathe, of those excellente members of
the Churche, on whome dependeth the
singuler benifite of the flocke, and comfortable
staye of the people, affordeth &
ministreth vnto vs (as by the scriptures
wee maye plainelye perceiue) manifest
arguments & profitable lessons to draw
vs, in this euidence token of Gods displeasure,
to lament our sinnes, and to amend
our wicked liues. It is ynoughe
(I say) to moue vs to loke better to our
selues, to feare afterclaps, and to be inwardly
most hartely sorie for our churlish
behauiour & extreeme ingratitude
toward so gracious a God.
            One example fitlie seruinge to this
purpose, I will offer here vnto your considerations.
Call to your remembrance
that rebellious, obstinate, murmuring,
mutinous & stifenecked people of Israell,
ouer whō god set that excellent man
Moses, to be their Captaine & Gouernour.
And that I may omit & not speak
of the huge heape of their manifolde

leawdnes & wicked disobediences: to omitte
also ye sundry punishments wherwith
God many times afflicted them: to
omit, how & how often their leader and
Gouernor Moses was prest & ready by
prayer & intercession to reconcile God
vnto them & to turne away his plagues
from them: for whose sake & at whose
suite their misdeedes were often forgiuen,
& their offences pardoned: how worthy
a Gouernor he was, how notabe a
stay, and what a shining light he shewed
himselfe vnto them, the whole course
of his dealinges, the whole race of
his lyfe, and the whole manner of his
proceedings, during the time of his rule
& gouernment doth sufficiently declare.
And yet against him being so worthy &
so noble a Prince, & appointed of god to
them for their great comfort, and singuler
commodity, did Corah, Dathan and
Abiram maliciously conspire,Num. 16. 3. and him
rebelliouslye despise, shaking of the
yoke of obedience, and moste vnnaturallye
forsaking him, or rather their
owne profites and commodities which
by him they bountifully enioyed.
            But how seuerelye, how strangely and

dreadfullye did the Lorde God reuenge
that thir so mutynous reuolt and vndutifull
contumacie? Did not the earth open
her mouth, and swallowe them vp,
with their tabernacles, and familyes
and all them that were with them, soe
that they and all that they had, wente
downe aliue into the pit with all their
traine and goodes. This dreadfull and
terrible example notwithstanding, whē
as yet they seditiously persisted in their
treacherous mutinie and peeuishe frowardnesse
agaynste the same Moses
their Prince and Gouernour, the Lord
(for an euerlasting terror to al murmuring
Malcontents, against so worthie a
man geuen to them (if they could haue
accordingly so considered it,) for the inestimable
benefit & comfort both of them
& their whole companie,) sent a plague
among them, whereof there dyed in one
day fourteen thousand & seuen hundred.
            God so strōgly & terribly reuēged this
their seditiō & consperacy, chiefly & especially
therby to bring thē to ye acknowledgmēt
of that singuler benefit, which
they inioyed by hauing so good and godly
a magistrat ouer thē as Moses was:

meaning by such a kind of punishment
to make them more thankfull, and better
contented with this benefite. But
when almighty God saw that all these
punishments would not serue to bring
them to amendment, nor to stur them
vp to their dutifull thankefullnesse, and
obedient behauiour; after many assaies
and waies practised and wrought for
their recouery, he was at length driuen
in his heauy indignation to betake himselfe
to an other course, and to proceede
further. And what course was that:
Forsooth, for their sins and wickednes,
he shortned the life of Moses, and would
not, that by him they should be brought
into the land of promise. Moses therefore
dyed, before they had set one foote
therin. But how profitable had it beene
for them; if hee had remained aliue,
considering his graue wisedome, and
ripe iudgement, wherein by reason of
his great practise and long experience
hee singularlye excelled? Howe fitte
a man had hee beene, by reason of his
Sanctytye and holinesse of lyfe, and
of his vertuous dealinges and godlye

cogitations to turne awaye the wrath
of GOD, iustlye conceiued against
them: What an helpe, furtherance,
and direction, moreouer mighte hee
haue beene to them, after they had
beene once entered and come into the
Lande, touchinge their Sacrifices,
Rytes and Ceremonies, which hee eyther
by worde of mouthe, or by traditions
written, had lefte amonge
them.
            How necessarie in all respectes was
this reuerend Doctor Martin Bucer, to
the Church of Christ, being a man so
notablye furnished & so exquisitely enclyned
to the aduauncement of the glorye
and true religion of God? And yet
notwithstanding, God hath taken him
away from amonge vs: the lyght that
was in him, hee hath quenched: and
would not that we should bee shrowded
any longer vnder his winges, or priuiledged
vnder his shadowe: reputing vs
people most vnworthy, to be so much as
the leaste partakers of suche surpassing
benefites.
            And if (as it is indeede) the greater

greater the sinne is, the greater punishment
is there vnto due, and the sharper
smart it deserueth: then shall it bee no
hard matter to iudge, among what sort
of punishment this is nowe to be reckened,
that this time so good a pastor is taken
awaye from vs, so brighte a lampe
quenched, and such a lighte put oute, as
while wee enioyed, wee safely walked
thoroughe the daungerous and darke
pathes of this life. Lette vs diligently
waighe and effectuallye consider these
thinges (dearely beloued) and beeinge
herein in like sort punished by the hand
of God, as the Isralites were, lette vs
learne to acknoweledge the wrathe of
God, and receyue it as an vndoubted
signe that hee is angrie and displeased
with vs.
            We haue heertofore shewed our selues
waiward, churlish, and vnthankful
by murmuring both againste God, and
also againste this man his Seruaunt.
Nowe, euen this daye we feele (as Israell
did) the heauie wrath and reuenging
hand of God for the same, and may

perceiue how yt he euidently punisheth
vs therefore. We haue bene heretofore
vngratefull, and repyning for the light
that wee receyued from this excellent
and worthy Doctor: now is it therefore
put out and quenched. It is sayde, that
hee liued heere amonge thankelesse,
crabbed, and frowarde sinners: nowe
therefore is he taken awaye from them.
As for him-selfe hee liude still: but soe,
that hee liueth in ioye and blisse with
God, and is hence dispatched and freed
from the toylesome greiues, and wretched
troubles of this life, & from those
paynefull labours which hee heere willinglye
suffered and patyentelye endured
for oure beehoofe and benefytte,
but nowe is he at rest with GOD,
to his owne beehoofe, comforte and
commodytye. GOD looueth him
in that hee hasted soe soone to call
hym awaye oute of the companye of
wicked Sinners. But hee is angrye
with vs, in that he thinketh vs
inworthye any longer to enioye such
a precious piller.
            
               
If these thinges being thus duely &
diligently considered can nothing at all
moue vs (wherwith (notwithstanding)
I knowe, that euery godly person is &
will be not a little touched) yet is there
greater cause to drawe vs, heauilie and
sorowfully to take this misfortune: not
in suche sorte lamenting and sorowing,
for him that is deade (as hath bene said
before) as though death had done to him
any harme, but in applying and translating
the whole cause of our sorowe and
greife vnto our owne selues, according
to that saying of our Lord & Sauioure
Christ, who would not haue the Hierosolimitanes
to mourne for him, but for
themselues and their children.Luc. 23. 28. 
               Daughters
of Hierusalem (sayth he) weepe not
for me, but weepe for your selues and for
youre children. And hee there yeldeth a
reason why they should weepe for them
selues & their children. For (sayth he)
if they doe this to the greene tree, what
shalbe done to the drie?
               Ver. 31.
            
            Let euery one of vs now here present
note well this sentence, and loke wel to
himselfe: let euerye one of vs (I saye)

thinke well of this matter, & vpon this
occasion heere presently offered by the
death and departure of this graue and
reuerend Father, let him be mooued to
feare. For, if by the secrete and hidden
(but yet iust) iudgment of almighty god
we see and heare suche heauye sentence
pronounced against his owne familie &
haushold, that he threateneth to abridge
their life, and shorten their dayes, howe
neere at hand is the end of them which
beleeue not the Gospel? If his life were
shortened, whom while hee heere liued,
the Lorde so entirelye loued, beeing the
beautie of his house, & in the building,
repayring and euery way garnishinge
whereof, he shewed himselfe a most dyligent
and paynefull builder, and a most
wise and cunning maister workman: if
(I say) his daies were cut shorte, to the
end he mighte rest from his vehemente
toyle and zealous studie, which hee had
toward the promoting and aduauncing
the lordes building: how commeth it to
passe, that we, (we I say) ūnful caitiues
do promise to oure selues longe life, and
thinke here to liue many yeares, spendding

and bestowing the same (as some
doe) in idlenesse, vanitye and loytring:
Whereby it must needes come to passe,
and necessarily follow, that they cannot
be saide to liue ouerwise, then by the
spoyles of the goodes and Patrimonye
of Christ crucified.
            Some there be, that deuise all the
waies they can, and seeke all meanes
possible, to the vttermost of their ability
to deface the beautye & glory of this
building, to vndermine the walles and
ouerthrow the foundation therof, that
all the wilde beastes of the woode, may
freely enter, to deuoure; spoyle, robbe
and moste cruellye to make hauocke
of all.
            If this greene Tree which yelded
plentifull store of fruite in due season,
and which was planted by the riuers
side, and moystened with the liuelye
waters of the Fountaine of lyfe, and
which brought foorth such continuall,
heauenly and durable fruict, to the glory
of God, and for our consolation, to be
imitated, was (notwithstanding his
flourishing and fruitfull encrease) plucked

vp by the rootes: what shalbe the
ende of vs, (thinke wee) being deade,
drye and wythered Figge trees, without
eyther blossome or fruite,Matt. 21. 19. vnworthy
any longer to occupye the ground,Mar. 11. 13.
or to set one foote vppon the earth? He
was (without doubt) a most florishinge
greene tree, yelding foorth most excellent
fruite, and therefore is not vtterly
and altogither cutte downe, but onelye
transplanted and remooued out of his
place, to bee sette in a pleasaunter and
wholesommer soyle. But what maye
wee iudge of our selues, that bring
foorth in our lyfe nothing but brambles
and thistles: and yet are continually
and dayly moystened and watered
with the deawe of the heauenlye
grace and word of God: Why should
not wee tremble, and with compunction
of heart greatly feare, least we be vtterly
cut downe with the Axe of Gods
iudgement;Matt. 3. 10. and by diuine sentence throwen
into the fire.Luc. 3. 9. 
               Vnderstande yee
vnwise among the people:
               Psal. 94. 8. 
               & be wise at
length ye fooles. O consider this, ye that
forget God, least he teare you in peeces,

and there be none that can deliuer you.
Say not within your selues.Psal. 50. 22. 
               We haue
Abraham to our Father,
               Matt. 3. 9. 
               For I saye vnto
you, that euery tree which bringeth not
foorth good fruite, is hewne downe &
cast into the fire. Feare ye the dreadfull
and terrible wordes of the Lorde, who
saith,Mat. 21. 43. 
               The kingdome of God shalbe taken
from you & shal be giuen to a Nation
that shal bring forth the fruits therof.
Remember thy selfe therfore O Cambridge
and looke well aboute thee: consider
thine estate, seeing that vnto thee,
God hath sent his Prophets, Wisemen
& Scribes from the far distant places of
the world: Least there come vpon thee
all the iust bloud that hath beene shed
vppon the earth.
               Luk. 11. 50. Repent, repent, thou
that killest the Prophets, & with slaunderous
words stonest them that are sent
vnto thee. But marke ye & heare what
doth there in that place immediately
followe: Behold, your house is left vnto
you desolate.
               Luk. 13. 34. 35. 
               Amende therefore youre
waies and your workes: and trust not in
lying wordes,
               Ierem. 7. 3. 
               sayinge, The Temple of
the Lord, the Temple of the Lorde, this

is the Temple of the Lord. For, behold, the
Lord commeth with thousands of his saints,
to giue iudgment against all men, and to rebuke
all the vngodly among them,
               Iude. 14. 
               of al their
wicked deeds which they haue vngodly committed,
and of al their cruell speakings, which
wicked sinners haue spoken against him.
               Luke. 8. 8 He
that hath eares to heare, let him heare.
            
               ¶Exhortation to Prayer.
               THat therfore the vaile of ignorance may
be remooued from our hearts, & the dazeling
dimnes of spight & enuy banished from
our eyes: that we may deeply weigh & with
humble confession of our sins effectually consider
this heauy stroke & punishment here offred
vnto vs by God vpon this present occasion:
that all bitternes of words, al boasting,
wrath, cursed speaking railing & backbiting
with all malice rancor & hartburning may
bee put away from among vs: let vs humbly
prostrat our selues before our gracious God
& heauēly father meekly & deuoutly by earnest
prayer crauing at his mercifull handes
the assistance of his holy spirite, and that he
will of his infinite goodnes forgiue vs out
sinnes and pardon our offences.
               In which prayers I do commend vnto you
the state of the Catholike Church being the

blessed communion of the sainte of God, the
the same may florish & go forward in yt knowledge
of his diuine will, du
                     •
                  y
                     •
                  ully agnising
& confessing his holy name & sincere religiō,
& thankfully receiuing & embrasing the graces
& gifts of Christ, her Spouse & head and
that she may persist & continue to the end, in
the vndoubted faith of our Lord & Sauiour.
Pray ye also for al those, yt through error &
misbeleefe are foūd to be out of this church,
and for such as through hypocriticall dissimulation
ar reck
                     •
                  ned to be of ye true church,
being (indeede) the Synagog of Sathan, yt
they and we with one minde & consent may
willingly heare and ioyfullye embrace the
voyce of our high Shepheard Christe, and
that we may become one Sheepefold & one
flocke, with one mouth and one hart glorifying
God the father of our lord Iesus Christ.
Pray ye also particularly for this church of
England & Ireland, and for ye supreme head
of both the same, next & immediately vnder
Christ, our most excellent and gratious Soueraigne,
King Edward the sixt, &c. Finally
let vs giue humble thankes vnto almightye
God, for our brethren and sisters, which are
departed out of this vale of misery, marked
with the Seale of Faith. And last of all,
let vs pray for our selues, that euen as the

Fathers of the olde Testament earnestly desired
and zealously continued still looking &
expecting for the first comming of our Sauiour
Christ in the flesh, that they might be

                     •
                  artakers of that abundant blessing, which

                     ••
                  ey assuredly & vndoubtedly knew that he

                     •
                  ould bring with him: & after he was exhibited
to the world, had a longing desire to be
hold him with their bodily eyes: So likewise
that we now vnder the new Testamēt
may liue soberly, godly and honestly in this
world, earnestly waiting for his second comming:
& that we greedily thirsting (with our
brethren alreadye deceassed) for the full redemption
of our bodies, to bee vnited to his
glorious bodie, may be ioyned in fellowship
with Abraham, Isaac, Iacob, &c. Among
whom I doe recken & pronounce this excellent
and reuerend Doctor Martin Bucer to
bee: for whom let vs hartily and in full assurance
thereof, thanke almighty God, for so
guiding him with his heauenly spirite, that
in holinesse and sanctity he hath thus begun
his rest: that he remained & continued constant
& vnmoueable to the last gaspe, in pure
& incorrupt doctrine grounded vpon the infallible
word of God and founded vppon the
faith of the Apostles & the Catholike church
of Christ; constantly confirming his profession,

both in life and maners agreeable to the
same. For, by warrant of the mercies and
promise of almighty God, I doe boldly pronounce
that he is now in Abrahams bosome,
& enioyeth most happie blisse, rest & felicitie,
with al the holy company of the elect childrē
of God. And thus for him & in his name do I
affirme: I know that he shall rise againe at
the resurrection in the last day with a moste
assured and certaine knowledge, such (I say)
as commeth of faith: I know, that forsomuch
as our Sauiour Christ saieth of himselfe, yt
he is the resurrection & the life: & that, whosoeuer
beleeueth in him, although hee were
dead, yet liueth: and againe, that euerye one
which liueth and beleeueth in him, shall not
die for euer: I know, (I say) and by that vndoubted
trust & warrant which I haue in the
word of God, and by that testimonie whiche
he constantly made of his faith, life, conuersation,
& constant confession of Christs name,
euen till the verie last pointe of his life, that
although he be dissolued for a time, in respect
of his body, yet in spirite he liueth with god,
& at the last day in the ioyful resurrection of
the iust shall againe be conioyned, & shall
enioy the presence of God, & raigne
with him both in body and
soule for euermore.
               FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   