
      
         
            
            
            THE Second part of the Booke of Christian exercise, appertayning to Resolution.
            OR A Christian directory, guiding all men vnto their saluation.
            VVritten by the former Author R. P.
            
            
               
                  Psalme, 27. ver. 4.
               One thing haue I requested of the Lorde, and that I vvill demaund still, vvhich is, to dvvell in his house all the dayes of my life: to the ende I may knovve and doe his vvill.
            
            AT LONDON, Printed by Iohn Charlwood for Simon Waterson, in S. Paules Church-yarde, at Cheape-gate. 1592.
         
         
            
            
            To the right Honourarable, Sir Thomas Heneage, Knight, Chauncellour of the Dutchie of Lancaster, vize Chamberlaine to her excellent Maiestie, Treasurer of her royall Chamber, and one of her Highnesse most honorable priuie Counsaile. All happinesse in this life, and in the life to come hartily wished.
            BOth duety, for honourable fauours receyued, and intire affection, the spurre that pricketh forward the verie harshest conceite: hath imboldened mee to present this treatise to your honours viewe, as a testimonie of good will to shunne the infamous title of ingratitude, as also in some measure to expresse my poore yet vnfeyned zeale, the boldnesse of the one (I presume) noble nature wil pardon, the slender habilitie of the other (I hope) the same will accept.
            I know howe far from your honorable

thoughts, sinister opinions are, that might checke the young springing plants, whose forwardnes promise greater mattters to ensue. I know withall, not onely your honorable care to cherish such endeuours, but also your prouident and liberall bountie, in supporting any towardly hope from falling. Ouer faint harted might hee then bee thought, that would dismay when doubt is so worthily remooued.
            Then boldly (yet as it becōmeth me in duetie) I reuerently deliuer your honour this simple gift: referring the iudgement both of it and me, to your wonted noble consideration. And as your yeeres, so pray I all blessings of heauen may encrease vppon you, to the comfort of such as haue good cause to loue you.
         
         
            
            TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, Health.
            CVrteous Reader, not many yeres since a book vvas published Of Christian Exercise, appertaining to Resolution: vvritten by a Iesuit beyond the seas, yet an Englishman, named M. Robert Parsons; vvhich Booke M. Edmund 
                     •
                  unney hauing diligently perused, committed to the publique vievv of all indifferent iudgements: as glad, that so good matter proceeded from such infected people, and that good might arise thereby to the benefit of others. Since the manifestation of that Booke, the first Author thereof, named M. Robert Parsons, hath enlarged the same Booke, vvith a second part and nevv Additions, vvherein hee hath concluded and finished his vvhole intent of the Resolution, and that vpon speciall causes, as himselfe sets dovvn in Preface in this maner.
            
               Beeing admonished by the writings of diuers, that since the publishing of my first Booke, it hath been misliked in two principall points. First, that I speake so much of good works & so little of faith. Secōdly, that I talked so largely of Gods

iustice, and so briefly of his mercie. Beside, conceiuing by the information of manie, that diuers persons, hauing a desire in themselues to reade the 
                     •
                  ormer booke, but yet being weake & fearful to be touched so neere in conscience, as they imagined that Book did, durst neuer intermedle therwith, being informed there was nothing in the same wherewith to entertaine themselues, but only such vehement matter of perswasion, as would greatly trouble and afflict them. For remedy of which inconueniencie, I haue framed this second part of that work, & therein inserted diuers chapters and discourses of matters more plausible, & of themselues more indifferent, wherewith the Reader may solace his minde, at such times as he findeth the same not willing to feele the spur of more earnest motion to perfection.
            
            Hereupon grevv the occasion of his framing his second book: vvhich being perused by sundrie lerned men vvho haue thought it as vvorthy to bee seene as the first, 
                  •
               s novv (gentle Reader) presented to thy vievv: read it indifferently, and iudge thereof, as thou findest occasion.
         
      
      
         
            
            OF THE MANIFOLD PERILS THAT ENSVE to the VVorld by Inconsideration. And how necessarie it is for eueri
                  •
                man, to enter into cogitation of his owne estate. CHAP. I.
            THE Prophets and Saints of GOD,The charitable proceeding of God by his Prophe
                     •
                  s. vvho from time to time haue beene sent by his mercifull prouidence to aduertise & vvarne sinners of their perilous estate & condition for sin, haue not onely foretold them of their vvickednes & imminent dangers for the same, but also haue reuealed the causes thereof, vvhereby they might the easier prouide remedie for the inconueniences to come.
            Such is the charitable proceeding of our most merciful Lord vvith the children of men. And among other causes, none is more generall, or oftner alledged, than the lack of consideration:The danger of Inconsideration. by vvhich, as by a cōmon snare and deceipt of our aduersarie,

most men fall into sin, and are holden also perpetually in the same, to their finall destruction and eternall perdition. So Esay the Prophet, speking of the carelesse Nobilitie and Gentrie of Iurie, that gaue themselues to banquetting and disporte, vvithout consideration of their duties tovvards God: repeateth often the threate of woe against them, and then putteth dovvne the cause in these vvords:
                  Esa. 5. The sensual life of the Ievvish gentrie. 
               The Lute, and Harpe, and Timbrel, & Shalme, & good wine, aboundeth in your banquets, but the workes of God you respect not, nor haue you consideration of his dooings. And then insueth, Therefore hath hell enlarged his soule, and opened his mouth without all measure or limitation, and the stout, and high, and glorious of thi
                     •
                   people shall descend into it.
            
            Here are tvvo causes (as you see) and tvvo effects linked together, of these Ievves damnation, the one depending of the other. For as good cheere and sensualitie, brought these men to inconsideration of GODS vvorks & proceedings tovvards sinners: so inconsideration brought them to the mouth and pits brimme of hell. I say, that inconsideration

of Gods vvorkes tovvards sinners, brought them to this perrill, for that it follovveth in the very same place: And the Lord of hostes shall be exalted in iudgement, and our holy God shall be sanctified in iustice: as if he had saide, that albeit you vvill not consider novv Gods iudgements and iustice, amidst the heate & pleasure of your feasting: yet shall he, by exercising the same vppon you heereafter, bee knovvne exalted and sanctified thoroughout the vvorld. The like discourse maketh God himselfe by the same prophet, to the daughter of Babylon,
                  Esa. 47. and by her to euerie sinfull & sensuall soule, figured by that name.
Come dovvne (saith he) & sit in the dust thou daughter of Babylon
                     •
                   thou hast said,The daughter of Babilon forgetteth her end I shalbe a Ladie for euer, & hast not put vpon thy heart ye things that thou shouldst, nor hast thou had remembraunce of thy last ende, &c. Now therfore harken thou delicate (daughter) which dwellest so confidently, there shal come vpon thee an euill, whereof thou shalt not knowe the of-spring, and a calamitie shall rush vppon thee, from which thou shalt not bee able to deliuer thee. A miserie shall ouertake thee vpon the

suddaine, which thou shalt not know, &c.
            
            Holy Ieremie, after he had weighed with himselfe what miseries for sinne the Prophets Esay, Amos, Hosea, Ioel, Abdias, Micheas, Nahum, Sophonias, and himselfe, (all which Prophets liued within the compasse of one hundred yeres) had foretold to be imminent vppon the world: not onely to Samaria and the tenne Trybes of Israel,4. Reg. 15. & 17. which were now alreadie carried into banishment to the furthest parts of the East, but also to the States & Countries that most flourished at that time, (as by name to Babilon, Egypt, Damasco, Tyrus, Sidon, Moab, and finally to Ierusalem and Iudea it selfe,The complaint of Ieremie for inconsideration. which he foresaw should soone after most pitifully be destroied) when he saw also by long experience, that neyther hys words, nor the words and cries of the other fore-named Prophets, could anie thing mooue the harts of wicked men:
he brake forth into this most lamentable complaint, 
                  Desolatione desolata est omnis terra, quia nullus est qui recogitet corde. The whole earth falleth into extreame ruine & desolation, for that there is no man

which cōsidereth deeply in his hart.
            
            This complaint made good Ieremie in his dayes for compassion of his people, that ranne miserably to perdition for want of consideration. And the same complaynt with much more reason, may euerie good Christian make at this time, for the infinite soules of such as perish daily by inconsideration. VVhereby, as by a generall and remedilesse enchantment, manie thousande soules are brought a sleepe, & doo finde themselues within the gates of hel, before they misdoubt anie such inconuenience, being led thorough the vale of this present life as it were blindfolded, with the veyle of careles negligence, (like beasts to the slaughterhouse) and neuer permitted to see their owne danger, vntill it bee too late to remedie the same.
                  Esay 5. 
               Propterea captiuus ductus est populus m
                     •
                  us, quia non habuit scientiam, saith God by the mouth of Esay.
Therefore, & for this cause is my people ledde awaye captiue in al bondage and slauerie to perdition, for that they haue no knowledge, no vnderstanding of their owne estate, no fore-sight of the times to come, no consideration

of their danger. Herehence floweth all the miserie of my people, and yet this is a mysterie that al men wil not know.
            
            
               The mistery of Inconsideration. Iob. 4.VVill you see what a mysterie and sealed secrete this is? harken then how one describeth the same, and with what circumstances.
Furthermore (saith hee) a certaine hidden word was spoken vnto me, & mine e
                     •
                  re (as it were by stealth) receiued the veines of his whispering: it was in the horror of a vision by night, when dead sleepe is wont to possesse men: feare came vpon me & trembling, and all my boanes were extreamely terrified. At length a spirit past by, in my presence, whereat the haires of my flesh stood vp in horrour. There stood before mee one whose face I knewe not. His image was before mine eyes, & I heard his voyce, as the sound of a soft ayre.
            
            Hetherto is described in what maner and order this secrete was reuealed; but now what said this vision or spirit (think you) at the last? truely, he m
                  •
               de a short discourse, to proue by the fall of Angels for their sinne, that much more,
                  Iob. 4.
               
                  Qui habitant domus luteas, & terrenum habent fundamentum,

consumentur velut tinea, et de mane vsque ad vesperam succidentur:
                  A collection to bee noted. they who dwell in houses of morter, (as all doo, whose bodies are of flesh) and they which haue their foundation of earth, (as most folke of this world haue, that put their cōfidence in things of this life) they must all consume by little and little, as the cloth doth by the moth, & at length they must vpon the suddaine (within lesse space perhaps than is from morning to night) be cut downe & dispatched, when they thinke least of it.
            
            And to shew that herein standeth a poynt of high secrecie (I meane to cōsider & pōder well this discourse) hee maketh his conclusion in these words immediately following Et quia nullus intelligit, in aeternum peribunt;
And for that few or none of these men before mentioned, who haue such earthly foundations, doo vnderstande this poynt aright, (I meane of their suddaine death,Lack of cō
                     sideration, cause of eternall destruction. and cutting off from this world) therefore must they perish eternally, and this is a secrete which few men will beleeue.
                     Psalm. 91. 
                  Vir i
                        •
                     sipiens non cognoscet (saith Dauid) & stultus non intelliget

haec: An vnaduised man wyll not learne these things,A point that fooles will not consider. nor wyll a foole vnderstand them. But what things? it insueth in the same place: howe wonderfull the workes of God, and how deep his cogitations are about sinners; who spring vp as grasse (and florish in this world) vt intereant in seculum seculi: to the ende they may perish for euer and euer.
            
            The Prophet Daniel had many visions, & strange reuel
                  •
               tions of great and high mysteries: but one among all other (and this is the least) of the most dreadfull iudgements of God, vpō sinners in the end of the world. The Vision was by the great Riuer Tygris:
                  Dan. 10. A most terrible vision of Daniel, wherein he saw Christ. where, as diuers Angells were attending about the bankes, so vpon the water it selfe stood one in the likenes of a man, of exceeding dreadfull maiestie; his apparell beeing onely linnen, through which his bodie shined like precious stone, his eyes like burning lamps, his face like flashing lightning, his armes and legs like brasse enflamed, and his voice as the shoute of a whole multitude of people that should speake together. This was Christ by all interpretation, at whose terrible presence when

Daniel fell downe dead, he was erected againe by an Angel, and made strong to abide the vision; and so hauing heard and seene the most wonderful things that in his Book he recounteth, he was bold to ask a question or two, for better vnderstanding thereof: & his first question was,
                  Dan. 12. 
               How long it should be ere these wonderfull things tooke their end? VVhereunto the man vpon the water aunswered, by stretching foorth both his brasen armes to heauen, & swearing strangly by him that lyueth for euer: that it should be A time, and times, and halfe a time. VVhich aunswer, Daniel not vnderstanding, began to question further, but he was cut off with this dispatch:A secrete. 
               Goe thy way Daniel, for these speeches are shut vp and sealed, vntyll the time pre-ordayned. And yet for his further instruction, it was added in the same place; Impreagent impij nec intelligent:
               
                  Dan. 12. wicked men will alwayes doe wickedly, and will not vnderstand these mysteries, albeit wee should neuer so much expound them.
            VVhereby,VVilfull ignorance. as by all the rest that hetherto hath been alleaged, is made apparant, that inconsideration, negligence,

carelesse ignorance, & lacke of vnderstāding in our own estates, and in Gods iudgements and proceedings with iniquitie and sin: hath been a bane, and a common perdition of retchlesse men from time to time.
            
               The cause of so much sin at this day.And if wee will turne our eyes to this our age, much more shall we see the same to be true. For, what is the cause (thinke you) why at this day wee haue so many of those people,
                  Iob, 15. whom holy Iob dooth call abhominable, that drink vp iniquitie, as beastes drinke water? that commit all sinne, all iniustice, all turpitude, without remorse or scurple of conscience? VVhat is the cause of this (I say) but lacke of consideration, lacke of vnderstanding, lacke of knowledge? For as Christ sayd to Ierusalem touching her destruction,
                  Luke, 19. 
               Si cogno
                     •
                  isses et tu, &c. If thou also (ô sinful soule) didst knowe what hangeth ouer thy head for this carelesse life of thine: if thou (daughter of Babylon) wouldst remember & ponder in thine heart, what shalbe the end of thy delights, thou wouldest not liue so pleasantly as thou doost:
                  Luke, 19. 
               Nunc autem abscondita sunt ab occulis tuis: But now (saieth

Christ) these thinges are hidden from thine eyes.
            Not, but that thou mightest haue knowne them if thou wouldest, but for that thou art one of them that say to God,Voluntarie inconsideration. 
               scientiam viarum tuarum nolumus, we wil not haue vnderstanding of thy wayes: one of them qui sunt rebelles lumini,
               
                  Iob. 21. yt are rebellious against the light and illumination of Gods grace:
                  Iob. 23. one of them, qui nolunt intelligere vt bene agent, that will not vnderstand to doe well: and finally, one of them,
                  Prou. 28. 
               qui declinant aures ne audiant Legem, that turne away theyr eares to the end they may not heare Gods Law:
                  Prou. 28. 
               quorum oratio est execrabilis, whose not onely life, but also prayer is execrable and dete
                  •
               table in the sight of their Maker.
            Truely, nothing in reason can bee lesse tollerable in the presence of Gods Maiestie, than wheras he hath published a Lawe vnto vs,
                  Deut. 6. and 11. with so great charge to beare it in minde, to ponder in hart,
                  Iosua. 1. to studie & meditate vpon it both day and night,
                  Psal. 118. at home and abroade,
                  Eccle, 6. and 22. at our vprising & our downe lying, to make it our cogitation, our discourse, our talke, our exercise, our rumination, and our delight:

that we should notwithstanding contemne the same, as to make it no pat of our thought, but rather to flee the knowledge thereof, as we see most men of the world doe, for not troubling their consciences.
            
               
                  Eccl
                        •
                     
                   17. The first cause why men flee consideration. But the holy Ghost hath laid down the reason hereof long agoe in these words: Cum sit timida nequitia testimonium condemnationis: For that wickednes in it selfe is alwaies fearefull, it gyueth witnesse against it selfe of damnation, whensoeuer it thinketh of the Lawe of God, or of hon
                  •
               stie. So Foelix the Gouernour of Iurie, when S. Paule began to talke of iustice, chastitie,
               
                  Acts 24. 
               & Gods iudgements before him, he was wonderfully afeard and said to Paul, that he should depart for that time, and that he would call for him afterward, when occasion should require. But hee neuer did, and wh
                  •
               t was the cause? for that (as Iosephus testifieth) he was a wicked man,
                  Iosep. lib. 20. antiq. cap. 5. and Drusilla his faire Lady that was with him at S. Paules speech, was not hys true wife, but taken by allurement and violence from an other, & therfore it offended them both to heare preaching of chastitie.
            This then is one principall cause,

why men of this world will not enter into consideration of their owne estate, and of Gods commaundements, least they should read and see their owne faults, and beare witnes against thēselues of their own condemnation.The second cause why men flee cō
                  sideration. VVhereunto the holy Scripture annexeth an other cause, not far vnlike to this, which is, that worldly men doe so drowne themselues in the cares & cogitations of this life, as they leaue in their minds no place to thinke vppon Gods affaires, which are the busines of their owne soules.
            Thys expresseth Ieremie the Prophet most effectually,
                  Ierem. 7. when hauing made his complaint, that notwithstanding his preaching and crying in the Temple gate, for long time together, where al the people passed by him and heard him: yet no man (saith he) would enter into consideration, or say with himselfe,
                  Ierem. 8. 
               what haue I doone? and reason: Omnes enim conuersi sunt ad cursum suum, qua siequus impetu vadens ad praelium.
               All men are set vppon their owne courses and wayes, and doe runne in the same with as great vehemencie and fearce obstinaciō, as a furious armed

horse, when he heareth the Trumpet in the beginning of a battayle.
By which comparison, the holy Ghost expresseth very liuly, ye irrecouerable state of a setled worldlly man, that followeth greedily his own designments in the negotiation of earth.
            These are two of the cheife causes of inconsideration, I meane wilfull malice and obstinate corruption in the vanities of this life. And yet mē
               tioneth the Scripture,The third cause of inconsideration. a third sort also of inconsiderate men, who neyther of direct malyce, nor yet of great occupation in worldly affaires doe neglect consideration, but rather of a certain lightnes and idle negligence, for that they will not trouble theyr heads with any thing but disport and recreation, of whom it is writtē,
                  Wisdom. 15. 
               aestimauerunt lusum esse vitam nostram: They esteeme this life of ours to be but a play-game. And in an other place of the same men:
                  Eccle, 8. 
               Ita securi viuunt quasi iustorum facta habeant. They liue as securely & confidently without care and cogitation, as if they had the good works of iust men to stand for thē. But as the holy Ghost pronounceth in the same place
                  •
                
               hoc vanissimum: this is vanity

and folly in the highest degree.
            For as in things of this lyfe,A comparison. hee were but a foolish Merchant, that for quietnes sake would neuer looke into his own account booke, whether he were behind hand or before and as the ship-master were greatly to be laughed at, that for auoyding of care, would sit downe and make good cheere, & let the ship goe whether shee would: so, much more in the busines of our soule, it is madnes and folly to fly consideration for eschewing of trouble, seeing in the ende thys negligence must needes turne vpon vs more trouble, and irremediable calamitie.
            For as Ieremie sayth to all such men,
                  Iere. 30.23. 
               in nouissimo die intelligetis ea, in the end of your dayes, you shall not chuse but know, and see, and vnderstand these things,In the end euill me
                     •
                   shall vnderstand, whither they will or no. which nowe for delecacie you wil not take the pains to thinke of. But when shall this be trow you? he telleth plainely in the same place: When the fury of the Lord shall come foorth as a whirlwind, and shall rush and rest vppon your heads as a tempest: then shall you know and vnderstand these things.
            It seemeth that the Babylonians

were a people very faultie in thys poynt of consideration,The example of the Babylonians. (as all wealthy people are) not onely by that which before hath beene touched of the daughter of Babilon, that would not consider her ending dayes: but also, for that not long before ye most terrible destruction of that great cittie by the Medes and Persians, God cryed vnto her in these words:
                  Esay, 21.
               My deerely beloued Babylon, put aside the Table, & stand vpon thy watch: ryse vp you Princes from eating and drinking: take your Targets in your hands: goe, and set a watchman vppon the walles, and what soeuer hee seeth, let him tell you.
            
            And then was there a watchman set vppon the walles, and a Lyon to denounce with open mouth, whatsoeuer daunger he saw comming towards them.
And God taught the Prophet to cry in thys sort to theyr Sentinell or watchman: 
                  Custos, quid de nocte? custos, quid de nocte? Thou VVatchman, what seest thou comming towards thee by night? what espyest thou (O Sentinell) drawing on vs in the darkenesse?
            
            By all which circumstaunce, what els is insinuated, but that God wold

haue vs stand vppon our watch,VVe must stand vppon our watch. for that his iudgements are to come vppon the world by night, when men least think therof? they are to come as a theefe at midnight, as also in an other place we are admonished, and therfore happie is the man that shall be founde watchfull.Consideration the only doore to our watch. But nowe the doore and sole entrance into thys watch, wherof the securitie of our eeternal life depēdeth, can be nothing els but consideration, for that wher no consideration is, there can be no watch, nor fore-sight, nor knowe
               
                  •
               edge of our 
                  •
               state; and consequent
               
                  •
               y no hope of our saluation, as holy S. Bernard holdeth;
                  Bern. lib. 1. de con
                        •
                     i.
                which thing, caused that blessed man to write 
                  •
               iue whole bookes of consideration 
                  •
               o Eugenius.
            Consideration is the thing that 
                  •
               ringeth vs to knowe God and our 
                  •
               elues. And touching God, it layeth 
                  •
               efore vs his Mai
                  •
               stie, his mercie, his 
                  •
               udgments, his commaundements, 
                  •
               is threatnings, his promises, his 
                  •
               roceeding with other men before 
                  •
               s, wherby we may gather, what we 
                  •
               lso in time must expect at his hands
            And for ourselues, consideration 
                  •
               s the key that opneth the doore to

the closet of our hart, vvhere all our Bookes of account doe lye:The many commodities of consideration. it is the looking glasse, or rather the very eye of the soule, vvhereby she taketh the view of herselfe, and looketh into al her whole estate; into her ritches, her debts, her duties, her negligences, her good gifts, her defects, her safety, her daunger, her way she walketh in, her course shee followeth, her pace shee holdeth, and finally, the place & end vvherevnto she draweth. And without this consideration, shee runneth on headlong, into a thousand brakes and bryers, stumbling at euery step, into some inconueniencie or other, and continually in perrill of some great and deadly mischeefe.
            And vvonderfull (truely) it is, that in all other busines of thys lyfe, men can see and confesse, that nothing may bee begun, prosecuted, or vvell ended, without consideration: and yet in this great affayre, of vvinning heauen, or falling into hell, fevve thinke consideration greatly necessarie to be vsed.
            
               Effects of consideration.I might stand here to shew the infinite other effects and commodities of consideration, that as it is ye watch or larum bell, that stirreth vp and awakeneth

all the powers of our mind; the match or tinder, that conceiueth & nourisheth the 
                  •
               ire of deuotion: the bellows that enkindleth & enfl
                  •
               m
                  •
               th the same, the spur that pricketh forward to all vertuous, zealous, and h
                  •
               royc
                  •
               ll acts; and the thing indeede, that giueth both light lyfe, and motion to our soule.
            Our faith is 
                  •
               onfirmed & increased by cōsideration of Gods works and myracles; our hope by consideration of his promises,How al vertues are stirred vp and quickned by consid
                     •
                  ration. & of the true performance therof to all them that euer trusted in him: our charitie or loue to God, by consideration of his benefits & innumerable deserts towards vs: our humilitie by consideration of his greatnes, & of our own infirmitie: our courage & fortitude, by contemplation of his assistance in all causes for his honour: our cō
               tempt of the world, by consideration of the ioyes of heauen eternall; and so all other vertues both morral & diuine, doe take their heate, quickning, and vitall spirite from consideration.
            By the exercise of consideration 
                  •
                meditation, holy Dauid saith,
                  Psal. 38. that he felt a burning fire to flame within

his breast; that is, the fire of zeale, the fire offeruour in Religion, the fire of deuotion, the fire of loue towardes God and his neighbour. And in an other place he saith, that by the same exercise,
                  Psalm. 76. 
               he swept and purged his owne spirit: which is to bee vnderstood, from the dust of thys world, frō the dregs of sin, from the cōtamination and coinquination of humane creatures, for that consideration indeed, is the very fan that seuereth and driueth a way the chaffe from the corn.
            For vvhich cause vve shall neuer reade of any holy man from the beginning of the world, neither before Christ nor after,The exercise of holy men touching consideration. who vsed not much and familiarly this most blessed exercise of consideration and pondering. And for the first three Patriarches, it shalbe sufficient to remember the custome of young Isaack recorded in Genesis. VVhich vvas to goe foorth towards night into the fielde, ad medit andum, that is, to meditate, consider & ponder,
                  Gen. 24. vpon th
                  •
                vvorkes, iudgments, and commaundements of God.The first three Patriarches. And this hee di
                  •
                beeing but a childe and vnmarried (farre different from the custome o
                  •
                young Gentlemen now adaies, wh
                  ••
               
               
frequent the fieldes to followe theyr vanities,) and as little Isaack coulde not haue that custome but from hys Father Abraham, so (no doubt) but hee taught the same to his sonne Iacob, & Iacob again to his posteritie.
            And as for Moses & his successor Iosua,Moses and Iosua. it may easily bee imagined howe they vsed this exercise,
                  Deut, 6. and 11. by the most earnest exhortations, vvhich they made thereof to others,
                  Iosua. 1. in their speech & writings. The good Kings of Iuda also, notvvithstanding theyr many great temporall affayres, doe testifie of themselues cōcerning thys exercise; as Dauid almost euery vvhere,K. Dauid. that the commaundements of God vvere his dayly meditation, not onely by day,
                  Psal. 38.62. & 118. & that tota die, all the day, et per singulos dies, euery day, et in matutino, in the morning, et septies in die, seauen times a day, but also hee insinuateth this custome by night;
                  Psal. 76. 
               meditatus sum nocte cum corde meo, I doe meditate by night in my hart, vpon thy commaundements ô Lord; signyfying heereby, both hys vvatchfulnes by night vvhen other men vvere a sleepe, and the hartie 
                  ••
               re that hee had of this exercise, which vve esteeme so little.
            
               
               King Salomon.Salomon also King Dauids son, so long as he lyued in the grace and fauour of God, obserueth this exercise of his Father, and exhorteth other men,
                  Eccle. 6. 
               to haue continuall and daylie cogitation in this affaire. Which if himselfe had continued still, it is likely he had neuer fallen from God by women as he did. The good K. Ezechias is reported to haue meditated lyke a Doue,King Ezechias. that is, in silence & solitarines with himself alone, which is the true vvay of profitable meditation. Esay testifieth of his owne vvatching by night in this exercise,
                  Esay. 58. and howe hee did the same vvith his spirite alone,
                  Esay. 26. in the very bowels of his hart.
            
               The consideratiō that Iob vsed, & the fruites thereof.Holy Iob maketh mention, not onely of his manner of considering, but vvhat also hee considered, and what effect hee found in himselfe by the same.
First hee considered (as I said) the wayes, foote-steps, & commaundements of God, and then his dreadfull power: to vvit, howe no man vvas able to auert or turn away his cogitation, but that his soule did vvhat it pleased, & by this (saith he) considerans eum timore sollicitor:
                  
                     Iob. 23. I am made sollicitous or vvatchfull vvi
                     ••
                   feare, vvhen I consider him.
            
            
               In which words he insinuateh two most excellent effects of consideratiō;Tvvo effects of consideration. Esay, 32. First, the feare of God, of which it is vvritten, salutis thesaurus timor Domini, the feare of God is the treasure of saluation; & the second, yt by this feare hee vvas made sollicitous, vvatchfull, & dilligent in Gods seruice, of vvhich the Prophet Michaeas saith thus.
                  Michae. 6. 
               I wil tell thee (O man) what is good, and what the Lord requireth at thy hands: to vvit, to doe iudgement & loue mercie, and to walke sollicitous and watchfull with thy God.
            
            But thou ô holy and blessed man Iob,A consideration vpon the doings of Iob. Iob. 9. did this exercise bring foorth in thee, so great terror & feare of God: & so carefull watchfulnes for obseruing his cōmaundements? now I see vvell the cause vvhy thou vvrit
                  •
               st of thy self, that thou diddest doubt and feare all thy vvorks & acti
                  •
               ns, vvere they neuer so circumspect. But what shal vve say now adaies (most happy saint) vvho do not doubt so much as our own dissolute, carelesse, and immoderate actions, vvho feele no terror of God at al, nor do vse any one 
                  •
               ote of watchfulnes in obseruing his 
                  •
               ommaundements? t
                  •
               uly, this proceedeth of nothing els but of inconsideration:

it proceedeth of lacke of knowledge both of God and of our selues. For (doubtlesse) if vve knevve either of these two things aright, (as indeede neither of them can be vvell vnderstoode vvithout the other) it could not bee, but that many of vs vvould change our vvrong courses.
            O merciful Lord, what sinful man in the vvorld would liue as he doth, if he knevv either thee or himselfe as he should doe? I meane, if he considered vvhat thou art: & vvhat thou hast beene to other that haue lyued and continued in sinne as he dooth? Not vvithout great cause cryed to often & earnestly to thee, that holy Doctor of thy church,
                  August. in lib. confes.
                for obtaining of those tvvo points at thine hands: vt cognoscam te, vt cognoscam me: that I may knovve thee, and that I may knovve my selfe, saith hee, that is, that I may consider, and feele the true knovvledge heereof, for many men doe knovve, but vvith little commoditie.
            
               Knowledge and beliefe in grosse.VVe knovve and beleeue in grosse the misteries of our faith, that there is a God vvhich revvardeth good & euil, that he is terrible in his counsel
                  •
                vpon the sons of men: that there is a

hell for sinners, a heauen for good lyuers, a most dreadful day of iudgement to come, a streight account to be demaunded, and the like. All this we knowe and beleeue in generall, as merchandise wrapped vp together in a bundle. But for that wee vnfold not these things, nor rest vpon them in particular, for that wee let them not downe into our harts, nor doe ruminate on them with leysure and attention: for that wee chewe them not well in minde by deepe consideration, nor doe digest them in heart, by the heate of meditation, they remaine with vs as a sword in his s
                  •
               aberd, & doe help vs as little to good life,A similitude. (for which they were reuealed,) as a preseruatiue in our pocket neuer applyed, can helpe our health. VVee beare the generall knowledge of these mysteries locked vp in our breastes, as sealed bagges of treasure that be neuer tolde nor opened, and consequently, wee haue neither feeling, sence, nor motion thereby, euen as a man may carry fire about him in a flint stone without heate, and perfumes in a Pomander without smel, except the one be beaten, and the other chafed.
            
               
               The importance of cō
                  sideration.All standeth then (good Reader) in thys one poynt, for direction of our selues in this life, & for reaping benefit by the misteries of our faith, & Religion; that wee alot our selues time to meditate, ponder, and consider what these things doe teach vs. For as the sicke man that had most excellent remedies & precious potions set before him, could expect no profit or ease thereby, if he only did looke vpon them, or smelled them, or tooke them in his mouth alone, or should cast them forth of his stomacke agayne, before they were setled, or had time to worke their operation: euen so is it in thys case of ours.
And therefore with great reason said S. Paul to Timothie,1, Tim. 4. after he had taught him a long lesson, haec meditare, meditate, consider, & ponder vppon these thinges which I haue shewed you, as if in other speeches hee had said: all that hetherto I haue tolde you, or written for your instruction, and all that euer you haue heard or learned besides, will auayle you nothing for you
                     •
                   saluation, except you meditate and ponder vpon the same, and doe sucke out the iuyce thereof by often consideration.
            
            
               VVherfore to conclude this chapter,The conclusion of the Chapter. my deere and vvelbeloued brother, for that consideration is so precious and profitable, so needeful and necessary a thing as hath been declared, I thought it conuenient in thys first front & entrance of my booke, to place the mention and dilligent recommendation thereof, as a thing most requisit for all that ensueth. For without consideration, neither thys that I haue saide already, nor any thing els that shall or may bee sayde hereafter, can yeeld thee profit, as by lamentable experience we see dayly in the world,The misery of the world. where many millions of men passe ouer theyr whole age, without taking profite of so many good Books, so many preachings, so many vertuous examples, so many terrible ch
                  •
               stisements of God vpon sinners, which euery where they see before theyr face. But yet for that they will not, or haue not leysure, or dare not, or haue no grace to enter into consideration therof, they passe ouer all, as sick men do pylles, diuerting as much as they may, both their eyes & cogitations, from all such matters as are vngratefull to them.
            Bu
                  •
                as good Ieremie sayth,
                  Iere. 30. and 2
                     •
                  . the

time vvill come vvhen they shall bee enforced to see and know, & consider these things, when perhaps it wil be too late to reape any comfort or consolatiō therby. Wherfore (deere brother) that which perforce thou must doe in time to come, and that perhaps to thy greater damnation, (I mean to enter into consideration of thine owne estate,) doe that nowe willingly to thy comfort & consolation, for preparing the way to thy saluatiō.
                  Ephe. 5. Preuent the day & redeeme the time, according to S. Paules wise counsell; run not headlong with the world to perdition, stay sometime as holy Ieremie admonisheth thee, and say to thy selfe,
                  Iere. 7. 
               what doe I? whether goe I? what course hold I? what shall be my ende? Take some time from thy pleasures, and frō the company of thy pleasant friends, to doe thys, althought it bee with losse of some pastime and recreation; for I assure thee, it will recompence it self in the end, & make thee merry when thy laughing friends shall weepe.
            
               The effect of all the Chapter. following.The effect of al the considerations that ensue, is, rightly to know God, for by knowing him, we shal knowe our selues, & all things els which are

necessary for vs to know: & without knowing him, all knowledge in the world is vanitie, & meere folly. Haec est vita eterna, (saith our Sauiour Christ to his Father) vt te cognoscant solum Deum verum,
               
                  Iohn. 17. 
               et quem misisti Iesum Christum. This is life euerlasting, that men know thee which art onely true God, and Iesus Christ whom thou hast sent.
            Gods nature and essence vvee can not know in this life;The way to know God in this lyfe. but the onely meane to knowe God in this world, is, to know his Maiestie, to know his mercy, to know his iustice, to know his iudgements; to know his hatred against sin, his fauour to the good, his benefites, and promises to all: his grace, his threats, his wayes, his commaundements, his dealings towards other men before vs: all which things, the considerations following doe set before our eyes, & consequētly, they doe teach vs to know GOD aright. Reade then therefore (deere brother) with attention, and remember the wordes that God vseth to vs all;
                  Psalm. 45. 
               Vacate et videte quoniam ego sum Deus. Take leysure, and consider that I am a God. It must not be doone in haste, nor (as the fashion

is) for curiositie onely, to read three or foure leaues in one place, & so in another? but it must bee doone with such serious intention, as appertayneth to so great a businesse, which (in truth) is the weightiest that possible vnder heauen may bee taken in hand. It is the busines wherof Christ ment especially, when hee said,
                  Luke. 10. 
               vnum est necessarium, one onely thing is necessary. For that all other things in this world, are but trifles to this, and this alone of it selfe, of more importance than they all.
         
         
            
            THAT THERE IS A GOD, VVHICH REWARDETH GOOD AND EVILL, against all Atheists of old, and of our time. With the proofes alleadged for the same, by the Iewe and Gentile. CHAP. II.
            IT is a thing both common and ordinary in Sciences and Artes,A common customes in Sciences to suppose principles. when they are learned or deliuered by other, to suppose diuers points & principles, and to passe them ouer without proofe, as either knowne before to the learner, or els so manifest easie, & euident of themselues, as they neede none other proofe, but onely declaration.
            So when wee take in hand to instruct a man in Chiualrie,An example in Chiualry. or feats of Armes, we do suppose that he knoweth before, (were hee neuer so rude) what a man, what a horse, what armor, what fighting meaneth: as also that warre is l
                  •
               wfull & expedient in diuers causes; the Princes of y• world may wage the same; that Souldiours

haue to liue in order and discipline vnder their regiment, that Kings for this cause doe holde their Generals, Lieuetenants, Coronels, Captaynes, & other like Officers, in their bands, Garisons, Camps, and Armies.
            
               In handy crafts.In manuall artes and occupations lykewise, it is euident, that diuers things must bee presupposed to bee foreknown by the learner; as in husbandry or agriculture; in bulding, in paynting, and other such exercises, when a man is to bee taught or instructed, it were not conuenient for the Teacher, to stand vppon euerie point or matter that appertaineth to the same, but must leaue and passe ouer many thinges, as apparant of themselues, or easie to bee discerned of euery learner by nature, sence, reason, or common experience.
            
               In liberall Sciences.But yet in liberall sciences & professions of learning, is this more apparant, where not onely such common & vulgare points are to be presumed, without proofe or discourse: but also certaine propositions are to bee graunted in the beginning,Grounds to be graunted in Sciences. as grounds whereupon to build all the rest that insueth. So the Logitian (for example) will haue you yeelde ere he

enter with you;In Logick. 
               that contradictorie propositions cannot bee together eyther false or true, neither, that one thing may be affirmed & denyed of an other, in one and the selfe same respect and time.
            
            The Morrall Phylosopher,In Morrall phylosophie wyll haue you graunt at the beginning, that there is both good & euill in mens actions: and that the one is to bee followed, and the other refused.
            
            The naturall Phylosopher,In Naturall philosophie wyll haue you confesse, that all physicall bodies which depend of nature, haue motion in themselues, & are subiect to alterations, and whatsoeuer is mooued, is mooued of another.
            
            The Mathematique at his first entrance,In the Mathematicks. wil demaund your assent, that euery whole is bigger than his parts: as also, the Metaphisicke or Supernaturall Phylosopher,The Metaphisick. 
               that nothing can be, and not be at one time. And so other such like principles and common grounds, in these and all other Sciences are to be demanded, graunted, & agreed vpon at the beginning, for the better pursute and establishment of that which hath to follow, being things in themselues, (as you see) either by nature, common sence, or

experience, most cleere & manifest.
            
               In Diuinitie.And is not this also in Diuinitie (trowe you) and in the affayres that we haue now in hand? yes truely, if wee beleeue S. Paule, who writeth thus to the Hebrues:
                  Heb. 11. 
               Credere oportet accedentem ad Deum, quia est, et inquirentibus se remunerator sit. He that is cōming towards God, must beleeue that there is a God, and that he is a rewarder of such as seeke him. Beholde heere two principles,Two principles in Diuinitie. wherin a man must bee resolued before hee can seeke or drawe vnto God. The one, that there is a God, and the other, 
               that the same God is iust, to reward euery  man according to his deserts.
            
            VVhich two principles or general groundes, are so euident indeede of their own natures, & so ingraffed by Gods owne hand, into the mind and vnderstanding of euery particuler man, at his natiuitie, (according to the saying of the Prophet:
                  Psalm. 4. 
               the light of thy countenance is sealed vpon vs (O Lord,) that were not the times wee lyue in, too-too wicked, and the shamelesse induratian of sinners intollerable, wee should not neede to stand vpon ye proofe of these poynts for confirmation of our cause that

we now intreate, of resolution; but rather supposing and assuring our selues, that no resonable creature lyuing, could doubt of these principles; should pursue only the consideration of other things, that might styr vp our wills to the performance of our duetyes towards this GOD that hath created vs, and remayneth to pay our reward at the end.
            But for so much as iniquitie hath so aduaunced her selfe at this day in the harts of many,The cause of thys Chapter. as not onely to contemne and offend their Maker, but also to denie him, for patronage of their euil life, & for extinguishing the worme of their own afflicted & most miserable consciences; I am enforced before all other things, to discouer this fond and foule errour of theirs, and to remoue also this refuge of desperate iniquitie, by shewing the inuincible veritie of these two principles, the one depending of the other in such sort, as the first beeing prooued, the second hath of necessitie to follow. For if once it be manifest that there is a God,If there be a God, he is a iust rewarder. which hath care & prouidence of all those: whom he hath created & gouerneth; then must it ensue by force of all

cōsequence, that he is also to reward the same men, according to their good lyuing and deserts of this life.
            First then to proue this principle, That there is a GOD, I neede vse no other argument or reason in the world, but only to referre each man to his owne See Lactantius at large, in his booke of the workmanship of the world. The workes of ye world doe declare the workman. sence, in beholding the world, wherof euery part & portion is a most cleere glasse, representing God vnto vs, or rather a fayre Table, wherin God hath drawn or imprinted himselfe, in so manifest characters and legible Letters, as the simpliest man lyuing, may read and vnderstand them.
            In respect heereof said the VViseman so long agoe. That vaine and foolish were all those, who considering the workes that are seene in the world, could not thereby rise to vnderstand the work-man.
And he giueth this reason.
                  Wisd. 3. 
               A magnitudine enim speciei creaturae, cognoscibiliter poterit Creator horum videri. For that by the greatnes of beauty in the creature, may the Creator therof be seene and known.
                  Rom. 1. Which S. Paule confirmeth, when hee saith, that the inuisible thinges of God, may bee seene and knowne by the visible creatures of

the world. VVhich is to bee vnderstood in this sense, that as a prisoner in a dungeon, may easily by a little beame that shineth in at a chincke, conceiue ther is a Sun, from whence that beame descendeth: & as a Trauailer in the wildernesse that falleth vpon some channell or brooke, may ascend by the same to the VVell or Fountaine: euen so, hee that beholdeth & considereth the wonderfull workes of this world, may thereby conceiue also, the wonderfull Artificer or work-man that made them.
            If a man should passe by Sea,A similitude. into some forraine, strange, or sauage Countrey, where nothing els but birds and beasts doe appeare: yet if he should espye some exquisite building, or other worke of arte & reason in the place, he would presently assure himselfe, that some men dwelt or had beene in that Countrey, for that such things could not be doone by beasts or vnreasonable creatures, euen so in the view and consideration of this world.
            If we cast our eyes vpon the heauens,The heauens teach GOD. we remain astonished with the myracles that we behold: but who made them? we see the skyes of exceeding

great highnes, distinguished with collours, and beautie most admirable; adorned with starres and Plannets innumerable, and these so qualified with their diuers, different, and vnequal motions, as albeit they neuer moue or goe together, yet doe they neuer giue let or hinderaunce the one to the other, nor change their course out of order or season.
            
               
                  
                     I
                           •
                        b. 28.
                  Quis enarrabit coelorum rationem, et concentum coeli, quis dormire faciet? VVho is able to declare the reason of these heauens, or who can make cease or sleepe the vniforme course of theyr motions, saith God to Iob?
As who would say, that because no man or mortal creature can do this, therefore may we imagine of what power & perfection theyr maker is.
VVhich King Dauid had done when he pronounced, 
                  Coeli enarrant gloriam Dei, et opera manuum eius, annunciat firmamentum, the heauens declare the glorie of God, and the firmament dooth preach the workes of his hands.
            
            If we pull downe our eyes from heauen to earth,The earth teacheth GOD. we behold the same of an infinite bignesse, distinguished with hils and dales, woods and pastures,

couered with all varietie of grasse, hearbes, flowers, and leaues: moystened with Ryuers, as a body with veynes, inhabited by creatures of innumerable kindes & quallities: enriched with inestimable and endlesse treasures, and yet it selfe standing, or hanging rather vvith all his weight and poyse, in the middest of the ayre, as a little ball without prop or pyller. At which deuise and most wonderfull myracle, God himselfe, as it were glorying, sayde vnto Iob,
                  Iob, 38. 
               Where wert thou, when I layde the foundations of the earth? Tell mee if thou haue vnderstanding, who measured it out, or drewe his line vppon the same? Whereuppon are fastened the pyllers of his foundation, or who layde the first corner stone thereof?
            
            If we looke neyther vp nor down,The Sea sheweth GOD. but cast our countenannce onely aside, wee espy the Sea on each hande of vs, that enuironeth round about the Land. A vast creature, that contayneth more wonders than mans tongue can expresse. A bottomlesse gulfe, that without running ouer, receyueth all Riuers which perpetually doe flowe. A restlesse fight and turmoyle of vvaters, that neuer repose

neither day nor night. A dreadfull, raging, and furious element, that swelleth and roareth, and threatneth the Land, as though it woulde deuoure it all at once.
                  Arist. lib. de mirabilib.
                And albeit in situation it be hier than the earth, as the Phylosopher sheweth, and doe make assaults daily towardes ye same with most terrible cryes, and waues mounted euen to the skye: yet when it draweth neere to the Land, and to his appoynted borders: it stayeth vpon the suddaine, though nothing bee there to let it, and is enforced to recoyle backe againe, murmuring as it were, for that it is not permitted to passe any further.
            Of which restraint, GOD asketh Iob this question.
                  Iob. 38. 
               Who hath shut vp the Sea with gates, when he breaketh forth in rage as from his mothers womb? VVhereunto no man being able to giue aunswer, God aunswereth himselfe, in these words: I haue limitted him with my bounds, and I haue set him both a doore and a barre, and haue saide vnto him, hetherto shalt thou come, and shalt not passe further: heere shalt thou breake thy swelling waues.
            
            This in summe, is of things without vs. But if we should leaue these,

and enter to seeke God within our selues,The thinges in man declare God. whether we consider our bodies or our soules, or any one part therof, we shall find so many strange things, or rather so many seas of miracles and wonders, that preach and teach theyr Maker vnto vs, that wee shall not onely perceiue & see God most euidently, but rather (as a certaine old Heathen hath written) we shall feele and handle him in hys workes.
                  Iamblicus de Mist. cap. 1.
Which kinde of speech also S. Paule himself doubted not to vse, affirming that God hath giuen space to euery man in this life to seek him, 
                  Si forte attractent eum aut inueniant:
                  
                     Acts. 17. if perhaps they woulde handle him, or find him out.VVhich manner of words doe signifie, that by consideration of Gods creatures, and especially of the wonders in man himselfe, we may come to see and perceiue the Creator so cleerely; that in a sort we may be saide to handle and feele him.
So ioyntly doe all thinges concurre to the manifestation of theyr Maker: so manifestly & effectually doe they teach, demonstrate, and paint out God vnto vs; nothing being so little, that declareth not his greatnesse: nothing so

great, which acknowledgeth not his soueraigntie: nothing so lowe, that leadeth vs not vp to behold his Maiestie, nothing so high, that descendeth not to teach this verity.
            It were a labour without end, to goe about in this place to alleadge what might be saide in the proofe of this principle, That there is a GOD, seeing there was neuer yet learned man in the world, eyther Gentile or other, that acknowledged and confirmed not the same, beeing driuen thereunto by the manfiest euidence of the trueth it selfe.
            If you obiect against me Diagoras, Protagoras, Theodorus, Cyrennensis, Bion Borysthines, Epicurus,
               Olde Atheists. and some few others, that were open Atheists, and denyed GOD, I aunswer, that some of these were vterly vnlearned,
                  La
                        •
                     rtius lib. 2. et 4. de vit. Phylos.
                and rather sensuall beastes than reasonable men; and consequently might deny any thing, according to the saying of holy Dauid, The foole sayd in his hart there is no God. Others, that had some smack of learning,
                  Psalm. 13. and 52. rather iested at the falshood of theyr own Panisme Idols, than denye the beeing of one true God.
            But the most part of these men in
                  •
               deede,

and such others, as in old time were accounted Atheists, denied not God so much in words, as in life & facts;
                  Rom. 1.
               
                  Phil. 3. such as S. Paule called Atheists in his dayes, that obeyed theyr bellyes, and followed their pleasures in sinne and s
                  •
               usualitie
                  •
                not vouchsafing to thinke of God in this lyfe, (such was the Epicure,
                  Lactant. lib. 3. institut.
                & many other are at this day of his profession) but yet (as Lactantius wel noteth) when the same men came to be sober, and spake of iudgement (as at their death or other time of distresse & miserie,) they were as ready to confesse God, as any other whatsoeuer.
            But for learned men, & people of discretion, sobrietie, and iudgement, there was neuer yet any (were hee Iew or Gentile) that doubted in this veritie, but had meanes of probations to confirme the same, as more particularly in the rest of this Chap
               
                  •
               er shall be declared.
            
               Howe the Heathen prooued there was a God. SECT. 2.
               AMong the Gentiles or Heathen people, those men were alwayes

of most credite and estimation, that professed the loue of wisdome, & for yt respect were termed Philosophers.Phylosophers. VVho beeing deuided into diuers sorts & sects, had four principal Sciences, wherof they made profession, each one of these hauing other lower Sciences comprehended vnder it.
               
                  Foure principall Sciences.The first of these foure, is called Naturall Phylosophy: the second, Morrall; the third, Supernaturall, or Metaphisick; the fourth, Mathematick. And for the first three, they haue each one their proper meanes & peculiar proofes, wherby to conuince, that there is a GOD. The fourth, which is the Mathematique,The Mathematick proueth not GOD. for that it hath no consideration at all, of the efficient or final cause of things, (vnder which two respects & considerations only, God may be known & declared vnto men in this world) therefore this Science hath no proper meane peculiar to it selfe, fo
                     •
                   proouing this veritie, as the othe
                     •
                   Sciences haue, but receyueth th
                     •
                   same as borrowed of the former.
               
                  ¶ The Naturall Phylosopher.
                  THe Naturall Phylosopher amon
                        •
                      the Gentiles, had infinite arg
                        ••
                     ments,

to prooue by creatures, that there was a God, but all hee reduced to three principall & generall heads, which he tearmed Ex Motu, ex Fine, et ex Causa efficiente. That is, arguments drawne from the Motions, from the Ends, and from the Cause efficiēt of creatures that we behold; which tearmes ye examples following shall make cleere and manifest.
                  The argument of Motion,
                     The first argument in Naturall phylosophy Arist. lib. 7. et 8. phy.
                      standeth vpon this generall ground in phylosophy, that what soeuer is mooued, is mooued of another: Wherin also is obserued, that in the motions of creatures, there is a subordination the one to the other. As for example; These inferiour bodies vpon earth, are mooued and altered by the ayre & other elements: and the elements are mooued by the influence & motion of the Moone, Sunne, and other heauenly bodyes; these Planets againe are mooued from the hyghest Orbe or Sphere of all, that is called The first moueable:
                     
                        Primum mobile.
                      aboue which wee 
                        •
                     an go no further among creatures.
                  Now then asketh the Phylosopher 
                        •
                     eere, who mooueth this first moue
                        
                           •
                        ble? for if you say that it moueth it 
                        ••
                     lfe, it is against our former ground,

that nothing is mooued in nature but of another. And if you say that some other thing mooueth it, then is the question again, who moueth that other? and so from one to one, vntyll you come to some thing that mooueth, and is not moued of an other, and that must needes be God, which is aboue all nature.
                  
                     
                        Plato lib. 10. de legib.
                     This was the common argument of Plato, and of Aristotle,
                        Arist. lib. 8 pysic. cap. 5. & of al the best philosophers
                        •
                      And they thought it a demonstration vnauoydable, & it seemeth they were admonished of this argument by consideration of the Clock,An argument taken from the Clocke. whose hammer when it striketh, sheweth the next wheele wherby it is moued, and that wheele sheweth to another wheele, and so from one to one, vntill you come to him that was the first cause of motion to all the wheeles, that is, to the Clock-maker himselfe.
                  Aristotle,
                        Arist. lib. de mundo.
                      to King Alexander, vseth this pretie similitude. That as in a Quiar of singers, when the foreman hath gyuen the first tune or note, there ensueth presently a sweet harmonie, and consent of all other voyces, both great and small, sharpe & meane: so God in the creation o
                        •
                     
                     
this world,A similitude. hauing giuen once the first push or motion to the highest heauen, called Primum mobile, there ensueth vppon the same, all other motions of heauens, planets, elements
                        •
                      and other bodies, in most admirable order, concord, & congruetie, for conseruation & gouernment of the whole. And thus is God proued by argument of motion.
                  The other two arguments of the End, and of the Cause efficient of creatrues,
                     The second argument of Naturall phylosophy are made euident in a certaine manner, by this that hath beene spoken of motion. For seeing by experience, that euery thing brought forth in nature, hath a p
                        •
                     culiar end appoynted, whereto it is directed by the self same nature, (as we see y• bird is directed to build her neast by nature, the Foxe to make his den, & so so the like in all other creatures,) the Philosopher asketh here, what thing is that that directeth nature herselfe, seeing each thing must haue somewhat to direct it to his end? And no aunswer can be made, but that the Director of Nature, must bee some thing aboue nature, which is GOD himselfe. This argument of the finall End, is most excellently handled, by

Phylo Iudaeus,
                        Phylo lib. de opific. mund.
                      in his learned treatise, Of the workmanship of the world.
                  
                  
                     The third argument of Naturall philosophy.From the Cause efficient, the Phylosopher disputeth thus. It is euident by all reason, in respect of the corruptions, alterations, and perpetuall motions of all creatures, that thys world had a beginning, & 
                        Vide Plutarch de placetis phylos.
                      all excellent Phylosophers that euer were
                        •
                      haue agreed therupon, except Aristotle,
                        
                           Arist. lib. 8. phys. et lib. de Gen. et corrup.
                        
                        
                           Arist. lib. de mund. Et vide Ploti. lib. de mundo.
                        
                      who for a time held a fantasy that the worlde had no beginning, but was from all eternitie; albeit at last in his old age, he confessed ye contrarie, in his Booke to King Alexander.
                  This then being so, that this world had a beginning, it must needes follow also, that it had an efficient Cause. Now thē is the question, who is that efficient Cause that made the world? If you say, that it made it selfe, it is absurde, for how could it haue power to make it selfe, before it self was, and before it had any being at all? If you say, that something within the world, made the world: that is, that some one part of ye world, made the whole: this is more absurde; for it is, as if a man should say, that the finger (& this before it was a finger, or part of ye body) did make the whole body
                  
                     Wherefore we must confesse by force of this argument, that a greater and more excellent thing, than is the whole world put together, or than any part thereof, made the world, and was the Cause e
                           •
                        ficient of the frame that wee see; and this can be nothing els but God that is aboue the world. So that heereby we see, how many waies the Naturall Phylosopher is fraught with arguments, to proue there is a God, and that by reason only, without all light or assistance of fayth.
               
               
                  The M
                        •
                     taphisique and his argument.
                  BVT the Metaphisique, or Supernaturall Phylosopher among the Gentiles, as he to whom it appertained most in speciall to handle these high and supernaturall affayres, and many more arguments and demonstrations, to proue and conuince the being of one God.
                  And first of all he saide,The first argument in Metaphisicke. that it could not stand with any possibility in his Science, that Ens finitum, a thing finite, or closed within bounds or limits, (as this world, and euery creature therin is) could be, but from

some Maker or Creator. For (saith he) the thing that in it selfe is not infinite, hath his bounds & limits, and consequently there must bee some thing, that assigned these bounds & limits. And seeing in this world ther is no creature so great, which hath not bounds and limits, we must of necessitie imagine some infinite supreame Creator or Maker that limited these creatures, euen as we see that the Potter (at his pleasure) giueth boundes and limits to the pot that he frameth.
                  Thys argument the Metaphisicke confirmeth by a ruled principle in his Science.A Maxime in Metaphisicke. 
                     That euery thing which is by participation, must be reduced & referred to some other thing, that is not by participation, but of it selfe.
                     
                        Arist. lib. 8. metapis. capit. 2. And hee calleth a thing by participation, which is not in the fullest or highest degree of perfection in his kind, but may haue addition made vnto it. As for exmple; water, or any thing els that is heated by fire, is hote by participation, and not of it selfe, for that it may alwaies be hoter, & haue addition of heate made vnto it; but fire is hote of it selfe, and not by participation, for that it hath heate in the

highest degree, and in that kinde can receyue no addition, wherefore the heate of all other things, which are hote by participation of fire, are reduced (concerning theyr heate) to the heate of fire, as to their origin
                        •
                     ll.
                  Now then (saith the Metaphisick) we see by experience, that all the creatures and parts of thys worlde, are things by participation onely, for that they are infinite in nature,Howe all creatures are by participation of GOD. and haue limitatio
                        •
                     s in all theyr perfections, and may receiue additions to the same, & consequently, they must of necessitie be referred to some higher cause th
                        •
                     t is infinite in perfection, & consisteth of it selfe alone, without participation from others: & thys is God, who being absolute, endlesse, and without all limitation of perfection in himselfe, deriueth from his own incomprehensible infinitnesse, certaine limited natures and perfections to euery creature: which perfections in creatures, are nothing els but little particles, & participations of the bottomlesse sea of perfections in the Creator, whereunto they are to be referred and reduced, as the beame to the Sunne, and the brooke to the Fountaine.
                  
                     
                     
                        The second argument in Metaphisicke.
                        Multitude. Plato in Parmen.
                        
                     A second argument vseth the Metaphisicke, grounded vpon certaine rules of vnitie, wherof one principle is, That euery multitude or distinction of things, proceedeth from some vnitie, as from his Fountaine.
                  
                  This he sheweth by many examples of things in this world. For we see by experience,
                        Primum mobile.
                      that ye diuers motions or mouing of the lower Spheres or bodies celestial, do proceed of the mouing of one highest Sphere, & are to be referred to the same, as to theyr Fountaine. Many Riuers are reduced to one well or of-spring: innumerable beames to one Sunue: & all the boughes of a tree to one stock.
                  
                     MICROCOSMOS.In the body of Man, which for his beauty and variety, is called the little world: the veynes which are without number, haue all one beginning in the Lyuer, the arters, in the heart, the sinnowes, in the brain. And that which is more, the infinite actions of life,The infinite things that proceede from the soule. sence, and reason in man, as generations, corruptions, nourishments, disgestions, & alteration; feeling, smelling, tasting, seeing, hearing, mouing, speaking, thinking, remembring, discoursing, and ten hundred thousand particular actions, operations

and motions besides, which are exercised in mans body, vnder these or other such names and appellations: all these (I say) being infinite in number, most admirable in order, & distinct in euery theyr office and operation, doe receiue notwithstanding theyr beginning from one most simple vnitie, and indiuisible substance, called the soule, which produceth, gouerneth, and directeth them al to so innumerable, different and contrarie functions.
                  By this concludeth the Metaphysicke; that as among the creatures, we finde this most excellent order & connexion of things, vvhereby one bringeth forth many, & euery multitude is referred to his vnity
                        •
                      so much more in all reason, must the whole frame of creatures contayned in the world, (wherein there are so many millions of multitudes with their vnities) be referred to one most simple & abstract vnity, that gaue beginning to them all, and this is God.
                  A third argument vseth the Metaphisick,The third argument in Metaphisick. Subordination. deriued from the subordina
                     
                        •
                     iō of creatures in this world; which 
                        •
                     ubordination is such, & so wonder
                     
                        •
                     ull, as we see no creature by nature

serueth it selfe, but another, and altogether doe conspyre in seruing the common. We see the heauens doe moue about cōtinually without ceasing, & this not to serue thēselues, but inferiour creatures, lesse excellent than thēselues. We see ye water moysteneth the ground, the ayre cooleth, openeth, & cherisheth the same, the Sunne heateth and quickeneth it, the Moone & Starres poure foorth their influence, the windes refresh it, and all this not for themselues, but for other. The earth againe, that receyueth these seruices, vseth not the same for herselfe, or for her owne cōmoditie, but to bring forth grasse wherewith to feede Cattell, & they feede not for themselues, but to giue nourishment vnto man.
                  
                     A similitude.Now then (sayth the Metaphisick) if a man that stood a farre off vpon 
                        •
                      Mountain, shold see in a field vnder him, a great, huge, and maine Armi
                        •
                      of Souldiours, most excellent wel
                        •
                      appointed, each one in order agreeing with the other, deuided int
                        •
                      Rankes, Squadrons, Companies, an
                        •
                      Offices; subordinate the one to y• o
                        •
                     ther by degrees, & yet all tēding on way, all theyr faces bent vppon on

place, al mouing, marching, and turning together, all endeuouring with alacritie towards the performance of one common seruice by mutuall assistance, without dissention, discord, difference, or clamor; he that should see this (sayth the Metaphisicke) as he could not but imagine some Generall high Captaine to be among these Souldiours, whom all obaied, & from whose supreame cō
                     maundement & order, this most excellent subordination, agreement, & vnion proceeded, so much more, vppon consideration of the former coherence, consent, and miraculous subordination of creatures among themselues in their operations, must we inferre, that they haue some generall commaunder ouer them all; by whose supreame dispositiō, each creature hath his charge & peculiar taske appointed, which he must performe, for the common and vniuersall seruice of the whole.
                  The fourth reason or argument alledged by the Supernaturall Phylosopher,The fourth argument in Metasick. Prouidence. is, of the marueilous prouidence arte and wisdome, discouered in ye making of euery least creature wythin the vvorlde. For seeing

there is nothing so little, nothing so base or contemptible, within the compasse of this heauen that couereth vs, but if you consider it, you finde, both arte, order, proportion, beauty, and excellencie in the same: thys cannot proceed of Fortune, as foolish Lucrecius made diuers bookes against the workmanship of the world. Lucrecius and some other would haue it, for that Fortune is casualty without order, rule, or certain tie, & therefore needes it must come from the wisedome and prouidence of some omnipotent Creator.
                  If you take a flye, or a flea, or a leafe from a tree, or any other, the least creature that is extant in the world, and consider the same attentiuely: you shall finde more myracles, than parts therein: you shall finde such proportion of members, such varietie of collours, such distinction of offices, such correspondence of instruments, & those so fit, so well framed, so coherent, and so subordinate: as the more yee contemplate, the more ye shall maruaile, neyther is there any one thing in the worlde more effectuall, to drawe a man to the loue and admiration of his Creator, than to exercise himself often in this contemplation, for if

hys heart be not of stone, this will moue his affection.
                  VVe read of Galen,
                        Galen. lib. 5. de vsu part.
                      a prophane & very irreligious Phisitian, who as himself confesseth in a certain place, taking vpon him to consider of the parts of mans body; & finding much wisdome in the order, vse, and disposition of the same, sought first to giue the praise & glory therof to nature, or to some other cause than to God. But in processe of time, beeing oppressed (as it were) with the exceeding great wisdome, cunning & prouidence, which he discouered in euery least parcell & particle of mans body, wherein nothing was redundant, nothing defectiue, nothing possible to be added, altered, or better deuised; he brake forth into these words:
                        Lib. 3. de vsu. par.
                      
                     Compono hic profecto canticum in Creatoris nostri laudem, quod vltra res suas ornare voluit, melius quam vlla arte possent.
                     Heere truely doe I make a song in praise of our Creator, for that of his own accord, it hath pleased him to adorne and beautifie his things better, than by any art possible it could be imagined.
                  
                  Heereby then doth the Metaphysicke gather and conclude most euidently,

that there is a God, a Creator, a most wise and powerfull artificer, that made all things: such a one, as exceedeth all boundes of nature, & of humaine abilitie. For if all the world should ioyne together, they could not make ye least creature that we see in this wo
                        •
                     ld. He concludeth also, that the for-sight & prouidence of this Creator is infinite, for things to come in all eternitie; and finally, that his wisdome & cogitations are i
                        •
                     scrutable. And albeit sometime he reueale vnto vs some part therof, yet often againe we erre therein. For which cause,A wonderfull speech of a Heathen. a wise Heathen Platonick concludeth thus, after long search about these affayres.
I will praise God (saith he) in those things I vnderstand, and I will admire him in those things which I vnderstand not. For I see that my selfe oftentimes, do things wherin my seruants are blind & conceiue no reason. As also I haue seene little chyldren,
                           Plotin. lib. de proui.
                         cast into the fire Iewels of great price, and their Fathers writings of great learning and wisedome, for that they were not of capacitie to vnderstand the value, & worthines of the thing.
                  
                  One argument more wyll I alledge

of the Metaphisick,The fift argument in Metaphisicke. Immortalitie of the soule. Plato. lib. 10 de Republ.
                      grounded vpon the immortalitie of mans soul; which immortalitie is proued with one consent of all learned men, (as Plato alledgeth) for that it is a spyrit and immateriall substance, whose nature dependeth not of the state of our mortall body, for so by experience we see daily, that in old men & withered sickly bodies, the minde & soule is more quick, cleere, pregnant, and liuely then it was in youth, whē the body was most lusty.
                  The same is also prooued by the vnquēchable desire which our mind hath of learning, knowledge, wisedome, and other such spirituall and immateriall things, wherin her thirst by nature is so great, as it cannot bee satis-fied in this life, neither can the obiects of sence & bodily pleasures, or any other commodity or delight of this materiall world, content or satiate the restlesse desire of this immaterial 
                        •
                     reature.VVhen the desire of our soule shall be satisfied. VVhich is an euident argument to the Phylosolopher, that some other obiect and contentation, is prepared for her in another world: and that of such excellencie and supereminent perfection, as it sh
                        •
                     ll haue in it all wisdome, all learning,

all knowledg, all beautie, & all other causes of loue, ioy, & contentation, wherin our soule may rest for euer.
                  This being so (sayth the Phylosopher) that the soule & mind of man is immortall, of necessity it must ensue, that an immortall Creator sent the same into our bodies, and that to him againe it must returne after her departure from this lyfe heere.
                        Themist. in lib. de anima.
                      This was the true meaning indeede (how soeuer some latter interpreters haue mis-vnderstood the same) of that ancient doctrine of olde Phylosophers, which Plutarch alledgeth out of Pythagoras & Plato:
                        Plut. de placit. phylos.
                      affirming, that all particular soules of men, came sent frō one generall & cōmon soule of the whole world, as sparkles from the fire, and beames from the common Sunne: and that after their seperation from theyr bodyes, they shall returne againe to that generall soule, called Anima mundi:
                     The meaning of olde Phylosophers, touching Anima mundi.
                      the soule of the world (for that it giueth life & being to the world) & so to remaine with that g
                        •
                     nerall soule eternally.
                  This was the doctrine of old Philosophers, which seemed indede to haue beene nothing els, (though deliuered

in other speeches) but that which Salomon himselfe affirmeth in playner wordes,
                        Eccle. 12.
                     
                        Et spiritus redibit ad Deum, qui dedit illum: & our soule or spirit shal return to God that gaue it vnto vs.And this may suffice for a taste of that which the Metaphisicke or Supernaturall Phylosopher can say, for proofe that there is a God.
               
               
                  The Morrall Phylosopher.
                  THere remayneth yet a third part of humaine wisdome or phylosophie, called Morrall, whose reasons & arguments for proofe of this veritie, I haue of purpose referred to the last place, for that they bee more plain and easie than the former, and more siensible to the capacitie of euery simple and vnlearned Reader.
                  For first of all,The first argument of Morral phylosophy. hee obserueth in the very natural inclination of man, (be his manners otherwise neuer so euill) that there is a certain propention and disposition to confesse some GOD or Deitie; as by example he prooueth in all Nations, were they neuer so fierce or Barbarous, yet alwayes confessed they some God by

nature, though no man did teach or instruct them therin. The same is cō
                     firmed by the cōmon vse of all Heathens, in Tertullian handleth thys poynt excellently in Apolog. lifting vp theyr eyes and hands to heauen, in any suddain distresse that commeth vppon them. Which importeth that nature herself hath ingrafted this feeling, that there is a God. Yea, further he alledgeth, that by experience of all ages, it hath been proued, that Atheists thēselues, that is, such men, as in their health & prosperitie, for more liberty of sinfull life, would striue against the beeing of any God; when they came to die, or fal into any great misery, they of all other men, would shew themselues most fearfull of this God, as Seneca declareth, and as Suetonius sheweth in the example of Caligula
                        •
                     
                     
                        Seneca lib. 1. de ira Suet. in Caligu.
                      VVhich is a token, that theyr conscience inforced them to beleeue a God-head.
                  Nay, Zeno the Phylosopher vvas wont to say,The saying of Zeno, touching the death of Atheists. that it seemed to hym a substantiall proofe of this veritie, to heare an Atheist at his dying day
                        •
                      preach God frō a paire of gallowes or rather such place of misery, (wh
                        •
                      he asked God & nature forgiuenes) than to heare all the Philosophers i
                        •
                     
                     
the worlde dispute the poynt; for that at this instant of death and myserie, it is lyke, that such good fellowes doe speake in earnest and sobrietie of spirit, who before in their wantonnes, impugned God, 
                        •
                     yther of vanitie, ambition, sensuallitie, or dissimulation.
                  Now then, when the Morral Phylosopher hath proued by this naturall inclination of man, that there is a God, which hath imprinted in vs such a feeling of himselfe, as no conscience can deny him, when it commeth to speak sincerely: thē steppeth he a degree further, and proueth that this God which is acknowledged, can be but one; for that if hee bee a God,The reason why there can be but one God. he must be infinite, and if he be infinite, he can haue no companion, for that two infinite things cannot stand together, without impeachment the one of the others infinitie.
                  Hee prooueth the same by the cu
                     
                        •
                     tome of the most Gentiles,
                        Lact. lib. 2. diui. instit. cap. 2. who (as Lactantius well noted in his tyme) whē they swore, or cursed, or praied, or wished any thing hartily, (especi
                     
                        •
                     lly in affliction, that lighteneth the 
                        •
                     nderstanding,) theyr fashion was 
                        •
                     o say, God, and not the Gods.
                        Deus et no
                              •
                            Dij.
                      And

for the learneder sort of them, howsoeuer they dissembled, and applyed themselues outwardly to the error of the common people, yet in earnest they neuer spake of more thē of one God, as Plato signifieth of himselfe to Dionisius King of Sicilie, in a certaine Letter, wherein he gaue him a signe when hee spake in earnest, and when in iest.
                        Plato Epist. 13. ad Dyonisi.
                      
                     Hinc discis tu, s
                           •
                        ribam ego serio, nec ne: cum serio, ordior Epistola
                           •
                         ab vno Deo, cum secus, a pluribus.
                     By this signe shall ye knowe whether I write in earnest or not: For when I write in earnest, I beginne my Letter with one God, and when I write not in earnest, I doe begin my Letter in the name of many Gods.
                  
                  Iulian the Apostata, in hys three most scornfull Bookes that he wrot
                        •
                      against vs Christians,
                        Cyrillus lib. 2. cont. Iuli.
                      (whom contemptuously he called Galilaeans) endeuouring by all his meanes to aduance and set foorth the honour o
                        •
                      Paganisme,
                        Plotin. Ennea. 1. lib. 8.1 2. et Eu. 6. lib. 4. capit. 12.3.4. alledgeth this Plato for a chiefe pyller and father thereof, an
                        •
                      dareth preferre him with our Moses: and yet you see what he testifieth of himselfe. And that this wa
                        •
                      his perpetuall opinion, three of hi
                        •
                      most worthy Schollers, I mean thre
                        •
                     
                     
of the most learned that euer professed the Platonick sect, Plotinus, Porphyrius,
                        Porhy. lib. 2. de abst. et lib. de occa. cap. 21. Procl. in theolo. Platon. et lib. de anima. et Daem. 1.31.42.53. and Proclus, all Heathens thēselues, doe testifie & proue in dyuers parts of theyr workes, assuring, that both they and their master Plato, neuer beleeued indeede but onely one God. And as for Socrates that was Platos Master,Socrates. Apuleius, Alegus, et Laerti. in vita Socratis.
                      and pronounced by the Oracle of Apollo, to bee the wisest man in all Greece; the world knoweth that hee was put to death foriesting at the multitude of Gods among the Gentiles.
                  Aristotle th
                        •
                     t ensued after Plato, began ye sect of Peripateticks,Aristotle & the Peripateticks. & was 
                        •
                      man so much giuen to the search of Nature, as in many things he forgat the Author of Nature, or at least 
                        •
                     ise, he treated little & very doubt
                     
                        •
                     ully therof, yet in his old age, when 
                        •
                     ee came to write the Booke of the world to K. Alexander (which Book Iustine the Martyr esteemed great
                     
                        ••
                     ,
                        Iustin. in Apolo.
                      and called it the Epitome of all 
                        •
                     ristotles true philosophy) he resol
                     
                        •
                     eth the matter more cleerely,
                        Arist. lib. de mundo.
                      say
                     
                        ••
                     g thus of God, Hee is the Father of 
                           ••
                        ds & men, he is the maker & conser
                        
                           ••
                         all things that be in the world. And 
                        •
                     ee addeth further in the selfe same

place, that the multitude of many Gods,
                        Theo. in metaph. Alex. Aphrod. lib. de prouiden.
                      was inuented to expresse the power of this one God, by the multitude of his ministers: so that hee maketh all Gods to be seruants besides onely one. VVhich sentence of theyr Master, Theophrastus and Aphrodiseus, two principal Peripatetickes, doe confirme at large.
                  
                     Zeno & the Stoickes.Zeno the cheefe and 
                        •
                     ather of the Stoicks was wont to say, (as Aristotle reporteth) that, either one God, or no God.
                     
                        Plut. de oracul. defect. de 
                              •
                           ranc. de quest. Plat. Seneca de vita beat. de prouid. in Epist.
                      Which opinion is auerred euery where, by Plutarch and Seneca, two most excellent writers, & great admirers of the Stoick seueritie. And before them, by Epictetus, a man of singuler account in that sect, whose words were esteemed Oracles. Dicendum ante omnia, vnum esse Deum
                           •
                         omnia regere, omnibus prouidere.
                     
                        Epict. apud Arianum.
                      Befor
                        •
                      all things (saith he) we must affirm
                        •
                      that there is one God, and that thi
                        •
                      God gouerneth all, and hath prouidence ouer all.
                  As for the Academiks,The Academickes. who mad
                        •
                      the fourth deuision or sect of Phylo
                        •
                     sophers, it is sufficient which I hau
                        •
                      mencioned before, that Socrate their founder, was caused to dye fo
                        •
                      his opinion in this matter; albeit 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     
seem, that such as insued in that sect, whose profession was to dispute and doubt of euery thing, So in this tyme of varietie of Sects. came at length, by their much iangling and disputing, to beleeue and hold nothing. Wherof Cicero himselfe may be an example, who in his Bookes De natura Deorum, followeth so farre the Academicall veine of doubtfull disputing to and fro, about the nature of Gods, as hee may seeme (and so did he to dyuers Christians of the Primatiue Church) to be very irresolute whether there were any God or no.
                        Arnob. cont. gentes.
                      Albeit in the end he make shew to conclude very plainely and peremtorily with the Stoicks.
                  All the foure sects of Philosophers then,All old Philosophers acknowledged one GOD. who in theyr times bare the credite of learning & wisdom, made profession of one GOD, when they came to speake as they thought. But if we ascend vp hyer, to the daies be
                     
                        •
                     ore these sects began, that is, to Py
                     
                        •
                     hagoras, 
                        Vide apud Plutarch de placitis phylos. Trismeg. in Paemand. et in Asclep.
                      & Archytas Tarentinus, 
                        •
                     nd before them againe, to Mercuri
                     
                        ••
                      Trismegistus, that was the first pa
                     
                        •
                     ent of phylosophie to the Egypti
                     
                        •
                     ns: we shall finde them so resolute 
                        •
                     nd playn in this poynt, as no Chri
                     
                        •
                     tian can be more. VVherfore he that

desireth to see innumerable examples, as well of these mens sayings, as of other learned Heathens of all ages: l
                        •
                     t him read but S. Cyrils first Booke against Iulian the Apostata; or Lactantius his first and second books against the Gentiles, and hee shall remaine satisfied.
                  
                     The recollection of the first argument in Morral philosophy.This th
                        •
                     n is the Morrall Phylosophers first argument: the inclination of al people to beleeue a God-head
                        •
                      the instinct of nature to confesse it, the force of mans conscience to fear it, the custome of all Nations to adore it. And finally, the consent and agreement of all learned and wyse men, in applying this God head not to many, but to one only, that made this world, and gouerneth the same. Non hominibus, non demonibus, non Dijs ipsis, quos non naturae ratione, sed honoris causa Deos nominamus.
                     
                        Trismeg. in Paeman. cap. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, &c.
                      We do not attribute the appellation of true God (saith Trismegistus) either vnto men,
                        In Asclep. 1.2.6. &c.
                      or vnto deuils, or vnto the multitude of other Gods themselues, for that wee call them Gods, not in respect of theyr natures, but for honours sake. That is, we call them Gods to honour them for theyr fa
                        •
                     mous acts, and not for that we thin
                        •
                     
                     
them in nature true Gods. VVhich Cicero confirmeth in these vvords;Cicero hys opinion of the multitude of Panyme gods how they were made. 
                     The life of man, and common custome hath now receyued, to lift vp to heauen by fame and good will, such men as 
                           •
                        or theyr benefits are counted excellent. And heere hence it commeth, that Hercules, Castor, Pollux, Aesculapius, and Liber, are nowe become Gods, and heauen almost is filled with mankinde.
                  
                  The second argument of Morrall philosophy,The second argument of Morral philosophy. is, De vltimo fine, et summo hominis bono: that is, concerning the last end of man, and of his highest or supreame felicity, wherby the beeing of God is also confirmed. And albeit I haue said somewhat of mans end before: yet that which in this place I am to adde, is more proper and peculiar to Morrall phylosophy. For as other Sciences may, & doe consider the finall ends, of other 
                        •
                     reatures, which are dyuers, and yet 
                        •
                     ll concur for the seruice of man: so 
                        •
                     his Science of Morrall phylosophy, 
                        •
                     oth properly consider the final end of man himselfe, calling it, summum 
                           •
                        onum, his greatest and highest hap
                     
                        •
                     inesse, where-vnto he was created, 
                        •
                     nd where-vnto he tendeth in thys 
                        ••
                     fe, and wherin he resteth and reposeth,

without further motion or appetite, when he hath obtayned it.
                  For better vnderstanding wherof, it is to be cōsidered, that euery thing in this worlde, hath some particuler end, together with an apetite & desire ingrafted by nature to that end,Euery thing in thys world hath a naturall desire to his end. which desire ceaseth when the end is obtayned. As for example, a Stone hath a naturall appetite to go downward into the Centre or middle of the earth, and so resteth in no place (except by violence it be stayed) vntill it come thether. On the contrary, fire, reposeth no where, (except it be restrayned) vntill it mount aboue the ayre to his peculier and naturall place of abode, where, of it self it resteth. And so in other things that are without sence, there is a certain appetite and desire to theyr end, which end being once obtained, that desire and appetite of it selfe reposeth.
                  In beastes likewise we behold, that they haue a desire to fill their bellies, and to satis-fie theyr other sences, which being satis-fied they remain
                        •
                      contented, & desire nothing els, vn
                        •
                     till the same appetite of sence vvan
                        •
                      his obiect againe.The felicity of beastes. VVherby we per
                        •
                     ceiue, that sensuality or cōtentatio
                        •
                     
                     
of the sences, is the finall end desired of beasts, and theyr very summum bonum, or supreame felicitie.
                  But in man, albeit for maintenance of the body, ther be this appetite also to satisfie his sences, according to the lower proportion of hys minde, that is called sensatiue, yet according to the higher part of his mind, whose name is reason, or the reasonable part, (which is the only part indeed, that is peculier to man, and distinguisheth him from vnreasonable beastes,) he hath an appetite of some more high and excellent obiect, then is the contentation of these sences: for that by experience wee see and feele, that oftentimes when the sences be al satisfied, yet is the mind not quyet, which argueth, that sensualitie, or sensuall delectation, is not our s
                           •
                        mmum bonum, wherein our minde must rest, and enioy her felicitie.
                  Heereupon haue Phylosophers & wise men fallen to dispute in all a
                     
                        •
                     es, what should be the finall felicity and summum bonum of mankinde? And Cicero saith,
                        Cic. lib. de sibonorum & malorum.
                      that this poynt is, 
                        
                           ••
                        do totius phylosophiae, the very hook 
                        ••
                     hynge wherupon all phylosophie 
                        •••
                     geth. For that this beeing once

found out, cleere it is, that all other things and actions are to be referred to the obtayning of this end & happines. And therfore about this point there hath been maruellous contention and fight among Phylosophers,The contē
                        tion of Phylosophers about the felicity of man. the Stoickes refuting the Epicures, & Peripatetiques refuting againe the Stoicks: and the Platonickes, (who went neerest the trueth) impugning and refuting both the one and the other: and this dissention went so far foorth, the one part assigning one thing, and the other another, to bee this felicitie or summum bonum, that Marcus Varro, a most learned Romaine, gathered two hundred, fourscore,
                        Aug. lib. 19. de ciuit. cap. 1 and eyght different opinions (as S. Augustine noteth) about thys matter.
                  And finally, when all was said and examined, Plato found, that nothing which might be named or imagined in thys life, could be the felicitie or summum bonum of man, for that it could not satis-fie the desire of ou
                        •
                      mind. And therfore he pronounceth this generall sentence.The sentēce of Plato in Phaedon. 
                     It is impossibl
                           •
                         that men should finde their felicitie 
                           〈◊〉
                         summum bonum, in thys life, see
                           •
                         what way they will: but in the next li
                           ••
                        
                        
without all doubt it must be found. The reason of which sentence and determination was, for that Plato was able to refute any thing, that the other Phylosophers did or could name, to bee our felicitie and fin
                        •
                     ll end in this life, were it Riches, Honours, Pleasures, morrall vertues, or o
                        •
                     her like, which each sect did assigne.
                  As for example,How nothing in this life can be our felicity. hee prooued that riches could not be our summum bonum or happinesse, for that they are vncertaine, vndurable, vaine, variable, and things that bring with them more daunger oftentimes & trouble of minde, than pouertie dooth. Honours hee refelled, for that besides theyr vanitie, they depende of the mouth & minds of other men, who are changeable and inconstant. Pleasures of the body, and voluptuousnes, for that they are common to vs with beastes, and alwayes haue annexed thy r
                        •
                     sting, and discontentation, when they are past. Morrall vertues, for that they consist in a certain perpetual fight & war with our own passions, which neuer giue vs rest or repose in this life. Finally, whether soeuer we turn our selues, or what so euer wee lay our hands vpon in thys

life, to make our felicitie or summum bonum, it fayleth vs (saith Plato) neyther giueth it any durable contentation to our minde, wherfore this felicitie is to be sought and obtayned in the life to come.
                  Thus farre arriueth Morrall phylosophie by reason,How farre Morral phylosophy reacheth in determining mans felicitie. to proue, that mans felicitie or final end, cannot be in any thing of this life or world. It proueth also by the same reason, (as in part it hath been touched before) that this felicitie of our minde in the life to come, must be a spirituall and immaterial obiect, for that our mind and soule is a spirite: it must bee immortal, for that our soule is immortall. But what? goeth yet humaine phylosophy any further? or can Plato assigne the particuler point wherin it standeth? Heare his words and confesse, that not without reason he was called Diuine.
                     
                        Plato in Phaedon.
                      In this it consisteth (saith he) Vt coniungamur Deo, qui omnis beatitudinis fastigium, meta, finis, That we be ioyned to GOD, who is the top, the butt, and the end of all blessednes. And can a
                        •
                     y Christian (think you) say more than this? Yet ha
                        •
                     ken what a scholler of hys sayth, for explication of his Masters

sentence:
                        Plotin. Enu. 1. lib. 4. cap. 1 
                     Supremus hominis finis, supremum bonum, id est Deus. The finall end of man wherto he tendeth, is a supreame or soueraigne good thing, and this is God himselfe. By which wordes we see, that these Heathens, by the ende of man could finde out God, which was the second argument propounded in Morrall phylosophy.
                  A third argument vseth the Morral Phylosopher,The third argument in Morral phylosophy, touching reward & punishment. for proofe of God, (which shall be the last I will alledge in this place) deduced from consideration of good and euill, vice & vertue, and especially of the rewarde, which by nature, reason, and equity, is due to the one: as also, of the punishment belonging to the other.
                  For (saith he) as in all other things, cre
                        •
                     tures, and actions of this world, that passe from the Creator, wee see proportion, order, iustice, wisedom, and prouidence obserued; so, much more must we assure our selues, that the same is obserued in the same Creators actions & proceedings towards man, that is the cheefe and principall of all other his creatures.
                  Now then we see & beholde, that all other creatures are directed to

theyr ends by nature, and do receiue comfort and contentation so long as they holde that course: and losse, disease, and griefe, as soone as they breake and swarue from the same. Onely man, hath reason giuen him whereby to knowe and iudge of his end; and the holy Scriptures, wherby he may eyther direct hys vvay to the same by vertue, or run astray by following of wickednes. Wherupon it ensueth, that in all equitie and iustice, there must remaine reward for such as doe wel, and follow the right path assigned them to theyr end and felicitie, which is by good life: and punishment for the other that abandon the same, for pleasure and sensualitie.
                  But we see in this world, (saith the Phylosopher) that most wicked men doe receyue least punishment: and many there be, (as Princes and high Potentates) whose liues & actions, be they neuer so vicious, yet are they aboue the correctiō of mortall men: and many poore men on the contrary part, who for theyr vertue, pa
                        •
                     ience, & honestie, receiue nothing in this lyfe, but enuie, m
                        •
                     lyce, contempt, reproch, despite, and oppression.

                     See of this matter Socrates in Apolog.VVherfore (saith he) eyther wanteth there prouidence & equitie in the gouernment & disposition of these affaires, which we see not to want in things of lesser moment: or els must there bee a place of punishment & rewarde in the life to come,
                        Plato in Cratil. et in Gorgia. et in Phaed. et in lib. 10. de legibus. Plutarch. de Sera numinis vindicta & others.
                      vpon the soules of such as part from hence, and a iust and powerful Iudge to make recompence of these inequalities and iniustices permitted in this world. VVhich Iudge can bee none but the Creator himselfe.
                  And so hetherto haue I declared, how euery particuler Science among the Gentiles, had particuler meanes and wayes to demonstrate God by contemplation of his creatures, and by force of reason, which no man could deny.
                  Now remayneth it to shew, howe the Iewe or faithfull Israelite, before Christes appearance in the fl
                        •
                     sh, was able to confirme thys veritie to a Heathen, which shall be the subiect of the Section following.
               
            
            
               
               How the Iewes were able to prooue God. SECT. 3.
               
                  The people of Israell Gods partage.THE people of Israell, that for many yeres & ages, were the peculiar people and partage of God, as they dwelt inuironed with Gentiles of each side, that impugned theyr Religion & worship of one God, and had many weak-lings among themselues, that were often tempted to doubt of the same Religion, by the example of so many Nations and Countryes about them, that made profession of a contrary Religion, so had the Diuines and learned men of this people diuers forcible proofes, & most reasonable arguments peculier to themselues, (besides the gyft of faith, or any other demonstration that hetherto hath beene alleadged) to confirme their bretheren in ye beleefe of one God, & to conuince all Atheists or Infidels in the world.
               
                  Diuers thing
                        •
                      wher by the Iewes shew God.And albeit these proofes which they vsed were many, as the creation of the world by one God: the deuiding of the Hebrue Religion from

the beginning: the conuersation of God with Abraham, of whom the Iewes descended: the myraculous deliuering of that Nation frō Egipt: the Law receyued from Gods owne mouth by Moses: the strange en
                  
                     •
                  rance of the Iewes into the Land of Promise: the extinguishing of the Gentiles vvhich before inhabited there: the errection of the Iewish Monarchie; and protection thereof against all Nations; the myraculous deedes and sayings of Prophets: and a thousand reasons besides, which confirme most euidently, that the Iewes God, was the only true God: yet for that all these things and sayings with an Infidell, had no more credite, than the wrytings or Scriptures wherein they were recorded; hereby it came to passe, that al which a Iewe could say for proofe of God, more than a Gentile, depended only vpon ye authoritie of his Scriptures; and for this cause he referred all hys proofes and arguments to make euident the trueth & certaintie of these Scriptures, which thing once performed, the being of one God cannot be called into controuersie: for that these Scriptures are nothing els, but

a narration of the acts & gests of that only God, which the Iewes professe.
               
                  Comfortable to heare the certainty of Scriptures declared.VVe are now to see then, what the Iew was able to say for proofe of his Scriptures, & consequently, for demonstration of God, & of his iudgements declared therin. VVhich discourse, as it was profitable in olde time, for stay & confirmation of all such, as were or might bee tempted with infidelitie: so can it not be but very comfortable to vs Christians of these daies, to behold the certaintie of these Scriptures layd open before vs, vpon which the foundation of our whole fayth dependeth.
               
                  ¶ The first proofe of Scriptures.
                  FIrst therefore, the Iew for proofe of his Scriptures, alledgeth the great & wonderfull antiquitie thereof.Antiquitie. For as God (sayth he) was before Idols, and trueth before falshood, so was the Scripture, (which is the Storie of the true God) long before the writings of Panims or Infid
                        •
                     ls. Nay, Iosephus lib. 10. con. Appion handleth this at large. further he sheweth, that the most part of things recounted in the Bible, were do one before most of the

Panym gods were extant, and that the very last Writers of the Hebrue Cannon, which are Esdras, Aggaeus, Zacharias, and Malachie, (Eusebius assigneth them 570. in Chron. almost sixe hundred yeeres before the comming of Christ, when the second Monarchie of Persians began) were before most of the Heathen auncient Historiographers; to wit, before Hellanicus, Herodotus, Pherecides, Thucydides, and Xenophon. And albeit the Gentiles had some Poets before, as Orpheus, Homer, Hesiodus, and Lycurgus the Law-maker, that lyued a good whyle after: yet the eldest of these, arryued no higher than the daies of K. Salomon, which was fiue hundred yeeres after Moses, the first writer of the Bible. After whose tyme, the most part of Heathen gods were long vnborne, as Ceres,
                        Euphemerus Missen. in Genealo. Deorum.
                      Vulcan, Mercurie, Apollo, Aesculapius, Castor, Pollux, & Hercules, as the Gentiles themselues in their Genealogies doe confesse. And as for Abraham, that liued fiue hundred yeres before Moses, he was not only elder than these gods, which I haue named, but also than Iupiter, Neptune, Pluto, & such other, who for dignities sake and antiquitie, are

called by the Gentiles,
                        Ci
                              ••
                            de natura Deorum.
                      
                     Dij maiorum Gentium, the gods of great Nations. And yet before Abraham, doe the Scriptures containe the story of two thousand yeeres or there abouts.
                  So that by this it is euident, that the writing of Heathens, and the multitude of theyr gods, are but late Fables in respect of the olde and venerable antiquitie of Hebrue Scriptures, and consequently the authoritie of these Scriptures, must in reason be greater than all other writings in the world besides, seeing they were extant before all others, in those first times of simplicitie & sinceritie, and were in part translated into dyuers languages, before the Monarchie of the Persians, that is, before any story of the Gentiles vvas written,
                        Euseb. lib. 9. de praep. Euang. cap. 2.3.4. as Eusebius out of many Heathen Authors declareth.
               
               
                  ¶ The second proofe of Scriptures.
                  
                     Their manner of wryting & conseruing.NExt to the reason of antiquitie, is alledged the manner of writing, authorising, and conseruing these Scriptures, which is such, as greatly confirmeth the certainty of thinges

contained therein. For first, what soeuer is sette downe in these writings, was eyther taken immediatly from the mouth of God, as were the prophecyes and bookes of the Lawe: or els collected from time to time by generall consent, according as matters & myracles fell out, as were the Bookes of Iudges, the Bookes of Kings and Chronicles, and some other that containe records and Hystories of times. Which bookes were not gathered by some one pryuate man, vpon heare-say, or his own imagination, long after things done, as Heathen Hystories, & other prophane records and monuments are; but, they were vvriten by generall agreement, in the selfe same dayes, when things were in sight & knowledge of all men, and so coulde not be feigned.
                  Secondly,How Scriptures were authorised. when books were written, they were not admited into the common authoritie of Scriptures, that is, of Gods word or diuine wrytings, but vpon great deliberation, & most euident proofe of theyr vndoubted verity. For either the whole Congregation or Sinagogue, who had the approouing heereof, (and among

whom commonly were dyuers Prophets) did knowe most certainly the things and myracles to be true, (as did also the whole people,) that were recorded in these vvritings, cōcerning Histories, or els they saw the same confirmed from God, by signes & wonders, as in the books of the Prophets, and of theyr Law-giuer Moses it fell out.
                  Thirdly, vvhen any thing vvas written and admitted for Scripture, the care of conseruation therof was such,The care of conseruation. & the reuerence of Iewes thervnto so great: as may easily assure vs, that no corruption or alteration could happē vnto it. For first ye thing was coppied out into twelue Autentical copies, for al the twelue Tribes: and then again in euery Trybe there were so many copies made, as were particuler Synagogues within that Trybe. All was doone by speciall Notaries, Scribes, Ouer-seers, and Witnesses. The copies after diligent reuiewe taken, were laide vp by the whole congregation, in the Treasure house of the Temple, vnder dyuers locks & keyes, not to be touched, but by men appointed; not to be vsed, but with singuler reuerence To add;

diminish, corrupt, or alter, was present death by the Lawes of the Nation. And then howe was it possible (saith the Iewe) that among these writings, eyther falshood shoulde creepe in, or trueth once receiued, could afterward be corrupted?
                  It is not possible (saith he) in reason, and therfore obserueth he another thing in thys case, which in truth is of very great consideration, to wit, that no other Nation vnder heauen, dyd euer so much esteeme their own writings,The estimation that the Iewes had of theyr Scriptures, that they would offer to dye for the same, as the Iews were ready to do, for euery sentence & sillable of their Scriptures. Wherfore also it did proceede, that in all theyr miseries & afflictions (wherein they were a spectacle to all ye world) in all theyr flights & banishments, to Egypt, Babylon, Persia, Media, and other corners of the earth, in al their spoyles, assaults, and deuastations at home: they euer yet had special care to conserue these writings, more than theyr owne liues, and so haue kept the same wythout mayme or corruption, more ages together, than all Nations in the world haue done any other Monuments.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ The third proofe of Scriptures.
                  THE thirde perswasion which is vsed by the Iew for the veritie of these Scriptures,The sinceritie of the VVriters. is, the cōsideration of the particuler men that vvrote them: who were such, as in no reason can be suspected of deceipt or falshood. For as I haue sayd, the stories of the Bible, were written from time to time by publique authoritie, and by the testimonie of al men that saw and knew the things that are rehearsed. The bookes of the prophecies were indited by the Prophets themselues, who were plaine, simple, & sincere men, authorised from God by continual miracles, & yet so scrupulus & timorus of their owne speeches, as they durst say nothing, but onely, The Lord sayth thi
                           •
                        , the Lord of Hostes commaundeth that &c.
                  
                  And when they preached & read theyr wrytings in the hearing of all the people, they protested, that it was not mans word, but Gods, and that for such they left it in the publique Treasurie of theyr Nation, vntill by tract of time, the euent and fulfilling

of theyr prophecies shold proue them true,The liues & deaths of the Prophets. (as alwayes it did) and theyr owne both liues & deathes declare, that they meant no falshood: subiect to the corruption, pride, vanity, or ambition of this life (as other prophane and Heathen VVryters were) and theyr deathes for the most part offered vp in holy martyrdom, for defence of that truth which they had preached and written: as appeareth in 
                        See Epiphan. de vitis Propheta.
                      Esay, that was sawed in peeces by King Manasses; in Ieremie, that was stoned to death by the common people; in Ezechiell, that was slaine by the Captaine of the Iewes at Babilon; in Amos, whose braines were beaten out
                        •
                      by Amasias the wicked and Idolatrous priest in Bethell; in Michaeas whose neck was broken by Ioram, sonne to King Achab; in Zacharias, that was slayne at the Altar, and the like.
                  And this for the Prophets of the latter times among the Iewes. But now, if we consider the first Prophet of all that wrote among the people,A peculier consideration of Moses, first writer in the Bible. I meane Moses, that was not onely a prophet, but also an historiographer, a Law-gyuer, a Captaine, & a Priest, the first that euer reduced that people

to a Common-wealth, and the first that put theyr acts and gestes in writing, or rather the acts and gestes of the almighty God towards them: thys man (I say) if we consider him onely? (I meane the circumstances of his person) the I
                        •
                     we thinketh this a sufficient motiue to make any man of reason beleeue what soeuer he hath left writen in the Bible without further confirmation.
                  And first for hys antiquitie, I haue spoken before, and the Heathens doe confesse:
                        Euseb. lib. 9 et 10. de pre. Euan. Ioseph. lib. 1. de content. Appio. et li. 2. anti.
                      and for myracles doone by him, the greatest enemies that euer he had in the world; that is, Appion in his fourth booke against the Iewes, and Porphyrie in hys fourth booke against Christians doe acknoweledge them; and Porphyrie adioyneth more for proofe heereof, that he found the same confirmed by the story of one Saconiathon a Gentile, who liued (as he affirmeth) at the same time wyth Moses. But what? all those myracles (say they) were doone by Arte-magick, and not by the power of God, as Moses boasted.
                  But then asketh them the Iewe, where Moses a sheepeheard,
                        Exo. 3.4.8. could

learne so much Magicke, or why could not the Magitians of Pharao, whose study vvas in that profession from theyr infancie, eyther doe the lyke, or at least wise delyuer themselues from the plagues of Egypt? why did they cry out,The miraculous works of Moses. Exo. 14. 
                     The finger of God is heere? VVhere did you euer heare of such workes doone by Magick, as Moses did, when he deuided the Red-sea? when he called into his Campe so many Quayles vppon the suddaine,
                        Exo. 16. as sufficed to feede sixe hundred thousand men, besides women and Children? VVhen he made a Rocke to yeeld forth a Fountaine?
                        Numb. 11. when he caused a dewe to fall from heauen,
                        Iosua 5. that nourished hys whole Campe for forty yeeres together?
                        Psalm. 77. VVhen hee caused the ground to open, and swallow down aliue,
                        Numb. 16. three of the richest Noble men of all hys Army, together with their Tabernacles, and all other bagges & baggage?
                        Ioseph. lib. 4. antiq. cap. 2. & 3. When he caused a fire to come from heauen, and consume fiftie Gentlemen of the former Rebels and Ad
                     
                        ••
                     rents, without hurting any one that stood about them?
                  These things did Moses, and ma
                     
                        •
                     y other in the sight of al his Army,

that is, in the sight of manie hundred thousand people, amōg which there were diuers his emulators & sworne enemies, as by the storie and Scripture it selfe appeareth, Core, Datha
                        •
                     , & Abiron, with their faction,
                        Numb. 16. sought in all things to disgrace him,
                        Deut. 11. and to diminish his credite:
                        Psalm. 125. and therefore, if any one point of the miracles had been reproouable, Moses would neuer haue durst to put the same in writing, nor would the people haue stood with him; and much lesse haue receiued his writings for diuine, and for Gods own words, (being solicited against him by so potent means) had not they knowne al things to be most true therein contained, and had seene his strange myracles, and familiaritie with God.
                  
                     The plaine and sincere proceeding of Moses.But he delt plainely and simply in thys behalfe: he wrote the things of his owne doings, which euery man present did know to be true: and of Gods speeches, & communications to himselfe, he wrote so much as hee was commaunded, whereof both God, and his conscience did beare hym witnesse. Hee caused the whole to be read vnto the people, and laide vp in the sacred Arke and Tabernacle,

as Gods owne writing & couenant with that Nation. He caused all the whole Armie to sweare and vow the obseruaunce thereof.
                        Num. 20. and 17. And then drawing towards his death,
                        Deut. 31. he made a most ex
                        •
                     ellent Exhortation vnto them, perswading them sincerelie to the seruice of their God; and confessing his owne infirmities, and hovv for his offences he was to die before their entrance into the Land of promise. Hee concealed not the offence of his brother Aaron,
                        Exod. 32. of his grandfather Leui,
                        Gen. 49. of his sister Marie,
                        Numb. 12. and other of his kindred,
                        Deut. 14. (as worldlye princes for their honors are wont to doo) neither did hee goe about to bring in gouernment after hys decease, anie one of his owne sonnes, (which is greatly to bee obserued) notwithstanding he left behind him goodly gentlemē fit for the roome,
                        Numb. 27.
                     
                        Deut. 3. and himself of power to place them, 
                        •
                     f hee had endeuoured: but hee left 
                        •
                     he gouernment to a Straunger, na
                     
                        •
                     ed Iosua, as God had commaunded him.
                  Al which things (saith the Iew) do 
                        •
                     rooue sufficiently, that Moses was 
                        •
                     o man of ambition, or of worldly 
                        •
                     pirit, but a true seruant of God, and

consequently, that he wrought not by Magicke or falshood, but by the onely power of his Lord & Master, and that his writings are true, and of the same authoritie, that in his life & death he affirmed them to be, that is, the vndoubted VVord of Almightie God.
               
               
                  The fourth proofe of Scriptures
                  THis he confirmeth yet farther by a fourth reason,Consent. which is the consent & approbation of al later VVriters of the Bible, that ensued after Moses. For as among prophane writers of worldly spirit, it is a common fashion for him that foloweth to reprehend the former, and to hunt aft
                        •
                     r praise by his auncetors disgrace: so in these VVriters of the Bible, it is a most certaine argument, that all wer guided by one Spirit from God, that in continuance of so many Ages and thousand yeeres, no one yet euer impugned the other, but alwaies the latter supporting and approuing the former for true, doth bui
                        •
                     d therupon, as vpon a sure foundation. S
                        •
                      the writings of Iosua doo confirm
                        •
                     
                     
and approue the writings of Moses: and the records of the Iudges do reuerence and allow the Booke of Ios
                        •
                     a. The storie of the Kings & Chronicles, doth refer it selfe to the storie of Iudges. One Prophet confirmeth another. And finally, Christ appro
                     
                        •
                     eth them all, by the known diuision of the Law, Psalmes, and Prophets, which is a demonstra
                        •
                     ion, that all 
                        •
                     heir spirits agreed in one.
                  And thus hethertoo hath been declared the foure considerations,Foure considerations externall. that 
                        •
                     re externall or without the Bible, to 
                        •
                     it; the antiquitie an continuaunce of the Scriptures; the maner of their  writing & preseruing from corrup
                     
                        •
                     ion;  the sinceritie, vertue, and sim
                     
                        •
                     licitie  of their VVriters; together  
                     
                        •
                     ith their agreement and coherence none spirit. But now further,Considerations internall. (saith he learned Iew) if you will but open 
                        ••
                     e Booke it selfe, and looke into the 
                        •
                     ext, and that which therein is con
                     
                        ••
                     ined: you shall see Gods ovvne 
                        ••
                     nd, Gods owne charecters, Gods 
                        •
                     wne sign
                        •
                      and seale, and subscripti
                     
                        ••
                      to the paper. You shall see Gods 
                        •
                     mnipotencie, Gods Spirite, Gods 
                        •
                     rouidence, no lesse in these Letters 
                        •
                     f his Booke, than you behelde the

same before, in the tables of his creatures. Nay, much more (sayth he) for these letters were deuised for declaration of those Tables, to the end that such as for their blindnes could not see him in his creatures, might learn at least to read him in his scriptures.
               
               
                  ¶ The fifth proo
                        •
                     e of Scriptures.
                  
                     Their argument, and ende.COnsider then first (saith hee) the subiect or Argument which the Scriptures do handle, together with their scope & ende whereuntoo they doo leuell. You shall find, that th
                        •
                      first is nothing els, but the actes and gests of one eternall God, as befor
                        •
                      hath been mentioned; & the second nothing els, but the onely glorie an
                        •
                      exaltation of the same great God together with the saluation of mankinde vpon earth. And shal you fin
                        •
                      anie writings in the world besides
                        •
                      that haue so worthy an argument, o
                        •
                      so high an end? Read all the volumes and monuments of the Pagans, turn ouer all their Authors, of what kind
                        •
                      name, or profession soeuer; and see vvhat mention they make of the
                        ••
                     
                     
two things
                        •
                      I meane, of the honour of God, and the saluation of man? Read their Philosophers,Philosophers. & see whether euer they name or pretend these things. Read their Historiographers,Historiographers. and marke how manie battailes and victories they attribute vnto God? They will describe to you often the particuler commendation of theyr Captaine, they will defraud no one Souldiour of his praise in the victorie, they will attribute much to the wisedome of their Generall, much to his courage, much to his watchfulnes, much to his fortune. They will attribute to the place, to the winde, to the weather, to the shining of the Sun, to the raising of the dust in the enemies eyes, to the flying of some little bird in the ayre, and to a thousand such pettie obseruations besides; but to God nothing. VVhereas contrariwise in the Scriptures, it is in euerie battaile recorded, God deli
                        
                           •••
                        ed them into their enemies handes: G
                           •
                        d ouer-threwe them: God gaue the 
                           ••
                        ctorie.
                  
                  Againe, consider the Lawes & law makers among the Gentiles,Heathen Law-makers. as Ly
                     
                        •••
                     gus, Solon, Draco, Numa, and the 
                        •••
                     e, and see whether you finde anie

one such Law, or tending to such an end, as this of the Iewes:
                        Deut. 6. 
                     Thou shal
                           •
                         loue the Lord thy God, with all thy hart, and with all thy soule: and shalt loue thy neighbour as thy selfe.
                  
                  
                     Prophets & Sooth-sayers.Consider in all the Sooth-sayers and Diuines among the Gentiles, whether they vsed to say in their predictions, as the prophetes of Israell did, Dominus dixit, the Lord hath spoken it; or els, Ego dico, I do speake it. Compare their versifiers and Poets with those of the Scripture,Versifyers & Poets. and see, whether they haue laboured in the praise of men, or of God. And whereas Heathen Poets haue filled vp their Bookes (as also the most part of ours at this day,) with matte
                        •
                      of carnall loue: marke where any o
                        •
                      them euer brake foorth in
                        •
                     o such panges of spiritual chast loue, as holie Dauid did, when he said: I will loue thee my God,
                        Psalm. 17. my strength, my firmament, my refuge, my deliuerer, my helper, my protector, and th
                        •
                      horne of my saluation. And again
                        •
                      in another verse.The vehement loue of Dauid. Psalm. 72. What haue I desired vpon earth besides thee? my fle
                        ••
                      and hart haue fainted for thee, tho
                        •
                      God of my hart, thou God art m
                        •
                      part and portion euerlasting?
                  
                     By all which is euident, that as prophane writings and Wryters, which do treate of men,Prophane writers treat onelie of men. extol men, seeke the grace of men, referre all to the commoditie and good lyking of men, doe proceede of the spyrite of man, and are subiect to those infirmities of falshood, errour, and vanitie wherewith m
                        •
                     n is entangled in thys life: so the Scriptures, which handle matters aboue the compasse of flesh and blood; that referre al to God, and supernaturall ends, could not proceed of nature or of humane spirit. For th
                        •
                     t by nature, the Iewes were men as the Gentiles were, and had their infirmities of fleshe and blood as the other had. And therefore it must needes be concluded, that these hygh and supernaturall writings among them, proceeded from God, that speciallie directed them, and gaue them light of vnderstanding, aboue all other Nations and people in the world.
               
               
                  ¶The sixt proofe of Scripture.
                  NExt after the argument and ende of the Scriptures, the Iewe willeth vs to consider the peculier styleTheir style.
                     
and phrase which they vse: for that (saith he) it being different from all manner of writings in the world, & vnimitable to man, it doth discouer the finger of God, by which it was framed. For See S. Augustine of this at large. Lib. 12. de ciuit. Dei. wheras humaine writers do labor much in adorning their style, and in reducing their words to number, weight, measure & sound, with addition of many figures, and other ornaments for allurement of the Reader: the Scripture taketh quite another course, and vseth a most meruailous simplicitie,Simplicitie. therby to accomodate it selfe to the capacitie of the weakest; but yet alwaies carrying with it so great profundity,Profunditie as the best learned in the serch therof, shall confesse theyr owne ignorance. For examples sake, consider but the very 
                        •
                     irst words of the Bible,
                        Gene. 1. 
                     In the beginning, God created heauen and earth: and the earth was emptie and voide: and darkenesse was vpon the face of the deapth: and the Spirit of God was carried vpon the waters: and God said, let light be made, and light was made &c. What can be more plaine and simple then this narration, to instruct the most vnlearned about the beginning and creation o
                        •
                     
                     
the world? and yet when learned men come to examine euery point thereof, how, and what, and where, and in what maner, & when things were done; it astonisheth them all, to consider the difficulties which they finde, and the depth of so infinite inscrutable misteries.
                  Besides this,The grauity and maiesty of speech in the Scriptures. there goeth in the same simplicitie, a strange maiestie, and grauitie of speech, declaring sufficientlie, from how great & potent a Prince it proceedeth. For as great Monarches in their Edi
                        •
                     ts & proclamatiōs, are wont to speak vnto their subiects, not in figures or rethorical ph
                        •
                     ases, but plainlie, breefelie, and peremptorilie to shew their authoritie, so the Scriptures, to declare whose Edicts they be, do vse the like manner of phrase and style to all the world, without alluring or flattering any man, & without re
                        •
                     pect of Monarch, Emperor, King, Prince, or Potentate: Fac hoc & viues:
                        De
                              •
                           . 4.16. and 22. do this, and thou shalt liue. Si peccaueris in me, 
                           ••
                        rieris in aeternum: if thou sin against mee, thou shalt die euerlastinglie.
                  And albeit (as I haue saide) the Scriptures do vse this simplicitie of speech, and do not admit that kind

of painted and artificiall stile, which humane writers doe so much couet, yet in perswading, instructing, mouing of affections,The force of the scriptures in mouing of affections. & all other effects which speech or writing can work, there is no comparision, (a thing most wonderfull) betweene any other writing in the world and these.
                  Wherefore I could alledge many proofes and examples, but that it were too-long. Let any man reade attentiuely, but the first Chapter of the prophecie of Esay, and compare it with any one part or parcell of Tullies or Demosthines Orations. and see whether the difference of wordes, be as great as the difference of motions? Let diuers Himnes and holie Psalmes of the Scriptures, be conferred with the most patheticall Poems, that mans wit hath inuented, and see whether there bee any comparison in stirring and siering of affections, or no?
                  
                     
                        Flauius Iosephus de antiq. Iud.
                     This am I sure, that Iosephus the I
                        •
                     w, who for glory of his eloquence, had his Image of mettall erected by Titus the Emperour in the Marketplace of Rome, wrote the sam
                        •
                      story which the Scriptures conta
                        •
                     ne, and bestowed much labour and humane

cunning therein.See S. Ierom lib. de scrip. Eccle. But yet euen in those places, where hee endeuoured most to shew his arte, as in the Sacrifice of Isaack by his father, and in the meeting of Iephte with his onelie daughter,
                        Gene. 12.
                     
                        Iudg. 11. which by vowe he was constrayned to put to death; the scriptures are able to pierce the h
                        •
                     rt, and wring out teares of the Reader, whom Iosephus will not greatlie mooue with hys rethoricall narration, though otherwise verie learned and artificiallie penned.
                  Aristaeus that learned Gentile,Two Miracles reported by Aristaeus. of whom wee haue made mention before, who was in speciall fauor with Ptolomie, the second great Monarch of Egipt, (about three hundred yeres before our Sauiour Christ his natiuitie) and a chiefe doer in procuring the translation of the Hebrue Bible into the Greeke language,
                        Aristaeus libello de trāslat. Bibli, & apud Euseb. lib. 8. de praep. E
                              •
                           ang. cap. 1 reported of his owne knowledge 
                        •
                     o the saide King Ptolomie, two strange accidents which had happened in hys time, and which he had vnderstood o
                        •
                      the parties themselues, to whom they had happened. The first was, of Theopompus,Theopompus. an eloquent Historiographer, who hauing translated manie things out of the Bible, & endeuouring

to adorne the same with vaine collours of eloquence, could not performe his desire, but was striken with a suddaine maze and giddinesse in the head, and was warned in his sleepe, not to proceed any further in that work after that sort, for that such manner of style was too base for so high matters, as the scriptures contained.
                  The other example, was of one Theodectes a writer of Tragaedies,Theodectes who told Aristaeus, that he once attempted to bring certaine matters out of the Iewes Bible into a Pagan tragaedie, and that thereupon he was presentlie striken blind, wherewith he beeing astonished, and falling to repentance for that he had done, & desisting from the enterprise, (as also Theopompus did) they were both of them restored againe to their former healthes. And thus much did these three Pagans confesse of the authoritie, diuinitie, and peculier sacred style of our Scriptures.
               
               
                  ¶The seuenth proofe of Scriptures,
                  BVT now further it insueth in order, that after the subiect and

phrase, we should consider a little the contents of these Scriptures,The Contents. which will perhaps, more cleerelie direct vs to the viewe of their Author, then any thing els that hetherto hath been said. And for our present purpose, I will note onelie two speciall things contained in the Bible. The first shal be certain high and hidden doctrines,High doctrines. which are aboue the reach and capacitie of humaine reason, and consequentlie could neuer fall into mans braine to inuent them. As for example; that all this wonderfull frame of the world, was created of nothing, whereas Phylosophy saith, That of nothing, nothing can be made: That Angels being created spirits, were damned eternallie for their sinnes; that Adam by disobedience in Paradise, drewe all his posterity into the obligation of that his sinne: and that the womans seed should deliuer vs from the same: That God is one in substance, and three in person; that the second of these persons being God, should become man, and die vpon a crosse for the raunsome of mankind; that after him, the way to all felicitie and honour, should bee by contempt, suffering,

and dishonour. These doctrines (I say) and many more, contained in the Bible, beeing things aboue mans capacitie to deuise, and nothing agreeing with humane reason: most euidentlie do declare, that God was the Authour and enditer of the Scriptures, for that by him onely, and from no other, these high & secret misteries could be reuealed.
                  
                     The prophecies in Scriptures do declare theyr Authour.The second thing contained in the Scriptures, that could not proceede but from GOD alone, are certaine prophecies & fore-tellings of things to come. Wherein God himselfe prouoketh the Idols of the Gentiles, to make experience of their power, in these words:
                        Esay. 42.23. 
                     Declare vnto v
                           •
                         what shall ensue heereafter, and thereby wee shall know that you are God
                           •
                         indeede. Which is to be vnderstood, if they could fore-tell particulerly & plainly, what was to come, in things meerelie contingent or depending of mans will:Howe the Deuils and other creatures may fore-tell things to come. they should thereby declare their power to be diuine.
                  For albeit these Idols of the Gentiles
                        •
                      as Apollo, and other that gaue forth Oracles, (which were nothing els indeed, but certaine wicked spirites, that tooke vppon them these

names) did sometimes happen vpon the truth, & fore-tel things to come, as also most Astrologers, Soothsaiers, and Magitians doe, either by 
                        •
                     ore-sight in the starres and other elements, or by the assistance of these wicked spirits and deuils: yet are the things which they pronosticate, eyther natural & not contingent, & so may be foreseene & foretold in their causes; (as raine, heate, colde, winds, and the like) or els, if they be meere accidentall: these predictions of theirs, are onely coniectures, and so most in certain, & subiect to errors.
                  This testifieth Porphirie the great Patron of Paganisme,The opinion of a Heathen touching the Prophecies of his gods. in a speciall book of the answers of gods, wherin he sweareth, that he hath gathered truely without addition or detraction, the Oracles that was most famous before his time, wyth the false and vncertaine euent thereof, in consideration of vvhich euent, he setteth down his iudgement of their power in predictions, after this maner. The Gods do fore-tell some naturall things to come,
                     
                        Porphiry lib. de resp. et Oraculorum.
                      
                     for that they do obserue the order and coniunction of their naturall causes: but of thinges that are co
                           •
                        tingent, or doe depende of mans

will, they haue but coniectures onely, in that by their subtiltie and celeritie, they preuent vs. But yet they oftentimes doe lie, and deceiue vs in both kindes, for that as naturall things are variable, so mans will is much more mutable.
                  
                  Thus farre Porphirie of the prophecies of his Gods, wherunto agreeth an other Heathen, o
                        •
                      great credite among the Grecians, named Oenomaus,
                        Oenomaus de falsitate oracul. et de artificibus maleficijs.
                      who for that he had been much delighted with Oracles, and more deceiued
                        •
                      wrote a special Booke in the ende, of their falshood and lyes; and yet sheweth, that in many things wherin they deceiued, it was not easie to conuince them of open falshood, for that they would inuolue their aunswers (of purpose) with such obscurities, generalit
                        •
                     es, equiuocations, and doubt
                        •
                     uln
                        •
                     sse, as alwaies they woulde leaue them selues a corner wherein to saue their credites, when the euent shoulde prooue false.Deceitfull Oracles. As for example, when Craesus that famous & rich Monarch of Lydia, consul
                        •
                     ed with the Oracle of Apollo, whether he should make warre against the Persians, & therby obtain theyr Empire, or no? Apollo desirous of bloodshed, (as all wic
                        •
                     ed

spirits are,) gaue his Oracle in these words, for deceyuing of Craesus.
                        Euseb. Lib. 5. de praep. Euan. cap. 10 
                     If Craesus without feare, shall passe ouer Halys, (this was a Riuer that lay betweene him and Persia) he shal bring t
                           •
                         confusion a great riche kingdome. Vpon which words, Craesus passed ouer his Armie, in hope to get Persia, but soone after he lost Lydia, by euill vnderstanding of this doubtful prophecie.
                  This then is the imbecilitie of both humane and angelicall power,The circū
                        stances of prophecies set down in the Scriptures. in pronosticating things to come, which are meere contingent. In which kinde, notwithstanding, seeing that the Scriptures haue manie, and almost infinite prophecies, foretold many yeres, (& somtimes ages) before they came to passe, set downe in plaine, particuler, and resolute speech: at such tyme as there w
                        •
                     s neyther cause to coniecture them, nor probabilitie that euer they shold be true; deliuered by simple and vnlearned persons, that could fore-see nothing by skill or arte; and yet that all these by theyr euents, haue prooued most true, and neuer any one iote in the same haue fayled: this (I say) alone, doth conuince most apparently,

(all proofes & reasons, and other argumēts laid aside) that these Scriptu
                        •
                     es are of God, & of his eternall and infallible Spirit. And therefore of these Prophecies, I wil alledg in this place some few examples.
               
               
                  ¶The Prophecie to Abraham for his posteritie.
                  ABraham the first Father and speciall Patriarch of the Iewes, had manie prophecies and predictions made vnto him, as of hys issue, when he had yet none, nor euer like to haue: of his inheriting the Land of Canaan,
                        Gene. 12.13.15.17.18. &c.
                      and the like. But thys which followeth is wonderful, of his posterities discent into Egypt: of their time of seruitude, and manner of deliuerance thence; the same being fore told, more then foure hundred yeeres before it was fulfilled, & at that time, when no likelyhood thereof in the world appeared. The words are these.
                        Gene. 15. 
                     Know thou be
                           •
                        o
                           •
                        e hande, that thy issue shall be a strange
                           •
                         in a forraine Land, and they shall subiect them to seruitude, and shall afflict them for foure hundred yeeres: but ye
                           •
                        
                        
I will iudge the Nation vnto whom they haue been slaues, and a
                           •
                        ter that, they shall depart thence with great riches. This is the Prophecie, and how exactlie it was afterward fulfilled, by the ruine of the Egyptians, and deliuerance of the Israelites, euen at that time which is heere appointed: not onely the book of Exodus doth declare,
                        Exod. 12. Gala. 3. where the whole storie is laid downe at large, but also the consent of 
                        Porph. lib. 4. contra Christia. Appion lib. 4 cont. Iud
                              •
                           .
                      Heathen writers, as before hath been touched. And it is speciallie to be noted, that this prophecie was so common and wel known among all the Iewes, from Abrahams time down vnto Moses, and so deliuered by tradition from fathers vnto their children; as it was the onelie comfort and stay, not onely of all that 
                        •
                     eople in their seruitude of Egypt, but also of Moses & others, that gouerned the people afterwards, for forty yeres together in the desert, and was the onely mean
                        •
                      indeede, whereby to pacifi
                        •
                      them in their distresses and miseries: and therefore Moses in euery exhortation almost, maketh mention of this promise and prophecie, as of a thing well known vnto them all, and not

deuised or inuented by himselfe or any other.
               
               
                  ¶The Prophecie for the gouernment of Iuda.
                  LOng after this, Iacob that was Abrahams Nephewe, beeing in Egypt, and making his Testament, said of his fourth sonne Iuda.
                        Gene. 49. 
                     Iuda, thy brother shall praise thee, and the children of thy Father shall boowe vnto thee, &c. The scepter shall not be taken from Iuda, vntill hee come that is to 
                           •
                        e sent, and he shall be the expectation of Nations. Which latter part of the prophecie, all Hebrues do expound, that it was meant of the comming of Messias, which was fulfilled almost two thousand yeeres after, at the comming of Christ, as shall be shewed in another speciall Chapter. For at that time,
                        Iosep. de antiqu. lib. 14. King Herod a stranger, put out quite the line of Iuda, from the gouernment of Iurie. But for the first part, touching Iudaes scepter, it is wonderfull to consider the circumstances of this prophecie.
                  For first, when it was spoken and vttered by Iacob, there was no probabilitie of any scepter at all, to be

among the Iewes, for that the Israelites, or sonnes of Iacob at that day, were poore, and few in number, and neuer like to be a distinct Nation of themselues, or to depart foorth of Egypt againe. And secondly, if any such thing should come to passe, as they might be a people, and haue a scepter of gouernmēt of their own, yet was it not likelie,Vnlikeli-hoods of this prophecie. that Iuda and his posteritie should possesse ye same, for that he had three elder Brothers, to wit, Ruben, Simeon, and Leui: who in all likeli-hoode were to go before him. And thirdly, when Moses recorded and put in writing thys prophecie, (which was diuers hundered yeeres after Iacob had spoken it,) it was much lesse likelie, that euer it should be true, for that Moses then present in gouernment, was of the Tribe of Leui,
                        Exod. 2. and Iosua designed by God for his successor,
                        Iosua. 15. was of the Tribe of Ephraim, and not of Iuda: which maketh greatlie for the certaintie of this recorde. For that it is most apparant, that Moses would neuer haue put such a prophecie in writing, to the disgrace of his owne Tribe, and to the preiudice and offence of Ruben, Simeon, Ephraim,

and other Trybes; neyther would they euer haue suffered such a derogation, but that it vvas euident to them by tradition, that their Grand-sire Iacob had spoken it, albeit then presently there was no great likelyhood, that euer after it should come to be fulfilled.
                  And this was for the time of Moses, but yet consider further,1. Regu. 1. and 8. that from Moses to Samuell, (that was last of all the Iudges) there passed foure hundred yeeres more, and yet was there no appearance of fulfilling this prophecie in Israel; for that the Tribe of Iuda was not established in that gouernment. At length they came to haue Kings to rule,2. Reg. 9. and then was there chosen one Saul to that place, not of the Tribe of Iuda, but of Beniamin, and he indued with dyue
                        •
                     s chyldren to succeede him. And who would then haue thought, that this prophecie could euer haue beene fulfilled? but yet for that it was Gods word, it must needes take place, and therefore when no man thought thereof, there was a poore Dauid. Sheepeheard chosen out of the Tribe of Iuda,1. Reg. 16. to bee a King, and the regiment & scepter so established

in his posteritie, that albeit manie of his descendents offended God more greeuously then euer did Saul, who was put out before:3. Reg. 12
                           •
                        
                     
                     2. Chro. 11. And albeit ten Trybes at once brake from Iuda, and neuer returned to obedience againe, but conspired with the Gentiles and other enemies on euerie side, to extinguish the said Kingdome and regiment of Iuda:The wonderful prouidence of God towards the house of Iuda. yet for the fulfilling of this prophecie, the gouernment of Iuda held out 
                        ••
                     ill, for more then a thousand and two hundred yeeres together, vntill Herods time, (as I haue alreadie said) which is more then any one familie in the world besides,
                        Euseb. in Chron.
                      can shew for hys nobilitie or continuance in gouernment.
               
               
                  The Prophecie for the greatnesse of Ephraim aboue Manasses.
                  THE same Iacob, when he came to blesse his little Nephewes Manasses and Ephraim, that were Iosephs Chyldren: though himselfe were now dimme of sight, & could not well discerne them, yet dyd he

put his right hand vpon the head of the younger, and his left hand vpon the elder, and that of purpose, as it prooued afterwarde. For when Ioseph their Father misliked the placing of their Grand-fathers hands, and would haue remoued the right hand from Ephraim, and haue placed it vpon the heade of Manasses, that was the elder Brother, Iacob would not suffer him, but answered,
                        G
                              •
                           ne. 48. 
                     I kn
                           •
                        w my sonne, I know, that Manasses is the elder: and hee shall be multiplied in many people, but yet his younger brother shall bee greater then he. Which afterwarde was fulfilled,
                        Iosua, 16. and 17. for that Ephraim was alwaies the greater and stronger Tribe, and in fine, became the head of the Kingdome of Israell,
                        Eccle. 47. or of the ten Trybes,
                        Esay, 7.28. whereof there was no suspition or likelihood,
                        Ierem. 31. when Iacob spake this,
                        Ezech. 37. or when Moses recorded it.
                        H
                              •
                           sea, 5. And how then came Iacob to foresee this so many hundred yeeres before?
                        Gene. 49. as also to foresee & foretel the particuler places of his childre
                        •
                     s habitations in the land of Promise?
                        Iosua, 14. as Zabulon at the sea side;
                        Exod. 12. Aser in the fertile pastures;
                        Gala. 3. & other the like that fel out by casting lotts,
                        Acts, 13. after foure hundred

yeeres and more. Where-hence had he this (I say) to fore-tell what lots so long after should appoynt, but onely from GOD, who gouerned theyr lots.
               
               
                  The fore-sight of Moises.
                  THE like may be asked cōcerning Moises,
                        Numb
                              •
                            34, 35, 36.
                      who before his death in the Deser
                        •
                     , deuided out the Land of Canaan to euery Trybe,
                        Iosua, 15.16.17.
                      euen as though he had beene in possession thereof, & as afterward it fel out by 
                        •••
                     ting of lots, as in the booke of Iosua appeareth. And coulde any humane wit or science (think you) fore see, what each Tribe should attaine (a
                        •
                     ter his death) by drawing of lots?
                  Again, the same Moises fore-saw and fore-told in publique hearing of al the people, how in times to come, long after his death, the Iewes shold forsake GOD,
                        Deu, 31, 32,
                      and for theyr sinnes be cast into many banishments, and finally be forsaken,
                        Deut, 32, verse, 21.
                      and the Gentiles 
                        ••
                     ceiued in their roome, as indeede it came to passe. And whence (trowe you) could he learne thys, but from God alone?
               
               
                  
                  The Prophecie for the perpetuall desolation of Iericho.
                  IN the booke of Iosua, there is a curse layde vpon the place where Iericho stood, & vpon what-soeuer person should goe about to rebuild the same, to wit, That in his eldest sonne hee should lay the foundations, and in his youngest Sonne should he build the gates thereof.
                     
                        Iosua, 6.
                      Which is to say, that before the 
                        •
                     oundations were layd, and the gates builded, he shold be punis
                        •••
                      with the death of al his chyldren. Which thing was fulfilled almost fiue hundred yeeres after, in one Hiel, who presumed vnder wicked King Achab, to rebuild Iericho againe, and was terrified from the same, by the suddaine death of Abiram and Segul his chyldren, as the booke of Kings reporteth,
                        3, Regu, 16,
                      
                     according to the words of the Lord, which he had spoken in the hand of Iosua the Sonn
                           •
                         of Nun. And since that time to this, no man, eyther Iew or Gentile, hath taken vpon him to rayse againe the said Citty, albeit the situation be most pleasant, as by relation of stories and Geographers appeareth.
               
               
                  
                  The prophecie for the birth and acts of Ios
                        ••
                     s.
                  THE thyrd booke of Kings maketh mention,
                        3. Reg. 1
                              •
                           .
                      that when Ieroboam had with-drawne ten Trybes from the obedience of Roboam K. of Iuda: to the end they might neuer haue occasion to reunite themselues again to Iuda, by theyr going to sacrifice in Ierusalem, (as by the Law they were appointed) he builded for thē, a goodly gorgious high Altar in Bethel, and there commanded them to doe theyr deuotions. And whē he was one day there present himselfe, and offering hys incense vpon the sayd Altar, and al the people looking on: there came a man of God, (saith the scripture) & stood before the Altar, and cried out 
                        •
                     loude, and spake these wordes;
                        3. Reg. 13.
                      
                     O 
                           •
                        ltar, Altar, this saith the Lord, be
                        
                           ••
                        ld, a child shall be borne of the house of Dauid, whose name shall be Iosias, and he shall sacrifice vpon thee, these i
                           ••
                        latrous Priestes that nowe burne 
                           •••
                        ncumcense vppon thee, and he shall 
                           •••
                        ne the bones of men vpon thee.
                  
                  
                     Thus spake that man of God in the presence and hearing of all the people, more the
                        •
                      three hundred yeeres before Iosias was borne: and it was registred presently, according to the manner of that time (which I haue noted before) & with the same were registred also, ye miracles which happened about that fact: as that the Altar cleft in two vpon the mans words: & Ieroboam extending out his hand to apprehend him, lost presently the vse and feeling therof, vntill it was restored again by the sayd holy mans Prayers: who notwithstanding, for that he disobeied Gods commaundement in hys return, and eate with a Prophet of Samaria,Disobedience punished greeuously in Gods deerest. (which was forbidden him,) he was slaine in his way home-warde by a Lyon, and his body was brought back again & buried in Bethel nigh
                        •
                      the saide Altar, amongst the Sepulchers of those idolatrous Priestes of that place, but yet with a superscription vpon hys Tombe, cont
                        •
                     yning his name, and what had happened.
                  There passed three hundred yere
                        •
                      and Iosias was borne,
                        4. Reg. 23.
                      and came to raigne in Iuda, & one day comming to Bethel to ouerthrow the Altar, &

to destroy the Sepulchers of those Idolatrous Priests that had been buried in yt place: when he began to breake theyr Tombes, he found by chaunce, the Sepulcher of the sayd man of God, with the superscription vpon it. By which superscription and relation of the Cittizens of Bethel, when he perceiued that it was the Tombe of him that had foretold hys byrth, his name, & his doings, so many hundred yeeres before he was borne: he let the same stand vntouched,
                        Chap, 23,
                      as the fourth booke of Kings doth declare.
                  Nowe consider, whether among any Nation in the worlde, but onely among the Iewes, there were euer any such prophecie, so certaine, so particuler, so long fore-told before the tyme, and so exactly fulfilled? But yet the holy scriptures are full of the lyke, and time permitteth me onelie to touch some few of the principall.
               
               
                  The prophecie for the destruction of Ierusalem & Babilon.
                  ESay the Prophet is wonderfull in fore-telling the misteries & acts

of the Messias, his natiuitie, his lyfe, and all the particulers that happened in hys passion. In so much, that S. Ierom sayth, he may seeme rather to write a story of deedes past,
                        Hieron. in prol. Galeat
                              •
                           
                        
                      then a Prophecie of euents to come. But yet among other things, it is to be noted, that he lyuing in a peaceable and prosperous time in Iuda, when the Iewes were in amitie and great securitie with the Babilonians, hee fore-saw & fore-told the destruction of Ierusalem by the sayd Babilonians,
                        4, Reg, 20, verse, 17, Esay, 5.
                      and the grieuous captiuity of the Iewes vnder thē; as also the destruction of Babilon again by Cyrus King of Persia, whose expresse name and greatnes, he published in wryting almost two hundred yeeres before he was borne: saying in ye person of God; First, to Ezechias king of Iuda, that reioyced in the friendshyp he had with Babilon:
                        4. Reg. 20.
                      
                     Behold, the dayes shall come, when all that thou and thy Fathers haue layde vp, shall be carried away to Babilon, and thy chyldren shal
                           •
                         be Eunuches in the King of Babilons Pallace. And next, to Babilon, he sayd:
                        Esay, 13,
                      
                     The destruction of Babylon, which Esay the sonne of Amos saw, &c. Howle and cry, for

that the day of the Lord is at hande. &c.
                  
               
               
                  The wonderfull prophecie for Cyrus King of Persia.
                  THirdly vnto Cyrus (not yet born) who was preordained to destroy the same, and to restore the people of Israell from banishment, to rebuild the Temple in Ierusalem, hee sayth thus;
                        Esay, 24.
                      
                     I say to Cyrus, thou art my sh
                           •
                        epe-heard, and thou shalt fulfill all my will. I say to Ierusalem, thou shalt be builded againe. I say to the Temple, thou shalt be founded againe. This sayth the Lord to my annointed Cyrus, I will goe before thee, and will 
                           •
                        umble the glorious people of the earth in thy presence: I will breake theyr brasen gates,
                     
                        Esay, 25.
                      
                     and crush in peces theyr yron barres, for my seruant Iacobs sake haue I called thee by Name, and haue armed thee, whereas thou 
                     Thys he sayth, for that Cyrus was an Infidel. 
                     knowest not mee.
                  
                  Can any thing be more cleerely or miraculously spoken in the world, then to name a Heathen not yet borne, that shold conquer so strong a Monarchie as Babilon was at thys

time, and should builde againe the Temple of Ierusalem, which others of his owne Religion had destroyed before him? What cause, what reason, wh
                        •
                     t likeli-hoode could be of thys? Yet Esay speaketh it so confidently, as he sayth,
                        Esay, 13,
                      
                     that he saw it: and he nameth two witnesses thereof, that is, Vrias, and Zacharias, that were not borne in many ye
                        •
                     es after, saying:
                        Es
                              •
                           y, 8, verse, 2.
                      
                     & I tooke vnto me two faithfull witnesses, Vrias the Priest, and Zacharias the Sonne of Barachias. Whereof the first was a Prophet in Ieremies time, a hundred yeres after Esay,
                        Ierem, 26, verse, 20,
                      and the second liued fourscore yeeres after that againe, in the dayes of Dari
                        •
                     s, as by the beginning of his prophecie appeareth:
                        Zach, 1, verse, 1,
                      and yet both (as you see) were d
                        •
                     stinctly named by Esay long tyme before.
                  And whereas thys Booke of Esay was pronounced openly to the people (as other prophecies we
                        •
                     e) and published into manie thousande hands before the captiuity of Babylon fell out,Circumstances of certaine truth. and then carried also with the people, and dyspersed in Chaldea, & other parts of the world, there can be no possible suspition of forgery in thys matter, for al that the

world both saw it and read it, many yeres before the thing came to passe: yea, when there was no likeli-hood of any such possibility to come.
               
               
                  The Prophecies and dooings of Ieremie, in the siedge of Ierusalem.
                  THE same captiuitie & destruction of Ierusalem by the Babylonians, was prophecied by Ieremie, a hundred yeeres after Esay, & a lyttle before the matter came to passe: yea, while the Babylonians were about the walles of Ierusalem, & besiedged the same for two yeres together, Ieremie was within, and tolde euery man, that it was but in vaine to defend the Cittie, for that GOD had nowe deliuered it. And albeit he were accounted a Traytour for so saying, (especially, when by an Armie of Egipt, that came to the ayde of Ierusalem from Pharao, the siedge of the Babylonians was raised for a certaine time,) yet Ieremy continued still in his asseueration, & said to Zedechias the King,
                        Ierem, 37.
                      
                     Thou shalt bee deliuered into the handes of the King

of Babylon.
                     
                        Iere, 38,
                      And to the people, Hae dicit Dominus, tradendo tradetur, haec Ciuitas, &c. Thys sayth the Lorde, thys Citty most certainly shal be deliuered into the hands of the Babylonians. And so he continued notwithstanding he were put in prison and whipt, and threatned daily to be hanged: vntill indeed the Citty was taken, and Zedechias eyes puld out, hys chyldren slaine before his face,
                        Iere, 39, 4, Reg, 24, 25,
                      & al other things performed, which Ieremie had prophecied & fore-told them before.
                  And which was yet more meruailous, Ieremy did not onely fore-tell the particulers of thys captiuitie, but also the determinate time, how long it should endure, saying.
                        Ierem, 25,
                      
                     And all this Land of Iurie shall be into wildernes, and astoniednesse: and all this people shall serue the King of Babylon for three-score and tenne yeeres,
                     The yeeres fore-told of the captiuitie of Babilon. 
                     & when three-score and tenne yeeres shall be complete, I will visite vppon the King of Babilon, & vpon that Nation saith the Lord, and I will lay the same into eter
                           •
                        all desolation.
                     
                        Iere, 24, and 29
                      
                     But vppon Iud
                           •
                         will I cast my pleasant eyes, and will bring them back
                           •
                         to this Land again. &c. In which prophecie is contained,

first the particuler tyme howe long thys captiuitie should endure. Secondly, the destruction of Babylon, and of that Monarchie by the Persians. And thirdly, the returning home of the Iewes againe; which three things to haue been afterward fulfilled,
                        1. Esdr. 1, 2. 2, Esdr. 2.
                      not onely Esdras that liued at that tyme, and was an actor in performance of the last: but all other Heathen writers besides, doe record and testifie.
                  And thys prophecie of Ieremie, was so famous, and certainly belieued amongst all the Iewes, in the time of their captiuity: as when the day of expiration drew neere, Daniell writeth thus of himselfe.
                        Dan, 9.
                      
                     In the first yeere of Darius, I Daniell, vnderstood in the scriptures, the nūber of the seauentie yeeres whereof God spake to Ieremie, that they should be fulfilled, touching the desolation of Ierusalem: & I turned my face to my Lord God, and besought him in fasting & sackcloth. &c. Neyther onely the Iewes vnderstoode and beleeued thys prophecie,Gentiles belieued the scripture. but euen Cyrus himselfe, that was a Gentile, gaue ful credite thervnto, and the
                        •
                     eby was induced to restore the Iewes, as appeareth both

by hys own words and Proclamations,
                        1. Esdras, 1. 3. Esdras. 2
                      sette downe by Esdras that executed the same: and by hys deedes also, in r
                        •
                     storing home the Iewes, & rebuilding theyr Temple at his own great cha
                        •
                     ges, as all Historiographers of the Heathen doe confesse.
                  I might heere alledge infinite other examples, and make no end, if I woulde followe the multitude of Propheci
                        •
                     s which are dys
                        •
                     ersed thorowe out the whole Scripture? I might shew how Daniell fore-tolde to Baltasar King of Babylon,The Prophecies of Daniell. Dan. 5,
                      in the midst of hys tryumph, as in the hearing of all hys Peeres, the destruction which insued vpon him the verie same night after.
                  I myght heere alledge, how the same Daniel,
                        Dan. 11.
                      in the first yere of Darius the Median, in the beginning of that second Monarchie of Medians and Persians, fore-told howe manie Beholde, three kings shall yet stand in Persia and the four
                           •
                        h shal be rich aboue all the rest. Dan. 11.
                      Kings should raigne after him in Persia, and how the last (who was the fourth after him, and hys name also Darius) should fight against the Grecians, & be ouercome by a Grecian King, (which was Alexander) and how the Kingdome also of the Grecians, should be deuided and

torne in peeces, after Alexanders death,
                        Iustin. hist. lib. 12. et 13.
                      and not passe to his posteritie, as Iustine & other Heathen writers doe testifie that it was, by Antigonus, Perdiccas, S
                        •
                     leuchus, Antiochus, Ptolomaeus, and other Captaines of Alexander, that deuided the same among themselues, aboue a hundred yeeres after Darius was dead.
                  I might declare also, how the same Daniell fore-saw and fore-told, the four great Monarchies of the world,The foure Monarchies of Assirians, Persiās, Grecians, & Romaines. and described the same as distinctly, as if he had lyued in them all, and as by experience we finde since to be true. I myght alledge the particuler description, of the fight betwixt Darius and Alexander,
                        Dan, 2, Dan, 8,
                      sette downe by Daniel vnder the names of the great Ramme,The foretelling of great Alexander. & the fierce Gote with one horne, which Goate himselfe interpreteth it to be meant of a Grecian King that should conquer the Persians. And therfore Alexander (as Iosephus reporteth) comming to Ierusalem about a hundred yeeres after,
                        Iosep
                              •
                            lib. de antiq. Iud. cap. 8,
                      and hearing the Prophecie of Daniell interpreted vnto him by Iaddus the high Priest, assured himselfe that he was the man therein signified, &

so after long sacrifice doone to the God of Israel, (of whom he affirmed that he had appeared vnto him in Macedon, and had exhorted him to take thys war in hand,) and after he had bestowed much honor & many benefits vpon the high Priest, & Inhabitants of Ierusalem, he went forward in his war against Darius, with great alacritie, & had yt famous victorie which all the world knoweth.
                  A hundred such prophecies more, which are as plaine, as euident, and as distinct as thys, I might alledge of Elias, Elizeus, Samuel, Dauid, Ezechiel, the twelue lesser Prophets, and of other which I haue not named. And in very truth, the whole Scripture is nothing els, but a diuine kind of body, replenished throughout with the vital spirite of prophecie, & euery day some prophecie or other is fulfilled, (though we marke it not) and shal be vnto the worlds end.
                  
                     What maner of persons our Prophets were.And the myracle of this matter is yet more increased, if wee consider what manner of people they were for the most part, by whom these Prophecies of hydden thinges wer
                        •
                      vttered, to wit, not such men is could gather the fore-sight of things

by Astronomie or Astrologie, that is, by contemplation of the starres, as some fond Gentiles did pretende, (though Ptolomie denie that anie such thing can be fore-told but onelie by inspiration from God,
                        Ptolo. in lib. de fructu.
                     ) neyther yet were they so sharpe witted, as to attaine to Prophecie by strange imaginations,
                        Moses Narbon in lib. Abubacher et Auampare.
                      as most vainly Auerroes and his fellowes hold that some men may; nor finally, were they so delicatly fedde, as by 
                        •
                     xact dyet and rules of Alchimie, to come to Prophecie
                        •
                      as Alchimists dreame that a man may doe, & that Appolonius Thyanaeus dyd,
                        Roger. Baco. lib. de sex scient experimentalib.
                      who by stillified meates (as they speake) came to be stillified himselfe, and so by helpe of hys Glasse called Alchimusi, to soretel some matters & affaires to come. Our Prophets (I say) knew none of these fantasticall deuises, beeing for the most part poore, simple and vnlearned men, as in particuler was recorded, that Dauid was a sheepeheard, & Amos was a keeper of Oxen.
                        Amos, 1,
                      Yea, oftentimes they were Women, as Marie the sister of Aaron,
                        Exod, 15,
                      called in the Scripture by the name of Prophetesse.
                        Iudges, 5,
                      Debora the wife of Lapidoth:1. Reg, 2, Hanna the Mother of

Samuell, Elizabeth the Mother of Iohn Baptist: Anna the Daughter of Panuell: and finally, the most holy and blessed virgine Mary,
                        Luke, 1, et 2,
                      with the daughters of Phillip,
                        Acts, 21.
                      and manie such other, both in the old and new Testamēt, who prophecied strangely, nor could possibly receiue such fore-knowledge of things to come, but onely from the Spirite of the lyuing GOD, and by inspiration of the holy Ghost, which is a manifest demonstration, of the excellencie of Holy-writ, and of the certainty contained therein.
               
               
                  The eyght proofe of Scriptures.
                  AND nowe, albeit this myght seeme sufficient in the iudgment and conscience of euery reasonable man (as the Iew supposeth) to proue that the Scriptures be only 
                        •
                     rō God, & consequently by them, that there is a GOD; yet hath he one reason more to confirme theyr sinceri
                        •
                     ie, which I will alledge in this place, & there-with make an ende. His reason is, that although these holy writings, (which proceede of Gods spirite)

doe not take theyr testimony or confirmation frō man: yet 
                        •
                     or more euidence of the truth, God hath so prouided, that al the principall, most strange and wonderfull things, recounted in scrip
                        •
                     ure, should be reported also, and confirmed by Infidels, Pagans, Gentiles, and Heathen Writers themselues;Approbation of Heathen Wryters. albeit in some poynts they dyffer from the Scriptures, in the manner of theyr narr
                        •
                     
                     tion, for that they adioyne superstitions thereunto. Which maketh the more for approbation of the things, for that heereby it appeareth, they tooke not theyr stories direc
                        •
                     ly 
                        •
                     rom the Bible, but by tradition and most auncient antiquities of theyr owne.
               
               
                  The Creation of the world.
                  FIrst thē he sheweth,
                        Gene, 1, et 2,
                      that the creation of the World, which is the meruaile of all meruailes, with the infusion of mans soule from God, is 
                        •
                     oth graunted and agreed vpon, by all those Heathen Phylosophers that haue beene cited before, (albeit the particularities be not so sette downe by them, as they are in Scriptures,)

and by all other, that doe see in reason, that of necessitie, there must be yeelded som Creator of these things.
               
               
                  The floode of Noe.
                  
                     
                        Gene, 6, 7, 8
                     NExt to thys, the flood of Noe is mencioned by diuers most auncient Heathen Wri
                        •
                     ers: as by Baerosus Chaldaeus,
                        Iosep. li. 1. de antiq. Iud.
                      Ieronimus Egyptius, Nicholaus Damascenus, Abydenus, and others: according as both Iosephus and Eusebius doe proue.
                        Euseb lib. 9, de praep. Euan
                              •
                            cap. 4.
                      And in Bresile, and other Countries dyscouered in our age, where neuer teach
                        •
                     rs were known to be be
                        •
                     ore, they talke of a certaine drow
                        •
                     ing of the World, which in tyme past happened: and doe say, that this was left vnto them by tradition, from tyme out of minde, by the first inhabitants of those places.
               
               
                  The long life of the first Fathers.
                  OF the long life of the first Patriarches,
                        Gene, 5, 10. and 11.
                      according as the Scripture reporteth it, not onely the former Authors, but also Manethus,

that gathered the Historie of the Egiptians: Molus Hestiaeus, yt wrote the Acts of the Phaenicians, Hesiodus, Hecataeus, Abderida, Helanicus, Acusilaus, and Ephotus, do testifie, that those first inhabitants of the world, liued commonly a thousand yeeres a piece; and they alledge the reason thereof to be, both for the multiplication of people, and for bringing all Sciences to perfection, especially Astronomie and Astrologie, which, (as they write) could not be brought to sufficient perfection, by any one man that had lyued lesse then sixe hundred yeeres, in which space, the great yeere (as they call it) runneth about.
               
               
                  Of the Tower of Babilon.
                  OF the tower of Babilon,
                        Gene. 11.
                      and of the confusion of tongues at the same, Eusebius citeth the testimonies at large, both of Abydenus that lyued about King Alexanders time,
                        Euseb. lib, 9 de praep. ca. 4
                              •
                           
                        
                      & of Sibylla, as also the words of Hestiaeus concerning the Land of Sennaar, wher it was builded. And these Gentiles doe shew by reason, that if

there had not beene some such myracle in the deuision of tongues,Marke thys reason. no doubt but that al tongues being deriued of one, (as all men are of one Father,) the same tongues woulde haue retained the selfe same roo
                        •
                     es and pri
                        •
                     ciples, as in all dial
                        •
                     ct
                        •
                      or deri
                        •
                     ation of tongues we see 
                        •
                     hat it commeth to passe.
                  But now (say they) in many tongues at thys day, we see that there is no lik
                        •
                     l
                        •
                     -hoode or affin
                        •
                     tie 
                        •
                     mong them, but all different the o
                        •
                     e 
                        •
                     rom the other, and thereby it app
                        •
                     ar
                        •
                     th, that they were m
                        •
                     de di
                        •
                     ers 
                        •
                     nd distinct e
                        •
                     en from the 
                        •
                     eg
                        •
                     n
                        •
                     ing.
               
               
                  Of Abr
                        •
                     ham.
                  
                     
                        Gene, 11, 12.13, 14, &c
                     OF Abraham and his 
                        •••
                     ayres, I haue all
                        •
                     dged s
                        •
                     me Heathen Writers before, as Berosus, H
                        •
                     cat
                        ••
                     
                     us, and Nicholaus Damascenus. But of all other, Alexander Polyhistor alledgeth Eupolemus most at large,
                        Alexan. Polihist. lib. de Iudai. hist.
                      of Abrahams being in Egypt, & of his teaching thē Astronomie t
                        •
                     ere
                        •
                      of his fight and victorie in the behalfe of Lot: of his entertainment by K. Melchisedech, of his wife and

sister Sara, and of other his doings, especially of the sacrifice of his sonne Isaack. To whom also agreeth Melo,
                        Melo lib. de fraudib. Iudeorum.
                      in hys bookes written against the Iewes, and Artabanus.
                        Arta. in Iudeorum hist. Gal de simp. Pausan. in Eliae Solin. in Polih. Tacitus lib. vlt. histor.
                      And of the strange Lake wherinto Sodome and Gomorra were turned by theyr destruction, called Mare mortuum, the dead Sea, wherin nothing can lyue. Both Galen, Pausanius, Solinus, Tacitus, and Strabo, doe testifie and shew, the particuler wonders therof.
               
               
                  Of Isaacke, Iacob, Ioseph, Iob, &c.
                  FRom Abraham down to Moises, writeth very particulerly the fore-named Alexander, albeit he mingle sometimes certaine fables, whereby appeareth, that hee tooke hys storie not out of the Bible wholy.
                        Gen, 15, 16.17, 18, &c,
                      And he alledgeth one Leodemus, who as he sayth, lyued with Moises, and wrote the selfe same things that Moises did, so that these writers agree almost in all things touching Isaacke, Iacob, Ioseph, and all their affaires, euen vnto Moises; & with these do concurre also Theodotus a most auncient

Poet, Artabanus and Phylon, Gentiles. Aristaeus in like manner about Aristotles time,
                        Aristae. lib. de Iob.
                      wrote a booke of Iob.
                  
               
               
                  Of Moises.
                  OF Moises and his acts, not onely the fore-named,
                        Exod, 2, 3, 4, 5, &c.
                      (especially Artabanus in hys Booke of the Iewes) do make mention at large: but manie others also, as namely Eupolemus, out of whō Polyhistor reciteth very long narrations, of the wonderful and stupendious things done by Moises in Egypt, for which he sayth, that in hys time he was worshipped as a God in that Countrey, and called by many Mercurius. And that the Ethiopians learned circumcision of hym, which afterwarde alwayes they retained, and so doe vnto thys day. And as for his miracles done in Egipt, hys leading the people thence by the Redde-sea: hys lyuing with them fortie yeeres in the wildernes: the Heathen Wryters agree in all things with the Scriptures, sauing only, that they recount diuers things to the prayse of Moises, which hee

hath not written of himselfe, adding also his description,The description of Moses person out of Heathen Wryters. to wit, that hee was a long tale man, with a yellow beard, and long hayre, wherwith also accordeth Numenius Pythagoricus, touching the actes of Moises, whose lyse he sayth that he had read in the auncientest records that were to be had.
               
               
                  The storie of Iosua, the Iudges and the Kings.
                  BVT the fore-named Eupolemus goeth yet forward, and pursueth the story of Iosua, of the Iudges, of Saul, Dauid, and of Salomon, euen vnto the building of the Temple,
                        Iosep. lib. 8
                              •
                            de antiq. cap. 2.
                      which he describeth at large, with the particuler Letters written about that matter to the King of Tyrus, which Iosephus sayth were in hys dayes kept in the records of the Ty
                     
                        ••
                     ans. And with Eupolemus, agree Polyhistor, and Hecataeus Abderita, that liued and serued in warre with King Alexander the great,The treasures hiddē in the Sepulcher of Dauid. and they make mention among other things, of the inestimable riches of Salomon, and of the treasures which he

had hyd and buried, (according to the fashion of that tyme) in the Sepulcher of hys Father Dauid, which to be no fable, (though not mentioned by the scripture) Iosephus wel prooueth,
                        Iosep. l. 13. de antiq. ca. 16.
                      for that Hir
                        •
                     anus y• high Priest and King of Iurie, beeing besiedged in Ierusalem by Antiochus, surnamed Pius, not many yeeres before our Sauiour Christ his nati
                        •
                     ity, to redeeme himselfe and the Cittie, and to pay for his peace, The same thing attēpted Herode in hys time, as Iosephus saith lib. 18, anti. opened the sayd Sepulcher of Dauid, and fecht out of one part thereof, three thousande Talents in ready money, which amount to sixe hūdred thousand pounds English, if we account the Talents but at the least size, of Talentum H
                           •
                        braicum.
                  
               
               
                  The things that ensued after King Salomons dayes.
                  AND as for the things that ensued after Salomon, as the deuision of the Tribes among themselues, and theyr diuers warres, a
                        •
                     flictions, & transmigrations into other Countries, many Heathen Writers doe mention & recorde them, & among

other, Herodotus, and Diodorus Si
                     
                        •
                     ulus. And the fore-said Alexander Polyhistor, talking of the captiuitie of Babilon, sayth, that Ieremie the Prophet, tolde Ioachim hys King,
                        Ierem. 37.
                      what would befall him,
                        4. Reg, 24.
                      & that Nabuchodonoser hearing thereof, was moued thereby to besiedge Ierusalē.
                  Of the flight of Senacherib from the siedge of Ierusalem,Of Senacherib. and how he was killed at his returne home, by hiw owne sonnes in the Temple, according to the Prophecie of Esay,
                        Esay, 31. and 33, and 36.
                      & story of the booke of Kings, for that he had blasphemed the Lord God of Israell,
                        4. Reg, 9
                      as Herodotus witnesseth: and that after hys death, he had a statue or Image of mettal erected in his memory, with this inscription in Greeke:
                        Hero. lib. 2.
                      
                     Hee that beholdeth me, let him learne to be godlie. Confer Xenophon also in hys seauenth booke De Cyropaedia, and you shal see him agree with Daniell in his narrations of Babylon.
                        Dan. 16
                     
                  
                  And finally, I wil conclude with Iosephus the learned Iew,
                        Iosep. li. 1, de antiq. Iudai.
                      that wrote immediatly after Christes ascention, & protesteth that the publique writings of the Syrians, Chaldaeans, Phaenicians, and innumerable hystories

of the Graecians, are sufficient to testifie the antiquity, truth, authoritie, and certainty of the holy scriptures, if there were no other proofe in the world besides.
               
            
            
               The conclusion of this Chapter, with the application. SECT. 4.
               THus 
                     •
                  arre haue I treated of the waies and meanes, which haue beene left vnto the worlde from the beginning, therby to know and vnderstande theyr Maker. In treating which poynt, I haue stayed my selfe the longer, for that it is the ground and foundation of all that is, or may be said heereafter. It is the first, finall, and chiefe principle, of our eternall saluation or damnation, and the total weale or woe that must befall vs, and possesse vs for euer.
               Which grounde and veritie, if it be so certaine and euident, as before hath been shewed, by all reason an
                     •
                   proo
                     •
                  e, both diuine and humane, & that ye matter be so testified & proclaimed vnto vs, by all the creatures of heauen & earth, & by the mouth

and writing of our Creator himself, as no ignoraunce or blindnes
                     •
                  e can excuse the same,No excuse of ignorāce of GOD. no slothfulnes dissemble it, no wickednesse denie it: what remaineth then, but to consider with our selues, what seruice this God requireth at our hands? what gratitude, what dutie, what honor for our creation? to the end, that as we haue proued him a most bountifull Creator, so we may finde 
                     •
                  him a propitious Iudge, and munificent rewarder. For it is not probable, that his diuine Maiestie, which hath appointed euery other creature to some action for hys owne glo
                     •
                  y, (as hath been declared at large before) shold leaue man-kind onely, which is the worthiest of all the rest, without obligation to his seruice.
               In which one point notwithstanding, though neuer so cleere (such is the fondnes of our corrupt nature,The errour of the old Phylosophers. Rom. 1. et 2,
                   without Gods holy grace:) fayled those auncient wisemen of ye world, of whom S. Paul speaketh so much in hys Epistle to the Romaines, taking compassion of theyr case, and calling them fooles, and all theyr great learning & Phylosophy meere fondnes: for that whereas (by the

means before mentioned) they came to know GOD, they did not seeke to glorifie him,
                  
                     Rom, 1.
                   
                  as appertained vnto God, nor yet did render him due thankes: but vanished away in theyr cogitations. &c. That is, they tooke no profite by this knowledge of theirs, but applyed their cogitations vppon the vanities of this world, more thē vpon the honour and seruice of thys theyr God.
For which cause, as Saint Paul adioyneth presently in the same place,
                        Rom, 1.
                      that for so much as they dyd thus, & dyd not shew forth by their lyfe and workes, that they had the knowledge of God indeede: GOD deliuered them ouer to a reprobate sence, and suffered them to fall into horrible sinnes, which S. Paul doth name and detest in al that Chapter, and finally concludeth, that theyr euerlasting perdition ensued principallie vpon thys one poynt: that wheras,
                        Rom. 1.
                      
                     They knew the iustice of God, (by all the wayes & arguments that before haue been declared,) yet wold they not vnderstand (sayth he) that death was due to all such, which lyued wickedly as they did.
               
               And the same Apostle, vpon consideration of these matters, wherein

he standeth long for the importance thereof, pronounceth in fine, thys generall sentence,A generall sentence pronounced by S. Paule. Rom, 1.
                   with great asseueration and vehemencie of Spyrite: That the wrath of God is reuealed frō heauen, vpon all impietie and iniustice of those men, who hold the knowledge of God in vnrighteousnes. That is, who being indued with y• knowledge of God, doe liue notwithstanding vnrighteously, or (as he sayde before) doe consume theyr dayes in vanitie, not making account of the seruice which they doe owe to that God, for theyr creation & other benefites.The application to our selues. Which thing, if Saint Paule might truly say to those Gentiles before hys time, who had onely naturall knowledge and vnderstanding of God: that is, so much as by hys creatures was to be gathered: what may, or shall be said vnto vs, who haue not onely that light of nature which they had, but also the wrytings & law of God himselfe, communicated especially vnto the Iewes, and aboue that also, haue heard the voice of his onely sonne vpon earth, & haue receiued the doctrine of hys most blessed Gospell, and yet doe liue as negligently (manie of vs) as

dyd the verie He
                     •
                  then, touching good lyfe and vertue.
               Surely in this case I must denoūce against my sel
                     •
                  e, that if it be true, (as it cannot be 
                     •
                  alse) which this blessed Apostle affirmeth here of these Heathen Phylosophers, that by that little knowledge they had of GOD, they were made inexcusable,
                  
                     Rom. 1,
                   then by the most iust & certaine rule of Christ, laid downe by S. Luke, 
                     cui multum datum est, multum queretur ab eo,
                     
                        Luke, 12.
                      that of euery man which hath receiued much, a gre
                        •
                     t a
                        •
                     count shall be taken for the same;
we are forced to in
                     •
                  erre, that our account shal be the greater, and our selues much more inexcusable before hys diuine Maiestie, then the very Gentiles & Heathens are; if after our knowledge & manifest vnderstanding of his Godhead and iustice, We vanish away in our cogitations, as they did, & as the most part of the worlde at this day are seene to doe, that is, if we apply our cogitations and cares, about the vaine affayres of thys tempor
                     •
                  l lyfe and transitory commodities, which we should bestow vpon the seruice and honour of thys Lord and Creator.
            
         
         
            
            OF THE FINAL ENDE AND CAVSE WHY MAN VVAS CREATED BY GOD, and placed in thys world. And of the obligation he hath therby, to attend to the affaire for which he ca
                  •
               e heth
                  •
               r. CHAP. III.
            BY the Chapter precedent, I nothing doubt (gentle Reader) but if thou haue seene & perused the same, thou remainest sufficiently informed of thy Creator.A necessary consideration. Now foloweth it by order of good consequence, that we consider with some attention, (for that is standeth vs much vpon) what intent and purpose God had in creating vs, & thys world for our sakes, and in placing vs therein as Lordes of the same? By the former considerations we haue learned, that as among other creatures, nothing made it selfe: so nothing was made for it selfe, nor to serue it selfe. The heauens (we see) doe serue the ayre
                  •
               
               
the ayre serueth the earth, the earth serueth the beastes, the beastes serue man: and then is the question, whō man was made to serue? for in him also hold
                  •
               th the former reason, that seeing he was not made by himselfe, it is not likely that he was made to serue himselfe.
            If we consult with the scriptures heerein, we finde a generall sentence layd downe without exception:
                  Prou. 16.
                
               Vniuersa propter semetipsum operatus est Dominus, the Lord hath made al things for himselfe.Man made to serue GOD. And if al, then man (no doubt,) who is not ye least of the rest which he hath made.
            And heerby it commeth to passe, that man cannot be sayd to 
                  •
               e free, or at hys owne appointment or dysposition in thys world, but is obliged to performe that thing, for the which he was sent into this habitation. Which point holy Iob declareth plainly, in a certain inuectiue against such men as were carelesse and negligent in consideration of thys affayre. A vaine man, (sayth he) is lifted vp in pride,
               
                  Iob, 11.
                
               and think
                     •
                  th himselfe to be borne as free as the 
                     •
                  olt of a wild Asse. That is, he thinketh himselfe bounde to nothing, subiect to nothing,

accountable for nothing that he doth in thys lyfe: but only borne free, to passe his time in disport and pleasure, as a Colt in the wildernes, that hath no Maister to tame him.
            Which in other words, the wiseman vttereth thus;
                  Wisd, 15
                        •
                     
                  
                
               He esteemeth this lyfe of ours, to be but a play-game, and therefore careth not how he lyueth, or wherein he spend and passe ouer his time. And this of the man whō the Scripture calleth vaine.
            But now, for the sober, wise, and discreet, of whom it is written,
                  Prou, 15,
                
               The way of life is vppon the learned, to the ende he may decline from the lowest hell: they are farre from so great follie, as to imagine that no account shal be demaunded of our being in this world: for that they haue read,
                  Eccles. 11, and 12.
                
               That God shall bring into iudgement what-soeuer is doone, for euery faulte that is committed. And the Christian man knoweth further, by the mouth and asseueration of hys Sauiour and Redeemer, that hee shall be accountant for euery idle worde that hee mis-vttereth,
                  Math, 12, Account to be gyuen. and finallie, there is no man that is eyther of reason, or conuersant in the wrytings and Testament of his Creator, but

remembreth well, that among al other irritations, whereby the wicked man is saide to prouoke Gods patience to indignation, none is more often repea
                  •
               ed, or more grieuouslie taken,
                  Psal, 9, 43. and 141.
                then, that he said in his hart, God will aske no account.
            
            With these men then alone shall be my speech in this present Chapter, who haue a desire to dyscharge well thys account. For attayning whereof (truly) I can giue no better counsaile, instruction, o
                  •
                aduise, then to doe in thys case, as a good Merchant factor is wont to doe, when he arriueth in forraine Countries, or as a Souldiour or Captaine, sent by hys Prince to some great exployt, is accustomed, when he commeth to the place appointed,Profitable demaunds and considerations. that is, to weigh and consider deepely, for what cause he came thether? why he was sent? to what ende? what to attempt? what to prosecute? what to performe? what shall be expected and required at his hands (vppon his returne,) by him that sent him thether? For these cogitations (no doubt) shall styrre him vp to attend to that for which he came, and not to employ hys time in impertinent

affaires. The like would I counsaile a Christian to put in vre, concerning a case proposed, and to demaunde of himselfe, betweene God and hys conscience, why, and wherefore, and to what end, he was created & sent hether into this world? what to do? wherein to bestow his d
                  •
               yes. &c.
            And then shall he finde, that for no other cause, matter, or end, but onely to serue God in thys lyfe, and by that seruice to enioy heauen, and euerlasting saluation in the lyfe, to come. Thys was the condition of our creation,
                  Gene, 14,
                as Moises wel expresseth: and thys was the consideration of our redeeming, fore-tolde by Zacharie, before we were yet redeemed:
                  Luke, 2,
                
               That we being d
                     •
                  liuered from the hands of our enemies, should serue God in holinesse and righteousnes, all the dayes of o
                     •
                  r l
                     •
                  ues.
            
            Of thys consideration doe ens
                  •
               e two con
                  ••
               quents to be obserued.The first cō
                  sequence, vpon due consideration of our ende. Where
                  •
               f the first is, that seeing our end and finall cause of being in thys world, is to serue God, & so to work our owne saluation with feare and trembling: what-s
                  •
               euer thing wee doe, or bestowe our time in, which eyther is contrary or impertinent, or

not profitable to thys end, (though it were to gaine kingdoms) it is vanitie and lost labour, that wil turne vs in time to griefe and repentance, (if we change not our course) for that it is not the matter for which wee came into thys life, nor whereof we shal be demaunded an account, except it be to receiue iudgement & punishment for the same.
            
               The second cōsequence,Secondly, it foloweth of the same consideration, that seeing our onely busines and affaire in thys world, is to serue our Maker, & saue our own soules, and that all other earthly creatures, are put heere to serue our vses to that end onely: we should for our parts be indifferent to all these creatures, as to riches or pouertie, to health or sicknes, to honour or contempt: to little learning, or much learning; and we should desire only so much or little of eyther of them, as were best for vs, to the attainment of our s
                  •
               id end & Butte pretended; that is, to the seruice of God, & the weale of our soules. For whosoeuer desireth, seeketh, loueth, or vseth these creatures, more then for thys, runneth from the end 
                  •
               or which he came hether.
            
               By this then may a careful Christian take some scantling of his own estate with God,How each man may take a scantling of hys own estate. and make a coniecture whether he be in the right way or no For if he attend onely or principally to this end, for which he was sent hether; if his cares, cogitations, studies, endeuours, labours, talke, conuersation, and other his actions,A right course. doe runne vpon thys mat
                  •
               er, & that hee careth no more for other creatures, as honours, riches, learning, and the lyke, then they are necessarie vnto him for this ende that he pretendeth; if hys dayes & life be spent in thys study of the seruice of God, and procuring his own saluation, in carefulnes, feare, and trembling, as the Apostle aduised him:
                  Phillip, 2,
                then hee is (doubtles) a most happy man, & shall at length attaine to the Kingdome which he expected. But if he find himselfe in a contrary case and course:A wrong and dangerous course
                     •
                  
                that is, not to attend indeed to this matter, for which only he was sent hether, nor to haue in his hart & study this seruice of God, and enioying of heauen, but rather some other vanitie of the worlde: as promotiō, wealth, pleasure, sumptuous apparel, gorgious buildings, beauty,

fauour of Princes, or any other thing els, that appertaineth not vnto thys end
                  •
                If he spend his time about these trifles, hauing his car
                  •
               s and cogitations, his t
                  •
               lk & delight more in these thinges then about the other great busines, of possessing Gods eternall kingdom, f
                  •
               r which he was made & pla
                  •
               ed in this world: then is hee (I as
                  •
               ure him) in a perrilous waie, leading directly to perdition, ex
                  •
               ept he alter & change his course. For, m
                  •
               st cert
                  •
               in it is, that whosoeuer shal not att
                  •
               nd vnto the ser
                  •
               ice he came for, shal neu
                  •
               r attaine the reward assigned & promised to that seruice.
            And for that the most part of all thys wo
                  •
               ld, (not onely of Infidels, but also Christians) doe run amis
                  •
               e in thys poynt, and doe not take care of that assayre & busines,The reason why so few are saued. for which alone they were created and placed heere: hence is it, that Christ & hys holy Saints, both before and a
                  •
               ter hys appe
                  •
               rau
                  •
               ce in the flesh, haue spoken so hardly, and seuerely, of the very small number that shall be saued, (euen among Christians,
                  Math, 7.20. and 22.
               ) and haue vttered certaine speeches which seeme very rigorous to fleshe and blood,
                  Luke, 13,
                (and to such as are most touched

therein) scarce credible, albeit they must be fulfilled. As among other thinges,
                  Iames, 4,
                that a louer of thys worlde cannot be saued;
                  Math, 19,
                that rich men do enter as hardly into heauen,
                  Marke. 10.
                as a Camell through a needles eye, and the lyke. The reason of which maner of speeches doe stand in this, that a rich man or worldling, attending with all his industrie to heape vp ri
                  •
               hes (as the fashion is) can not attende, (nor euer doth) to that for which he came into this world, and conseq
                  •
               ently, can neuer attaine heaue
                  •
               , except God worke a miracle, & thereby doe cause him to spende out hys riches to the benefit of his soule, (as sometimes he doth) & so do lessen the Cammell in such sort, as hee may passe the needles eye. Whereof we haue a very rare example in the Gospell,
                  Luke, 19
                        •
                     
                  
                of Zacheus, who beeing a very rich man, dyd presently vppon the entering of christ into his house, (but much more as appeareth into hys hart by fayth) resolue himselfe to change his former course touching riches, and at one blow to beginne with-all gaue away halfe of all hee posses
                  •
               ed to the poore; and for the rest made proclamation, that whosoeuer

had receiued any wrong at his handes,A perfit example of a good conuersion. (as commonly many do by thē that are rich) he shold come and receyue foure times so much amendes. By which almes and restitution, hee was deliuered from the Camels gib or bunch on his backe, that letted his passage through the needles eye. And thys extraordinary fauour and grace he receiued, by the fortunate presence, of his most blessed and bountifull guest, who had signified before in an-other place, that himselfe was able, so to draw the Camel,
                  Math. 19.
                as he should passe the needles eye, for that the thinges which are vnpossible with man,
                  Marke, 10,
                are possible with GOD.
            But to leaue this, and to goe forward in our former purpose, no meruaile it is, if in the world abroade, so few be saued, seeing yt of thousands, scarce one doth account of that busines, which of all other is the chiefe and principall. Consider you ye multitude of all sorts of people vppon earth, and see what theyr traffique and negotiation is? see whether they treate thys affaire or no? see wherin their care, study, & cogitation consisteth? How many thousand finde

you in Christendome,The wrong course of the world. who spende not one houre of four and twentie, nor one halfe day in forty, in the seruice of GOD, or businesse of theyr 
                  •
               oule? How infinite haue you, that breake theyr braines about worldlie commodities, and how few that are troubled with this other cogitation? How many find time to eate, drink, sleepe, disport, deck and trym themselues to the view of others, and yet haue no time to bestow in this greatest busines of all other businesse? How manie passe ouer whole dayes, weekes, monthes, and yeeres, (and finally their whole life time) in hauking, hunting, and other pastimes, without regard of this important affaire? How many miserable women haue you in the world, that spende more d
                  •
               yes in one yeere, in pricking vp theyr apparrel, & adorning theyr carkasse, then they doe houres in prayer for the space of all theyr ly
                  •
               e? And what (alas) shall becom of this people in the ende? what will they doe or say at the day of account? what excuse will they alledge? what way will they turne them?
            If the Merchant-factor which I mentioned before, after many yeres

spent in forraine Countries vpon his Maisters expences,A comparison expressing the vanitie of our occupations. should returne at length and gyue vp his accounts, of so much tyme and money spent in singing; so much in dauncing, so much in fencing; so much in courting, and the like; who would not laugh at so fonde a re
                  •
               koning? but beeing further demaunded by hys Maister, what time he had bestowed vpon the Merchandise & affaires for which hee was sent, if the man should aunswer, that he had no leysure to thinke vpon that thing, for the great occupation which he had in the other: who woulde not esteeme him woorthy of all punishment and confusion? And much more shame & confusion, no doubt shal they sustaine at the last dreadful day,
                  Math, 16,
                in the face and presence of God and all his Angels, who beeing sent into thys worlde, to traffique so rich a Merchandise as is the kingdome of heauen: haue neglected the same, and haue bestowed theyr studies, vpon the most vayne trifles and f
                  •
               llies of thys world, witho
                  •
               t cogitation or care of the other.
            
               
                  Psalm, 4,
               
               O yee children of Adam, saith the Spyrit of GOD,
                     Ierem, 2.
                   why loue ye so vanitie,

and seeke after lyes?
why leaue you the Fountaine and seeke after Cesterns? If a golden game of inestimable value, should be proposed for such as would runne, and could winne the same;A comparison.
& when the course or r
                  •
               se were begun, if some shoulde s
                  •
               ep aside and follow flyes or fethers that passed in the ayre, without any regard of the prize and gole proposed, who wold not meruaile & take pitty of their folly? euen so is it with men of the worlde, if we beleeue S. Paule, who affirmeth,
                  1. Cor. 9.
                that we are all placed together in a course or race, and that the kingdome of heauen is propounded vnto vs for the Game or Prize, but euery man sayth hee, arriueth not thether; and why? for that most men doe steppe aside, and leaue the marke. Most men do run awry, and doe follow fethers vp and downe in the ayre; most men doe pursue vanities, & doe weary themselues out in the pursute thereof, vntil they can neyther run nor goe, nor mooue theyr lyms any further: and then, for the most part, it is too-l
                  •
               te to amend theyr folly.
            Will you heere the lamentations of such vnfortunate men? these are

theyr owne words recorded by scripture. We are wearied out in the way of iniquitie and perdition,
                  Wisd. 5. The complaint of worldlings in the end of their life
                     •
                  
                and the way of God haue we not knowne.
What profit haue we receiued of al our pompe and pride, and vaunting riches? what good haue they done vs? They are nowe past away as a shadow, and as a Messenger that ryde
                     •
                  h in post, and we are consumed in our owne iniquities.
            
            Thys is the lamentable complaint of such men, as ranne awry, and followed a wrong course in their actions of thys lyfe. These are they who pursued riches, honour, pompe, and such lyke vanities, and 
                  •
               orgate the great and weighty busines for which they were sent
                  •
                These are they, who were esteemed happy men in thys worlde, and thought to run a most fortunate course, in that they heaped much riches together; aduaunced themselues & their families to great dignities: became gorgious, glorious, and dreadful to others: and finally, obtained what-soeuer theyr lust & concupiscence desired.The fonde iudgement of ye world. Thys made them seeme blessed to worldly cogitations, and the way wherein they ran, to be most prosperous and

happy. And I make no doubt, by experience of these our tymes, but they had admirours and enuiours in great aboundaunce, who burned in desire to obtaine ye same course. And yet when I heare their complaint in this place, and theyr owne confession, wherein they say expreslie:
                  Wisd, 5
                        •
                     
                  
                
               We sencelesse men did erre from the way of truth:
When I consider also the addition of scripture, 
                  Talia dixerunt in inferno: they spake these thinges when they were in hell: I cannot but esteeme theyr course for most miserable, and condemne wholy the iudgement of flesh in thys affaire.
            Wherefore, my deere brother, if thou be wise, yeeld not to this deceit of worldly lips and tongues, that v
                  •
               e to blesse and sanctifie such,
                  Psalm. 10.
                as are in most danger and neerest to perdition. Leane rather to the sincere counsaile of saint Paul, who willeth thee to examine vprightly thine own works and waies,
                  Gala, 6.
                and so to iudge of thy selfe without deceite. If thou walke the way of Babilon, most certaine it is, that thou shalt neuer arriue at the gates of Ierusalem, except thou change thy course.
            Oh my brother, what a griefe wil

it be vnto thee,A cōparison expressing our griefe in the end, for running a wrong course. when after long labor and much toyle, thou shalt find thy selfe to haue gone awry? If a man had trauailed but one whole day, and thereby made weary should vnderstande at nyght, that all his labour were lost, and that his whole iourney was out of the way: it wold be a meruailous affliction vnto hym (no doubt) albeit no other inconuenience were therein, but only the losse of yt daies trauaile, which might be recouered and recompenced in the next. But if besides thys, hys busines were great, if it lay vpon his life to be at the place whether he goeth, at a certaine houre: yf the losse of his way were irrecouerable: if the punishment of hys error, must be death and confusion; and hymselfe weare so wearie, that he could styrre no one foote further: imagine then what a grieuous message thys would be vnto hym, to heare one say: Syr, you are amisse, your labour is lost, and you haue trauailed wholie besides your way.
            So then will it be vnto thee (my soule) at the day of death,The miserie of a soule that hath gone awry, at the last day. and separation from my body, if in thys lyfe thou attend not to thy saluation for

which thou wert created, but shalt passe ouer thy dayes in following of vanites. Thou shalt find thy selfe astray at the end of thy iourney, thou shalt find thy selfe wearie, & enforced to say with those miserable damned spirits,
                  Wisd, 5
                        •
                     
                  
                
               I haue walked harde and craggy wayes: for that indeede the way of wickednes is full of thornes and stones, though in shew it be couered with fayre grasse, and manie flowers. Thou sha
                  •
               t find at that day that thou hast lost thy labour, lost thy time, lost al opportunity of thine owne commodity. Thou shalt then find thy errour to be vnrecouerable, thy danger vnauoidable, thy punishment insupportable, thy repentance vnprofitable, and thy griefe, sorrow, and calamity inconsolable.
            Oh, hee that could behold and feele the inwarde cogitations of a worldly mans hart at that instant, after all hys honours and pleasures were past; no doubt, but he should find him of another iudgement and opi
                  •
               ion in thinges, then he was in the ruffe and heate of his iolitie. He doth wel perceiue then, the sondnes of those tryfles which he followed in this l
                  •
               fe, albeit it were to make himselfe

a Monarch. If a man dyd know the cogitations that K. Alexander the great had,Alexanders death. when of poyson hee came to die, after al his victories and incredible prosperitie; if we knewe the thoughts of Iulius Caesar,Iulius Caesars death. at the day of his murther in the Senat-house, after the conquest of all hys enemies, & subi
                  •
               ction of the whole world, to hys own onely obedience, we should wel perceiue, that they tooke lyttle pleasure in the wayes they walked; notwithstanding they were esteemed most prosperous and happy men of this world.
            Iosephus the Iew, recounteth two very rare examples of humane felicitie,Two rare examples. in Herod the first, and Agrippa hys Cosine, whereof the one by Anthony the Triumuir, and the other by Caligula the Emperour,
                  Iosep. lib. 14.15. et 18. d
                        •
                      antiq. Iudai. et bello. Iud. lib. 2.
                (both of them beeing otherwise but priuate Gentlemen, & in great pouertie and misery when they fledde to Rome,) were exalted vppon the suddaine, to vnexpected great fortune, and made rich Monarches and glorious Potentates. They were indued (at seueral times) with the kingdom & crowne of Iurie, & that in such ample sort, as neuer any of that Nation after thē
               
had the lyke. For which cause they were called in the Hebrue story, (for distinction sake) Herode the great, and Agrippa the great. They ruled and commaunded al in theyr daies, they wanted neither siluer nor gold, neither pleasures nor pastimes, neyther friendes nor flatterers. And besides all these gyfts of Fortune, they abounded also in ornaments and excellencie of body & wit. And all thys was increased & made the more admirable, by reason of theyr For enuie onely of Agrippa hys fortune, Herodias did ruine herselfe and her husband, as Iosephus saith. Lib. 18. antiqu. capit. 8, 9, 15, Her husbande was Herode Antipas, that slew Saint Iohn Baptist, and was sonne to Herod the first. Luke, 3. Math, 14.
                base & low estate before, in respect whereof, theyr present fortune vvas esteemed for a perfect patterne of most absolute felicitie.
            Thys they enioyed for a certaine space, & to assure themselues of the continuaunce, they bent all theyr cares, cogitations, and studies, to please the humors of the Romaine Emperours, as theyr Gods, and Authors of all theyr prosperitie and felicity vpon earth. In respect of whose fauours, (as Iosephus noteth,) they

cared little to violate their own Religion of the Iewes, or any thing els that was most sacred. And this forsooth, was esteemed of many a most wise, politique, prosperous, and happy course. But what was the end & consumation of thys theyr pleasant rase?
            First, Herod fell sicke of an incurable and lothsome disease,Herods death. Iosep. lib. 15. antiq.
                and was tormented in the same with so many terrors, Thys Herod was called Ascolonita, & slew the infants in Bethlem. Math, 2.
                & horrible accusations of his conscience, as he pronounced himselfe to be the most miserable afflicted creature that euer liued; and so calling one day for a knife to pare an apple, would needes haue murthered himselfe with the same, if his arme had not beene stayed by them that stood by. And for Agrippa, Iosephus reporteth, how that vppon a certaine day which he kept festiuall in Caesaria,The death of Agrippa. for the honour of Claudius the Romaine Emperour, when he was in his most extreame pompe and iolitie,
                  Iosep, li. 19. capit, 7,
                in the middest of all hys Peeres, Nobles, and Damosels, comming forth at an houre appointed, all glyttering in gold and siluer, to make an Oration vnto the people hys voyce, gesture, countenaunce

and apparrell so pleased, as the people beganne to cry, (beeing solicited thereunto by some flatterers) That it was the voyce of God, and not of man, whein Agrippa taking pleasure and delectation, was S. Luke saith he was stroken by Gods Angel. Acts, 12. And consider how Iosephus agreeth with thys narration. stroken presently from heauen, with a most horrible putrifaction of al hys body, whereof he died, repeating only to his friends these words in the midst of hys torments; 
                  Euse. li. 2. hist. cap. 9,
                
               Behold ye me, that do seeme to you a God, how miserably I am enforced to depart from you all.
            
            Now then would I demaunde of these two fortunate men, who laying aside all care of God and Religion, did follow the preferments of thys world so freshly, and obtayned the same so luckily: how they liked of thys theyr course and rase in the ende? Truely, I doubt not, but if they were heere to answer for themselues, they would assure vs, that one houre bestowed in ye seruice of God, and of theyr saluation, would more haue comforted them at the last instant, then all theyr labours & trauailes which they tooke in their liues for pleasing of Emperours, and gathering the grace and good lyking of mortall men.
            
               Vse then, ô Christian, vse thys experience to thy commoditie:Sincere and profitable counsaile. vse it to thy instructiō, vse it to thy forewarning. That which they are now, thou shalt be shortly, and of all follies it is the greatest, not to profite or flee from danger by the example of others.
            The difference betweene a wiseman and a foole is this, that the one prouideth for a mischiefe while time serueth, and the other would doe, when it is too-late. If thou mightest feele now, the state & case wherin thy poore hart shall be at the last day, for neglecting the thing, that of all other it shoulde haue studied and thought vpon most, thou wouldest take from thy meate, and sleep, and other necessaries, to repaire that is past; Hetherto hast thou time to reforme thy course of lyfe if thou be willing, which is no small benefite, if all were knowne. For in this sence (no doubt) it is most true, which the wise man sayth;
                  Eccle. 4.
                that better it is to be a liuing dog, then a dead Lyon. For that while the day time of thys life endureth, all things amisse may easilie be amended.
                  Iob. 9.
                But the dreadful nyght of death will ouer-take thee

shortly, and then shall there be no more space of 
                  •
               eformation.
            Oh that men would be wise, and fore-see things to come, sayth one Prophet.
                  Deut, 32.
                The greatest wisedome in the world (deere brother) is to looke and attende to our saluation: for as the scripture sayth most truely:
                  Eccle. 37.
                
               Hee is a wise man indeede, that is wise to his owne soule. And of this wisdom it is written in the very same Booke, as spoken by herselfe.
                  Eccle. 24.
                
               In mee is the grace of all life and truth, and in me is the hope of all lyfe and vertue. In morrall actions and humaine wisedome, we see that the first & chiefest circumstaunce is, to regard well and consider the end.Great follie and errour. And how then doe we omit the same, in this great affayre of the kingdome of heauen? If our end be heauen, what meane we so much to affect our selues to earth? If our end be God, why seeke we so greedily the worldly fauour of men? If our end be the saluation & eternitie of our soule, why doe wee follow vanities and temporalities of thys lyfe? Why spend yee your money and not in bread, sayth GOD by the mouth of Esay,
                  Esay. 55.
                
               Why bestow ye your labour on things that will not yeeld ye

saturitie?
               
                  Ephe, 1, 1, Thes, 2, 2, Pet, 1, Luke, 15.
                If our inheritance be that we should raigne as Kings, why put we our selues in such slauery of creatures? If our byrth allow vs to feede of bread in our Fathers house, why delight we to eate huskes prouided for the swyne?
            But (alas) we may say with the wise man in the Scripture,
                  Wisd, 4,
               
                
                  Fascinatio nugacitatis obscurat bona. The bewitching of worldly trifles, doe obscure and hide vs from the things that are good and behoueful for our soules: ô most daungerous enchauntment.
               Error in our course of lyfe is not pardoned. Osea, 4,
               
But what? shal thys excuse vs? no truely for the same Spyrite of GOD hath left recorded, Populus non intelligens vapulabit: The people that vnderstandeth not, shall be beaten for it. And another Prophet to the same effect pronounceth.
                  Esay, 28,
                
               This people is not wise, and therfore he that made them shall not pardon them, neyther shal he that created them, take mercie of them.
It is written of fooles, 
                  Ventum seminabunt et turbinem metent. They shall sowe and cast their seede vppon the windes, and shall receiue for theyr haruest, no
                     •
                  hing els but a storme or tempest.
Whereby is signified, that they shall not onelie

cast away and leese theyr labours, but also be punished for the same.
            Consider then I beseech thee (my deere brother) attentiuely,A profitable forewarning. what thou wilt doe or say, when thy Lord shal come at the last day, & aske thee an account of al thy labors, actions, & time spent in thys life: whē he shall require a reckoning of his talents lent vnto thee:
                  Math, 25.
                when he shal say, as he said to the Farmour or Steward in the Gospel,
                  Luke, 16.
                
               Redde rationem villicationis tuae: giue account of thy stewardship and charge committed vnto thee. What wilt thou say when he shal examine, & weigh and try thy doings, as gold is examined & tryed in the fornace, that is, what end they had? wherto they were applyed? to what glory of God? to what profit of thy soule? what measure, weight and substance they beare?
            Baltasar King of Babilon,A rare chance that happened to Baltasar K. of Babilon. Daniel, 5.
                sitting at his banquet merry vppon a time, espied suddainly certain fingers with out a hand, that wrote on the wall right ouer-against hys Table, these three Hebrewe wordes, MANE, THEKEL, PHARES. Which words Daniell interpreted in three sentences vnto the King, in thys maner.

               Mane, God hath numbred thee (Baltasar) and thy kingdom: Thekell, he hath weighed thee in ye Goldsmithes ballance, and thou art found too-light: Phares, for this cause hath he deuided thee from thy kingdome, and hath giuen the same to the Medes and Persians.
            Oh, that these three most golden and most significant words, engrauen by the Angell vppon Baltasars wal, were registred vpon euery doore and post in Christendome, or rather imprinted in the hart of each Christian, especially the two first, that import the numbring and weighing of all our actions, and that in the weights and ballance of the Goldsmyth, where euery graine is espied that wanteth.If God examine straitly the actions of Infidels, much more of Christians if they lyue carelesse. Dan. 5,
                And if Baltasars actions, that was a Gentile, were to be examined in so nyse and delicate a payre of Ballance for theyr trial, and if hee had so seuere a sentence pronounced vpon him, that he should be deuided from life & kingdome, (as he was the same night folowing) Quia inuentus est minus habens, for that hee was founde to haue lesse weight in him then he shold haue: what shall we thinke of our selues,

that are Christians, of whom it is written aboue al others;
                  Soph, 1.
                
               I will search the sinnes of Ierusalem with a candle. What shal we expect, that haue not onely lesse weight then we shoulde haue, but no weight at all, in the most of our actions? what may such men (I say) expect, but onelie that most terrible threat of diuisiō made to Baltasar,A dreadful diuision. (or rather worse, if worse may be) that is, to be deuided from God and hys Angels: from participation of God & our Sauior: from communion of Saints: from hope of our inheritance: from our portion celestial & lyfe euerlasting: according to the expresse declaration made heereof by Christ himselfe, in these words to the negligent seruant.
                  Math. 24.
                
               The Lorde of such a seruant shal come at a day when he hopeth not, & at an houre that he knoweth not, and shall deuide him out, and assigne his part with hypocrites, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
            
            Wherfore (deere brother) to conclude this chapter,The conclusion. I can say nothing more in this dangerous case, wherin the world so runneth awry, but onelie exhort thee (as the Apostle doth) not to conforme thy selfe to the cō
               mon

errour that leadeth to perdition. Fal at length to some reckoning and account with thy selfe, and see where thou standest, and whether thou goest. If hetherto thou haue wandered and gone astray, be sorrie for the tyme lost, but passe no further. If hetherto thou haue not considered ye weightines of thys affayre, serue thy selfe of thys admonition, and remember that it is written, that a Wiseman profiteth by euery occasion.
               
                  Prou, 6.
                Esteeme thy resolution in thys one poynt, the chiefest menage that euer shal passe through thy hands in this world, albeit yu wert a Monarche and Ruler of tenne worlds together. And finally, I will end with the verie same words, wherewith the wiseman concludeth hys whole Booke. Feare God and obserue his commaundements, for this is euery man.
               
                  Eccle, 11.
                That is, in thys dooth all and euery man consist: his end, his beginning, hys lyfe, and cause of beeing: that hee feare God, and direct hys actions to the obseruaunce of hys commaundements; for that without thys, he is no man in effect, seeing that hee looseth al benefit, both of his name, nature, redemption and creation.
         
         
            
            THAT THE SERVICE WHICH GOD REQVIRETH OF MAN IN THIS present lyfe, is Religion. With the particuler confirmations of Christian Religion, aboue all other in the world. CHAP. IIII.
            HAuing prooued in the former chapters, that there is a GOD, which created man: and that man in respect thereof, and of other benefites receiued, is boūd to honor and serue the same GOD, the question may be made in thys place, what seruice this is that God requireth, and wherin it dooth consist? Whereunto the aunswer is briefe & easie, that it is Religion;Of Religiō. which is a vertue that containeth properlie the worshyp & seruice that we owe vnto GOD; euen as Pietie is a vertue,Pietie. contayning the duety that chyldren doe owe vnto theyr Parents, & Obseruaunce another vertue,Obseruaunce, that comprehendeth the regard, that schollers

and seruaunts beare vnto their Maisters. In respect of which comparison and likenes betweene these vertues, God sayth by a certaine Prophet;
                  Mala. 1.
                
               The sonne honoreth his father, and the seruaunt his Maister, if then I be a Father, where is my honour? if I be a Maister, where is my feare?
            
            
               The acts & opperations of Religion.The acts of Religion are diuers, & different; some internall, as deuotion and prayer: some other external, as adoration, worship, sacrifice, oblations, and such lyke, that are declarations, and protestations of the internall. It extendeth it selfe also to styrre vp and put in 
                  •
               re, the acts and operations of other vertues for the seruice of God; in which sence saint Iames nameth it,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ames, 1,
                
               Pure & vnspotted Religion, is to visite Orphans & widdowes in their tribulation, & to keepe our selues vndefiled from the wickednes of this world. Finally, how soeuer some Heathens doe vse thys worde Religion,
                  August. lib, 10, de ciuit. capit. 1.
                to some other significations: yet, (as S. Augustine well noteth) the vse therof among the faithfull, hath alwaies beene,How much it importeth to be religious. to signifie thereby, the worship, honour, and seruice, that is due vnto GOD, so that if in one word you will haue it

declared, what GOD requireth of man in thys life: it may be rightlie sayd, that all standeth in thys, that he be religious.
            Heereof it proceedeth, that whatsoeuer sort or sect of people in the world, professed reuerence, honor, or worship to GOD, or to gods, or to anie diuine power, essence, or nature what-soeuer: (were they Iewes, Heathens, Gentiles, Christiās, Turks, Moores, Heretiques, or other,) they did alwaies cal theyr said profession, by the name of their Religion. In which sence also, and signification of the worde, I am to treate at thys tyme of Christian Religion; that is, of the substaunce, forme, maner & way, reuealed by Christ and hys Apostles vnto vs, of performing our duty and true seruice towards God. Which seruice, is the first poynt necessary to be resolued vpon, by hym that seeketh his saluation, as in the Chapter yt goeth before hath beene declared. And for obtaining this seruice & the true knowledge thereof, no meane vppon earth is left vnto man, but only the light and instruction of Christian Religion,The necessity of Christian Religion. according to the protestation of S. Peter

vnto the Gouernours of the Iewes, whē he sayd;
                  Acts
                        •
                      4,
                
               There is no other name vnder heauen giuen vnto men whereby to be saued, but onely this of Christ and of his Religion.
            
            If you obiect against me, that in former tymes before Christes natiuitie, as vnder the law of Moises for two thousand yeeres together, there vvere many Saints
                  •
                who without Christian Religion serued God vprightly,How men were saued in old tyme without Christian Religion. as the Prophets & other holy people: and before them againe in the law of Nature, when neyther Iewish nor Christian Religion was yet heard of, for more thē two thousand yeeres: there wanted not dyuers that pleased God, & serued him truely, as Enoch, Noe, Iob, Abraham, Iacob, and others. I aunswer, that albeit these men, (especially the former, that liued vnder the Law of nature) had not so particuler & expresse knowledge of Christ & of his misteries, as we haue now: for thys was reserued to the time of grace, (as S. Paul in diuers places at large declareth,
                  Gal, 3, & 4, Ephe, 3, Colos, 1,
               ) that is, albeit they knewe not expresly, how and in what maner Christ should be borne: whether of a Virgine or no; or in what

particuler sort he should liue & die: what Sacraments he should leaue,
                  See S. August. lib. 19. cont. Faust. capit. 14.
                what way of publishing his Gospell he shold appoint, & the like, (wherof notwithstanding very many particulers were reuealed to the Iewes from time to time, and the neerer they drewe to the tyme of Christes appearaunce, the more plaine reuelation was made of these misteries:) yet I say, all and euery one of these holy Saints, that lyued from Abraham vntil the comming of Christ, had knowledge in generall of Christian Religion, and did belieue the same;All olde Saints beleeued in Christ, and were saued by him. that is, they belieued expresly that there shold come a Sauiour and Redeemer of man-kinde, to deliuer them from the bondage contracted by the sinne of Adam.
            This was reuealed straight after theyr fall, to our first Parents and Progenitors in Paradise: to wit, that by the Womans seede,
               
                  Gen
                        •
                      3, v, 15
                our redemption should be made. In respect wherof, it is sayd in the Reuelations,
                  Apoc. 3,
                that Christ is the Lambe that hath been slaine 
                  •
               rō the beginning of ye world.
            And Saint Peter, in the first generall Counsell holden by the Apostles,
                  Acts, 15.
                affirmeth, that the old auncient

Fathers before Christes natiuitie,
                  Rom, 5.
                were saued by the grace of Christ,
                  Ephe, 8.
                as we are nowe, which S. Paul confirmeth in diuers places. And finallie, the matter is so cleere in this behalfe, that the whole 
                  Reade S. Aug. l. 18. de ciuit. 1.47. et Epist. 49. & 157. & tract, 45. in Ioh. Cle. Alex. lib. 6. Strom. et Ierom in ca. 3. ad Gala.
                schoole of Diuines accordeth, that Fayth and Religion of the auncient Fathers, before Christes appearaunce: was the very same in substaunce that ours is now, sauing onely, that it was more generall, obscure, and confuse then ours is, for that it was of things to come, as ours is now of things past & present.
            For example; they belieued that a Redeemer should come: and we belieue that hee is already come.The difference betweene our beliefe and the old Fathers. They sayd, Virgo concipiet, a Virgine shall conceiue: and we say: Virgo concepit, a Virgine hath conceiued. They had sacrifices and ceremonies yt prefigured his comming for the time ensuing: we haue sacrifice & sacraments that represent hys being for the time present. They called theyr Redeemer, The expectation of Nations:
               
                  Esay, 7.
                and we call him now, The saluation of Nations.
               
                  Gene, 49.
                And finallie, there was no other difference betweene the olde fayth of good men

from the beginning, and ours: but only in the circumstaunces of time, cleerenes, particularitie, and of the manner of protesting the same, by outward signes and ceremonies. For that in substaunce they belieued the same Redeemer that we doe, and were saued by the same beliefe in his merits as we are. For which cause Eusebius 
                  Eusebius handleth this matter at large, lib. 1. dem. Euan. cap. 5,
                well noteth, that as wee are called now Christians, so they were called then Christi, Psalm, 104. that is, annointed in prefiguration of the true Christ in whom they belieued, as the first and head of all other annointed, and who was the cause and authour of their annoynting.
            By thys then it is most manifest, that not onely nowe to vs that are Christi
                  •
               ns, but at all other times from the beginning of the worlde, and to all other persons and people what-soeuer, that d
                  •
               sired to haue theyr soules saued, it was necessarie to belieue and loue CHRIST, and to professe in hart hys Religion. For which consideration,The causes of thys Chapter. I thought it not amisse in thys place, after the former groundes layde that there is a GOD, and that man

was created and placed heere for hys seruice: to demonstrate and prooue also this other principle, that the only seruice of thys God, is by Christian Religion. Wherein, al
                  •
               eit I doe not doubt, but that I shall seeme to many, to take vppon me a superfluous labour, in proouing a verit
                  •
               e, which all men in Christendome doe confesse: yet for the causes before alledged in ye second chapter, which mooued me in that place to proue, that there is a GOD; that is to say, first, for the comfort, strength, and confirmation of such, as either from the enemy may receiue temptations, or of themselues may desire to see a reason of theyr bel
                  •
               efe: and second-lie, for awaking
                  •
                styrring, or stinging of others, who either of malice, carelesnes, or sensualitie, are fallen a sleepe, and haue lost the feeling and sence of theyr beleefe, (for ma
                  •
               ie such want not in these our miserable dayes,) it shall not be (perhaps) but to eue
                  •
               y good purpose, to lay together in thys place, with the greatest breuity yt possibly may be, the most sure groundes and inuincible euidences, which we haue for declaration & confirmation of this matter.
            
               For albeit the Apostle Saint Paule declareth the things which we beleeue,
                  Heb, 11,
                be not such in themselues, as may be made apparant by reason of humane arguments: yet such is the goodnesse, and most sweete proceeding of our mercifull GOD towardes vs, as he will not leaue himselfe without sufficient testimonie, both inward and outwarde, as the same Apostle in another place doth testifie.
                  Acts, 14,
                For that inwardly, he testifieth the truth of such thinges as wee belieue, by gyuing vs light and vnderstanding, with internall ioy and consolation in belieuing them. And outwardly hee giueth testimony to the same,The diuers testimonies from God, of ye things that we belieue. with so many conueniences, probabilities, and Arguments of credibilitie, (as Diuines doe cal thē,) that albeit the very point of that which is belieued, remaine stil with some obscuritie: yet are there so many circumstaunces of lykelihoodes, to induce a man to the beleefe thereof, as in all reason it may seeme against reason to deny or mistrust them.
            Thys shall easily appeare by the Treatise following of Christ and Christianitie, and of the foundations

of our Religion, which shal be confirmed by so many pregnant reasons, and most manifest circumstances of euident probability, as I doubt not, but the zealous Christian shall take exceeding comfort therein, and ésteeme himselfe happy, to haue a lot in that faith & Religion, where he shal see & feele so much reason, proofe, & conueniencie to concurre & shew it selfe, for hys satisfaction.
            And to thys effect, it shall bee of no meane moment, that I haue proued before, the certaintie, diuinitie, and infallible truth of ye Iewes scriptures, or olde Testament; which writings we haue receiued from that Nation that dooth (as it were) professe enmitie against vs, & the same being written so many ages before the name of Christianity was known in the worlde: it cannot be but of singuler authoritie, whats
                  •
               euer shal be alledged out of those recordes for our purpose. And therefore as before, in procuing our first principle, That there is a GOD, we vsed onelie the testimonie of such witnesses,The vndoubted witnesses to be alledged in thys Chapter. as could not be partiall: so, much more in this confirmation of Christian Religion, shall we stand onelie,

eyther vppon the confession of such as are our enemies, or vpon the records of others, who must needes be indifferent in the cause, for that they lyued before eyther cause or controuersie in Christianitie was knowne or called in question.
            My whole purpose shall be then, to make manifest in thys Chapter,The dryft of thys Chapter. that IESVS CHRIST vvas the Sauiour and Redeemer of all mankinde, fore-promised and expected from the beginning of the worlde; that he was the onely sonne of God, and God himselfe, and consequentlie, that what-soeuer he hath left vs in hys doctrine and Religion, is true and sincere, and the onely way of saluation vpon earth.
            For cleerer proofe, & declaration whereof, I wil reduce what-soeuer I haue to say heerein, vnto three principall heads or branches,The principall heads. according to the order of three distinct tymes wherein they fel out; That is to say, in the first place shal be considered, the things that passed before the natiuitiy or incarnation of Christ. In  the seconde, the thinges doone and verified from that time vnto his ascention, which is the space of hys abode

                vpon earth. And in the thyrde place, such euents shall be considered, as ensued for confirmation of his Deitie, after his departure.
            In declaration of which three generall poynts, I hope by the assistaunce of him whose cause we handle, that so many cleere demonstrations shall be dyscouered: as shall greatly confirme thy fayth (gentle Reader,) and remoue all occasions of temptation to infidelitie.
            
               How Christ was fore-told to Iew & Gentile. SECT. 1.
               FIrst then, for such things as passed before Christ appeared in the flesh, and doe make for proofe of our Christian Religion, it is to be noted, that they are of two sorts, or at least wise,The Iew & Gentile. they are to bee taken from two kindes of people, that is, partly frō the Iewes, & partly from the Gentiles. For seeing that Christ was appointed from the beginning, yea, before the world was created, 
                     Ephe, 1, 1. Tim, 2,
                  (as Saint Paule affirmeth) to worke the redemption both of Iewe and

Gentile,
                     Titus, 1, 1. Peter, 1,
                   and to make them both one people in the seruice of hys Father: heer-hence is it, that he was fore-told and prefigured to both these Nations,
                     Esa, 2, 11, 19
                   and diuers fore-warnings were left among them both,
                     Ier, 9, 12.16
                   for styrring them vp to expect hys comming, as by the considerations folowing shal most euidently appeare.
               
                  The 
                        •
                     irst Consideration.
                  AND to begin with the Iewes,The Messias promised. no man can deny, but that throughout the whole bodie and course of Scriptures, that is, from the very beginning to the last ende of theyr olde Testament, they had promised vnto them a Messias, which is the very same that we cal Christ, that is to say, a person annointed & sent from God, to be a Sauiour, a Redeemer, a Pacifier of Gods wrath, a Mediator between God and man, a Satisfier for the sinnes and offences of the whole worlde, a Restorer of our innocencie lost in Paradise, a Maister, an Instructer, a Law-giuer, a Spirituall and eternall King, that should sitte, and rule and raigne in

our harts, to conquer the power and tyranny of satan, ye enemy of mankinde, who ouer-came our first Parents Adam and Eue, and neuer ceaseth to assaile vs.
               
               
                  The first couenaunt to Adam.
                  THIS is euident by the first couenant of all, that euer GOD dyd make wyth man, when he sayde to Adam our first Father in Paradise,
                        Gene, 2,
                      
                     In what day soeuer thou shalt eate of the Tree that is forbidden, thou shalt die.
                  
                  Which couenaunt beeing after broken, on the part of our sayd Progenitor, he receiued hys iudgement, but yet with a most benigne promise of redemption for the tyme to come: for thus God said to ye deuill or Serpent that had deceiued hym:
                        Gene, 3.
                      
                     The seede of the Woman shall crushe thy head, and thou shalt lie in waite to hurt his heele. That is, one shall proceede in tyme, of the seede of the Woman, who shall conquer Death and Sinne (that are thy weapons,) and shall not care for thy temptations, but shall treade them vnder hi
                        •
                     
                     
feete, and thys shall be Christ the Messias of the world.
                  Thus did not onely the 
                        Rabbi Moses Benmaimon in hun
                              •
                            locum.
                      eldest Iewes & Rabbines vnderstand thys place, (what-soeuer the latter haue dreamed, that their Messias should be onely a temporall King,) but also the olde Chaldie Paraphrase, (named Thargum Hierosolimitanum) expoūdeth it plainly in these words, applyed vnto the deuil that had d
                        •
                     
                     ceiued Adam:
                        Tharg. Hieroso. in Gen. cap. 3.
                      
                     They haue a certain and present remedy against thee (O deuill,) for that the time shall come, when they shal tread thee downe with theyr heeles, by the helpe of Messias which shall be theyr King.
                  
               
               
                  To Abraham and Isaacke.
                  THE same thing is confirmed by the very same promise seauen times repeated and established vnto Abraham, that liued very neere two thousand yeeres after Adam: and again to Isaack his sonne after him, In semine tuo benedicentur omnes gentes terrae.
                     
                        Gene. 12. & 18. and 22.
                      All Nations of the earth shall be blessed in thy seede. Which had beene indeede, but a very small

benediction to Abraham, or to the Iewes after him, (yt neuer saw theyr Messias actually) if hee had beene onely to be a temporall king: And much lesse blessing had it beene to the Gentiles & all other Nations, if this Messias of the Iewes, must haue been a tēporal & worldly Monarch, to destroy & subdue them to the seruitude of Iurie, as fondly the latter teachers of that Nation do contend.
               
               
                  Iacobs prophecie of Christ.
                  THIS yet maketh the Patriarch Iacob more plaine, who prophecying at his death of the cōming o
                        •
                      Christ, hath these words:
                        Gen, 49,
                      
                     The scepter (or gouernment) shall not be taken from the house of Iuda, vntill 
                           •
                        ecome that is to be sent, and he shall b
                           •
                         the expectation of Nations.
Which latter words, the fore-named Chaldie Paraphrase, as also great Onke
                        •
                     los,
                        Tharg. Hieroso 
                              •
                           t Onkelos in hunc locum.
                      (both of singuler authoritie a
                        •
                     mong the Iewes,) do interpret thus 
                        Donec Christus 
                              •
                           eu Messias venia
                              •
                            &c. Vntil Christ or ye Messias com
                           •
                         (which is the hope and expectatio
                           •
                         of all Nations, as wel Gentiles, as 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        
vs that are Iewes,) the gouernment shall not cease in the house or Tribe of Iuda. By which sentence of scripture, and interpretation of the Iewes themselues, we come to learne, (besides the promise of the Messias,) two consequences in this matter, against ye Iewes of latter tymes.
First, that if their Messias must be ye hope and expectation as well of the Gentiles as of the Iewes:The Messias must be a spirituall & not a temporall king. then can hee not be a temporall King to destroy the Gentiles, (as ye latter Iewes wold haue it,) but a spyrituall King, to raigne ouer them, and to bring in subiection theyr spyrituall enemies for thē, (I mean the flesh, the world and the deuil,) as all true Christians doe beleeue. Secondly, if the temporal kingdome of the house of Iuda, (whereof Christ must come,) shall cease and be destroyed at the comming of Messias, as the Scripture auoucheth: how then can the Iewes expect yet a temporal King for their Messias, as most fondly they doe?
                  But to leaue this controuersie with the latter Rabbines, and to goe forwarde in declaration of that which we tooke in hand, that is, to shewe how Christ was fore-tolde and promised

to the Iewes. It is to be noted, that after the death of Iacob last mentioned, there is little recorded in scripture of the doings of his people, during the space of foure hundred yeres being ye time of their bondage in Egipt;The tradition of the Iewes in Misdrasch Thehilim. but yet ye tradition of that Natiō teacheth, that as soone as they were deliuered out of Egypt, & were in the Desert towards the Land of Promise, the three sonnes of Chore, called Aser, Eleana, and Abiasaphe, (of whom mention is made in the sixt chapter of Exodus, & other places) made diuers songs & Psalmes in the praise & expectation of the Messias to come, and that the holy men of that time, did solace themselues with singing the same: & that king Dauid afterward in the second part of his Psalmes,See the tytles of these Psalmes heere specified. beginning from the fortie and one, vnto the eyghty and seauen, gathered the most parte of these old songs together, as yet they are to be seene in his Psalter.
               
               
                  Moises Prophecie of Christ.
                  BVT Moises, who liued with the people, and gouerned thē in the

wildernesse, had a cleere reuelation from GOD of thys Messias in these words,
                        Deut. 18
                              •
                           
                        
                      
                     I will raise vp a Prophet to this people from amongst theyr bretheren, euen as my selfe: and I will put my words in his mouth, & he shall speake vnto them all things which I shall ordaine vnto him: and he that shal refuse to heare the wordes which he shal speake vnto them in my name, I will be reuenged vppon that man. Which words, that they cannot be vnderstoode of any other Prophet that euer lyued after Moises among the Iewes, but onely of CHRIST, it appeareth most manifestly and plainly by the testimony of the holie Ghost, where he sayth,
                        Deut. 34.
                      
                     And there arose not any other Prophet in Israell like vnto Moises. &c,
                  
               
               
                  Dauids Prophecie of Christ.
                  AFter Moises about four hundred yeeres, ensued Dauid, who for that he was a holy man, & the first King of the house of Iuda, out of whose linage ye Messias was to com: the particulers of thys misterie, were more aboundantly and manifestlie

reuealed vnto him, then vnto any other. And first, for assuraunce that Christ should be borne of his stock and lynage, these are the wordes of GOD vnto hym:
                        Psalm, 88, 2, Reg, 7, 1. Chro, 22.
                      
                     I haue sworne to Dauid my Seruaunt: I will prepare thy seed from eternity, and wil builde vp thy seate to al generations. Which words, albeit the latter Iewes wil apply it to King Salomon, that was Dauids sonne, (and in some sence they may so be, for that King Salomon was a figure of Christ to come) yet properly these wordes,
                        3, Reg, 5, 1. Chro. 22.
                      
                     And his kingdome shall stand for euer, and for all eternitie, which are so often repeated in thys & other places of the Scripture, cannot be verified in Salomon, whose earthly kingdom was rent and torne in peeces straight after hys death by Ieroboam,
                        3, Reg. 12,
                      and not long after, as it were extinguished; but they must needes be vnderstood of an eternall King, which should come of Dauids seede: as must also these other wordes of GOD in the Psalmes:
                        Psal, 2, 45, 47, 67, 72.
                      
                     Thou art my sonne, this day haue I begotten thee, I will giue vnto thee the Gentiles for thine inheritāce.
                  
                  Which was neuer fulfilled in Salomon, nor in any other temporall

King in Iurie after him. And much lesse these words which follow:
                        Psal
                              •
                            71,
                      
                     He shall endure with the sunne, and before the Moone, from generation to generation. There shall ryse vp in his daies peace, vntill the Moone be taken away: he shal raigne from sea to sea, vnto the ends of the world: all kinges shall adore him, and all Nations shall serue him: for that hee shall deliuer the poore man that had no helper: he shall saue theyr soules, and deliuer them from vsurie, & from iniquitie: all Trybes of the earth shall be blessed in him, and all Nations shall magnifie him.
                  
                  These words of Christes eternall kingdome, of hys enduring to the worlds end: of his vniuersal raigne ouer Iewe and Gentile: of his adoration by all Nations: of his deliuerie of soules from bondage of iniquitie, and finally, of hys making blessed all trybes of the earth: cannot possibly be applied to any temporall King that euer was among the Iewes, or euer shall be vnto the worlds end, but onely Christ.
               
               
                  
                  Ieremies Prophecie of Christ.
                  THIS promise made vnto Dauid, for Christ to come of hys seede, is repeated after his death, by many Prophets, and confirmed by GOD, as in Ieremie, where God vseth these words; Behold, the dayes come on, and I wil rayse vp to Dauid a iust seede,
                     
                        Ierem, 23. and 33.
                      
                     & he shal raigne a king, and shal be wise, and shal doe iudgement and iustice vpon earth. And in his dayes shal Iuda be saued, and Israell shall dwell confidently, and this is the Name that men shall call him, OVR IVST GOD. All thys was spoken of Dauids seede, aboue four hundred yeeres after Dauid was buried.
                  Which proueth manifestly, that the former promises and speeches, were not made to King Dauid for Salomon hys sonne, or for anie other temporal King of Dauids line: but for Christ, who was called so particulerly The son & seede of Dauid: for that Dauid was the first King of the Trybe of Iuda, and not onely was Christes Progenitor in the

flesh, but also did beare hys tipe & figure in many other things.
               
               
                  Ezechiels prophecie of Christ.
                  FOR which cause likewise in the Prophet Ezechiell (who lyued about the same tyme yt Ieremie did,) the Messias is called by the name of Dauid himselfe: for thus GOD spake at that time vnto Ezechiel:
                        Ezech. 34. Christ is called Da
                        
                           •
                        id. 
                     I wil saue my flocke, nor shal they be any longer left to the spoyle, &c. I will rayse ouer them, ONE PASTOR, which shall feede them, my seruaunt DAVID, he shal feede them, & he shall be theyr sheepheard, & Prince, and I will be theyr God, & will make with them a couenaunt of peace. &c. In which words, not onely we that are called Christians, but the latter Iewes also themselues, doe confesse in theyr Thalmud,
                     
                        Thal. tract. Sanch. cap. halec.
                      that their Messias is called by the name of Dauid, for that he shall discend of the seede of Dauid; as by reason also it must of necessity be so, for that King Dauid beeing dead four hundred yeres before these wordes were spoken, (as hath beene noted) could not nowe

come againe to feede Gods people, or gouerne them himselfe.
               
               
                  The Prophecies of Esay, touching Christ.
                  ESay the Prophet, who lyued about a hundred yeeres before Ieremie and Ezechiel, had meruailous fore-knowledge of the Messias, and hys affayres, and describeth him very particulerly, beginning in thys manner.
                        Esay. 2,
                      
                     In the latter daies, the HIL of Gods house shall be prepared vppon the toppe of Mountaines, and all Nations (or Gentiles) shall flowe vnto him. And many people shall say, come and let vs ascend vnto the HIL of the Lord, and he shall teach vs his waies, and we shall walke in his pathes: hee shall iudge Nations, &c. Which very words are also repeated in Michaeas the Prophet,
                        Mich, 4,
                      and are applyed there (as also heere) vnto the Messias, and can haue no other meaning, by the iudgement of the Iewes & Hebrues themselues. And Esay dooth prosecute the same matter afterwardes in dyuers Chapters. As for example, in the fourth, talking of the same Messias,

which before he called the HIL of Gods house, he addeth these words.
                        Esay, 4,
                      
                     In that day shal the issue of the Lord, be in magnificence and glory, and the fruite of the earth, in sublimitie and exultation, to all such as shal be saued of Israell. In which words he calleth the Messias, both the issue of GOD, and the fruite of the earth, for that he should be both God and man. And in the ninth Chapter he calleth him by these termes,
                        Esay, 9,
                      
                     Admirable: Counseller: God: Strong: Father of the future world: and Prince of peace.
                  
                  In the eleuenth Chapter, hee describeth him most wonderfully, in these words:
                        Esay, 11, Psal, 71.
                      
                     There shall goe foorth a branch of the stocke of Iesse, (which Iesse was Dauids father,
                        Eccle. 45.
                     ) and out of the roote of that branch, there shall mount vp a flower, and the Spirite of the Lord shal rest vpon him: the spirite of wisdome & of vnderstanding, the spirit of counsell and fortitude, the spirite of knowledge & pietie:
                     Wonderful properties of Christ. 
                     he shal not iudge according to the sight of (fleshlie) eyes, nor yet condemne according to the hearing of (fleshlie) eares: but hee shall iudge poore men in iustice, and shall dispute in equitie for the milde men of the earth. Hee

shal strike the earth with the rodde of his mouth, and with the spirite of his lyps shal he sley the wicked man. Iustice shall be the girdle of his loynes: and fayth shall bee the bande of hys reynes. &c.
                  
                  Hetherto are the wordes of the Prophet: wherin truely nothing can be more plaine & euident, then that by the rod or branch of Iesse, is meant the Virgine Marie,
                        Math. 1.
                      who directly discended of the linage of Iesse,
                        Luke. 3.
                      & by the flower ascending frō this branche,
                     
                        Acts. 13.
                      must needes be vnderstoode Christ,
                        Rom, 15.
                      that was borne of her, and had all those excellencies and priuiledges aboue other men, which Esay in this place assigneth vnto him.
                  Whose further gr
                        •
                     ces yet, & speciall diuine properties,Other properties of Christ. the same Prophet expresseth more particulerly in the Chapters following, where hee sayth;
                        Esay, 25.
                      
                     Hee shal for euer ouer-throwe and destroy death: he shall open the eyes of the blynde, and the eares of the deafe:
                     
                        Esay, 35. Esay, 42.
                      
                     hee shall not cry nor contende, nor shal he accept the person of anie man: but in truth shal he bring forth iudgement. He shal not be sorrowfull nor turbulent. &c.
                  
                  And finally, in the forty & nine

Chapter, he alledgeth the wordes of God ye Father vnto Christ, touching hys commission, in thys sort;
                        Esay, 49, Acts. 13.47.
                      
                     It is too-little that thou be to me a seruant, to rayse vp the trybes of Iacob, and to conuert vnto mee the dregs of Israell.
                     The Commission of Christ. 
                     Behold, I haue appointed thee also for a light vnto the Gentiles
                           •
                         that thou be my saluation vnto the vttermost parts of the earth.
                  
               
               
                  Daniels prophecie of Christ.
                  AND to conclude thys matter, without alledging more Prophecies for the same, (which in truth are infinite throughout the Bible,) Daniell that liued in the end of the captiuity of Babilon, a lyttle before Aggaeus, Zacharias, and Malachias, (who were the last Prophets that euer florished among the Iewes, almost fiue hundred yeeres before the natiuity of Christ:) this Daniel (I say) reporteth of hymselfe, that being in Babilon, and hauing fasted, worne sack-cloth, and prayed long vnto GOD, there came the Angell Gabriell vnto him at the time of the euening sacrifice, & fore-tolde hym,

not onely of the deliueraunce of the people of Israell from the captiuitie of Babilon out of hand, for that the seauentie yeeres of their punishment fore-told by Ieremie, were nowe expired, but also he tolde him further, that the time of the vniuersall deliueraunce of man-kinde, from the bondage and captiuitie of sin: was now shortned, and that after seuentie Hebdomades, (which as shal be shewed after, make vp iust the time that passed from the rebuilding of the Temple of Ierusalem after theyr deliueraunce from Babilon, vnto the byrth of Christ,) there shoulde be borne the Sauiour of the world, and be put to death for the redemption of man-kind.
                  The Angels wordes are these:
                        Dan, 9.
                      
                     I am come to shew thee, O Daniell, for that thou art a man of good desires. And therefore doe thou marke my speech, and vnderstande this vision. The seauentie Hebdomades are shortned vpon thy people, & vpon thy holy Cittie: to the end preuarication may be consumed, and sin receiue an ende, to the ende iniquitie may be blotted out, and eternall iustice brought in her place: and to the end visions and

prophecies may be fulfilled, and the SAINT OF SAINTS annoynted. Know thou therefore and marke, that from the end of the speech, for rebuilding of Ierusalem, vnto Christ the CAPTAINE, there shal be hebdomades seauen, and hebdomades sixtie two, and after sixty two hebdomades, Christ shall be put to death, and the people which shall denie him, shall not be his people.
                  
                  I myght passe on further to other Prophets, and make no ende, if I would alledge what might be sayde in thys behalfe; for that the whole Scripture runneth all to thys one poynt:The Butte of all Scripture. to fore-tell and manifest Christ, by signes, figures, parables and prophecies: and for thys cause was it principally written. But that which is already spoken, shall bee sufficient for our first consideration, whereby is seene, that among the Iewes from age to age, Christ was prophecied and fore-told, together with the eternitie of his kingdome, that should be spirituall.
               
               
                  
                  The second Consideration.
                  
                     That Christ should be both God and man.NOwe followeth there a seconde consideration of the qualitie of Christes person, of no lesse importance then the former, and wherein the latter Iewes doe more dyscent from vs: & that is, of the God-head of the Messias promised. I say the latter Iewes or Rabbines, are different herein frō vs, as also they are in many other poynts & articles, wherin theyr auncestors (that were no Christians) did fully agree. Euen as all Heretiques are wont to doe,The custome of Heretiques. that first breake in one poynt, & then in another, from the true Catholique fayth of Christ, to followe mens traditions; and so doe run on from one to one, making themselues in al things as dislike as they can, for hatred of that vnitie, whereunto theyr pride wil not suffer them to return. So is it in the generation of thys reprobate people, who first agreed with vs in all, or most poynts, touching Christ to come, and denyed onely the fulfilling or applycation thereof in Iesus our Sauiour, but afterward,

their vngracious of-spring, being not able to stand in that issue against vs, deuised a newe plea, and be tooke themselues to a far higher degree of impietie, affirming that we attribute many thinges vnto Iesus, that were not fore-tolde of the Messias to come; & among other, that he should be GOD, and the sonne of God, and the second person in Trinitie. &c.
                  But heerein (no doubt) these obstinate and gracelesse men, do shew themselues both ignoraunt of theyr own scriptures, & disagreeing from the writings of theyr owne fore-fathers. For as for scriptures, it is euident by all, or most of the Prophets alledged before, that Christ (or the Messias) must be GOD, & the son of God,That Christ must be both God and man. indued with mans nature; that is, both God and man. So in Genesis,
                        Gene. 3.
                      where he is called the seede of the Woman, it is apparent that he shal be man; and in the same place, when he is promised to crush the deuil and to breake his head:
                     The first proofe. who can doe thys but onely God? Likewise, when he is called Germen Iehouae,
                     
                        Esay
                              •
                            4,
                      the seede of our Lorde God, hys God-head is signified, as is his man-head,

also, when in the same place hee is named the fruite of the earth.
                     
                        Esay, 9.
                      Who can interprete these speeches;
                        Psalm 71,
                      That, his kingdom shalbe euerlasting. That, he shall endure vntill the Moone be taken away, and after.
                     
                        Psal. 109.
                      That, God bega
                           •
                        e him before Lucifer was created.
                     
                        Esay, 53.
                      That,
                        Psal. 96.
                      
                     no man can tell or recount his generation.
                     
                        Hebru, 1.
                      That, all Nations and Angels must adore him.
                     
                        Psal, 110
                      That, hee must sitte at the right hand of God. And many other such speeches pronounced directly and expresly of the Messias, who (I say) can vnderstand or interprete them, but of God, seeing that in man they cannot be verified? And as for the last of these testimonies, cōcerning Christes sitting at hys Fathers right hand: three of our Euangelists doe report,
                        Math, 2, Luke, 20.
                      that Iesus did blancke diuers of the learnedest Pharisies, with alledging onelie these words of Dauid, The 
                     Iehoua in Hebrue. Psalm, 110.
                      
                     Lorde said to my Lord, sit at my right hand, vntill I put thine enemies as thy footstoole. For (saide Iesus) if Christ be Dauids sonne,
                        Rab. Ionath. lib, collect. et Misdr. Tehillim. in Psal. 2. v. 7,
                      how did Dauid call him hys Lord? signifying heereby, that albeit the Messias was to be Dauids sonne, according to his man-head: yet was he to be Dauids Lord

according to his God-head. And so doe both Rabbi Ionathan, and the publique Commentaries of the Hebrues, interprete thys place.
                  Micheas is plaine;The second proofe. Mich
                              •
                           
                         
                        
                           •
                        . 
                     And thou Bethleem, out of thee shall proceede a RVLER in Israell, and his going foorth is frō the beginning, & from the dayes of eternitie. Thys cannot be vnderstood of any mortall man, that euer was or shall be. But yet Esay goeth further, when he sayth:
                        Esay, 9.
                      
                     A litle child is borne vnto vs, & a young sonne is giuen vnto vs, and his principality is vpon his owne shoulder, and his name shall be GOD, the Father of the future world (
                     So it is in the Hebrue
                           •
                        
                      
                     or of eternitie:) the Prince of peace. &c.
                  
                  In which words we see that Christ is called GOD. But if the Iewe doe cauill heere,An obiection aunswered. and say, that El or Elohim the Hebrue words, which wee interprete God in thys place, may sometime be applyed to a creature, as in Exodus,
                        Exod. 10.
                      once El signifieth an Angel, and Elohim at other tymes is applyed to Iudges: then mark thys discourse of Dauid touching ye Messias, to whom he sayth:
                        Psalm, 45.
                      
                     Thou art beautifull in forme aboue the children of men: grace is spred in thy lyps, and

therefore hath God blessed thee for euer. &c. Thy seate O God, is for euer and euer: the rod (or Scepter) of thy kingdom, is the rod of direction, thou hast loued iustice and hated iniquity, therefore God, thy God hath annointed thee with oyle of ioy aboue thy partners. Heere the Messias is called God twice by the same worde Elohim, as God his Father is: and therfore as the word signifieth true God in the one, so must it also in the other.
                  
                     The thyrd proofe.But to remoue all ground of this refuge touching El or Elohim, that are names of GOD, which may be communicated sometimes, and vppon some occasions to creatures: most apparant it is, that the name IEHOVA,Christ is called Iehoua. which is called Tetagrammaton, & which is so peculier to GOD alone, as neuer it may be communicated to any other, thys name (I say) which is of such reuerence among the Iewes, as they dare not pronounce it, but in place thereof doe reade Adonai, that signifieth Lord, is euery where almost in scripture, attributed to Christ, See Esay cap. 18. ver. 7. and cap. 28. ver. 5. namelie where the Latine Interpreter hath translated Lord: as for example, in

two diuers places of Ieremie, after the long description of the Messias, which before I haue recited, he concludeth thus;
                        Ierem, 23,
                      
                     Hoc est nomen quod vocabunt eum, Iehoua iustus noster:
                     Iere, 33. thys is the name which they shal cal him, OVR IVST IEHOVA, or as the Hebrue hath word for word, Iehoua our iustice. And so doe the auncient Hebrue expositors confesse vpon thys place of Ieremy, namely, Rabbi Abba,
                        Rab. Abba coment in Thren. v. 16 Misd. Theh. in Psal. 20. ver. 1.
                      who asketh the question what Messias shall be called? and then he aunswereth out of thys last place, He shall be called the eternal Iehoua. The like doth Misdrasch gather vpon the first verse of the 20. Psalme. And Rabbi Moses Hadarsan, expounding a place of the Prophet Sophonie, Chapter 3. verse 9. concludeth thus:
                        Rab. Moses Hadars. in Gene. ca. 41
                              •
                           
                        
                      
                     In this place Iehoua signifieth nothing els but the Messias.
                  
                  Whereby appeareth, that as well in scripture, as also in the opinion of old Hebrue expositors, the Messias was to be true God and man. And I myght alledge many other testimonies of auncient Rabbines, if it were not too long: especially, if I would enter among the kind of expositors,

whom they call Cabalists,Two sorts of Hebrue expositers, Cabalists & Thalmudists. (who are more auncient, and lesse brutish then are the other sort, which are termed Thalmudists,) I should finde many cleere and manifest declarations against the Iewes doctrine and errour of latter tymes. And among other, (for example onelie of Cabalisticall expositions) I refer the Reader to the discourse of Rabbi Hacadosch (which in Hebrue signifieth the holy Rabbine, & liued not long after Christ) vppon the wordes of Ieremie before recited: in which, for that he findeth the Messias to be called Iehoua, which word in the Hebrue is compounded of the three Letters,
                        Ierem. 23.
                      
                     Iod, Vau, and He twyse repeated: thys Doctor maketh thys discourse by arte Cabalist, in thys manner.
                  
                     Euen as (saith hee) the Letter He in Iehoua, is compounded of two other Letters, named Daleth & Vau, (as appeareth by their forme) so shal the Messias,
                           Rab. Hacadosch in Esay. cap. 9.
                         (that is signified by this word Iehoua,) bee made of two natures, the one diuine, and the other humane.A Cabalisticall discourse. And as in Iehoua, there is twise He, and consequently two Daleths, & two Vaus contained therein:

so are there two byrthes, filiations, or chyld-hoods in Messias, the one, whereby he shall be the sonne of GOD, and the other whereby he shal be the sonne of a Virgin, which Esay calleth the Prophetesse.
                        
                           Esay, 8.
                         And as in Iehoua, the Letter He is twise put, and yet both Hes doe make in effect but one Letter: so in Messias there shall be two distinct natures, and yet shall they make but one Christ.
                  
                  Thus playeth this Cabalist vpon the Letters of Iehoua, (according to the manner of theyr diuinitie,) and draweth great misteries (as yee see) from Letters ends. In which kinde of reasoning, albeit we put no groūd of strength at all: yet is it sufficient to shew, that among ye elder Iewes, it was knowne and confessed doctrine, that Christ shoulde be both God and man, & haue two natures conioyned distinctly in one person, which is the same that we Christians doe affirme.
                  Nay, I will adde further,The fourth proofe. (& thys is greatly to be obserued,) that the selfe same auncient Iewes, (as some also of the latter) doe hold, & proue by Scripture, that Christ shal be,Christ called the Son of GOD. (for alwaies they speake of the Messias to

come) the very sonne of GOD. Et verbum Dei incarnatum, & the word of God incarnate, or made fleshe. And for the first, that shall bee the sonne of God, they proue it out of diuers places alledged by me before: as for example, out of Genesis,
                        Gene, 49.
                      whe
                        •
                      the Latine text hath: The scepter of Iuda shall not be taken away, vntill he come that is to be sent.
                     
                        Rab. Dauid Kimhi. in li. radicum.
                      The Hebrue hath, vntill Silo come, which Silo, Rabbi Kimhi proueth by a long discourse, to signifie so much as Filius eius, hys sonne, that is, the sonne of GOD. The same they proue by the place of Esay,
                        Esay. 4.
                      where the Messias is called Germen Iehouae, the seede or sonne of Iehoua. Which the Chaldie Paraphrase termeth,
                        Tharg. in hun
                              •
                            locum.
                      
                     the Messias of Iehoua. They proue the same also out of diuers Psalmes, where Christ is called plainly the sonne of GOD, as where it is sayd:
                        Psal, 49.
                      
                     He shal say vnto me, thou art my Father. &c. I will put him, mine eldest sonne, more higher then al the Kings of the earth, &c. Iehoua said vnto me, thou art my son, this day haue I begotten thee, &c.
                     
                        Psalm. 
                              •
                           .
                      
                     Kisse the 
                     This is according to the Hebrue text. 
                     son ye Kings & Iudges of the earth, and happy are al they they place theyr hope in him. Which last

words can no way be vnderstood of the sonne of any man, for that it is written, Cursed is the man that putteth his trust in man.
                     
                        Ierem, 17
                              •
                           
                        
                      Wherefore Rabbi Ionathan, Rabbi Selemoth, Aben Ezar, and others, do conclude by these and other places which they alledge, that the Messias must be the very Sonne of GOD.
                  And for the second poynt,The fist proofe. they goe yet further, affirming this sonne to be Verbum Patris, the worde of God the Father. Which the foresaid Ionathan in his Chaldy Paraphrase, doth expresse in many translations: as for example; where Esay saith, Israell shall be saued in Iehoua with eternall saluation, (which Iehoua signifieth Christ, as al men do cōfes
                        •
                     e) Ionathan In the Chaldie Paraphrase. Hosea, 1,
                      turneth it thus: Israell shall be saued by Gods word. So againe, where God sayth by Hosea, I will saue the house of Iuda by Iehoua theyr God: (which is by Christ,) Ionathan translateth it thus: I wyll saue Iuda by the word of theyr God. In lyke manner where Dauid wryteth,
                        Psalm. 110.
                      
                     Iehoua sayd to my Lord, sitte at my right hand, &c. Ionathan expresseth it thus: Iehoua sayde vnto his worde, sitte at my right hand. So
                     
Rabbi Isaack Arama,
                        Rab. Isaack. com. in cap. 47. Gen.
                      writing vpon Genesis, expoundeth this verse of the Psalme:
                        Psalm, 106. verse 20.
                      
                     he sent his word and healed them, &c. to be meant of Messias, that shal be Gods word. And Rabbi Simeon the chiefe of all the Cabalistes, vpon these words of Iob,
                     
                        Rab. Simeon Ben. Iahai. com. in cap. 10, Gene. Iob, 19,
                      
                     I shall see GOD in my flesh: gathereth, that the word of God shal take flesh in a womans wombe. So that thys doctrine was nothing strange among the auncient Rabbines.
                  For further confirmation whereof, (seeing the matter is of so great importance) consider what is recorded in a Treatise called Zoar,
                        Rab. Simeon in Zoar.
                      of high authoritie among the Iewes, where Rabbi Simeon that was last before alledged, citeth a place out of olde Rabbi Ibda, vppon these wordes in Deuteronomie,
                        Deut, 6.
                      
                     Iehoua our Lorde is one Iehoua, which words the sayde auncient Rabbi Ibda,The blessed Trinitie, prooued by an auncient Rabbine. interpreteth in thys manner:
by the first Iehoua in thys sentence, (being the incōmunible name of God,) is signified, sayth he, GOD the Father, Prince of all things. By the next words our Lorde is signified GOD the sonne, that i
                           •
                         fountaine of all Sciences. And b
                           •
                         the second Iehoua, in the same sen
                           •
                        tence,

is signified GOD the holie Ghost, proceeding of thē both. To all which there is added the worde (One) to signify that these three are inuincible. But this secrete shall not be reuealed vntill the comming of Messias. Hetherto are the words of Rabbi Ibda, reported in Zoar by Rabbi Simeon, where also the said Rabbi Simeon interpreteth these words of Esay, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabaoth, in this manner. Esay by repeating three times holy, sayth he, doth as much, as if he had sayd, Holy Father, holy Son, & holy Spirite: which three Holies, doe make but one only Lord God of Sabaoth.
                  
                  Finally,The sixt proofe. I will conclude thys controuersie betweene the latter Iewes and vs, with the authoritie of learned Philo, who lyued in the verie same time with Christ, and was sent Embassadour twise to Rome, in the behalfe of his Nation in Alexandria;
                        Phil. li. 2. legat Ruff. lib. 1. hist. 1, 6. Euseb. in Chron.
                      that is, first in the 15. yeere of Tyberius the Emperour, which was three yeeres before Christes passion, and the very same yeere wherein he was baptised by S. Iohn: and the second time about eyght yeres after, to wit, in the first yere of the raigne of Caligula.

Thys man, that was the learnedest that euer wrote among the Iewes, (after ye writers of holy scriptures ceased) made a speciall Booke of the banishment of hys Countrimen, where hee hath thys discourse ensuing.
                  
                     
                        
                           Philo. lib. de exulibus.
                        What tyme may be appointed, (saith he) for the returne home of vs banished Iewes, it is hard to determine. For by tradition we haue, that we must expect the death of an high Priest. But of those some die quicklie, and some liue longer. But I am of opinion, that this high Priest shal be the very word of GOD
                           •
                         which shall be voyde of all sinne, both voluntarie and inuoluntarie: whose Father shall be GOD, & this word shall be that Fathers wisedome, by which all things in thys world were created. His head shal be annointed with oyle, and hys kingdome shall florish, and shyne for euer.
                  
                  Thys wrote Phylo at that tyme, when he little imagined, yt the same high Priest, whom he so much expected, and the same word of God, whose kingdome he describeth, was now already come into the worlde. And this shall suffise for our second

consideration, what maner of Messias the Iewes did expect.
               
               
                  The third Consideration.
                  NOw in the third place commeth to be considered, what authoritie and power the Messias shoulde haue at hys appearance vpon earth, and whether he should change and abrogate the Law of Moses,Whether christ shold change the Lawe of Moses. or no? Wherein there is no lesse controuersie between vs and the latter Iewes, then in the former point of his diuinitie. For we hold with Saint Paule,
                        Gal
                              •
                            3, & 4
                              •
                           
                        
                      that the Lawe of Moses was gyuen vnto the Iewes but for a time,
                        Hebru. 7.
                      to entertaine the people withall, and by the outward signes and ceremonies which it had,
                        1, Cor, 20.
                      (whereof ye most pa
                        •
                     t, or a
                        •
                     l, prefigured Christ to come:) to be their Schoole-maister and leader to the tyme of fayth, wherein it should be abrogated, & a far more perfect law se
                        •
                     te downe by Christ in place thereof.
                  This we prooue first,The Lawe of Moses imperfect. Hebru. 7.
                      for that the Lawe of Moses was an imperfect Law, bringing nothing to perfection, as S. Paule well noteth; It was

as S. Peter saith,
                        Acts, 15,
                      a burdensome law, which the Iewes thēselues were not able to beare, for the multitude of ceremonies therein contayned. It was a carnall and seruile Law, consisting most in the external. It was a Law of terror and feare,
                        Gala, 3.
                      more then of loue and liberty of the spirite. It was a Lawe (as I sayd before,) of signes & figures for things to come, & consequently to cease, whē those things which it prefigured shoulde come to be present. It was a Lawe, peculier and proper to the Iewes only,
                        Deut, 15,
                      without respect of all the rest of the world:
                        Deut, 13, and 14, Leu, 5, 25, Exod, 23, Deut, 27,
                      and the exercise thereof, was allowed onely in the Countrey of Iurie; and that which is more, it was not permitted but in one place onely of that Countrey, that is, in Ierusalem, whether euery man was bound to repayre three times a yere, to wit, at the Pasqua, at the Pentecoste, & at the feast of Tabernacles: & in that place alone to make theyr sacrifices, and in no other Countrey or place besides.
                  Now then reasoneth the learned Diuine,Good reasons. if thys Lawe of Moses were for the Iewes, and Iurie onely, howe could it serue for ye tyme of the Messias,

who was to be King as well of the Gentiles as of the Iewes:
                        Psal, 2, 21.
                      and to rule all people in the worlde,
                        Esay, 2, 11,
                      that shoulde belieue in hym vnder one Law. If the exercise of this law were allowable onely, and law
                        •
                     ull in Ierusalem: how could it possiblie be fulfilled by Christians, that are dyspersed ouer all the world? as for example, howe could they repayre to Ierusalem thrise euery yeere? howe should euery woman that shoulde dwell in England or India,
                        Leuit, 12, Exod, 13, Num, 8,
                      repayre to Ierusalem for her purification after euery chyld-byrth, as by the law of Moses she was commaunded?
                  Most euident is it then, which we sayd before, that thys Law was gyuen but to endure for a time. And to vse S. Paules owne words, it was but Introductio melioris spei,
                     
                        Hebr. 7,
                      an introduction to a better hope. It was but an entertainement to that people, (which by theyr beeing among the Egiptians, were prone to Idolatrie) vntill Christ should come and ordaine a perfect Lawe.The newe Lawe of Christ, and the perfections therof. That is, a Law of spirit & internall affection: a Law of loue and libertie: a Lawe that should be common to al men: serue for al Countries, times, places,

and persons: a Law that should be written in the bowels of our harts: a Law that should be tollerable, easie, sweet, plaine, light, breefe, and flexible, as wel to the poore as to the rich, a Lawe (to conclude) yt shold consist in charitie.
                  Thys signified Moses, when hee sayde to his people, after he had deliuered the former Law vnto them:
                        Deut, 18,
                      
                     The Lorde shall rayse vnto you a Prophet of your owne Nation, and from among your owne bretheren, as my selfe: him shall you heare. As though he had sayd, you shall heare me vntill he come, that must be a Law-giuer as my selfe, but yet of a more perfect Law: and therefore more to be heard and obeyed. And then he addeth, whosoeuer shall refuse to hear the words of this Prophet, I my selfe will reuenge it sayth the Lord God. Which words cannot be verified in any other Prophet after Moses vntill Christ: for that of those Prophets the Scripture sayth,
                        Deut 34,
                      
                     There arose no Prophet like vnto Moses in Israell.
                  
                  Which is to be vnderstood, that they had no authoritie to be Law-makers, as Moses had, but were all bound to the obseruation of yt Law

onely which Moses left, vntil Christ came, whom Moses heere calleth A Prophet as himselfe: that is, a Law-maker, and exhorteth all men to heare and obey hym.
                  Thys yet is made more plaine by the Prophecie of Esay, who sayth: Out of Sion shall come a Law, and the word of God out of Ierusalem,
                     
                        Esay, 2,
                      which cannot be vnderstood of Moses law,A new law proph
                           •
                        cied. that had been published eight hundred yeeres before thys was spoken, and that from the Mount Sinai, & not from Sion. But Christes Lawe began from Sion and Ierusalem, & from thence was spredde into al the world. Which the same Esay foresaw, when talking of the comming of the Messias, he sayth:
                        Esay, 1
                              ••
                           
                        
                      
                     In that day there shall be an Altar to God, in the midst of the Land of Egipt. And the title of the Lord at the end therof. &c And God shall be known to the Egiptians at that day, and they shal honour him with sacrifices and oblations.
                  
                  Which words could not be verified in the old Law of Moses, for that by that Lawe, the Egiptians coulde haue neyther Altar nor Sacrifice, but at Christes comming it was fulfilled when ye Egiptians were made Christians,

& enioyed both the Altars & Sacrifices that Christians doe vse.
                  The same thing was fore-told by GOD in Malachie, where he sayth to the Iewes and of the Iewish Sacrifices. I haue no pleasure in you, neither wil I receiue oblations at your hands.
                     
                        Mala, 1.
                      
                     For that from the vprising of the sunne, vnto the going down thereof, my name is great among the Gentiles,
                     The reprobation of the old Law with a promise of a new. 
                     and they doe sacrifice vnto me euery where, and doe offer vnto my name a pure oblation, saith the Lorde God of Hostes. In which words wee see first, a reprobation of the Iewish sacrifice, & consequently of the law of Moses, which dependeth principally of that Sacrifice. Secondly, we see, that among the Gentiles, there should be a pure maner of sacrifice, more gratefull vnto God then the other was, & such, as myght be performed in euery place of the world, and not to be tyed to one place onlie, as the Moisaicall Law and sacrifice was. And finally, I wil conclude thys whole matter, with the expresse words of God himselfe, concerning the ceremonies and precepts of the old Law;
                        Ezech, 20,
                      
                     Dedi eis praecepta non bona, & iudicia in quibus non viuent.
                     
I gaue vnto them precepts that were not good, and iudgements wherein they shall not lyue. That is, they were not good to continue perpetually, nor shall they lyue in them for euer, but vntill the tyme by mee appointed: of which time he determineth more particulerly by Ieremie the Prophet in these words;
                        Ieremie. 3,
                      
                     Behold, the daies shal come, and I will make a newe Couenaunt or Testament with the house of Israell and Iuda:
                     A new Testament promised. 
                     not according to that Couenaunt which I made with your Fathers, when I brought them forth of the Land of Egipt. Where you see, that at the comming of Christ into thys world, (for of hym and hys byrth, he talketh at large in thys chapter) there shall be a newe Testament, contayning a different Law from that of the olde Testament, which was gyuen to the Iewes at theyr going forth of Egipt.
                  Thus much then hetherto hath been shewed, that Christ in all ages was fore-told & promised:The sum of that which hath been said. that he should be God, and that his authoritie should be to change the Lawe of Moses, that was giuen but for a tyme, and to establish a newe Lawe and Couenaunt, and a newe Testament

of hys owne, that shoulde endure and continue for euer.
               
               
                  The fourth Consideration.
                  
                     All particulers foretold of Christ.AND albeit these things be verie wonderfull, and sufficient to establish any mans beleefe in the worlde, when he shal see them fulfilled, (which shal be the argument of my second Section,) yet resteth not the Scripture heere, but passeth further, and fore-telleth euery particuler acte, accident and circumstaunce, that shal fall out of importance about the Messias at his comming, incarnation, byrth, lyfe, death, and resurrection. As for example, at what particuler time and season he should appeare. Gene, 49. verse, 10, That he shoulde be borne of a Virgine.
                        Math, 1, 
                     Esay, 7, ver. 14. That the pl
                        •
                     ce of his birth should be the Towne of Bethleem
                        •
                     
                     
                        Luke, 2,
                      
                     Michae. 5, verse, 1. That at at hys byrth all the Infants round about Bethleem should be slaine for his sake.
                        Math, 2,
                      
                     Ierem. 31, verse, 15. That the Kings of the East should come and adore him,
                        Math, 2,
                      & offer Gold and other gyfts vnto him. Psal. 71. ve. 10. That

he should be presented by hys Mother in the Temple of Ierusalem.
                        Luke, 2,
                      
                     Mala. 3, ver, 1. That he should flee into Egypt, & be recalled thence againe. Ose. 11, ver, 2, Esay, 19, verse, 1. That Iohn Baptist shold goe before hym, & cry in the Desert. Esay, 40. ver, 3, Mala, 3. ver. 1.
                  
                  After thys, that he should begyn his owne preaching with all humilitie, quietnesse, and clemencie of spirite.
                        Math, 5.
                      
                     Esay, 42, verse, 2. That he shold doe strange miracles,
                        Mat, 4. et 8, Marke, 8.
                      and heale all diseases. Esay, 29, verse, 8, and 35. ver. 5. and 61. ver. 1. That he shoulde die for the sinnes of all the worlde. Esay, 53, Dan, 9.
                     
                        Math, 27,
                      That he should be betrayed by his own Disciple. Psal. 40, ver, 10. and 54, ver. 14, and 108, verse, 8.
                     
                        Math, 16, and 27.
                      That he should be sold for thirty peeces of siluer. Zach, 11, ver. 12. That with those thirtie peeces, there should be bought afterward a Field of pot-shardes. Ierem, 30.
                     
                        Mat. 21.7
                              •
                           
                        
                      That he should ride into Ierusalem vpon an Asse before hys passion. Zach, 9, verse, 9.
                     
                        Mat, 26, 67
                      That the Iewes shold beate and buffet his face, and defile the same with spetting vpon him. Esay, 50. verse, 6. That they should whip, rent and teare his body before they

put hym to death. Esay, 53, ve. 2. Psa. 37. verse, 18.
                     
                        Luke, 22,
                      That they should put him to death among thieues & malefactors. Esay, 53, ver. 12. That they should giue him vineger to drinke,
                        Math, 27,
                      deuide his apparrel, and cast lots for hys vpper garment. Psal, 68, ver, 22, and 21, verse, 19.
                     
                        Math, 28,
                      That he shoulde rise againe from death the third day. Psalm. 15. verse 19. Ose, 6, ve. 3. That he should ascend to heauen,
                        Luke, 24,
                      and sit at the right hand of God his Father for euer.
                        Acts, 7.
                      
                     Psal, 67, verse, 19, & 109. verse. 1.
                  
                  All these particularities, and a nūber more, were reuealed in scripture touching the Messias, some four thousand yeres, some two thousand, and some one thousand, & the last of all, aboue foure hundred yeeres before Christ was borne. Which if we lay together, and doe consider withall, how exactly they were fulfilled afterwarde, in the person of Christ, as in the next Section shall be declared: if we adde also to this, that we haue receiued these Prophecies and predictions from a Nation that most of all other doth hate vs, and that the same are to be seene & read in theyr Bibles, euen worde for

word as they are in ours; if you hold in memorie also, what inuincible proofes are alledged before in the second chapter, for the infallible truth and certainty of those Hebrue scriptures: you shall find, that hardly any thing can be imagined for manifestation of a truth before it com to passe, which God hath not obserued in fore-shewing the Messias.
               
               
                  The fift Consideration.
                  AND all these considerations are touching the Iewes. There remayneth some-what to be sayde of the Gentiles;Manifestation of Christ to the Gentiles. who albeit they were to receiue their principal knowledge in thys affayre from the Iewish Nation, to whom the Messias was first and principally promised, and from whom the Gentiles had to expect, both theyr Sauiour and hys Apostles, as also the Scriptures for testimonie and witnesse of them both, and finally, al theyr certaine knowledge and sounde vnderstanding in the misteries of Christ: yet had they also among themselues, some kinde of notice and fore-warning in thys

matter, which beeing ioyned with that which I haue sette down before of the Iewes, and examined at the light of Gods diuine Prophecies before alledged, it wil make very much for confirmation of our Christian veritie. And therefore thys last consideration, shal be of the foreknowledge of Gentiles in thys behalfe.
                  For better vnderstanding wherof, it is to be noted, yt besides all knowledge of ye Messias, that diuers Gentiles might haue by the Hebru
                        •
                      scriptures, which (as Chap, 2. I haue shewed before) were in the Greeke language, diuers ages before Christ was 
                        •
                     orne, or by the instruction or conuersation of the Iewes, with whom many Pagans dyd lyue familiarlie: there remained three waies peculier to the Gentiles,Three particuler waies wherby the Gentiles might heare of Christ. wherby they receiued some vnderstanding and fore-warning of this great mistery. The first was, by tradition and writing of theyr auncestours. The second by prophecies of theyr owne. The third, by admonishment of their Idoles & Oracles, especially when the time of Chris
                        •
                     es appearaunce drew neere.
                  
                     The first way.And for the first way, it is euident, that as the Iewes receiued diuers

things by succession from their forefathers, & they againe from Moses, and Moses from the Patriarches, Iacob, Isaack, & Abraham, (who was the first man frō whom that whole Nation proceeded, and in whom they were distinguished from all other people in the world:) so had the Gentiles & other Nations,Tradition of learning among Iewes and Gentiles. theyr succession also of doctrine and monuments, euen from the beginning, albeit the lower they went, the more corrupt they were, and more obscured in diuine knowledge, by theyr exercise in Idolatry. So we knowe, that the Romains had their learning from the Graecians: the Graecians from the Egyptians: and the Egyptians from the Chaldaeans, who were the first people that receiued instruction in diuine matters from Adam, Methusalem, Noe, and others of those first auncient Fathers.
                  Now then it is to be considered,
                        Eusebius in Chron.
                      that by consent of Writers, there were three famous men that lyued together in those auncient times, to wit, A
                        •
                     raham,Abraham. (who descending from HEBER, was the Father and beginner of the Iewes or Hebrues,) and with him Iob,Iob. and one Zoroastres,Zoroastres.
                     
that were not of that linage of HEBER, but as we call them for distinctions sake, eyther Heathens or Gentiles, albeit that difference was not then in vre. And of Iob, wee know by ye testimony of his booke, that he was a most holy & vertuous man. Of Zoroastres, we know onelie, that he was greatly learned, and left testimonies thereof vnto his posteritie.
                  Thys Zoroastres lyuing in Abrahams tyme, might (by account of Scripture) see or speake with Noe. For Abraham was borne three-score yeeres before Noe deceassed. And Noe was borne aboue fiue hundred yeeres before Met
                        •
                     usalē died, which Methusalem had liued two hundred and fortie yeeres with our first Father Ad
                        •
                     m, and had enioyed conuersation both with God & Angels. And thereby (no doubt) could tell many high and secrete misteries, especially touching Christ, in whom all hys hope for redemption of hys posterity did consist. Which misterie and hidden knowledge, it is not vnlike, but that Abraham, Iob, Zoroastres & others, who lyued at that time with them, might receiue at the

third hand, by Noe, and his children, I meane The Iewes haue a tradition, that Abraham serued Sem 15. yeeres in chaldaea. Sem, Cham, and Iaphet, who had liued before the flood, and had seene Methusalem, which Methusalem lyued (as I said before,) so many yeeres with Adam.
                  Heere-hence it is, that in the wrytings of Zoroastres which are extant 
                        See Clem. Alex. lib, 1, strom. et Orig
                              •
                            lib
                              •
                            6. cō
                           tra Celsum. et Procl. lib. 2, et 3, in Par. Plato,
                      or recorded by other Authors in his name, there be found very plaine speeches of the Son of GOD, whom he calleth, Secundam mentem, the second minde. And much more is to be seene in ye writings of Hermes Trismegistus, (who liued after in Egipt, and receiued his learning from thys Zoroastres:Trismegistus.) that these fyrst Heathen Philosophers had manifest vnderstanding of this second person in Trinitie, whom Hermes calleth,
                        Mercu. Her. in Paemand. cap, 1, et de incepi.
                      
                     The first begotten Sonne of God: his onely sonne: his deere, eternall, immutable, and incorruptible Sonne: whose sacred Name is ineffable, those are hys words. And after him againe among the Graecians,Graecians. were Orpheus, Hesiodus and others, that vttered the like speeches of the son of God: as also the Platonists, whose wordes and sentences were too-long to repeate in this place. But he that will

see them gathered together at large, let hym reade eyther Origen against Celsus the Heathen, or els S. Cyrill in his first booke against Iulian the Apostata. And thys shall suffise for thys first way, whereby the Gentiles had vnderstanding of Christ.
                  
                     The prophecies touching christ among the Gentiles.For the second thing which I mē
                     tioned, is to be vnderstoode, that among the Gentiles there were certayne Prophetesses, or women Prophets, called Sibyllae, which in the Greek tongue (as Lactantius gathereth) may signifie so much, as either Counselle
                           •
                        s to God, or Reuealers of Gods councell.
                     
                        Lact. li. 1. diui. inst. ca. 6.
                      And these women, being indued, (as it seemeth) with a certaine spirit of prophecie, did vtter from tyme to tyme, (though in such termes as most Gentiles vnderstoode them not,) most wonderful particularities of Christ to come, agreeing (as it were) wholy with the Prophets of Israell, or rather setting downe many thinges in more plaine & euident speech then dyd the other:Of the Sibyls. the one of them beginning her Greeke meeter in these very words. Knowe thy God, which is the sonne of God. &c.
                     
                        Lact. lib. 4, inst. cap. 6.
                      An other of them maketh a whole discourse of Christ in Greeke

verses called Accrostichi, for that the beginning of euery verse, is by some Letter appointed in order, foorth of some one sentence that runneth thorow the whole. As for example, the sentence that passed through the beginning of those verses which nowe we talke of, was this, 
                        S. Aug
                              •
                           . translateth al the verses lib, 18, de ciuit. Dei. cap, 23.
                      
                     Iesus, Christ, Sonne of God, Sauiour, Crosse. And there were so many verses in ye whole discourse, as there are Letters in this 
                        •
                     entence. The totall argument being, of the incarnation, life, death, glory, & iudgement of the sonne of God. And ye last two verses of al the meeter, are thus, He that hath beene heere described, by our Accrostick verses: is an immortall Sauiour, and a King that must suffer for our sinnes.
                  
                  And for that these Prophecies of the Sibyls are of meruailous importance to confirme the verity of our Christian Religion,The Greeke verses of the Sibyls, of what importance & authority. and are alledged often for that purpose, by the most graue & learned Fathers of the Primatiue Church: as for example, by Iustinus the Martyr, in his Apologie for Christians; by Origen against Celsus; by Arnobius and his scholler Lactantius against the Gentiles; by S. Cyrill, against Iulian the Apostata;

by S. Augustine in his booke De ciuitate De
                           •
                        : by Eusebius, and Constantine the Emperor & other; I wil say some-what in thys place, for the authoritie & credite of these verses, least any man perhaps might imagine, (as some Gentiles in olde time would seeme to doe) that they were deuised and inuented by Christians. And the most of my proofes shall be out of a learned 
                        See this Oration in Euseb. lib. 4, cap, 32, de vita Const. at the end.
                      Oration, written in Latine by the foresayde Emperour, to a Counsel of Prelates in hys dayes: wherein he endeuoureth to shew, the vndoubted authoritie of these Sibyl prophecies, which he esteemed so much (after dilligent search made for theyr credite & sincerity) as they seeme to haue beene a great cause of his constant zeale and feruour in Christianity.
               
               
                  The first proofe, for credite of the Sibyls verses.
                  
                     
                        Varro lib. de rebus diui. ad C. Caesarem pont. max.
                     FYrst then hee sheweth, that these predictions of the Sibyls, coulde not be deuised or fained by Christians, or made after the time of Christes natiuity, for that Marcus Varro,

a most learned Romaine, who liued almost a hundred yeeres before Christ, maketh mention at large of the Sibyls, (who in number he saith were tenne) and of their writings, Countries and ages, as also of the writers & Authors, that before hys time had left memory of them. And both hee and Fenestella,
                        Fenest. cap. de 15, viris.
                      (an other Heathen) doe affirme, that the wrytings of these Sibyls, were gathered by the Romaines from all partes of the worlde, (where they myght be heard of,) & layd vp with diligence and great reuerence in the Capitole, vnder the charge and custody of the High Priest and other Officers, in such sorte, as no man might see or reade them, but onely certaine Magistrates, called the Fiftine, & much lesse might any man come to falsifie or corrupt them.
               
               
                  The second proofe.
                  SEcondly he sheweth, that Sibylla Erithraea, who made the former Accrostike verses of Christ, testifieth of herselfe, that she liued about sixe hundred yeeres after the floode of

Noe, & her Countriman Apollidorus Erithraeus and Varro doe report, that she liued before ye war of Troy, and prophecied to the Graecians that went to that war, that Troy should be destroied.
                        Lact. lib, 1, inst. cap. 6.
                      Which was more thē a 1000. yeres before Christ was borne.
                  
                     Cicero.Cicero also, that was slaine more forty yeeres before Christes natiuity, translated into Latine, the former Accrostike verses,
                        See Cicero of these Accrostike verses of Sibylla, lib. 2. de diuinatione.
                      as Constantine affirmeth, which translation was to be seene in his workes, when Constantine wrote this Oration: so that by no meanes they could be deuised or brought in by Christians.
               
               
                  The thyrd proofe.
                  THirdly he sheweth, that the same Cicero, in diuers places of hys works, besides the mention of these Accrostike verses, insinuateth also an other Prophecie of Sibylla, touching a King that should ryse ouer all the world, where-with himselfe and the Romans were greatly troubled: and therefore in one place, after a long inuectiue against hys enemie Anthonie, that would seeme to giue credite to that Prophecie, or rather

as Cicero dooth vrge against him, would haue had the same fulfilled in Iulius Caesar, he concludeth thus;
                        Cicero, lib. 2. de diui. paulo post medium.
                      
                     Let vs deale with the Prelates of our Religion, to alledge any one thing rather out of the booke of Sibilla, then a King, whom neither the Gods nor yet men, can suffer hereafter to be in Rome.
                  
                  The like prophecie of Sibylla touching a King,
                     
                        Cicero, lib. 1. Epist. fam. Epist. 1.2.3.4.5.6. is insinuated by the same Cicero, in his first Booke of Epistles to Lentulus: to wit, that when the 
                        See lib. 2. Oracul. Sib.
                      Romaines shoulde restore a King in Egypt by force, then shoulde ensue the vniuersall King, that should be Lord ouer Romaines and all other. Which Prophecie beeing much vrged by Cato the Tribune, 
                        Epist. 5. against the restoring of Hee was Father to Cleopatra. Ptolomeus Aulates late King of Egypt, that for his euill gouernment was expulsed by his subiects, ye matter was thought of such weight by all the Romaine Senate,The feare which the Romans had of the vniuersall King prophecied by Sibylla. (I mean the sequel of this Prophecie) that wheras otherwise for many respects, they were greatly inclined to haue restored the said Ptolomie: yet in regard of thys Religion, (as they called it,) they changed theyr mindes. But what? could they alter by thys the

determination of God? No truelie, for soone after, King Ptolomie perceiuing the Senators mindes to bee altered, fled secretlie from Rome to one Gabinius, that was Gouernour of Syria,
                        Dion. li. 39. histor.
                      and for fiue Millions of Gold that he promised him, he was by the force of Gabinius restored: and not long after was Christ born, according to the meaning of the Sibyll Prophecie.
               
               
                  ¶The fourth proofe.
                  FOurthly, the said Emperor Constantine prooueth the authoritie of these Sibyls verses, for that Augustus Caesar, before our Sauior Christ was borne, had such regard of them, that he laid them vp in more straighter order then before, (according as Suetonius a Heathen,
                        Suet. tranq. cap. 3. de vita Aug.
                      in his life reporteth) vnder the Alter of Apollo, in the hyll Palatine: where no man might haue the sight of them but by speciall licence; which licence Constantine prooueth that Virgill the Poet had,The Prophecies of Sibylla alledged by Virgill. for that hee was in high fauour with Augustus. And therefore in a certaine Eglogue or composition of Verses, that he made in

praise of a yong child named Saloninus, newlie borne to Asinius Pollio, Augustus great friend, (or as other take it) of Marcellus a little boy, that was Nephew to Augustus by his sister Octauia, or rather of them both, for adulation of Augustus, he applieth (I say) to one or both of the young Infants, the whole prophecie, which he had reade in the verses of Sibylla, touching the birth of Christ, and of the peace, grace, and golden world yt shold come with him. Vpon which subiect he beginneth thus.
                  
                     Vltima Cumaei venit
                     iam temporis aetas:
                           Virgil. Eglog. 4.
                     
                     Magnus ab integro
                     saeculorum nascitur ordo:Christes preordination.
                     
                     I am redit & Virgo,
                     rediunt Saturnia regna.
                  
                  That is, now is come the last age prophecied by Sibilla, called Cumaea, now commeth to bee fulfilled the great ordinance and prouidence of GOD, appointed from the beginning of the world, (these were Sibylles words,) now commeth the Virgine, and the first golden daies of Saturnus shall returne againe.
                  
                  Thus much translated Virgill out of Sibylla, touching the eternall determination

of God, for Christes comming into this world: as also of his Mother the Virgine: and of the in
                        •
                     inite blessings that should appeare with him. Now ensueth in the same Poet, what Sibylla had said for Christes actuall natiuitie.
                  
                     
                        Christes birth.I am noua progenies
                     caelo dimittitur alto:
                     Chara Deum soboles. &c.
                  
                  
                     Now a new progenie or of-spring is sent downe from Heauen: the deerelie beloued issue or child of the Gods.
And note heere, that Sibylla saith plainlie, Chara Dei soboles, the deerely beloued Sonne of God, and not of Gods; but that Virgil would follow the style of his tyme. And thirdly, hee setteth downe out of Sibylla, the effect and cause of this sonne of Gods natiuitie, in this sort.
                  
                     
                        Christes cause of comming.Te duce, si qua manent,
                     sceleris vestigia nostri:
                     Irrita perpetuo,
                     soluent formidine terra.
                  
                  That is, thou being our leader or Captaine: the remnant of our sinnes shall be made voide, or taken away, and shall deliuer the world for euer from feare for the same.
                  
                  These are Virgils words translated

(as I said) out of Sibylla. And now consider you in reason, whether these Prophecies might be applied (as Virgill applied them) to those poore children in Rome, or no, who died soone after this flatterie of Virgill, without dooing good, either to themselues, or to others? Albeit (perhaps) in this point, the Poet be to be excused, in that he beeing not able to imagine what the Sibyl shold meane, made his aduantage thereof, in applying the same to the best pleasing of Augustus.
                  These then are the proofes, which Constantine vsed for the credite and authoritie of the Sibyll verses. And of Sibylla Erithraea in particuler, that made the Accrostike Verses before mentioned, of Christes death and Passion, hee concludeth in these words;
                        Constantines opinion of the spirit of Sibylla Erythraea: orat. ad caetum. Sanct. ca. 18 
                     These are the things that fell from Heauen, into the mind of this Virgine to 
                           •
                        ore-tell. For which cause I am induced to account her for blessed, whom our Sauiour did vouchsafe to chuse for a Prophet, to denounce vnto the world, his holie prouidence towardes vs. And we may consider in this whole discourse of Constantine, for authoritie of these verses. First, that he vseth

                      onely the testimonie of such Writers, as liued before Christ was born, or Christians once thought vpon.  Secondly, that he vseth these proofes to no meaner audience, then to a Councell and congregation of learned  men. Thirdly, that he vvas an Emperour which vsed them, that is, one that had meanes to see and examine the originall Copies in the  Romaine Treasurie. Fourthly, for that he had great learned men about him, who were skilfull, and would be dilligent in the search of such an antiquitie of importance: especially Lactantius,Lactantius. that was Master to hys sonne Crispus, and who most of anie Author, reciteth and confirmeth the said Sibyls verses: and Eusebius Caesariensis, that wrote the Ecclesiasticall historie, and 
                        See Euseb. lib. 4. cap. 32. de vita Constant. howe this Oration was first written in Latine and translated into Greeke.
                      recorded this Oration of Constantine therin. And finallie, we may consider, that Constantine was the first publique Christian Emperour, and lyued within three hundred yeeres after Christ, when the recordes of the Romaines were yet whole to be seene. He was a religious, wise, and graue Emperor, and therefore would neuer haue bestowed so much labour, to confirme

such a thing, at such a time, to such an audience, had not the matter ben of singuler importance. And thus much of the second point, touching Prophets among the Gentiles.
               
               
                  ¶Of the conf
                        •
                     ssion of Oracles, concerning Christes comming.
                  THere remaineth onelie a word or two to be spoken of the thirde: which is, of the confession of deuils and Oracles, concerning the comming of Christ; especiallie when the time of his appearance drew neere, and that they began to fore-tell his power and vertue. Wherein as I might alledge diuers examples, recorded by the Gentiles themselues: so for that I haue been some-what long in the former points, and shall haue occasion to say more of thys matter in another place heereafter, I will touch onelie heere two Oracles of Apollo concerning this matter.
                  The one whereof, was to a Priest of his owne, that demaunded hym of true Religion, and of GOD: to whom he aunswered thus in Greek.The first Oracle. 
                     O thou vnhappie Priest, why doost thou aske me of GOD, that is the father of

all things: and of this most renowmed Kings deere and onelie sonne, and of the spirit that containeth all. &c. Alas, that spirit will enforce me shortlie, to leaue this habitation and place of Oracles.
                     
                        Suidas in Thulis, et Porphy. et Plut. de ora.
                     
                  
                  The other Oracles was to Augustus Caesar,The second Oracle. euen about the verie time that Christ was readie to appeare in flesh. For wheras the said Emperour now drawing into age, wold needes goe to Delphos,
                        Suidas in vita August. Niceph. lib. 1 hist. cap. 17. and there learne of Apollo, who shoulde raigne after him, and what should become of things when he was dead, to which demaunde, Apollo for a great space would make no aunswere, notwithstanding, Augustus had been verie liberall, in making the great Sacrifice called Hecatombe. But in the end, when the Emperour began to iterate his Sacrifice againe, and to be instant for an aunswer: Apollo (as it were) inforced, vttered these strange words vnto him. An Hebrue childe, that ruleth ouer the blessed Gods, commaundeth me to leaue this habitation, and out of hande to get mee to Hell. But yet doe you depart in silence from our Altars.
                  
                  Thus much was Apollo inforced to vtter of his owne miserie, and of

the comming of the Hebrue boy, that should put him to banishment. But yet the deceitfull spirit, to hold still his credite, would not haue the matter reuealed to many. Wherevpon, Augustus falling into a great musing with himselfe, what thys aunswer might import: returned to Rome, and builded there an Altar in the Capitole, with this Latine inscription (as Nicephorus affirmeth,) Ara primogeniti Dei:
                     
                        Niceph. lib. 1 hist. cap. 17. The Altar of Gods first begotten Sonne.
                  Thus then haue I declared, howe that the comming of Gods son into the worlde,The conclusion of this first Section. was fore-tolde both to Iewe and Gentile, by all meanes that possibly in reason might be deuised; that is, by Prophecies, signes, figures, ceremonies, tradition, and by the confession of deuils themselues. Not onelie that his comming was fore-tolde, but also, why, and for what cause he was for to come, that is, to be the onely Sauiour of the worlde: to die for the sinnes of all men: to ordaine a newe Law, and more perfect Common-wealth. How also he was to come to wit, in mans fl
                        •
                     sh, in likenes of sinne, in pouertie, and humilitie. The time likewise of his

appearance was prefigured, together with the manner of his byrth, lyfe, actions, death, resurrection, and ascention. And finally, nothing can be more desired for the foreknowledge of any one thing to come, then was deliuered & vttered concerning the Messias, before that euer Christ or Christians vvere talked of in the world.The argument of the two Sections following. Now then remaineth it to consider and examine, whether these particularities, fore-told so long ago of the Messias to come, do agree in Christ, whom we acknowledge for the true Messias. And this shall be the subiect or argument of all the rest of our speech in this Chapter.
               
            
            
               ¶How the former predictions were fulfilled in our Sauior Christ, at his beeing vpon earth. SECT. 2.
               ALbeit in the points before recited, which are to be fulfilled in the Messias at his comming, we haue some controuersie & disagreement with the Iewe,Our controuersie with Gentiles. as hath been shewed, yet our principall contention in thē all, is with the Gentiles & Heathen,

that beleeue no Scriptures. For that in diuers of the former Articles, the Iew standeth with vs, and for vs, & offereth his life in defence therof, as far forth as if he were a Christian. In so much, as the Gentile oftentimes, is inforced to meruaile, when he seeeth a people, so extreamely bent one against another, as the Iewes are against Christians: and yet doest and so peremptorilie in defence of those verie principles, which are the proper causes of their disagreement.
               But heereunto the Iewe maketh aunswer,Our controuersie with the Iewes. that his disagreement from vs, is in the application of those principles, For that in no wise he wil allow, that they were, or may be verified in Iesus. And heerein he st
                     •
                  ndeth against vs, much more obstinatly then doth the Gentile. For that the Gentile, as soone as he commeth once to vnderstand and beleeue the Prophecies of Scripture, he maketh no doubt or difficultie in the application thereof: for that he seeth the same most euidentlie fulfilled in our Sauiour Christ. Which is the cause, that few or no Gentiles since Christes appearance, haue come to bee Iewes, but that presentlie also they

passed ouer to be Christians.
               
                  The obstinacie of the Iewes.But the Iewe by no meanes wil be moued to yeeld, albeit he haue neyther Scripture, nor reason, or probability for his de
                     •
                  ence. Which among other things, is a verie great argument to prooue, that Iesus was the true Messias indeede, seeing that among the markes of the true Messias set downe by Gods Prophets, that was one: that he should be refused of the Iewish Nation. Heerehence are those wordes of the holie Ghost so long before vttered;
                     Psalm. 118 
                  The stone which the 
                  The Iewes are the builders, who take vpon them to build Gods house. 
                  builders refused, is made the head stone of the corner, this is done by God, and it is maruailous in our eyes. Heere
                     •
                  hence is that great complaint of Esay, touching the incredulitie and obstinacie of his people, against their Messias, at his comming, which Moses also long before Esay expressed most effectually
                     Math. 21.
                  
                     Esay, 6.
               
               
                  
                     Deut. 28.It maketh then, not a little for our cause (gentle Reader) that the Iewish Nation is so wilfully bent against vs,The Iewes obstinacie against vs, a great argument for vs. and that they refused Christ so peremptorily at his being among them. For whom soeuer that Nation shold receiue and acknowledge: it were a great argument by Scripture, that he

were not indeede the true Messias. But yet to demonstrate to the world, what little shew of reason they haue in standing thus against their owne saluation, and in refusing Christ, as they doe: I will in as great breuitie as I may, run ouer the chiefe points that passed at his beeing vpon earth, and thereby examine by the testimonies of his greatest enemies, whether the foresaid Prophecies, and all other signes, which haue beene from the beginning, to fore-tell vnto vs the true Messias, vvere fulfilled in him and his actions, or no.
               And for that the matters are manie and diuers, that will come heerin to be handled, I will for order sake, reduce all to fower considerations.The deuision of thys Section into fower considerations. Whereof the first, shal be, touching the time fore-prophecied of ye comming of the Messias, and whether the same agreed with Christes natiuitie or no. The second shall be of dyuers particulers that passed in Christes incarnation, birth, circumcision, and other accidents, vntil the time that he began to preach. The third shall be of his life, conuersation, miracles, and doctrine. The fourth and last, shal be of his passion,

death, resurrection, and ascention. In all which, (as I said before) I will vse no one Authour or testimonie of our owne side,The testimonies here vsed. for approuing any thing that is in controuersie beetweene vs: but all shal passe by trial, either of their owne Scriptures, or of manifest force and consequence of reason, or els by expresse recorde of our professed enemies.
               
                  ¶The first consideration.
                  FOR the first then, concerning the time,The time appointed. which is the principall and heade of all the rest it is to bee noted, that by consent of all Writers, both Pagan, Iewish, and Christian, IESVS, (whom we beleeue and confesse to be true CHRIST) was borne the twentie fiue day of December, in the ende of the fortie and one yeere of the raigne of the Emperour Augustus Caesar, vvhich was fifteene yeeres before his raigne ended. Also in the beginning of the thirty-three yeere of Herods raigne in Iurie, which was foure yeeres and more before his death. And from the beginning of the world, as 
                        See Euseb. in Chron.
                      some account, foure thousand, one hundred,

and ninetie-nine. And as others doe account, foure thousand, foure-score and nine: for that in this point, betweene the Hebrues and the Graecians, there is a difference of some little more then an hundred yeeres, concerning their reckoning.
                  The state of the world at Christes natiuitie,The general state of the world at Christes comming. was this. The three Monarchies of the Assirians, Persians, and Graecians were past ouer, and ended: and the Romaines were entered into the fourth, that was greater then any of the rest, according to the Prophecie of Daniell,
                        Daniel, 2. fiue hundred yeeres before Octauius Caesar, surnamed Augustus,
                        Suet. tran. et Aurel. victo. et alij in vita August.
                      after fiue ciuill warres by himselfe waged, and after infinite broyles & bloodshed in the world, raigned peaceably alone for many yeeres together: and in token of an vniuersall peace ouer all the earth, he caused the Temple gates of Ianus to be shutte, according to the custome of the Romans in such cases: albeit this had happened but twice before, from the building of Rome vnto that time. And the verie same day that Christ vvas borne in Iurie, Augustus commaunded in Rome (
                        Oros, lib. 6. hist. cap. 22.as afterward was obserued)

that no man should call him Lord, thereby to signifie the free libertie, rest, 
                        •
                     oy, and securitie, wherein all men were after so long miseries, which by continuall warres the vvorld had sustained.
                  
                     The first proofe.By this we gather first, that thys time of Christes birth, agreed exactlie vvith the Prophecie so long before set downe in Daniell, (who liued in the first Monarchie,The Romaine Monarchie. Daniell, 2.) that after his time there should be three Monarchies more, and the last biggest of all: at whose appearing the Messias should come, and builde vp Gods kingdome throughout the whole vvorld.
                  
                     The second proofe.Secondly, wee see that fulfilled, vvhich Esay the Prophet, aboue an hundred yeeres before Daniell, foretolde that at the comming of Christ, people should sit in the beautie in peace.
                     The peace of all the world. Esay, 32. And againe, there should bee no ende of peace. And yet further, hee shall be Prince of peace. And K. Dauid long before him againe:
                        Psalm, 71. 
                     In his daies there shall arise iustice and aboundance of peace. Which thing, though especiallie it be to be vnderstood, of the internal peace & tranquillitie of our mindes and soules: yet considering

that external peace also was necessarie for a time, for the quiet planting and publishing of Christes Gospell, and seeing that ye same was brought to passe most miraculously vpon the suddain, when in reason men might least expect the same, for the infinite warres wherein the world a little before had been: and by reason of the Romaine Monarchie so freshly established, (which in their beginnings are wont to be troublesome:) thys peace (I say) can not bee but a great argument, that this was the proper time of the Messias his comming. And thus much for the state of the world in generall.
                  And now for the particuler state of Iurie at Iesus natiuity,The third proofe. thus it was, according as Iosephus the Iew (who was borne within fiue yeeres after Christes passion) describeth ye same.The Scepter of Iuda. One Herod a stranger, whose Father called His grandfather was a Sextane in Apollos tē
                        ple, and his father was brought vp among theeues in Idumaea. Antipater, came out of Idumaea, was risen to acquaintance and fauour with the Romans, partlie by his said Fathers meanes, who was, (as Iosephus words are) a well monied man, industrious, and factious, and partlie by hys owne diligence and ambition, beeing of himselfe both

wittie, beautifull, and of excellent rare qualities. By which commendations,
                        Euseb. lib. 1. cap. 6. ex Aphricano. Ioseph. lib. 14 antiq. cap. 2. he came at length to marrie the daughter of Hyrcanus King of Iurie, that was descended lineally of the house of Dauid, and Tribe of Iuda. And by this marriage, obtayned of his Father in law to bee Gouernour of the Prouince of Galilie vnder him. But Hircanus afterwards falling into the hands of the Parthyans, that carried him into Parthya: Herod ran away to Rome,The first rysing of Herod Ascolonita. and there by the special helpe and fauour of Anthonie, that ruled in company together with Octauius, he obtained to be created King of Iurie, without any title or interest in the world. For that not onely his said Father in law Hyrcanus was yet aliue in Parthya, but also his yonger brother Aristobulus, and three of his sonnes, named Antigonus, Alexander, and Aristobulus, and diuers other of the blood royall in Iurie.
                  Herod then, hauing procured by these meanes to be King of Iurie: procured first to haue in his handes the fore-said King Hyrcanus,
                        Ioseph. lib. 15 anti. ca. 9.11 and so put him to death: he also brought to the same ende, his younger brother

Aristobulus, and his three sons likewise. He put to death also his owne wife Mariamnes,The most horrible murders committed by Herod. that was K. Hyrcanus daughter, as also Alexandra her Mother: and soone after two of his owne sonnes, which he had by the said Mariamnes, for that they were of the blood royall of Iuda. And a little after that again,
                        Lib. 17. c. 10. he put to death his thirde sonne named Antipater. He caused also to bee slaine at one time, fortie of the cheefest noble men of the Trybe of Iuda.
                        Lib. 15. ca. 1. Phylo lib. de tempore.
                      And as Phylo the Iew writeth (that liued at the same time with him) he put to death all the Sanhedrin, that is, the seauentie and two Senatours of the Trybe of Iuda, that ruled the people. Hee killed the chiefe of the Sect of the Pharisies.
                        Ioseph. lib. 14. cap. 2. He burned the Genealogies of all the Kings and Princes of the house of Iuda: and caused one Nicholaus Damascenus an Historiographer that was his seruant, to drawe out a Petidegree for him and his lyne, as though he had discended from the auncient Kings of Iuda.
                  Hee translated the High priesthood,A patterne of an ambicious Tirant. and solde it to strangers. And finallie, he so rased, dispersed, and mangled the house of Iuda: as no

one iote of gouernment, dignitie, or principalitie remained therein. And when he had done all this, then was IESVS of the same house and lyne of Iuda, borne in Bethleem, the proper Cittie of Dauid, which Dauid was the founder and first Author of Regalitie in Iuda.
                  
                     The Prophecie of Iacob touching the Scepter of Iuda. Gene. 49.Now then, consider the prophecie of Iacob, concerning the particuler time of Christes appearance, almost two thousand yeeres before these things fell out. Come hether my chyldren, (said he) that I may tell you the things which are to happen in the latter dayes &c. The Scepter shall not be taken from Iuda, vntill he come who is to be sent: and he shall be the expectation of Nations. Which prophecie, that it was fulfilled novv at Christes natiuitie, vvhen Herod h
                        •
                     d extinguished all gouernment in Iuda, no man can denie, that will acknowledge the things set downe before, which are recorded by Writers both of that time, and of the Iewish Nation and Religion themselues.
                  
                     That the Scepter neuer failed in Iuda vntill Herod cameAnd that it neuer vvas fulfilled from Dauids daies, (who began the gouernment of the house of Iuda) vntill this time, appeareth plainly by

all Histories and Recordes both diuine and prophane. For that from Dauid,1. Reg. 16. (who was the first King) vnto Zedechias that vvas the last, and died in the captiuitie of Babilon,4. Reg. 29.
                     
                        Ierem. 37. the Scripture sheweth how all the Kings descended from the house of Iuda. And during the time of their captiuitie in Babilon,
                        Thal. in tra. Sanh. ca. Dinei. Manmonoth.
                      (which was seauentie yeeres) the Iewes were alwaies permitted to chuse themselues a Gouernour of the house of Iuda, whom they called RESCHGALVTA.
                  And after their deliuerie from Babilon,
                        Rab. Moyses Egip. in prae. Maimonim. Esd. lib. 1. ca. 1.2.3. Zorobabel was their Captain of the same Tribe: and so others after him, vntill you come to the Macchabees,
                        Mac. lib. 1. cap. 2.3. who were both Captaines and Priestes: for that they were by the Mothers side, of the Tribe of Iuda, and by the Fathers side, of the Tribe of Leui, as Rabbi Kimhi holdeth.
                        Rab. Kimhi. com. in Agg. Iosep. lib. 13. & 14 antiq.
                      And from these men down to Hircanus and Aristobulus whom Herod slewe, there continued stil the same lyne, as Iosephus declareth. So that by this Prophecie it is euident, that Iesus was borne at the proper time appointed for the Messias, whē there was neither King nor Captain, nor High Priest, nor Counseller,

nor any one Gouernour of the house and Trybe of Iuda, left in Iurie.
                  
                     The fourth proofe.An other Prophecie there is, no lesse euident then the former, wherein it is affirmed, that the Messias shold come before the second Temple of Ierusalem,The destruction of the seconde Temple. (that was builded by Zorobabel after the Iewes were returned from their captiuity in Babilon) should be destroyed by the Romaines. For better vnderstanding whereof, it is to be noted, that the Temple of Ierusalem was builded twice;3. Reg. 6. et 7 first by Salomon, which lasted about foure hundred and fortie two yeeres,2. Chron. 3. and then it was burned and destroied by Nabuchodonozer King of Babilon.
                        Euseb. in Chron. Clem. lib. 1. strom.
                      Wherefore about seauentie yeeres after, it was builded againe by Zorobabel,4. Reg. 25. who reduced the Iewes from Babilon,1. Esd. 1.3.4. and so it continued, vntil it was destroyed the second time by Tytus, son to Vespasian the Romaine Emperour, about fortie & sixe yeres after our Sauiour Christ his ascention. At what time it had lasted from Zorobabel almost sixe hundred yeeres: and from Salomon, aboue a thousand.
                  And in the time of the seconde building, the people of Israell were

poore, and much afflicted in respect of their late banishment,1. Esdras 5. and 6. (though much assisted to this worke by the liberalitie and munificencie of Darius King of Babilon:) so was the building and workmanship of thys second Temple,The building of the seconde Temple lesse gorgeous then the first. 1. Esdras, 5. nothing comparable, for excellencie to the first, which was builded by Salomon, when the Iewes were in the flower of their glorie and riches. This testifieth Aggaeus the Prophet, vvho was one of the builders, and he testifieth the same to Zorobabel, and to the rest of those that were with him, by Gods owne appointment, in these words.
                        Aggae. 2. 
                     The woord of God was made to Aggaeus the Prophet. Tell Zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel Captaine of Iuda, and Iesus the sonne of Iosedec high Priest, and the rest of the people. Who is there left of you, that saw this Temple in his first glorie, (before our transmigration,) and what say you to this, which now we see? is it not in our eyes as though it were not at all? That is, is it not as though it were a thing of nothing, in comparison of ye former Temple, which Salomon builded.
                  Thus saith Aggaeus by Gods commission, of the materiall building of

the seconde Temple. And yet to comfort the Iewes with all, he was commaunded presently in the same Chapter to say thus; Comfort thy selfe Zorobabell, and comfort thy selfe Iesu thou sonne of Iosedec high Priest, and comfort your selues all yee people of the earth, saith the Lord God of Hostes:
                     
                        Aggae. 2. 
                     do yee the thinges which I couenanted with you, when yee came foorth of the Land of Egipt, and feare not, for that my Spirit shall bee among you. Thus saith the Lord God of Hostes
                     This he said for that the three Monarchies ensued, wherein there was continuall warre and bloodshed. 
                     a little time yet remaineth, when I will mooue both heauen and earth, both Sea and Land, with all Countries in the world. And then shall come the DESIRED OF AL NATIONS: And I will fill his house (or Temple) with glorie
                           •
                         saith the Lord GOD of Hostes. Siluer is mine, and Gold is myne, sayth the Lord GOD of Hostes: great shall bee the glorie of this last house or Temple, more then of the first, saith the Lord GOD of Hostes. Hetherto are the words of God by Aggaeus, and the often repetition, o
                           •
                         the Lord GOD of Hostes, is to signifie the certaintie and great weight of the matter promised. Now consider then, that wheras God had said immediatly before,

that thys seconde Temple was nothing in respect of ye first, for pompe and riches of the material building, which the old men in the booke of Esdras doe testifie by their weeping
                        •
                      (when they saw this second, and remembred the first) yet now GOD sayth,
                        1. Esdras, 3.
                      that Gold & Siluer is his owne, (as though he made no account of the aboundance thereof in the former Temple, or of the want of the same in thys) and that notwithstanding the pouerty of the second building, yet, shall it be filled and replenished with glorie, and that in such sorte, as it shall far passe in glory the former: and that shall be, (as both heere is expressed, and other where most plainly,) by the comming of our Sauiour Thys was fulfilled whē christ was personally, and taught in the Temple. Christ into the second Temple,
                        Luk. 1, 2, 19.
                      which shall be a greater dignitie,
                        Math, 21, 26, &c.
                      then any dignitie what soeuer was found in the first building of Salomons Temple.
                  Concerning which poynt,Prerogatiues of the first Temple. it is to be considered, yt the learned Iewes, besides the materiall dyfference of building before mentioned, doe note fiue things of great importance to haue been wanting in the second Temple,
                        Rab. Samuel tract. Sanh. in Thalm.
                      which were in the first. To

wit, The fire sent from Heauen to burne the Holocaustes;
                        Hieroso. Ra. Aba. in lib. deorum.
                      The glorie of GOD (or Angels) appearing among  the Images of Cherubines  that stood in the Temple; The manifest  inspiration of Gods Spirit vppon Prophets, (for that Prophecie  fayled in the second Temple;) The  presence of the Arke; and last of all Vrim and Thumim. All which great wants and differences, notwithstanding, God sayth as you see, that the glory of this second Temple, shall be much greater then the first, by the comming of Christ into the same. Which thing, Malachie that lyued at the same tyme when the seconde Temple was in building, confirmeth more expresly in these words.
                        Mala, 3,
                      
                     Behold, I send my 
                     Thys christ interpreted of S. Iohn Baptist. Mat. 11,
                      
                     Angel, & he shall prepare the way before my face. And straight after, shall come to this Temple, the Lord or Ruler, whom ye seeke & the MESSENGER OF THE TESTAMENT whom you desire. Behold, he commeth sayth the Lord of hostes, and who can imagine the day of hys comming? or who can stande or abide to see him? for he shall be as a purging fire. &c.
                  
                  By all which is made euident, tha
                        •
                     
                     
Christ must come & appeare in the second Temple before it be destroyed, (as Iesus did) and therefore hee cannot be now to come, seeing the sayde Temple was destroyed aboue one thousande and fiue hundred yeeres past by the Romaines, as hath beene sayd. Which destruction and finall desolation, was prophecied by Daniell, to ensue soone after the byrth and passion of Christ in these words.
                        Dan, 9.
                      
                     After sixtie and two hebdomades, Christ shall be slaine: and a people with their Captaine to come, shall destroy the Cittie,
                     The second Temple to be destroyed presently after Christes passion. 
                     and the Sanctuary, and the ende thereof shall be vastitie or spoyle. And after the warre ended, there shall ensue the appointed desolation. Which prophecy to haue fallen out litterally about 40. yeres after Iesus was put to death, whē Ierusalem was destroied & the Temple ouerthrowne by Titus,
                        Iosep. de. bel. Iudaico. li. 6.
                      the story of Iosephus yt learned Iew, who was Captaine against Tytus in that war, doth mani
                        •
                     estly and at large declare.
                  And for that we haue made mention heere of Daniels prophecy concerning the particuler time of Christes comming,The fift proofe. The 72. Hebdomades. and of his death, which confirmeth the purpose we

treate of so perspicuously, as nothing can be said more euident, it shal not be amisse to examine the same before we passe any further. For better conceiuing whereof, it is to bee vnderstoode, that thys Greeke word Hebdomada, (signifying seuen) doth som-time import a weeke or seauen dayes,Two kindes of weekes. according to our common vse, and then it is called in scripture Hebdomada dierū, a weeke of daies, as in Daniell the tenth chapter, and the second verse; where the Prophet saith of himselfe, that he did mourne three weekes of dayes. But at other times, it signifieth the space of seauen yeeres, and is called in scripture Hebdomada annorum, a weeke of yeeres. As in Leuiticus where it is sayd;
                        Leu. 25. vide etiam ca
                              •
                            23 et ali. passim
                      
                     Thou shalt number vnto thee seauen weekes of yeeres, that is seauen times seauen, which make fortie and nine yeeres.
                  
                  Now then it is certaine, that Daniell in the Prophecie before alledged, where hee assigneth sixty-two weekes to ye time of Christes death, could not meane weekes of daies, fo
                        •
                      that hee appoynteth onely seauen weekes, to the rebuilding of the Cit
                        •
                     tie of Ierusalem, of the Temple, an
                        •
                     
                     
of the wals about; which were not ended but in forty and nine yeeres after, as m
                        •
                     y be gathered by the Bookes of Esdr
                        •
                     s:
                        Lib. 1. et 2.
                      which forty nine weekes, do make iust seauen weekes of yeeres. And ther
                        •
                     ore it is certaine, that such Hebdomades of yeeres, are meant heere by Daniell in all the prophecie.
                  First then, whē the Angel came to comfort him, and to open vnto him secrets for the time to come, he sayd these words;
                        Dan. 9.
                      
                     Marke my speech, and vnderstand the vision. The seauentie Hebdomades or weekes are shortened, (or hastened) vpon thy people, & vppon thy holy Citty: to the end all preuarication and sinne may take an end, and iniquity be blotted out, & euerlasting iustice be brought in place therof: to the end that visions & prophecies may be fulfilled, and the HOLY OF HOLIES may be annointed.
                     
                        Ierem, 25, et 29.
                      In which words, it seemeth that the Angel did allude by naming s
                        •
                     auentie,Why the Angel named seuentie and two Hebdomades in thys place
                           •
                        
                      vnto the seauentie yeeres of captiuitie, prophecied by Ieremie, after which ended, the people should be deliuered 
                        •
                     rom their temporall bondage in Babylon. And therfore Daniell nowe being in that place, and

perceiuing the same tyme to be expired, prayed to God with great instance, to fulfill his promise made by Ieremie. Whereto the Angell aunswered, that it should be done. And as after the expiration of 70. yeeres, God was now to deliuer them from the bodily captiuity of Babilon: so was hee also a
                        •
                     ter seauentie Hebdomades more, to deliuer them from bondage of sinne & pre
                        •
                     arication, and that by the annointed MESSIAS, which is indeed the Holy of all Hol
                           •
                        es.
                  
                  This (I say) may be the reason of naming seauentie Hebdomades, thereby to allude to the number of the se
                        •
                     uentie yeeres of that Babilonicall seruitude. For that immedi
                        •
                     tly a
                        •
                     ter, the Angell appoynteth the whole exact nūber to be three-score and nyne Hebdomades, that is, seauen to the building of the Cit
                        •
                     y and Temple, and sixtie-two from that to y• death of Christ, in these words.
                        Dan. 9,
                      
                     Know 
                           •
                        hou and marke, that from the end o
                           •
                         this speech, to the time that Ierusalē shal be builded,
                     The exact number of we
                           •
                        kes frō the building of the second Tē
                        ple to the death of Ch
                           •
                        ist. 62. 
                     and vnto Christ the Captaine, there shal be Hebdomades seauen, and Hebdomades sixtie-two: and the streetes & wals (of Ierusalem)

shal be builded again, though with much difficultie of the times: & after sixtie and two Hebdomad
                           •
                        s, Christ shall be slaine. And the people that shall denie him, shall not be his
                           •
                         &c. And then vnto consumation and end, shall perseuer desol
                           •
                        tion.
                  
                  Now then, if we put these yee
                        •
                     es together, which are here mencioned by Dani
                        •
                     ll:The accoūt of Daniels weekes. that is, fi
                        •
                     st the seauen Hebdomades, whi
                        •
                     h make fortie and nine yeeres, and then the threescore and two, from the restauration of Ierusalem, which make foure hundred, thirty and foure more, we shall finde the whole number to be foure hundred, and eyghtie-three yeeres. Which being begunne from the first yeere of Cyrus, as some wil, (for yt he first determined the Iewes reduction,) or from the second yere of Darius, as others will, (for that hee confirmed and put the same in execution,) or from the twenty ye
                        •
                     e of the said Darius, for that then, hee made a new Edict in the fauour of Nehemias, and sent him into Iurie, euery way they wil end in the raigne of Herod and Augustus, vnder whō Christ was borne, or in the r
                        •
                     igne of Tyberius Caesar, vnder whom he

suffered. And by no interpretation in the world, can it be auoided, but that this time appointed by Daniel, is now out, aboue one thousand and fiue hundred yeeres past, whyle yet the Temple stoode, and was not put to desolation. And therefore of necessity, Christ must be come about that time, and neuer more heerafter to be looked for.
                  
                     The sixt proofe.The traditions and obseruations of the olde Iewes themselues, doe meruailously confirme thys beleefe of ours, for that they all dyd run to thys one poynt,The traditions of Rabbines. that about the tyme of Augustus his raigne, (wherein Iesus was borne) the Messias shoulde appeare. It is often repeated in the Thalmud,
                        Thal. tract. Sand cap. 
                              •
                           elec. et alibi
                      that one Elyas left thys tradition, that the world should endure sixe thousande yeeres; that is, two thousand before the Lawe of Moses, two thousand vnder the same Lawe, and two thousand after that, vnder the Messias. Which last two thousande yeeres, by all computation, could not begin much from the byrth of Iesus. And the Rabbines a great while agone, complained in theyr Thalmud,
                        Thal. in tra. Auodazara.
                      that there seemed to them in those dayes, seauen

hundred and fourteene yeeres past, since Christ by the Scriptures shold haue appeared: and therefore they doe meruaile why God so long deferreth the same.
                  An other obseruation they haue vpon the words of Esay,
                        Esay, 9. An obseruation of the Cabalistes. 
                     Paruulus natus est nobis, a little chyld is borne vnto vs. In which wordes, for that they finde the Hebrue Letter Mem, to be shut in the midst of a worde, (which is strange in that tongue, for that Mem is wont to be open in the midst of words, and shut onely in the end,) they gather many secretes.
                        Thal in lib. Sabbat. et in tract. Sanh
                              •
                           .
                      And among other, that seeing Mem signifieth sixe hundred yeres, so long it should be after Esay, vntil the time of Christ. Which account of theirs falleth out so iust,
                        Esay, 7,
                      that if you reckon the yeeres from Achaz King of Iuda, in whose tyme Esay spake these wordes,
                        Math, 2.
                      vntil the time of King Herod vnder whom Christ was borne, you shall perceiue the nūber to fayle in little or nothing.
                  A much lyke obseruation hath Rabbi Moses,The obseruation of Rabbi Moses. the son of Maimon, (whom the Iewes doe holde in extreame great reuerence, calling hym the Doctor of iustice,) in his Epistle

to hys Countrimen of Affrica,
                        Rab. Moses Ben. Maimon. ep. ad Iudeos Afri,
                      concerning the time of Christes appearaunce, which hee thinketh to be past according to the Scriptures, aboue a thousand yeeres in his daies, (he lyued about the yeere of Christ, one thousand, one hundred & fortie,) but that God deferreth his manifestation for theyr sinnes.
                  
                     
                        Rab. Iosue Ben. Leui, in Thal tract. Sanhed. cap. helec.
                     To which purpose also, appertaineth the Narration of one Elias, as Rabbi Iosue reporteth it in ye Thalmud, yt the Messias was to be borne indeede, according to the Scripture, before the destruction of the second Temple; for that Esay saith of the Sinagogue,
                        Esay, 66,
                      
                     Before she was with child shee brought foorth: and before the griefe of trauaile came, she was deliuered of a man child. That is, sayth hee, before the Sinagogue was afflicted and put to desolation by the Romaines, she brought foorth the Messias. But yet (sayth he) this Messias for our sinnes, dooth hyde himselfe for a time in the Sea,Christ hydeth himselfe in the Sea
                           •
                        
                      and other desert places, vntill we be worthy of his comming. To the lyke effect is the obseruation of the Thalmud it selfe,The obseruation of the Thalmud. and of diuers Rabbines therin, concerning the wicked manners

of men that should be at Christes appearance vppon earth, of whō they doe pronounce these wordes:
                        Thal. tract. Sanhed. cap. helec. Rab. Iohanan. Rab. Iuda. Rab. Nehoras. &c.
                      
                     The wise men in Israell shall be extinguished: the learning of our Scribes and Pharisies shall be putrified: the schooles of Diuinitie shal be stewes at that time. Which thing Iosephus that lyued in the same age with our Sauiour Christ,
                        Iosep lib. 20, anti. ca. 6. et 8
                              •
                            et lib. 6, de bel. Iud. 15, et li. 7. cap. 9.
                      affirmeth to be fulfilled in the tyme of Herode: in so much, that if the Romaines had not destroyed thē, without doubt, sayth he, eyther the earth would haue opened and swallowed them downe, or els fire from heauen would haue consumed them.
                  All then runneth to this end,The seuēth proofe. both by Scripture, tradition, obseruation, and instinct of God himsel
                        •
                     e:
                        Foreboding.
                      that about Herods time the true Messias should be borne. And heereof came that common and publique fame that is recorded by Tacitus Suetonius, and Iosephus,
                        Tacit. li. 12, Sueton. in vita Vesp. Iosep. de bello Iudai. lib, 7, cap. 12,
                      (which was also written in open sight, vpon the chiefest Tower of the Citty of Ierusalē) that out of Iurie should rise
                        •
                      
                     A generall Lord of the vniuersall worlde. Which Prophecie, as the Romaines eyther contemned, or turned another

way, applying the same afterward to the Emperour Vespasian, so the Iewes vnderstood it of their Messi
                        •
                     s, and Herode feared the matter greatly; and for that was so watchfull to extinguish the line of Dauid as hath beene already shewed.
                  Heereof also it did proceede, that the Magi,The eyght proo
                           •
                        e. or Wise men of the East, attended so diligently about yt time, to expect the starre that Balaam had promised at the comming of thys King. Heere-hence also it was, that the whole people of Iurie,The general expectation of the people. remained so attent at thys time, more then euer be
                        •
                     ore or since, in expecting the Messias. Whereupon, so soone as euer they hearde of I. Baptist in the Deserte,
                        Iohn, 1,
                      they ran vnto him, asking if he were Christ? As afterward also they flocked to Iesus, demaunding; Art thou he which is to come, or do we expect another? Which wordes import the great expectation wherein that people remained in those dayes. Neither wanted that expectation in the chiefe Gouernors themselues, as may appeare by that sp
                        •
                     ech of theirs to Iesus;
                        Iohn, 10.
                      
                     How long wilt thou kill vs, (with thys expectation?) if thou be Christ, tell vs plainlie.
                  
                  
                     Of which fame, expectation,Diuers false Christes did rise in Iurie. and greedie desire of the people, diuers deceiuers tooke occasion to cal thē
                     selues the Messias in those daies, and the people followed them presently:
                        Acts, 5.
                      which thing had not happened in any age before.
                        Iosep. lib. 17, ca. 8. et li. 18 ca. 1. et 2. et lib. 20. cap. 2, & 6.
                      And among other, there is named one Iudas Gaulonites, or Galilaeus (as S. Luke calleth hym,) and another Iudas the sonne of Ezechias, both of them very wicked and licentious fellowes One also called A tonges, a sheepheard, and two other, named Theudas, & Egiptus, most notable deceiuers. And aboue all, there was one Barcozbam,
                        Thal. tract. San. ca, helec Rab. Moses, Ben Maim. in Sententijs
                      (who as the Thalmud affirmeth) for thirty yeeres together was receiued for the Messias, by the Rabbines themselues, vntill at last they slewe him, for that he was not able to deliuer them from the Romaines.
                  Which facility in the people whē Herod sawe: hee caused Nicholaus Damascenus (as I noted before) to deuise a petidegree for him,
                        Nicol. Damascenus. Iosep. lib. 14. antiq. cap. 2.
                      from the auncientest Kinges of Iuda, and so he, as well as other, tooke vpon him to be the Messias, whom diuers carnall Iewes, that expected the Messias to be a magnificent King, as Herod

was, would seeme to beleeue, and divulgate abroade, and thereof in the Gospell, they are thought to haue beene called Herodiani, that is, Herodians or followers of Herod,
                        Math, 22,
                      who came to tempt Christ,
                        Mar, 3, 12,
                      with the Scribes and Pharisies.
                  Wherefore to conclude at length, this weighty poynt of the tyme of Christes appearing;The cōclusion of thys fi
                           •
                        st consideration of the tyme. seeing that about ye birth of Iesus vnder Herods raigne, there concurred so manie signes and arguments together: as the generall peace of the Romaine Empyre; the defection of the lyne and regiment of Iuda; the open decay of the second Temple; the iust calculation of Daniels Hebdomades; the attestation of Oracles; the obseruation of Rabbines; the publique fame & expectation of all the Iewes: together with the palpable experience of more then fif
                        •
                     eene hundred yeeres past, since Iesus appeared, wherein we see the Iewish people in vaine doe expect another Messias, they being dispersed ouer all the world, without Temple, law, Sacrifice, Prophet, or promise for their redemption, (which neuer happened vnto thē til after Iesus death,

for that in all other theyr banishments, captiuities, and afflictions, they had some Prophecie, consolation, or promise for theyr deliuerie.) These things all (I say) considered and put together, we may most vndoubtedly and assuredly conclude, that Iesus was borne at the iust time appointed, and fore-told by the spirite of GOD; and consequentlie, that he only was the true Messias & Sauior of the world, which yet shall better appeare, by examination of other things that are to follow.
               
               
                  The second Consideration.
                  NOw in the second consideration there come to be weighed these poynts following;Christ hys byrth. the lyne & stock of Iesus; his manner of conception; the place of hys byrth; his circumcision & name; hys adoration by the Magi; his presentation in the Temple; and hys flight to Egypt.
                  For hys line and stock,Iesus lyne. there was neuer man denied or doubted, but 
                        •
                     hat Iesus was directly of the Trybe of Iuda, and descended linially by hys Mother of the peculier house of Dauid, (
                        3, Reg, 7, Psalm, 80,
                      according as it was foretolde

that the Messias should doe,
                        Esay, 11, Math, 1, Luke, 3,
                     ) which is prooued most cleerely by the two Genealogies & petidegrees, sette downe by S. Matthewe and S. Luke, of the blessed Virgins whole discent, from Dauid to Ioseph, that was of the same Tribe and kindred with her. And it is confirmed by theyr repayring to Bethleem, (when Proclamation was made by C
                        •
                     renius in 
                        Of thys matter writeth Iosep. lib. 18. cap. 1. antiq.
                      Augustus name, that euerie person should repaire to the heade Cittie of theyr Trybe and family, to be cessed for theyr Tribute,) seeing that Bethleem was the proper Cittie onely of them that were of the house and line of Dauid: for that K. Dauid was borne therein.
                        1. Regu. 17
                              •
                            2 Reg, 2,
                      And finally, it is euident by that the Scribes and Pharisies, who obiected matters of much lesse importance then thys against Iesus,
                        Math, 13.
                      (as that he was a Carpenters sonne,
                        Luke, 6.
                      therby to debase him for hys pouerty,) yet neuer obiected they against him, that he was not of the house of Dauid, which they would neuer haue omitted, if they might haue doone it with any colour: for that it wold haue weighed more against him then all the rest: and would in one word haue dyspatched

the whole controuersie Nay I adde further, that it remaineth registred in the Iewes Thalmud it self,
                        Thal. tract. San. ca. Nigmar had.
                      that Iesus of Nazareth Crucified, was of the blood royal from Zorobabel of the ho
                           •
                        se of Dauid.
                  
                  For the maner of his conception,The maner of his conception. Luke, 1,
                      and of the Message or annunciation made vnto hys Mother by the Angel, albeit it depend principally, vppon the relation and credite of the Virgine herselfe, who onely was priuie thereunto: and 
                        •
                     ppon the testimonie of Ioseph, to whom it was re
                     
                        •
                     ealed by the same Angel afterward; yet, he that shall consider the circū
                     stances of the thing it selfe: as first, the simplicity of both the reporters, then, howe that it is not vnlikeli
                        •
                     , that Ioseph beeing iust (as he is described) woulde haue concealed a thing so much against himselfe,
                        Math, 1,
                      & against the Law, if he had not some way beene assured of the truth.
                  Thirdly,
                        Augus. lib. 4
                              •
                            de Trin. ca. 5 et lib. cont. Iudaeos ca. 5, Chrisost. in cap. 1, Luc.
                      the innocent age of the blessed Virgine, (who was not past fourteene yeeres olde at that tyme, as S. Augustine and other auncient Fathers doe prooue by manifest arguments) All these things I say, do make it improbable, that she would

inuent such a matter of herselfe. And finally, the strange prophecy which she vttered in her Canticle of Magnificat, and which we see nowe fulfilled, (albeit at that tyme very vnlikely,) to wit, That all generations should call her blessed. These circumstances, he that shal consider them, cannot but see that the matter must needes be true.
                  
                     The maner of Iesus natiuitie.And as for the kind and manner of hys natiuity: most mani
                        •
                     est it is by scripture, that the Messias was appointed to be borne of a Virgine, for so sayth Esay plainlie: Behold, a virgine shal conc
                           •
                        iue, and bring foorth a Sonne.
                     
                        Esay, 7,
                      And Esay appointeth thys to King Achaz for a wonderfull and strange signe from GOD, which he could not haue doone in reason, if the Hebrue word in yt place, might haue signified a young woman onlie, (as some latter Rabbines will affirme) for yt it is no signe or strange thing, but very common and ordinary for young women to conceiue and bring forth children. Wherfore the Septu
                        •
                     gent doe very well translate it in Greeke,
                        Parthenos.
                      by the proper name of Virgine, and so did also the elder Iewes vnderstand it,
                        Rab. Simeon Ben. Iohai. in capit. 2, Gene.
                      as Rabbi Simeon

well noteth. And Rabbi Moses Hadarsan, of singuler credite wyth the Iewes, vpon these words of the Psalmes:
                        Rab. Moses Hadar. in Psal, 14, verse. 12.
                      
                     Truth shall bud foorth of the earth, &c. sayth thus: heere Rabbi Ioden noteth, that it is not sayd, Truth shal be ingendered of the earth, but, Truth shall bud foorth, To signifie thereby, that the Messias, (who is meant by the worde Truth) shal not be begotten (as other men are) in carnall copulation. Thus farre Rabbi Moses: who in another place, that is, vppon the twenty and fiue Chapter of Genesis, alledgeth Rabbi Berachias to be of the same opinion; and to prooue it out of the hūdred & nine Psalme and fourth verse.
                  The same is prooued also, in the plain words of the Prophet Ieremie:
                        Ierem, 31,
                      
                     God hath created a newe thing vppon earth: a woman shal inuiron (or inclose) a man. That is, she shall inclose him in her wombe, and bring hym forth after a newe and strange maner, without generation of man. And finally, Rabbi Hacadosch proueth by Cabala out of many places of Scripture,
                        Ra. Hac. qu. 3. in Ea. c. 9.
                      not onely that the Mother of the Messias shalbe a Virgine,

but also that her name shall be Marie.
                        Betu. in lib. de car. Sibyl.
                      All the tenne Sibyls in like manner, (according as Betulius setteth out theyr Prophecies) doe make speciall mention of the Mother of 
                        •
                     he Messias, that she should be a most pure and holy Virgine; so that thys matter was reuealed very cleerely, both to Iewe and Gentile before it came to passe. And Clemens Alexandrinus writeth,
                        Clem. in recog.
                      that Simon Magus, to the end he might not seeme inferiour to Iesus in thys poynt, fayned, that he was also borne of a Virgine, as Iesus was.
                  That Bethleem where Christ was borne,The place appointed for ye byrth of the Messias. was the peculier pla
                        •
                     e preordained by God for the byrth of the Messias: the Prophet Michaeas foretold plainly, when he vttered dyuers ages before Christ was incar
                        •
                     ate, these wordes;
                        Mich, 5,
                      
                     And thou Bethleem Ephrata, art but a little one (in respect of thousands in Iuda:) and yet shall there come foorth of thee, one that shall be the RVLER of Israell: and his comming forth is from the beginning, and from THE DAIES OF ETERNITIE. By which words is plainly expressed, that albeit Bethleem were but a lyttle poore

Towne, (as indeede it was, in comparison of many other in Iuda:) yet therein should be borne temporally that Gouernour of Israel, whose diuine byrth, was before the worldes foundation, and from all eternitie. And so doe interprete thys place, both Ionathan Ben vziell the great Author of the Chaldie Paraphrase, (who dyed twenty-eyght yeeres before our Sauiour Christ was borne,) and also Rab. Selomoth and Hacadosch, in theyr Commentaries vpon thys place of Michaeas.
                  The same thing fore-tolde Dauid of Ephrata, or Bethleem, (for both names doe signifie one thing, as appeareth by the former place of Michaeas and 
                        Gene, 35. and 48. 1. Cron, 2. Psalm, 131,
                      others,) when talking of the Messias, & beeing desirous to knowe where he should be borne, sayth; I will not goe into the tabernacle of my house, nor into my bed: nor will I giue mine eyes sleepe, or rest to the temples of my head: vntil I finde out the place that is appointed for my Lord: the tabernacle (or house) for the God of Iacob. And then, the mysterie beeing reuealed vnto him: he sayth presently; Beholde, wee haue heard of it (nowe) in Ephrata (or

Bethleem) we haue founde it out in the fieldes of 
                     This he said for that in Dauids time Bethleem stoode nigh vnto woods. Math, 2,
                      
                     woode. And to shewe how he reuerenced ye place for that cause, he addeth immediatly; Wee will adore in the place where his feete haue stoode. Whereby he fore-prophecieth, not onely the adoration vsed after in that place vnto Iesus by the Magi, or three kings of the East, but also of all other adoration vsed in the same place in the memorie of Iesus, by other deuout Christians vntill thys day; for which cause Origen sayth,
                        Orig. cont. Cels.
                      that the place of Bethleem, was most famous and renowned in hys dayes.
                  
                     The Angels singing.For the Angels appearing to the Sheepe-heards, in the nyght of the Natiuity, there can be no more said, but the credite, honestie, and simplicitie of them that reported it: and likely it is, they woulde neuer fayne a thing, that might haue been refuted by testimony of the sheepheards themselues, if it had been false.
                  Of the Name of IESVS, giuen to hym in hys circumcision:The name of IESVS. it was to be s
                        •
                     ene sette down in a booke, that how soeuer it were not scripture, yet was it extant in the worlde before Christ was borne I mean the second

Booke of Esdras, which hath these wordes in the person of GOD the Father.
                        2. Esdr, 7,
                      
                     Behold, the time shall come, when the signes shall appeare that I haue tolde, &c. And my son IESVS shal be reuealed, with those who are with him. And after those yeeres my sonne CHRIST shall die: and the earth shall render those that sleepe therein.
                  
                  Rabbi Hacados
                        •
                     h also prooueth by arte Cabalist,
                        Ra. Hac
                              •
                           . in Esay, 9, Gene, 49, Psal, 71, and 95.
                      out of many places and textes of Scripture, that the Messias name at his comming, shall be IESVS. And among other, hee addeth this reason: that as ye name of him who first brought the Iewes out of bondage into the Lande of Promise,Note thys reason. was Iesus, or Iosue, (which is all one) so must his name be Iesus, that shall the seconde time delyuer them frō the bondage wherein they are, and restore them to theyr olde and auncient possession of Iurie: which is the chiefe benefit they expect by the Messias.
                  Finally, it is not probable, that the Virgine Mary should fayne thys name of herselfe, for that among the Iewes there were many other names of more honour and estimation at

that time; as Abraham, Isaack, Iacob, Moses, and Dauid. And therefore if she wold haue feigned anie: it is like she would haue taken one of them, as soone as this, which had not been the name of any great Patriarch.
                  
                     The comming of the three kings.There followeth the comming of the three Magi or wisemen frō the East: of whom 
                        Cypr. ser. de Bapt. et idem Yert. lib. 3. cont. Marcion. in hillar. lib. 4. de Trin. Iosua, 12.
                      Cyprians wordes are these: It is an old tradition of the Church, that the Magi of the East, were Kings, or rather little Lords of particuler places. Which is to be vnderstoode, such little Kings as Iosua slew thirty in one battaile. And it is to be noted, that S. Matthew maketh mention of the comming of these Kinges to Ierusalem, as of a knowne & publique matter, whereof all Ierusalem and Iurie were able to beare him witnesse. For he talketh of theyr often comming to Ierusalem, and of the inqui
                        •
                     y for the new borne King: of their speech & conference had with Herod: as also of Herods consultation with ye Scribes and Pharisies about the place of the Messias birth. And finally, he sheweth the most pittiful murder that ensued, of almost 
                        14. Thousand as saith the Lyturgie of the Aethiopians, et Calend. Grecorum.
                      infinite infants, in

all the circuite of Bethleem for thys matter. Which could not be a thing vnknown to all Iurie, & much lesse fained by the holy Euangelist Saint Mathew; for that he shoulde haue giuen his aduersaries the greatest aduantage in the world; if he had begun his Gospell, with so notorious and open an vntruth, which might haue been refuted by infinite persons that were yet aliue.
                  Epiphanius is of opinion,
                        Epiph. haerit. 51.
                      that the three Kinges arriued in Ierusalem, two yeeres after Christes Natiuitie, for that Herod slewe all the infants of that age.
                        Amō. Alex. in Harm. Niceph. lib. 1, cap. 13.
                      But other holde more probablie, that the starre appeared vnto them, two yeeres before Christes natiuity, so that they came to Bethleem the thirteenth day after Christes byrth, according as the Church doth celebrate the Epiphanie. Saint Basile thinketh that they were learned men,
                        Basil ser. in nati. Dom.
                      and myght by theyr learning and Arte Magicke, (wherein those Countrimen at that tyme were very skilful,) vnderstande and feele, that the power of theyr Heathen Gods, was greatly diminished and broken. They might also be stirred vp with that cōmon brute,

and generall prophecie, spred ouer all the East in those dayes, as both Su
                        •
                     tonius and Iosephus do recorde. That out of Iurie should come an vniuersall King ouer all the worlde.
                     
                        Suet. in Ves. cap. 4. Iosep. lib. 7. de bel. c. 
                              •
                           .12. Num. 24.
                      By these meanes (I say) and by the prophecie of Balaam, lest among them from Mos
                        •
                     s time, (for he was a Gentile) whereby was signified, that a starre should rise and declare a great and mighty King in Israell; they might be induced at the sight of this starre, to take so long a iourney as they dyd towards Iurie.
                  
                     Prophecies of things that should fall out in Bethleem. Num, 24, Psal, 71.
                     Thys starre (as I haue sayd) was fore-told by Balaam a Heathen prophet, aboue one thousand and fiue hundred yeeres before it appeared. And after Balaam againe, it was prophecied by Dauid, that Kings of Arabia, Saba, and other Easterne Countries should come and adore Christ, and offer both golde and other gyfts vnto him. The murder also of those infants of Bethleem, was presignified by Ieremie, in the weeping of Rachell for the slaughter o
                        •
                      her children:
                        Ierem, 31, Gene. 35.
                      which Rachel was buried in Bethleem, and for that cause those Infants were called her chyl
                        •
                     drē, albeit she were dead aboue tw
                        •
                     
                     
thousande yeeres before they were slaine, and aboue one thousand and fiue hundred yeeres before Ieremie wrote thys prophecie.
                  Amongst which infants, Herode also for more assuraunce,
                        Philo lib. de temp,
                      slewe an infant of his own. For that (as Phylo noteth) he was discended by hys Mothers side of the lyne of Iuda. Which crueltie comming to Augustus eares, he sayd,
                        Macro. lib. 2 Saturnal. cap. 4. Augustus speech of Herod. (as Macrobius reporteth) that he had rather bee Herods swine then hys sonne, for that he being a Iewe, was forbidden by his religion to kil his swine, though not ashamed to kill his sonne.
                  The same starre wherof we spake, is mentioned by dyuers Heathen Wryters:
                        Plin. lib. 2. capit. 25. Heathen testimonies for the star which guided ye Wisemen. as by Plinie, vnder the name of a Comete, (for so they termed all extraordinary starres) which appeared in the latter end of Augustus dayes, & were far different from all other that euer appeared. And therefore contrary to the nature of those kind of starres, it was adiudged by the whole Colledge of Soothsaiers, to pretend vniuersall good vnto the earth; and for that cause had an Image of mettall erected to it in Rome, and (as Plinies wordes are)

                     Is Cometa vnus, tota orbe colitur, that onely Comete, is worshypped thorow out the whole world.
                  
                     
                        Orig. cont. Celsum.
                     Origine also, writeth of one Chaeremon a Stoike, that was much moued with the consideration of thys Starre, and for that after the appearance therof, he perceiued the power of hys Gods decayed: tooke a iourney into Iurie, (in companie of other Astronomers) to informe himselfe further of the matter. Wherunto Chalcidius a Platonicke doth ad, that the Chaldaean Astronomers did gather by contēplation of this star,
                        Chalcid apud Marsil. Ficin tract. de stella Magi.
                      that some God discended from heauen to the benefit of mankind. And finally, the Sibyls talking of the cō
                     ming of Christ, affirmed plainlie: Rutilans eum Sydus monstrabit:
                        Sibyl. Samia apud Betul.
                      a blazing starre shal declare his comming. Which prophecie, Virgil the Poet hauing read in Augustus tyme, and soone hauing seene ye same fulfilled: applyed it (as I haue shewed before of all the rest.) to the flattering of Caesar, and therfore he sayth in the place before alledged.
                  
                     
                        
                           Eglog. 4.
                        Ecce Dionaei,
                     processit Caesaris astrum.
                  
                  
                     Behold the star of Caesar, (descended

of Venus) hath now appeared.
Which starre indeede, was the starre of Caesars Lord and Maister.
                  After fortie daies past ouer, Saint Luke reporteth,
                        Luke, 12.
                      how Iesus by hys Mother was presented in the Temple of Ierusalem:The presentation of Iesus in Ierusalem. and therewithall, recounteth two strange thinges th
                        •
                     t h
                        •
                     ppened at the same time; to wit, that two graue and reuerende persons, Simeon, surnamed Iust, and Anna the Prophetesse: both of singuler sanctitie amongst the Iewes, comming into the Temple at the same time when Iesus was there in hys Mothers armes: tooke notice of hym, and acknowledged him publiquely for the Messias and Sauiour of the world Fore-telling also by the Spyrite of prophecie, dyuers particuler things yt were to ensue, both to Christ and Christians, & especially to hys Mother the blessed Virgine.
                  Which things being published at that time, and confirmed afterwards by the euent, doe well declare, that thys narration of S. Luke could not be forged; as doe also the number of particuler circumstaunces sette downe about the tyme, place, and persons, most notoriously knowne

to all Ierusalem. For, as for Anna,Anna the Prophetesse. she had lyued from her youth vntill four-score yeeres of age in the Temple, and thereby was knowne to the most part of Iurie. And as for Simeon,Simeon. he was the Scholler of the most famous Hillel, & condisciple to Ionathan maker of the Chaldie Paraphrase,
                        Thal. tract. pitkei. A
                           
                              •
                           outh.
                      of whom I spake before, and the Iewes Thalmud con
                        •
                     esseth, that by the death of these two men, (especially of Simeon) fayled the spyrite of the great Sinagogue,
                        Thal. tract. Ioma. cap. Tereph. Becalp
                              •
                           .
                      called Sanhedrin: which after the captiuitie of Babilon vntill Herods tyme, supplied (in a sort) the spirit of prophecie, that was expresly in Israell before the sayd captiuitie.
                  
                     Christes flight into Egypt. Luke, 2.
                     Of Christes flight into Egypt for feare of Herod, S. Luke wel noteth, that it was prophecied by Ose
                        •
                      long before:
                        Osea, 11,
                      
                     that God would call his sonne out of Egipt. And the Prophet Esay describeth the same very particulerly when he sayth:
                        Esay, 19.
                      
                     Behold, our Lord Iehoua shal ascend vp, (or ryde) vppon a lyght cloude: (which was his f
                        •
                     esh or humanitie) and shall goe down into Egipt, and all the Idoles of Egipt shall shake at his presence.
                  
                  Which latter poynt, Eusebius

sheweth that it was fulfilled most e
                     
                        •
                     idently in the sight of al the world,
                        Euseb. lib. 6 dem cap. 20, 
                              •
                           t lib. 9, cap. 2, 3, 4.
                      for that no Nation came to Christian Religion with so great celeritie or fer
                        •
                     our, as dyd the Egiptians, who threw downe theyr Idols before anie other heathen Nations. And as they had beene the first in Idolatr
                        •
                     e to other Countryes: so were they the first,The benefite that Egipt receiued by Christes flight vnto it. by Christes comming vnto them, that afterward gaue example of true returne to theyr Creator. It followeth in Esay: And I wil giue vppe Egipt into the handes of cruell Lordes: and a Potent King shall take dominion ouer them. Which was fulfilled about the verie time wherein Christ was to come. For that then, after many spoyles and cruelties exercised vpon Egypt by the Romaine Lords & Princes, as Pompey, Caesar, Anthony and others: in the end Cleopatra theyr Queene, that was the last of all the bloode and lyne of the P
                        •
                     olomies, was enforced to sley herselfe: and so Augustus the Emperour tooke possession of al Egipt, and subiected it as a Prouince to the Romaine Empire.
                  But consider you, how Esay concludeth ye matter, a
                        •
                     ter all these temporall

afflictions threatned against Egypt, and confesse, that such aduersitie, is no signe of Gods dys-fauour to thē who receiue it. For thus sayth God after all his cominations, In that day, there shall be an Aultar of Iehoua in the midst of Egypt: they shall cry to God in their tribulation, and he shall send them a Sauiour, &c. Blessing shall be in the midst of that Lande, to whom the Lord GOD of Hostes hath giuen his benediction, saying: Blessed is my people of Egipt. And heere we make an ende of our second Consideration.
               
               
                  The third Consideration.
                  
                     The life & actions of IESVS.NOw in the third place there cō
                     meth to be considered, (according to our former diuision) the life, conuersation, doctrine, & myracles of IESVS. And first, touching things doone by him after hys comming out of Egypt, which might be about the sixt or seauenth yere of hys age, vntill hys baptisme by S. Iohn, which was the thirtith, there is lyttle recorded,
                        Iust. in Trip. Chris. in Ioh. Aug. li. 4, de Trin. cap. 5.
                      eyther in prophane, or Ecclesiasticall wryters. For that as S. Iustine, S. Chrisostome, S
                        •
                      Augustine

& others do write, he bestowed that time in the cōmon exercise and labours of mans lyfe: thereby to shewe hymselfe true man, and gyue demonstration how much he hated and detested idlenes.
               
               
                  Of S. Iohn Baptist.
                  OF Saint Iohn Baptist, all Hebrue Wryters of that tyme doe make mention, with exceeding praise and admiration of hys holinesse: especially Iosephus that lyued immediatly after Christes daies, sayth: he was,
                        Iosep. lib. 18, antiq. cap. 7
                      
                     Vir optimus: Iudaeos excitans ad virtutum studia. A most excellent man, styrring vp the Iewes to the exercise of vertue. He addeth also, that partlie for feare of the great concourse of people which flocked vnto him, and partly by the solicitation of Herodias, concubine and brothers wife to Herode Antipas, the great Herods sonne, for whose cause he had turned off hys owne wife, daughter to Areta King of the Arabians
                        •
                      hee was apprehended and imprysoned in the Castle of Acherun, and therin soone after put to death. Which murder, Iosephus esteemed to be

the cause of all the misery which insued afterward to Herode and hys whole familie.
                  Of thys man it was written by Malachie the Prophet: Beholde, I send my messenger (or Angel) before me,
                     
                        Mala, 3.
                      
                     and he shall prepare the way before my face: and presently shal come to his Temple, the RVLER whom ye seeke, & the MESSENGER OF THE TESTAMENT whom yee desire. Which prophecie was fulfilled most euidently, vppon the preaching of S. Iohn,S. Iohns behauiour towardes Christ
                           •
                        
                      when Christ came vnto him, and albeit S. Iohn had neuer seene him before, yet he a
                        •
                     knowledged hym for the Messias, in the presence of infinite people, and hys acknowledgement was confirmed by the visible descending of a Doue and voice from heauen,
                        Math, 3, Marke, 1. Luke, 3.
                      in the sight and hearing of all the people present, according as three of our Euangelists doe report. Which they would neuer haue presumed to do: had not the matter beene most euident, and without all compasse of deniall or contradiction.
                  And truely, no one thing in all thys story of Iesus lyfe, dooth more establish the certaintie of his beeing

the true Messias: then that S. Iohn Baptist, whose wisedome, learning, vertue and rare sanctitie is confessed and recorded by the writings of all our aduersaries, shold ref
                        •
                     se the honor of the Messias offered vnto him selfe, and lay it vpon Iesus: as also, should direct those disciples that depended vpon him, to the onely following & embracing of Iesus doctrine. Which is most euidently proued that he dyd
                        •
                     , for that so many followers and Disciples as himselfe had, not one appeared euer after, that was not a Christian.
               
               
                  The preaching & doctrine of Iesus.
                  WHen Iesus was baptised, he began to preache, and hys whole doctrine was directed to the manifestation of hys Fathers wyll, and amendement of mans life. It tendeth all to this one ground and principle. Thou shalt loue the Lord thy GOD with al thy soule:
                     
                        Deut, 6.
                      
                     and thy neighbour as thy selfe.
                     
                        Math, 2.
                      It was plaine, easie, perspicuous, & euident, though it treated of most high mysteries.Heathen doctrine
                           •
                        
                      It had neither pompe nor pride of rethoricall wordes, nor flattering of mans

wickednes, as the doctrine of manie Phylosophers had. Neither consisted it, of vnprofitable externall ceremonies,Iewish Ceremonies. as the latter obseruations of the Iewish Law did, nor was it fraught with carnalitie and spyrite of thys world, as the Turkish Alcoran,Turkish Alcoran. and other sectaries doctrine is. But al was simplicitie; all was spyrite; all was truth; all was honestie; all was humility; all was charitie.
                  It tooke away or disanulled no one perfect or spiritual point of Moses Lawe,The comparison of Christes Law with that of Moses. Math, 5.
                      but rather reuiued, interpreted, fulfilled, and made perfect the same. For wheras that commanded externall obseruaunce, thys addeth also internal obedience. Wheras that said, loue your friendes, thys adioyneth, loue also your enemies. Whereas that commaunded wee should not kyll, thys further commandeth to speake no angry words. Whereas that prohibited to commit actuall adultery: thys also forbyddeth to couet in mind. Wheras that sayde, take no interest or vsury of a Iew that is thy Countriman: thys sayth, take it of no man what soeuer
                        •
                      Whereas that accounted euerie Iew onely to be thy neighbour, this

teacheth 
                        •
                     uerie person lyuing to be thy brother. Whereas that taught thee to offer vp a Calfe, a Sheepe, or an Oxe for thy sinnes: thys instructeth thee, to offer vp a contrite hart, by fayth in the bloode of him that dyed for all, with a firme & resolute purpose of amendement of life. And finally,The effect of Christes doctrine. this doctrine tendeth wholy to the true, sincere, and perfect seruice of GOD thy Lorde, that made and redeemed thee, to the exaltation of his holy name, power, goodnesse, & glory: to the depression of mans pryde by dyscouering his misery, to the contempt of this world & vaine pompe thereof; to the mortification and subduing of our sensuall appetite: to the true loue and vnfeyned charitie of our neighbour: to the styrring vp of our spirit to celestiall cogitations; to peace of conscience; tranquility of minde; purity of bodie; consolation of our soule. And in one word, to reduce mankinde againe to a certaine estate of innocencie, simplicitie, & Angelical sanctitie vppon earth, wyth hys eye fixed onely in the eternall inheritaunce of Gods kingdome in heauen.
                  Thys was the doctrine deliuered

by Iesus: which is the same that the Prophets of God fore-tolde shoulde be deliuered by the Messias.
               
               
                  The life & conuersation of Iesus.
                  AND as for hys life & conuersation, by ye testimonie of his greatest aduersaries, it was more admirable then his doctrine, his lyfe beeing a most liuely Table, wherin the perfection of all hys doctrine was expressed. A man of such grauitie, as neuer in hys lyfe hee was noted to laugh, of such humilitie, as beeing the sonne of GOD, he scarce vsed in thys worlde the d
                        •
                     gnity of a seruant, of such swee
                        •
                     e and milde behauiour, as all the iniuries of hys enemies, neuer wrested frō him one angry word. Finally, he was such a one, as he was described by Esay, so many ages before he was borne, in these words;
                        Esay, 42,
                      
                     He shal not cry nor contend, nor shal any man heare his voice in the streete: he shal not crush a broken reede, nor tread out a little 
                           •
                        laxe that 
                           •
                        ieth smoking on the ground &c. And another Prophet not long after him, brake foorth into thys speech, vpon cōsideration of the behauiour

that should be in the Messias:
                        Zach, 9.
                      
                     Reioyce thou daughter of Sion: tryumph thou daughter of Ierusalem: for behold thy King shal come vnto thee, thy iust Sauior: he is poore and humble. &c. And as the Prophets did foretel the vertue & sanctitie of the Messias, so the deuils thēselues could not but con
                        •
                     esse the same to haue beene fulfilled in the person of Iesus; as is most euident by the testimonie of Porphiry, a professed enemie of the Christian name. Who after consideration of diuers Oracles vttered by hys Idols, touching Iesus, he breaketh forth into this cōfession.
                        Porph. lib, de laud. Phylo
                              •
                           
                        
                      
                     It is exceeding wonderful, what testimonie the Gods do giue of the singuler pietie & sanctitie of Iesus: for which they auouch him rewarded with immortalitie: but yet these Christians are deceiued in calling him GOD. Thus much writeth Porphirie. And last of all Iosephus the Iew, that was borne immediatly after Iesus, writeth of him thus.
                        Iosep. lib. 18, antiq. cap. 7.
                      
                     There was at this time one Iesus, a wise man, if it be lawfull to call him a man: a worker of most wonderful miracles, & a Maister & teacher of all such men, as willinglie were content to imbrace the truth.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Of Iesus myracles.
                  BY which testimony of Io
                        •
                     ephus, we see mention also of Iesus myracles, which is the next thing wherof we are to consider. And as Iosephus in this place, (beeing a Iewe) beareth witnesse that Iesus performed many strange myracles: so most apparently, and according to the interpretation of Iosephus in this place, were the same miracles foretold by the Prophets of GOD, that they should be done by ye true Messias. So Esay in his thirty-fiue chapter, describeth at large, how the Messias at hys comming,Predictions of the Messias myracles. shall declare hys commission, by giuing sight to the blinde, hearing to ye deafe, speech to the dumbe, and agilitie of bodie to the lame and cripple. And that which is more; God reuealed thys poynt very particulerly to the Gentiles by the Sibyls, among whom, one of them wrote thus of Christ to come, as Lactantius recordeth:
                        Lact. lib. 4, diu
                              •
                           na. In
                           
                              •
                           tit. cap. 15
                      
                     He shall doe al by his onely word, he shall cure all infirmities: he shall raise the dead: he shall make the lame to run and skip: the deafe shall heare: the

blinde shall see: and the dumbe shall speake. In fiue loues & two fishes, fiue thousand persons shall be satisfied, and the fragments shal fill twelue baskets, to the hope of many. He shal cōmaund the windes, and walke vpon the furious sea, with his feete of peace.
                  
                  And after diuers other Greek verses to thys purpose, shee concludeth in these words;
                        Thal. tract. Beracoth, et Mermathas. Coli
                              •
                           .
                      
                     Men shall say, that I am a mad and lying Prophetesse, but when all these thinges shall come to passe, then remember mee: for then shall no man say more, that I was a lyar, but rather the Prophet of the great God.
                  
                  To these predictions of Prophets in Iurie and among the Gentiles, do agree the Doctors of the Iewes thē
                     selues, in many places of their Thalmud: to wit, that the Messias shall be most wonderful in working myracles. And in theyr publique Commentary vpon Ecclesiastes, they haue these words.
                        Misdrach, coheleth, ca. 1,
                      
                     All the former miracles of Prophets or Saints shal be nothing to the myracles of the Messias, when he commeth. And thus much of the fore-telling of Christes miracles. But now for the fulfilling thereof in Ie
                     
                        •
                     us; that is, howe these predictions

were performed in the stupendious workes and actions of our Sauiour Christ, there is no difficultie. For that besides the former testimony of Iosephus, (which were sufficient in thys case) the Iewes themselues doe graunt and record Iesus miracles,The confession of Iesus myra
                           •
                        les by hys enemies. in dyuers places of Treatises of theyr Thalmud; yea, they make mention of many wonderful thinges that Iesus did, which are not written by our Euangelists. The same doth Mahomet in his Alcoran,
                        Tha. in tract Auodazara Misdr. Coheleth Alcoran Azoar. 14, 11, 13.
                      affirming Iesus the sonne of Mary, to haue beene a great Prophet, & to haue wrought hys myracles, by the onely power & Spyrite of God; and that himselfe was sent to confirme Iesus doctrine, sauing onely in the poynt of hys God-head: wherein he sayth, that Iesus went too-farre, & had a check for the same at Gods hand when he returned to heauen.
                  Thus much do these enemies confesse of Iesus miracles. Which, as it is much, comming from such witnesses: so if they would either deny or dissemble the same, they myght be prooued against them by most euident reasons: especially in tvvo poynts, wherin there can be no probability

of any deniall.
                  The first is, the calling and retayning of hys Apostles,The calling of the Apostles. Iosep. lib. 18, antiq. cap 4
                      and other followers, (whereof Iosephus also in the place before alledged, maketh mention, as of a great miracle) who were of dyuers callings, states, conditions, trades, and occupations in the world. And yet al, vpon the suddaine, left both father, mother, wife, children, & other temporal respects, & followed him, who had nothing to giue or promise thē in this world. A man, that neuer spake them faire, or vttered doctrine that was not repugnant to the sensuality of this life, as may appeare by theyr owne wrytinges and testimonies of hym. A man, that was accounted by the b
                        •
                     tter sort, as then it might seeme: that is, by the Wise and learned of that Countrey, and especially dislyked by them that were in gouernm
                        •
                     nt, as a dangerous and troublesome man to the state. One that had neyther freendes in the worlde to beare hym out, nor a house to put hys head in.A great miracle. And yet notwithstanding all thys, that worldly men and women, and some such also as were great sinners, & loose lyuers before,

should leaue all their worldly hope, stay, and condition, to follow such a man, with so great inconueniences, losses, dangers
                        •
                      & disfauours as they did; and should continue with him in all his afflictions, and be content to die & loose their lyues rather then forsake him, or abandon his seruice; thys (I say) is such a miracle, as neuer in the world fel out the like, & must needes be graunted by the enemie, to be supernaturall.
               
               
                  The miraculous facts of Iesus.
                  THE second poynt is, of externall things and facts done by Iesus, aboue all power of humane abilitie, in the sight and knowledge of all the Iewes, which facts were published by our Euangelists, and especially by S. Matthew, in the Hebrue tongue, while yet the persons were aliue vpon whō they were wrought, or infinite other that might be witnesses thereof. As for example, the raysing of Lazarus in Bethania, that was a Village but a myle or two distant from Ierusalem:
                        Iohn, 11.
                      at vvhose death and buriall, (beeing a Gentleman) many Scribes and Pharisies

must needes be present, (according to the Iewish custome at that tyme, as is reported by Iosephus) and they saw him both deceas
                        •
                     ed,
                        Iosep. lib. 17. antiq. ca. 11.
                      interred, & the funerall feast obserued for hym, as also raised againe from death by Iesus, after four dayes of his buriall. With whom they did both eate and drink, and conuerse after his returne to lyfe, and euery day might behold him walking vp and downe openlie in the streetes of Ierusalem. Thys storie (I say) how could it be feigned.
                  So in like manner,
                        Math, 9. Marke, 5,
                      the raysing of the Archisinagogues Daughter, whose name is affirmed to be Iai
                     
                        •
                     us, with dyuers other circumstances that doe make the thing most notorious. The raysing of the widdowes sonne,
                        Luke, 7.
                      before the gate of the Cittie Naim, in the presence of all the people that bare the sayde corpes, and stoode about it. The healing of the Cripple in Ierusalem,
                        Iohn, 5,
                      that had lyen thirty and eyght yeeres lame, at the Pooles side or Bath called Probati
                        
                           •
                        a, which miracle was done also in 
                        •
                     he sight of infinite people. The ca
                     
                        •
                     ting out of a Legion of deuils,
                        Math, 8. Marke, 5,
                      from 
                        •
                      man that for many yeres together

was known to lyue possessed in the Mountaines, which deuils by peculiar lycence, obtained of Iesus to enter into a heard of swyne, & so presently carried two thousand of them away into the sea, & drowned thē. Whereupon the whole Country about of the people called Gerasines, beeing striken with extreame feare vpon sight of the fact,
                        Math, 14.
                      besought Iesus most humbly to depart 
                        •
                     rom their borders.
                        Luke, 9,
                      The feeding & filling of fiue thousand men, besides women and chyldren, wyth fiue Barley loues and two fishes only. The turning of water into wine, at a marriage at Cana, in the presence of all the Guestes. The healing of him by a word only,
                        Luke, 14,
                      that had an incurable dropsie, and thys at the Table of a principall Pharisie, and in the sight of all that sate at dynner with hym.
                  Thys (I say) & diuers other such myracles, which were doone in the presence and sight of so infinite a number of people, and recorded by our Euangelists, at such times when many desired to discredite the same
                        •
                      and might haue done easily by many witnesses and authorities, if any one part thereof had beene subiec
                        •
                     
                     
to calumniation: cannot in reason or probability be doubted of. And there
                        •
                     ore I must conclude,The conclusion of thys Consideration. that seeing these things are aboue al power of humane nature, and coulde not be done, but by the finger and vertue of the liuing God himselfe, considering also that it is impossible, that God should assist or gyue testimonie vnto any falsehoode, it must needes ensue, that all was true and sincere which Iesus affirmed: and consequently, seeing he affirmed himsel
                        •
                     e to be the sonne of God, and the true and onely Messias, it must needes folow by these miracles, that he was so indeede; which is the ground of that speech of hys to the faithlesse Pharisies,
                        Iohn, 10.
                      
                     If you will not beleeue my words, beleeue my deedes. And thus much of Iesus lyfe, doctrine, conuersation, & miracles.
               
               
                  The fourth Consideration.
                  THere remaineth now onely, the fourth and last consideration of thys Section, which is, the passion,The passiō and resurrection. resurrection, and ascention of Iesus. And about hys passion there is little or no controuersie: for that all hys

enemies doe agree and graunt, that he was betrayed by hys owne Disciple; apprehended, afflicted, and deliuer
                        •
                     d vp by the Iewes, and finallie put to death vppon a Crosse by the Gentiles. The testimony of Iosephus may serue for all herein, whose wordes are these;
                        Iosep. lib, 18. antiq. cap. 4
                      
                     That the principall Iewes of his Countrey, hauing accused and deliuered ouer Iesus to Pilate, (that was Gouernour of Iurie for the Romaine Emperor) he adiudged him to the Crosse. The same doe other Iewes and Gentiles record, and in thys they take great offence & scandale, that we should attribute diuinitie vnto a man that had suffered death vpon the Crosse.
                  But if we shew that this was the eternall preordination and appointment of GOD, for sauing of mankinde: and that the same was foretold both to Iew and Gentile from the beginning: and so vnderstoode also by the Iewish Doctors themselues of elder times: then euery reasonable man (I trow) will remaine satisfied, and preferre Gods diuine wisedome before mans follie.
               
               
                  
                  Christes ascending to Ierusalem to receiue his passion.
                  FIrst then consider, that when Christ had ended his preaching, and wrought so many miracles as seemed sufficient to hys eternal wisdome, and when the time was come preordained for his passion, (wherof he told publiquely his Disciples before,) hee went vp to Ierusalem of purpose to receiue hys death: and made a solemne entry into that Cittie vpon an Asse, which was prophecied of him many yeeres before;
                        Math, 21.
                      
                     Reioyce daughter of Sion. Behold thy IVST KING and SAVIOVR,
                        Zach, 9,
                      
                     shall come vnto thee vpon an Asse.
                  
                  And after hys abode some dayes in that place, hee was betrayed and sold by his owne Disciple,
                        Math, 10, and 16.
                      as Dauid before hande in many places had fore-told shold come to passe.
                        Psalm, 40
                              •
                            54, & 108.
                      Then folowed his apprehension, & most seruile abusage by the Iewes, wherof it was fore-prophecied in his person by Esay;
                        Esay, 50.
                      
                     I gaue my body to thē that beate it, and my cheekes to them that buffeted the same. I did not turne my

selfe away from them that reproched me: nor yet from them that dyd spet in my face.
                  
               
               
                  The barbarus abusage of Iesus, foretolde by prophecie.
                  AFter thys barbarous intreatie by the Iewes, they deliuered hym ouer to Pilate a Gentile, & neuer ceased to solicite and pursue theyr vnquenchable hatred against him, vntill they saw him on ye Crosse, where also he was vsed in the highest degree of spightfull dealing. Whereof likewise the Prophet Dauid made mention long before, in the person of the Messias, when he sayd;
                        Psalm, 21,
                      
                     They pearsed my hands and feete: they deuided among them my apparrell, and vpon my (vpper.) garment they did cast lo
                           •
                        s. And againe of another cruelty hee complaineth, saying; They gaue mee gaule to eate, and in my thirst they refreshed me with Vineger.
                  
               
               
                  Christes death plainly fore-tolde.
                  AND finally, that Christ should die for the sinnes of mankind, i
                        •
                     
                     
a common principle, both prefigured and fore-told throughout all the old Scripture. Prefigured by the Sacrifice of Isaack:
                        Gene, 21, 22
                      by the raysing vp of the brasen Serpent,
                        Numb, 21.
                      and by all other sacrifices that were in the Law. Fore-tolde, not onely by the Scriptures before alledged, but also most plainly by Daniell,
                        Dan. 9
                              •
                           
                        
                      who was told by an Angell, that a
                        •
                     ter a certaine tyme by him there appointed:

                        Vngetur Sanctus Sanctorū, the Saint of Saints shal be annointed, et occidetur Christus, and thys annointed Saint or Christ shal be put to death. Zacharie also about the same tyme, dooth not onely fore-tell his death, but also the kind thereof, and from what people he should receiue the same:
for thus hee saith in the person of Christ himselfe.
                        Zach, 12.
                      
                     The inhabitants of Ierusalem at that day, shal looke vpon me, whom they haue crucified.
                  
               
               
                  The wonderful predictions of Christes passion, set down by Esay.
                  
                     BVT if yee will reade the whole story of Christes passion, sette down at large sixe hundred yeres before it fell out, I refer you to a narration

of Esay, who to signifie the strangenesse of the case, beginneth with the Praeface.
                     Esay, 57, Who wil giue credite to that we shal report. &c. And thē a little after he goeth on in these words.
                     
                        Christes deformity vppon the Crosse.
                      He shall mount vp as a twig frō a dry earth. He hath no forme or beautie vpon him. We beheld him, & there was no count
                        •
                     naunce in him, we saw him the most contemptible & despised man in the world. A man full of paines, and experienced in infirmitie. His countenaunce was obscure & dispicable, and we made no account of him.
                        Christ appointed to die for our sinnes.
                      Truly he tooke vpon himselfe our greefes, and did beare our paines. We accounted him as a Leaper, and as a man striken and punished by GOD. But he was wounded for our iniquities, and crushed in peeces for our wickednes. The discipline (or correction) of our peace lyeth vpon him: and by his woundes we are made whole. We haue all erred, and gone astray lyke sheep, euery man after his own waies, and God hath layd vpon him the iniquity of vs al. He was offered vp for v
                        ••
                      because he wold so, he shal be led to hi
                        •
                      slaughter as a sheepe: & as a Lamb he shal be silent before his shearers.
                  For the sinnes of my people haue

striken him, saith God. He hath doone no iniquitie, neyther was there deceit found in his mouth. Yet would the lord crush him in infirmitie.
                  But if he shall giue his lyfe for sin:
                        The increase of Christes kingdome after his resurrection.
                      then shal he see a long seede (or generation) & the wil of the Lord shal be directed in his hand. And for so much, as his soule hath sustained labour: it shall see and be filled. And this MY IVST SERVANT,
                     
                        That is in making himselfe known, or reuealing the knowledge of him selfe to the world.
                      in his knowledge shall iu
                        •
                     tifie many, and beare theyr iniquities. And I will allot vnto him very many people, and hee shall deuide the spoiles of the stoute, for that he hath deliuered his soule vnto death and was accounted among the wicked, & prayed 
                        •
                     or his trespassours.
               
               
                  The particulers of Christes passion, fore-told by Sibylla.
                  
                     THus particulerly (as we see) was the death & Passion of our Sauiour Christ, fore-told by the Prophets of Israel, to that Nation. Now heare ye the Prophecie of Sibylla, if ye please, wherein she fore-shewed the same to the Gentiles; These are her owne words, set downe by Lactantius.
                     
He shall appeare miserable, ignominius and deformed,Lactan, li. 4 diuin. instit, ca. 16, et 18, to the ende he may giue hope vnto the miserable. Afterwarde hee shall come into the handes of most wicked and faithlesse men: they shal buffet him with their sacriligious fistes, and shall spet vppon him, with their vncleane mouthes. He shall yeelde his innocent backe to the whyp, and shal say nothing while hee receiueth the stripes, to the end he may speake to those that are dead. He shall beare a crowne of thornes, and they shal giue him Gaule to eate, & Vineger to drinke. And this shall be the hospitalitie he shall find among them. What thing can be more plainly described then thys?
                  
               
               
                  The consent of Rabbines.
                  NEyther doe the auncient Rabbines and Teachers among the Iewes discent from this.
                        Thal. tract. Sanh. ca. helec. Misdr. Ruth. Rab. Iosep. in lib. Siph Rab. Iacob et R. Hanina in cap. helec.
                      For that in theyr Thalmud, that was gathered aboue one thousand and two hundred yeres agone, the plaine sentences of diuers are sette downe: that theyr Messias at hys comming shall be put to death. And as for Rabbi Ionathan, the Author of the Chaldie

Paraphrase, who died a little before our Sauiour Christ was borne, he applyeth the whole narration of the Prophet Esay before recited,
                        Esay, 53.
                      (as needes he must) to the murther of the Messias by the Iewes. Whereuppon Rabbi Simeon, that lyued the next age after hym, wryteth these words folowing;
                        Rab, Simeon Ben. 
                              •
                           ehai. lib. de spe.
                      
                     Woe be to the men of Israell, for that they shall sley the Messias. God shal send his son in mans flesh to wash them, and they shal murder him.
                  
                  Whereto agreeth Rabbi Hadar
                     
                        •
                     an and others,
                        Rab. Had. in Dan.
                      and doe prooue further, out of the fore-alledged Prophecie of Daniell, Chapter 9, verse 27. that after the Messias shall haue preached halfe seauen yeres, he shall be slaine. For that Daniel sayth:
                        Dan. 9.
                      
                     In halfe of seauen yeres, the Hoste and Sacrifice shall cease. Vppon which wordes they comment thus: Three yeeres and a halfe shall the presence of God in flesh, cry and preach vpon the Mount Oliue
                           •
                        , and then shall hee be slaine. Which words the Iewes ordinary 
                        Misdrasch Tehel
                              •
                           m.
                      Commentarie vppon the Psalmes, doe interprete to be meant of Christes preaching three yeres & an halfe before his passion. Which

disagreeth very little or nothing frō the account of vs Christians, and of our Euangelists.
               
               
                  Of the miracles that fell out in Christes death and passion.
                  THus see we by all that hetherto hath beene sayde, that the verie particulers of Christes whole death and p
                        •
                     ssion, were fore-tolde most plainly both to Iew & Gentile, and acknowledged also by the auncient Doctors of the Iewish Nation, before the effectuation therof came to passe. And Sibylla adde
                        •
                     h further two particul
                        •
                     r miracles, that should fall out in the sayd Passion of the Messias, to wit;
                        Lact. lib. 4. diuin. Inst. capit. 19,
                      
                     That the veile of the Iewes Temple should breake in two: and that at midday, there should be darknes for three houres ouer all the worlde. Which thing to haue beene fulfilled at the death of Iesus, not onely S. Matthew doth assure vs in hys Gospell:
                        Math, 27.
                      but also Eusebius affirmeth that hee had read the same word for worde, recorded in dyuers Heathen Wryters. And amongst other, he citeth one Phlegon an exact Chronicler, that reporteth the same

in the fourth yeere of the two hundred and two Olimpiad,
                        Eusebius in Chron. An. Domi. 32, Phleg. Trallian. 11.14. Chro. An. 4 Olim. 202.
                      which agreeth iust with the eyghteene yeere of Tyberius hys raigne, which was the yeere wherein our Sauior Christ suffered. And he goeth so nigh, as to name the very houres of the day, as our Euangelists doe. 
                        See Orig, cont. Cels li. 6. et Suid. in verbo Iesus et Tert. in Apolg. Dioni Are. in Epist.
                      Aesculus an old Astronomer, doth confirme the same, and prooueth moreouer, by the situation & cons
                        •
                     itution of the Sunne and Moone at that time, that no Eclipse could then be naturallie. Which thing in lyke manner, Dyonisius Areopagita did obserue in the very day of Christes passion, beeing at that time but twenty & fiue yeres olde, and yet well studied in Astronomie, as himselfe testifieth. And finally, Lucianus a learned Priest of Antioche,
                        Lucian praes. apud Euseb.
                      was accustomed to prouoke the Gentiles to theyr owne Commentaries & stories, for recorde and testimonie of those things.
               
               
                  Of Iesus Resurrection.
                  THere ensueth now, f
                        •
                     r ending & confirmation of all that hath beene sayd and prooued before, to adde a word or two of Iesus Resurrection.

Which poynt, as of all other it is of most importaunce: so was it exactly fore-told both to Iew and Gentile, and promised by Christ himselfe in all his speeches while he was vppon earth. And among the Iewes, it was assured by all the Prophecies before recited, which do promise so great aboundance of glorie, ioy, & tryumph to Christes Church after his Passion. Which neuer possibly could be fulfilled, vnlesse hee had risen from death againe. And therefore the sayd Resurrection was prefigured in Ionas,
                        Ionas, 2,
                      together with the time of his abode in the Sepulcher. It was also expresly fore-shewed by Dauid, affirming;
                        Psalm, 16.
                      
                     That God would not suffer his holy one to see corruption. And after him againe, more plainly by the Prophet O
                        •
                     e;
                        Osea, 6.
                      
                     He shall quicken vs againe after two dayes, in the thyrd day he shall rayse vs, & wee shal liue in his sight. And to the Gentiles, Sibylla left written not far frō the same time:
                        Lactan. li. 4 inst. di. c. 19,
                      
                     He shall ende the necessity of death by three dayes sleepe: and then returning frō death to lyght againe, he shall be the first that shall shew the beginning of Resurrection to his chosen: for that by conquering

death, he shall bring vs lyfe.
                  
                  Thus much was promised by prophets before christes appearance. And Iesus to comfort his disciples & followers,
                        Mat, 12, 16, Marke, 8, 9, Luke, 11, 18.
                      reiterated hys promise againe of himselfe in many speeches, albeit many times his meaning was not perceiued.
                        Iohn, 2.
                      Which promise of returne from death, if it had beene made for some long time to come, (as Mahomet promised his Sarasins after eyght hundred yeeres to reuisite them again,
                        Maho. in Alcor. Azoar, 17.
                     ) albeit the performance were neuer meant: yet might the falshood lurk in the length of tyme. But Iesus assuring all men that hee would rise again within three daies, it cannot be imagined, but that he sincerely purposed to fulfil hys promise, for that otherwise the fraude must haue beene discouered. Nowe then let vs consider what manner of performance Iesus made heereof.
               
               
                  The appearings which Iesus made after his Resurrection.
                  AND first the persons most interessed in the matter, as they whose totall hope, stay, refuge, and felicitie depended heereof, I meane hys appalled

dysmaied, and afflicted Disciples, do recount twelue sundry apparisions, which Iesus made vnto them in flesh, after his Resurrection. The first was, to Mary Magdalen apart,
                        Math, 16,
                      when she with Solome and other women, went and remained with oyntments about the Sepulcher. The second was, to all the women together, as they returned home-wards,
                        Math, 28,
                      who also were permitted to embrace his feete. The thyrde was to Simon Peter alone.
                        1, Corin. 15,
                      The fourth, to the two Disciples in theyr iourney to Emaus.
                        Luke, 24,
                      The fift was, to all the Apostles, and other Disciples together when the dores were shut.
                        Iohn, 20,
                      The sixt, was to the same companie againe,
                        1, Cor, 15, Iohn, 20,
                      after eight dayes when Thomas was with them, at what tyme also he did both eate & drinke, and suffered his body also to be handled among them. The seauenth was to S. Peter and Saint Iohn,
                        Iohn, 21,
                      with fyue other disciples, when they were a fishing at what time also he vouchsafed to eate with them. The eyght was to eleuen Disciples at one time,
                        Math, 28,
                      vpon the Mount Thabor in Galiley. The ninth was,
                        1. Corin, 15,
                      to more thē 5. hundred bretheren at one time, as Saint

Paule testifieth. The tenth was to S. Iames,
                        Ibidem.
                      as the same Apostle recordeth. The eleuenth was to al his Apostles disciples & friends together,
                        Acts, 1,
                      vpon the Mount Oliuet by Ierusalem, when in their presence he ascended vp to heauen. The twelfth and last, was after his ascention,
                        1. Cor. 15.
                      vnto S. Paule, as himselfe beareth witnesse.
                  All these apparitions are recorded in Scripture, as made by Iesus after hys Resurrection, to such as by hys eternall wisedome, were preordained to be witnesses of so glorious a spectacle. To whom (as S. Luke affirmeth,
                        Acts, 1,
                     ) He shewed himselfe aliue by many arguments, for the space of fortie dayes together, and reasoned with them of the kingdome of his Father. And why any man should mistrust the testimonie of those men which saw him, conuersed with him, eate with hym, dranke with him, touched him, and heard him speake, & whose entire estate and welfare, depended wholy of the certainty heerof; I see no reason. For what comfort had it beene or consolation to these men, to haue deuised of themselues these former apparitions?
                  What encouragement might they

haue taken, in those doleful tymes of desolation and affliction, to haue had among them the dead bodie of him,Circūstances that cō
                        firme the true resurrection of IESVS. on whose onely lyfe, theyr vniuersall hope and confidence depended? The Scribes and Pharisies, being astonished with the suddaine newes of hys rysing againe, confirmed vnto them by their own Souldiours that saw it, founde no other way to resist the fame thereof, but onely by saying, (as all their posteritie doe vnto this day) that hys Disciples came by night, and stole away his body while the souldiours were a sleepe. But what likeli-hoode or possibilitie can there be in thys? for first, it is e
                        •
                     ident to all the worlde, that his Apostles themselues, (who were the heads of all the rest) were so dismaied, discomforted, and deiected at that time, as they durst not once goe out of the doore, for which cause onely those seely women, who for theyr sexe esteemed themselues more free from violence, presumed alone to visite the Sepulcher, which no one man durst doe for feare of the Souldiours: vntill by those women they were enformed, that the fore-sayd band of Souldiours were

terrified & put to flight by Christes Resurrection.
                  And then how was it likely,Great improbabilities. that men so much amazed & ouercome with feare, shold aduenture to steale away a dead body from a Guard of Souldiours that kept it? or if theyr hearts had serued them to aduenture so great a daunger: what hope or probabilitie had there beene of successe? especially, considering the said body lay in a newe Sepulcher of stone, shut vp, locked, and fast sealed by the Magistrate?
                  Howe was it possible (I say) that hys Disciples should come thether? breake vp the Monument? take ou
                        •
                      his body? and carry the same away, neuer after to be seene or founde, without espial of some one amongst so many that attended there? Or if thys were possible, (as in reason it is not) yet what profite, what pleasure, what comfort coulde they receyue heerby? We see that the Apostles & Disciples of his, who were so abandoned of life & hart in his passion: after two dayes onely they were so changed, as life and death can be no more contrary.
                  For whereas before they kept

home in all feare, and durst appeare no where, except among theyr own priuate freendes:The great change in Iesus Disciples by hys resurrection nowe they came forth into the streetes and common places, and auouched with al alacritie, and irresistable constancie, euen in the faces & hea
                        •
                     ing of their greatest enemies, that Iesus was risen frō death to lyfe; that they had seene him, and enioyed his presence. And that for testimonie and confirmation heereof, they were most readie to spend their liues. And could all thys (trow you) proceed onely of a dead body, which they had gotten by stealth into theyr possession? wold not rather the presence and sight of such a body, so torne, mangled, and deformed, as Iesus body was, both vpon the Cros
                        •
                     e and before: haue rather dysmayed them more, then haue gyuen him any comfort? Yes truely
                        •
                      And therefore Pilate the Gouernour,The examination of the matter by Pilate. considering these circumstaunces, and that it was vnlikelie, that eyther the body shold be stolne away without priuity of the Souldiours, or if it had been, that it should yeeld such life, hart, consol
                        •
                     tion, and courage to the ste
                        •
                     lers: beganne to giue eare more diligently to ye matter;

and calling vnto him the Souldiers that kept ye watch, vnderstood by them the whole truth of the accident, to wit, that in their sight & presence, Iesus was risen out of hys Sepulcher to lyfe, and that at hys rysing, there was so dreadful an earthquake, with trembling and opening of Sepulchers rounde about; such skryches, cryes, and commotion of all Elements: as they durst not abide longer, but ranne and tolde the Iewish Magistrates thereof, who being grea
                        •
                     ly discontented (as it seemed) with the aduertisement, gaue them money to say, that whyle they were sleeping, the body was stolne away from them by hys Disciples
                        •
                     
                  
                  All thys wrote Pilate presently to hys Lord Tyberius,Pilats Letters to Tyberius, and his pro
                           •
                        eeding therevppon. who was then Emperour of Rome. And he sent withall, the particuler examinations & confessions of diuers others, that had seene and spoken wyth such as were rysen from death at that tyme, and had appeared to many of their acquaintance in Ierusalem, assuring them also of the Resurrection of Iesus. Which information, when Tyberius the Emperor had considered, he was greatly moued therwith, and

proposed to the Senate, that Iesus myght be admitted among the rest of the Romaine Gods: offering hys owne consent, with the priuiledge of hys supreame royall suffrage 
                        •
                     o that de
                        •
                     ree. But ye Senate in no wi
                        •
                     e would agree thereunto. Wherupon, Tyberius beeing offended, gaue lycence to all men to beleeue in 
                        •
                     esus that would: and forbid vpon paine of death, that any Officer or o
                        •
                     her, should molest or trouble such, as bare good affection, zeale
                        •
                      or reuerence to that name. Thus much testifieth Tertullian against the Gentiles,
                        Tertul. in Apolog. pro Christ.
                      of hys owne knowledge, who lyuing in Rome a learned man, and pleader of causes, dyuers yeeres before he was a Christian, (which was about one hundred and foure-score yeeres after our Sauiour Chr
                        •
                     st hys ascention,) had great ability by reason of the honour of his familie, learning, and place wherein hee lyued, to see and know the Recordes of the Romains. And the same doth affirme also Egisippus,
                        Egesip. lib. 1. hist. Euseb. lib. 4, cap. 21, Ruff. li. 1, cap. 22.
                      another auncient W
                        •
                     yter, of no lesse authoritie then Tertullian, before whom he liued.
                  Neither onely diuers Gentiles had

thys opinion of Iesus Resurrection againe from death,The opinion of ye wiser sort of Iewes, touching Iesu
                           •
                         resurrection at that time. but also sundry Iewes of great credite and wisedom, at that tyme were enforced to belieue it: notwithstanding it pleased not God to gyue them so much grace as to become Christians.
                  Thys appeareth plainelie by the learned Iosephus, who wryting his storie not aboue fortie yeeres after Christes passion, tooke occasion to speake of Iesus and of his Disciples. And after he had shewed howe hee was crucified by Pilate, at ye instance of the Iewes, and that for all thys, his Disciples ceased not to loue him sti
                        •
                     l: he adioyneth for
                        •
                     h-with these words;
                        Iosep. lib. 14, antiq. ca. 4,
                      
                     Id
                           •
                        irco illis tertio die vita resumpta, denuo apparuit.
That is, for thys loue of hys Disciples, he appeared vnto them againe the third day, whē he had resumed life vnto him.
Which expresse, plaine
                        •
                      & resolute words, we may in reason take, no
                        •
                      as the confession onely of Iosephus, but as the common iudgement, opinion and sentence, of all the dyscreete and sober men of that tyme, layde downe and recorded by thys Historiographer. In whose dayes there were yet many Christians aliue,

that had seene & spoken with Iesus after his Resurrection; & infinite Iewes, that had heard the same protested by theyr Fathers, bretheren, kins-folkes and freendes, who had beene themselues eye witnesses thereof.
               
               
                  Of Iesus ascention.
                  AND thus hauing declared and proued the Resurrection of our Sauiour Iesus, both how it was foreshewed, as also fulfilled: there remaineth nothing more of necessitie to be sayd in thys Section. For that whosoeuer seeth & acknowledgeth, that Iesus beeing dead, could rayse himselfe againe to lyfe, wil easily beleeue also, that he was able likewise to ascend vp to heauen. Whereof notwithstanding,
                        Acts, 1,
                      S. Luke alledgeth one hundred and twenty witnesses at the least, in whose presence he ascended from the top of the Mount Oliuet, after forty dayes space, which hee had spent with them from the tyme of hys resurrection.
                  Hee alledgeth also the appearing of two Angels among al the people

for testimonie thereof.Likelihoods of truth. He nameth the day and place, when, and where it happened. He recounteth the very words that Iesus spake at his ascention.
                  He telleth the manner howe hee ascended, and how a Clowde came downe, and receiued hym into it out of theyr sight. He declareth what the multitude dyd, whether they went, and in what place they remained after theyr departure thence.
                  And finally, he setteth downe so many particulers, as it had been the easiest matter in the world, for hys enemies to haue refuted his narration, if all had not beene true. Neyther was there anie to receiue more domage by the falsehoode thereof, then himselfe, and those of his profession, if the matter had beene feigned.
                  Wherefore to conclude at length thys treatise of the byrth,The conclusion of this seconde Section. lyfe, doctrine, actions, death, resurrection, and ascention of Iesus: seeing nothing hath happened in the same, which was not fore-tolde by ye Prophets of GOD: nor any thing foreshewed by the same Prophets concerning the Messias, which was not

fulfilled most exactly, within the compasse and course of Iesus abode vpon earth: we may most certainly assure our selues, that as GOD can neyther fore-tell an vntruth, nor yeeld testimony to the same, so can it not be, but that these things which wee haue shewed to haue beene so manifestly fore-prophecied, and so euidently accōplished, must needes assure vs, ye Iesus was the true Messias. Which thing shal yet more particulerly appeare, by that which ensued by his power and vertue, after his ascention: which shall bee the argument of the next Section which followeth.
               
            
            
               How Iesus proued his Deitie, after his departure to heauen. SECT. 3.
               AS by the deedes and actions of IESVS while he was vpon the earth, compared with the predictions of Gods Prophets from tyme to time:The contents of thys thyrd Section. he hath beene declared in the former Sections to be the true Messias and Sauiour of the world; so in thys that now we take in hand, shal

the same be shewed by such thinges as insued after hys ascention and departure from thys world. Wherein his power & Deitie appeared more manifestly, (if it may be so spoken,) then in other hys workes which he wrought in his life. In which kinde, albeit I might treate of many & almost infinite branches, yet for order and breuities sake, I meane onely to take in consideration these few that ensue. Wherein not onely the power of Iesus, but also his loue, his care and prouidence, & most perfect accomplishment of all hys promis
                     •
                  s, and finally, the iustification of al his speeches, prophecies, and doctrines vpon earth haue declared.
               And to reduce what is to be sayd heerein to some order and method,The deuision of the particuler considerations ensuing. it is to be noted, yt in the first place shal be considered the sustentation, protection, increase, and continuation of Christes lyttle Church and kingdome, that himselfe first planted and left vpon earth. The seconde consideration, shall be of hys Apostles and theyr actions. The thyrd of his Euangelists. The fourth of hys Witnesses and Martyrs throughout the world. The fift shal treate of the

kingdome of infernall powers, beaten downe by hys vertue. The sixt, of the punishment and iust reuenge that lighted vpon his enemies, who most impugned his diuine person in the world. The seauenth and last, shall declare the fulfilling of al such Prophecies and predictions, as proceeded frō his diuine mouth, while he was conuersant vppon earth.
               
                  The first Consideration.
                  NOw then for the first, it is to be considered,Christes Church. that as IESVS departure out of thys world from the Mount Oliuet, S. Luke reporteth, that all the multitude of his followers, which there had beheld hys ascention into heauen, returned backe together into the Citty of Ierusalē, and there remained in one house together, continuing in prayer and expectation what should become of them, The whole Citty was bent against them: themselues were pore and simple people: and dyuers of them women: Lands or reuenewes they had none to maintaine them: nor freendes in Court to gyue them conntenannce against theyr enemies.

The name of Iesus was most odious: and whoso
                        •
                     uer did fauour him, was counted an enemie to the state. There wanted not (perhaps) among them, who considering the great multitude,The state of christes first Church. woulde imagine with themselues what should become of them: where they shoulde find to maintaine & sustaine them, what should be the end of that 
                        •
                     eeble Congregation? For abroad they durst not goe, for feare of persecution; & continue long together they might not, for want of necessaries. Besides that, euery houre they expected to be molested and drawne forth by Catch-poles and other Officers. And albeit in these distresses, the fresh memorie of Iesus, and his sweet promises made vnto them at his departure: as also the delectable presence of his blessed Mother, and her often exhortations and encouragements vnto them, dyd comfort them generally as may be supposed: yet, to hym that by humaine reason should ponder and weigh theyr present state & condition, it could not chuse but seeme hard, and no waies durable.
                  But beholde vpon the suddaine,

when they had continued nowe ten dayes together, and might by al probability find themselues in very high degree of temporall distresses, Iesus performed hys promise of sending them a Comforter, which was the holy Ghost.The comming of the holy Ghost, and what comfort he brought with him. Acts, 2.
                      By whose comming, besides the internall ioy and incredible alacritie & exultation of minde, they receiued also fortitude and audacity, to goe forth into the worlde. They receiued the gyft of tongues, enabling them to concourse & deale with all sorts of people. They receyued wisedome and learning, with most wonderfull illumination in highest misterie, wherby to preach, to teach, & conuince their aduersaries. They receiued the gyft of Prophecie to fore-tell things to come, together with the power of working signes and myracles, whereby the whole world remained astonied.
                  And for a taste or earnest pennie of that which should ensue, concer
                        •
                     ning the infinite increase of that little Congregation: they sawe thre
                        •
                      thousand of theyr aduersaries con
                        •
                     uerted to them in one day, by a Se
                        ••
                     mon of S. Peter.
                  Which increase went on so fa
                        ••
                     
                     
for the time that ensued: that within forty yeeres a
                        •
                     ter, the Gentiles themselues confessed, that the branches of thys Congregation, were spredde ouer all the world, and began to put in feare the very Romane Emperors themselues.
                        Suet. in vita Nero. Co
                              •
                           n. Ta
                              •
                           it. lib. 5. hist.
                      Whereof not long after, a man that was as learned as euer was any, conuerted from Paganisme to Christianitie, beareth record in his de
                        •
                     ence to an Emperour and his Officers, who according to the nature of persecutors, accounted Christians for Traytors & enemies to his state and dignity. Which vulgare obiection, this fore-sayde learned man refuteth in these words.
                  
                     If we were enemies to your estate,
                           Tertul in apol. ad gen.
                         you myght well seeke newe Citties and Countries whereof to beare gouernment; for that you shold haue in your Empire more enemies then Cittizens. We haue filled you Citties, your Townes, your Prouinces, your Ilands, your Castles, your Fortresses, your Tents, your Campes, your Courts, your Palaces, your Senats, and your Market places. Onely we haue left your Idolatrous Temples vnto your selues: all other pla
                        
                           •
                        es are full of Christians. If we were

enemies, what daungerous warres might we make against you, (albeit our number were farre lesse,) who esteeme so little of our liues, as to offer our selues daily to be slaine at your hands? Thys then is your safetie in very deed, not your persecuting of vs, but that we are honest, patient, and obedient; and that it is more lawfull in Christian Religion, to be killed, then to kill.
                  
                  By which words of Tertullian, in this first beginning and infancie (as it were) of Christian Religion,The wonderful quick increase of Christes Church. (for he liued in ye second age after Christ) we see how this little flock & kingdom of IESVS was increased, notwithstanding all the resistance and violence of the worlde against it
                        •
                      Which appeareth by the same Ter
                        •
                     tullian, to haue beene such:
                        In Prefa. Apolog.
                      & was euen at that tyme when hee wrote those words (the fourth persecution being then in most furie,) as all the malefactors of the worlde together had not so much rigour shewed a
                        •
                     gainst them: as had the most inno
                        •
                     cent Christian that liued, for confe
                        •
                     sing onely that name and Religion
                        •
                     
                  
                  This then declared most apparen
                        ••
                     ly, that it could not proceede but 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     
some diuine power and supernaturall assistaunce, that in so shorte a space, amidst the contradiction and oppositions of so many aduersaries, among the whyppes, swordes, and tortures, of so great, potent, and violent persecutions, this poore, simple, and feeble Congregation shoulde pearse through, and augment it selfe so strongly. Especially if we consider the outward meanes of this incre
                        •
                     se,The increase of Christians against nature. wherein there was nothing to allure or content mans nature: nothing gorgius, nothing delectable, nothing to please or entertaine sensualitie.
                  We reade of an Emperour, that taking in hand to cōquer the world, made thys Proclamation for winning men vnto hys partie.
                        Plut. in Apoth. Prisc. regum. The Proclamation of Cyrus, Monarch of Media. 
                     Who soeuer wil come and be my seruaunt:
if he be a foote-man, I will make hym a horse-man; if he be a horse-man, I will make hym ride wyth Coches; if he be a Farmour, I will make him a Gentleman, if he possesse a cottage, I wil giue him a Village; if he haue a Village, I will gyue him a Citty; if he be a Lord of a Citty, I will make him Prince of a Region or Countrey. And as for gold, I wil poure it forth vnto them

by heapes and weight, and not by number.
                  
                  Thys was the Proclamation and Edict of Cyrus to hys followers, very glorious (as we see) in pompe of words and ostentation of style. Let vs now compare the Proclamation of Iesus,Iesus Proclamation. whose enterance and Praeface was: Paenitentiā agite, Repent yee. And then it followeth:
                        Math, 3,
                      
                     In hoc mundo pressuram habebitis:
                     
                        Iohn. 16,
                      in thys world you shall receyue affliction. And then after againe; They shall whyp and murder you.
                     
                        Math, 10.
                      And yet further: You shal be hatefull in the sight of all men for my sake. Then is there adioyned
                        •
                      
                     He that loueth his life, shall lose his soule.
                     
                        Luke, 9.
                      After that ensueth, Hee that will follow mee, must beare his Crosse. And finally, the conclusion is;
                        Luke, 14,
                      
                     He that commeth to me and doth not hate his Father, his Mother, his wife, his chyldren, his bretheren, his sisters and his owne lyfe for my sake, he is not worthy to be my seruaunt.
                  
                  Thys was the entertainment proposed by Iesus, to such as wold come & serue vnder hys Banner; with expresse prostestation, yt hymselfe was sent into the worlde,
                        Math, 5,
                      not to bring peace, rest, & ease to flesh & blood,

but rather to be the cause of sword, fire, trybulation, combate, and enmitie. And yet with these colde offers, presented to the world by pore, abiect, and most contemptible Officers; and by this doctrine, so crosse and opposite to mans nature, inclynation, and sensual appetite, he gayned more harts vnto him, within the space of forty yeeres, as hath beene sayde, then euer did Monarch in the world possesse louing Subiects, by what-soeuer temporall allurement they dyd or might propose. Which argueth most euidently, the omnipotent puissaunce of hym, that contrary to mans reason, could bring to passe so miraculous a conquest.
               
               
                  The second Consideration.
                  THere followeth in order, the consideration of Christes Apos
                        •
                     les:Of Christes Apostles. which in some respect, may be sayde more strange & wonderful then the former, in that they beeing both rude, simple, and vnlearned men, (and for the most part of the baser sort,) should be chosen & assigned to so great a worke, as was the conuersion of all Countries & Nations,

and to stande in combate with the power, learning and wisedome of all the world. Neither only had they to contend and fight against they
                        •
                      enemies, but also to direct, gouerne, and menage all those, who shoulde be adioyned to theyr Maisters kingdom
                        •
                      To which charge they seemed so vntoward and insufficient, in all that tyme wherein they lyued with him heere vppon earth: as by theyr questions and demaunds made vnto him a little before his passion, they might appeare to haue learned very little, in three whole yeeres conue
                        •
                     sa
                        •
                     ion & instruction: and in verie deede, to be incapable of so high mysteries and 
                        •
                     unctions.
                  Yet notwi
                        •
                     hstanding, these men, who of themselues were weake and impotent, after strength and confirmation receiued by ye descending of Gods holy Spirit into them, became so perfect, able, and most excellent men, as they brought the whole world in admiration of them. Not onely by the most exquisite perfection of theyr doctrine, (wherein on a suddaine, without study, they excelled, and conuinced the greatest Phylosophers then lyuing,) but also, and

that especially, by the rare & stupendious myracles which they wrought in the sight of al men. The contemplacion whereof,
                        Acts, 2,
                      as S. Luke reporteth, droue the beholders, not onelie into great meruaile, but also into feare and exceeding terrour.
                  And for example, he recounteth the restoring of a lame man at ye Temple gate of Ierusalem,The Apostl
                           •
                        s miracles. which had been a Cripple for the space of forty yeeres and more, and thys myracle was doone and testified in the presence and knowledge of all the Cittie. He recordeth also the dreadfull death of Annanias and Saphira, by the onely speech and voyce of S. Peter:
                        Acts. 3,
                      as in lyke manner, the healing of infinite sicke people, by the presence and shadowe of the same Apostle. He reporteth also the most wonderful deliueraunce of the sayd Saint Peter,
                        Acts. 5,
                      out of the hands & pryson of Herod by the Angel of God. The varietie of languages, which all the Apostles spake. The visible descending of the holy Ghost vppon al such, on whom the sayde Apostles dyd but lay theyr hands.
                        1. Cor, 15, 2, Cor, 12, Acts, 9, 22, and 26,
                      The miraculous conuersion of S. Paule, by Christes appearing vnto him in the

way, when he went to persecute. Of which myracle, S. Paul himself protesteth in euery place afterward, and once especially, in an open audience and iudgement, before K. Agrippa, and Festus Gouernour of Iurie.
                  These miracles & many moe are recorded by S. Luke, whereof some part were seene by hymselfe, and the rest most euident to all the worlde, as doone in publique before infinite witnesses. Neyther is it possible they could be 
                        •
                     ayned,The miracl
                           •
                        s reported of the Apostles, could not be fayned. for that (as in the like I haue before noted) it had been most easie to haue refelled them, & thereby to haue discredited ye whole pro
                        •
                     eedinges of Christian Religion in theyr first beginnings. As for example; if the miracle of Saint Peter, beeing deliuered foorth of the hands & pryson of Herod Agrippa, had any way beene to be touched with falshood, howe many would there haue beene of Herodes Officers, Courtiers, seruants & friendes, that for defence of their Princes honour, (so deeply tainted by this narration of Saint Luke, published not long after the thing was done) how many (I say) woulde haue offered themselues to refute and disgrace the

writer heereof, hauing so pregnant meanes by publique recorde to doe the same; So again, wheras the same S. Luke reporteth of his own knowledge, that in a Citty of Macedonie, named Philippi,
                        Act, 
                              •
                           6.
                      Saint Paule and Silas after many myracles doone, were whypped and put in pryson, with a dilligent guarde in the lowest prison of all: theyr feete lo
                        •
                     ked fast in the stockes of Tymber, & that at mydnyght, when Paule and Silas began to pray, the whole pryson was shaken, and all the doores throwne open, as also the gyues, not onely of those two, but of all the other prysoners vpon a suddain burst in sunder: and that thereupon, not onely the Iaylor cast hymselfe at the feete of S. Paule, but the Magistrates also, (who the day before had caused them to be whipt,) came and asked them pardon, and humbly intrea
                        •
                     ed them to depart out of theyr Cittie. This story (I say) if it had been false, there needed no more for confutation therof, but onely to haue examined ye whole citty of Philippi, which could haue testified the contrary.
                  And yet among so many aduersaries, and eager impugners of Christian

Religion, as Gods enemy styrred vp in the Primatiue Church, of all sorts and sects of people: no one euer appeared, that durst attempt to take in hande,None euer durst impugne the miracles of the Apostles, but by calumniation. the particuler improuing of these or ye like miracles, but rather confessing the facts, sought alwaies to discredite them by other sinister calumniations: namely and commonly, that they were wrought by the deceits and sleightes of Arte-Magick.
                  Thus sayde the Iewes of the myracles of Iesus,
                        Math, 12.
                      and so said Iulian the Apostata, of the wonderfull strange things doone by Saint Peter and S. Paule;
                        Apud Cyril. lib, 1, cont. Iulian.
                      affirming thē to haue beene the most expert in Magicke, of any that euer liued:
                        Augu, lib, de 
                              •
                           era Relig.
                      and that Christ wrote a speciall booke of that profession, and dedicated the same to Peter and Paule: whereas notwithstanding it is most euident, that Paule was a persecutor diuers yeeres after Christes departure.
                  
                     
                        Euseb. lib. cont. Hiero.
                     One Hierocles also wrote a booke, wherein he fayned Appolonius Tyanaeus to haue done the lyke myracles by Magick, which Christ & hys Apostles did by diuine power. And finally, it is a generall opinion, that

both Nero and Iulian, gaue themselues so extreamely to the studie of that vaine Science, as no men euer did the lyke; vpon emulation onlie of the miracles doone in Rome by Peter and Paule when Nero lyued, and by other Saints and Disciples in the tyme of Iulian.
                  But what was the ende? Plinie that was a Pagan,
                        Plin. lib. 30. Nat. Hist. cap. 1.
                      wryteth thus of Nero; that as no man euer laboured more then he in that Science, so no man euer left a more certaine testimonie of the meruailous exceeding vanitie thereof. The like in effect wryteth Zosimus of Iulian,
                        Zosimus in vita Iulian.
                      albeit himselfe a malicious Heathen. And if it were not written, yet theyr seuerall extraordinarie calamities, & most miserable deathes, which by al their Magick they could not foresee, dooth sufficiently testifie ye same vnto vs; especially the last wordes of Iulian,
                        Niceph. lib. 10. c. 35. hist.
                      
                     Vicisti Galilaee, vicisti. Thou hast wonne (ô Galilaean) thou hast gotten the victory. Acknowledging thereby, as wel the truth of Christes myracles and of hys followers, as also the vanitie, folly, and madnes of his owne endeuours.
                  Thus then went forward Christes

Apostles,The successe of the Apostles. and preached him euerie where throughout the worlde; Domino cooperante & sermonem cō
                        firmante, sequentibus signis:
                     
                        Marke, 16,
                      that is, (as S, Marke affirmeth) the Lorde Iesus working with them, and confirming their preaching by signes & myracles. In respect of which benigne assistance of Iesus in theyr actions, S. Luke sayth further:
                        Acts, 14,
                      
                     They dealt most confidently in the Lorde: his worde of grace giuing testimonie vnto their doings, and shewing foorth signes & most prodigious wonders by theyr hands. No persecution, no terrour, no threates of enemies, no dyfficultie, or danger that might occur, could stay them frō their course of setting forth Christes name & glorie. And they were so assured of the truth,The assurance of the Apostles. by the inwarde illuminations which they had, and by this certaine testimony of Gods fauour and assistance in dooing myracles: as one of them wryteth thus;
                        1. Iohn, 1,
                      
                     That which we haue hearde, which we haue seene with our eyes, which we haue behelde, which our hands haue handled of the word of lyfe: that we doe testifie and announce vnto you. And another who had S. Paule. been a grieuous persecutor,

and was conuerted without any conference with any Christian in the world; sayd,
                        Rom, 8,
                      
                     of Iesus that was deade and risen again, that neither tribulation, nor distresse, nor famine, nor beggery, nor danger, nor persecution, nor dint of sword, could daunt hym from the seruice of such a Maister. And in another place he sayth, that he esteemed al things of this world, wherein a man might glory, to be as very dounge and detriments, in respect of the eminent knowledge,
                        Phil. 3.
                      (that is hys word) of hys Lord Iesus Christ. In which very name he tooke so exceeding great delight: as in a fewe Epistles which he left written, he is obserued to haue vsed this sentence, Dominus noster Iesus Christus, aboue two hundred times.
                  Neyther indured thys in these Apostles for a time onely,The ioyfull ending of the Apostles. but al theyr lyues, which as they spent the same with alacritie in the seruice of Iesus, so in the end they gaue vp the same most cheerefully,
                        2, Tim, 4, 1, Thes, 2,
                      to what-so-euer death presented it selfe, for confirmation and sealing of theyr former doctrine; neuer so ful of confidence, courage, and consolation, as at that houre, nor neuer so boldly denouncing

theyr Maister, or talking so ioyfully of rewards, Crownes and kingdoms, as at the very last instant and vp-shot of theyr worldly combat.
                  This then declareth most manifestly, that the actions of these men, proceeded not of humane spirit, nor could be performed by the power of man, but by the diuine force and supernatural assistance of theyr Lord and God, whom they confessed,
               
               
                  The third Consideration.
                  AND thus much in breuitie of Christes Apostles.Of the Euangelists. There ensue next hys Euangelistes: that is, such men as haue le
                        •
                     t vnto vs written, his byrth, life, doctrine, & death. Wherin it is to be noted, that Iesus being God, tooke a different way from the custome of man, in deliuering vnto vs his Lawes and precepts. For that men, who haue beene Law-makers vnto the worlde, knewe no surer way of publishing theyr Lawe, and procuring authority to the same, thē to write thē with their own handes, and in theyr life tyme to establishe theyr promulgation. So Lycurgus, Solon, and others among the Graecians,

Numa to the Romaines, Mahomet to the Sarasines: and dyuers other in lyke manner. But Iesus to shew hys diuine power in directing the penne and style of his Euangelists, wold not leaue any thing written by himselfe,Iesus left nothing written by himselfe. but passed frō thys world in simplicity and silence, with out any further shew or ostentation of hys owne doings: meaning notwithstāding by his eternal wisdome, that the prophecy of Ezechiel shold be fulfilled,
                        Ezech, 1,
                      which fore-signified the beeing of his foure irrefragable witnesses, which day & night without rest, should preach, extoll, and magnifie theyr Lord and Maister to the worlds end.
                  Foure then were fore-prophecied,The different qualities and circumstances of the foure Euangelists. and foure as we see by Gods prouidence, were prouided to fulfill the same prophecie. The first & last are two Apostles, that wrote as they had seene. The two middle are two disciples, who registred thinges as they had vnderstood by conference wyth the Apostles. The first Gospell was written by an Apostle, to giue lyght & open the way to al the rest. And the last in lyke manner was written by an Apostle, to giue authority and

confirmation to all the former. The first was written in the Hebrewe or Iewish tongue, for that Iesus actions were doone in that countrey, to the end that thereby, eyther the whole Nation might belieue them, or the obstinate impugne them. The other three were wrytten in the publique tongues of all other Nations, that is in the Greeke & Romaine languages, if it be true (
                        See Armacan. lib. 9 de quest.
                      which dyuers holde) that S. Markes Gospell was first wrytten in Latine.
                  They wrote their stories in diuers countries, each one remaining farre distant from another,Circumstā
                        ces of truth in our Euangelists. and yet agreed they all (as we see) most exactly, in the very same narration. They wrote in dyuers tymes, the one after the other, and yet the latter dyd neyther correct nor reprehende any thing in the former. They published they
                        •
                      stories, when infinite were aliue that knewe the factes, and many more that desired to impugne them. They sette down in most of their particuler narrations, the tyme, the day, the houre, the place, the Village, the house, the persons, the men, the women, and other the lyke. Which circumstaunces, the more they are in

number, the more easie to be refuted if they were not true. Neyther dyd they in Iurie, write of things doone in India, but in the same countrey it selfe, in Townes and Citties that were publiquely knowne, in Bethania and Bethsaida, Villages hard by Ierusalem: in the Suburbes & hyls about the cittie, in such a streete, at such a Gate, in such a porche of the Temple, at such a fish-poole, which al people in Ierusalem did euery day behold.
                  They published theyr writing in theyr owne lyfe tyme,The publishing of our Gospels. and preached in word, so much as in writing they had recorded. They permitted the same to the iudgement and examination of all Christes church, especially of the Apostles, who were able to dis
                        •
                     erne euery least thing therin contained. So S. Marke set foorth hys Gospell,
                        Hier. in catalog scrip. Eccles.
                      by the instruction and approbation of S. Peter, as also dyd S. Luke by the authority of S. Paul. They altered not theyr writings afterward, as other authors are wont in theyr latter editions, nor euer corrected they one iote of that which they had first sette downe. And that which neuer happened in any other

wrytings in the world besides, nor euer Prince or Monarch was able to bring to passe, for c
                        •
                     edite of hys Edicts or sanctions: they gaue theyr lyues for de
                        •
                     ence and iustifying of that which they had written.
                  
                     The maner of style in our Euangelists.Theyr manner of wryting, is sincere and simple, without all Arte, amplification, or rethoricall exhortation. They flatter none, no not Iesus hymselfe, whō they most adore, nor in confessing hym to be theyr God and Creator
                        •
                      doe they conceale his infirmities of flesh,
                        Math, 21, Marke, 2.
                      in that he was man: as hys hunger and thyrst: his beeing weary:
                        Iohn, 7.
                      howe he wept: hys passions of feare, and the lyke.
                        Luke, 19.
                      So lykewise in the Apostles that were the Gouernours, Superiours, and heads of the rest: do these Euangelists dyssemble, hyde, or passe ouer no such things as were de
                        •
                     ects, and might seeme to worldly eyes to turn to theyr dyscredites. As for example, how Christ rebuked them for theyr dulnes in vnd
                        •
                     rstanding:
                        Marke, 15.
                      howe after long instruction,
                        Iohn, 10, 11, and 20,
                      they proposed notwithstanding, very rude and impertinent questions vnto hym; how Thomas would not beleeue the attestation of hys fellowes: howe S.

Iohn and S. Iames, the sons of Zebedee, ambiciously solicited to haue the preheminence of sitting neerest to Christ in hys glory: which latter clause, beeing sette downe cleerelie by S. Marke,
                        Marke, 10,
                      whyle yet S. Iohn the Apostle was lyuing, the same was neuer denyed, nor taken ill by the sayd Apostle, neyther was S. Marks Gospel any thing the lesse approued by hym, albeit he lyued longest, and wrote last of al the rest.
                  Nay, which is more, and greatly (no doubt) to be obserued;A speciall poynt to be obserued in our Euangelists. these Euangelists were so sincere and religious in theyr narrations, as they noted especially the imperfections of themselues, & of such other as they principally respected. So S. Mathew nameth hymselfe Mathew the Publican.
                     
                        Math, 10.
                      And so S. Marke,
                        Marke, 14.
                      beeing Peters Disciple, recordeth particulerlie how S. Peter thry
                        •
                     e denyed his Lord and Maister. S. Luke that was Scholler and dependent of S. Paule,
                        Acts, 15.
                      maketh mention alone of the differences between Paule & Barnabas, and in the story of S. Stephens death, after al hys narration ended, he addeth a clause that in humane iudgement might haue beene left out, to wit,

                     Saulus erat cōsentiens neci eius,
                     
                        Acts, 17,
                      Saule was consenting & culpable of Stephens death. Whereby we may perceiue most perspicuously, that as these men were plaine, sincere, and simple, and farre from presuming to deuise any thing of themselues, so were they religious, and had scruple to passe ouer, or leaue out any thing of the truth in fauor of themselues, or of any other whatsoeuer.
                  These mens wrytings then, were published & receiued for vndoubted truth, by all that lyued in the very same age, and were priuie to the particulers therein contained. They were coppyed abroade into infinite mens hands, and so conserued wyth all care and reuerence, as holy & diuine Scripture. They were reade in churches throughout all countries and Nations: expounded preached and taught by all Pastours, & commentaries made vpon them by holie Fathers 
                        •
                     rom time to tyme. So that do doubt can be made,No doubt but that we haue ye true writings of our Euangelists. but that we haue the very same wrytings incorrupt as the Authors left them: for that it was impossible for any enemie to corrupt so many copies ouer the world, without dyscouery & resistance.

And the same very text, wordes, and sentences, which from age to age the learned Fathers doe alledge out of these Scriptures, wee find them now, as they had them at that tyme. As for example, S. Iohn that liued longest of all the Apostles and Euangelists, had among other Schollers and Auditors, Papias, Ignatius, and Policarpus, all which agree of the foure Gospels and other writings left vnto vs in the new Testament, affirming S. Iohn to haue approued the same. These mē were Maisters againe to Iustinius Martyr, Irenaeus and other, whose wrytings remain vnto vs. And if they dyd not, yet theyr sayinges and iudgements touching the Scriptures, are recorded vnto vs by Eusebius and other Fathers of the next age after,
                        Euseb. lib, 5. hist. cap. 15.
                      & so frō hand to hande vntill our dayes. So that of thys there can be no more doubt, then whether Rome, Constantinople, Ierusalem, and other such renowned citties, knowne to all the world at this day, be the verie same whereof Authors haue treated so much in auncient tymes.
               
               
                  
                  The fourth Consideration.
                  AND thus much of Christes Euangelists, for whose more credite, and for confirmation of things by thē recorded: his diuine prouidence preordained, that infinite witnesses (whom we cal MartyrsOf Martyrs.) shold offer vp their blood in the Primatiue Church and after. Whereas for no other doctrine, profession, or Religion in the world, the lyke was euer heard of; albeit among the Iewes in the tyme of the Machabees,
                        Maca. lib. 1. and 2.
                      and at some other times also, whē that Nation for theyr sinnes were afflicted by Heathen Princes, some few were tyrannized and iniuriously put to death; yet commonly, and for the most part, this was rather of barbarous cruelty in the Pagans for theyr resistaunce, then directly for hatred of Iewish Religion. And for the number there is no doubt, but that more Christians were put to death within two monethes for theyr beleefe thorow out the worlde, then were of Iewes for two thousande yeres before Christes cōming: which is vndoubtedly a matter very wonderfull,

considering that the Iewish Religion impugned no lesse the Pagan Idolatry, then doth the doctrine of the Christians. But this came to passe that Christes words might be fulfilled, who sayde; I come no
                           •
                         
                        
                           •
                        o bring peace, but the sworde.
                     
                        
                           〈1 paragraph〉
                        
                      And a
                        •
                     gaine, I send you 
                           •
                        oorth as sheepe among wolues. That is to say, to bee torne and harried, and your bloode to be deuoured.
                  In which extreame and most incredible sufferings of christiās, three poynts are worthy of great consideration.Poynts 
                           •
                        o be considered in our Martyrs. The first, what infinite multitudes of al estates, conditions, sexe, qualities, and age, dyd suffer dailie, for testimony of thys truth. The second, what intollerable and vnaccustomed 
                        See the narration of Phil
                              •
                           as, Byshop in Affrica, touching thys poynt, alledged by Euse. lib. 8, hist. c. 11, & 12.
                      torments, not hearde of in the world before, were deuised by Tyrants for afflicting thys kinde of people. The thyrd, what inuincible courage and vnspeakeable alacritie, the Christians shewed, in bearing out these afflictions, which the enemies themselues could not attribute, but to some diuine power & supernaturall assistance.
                  And for thys latter poynt of comfort in their sufferings, I wil alledge

onely thys Testimonie of Tertullian against the Gentiles, who obiected, that wicked men suffered also as wel as Christians;
                        
                           •
                        he singu
                        
                           •
                        er alacritie of Christians in theyr sufferings. whereto this learned Doctor made answer in these words.
Trueth it is, yt many men are prone to ill, and doe suffer for the same: but yet dare they not defend their euill to be good,
                           Tertul. in Apol. cap. 1.
                         as Christians doe theyr cause. For that euery euil thing by nature, dooth bring with it eyther feare or shame: and therefore we see, that malefactors, albeit they loue euil, yet wold they not appeare so to the worlde, but desire rather to lye in couert. They tremble when they are taken, and when they are accused, they denie all, & doe scarce often-times confesse theyr dooings vpon torments. And finally, when they are condemned, they lament mone, and doe impute theyr harde fortune, to destiny, or to the Planets
                           •
                         But the Christian, what dooth hee lyke to thys? is there any man ashamed? or doth any man repent him whē he is taken, except it be for that he was not takē rather? if he be noted by the enemy for a Christian, he glorieth in the same; if he be accused, hee defendeth not himselfe; if

he be asked the question, he confesseth it willingly; if hee be condemned, he yeeldeth thanks. What euill is there then in the Christian cause, which lacketh the natural sequell of euill? I meane feare, shame, tergiuersation, repentance, sorrowe, and deploration? What euill (I say) can thys be deemed, whose guiltinesse is ioy? whose accusation is desire? whose punishment is happinesse?
                  
                  Hetherto are the words of learned Tertullian, who was an eye witnesse of that he wrote,Iesus assistan
                           ••
                         to his Martyrs. and had no small part in the cause of those that suffered, being himselfe in yt place and state, as daily he might expect to tast of the same affliction. To which combat, how ready he was
                        •
                      may appeare by diuers places of thys hys Apologie, wherein he vttereth (besides his zeale and feruour) a most confident securitie, and certaine assurance of Iesus assistance, by that which he had seene performed to infinite other, in their greatest distresses, from the same Lord before. So that nothing doth more acertaine vs of the diuine power and omnipotencie of IESVS, then the fortitude inuisible, which aboue all humaine reason,

force, and nature, hee imparted to hys Martyrs.
               
               
                  The fift Consideration.
                  AFter which consideration, there commeth to be weighed, the fift poynt before mentioned, which is, of the same power and omnipotencie of Iesus, declared and exercised vppon the Spyrits infernall.The subiection of Spyrits. Which thing, partly may appeare by the Oracles alledged in the end of the former Section, (wherein those spyrits fore-tolde, that an Hebrew chylde shold be borne, to the vtter subuersion and ruine of theyr tyrannicall dominion,) & much more at large the same might be declared, by other answers & Oracles vttered after Christes natiuity, & registred in the Monuments euen of the Heathens themselues. Wherof he that desireth to see more ample mention (especially out of Porphyrie who then was lyuing,) let hym reade Eusebius sixt Booke, De preparatione Euangelica, where he shal finde store, & namely, that Apollo many tymes exclaimed
                        •
                      
                     Hei mihi, congemiscite: Hei mihi: hei mihi: Oraculorum defecit

me claritas.
                     Woe vnto m
                           •
                        e, lament ye with me; woe vnto me, woe vnto me, for that the honour of Oracles hath now forsaken me. Which cō
                     plaints & lamentations, are nothing els but a plaine confession that Iesus was he, of whom a Prophet sayd diuers ages before:
                        Soph, 2,
                     
                     
                        Attenuabit omnes Deos terrae: he shall weare out and bring to beggery, all the Gods or Idols of the earth. This confessed also the wicked Spyrits themselues, whē at Christes appearing in Iurie, they came vnto hym dyuers tymes, and besought hym, not to afflict or torment them, nor commaund thē, presently to return vnto hell, but rather to permit them some little time of entertainement in the Sea, or Mountaines, or among heardes of Swyne, or the lyke.
Which confession they made in the sight of all the world, and declared the same afterwards by theyr facts and deedes.
                  For presently vpon Iesus death, & vpon the preaching of his name & Gospel throughout the worlde,Of the myraculous ceasing of Oracles at Christes appearing. the Oracles which before were aboundant in euery Prouince and Countrey, were put to silence. Whereof I might alledge the testimony of very

many Gentiles themselues, as that of Iuuenall.
                        Iuuenall.
                     
                  
                  
                     Cessant Oracula Delphis.
                  
                  
                     
                        Saty. 6.
                     All Oracles at Delphos doe now cease, &c.
                  That also of another Poet:

                        Excessere omnes adytis,
                        
                           
                              Lucan.
                           arisque relictis
                        Dij, quibus imperium
                        hoc steterat, &c.
                     
                  
                  That is, the Gods by whom thys Empyre stood, are all departed from theyr Temples, & haue abandoned theyr Altars and place of habitation. Strabo hath also these expresse wordes.
                        Strab lib. Geograph.
                      
                     The Oracle of Delphos at this day is to be seene in extreame beggery & mendicitie.
                  
                  
                     
                        Plutar. de defectu Oraculo.
                     And finally, Plutarch that lyued within one hundred yeeres after Christ, made a speciall Booke to search out the causes, why the Oracles of the Gods were ceassed in hys tyme. And after much turning and winding many waies, resolued vpon two principall points, or causes therof.Two insufficient causes. The first, for that in hys tyme, there was more store of Wise-men then before, whose aunswers might stand in steede of Oracles; and the

other, that peraduenture the spyrites which were accustomed to yeeld Oracles, were by length of tyme growne olde and dead. Both which reasons, in the verie common sence of all men, must needes be false, and by Plutarch himselfe, cannot stande with probability. For first, in hys Bookes which he wrote of the lyues of auncient famous men, he confesseth, that in such kind of wisedome as he most esteemed, they had not their equals among their posteritie. Secondly, in hys Treatise of Phylosophy, he passeth it for a grounde, that spirits not depending of materiall bodies, cannot die, or wexe old, and therefore of necessitie he must conclude, that some other cause is to be yeelded of the ceassing of these Oracles, which cannot be but the presence and commaundement of some higher power, according to the saying of S. Iohn,
                        1. Iohn. 3.
                      
                     To this ende appeared the sonne of God, that hee might dissolue (or ouerthrowe) the workes of the deuill.
                  
                  Neyther dyd Iesus thys alone in hys own pers
                        •
                     n, but gaue also power and authority to his Disciples & followers to doe the lyke, according

to their commission in S. Mathewes Gospell:
                        Math, 10
                              •
                           
                        
                      
                     Super omnia Daemonia et spiritus immundos, &c. You shall haue authoritie ouer al deuils & vncleane spyrits. Which commission, how they afterward put it in execution, the whole worlde yeeldeth sufficent testimonie. And for examples sake onely, I wil alledge in this place an offer or challenge, made for the tryall or proofe thereof, by Tertullian to the Heathen Magistrates and persecutors of hys time, his wordes are these
                        •
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Tert. in Apol. ad gen.
                        Let there be brought heere in presence before your trybunall seates, som person, who is certainly known to b
                           •
                         possessed with a wicked spirit, and let that spirit 
                           •
                        e comma
                           •
                        n
                           •
                        ed by a Christian to s
                           •
                        eak and he shall as truly con
                           •
                        esse himselfe to be a de
                        
                           •
                        il
                           •
                         as 
                           〈◊〉
                         other tymes to you,A mo
                              •
                           t cō
                           fide
                              •
                           t o
                              •
                           fer, made 
                              •
                           y Ter
                              •
                           u
                              •
                           l
                              •
                           an. he will falsel
                           •
                         say he is a God. Aga
                           •
                        ne, at 
                           〈…〉
                         let there be bro
                           •
                        ght foorth one of these (your Priestes or Prophets) that will seeme to be possessed with a diuine spirit, I mean of those that speake gasping, &c. (in whom you imagine your Gods to talke,) and except that spyrite also, (commaunded by vs) doe confesse

himselfe to be a deuill, (being afraid indeede to lye vnto a Christian) doe you shedde the bloode of the Christians in that very place, &c. None will lye to theyr owne shame, but rather for honour or aduantage, yet those spyrits will not say to vs, that Christ was a Magitian, as you doe, nor that he was of the common cō
                        dition of men. They wil not say, he was stolne out of the Sepulcher, but they will confesse, that hee was the vertue, wisedome, & word of God; that he is in heauen, & that he shall come againe to be our Iudge, &c. Neither will these deuils in our presence, deny thēselues to be vncleane spyrits, and damned for theyr wickednes, & that they expect his most horrible iudgement, professing also, that they doe feare Christ in GOD, and God in CHRIST, and that they are made subiect vnto hys Seruants.
                  
                  Hetherto are the words of Tertullian, contayning (as I haue sayde) a most confident challenge, and that vpon the lyues & blood of al Christians, to make tryall of theyr power in controling those spirits, which the Romaines & other Gentiles adored

as theyr Gods. Which offer, seeing it was made and exhibited to the persecuters themselues, then lyuing in Rome, wel may we be assured, that the enemy would neuer haue omitted so notorious an aduantage, if by former experience he had not beene perswaded, that the ioyning heerein would haue turned and redounded to hys owne confusion.
                  
                     The wonderful authorite of christians ouer spyrits.And this puissant authority of Iesus imparted to Christians, extended it selfe so farre forth, that not onely theyr words and commandements, but euen their very presence did shut the mouthes and driue into feare the myserable Spyrites. So Lactantius sheweth,
                        Lact. li. 2. di inst. cap. 16,
                      that in hys dayes, among many other examples of thys thing, a seely Seruing-man that was a christian, following hys Maister into a certaine Temple of Idols, the Gods cryed out, that nothing coulde be well done, as long as that Christian was in presence. The like recordeth Eusebius of Dioclesian the Emperour, who going to Apollo for an Oracle, receiued aunswer, That the iust men were the cause that he could say nothing.
                     
                        Euse. li. 5, de praep. Euan.
                      Which iust men, Apollos Priestes interpreted, to be meant

ironically of Christians: and therevppon Dyoclesian began hys most fearce and cruell persecution in Eusebius dayes. Sozomenus also wryteth,
                        Sozom. lib, 3. hist. cap. 18.
                      that Iulian an Apostata, endeuouring with many sacrifices & cō
                     iurations, to draw an aunswer from Apollo Daphnaeus, in a famous place called Daphne, in the suburbes of Antioch: vnderstood at last by the Oracle, that the bones of S. Babylas the Martyr, that lay neere to the place, were the impediment why that God coulde not speake. And thereupon, Iulian caused the same body presently to be remooued. And finally, heereof it proceeded, that in all sacrifices, coniurations, & other mysteries of the Gentiles, there was brought in that phrase recorded by scoffing Lucian,
                        Lucian in Alex.
                      
                     Exeant Christiani, let Christians depart; for that while they were present, nothing could be well accomplished.
                  To conclude, the Pagan Porphyrie,
                        Porph. lib. 1. cont. Christ. apud Euseb. li. 5. ca. 1. de praep. Eua
                              ••
                           
                        
                      that of all other most earnestlie endeuoured to impugne & disgrace vs Christians, and to holde vp the honour of hys enfeebled Idoles, yet discoursing of the great plague that raigned most furiously in the Cittie

of Messina, in Cicilie wher he dwelt, yeeldeth this reason, why Aesculapius the God of Phisicke (much adored in yt place) was not able to helpe them.A meruailous confession of Porphyrie. 
                     It is no meruaile (sayth he) if this Citty so many yeeres bee vexed with the plague, seeing that both Aesculapius and all other Gods be nowe departed from it, by the comming of Christians. For since that men haue begun to worship this Iesus, wee could neuer obtaine any profit by our Gods.
                  
                  Thus much confessed this Patrone of Paganisme, concerning the maine that hys Gods had receiued by Iesus ho
                        •
                     our. Which albeit he spake with a m
                        •
                     li
                        •
                     ious minde, to bring Christians in hatred and persecution thereby, yet is the confession notable, and confirmeth that story which Plutarch in his fore-named booke doth report; that in the latter yeres of the raigne of the Emperour Tyberius,A prety storie of Plutarch. a strange voyce, and exceeding horrible clamor, with hidious cryes, skryches, and howlings, were hearde by many in the Grae
                        •
                     ian sea, complaining that the great GOD Pan was nowe departed. And thys Plutarch (that was a Gentile) affirmeth to haue beene alledged and approued,
                        Plut. de de
                           
                              •
                           ectu. oracu.
                     
                     
before the Emperour Tyberius, who meruailed greatly thereat, and could not by all his Diuines and Soothsayers, whom he called to that consultation, gather out any reasonable meaning of this wonderful accidēt. But we Christians, comparing the time wherin it happened, vnto the time of Iesus death and passion, and finding the same fully to agree, may more then probably perswade our selues, that by the death of theyr great God Pan, (which signifieth al) was imported ye vtter ouerthrow of al wicked spirits & Idols vpon earth.
               
               
                  The sixt Consideration.
                  AND thus hath the Deitie of Iesus beene declared and approoued by hys omnipotent power, in subduing infernall enemies.The punishment of enemies. Nowe resteth it for vs to make manifest the same, by hys lyke power and diuine iustice, shewed vpon diuers of his enemies heere on earth; whose greatest punishment, albeit for the most part, he reserueth for ye life to come, yet sometimes for manifestation of hys omnipotencie, (as especially it was behoue
                        •
                     ul in those first daies of

hys appearaunce in the worlde) hee chasteneth them also, euen heere on earth in the eye and sight of al men. So wee reade of the most infamous and myserable death of Herode the first,Herod Ascolonita. surnamed Ascolonita, who after hys persecution of Christ in hys infancie,
                        Iosep. lib
                              •
                            17. antiq. ca. 10. et lib. 1. de bell. Iudai. cap. 21,
                      & the slaughter of the infants in Bethleem for hys sake: was wearied out by a lothsome lyfe, in feare and horrour of hys owne wife and children: whom after he had most cruelly murthered, was enforced also by desperation, through hys vnspeakeable griefes, vexations, and torments, to offer his owne hande to hys owne destruction, if he had not been staied by his friends that stood about hym.
                  
                     Archelaus.After hym, Archelaus his eldest Sonne, that was a terrour to Iesus at hys returne from Egypt, fell also by Gods iustice into meruailous calamities. For first, beeing left a King by hys Father,
                        Iosep. lib, 17, antiq. ca. 15 lib. 2. de bel. Iuda. cap. 6,
                      Augustus would not allow or ratifie that succession, but of a King made him a Tetrarch, assigning vnto hym onely the fourth part of that dominion which his father had before. And then againe after nine yeeres space, tooke that away

in lyke manner, with the greatest dishonour he could deuise, seazing vpon all hys treasure and riches by the way of confiscation, and condemning hys person to perpetuall banishment, wherein hee died most myserably in Vienna in Fraunce.
                  Not long after thys, the seconde sonne of Herod the first, named Herod Antipas,Herod Antipas. Tetrarch of Galilie, who put S. Iohn Baptist to death, & scorned Iesus before his passion, (whereat both himselfe and Herodias hys Concubine was present,) was deposed also by Caius the Emperor,
                        Iosep. lib. 18. antiq. cap. 9 lib. 2, de bel. cap. 8,
                      (beeing accused by Agrippa his neerest kinseman) and most contumeliously sent in exile, first to Lyons in Fraunce, and after that, to the most deserte and inhabitable places in Spayne, where hee with Herodias wandred vp and down in extreame calamity so long as they lyued, and finally ended theyr daies abandoned of all men. In which misery also it is recorded, that the dauncing daughter of Herodias,Herodias daughter. who had in her iolity demaunded Iohn Baptists head, beeing on a certaine time enforced to passe ouer a frosen Riuer,
                        Niceph. li. 1 capit, 20.
                      suddainly the Ise brake, and she in her fall,

had her heade cutte off by the same Ise, without hurting the rest of her body, to the great admiration of all the lookers on.
                  The lyke euent had another of Herods family, named Herod Agrippa,Herod Agrippa. the accuser of the fore-named Herode the Tetrarch; who in hys great glory & tryumph, hauing put to death S. Iames, the brother of S. Iohn Euangelist, and imprisoned S. Peter, was soone after in a publique assembly of Princes and Nobles at Caesaria, striken from heauen with a most horrible disease, whereby hys body putrified,
                        Acts, 12.
                      and was eaten with vermine, as both S. Luke recordeth, and Iosephus affirmeth.
                        Iosep. lib. 19. antiq. cap. 7
                      And the same Iosephus, with no small meruaile in himselfe, declareth: that at the very same time when hee wrote hys story,
                        Lib. 18, ca. 7
                      (which was about threescore and ten yeeres after the death of Herod the first) the whole progenie and of-spring, kindred & familie of the said Herod, (which he saith was exceeding great,The stock of Herod soone extinguished. by reason hee had many wiues together, with many chyldren, brothers and sisters, besides Nephewes & kins-folke) w
                        •
                     re all extinguished in most miserable

sort, and gaue a testimony (sayth Iosephus) to the worlde, of the most vaine confidence, that men doe put in humaine felicitie.
                  And as the punishments lighted openly vpon Iesus professed enemies in Iurie:The punishmēts of the Romans. so escaped not all the Romaines their chastisement; I meane such, as especially had their hands in persecution of him, or of his followers after hym
                        •
                      For first, of Pontius Pilate that ga
                        •
                     e sentence of death,Pilate. against him, we read, that after great disgrace rec
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     ed in 
                        •
                     urie,
                        Eutrop. lib, 7, hist.
                      hee was sent home into Italie, an
                        •
                      there by mani
                        •
                     est dysfauours shewed vnto hym by the Em
                        •
                     erour hys Maister,
                        Euseb. lib
                              •
                            2, cap, 7, hist,
                      fell int
                        •
                      s
                        •
                     ch des
                        •
                     era
                        •
                     ion
                        •
                      as he slew himself
                        •
                      with hi
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     wne h
                        •
                     nds.
                  A
                        ••
                      secondly o
                        •
                      the very Emperou
                        •
                     s themsel
                        •
                     es, w
                        •
                     o liued 
                        •
                     rom Ty
                        •••
                     i
                        •
                     s (v
                        •
                     der whom 
                        •
                     esus suffered
                        •
                      vnto Constantine the great, vnder whom Christian Religion tooke dominion ouer the worlde, (which contayned the space of three hundred yeres) very few or none escaped the manifest scourges of Gods dreadfull iustice, shewed vpon thē at the knitting vp of their daies. For examples sake, Tyberius, that permitted

Christians to lyue freely,
                        Tertul. in Apolog.
                      and made a Lawe against theyr molestation, (as before hath beene shewed) dyed peaceably in hys bed. But Caligula that followed him,Caligula
                           •
                        
                      for his contempt shewed against all diuine power, in making hymselfe a God, was soone after murthered by the consent of his deerest freendes.
                  Nero also, who first of all other began persecution against the christians,Nero. within fewe Monethes after he had put S. Peter and S. Paule to death in Rome, hauing murthered in lyke manner hys owne Mother, Brother, Wyfe, and Maister, was vpon the suddaine, from hys glorious estate and Maiestie, throwne down into such horrible distresse & confusion in the sight of all men, as beeing condemned by the Senate, to haue 
                        •
                     ys head thrust into a Pyllary, and there most ignominiously to be whypped to death, was constrayned (for auoyding the execution of that terrible sentence) to massacre hymselfe with hys own handes, by the assistance of such as were deerest vnto hym.
                  The lyke may be shewed in the tragicall endes of Galba, Otho, Vitellius,

Domitian, Commodus, Pertinax,Many Emperors that dyed myserably. Iulian, Marcinus, Antoninus, Alexander, Decius, Gallus, Volutianus, Aemilianus, Valerianus, Galienus, Caius, Carinus, Maximianus, Maxentius, Lucinius and others.
                  Whose miserable deathes,
                        Euagr. Scolast. lib. 3. hist. cap. 41,
                      a noble man & Counseller, (wel neere one thousand yeeres past) dyd gather against Zosimus a Heathen Wryter, to shew thereby the powerful hand of Iesus vppon his enemies: adding furthermore, that since the tyme of Constantine, (whiles Emperors haue been christians) few or no such examples can be shewed, except it be vpon Iulian the Apostata, Valens the Arian heretique, or some other of lyke detestable & notorious wickednes. And thus much of particuler men chastised by Iesus.
                  But if we desire to haue a ful example of hys iustice vppon a whole Nation together,The chastisement of Ierusalem, and of the Iewish people. let vs cōsider what befell Ierusalem and the people of Iurie, for theyr barbarous crueltie practised vpon hym, in hys death & passion. And truly, if we belieue Iosephus and Phylo the Iewish Historiographers, (who lyued either with Christ, or immediatly after him,) it

can hardly be expressed by ye tongue or penne of man, what insufferable calamities and miseries, were inflicted to that people (presently vppon the ascention of IESVS) by Pylate theyr Gouernour, vnder Tyberius the Emperour; and then againe by Petronius vnder Caligula,
                        Iosep. lib. 19. antiq. lib. 2, et 3, de bell, 
                              •
                           udai. Philo in Flacco et lib. 2. de leg. Cornel. Tac. lib. 12,
                      and after that, by Cumanus, vnder Claudius, and lastly by Festus and Albinus vnder Nero. Through whose cruelties, that Nation was enforced finally to rebell, and take Armes against the Romaine Empyre, which was the cause of theyr vtter ruine and extirpation by Tytus and Vespasian. At what tyme besides the ouerthrow of theyr Citty, burning of theyr Temple, and other infinite dys
                        •
                     resses, which Iosephus an eye-witnes protesteth, that no speech or discourse humane can declare.
                  The same Auth
                        •
                     ur lykewise record
                        •
                     th, eleuen hundred thousande persons to haue been slaine, & fourscore and se
                        •
                     uen teene thousand taken alyue, who were eyther put to death afterwarde in publique tryumphes, or sold openly for bond-
                        ••
                     aues into all parts of the world.
                  And in thys vniuersall calamitie

of the Iewish Nation,H
                           •
                        w Christ his death was 
                           •
                        unished with like circumstances vpō the Iewes. b
                        ••••
                     g the most notorious and grie
                        •
                     ous, 
                        〈◊〉
                      euer happened to peo
                        •
                     l
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     r Na
                        ••
                     on before or after 
                        •
                     he, (for the Romans neuer practised the like vpon others) it is si
                        •
                     gularly to be obserued, that in the same time and place, in which they had put Iesus to death before: that is
                        •
                      in the feast of the Paschall, whē theyr whole Nation was assembled at Ierusalem, from all partes, Prouinces, and Countries of the earth: they receyued this their most pittifull subuertion, and that by the hands of the Romaine Caesar, to whom by publique cry, they had appealed from Iesus, but a litle before.
                  Yea, further it is obserued and noted, that as they apprehended Ie
                     
                        •
                     us, and made the entrance to hys passion vppon the Mount Oliuet,
                        Iosep. lib. 5. de bel
                              •
                            ca. 8,
                      so Tytus (as Iosephus wryteth) vppon the same Mount planted hys first siege for their finall destruction.
                  And as they ledde Iesus from Caiphas to Pilate, afflicting him in their presence:
                        Capit. 27,
                      so nowe were they themselues ledde vp & downe from Iohn 
                        •
                     o Symon, (two Tyrants that had v
                     
                        •
                     urped dominion within the Citty,) and were scourged and torm
                        •
                     nted

before the trybunal seates. Again, as they had caused Iesus to be scoffed, beaten, and villainously intreated by the Souldiours in Pilats Pallace: so were now theyr own principall Rulers and Noble men, (as Iosephus writeth) most scornfully abused, beaten, and crucified by the same Souldiers. Which latter poynt of crucifying, or villainous putting to death vpon the Crosse, was begun to be practised by the Romaines vpon the Iewish Gentrie, immediatly after Christes death, and not before. And nowe atthys tyme of the war, Iosephus affirmeth, that in some one day, 
                        •
                     yue h
                        •
                     ndred of hys Nation were taken and put to thys opprobrius kinde of punishment; in so much, that for the great multitude he sayth:
                        Lib, 5, de bel. capit. 28.
                     
                     
                        Nec locus sufficeret Crucibus, nec Cruces corporibus: that is, neyther the place was sufficient to contayne so many crosses as the Romaines sette vp, nor the crosses sufficient to sustaine so many bodies as they murthered by that torment.
                  
                  Thys dreadfull and vnspeakable misery,A meruailous prouidence of God, for deliuering the Christians that were in Ierusalem at the time of destruction. fel vpō the Iewes about fortie yeeres after Christes ascention, when they had shewed themselues

most obstinate & obdurate against hys doctrine, deliuered vnto them, not only by himselfe, but also by hys Disciples; of which Disciples they had now slayne S. Stephen & Saint Iames, and had driuen into banishment both S. Peter and S. Paul, and other that had preached vnto them.
                  To which latter two Apostles, (I meane S. Peter & S. Paule) our Sauiour christ appeared a little before theyr martyrdoms in Rome, as Lactantius wryteth, and shewed that within three or foure yeeres after their deathes, he was to take reuenge vpon theyr Nation, by the vtter destruction of Ierusalem and of that generation.
                        Lib. 4. diui. instit. ca. 21.
                      Which secrete aduise, the sayd Lactantius affirmeth, that Peter and Paule reuealed to other christians in Iurie;
                        Euseb. lib. 3. hist. cap. 5. Nicep. cap, 3
                      wherby it came to passe, (as Eusebius also and other Authors doe mention) that all the Christians lyuing in Ierusalem, departed thence, not long before the siedge began, to a certayne Towne named Pella, beyond Iordan, which was assigned them for that purpose by Iesus himselfe, for that it beeing in the dominion of Agrippa, who stood with the Romaines, it remained

in peace & sa
                        ••
                     ty, while all Iurie besides was brought to desolation.
                  Thys then wa
                        •
                      the prouidence of God for ye puni
                        •
                     hment of the Iewes at that tyme.The Iewish miseries after the destruction of Ierusalem. And euer after, theyr estate declined from worse to worse, and theyr miseries daily multiplyed throughout the world. Whereof hee that wil see a very lamentable narration, let him read but the last booke onely of Iosephus hystory De bello Iudaico, wherein is reported besides other things, that after the war was ended, and all the publique slaughter ceassed, Tytus sent three-score thousand Iewes, as a present to hys Father to Rome, there to be put to death in dyuers & sundry manners. Others hee applyed to be specta
                        •
                     les for pastime to the Romaines yt were present with him; wherof Iosephus sayth, that he sawe with his owne eyes, two thousande and fiue hundred murthered and consumed in one day, by fight & combat among themselues, and with wilde beastes at the Emperours appointment.
                        I
                              •
                           sep. lib. 7, de bello cap. 20, et 21.
                      Others were assigned in Antioche & other great Citties, to serue for fagots in theyr famous bond-fires at 
                        •
                     ymes of tryumph. Others were sold

to be bond-slaues, others condemned to dyg and hewe stones 
                        •
                     or 
                        •
                     uer. And thys was the end of th
                        •
                     t warre and desolation.
                  A
                        •
                     ter thys againe vnder Traiane the Emperour, there was so infini
                        •
                     e a number of Iewes slaine,The finall desol
                           •
                        tion of the Iewish Nation. and made away by Marcus Turbo in Affrica, and Lucius Quintus in the East, (as all Histories agree) that it is impos
                        •
                     ible to expresse the multitude. But yet more wonderfull it is, which the same Historians report: that in the eyghteene yeere of Adrian the Emperour,
                        Oros. li. 7
                              •
                            ca. 13. Ariston. pellaeus in hist. Euse. li, 4, capit. 8. Niceph. lib. 3. cap. 24.
                      one Iulius Seuerus beeing sent to extinguish all the remnant of the Iewish generation: destroyed in smal time nine-tie & eyght Townes and Villages within that Countrey, and slew fiue hundred & four-score thousand of that blood and Nation in one day: at which tyme also, he beate downe the Cittie of Ierusalem in such sorte, as he left not one stone standing vpon another of their auncient buildinges: but caused some part thereof to be reedified againe, and inhabited onely by Gentiles. He changed the name of the Citty, and called it The Emperours name was Aelius Adrianus. AELIA, after the Emperours name. He droue all the progenie

and of-spring of the Iewes foorth of all those Countries, with a perpetual Law confirmed by ye Emperour, yt they should neuer returne: no, nor so much as looke backe frō any high or eminent place to that Country againe. And thys was done to the Iewish Nation by the Romaine Emperours for accomplishing that demaund, which their principal Elders had made not long before to Pilate the Romaine Magistrate, concerning Iesus most iniurious death, crying out with one cō
                     sent & voice, to wit, Let his blood be vppon vs and vpon our posteritie.
                     
                        Math, 25.
                     
                  
               
               
                  The seauenth Consideration.
                  AND heerein also, I meane in the most wonderful,The fulfilling of Iesus prophecies. and notorious chastisement, or rather reprobation of the Iewish people, which of all the worlde was Gods peculier before, is sette out vnto vs, as it were in a Glasse, the seauenth and last poynt, which wee mention in the beginning of this Section: to wit, the fulfilling of such speeches and prophecies, as Iesus vttered when he was vppon the earth; as namely at

one tyme, after a long & vehement commination made to the Scribes and Pharisies and principall men of that Nation, (in which he repeateth eyght seuerall tym
                        •
                     s that dreadfull threat woe,) he concludeth finally, that all the iust bloode, iniuriously shedde from the first Martyr Abel,
                        Math, 23.
                      should be reuenged very shortly vpon that generation. And in the same place, he menaceth the populus Ci
                        •
                     
                     tie of Ierusalem, that it shoulde be made desert.
                        Luke, 21.
                      And in another place hee assureth them, that one stone should not be left standing thereof vpon another. And y
                        •
                     t further hee pronounceth vppon the same Cittie these words;
                        Luke, 1
                              ••
                           
                        
                      
                     The dayes shal com vppon thee, and thine enemies shal enuiron thee with a wall, and shall besiege thee: they shal straighten thee on euery side, and shall beate thee to the ground, & thy children in thee.
                     Iesus speeches of Ierusalem. And yet more particulerly, he fore-telleth the very signes wherby his Disciples shoulde perceiue when the time indeede was come, vsing thys speech vnto them.
                        Luke, 21
                              •
                           
                        
                      
                     When you shall see Ierusalem besieged with an Armie: then know ye that her desolation is at hand; for that these are the daies of reuenge,

to the end all may be fulfilled which is written. Great distresse shal fal vpon this earth, and vengeance vppon this people. They shall be slaine by d
                           ••
                        t of the sword, & shalbe led as slaues into al Countries. And Ierusalē shalbe troden vnder feete by the Gentiles, vntill the time of Nations be accomplished.
                  
                  Thys fore-tolde Iesus of the miserie that was to fall vpon Ierusalem,The circū
                        staunce of the tyme, when Iesus spake hys words, and when they were written. and vppon that people (by the Romaines and other Gentiles,) when the Iewes seemed to be in most securitie, and greatest amitie with the Romaines, (as also they were when the same things were written,) and consequentlie at yt tyme, they might seeme in al humaine reason, to haue lesse cause then euer before to mysdoubt such calamities. And yet how certaine & assured fore-knowledge, (& as it were most sensible feeling) Iesus had of these miseries, he declared, not onely by these expresse words, and by their euent: but also by those pittiful teares he shed vpon sight & consideration of Ierusalem,
                        Luke, 19,
                      and by the lamentable speech he vsed to the women of yt Cittie, who wept for hym at his passio
                        •
                     , perswading them to weepe rather for themselues

and for theyr chyldren,
                        Luke, 23,
                      (in respect of the miseries to follow) then for him. Which words & predictions of Iesus, together with sundry other his speeches, fore-shewing so particulerly ye imminent calamities of y• Nation, (& that as I haue sayd, at such tyme, when in humane dyscourse there could be no probabilitie thereof,) when a certaine Heathen Chronicler and Mathematique, named Phlegon,
                        Phle. Thral, lib. annal.
                      about a hūdred yeres after Christes departure, had dilligently considered, hauing seene the same also in hys daies most exactlie fulfilled, (for he was seruaunt to Adrianus the Emperour, by whose commandement as it hath been said before
                        •
                      the finall subuersion of that Iewish Natiō was brought to passe) thys Phlegon (I say) though a Pagan,The testimony of a Heathen, for the fulfilling of Christes prophecies. yet vpon consideration of these euents, and others that he sawe, (as the extreame persecution of Christians fore-told by Christ and the like) he pronounced, that neuer any man foretold things so certainly to come, or that so precisely were accomplyshed, as were the predictions & prophecies of Iesus. And 
                        •
                     hys testimonie of Phlegon, was alledged and vrged

for Christians, against one Celsus a Heathen Philosopher and Epicure, by the famous learned Origen; euen the very next age after it was written by the Authour:
                        Orig. lib. 2, con. Cels. sub initium.
                      so that of the truth of thys allegation, there can be no doubt or question at all.
               
               
                  Other prophecies of Iesus, fulfilled to his Disciples.
                  AND nowe albeit these predictions and prophecies, concerning the punishment and reprobation of the Iewes, fulfilled so euidently in the sight of all the world, might be a sufficient demonstration, of Iesus fore-knowledge in affaires to come, yet are there many other things besides fore-shewed by him, which fel out as exactly as these dyd, notwithstanding that by no learning, Mathematicall reason, humane coniecture, they were or might be foreseene. And as for example, the foretelling of hys owne death, the manner, tyme, and place thereof: as also the person that should betray him, together with hys irrepentant ende. The flight, feare, & scandale of hys Disciples, albeit they had promised

and protested the cōtrary. The three seueral denials of Peter. The particuler tyme of his own resurrection, and ascention. The sending of the holy Ghost, & many other the lyke predictions, prophecies and promises, which to hys Apostles, Disciples and followers that heard them vttered, & left them written before they fell out, and sawe them afterward accomplished: and who by the falshood thereof, shoulde haue receiued greatest domage of al other men, if they had not been true; to these men (I say) they were most euident proofes of Iesus diuine prescience in matters that should ensue.
               
               
                  Prophecies fulfilled in the sight of Gentiles.
                  BVT yet for that an Infidel, (with whom onely I suppose my selfe to deale in thys place) may in these and the like things, finde (perhaps) some matter of cauilation, and say, that these prophecies of Iesus were recorded by our Euangelists, after the particularities therein prophecied were effectuated and not before; and consequently, that they might

be sorged; I will alledge certaine other euents, both fore-told and registred before they came to passe, and divulged by publique wrytings in the face of all the world, when there was small semblance that euer the same should take effect. Such were the particuler foretellings of ye kinde and maner of S. Peters death, whiles he lyued. The peculier and different manner of S. Iohn the Euangelists ending, from the rest of the Apostles. The fore-s
                        •
                     ewing and describing to hys Disciples, the most extreame and cruell persecutions, that should ensue vnto Christians for his sake
                        •
                      (a thing at that tyme not probable in reason, for that the Romans permitted the exercise of all kinds of Religions;) and that notwithstanding all these pressures and intollerable afflictions, his faithful followers should not shrinke, but hold out and daily increase in zeale, fortitude, and number, and finally should atchiue the vict
                        •
                     ry and conquest o
                        •
                      al the world: a thing much more vnlikely at that day, and so far passing all humaine probability, as no capacitie, reason, or conceite of man, might reach or attaine the foresight

thereof. And with thys will we conclude our thyrd and last part of the generall diuision sette downe in the beginning, concerning the grounds and proofes of Christian Religion.
               
            
            
               The Conclusion. SECT. 4.
               BY al that hetherto hath been said,The sum of the former 3. Sections. we haue declared & made manifest vnto thee (gentle Reader) three things of great importaunce. First, that from the beginning and creation of the worlde, there hath beene promised in all times & ages a Messias, or Sauiour of man-kinde, in whom, and by whom, all Nations should be blessed; as also, that the particuler tyme, manner, & circumstaunce of hys comming, together with the qualitie of hys person, purpose, doctrine, lyfe, death, resurrection, & ascention, were in lyke maner by the Prophets of GOD, most euidently foreshewed. Secondly, that  the very same particulers & speciall poynts that were dissigned and sette downe by the sayde Prophets, were also fulfilled most exactly with theyr circumstances, in the person & actions

of Iesus Christ our Lord & Sauiour.  Thirdly, that besides the accomplishment of all the fore-sayde prophecies, there were gyuen by Iesus many signes, manifestations, & most infallible arguments of hys deitie & omnipotent puissaunce, after hys ascention or departure from all humaine and corporall conuersation in thys world.
               By all which wayes, meanes, arguments and proofes, and by ten thousand more, which to the tongue or penne of man are inexplicable, the christian mind remaineth setled, & most firmely grounded in the vndoubted beliefe of his Religion, hauing besides al other things, euidences, certainties, & internal com
                     •
                  orts and assura
                     •
                  nces which are infinite: these eyght demonstratiue reasons & perswasions which ensue,Eyght reasons. for his more ample and aboundant satisfaction therein.
               
                  The Prophecies.
                  FIrst, that it was impossible that so many things should be foretolde so precisely, with so many particularities, in so many ages, by so

different persons of al sanctity, with so great concorde, consent, and vnitie, and that so long before hande, but by the Spyrit of God alone, that onely hath the fore-knowledge of future euents.
               
               
                  The fulfilling.
                  SEcondly, that it could not possibly be, that so many thinges, so difficult and strange, with all theyr particularities and circumstaunces, should be so exactly & precisely 
                        •
                     ulfilled, but in hym alone, of whom they were truely meant.
               
               
                  Gods assistance.
                  THirdly, that it can no wayes bee imagined, that GOD would euer haue concurred with Iesus dooings, or assisted him, aboue al course of nature, with so aboundant myracles, as the Gentiles doe confesse that he wrought, if he had beene a seducer, or taken vppon him to sette forth a false doctrine.
               
               
                  
                  Iesus doctrine.
                  FOurthly, if Iesus had intended to deceiue and seduce the world, he would neuer haue proposed a doctrine so difficult and repugnant to al sensualitie, but rather would haue taught things pleasant and gratefull to mans voluptuous delight, as Mahomet did after him. Neither could the nature of man, haue euer effectuously embraced such a
                        •
                     steritie, without the assistance of some diuine and supernaturall power.
               
               
                  Iesus manner of teaching.
                  FIf
                        •
                     ly, for that Iesus beeing poorely borne and vnlettered, as by hys aduersaries confession doth appeare, and that in such an age and tyme, when all worldly learning was in most florishing estate: he could neu
                        •
                     r possibly, but by diuine power, haue attayned to such exquisite knowledge in al kind of learning
                        •
                      as to be able to decide all doubtes and controuersies of Phylosophers before hym, as he dyd, laying downe more plainly, distinctly, & perspicuouslly,

the pyth of all humane and diuine learning, within the compasse of three yeeres teaching, (and that to auditors of so great simplicity) then dyd all the Sages of the worlde vnto that day: insomuch that euen then, the most vnlearned Christian at that time, could say more in certainty of trueth, concerning the knowledge of God, the creation of the worlde, the end of man, the rewarde of vertue, the punishment of vice, the immortalitie and rest of our soules after thys life, and in other such high poyn
                        •
                     s and mysteries of true phylosophy, then coulde the most famous and learned of all the Gentiles, that had for so many ages before, beaten theyr braynes in contention about the same.
               
               
                  Iesus lyfe and manner of proceeding,
                  SIxtlie, if Iesus had not meant plainly and sincerely in al his doings, according as he professed: he would neuer haue taken so seuere a course of lyfe to himselfe, neyther would he haue refused all temporall dignities and adua
                        •
                     ncements as he

did: he wold neuer haue chosen to die so opprobriously in the sight of all men, or made election of Apostles and Disciples so poore and contemptible in the world: nor if hee had, would euer worldly men haue folowed him in so great multitudes, with so great feruour, zeale, cōstancie, and perseuerance vnto death.
               
               
                  The beginners & first publishers of Christian Religion.
                  SEuenthly, we see that the first beginners and founders of Christian religion left by Iesus, were a multitude of simple and vnskilfull persons, vnapt to deceiue or deuise any thing of themselues. They beganne against all probability of mans reason: they went forward against the streame and strength of the world: they continued and increased abou
                        •
                      humaine possibilitie: they perseuered in torments and afflictions insufferable: they wrought myracles aboue the reach and compasse of mans ability: they ouerthrewe Idolatry that then possessed the worlde, and confounded all powers infernal by the onely name & vertue of their

Maister. They saw the prophecies of Iesus fulfilled, & all hys diuine speeches and predictions come to passe. They sawe the punishment of theyr enemies & chiefe impugners, to fall vpon them in their dayes. They saw euery day whole Prouinces, Countries, and Kingdomes conuerted to their saith. And finally, the whole Romaine Empire & world besides, to subiect it selfe to the lawe, obedience, and Gospel of theyr Maister.
               
               
                  The present state of the Iewes,
                  LAstly, among all other reasons and arguments, this may be one most manifest vnto vs: that wheras by many testimonies and expresse prophecies of the old Testament, it is affirmed, that the people of Israell should abandon, persecute, and put to death, the true Messias at hys cōming, as before hath beene shewed; and for that fact, should it selfe be abandoned of God, and brought to ruine and dispersion ouer all the world: (wherein according to the words of Ose,
                        Osea, 3.
                      
                     They shall sitte for a long time, without a King, without Prince, without sacrifice, without Altar,

without Ephode, or Images, and after this again, the chyldren of Israell shall returne, and seeke theyr God, in the last daies.) We see in this age the same particularities fulfilled in that Nation, and so haue continued nowe for these 15. hundred yeeres: that is, we see the Iewish people afflicted aboue al Nations of ye world: dispersed in seruility throughout all corners of the earth: without dygnitie or reputation: without King, Prince, or common-wealth of themselues, prohibited by all Princes, both Christian and other, to make theyr sacrifice where they inhabite; depriued of all meanes to attaine to good knowledge in good litterature, whereby daily they fall into more grosse ignoraunce, and absurdities against cōmon reason, in theyr latter doctrine: thē dyd the most barbarous Infidels that euer were, hauing lost all sence and feeling in spyrituall affayres; all knowledge and vnderstanding in celestiall thinges for the life to come: hauing among them no Prophet, no graue teacher, no man directed by Gods holy Spyrite; and finally, as men forlorne & filled wyth all kynd of myserie, doe

both by theyr inwarde and externall calamities, preach, denounce, and testifie to the world, that Iesus whō they crucified, was the onely true Messias and Sauiour of man-kinde, and that hys bloode, (as they themselues required) lyeth heauily vppon theyr generation for euer.
               
               
                  The conclusion of the Chapter, with an admo
                        •
                     ishment.
                  WHerfore to conclude this whole dyscourse and treatise of the proofes and euidences of our Christian Religion: seeing that by so manifold & inuincible demonstrations, it hath beene declared & layd before our eyes, that Iesus is the only true Sauiour & Redeemer of the world: and consequently, that hys seruice and Religion, is the only way and mean to please Almighty God, and to attaine euerlasting happines: there remayneth now to be considered, that the same Iesus, which by so many Prophets was promised to to be a Sauiour, was also foretold by the selfe same Prophets, yt he should be a Iudge,Iesus shall be also a Iudge. and examiner of all our actions. Which latter poynt, no one

Prophet that hath fore-shewed hys comming, hath omitted seriously to inculcate vnto vs. No not the Sibyls thēselues, who in euery place where they describe the most gracious cō
                     ming of the Virgins sonne, doe also annexe thereunto hys dreadfull appearance at the day of Iudgement, especially, in those famous Acrostick verses, whereof there hath beene so much mention before; the whole discourse vpon ye words Iesus Christ the sonne of God, Sauiour & Crosse,
                     
                        Apud Euse. lib. 4, in vita Const. infi.
                      contayneth nothing els, but a large and ample description of hys most terrible comming in fire and flame, and conflagration of the worlde at that dreadfull day, to take account of all mens words, actions, and cogitations.
                  To which description of these Pagan Prophets, is consonant the whole tenor and context of the olde Bible,
                        1, Reg, 2, Psalm, 95, Esay, 2, 13, 26, 27, 30.
                      foreshewing euery where, the dreadful maiestie, terrour, and seueritie of the Messias at that day. The newe Testament also, which tendeth to comfort and solace mankinde,
                        Ierem, 30, Dan, 7, Soph, 1, Mala, 4.
                      and hath the name o
                        •
                      Euangile, in respect of the ioyfull newes which it brought to the worlde, omitteth

not to put vs continually in minde of this poynt.
                        Math, 12.13 16, 14.25, Marke
                              •
                            13.
                      And to y• ende both Christ himselfe, amidst all hys sweet & comfortable speeches wyth hys Disciples,
                        Luke, 17, Rom, 2, 14.
                      dyd admonish them often of thys last day,
                        1, Cor, 15, 2, Cor, 5.
                      and hys Apostles, Euangelists, and Disciples after hym, repeated, itterated,
                        1. Thes. 4, 5
                              •
                            2, Thes, 1, 1, Titus
                              •
                            2, 2, Peter, 3.
                      and vrged thys important consideration, in all theyr words and wrytings.
                  Wherefore, as by the name and cogitation of a Sauior,
                        Hebr, 9.
                      we are greatly styrred vp to ioy,
                        Iude, 4.
                      alacritie, confidence and consolation,
                        Reue, 1,
                      so by thys admonishment of Gods Saints, and by the testimony of our Lord & Sauiour Iesus Christ himselfe, that hee is to be our Iudge, and seuere examiner of all the minutes & moments of our lyfe: we are to conceiue iust feare and dreade, of thys hys second comming.
               
               
                  An illation vpon the premisses, with an exhortation.
                  AND as by ye whole former treatise, we haue beene instructed, that the onely way to saluation, is by the true profession of Christian Religion: so by thys account that shal

be demaunded at our handes at the last day, by the Authour and first institutor of thys Religion; wee are taught, that vnlesse we be true Christians indeede, & doe performe such duties as this Law and Religion prescribeth vnto vs, so farre off shall we be frō receiuing any benefite by the name, as our iudgement shall bee more greeuous, and our finall calamitie more intollerable. For which cause, I would in sincere charity, exhort euery man that by the former discourse hath receiued any light, & is thorowly confirmed in his iudgement concerning the manifest and vndoubted truth of thys Christian Religion: to employ hys whole studie & indeuours for the attainment of the fruite and benefite thereof, which is by beeing a true and faythfull Christi
                        •
                     n; for that our Sauiour Christ hymselfe fore-signified; that many shoulde take the name w
                        •
                     thout benefit or commodity of theyr profession.
                  And to the ende each man may the better knowe or coniecture of himselfe, whether he be in the right way or no, & whether he performe indeede the true duety belonging to

a faythful Christian, I haue thought conuenient to adioyne this Chapter next following of tha
                        •
                      matter, and therin to declare ye particuler poynts belonging to that profession. Which beeing knowne, and thorowly considered, it shall be easie for euery one that is not ouer partiall, or wilfully bent to deceiue himselfe, to discerne cleerely of hys own estate, and of the course and way that hee holdeth.
                  Thys (I say) is a high poynt of wisedome for all men to doe whyle they haue time; least at the last day, we hauing passed ouer the whole course of our liues in the bare name onely of Christianitie, without the substance and true knowledge therof: doe find our selues in the number of those most miserable and vnfor
                        •
                     unate people, who shal cry lord, Lorde, and receiue no comfort by that confession.
               
            
         
         
            
            HOWE A MAN MAY IVDGE OR DISCERNE OF HIMSELFE, WHETHER he be a true Christian or not. With a declaration of the two parts belonging to that profession: which are, beleefe and life. CHAP. V.
            AS in humaine learning and Sciences of thys worlde, after declaration made of the vtilitie, possibilitie, certaintie, conueniencie, and other qualities, commendations, & properties thereof: the next poynt is, to shewe the meanes & wayes whereby to attaine the same: so much more, in thys diuine & heauenly doctrine of Christian Religion, (which concerneth our soule & euerlasting saluation,) for that we haue shewed before, not onely the most vndoubted trueth whereupon it standeth, but also that the knowledge heerof, is so absolutely necessary, as there is no other name or profession vnder heauen,

whereby mankind may be saued, but onely thys of Iesus:
                  Acts. 4.
                it followeth by order of cōsequence, that we should treate in thys place,The effect of thys Chapter. how a man may attaine the frui
                  •
               e of this doctrine: that is to say, howe hee may come to be a good Christian; or if he already possesse that name, how he may examine or make tryal of himselfe, whether he be so indeed or not. Which examination to speak in briefe, consisteth wholy in consideration of these two poynts.Two points First, whether he doe not onely, beleeue  vnfainedly the totall summe of do
               
                  •
               uments and misteries, left by Iesus and his Disciples to the Catholique Church, but also perswade & assure hymselfe, of the forgiuenes of all hys sinnes, and of the fatherly loue and fauour of GOD towardes hym in Christ Iesus, whereby he is adopted to be the sonne of God, & an heyre of euerlasting life. Secondly, whether  he conforme and frame hys lyfe, according to the precepts and doctrine of Christ Iesus. So that in these two poynts we are to bestow our whole speech in thys Chapter.
            
               
               The first part, concerning beleefe.
               AND for the first, howe to examine the trueth of our beliefe, it would be ouer tedious to lay down euery particuler way that might bee assigned for discussion thereof: 
                     •
                  or that it would bring in the contention of all tymes, as well auncient as present, about controuersi
                     •
                  s in christian Fayth, which hath beene impugned from age to age, by the seditious instruments of Christes infernall enemie. And therefore, as well in respect of the length, (wherof this place is not capable,) as also for that of purpose I doe auoyde all dealing with matters of controuersie within the compasse of this work, I meane onely at thys tyme, (for the comfort of such as are already in the right way, and for some light vnto others, who perhaps of simplicity may walk awry,) to 
                     •
                  ette downe with as great breui
                     •
                  y as possibly may be, som few generall notes or obseruations, for theyr better helpe in thys behal
                     •
                  e.
               In which great affaire of our sayth and beleefe (wherein consisteth as well the ground and foundation of

our eternall welfare, as also the fruite and entire vtilitie of Christes comming into this world; it is to be cō
                  sidered, that GOD could not of his infinite wisedome, (fore-seeing all things and times to come) nor euer would of his vnspeakable goodnes, (desiring our saluation as he dooth) lea
                     •
                  e vs in this life, without most sure, certaine, and cleere euidence of thys matter; and consequently, we must imagine, that all our errors cō
                  mitted heerein, (I meane in matters of fayth & beleefe among Christians) doe proceede rather of sin,The matters of faith and beleefe easie among Christians. negligence, wilfulnes, or inconsidera
                     •
                  ion of our selues, then eyther of dyfficulty or doubtfulnes in the means left vnto vs for discerning of ye same, or of the want of Gods holy assistaunce to that effect, if we woulde with humilitie accept thereof.
               Thys Esay made plaine, when he prophecied of thys perspicuitie, that is, of this most excellent priuiledge in Christian religion, so many hundred yeeres before Christ was borne. For after that in diuers chapters hee had declared the glorious comming of Christ in signes and myracles, as also the multitude of Gentiles that

should embrace hys doctrine, together with the ioy and exultation of theyr conuersion: he fore-sheweth presently, the wonderful prouidence of God also, in prouiding for Christians so manifest a way of direction for theyr fayth and Religion, as the most simple and vnlearned man in the world, should not be able (but of wilfulnes) to goe astray therein. Hys wordes are these, directed to the Gentiles.
                     Esay, 35,
                   
                  Take comfort and feare not. Behold, your God shall come and saue you. Then shall the eyes of the blinde be opened, and the eares of the deafe shall be restored, &c. And there shall be a path & away: which shalbe called 
                  The direct holy way of Christians vnder the Gospel. 
                  The holy way: and it shalbe vnto you so direct away, as fooles shall not be able to erre therin. By which words we see, that among other rare benefits that Christes people were to receiue by his cōming, thys shold be one, and not the least, that after hys holy doctrine once published & receyued, it shoulde not be easie for the weakest in capacitie or learning that might be, (whom Esay heere noteth 
                     •
                  y the name of Fooles,) to runne awry in matters of theyr beleefe, s
                     •
                   plaine, cleere, and euident,

should the way for tryall thereof be made.
               God hath opened hymselfe vnto vs in ye holy scriptur
                     •
                  s, the wrytings and doctrine of Moses and the Prophets of Christ, and hys Apostles:
                     Iohn
                           •
                         20, 28
                   wherin is contayned what soeuer is necessary for our saluation.
                     2, Tim, 3, 14, 15. &c.
                   For although the inuisible things of God,Rom. 1, 20, that is, hys power and God-heade, may be seene by the workmanshyp and creation of the world, wherein, as in a booke written with the hand of GOD, and layd open to the eyes of men,
                     Psal. 19, 1,
                   the glory of God and hys mighty power appeareth; Yet because,
                     Abac, 2, 2,
                   eyther we read not this booke at all, or if wee doe, we read it carelesly, therefore it was necessary that the Lord God should adde another Booke, more plaine and easie to be read, so as he may run that readeth it, and this is, (as hath been said) his holy will, reuealed vnto vs in hys written word. Which S. Augustine therefore very well,
                     August. in exposi. Psal. 96, et Serm, 59, ad Fratrem. in Eremo.
                   calleth ye Letters or Epistle of GOD, sent vnto vs from our heauenly Countrey to teach vs to lyue godly and righteously whilst wee soiourne heere in thys present world.
                     Titus, 2, 12,
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Psalm, 119, 105,
                  Thys is that Lanthorne whereby our feete may be directed, and that light wherby our paths may be guided vnto Christ: it is that most certaine and infallible rule and leuel of all our actions, whereby both our fayth & lyfe are to be squared and framed.
                     Psalm, 19, 7
                   Yea, it is that holy and vndefiled way, and withal, that plaine & easy way denoted by Esay, which euen the very entraunce thereof, gyueth lyght and vnderstanding (as Dauid speaketh) vnto the simple.
                     Psal. 119, 130.
                  
               
               And although we must confesse with S. Peter, that there are some things in the Scripture harde to be vnderstoode, yet we may also say with the same Peter,
                     2. Pet, 3, 16,
                   that they are hard to those that are vnlearned and vnstable, which peruert and wrest them to their owne destruction. So that if the Gospell of Christ be yet hyd,
                     1, Cor. 4, 3, 4
                   it is hid vnto them that perish, whose sences sathan hath closed, that the lyght thereof shoulde not shyne vnto them. And heere-hence it is that the Apostle S. Paule, pronounceth so peremptorily of a contentious and hereticall man,
                     Titus, 3,
                   that hee is damned by the testimony of his own iudgement or conscience, for that hee

hath abandoned thys common, direct, and publique way, which all men might see, & hath deuised particuler paths and turnings to himselfe. And heere-hence is it, that the auncient Fathers of Christes Primatiue Church, dysputing against the same kind of people, defended alwaies, that theyr errour was of malice, and wilful blindnes, and not of ignoraunce: applying these wordes of prophecie vnto them;
                     Psal, 31, 11.
                   
                  They that sawe me, ranne out from me.
               
               Thus then it appeareth, that the plaine and direct way mentioned by Esay, wherin no simple or ignorant man can erre, is the doctrine taught by the mouth of our Sauiour Christ and hys Apostles, which howsoeuer it seeme to be obscure & darksome to men of peruerse mindes, that are not exercised in it, yet to the godlie and studious readers & hearers, that haue theyr eyes opened, and theyr mindes lightened to see the trueth, it is most plaine & easie to be vnderstood.
                     1, Pet, 1.19,
                  
               
               And thys is the cause, that those holy and sage Apostles of Christ, for the better peruerting of al bie-waies, crooked pathes, and blinde lanes of

errors that afterwards might arise,
                     1, Corin. 16.
                   (as by reuelation from Iesus they vnderstoode there shoulde doe many,
                     Gala, 5.
                  ) so earnestly exhorted,
                     2, Thes, 2, 1, Tim, 6, 20 2, Tim, 1, Math, 7, Rom, 16, 2, Tim, 2, 3, Titus, 3,
                   & so vehemently called vppon the people, to stand fast in the documents thē receyued, to hold firmely the faith & doctrine already deliuered, as a Depositum & treasure committed, to be safely kept vntill the last day. And aboue all other things, they most dilligentlie fore-warned them, to beware of new-fangled Teachers, whom they called Heretiques, who shold breake frō the vnity of that body whereof Christ is the head, & shoulde deuise newe glosses, expositions, and interpretations of Scripture, bring in new senses, doctrines, opinions, and deuisions, to the renting of Gods Church and citty now builded, and to the perdition of infinite soules.
               The Apostle S. Paule, euen whilst he lyued,
                     Gala, 1, 11,
                   found some of hys Schollers to be remooued by new fangled Teachers to another Gospell, & the better to make them see their error, hee appealeth to the Gospell which he had taught them. The gospell he preached, was not after man, neyther receiued he it of man, but by reuelation

from Iesus Christ. Hee brought them no fancies, visions, dreames, interpretations of Scripture hatched in his owne braine, but the pure and sincere doctrine,
                     1. Cor
                           •
                         12, 1
                           •
                        
                     
                   receyued by reuelation from GOD hymselfe, and faythfully deliuered vnto them, without hacke or mayme as he receiued it.
               Therefore S. Ierome vppon that place,
                     Ierom. in Epist. ad Gal.
                   considering how all Hereticks haue iugled with the Scriptures frō tyme to tyme, sayth. That Marcion and Basilides, and other Heretiques, (the contagious botches and plague sores of the church,) haue not the Gospell of God, because they haue not the Spyrite of GOD, without which, that which is taught, groweth to be mans Gospell. Thys maketh that learned Father to resolue vpon the matter, that it is a dangerous thing peruersly to expound the holy Scriptures, for by thys meanes, that is, by wrong and peruerse interpretation, that which is Gods Gospell, is made mans Gospell, et quod peius est, and that which is worse, (sayth thys holy Father,) it is made the deuils Gospell. For discerning therefore of thys kynde of most pernicious

people, and theyr deuilish dealing,
                     Ephe, 4.14,
                   and least we should be carried away with euery winde of docdrine by the wilinesse of men, GOD hath ordained in hys Church,
                     1, Corin. 12,
                   Apostles, Doctors, Prophets, Pastors & Interpreters, whom he hath so guyded and gouerned frō time to time with hys holy Spyrit, that they haue beene able by the Scriptures to represse and beate downe whatsoeuer errours and heresies haue been raysed vp by the enemies of Gods truth, contrary to the analogie of fayth & rule of charitie: that is to say, beside the true sence and meaning of the Canonicall Scripture.
               
                  No heresie finally preuailed against the scriptures.When there rose vp certaine seditious fellowes among the Iewes in the Primatiue Church, making som contention about theyr ceremonies, as did Simon Magus, Nich
                     •
                  las
                     •
                   Cerinthus, Ebion, and Meand
                     •
                  r, that were Heretiques; They were refelled and conuinced out of the scriptures by the Apostles and their Schollers, Martialis. Dyonisius Areopagita, Ignatius, Policarpus, and other, who were no doubt directed and guided by the Spyrit of GOD. Afterwarde, when Basilides, Cerdon, Marcion,

Valētinus, Tatianus, Apelles, Montanus, and diuers other troubled the Church wyth monstrous heresie, they were cōfuted by Iustinus Martyr, Dionisius Bishop of Corinth, Iraeneus, Clemens, Alexandrinus, Tertullian, & their equales, who in all theyr controuersies had recourse vnto the Scriptures, and beeing instructed and ledde by the spyrite of trueth, preuailed mightilie against theyr aduersaries. And so downward frō age to age vnto our dayes, whatsoeuer heresie or different opynion hath sprung vp contrary to the doctrine of Christ and hys Apostles, it hath beene checked and controlled by the Watchmen, spiritual Pastors, and Gouernors of the Church, who alledged alway the cōsent of ye scriptures for decyding of al doubts, and were most graciously guided by the Spyrite of GOD in all theyr actions. And heereof it is,
                     Ephe, 6, 17.
                   that the worde of God is called the sword of the spirit: because, as it was giuen by inspiration at the first, so beeing expounded by the direction of the same Spirite, it is most liuely and mighty in operation:
                     2. Tim. 3, 16
                  
                  
                     Hebr, 4, 12,
                   sharper then any two edged sword, and entering through euen

to the deuiding a sunder of the soule and the Spyrit, of the ioynts and the marrowe, and it is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the hart.
               This is that spyriual sword wherwith our Sauior Christ preuailed against sathan the head Lord & maister of all Heretiques,
                     Math, 4.
                   who notwithstanding pretended scriptures for his deuillish purposes. And the Apostle Paule,
                     Acts, 9,
                   beeing furnished with thys onely weapon, dysputed against the peruerse and ouer-thwart Iewes, which dwelt at Damascus, and confounded them, proouing by conference of Scriptures, that thys was verie Christ.
               Now as it was expedient that the Gospels should be written,Theophilactus. that we learning the truth foo
                     •
                  th of them, should not be deceyued by the lyes of her
                     •
                  sies; so was it necessary that the same gospels shold be preached for the confirmation of fayth.Hi
                        •
                     ronimus. And heereof it is, that the Apostle Saint Paule, Rom. 10,
                     Rom, 10, 17
                   sayth, that fayth cō
                  meth by hearing the word of God, because the word preached, is the ordinary meanes to beget and increase faith in vs,
                     1, Pet, 1, 23, Ephe, 5, 26,
                   for the which cause also, it is called the incorruptible seede,

whereby we are borne a newe, and whereby the Church is sanctifyed vnto the Lord.
               Wherfore to conclude this point, seeing that the holy Scriptures are that most infallible and secure way mentioned by Esay, seeing they are the rule and leuell both of our faith and lyfe, containing in them sufficient matter to confute errour & confirme the truth, able to make a man wise vnto saluation, and perfectly instructed vnto euery good worke, this ought to be the duty of ye faythful, (that I may vse the words of Basil,
                     2, Tim
                           •
                         3, 15.16, 17. Basil. mora. Regula 80, capit, 21,
                  ) to be thorowly perswaded in his mind, that those things are true and effectuall, which are vttered in the Scripture, & to reiect nothing thereof. For if whatsoeuer is not of fayth be sinne, (as sayth the Apostle) and if fayth commeth by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, without doubt, when any thing is without the holy Scripture, (which cannot be of fayth,) it must needes bee sinne. And therefore (to speake as S. Augustine speaketh) if any,
                     August. con. litteras petil lib, 3. cap. 6. Gala, 1, 8,
                   I will not say if wee, but (which S. Paule addeth) if an Angel from heauen, shal preach eyther of Christ or of his

church, or of any other thing which pertaineth to faith, or to the leading of our lyfe otherwise, then we haue receiued in the holy scriptures of the Law and the Gospell, let them bee accursed.
               Now if forsaking al by-pathes of mens inuentions and traditions, we wil search diligently in the scriptures wherein we thinke to haue eternall lyfe,
                     Iohn, 5, 39.
                   we shall see that they testifie of nothing so much, as of the promises of God in Christ Iesus; who as he is the ende of the law for righteousnes to euery one that beleeueth;
                     Rom, 10, 4, Gala, 3, 24
                   so doe they send vs directly, and as it were lead vs by the hand like a carefull Schoole-maister vnto hym, teaching vs to apprehend and lay hold on hym with the hand of fayth, and to apply hym with hys gifts & graces vnto our selues, and our own saluation. So that fayth is made the meanes, and as it were the Conduit to conuay Christ himselfe, his death, buriall, and resurrection, and all the rest of his benefits vnto vs, which the Apostle witnesseth. Colos. 2.12. Yee are buried (saith he) with hym thorow Baptisme, in whom ye are also raised vp together, through the sayth
                  
of GOD, effectually working, who raised hym from the dead. Whereof it ensueth, that all the faythfull doe not only obtaine ye benefit of Christes death, and buriall by theyr Baptisme, whereby they die vnto sinne, but also doe receiue and enioy, the fruite & effect of his resurrection by a liuely faith, wherby they are quickned and raised vp vnto righteousnes in thys life, and are assertained of resurrection to glory in ye life to come, by hys mighty working that is able to subdue all things to hymselfe.
                     Phil, 3, 21,
                  
               
               Seeing therefore that the summe and substance of our whole Religion, and of our eternall saluation or damnation, consisteth in the knowledge of thys one vertue, it shall be worth the labour, breefely (but yet plainly) to describe the forme, force, and nature of thys faith whereof we speake. Wherin you shall not looke for the diuers significations, which that word receiueth in scripture, nor for any declaration of those vnprofitable faythes wherof S. Iames speaketh,
                     Iam, 2, 19,
                   which are cōmon to the wicked, and to the deuils themselues, whereby they beleeue that Iesus is that Christ;
                     Mar, 1, 24.
                   but heere my purpose is

to entreate of that liuely and sauing fayth, which is peculier and propper to the elect and chosen chyldren of GOD, whereby th
                     •
                  y beleeue, tha
                     •
                   Christ is theyr Iesus,
                     Math, 1, 21.
                   by whom they are saued from theyr sinnes, & from the punishment due vnto them for the same, and by whom onely they are restored vnto the fauour of God, and made heyres with Christ of his heauenly kingdome.
                     Rom, 8, 17.
                  
               
               In the Epistle to the Hebrues, there is a notable description of that liuely faith,
                     Hebr. 11, 1,
                   where it is said, to be ye ground of things that are hoped for, and the euidence of thinges yt are not seene. Of whi
                     •
                  h description of ye Apostle, we may make a plaine definition after thys sort. Fayth is an assured perswasion of our saluatiō by ye means of Christ, which is grounded on the promises of God, and sealed in our harts by the holy Ghost. This definition is drawne from the forme and propertie of true fayth, but the other in the Epistle to the Hebrues, seemeth rather to be taken frō the substaunce of faith, and speaketh of the obiect matter thereof. But both of thē tende to one & the same thing, namely, to expresse the nature of

true fayth, to consist in the certainty of that eternall lyfe, which is purchased vnto vs by Christ Iesus, which althogh we enioy not presently, yet by faith we are as fully assured of it, as if we had possession and fruition thereof already. And heereof it is,
                     Colos. 2.2, Heb, 10, 22,
                   that ye Apostle calleth it plerophoria, fulnesse or assurance of fayth, when wee are perswaded that wee are so highly in Gods fauour, that nothing is able to separate or remoue vs frō the loue that God beareth vs in his sonne and our Sauiour Christ Iesus. Thys fulnes of faith containeth in it these three things.
               Fyrst, a notice or knowledge of the mercifull promises of God in Christ Iesus. Secondly, an vndoubted perswasion of the truth of those promises. And thirdly, the applying of the same to the comfort of our soules and consciences, for our saluation. For as it is not enough for a man to haue meate, vnlesse hee also eate it & digest it, so it is not enough for vs to know the promises of God,
                     Hebr, 4.2,
                   vnlesse we beleeue the same to be true, and apply them to our owne selues. And as it is not enough for a wounded man, to haue a soueraigne

salue or Medicine in hys windowe, vnlesse he apply it to hys wound, so is it not sufficient for vs, to knowe that Christ is the Sauiour of the world, vnlesse also we acknowledge hym to be a Sauiour vnto vs, & lay hold on hym by the hand of fayth.
               Wherefore thys is the propertie and effect of a sauing fayth, euen to apply Christ wyth hys gyfts vnto euery one of the faythful, & to make all cōclusions of Gods promises particuler, that is, peculier to themselues and their own saluation.
                     Habac. 2.
                   And therefore it is that fayth is called the lyfe of the soule,
                     Rom, 1, 17, Heb, 10, 37.
                   because it is the instrument, wherwith Christ the true lyfe & foode of our soule is to be eaten. Yea it is the mouth, the tongue, the teeth, the stomack, and that heate of our harts and soules, whereby Christ the word of GOD, is spiritually taken, eaten, and digested of vs, wyth which worde, or rather with which Christ,
                     Iohn, 6, 51,
                   our soules doe lyue: namely, with the flesh & blood of Christ which we eate and drink, whilst we embrace & receiue Christ by a lyuely fayth. Wherupon S. Cyprian hath thys sweet saying.
                     Cypr. lib. de Caena Dom.
                   
                  Quod est esca carni, hoc animae est fides. &c. That

which meate is to the fleshe, that is 
                     •
                  ayth to the soule. That which foode is to the body, that is the worde to the Spyrite. So that fayth is the bond, which doth so straightly vnite and knit vs vnto Christ, no otherwise then the members are vnited to the heade, whereby we pertake his spiritual graces, as the members of mans body receiue nutriment from the head; and in a word, what good things soeuer are necessary for our eternall lyfe, doe flowe and are deriued vnto vs from Christ, as from a most plentiful & wholesom fountaine, & are c
                     •
                  nueied vnto vs by the instrument of fayth, as by a strong and substantiall Conduit-pype.
               It were too long, and not so pertinent to the purpose, to re
                     •
                  ite all the prope
                     •
                  ties of this s
                     ••
                  ing faith, wherof we speake: it may suffise ther
                     •
                  ore to haue shewed you these few notes, and effects thereof, by the due consideration whereof, it shall be easie for any to examine & try themselues as the Apostle speaketh,
                     2, Cor, 13, 5,
                   whether they be in the faith or no: & consequently, whether they be true Christians for the first part of yt profession: namely for matters of beleefe,

which cōsisteth (as hath been shewed,) not onely in beleeuing whatsoeuer is propoūded vnto vs in the holy Scripture, (although that also be a true fayth) but also in the assurance of Gods loue & fauour towards vs, wrought in our harts by the preaching of the Gospel, & sealed by the holy Ghost; whereby we do firmely perswade themselues, that our sins are as vtterly forgiuen vs for Christ his sake, as if he neuer had committed any, and his righteousnes as perfectly imputed vnto vs, as if we had performed the same in our own persons. Wherfore to cōclude thys first part of our present speech,
                     Dial cont. Lucifernanum.
                   hee that not onely protesteth with S. Ierome that he dooth abhorre all sectes and names of particuler men, as Marcionists, Montanists, Valen
                     •
                  inians, & the lyke, (which like the builders of Babel) haue built vp Churches,
                     Gene, 11,
                   Sinagogues, and Conuenticles to gette themselues a name, that men might be called after them, Marcionists, Montanists, and such others, hee I say, that loatheth & detesteth sects, and as hee was not baptised in the name of Marcion, Montan, or Valentine, but in the Name of Iesus

Christ, so refuseth hee to be called a Marcionist, Montanist, or Valentinian, or by any name of any man vnder heauen: and therewithall reioyceth in the Name of Christ to be called a Christian, & giuing al doctrines and Gospels the slyp, pitcheth him vpon the doctrine and Gospell of IESVS, taught by his holy Apostles; he that can captiuate hys vnderstanding to the obedience of Christ, to beleeue hūbly such things as Christ by his Apostles proposeth to hym,
                     2. Cor, 10, 5,
                   albeit hys reason or sence should stand against the same. And not onely so, but also perswadeth & assureth hys own hart & soule, that all the mercifull promises that God maketh in his word, doe belong vnto hym in especiall, and that he is one of that nūber which God hath elected to saluation, and for whose sinnes Christ Iesus the son of GOD was content to die,
                     Ephe, 3, 17,
                   and to rise again for hys iustification, he that findeth hymselfe to be in this faith, or rather thys fayth to be in hym, and feeleth the fruites & effects thereof, that is, as they are reckoned by the Apostle, Rom. 5. to be at peace wyth God,
                     Rom, 5, 12.
                   to haue an entrance vnto grace, to haue

spirituall ioy, not onely in prosperitie, but euen in tribulation and affliction; to haue hope that maketh not ashamed; and to haue the loue of God shedde abro
                     •
                  d in his hart by the working of the holy Ghost, &c. Thys man, (no doubt,) is in a most sure case for matters of his fayth, and cannot possibly walke awry therein, but may thynke hymselfe a good Christian for thys first poynt, which is for matters of beleefe.
            
            
               The second part of this Chapter.
               THere followeth the second parte of Christian pro
                     •
                  ession, concerning lyfe and manners; which is a matter of so much more difficultie then the former, by how many more waies a man may be ledde from vertuous lyfe then from sincere fayth, wherein there can be no comparison at all, seeing the path of our beleefe is so manifest, (as hath beene shewed,) that no man can erre therin but of inexcusable wilfulnesse. Which wilfulnes of errour, 
                     See S. Au. de vtil. cre cap 1. Cyp. Epist. 61.
                   the holy Fathers of Christes Primatiue Church, dyd alwaies referre to two principall and originall causes,The two causes of heresie. that is, to pryde

and ouerweening in our owne conceits, and to malice against our Superiours, for not gyuing our selues contentation to the things that wee desire. Of the first doe proceede new opinions,The doings of Precismatiques. new glosing, expounding and applying of the Scriptures, pre
                  
                     •
                  erring our owne iudgement before all other past or present; the contempt and debasing of holy Fathers and Councels, & whatsoeuer proofe standeth not with our owne lyking and approbation.
               Of the second fountaine are deriued other qualities conformable to that humor, as are the denying of iurisdiction & authority in our Superiours, the contempt of Prelates, the exaggeration of the faults & defects of our Gouernours, the impugnation of al byshoplike dignities or Ecclesiasticall eminencie, and especially of that rule wherunto appertaineth the correction of such like offenders: and finally, for satis-fying this deuilish and pernicious venime of malice, those wicked 
                     •
                  eprobates do incite & arme the people against theyr spirituall Pastours, they kindle factions against Gods faithfull Ministers, they deuise a new Church, a

newe forme of gouernment, a newe kingdome and Ecclesiasticall Hiera
                     •
                  chie vpon earth, wherby to bring men in doubt or staggering what or whom to beleeue, or whereunto to haue recourse in such difficulties as doe arise.
               These two maladies I say of pride and malice, haue beene the cause of obstinate errour in all Heretiques from the beginning, as 
                     •
                  ul well noted that holy and auncient Martyr S. Cyprian, when he sayd so long agoe.The obseruation of S. Cyprian. These are the beginnings & originall causes of Heretiques & wicked Scismatiques, first to please and lyke wel of themselues, and then being puffed vp with the swelling of pryde,
                     Cyp. epist. 65 ad Rogation
                   to contemne their Gouernors and Superiors. Thus doe they abandon and forsake the church, thus doe they erect a prophane Altar out of the church against the church. Thus doe they breake the peace and vnitie of Christ, & doe rebel against Gods holy ordination.
               Nowe then, as these are the causes eyther onely or principally of erring in our beleefe,Many causes of euill lyfe. most facile and easie (as we see) to be discerned, so of errour in lyfe and manners, there

are many more occasions, causes, ofsprings, and fountaines to be found. That is to say, so many in number, as we haue euil passions, in ordinate appetites, wicked desires, or vnlafull inclinations within our mind, euery one whereof, is the cause oftentimes of dysordered life, & breach of Gods commaundements. For which respect there is much more set downe in scripture for exhortation to good lyfe, then to fayth, for that the error heerein is more ordinary and easie, and more prouoked by our owne frailtie, as also by the multitude of infinite temptations. Wherefore wee reade that our Sauiour Christ in the verie beginning of hys preaching, strayght after he was baptised, and had chosen vnto him S. Peter and S. Andrew, Iames and Iohn, & some other fewe Disciples, went vp to the Mountaine,The effect of Christes Sermon. & there made his most excellent, famous, and copious Sermon, recited by S. Mathew in three whole chapters,
                     Mat. chap. 5 6. and 7,
                   wherein he talketh of nothing els but of vertuous lyfe, pouertie, meekenes, iusti
                     •
                  e, purity, sorrow for sinne, pati
                     •
                  nce in suffering, contempt of ryches
                     •
                   forgiuing of iniuries, fasting, prayer, repentance,

entrance by the straight gate, and finally, of perfection, holinesse, and integritie of conuersation, and of the exact fulfilling of euery iote of Gods Law and cōmandements. He assured hys Disciples with great asse
                     •
                  eration, that he came not to breake the Lawe, but to fulfill the same: and consequently, who soeuer should breake the least of hys Commaundements, and shoulde teach men so to doe, that is, should perseuere therin without repētance, and so by hys example drawe other men to doe the like, should haue no place in the kingdom of heauen. Againe, he exhorted them most earnestly to be lyghts,
                     Math, 5, 20
                   and to shyne by good works to al the world, & that except theyr iustice dyd exceede the iustice of the Scribes and Pharisies,
                     Math, 6, 24
                   (which was but ordinary and externall) they could not be saued. Hee told them plainly, they might not serue two Maisters in thys lyfe, but eyther they must forsake God, or abandon Mammon. He cryed vnto them Attendite,
                  
                     Math, 7, 13
                   stand attent, and consider wel your state and condition, and then againe
                     •
                   
                  seeke to enter by the straight gate.
                  
                     Math, 7, 20.
                   And lastly he concludeth,

that the only trial of a good tree, is the good fruite which it yeeldeth, without the which fruite, let the Tree be neuer so faire or pleasant to the eye, yet it is to be cutte down and burned. And that not euery one that shall cry or say vnto him Lord, Lord, at the last day, shal be saued,
                     Mat, 7, 
                           •
                        5.
                   or enter into the kingdome of heauen, but onely such as did execute in deedes, the will and commaundements of hys Father in thys life. For want whereof, he assured them, that many at that day, who had not only beleeued, but also doone miracles in hys Name, should be denied,
                     Mat, 7, 22,
                   reiected, and abandoned by hym.
               Which long lesson of vertuous lyfe, being the first that euer our Sauiour gaue in publique to his Disciples then newly gathered toge
                     •
                  her, (as S. Matthew noteth,) (hauing treated some-what before of poynts of fayth, and by some miracles and preaching shewed himselfe to be the true Messias) doth sufficiently teach vs, that we must not only belieue in his name & doctrine, but conforme our liues & actions also to the prescript rule of his commaundements.
               For albeit in Christian Religion,

faith be the first & principall foundation,A similitude touching faith and works. whereupon all the rest is to be staied and grounded. Yet as in other materiall buildings, after the foundation is layde, there remaineth the greatest labour, time, cost, cunning and diligence, to be bestowed vpō the framing, & furnishing of other parts yt must ensue: euen so in thys celestiall edifice or building of our soule, hauing laid on the foundation and ground of true beleefe, the rest of all our life, time, labor & studies, is to be imployed in the perfecting of our lyfe and actions, and as it were in raysing vp the wals and other parts of our spiritual building by the exercise of all vertues, & dylligent obseruation of Gods cōmandements, without the which it will be to no more purpose for vs to brag of our knowledge in the scriptures, or to say we haue fayth, & looke to be saued as wel as other men, then it wil be to purpose, to haue a foundation without a building vpon it, or a stock or tree yt beareth no fruite. Which thing S. Iames (speaking of that historical and dead fayth, wherby the wicked and the very deuils themselues belieue that there is one

GOD,) expresseth most excellently in thys fit similitude:
                     Iam, 2, 26
                           •
                        
                     
                   
                  As a bodie without a spirit is dead, euen so (saith he) is fayth without workes.
               
               Thys poynt of doctrine of vertuous life, & obseruing of Gods commandements, not our sauior Christ alone in hys Sermon, most earnestly vrged, (as hath beene sayde) but hys fore-runner also S. Iohn the Baptist, and his followers the holy Apostles, whereof the one continually called vpō the people to bring forth fruits meete for repentance;
                     Math, 3, 8,
                   the other in all theyr wryting,
                     Rom, 12, 1.
                   & no doubt in all theyr Sermons after matter of doctrine and fayth propounded,
                     Ephe, 4, 1,
                   do proceede to exhortation, & precepts of Christian lyfe. In so much as S. Augustine & other auncient Fathers are of opinion, that the rest of the Apostles, S. Peter, S. Iames, S. Iohn, and S. Iude, perceiuing the loosenes and security of the people in their times, directed theyr writings, eyther onely or principally to thys ende, euen to perswade and enforce the necessitie of good life & conuersation among Christians. Yea and that Saint Paule himselfe,
                     Rom, 3, 28,
                   when he concludeth that a man is iustified by fayth without

the works of the Law, doth not exclude the workes of charitie, as effects and fruites of fayth, which followe hym that is already iustified in the sight of God, but hee excludeth them as causes of saluation, which goe before him that is to be iustified. Whereby it appeareth, that saint Paul handling the causes of our iustification in the sight of God, is not repugnant 
                     •
                  r contrary to S. Iames, speaking o
                     •
                   the notes and signes whéreby we are iustified: that is, (as the worde is taken 
                     Mat. 12.37.
                   els where) declared or knowne to be iust or righteous before men.
               The sum is, that although good works are not the causes of our saluation,
                     Colos, 1, 10,
                   yet they are the way (as it were) & the path that leadeth thervnto: because by them, as by certayne marks, we perceiue our selues to haue entered, and to haue proceeded in the way of eternal life. Yea they are the fruites and effects,
                     Iam, 2, 18,
                   wherby we testifie and declare both vnto our selues and to others, the truth of that fayth which we professe. And therefore our Sauiour Christ willeth vs in ye gospel, to let our light shine before men,
                  
                     Math, 5, 16,
                   that they seeing our good

works, may take occasion therby to glorifie our heauenly Father.
               And his holy Apostle Saint Iames,
                     Iam, 2, 18,
                   byddeth those carnall and sensuall Christians, that stoode so much vpon the onely name of faith, to shew hym theyr fayth by their works, that is, they should declare & testifie vnto men (as I haue sayde) the fayth which they professed, by the fruites thereof. To men (I say 
                     〈◊〉
                   cause men which iudge but by 
                     〈◊〉
                   outwarde appearance onely,
                     Mat, 7, 16,
                   cannot know the goodnes of a Tree, but by the good fruite which it yeeldeth; they cannot discerne the inwarde fayth but by the outward workes. But as for God, that searcheth the secrets of the hart and raynes, it needeth not that we should shewe him our fayth by our works, nor may we looke for iustification at his hands by the best of them,
                     Rom, 4.2,
                   for thē might we haue wherof to boast, but there is no boasting with God, & therfore no iustifying by works in hys sight. Yet notwithstanding, the Lord requireth good works at our hands, to the end that hymselfe myght be 
                     1. Pet. 2.12
                   glorified, our needie bretheren relieued & 
                     1. Cor. 9.1.23.
                   comforted, others gained & wonne by

our example, to the embracing of the same fayth and Religion which we professe: our owne fayth exercised and strengthened,
                     2, Pet, 1, 10.
                   & our calling & election made sure & confirmed.
               And it is very requisite yt the chyldren of God, which are bought with so high a price, as with the blood of Iesus,
                     1, Pet, 1, 18.
                   shold glorify god both in soule & body, because they are redeemed both in soule & body, and not lyue vnto thēselues, but vnto him which dyed and rose againe for them.
                     1, Cor, 6, 20. 2, Cor, 5, 15
                  
               
               This is the end of our election before the foundations of the worlde were layde, as the Apostle testifieth, Ephes, 1, 4,
                     Ephe, 1, 4,
                   euen that we should be holie and blamelesse before hym in loue. Thys is the ende of our creation, as the same Apostle witnesseth, Ephesians, 2, 10.
                     Ephe, 2, 10.
                   Where he saith that we are Gods workmanshyp created in Christ Iesus vnto good workes, wherein he hath ordayned that wee should walke. This is the end of our redemption, as old Zachary prophecied. Luke, 1, 74, 75,
                     Luke, 1, 74.
                   that beeing redeemed and deliuered from all our spirituall enemies, and from eternall destruction wherunto we were subiect, we should serue God without

feare, in holines and righteousnesse before hym all the daies of our lyfe. Finally, this is the ende of our vocation. For God hath not called vs to vncleannesse, but vnto holinesse,
                     1, Thes. 4, 7
                   and as he that hath called vs is holy,
                     1, Pet. 1, 15,
                   so must we be holy in all maner of cō
                  uersation. And it cannot be that they which are truely iustified, that is to say, made righteous by a liuely faith in Christ, should not also in some measure be sanctified, that is, made holy by a faithfull lyfe in hym.
               Let not men therfore deceiue thē
                  selues with the onely name & shadow of faith, without the nature and substaunce thereof. Let them not promise vnto themselues euerlasting life, because they knowe ye true God,
                     Iohn, 17, 3.
                   and whō he hath sent Iesus Christ: but let them remember how Christ hys Apostle whom he deerely loued, expoundeth that saying, when hee wryteth. By thys we knowe GOD (truly) if we keepe his commaundements:
                     1, Ioh, 2, 3.4
                   and whosoeuer sayth that 
                     •
                  e knoweth hym, and yet keepeth not his commaundements, is a lyar, and the trueth is not in hym. For as it is a true saying,
                     1, Tim, 1, 15
                   and by all meanes worthy to be receiued, that Christ

Iesus came into the worlde to saue sinners: so is it as true a saying, and no lesse worthy to be affirmed,
                     Titus. 3, 8,
                   that they which haue belieued GOD, shold be careful to shew forth good works. S. Gregory vppon the words of Christ to S. Thomas,
                     Gre. in hom. 29. in Euā. Iohn 20.
                   
                  Blessed are they who haue not seene, & yet haue belieued, hath a notable discourse to thys purpose. If any (sayth he) infer heereof, I beleeue and th
                     •
                  refore am blessed, and shall be saued, he sayth truely, if hys life be aunswerable to hys beleefe: for yt a true faith dooth not contradict in maners, the things which he professeth in words. For which cause, S. Paule accuseth certaine false Christians, in whom he founde no vertuous lyfe aunswerable to theyr profession;
                     Titus, 1, 16.
                   that they confessed God in words, but denyed hym in theyr deedes. And S. Iohn auocheth,
                     1. Ioh
                           •
                         2, 4,
                   that who soeuer sayth he knoweth God, and keepeth not his cōmaundements is a lyar. Which beeing so, we must examine the trueth of our fayth by consideration of our lyfe: for then and not otherwise we are true Christians, if wee fulfill in works, that wherof we haue made promise in words. That is, in

the day of our Baptisme,What we promised in our Baptisme. we promised to renounce the pompe of thys world, together with all the workes of iniquitie; which promise, if wee performe now after Baptisme, then are we true Christians, and may be ioyful. But contrariwise, if our life be wicked, and contrary to our profession, it is sayd by the voyce of truth it selfe. Not euery one that shall say to me Lord, Lorde,
                     Math, 7.
                   shall enter into the kingdom of heauen. And again, why doe ye call me Lord, Lord, and doe not performe the things yt I tell you. Here-hence it is, that God complayned of his old people the Iewes, saying:
                     Esay. 29.17
                   
                  This people honoureth mee with their lips, but their harts are far off from me. And the Prophet Dauid of the same people.
                     Psalm. 78.36, 37,
                   They loued him with theyr mouth, & with their tongues they lyed vnto him. Wherefore let no man presume to say hee shal be saued, if fayth and good lyfe be diuorced and put a sunder, which S. Chrisostome noteth, by the woful and hea
                     •
                  y chaunce and iudgement that happened vnto him, who in the gospel was admitted to the feast of christian fayth and knowledge, but for lack of the ornament or garment

of good lyfe, was most contumeliously depriued of his expectation.
               Of whom S. Chrisostoms words are these.
                     Chris. hom, 9 in Iohn.
                  
                  He was inuited to the feast, and brought vnto the table, but for that by his foule garment he dishonoured our Lorde that had inuited him: he was not onely thrust from the Table and banquet, but also bound hand & foote, and cast into vtter darknes, where there is eternall weeping and gnashing of teeth.
               
               Wherefore let vs not (deere bretheren) let vs not I say deceiue our selues, and imagine that our deade and vnfruitfull fayth wil saue vs at the last day: for except wee ioyne pure lyfe to our beleefe, and in thys heauenly vocation of ours, do apparel our selues with the woorthy garments of vertuous deedes, whereby we may be admitted at the mariage day in heauen: nothing shall be able to deliuer vs from the damnation of this miserable man, that wanted hys wedding weede.
               Which thing S. Pa
                     •
                  l wel noteth, when hauing said, we haue an euerlasting house in heauen,
                     2, Cor. 5, 1, 2
                   not made with mens hands, he addeth presently thys exception, Si tamen vestiti et

non nudi inueniamur. That is, if we be found at that day well apparrelled and not naked. Would God euery Christian desirous of his saluation, woulde ponder well thys dyscourse of S. Chrisostome.
               And so wyth thys alone to conclude our speech in thys Chapter,The conclusion of this chapter. without allegation of further matters or authorities, (which are infinite to this effect) it may appeare by that which hath already beene sette downe, wherein the true profession of a Christian consisteth: & therby each man that is not partial, or blinded in hys owne affection, (as many are) may take a view of his state and condition, and frame vnto hims
                     •
                  l
                     •
                  e a very profitable coniecture, how he is lyke to speede at the last accounting day. That is, what profit or damage he may expect by his knowledge & profession of Christian Religion. For as to him that beleeueth soundly, and walketh vprightly in hys vocation, performing effectually euery way hys professed duety, there remaine both infinite and inestimable rewards prepared: so to him that strayeth aside, & swerue
                     •
                  h from the right path o
                     •
                   fayth & life prescribed

vnto hym, there are no lesse paynes and punishments reserued.
               For which cause, euery Christian that is carefull of his own saluation, ought to fixe hys eyes very seriouslie vpon them both: and as in beleefe to shewe hymselfe constant, firme, humble and obedient: so in life & conuersation, to bee honest, iust, pure, innocent and holy.
               And for this seconde poynt concerning lyfe and maners, hath beene already hādled in my former booke, (which as I vnderstand is imprinted in England) I shal need to wade the lesse in further discourse heereof. But for I haue been admonished by the wrytings of dyuers, howe my former booke hath been disliked in two speciall poynts; first, that I speake so much of goods works, & so little of fayth: secondly, that I talk so largely of Gods iustice, and so briefely of hys mercy, whereby the consciences of many haue beene offended: let the last chapter going before of beleefe and lyfe aunswere the first, and that which immediatly followeth, serue for the latter obiection, and so I doubt not, but a Christian man may be thorowly resolued.
            
         
         
            
            OF THE ONELY IMPEDIMENT THAT IS WONT TO LET SINNERS FROM Resolution. Which is, the mistrust and diffidence in Gods mercie, through the multitude and greeuousnes of their offences. CHAP. VI.
            AMong all other the most greeuous and perrilous cogitations, which in thys world are accustomed to offer themselues to a minde intangled and loden with great sinnes,Dispaire, an ordinarie temptation to the greatest sinners. this vsually is the first, (through the nature of sinne it selfe and crafty suggestion of our ghostly enemie,) to fa
                  •
               l into distrust & dispayre of Gods mercy. Such was the cogitation of most vnhappy Caine,Caine. one of the first inhabitants of the earth, who after the murther of his own onely Brother, and other sinnes by him committed, brake into that horrible and desperate speech, so greatly offensiue vnto his Lord & Maker,
                  Gene, 4.
                
               Mine iniquitie is greater then that I may hope

for pardon. Such was in lyke manner the desperate conceite of wicked Iudas,Iudas. one of the first of them that were chosen to the peculier seruice of our Redeemer; who feeling hys conscience oppressed with manifold iniquities, and most of all with the prodition of hys own Lord & Maister, tooke no other way of amendment or redresse, but to destroy him selfe both in body and soule, adioyning onely these words, ful of myserable distrust & desperation, I haue sinned in betraying the innocent and iust blood.
               
                  Math, 27,
                By which words & most wretched end, hee more greeuously offend
                  •
               d and iniured hys most louing and merciful Sauiour, then by all hys former iniquities committed against hym.
            Thys then (most louing brother) is the first and greatest Rock, whereat a sinfull soule ouerburdened with the charge of her own iniquities,The shypwrack of soules ouerloden with sinnes. & tossed in the waues of dreadfull cogitations, by the blastes & stormes of Gods threates against sinners, doth cōmonly make her shipwra
                  •
               k. That is, that most horrible depth & dungion, wherof the holy scripture saith;
                  Prou, 18,
                
               The impious man, when hee is

come into the bottom & profundity of his sinnes, contēneth all. That is y• remediles sore, & incurable wounde, wherwith God himselfe charged Ierusalem,
                  Ierem, 3,
                when he sayde, Insanabilis fractura tua: thy rupture is irremediable. And the Prophet Michaeas considering the same people, thorow the multitude of their wickednes, to encline nowe to dispaire of Gods goodnes towards them, brake forth into this most pittiful cōplaint;
                  Mich, 1.
                
               For this will weepe & lament extreamely, I wil stryp off my clothes & wander naked: I wil rore like vnto Dragons, and sound out my sorow at Struthious in the desert, for that the wounde and malady of my people is desperate.
            
            Thys is that great and maine impediment,The misery of desperation. that stoppeth the conduits of Gods holy grace, from flowing into the soule of a sinfull man. This is the knyfe that cutteth in sunder all those heauenly and blessed cordes, wherewith our sweet Lorde and Sauiour endeuoureth to drawe vnto repentance the harts of sinners, saying by his Prophet,
                  Hosea, 11,
                
               I wil pul them vnto me, with the chaines of loue and charitie. For by thys meanes euerie sinful conscience commeth to aunswer

almighty God, as did Ierusalē, whē being admonished of her sins, and exhorted by hys Prophet to amendement of lyfe, she sayd, Desperaui, nequaquam faciam,
               
                  Ierem, 2.
                I am become desperate, I will neuer thinke of any such thing. To which lamentable estate when a sinfull man is once arriued, the next step hee maketh, is, (for auoyding al remorse & trouble of cōscience) to engulfe him selfe into the depth of all detestable enormities, & to abandon his soule to the very sinck of al filth & abhominations, according as S. Paul said of the Gentiles in lyke case,
                  Ephe, 4.
                
               That by dispaire they deliuered thēselues ouer to a dissolute life, thereby to commit all manner of vncleannes. Which wicked resolution of the impious, is the thing, (as I haue noted before) that most of all other offences vpon earth, dooth exasperate the ire of GOD, depriuing his diuine Maiestie of that most excellent propertie, wherin he chiefely delighteth & glorieth; which is, hys infinite and vnspeakable mercy.The thing wherin God most delighteth, is mercie. This might be declared by dyuers and sundry examples of holy writ, how beit two onely shall suffise for thys present.
            
               The first is of the people of Israel, not long before their banishment into Babilon, who being threatned from God by the Prophet Ieremie, that manifolde punishments were imminent ouer their heads, for their greeuous sinnes committed against his Maiestie, began (in sted of repentance) to fall to desperation, and cō
               sequently, resolued to take that impious course of all dissolute lyfe, alledged before out of S. Paule: for thus they aunswered God exhorting them by his threates to reforme their wicked liues. We are now growne desperate, and therefore we will heereafter follow our own cogitations,
               A desperate resolution. 
               and euery one fulfill the wickednesse of hys owne conceite. Wherat God stormed infinitely, and brake forth into thys vehement interrogatiō; Interrogate Gentes, quis audiuit talia horribilia?
               
                  Ierem, 18,
               
               Aske and enquire of the very Gentiles, whether euer among thē were heard any such horible blasphemies.
            
            And after thys, for the more declaration of thys intollerable iniurie heerein offered to hys Maiestie: hee commaunded the Prophet Ieremie to goe forth out of his owne house, and to gette him to a Potters shop
                  •
               
               
which in ye Village was framing hys vessels vpon the wheele.
Which Ieremie hauing done, he sawe before his face a pot crushed & broken by the Potter al in peeces vpon the wheele, and thinking thereby that the vessel had been vtterly vnprofitable & to be cast away,A meruailous example of Gods clemencie. he sawe the same clay presently framed agai
                     •
                  e by the Potter into a newe vessell, more excellent then before. Wherat he meruailing, God sayd vnto him; Dost not thou think (Ieremy) that I can doe with the house of Israel, as this Potter hath doone with his Vessell? or is not ye house of Israel in my hands, as the clay in ye hands of this craftesman? I wyll denounce vpon a suddaine against a Nation & kingdom, that I will roote it vp and destroy it, and if that Nation or Kingdome do repent from theyr wickednes, I also will repent mee of the punishment which I intended to lay vpon them.
And thē he proceedeth forward, declaring vnto Ieremie the exc
                  •
               eding griefe & indignation which he conceiueth, that any sinner whatsoeuer, should dyspaire of mercy and pardon at hys hands.
            The second example is, of ye same

people of Israel, during the tyme of their banishmēt in Babilon, at what time, being afflicted with many miseries for theyr sinnes, & threatned with many more to come, for that they changed not the course of their former wicked conuersation: they began to dispaire of Gods mercy,An other example of Gods wonderful mercie. & to say to the Prophet Ezechiell that lyued banished among them, & exhorted them to amendement vppon assured hope of Gods fauor towards them;
                  Ezech, 33,
                
               Our iniquities and sins doe lye greeuously vpon vs, and we languishe in them: and what hope of life then may we haue? At which cogitation and speech, God being greatly moued
                  •
                appeared presently to Ezechiel, and sayd vnto hym. Tell this people I doe lyue saith the Lord God of hostes, I wishe not the death of the impious, but rather that he should turne from his wicked wa
                     •
                  es and lyue. Why will the house of Israel die in their sinnes, rather then turn vnto me. And then he maketh a large & vehement protestation, that how grieuously soeuer any person should offend hym, and how great punishments soeuer he shall denounce against hym, yea, if he had giuen expresse sentence of

death & damnation vpon him, yet Si egerit paenitentiam a peccato suo, feceritque iudicium et iusticiam: that is, if he repent himselfe of hys sinnes, & exercise Iudgment & iustice to be vsed in true repentance, that is, iudgmēt vppon our selues, & iustice toward others. iudgement and iustice for the time to come, all his sinnes that he hath committed shal be forgiuen him (sayth almighty God,) for that he hath done iudgement and iustice.
            
            And thys nowe might be sufficient, (albeit nothing els were spoken) for remoouing thys first obstacle & impedimēt of true resolution, which is the despaire of Gods infinite goodnes and mercy. Neuerthelesse, for more euident cleering and demonstration of thys matter, and for the greater comfort of such as feele thē
               selues burdened with the heauie weight of their iniquities committed against his diuine Maiestie: I haue thought expedient in thys place, to declare more at large, this aboundant subiect of endlesse mercie, towards al such as wil truely turne vnto him; in what tyme, state, condition, or age soeuer in this lyfe, which shal be shewed and sette downe by these four poynts and parts that doe ensue.Foure parts of thys Chapter.
            
            
               
               The first part, touching the loue that God beareth towards man.
               FIrst of all, by the infinite and incomprehensible loue ye almightie God beareth vnto man, which loue is alwaies ye Mother of fauor, grace, and mercy. If you demaund of mee in what sorte I doe prooue that the loue of God is so exceeding great towards man, I answer as the Cosmographer is wont to doe, who by the greatnes & multitude of ye streames and Riuers, doth frame a coniecture of the Fountaine from which they flowe, The proper Riuers which are deriued and doe run forth of loue, are good turnes and benefits, which seeing they are infinite, endlesse and inestimable, bestowed by God vpon man, (as in the place before hath beene declared, and the whole vniuersall frame of thys world doth aboundantly beare witnes,) it foloweth most euidently, that the origine, fountaine, & wel-spring of al these fauours, graces, and good turnes, must needes be infinite, immeasurable, and far surpassing all compasse of mans vnderstanding.
               
                  If you require of me the cause & reason, why Almighty God should so wonderfully be affected towardes man, I can directly yeelde ye none at all, but rather meruaile thereat with holy Iob,
                     Iob, 7.
                   why so soueraigne a Maiestie should set his hart vpon so base a subiect. Notwithstanding, the holy Scripture seemeth to alledge one principal reason of his loue, when it sayth;
                     Wisd, 11,
                   
                  N
                        •
                     hil od
                        •
                     sti 
                        •
                     orum que fecisti, et parcis omnibus, quia tua sunt Demine, qui diligis animas.
That is, Thou (ô Lord) which louest soules, canst not hate those thinges which thou hast made, but dost vse mercie towardes all men, for that they are thyne.
And the lyke manner of reasoning vseth God himselfe, when he sayth by the Prophet Ezechiel:The first cause why God loueth vs, for that he is our Creator, & we are hys own works. Ezech, 18.
                   
                  Behold, all soules are mine, and heerevpon he inferreth a little after, Numquid voluntatis me
                        •
                      est mors impij: Can I haue the wil to damne a wicked man, seeing yt his soule is mine, created & redeemed by me? as who would say, thys were a case against all order and equity. And the reason of this maner of speech & argument is, for that euery man naturallie is inclined to loue the things that be of

his own making. So we see, that if a man haue an Orchard, wherein be great varietie of Trees & plants, yet if there be but one of his own peculier grafting, that florisheth & prospereth well: he taketh more delight therein, then in any of the rest, for that it is hys owne workmanshyp. So in lyke manner, if a man haue a Vineyard of his owne planting and trimming.Euery man gyuen to loue hys owne. For which respect the holie Prophet Dauid, finding himselfe and the whole kingdome of Iurie in great affliction & calamity, thought no other meanes so forcible to draw God to compassion and commiseration of theyr case, as to cry out to hym in this maner;
                     Psalm, 79.
                   
                  Thou which gouernest Israel, looke towards vs & be attent. Thou hast brought foorth a Vineyard out of Egipt, thou hast purged the same from Gentiles, and hast planted it. Thou O God of all power, turne towards vs, looke vpon vs from heauen, and visite this thy vineyarde which thine owne right hande hath planted. The like maner of perswasion vsed the holy Prophet Esay to moue God, when he said; Looke vppon vs I beseech thee, O Lorde, which are the worke of thine owne hands.
               
               
                  But aboue all other, the blessed man Iob,
                     Iob. 10.
                   standeth as it were, in argument and dysputation with God about thys matter,The confidēce of Iob, in that God had made him. saying, haue not thy hands made me? haue they not framed me of clay and earth? hast not thou compacted me as cheese is made of mylke? hast not thou knyt my bones and sinewes together, and couered my fleshe with skyn? hast not thou giuen me lyfe, and conserued my Spyrite with thy continuall protection? how soeuer yu seeme to dissemble these matters & hide thē in thy hart, yet I know that thou remembrest them all, and art not vnmindful of them. By which wordes thys holy man signified, that albeit god suffered him greatly to be tempted and afflicted in thys lyfe, so farre foorth as hee might seeme to haue forgotten him, yet was he well assured that his diuine Maiestie coulde not of his goodnes forsake or despise him, for that he was his creature, & the proper workmanshyppe of hys own hands. In which very name of workmanship, holy Dauid tooke such great comfort, considering that the workman cannot chuse but be louing and fauourable towardes hys

owne worke, (especially so excellent and bountifull a workman, as is almighty God, towards a work made as man is, to his own shape & likenes,) that in all his necessities, yea euen in hys greatest infirmities of fleshe, and most grieuous offences committed against hys Maiestie, he conceiueth most assured hope of mercy and pardon, vpon this consideration, that he was his workmanship,The assured hope Dauid had, in that he was gods workmanshyppe. Psal, 102.
                   and consequently wel knowne to his diuine wisedome, of how brickle & infirme a mettal he was made. For thus at one time among other, he reasoneth of thys matter.
Looke how far distant the East is from the West, so far off hath God remoued our iniquities from vs. Euen as a father dooth take compassion of hys own chyldren, so doth the lord take mercy vpō vs, for that he wel knoweth the mould wherof we are made, and doth remember that we are nothing els but dust.
               
               In which discourse, the holy Prophet maketh mention of two things that did assure hym of Gods mercy, the one, that God was hys Creator, and maker, and therby priuie to the frailty of hys constitution & nature,

the other, that he was hys Father, whose property is to haue compassion on hys chyldren; and thys is a second reason,The second reason of assurance of Gods loue, for that he is our Father. more strong & forcible perhaps then the former, why euery man may be most assured of pardon that hartily turneth vnto almighty GOD; considering that it hath pleased his diuine Maiestie, not onely to be vnto man a Creator, (as he is to all other things,) but also a Father, which is the title of the greatest loue and coniunction, that nature hath left to things in this world. Wherof a certaine Phylosopher sayd well, that no man coulde conceiue the loue of a Parents hart, but hee only yt had a chyld of hys owne. For which respect, our Sauiour Christ to put vs in minde of this most feruent loue; and thereby as it were, by one fire to enkindle another within our harts, dyd 
                     •
                  se oftentimes & ordinarily, to repeate thys sweete name of Father in his speeches to hys followers
                     •
                  
                  
                     Math, 5.6.7, 8, &c.
                   and thereupon founded dyuers most excellent and comfortable dyscourses; as at one time when he exhorted them from ouer-much car
                     •
                   and worldly solicitude: hee addeth thys reason;
                     Math. 6.
                   
                  Your Father in Heaue
                        •
                     
                     
knoweth, that you haue neede of these thinges. As who woulde say, hee knowing your wants, & being your Father, you shall not neede to trouble your selues with too great anxiety in these matters, for that a fathers hart cannot but be prouident and carefull for hys chyldren. The lyke deduction maketh hee in the same place, to the same effect, by comparison of the byrdes of the ayre, and other irresonable creatures; for which, if God doe make (sayth he) so aboundant prouision, as all the whole world may witnesse that hee doth: much more carefull wil he b
                     •
                   to prouide for men that are his own chyldren, which are more deere vnto hym then any other terrestiall thing created.
               All which speeches and reasons of our Sauiour, are deriued from the nature and property of a Parent,What a Father God is. which cannot but affect & loue his chyldren; especially such a Father, whom Christ calleth celestiall, who in thys perfection of true fatherlie loue, so far exceedeth all earthly Parents put together, as in power, clemencie & goodnes, almighty God surpasseth the infirmity of hys feeble

creatures. Such a father, as hath not onely gyuen lyfe and beeing vnto hys chyldren, but also (as S. Paule sayth,
                     Gala, 4,
                  ) hath poured into theyr harts the diuine spirit of hys onely eternall Sonne, styrring them vp to most assured cōfidence & inuincible hope, in hys fatherly goodnes & protection. And vppon assurance of thys hope, haue as well sinners as Saints from the beginning, fled vnto hym confidently vnder thys title of paternitie, and neuer were deceiued. So the Prophet Esay, as wel in hys own name, as in the name of the sinfull people of Israel, doubted not to cry,
                     Esay, 63.
                   
                  Thou art our Father, Abraham hath not knowne vs, and Israell is ignorant of vs: Thou O Lord, art our Father, thou art our Redeemer. And to confirme thys assuraunce vnto vs, Christ sent that most sweet & comfortable embassage vnto hys Disciples,Christes cō
                     fortable embassage. presently vpon his resurrection:
                     Iohn, 20.
                   
                  Goe and tell my bretheren, that I doe ascend vnto my Father, & vnto your Father: vnto my God, and vnto your God. By which words of Father, and God, the one of loue and the other of power: the one of will, the other of abilitie, hee tooke away al doubt

of not speeding, frō each man that should make recourse to this merciful Lord and Father. God himselfe also, after many threates vsed by the Prophet Ieremie against the people of Israel for theyr sinnes, in the end, least they should dispaire, turneth about hys talke, & changeth his stile, assuring them of many graces & fauours, if they woulde returne vnto him;How greatly ye respect of a Fathe
                        •
                      mooueth GOD. telling the house of Israel, that hee had loued her from the beginning
                     •
                   and had sought to drawe her vnto hym by threates, to the end he might take mercy vpon her, & that now he intended to builde her vp againe, to adorne her with ioy & exultation, to gather her children from all corners of the earth, to refreshe them with the waters and Riuers of lyfe, and all this (saith he) Quia factus sum Israeli Pater: for that I am become now a father to Israel. And in the same place to wicked Ephraim (the head Citty of the rebellious kingdome of Samaria,) he sayth,
                     Ierem. 31.
                   
                  Ephraim is becom my honorable son
                        •
                      my delight, & deerly beloued child, therfore my bowels are mooued with compassion vppon him, and in aboundance of mercy will I take pittie of him. So

much attributed God to this respect of beeing a father vnto Israel and Ephraim, and of theyr being his children: that for thys cause onely (notwithstāding their infinite enormous sinnes) his bowels of endlesse mercy were moued with loue & compassion towards them.
               And these are those tender & mercifull bowels, which holy Zacharie father to S. Iohn Baptist,
                     Luke. 1.
                   protesteth to be in almighty God towards man kind that had offended hym
                     •
                   These are those which were in yt good old father mentioned in the gospel, who being not onely offended but also abandoned by his younger sonne,
                     Luke. 16.
                   yet after he saw him return home again, notwithstanding hee had wasted all hys thrift & substance, & had wearied out hys body with wicked lyfe, he was so far off from disdaining to receiue hym, as hee came foorth to meete with hym, fel vpon his necke & kissed hym for ioy: adorned him with newe apparel and rich Iewels, prouided a solemne banquet for him
                     •
                  
                  The fathers liberall hart to the prodigall Son. inuited his friends to be merry with hym, & shewed more exultation & tryumph for his return, then if he had neuer departed from hym.
               
                  By which parable, our Sauiour Christ endeuoured to set 
                     •
                  orth vnto vs, the incomprehensible mercy of his heauenly father towards sinners, in which respect he is truly called by hys Apostle Pater misericordiarum,
                  
                     2. Cor. 1.
                   the father of mercies. For that (as S. Bernard well noteth) this sea & Ocean of mercies,
                     Ber. Ser. 5, de natal.
                   doth flow peculiarly from the hart of a Father, which cannot be sayde so properly of the gulfe and depth of his iudgements. For which cause he is called in scripture the God of iustice & re
                     •
                  enge,
                     Psalm. 35,
                   and not the Father. And finally, thys blessed name of father in God,What the name of father doth import. doth import vnto vs by Gods owne testimony, al sweetnes, al loue, al friendshyp, all comfort, all fatherly prouidence, care & protection; all certainty of fauour, all assuraunce of grace, all security of mercy, pardon, and remission of our sins, when soeuer vnfainedly we turne vnto hym.
               And in thys poynt hys diuine Maiestie is so forward and vehement, to giue vs assurance, that being not cō
                  tent to set foorth hys loue vnto vs by the loue of a fathers hart, hee goeth further, and protesteth vnto vs, that hys hart is more tender towardes vs

in thys behalfe, then the hart of any mother can be to the onely child & infant of her owne wombe. For thus he sayth to Sion, which for her sins began to doubt least he had forsakē her;
                     Esay, 49.
                   
                  Can the Mother forget her owne infant, or can she not be mercifull to the childe of her owne wombe? if shee could, yet can I not forgette or reiect thee: behold, I haue written thee in the flesh of mine owne handes. And thys, for so much as GOD is called our Father.
               There remaineth yet a third consideration,The thyrd argument of Gods loue, the giuing hys son for vs. which more setteth forth Gods inestimable loue, then any of the other demonstrations before handled. And that is, that he gaue the lyfe and blood of hys onely begotten & eternal sonne, for purchasing & redeeming vs when we were lost; a price so infinite and inexpiable, as (no doubt) hys diuine wisedom would neuer haue giuen, but for a thing which he had loued aboue all measure. Which our Sauiour himselfe that was to make the payment, doth plainly signifie, and therefore also seemeth as it were, to wonder at such a bargaine, when he sayth in the Gospel;
                     Iohn, 3,
                   
                  So deerely hath

God (my Father) loued the worlde, that he hath giuen for it his onely begotten sonne. In which words he ascribeth this most wonderful dealing of hys Father, vnto the vehemencie and exc
                     •
                  eding aboundance of loue, as doth also his deerest Disciple and Apostle S. Iohn,
                     1. Iohn, 4,
                   saying:
In this appeareth the great loue and charitie of God towardes vs, that he sath sent hys onely begotten Sonne into the world, to purchase life for vs. In this (I say) is made euident his exceeding charitie,Christ was gyuen for loue. that we not louing him, he loued vs first, and gaue his own son to be a raunsome for our sins. Wher vnto also the holy Apostle S. Paul agreeth, admiring in like manner the excessiue loue of god in these words; God doth meruailously commende and set forth hys great loue vnto vs,
                        Rom, 5,
                      in that we being yet sinners, he gaue his son to the death for our redemption.
 And in another place, framing out, as it were, a measure of Gods mercy by ye aboundance of his loue, sayth thus;
God who is rich in mercie,
                        Ephe, 2,
                      through the exceeding loue which he bore vnto vs, wee beeing dead in sin, he reuiued vs in Christ, and raysed vs vp euen vnto heauen,

making vs to sitte downe there with hym, to the end he might declare to all ages & worlds ensuing, the most aboundant riches of hys grace and goodnes towards vs.
               
               Thys was the opinion of that noble Apostle S. Paule, and of all hys coequals, Apostles, Euangelists, Disciples and Saints: that this work of our redemption, proceeded only frō the inflamable fornace of Gods immeasurable loue. And therefore to make no other conclusion heereof,The conclusion of thys poynt made by S. Paule. then that which S. Paule hymselfe doth make,
If God haue not spared his owne propper and onely begotten sonne,
                        Titus. 3.
                      but hath giue
                        •
                      him vp to death for gayning vs vnto hym, how can it be, that with him he hath not giuen vs al other things.
If when we were hys enemies,
                     Rom. 5.
                   and thought not vpon hym, hee sent to seeke vs so diligently, by such a messenger as hee loued so deerely, allowing hym to lay downe a price for vs which he so infinitely esteemed: what shall we thinke that he wil doe vnto vs now, (wee being made hys owne by our redemption,) if we return willingly vnto hym: when our receiuing shal cost hym nothing els, but onely a

mercifull looke vppon vs: which is not so much from the infinite bowels of hys bottomlesse mercie, as is one droppe of water from the most huge gulfe of the maine Ocean sea. And thys shall suffise for the fi
                     •
                  st poynt of Gods loue, declared vnto vs by the three most sweet and comfortable names and respects of Creator, Father, and Redeemer.
            
            
               The second part: how God expresseth his loue towards sinners.
               NExt after which, we are to consider in what manner God is accustomed to expresse & declare thys loue of hys, in his dealings and proceedings towards sinners. And first of al the wise man (hauing had long experience of thys matter,) beginneth to describe and sette 
                     •
                  oorth in thys sort, saying vnto God hymselfe, Thou (O Lorde) doost dissemble the sinnes of men, to giue vnto them tyme of repentance.
                  
                     Wisd. 11
                           •
                        
                     
                   And then when they will not vse thys benefite of hys forbearing, but wil needes enforce him to punish and correct them, he sayth further of thys correction: Such as

wilfully doe runne astray (O Lord) and will not turne vnto thee,
                  
                     Wised
                           •
                         12,
                   
                  thou dost correct them sweetly by little & litle, admonishing and exhorting them to leaue theyr sinnes, and to beleeue in thee. These two poynts then of exceeding clemencie,Two rare poynts of clemencie in God. by the testimonie of the wiseman, are founde in Almighty God; first, to wincke at the wicked lyfe of men, and to expect theyr conuersion with vnspeakeable patience and longanimitie, according as also the Prophet Esay bea
                  
                     •
                  eth witnesse, adioyning the cause thereof in these words; The Lorde doth attend your conuersion, to the end he may take mercie on you, and thereby be exalted.
                  
                     Es
                           •
                        y, 30.
                   And secondly, for the same respect when he is enforced by reason of his iustice to chastise them, yet doth he the same with such moderation and mildnes, as alwaies in this life hee reserueth place of pardon. And to these two we may adioyne yet a third property of his mercie, more admirable (perhaps) then the former
                     •
                   which is, (as Tertullian excellē
                  
                     •
                  ly noteth,
                     Tert, in Apol. cap. 2.
                  ) that he being the partie offended, yet first and principally desireth reconsiliation: he hauing receiued the wrong & iniurie,

yet doth he most busily intreate for amiti
                     •
                   & attonement.God that is offended, seeketh attonement with vs. And whereas in all ryght and equitie, he might denie vs pardon, and for hys power take reuenge of vs at hys pleasure, yet doth he not onely offer vs peace of hys owne accorde, but also sueth vnto vs by all meanes possible to accept thereof, humbling (in a certaine manner) hys diuine Maiestie to our basenes and vilitie: and behauing himselfe in thys respect, as a Prince that were enamoured of hys bond-slaue and abiect seruaunt.
               Thys might be declared by many of hys own speeches and doings in holy Scripture; but one place out of the Prophet Esay shall serue for all: where Almighty GOD so earnestly wooeth ye conuersion of Ierusalem, as no louer in the world could vtter more signes & testimonies of a hart inflamed & sette on fire with loue,Gods wooing of Ierusalem. then he dooth towards that Cittie which so highly had offended hym. For first, after many thr
                     •
                  ates poured out against her, if she dyd not return, least she might perhaps fall into despayre,
                     Esay, 25.
                   he maketh this protestation in the beginning of hys speech, Indignatio non est mihi, &c. Angry

I am not (ô Ierusalem) but whatsoeuer I haue spoken, I haue spoken of good wil and loue. Secondly, hee entreth into this dyspute,Hys protestation. and doubt with hymselfe about punishing her for her sinnes, what shal I do? Shall I treade her vnder my feete and put her to the fire? or els will she stay my puissaunt hand,
                  Hys cunctation. 
                  and make peace with me, will she (I say) make attonement with me? After which doubt and cunctation, he resolueth himselfe to change hys manner of stile, & to 
                     •
                  al a lyttle to chyde with her, and then he sayth; Harken O ye deafe inhabitants of Ierusalem, looke about ye, yee blinde folke that will not see:
                  His chiding. 
                  who is blind and deafe but my seruaunt, that wil not regarde or listen to the Messengers which I sende? O thou which hast open eares, wilt thou not heare? And then a lyttle after he beginn
                     •
                  th to smooth and speake faire againe, saying;Hys fayre speech. 
                  Euer since thou hast beene gracions and glorious in mine eyes, I haue loued thee, and for thy soule wil I giue whole Nations. Feare not, for that I am with thee. Wherwith shee beeing little or nothing mooued, he returneth to a sweet maner of complaynt, saying; Thou hast enthrall
                        •
                     d

me by thy sins, and with thine iniquities thou hast greatly afflicted mee.
                  Hys complaynt. Which beeing sayde, and she somewhat moued thereby to loue him as it seemeth, he turneth vnto her with thys most comfortable and kynde speech;Hys kynde speech. 
                  I am he, I am he, which cancelleth thine iniquities for myne own sake, & wil neuer think any more vpon thy sins. All which being done, & they now reconciled, and made fast friends together, his diuine Maiestie beginneth a very louing conference (as it were) and sweet expostulation wyth her, sayiug in these words,Hys conference. 
                  Call thou to memory the thinges that are past, and let vs iudge our selues heere together. Tell mee if thou haue any thing wherby thou maist be iustified. Thy first Parent was a sinner, &c. Wherat she being ashamed, & hauing nothing in the world to aunswer for her selfe, almighty God cō
                  forteth her, and knitteth vp ye whole matter in thys most kind and amiable sort.Hys sweet cōclusion.
                  Feare not, for I will poure out my spirite vpon thee, and vppon thy seede, and my benediction shall be vppon thyne of-spring; thy children shal bud vp and florish as willoes planted by the water side. Thus

sayth the Lorde and king of Israell, the Lord of hostes that is thy redeemer; I am the first and the last, and besides me there is no other God. Be mindfull of thys thou house of Iacob, I haue dissolued and dissipated thy sinnes, as a clowde is dissolued in the ayre; be mindful of this, and haue an assured confidence.
Thus far continueth the treaty betweene God and hys Citty of Ierusalem.
               And now tell me (deere christian brother) whether it be possible for any hart or tongue in the worlde,A consideration vpon the former treatie of God with Ierusalem. to conceiue or expresse more wayes or significations of most vehement good will & burning affection, then of Gods part in this treaty hath been declared? What louer or enamoured person vpon earth, what passionate hart could wooe more earnestly, s
                     •
                  e more diligently, sollicite more artificially, complaine more pittifully, expostulate more amiably, confer more intrinsically, remitte offences more readily, offer benefites more aboundantly, conclude more sweetly, and gyue more pregnant testimonie of vnfained loue, or more assured certaintie of eternall league & amitie, then doth almighty God vnto

thys Nation that so greeuouslie had offended him? who wil not cō
                  fesse now with the Prophet Dauid,
                     Psalm, 144.
                   
                  that sweet and mercifull is the Lord, and his miserations spred ouer all the rest of his most wonderfull workes. Who will meruaile if the same prophet made a vowe,
                     Psalm, 16.
                   that hys euerlasting song shoulde be of the mercies of thys hys Lord and Maker?
               But yet this thing is made much more apparant,Gods tender loue to Ierusalē when he was to destroy it. by that which hys diuine Maiestie dyd afterwardes to the same people in the dayes of Ieremie the Prophet (aboue an hundred yeres after this treatie in the tyme of Esay) at what time God beeing resolued to destroy them & their Cittie, for their obduration in their sins, when the howre of execution drewe neere, hys bowels of mercie were so touched with cōmiseration towa
                     •
                  ds them, as he called to Ieremie, & cō
                  maunded hym once againe to goe vp to the Temple gate, where all the people did passe in & out, and there with a loude voice to cry as followeth;
Heare ye the word of God,
                        Ierem, 7,
                      ô al you of Iuda, that doe passe in and out by these gates: thus sayth the Lord of hostes, the God of Israel, yet

doe you amende your waies, and I wil dwel in this place with you. &c.
And when this exhortation, & blessed endeuor of almighty God, could not moue or profit them any thing at all, then hys vnspeakeable goodnes beganne with sharpe threates in thys maner;
My furie and indignation is gathered together against this Citty,
                        Ierem, 7,
                      & vpon the inhabitants, and vpon the very beastes & Cattel therof, as also vpon the fruite and Trees of thys Region. The carkases of thys people, shall be foode to the byrdes of the ayre, and to the beastes of the field,
                        Ierem. 8.
                      theyr enemies shall come and cast foorth of theyr Sepulchers, the bones of the Kinges and Princes of Iuda; the bones of theyr Priestes, Prophets and inhabitants; and shal dry them at the sunne, & cast them out vnto the dunghil.
After al which long and dreadful commination, he altereth his speech presently againe, and sayth with a very lamentable & pittifull voyce. And will not he that is fallen (notwithstanding all this) rise vp againe?
                  A pittifull complaint. 
                  Wil not he that is departed from me, returne vnto mee againe? O, why doth my people runne from me so obstinatly? By which louing

complaint, and infinite other meanes of mercy that God vsed to that people,The wonderful proceeding of God wyth Ierusalem. when no amendement at all could be procured, hys diuine Maiestie was enforced to call Nabuchodonoser K. of Babilon before the wals of Ierusalem, to destroy it. But 
                     •
                  uen now also consider the bowels of hys vnspeakeable mercy. For hoping that by thys terror they might perchance be styrred vp to conuersion, hee sent Ieremie the Prophet to them againe, with thys embassage,
                     Ierem. 35.
                   
                  Tell the inhabitants of Ierusalem, will yee not yet receiue discipline and obey my words? Whereat those gracelesse people were so lyttle moued, as they tooke Ieremy and cast him into prison for his message, and thereby exasperated most grieuously Gods further indignation against them. Notwithstanding all which, his incomprehensible clemencie woulde not thus abandon them: but commanded holy Ieremie to write out all his threates and promises in a booke together,
                     Ierem. 36.
                   and to sende the same vnto them, forth of the pryson where hee lay, by hys seruaunt Baruch, to be read in theyr hearing; & so he dyd. Wherof when Ioacim the king had

vnderstanding; hee commaunded Baruch to be brought into his presence, and there to reade the Booke by the fire side, (as the scripture noteth.) And when hee had heard but three or foure pages thereof, he cut them out with a penknife,The obstinacie of the Iewish Nation. & threw the whole booke into the fire, & so consumed it. At which obstinate & impious dealing, albeit Almighty God were exceedingly offended, yet commaunded he the same booke to be indited & written again, in much more ample manner then before, thereby (if it had beene possible) to haue stirred vp and gayned that people vnto hym. But when thys by no means in ye world could be brought to passe: then permitted his diuine Maiestie, the whole Cittie to be destroyed, according to hys former threates, and that rebellious people to be led away captiue in bondage to Babilon. In which place and miserie (notwithstanding theyr demerits) hys infinite mercie could not forsake them, but sent hys Prophet Ezechiell,
                     Ezech. 23.
                   as also Baruch vnto them, with extreame complaint of theyr obduration
                     •
                   and yet offering vnto them mercy and pardon euen then,

if they would repent.
               And what more wonderfull clemencie then thys, can possibly bee imagined deere Christian brother? May in reason any man euer nowe enter into doubt or dispaire of gods mercy,
                     Ezech. 2, Epithetons gyuen by God to the people of God. how great and grieuous soeuer the burden of his sins be, when he considereth thys proceeding of hys eternal Maiestie with the people of Israell, for so many yeeres & ages together: whom hymselfe calleth notwithstanding, Gentem Apostatricem dura facie & indomabili corde:
an apostalicall Nation, of a shamelesse countenance and incorrigible dysposition? Can GOD deuise any more effectuall and forcible meanes, to erect and animate a sinner confidently to return vnto him, then are these?
And yet (gentle reader) for thy further comfort and encouragement in thys behalfe, I wyll adioyne one thing more, which doth exceede and passe all reason & reach of humaine imagination, and thys is,A wonderfull poynt. that GOD promiseth to a sinner that faithfully will return vnto him, not onely to forgette and vtterly extinguish all memory of hys former iniquities, but also to make more

ioy and tryumph at hys conuersion, and to loue and cherish hym more tenderly at hys returne, then if hee had neuer fallen or departed frō hys seruice. This God himselfe signifieth by the Prophet Esay, when he sayth; Call vnto Ierusalem, speake vnto her hart,
                  
                     Esay. 40.
                   (that is, comfortably,) for that her iniquity is forgiuen, shee hath receiued double at Gods hands for all her sinnes committed.
                  What ioy there is made at a sinners conuersion. Esay. 30.
                   And more plainly in another place by the same Prophet, The lyght of the Moone shall be as the light of the Sun: and the light of the Sun shal be as the lyght of seauen dayes, seauen times put together, when God shall binde vp the wounds of his people, and heale theyr sores. And to thys purpose doe appertaine directly those most wonderfull Parables of our Sauiour in the Gospell, concerning the extraordinary ioy & feasting that the carefull Woman made,
                     Luke, 15.
                   when she had founde againe her grote that was lost, & the good sheepeheard, when he brought back the sheepe that was astray: and the mercifull Father when hee receiued home hys sonne that before had abandoned hym. And to the same purpose doth it also appertaine, that

in the Prophet Dauid God glorieth especially in the seruice of those people,
                     Psalm, 57
                           •
                        
                     
                   yt before had not knowne hym.
               And thys shall suffise for thys second poynt, to shew what wonderful meanes almighty God doth vse, in setting forth his mercy, for allurement of sinners vnto repentance.
            
            
               The third part, what assurance God giueth to them that repent.
               AND so hauing declared what exceeding great loue and mercie God beareth towards man, & how effectually he expresseth the same by his suing vnto sinners for theyr conuersion: it followeth that we shold in thys thyrd place, examine somewhat more in particulers, what certaine assuraunce his diuine Maiesti
                     •
                   gyueth, of vndoubted pardon & ful remission of theyr sins, to all such as vnfainedly shall resolue themselues to make theyr refuge vnto hym.
               Which thing, albeit euery man by that which before hath been treated, may sufficiently conceiue, yet for the importance of the matter, it shall not be amisse in thys place also, to adde a word or two, for more

plaine and euident demonstration thereof. And thys shall be doone by setting downe both the wordes and deedes, that is, both the promises & performance which almighty GOD hath vsed & exercised in this behalf, to all such as haue offended hym whatsoeuer. And for the first, which are hys promises,The promises of God to sinners
                        •
                      that repent. most apparant it is as wel by the thinges which before haue beene discussed, as also by the whole course, body, & dryft of holy scripture, yt the promises of mercy & pardon which hys diuine Maiestie hath made to sinners, and wherunto by hys sacred worde, he hath in a certaine manner, obliged hymselfe, are both manifold, vehement, absolute, resolute and vniuersal. Whosoeuer shal depart from his wicked waies and turne vnto me,
                  
                     Ezech. 18.33, 34.37.
                   (sayth Almighty God) I will receiue him. Beholde the vniuersalitie of all people & persons, without excluding any. And then further, At what time soeuer an impious man shall returne vnto me from his impietie, his wickednesse shall not hurt him, sayth the Lord GOD of hostes. See the vniuersality of al times and seasons without exception. But yet harkē what God addeth besides.

                  Leaue off to doe peruersly,
                  
                     Esay. 1.
                   (sayth hee to the Iewes &c.) and then doe you come and find fault with mee if you can. For if your sinnes were as red as skarlet, they shall be made as white as snow. &c. Consider the vniuersality of al kind of sinnes, be they neuer so grieuous, so horrible, or heynous. And finally, God talking to a soule that hath oftentimes fallen & most infinitely offended him,
                     Ierem, 3.
                   hee sayth thus;
It is a common receiued speech, that if a woman depart from her husband, and doe ioyne herselfe to another man, she may not return to her first husband againe, for that shee is defiled and made contaminate. And yet where as thou hast departed from mee, and hast committed fornication with many other louers, doe thou returne vnto mee againe, and I will receiue thee, sayth Almighty GOD.
               
               By which wordes is expressed the fourth vniuersalitie, contayning all states, qualities, and conditions of men, how many waies, or howe oftentimes, or howe contemptuouslie soeuer they haue committed sinnes against hys diuine Maiestie. And what may be added now more vnto

thys? was there euer Prince that made so large an offer to hys Subiects? or was there euer Father that gaue so ample & vniuersall promise of pardon vnto his chyldren?Foure vniuersalities in Gods promises to sinners. Who can now mistrust himselfe to be excluded from this assurance of mercy, wherin all sorts of people, all kinde of sinners, all tymes and seasons, all states & qualities of sinners are cō
                  prehended? O most miserable and infortunate man, that excludeth him selfe, whō God excludeth not. What is there in this general and vniuersall promises, whereof any man in the world shold haue pretence, to make any least doubt or question? Of the meaning (perhaps) & intent of him that promiseth, ô deere brother, it is onely loue and charitie; and consequently cannot deceiue vs.
               Of the trueth and surety of hys promises? It is infallible, and more certaine then heauen and earth put together. Of the power that hee hath to performe his promises? it is infinite, and not restrained by anie bounds or limitation:Poynts of great comfort. wherof then may we doubt? or in which of these three poynts may wee not conceiue most singuler consolation? Heare

the comfortable meditation yt blessed S. Bernard made vpō these three particulers which wee haue nowe mentioned.
                     Bern. ser. in ver. Psalm. miseric. Doin 
                           •
                        ter. Can.
                   
                  Tria considero (saith he) in quibus tota spes mea consist
                        •
                     t, charitatem vocationis, veritatem promissionis, potestatem redditionis. &c.
               
               
                  That is, I do consider three things (sayth thys holy man) wherin al my hope consisteth, and whereby it is made inuinsible. First, the exceeding loue and charity of him, that calleth me to him by repentance; secondly, the infallible trueth and certainty of his promise which he maketh to me of pardon and mercy; thirdlie, the endlesse power and abilitie hee hath to performe whatsoeuer hee promiseth. Thys is that triple or three
                        •
                     fold rope and chayne, which holy Scripture sayth is hardly broken,
                        Eccle. 4,
                      for that by thys rope let downe vnto vs from heauen (which is our Countrey) into this world, that is our prison, we may ascende and mount vp (if we will) euen vnto the sight & possession of Gods eternal kingdome and heauenly glory. Thus far that blessed Father.
               
               But now to the second poyn
                     •
                  ,Howe God hath performed hys promises to sinners that haue repented. if we consider how faithfully almightie

God hath put in execution those promises of hys from tyme to tyme, & how no one man vpon earth, (so many ages as the world hath continued) was euer yet frustrate of thys hope, in making his conuersion vnto his Maiestie, if he made it frō his hart; we shall find further cause for vs to confide. For so much as it is not probable, or in reason to be imagined, that he which neuer failed in times past, wil breake his promise for the time to come; especially seeing now in Christianitie, when we haue thys aduantage aboue other former tymes (as S. Iohn doth also note) that he who was and is our Iudge,
                     1, Iohn, 2.
                   is become also our aduocate to pleade our cause.
               Cast backe thyne eyes then my louing brother, and take a viewe of all ages, times and seasons past and gone. Begin from the first creation of the world, and come downwarde euen vnto thys day:Neuer sinner repented that was not pardoned. & examine indifferently whether in all thys wide compasse of tymes, persons, places, and most greeuous offences cōmitted against his diuine Maiestie, there wer
                     •
                   euer yet any one sinner vppon earth, that returned vnfainedly and

was not receiued. The sinne of our first Parents was presently forgiuen vnto them,Adam and Eue. vpon theyr first signification of greefe and sorrowe for the same. And not onely this, but our Sauiour also Iesus Christ was promised to be sent,
                     Gene. 3.
                   for restoring them and their posterity to the glory and felicity which by their fall they had lost. After this, vntill the time of Abraham and of the people of Israel, as some workes of Gods iustice are recorded in holy writ, that were exercised vppon irrepentant offenders: so are there many more celebrated of his mercy; & only two persons in particuler are mentioned, who notwithstanding some sorrowe which they seemed to haue of theyr offences, were yet reiected;The reiection of Caine and Esau. the first wherof was the murtherer Caine, who at the beginning denyed hys wickednes vnto God, and then beeing conuicted, dispaired of remission. The second was Esau,
                     Hebr. 12.
                   whom Saint Paule calleth a Prophane fornicator, who found no place of repentance albeit with teares he sought ye same. Wherof S. Chrisostome giueth the reason in these words;
                     Chris. hom. 80. de paenit. ad pop. Antio.
                   
                  For this cause Esau obtained not pardon, for that hee dyd

not repent as he should haue doone, his teares proceeding rather of anger and temptation, then of true sorrow.
               
               When the people of Israell came to be a distinct Nation, & to be gouerned at Gods appointment, howe grieuously (trow you) dyd they offend daily, and almost hourely hys diuine Maiestie? And howe graciously dyd his vnspeakeable clemencie remit and pardon their manifold and innumerable sinnes and trespasses done against hym?The infinite sins of the Iewish people, & theyr infinite pardons receiued from God. The whole scripture (in truth) seemeth nothing els, but a perpetuall narration of Gods incredible patience & infinite mercies towardes them. And if I would speake of particuler persons among them, which hee receiued to his fauour after great and manifold offences committed: there woulde be no end of all that recital
                     •
                  .
               Let Manasses that most impious and wicked king be an example for all: of whose enormous life & most detestable actes, whole pages are replenished,The example of Manasses. both in the bookes of Kinges & Chronicles; and yet afterwards notwithstanding,
                     4. Reg, 21, 2, Chro. 33,
                   the same man falling into misery & calamity among ye Babilonians, (a fortunate

schoole oftentimes for Princes, who in theyr prosperity are wont to contemne God,) he beganne to be sorrowful for his former life & actions, and became repentant (as the scripture sayth) in the sight of GOD for the same. Whereat his diuine and incōprehensible mercy was so much moued presently, as he receiued hym to fauour, and brought hym backe from hys prison and fetters, to hys kingdom & imperial throne of maiestie.
               The example also of the Niniuites is very notable and singuler in this behalfe,The example of the Niniuites. gainst whō almightie God hauing decreed a sentence of death, to be executed within a certaine time; he commaunded Ionas the Prophet to go & denounce that sentence vnto them.
                     Ionas, 1, 2, 3, 4,
                   But Ionas wel knowing the nature and disposition of God towards mercie: foresawe (as afterwards he signifieth) that if he shoulde goe and beare that embassage vnto them, and they therevppon make change of theyr lyues, hys Maiestie wold presently pardon them, and so he should be taken for a false and lying Prophet. For auoyding which inconuenience, he chose

rather to flee away by sea to the Cittie of Tharsis, and there to hide him selfe. But Almightie God raised a tempest in that iourney, and disposed in such sort, as Ionas was cast into the sea, and there receiued & deuoured by a Whale: from whose belly hee was commaunded afterwards to repaire to Niniuie, and to doe hys former message, which he performed. And the tennour of his message was, that within forty daies that huge Citty of Niniuie shoulde be destroyed. Which he hauing denounced vnto them, the sequell fell out as Ionas before had suspected. For the Niniuites belieuing the message, and betaking themselues to repentaunce, God forgaue them presently, wherat Ionas was exceedingly greeued and offended, and complained sweetly to God of his strange dealing heerein, demaunding why hee had enforced him to come and preach destruction vnto thē, knowing before hand that he would pardon them. But his mercifull Lorde aunswered him fully to this poynt, by a certaine accident that fell out, whereto Ionas was not able to reply one word.
               
                  For so it chaunced, that Ionas sitting without the walles of the Citty Niniuie, vnder an Iuie bush, that in one night by Gods appointment was sprung vp to couer him frō the sunne: the same Iuie by Gods ordinance perrished vpon the suddaine, and was consumed by a worme,Consider thys speech of almighty GOD. leauing the poore Prophet destitute of that consolation of shaddow which he receiued by it. Wherwith he beeing not a little disquieted and afflicted, God sayd vnto hym; thou (Ionas) art sorrowf
                     •
                  ll,
                     Ionas. 4.
                   and much greeued for losse of thine Iuie tree, which notwithstanding thou diddest not plant or make to growe, nor 
                     •
                  ookest any labour at all about it. But the same grew vp in one night, and in one night it perrished againe. And shal not I then be careful to pardon my great Cittie of Niniuie, wherein there be aboue an hundred & twentie thousand innocent people, which cannot distinguish betweene theyr right hand and theyr le
                     •
                  t? Thys was the aunswere of Almightie GOD to Ionas, for defence of his singuler inclinatiō to mercy, in respect that the Niniuites were his owne creatures, hys owne workmanship, and the labours

of hys owne handes, as all other people also are. Of which kinde of reason and consideration, there haue been diuers things saide & declared In the first part of this booke. before, for manifestations of Gods infinite mercy. And al this that hetherto hath beene spoken, is of things onely done in time of the olde Testament, before the appearance of Christ our Sauiour in the flesh. But now if we looke into the time of grace, when God incarnate came himselfe in person, to shew the riches of hys endlesse mercie vnto mortall men vpon earth: we shall see more examples without comparison,Examples of mercy in the new Testament. of his exceeding clemencie. For that nowe, our Creator and sheepeheard, ouercom (as it were) with extreame compassion, cam down into the vale of our misery, with resolution, not onely to offer pardon and forgiuenes to all hys sheepe yt were astray and would returne: but also to follow and seeke them out: and beeing founde, to lay them on hys owne shoulders,
                     L
                           •
                        ke, 15,
                   & so to beare them back vnto the fold againe, and there to gyue his life and blood for theyr defen
                     •
                  e against the Wolfe.
               O sweet Lord, what greater loue

can be imagined then thys?
                     Iohn, 10, 12,
                   what more pregnant signification of inflamed charitie, can mans cogitation cōceiue or apprehend? is it meruaile nowe if hee which descended vnto vs with his hart, & with these bowels of burning affection, did set open the gates of all his treasures, fauours and graces vnto vs?
Is it meruaile if the Apostle S. Paule doe say of thys time Superabundauit gratia,
                     
                        Rom, 5,
                      that grace did ouer abound; & yet further in another place, that Christ beeing very God, did in a certaine sort impouerish and emptie hymselfe,
                        Phil. 2,
                      with the most wonderfull effusion of mercies and hauocke of heauen, which at thys tyme & euer since he hath made?
               
               Heere hence it proceeded, that all hys delight and pleasure vpon earth, was to conuerse with sinners, and to giue them comfort, courage, & confidence in hym.The wonderful clemencie of Iesus our Sauiour. Which he dyd so manifestly in ye sight of al the world, as he became very scandalous & offensiue therby to the Scribes & Pharisies, and other principall Rulers among the Iewish Nation.
                     Math. 9.11, Marke, 2, Luke, 5,
                   Heerehence also dyd proceede those hys most meruailous speeches & strange

inuitations of wicked men vnto him as for example at one tyme among other, whē he cried out in publique.
                     Math, 11.
                   
                  Come vnto me all yee that doe labour and be heauie loden, and I wil refresh you. And at another time, going into the Temple of Ierusalem vpon a high festiuall day, when all the people were gathered together, he stood vp in the midst of them al, & brake forth into this vehement inuitation, with a loud voyce, as S. Iohn Euangelist recordeth;
                     Iohn, 7.
                   
                  If any man among you be thirstie, let him come vnto mee and he shall drinke. Heereby it came to passe, that his diuine Maiestie was termed commonly
                     •
                  
                  
                     Math, 11.
                   
                  Publicanorum et peccatorum amicus, the friend and familiar of wicked publicans & sinners. And heereof finally it did proceede, that he receiued al, embraced all, and forgaue all that repaired vnto him; were they Scribes, Pharisies, Souldiours, Publicans, V
                     •
                  urers, Harlots, Theeues, Persecutors, or whatsoeuer most grieuous offenders besides; (whereof particuler examples in each kinde myght be alledged,) assuring vs furthermore, that after hys resurrection, and blessed ascenti
                  
                     •
                  n to the right hand of hys Father,

he would be more bountifull yet in thys maner of proceeding, and draw all men vnto him:
                     Iohn. 12.
                   beeing at one tyme both our Iudge & Aduocate, our King and Mediatour, our God and Redeemer, our Father and brother, our Priest and Sacrifice, and he that both pleadeth and determineth our cause together.
               What then should not wee hope at thys tym
                     •
                   (deere Christian Brother) at the hands of thys our Lord and Maister,Great and many causes of assured hope in Christ. which hath left vnto vs such words, such deedes, such assured euidence of his infallible loue & aboūdant mercies towards vs? why should not his dealinges with other men before vs, giue vs hart and courage to trust assuredly in him, for the tyme present and to come? Why should not his former most infinite mercies, be vnto vs odoriferous alluring sauours & oyntments, to make vs as the spouse did in the Canticles,
                     Cant. 10,
                   follow and runne after him.
               Heare what deuout S. Bernarde doth meditate vpon thys passage of Christes fragrant oyntments.
                     Ber. Ser. 5, in Cant.
                  
                  O sweet Iesus (sayth he) the freshe and odoriferous smell of thy wonderfull clemencie, dooth allure vs to run after

thee, whē we heare say, that thou dispisest not beggers, nor abhorrest sinners
                        •
                      We know right wel ô lord
                        •
                      that thou diddest not reiect ye thiefe that confessed thee, nor the sinfull woman that wept vnto thee, nor the Chananaean that humbled herselfe before thee, nor the wicked adulteresse brought vnto thee, nor ye touller or tribute gatherer that followed thee, nor the publican that repaired vnto thee, nor the disciple that denied thee, nor Saule that did persecute thee, nor thy tormentors yt did nayle thy sacred bodie to the Crosse. O Lorde, all these are fragrant smelles and sauours of thy most sweet mercie: and at the sent of these thyne oyntments, we doe followe and run after thee. Thus farre S. Bernard.
            
            
               The 4
                     •
                   part: the application of all that hath beene sayde.
               AND so with thys to come to the fourth & last part of this Chapter, and to apply all that hath beene sayde of Gods mercy to our present purpose; What man is there lyuing in the world, that reading and belieuing these things, can doubt or mistrust

to receiue pardon for their sins? If God be he that iustifieth,
                  
                     Rom, 8.
                   
                  who is able to condemne vs, sayth the holy Apostle S. Paule? If God be minded to deliuer vs, who can take vs out of hys hands?
                     Iohn, 10,
                   If God protest that hee wil pardon vs, why should we make any doubt or question thereof at al? Why shoulde wee not ioyne rather with that confident & faithfull seruant of hys S. Paule, who sayth vnto vs, and to al other sinners lyuing, in hys Maisters name;
                     Hebr. 10. S. Paules exhortation to confidence. 
                  Let vs repaire vnto him with a true hart in fulnesse of fayth, hauing purged our harts frō an euill conscience: let vs hold fast an immouable cōfession of our hope, seeing he is faithful which hath giuen vnto vs his promises, and let vs consider how one of vs may prouoke another to charity & good works. By which words, the holy Apostle signifieth, yt what sinner soeuer shal resolue with himselfe, to purge his conscience from wickednes for ye time to come, & to employ the rest of hys life in charitie and good works, he may confidently and boldly repaire vnto almighty God, with most certaine assuraunce to receiue pardon and remission.
               And alas (deere brother) why thē
                  
shoulde any man despaire? Wherefore should any man cast away hys owne soule, that God so much desireth to saue? what a pittifull & lamentable case is it, to behold so many Christians in the worlde to goe languishing in theyr sinnes, and to gyue themselues ouer to all kind of carelesse and dissolute sensualitie, (which by god himselfe is called desperation) vpon thys conceit & wicked cogitation, that nowe they are gone so farre, and so deepely rooted and habitated in thys kinde of lyfe, as eyther it is impossible or in vaine for them nowe to thinke of change or amendement? O deere brother, let these men harken to this excellent discourse of holy Saint Chrisostom, which ensueth.
               If thou be a wicked man, (sayth hee) thinke vppon the Publican.An excellent discourse & exhortation of S. Chris. hom. 2. in Psal, 50, If thou be vncleane of lyfe, consider the harlot. If thou be a murtherer, remember the theefe. If thou be a swearer, call to minde the blasphemer.
Cast thyne eyes vpon Saul and Paule, first a persecutor, and then a preacher; first a violent robber, afterward a good steward and dispenser
                        •
                      First chaffe, afterwarde corne:

first a wolfe, afterward a sheepheard first lead, afterward gold: first a Pirat, afterwards a good pilot: first a disperser, afterward a gatherer together: first a breaker down of Gods vineyard, afterward a Planter: first a destroyer, afterwarde a builder. Thou hast seene manifolde wickednesse, but nowe behold vnspeakeable mercie. Thou hast hearde the pryde of the seruaunt, consider now the loue and clemencie of the Maister. I will not thou say to me, I am a blasphemer, I haue beene a persecutor, I haue led an vncleane & abhominable life, & therefore I doubt least I shall not be pardoned; Say not so vnto me, for heere thou hast examples to the contrary, in euery of these and many other sinnes. Thou mayst safely flie to what port thou lyst, and that eyther in the olde or newe Testament. For in the olde, thou hast Dauid, in the newe thou hast Paul. I will not haue thee therfore alledge excuses vnto me, for couering thine owne cowardnesse. Hast thou sinned, repent: hast thou sinned a thousande times, repent a thousand times vnfeynedly. Thys is the onely oyntment that may bee

poured into an afflicted conscience
                        •
                      the torment whereof I doe well knowe. For the deuill standeth by, whetting hys sword of desperatian, and saying vnto thee;The speech of the deuil to a soule loden with sinne. Thou hast lyued wickedly all thy youth, and thy former daies thou hast mispent, thou hast haunted playes, and spectacles with thy companions, and followed after loose and lasciuious women; thou hast taken other mens goods from them wrongfully; thou hast beene couetous, dissolute, and effeminate: thou hast forsworne thy selfe: thou hast blasphemed, and committed many other heynous & wicked crymes, and therefore what hope canst thou haue of saluation? Truely none at all. Thou art a meer cast-away, and canst not nowe goe backe, and therfore my counsaile is, that nowe thou vse the pleasures & commodities of thys worlde, and passe ouer thy time in mirth of hart, without cogitation of other affaires.These are the words of the deuill (louing brother) these are the counsailes & perswasions of our enemie.S. Chrisostoms coū
                           saile against the deuils temptation. But mine are contrary. If thou haue fallen, thou maist rise againe. If thou haue beene a lost companion, yet

thou maist be saued. If thou haue committed fornication and adulterie in times past, thou maist be continent for the time to come. If thou haue haunted plaies & games, thou maist draw backe thy foote from hence-forth. If thou haue delighted in leude and euill company, thou mayst heereafter acquaint thy selfe with good. Thys onely is necessarie, that thou begin thy conuersion out of hand, and that thou repent, and take in hande to reforme thy selfe, though it be at the first but a little.
                     Let thine eyes begin but to shed foorth one teare, enter into thy conscience, consider thy selfe but indifferently, examine thine actions and what they deserue: lay before thy face the day of iudgement with the torments of hell on the one side, & the ioyes of heauen on ye other. Repent, confesse, amend thy life, seeke a medicine for thy wounde out of hand while thou art in thys life, in what state or condition soeuer thou be. Yea if thou be vppon thy deathbedde, and ready to breath out thy soule and spirit, feare not to repent,No tyme too late to repent. for that Gods mercy is not restrained by the shortnesse of tyme
                           •
                         Which I

speak vnto you (my deere bretheren) not to make you heereby the more negligent, but onely to stirre you vp to the confidence of Gods mercy, & thereby to auoyd the most daungerous gulfe of desperation. Hetherto are the wordes of this holy and learned Father.
                  
               
               In which long & large dyscourse of hys, we are to note, that (together with most excellent encouragement which hee gyueth to all sinners, of what state & condition soeuer they be, in all times and seasons to trust in Gods mercy, and neuer to despaire) he giueth also an wholesome admonishment, that we should not by thys confidence become more negligēt in reforming our liues, but rather doe it out of hande, without all delay or procrastination. Whervnto in like manner the holy Father S. Augustine in like exhortation against dispayre,An exhortation & admonition of S. Augustine, Ser, 58 de temp. dooth endeuour most vehemently to stirre vs vp, in these words.
Let no man after a hū
                     dred sins
                        •
                      nor after a thousand, despaire of Gods mercy, but yet so let hym not despayre, as he seeke presently without all stay, to reconcile himselfe to God by amendement of

life
                        •
                      least perhaps, after that by custom he hath gotten a habite of sin, hee be not able to delyuer himselfe from the snares of the deuill, albeit he would.
               
               And in the very same sermon he discourseth yet further of the same matter, in manner following.
Not euery man that hath sinned, but he that perseuereth in sin, is hateful and abhominable in the sight of GOD. For that no man must distrust of Gods mercy towards him that will amend and leaue his sinnes. For that God himselfe as a most sweet comforter, hath said by his prophet.
                        Eze
                              •
                            11.33,
                      
                     That the impietie of a wicked man shal not hurt him, at what time soeuer he shall returne from the same. But yet thys great mercy of the Lord, is then only profitable vnto vs, if we delay not our conuersion, nor doe multiply sins vpon sins. Which I will declare vnto you by the example of wounds & ruptures of our body, by which, the infirmities also of our mind and soule may be conceiued.
               
               Thus then we see,A similitude of the body to expresse the misery of the soule by multipliing sinne. if a mans foote, leg, or arme be broken, with howe great paine the same is restored to hys accustomed strength. But if any

member of our body shold be broken twise or thrise, or more often, in one and the selfe same place:
your charitie can imagine, howe hard a thing it were for that part to recouer her perfect health againe. So fareth it (deere bretheren) in the woundes and rup
                        •
                     ures of our soule. If a man do commit sin once or twise, and do vnfainedly without dissimulation, make his refuge to the medicine of repentance, he doth out of hand obtaine health againe, and that sometimes without any skar or blemish of the disease past. But if he begin to adde sins vpon sins in such sort, that the woundes of his soule do rather putrifie within him, by couering & defending thē, then heale by repentance and confession, it is to be feared, least that heauie speech of the Apostle be fulfilled in him, to whō he sayth;
                        Rom, 2,
                      
                     Doost thou not knowe, that the benignitie of God is vsed to bring thee to repentance? but thou by thy obdurate and irrepentant hart, doost heape to thy selfe wrath, in the day of vengeance, and of the reuelation of Gods iust iudgement.
                  
Thus farre S. Augustine.
               But nowe (deere Christian brother)

what can be spoken more effectually; eyther to erect vs to hope and confidence in Gods mercie, or to terrifie vs frō presumption in delaying our amendement, then heere hath been vttered by these noble pillers and Fathers of Christes church,Good mens wordes ought to mooue vs greatly. Eccle, 12
                           •
                        
                     
                   and most excellent instruments and temples of his holie Spyrit? The diuine wisedom of almighty God, in a certaine place, sayth; That ye words of wise men, ought to be spurs vnto vs, and as it were nayles, driuen into the depth of our hearts, meaning therby that we should be stirred vp, and most vehemently moued, when we heare such wise men as the holie Ghost there meaneth (which in deed are only they yt haue the knowledge and true feare of God,) make such exhortations vnto vs, and gyue vs such wholesome admonishments, as these godly Fathers in thys great affaire haue done. And how is it then (deere brother) that we are nothing styrred vp thereby, nothing quickned, nothing awaked? Well, I will conclude thys whole Chapter and treatise, with another exhortation & admonishment of S. Augustine, for that besides the graue authoritie

of the man, (which ought to moue vs much,) I thinke nothing can be spoken more excellently, or more agreeing to our peculier purpose, Thus then he sayth.A notable discourse of S. Augustine touching our conuersion. Ser. 181, de temp. Almighty God doth neuer despise the repentance of any man, if it be offered vnto him sincerely and simply; nay, he accepteth the same most willingly, embraceth the penitent, and endeuoureth to reduce hym to hys former state wherein he was before he fell.
And that which is yet more; if a man be not able to fulfil the whole order of his satisfaction, yet dooth not God refuse the least repentaunce that is, though it be done in neuer so short a space. Neyther doth he suffer the reward to perrish of any little cōuersion. And thys doth the Prophet Esay seeme to me to signifie,
                        Esay. 58,
                      when he saith in gods person to the people of Israel; I haue contristed thee a little for thy sinnes, I haue striken thee & turned my face from thee, thou hast been sad & hast walked in sorrowe, and I haue comforted thee againe. These examples then of repentance (deere bretheren) we hauing before our eyes, let vs not perseuere in wickednes, nor despaire or reconcilliation,

but rather let vs say with a confident hart, we wil turn home to our Father, and present our selues vnto our God, for truely (my bretheren,) hee will neuer turne away from the man that turneth vnto hym. Himselfe hath sayde,
                        Esay, 59,
                      yt he is a God which draweth neere vnto vs, were it not that our sins doe make a seperation betwixt him & vs. Let vs take away then the seperation and obstacle, & so nothing shal let our coniunction with him, which he greatly desireth. For to thys end did he create vs, that he might bestowe vppon vs eternall blisse in the kingdom of heauen. He did not make vs for hel,Hell not made for man. Math, 25,
                      but he made his kingdome for vs, and hell for the deuill. So hee sayth in the Gospell. Come ye blessed of my father, enioy the kingdome prepared for you, from the beginning of the world. And to the damned; Depart from me, ye accursed into euerlasting fire, which is prepared for the deuill and his angels.
                     If then hell fire was prepared for the deuil, and the kingdom of heauen for man, from the beginning of the world, it remaineth onely, that we prouide, not to loose our inheritance by persisting in sin. So long as

we are in thys lyfe,In thys lyfe repentance is auailable, but not after. howe manie of great soeuer our sinnes may be, it is possible to wash them away by true and vnfained repentance,
but when we shall once depart frō this world, albeit then wee doe repent, (as no doubt but we shal from the bottom of our harts,) yet shall it auaile vs nothing. And albeit our teeth doe gnash, our mouth cry out, our eyes gush foorth in teares, and our harts lament with innumerable cōplaints and supplications, yet shall no man heare vs, no man assist vs, nor so much as with the typ of hys finger giue vnto vs a drop of water to coole our tongue amidst her torments, but we shal receiue that lamentable answer which the rich glutton receiued at the mouth of Abraham; There is betweene vs and you a great distance, so that none may passe from vs to you, nor from you to vs.
                     
                  
               
               Hetherto lasteth S. Augustines exhortation. And there-withal think I it good to conclude thys Treatise.
               FINIS.
            
            The end of the second and last Booke, tending to Resolution.
         
      
      
         
            
            A necessarie Table, guiding the Reader to euerie Chapter in thys Booke, as also to euery particuler argument handled in each Chapter.
            
               The first Chapter. Of the manifold perils that ensue to the worlde, by inconsideration: and how necessary it is for eueri
                     •
                   man, to enter into cogitation of his owne estate.
               
                  The seuerall matters handled in this Chapter.
                  THE charitable proceeding of GOD by hys Prophets, in fore-telling men of theyr wickednes, and reuealing the cause thereof.
                  page, 1,
                  The daunger of inconsideration, declared in two speciall causes.
                  eodem.
                  The complaint of the Prophet Ieremie, for inconsideration.
                  page, 4,
                  The misterie and sealed secrete of inconsideration.
                  page, 6,
                  Lack of cōsideration, cause of eternal destruction: a poynt that fooles will not consider.
                  7.8
                        •
                     
                  
                  Inconsideration the cause of so much sinne at this day.
                  page, 10,
                  Wilful malice, obstinate corruption in the vanities of thys lyfe, and idle negligence: three speciall causes of inconsideration.
                  12, 13, 14.
                  How we must stand vpon our watch, that consideration

is the only doore to our watch: wyth the many cōmodities & effects thereof,
                  17, 18,
                  That all vertues are stirred vp & quickned by consideration.
                  page, 19,
                  Howe holy men exercised themselues in consideration: namely the three first Patriarches. Moses, Iosua, King Dauid, king Salomon, & king Ezechias: as also what fruite holy Iob gathered by consideration: and two principal effects ensuing thereon.
                  page, 20, 21, 22
                  The importance of consideration breefely described.
                  page, 26
               
            
            
               The second Chapter. That there is a God, which rewardeth good & euil, against al the Atheists of old, and of our time. With the proofes alledged for the same, both by Iewe and Gentile. The matters handled in this Chapter, are deuided into foure Sections.
               
                  
                     The first Section.
                     IF there be a God, he is a iust rewarder.
                     35,
                     The workes of the world declare the workman.
                     page, 36
                     Howe the myracles of heauen teach to know GOD.
                     page, 37,
                     In what manner the earth teacheth vs there is a God.
                     page, 38,
                     Howe the Sea doth wonderfully shewe there is a GOD.
                     39,
                     
                        The parts of man in body and soule, do amply declare God.
                     page, 41,
                  
               
               
                  
                     The second Section.
                     How the Heathen prooued there was a God, by theyr Phylosophy,
                     43,
                     The three arguments of the naturall Phylosopher, Ex motu, ex fine, and Ex causa efficiente.
                     
                     45, 47.48,
                     The foure argumēts of the Metaphisi
                           •
                        k, or supernatural philosopher. The first, ens finitum.
                     
                     49,
                     The second, that euery multitude or distiction of things, proceedeth from some vnitie as from hys fountaine.
                     page, 52,
                     The thyrd, subordination of Creatures in thys world.
                     page, 53
                     The fourth, prouidence in making the verie least creature in the world.
                     55,
                     The fi
                           •
                        t, immortalitie of the soule of Man.
                     59,
                     And the meaning of olde Phylosophers touching Anima mundi.
                     
                     60,
                  
                  
                     
                        The three Arguments of the Morrall Phylosopher.
                        1. How in the naturall inclination of Man, there is a disposition to confesse some GOD or Deitie.
                        61,
                        The reason why there can be but one God.
                        63
                        All olde Phylosophers acknowledged one GOD.
                        67,
                        Cicero hys opinion of the Painime gods, how they were made.
                        69
                        2. The second argumen
                              •
                            of Morrall phylosophy,

                           de vltimo 
                                 •
                              ine, et summo hominis bon
                                 •
                              .
                        
                        69
                        Euery thing in thys world, hath a naturall desire to hys end.
                        page, 70,
                        The contention of Phylosophers about the felicitie of man.
                        page, 72,
                        Howe nothing in thys lyfe can be our felicitie.
                        page, 73,
                        3. The thyrd argument, touching rewarde and punishment.
                        page, 75,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     The thyrd Section.
                     How the Iewes were able to prooue God.
                     78,
                     Their first proofe of scripture, is antiquity.
                     80,
                     The manner of w
                           •
                        yting
                           •
                         authorising, & conseruing of Scriptures: the second proofe.
                     82,
                     Cōsideration of the particuler men that wrote them, and theyr sincerity: the third proofe.
                     86,
                     Consent and approbation of all latter Wryters of the Bible, that ensued after Moses: the fou
                           •
                        th proofe.
                     page, 92,
                     The subiect handled in the Scriptures, with the end whereto they leuell: the fi
                           •
                        t proofe.
                     94
                     The peculier stile and phrase which they vse: the si
                           •
                        t proofe.
                     97,
                     The contents of the Scriptures: the seauenth proofe.
                     102,
                     The circumstaunces of prophecies set down in the Scriptures.
                     107

                           1. The prophecie to Abraham for hys posteritie.
                           108.
                           2. The prophecy for ye gouernmeēt of Iud
                                 •
                              .
                           110
                           
                              3. The prophecie for the greatnesse of Ephraim aboue Manasses.
                           page. 113
                           4. The fore-sight of Moses.
                           115
                           5. The prophecie for the perpetuall desolation of Iericho.
                           116,
                           6. The prophecie for the byrth and actes of King Iosias.
                           117,
                           7. The prophecie for the destruction of Ierusalem and Babilon.
                           page, 119.
                           8. The wonderfull proph
                                 •
                              cie for Cyrus king of Persia.
                           121,
                           9. The prophecies and dooings of Ieremie in the siedge of Ierusalem.
                           123,
                        
                     
                     Approbation of Heathen Wryters: the eyght proofe.
                     page, 130,

                           1. The creation of the world.
                           131,
                           2. The flood of Noe.
                           132,
                           3. The long life of the first Fathers.
                           132,
                           4. Of the Tower of Babilon.
                           133,
                           5. Of Abraham and hys affaires.
                           134,
                           6. Of Isaack, Iacob
                                 •
                               Ioseph, Iob, &c.
                           135
                           7. Of Moses, and his acts.
                           136,
                           8. The story of Iosua, the Iudges, and the Kinges.
                           137
                           9. The thinges that ensued after King Salomons daies.
                           page, 138
                                 •
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     The fourth Section.
                     The conclusion of the Chapter with the application.
                     page, 140
                           •
                        
                     
                     No 
                           •
                        xcuse can auaile of the ignoraunce of

God.
                     page, 141,
                     The application to our selues of the premisses.
                     page, 143,
                  
               
            
            
               The thyrd Chapter. Of the finall end and cause why man was created by God, and placed in this world. And of the obligation he hath thereby, to attend to the affaire for which he came hether.
               
                  The matters handled in this Chapter.
                  How man was made to serue God, and therefore cannot be free, or at his own appointment,
                  146
                  Man shall be accountant of euery idle worde hee vttereth.
                  page
                        •
                      146
                  Profitable demaundes and considerations for a man to thinke vppon.
                  148,
                  How a man may take a scantling of his owne estate with God: by following the right course for which he was sent, and shunning the wrong and dangerous course.
                  151,
                  The reason why so fewe are saued,
                  152
                  A perfect example of a good conuersion.
                  154
                  The complaint of worldlings in the ende of theyr lyfe.
                  158.
                  A comparison expressing our griefe in the end for running a wrong course.
                  160.
                  The misery of a soule that hath gone awry, at the last day.
                  pag
                        •
                     , 161,
                  
                     Two rare examples of humane felicitie, in Herod the first, and Agrippa, with theyr seuerall strange, and wonderfull endes,
                  162, 163, 164,
                  Errour in our course of lyfe, is not pardoned,
                  page, 168,
                  A rare chance that happened to Baltazar.
                  169,
                  If God examine straightly the actions of Infidels, much more will he doe of carelesse Christians.
                  page, 170,
                  The dangerous and most dreadfull deuision from God, our Sauiour, &c.
                  171,
               
            
            
               The fourth Chapter. That the seruice which God requireth of man in this present life, is Religion: with the particuler confirmation of Christian Religion, aboue all other in the world.
               
                  What speciall poynts are handled in this Chapter, and first for the formost part.
                  An aunswere to the demaunde, what seruice God requireth of vs, &c,
                  173,
                  The internall and externall acts and operations of Religion.
                  174
                  No way left to obtaine this seruice, but the light & instruction of Chris
                        •
                     ian Religion.
                  175,
                  Howe men in olde tyme were saued without Christian Religion.
                  176
                  The difference betweene our beleefe and the beleefe of the old Fathers.
                  page, 178,
                  Diuers testimonies from God of the thinges

that we beleeue.
                  181
                  The principall heads of thys Chapter, deuided into 3. parts, & handled in foure Sections.
                  183
                        •
                     
                     
                        1. The thinges that past before the natiuitie and incarnation of Christ.
                        184
                        2. The things doone and verified from that 
                              •
                           yme, vntill hys ascention.
                        184
                        3. Such euents as happened for confimation of hys Deitie, after hys deparure.
                        page, eadem,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     The first Section.
                     How Christ was fore-told both to Iewe and Gentile, declared in foure considerations.
                     184,
                     The first consideration, touching the Messias promised.
                     185,

                           The first couenaunt to Adam in Paradise,
                           186,
                           The same promise to Abraham and Isaack.
                           187
                           Iacobs prophecie of the comming of Christ,
                           page, 188,
                           Moses prophecie of Christ, lyuing in the wildernesse with the people.
                           190,
                           Dauids prophecie of Christ, foure hundred yeeres after.
                           page, 191.
                           Ieremies prophecie of Christ, foure hundred yeeres after Dauid.
                           194,
                           Ezechiels prophecie of Christ, wherein hee is called by the name of Dauid.
                           page, 195,
                           The prophecie of Esay touching Christ.
                           196,
                           Daniels prophecie of Christ, in the ende of Babilons captiuitie.
                           199,
                        
                     
                     
                        The second consideration: that Christ should be both GOD and man, sixe wayes prooued.
                     202
                           •
                        
                        
                           1. That he should crush the deuill, and breake hys head.
                           page, 202,
                           2. That he shoulde be a Ruler in Israell, and hys name GOD.
                           205.
                           3. That he shoulde be called Iehoua, with the interpretation of the Rabbines.
                           206,
                           4. That he should be called the very Sonne of GOD.
                           page, 209.
                           5. That he should be the worde of the Father,
                           page, 211,
                           6. Learned Phylo. his discourse for the returne home of the banished Iewes.
                           214.
                        
                     
                     The thyrde consideration: whether Christ should change the Law of Moses or no.
                     215

                           Moses Lawe was an imperfect Law, bringing nothing to perfection,
                           eodem
                           The newe Law of Christ, and the perfections thereof.
                           page
                                 •
                               217,
                           The reprobation of the olde Law, with a promise of a newe.
                           page, 220
                                 •
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     The fourth consideration: wherein all particulers are fore-told of Christ, for hys incarnation, byrth, lyfe, death, and resurrection.
                     page, 222, 223, 224,
                     The fift consideration: touching the mani
                           •
                        estation of Christ to the Gentiles.
                     page, 225

                           
                           Three peculiar waies, whereby the Gentiles might heare of Christ.
                           226
                           Prophecies touching Christ among the Gentiles by the Sibyls.
                           page, 230
                           Of what importance & authoritie, the Greeke verses of the Sibyls were.
                           231
                           Foure seuerall proofes for credite of the Sibils verses.
                           page, 233, 234, 236,
                           Of the confession of Oracles, concerning Christes comming.
                           page, 241,
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     The second Section.
                     How the former predictions were fulfilled in our Sauiour Christ, at his being vpon earth,
                     244,
                     The first consideration: of the appointed tyme for Christes byrth.
                     241

                           1. proofe. The generall state of the worlde at Christes natiuitie.
                           page, 449
                           2. proofe. The peace of all the worlde at his comming.
                           page, 250
                           3. proofe. The Scepter of Iuda, and most horrible murders cōmitted by Herod,
                           251, 253,

                                 The prophecie of Iacob touching the Scepter of Iuda.
                                 254
                                 That the Scepter neuer failed in Iuda, vntill Herods tyme.
                                 eodem.
                              
                           
                           4. proofe. The destruction of the second Temple.
                           page. 256

                                 The building of the seconde Temple, lesse gorgious then the first,
                                 257.
                                 Fiue speciall prerogatiues of the fyrst Temple.
                                 page, 259
                                 
                                    The seconde Templ
                                       •
                                     to be destroyed, presently after Christes passion,
                                 261,
                              
                           
                           5. proofe. The seauentie-two Hebdomades prophecied by Daniell.
                           261

                                 Why the Angell named seauenty Hebdōmades in thys place.
                                 263
                                 The exact number of weekes, from the building of the seconde temple, to the death of Christ, sixtie-two.
                                 264,
                              
                           
                           6. proofe. The traditions and obseruations of the old Iewes themselues.
                           266

                                 Christ hideth himselfe in the sea.
                                 268
                              
                           
                           7. proofe. That out of Iurie shoulde rise a generall Lord of the vniuersall world.
                           269
                           8
                                 •
                               proofe. The generall expectation of the people.
                           page, 270
                        
                     
                     The seconde consideration: concerning the byrth of Christ, &c.
                     274,

                           Iesus lyne and stocke, directly of the Trybe of Iuda, and lineally by hys Mother, of the peculier house of Dauid.
                           page eodem.
                           The manner of hys conception, and the message made by the Angell, &c.
                           page, 275,
                           Iesus natiuitie, and in what manner.
                           page, 276,
                           The place appointed for the birth of the Messias.
                           page, 278
                           The singing of the Angels, and of the Name of Iesus.
                           page, 280
                           The comming of the three Magi, or wise men of the East.
                           282
                           Prophecies of thinges that shoulde fall out in

Bethleem.
                           284,
                           Heathen testimonies for the starre which guyded the Wisemen.
                           page, 285,
                           The presentation of Iesus in Ierusalem.
                           287,
                           Christes flight into Egipt for feare of Herode.
                           page, 288,
                           The benefite that Egypt receiued, by Christes flyght into it.
                           289,
                        
                     
                     The thyrd consideration, shewing the life, conuersation, doctrine, and myracles of Iesus.
                     page. 290,

                           Saint Iohn Baptist, the Messenger of the Testament.
                           291,
                           The order of Iesus preaching and doctrine,
                           293,
                           The comparison of Christes Lawe, with that of Moses.
                           page, 294,
                           The meaning and effect of Christes doctrine,
                           page, 295,
                           The lyfe and conuersation of Iesus, testified by hys greatest aduersaries.
                           296
                           Of Iesus myracles: and of the predictions of the Messias hys myracles.
                           298,
                           The confession of Iesus myracles by hys verie enemies.
                           page, 300
                           The calling of hys Apostles and other followers.
                           page, 301,
                           Externall myracles doone by Iesus, aboue all power of humaine capacitie.
                           302,
                        
                     
                     The fourth consideration: deliuering the passion, resurrection, and ascention of

Iesus.
                     page, 305.

                           Christes ascending to Ierusalem to receiue hys passion,
                           page, 307,
                           His barbarous abusage foretold by prophecie, as also his death most plainely,
                           308,
                           The wonderfull predictions of hys passion, set downe by the Prophet Esay.
                           309
                           The particulers of hys passion, fore-tolde by Sibylla,
                           page, 311,
                           Of the myracles that fell out in hys death and passion,
                           page, 314,
                           Hys resurrection exactly fore-tolde both to Iew & Gentile,
                           page, 315.
                           The appearings which Iesus made after his Resurrection,
                           page, 317,
                           Circumstances confirming the true Resurrection of Iesus,
                           page, 320,
                           The great change in his Disciples, by hys Resurrection,
                           page, 322,
                           The examination of the matter by Pilate,
                           322,
                           Pylats Letters to Tyberius and hys proceeding thereupon,
                           page, 323,
                           The opinion of the wiser sorte of Iewes, touching Iesus resurrection at that tyme,
                           325,
                           Likeli-hoodes of truth, concerning Iesus ascention.
                           page, 326,
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     The third Section.
                     Howe Iesus prooued hys Deitie after his departure to heauen.
                     page, 328,
                     The first consideration: declaring the

sustentation, protection, increase, & continuation of Christes little Church and kingdome, &c.
                     330

                           The state of Christes first Church, &c,
                           331
                           The comming of the holy Ghost, and what comforts he brought with him. &c.
                           332,
                           The wonderfull quicke increase of Christ hys Church.
                           334,
                           The increase of Christians against nature,
                           335
                        
                     
                     The second consideration: concerning the Apostles of Christ
                           •
                        
                     
                     337

                           The myracles reported of the Apostles coulde not be fained, &c.
                           339, 340,
                           The successe of the Apostles.
                           342,
                           The assurance and ioy
                                 •
                              ull ending of the Apostles.
                           344,
                        
                     
                     The thyrd consideration, treating of the Euangelists.
                     page, 346,

                           The different qualities and circumstaunces of the foure Euangelists.
                           347,
                           Circumstances of trueth in the Euangelists.
                           page, 348
                           The publishing of the Gospels, and the manner of stile vsed by the Euangelists.
                           349, 350,
                           A speciall poynt to be obserued in the Euangelists.
                           page, 351
                           No doubt but we haue the true writing of the Euangelists.
                           353
                        
                     
                     The fourth consideration: of Martyrs, that by theyr bloode shoulde confirme 
                           •
                        hys doctrine.
                     354

                           
                           Three poynts to be considered in our Martyrs, and the singuler alacrity of Christians in theyr sufferings.
                           page, 355,
                           Iesus assistance to his Martyrs.
                           357,
                        
                     
                     The fift consideration: concerning the subiection of the infernall spirits.
                     358,

                           Of the myraculous ceasing of Oracles, at Christes appearing.
                           359
                           The wonderf
                                 •
                              ll authoritie of Christians ouer Spyrits.
                           page, 364
                        
                     
                     The sixt consideration: of the punishment of Christes enemies here on earth.
                     page, 367,

                           Herod Ascolonita: Archelaus: Herod Antipas: Herodias daughter: Herod Agrippa: and the stocke of Herode soone extinguished.
                           page, 368, 369, 370.
                           The punishment of the Romans.
                           371
                           The chastisement of Ierusalem, and of the Iewish people.
                           page, 373
                           With what circumstaunces Christes death was punished vpon the Iewes.
                           page, 375,
                           A meruailous promise of God, for deliuering the Christians that were in Ierusalem.
                           377
                           The Iewish misery after the destruction of Ierusalem.
                           page, 378,
                           The finall desol
                                 •
                              tion of the Iewish Nation.
                           page, 379,
                        
                     
                     The seauenth consideration: the fulfilling of such speeches and prophecies, as Iesus vttered on earth.
                     380

                           
                           The circumstaunces of the tyme when Iesus spake hys wordes, and when they were written,
                           page, 382,
                           The testimonie of a Heathen, for the fulfilling of Christes prophecies,
                           page, 383,
                           Other prophecies of Iesus, fulfilled to his Disciples,
                           page, 384,
                           Prophecies fulfilled in the sight of Gentiles.
                           page, 385,
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     The fourth Section.
                     The summe of the three former Sections, wyth eyght demonstratiue reasons for better satisfaction,
                     page, 387, 388, 389, &c,
                     The conclusion of the Chapter, with an admonishment,
                     page, 395,
                     An illation vpon the premisses, with an exhortation.
                     page, 397,
                  
               
            
            
               The fift Chapter. How a man may iudge or discerne of himselfe, whether hee be a true Christian or not: with a declaration of the two parts belonging to that profession: which are, beleefe and lyfe.
               
                  The matters handled in this Chapter.
                  The first part, concerning our beleefe, howe to examine the trueth thereof.
                  page, 402,

                        
                        The matters of fayth and beleefe, easie among Christians.
                        page, 403
                        The direct holy way of Christians vnder the Gospell,
                        page, 404,
                        No heresie finally preuailed against the Scriptures.
                        page, 410,
                        The spirituall sworde, where-with our Sauior Christ preuailed against sathan, the head Lorde and 
                              •
                           hiefe maister of all heretiques,
                        414
                        What the diligent reading of the Scriptures leadeth vs vnto, forsaking the by pathes of mens inuentions and traditions,
                        page, 414,
                        A discription of the forme, force, and nature of fayth.
                        415.
                        The fulnesse of fayth containeth in it three especiall things.
                        page, 417.
                        That which is meate to the flesh, that is fayth to the soule.
                        418,
                        A conclusion of thys first part, according to Saint Ierome.
                        420,
                     
                  
                  The second part of thys Chapter, concerning lyfe and manners.
                  422,

                        Two causes of heresie, according to the opinion of the holy Fathers, of Christes primatiue Church.
                        page, 422,
                        The dooings of Precismatiques.
                        423,
                        The obseruation of S. Cyprian, concerning the originall causes of heretiques,
                        424.
                        Many causes of euill lyfe.
                        
                           
                              •
                           odem
                        The effect of Christes most excellent Sermon on the Mountaine.
                        page, 425,
                        
                           A similitude touching fayth and workes.
                        428,
                        The summe of fayth and workes.
                        429,
                        What we promise in our Baptisme.
                        435,
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The sixt Chapter. Of the only impediment which is wont to let sinners frō resolution: which is, the mistrust & diffidence in Gods mercy, through the multitude and grieuousnes of theyr offences.
               
                  Despayre, an ordinary temptation to the greatest greatest sinners.
                  page 439,
                  The shypwrack of soules ouerloden with sin.
                  440
                  The woful mysery of desperation.
                  441
                  The thing wherein GOD most delighteth, is mercy.
                  page, 442
                  A meruailous example of Gods clemencie.
                  444
                  An other example of Gods wonderfull mercie.
                  page 445,
                  Iudgement and iustice to be vsed in true repentance.
                  page, 446
                  The deuision of thys Chapter, into foure especiall parts.
                  eodem.
                  The first part, touching the loue that God beareth towards man.
                  447,

                        The first cause why God loueth vs: for that he is our Creator, and we are his own works.
                        448
                        Euery man is giuen by nature to loue his own.
                        page 449,
                        The confidence of Iob, in that GOD made hym.
                        page, 450,
                        
                           The assured hope Dauid had, in that he was Gods workmanshyp.
                        page, 451,
                        The second reason of assurance of Gods loue, for that he is our Father.
                        452
                        What a Father GOD is.
                        453,
                        Christes most comfortable embassage.
                        454,
                        How greatly the respect of a Father mooueth GOD.
                        page, 455.
                        The Fathers lyberall hart to the prodigal
                              •
                            sonne.
                        page, 456
                        What the name of Father dooth import.
                        457
                        The third argument of Gods loue; the giuing of hys sonne for vs.
                        page, 458,
                        The conclusion of thys poynt, made by Saint Paule.
                        page, 460
                     
                  
                  The second part; how God expresseth hys loue towards sinners.
                  461,

                        Two rare poynts of clemencie in God.
                        462,
                        God that is offended, seeketh attonement with vs.
                        page 463,
                        Gods wooing of Ierusalem.
                        page, 464,
                        A consideration vpon the former treatie of God with Ierusalem.
                        466,
                        Gods tender loue to Ierusalem, when hee was to destroy it.
                        467,
                        A pittifull complaint vsed by God for the wilfulnesse of hys people.
                        468,
                        The wonderful proceeding of God with Ierusalem.
                        page, 469,
                        The obstinacie of the Iewish Nation.
                        470,
                        Epithetons gyuen by GOD, to the people

of Israell.
                        page, 47
                        A wonderful poynt included in Gods promise to a sinner.
                        page, 
                              •
                           ad.
                        What ioy there is made at a sinners conuersion,
                        page, 472,
                     
                  
                  The thyrd part, what assuraunce God gyueth to them that repent.
                  473,

                        The promises of GOD to sinners that repent,
                        474,
                        Foure vniuersalities, in Gods promises to sinners.
                        page, 476.
                        Three speciall poynts of great comfor
                              •
                           .
                        476,
                        How God hath performed his promises to sinners that haue repented,
                        477,
                        Neuer sinner repented that was not pardoned.
                        page, 478,
                        The reiection of Caine and Esau,
                        479.
                        The infinite sinnes of the Iewish people, and theyr infinite pardons receiued at Gods handes,
                        479,
                        The examples of Manasses and the Niniuites,
                        480.481,
                        A speech of God to be heedefully considered,
                        483,
                        Examples of mercies in the newe Testament.
                        484.
                        The wonderful clemency of Iesus our Sauiour.
                        page, 485,
                        Great and many causes of assured hope i
                              •
                            Christ,
                        487,
                     
                  
                  The fourth part, being the application

of all that hath beene sayd before.
                  488,

                        Saint Paules exhortation to confidence,
                        489,
                        An excellent discourse, and exhortation of S. Chrisostome.
                        490,
                        The speech of the deuill to a soule loden with sinne,
                        492
                        Saint Chrisostomes counsaile, against the deuils temptations.
                        492
                              •
                           
                        
                        No tyme too late to repent,
                        493.
                        An exhortation and admoni
                              •
                           ion of Saint Augustine.
                        494,
                        A similitude of the body, to expresse the misery of the soule by multiplying sinne,
                        496,
                        Godly mens words ought to moue vs greatly,
                        page. 497
                        A notable discourse of S. Augustine, touching our conuersion.
                        498,
                        Hell was not made for man, but for the deuill.
                        499,
                        In thys ly
                              •
                           e repentance is auailable, but not after.
                        page, 500,
                     
                  
               
            
            FINIS.
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
      
   