
      
         
            
            The Treaſurie of commodious Conceits, and hidden Secretes.
            Commonlie called The good Huſwiues Cloſet of prouiſion, for the health of her Houſhold.
            Meete and neceſſarie for the profitable vſe of all eſtates.
            Gathered out of ſundry Experiments, lately practiſed by men of great knowledge: and now newly corrected, and inlarged, with diuers neceſſary phiſicke helpes, not impertinent for euery good Huſwife to vſe in her houſe, amongſt her own famelie.
            LONDON. Printed by Richard Iones, at the Roſe and Crowne neere Holborne bridge. 1591.
         
         
            
            The Printer to all vvomen, that couet the practiſe of good Huſwiferie, aſwel wiues as maides.
            GOod Huſwifes here you haue, a lewell for your ioy.
            A Cloſet meet your Huſwiferie to practiſe and imploy.
            Aſwel the Gentles of degree, as 
                  •
               ke the meaner ſort, 
            May practiſe here to purchaſe health, their houſhold to cōfort.
            
               
                  •
               nd as the prouer be prooueth true, to remedie each griefe,
            
               
                  •
               mongſt the reſt of the Phiſicks helps, the huſwifes help is chiefe.
            Therefore good Huſwiues once againe, I ſay to you, repaire
            
               
                  •
               nto this Cloſet when you need, and mark what ye find there.
            
               
                  •
               hich is a mean to make moſt things, to huſwiues vſe pertain
            
               
                  •
               s al Conſerues & Sirops ſweet to comfort heart and braine.
            
               
                  ••
               r banquets to, here may you find, your diſhes howe to frame
            
               
                  •
               s Succad, Marmalad, Marchapane to & each thing elſ by name
            
               
                  ••
               ne powders eke for linnen clothes & wollen, furd or fac'd
            
               
                  •
               o keepe them ſweet, and ſafe from Mothes, in cheſtes when they be plac'd
            
               
                  •
               ood medicines to, for preſent health in Cloſet here you haue
            
               
                  •
               o maintain life, & keep ye yong the chiefeſt thing ye craue.
            
               
                  •
               hus to conclude, I wiſh ye marke, the benefits of this book.
            
               
                  ••
               th Gentles ſtate, the Farmers wife, and Crafts-mans Huſwife Cooke.
            
               
                  ••
               d if ye reape commoditie by this my friends aduice▪
            
            
               
                  ••
               en giue him thanks, and think not much, of foure pence for the price.
            Fare well.
         
         
            
            To the Worſhipfull, Maiſter Richard Wiſtow, Gentleman, one of the aſsiſtants of the Companie of the Barbors and Surgions: Iohn Partridge, wiſheth increaſe of knowledge by his worthy trauell.
            AFter that I had (worſhipfull Sir) taken ſome paine, in collecting certaine hidden ſecretes together, & reduced them into a neceſſary litle booke, for my owne behoofe & my familiar friends: yet at the inſtance of a certain Gentlewoman, being my deare and ſpeciall friend, I was conſtrained to publiſh the ſame, & conſidered with my ſelfe the ſaieng of the wiſe, which is: That good is beſt, which to all indifferently is of like goodnes, or effect: or which without reſpect of perſon, is good to all indifferētly. The cōſideration of which, & her importunacye together, inſtiged me to cōmunicate vnto the view & publike benefit of al men, this ſmal book: the contents whereof doth inſtruct & teach all maner of perſons & degrees, to know perfectly how to make diuers & ſundry ſorts of new conceits, aſwel of meats, conſerues, and Marmalades, as also

of ſweet and pleaſant VVaters, of woonderful Odors, Operations & Vertues: with diuers other things, that haue not hitherto bene publiquely knowne: VVhich fact of mine (I knowe) will be, not only, diſliked of ſome, but altogether condemned: not for that it is euil: but that their fine heades cannot diſgeſt that any other beſide themſelues ſhould inioy the benefit thereof, hauing for their Maxime, that ſuch things are of ſmall price, as are common to al men: much after our Engliſh prouerbs, Quainty & Dainty, Far fetcht & deare bought is good for great eſtates. But I account that perſon foolish, & vnworthy help of any Phiſitian or Surgeon, that will refuſe to receiue, or gain health by the medicine of any ſuch Phiſitian or Surgeon, who by learning the ſame out of Galen, Auicen, Hipocrates, or any other ſuch like, hath oftentimes cured the diſeaſes in ſundrie and many perſons, for that the ſame hath bene commonly vſed: but rather moſt willingly and curteouſly to imbrace the ſame (for preſent remedie) as a thing excellently well experimented and prooued.

I need not (Right Worſhipful) to vſe theſe woordes for the defence of this litle Booke, conſidering that your VVorſhip doth very wel accept ſuch things, as vniuerſally bring with them a publike profite and vtilitie whence conſiſteth your delight, rewarding liberally the traueile of ſuch, who haue and doo traueile therein. VVherefore, for that I among all other perſons, doo thinke my ſelfe moſt beholden vnto your woſhip, to gratifie your goodneſſe, and to ſatisfie the requeſt of my friend, I haue compiled this litle booke: which I haue put foorth vnder your worſhips name and protection: proteſting, that if I ſhal ſee this woorke, which with ſome coſt and charge I haue brought to perfectiō, be wel accepted at your hands, I ſhall ſhortly exhibite vnto your worſhip, a thing of greater value & eſtimation. And thus committing your good worſhip vnto God, I end: who ſend you your deſire of vnderſtanding and knowledge.
            Your Worſhips to commaund. I. Part.
         
         
            
            The Authour to his Booke, concerning his friend, whoſe importunate ſuit procured him to publiſh the ſame.
            
               GOe litle booke, of profite and pleaſance,
               Vnto thy good Miſtreſſe without delay:
               And tel her I ſend thee for the performāce
               Of her earneſt ſuit, ſith ſhe would haue no nay.
               Let her vſe thy cōmodities, as right wel ſhemay
               To profite her friends, for healths preſeruation
               And alſo to pleaſure them for recreation.
            
            
               Tell her, that all thinges in thee contained,
               I haue ſeen them put oft times in vre:
               And geuen thee to be her ſeruant retained,
               To ſerue her, faithfullie doing thy cure:
               And alſo ſay, of this let her be ſure,
               That ſhe with her ſuit, of me hath obtained
               Thee, that no gold nor good could haue gained
            
            I. P.
         
      
      
         
            
            The Cloſet or treaſurie of hidden Secrets.
            
               To make March-paine. Chap. 1.
               
                  TAke halfe a pound of blanched Almonds, and of white Sugar a quarter of a pound, of Roſewater halfe an ounce, and of Damaſke water as much: beat the Almondes with a litle of the ſame water, and grinde them til they bee ſmal: ſet them on a few coles of fire, til they wax thick, thē beat them again with the ſugar, fine: then mixe the ſweet waters and them together, and ſo gather them & faſhion your Marchpame: Then take Wafer cakes of the broadeſt making, cut them ſquare, paſte thē together with a litle liquor, and when you haue made them as broad as will ſerue your purpoſe, haue ready made a hoope of a greene Dazell wand, of the thicknes of half an inch, on the inner ſide ſmooth and on the outer ſide round and ſmooth, without any knags: lay this hoope vppon your Wafer cakes aforeſaid, and then fill your hoop with the geare aboue named, the ſame driuen ſmooth aboue with the back of a ſiluer ſpoone, as ye doo a Tart, and cut away all the parts of the cakes, euē cloſe by the out ſide of the hoop, with a ſharp

knife, that it may be round: then hauing white paper vnderneath it, ſet it vpon a warm hearth or vppon an inſtrument of yron or braſſe, made for the ſame purpoſe, or into an Ouen, after the bread is taken out, ſo it be not ſtopped, it may not bake, but onelie be harde and thorow dried, and yee may while it is moiſte, ſticke it full of Comfets of ſundrie collours, in a comely order, yee muſt moiſt it ouer with Roſe-water and Suger together: make it ſmooth, and ſo ſet it in the Ouen, or other Inſtrument, the clearer it is like a Lanterne horne, ſo much the morecōmended. If it be through dried, and kept in a drie and warme ayre, a Marchpaine will laſt many yeares. It is a comfortable meat, meete for weake folkes, ſuch as haue loſt the taſte of meates by much and long ſickneſſe. The greateſt ſecrete that is in making of this clear, is with a litle fine flower of Rice, Roſewater, and Suger beaten together, and laid thin ouer the Marchpaine, ere it goe to drieng. This will make it ſhine like yee, as Ladies report.
            
            
               To gilde a Marchpane, or any other kinde of Tart. Chap. 2.
               TAke and cut your leafe of golde, as it lyeth vpon the booke, into ſquare peeces like Dice, and with a Conies tailes end moiſted a litle, take the gold vp by the

one corner, lay it on the place, beeing firſt made moiſt, and with an other taile of a Conie drie, preſſe the golde downe cloſe. And if ye will haue the forme of an Harte, or the name of Jeſus, or any other ſtrange thing whatſoeuer, cut the ſame through a peece of paper, and lay the paper vpon your Marchpane, or Tart: then make the voide place of the Paper, through which the Marchpane appeareth, moiſt with Roſewater, lay on your gold, preſſe it downe, take off your Paper, and there remaineth behind in golde, the print cut in the ſaid paper.
            
            
               To bake Quinces Chap. 3.
               PAre them, take out the coare, perboil them in water till they be tender, let the water run from them, till they be drie: Then put in euery coffin one Quince, in it a good quantitie of Marowe. Alſo take Suger, Sinamon, & a litle Ginger, & fil the Coffin therwith, cloſe it, let it bake an hower, and ſo ſerue it.
            
            
               To keepe Quinces vnpared all the yeere long. Chap. 4.
               TAke ripe Quinces, and at the great end cut a ſtopple, then take out the coare cleane, and ſtop the hole againe with the ſame ſtopple (but pare them not) and perboile them a litle, take them vp, and let the water drain from them: then put al the coares, and

ſome of the ſmalleſt Quinces, in litle peeces all to cut, into the water wherein all the Quinces were perboiled, and let them ſeeth till the liquor be as thick as molten ſyze that Painters occupy, then take it from the fire and let it coole: in the meane ſeaſon couch your cold Quinces in a barrell; or in an earthen pot, the great ende downwarde (if the ſtopple bee out, it makes no matter) and one vppon another. Then put the liquor in, that it bee a handfull ouer and aboue them: couer them cloſe, and after iiii. or v. daies looke to them, and when you ſee the liquor ſunk downe, put in more of the ſame, which yee purpoſely kept to couer them, as before: then lay a boord vpon them, and a ſtone, that they riſe not, and couer the veſſell cloſe with a thick cloth folded, that it take no aire, ſo let thē remaine. And when ye intend to occupie ſome of them, vncouer the veſſell, and yee ſhall finde a creame couering the whole liquor, breake it in the middeſt, turn it ouer with your hand, then take out your fruit in order, beginning in the middeſt firſt, thē by the ſides, ſo that you remooue nane, if it may be, but thoſe that you take away: and euerie time that ye breake the creame, turne it ouer againe into his place, for you muſt know, that the Creame keepeth out aire, and keepeth in the ſtrength of the Syrop therfore it maketh much to the conſeruation of the fruit to ſaue it, and

alſo to ſee the veſſell cloſe couered. Alſo, when you will bake your Quinces, waſh them well and cleane in warme water, and bake them as before is written.
            
            
               To make Vinigre of Roſes. Chap. 5.
               IN Sommer time when Roſes blow, gather them, ere they be full ſpread or blowne out, and in drie weather: plucke the leaues, let them lie halfe a day vpon a faire boord, then haue a veſſel with vinigre of one or two galōs (if you wil make ſo much Roſet) put therein a great quantitie of the ſaid leaues, ſtop the veſſell-cloſe after that you have ſtyred them wel together: let it ſtand a day and a night, then deuide your Uinigre, & Roſe-leaues together in two partes, put them into two great glaſſes, and put in roſe leaues inough: ſtop the glaſſes cloſe, ſet them vpon a ſhelfe vnder a wall ſide, on the South ſide without your houſe, where the Sun may come to them the moſt part of the day, let them ſtand there al the whole ſommer long: and then ſtrain the Uinigre from the Roſes, and keep the Uinigre. If you doo once in ten daies take and ſtrain out the Roſe-leaues, and put in new leaues of halfe a daies gathering, the Uinigre will haue the more odour of the Roſe.
               You may vſe in ſteed of vinigre, wine, that it may waxe eagre, and receiue the vertue of the Roſes, both at once.
               
                  Moreouer, you may make your Vineger of Wine, white, red. or claret: but the red doth moſt binde the belly, and the white doth moſt looſe.
               Alſo, the Damaſke Roſe is not ſo greate a binder as the Red Roſe, and the white Roſe looſeth moſte of all: hereof you may make Vineger Roſet.
               Thus alſo you may make Vineger of Violets, or of Elderne flowers: but you muſt firſt gather and vſe your flowers of Elderne, as ſhall be ſhewed here after, when we ſpeake of making Conſerue of Elderne flowers.
            
            
               Fine Sauce for a roaſted Rabbet: vſed to king Henrie the eight. Chap. 6.
               TAke a handful of waſhed Parcelie, mince it ſmall, boyle it with Butter and Verinice vppon a chaſingdiſh, ſeaſon it with Sugar, and a litle Pepper groſe beaten: When it is ready, put in a fewe crummes of of white bread amongeſt the other: let it boile againe, till it be thicke: then lay it in a platter, like the breadth of three fingers, lay of each ſide one roaſted Conie, or moe, and ſo ſerue them.
            
            
               
               ¶ To make Paſte of Sugar, whereof may bee made all maner of fruites and other fine thinges with their forme: as platters, diſhes, glaſſes, cups, and ſuch like thinges▪ wherewith you may furniſh a table: and when you haue done, you may eat them vp. A pleaſant thing for them that ſit at the Table. Chap. 7.
               TAke gum Dragant, as much as you wil, and ſteepe it in Roſe water, vntill it bee mollified. And for foure ounces of Suger, take of it the bigneſſe of a beane: the iuice of Limons, a Walnut ſhel full, and a litle of the white of an eg: but you muſt firſt take the gum, and beat it ſo much with a peſtle in a morter of white Marble, or of braſſe, vntill it become like water, then put to it the iuice with the white of the Egge, incorporating well together. This done, take foure ounces of fine white ſuger well beaten to pouder, and caſt it into the morter by litle and litle▪ vntill it be turned into the fourme of paſte: then take it out of the ſaid Morter, and bray it vpon the powder of Suger, as it were meale or flower, vntil al be like ſoft paſte, to the end you may turn it, & faſhion it, which way you wil: whē you haue brought your paſte to this forme, spread it abroad with Sinamō, vpō great or ſmal leaues, as you ſhal think it good, & ſo ſhal you forme & make what things you wil, as is aforeſaid, with

ſuch fine knackes as may ſerue a Table, taking heed that there ſtand no hot thing nigh vnto it. At the end of the banquet they may breake all, and eat the Platters, Diſhes, glaſſes, Cuppes, and all ſuch like: for this paſte is verie delicate and ſauourous. If you will make a thing of more ffneneſſe than this, make a Tart of Almondes, ſtamped with ſugre and Roſe-water of like ſort that Marchpanes be made of: this ſhal you lay betweene two paſtes of ſuch veſſels, or fruites, or ſome other thing, as you think good.
            
            
               To make fine blanch powder for roaſted Quinces. Chap. 8
               TAke fine ſuger, half a pound, beaten in a hot morter to fine powder, of white Ginger, pared, half an ounce, of choſen Synamō a quarter of an ounce, beaten ready to fine powder: mixe them well together, and if you will haue it moſt excellent, caſt two ſpoonful of Roſe or Damaſk water, in beating of the Suger,
            
            
               To conſerue Quinces in ſirop condict. alway ready to be ſerued, in whole or in quarters. Chap. 9.
               AFter your Quinces are coared and pared, ſeeth them till they be tender & ſoft: then lay them out til they be colde: in the meane time, take of the ſame liquor two quartes or more (according to the number of your Quinces which ye will keep) & put therein

the cores & ſome other ſmall peeces, ſeeth them in the liquor to make the ſirop ſtrong: ſtraine them, and put into the liquor, being two or three quartes, one pint of Roſe water, and for euerie quart of liquor, one halfe pound of Suger: ſeeth them againe together on a ſoft fire of coles, till the Suger be incorporated with the liquor, then put in your Quinces: let thē ſeeth ſoftly, til you perceiue that your ſirop is as thicke as life honey, then ſet them to coole, and take them out, lay them in a tray or platter till they be colde: then take one ounce of bruiſed Sinamon, and ſome whole Cloues: put them with ſome of the Sinamon in the Sirop, and when it is cold, lay a larde of Quinces in your glaſſe (called a geſtelin glaſſe) or an earthen pot well glaſed: then ſtraw a litle of your Sinamon vpō your Quinces, then powre ſome ſirop, lay on another lard of Quinces, and again of your ſpice and ſirope, and ſo foorth till you haue done, & couer them two fingers ouer with ſirop aboue, couer them cloſe: and within three of foure daies looke to them: and when you finde the ſirope ſhrunken downe, put in more, and ſo reſerue them. Theſe are to be ſerued in with ſirop.
               See that the Quinces bee tenderly ſodden, and the ſirop thicke and ſtrong ynough.
            
            
               
               Plums condict in ſirop. Chap. 10.
               TAke halfe a pound of Suger, halfe a pinte of Roſewater, and a pinte of faire Rainwater, or of ſome other diſtilled water, ſeeth the Suger, and the two waters vpon a ſoft fire of coles till the one halfe be conſumed: then take it from the fire, and when it leaueth boiling, put therein halfe a pound of ripe Damaſins, or other plums & ſet it again on the Embers, and keep it in the like heat, til the plums be ſoft, by the ſpace of an hower if need be: then put into ſome Cloues bruiſed, and when it is colde, keep it in a glaſſe, or in an earthen Gallipot: the ſtronger the ſirop is with Suger, the better it will continue. Some put into the ſirop Sinamon, Saunders, Nutmegs, Cloues, & a litle Ginger: ſeeth them not haſtilie, for feare of much breaking.
            
            
               To make fine Rice pottage Chap. 11.
               TAke halfe a pound of Jorden Almondes, and halfe a pound of Rice, and a gallon of running water, and a handfull of Oke barke, and let the barke be boyled in the running water, and the Almondes beaten with the hulles and all on, and ſo ſtrained to make the Rice Porredge withall.
            
            
               To make Marmalad of Quinces. Chap. 12,
               AFfter that your Quinces are ſodden, ready to be kept condict as before in the chapter

is written, thē with ſome of the liquor wherin they were ſodden (but without any ſpice) beat them and draw them as ye would doo a Tart: then put ſome ouer the fire, and ſeeth them ſoftly, and in the ſeething, ſtraw by litle and litle, of powder of Suger, the waight of the Quinces, or more, as your taſte ſhall tell you: ſtir it continually, put thereto ſome pure Roſewater, or bamaſk water, let it ſeeth on height, til it be walſtanding, which thing ye may know, by taking ſome of it vpon a cold knife, and let it coole, if it be ſtiffe, then take it off, and boxe it while it is warme, and ſet it in a warme or drie aire: if you will gilde your Marmalad, doo as afore is ſpoken of a Marchpane.
               The beſt making of a Marmalade is when the Quinces haue laine long, and are through rupe, and very yellow, as in Lent ſeaſon.
               And for as much as Quinces are binding, and therefore not good for ſome ſicke folkes coſtiffe, it is neceſſary to put a good many of ripe Apples of good verdure, as Renet, Pippin, Lording, Ruſſeting, Pomeriall, Rex pomorum, or any other Apple, that is pleaſant raw, among them, being firſt drawne from a Tart, and then ſoadden among the other matter of Quinces. Thus ſhall you make your Marmalade ſomewhat ſouple, and alſo incrraſe the quantity and vertue of the ſame, eſpecially if it be wel daſhed with ſweet water.
            
            
               
               To make Marmalad of Damſins, or Prunes. Chap 13.
               TAke Damſins which are ripe, boile them on the fire with a litle faire water, vntill they be ſoft: Then drawe them through a courſe Boulter, as ye make a Tart, ſet it on the fire again, ſeeth it on height with ſufficient Suger, as you do your Quinces, daſh it with ſweet water, &c. and boxe it.
               If you will make it of Prunes, euen likewiſe doo put ſome Apples alſo to it, as you did to your Quinces.
               This wiſe you may make Marmalade of Wardens, Peares, Apples and Medlars, Seruice, Checkers, or Strawberies, euery one by himſelf, or els mix it together, as you think good
            
            
               To make Succade of peeles of Oranges and Limmons. Chap. 14.
               FIrſt take of your peeles by quarters, and ſeeth them in faire water, frō three quarts to three pintes: Then take them out, and put to as much more water, & ſeeth them likewiſe, and ſo doo againe, till the water wher
                  
                     •
                  n they are ſodden haue no bitterneſſe at all of the peeles, then are they ready. Now prepare a Syrop as ye doo for Quinces condict in the ſirop, in the 9. Chap. before written, ſeeth them in a glaſſe or pot.
            
            
               
               To make greene Ginger. Chap. 15.
               TAke the Raſes of caſed Ginger of the faireſt and vſe them as followeth: Lay a broad lane of faire ſand vpon a low floore on the ground, halfe a foot thick, then lay your Raſes of Ginger vppon the ſand in order, couer the Ginger with more ſand, foure or fiue inches thicke, ſprinkle the ſande ouer with faire water twice euery day that it be moiſt, thus daily doo, til ye ſhal perceiue your Raſes to be ſoft. Then take vp your Raſes, waſh them, & ſcrape them cleane, haue a ſirop readie made, as aboue is ſaide, ſeeth them in it till they bee well ſeaſoned: take them vp, and with ſome of the ſirope caſt them, or put them in a pot of ſtone.
            
            
               To make Manus Chriſti. Chap. 16.
               TAke halfe a pounde of white Suger, put thereto foure ounces of Roſewater, ſeeth them vpon a ſoft fire of coales, till the water be conſumed, and the ſuger is become hard: Then put therein a quarter of an ounce of the powder of Pearles, ſtir them well together, put for euery ſpoonefull a peece of a leafe of gold cut of purpoſe, caſt them vpon a leafe of white paper being firſt annointed with the oile of ſweete Almondes, or ſweet butter for cleauing too.
            
            
               
               To make Aqua Compoſita. Chap. 17.
               TAke foure gallons of the beſt Ale, drawen from the yeaſt 24. howers after it hath ſtood tunned, and put it into a cloſe veſſell, wherin you ſhall put theſe hearbs following, and foure ounces of Licoraſe ſcraped, and bruiſed in a morter, and ſo much Anniſe ſeed wel garbled: then ſtirre them together twice a day for the ſpace of three daies, and let them ſtand 24. howers after: then put them into the ſtilling pot, and (if you pleaſe) you may alſo put in the Lees of Malmſey or Sacke, or any other diſtilled waters, but fil not your pot too full: then ſet on your Limbeck, and cloſe it faſt to the pot, and keepe a ſoft fire vnder it. Theſe are the hearbs with their quantities.
               Iſope, Time, Roſemarie, Sage, Parſley, Borage, Langdebeef, red fenel, Sorrel, Hartstoong, Bay-leaues, Bugloſſe, Scabias, Marigolde, Coſtmarie, Ribwoort, Sentorie, Liuerwoort, Fumitorie, of each a handful.
               Margeram gentle, Baſil, Mints, Champane, Woodbinde, Patience, Valerian, Endiue, Wormewood, Peneroyall, Camomill, of each halfe a handfull.
            
            
               To make Aqua Vitae. Chap. 18.
               TAke foure gallons of ſtrong Ale or Wine-Lees, and put them in a veſſell and couer it well: then put to it three or foure handfull of Roſemarie, Peniroyall, Liuerwoort, Hartestongue,

or any other good hearbs, and ſtir them together twice or thrice a day, for the ſpace of foure daies: then put them in a braſſe pot, and ſtill with a temperate fire, for els you burn your pot and looſe your Aqua Vite, which will ſtinke and look red: alſo, looke you keep your water in a temper, and when it is very hot, let it out, and put in colde water againe into the vpper part of the Limbecke, and ſo change your water as it waxeth hot.
               Take a ſpooneful from vnder the ſpoute, and light it with a paper, and if it burne cleane out, it is good, els not.
            
            
               To make Ipocras. Chap. 19.
               TAke of choſen Sinamon two ounces, of fine Ginger one ounce, of Graines halfe an ounce, of Nutmegs halfe an ounce, bruiſe them al, and ſtampe them in three or foure pintes of good odifferous wine, with a pound of Suger, by the ſpace of four and twenty howers: then put them into an Ipocraſſe bag of woollen, and ſo receiue the liquor. The readieſt and beſt way is to put the ſpices with the pound of Suger, & the wine into a bottell, or a ſtone pot, ſtopped cloſe, and after xxuii. howers it wil be ready, then caſt a thin linnen cloath, and letting ſo much run through as ye will occupie at once, and keepe the veſſell cloſe, for it will ſo well keepe both the ſpirite, odour and vertue of the wine, and alſo ſpices.
            
            
               
               How to make diuers neceſſarie Oiles of great vertue. Chap. 20.
               
                  Oleum Hiperici.
                  TAke the tops & flowers of S. Iohns woort that hath red iuice, three ounces, ſhred the ſmal, & lay them to ſteepe in ſweet wine, as much as needeth, three daies: then boile them in a double glaſſe, cloſe ſtopt, & preſſe out the liquor from them, which done foure times with freſh flowers, & a litle more wine, if any bee waſted, if not, take the wine the fourth time ſtrained, put to it, Terebinthii, 3. ounces: of good Oile 6. ounces, and of Saffron a ſcruple, ſo let thē boile til the wine be conſumed: which poured cleare out from the grounds, reſerue to be vſed.
                  It is hot & dry, and binding, wherefore it healeth the cuts and wounds of the ſinewes, taketh away the paine of the hips, thighes, and bladder, and helpeth the vrine.
               
               
                  Oile of Rue.
                  TAke bloſſoms and tops of Rue ſo many as you lift, which ſmal ſhred, put into ſome glaſen veſſell, and poure to ſo much ſweet Oile as will couer them, and cloſe ſtopt, let it ſtand in the ſunne, or in ſome other hot place, fiue daies: then boile it, & being ſtrained from the hearbs, take ſo many freſh hearbs, & vſe it as afore ſaid, four or fiue times, & reſerue it to vſe as aforeſaid
                  It is hot, opening, reſoluing, and mittigating paine: it heateth the raines, bladder and matrix,

it taketh away the pains of thē & the Colleck, if the belly bee anointed therewith, or a glyſter made therewith, it is good for the ſinewes, helpeth the cramp, and putteth away cold humors.
               
               
                  Oile of Dill.
                  TAke the flowers and leaues of Dil. &c. as afore of Rue. It mitigateth paine, openeth the pores, prouoketh ſweat, reſolueth vapors, impoſtumes, ſwellings & hardneſſe in any place, and if the back bone be annointed, it eaſeth the painēs and growing of Feuers.
               
               
                  Oile of Elder flowers, in the ſame maner.
                  It ſoupleth, cleanſeth the ſkin, helpeth the weaknes of the liuer, and the ſtopping of the ſame, and greatly aſſwageth the paine of the iointes.
               
               
                  Oile of the leaues and flowers of Camomill, as of Rue and Dill.
                  It is good againſt the pleuriſie, openeth the pores, reſolueth vapors, correcteth the euil quality of humors, and is good for the ſinewes, and abateth the paine meruellouſly.
               
               
                  Oile of ſweet Mints, as aforeſaid.
                  I comforteth a weake ſtomack, ſtaies vomit, mooues appetite, helpeth concoction, and taketh away loathſomnes.
               
               
                  Oile of Wormwood.
                  It is hot, & comforteth the parts that are too much cooled, chiefly the ſtomack, prouoketh appetite, takes away obſtructiōs, & killeth worms.
               
               
                  
                  Of Oile of Roſes, and of Roſe buds.
                  It is good againſt inflamations, it cooleth the burning and boiling of the ſtomacke, & fretting of the bowels, if it be geuen in gliſter, and to annoint the teeth, it taketh away the ach.
               
               
                  Of the oile of Violet Flowers.
                  It is good againſt all inflamations and heat.
               
               
                  Of the Oile of water-Lillie flowers.
                  It cooleth more than oile of Violets, it helpeth the heat of the raines.
               
               
                  To make Oile of Earth wormes.
                  TAke of Earth-wormes halfe a pound, of good Oile two pound, of ſweet wine two ounces: boile all together vntill the wine bee quite conſumed, then ſtraine it and keepe it.
                  This Oile is good for the ſinewes that are cold, and helpeth the paine in the iointes
               
               
                  Oleum benedictum.
                  TAke of Oile two pound, Storax Calamite, Labdanū, Olibanū, Saffron, Gumarabbick. Madder, Gum of the Iuie tree, Aloes, Succotrine, Maſticke, Cloues, Galingale, Sinamon, Nutmegs, Cubebes two ounces, Gum Elamy a pound, Mirrhe Bdellium, half an ounce, Galbamun, ſix ounces, Spike, an ounce, Roſin of the Pine tree, Armoniacke, Opoponax, two drams: beat all to powder that is to be beaten, and mix it with the Oile, and put all into a Stillitorie of glaſſe, with the head and receiuer ſo cloſed, that no aire come out, ſetting your Limbecke

vpon a ſoft fire, twelue howers, encreaſing your fire from ſix hower to ſixe, till al be ſtilled. This done, beat all the reſidence in the bottome of the Still to fine powder, and with the ſame oile diſtill it the ſecond and the third time as afore, & it ſhall be as it were Balme.
                  It is good againſt Crāps, palſies, paines of the ioints, cold Catars, green wounds & Ulcers: it comforteth the ſpirits, openeth obſtructions: one drop in the eare helpeth the hearing: A Roſe-Cake dipped in it and laid to the Temples, helpeth the Megrim, and taketh away the ſwimming of the head: an ounce in ſweet wine drunk three daies together, cureth the diſeaſe of the Lungs, and the quarterne Feauer: If you giue a ſpoonefull with wine thirtie daies, with a litle powder of Piony roots: It helpeth the falling ſickneſſe: ſo that if the coronall commiſſure bee alſo annointed, it eaſeth the paine of the French Pockes, and is good againſt the ſtinging of any venomous beaſts, and for all diſeaſes of the ſinewes.
               
            
            
               To make Conſerue of Roſes, or other flowers. Chap. 21.
               TAke buds of red Roſes, ſomewhat before they be ready to ſpread, cut the red part of the leaues from the white: then take the red leaues, and beate and grind them in a ſtone Morter with a peſtle of wood, and to euery ounce of Roſes, put three ounces of Suger

in the grinding (after the leaues are wel beaten) and grinde them together till they be perfectly incorporated, then put it in a glaſſe made for the nonce, and of purpoſe, or els into an earthen pot: ſtop it cloſe, and ſo keep it.
               Thus ye may make Conſerues of all kinde of flowers, vſed thereunto.
               
                  The vertue of Conſerue of Roſes.
                  COnſerue of Roſes comforteth the ſtomack, the heart and all the bowels, it molliſteth & ſoftneth the belly, and is good againſt black Choller, & Melancholy. Conſerue of white Roſes doth looſe the belly more than Red.
               
            
            
               To make Conſerue of Violets. Chap. 22.
               TAke the flowers of Uiolets, and picke them from the ſtalke, beate and grinde them with Suger, as you did your Roſes: to theſe put double the weight of ſugar to the waight of Uiolet flowers, but to all flowers put three parts of ſuger to one part of the flowers.
               
                  The vertue of the ſame.
                  COnſerue of Uiolet flowers is good againſt the heat and inflamation of Choller, called yellow choller, it quencheth thirſtineſſe, it maketh the bellie moiſt and ſoluble.
               
            
            
               The vertue of the Conſerue of Bugloſſe. Chap. 23.
               COnſerue of Bugloſſe flowers comforteth the heart, it is good for the frantick, for the Lunaticke, and for the Melancholike, it is

good for the Sincop & ſowning, it taketh away heart-burning, and trembling of heart or ſtomacke, it profiteth againſt choler.
            
            
               The vertue of Conſerue of Borage. Chap. 24.
               COnſerue of Borage flowers is of like vertue: it is eſpecially good againſt black Choller, or Melancholie, it alſo maketh one merie.
            
            
               The vertue of Conſerue of Roſemarie. Chap. 25.
               COnſerue of the flowers of Roſemarie, comforteth the cold and moiſt braine, it comfortes alſo the ſinewes, it is good againſt melancholy and flewine.
            
            
               To keep Cheries condict, or Gooſ-beries. Chap. 26.
               MAke your ſirop as for Plums▪ then take half a pound of Cheries, & cut off halfe the length of the ſtalk of euery Chery, put thē into the ſirop, & vſe them as you did the Plums, put in what ſpice pleaſeth you, & ſo keep it as before is written: but make your ſirope ſtrong ynough of ſuger, leaſt it wax hore & corrupt, then muſt ye make a new ſirop ſtronger of the ſuger, & put the cheries in it to keep, as before is ſaide. Thus may ye do with Gooſ-beries, to make of thē tarts or ſawces al the yeer long, ſauing that the Gooſe-beries may bee well ſodden without breaking, becauſe of their rough ſkinne, ſo it bee ſoftly & diligently done.
            
            
               
               The vertue of the Conſerue of Succarie. Chap. 27.
               COnſerue of Succary is good againſt yellow and blacke Choller, and in the burning and heat of hot Feuers.
            
            
               The vertue of Conſerue Of Eldern flowers. Chap. 28.
               COnſerue of flowers of Elder, is good againſt the Morphew, it cleanſeth the ſtomacke and the whole body from ſcabs.
               Gather the cluſters or bunches wheron the flowers growe, when they are newe blowne and ſpread, lay them vpon a faire ſheet abroad in a chamber a day or two, til ye ſhall perceiue the flower will ſhake off and fall away: then picke them cleane, and make thereof Conſerue, as yee do of other flowers.
               And whereas it is more wholſome than pleasant, therefore put ſome other Conſerue (ſuch as you liſt) amongſt it, when you will occupie it.
            
            
               The vertue of the Conſerue of Sorrell. Chap. 29.
               COnſerue of Sorrell is good againſt all kinde of heates of the ſtomacke, & other principall partes of the body, and againſt yellow choller.
               Take leaues of Sorrell, waſh them cleane, and ſhake off the water cleane, or els tarie til the

water be dried cleane: beate them, and grinde them with Sugar, as aboue, & then keep them.
            
            
               The vertue of the Conſerue of Maiden-haire Chap. 30.
               COnſerue of the leaues of Maiden-haire, is good againſt the ſickneſſe of the ſide, called the Pleuriſie, and for all the diſeaſes of the breaſt, and of the Lightes, and in all maladies of Melancholie, and againſt red Choller.
               Make it as you doe Conſerue of Sorrell.
            
            
               To make Conſerue of Elicampana Roots. Chap. 31.
               TAke the rootes of Elicompana, waſh them cleane, ſlice them into peeces as big as your thumbe, ſeeth them in faire water till they bee tender▪ take them vp and powne them, & drawe them through a haire ſieue: put thereto in the ſecond ſeething, the double or treble waight of Sugar, and when the Suger is perfectly incorporated, take it off and keepe it.
               
                  The vertue of the ſame.
                  COnſerue of Elicompana is a good comfort to the ſtomack, & the nouriſhing of the members, it marueilouſly looſeth tough fleame, diſſolueth, and conſumeth the ſame, by the ſiege it auoideth it.
               
            
            
               
               To make Conſerue of Acornes, or Gladen, with the vertue of the ſame. Chap. 32.
               TAke the roots of yellow Flowerdeluce, which groweth in moiſt ground, otherwiſe called a Flag root: waſh thē & ſcrape thē, ſeeth them and order them as ye do of Elicompana, now laſt before rehearſed, and ſo keep it. This Conſerue is good againſt all ſickneſſe of the braine, and Sinewes, and againſt all diſeaſes of flewine. Unto women it openeth natural courſe, and tearmes.
               And you muſt generally learne, that in making Conſerues, fruites & rootes are made with fire & ſeething. Moreouer, the more Suger or honey is put into them, ſo it bee not paſt three pound to one, the cōſerue ſhal cōtinue the better
            
            
               To make Conſerue of Strawberies, with vertue of the ſame. Chap. 33.
               Take Strawberies one quart, cleane picked and waſhed, ſet them on the fire till they bee ſoft, ſtrain them, put therto two times as much ſuger in powder as waight of the Strawberies let them ſeeth till the Suger bee incorporated with the Strawberies, put it in a glaſſe or earthen pot well glaſed.
               
                  The vertue of the ſame.
                  The Conſerue of Strawberies is good againſt a hot liuer, burning of the ſtomacke, and ſpecialy in the feruent heat of an ague.
                  Thus make Conſerue of Damſins and Prunes.
               
            
            
               
               To make conſerue of Cheries and Barbaries. Chap. 34.
               LIkewiſe you muſt make Conſerue of Cheries, and alſo of Barbaries, ſauing that theſe require more Suger than the other doe, which are not ſo ſowre as they be. Here is to be noted, that of Conſerue of fruites may be made Marmalade: for when your Conſerue is ſufficiently ſodden & ready to be taken off, then ſeeth it more on height, and it will bee Marmalad.
               Moreouer, ſome make their Conſerue, Marmalade, & ſtrops, with cleane Suger, ſome with cleane hony clarified, ſome with ſuger & honey together: and after the opinion of ſome great Clearks, honey is more wholſom, though it bee not ſo toothſome as the Sugar.
            
            
               To make al kind of Sirops. Chap. 35
               TAke Bugloſſe, Borage, white Endiue, of each one handfull: of Roſemarie, Time, Hyſope, winter Sauory, of each halfe a handfull, ſeeth them (beeing firſt broken betweene your handes) in three quartes of water vnto three pints, then ſtrein it, and put in the liquor, whole Cloues an ounce, pouder of Sinamon halfe an ounce, pouder of Ginger, a quarter of an ounce, one Nutmeg in pouder, of Suger halfe a pound or more, let them ſeeth vpon a ſoft fire wel ſtirred for burning too, vntill it come to thickneſſe of life honey, then keepe it Galley pots.
               
                  If you put one pinte of Malmeſey in the ſecond ſeething, it will be better. When it is perfect, haue ſixe grains of fine Muſke in powder, ſtir it amongſt your Sirope, as yee put it into your Gallipot, and couer it.
               This Sirope will laſte many yeares, and is excellent againſt ſowning and faintneſſe of hart: it comforteth the braine and ſinewes, if it bee vſed as much as a Haſel Nut at once, at your pleaſure,
            
            
               A Violet Powder for woollen cloathes and Furres. Chap. 36.
               TAke of Ireos two ounces, of Calamus Aromaticus three quarters of an ounce, of Cypres, of Gallingale, of Spikenall, of Roſeleaues dried, of each a quarter of an ounce, of Cloues of Spike, of Lauander flowers, of each halfe an ounce, of Nigella Romana a quarter of an ounce, of Beniamin, of Storax Calamite, of each halfe an ounce, let them be all finely beaten, and ſearced: Then take two or three graines of Muſke, diſſolue it in Roſe-water, and ſprinkle the water vpon the powder, and turne it vp and downe in the ſprinkling, till it haue drunke vp the water: when it is drie, keep it in bags of ſilke.
            
            
               A ſweet powder for Naperie, and all Linnen cloathes. Chap. 37.
               TAke of ſweet Mariorum (that which is hory is the ſweeter) when it hath in him ſeedes

ripe, cut the brāches, ſo that the root may ſpring againe, when this Mariorum is dried, then rub out the ſeeds and keep them to ſowe about Eaſter, and the huſkes and leaues that grow about the ſeeds take for your purpoſe, rub them ſmall (for if you beate them to powder in a morter, they will looſe the moſt part of their ſauour) thē take of white Saunders, or of grey Saunders, but look that they be new, of right ſweet odour, for if they be olde and haue no pleaſant & quicke odour, they are nothing woorth: Take (I ſay) of theſe ſweet Saunders beaten into fine powder, an ounce, and put it into an ounce of your ſweet Mariorum, rubbed between your handes as before is ſaid, and if you put one or two graines of Muſke thereunto, for your wearing linnen, it is the better: ſowe theſe vp in a ſilke bag together and lay it among your Linnen: of ſuch bagges haue a dozen or two, which will continue many yeares, and when you look to your Linneu, then chafe each of the bags between your hands, that they may yeeld out their ſweet odour.
               Moreouer, in the Summer time, gather red Roſes in fair weather, ſo ſoon as they be blown and opened, lay them vpon a table, a bed, or fair floore of boords, and now and then remooue thē, leaſt they mould and wax foiſty. When they are drie, picke of the leaues, that you may haue two peckes of them, then ſtraw them among and betweene the boughtes and foldings of your linnen

with one handfull of drie Spike flowers, to ſixe handfull of drie Roſes, and lay your ſweet bags amongſt them. Be ſure that your linnen be euer through drie, ere euer you lay them vp, or els the Roſes will waxe hore, ſet your co
                     ••
                  er in a drie ayre, and in the winter time or in wet weather, when ye perceiue your roſes to wax moiſt, then put them in a pi
                     •
                  owhere or twaine, that they fall not out, and lay them vppon your bed betweene the couerlet and the blanket al night, or els before the fire, let them drie, and ſtrawe them againe.
               Moreouer, ye muſt alwaies haue a bag full of drie Roſes in ſtore; kept in a drie ayre: for if he looſe his redneſſe, then looſeth the Roſe his ſweetneſſe.
               Finally, you muſt euerie yeare put awaye your old Roſes and occupie new, but help your ſweet bags ſtill many yeares.
            
            
               To make a Pomeamber. Chap. 38.
               TAke Benſamin one ounce, of Storax Calamite halfe an ounce, of Labdanum, the eight part of an ounce, beate them to powder, and then put them into a brazen ladle, with a litle Damaſke or Roſe water, ſet them ouer the fire of coales til they be diſſolued, and be ſoft like waxe: Then take them out and chaſe them between your hands as you doo wax: then haue theſe powders ready, finely Tearred: of 
                     〈◊〉
                  , of Cloues, of ſweet Saunders, grey or white, of

each of theſe three powders half a quarter of an ounce, mixe theſe powders with the other, and chaſe them wel together, if they be too drie moiſten them with ſome of the Roſe water left in the ladle, or other: If they wax colde, warme them vpon a kniues point ouer a chaſingdiſh of coales: then take of Amber Greece, of Muſke, and 
                     〈◊〉
                  , of each three graines, diſſolve the Amber Gréece in a ſiluer ſpoon ouer hot coles, when it is colde, make it ſmall, put it to your Muſke and Ciuet: then take your Pome that you haue chaſed and gathered together, and by litle and litle (with ſome ſweet water if need be) gather vp the Amber Muſke and Ciuet, and mixe them with your ball, till they be perfectly incorporated, then make one ball or two of the lumpe, as ye ſhall thinke good, for the waight of the whole is aboue two ounces, make a hole in your ball, and ſo hang it by a face.
               If you perceive that the ball is not tough inough, but too britle, then take a courteſie of Storax liquida, & therewith temper your Ball againſt the fire, but take not too much Storax liquida, becauſe it is too ſtrong.
               Or, the better way is to haue ſome Gum, called Dragagouthant, ready diſſolued in ſweet water, it wil be diſſolued in two daies, and with that gather your ball with the heat of the fire: this ball wil be of like goodnes within as without, and of great price.
               
                  Some men put in the making thereof, three or foure drops of the oile of Spike, beware of too much becauſe it is very ſtrong.
               When you will haue your Ball exceede in ſweetneſſe, breake it, & haue two or three grains of Muſke, or Ciuet, or Amber Greece, all you delight in, or alcoge them, diſſolue them in roſe or, Damaſk water, and with the ſan
                     ••
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   your Balle ouer the fire till it bee drunk
                     •
                   in, then pearce a newe hole, as before.
            
            
               To make a fine Fumigation to caſt on the coles. Chap. 39.
               TAke of 
                     〈◊〉
                   one ounce, of Storax Calamite halfe an ounce; diſſolue them as ſoya Pomander, then haue ready theſe woods in powders or out of them: Ginger, or Cypres, or of white Saunders and Cloues, of either halfe a quarter of an ounce, all in fine powder, mix them altogether: and with ſome Storax liquida gather thē together with the heate of fire, then make them 
                     •
                  ou
                     ••
                  , of the bigneſſe of a blacke Slo
                     •
                   and with youre ſeale print it a Cake while it is warme and ſoft.
               Of theſe caſte one or two vpon a chaſting diſh of coales, to purge all peſtiferous and corrupt aires out of your houſes if you put to the other thinges, the powder of Amber 
                     〈◊〉
                  , it will bee the ſweeter.
               Some put alſo Lavdanum, as before ſaide

in making the Pomeander, herein doe as the ſauour ſhall pleaſe you.
            
            
               To make the ſame in Oſelets. Chap. 40.
               TAke a litle of fine powder of Sallow, or willow coales, mixe with it ſome of your Fumigation laſt before named, in the making, woork them well together, then faſhion it with three or foure feete like a Cloue, and when it is drie, kindle the end of it at a quicke coale, and it will yeeld a ſweet ſauour to put not too much coales, for then it will ſauour of them: put not too litle coales, for then it will not keep fire: put not too much Storax liquida, for then it will be too britle and too moiſt, and will not lightly drie: therefore, it ſhall bee very well to have ſome Gum of the Cherie tree or Plum tree, which they call Gum Arabick: diſſolue ſome of it into ſweet water, til it be liquid & tough, with this gather your Oſelets: or other Fumigations.
            
            
               A moyſt Fume vpon a Fuming diſh. Chap. 41.
               TAke a peece of Pomeamber, as big as a Hazell nutt bruiſe it, put it into your Fuming diſh with ſweet water, put therunto a few Bay leaues, as much of dried Bazell leaues, a litle Roſemarie, and ſet it ouer the fire, vpon a Cup 
                     〈◊〉
                  , or els in ſteed of the Pomeamber, put two or three of the cakes before written, broken ſmall, and nine or ten whole cloues: and if you

will haue it 
                     〈◊◊〉
                   fewer, then put 
                     〈…〉
                   graines of Muſke, and let the leaues and them ſtand ouer the fire together, as before is ſaid.
            
            
               A Fumigation for preſſe and cloathes that no Moth ſhal breed therein. Chap. 42.
               TAke of the mood of Cypreſſe, or diſtemper, of Roſemarie dried, of Storax Calamite, of Beniamin, of Cloues, a like waight, beaten into powder: then take of the powder of Wormwood leaues dried, as much as al the others ſaid them well together, caſt thereof vpon a chafingdiſh of coales, and ſet in your preſſe, and shut it cloaſe: and thus doe oft times till you haue well ſeaſoned your Preſſe or coffer.
            
            
               A Perſtime for a Chamber. Chap. 43.
               TAke Roſemarie, ſweete Mariorum. Bay leaues, of each a hand full, 
                     〈◊〉
                   other Cloues, vinigre & Roſewater 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  tity, boile theſe in your perfuming 
                     〈◊〉
                  . A which smel is ſweet and holſome.
            
            
               A Perfume of Damaſke. Chap. 44.
               TAke Storax Calamite 
                     〈◊◊◊〉
                   Beniamin, Labdanum foure ounces, 
                     〈◊〉
                   ounce Maſke foure graines, Cloues and 
                     〈◊〉
                   Roſewater halfe a pound ſtamp them together and when you will occupie them, put them in your ſ
                     ••••
                  ing pan and boile them.
            
            
               
               An odorifferous ſweet Balle againſt the plague Chap. 45.
               TAke Storax, Labdanum, of each a dram Cloues halfe a dram, Camphix halfe a ſcruple, Spiknard a ſcruple, Nutmegs a dram: Of all theſe make a paſſe with Roſewater tempered with Gum Dragagant and Gum Arrabicke, ſtirring and bruiſing them well of this paſte make your balles & warm thē.
            
            
               An Odorifferous white Powder. Chap. 46.
               TAke Trios elect three ounces, white Sandall two ounces. Damaſke Roſes, Lignum Aloes, Beniamin, Ci
                     •
                  ri Alexand of each two ounces, Maſke foure graines, Ciuet, three grains: beat and ſift them by themſelues, and incorporate them in the ſame morter you beat them in, and keep it in a veſſel wel ſtopped.
            
            
               A ſine red Powder. Chap. 47.
               TAke Damaſke Roſes two ounces, Sandilt Attrui
                     •
                   one ounce, Ligai Aloes, Ligni Alex. of each a graine, fine Muſke three drams, Ciuet two drams, Amber two drams: mixe them and beat them and keepe them together, as before.
            
            
               A ſweet Blacke Powder. Chap. 48.
               TAke Cipri Alerand, Ligni Aloes of each halfe a dram, Sandali Cytrini, damaſke Roſes, of each an ounce, Cloues three grains, muſk three grains, & as much Ciuet, beate theſe together, and keep them cloſe in a vial well ſtopt.
            
            
               
               A Powder wherewith to make ſweete w
                     •
                  ter. Chap. 49.
               TAke the wood of Cypreſſe, or the root of Galingale one quarterne, of Calamus Aromaticus one quarterne, of Drace or Iris one quarterne, of Cloues one quarterne, of Storax Calamite one quarterne, of Beniamin one quarterne.
               Or, ye may take of each of theſe one ounce for a portion, let all be beaten into powder, and when you will diſtill your Roſes, fill your Still with Roſe leaues, and a few Spike flowers, and vpon the top of ſome, ſtrawe ſome of your powders, and ſo diſtill them.
               Some put a litle of the powder of Nigells, Romana, to the other powders.
               Theſe Cakes will be verie ſweete, put the water in a large glaſſe, & to the pot put twelue graines of Muſke, let it hang in the middeſt of the water, in a thin linnen cloath with a thread, ſet it in the Sun twentie or thirtie daies, then take the glaſſe in, and ſet it in a drie ayre.
            
            
               Concluſions & rules to be vſed in diſtilling, and the ordering of each hearb of flower before they be diſtilled. Chap. 50.
               FIrſt, a ſoft fire maketh ſweete water, and the ſweetneſſe to continue ſtrong.
Secondlie, coales 
                     〈◊〉
                   the beſt water.
               
                  Thirdly, waſh nothing that you wil ſtill, but wipe it with a cleane cloth.
               Fourthlie, all hearbes, flowers and ſeedes muſt be gathered when the dew is off them.
               Fiftlie, That which you will ſtill, muſt lie at the leaſt ſixe howers before you ſtill it.
               Sixtlie, Al Spices corrupt your water, except Amber Greece, Ciuet and Musſke.
               7. Scum your water well.
               8. Keepe your ſtill verie cleane.
               9. Waſh your ſtill, but not often, and then drie it with a drie cloath.
               10. The glaſſe Stil is beſt, the tinne next, the earth not ſo good as the thine, and the leaden is the woorſt of them.
               11. Tender flowers, as Uiolets, Jill
                     •
                  flowers, and ſuch like; would be ſtilled or glaſſe.
               12. All compoſitions muſt bee ſtopped cloſe before, and in ſtilling diligently weighed and meaſured.
               13. Liquid waters muſt haue greater fire than drie and light waters.
               14. Still not your glaſſe too ſtill.
               15. Put ſtore of aſhes vnder your ſtill, that your Still ſhall not burne.
               16. Wipe the vpper part of the Stil often, but eſpecially the ridge.
               17. Diligence in looking to all things. Borage, muſt be diſtilled: the hearb with the roote chopped together.
               
                  Hyſop, the leaues ſtripped from the ſtalk when it beares blew flowers.
               Camomill, the hearbe and flower chopt together in the middell of May.
               Dil, the hearb in the beginning of May.
               Fumitory, the whole ſubſtance chopped in the end of May.
               Mint, either red or other, the hearbe, ſtalke & leaues chopped in the middle of May.
               Roſes, the flowers cutting away the white endes.
               Roſemarie the flowers, buds & leaues ſtripped from the ſtalke in May, in the flowering.
               Sentorie, the hearbe and flowers chopped in the end of June,
               Uiolets, the flowers in April.
               Woodbind, the flowers in the beginning of June.
            
            
               To make the water of the ſame colour of the Flowers that you diſtil. Chap. 50.
               FIrſt, diſtill your water in a Stillitorie: then put it in a faire glaſſe, and take the buds of Roſes and cut away the white, and put the leaues into the ſtilled water, then ſtop the glaſſe, and put it into the Stillitorie to Still, putting hearbes into the Still for feare of burning. After this, ſtraine the water from the leaues, and ſcum it well.
            
            
               
               A compound Water to perfume gloues or other thinges. Chap. 51.
               TAke Damaſke water double ſtilled a pounde, Maſke ten graines. Cauet three graines. Amber greece foure graines: heate all theſe together to powder, and put it into the water aforeſaid, and ſtop it cloſe, and vſe it without any more ſtilling.
            
            
               To make Damask water. Chap. 52.
               TAke Damaſke Roſes, and red Roſes of each 
                     〈◊〉
                   handfull, let them drie foure howers in the ſhadow when take two drams of Labdanum Nigellae Romanae two peniworth, Irios halfe an ounces Storax, two drams, Cloues an ounce, Beniam
                     •
                  n Cola
                     •
                  us Aromaticus Nutmegs, of each half on ounce Mariorū & Bazel, of each half a hādful: bruiſe the ſpice, & put it in Malmſey or the lees thereof the ſpace of foure daies: then diſtil it and ſcum it fourteens daies.
            
            
               Another maner of making of Damask water. Chap. 53.
               TAke of 
                     •
                  race of Iris, of Spike flowers dried, of Cloues, of each an ounce, make them in powder, put them together, with a pint of new Ale in corns, and one pinte of Roſewater in an earthen pot, put thereto a good mary of greene Roſeleaues, let them ſoke in it a night time ſtopped cloſe, in the morning

when ye ſhall diſtill, firſt, ſay other Roſeleaues in the bottome of your Stillitorie for feare of cleauing too: then take of the Roſeleaues out of the pot, and put them with other green roſeleaues, in your Stillitorie ſufficient, and to the water put Muſke, as aboue is ſaid. This water is excellent to ſet foorth a Tart, an Apple Moyſe, or Almond butter.
            
            
               Powder of Holland againſt Collick, and the gnawing of the belly. Chap. 54.
               TAke Sinamon, Annis ſeede, Fenell ſeede, Cominſeed, of each a quarter of an ounce, of 
                     〈◊〉
                   Lu
                     ••
                  oris three quarters of an ounce, of Gallingale one ounce and a halfe, of Spikenard a quarter of an ounce, of Stene of Alexandria two ounces: beate them all into fine powder, and ſerue them, whereof take a quarter of an ounce in a meſſe of Pottage.
            
            
               Powder to make the belly ſolluble, cauſing a gentle laske; meete for Noble Perſonages. Chap. 55.
               TAke S
                     •
                  ene of Alexandria one ounce, of fine Ginger halfe a quarter of an ounce, of Annys ſeede a quarter of an ounce, beate them into fine powder into your fo
                     •
                  de Sugar, and make 
                     •
                  oſinges as before of the whole, the number of ſixteene, wherof diſſolue two of them into a meſſe of pottage, or in a cuppe of wine, faſting in the morning, and faſt one hower after:

If you do put as much of Suger in powder as the waight of the whole powder, ye may keep it in a bladder, and the whole powder will ſerue eight times to receiue: as euen now is ſaid
            
            
               A receit to reſtore ſtrength in them that are brought lowe with long ſickneſſe. Chap. 56.
               TAke of the brawn of a Feſant or Partridge, or of a Capon ſodden or roſted, of each a quarter of an ounce, ſteepe them in Roſewater two howers, of the kernels of Nuts called Piſtatiorum, and of the kernel of the pine Apple, of each a quarter of an ounce: of Sinamon in fine powder, the waight of twentie barlie cornes, of the ſpices of Dianthos, Diamargariton, Letificentes, Galem, of each the waight of fortie graines or Barlie cornes, of the ſeede of Millon, Pepon, Goord, and Cucummer, of each the waight of ten graines the ſkin taken off, let them bee all ground ſmall, then take ſixe ounces of Suger, diſſolued in Borage water, ſeeth it on height, as for looſings, and when it is ſodden inough, then put in all the other geare, and make looſinges thereof. Whereof one is ſufficient at once, diſſolued in a meſſe of Pottage, or a draught of drinke: Thus do two or three times euery day.
            
            
               To make Looſings. Chap. 57.
               TAke halfe a pound of Suger, and as much Roſewater, or other diſtilled water, as for

Mamis 
                     〈◊〉
                  , ſeeth them likewiſe; and When you will knowe when it is s
                     ••
                  den ynough, take out some vpon a kniues point, and let it coole; & if it be hard like ſuger, then it is ſodden inought: Then put into it powder of Gluger, Sinamon or Nutmeg: ſtir them well together, lay it vpon a paper oiled, driue it as thin as you think meet Lay on it your gold leafe with a 
                     〈◊〉
                   taile, cut your Loſings Diamond faſhion, and ſo keep them.
            
            
               To perfume gloues. Chap. 58.
               TAke the gloues and waſh them in roſewater, or Damaſke water, till the ſcurffe of the leather be gone, and then ſtretch thent foorth ſoftly, and keep the water you waſh them with ſtill: thea hang them vp to drie, and then lay them in a cleane linnen cloath that is folded three or foure times double, and when they be drie, let them lie in Roſeleaues dried a day or two, then take oile of Ciuet Almonds, and Muſke: and grind them together vpon a Marble ſtone, ſtretch them foorth ſoftly, and with your hande annoint your gloues three or foure times, and euer among ſtretch them fourth as they drie. Then take Sandiſe
                     •
                   mixed with a litle Amber Greece, and sta
                     ••
                  e the powder of it thinly vpon them, and lay them in a paper, and in a boxes or els moſt the Amber Greece in a quantity of Roſewater, and mixe the Sandifex in it, and ſo annoint the glous with the

ſame: then let them drie, and lay them in faire white paper.
               
                  2. To perfume gloues another way.
                  TAke the gloues and waſh them, as aforeſaid, three or foure times, and wring them euerie time ſoftlie: then take Gum of Dragagant and ſteepe it in fine Damaſke water one night, then ſtraine the Water through a fine linnen cloth, and take the Gum & mix it with an ounce of Amber Greece, and a quarter of an ounce of Muſke: firſt grinde your Amber Greece with oile of Turpentine: then mingle all together, and rowle your gloues: with the ſame: lay them to drie, and lay a paper betweene.
               
               
                  3. A preparatiue for gloues.
                  WAſh the gloues, as aforeſaid, till the ſent of the Leather bee gone, then take Beniamin two ounces, of Storax Calamit one ounce, let them be verie fine: then take oile of Ciuet Almonds and mingle it with Beiamin amd Storax vppon a Marble ſtone. When it is wel ground, put it into an earthen pot with more Dile of Ciuet Almondes, then put in Cloues in powder, and ſo let it ſtand cloſe couered: and when you neede, take a litle Roſewater in a Spoonge, and rub the gloues ſoftlie, and then in like maner, with the oile called Ciuet oile for the ſame purpoſe.
               
               
                  
                  4. Another way.
                  TAke twelue grains of Muſke, ſix grains of Amber Greece, three graines of Storax Calamite, ſixe graines of Beniamin, and a few Cloues: grinde all theſe together with oile of Ciuet, Almondes. Firſt, waſh your gloues with Euſſes, diſſolued a day in Damaſke water.
               
               
                  5. An other for gloues.
                  TAke your gloues and waſh them in Roſe water once or twice, till all the ſcurffe be gone from them, and then let them drie, and ſtretch them well out, fingers and all. Then plaine them, and waſh them once or twice: then take two ounces of Storax and as much Beniamin made in powder, dreſſe your gloues all ouer, on a ſmooth boord before they drie: then hang them to drie, and when they be drie, ſaue the powder that is left.
                  Then take a pint of Roſewater, & two ounces of Storax, and two ounces of Sinamon, put all theſe in powder, & caſt them to the Roſewater, and let them ſeeth in a cloſe Poſnet couered; Then take a fine bruſh; and bruſh them ouer.
               
               
                  6. An other way to perfume.
                  TAke Amber Greece a dram, of Muſk halfe a dram, of Fuſſes a dram, of Ciuet halfe an ounce, put all theſe together in a pince of Roſewater, or Damaſk water.
               
               
                  
                  4. Another way.
                  TAke a dram of Amber Greece, a dram of Beniamin, halfe a dram of Fuſſes, a dram of Storax, a quarter of an ounce of Labdanum, put all theſe in Roſewater.
               
            
            
               A Perfume for Cheſtes and Cupbords, and alſo for Gloues. Chap. 59.
               TAke Beniamin and Storax of each an ounce, Labdanum and Fuſſes, of each a quarter of an ounce, halfe a dram of Ciuet: If you burne it for cheſtes or cupboords, beate it in hote morter: If it be for gloues boile it, and put it to Roſewater.
            
            
               To collour Gloues. Chap. 60.
               YOu muſt haue hulles of greene Walnuts that muſt lie in water all the yeare long: rolle them well with theſe hulles, and make them as deepe a collour as you may.
               
                  How to collour gloues yellow within.
                  TO collour gloues yellow within, take the yolkes of twenty Egs, and put them in a frieng pan, with a ſoft fire, stir them euer, and bruiſe them with a ladle, and the oile that aſcendeth of them, being annointed on the inſide of the gloues, will make them looke yellow.
               
            
            
               To make muske Sope. Chap. 61.
               TAke ſtrong lie made of Chalke and ſixe pound of ſtone Chalke, foure pound of Deere Suet, and put them in the lie in an earthen pot, and

mingle it wel, and keep it the ſpace of forty daies and mingle and stir it three or four times a day till halfe he conſumed, and to that that remaineth ſeuen or eight daies after, you muſt put a quarter of an ounce of Muſke, and when you haue done ſo, you muſt alſo ſtirre it, and it wil linell of Muſke.
            
            
               To make red ſealing Waxe. Chap. 62.
               TAke to one pound of Waxe three ounces of cleare Turpentine in Sommer, in Winter take foure: melt them together with a ſoft fire, then take it from the fire & let it coole: then put in Uermilion verie finely ground, and Sallet oile, of each an ounce, and mixe them wel together, and it is perfect good.
            
            
               To keepe Damaſins in ſirop. Chap. 63.
               TAke Damaſins, and picke them well with a knife or a pin, then take clarifteu Suger, as much as you ſhall thinke will ſcrue, and then you muſte boile it till it bee as thicke as birdlime. Then boyle your Damaſins in the clarified Suger til they be ſoft, then take them vp and put them in a glaſſe, then you muſt boyle the ſirop, till it be as thicke as the other was, befor you put in the Damaſins. And as ſoone as it is ſo thick you muſt poure it into the Damaſins, and ſo couer them cloſe.
            
            
               
               A Water for the face, vſed of Gentlewomen. Chap. 52.
               TAke Goates milke two pound, fine Flower halfe a pecke, the white of three egges, and make it from paſte to litle loaues, and take it not too much: then take more of the ſaid Goates milke, and crum of the crummes of your bread into it, let it ſteepe all night, and wipe your face with a drie cloath, and then waſh with the ſaid milke, and in vſing this, it will make the face ſhine as white as ſnowe.
               
                  Another to make the face faire.
                  TAke the ſhearing of Scarlet four ounces, the whites of two new laid egs, white wine two pound. Roſemarie flowers, or Roſemary it ſelf, and ſeeth it or ſtill it, but if you ſeeth it, ſcum it clean, and when it is cold vſe it, and it wil make the ſkin looke ſmooth.
               
               
                  Another, to remooue high collour in the face.
                  LImons laide in butter-milke is an excellent meanes to remooue high collour in the face.
               
            
            
               A Water for heate in the face, and breaking out with Pimples. Chap. 65.
               TAke Allū glaſſe two pound, the iuice of Plantin, Purſlane, beriuice, of each halfe a pound, the whites of twenty egs, beate them and mixe

them and diſtil them: which water deſtroyeth chaffinges, heates, pimples, wheales, & ſcurffes, whereſoeuer they be.
            
            
               To know whether a Woman ſhall euer conceiue or no. Chap. 66.
               TAke of the ruine of a Hare, and hauing fraied and conſumed it in hot water, giue it the woman to drinke in the morning at her breakfaſt, then let her ſtande in a hot bath: And if there come a griefe or paine in her bellie, ſhe may conceiue, if not, ſhe ſhall neuer conceiue.
            
            
               To make a barren woman beare children. Chap. 67.
               TAke of thoſe litle Sea fiſhes, called in Latine Polipi or Polipodes, and roaſt them vpon the Embers without oile, and let the woman eate of them, and it ſhall profite and help very much, hauing in the meane time the companie of a man.
            
            
               To make women haua a quicke and ſpeedie deliuerance of their children, and without paine, or at the leaſt very litle. Chap. 68.
               TAke leaues of Bittanie, and ſtampe them, or els make powder of them, and giue the woman that laboureth to drinke of it with a litle water, and ſhee ſhall bee deliuered incontinent without any great paine or labour.
            
            
               
               To ſtop the running of the Raines fiue ſeuerall waies. Chap. 69.
               TAke Venice Turpentine waſht in red Roſewater, foure ounces, a Nutmeg, Plantine ſeede, a yellow Amber bead, of each a like, with like quantitie of Sinamon, & powder of Comſery rootes, which being mingled, rolle of the Turpentine in the powder, & make it into fine pilles as big as a beane, and take them in a ſpoone with ſirop of Rubarbe, three in the morning, and three, two howers before ſupper, and it will helpe it.
               
                  Another for the running of the Raines.
                  TAke Nutmegs half a pound, and bruiſe them in a morter, and knead them in dough, and bake them, which bread is very healthfull.
               
               
                  Another ſpecial way approoued.
                  TAke Hazell nuts well pilled or blanched two handfull, Sinkfield and knotted graſſe, of each a handfull, foure Camphir leaues: ſtampe the hearbs and ſtraine out the iuice into two pound of Muſcadell: then beate the Nut kernels as ſmall as you can, and put them in: alſo, take an Amber bead, and beat it to powder very fine, which being put in the wine to the reſt, ſtir them all together a good while: then ſeeth it vntill it come to a pound and a litle more, and drink the one halfe in the morning, and the other at night, making a verie light ſupper.
               
               
                  
                  An other for the ſame.
                  Nip and Clarie fried with the yolks of three or foure Egs, and taken euery morning is very good.
               
            
            
               To ſtrengthen the ſeed. Chap. 70.
               TAke Succorie, Endiue, Plantin, Violet flowers & the leaues, Clarie, Sorrel, of each half a handful, with a peece of Mutton, make a good broth, and to eat it euening and morning is eſpeciall good.
            
            
               For the gnawing in a Womans Stomacke. Chap. 71.
               TAke a good handfull of Spearemint, and a handfull of Wormwood, & heat a Tileſtone, and lay theſe two things on it, and make a litle bag, and when the hearbes be hot put thē in the bag, and ſo lay them to her ſtomacke.
               
                  To make a ſweete Damaske powder foure maner of waies.
                  TAke two or three handful of dried Roſeleaues two grains of Muſk, half an ounce of Cloues, and beat theſe all to powder.
               
               
                  2. Another way.
                  TAke ſixe ounces of Orace, foure ounces of Cloues, two ounces of Storax Calamite, an ounce of Labdanum, with two ounces of yellow Saunders, and a litle Muſke.
               
               
                  3. An other way.
                  TAke two ounces of Cloues, foure ounces of Spruce, foure ounces of Storax Calamite,

foure ounces of Roſes, three ounces of Beniamin.
               
               
                  4. Another way.
                  TAke three ounces of Cypres, foure ounces of Beniamin, two ounces of Coliander or Labdanum, three ounces of Storax Calamite, two ounces of Roſes, beate all to powder.
               
               
                  To make Pepper ſoft: with the vertue of the ſame.
                  YOu ſhall doo this after the ſame manner as is ſhowed for greene Ginger, in the 15. Chap. that is, with ſand, and the like ſirope, ſeaſon and keepe them. Ginger and Pepper in Sirope comforteth a colde ſtomacke, and helpeth much to good diſgeſtion.
               
               
                  To keepe Barbaries.
                  TAke clarified Suger, and boile it till it bee thicke, which you ſhall perceiue, if you take a litle betweene your fingers, it will rope like birdlime: then put in your Barbaries, and let them boile with a ſoft fire, vntill you perceiue they be tender, then put them in a glaſſe, and couer them, and ſo keepe them.
               
            
            
               For the ague in a womans breaſt. Chap. 72.
               TAke Hemlock leaues, and frie them in ſweet butter, and as hot as ſhee may ſuffer it lay it to her breaſt, and lay a warme white cotten, and it will driue it away in ſhort time.
            
            
               
               For breaſtes that be ſore with milke. Chap. 73.
               TAke Linſeed oile and waxe, melt them, and wet a ragge therein, and lay it to the breaſt warme, which will drie vp the milke.
            
            
               For a ſore breaſt. Chap. 74.
               TAke beane flower two handfull, branne, powder of Fengricke, of each a handful, white vinigre a pound, three ſpoonful of honey, and three yolkes of Egges, ſeeth all till they bee thicke, and lay it warme to the breaſt, which will both breake it and heale it, alwaies cruſhing out the matter when you ſhift it.
            
            
               To keepe a womans breaſt from breaking. Chap. 75.
               TAke Sage, Marigolds with the blacke ſeed, and the ſharpeſt Netles, of each halfe a handfull, bruiſe them together, and lay it to, which will keepe it from breaking.
               
                  For the breaſtes broken or not.
                  TAke Oile of Roſes, beane flower, and the yolk of an Egge with a litle Vinigre, ſet it on the fire till it be luke warme, then with a ſether annoint the place.
               
            
            
               For the vnnaturall heate of the Liuer. Chap. 76.
               TAke Borage, Bugloſſe, Succorie, Violets, Fumitorie, yoong hop buds, Fenell buds, of each a quarter of a handfull: yoong Malowes,

and Mercurie, of each halfe a handfull, boile theſe in a pottle of whey, and ſtraine them.
            
            
               For the Canker in the mouth. Chap. 77.
               TAke halfe a pinte of Ale, and a ſprig of Roſemarie, and ſeeth them together, and ſcum your Ale, and then put in a peece of Allum, as much as a nut, and a ſpoonefull of honey, & two ſpoonfull of Honey-ſuckle water.
            
            
               To make the face faire, and the breath ſweete. Chap. 78.
               TAke the flowers of Roſemarie, & boile them in white wine, then waſh your face with it, and vſe it for a drinke, & ſo ſhall you make your face faire, and your breath ſweete.
            
            
               To make haire as yellow as gold. Chap. 79.
               TAke the rine or ſcrapings of Rubarb, & ſteepe it in white wine, or in cleane lie: and after you haue waſhed your head with it, you ſhall wette your haires with a ſponge or ſome other cloath, & let them drie by the fire, or in the Sun. After this, wet them and drie them againe: for the oftner they doo it, the fairer they will be, without hurting your head any thing at all.
            
            
               To driue away all venemous beaſtes from your houſe. Chap. 10.
               TAke Juniper, the ſeed of Agnus Caſtus, the ſhelles of the riuer Creuiſes, Hartes-horne, the greaſe or ſuet of a Bucke, Kerſe or towne Creſſes, Organy and Bittanie, make of al theſe

drugs a dough or paſte. And when you will vſe or occupie it, burne it, for whereas the ſmoke thereof goeth, the beaſts wil void away.
            
            
               Againſt al poiſon eaten or drunken. Cap. 81.
               HAuing knowledge that any man is poiſoned, the chiefe remedy is to make him vomite the poiſon, in giuing him oile Oliue luke warm to drink alone, or mixt with warme water. And if you haue no oile, giue him butter with hot water, or with the decoction of Linſeed or the ſeed of netles, or of Semigrecū, & al theſe thinges purge the venom as wel downeward as vpward. After, hauing made him vomit diuers times, you muſt purge him with ſharp glyſters downward. Then giue him water mixt with honey, and alſo old wine enough to drinke. But if you can get good Triacle or Metrinate, they are the principall againſt poiſons, with Terra ſigillata, Acorne ſhels, and giue it him in good wine. Let his meat be the fat fleſh of old beaſts, and fat broths, ſpecially of hens and fat fiſh, and let him not ſleepe: And in continuing with this means, he ſhal be deliuered by the help of God.
            
            
               To driue away Lice. Chap. 82.
               TAke encenſe, and the Lard of a Barrow hog, properly called Barrows greaſe, boyle them together in an earthen pan or pot leaded, and with this ointment rub and annoint the place where the Lice be.
            
            
               
               ¶ Howe to make a ſoueraigne Water, that Maiſter Doctor Steuens Phiſitian, a man of great knowledge and cunning, did practiſe, and vſed of long experience. And therewith did very manie cures, and kept it alwaies ſecrete, till of late, a litle before his death, Doctor Parker, late Archbiſhop of Canterburie, did get it in writing of him. Chap. 83.
               
                  The Receipt.
                  TAke a gallon of good Gaſcoine wine, then take Ginger, Galinghale, Camomill, Sinamon, Nutmegges, Graines, Cloues, Mace, Annisſeedes, of euery of them a dramme: Then take Sage, Mint, Red Roſes, Time, Pelitorie of the wall, wild Mariorum, Roſemarie, Pennie mountaine, otherwiſe called wilde Time, Camamill, Lauender, and Auens, of euerie of them one handfull: then beat the Spices ſmall, and bruiſe the hearbes and put all into the Wine, and let it ſtande twelue howers, ſtirring it diuers tunes: Then ſtill it in a Limbecke, and keepe the firſte pinte of the Water, for it is the beſt: Then will come a ſeconde Water, which is not ſo good as the firſt.
               
               
                  
                  The ſundrie vertues and operations of the ſame, many times approoued.
                  THe vertues of theſe waters be theſe: it comforteth the ſpirites, and preſerueth greatly the youth of man, and helpeth the inward diſeaſes, comming of cold, againſt ſhaking of Palſey: it cureth the contractes of ſinewes, and helpeth conception of women that be barren, it killeth the wormes in the bellie, It helpeth the colde Gowt, it helpeth the toothach, it comforteth the ſtomacke verie much, it cureth the cold dropſie, it helpeth the ſtone in the bladder, and in the reines in the back: it cureth the Canker, it helpeth ſhortly a ſtinking breath. And who ſo vſeth this Water euer among, and not too oft, it preſerueth him in good liking, and ſhall make one ſceme yoong verie long. You muſt take one ſpoonefull of this water faſting, but once in ſeuen daies, for it is very hot in operation. It preſerued Doctor Steuens that he liued lxxx. and xviii. yeares, whereof ten yeares he liued bedred.
               
            
            
               To make a water that taketh off al ſtaining, dieng and ſpots from the handes of Artificers, that get them by working, and maketh them verie white and faire: It is alſo good for them that be Sun-burned. Chap. 84.
               TAke the iuice of a Lymmon, with a litle bay Salt, and waſh your handes with it, and let

them drie of themſelues: waſh thē againe, & you ſhall find all the ſpots and ſtaining gone. It is alſo very good agaynſt the ſcurffe or ſcabbes.
            
            
               To heale all manner of inflamation, and euil diſpoſition of the aire, leaperie faces, great ſwollen legs, or inflamed hands. Chap. 85.
               TAke flower or Amillum made of Barly, which ye ſhall eaſily find at the Apothecacaries, and ſeeth it halfe an hower in common water, then ſtraine it and put it into another new pot that is cleane and neat, putting to it a few Mallowes, Succorie, Hoppes, Endiue and Borage, and ſeeth all theſe together vntill it be diſſolved, and ad to it an ounce of Sandall, and then ſtraine all, and take in a linnen cloath as much Caſsia extracta, as will go into two nuts, and put it within the ſaid linnen cloath with the Caſsia, while the water bee hot, preſſing it ſo hard betweene your two fingers, that the ſubſtance of it may goe into the ſaid water, then put to it Suger or pennides, as much as you will. Of this drink (which is of a verie amiable ſauour) you muſt take from day to day a litle glaſſe full in the morning, lieng in your bed with your breaſt vpward, then laieng ſome linnen cloath vppon your ſtomacke, ſleepe if you can, and take of it alſo after you bee vp, and haue done your neceſſarie: the which doing,

you ſhall finde your ſelfe verie well healed in fewe daies. But here note, that this muſt be done in the Summer and not in the Winter, and hee that hath his Stomacke verie colde, may weare before his breaſt ſome peece of ſcarlet, or other cloath, and ſometime annoint his Stomacke with an Oile made for the weakneſſe of it, the perfect compoſition whereof, wee will put hereafter.
            
            
               A ſingular Ointment, which healeth all burning with fire, not leauing any 
                     •
                  katre where it hath bene. Chap. 86.
               TAke the white of two Egges, two ounces of Tutina Alexandrina, two ounces of quicke Lime waſhed in nine waters, an ounce of newe Ware, with as much Oile Roſet as ſhall ſuffiſe, and make thereof an ointment, which yee ſhall finde verie good for this that we haue ſpoken of.
            
            
               To draw an arrow head, or other yron out of a wound. Chap. 87.
               TAke the 
                     ••
                  ice of Vale
                     •
                  ian, in the which yee ſhall wet a tent, and put it into the wounde, laying the ſaid hearbe ſtamped vppon it, then make your binding or band as it appertaineth, and by this meanes you ſhal draw out the yron. And after heale the wound according as it ſhall require.
            
            
               
               For him that hath a bunch on his head, or that hath his head ſwollen with a fall. Chap. 88.
               TAke an ounce of bay ſalte, rawe honey three ounces, Cummin three ounces, Turpentine two ounces, intermingle all this well vpon the fire: then lay it abroad vpon a linnen cloath and make thereof plaiſters, the which you ſhall lay hotte to his heade, and it will altogether aſwage the ſwelling, and heale him cleane and neate.
            
            
               To know what time in the yeare hearbs and flowers ſhould be gathered in their ful ſtrength. Chap. 89.
               MEdicines are made diuers and ſundrie waies, ſome by leaues, ſome by ſeedes, ſome by roots, ſome by hearbs, ſome by flowers, & ſome by fruits. Such leaues as are put in medicines, ſhould be gathered whē they be at their full waxing, ere that their collour be changed, or that they fade any thing,
               Seeds when they be full ripe, and the moiſtneſſe ſomwhat dried away.
               Flowers ſhould be taken when they be fully open, ere they begin to fade.
               Hearbs ſhould be gathered when they be ful of ſap, and ere they ſhrink.
               Rootes ſhould be gathered when the leaues fall.
               Fruits ſhould be taken when that they be at

their full growth, or when they fall, and the heauier fruit is the better, and thoſe that be great and light in ponderation chooſe not them, and thoſe that be gathered in faire weather be better than thoſe that be gathered in raine.
               And thoſe hearbs that growe in the fieldes, are better than thoſe that growe in Townes and Gardens, and thoſe that growe on hilles in the fieldes are beſt for medicines, for commonly they bee leſſe, and not ſo fat, and haue more vertue.
               Many hearbs there be that haue ſpecial time to be gathered in: and if they be gathered in that time, they haue their full vertue to their propertie, or els not ſo good. Some doe help whenſoeuer they bee gathered, & ſome nought if they be gathered out of time: therefore marke well what I teach thee.
               Bettanie ſhall bee gathered principally in Lammas moneth, with the ſeed and the rootes, and without any iron coole, and it ſhal bee dried in the ſhadow: for medicines it may be gathered other times, but euermore it is the better if it be gotten without iron, and it muſt be gathered before Sun-riſing.
               Swinſgraſſe ſhal be gathered when it pleaſeth you, in time of neede.
               Camomill ſhall be gathered in Aprill.
               Pelitorie ſhall be gathered in June, before the Sun riſing.
               
                  Red Docke ſhal be gathered when they need daylie.
               Longdebeef ſhal be gathered in June & July,
               Peniwoort ſhal be gathered in the beginning of Winter.
               Germander ſhall bee gathered in Lammas moneth.
               Dragant ſhall be gathered in June & July.
               Columbine, in Lammas moneth.
               Addertong ſhould bee gathered in April.
               Pedelion, when thou wilt.
               Groundſell, alway after midday.
               Walwoorth, when it pleaſeth you, without Iron.
               Violet ſhould be gathered in the moneth of March, and in this moneth ſhould Violettes be put into Suger and to ſirop.
               Roſes ſhould bee gathered in Aprill and in May, and of them ſhould be made Suger Roſe
                     •
                   in ſirop of Roſes, and in the ſame moneth ſhuld oile be made of Camamill.
               Roſemarie flowers ſhuld be gathered in May.
               Sentorie, when he beginneth to flower.
               Organum, in the moneth of June.
               Solſequie ſhould be gathered the ſixteenth day of Auguſt, before the Sunne riſing, without Iron.
               Hartsſtrong ſhould bee gathered ere day in Nouember.
               Ariſtologia ſhould be gathered the ſame time
               
                  Garlike may bee taken when you neede for medicines.
               Wilde Garlke ſhould bee gathered when it flowreth.
               Gourdes ſhould bee gathered in the ende of September, when they be ripe, and dried wher the Sun may be all day.
               Wild Nep beries ſhould be gathered when they wax yellow.
               Cucumbers ſhould bee gathered when the fruit is ripe, and the fruit ſhould bee laid vnder vines, where the Sunne may not haue all his ſtrength to him in a moiſt place▪ that it may roote, for then the ſeed ſhall be good, and ful of kernels.
               Citrull when the fruit is ripe, and dried in a drie place in the Sunne.
               Calaminte ſhould bee gathered when it ſlowreth, and drie it in the ſhadow, and it wil laſt a yeare.
               Saffron ſhould bee gathered afore that the Sunne ariſe.
               Godur, that groweth among flare, ſhould be gathered when he beginneth to flower, and it may be kept three yeare.
               Drake ſhould be gathered when it flowereth, and drie him in the ſhadow, and a yeare it will laſte,
               Eleber muſt be gatherd in Harueſt time.
               Fenil ſeeds ſhould be gathered in the beginning

of Harueſt, and two year they may be kept
               The rootes of Fenell ſhould be gathered in the beginning of the yeare, and two yeares they are good.
               Baldemonie, that ſome men call Gentian, ſhould be gathered in the laſt ende of the yeare, and foure yeares he is good inough.
               The root of this hearb is vſed, and how thou ſhall ſhalt know him is this, that he be very bitter, the leſſe bitter the woorſe.
               Alſo, looke that it bee white, whole, and not hollowe within, but ſad and not brittle, nor full of powder.
               Gallingale is called in Phyiſick Typus: it may be taken at all times when thou wilt, but beſt is in the end of Ver: and three daies it muſt be laid in the Sunne, and ſo bee dried, that the moiſture rot it not, and then you muſt keepe it in the ſhadowe.
               Flowerdeluce ſhould be gathered in the end of Ver, and dried in the Sunne, and it will laſte two yeare well.
            
            
               Here followeth the ſundrie vertues of Roſes, for diuers medicines. Chap. 90.
               ROſes be colde and moiſt in two degrees: It hath theſe vertues, ſtamp it, and lay it to a ſore that burneth and aketh, and it ſhall ceaſe both the burning and aking.
               
                  Alſo it is good for the Feuer in the ſtomack, and againſt all euils that are gendred in hot hummors.
               Alſo let any woman drink it with wine, and it ſhall foorthwith teſtraine bleeding, and help the marrowes of the wombe.
               Alſo make oile of Roſes, and that is a principall Receipt for pricking in ſinewes: and the water thereof is good for ſore eien, and for hot euils, and the oile is good for head-ach to annoint therwith the temples, and the root of him is good, to drawe forth yron or other things in a mans foote, and the red Roſe is much better than the white.
            
            
               The ſundrie vertues of Lillies. Chap. 91.
               LIllies are cold and drie in the third degree and ſo ſaith Galen, that who ſo ſeetheth the leaues in water, it is a noble plaiſter for ſinewes that are ſhortned, and it is good for all maner of burnings and ſcaldings.
               Alſo when the leaues and the rootes are ſodden in olde wine, and tempered vp with honey, 
                     •
                  t is a profitable plaiſter for ſickneſſe that are ſtaruen. Alſo the water and the iuice is good for to waſh thy briſſers; and to do away the freckles on mans viſage or womans: and the roote is good to ripe therewith botches, and for to break them.
            
            
               
               Of the ſundrie vertues of Milfoyle Chap. 92.
               MIlfoyle is hot and drie in the ſecond degree, it is good to ſtanch the bloody flix, and the iuice thereof healeth the biting of a red hound: and if it bee ſod in red wine, drinke it, and it ſtayeth wormes in the wombe, and it ſoftneth hardneſſe in a mans wombe, and it helpeth the Jawndies & dropſie.
               And take the hearbe and ſtampe it and temper it with vinigre, and it will doo away blood in wounds, and it will ceaſe the toothach, when it is chewed faſting. Alſo it is good for the ſtinging of an Adder, when it is ſodden in wine, drinke it, and lay the ſubſtance thereto, and it will drawe out venome of the ſore.
            
            
               Of the ſundrie vertues of Roſemary. Chap. 93.
               ROſemarie is hot and drie: take the flowers thereof, and put them in a clean cloath and boile them in faire cleane water, vntill halfe be waſted, and coole it, and drink that water, for it is much worth againſt all maner of euils in the body.
               Alſo take the flowers & make powder therof, and binde it to thy right arme in a linnen cloth, and it ſhall make thee light and merie.
               Alſo eate the flowers with hony faſting, with ſowre bread, or els with other bread, and there ſhal riſe in thee no euill ſwelling.
               
                  Alſo, take the flowers, & put them in thy cheſt among thy cloathes, or among thy bookes, and Mothes ſhall not deſtroy them.
               Alſo, boile the flowers in Goats milke, and then let them ſtand all night vnder the aire couered, and after that, giue him to drinke thereof that hath the Tiſicke, and he ſhal be holpen.
               Alſo, if there be any man that is rammage, take the flowers and the leaues a great quantitie, and boile them together in a good quantitie of cleane water, in that Paciens Bulneat, and it ſhall heale him.
               Alſo, boile the leaues in White Wine, and waſh thy face therewith, and thy beard, and thy browes, and there ſhall no corns ſpring out, but thou ſhalt haue a faire face.
               Alſo, put the leaues vnder thy bed, and thou ſhalt be deliuered of all euil dreames.
               Alſo, breake the leaues to powder, and lay them on the Canker, and it ſhal ſlay it.
               Alſo take the leaues, and put them into a Wine veſſell, and it ſhal keep the wine from all ſowreneſſe and euill ſauours, and if thou wilt ſel thy wine, thou ſhalt haue good ſpeed.
               Alſo, if thou bee feeble with vnkinde ſweate, boile the leaues in cleane water, and waſh thy head therwith, and thou ſhalt be deliuered from that euill.
               Alſo, if thou haſt loſt appetite of eating, boile well theſe leaues in cleane water, and when the

water is colde, put thereunto as much of white Wine, and then make therein ſops, eate thou thereof well, and thou ſhalt reſtore thy appetite againe.
               Alſo, if thou haue the Fluxe, boyle the leaues in ſtrong Eyzill, and lay them on a linnen cloath, and bind it to thy wombe, and anon thy Fluxe ſhall be withdrawne.
               Alſo, if thy legs be blowne with the Gowte, boyle the leaues in water, & then take the leaues and binde them in a linnen cloath, and winde it about thy legges, and it ſhall doo thee much good.
               Alſo, take the leaues, & boyle them in ſtrong Eyzell, and bind them to thy ſtomacke in a cloth and it ſhall deliuer thee of all euils.
               Alſo, if thou haue the cough, by ſtirring or by any other way, drinke the water of the leaues boyled in white wine, and ye ſhall be whole.
               Make powder of the rinde of Roſemarie, and drinke it, and if thou bee in the poſe, thou ſhalt be deliuered.
               Alſo, take the timber thereof, and burne it to coales, and make powder therof, and then put it in a linnen cloath, and rub thy teeth therwith and if there be any wormes therein, it ſhall ſlay them, and keep thy teeth from all euils.
               Alſo, of the wood make a boiſt to ſmel therto, and it ſhall keepe thee yoongly.
               
                  Alſo make thereof a barrell, and drinke thou of the drink that ſtandeth therein, and thou needeſt not dread of any euill being therein, and if thou ſet it in the ſteld, or in thy garden, keepe it honeſtly, and it ſhall bring forth much increaſing of it ſelfe.
               And if a man haue loſt his ſmelling of the ayre, that he may not draw his breath, make a fire of the wood, and bake his breade therewith, and eate it, and it ſhall keepe him well.
               Alſo a man that hath the gowt, take oyle of Roſes, and the yolke of an egge, and the flowers of Roſemarie, and medle them together, and do it to his ſore, and he ſhall be holpen.
            
            
               ¶ How to make a ſpeciall ſoueraigne water, which is of three collours, and it is called the Mother of all waters: which is verie excellent to cure the Canker, the Pockes, or Leaproſie, or any other kinde of ſuperfluous humours, or any ſore, olde or new, and it is thus made. Chap. 94.
               TAke Turpentine foure pounde, of Frankenſence, Maſticke, of either two ounces, Alloes, Epaticke, Date ſtones, Labdanum, Caſtorum, roots of Detany, rootes of C
                     •
                  ula Campana, of each two ounces, diſtill them in a Limbecke of glaſſe, with a ſoft fire. The firſt water is cleare: the ſecond water is

yellow, & ſwimmeth aboue the other: the thirde water is reddiſh, like Saffron, and when it beginneth to be red and thicke as honey, then beginneth the third water.
               The firſt water burneth like a candle, the ſecond water curdeth like milke, and if you put one drop of the third water into a cup of drink, it goeth to the bottom, & there will it lie an hower, & then mount vp to the top, as true Bawme doth, and with this water, if you waſh your face twice a day, and chieftly your Noſethrils, it cureth the Rewme diſcending from the braine, & clarifieth the ſight. And if you wette a linnen cloth in this water, and lay it to any ſore leg or arme that hath dead fleſh, it will cleanſe it, and driue away the ach within ſix howers ſpace & it conſumeth al Apoſtumes, Ulcers, Fiſtules, Puſtules, Emeraldes, and healeth all greene woundes. And if ye dip a linnen cloath therein, and make it ſix folde, and lay it to the noddle of your necke, it healeth the Palſey: and ſo likewiſe it cureth the Gowt, or any ſinew that is drawne together therewith, hath it three or four times together warme.
               The water that is of the collour of blood, is of ſuch vertue, that if a leporous man or woman vſe thereof fifteene daies together, halfe a ſpoonfull euery day, he ſhall be healed.
               The firſt water is of ſuch vertue, that if it bee put in a freſh wounde, it healeth it in xxiiii.

howers, if he be not mortall. And it healeth all kinds of Cankers, Crepces, Noli me tangere, within fifteene daies, if you waſh them with the ſaid water euery third day, & if you make rags of cloath, and dip it in the ſame water, and lay it vpon a plague ſore, and drop one drop therein, it mortifieth the malignitie therof, and that ſhortly And if you drop one drop in the eie that hath a pearle, or is half blind, it will recouer it in eight daies without any paines: and if you drinke a ſpoonfull of it with white wine, it will recouer the ſtrangurie or diſſure within ſix howers, and breaketh the ſtone within two howers, whether it be in the raines or in the bladder. The water that hath the collour of blood is moſt precious, it comforteth the weak members, and preſerueth the bodie from all diſeaſes, and purifieth rotten blood, and healeth all diſeaſes of the Milte, and keepeth away the Gowte, and cauſeth good digeſtion, it purgeth colde and rotten blood, and putteth away ill humours, and healeth all agues. This water maſt be vſed from the moneth of Nouember, to the moneth of Aprill, and you muſt take but halfe a ſpooneful at once, nor oftener than ounce a weeke.
               The manner to make this water, ye muſt haue a glaſſe a cubit high, and fill it with Aquavite made with wine, and ſtop it well, then put it in horſ-dong, ſo that it bee not moiſt, nor too wet, leaſt the glaſſe breake, and you muſt leaue

the necke of the glaſſe without in the ayre, that glaſſe through the heate of the dung will boile ſore, ſo that the water will aſcend to the necke of the ſame, and diſcend againe to the bottome through the aire, and ſo let it ſtand thirty daies, then ta
                     •
                  e out the glaſſe, and put theſe thinges following in the water, and ſtoppe the mouth that it breathe not out, and ſo leaue it in eight daies. Laſt of all, put the glaſſe in Balneo Marie, with ſand, ſetting on a head with a receiuer well ſtopped, and make a ſoft fire, and gather the firſt water that drops cleare, but when yee ſee the ſecond water turne into redde collour, change the Receiuer, for then commeth the ſeconde Water, and that will keepe well in a glaſſe well ſtopped: The ſpices that goe to this water bee theſe, with the hearbes: Cardonum, Cloues, nutmegs, Ginger, Galingale, Zedoaire, long Pepper, Spikenarde, Lawrell berries, Smallage ſeedes, Mugwoort ſeedes, Fenell ſeedes, Annis ſeeds, flowers of Baſill, Elder flowers, red Roſes and white, lignum Aloes. Cubibes, Cardomum, Calamus Aromaticus, Maces, Germander, Frankenſence, Turmētil, Juniper, Egremonie, Sentorie, Fumitorie. Pimpernel, Dandelion, Eufrage, Endife, ſeeds of Sorrell, yellow Saunders, Fetherfoy, Aloes, Epaticke, of each two ounces, Rubarbe two drams, drie Figges, Reaſins, Dates without ſtones, ſweet Almondes, of each two ounces,

Aqua-uite to the quantity of them all, and foure times as much Suger as they be all, that is, for one pounds of Engredience, foure pounde of Suger, two pound of honey. This water is called the mother of all waters.
            
            
               A perfect way to cure the loathſome diſeaſe of the French Pockes, paines in the ioints, lameneſſe of limmes, paleneſſe of collour, lothſome ſcabbes, or any other filthy diſeaſe proceeding of superfluous or euil humours, as alſo to aſſwage ouer groſſe and foggie fat bellies, and that without danger Chap. 95.
               FIrſt, it is needfull to prouide for the ſicke bodie a cloſe and cleane chamber, out of all groſe aire, and cleane warme garmentes, both for body and legges, and at riſing and going to bed, a fire of Charecoales, for wood is not wholſome, for ſmoking: alſo they muſt not be troubled with any thing to bring them out of patience, for that corrupteth the blood, which muſt be new altered: alſo the ſicke bodie muſte eate but litle meate, and that kind of meate as ſhall hereafter be preſcribed, and at such times as ſhall be appointed, and let the ſicke body vse plaieng on ſome Inſtrumentes, or heare ſome plaieng, or tell merie tales, and haue no companie of women, for that is a moſt dangerous poiſon for the health of any perſon in that caſe.
               
                  Secondly, you muſt prepare two braſſe pots or els yron, one being foure gallons, the other ſixe gallons, one for ſtrong drink, the other for ſmall drinke: alſo, ye muſt haue cloſe couers to them of b
                     •
                  aſſe or yron, you muſt alſo prepare good earthen veſſels, with cloſe couers to keepe your drinke in, of both ſortes by themſelues: alſo, you muſt haue a Strainer of a ſearce cloath, to ſtraine your drinke after it is decoct, Inſtrumēts to take out dead fleſh, and to ſearch a ſore, and a ſyring to cleanſe any ſore being deep, with the ſame drinke. Alſo, you muſt haue a woodden veſſell to bathe the ſicke body in, at ſuch times as hereafter ſhall be appointed. Alſo, you muſt prepare cleane cloathes to drie the ſicke body after a ſweat, being warmed well firſt: other Inſtruments you ſhall need none, but only your wood raped ſmall, or turned, and the bark of the wood pounded in a Morter, and the drugs alſo ſmall, and your water which you ſhall decoct, the ſame muſt be of a good Conduit or runnin brook, verie clean without any kind of filth, Chalk water is good.
               Thirdly, for your ſtrong drink, ye muſt take your pot of foure gallons, and ſet it on a fire of coales, with foure gallons of the faire running water, then put into the ſame one pound and a halfe of your wood, ſmall raped, or turned at the Turners, but when you doo buy your wood, ſee it be not olde, and lacke moiſture, this

triall is beſt, take a litle cole burning, and lay it on the blocke before it be raped, and if it be good it will boyle vp on euery ſide of the coale, like Myrthe: Then put thereto one ounce or a litle more of the barke of the ſame wood, made in ſmall powder, then take a quarter of a pound of Cummin ſeeded put whole into the ſame, and one half quarter of an ounce of Radix and Rubarbe, and then ſtop your pot faſt, and lay paſte about the couer, and ſo faſt that no aire come out, then ſeeth it on a ſoft fire, but euer keepe it boyling, & let it boyle at the leaſt eight houres, then ſet it by, and vnſtop it not vntill it be cold, then take your Searce, and ſtrain it into a fair carthen potte, and couer it cloſe: The ſicke bodie muſte drinke of this but one draughte luke warme in the morning, and one other at night.
               Fourthlie, you muſt take your pot of ſixe Gallons, and put in it ſixe Gallons of running water, and one pound of the wood raped, and a quarter of Cummin ſeedes, and decoct it in all kinde of thing euen as the other, being cloſe ſtopped, and when it is colde, ſtraine it into an earthen veſſell or veſſels: and that muſt the partie drinke at meale, and at all other times when he liſt to drinke, and ſpare not, but draw it by.
               Fiftly, the ſick body muſt be kept very warm and not riſe out of bed before eight of the clocke,

and then eate a dozen or twenty Reiſins of the Sun. & no bread, but a draught of ſtrong drinke warm, and about eleuen of the clock, let the ſick bodie eate a litle meat, as may ſuffiſe nature, & what meat, it ſhal be here after ſhewed: then let the ſicke body walke ſomewhiles in his chāber, or read ſome booke, or play on inſtrumentes, to keep him from ſleeping: then at ſix of the clocke at night a dozen Reiſins of the Sun, & nothing els but a draught of ſtrong drink warmed.
               Sixtly, giue to the Patient to eate, theſe meats following, Chicken, Partridge, Feſant, Hen, Capon, Rabbet, Conie, Veale, Mutton, & none other, nor any ſalt, nor leauened breade, nor Rie bread, and very ſeldom roaſted, but boyled in water, & no broth nor porredge, nor any kind of ſauce: if the ſick body haue roſte, let it be but euery third meale, and no kinde of fiſh, milke, or fruites, Reiſins excepted.
               Seuenthly, once in three daies, for the firſt 9. daies in the morning let the ſick body drinke a good draught of the ſtrong drinke ſomewhat warme, & then lay very many cloathes on him, till he ſweat, for the ſpace of two howres: then eaſe ſome of the cloathes, and haue warmed linnen cloathes, & rub al the body drie ere he riſe, if hee haue any ſores that bee deepe, waſh the ſore with ſtrong drinke, and with a ſearce, and dip a litle cloath in the ſtrong drink, and lay it to the ſore, whether it be ſore or knobs.
               
                  Eightlie, after nine or ten daies be paſt, once in three daies let the ſicke body bee bathed on this ſort. Set faire running water on the fire, and put thereto a great deale of ground Juie leaues, and redde Sage and Fennell alſo, and by a good fire, when the ſicke bodie is going to bed, put the water and hearbes in a veſſell of wood, and let the ſicke body ſtand upright in it, by the fire, and take up the hearbes, and ruſh the body of the ſicke. Patient downwards, and then drie him with warme cloathes: vſe this three weekes, and by the grace of God the ſicke bodie ſhall be made whole, whatſoeuer hee bee: then if the partie be verie weake, after nine or ten of the firſt daies, let him eat euerie day at foure of the clocke in the after noone, a new layd Egge, potched in faire water, and as much new bread as will ſuffice nature, and a litle cleane wine. Uſe this diet with good regard, as before is preſcribed, and (by the grace of God) they ſhall bee perfectly cured of the diſeases aboue mentioned.
            
            
               The maner to make another kinde of Diet drinke of ſtronger operation, for the ſame diſeases, which by the practiſe only of one man, hath done very great good, aſwell in the Citie of London, as in diuers partes of the Realme. Chap. 96.
               TAke of the beſt Guaicum, moſt heauie, and full of Gum foure pound, let it be well raſe
                     •
                  
                  
with a Rape, or turned into fine chippes by a Turner, and of the ſame barkes two pound: of Cardus benedictus, which is called the bleſſed Thiſtle, half a pound, of Maiden hair, Cotrach, the flowers of wild, and garden Bugloſſe, Ana, one pound, ſweet Taſſia ſixe ounces, Anniſ-ſeed one ounce and a halfe, white Suger ſixe pound, caſt all theſe unto a wine veſſell, cleane and apt for the ſame purpoſe, vpon which, poure of the cleaneſt and beſt white wine that may be got, in quantitie one hundred and fiftie pound, couer this veſſell cloſe three daies, thē ſtrain it through an baire cloath: then keepe it in a cleane veſſell for the Pacient at dinner and ſupper, but not to drinke it in the morning and euening. Beſides the drinking of this Guaicum at dinner & ſupper, the pacient may between the times, as one bower before or after dinner or ſupper, drinke foure or fiue ounces. Alſo, your aforeſaid receits may be put in clean new, white or Claret wine being fiued and made in the preſcribed maner.
               Furthermore, the Pacient that hath the Pox, Dropſie, or Gowt, may drink among, this worthy medicine following: the doſſe or quantitie, is two ounces or more, according to the age and complexion of the Patient.
               Take Maiden-haire, clean freſh Hops, if Fumitorie, Sitrach, called Aſplenum, Sene of Alexand. of each three drams, great Centaurie roots, Liquorice, Polipodie, wilde and garden

Bugloſſe, each, foure ounces, Annis-ſeeves, Nigella Romana, the flowers of Bugloſſe, the three Sanders, Cinamon, each, five ounces, put this into twentie foure pound of the Gua
                     •
                  
                  cum water, ſodden after the deſcription in the Compoundes following: then put it in a cloſe veſſell, and ſtoppe the mouth, and when that is done, ſet the ſaid veſſell in an other ſeething kettle vpon the fire, ſo let it ſtande and ſeeth for twentie vowers faire and ſoftlie, then ſtraine it, and keepe it in a cleane cloſe Veſſell for the vſe aforeſaid: But if the Pacient be full of humors then do thus: take Sene Alexander two pound, Succa Roſarum ſolatiua, ſix pound, white Suger ſeuen pound, Rubarbe elected three ounces, finely cut, Turbit of the beſt one ounce, put theſe in a clean ſtone pot with a narrow mouth: poure into this pot xxiiii. pounde of the common Guaicum water, made in manner in the compounds following: ſtop pour pots mouth, ſeeth it in the foreſaid manner, vppon a ſoft fire xxiiii. howers, vntil it come to a thin ſirop, called Jelup, then ſtraine it, and keepe this precious purging drink for mornings, the doſe one ounce and a halfe, according to the age, complexion and ſtrength: the Pacient muſt alſo eat bread three ounces, well baked like Biſket, and the fleſh of Chicken, Hen, Capon, Partridge, Feſant, ſmall birds of the wood roſted, excell ſodden meates: and if the common drinke be too ſtrong, then the

Pacient may youre thereunto ſome ſmal clean Wine or Beere: Let the Patient bee merrie kept in a faire cleane chamber, with ſweet perfumes, not much feeding, but litle and fine, with cleane warm apparell, and a fire of Char-coles, eſchewing Venerie, wines, fruites, fiſh, groſſe 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  ottage, and white meats: care, anger, cold, much heat: and by Gods helpe yee ſhall haue preſent remedie, whether it be for the poxe, or to cleanſe the raines, or for them that bee ouer fat or foggie people, full of groſe humours, gotten with eaſe and feeding, to rebate and aſſwage their foggineſſe without hurt, but rather renew them (as it were) and make them ſeeme yoong. It helpeth alſo the Gowte, Dropſie, Sciatica, Canker and Cympanie, and many other lothſome diſeaſes, that proceed from ouer great aboundance of groſe humours, alſo for extreame paine in the iointes.
            
            
               The maner to chooſe the beſt Guaicum or Lignum vitae. Chap. 97.
               OF this wood Guaicum, there are three kindes: the firſt is blacke within, in the heart pale coloured, hauing in it ruſſet lines, verie hard and heauie. The other black within, but white without, hauing verie ſmall lines, is harde and heauie, and not ſo great as the firſt. The third is all right white within and without, hauing very ſmall lines, and the hart of this wood is the beſt, the arme of the

tree is better than the body, the boughes neere
                     •
                   the fruites haue more vertue, warmneſſe, and drineſſe, than the lower parts of the tree, which are groſer and more earthly of nature, and the more vncteous the wood is, it is the better, the ſap is not ſo good as the heart, neither the bark as good as the ſappe. But the white 
                     〈◊◊〉
                   ſweet & moſt excellent in operation, and is Lignum ſanctum, the holy wood. The barke of the ſtraight yoong branches or boughes, being heauie and white, moiſt, and without liues, harde compacted, be the beſt barkes for the Pore. All theſe wooddes called Guaiac
                        •
                     , have a Roſin, or matter like Beniamin, or pleaſant grim within the wood, which is the ſpirite or liuely helping humour in decoction for the Porzin the ſinewes, veines, muſkles, head hands, feet and the bones: No ſicknes is ſo ſharp and cruell to nature, but this precious wood wil both quickly and gently aſſwage the paine and griefe of the ſame, if it be miniſtered accordingly in decoction, namelie, to them whom either the Pox hath tormented, or els the Gowt with intollerable griefe.
            
            
               ¶ A moſt certaine and approoued remedie againſt all manner of peſtilence or plague be it it neuer ſo vehement. Chap. 98.
               TAke an Onion, and cut him ouerthwart▪ thē make a litle hole in each peece, the which you ſhall fill with fine Triacle, and ſet the p
                     •
                  eces

together againe, as they were before: after this, wrap them in a wet linnen cloath putting it to roſte, couered in the Embers or aſhes: and when it is roaſted inough, preſſe out all the iuice of it; and giue the Patient to drinke thereof a ſpoonfull, immediately hee ſhall feele himſelfe better, and ſhall without faile be healed.
            
            
               To make a ſirop of Vinegre, good for many things. Chap. 99.
               TAke ſharpe Vinigre a pound and a halfe Suger two pound and a halfe, boile it til it be a ſirrop: It will digeſt choller, Melantholie▪ and Flewme: It will make groſſe humours thinne: openeth obſtructions, prouokes vrine, expelleth naughty humors, is good againſt all peſtilent Feuers, cooleth and quencheth thirſt, and keeps the body looſe.
            
            
               To comfort the heart, and take away Melancholy. Chap. 100.
               TAke the iuice of Borage foure pounde, the flowers of Borage halfe a pound: let theſe ſtand infuſed in hot Embers fourteene howers, then being ſtrained & clarified, put to good Suger two pound, and boile it to a ſirop.
            
            
               A ſirop to cleanſe the breaſt and the lunges, the cough and Pleuriſie. Chap. 101.
               TAke Liquorice ſmall ſhred and bruiſed an ounce, Maiden haire halfe an ounce, Hyſope two drams, water two pound, let theſe lie mixt foure and twentie howers, then boile it till the

third part be conſumed, which ſtrained put in of good honey, Suger pellet, and white Suger of each foure ounces, and Roſe water three ounces.
            
            
               For ſpitting either of lightes or lungs. Chap. 102.
               TAke the iuice of Purſlane and Plantine, of each an ounce, red Corrall a dram, and bloodſtone half a dram fine powdered mixt together, vſe it.
            
            
               For wormes in yoong children. Chap. 103.
               TAke drie Lupines and make flower of them, which kneaded with hony, lay it to the ſtomacke of the childe.
            
            
               For the ſwelling of the Cods Chap. 104.
               TAke Rue ſtampt, lay it to the grieuen place, and thou ſhall haue preſent remedie.
            
            
               For him that cannot holde his water. Chap. 105.
               TAke the ſmall end of Oken leaues and ſeeth them in Claret wine, beeing well beaten, lay it as hot as may bee ſuffered vpon the yard in a plaiſter faſhion.
            
            
               For the Head-ach. Chap. 106.
               TAke the iuice of Mariorum, and put it into the noſethrils, and it will helpe you.
            
            
               
               For griefe of the ſtomacke. Chap. 107.
               TAke Maſticke, Cloues, Nutmegs, of each a dram, Mace & Sinamon of each half a dram fine powdered: then take the bottom of a brown loafe toſted and dipt in Malmeſey, ſtrawing of the ſaid powder vpon it, lay it to the ſtomacke, and it is a preſent remedie.
            
            
               For the itch. Chap. 108.
               TAke vnwrought waxe, freſh butter, Roſe Vinegre, red Roſewater, Brimſtone fine beaten, and Cloues all boyled together, make an ointment.
            
            
               A Gargill for a ſore throat. Chap. 109.
               TAke white wine, conduit water, of each a pound, roch Allum, half an ounce, two ſpoonful of honey, boyle all to a pounde and a halfe, and vſe it three or foure times a day.
            
            
               A water for ſcabbes Vlcers and puſhes. Chap. 110.
               TAke Plantine water halfe a pound, water of Oranges four ounces, Sublimate powder an ounce, put al in a double glaſſe or ſome other good veſſell, and let it boile with a gentle fire, a quarter of an hower, and take it off, and keepe it in a cleane veſſell, which vſe three or or foure ſundrie times and it ſhall heale them.
            
            
               
               To make a water to take out all ſpots out of cloath of gold, & veluet. Chap. 111.
               TAke rawe red Arſnicke, Martem Cudum, of each of them a like quantitie, and when they bee well brayed, poure ſome faire water vppon them, and putting the hearb Cinkfoyle to it, ſeeth it vnto the halfe, and then let it coole, and ſet it in the Sunne two howers: then waſh your cloath in it, and let it drie in the Sunne.
            
            
               To take ſpottes of greaſe and oyle out of all ſortes of cloath, white or other. Chap. 112.
               TAke the water that Peaſe haue bene ſodde in and ſteep your cloath where the ſpot is in it, and then waſh it with clean riuer water, and drie it in the Sunne.
            
            
               To take all maner of ſpots out of ſilke. Chap. 113.
               TAke the iuice of great and round Muſhroms of a ſharpe taſte, wet the ſpottes in it the ſpace of two howers, and then waſh them with cleare water, and then let them drie.
            
            
               To take ſpottes out of cloath. Chap. 114.
               TAke colde Lie, and lees of white Wine made a litle hot, and mixe them well together. But

you muſt take heede they bee not too hote, and waſh your cloath.
            
            
               A ſoueraigne remedie for the cough. Chap. 115.
               TAke Brimſtone beaten in powder halfe an ounce, and put it in a new laid Egge ſoft roſte, mingle it well together: then put to it Beniamin the bigneſſe of a Zich Peaſe, lightly ſtamped, and drinke it in the morning at your breakfaſt: Make as much againe at night when you goe to bed, and you ſhall be whole at the ſecond or third time. But if the cough haue holden you long, you muſt take it ſo much the oftener.
            
            
               To keepe Poultrie from deſtroying with Weiſels. Chap. 116.
               RUbbe your Poultry with the iuice of Rue or Herb-grace, and the Weiſels ſhall doo them no hurt: if they eate the lunges or lights of a Fox, the Foxes wil not eat thē.
            
            
               A briefe Treatiſe of Vrines, aſwell of mens vrines as of womens: to iudge by the colours, which betoken health, which ſickenes, and which death. Chap. 117.
               
                  IT is ſhewed, that in foure partes of the body dwelleth ſickneſſe and health: that is, in the wombe, in the head, in the liuer, & in the bladder: In what maner thou maiſt know their properties, and thereof thou maiſt learne.
               If a mans Urine be white at morrow, and red before meate, and white after meate, he is whole. And if it be fat and thicke, it is not good: and if the Urine be meanly thicke, it is good to like: and if it be thicke as Aſſe piſſe, it betokeneth headach.
               Urine that is two daies red, and at the third day white, betokeneth verie health.
               Urine that is fat, white and moiſte, betokeneth the Feuer quartaine.
               Urine that is blooddie, betokeneth that the bladder is hurt by ſome rotting that is within.
               A litle Urine all fleſhie, betokeneth of the reines, who piſſeth blood without ſickneſſe, hee hath ſome vaine broken in the reines.
               Urine that is ponderous, betokeneth that the bladder is hurt.
               Urine that is ſomewhat bloody of ſickneſſe, betokeneth great euil within the body, & namely in the bladder.
               Urine that falleth by droppes aboue, as it were great bolnes, betokeneth great ſickneſſe and long.
               Womans Urine that is cleare and ſhining

in the Urinall as ſiluer, if ſhe caſt oft, and if ſhee haue no talent to meat, it betokeneth ſhe is with Child.
               Womans Urine that is ſtrong & white with ſtinking, betokeneth ſickneſſe in the reines, and in her ſecret receites, in her Chambers full of euill humors, and of ſickneſſe of her ſelfe.
               Womans Urine that is bloody, and cleare as water vnder, betokeneth head-ach.
               Womans Urine that is like to gold, cleare and mightie, betokeneth that ſhee hath luſt to man.
               Womans Urine that hath collour of ſtable cleanſing, betokeneth her to haue the Feuer quartaine, and ſhe to die the third day.
               Womans Urine that appeareth as collour of lead, if ſhe be with childe, betokeneth that it is dead within her.
            
            
               Hereafter follow all the Vrines that betoken death, aſwell the Vrine of the man as of the Woman. Chap. 118.
               IN a whole Axis, one part red, another black, another green, and another blew, betokeneth death.
               Urine in whole Axis, black & litle in quantitie, fattie and ſtinking, it betokeneth death.
               Urine couered ouer all as Lead, betokeneth a prolōnging of death.
               
                  Urine that ſhineth rawe and right bright, & the ſkinne in the bottome ſhine not, it betokeneth death.
               Urine thinne in ſubſtance, hauing fleeting aboue, as it were a darke Skie, ſignifieth of death.
               Urine derſtie, ſtinking, and darke, with a blacke Skie within, betokeneth a prolonging of death.
               Urine that is of the collour of water, if it haue a darke Skie in an Axis, it betokeneth death.
               Urine that hath dreſtes in the bottom medled with blood, it betokeneth death.
               Urine blacke and thicke, if the ſicke loth
                     •
                   when he goeth to the Priuie, and when he ſpeaketh overtwhatt; or that he vnderſtandeth no aright, and if theſe ſickneſſes got hot from him they betoken death.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            The Table of the ſecrets in this booke.
            
               TO make a Marchpane. Chap. 1
               To gilde a Marchpane, Tart, or ſuch like. Chap. 2
               To bake Quinces. Chap. 3
               To keepe Quinces vnpared a whole yeare. Chap. 4
               To make Roſe Vinegre, Chap. 5
               A fine Sauce for a roſted Rabbet. Chap. 6
               Suger paſte to make conceites for banquets. Chap. 7
               Blanch powder for roſted Quinces. Chap. 8
               To conſerue Quinces in ſirop. Chap. 9
               To conſerue Plums or Damaſins in ſirop. Chap. 10
               Fine Rice pottage. Chap. 11
               To make Marmalad of Quinces. Chap. 12
               Marmalade of Damaſins or Pruines. Chap. 13
               Succade of peels of Oranges or Limons. Chap. 14
               To make greene Ginger. Chap. 15
               Manus Chriſti. Chap. 16
               To make Aqua compoſita. Chap. 17
               To make Aqua vitae, Chap. 18
               To make Ipocras. Chap. 19
               To make diuers neceſſarie oiles of great vertue. Chap. 20
               To make Conſerues of Roſes, Violets, Bugloſſe, Borage, Roſemarie, Succarie, Elder-flowers, Sorrell, Maiden-haire, Elacampana rootes, Acornes, Strawberies, Cheries, and Barharies, with their ſeuerall vertues. Chap. 21.22. &c. vnto the 35.
               To make all kind of ſirops. Chap. 35
               To make a Violet powder for woollen cloaths &c. Chap. 36
               A ſweet powder for Naperie & al linnen cloathes. Chap. 37
               To make a Pomeamher. Chap. 38
               A fine Fumigation to caſt on the coales. Chap. 39
               To make the ſame in Oſelets. Chap. 40
               To make a moiſt Fume vpon a fuming diſh. Chap. 41
               A fumigation for a preſſe & cloths againſt moths Chap. 42
               A perfume for a Chamber. Chap. 43
               A Damaske perfume. Chap. 44
               A ſweet ball againſt the plague. Chap. 45
               
                  To make an odorifferous white powder. Chap. 46
               A fine red powder. Chap. 47
               A ſweete blacke powder. Chap. 48
               A powder wherewith to make ſweet waters. Chap. 49
               Rules to be obſerued in diſtilling of all hearbes and flowers. Chap. 50
               To make the water of the collour of the hearbe you diſtill. idem.
               A compound water to perfume gloues &c. Chap. 51
               To make Damaske water. Chap. 52.53
               To make powder of Holland againſt the Collick. Chap. 54
               A powder to cauſe a gentle laske. Chap. 55
               A Receit to reſtore ſtrength, being weake with ſickneſſe. Chap. 56
               To make Loofings. Chap. 57
               To perfume gloues eight maner of waies. Chap. 58
               A perfume for cheſtes and cupboords. &c. Chap. 59
               To collour gloues. Chap. 60
               To make muske ſope. Chap. 61
               To make red ſealing Waxe. Chap. 62
               To keep Damaſins or plummes in ſirop. Chap. 63
               A water for the face, vſed of Gentlewomen. Chap. 64
               A water for heat in the face, and for pimples. Chap. 65
               To know, if a woman ſhal euer, conceiue or no. Chap. 66
               To make a barren woman beare children. Chap. 67
               To make women in labour haue ſpeedie deliue
                     ••••
                  e. Chap. 68
               To ſtoppe the running of the raines three or foure waies. Chap. 69
               To ſtrengthen the ſeede of man or woman. Chap. 70
               For the gnawing in a womans ſtomacke. Chap. 71
               To make ſweete Damaske powder, foure manner of waies. Chap. 72
               To make pepper ſoft, with the vertue of the ſame. Chap. 73
               To keepe Barbaries. Chap. 74
               
                  For womens breaſts that bee ſore, fiue ſeuerall waies. Chap. 75. &c.
               For the vnnaturall heat of the Liuer. Chap. 76
               For the Canker in the mouth. Chap. 77
               To make the face faire, & the breath ſweet. 78
               To make haire as yellow as golde. Chap. 79
               To driue all venemous beaſtes from your houſe. Chap. 80
               A Remedie againſt all poiſon eaten or dronken. Chap. 81
               To driue away Lice. Chap. 82
               To make Doctor Steuens water, with the ſoueraigne vertues of the ſame for many things. Chap. 83
               To make a water to take away Sunburning, ſpots and ſtainings of the face and handes. Chap. 84
               To heale leaprie faces and ſwollen legs. Chap. 85
               A ſingular ointment, for burning with fire. Chap. 86
               To draw out an arrow head or other yron out of a wound. Chap. 87
               For one that hath his head ſwollen with a fall. Chap. 88
               To know what time hearbes ſhould bee gathered in their full ſtrength and vertue. Chap. 89
               The ſundrie vertues of Roſes. Chap. 90
               The ſundrie vertues of Lillies. Chap. 91
               The ſundrie vertues of Milfoile. Chap. 92
               The ſundrie vertues of Roſemarie. Chap. 93
               To make a ſoueraigne water of three collours, called the mother of all waters. Chap. 94
               To make two the beſt and vſuall ſortes of 
                     〈◊〉
                   with the perfect manner to cure 
                     〈◊〉
                   Pockes, and other loathſome and 
                     〈◊〉
                   diſeaſes. Chap. 95.96
               The manner to chooſe the beſt Guaicum or Lignum vitae Chap. 97
               A moſt certaine and approoued remedie againſt all manner of peſtilence or plague, bee it neuer ſo vehement. Chap. 98
               
                  
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                   thinges. Chap. 99
               To comfort the heart, and take away the melancholy. Chap. 100
               A Sirope to cleanſe the breaſt and the lunges, the cough and the pleurifie. Chap. 101
               For ſpitting either of lightes or lunges. Chap. 102
               For wormes in yoong children. Chap. 103.
               For the ſwelling of the cods Chap. 104
               For him that cannot holde his water. Chap. 105
               For the headach. Chap. 106
               For griefe of the ſtomacke. Chap. 107
               For the itch. Chap. 108
               A gargill for a ſore throate. Chap. 109
               A water for ſcabbes vlcers and puſhes. Chap. 110
               To make a water to take out all ſpottes: out of cloath of golde and veluet. Chap. 111
               To take ſpottes of greaſe and oile out of all ſortes of cloath. Chap. 112
               To take all maner of ſpots out of ſilke Chap. 113
               To take ſpots out of cloath. Chap. 114
               A remedie for the cough. Chap. 115
               To keepe poultrie from deſtroieng with Weſels. Chap. 116
               A briefe Treatiſe of Vrines &c. Chap. 117
               To know Vrines that betoken death. Chap. 118
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   