
      
         
            
            
            A RELATION
OF THE TRIALL
Made before the King of France, vpon
the yeare 1600. betvveene the Bishop
of Eureux, and the L. Plessis Mornay.
            
               ABOVT
Certayne pointes of corrupting and falsifying authors,
wherof the said Plessis was openly conuicted.
            Newly reuewed, and sett forth againe, with a defence
therof, against the impugnations both of
the L. Plessis in France, & of O. E. in England.
            By N. D.
            Tertullian. lib. de praescript. aduers. haereses.
            Vinci possunt, persuaderi non possunt.
            Heretikes may be vanquished, & yet not persuaded:
            Imprinted vvith licence.
Anno M. DC. IIII.
         
         
            
            THE GENERALL CONTENTS
of this booke.
            
               IN THE RELATION.
               1. The preface and aduertisment to the Reader, conteyning
the occasion and summe of all. Chap. 1.
               
               2. The first Chalenge made by the L. Plessis to the
B. of Eureux for iustifying of his bookes, with the
Bishopps acceptance. Chap. 2. 3.
               
               3. The reply of the L. Plessis, with the agreement of
the triall. Chap. 4.
               
               4. Diuers letters both of the King, & others, about the
successe, & issue of the triall. Chap. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10.
               
               5. Certayne obseruations of the Relator, vpon the
former relation, togeather with a petition, that the
like triall might be made in England. Chap. 11.
               
            
            
               IN THE DEFENCE.
               1. The preface shewinge the authority of the Acts &
Gests sett forth of this conference in French since the
first edition of this relation.
               2. VVhat is conteyned more in these Acts. then was
sett downe in my former relation. Chap. 1.
               
               3. The examen of nine places chosen by the L. Plessis,
for his Iustification, in all which he was proued to
haue falsified. Chap. 2.
               
               4. How the conference was broken vp. & what ensued
afterward, & of a defence sett forth by the L. Plessis
after his retyring from the combatt, without a name,
more dishonorable then the combat it selfe. Chap. 3.
               
               An examen of that defence in French, as also of
the answere of O. E. in English. Chap. 4. and 5.
               
               The Conclusion with certayne considerations vpon
the whole. Chap. 6.
               
            
         
         
            
            TO THE READER.
Concerninge the causes of the
nevv Edition of this Relation;
vvith a defence therof against
diuers Impugners.
            
               
                  THREE or foure causes (good
reader) haue induced me to
renew this Relation, and to
sett yt forth againe, after three years
space, that it was first wrytten, and
printed, which was in the yeare of Iubiley
1600. The first reason is, for that 
hauing to performe afterward in this
third part of the Treatise, of three
Conuersions of England, diuers
points heere promised concerninge the
vnfolding of sundry falsifications, vsed
as well by Iohn Fox, as by some other
English wryters of our time; I thought
good to lay downe the ground of my
obligation and promise made in this
relation, to the end yt may be seene,

whether I do satisfie the same or no.
 Secondly, wheras my former narration
was very breefe, & founded only
vpo certaine letters receaued from Paris
at that time; now I hauing pervsed
the whole acts & gests of that coferēce,
betweene the B. of Eureux, & Plessis
Morney, authentically published by
authority, & by the approbatio of the
deputies themselues that were iudges in
the cause; I haue come to know many
particulars which then I knew not, &
consequently, I am desirous, that the
reader should be partaker therof in like
manner for that they may import him
not a little, being of the subiect they are.
            
                My third reason was, for that there
hath come to my hands since the forsaid
printinge of this Relation two
aduersary wrytings, published against
the same, or at least wise, against some
principall points therof, the one in

French, wrytten (as is thought) by
the L. Plessis himselfe or by some other
at his directio, after the flight from the
combat, the other in English by O. E.
otherwise interpreted Mathevv Sutcliffe.
who hath taken vpon him to be
his procter and aduocate: both vvhich
wrytings I thought good in this place,
breefely to looke ouer, & by occasion of
printing againe this Relation, to lett
the reader see, what truth or substance
there is in them; but yet with such moderation
of speach as we may imitate
therin (so neere as may be) the courteous
proceeding vsed by the aduersary
partyes in this Triall in France, as a
little after you shall heere, & in deed is
conuenient to the subiect handled,
(which is Religion) and to the persons
that treate the same.
            And albeit accordinge to the information
which men giue heere of the

nature & condition of O. E. little hope
is conceaued of any good correspondence
from him in this point, as not so
powerable ouer his owne passions, as to
performe it: yet will I hope the contrary
for this tyme, presuminge that
his so exorbitant excesse in former
wrytings, proceeding of the confidence
of a visard, wherby he thought perhaps
to passe vnknowen; but now the
maske being taken away, and euery
child being able to read and interprett
vvhat the vvords O. E. do signifie, to
witt, a person, that professeth Ecclesiasticall
life & dignity; I shall expect
somwhat from him agreeable to that
profession, vvherin I promise againe
all due correspondence on my behalfe,
to the end, that matters of Religion
may be handled in the stile they ought
to be. But if I be deceaued, and that
he vvill needs follow his ould veigne

still; I am like inough to leaue him in
that kind and giue him ouer to others;
that vvill pay him perhaps his dew,
according to that of the ghospell,Matt. 18 
               tradatur
tortoribus, quousque persouerit
vltimum quadrantem, for
there vvant neyther men, nor matter
to performe yt. And so much of this.
            For these reasons then, and some
other, I haue byn moued to sett forth
this Relation againe, togeather with
a defence therof, encreased, as yow
vvill see, and confirmed out of the authenticall
acts sett forth by publike
authority. I do thinke the reading, &
pervsing heerof, vvill turne thee (good
Reader) to singular commodity, if it
be done vvith indifferency and attention.
To Gods euerlasting glory be all
referred, vvhole euer preserue thee.
This first of December 1603.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE
OCCASION, ARGVMENT,
AND SVBSTANCE
of the ensuinge triall.
            CHAP. 1.
            NOtwithstanding (gentle reader) I may
iustly presume, that the report of the
late combat, and conference had in France,
betweene two noble and famous learned
men, concerning a triall of fidelity and falshood
in alleaginge authorityes for controuersies
in Religion, hath come into England
before this day, being a matter of so
notorious memory & done in the presence
of so great a King, and of so many Princes,
and so neare to our countrey, and vpon so
markable preambles and premisses, as heere
are declared:Causes of this Translation. yet was I moued by diuers
reasons, and considerations, to lay the same
togeather in these few sheets of paper, and
to sende them vnto thee to reade, and behold,
and (as the importance of the thing it
selfe requireth) to be considered with some
attention, and leasure. For first I weighed
with my selfe, that albeit the chalenges
which heerafter do follow, be extant in the
French tongue, and consequently like also
to be in England before this day: yet for
that euery man vnderstandeth not that language,
nor is it so probable that many men

will take the paynes to translate & diuulge
the same, to such as may haue neede or desire
to reade it; I iudged the labour not vnprofitable
to performe the same from hence.
            But besides there is another reason of
more moment, and more peculiar to this
place, to witt, that albeit the former printed
chalenges, might come to Englishmens
hands by other meanes: yet the combat it
selfe, with the true issue therof, togeather
with the manner of the triall, and particulars
occurred therin, which haue byn wrytten
hither by most authenticall partyes (as
vnto the place, where accompt of such affayres
concerninge Religion is wont to be
giuen) could not, or would not perhapps so
fully, and sincerely be related in England, as
the truth of the whole action requireth, the
reason wherof each man will easily cōsider.
            These then being the causes that moued
me to take this little paine, founded (as yow
see) in the zeale of truth and fidelity, I haue
thought good to deliuer faithfully vnto
you such letters, as haue come to my hands,
about this affayre, though not all. For that
diuers letters wrytten out of France, by diuers
other partyes reportinge the selfe same
thing, I thought not needful for me to print,
nor to multiply relations without necessity,
but to content my selfe only (for breuityes
sake) with the letter of the K. Maiestie
himselfe, and with one other of the Bishop

(that was an actor in the cause) wrytten to
the Kings Embassadour in this place, and
to some other Cardinalls besides, by them
to be exhibited vnto his Holynes,
               VVhy the B. of Eureux his relation in this matter is of much creditt. to whome
the Bishopp well knew, that the selfe same
thing would be wrytten by others also les
                  •
               e
interessed in the matter then himselfe; and
more then this, that his said letters and reporte
would be returned to France againe,
where all aduātage would be taken against
him by the aduersary, yf in any one point he
should exceed the bare truth in his narration;
which consideration may assure vs,
that he would haue great care to relate all
points both truly and modestly, as in his
letter that ensueth may be seene, that he
doth, and the same may be gathered also
plainely by the K. letter it selfe to the Duke
of Espernon, which after we shall relate.
            But yet besides these two letters, there
was another wrytten, two dayes after the
said Bishops letter, by the Popes Nuntio in
Paris vnto Cardinall Aldobrandino, and by him
to be deliuered to his holynes, wherin is related
& verified (though in very few words)
the very sameAll this is novv cōfirmed by the publique Acts printed that after do ensue. narration, which the Bishop
wryteth, as by the extract therof heerafter
sett downe appeareth. And this now
were sufficient for a preface only to this
matter, were yt not, that I haue thought
expedient also to touch breifely two other
points. First, what these two persons are,

which had the combat, and then the briefe
summe of that which passed betwene them
therein.
            For first the L. Plessis Morney
               L. Plessis Morney. his name and
person is well knowne in England; for that
aboue 20. yeares past I saw my selfe a booke
of his intituled: Of the Church, and notes therof,
translated into English, and much esteemed
by protestants of that time, for that he wryteth
more cunningly and couertly, and is
more plausible in shew both of scriptures &
Fathers, then commonly other wryters of
his Religion then were. And for that he is
a noble man borne, and of the laity and not
vnlearned in diuers languages, and in great
creditt for many yeares with this King of
France (whose Embassadour he was in England,
whilst he was yet a protestant, and
his Maiestie King only of Nauarre) and now
since his comminge to the kingdome of
France much trusted also, and vsed by him
in his ciuill affayres, and in gouernment of
the towne and country of Saumur. For these
causes (I say) and for that he hath wrytten
many bookes, he is accompted euery where
for one of the cheeife champions and head
pillars of Protestant Religion in France,
wherby this his disgrace so notoriously receaued
in that thinge, wherin he made publike
profession to be exact, to witt, in true,
and playne dealinge: must needs open the
eyes of such, as are discreet, and desirous in

deed to follow truth and decline from falshood,
and so it did vs after yow see.
            The B. of Eureux on the other side, named
Monsieur Person,
               L. Bishop of Eureux.
                is a person no lesse eminent &
markable, both for that his parents being
great Protestants, & himselfe also for many
yeares, he being a man also of great wyet, &
extraordinary memory, and by reason of his
state of life more occupied in studyes (as is
probable) then the other, comminge afterward
by readinge, and by Gods especiall
grace to be a Catholike, he became so zealous
earnest, and ardent therin (as none do
more when they are full informed) that his
greatest indeauours since his conuersion,
haue byn to conuert also others, and to impart
that light, which God hath bestowed
vpon him, to as many as possibly he can. In
which respect the K. Maiestie of France hauinge
loued him much, and esteemed also
before, when he was a Protestant, and no
lesse synce that he hath byn a zealous Catholike,
and knowinge him to be both learned
faithfull & sincere; made choyce of him
for his especially Embassadour in Rome in
the yeare 1595. to treat his great affayre for
his reconciliation to the Catholike Church,
which hath come to that happy issue, which

                  •
               ll the world seeth both for the good of his

                  •
               arson, people, and crowne.
            And thus much of these 2. persons, who
being both of them so gratefull and well

liked of the King, as I haue shewed, his Maiesties
indifferency in iudgmēt also betwene
them both, (the truth of the cause only excepted)
must needs be voyd of all suspition,
and consequently his sentence afterward
prononced on the one side (as by his letter
appeareth) must in reason be thought to
haue proceeded of the manifest difference
of the said cause, and force of truth it selfe,
which he discouered vpon that triall. Now
then to speake a word or two of the action
as it passed, you must vnderstand, that about
Christmasse last, there came forth a booke
in Paris of the aforsaid Monsieur Plessis against
the Masse;
               A briefe relation of the vvhole action. which booke making shew (as the
fashion is) of great aboundance and ostentation
of Fathers, Councells, Doctors and storyes
for his purpose, great admiration seemed
to be conceaued therof, and the Protestants
euery where began to triumph of so
famous a worke, published in their behalfe,
Whervpon diuers Catholike learned men
tooke occasion presently to examine the
said booke, & finding many most egregious
deceyts, shiftes, and falsifications therin, diuers
bookes were wrytten against it, & one
in particular by a FrenchP Fronto Duceus Burdeg. Iesuite, discouering
at least a thousand falshoods of his part.
            All the preachers of Paris in like manner,
the whole lent followinge, were occupyed
for the most part in refutinge, and shewinge
the falshood of this booke: duringe which

tyme, many Protestants of accounte were
either conuerted or greately moued heer
with,
                  Monsieur Sainct-Mary cō
                  uerted. and amonge other one Monsieur Sainct-Mary
du Monte a principal noble man o
                  •
               , Normandy,
who frequenting the preaching of
one F. Angelus a Capuchin friar, borne a
great noble man, and named before his entrance
into Religion Monsieur du Bouchage
brother to the late Duke of Ioyeus, whose state
he had of late inherited (his said brother
being dead) but left the same for that other
vocation of a poore, and humble seruant of
God.
                  Monsieur Bouchage leaue
                     •
                  h a Dukedome to be a 
                     •
                  riar. And albeit afterward vpon necessity
of the said temporal state which he had left,
he was forced for some yeares, to take a secular
life vpon him againe, and to mennage
armes, as he did, by licence of the Supreme
Pastor of Gods Church, yet after publike affayres
once accommodated, he retired himselfe
backe to his Religious habitt, & habitation
againe, where he liueth now a most
vertuous life, & preacheth with great zeale,
& singular edification of all sorts of men, &
well sheweth that his mind is superior to all
wordly welth & promotion. And these are
examples that are not found lightly among
Protestants, but are reserued as peculiar to
Christs Catholike Church, where the dew
of heauenly grace, continually falling, worketh
often such extraordinary effects. And
thus much of him.
            By this godly mans sermons then was

               Monsieur Sainct-Mary at length conuerted (the
experience of this triall not a little helping
thervnto, as after shall appeare) and made a
good Catholike with no small edification
of all men, in respect of the great humility,
and zeale he vsed in his returne to Gods
Church, and with much comfort of the K.
himselfe, to whome first before all other he
vttered his resolutiō. And heervpon as well
his Maiestie, as also the noble men that were
Protestants, and namely the Duke of Bouillon,
Monsieur Rosny, Monsieur Digiers, and other began
to call vpon this triall of Monsieur Plessis
his booke, for that it seemed to touch all
their honours, and of their Religion, especially,
when the B. of Eureux had protested
vpon his honour in the pulpit, that he could
shew more then 500. falsifications in the
same booke for his part.The issue of the chalēges. Vpon which offers
made as well by him as others, there ensued
the chalengs heerafter following. The issue
wherof was this; that when vpon the 4. of
May the K. being at his palace of Fountaynebleau,
had commaunded both partyes aforesaid
to be present, and their bookes to be
brought with them for this triall, to be
made in his owne presence: Monsieur Plessis
seemed to shrinke, and to seeke all delayes
possible, eyther to auoyde the same, or to
bring it to some longer examination, by
going ouer all his bookes and works leafe by
leafe, & lyne by lyne, as you shall heare him demaund

presently: but this being denyed by
the B. & cut of by the K. expresse cōmandement,
he appeared at last vpon the day aforsaid
with some 4. or 5. Ministers on his side.
            But the dayAll these things are more particularly sett dovvne in the defence follovvinge cap. 1. precedent before this, the B.
to deale more plainly, and shew frendshipp,
sent vnto him threescore places taken out
of his booke, vpon which he meāt to presse
him, and (as his words are) to begin the play:
wishinge him to come well prouided in the
same. Of which threescore Monsieur Plessis,
chose out nynteene, that seemed to him
most defensible, and vpon which he said he
would ioyne the combat, adding moreouer,
that he would leese his life, yf he were conuinced
therin. But the next day the triall
being begon vpon the first place, and that
found false, he would haue passed to the second,
but the B. refused so to do, except the
deputyes and iudges there present, would
first subscribe, and testifie, that this first place
was falsified, which at length they did, as
well in this, as in the rest there examined;
and Monsieur Plessis remayned in that pittifull
plight, which afterward yow shall heare by
the B. and other mens letters, vnto which
I remitt yow: beseechinge almighty Cod,
that this so notorious an accident, may
worke that consideration with yow, as the
moment & importāce of the marter requireth.
And so to his holy prouidēce I commit
yow from Rome the 10. of Iune 1600.
         
         
            
            THE CHALENGE OR PROVOCATION
MADE BY THE
L. Plessis Mornay, vnto the L. Peron Bishopp
of Eureux, the 20. of March. 1600.
            CHAP. II.
            THE L. of Plessis doth demaund and require,
that my L. Bishop of Eureux, and
all other, that blame or accuse him, to haue
vsed in his bookes sett forth, any false citations,
will vouchsafe to ioyne with him, for
subscribinge and presenting a most humble
request vnto the K. Maiestie, to intreate him
most humbly to ordaine and name such and
so many, as shall please his Maiestie, being
men of sufficient learning & vertue, before
whome the said L Plessis may verifie from
leafe to leafe, & from lyne to lyne, all authorityes,
which he hath cited in his said books. And
that this triall be made by such copyes and
bookes, as haue byn printed in those places,
and in those vniuersityes, which they of the
Roman Church hould not for suspected.
In wittnesse wherof I the aforesaid Plessis
Mornay haue heere put to my hand & seale.
At Paris the 20. of March in the yeare one
thousand six hundred.
         
         
            
            THE ANSWERE OF THE
B. OF EVREVX
to the former Chalenge the 25. of March 1600.
            CHAP. III.
            
               
                  HAVING receaued (good Reader) this
Chalenge, wherof not only the report
and brute, but the copyes also themselues
and already spread abroad, wrytten and subscribed
by the L. of Plessis: and consideringe
that this is not a chalenge of one priuate
man to another, but rather of one party or
side against the other; it seemed that the interest
of the commō cause of Gods Church,
did not permitt eyther to lett it passe without
answere, or to answere it secretly. For
as the end of this his offer is, in case it be refused,
by such refusall and sylence of Catholiks,
to gaine a publike iustification of his
books and wrytinges: so ys it conuenient,
that may answere to the same be also publike,
& that the enemyes of Gods Church
do not gett that aduantage, as to publish
one thing & conceale the other. And therfore
to the end that both heauen and earth
may see, and behould how I do proceed in
this matter;Acceptance of the offer by the B. I make yt knowne by this my
hand wryting both to him, and to all other,
that shall read the same; that I do accept of

his offer, and chalenge, and do require of
him againe to cause the same to be put in
execution, and not to end only in words:
                  And for my part, that all hinderance therof
may be remoued, I protest that I am presently
ready, and do desire out of hand to
come to the very point of shewinge the falshoodes,
without byndinge my selfe to that
large & wearisome methood of examining
his late booke against the Masse, leafe by leafe,
and lyne by lyne, as he requireth. Which demaund
of his;Diuers shifts discouered. yf we should yeld thervnto,
would vnder a faire protext of triall, make
his offer equiualent to a flatt refusall. For
besides that there will hardly be found out
any deputyes of such patience to try the
matter, but they wilbe wearied before they
haue examined in this manner, the tenth
part of this his worke: There will be found
also in euery leafe some allegations not so
clearly false as the rest, the which yf we
shouldThis is seene aftervvard by his dealinge in the defence follovving cap. 2. passe ouer, then would he take
them, as admitted by vs for true, and so take
wittnesse therof to the preiudice of the Catholike
Church. And if we stay and striue
about them, he would then of purpose
settle the whole disputation vpon the first
of those, which he should thinke might
longest be continued, to hinder therby the
examininge of the rest.
                  For these causes then, as also for that yt
appertayneth notto him, who is accused of

falsifications, to choose out the points vpon
the which he is to be examined, but to them
rather, which do accuse him, to propose
the articles, which they are to obiect against
him: For these causes (I say) see heere (good
reader) the protestation I make before God
& man: I protest that I do bynd my selfe to
shew him in any place furnished of bookes,
and in such company of capable men, as it
may please the K. Maiestie to ordayne, yea
in the presence of his Maiestie (yf it may
please the same to take contentment to be
present at some part therof) fiue hundred
enormous,A nevv offer and chalenge to Plessis for 500. places corrupted by him. and open falsifications, without
any amplification or exaggeration, and all
these conteyned in his only late booke against
the Masse. The which fiue hundred
falsifications, I will choose our amongst a
farre greater number, to th' end I may auoid
tediousnesse, and I will choose them all so
playne and manifest, as there shall be no need
of any further disputation to proue & conuince
them, then the only openinge of the
bookes which himselfe doth alleage.
                  And more ouer I say, that yf after this our
conference ended, he will take vpon him
for his part, to choose amongst all the citations
of his booke, or of his bookes (because
                        •
                     
he speaketh in generall) any such authorityes,
as he thinketh most sure, and to make
most for his aduantage, & most against vs:
I do bynd my selfe for conclusion of all to

refute the whole choice,Plessis his bookes named & shewed to be corrupte. that he shall haue
made therof, & to shew that neyther in his
said booke against the Masse, nor in his Treatise
of the Church, nor in his, Common welth of
Traditions, is there to be found so much as
any one place among them all, which is not
eyther falsely cyted, or impertinent to the
matter, or vnprofitably alleaged. And this
will I shew by the very texts of Greeke and
Latyn copies, of the authors themselues
printed at Geneua, Basill, Heydelberge, & other
townes of Protestants.
                  All which notwithstandinge I desyre
should be vnderstood, as not spoken against
the honour in particular of the L. Plessis,
whome in all other things, which concerne
not the interest of Religion, I esteeme accordinge
to his qualityes and meritts. Neyther
do I heerby pretend to blame him for
any other thing, then that he hath byn ouer
credulous in beleeuing the false relations &
collections of others, that haue endeauoured
to abuse the industry & authority of his
pen. And wheras he demaundeth instantly,
that I should ioine with him to present a
supplication vnto the K. Maiestie for triall
aforesaid: I declare againe by this my wrytinge,
that I do wholy agree thervnto, and
ioyne with him therin,Courteous 
                           ••
                        eaty vvith Plessis. & do make accompt
for this present tyme to haue subscribed
thervnto, yea (yf need were) with my owne
proper bloud, conceauing infinite gladnes,

that a
                        •
                     ter so many admirable victoryes,
which his Maiestie hath gotten both of his
enemyes by his valour, and of himselfe by
his clemency, the good Angell of France
doth now againe open to his Maiestie the
way, to obtayne another victory no lesse
glorious then the former, wherby he may
as another Constantine, after peace and tranquillity
restored to his temporall estate, restore
also the like peace and tranqui
                        •
                     lity to
the state of God, which is his holy Church.
For that this disputation shall not be like to
the others of former tymes, wherin were
examined matters of doctrine, & the truth
therof, as also of the true interpretations of
holy scriptures,The quality of this disputation or conference. and other such like: In examination
wherof, the shifts and sleights of
the disputers, and other disguisinge of the
matters, might make the truth vncertayne
to the hearers. But heere all questions in
this disputation, shall only be questions of
fact, whether places be truly alleaged, or
no; For triall wherof, yt shall only be needfull
to bringe eyes for iudges to behould,
whether the citations which we do accuse
of falshood, be so indeed in the authors, as
Plessis hath alleaged in his booke. And yet of
the ouerthrow of these so many falsifications
gathered togeather, ensueth the ouerthrow
and dishonour of the cause which is
defended by such weapons.
                  And consequently we are much bound

to the holy prouidence of almighty God,
that he hath permitted in this last assault of
heretikes,The importance of this combatt. the ministers of France to haue
placed all the heads of their false impostures
and deceytfull dealings vpon one body, to
the end they may be all cutt of at one blow.
And that the simple people by them abused,
seing discouered the false & vnfaithfull
dealings of those, vpon whose fidelity they
groūded their faith; may forsake them heerafter,
and returne to that faith, which is the
pillar and sure ground of all truth.
                  Wherfore to the end, that this happy successe
may be brought to effect without delay,
not only I do subscribe most willingly
togeather with the L. of Plessis, to present his
request to his Maiestie, but also do further
promise him in the execution therof, to vse
all sweetnes, modesty, & louing proceeding
towards his person;Bitter speeches in conference about religion reprehensible. for that I esteeme yt a
thinge most conformable to reason, that
combatts which proceed of charity, should
be tried with charity; & that as in old tyme
in the matrimoniall sacrificos that were ordained
for peace, and concord betwixt man
and wife, the gaules of beasts offered vp
were taken out: euen so in the disputations,
which are vndertaken for the peace and
vnion of the spouse of God (which is his
Church) the gaule and bitternes of hatred
and euill will be taken away.
                  
                     Made and
subscribed by me in the Castle of Condie
                        
being the house of the B. of Eureux 
                        the 25.
of March in the yeare one thousand six
hundred.
                     
                     By me Iames.
B. of Eureux.
                  
               
            
            This is the answere and acceptance of the Bishopp,
full of considence, witt, and medesty, as to the reader
must needs appeare: now lett vs see the reply of Plessis
Mornay no lesse captious and subtile, them this
is plaine, simple, and sincere.
         
         
            THE REPLY OF THE
L. PLESSIS TO THE FORMER
answere, published by the B. of Eureux vpon the
Chalenge made vnto him by the said Plessis.
            CHAP. IV.
            WHEN I had vnderstood (gentle Reader)
the L. B. of Eureux gaue forth,
that the places of the fathers quoted by me
in my books, were falsely cited: I sent him
a certayne Chalenge wrytten, and subscribed
by my owne hand of the date of the 20.
of March 1600. The which since that time,
the said B. hath caused to be printed & published,
though I sent the same to him priuately
by the way of his owne brother.
Heerevpon notwithstanding, my L. Bishopp
hath caused to be printed a certayne aduertisment
to the Reader, of the date of the 25.

of March, the which is now cryed about the
streets in this citty; and this in steed of sendinge
me his priuate answere by the same
way I sent to him.The first cavill of Plessis vpon nothing. Iudge (Reader) whether
in matter of prouocation (for so he calleth
my chalenge) this manner of proceeding be
to be receaued, and not rather subiect vnto
sinister interpretation. Yet notwithstanding
the euent perhaps will make men iudge
better of his intention, whervnto willingly
I reserue my selfe.
            And of this my priuate chalenge to him,
as of one particular man to another, he maketh
by & by a publike defiance of one part
to another; as they which in an army do
make their priuate quarrells, to be the publike
cause of the whole natiō. Iudge heere
againe (Reader) of this manner of proceeding
in a conference of Religion,2. Cauill contrary to the B. his owne words. the which
should tend to reniute, and ioyne togeather
mens mynds, and not to disunite their affections.
Consequently he flyeth the examination,
vnto the which I do submitt my
books before the K. deputyes from leafe to
leafe and from lyne to lyne, and fayneth that he
feareth the wearynesse of the deputyes.3. Cauill, for that the Bishopps, way offered is more easy and short.
Iudge heere againe (Reader) yf this triall
may be made with more comodity or lesse
labour, then I haue offered. Wherfore to
this againe I answere, that we will hould
heerin so easy, & short method of triall, that
I dare bragg, that this other paine shalbe

turned into pleasure most gretefull. But
that which greueth him (neyther can he
dissemble yt) is, that he feareth (as he saith)
that of some false citations, whose falshood
is lesse euident: (if he passe them ouer) I wil
take witnesse, as though they granted them
to the preiudice of the Catholike Church:
But the truth is, that he doubteth least by
his flyinge of my manifest verityes, I will
make a preiudice against his cauillations &
calumniations. For seeing this difference betweene
vs may be decyded by only true
See this afterward cō
                  tradicted by himselfe. readinge of that which is wrytten; what
means shall I haue in this triall to deceaue
the iudgment or rather the sight of the
deputyes.
            He skyrmisheth finally,Defence. cap. 2. sayinge, that he
will shew me 500. false citations by number,
but men will not easily beleeue him,
who know that such bragging without effect,
hath continued already 20. yeares and
more. And therfor heervnto I haue but one
word to answere, which is, that when we
meete, we shall seeNow it is seene by the tryall. what he can doe. And
therfore not to make many words which
serue for nothinge, but to put of the things
themselues, I will (notwithstandinge all
this) take myne offer, as accepted by him.
And euen now to this intent, I haue intreated
my L. Mareshall of Bouillon, who goeth
to take his leaue of the K. at his pallace of
Boys de Vincens, to present vnto his Maiestie

my most humble request to this effect, by
the which I do beseech this Maiestie, that
it will please him to ordaine some deputyes
to the end aboue mentioned. Which petition
if it please God to prosper and blesse, I
hope it wil proue a good preamble for some
greater designment, worthy the magnanimity
of our King, towards some holy reformation
of the Church in his Kingdome, by
the meanes wherof, we shall see in this our
one only King,Hereticall flattery. three most great Emperours,
and their vertues represented, to wit a Caesar
in conqueringe; an Augustus in pacifyinge of
his estate; & one that flieth higher then any
Constantine in restoringe the whole Church
of Christendome by the example of his
owne reformed Kingdome.
            This our requeste recommended by me
to the said L. Mareshall,
               Great dissimulation: as vvill appeare after by the euent. was yesterday the last
of March so earnestly by him presented to
his Maiestie, as by his answere he giueth me
no small hope, that very soone he will giue
vs meanes to effectuate our desires: And the
more to hasten the matter, I haue againe
this morninge intreated most humbly his
Maiestie by my letters; so as now there remaineth
nothing but to beseech the same of
God, as I do withall my hart, for his glory,
& for the instruction of his people. And so
heerafter an end of al words about this matter.
Wrytten at Paris the first of April. 1600.
Plessis.
            
            
               
HItherto are the chalenges, answers and
replies of these two partyes: which the
K. Maiestie hauinge pervsed, and seeing so
great shew and confidence to be in both for
entring the combatt, he gaue very nobly &
Christianly, his royall assent thervnto, as by
the ensuing letters of the whole fact & circumstances
therof doth appeare. And finding
presently some relenting and drawing
backe in the one party (as by the said letters
yow shall see) he further layd his full commandement
vpon them both, for performance
of their offers, and consequently
the triall was made at Fontayne-blea
                     •
                  
                some
foure or fiue dayes after, in the presence of
his Maiestie & Princes of bloud, with many
of the greatest nobility, with those particularityes,
which the said ensuing letters will
represent vnto yow. But yet before all, I
haue thought good to sett downe the K.
owne letter, though short, and briefe, yet
very substantiall and pithy, relatinge very
prudently in few words the successe of that
triall, with the good effect, that might be
hoped therof for conuersion of many Protestants,
that are not peruerse and willfull.
It was wrytten at Fontayne-bleau where the
meeting was, the very day of the triall: and
for the worthinesse therof and due respect
to so great a personage, yt shall go both in
French & English, for them that vnderstand
both languages.
         
         
            
            COPPIE DES LETTRES DV ROY
A MONSIEVR D' ESPERNON.
            CHAP. V.
            
               
                  
                     Mon amy.
                  
                  
                     LEdiocese d' Eureux agaigne celuy de Saumur,
& la doulceur, dont on
                           •
                        y a proced
                           •
                        ,
oste 
                           •
                        occasion a quelque Huguenot, que cesoit,
de dire que rien y eut force que la verité.
Ce porteur y ostoit, qui vous contera
comme i'y ay faict merueilles. Certes c' est vn
des plus grands coups pour l' Eglise de Dieu, qui s' est
faict ily long temps, suyuant l' eclarcissement de cest
erreur. Nous rammeinerons plus de separez
de l' Eglise en vn an, que par toute autre voy
en cinquante. Il y a vn long discours d'vn
chascun, qui seroit trop long a discourir par
escript. Il vous dira la façon, que ie suis d'auis
que mes seruiteurs tiennent, pour tirer
fruict de ce saincte oeuure. Bon soir mon
amy. Sachant le plaisir que vous en aurez:
Vous estes seul a qui l'on le mande. Le 5. de
May. 1600.
                  
                  
                     Henry.
                  
               
            
            
               Au dessus de la lettre.
A mon Cousin le Duc d' Espernon.
         
         
            
            THE COPIE OF THE K. OF
FRANCE HIS FORMER LETTER TO
the Duke of Espernon, concerninge the late
triall, had betwene the B. of Eureux, and the
Lord Plessis, translated into English.
            CHAP. VI.
            
               
                  MY Friend. The Diocesse of Eureux
hath ouercome the Diocesse ofFor that Plessis is gouernour of Saumur.
                      
                     Saumur,
and the sweet manner of proceedinge
that hath byn vsed, hath taken away all occasion
to any Hugenot whatsoeuer he be, to
say, that any force hath byn vsed, beside the
only force of truth: The bearer heerof was
present at the combatt, who will informe
yow what maruayles I haue done therin.
Certanily it is one of the greatest blowes, that hath
byn giuen for the Church of God this long while, for
the manifestation of this error. Byvvould god these meanes were vsed in England. this meanes
we shall reduce more in one yeare of them,
that are separated from the Church, then by
any other way in 50. yeares. There were a
large discourse to be made of each of their
actiōs, but the same were to long to wryte.
The bearer shall tell you the manner, which
I would haue all my seruants to obserue for
reapinge fruite of this holy worke. Good
night my friend. And for that I know what
pleasure yow will take heerof, yow are the
only man to whome I haue wrytten yt.
This 5. of May. 1600.
                  
                     Henry.
                  
               
            
            
               The superscription.
To my Cosyn the Duke of Espernon.
         
         
            
            EXTRICT DV POSTSCRIPTVM
DE LA LETTRE DE CELVY QVI
enuoy a ceste Coppie dela lettre du Roy a Rome.
            CHAP. VII.
            
               
                  
                     Monsieur.
                  
                  
                     I
                           •
                         vous enuoyé la coppie de la lettre du
Roy, qu'il a enuoyé a Monsieur d'Espernon
sur la dispute de l'Euesque d'Eureux, contre du
Plessi-Mornay pour verifier son liure, qui s'est
de tout trouué faulx, & s'en est allé cacher
comme vn regnard. Dieu conduise tout a
bonne fin a sa gloire, & salut des ames.
                  
               
            
            
               An extract of the Postscript of the letter of him
that sent this coppy of the forsaid K. letter,
to the French Embassadour in Rome.
               
                  
                     My Lord. I do send yow heere, the coppy
of the Kings letter wrytten to the Duke of
Espernon, about the disputation of the B. of
Eureux against Plessis Mornay, for iustifyinge of
his booke, found altogeather false, and he is
gone to hide him selfe like a Fox. God conduct
all to a good end for his glory, and saluation
of mens soules.
                  
               
            
            
               Thus much do wryte the King and his secretary,
the one to the Duke of Espernon, the
other to Monsieur Sylary Embassador in

Rome, & both of them present at the conference.
The Kings letter as yow see, is very
substantiall: & yt seemeth his Maiestie was
greatly moued himselfe by the seeing and
hearing of this combatt. For so much as he
affirmeth so resolutely, that yt was one of the
greatest blowes, that had byn geuen for the Church of
God a long while, & for discouering the erroneous
proceedings of Protestants. The secretary
also auoucheth as yow see, the falshood
found in Mornayes booke, and that for
shame therof he was gone to hide himselfe like a
Fox. Now shall yow heare three other letters,
relating more particularly the circumstances
of this conference, with the Acts &
successe therof, though all very breifely in
respect of the Acts themselues.
            
         
         
            THE COPIE OF THE LETTER
OF MONSIEVR PERON B. OF EVREVX,
to the L. Silary Embassadour for the K. of France
in Rome, the 10. of May 1600.
            CHAP. VIII.
            
               
                  
                     My Lord.
                  
                  AT length the victory of the combat betwixt
the L. Plessis and me remayneth
to the Catholike Church, and after many
tergiuersations, which he vsed for the space
of 5. or 6. dayes at Fontayne-bleau, I sent him
on wednesday the third of May, threescore

falsifications taken out of his booke, to begin
the play withall, for him to prepare
himselfe to answere the next day. Of them
he chose out 19. the which he went & told
the King the next day, that he had chosen
forth, examined, and found true, and that
he would loose his life, yf any one of them
were proued to be falsely cited. After dynner
the same day in the same place, he came
forth in the presence of his Maiestie, and of
7. or 8. Princes,States present at the combatt. and of the L. Chancelour of
France, and other officers of the crowne, and
Counsellors of State. Where first his Maiestie
declared both by himselfe, and by the
L. Chancelour, that he would not in any wise,
that in this conferēce should be handled any
point of Catholike Religion, wherof he
doubted nothinge, and knew also that the
iudgment therof pertained vnto the Sea Apostolike,
but only of the particular busynes of
the L. of Plessis, whether he had falsified the
texts of the Fathers or no? I added that
when Hunnericus K. of the Vandal
                           •
                        s would
haue had the Catholiks dispute with the
Arrians, Eugenius Archbishopp of Carthage (as
Victor of Vtica rehearseth) answered,Vict. l. 2. de persecut
                           •
                         Vandalica. that he
could not do yt, without the consentment
of other Bishopps, & chiefly of the Church
of Rome, which is head of all others: & that
this my entring into the present conference,
was not for that I bare lesse respect vnto the
Seat Apostolike, then that holy Bishop did.
                  
                     
But because there was no questions of
Religion heere to be discussed,The only point to be handled. but only to
shew the falsifications of the L. Plessis, about
the which I was well content to haue the
iudgment of the assistants, for as much as
appertained to the knowledg of Grammer,
to witt, whether the L. Plessis had corrupted
the words of the authors or no, but not as
touching points of diuinity, the which the
K. Maiestie had already very wisely forbidden
vs to treat, for that he will not heerin
follow the example of K. of Iuda, which
vsurped the incensour, and the function of
priesthood, but rather of Constantyne & Theodose,
and other religious Emperors in remittinge
the decision of Ecclesiasticall matters
vnto the Church.The manner of the combatt. This done we began to
dispute, & I began to obiect vnto him those
places, which himselfe had chosen out amongst
threescore, sent to him by me the
day before, following therin the same order
that he had taken in choosing them out, the
which all were conuinced of falshood, in order
as they were proposed, & sentence was
pronounced against him vpon euery place
by the heretiks themselues, which assisted
him there, and all with one voyce condemned
him.
                  The King in this conference hath shewed
himselfe so wise,The K. iustly praised. so intelligent, so affectionate,
& so zealous, taking vp the argument
against him at euery occasion, and pressing

him by disputation, and so conuincing him
of diuers falshoods; as he hath shewed manifestly
his witt, and affection towards the
Catholike Religion, admirable to all France,
which now doth shed teares for ioy, to see
their King to excell, as much all others in
piety, deuotion, and zeale towards the aduauncement
of Gods Church, as he hath
surpassed them in valour and victory. This
first conference ended,Plessis fell sicke of greefe the L. Plessis goinge
from the combatt pale, astonished, and maruelously
confounded fell into great conuulsions,
vomitinge, & tremblinge of his body
for the rest of that day; and for all the day
followinge was possest with a strange vniuersall
tremblinge of all the members of his
body, and euer synce hath remayned sicke,
and hath not byn able, nor durst shew himselfe.
I pray God this may serue not so much
to his confusion, as to his cōuersion: whome
I beseech also to graūt you my L. a good &
a happy life. From paris this 10. of may 1600.
                  
                     Your humble and affectionated seruant.
Iames B. of Eureux.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Postscript.
               This letter which I wryte vnto your honour,
is a copy of that which I wryte, to
Cardinall Aldebrandino, and to the Cardinall
of Aux, because the bearer, vrged by the
post, hath not giuen me leasure to do
otherwise.
            
            
               
               The superscription.
               To my Lord.
               The L. Silary, the K. Counselour of his Counsell of
State, Embassadour for his Maiestie at Rome.
            
         
         
            AN EXTRACT OF ANOTHER
LETTER VVRITTEN BY THE
PopesClaudius Ragonius episc. Rhegiensis. Nuntio, resident in Paris, vnto Cardinall
Aldobrandino the Popes Nephew in Rome:
the 12. of May 1600.
            CHAP. IX.
            I HAVE freshly receaued newes from Fountaine-bleau
of the prosperous successe of the
conference betwene the B. of Eureux, and
the L. Plessis Mornay. The Bishopp hath conuinced
manifestly by the iudgment and sentence
of all the assistants, the falshoods, as
he had before promised. Wherfore the said
Plessis was so ashtonished, and troubled, that
he fell presently sicke of an Ague. The King
himselfe in this conference hath shewed
great vnderstandinge, and no lesse zeale to
the Catholike Religion. The whole redoundeth
much to the confusion of the Hugonotts,
heere, who held Plessis for their S.
Augustine, &c. Paris the 12. of May 1600.
         
         
            
            THE WORDS OF ANOTHER
LETTER VVRITTEN FROM PARIS
the 10. of May, about the same matter by a gentleman
of accoumpt.
            CHAP. X.
            HEERE hath byn some 4. dayes past a
great conference at Fontayne bleau 15.
leagues hence, betwene Monsieur Peron B. of
Eureux, & Monsieur Plessis Mornay Counselour
to his Maiestie Gouernour of Saumur, and
generall of the Hugonotts. The K. with other
Princes were present, and iudges chosen &
appointed for both partyes. In the end Plessis
Mornay was vtterly disproued and confounded
by a generall consent of both sides, and
shamed, in so much as the K.The Kings oath. rose vp from
his place & swore Ventre S. Gry, he had heard
and seene inough of Plessyes falsityes, & that
by Act of Parlament he would cause his
bookes to be burned, sayinge that himselfe
had all his youth tyme ben abused, and carryed
away with their corruptions. He presently
sent word vnto the Duke of Espernon,
sayinge that the B. of Eureux had gotten the
gouernement of Saumur, and willed that the
Doctors & Preachers in Paris should be aduertised
therof to publish yt, and so yt is in
pulpitts with great ioy and thanks to God.
            The Hugonotts are stroken more dead, with

with this accident,Hugonotes much moued with the successe. then yf they had lost a
battle of 40. thousand men, & Plessis Mornay
himselfe is fallen sicke vpon yt, vomitts
bloud, and lookes like himselfe. There was
present of Plessis side a great Hugonot of accoumpt
amōg other, called Monsieur du Gramond,
who seing the euent of that conferēce,
said, that he neuer in his life durst follow
Monsieur Plessis for a Captayne, but now he
would lesse follow him for a diuyne. It is
hoped that the said Gramond will become a
Catholike vpon yt, & Monsieur du Rosney also;
and heresie was neuer so likely to go to
wracke in France, as at this present, &c.
Paris this 10. of May 1600.
            
               An addition of the translatour.
               HITHERTO are the letters which I
haue thought good to translate out of
French, & to sett downe in this place concerning
the euent of this triall and combat,
as also of the great and high honour, which
the most Christian King of France hath gayned,
by being present & furthering the same
in his royall person. Which act will be vnto
him (besides the benedictiō of almighty God
t
                     •
                  erby gayned as we hope) an euerlastinge
praise with all posterity. And yf yt might
please the same mighty hand of our Sauiour,
by his holy grace to inspire the heart

of herThis petition may better be made now to his royall Maiestie as more intelligēt in such affayres, & better enclyned to heare truth. 
                  Maiestie of England by the example of
so famous a fact of her neighbour and colleague,
and deare Cosyn the K. of France,
to take the same course in England, and to
heare and permitt the like triall betweene
such Catholiks, as would offer to prooue, &
conuince the like falshoods & falsifications;
(and greater also perhaps) in the chiefe protestant
wryters of our nation, as Iewell, Fox,
Fulke, & the like: and that some of the learned,
and zealous of the other side, might be
intreated or commaunded toe defend the
same; or if they refuse this, then at least some
competent number of equall iudges, might
be assigned on both sides to heare the matter,
with the same lawes and conditions as
the matter passed in France, to witt, that no
point of controuersie or disputation be admitted
to be disputed of, but only matter of
fact discussed: As for example, whether such
and such places and authorityes as are cyted
& quoted in their wrytings, out of Fathers,
Doctors, Councells, and storyes, and are
auouched by Catholiks to be falsified, be so
or no? If this (I say) might be obtayned
(seeing larger triall & disputation, so often
and earnestly by vs demaunded, cannot be
had) and that by the wisdome and authority
of her Maiestie & her honourable Councell,
this at last might be brought to passe;
yt would be an infinite comfort to all sincere,
and true meaninge men of all sides,

which desyre indeed to know the truth.
               And as for the triall it selfe, yt would be
more easy, breefe and pleasant vnto her Maiestie
and other assistants, whosoeuer they
should be; For that as the B. of Eureux well
noteth before, yt wilbe sufficient for this
triall, to bringe only eyes, and to open the
books, whence the authorityes are cyted.
And to the end that some tast before hand
may be taken of the matter, which would
breake forth in such a triall, concerning the
Protestants part; I haue thought good to
adde these few obseruations that do ensue,
which are of a person that would willingly
offer himselfe in this seruice, or at least
to send, and represent some part of those
obseruations, which to this effect he hath
gathered.
            
         
         
            CERTAINE OBSERVATIONS
VPON THE FORMER NARRATION.
            CHAP. XI.
            THOVGH yt be hard for any man to reflect,
and make obseruations vnto himselfe,
of what may best be noted, by the precedent
story & relation; yet to help the Readers
memory, & to stirre vp somwhat more
his vnderstandinge, and discourse about the
premisses, I haue not thought amisse to resent

in part by this postscript, what occurreth
vnto me in this behalfe.Act. 1. And first of all
is the wonderfull prouidence of almighty
God in conseruation, and continuation of
the ould ancient, Catholike, Apostolike, &
vniuersall faith left at the assension of our
Sauiour, vnto his followers and visible
Church that then was, and spread by them
miraculously in very short space ouer all the
world,The primitiue Cath. Church. and continued euer since by tradition,
and succession of one age to another
vntill our tyme, vnder the protection and
mighty powerable defence of the same
Lord and Sauiour, and vnder the gouernement
of his only espouse the said Catholike
Church.1. Tim. 4. Against which Church & discent
of faith therin,2. Tim. 3. though many new fantasyes
and deuises of particular men (which holy
scriptures call heresies) haue spronge vp in
euery age with fresh and glisteringe titles,3. Pet. 2.
               of pure ghospell, of new reueyled truth, of godly reformation,
and other like pretenses; and that
God for more triall and exercise of his said
Church,Causes of heresies and their ends. & for the speedier redresse perhaps
of some abuses, and corrupt manners crept
into some part therof, hath permitted the
said new inuentions to preuayle, grow, and
ruffle for a tyme (as by experiēce of all ages
we haue seene) yet euer in the end he bringeth
the same to confusion, and shame, accordinge
to those words of the Psalme.Psalm. 76 
               Percussit
inimicos suos in posteriora, opprobrium sempiternum

dedit eis. 
               He striketh his enemyes in
the hinder parts (that is towards the end of
their ruffle) and confoundeth them with
euerlasting shame. Which prophesy of the
Psalmist is principally to be vnderstood of
hereticall enemyes,Tert. l de praes rip
                     •
                  . aduers. haereses. Ep phan. cont. haer. as Tertullian, Epiphanius &
other anciēt Fathers wryting against them,
do interprete, and the experience of like end
in all heresies past doth make yt playne.
            And this shame and confusion of heresies
& heretiks,Foure confusiōs of heresies. (which Gods prouidence doth
heere fortell, and in tyme also bringeth to
passe so manifestly, as the whole world may
be wittnesse therof) consisteth principally
in foure points,1. Diuisiō amonge thēselues as holy Fathers do note.
First that euery new sect, diuideth it selfe
quickly into many others sects and heresies,
which S. Augustine sheweth largely of the Arrians,
               Aug. lib. 
                     •
                  . cont epist. Parm. c. 4. & l. 1 de bapt. cont. Donat. c. 6.
and Donatists, and Staphilus, Lyndanus, and
other wryters of our time do shew the same
of Luthers sect, diuided into so many sects &
branches in so few yeares, as all the world
seeth. And Stanislaus Rescius, a learned man of
Polonia
                     •
                  
                in his late booke of the Atheisine, of
haeretiks, sheweth out of the wrytings of protestants
themselues, that in the yeare 1596.
when he wrote his booke (which was but
4. yeares past) that there were now extant
in the world 270. different sects, all risen
out of Luthers, from the yeare 1517. wherin
Luther began. All which he declareth at
length; & the reason of this so great multiplication

is giuen by Tertullian in his booke
Of prescription against heretikes aboue 1400.Tertull. ibid.
yeares past, sayinge: That for so much as
euery scholler of a sectary knoweth, that his
maister inuented his opinions of his owne
head, he will inuent also somethinge himselfe,
therby to shew that his witt is not inferiour
to that of his Maisters. And heerby
they come to such confusion in the end that
one destroyeth the other. Wherof Luther
himselfe is a good witnesse, when he wryteth
these words:Luth. Commēt
                     •
                  in Psa. 5. 
               Truly God doth not fight by
any other meanes with heretiks, then by permittinge
among them a certayne seditious spiritt of dissention,
by which their ouerthrow also and perdition doeth
ensue. So he: who is a wittnesse in this cause
without exception as yow know.
            The second reproach followinge sectaryes
is Contradiction to themselues,2. Contradictiō of the Sects. in their
owne wrytings and sayings, and shamfull
inconstancy in their doctrine. The reason
wherof is, for that the said doctrine consystinge
only in the inuention, iudgment,
and memorye of the sectarye himselfe,
that inuented yt, or chose to follow yt,
though inuented by another, (for whatsoeuer
they alleage of scripture or other antiquity,
must depend of their owne new inuented
interpretation) of necessity it must
follow, that as their talents, and witts, discourse
or memory, do alter, change, or faile
in tyme; so must the doctrine also therof

dependinge, be altered: And so eyther forgetting
what they said in one time or place,
or matter; or hauing altered their iudgment
or opiniō vpon some further reason, which
then they saw not, they must needs come to
say cōtrary to that they did before. In which
kind of contradiction, some thousands haue
byn noted by learned men in Luther himselfe;In varijs lib. de antilog. Lutheri.
& no maruayle seeing he was the first
of that sect, that inuented new opinion
                  •
               
dayly. And the same is obserued in Caluyns
wrytings by VVestphalus Hesshusius, and other
Lutheran Protestants, that wrote against
him.
            The third confusion that followeth commonly
vpon heresie,3. Dissolution & Atheisme following vpon heresie. is coldnes & doubtfulnesse
in Religion, and at length also plaine
atheisme and contempt; and thervpon dissolution
of life, neglect of conscience, and
other sutable effects, which therfore among
heretiks principally do ensue. For that heresie
callinge into question, and shaking the
very pillars and strongest meanes, wherby
men remayned assured before of their faith,
to witt, the number, quality, and right vnderstandinge
of holy scriptures, tradition of
the Church, from whome we receaued
them, the verity of Ecclesiasticall storyes,
Christian miracles, authority of generall
Councells, creditt of ancient Fathers, and
the like: and breakinge downe besides the
hedges and walles, that were wont to be

bulwarks to good life, as Confession, Restitution,
Satisfaction, fastinge, vowinge, and
other helpes of that quality: this (I say) being
once done (which is the proper worke of
heresy) a man runneth naturally into doubt
& contempt of all; and consequently leesing
by little and little both feare and shame, geueth
himselfe ouer easily to all licentious liberty,
and sensuality of life, which the
Apostle calleth Desperation.
               Rom. 1.
            
            And thus much of the cause of this third
reproach; For as for the effect yt selfe, to
witt, that these fruits haue followed in the
world, since heresies came in, much more
then euer before, I could alleage both Luther
himselfe,Se, the story in both their liues the 17. of Febr. and 26. December. and Erasmus Roterodauius, and other
authors of most creditt with Protestants testifyinge
of their dayes: and as for England yt
selfe,
the present knowledge & experience
of thousands will beare me witnesse. Wherfore
I meane to prosecute no further these
first 3. reproaches followinge heresies and
heretiks, to witt
                  •
                
               diuision among themselues, contradiction
to themselues, and dissolution of life, or
propension to Atheisme; though for the
Readers fuller instruction therin (yf he vnderstand
the Latin tongue) I must needs
giue him notice of two famous bookes
wrytten of late of that argument,Two famous 
                     •
                  ookes. by two
excellent learned men of our tyme, & taken
out of the works themselues of all the Sectaryes
of this age. The one is of our contreyman

               Maister VVilliam Reynolds,
               M. Reynolds Caluino
                     •
                  turcismus. once fellow
of new-colledg in Oxford, & a Protestant
Preacher, intituled Caluino
                     •
                   turcismus: that is
of Caluyns Religion leading to Turcisme, or
a comparison of Turkish Religion with
Caluinisme. The other is of the aforesaid
Polonian gentleman Stanislaus Rescius, Embassadour
and Treasorer for his King in the
Kingdome of Naples
                     •
                  , where his said worke
was printed 4. yeares past as hath byn said,
to witt in the yeare 1596. and yt is diuided
into two bookes, the title wherof is this:
De Atheismis & Phalerismis Euangelicorum nostri
temporis, libri duo: quorum prior de fide,
               Stanislaus Rescius de Atheismis. 
               posterior
tractat de operibus eorum. Which in English is
thus: Two bookes of the Atheismes, and
Phalerismes (or crueltyes) of the ghospellers
of our tymes, wherof the first treateth
of their faith, the second of their works.
This is the title, and I do assure the Reader,
yf he pervse them with attention and indifferency,
he will remayne informed by their
readinge, and not a little astonished, to behould
what is there alleaged out of the
wrytings of Protestants themselues, and
other authenticall witnesses in this behalfe.
            Of the other worke of Maister VVilliam
Reynolds prouinge that Caluyns Religion is
worse in condition, and lesse probable in
reason, then that of the Turke, & hath lesse
ground & substance therin, then the other:
(for all this, and much more he declareth in

this worke) I shall not need to treat heere,
nor yet giue notice of the booke, for that it
was written, & printed very lately in Flanders;
& is (no doubt) or may be easily in England
before this day; only I will adde this
of the iudgment of strangers, to witt, that
by testimony and asseueration of diuers very
learned men of other nations, there was
neuer wrytten a thinge in that kind, and of
such an argument more excellent in respect
of the infinite variety of hereticall books,
which he sheweth to haue read, and well
pondered, and for the many inuincible reasons
& demonstrations which he alleageth
for his purpose. And so much of this.
            And now I will speake somewhat larger
of the fourth reproach and shame accompanyinge
comonly heretiks and sectaryes,The 4. reproach of heretiks, or open lyinge. and
especially the heads and cheefe therof that
wryte bookes, which is counterfaytinge,
deceytfull dealinge, falsifyinge, and open
lyinge; but principally in alleaginge antiquity
for their purpose, wherof I haue occasion
by this present story of Plessis Mornay
to say somewhat; and the accusation of ancient
Fathers,Heretiks called falsarij by ancient fathers. that call heretiks Falsarij, that
is falsifiars, and corrupters of antiquity, occurreth
euery where in their books. So as
the spiritt of old heretiks agreeth with this
of our new, in this point, as well as in many
others; and if we will consider the cause &
necessityes of this reproach in like manner,

we shall find them no lesse euident or forcible
then the former, for that sectaryes
pretendinge antiquity in their doctrine (for
that otherwise yt would haue no credit), &
findinge all antiquity wholy against them
(except only
                  •
                the antiquity of heretiks and
sectaryes, which they dare not alleage
openly, (though they follow them) they
are forced to fayne and forge somewhat of
their owne; as for example some of the ancient
Fathers to be with them, or els should
they remayne without all shew or colour of
honest pretence. In which point notwithstandinge,
they do not agree amonge themselues:Luther & other sectaryes denyed al fathers at the beginning.
For that first Martyn Luther their great
Father forseeinge this difficulty, & not willinge
at the beginninge to cast himselfe into
these two troublesome labyrinthes; first of
shiftinge of by diuised interpretations those
manifold authorityes of Fathers, that were
to be brought against him, and then in finding
out other Fathers in his owne behalfe;
he tooke a more briefe, and compendious
way, which was to deny and contemne
them all, for so he doth in very many places
of his workes, protesting at the very beginning
almost of all his heresies, (to wit in the
yeare 1521.) in an epistle wrytten to a German
knight,Luth. in epist ad equitem Germ. an. 1521. 
               that he was tyed by the authority of
no Father, though neuer so holy, yf he were not approued
by the authority of holy scriptures: wherof
you must imagine himselfe world be iudge.

and addeth in the same place, that the fathers
wrytings were full of errors, contrary often to themselues,
and disagreeing the one from the other, wrestinge
scriptures; and the like.
            The same also he saith of Councells in
the same place, and in the next yeare after
this, wrytinge against K. Henry the 8. he
saith:Luth. cōt. Henr. Angl. Reg. an. 1522. 
               I do oppose against all the testimonyes of fathers,
of men neuer so holy, of Angells, and of diuells,
&c. Wherby we may see, what accoumpt
he made of Fathers and Councells, when
they were against him. And the same did
Zuinglius, Caluyn, and others after him for a
tyme, when Fathers authorityes plainly
were against them, and could not be shifted
of, by sleight interpretation, as in their
works appeareth: and Rescius declareth it
notably and largely, by manifold examples,
and places in his tenth Chapter, and first
booke aforesaid.
            But when this audacity grew in tyme to
be very reproachfull, some later followers
of theirs blushinge therat, and desiringe to
exercise their witts in a higher kind of subtility,A new diuise of later protestants about the fathers.
they betooke themselues to a more
plausible, but yet more shamefull, and desperate
course then these their maisters, which
was to say, that indeed the Fathers, and ancient
wryters were wholy for them, & not
for vs, as the philosopher, that would defend,
that swow was blacke, & not white.
And this course tooke first of all Peter martyr
               
in the 
                  •
               yeare 1549. and third of the raigne of
K. Edward the 6. as appeareth by Fox in the
last edition of hispag. 1549. Acts and Monuments.
And this perhaps Peter martyr was forced to
do at that tyme, by commaundement of B.
Cranmer and others of the priuy Counsell,
who appointed his disputation for more authorizing
of their new decree in Religion,
scarse two monethes before agreed vpon, &
would perforce haue the Fathers to be of
their side.Peter Martyrs disputation in Oxford an. 1549. But what successe Peter martyr had
in this attempt, yt may appeare su
                  ••
               iciently
by the places themselues, which Fox alleageth
for him out of ten or twelue seuerall
Fathers, wherof the Reader will scarse find
one (though the said texts be breefely alleaged)
truly cyted, in all respects; but that
eyther the words next going before
                  •
                or immediatly
following, or both (making wholy
against them) are purposely left out, and
others put in or mistranslated.
            And let any man who listeth examine the
same, and conferre them with the authors
bookes themselues, he shall find this to be
true.See these places examined part. 3. c. 19. & 20. & 21. of the Treatise of 3. counersions of England. For I haue examined them with some
diligence my selfe, as vpon some other occasion
herafter may chance appeare, but
now yt were to long to alleage them in this
place; I meane the manifest falsifications
therin vsed. But yf any Protestant in defence
of Peter martyr, and Iohn Fox h
                  •
               s honour,
will take vpon him to verify the

same, and their quotations to be good, and
without fraud; lett him wryte a little pamphlet
therof (as easily he may, they being
conteyned in lesse then one page) & he shall
presently be answered: albeit yf he do but
sett downe the whole places themselues as
they ly in the Fathers books, whence they
are cut, they will need no answere, but will
answere themselues, and confute the alleager,
and shew the shamlesse dealinge eyther
of Peter martyr or Iohn Fox, or of both, in cytinge
them.
            The like deceytfull dealinge was vsed by
Nicolas Ridley B.B. Ridley & Bucers disputation in cābridge an. 1549. then of Rochester and after of
London, the next moneth following in the
Cambridge disputation, about the same controuersy
of the reall presence, wherof he being
president (Martyn Bucer refusinge vtterly to
deale in that controuersie) he affirmed to
the whole vniuersity,Fox pag. 1261. that he had fiue sure
grounds for the opinion of Zuinglius, wherof
the first was (to vse his words) the authority,
Maiestie, and verity of holy scriptures; the second,
the most certayne testimonyes of the ancient Catholike
Fathers, &c. Wheras the truth is, that
both these foundations are most euidently
against him, as much the one as the other,
which Bucer well k
                  •
               ew, & therfore would
not take part with him in that matter,
though soone after, to remedy this breach,
he putt vp three other impertinēt questions
to be disputed against Catholiks; but in this

other article, he know that Ridley lyed shamfully
against his owne conscience, for that
all Farthers are against him most euidently;
& so do the Magdeburgians their cheefe Protestant
Chroniclers shew & declare in euery
age,The Magdeburgians refute Ridleyes vaunt of fathers. or century of their Ecclesiasticall
history. And yt shalbe sufficient for the reader
to cast his eye ouer the 4. Chapters only
of euery century, intituled of doctrine. And
thus much for K. Edwards dayes, when
Zuinglian Religion first peeped vp in our
countrey.
            After this man, stepped to Paules Crosse in
the beginninge of this Queenes dayes about
the yeare 1559. and 1560.B. Iewels hypocriticall chalenge at Paules Crosse an. 1560. 
               Maister Iohn Iewell,
otherwise called B. of Salisbury, and he proceeded
yet further in this bragg or fiction;
For he protested there, euen with feigned
teares, that yf any one authority, place, sentence, or
asseueration of any one Father, Doctor, Councell, or
authenticall history, within the first 600. yeares after
Christ, could be brought forth by any man liuinge
for any one of those points of Catholike Religion
which he there recyted to be in controuersie, that
then plainely and sincerely he vvould subscribe.
Against which vayne and shamlesse bragg,
when Doctor Harding, and diuers other learned
men of our side, began to wryte from
Louayne, and to bring forth authorityes of all
Fathers, Doctors, Councells, and historyes
in great aboundance, the first effect of this
chalenge, that appeared to the world, was

a seuere proclamation, that no such bookes
wrytten in English by the Catholike party
should be receaued or read in England, vnder
great punishments, by which prouision
Maister Iewell thinking himselfe meetly well
de
                  •
               enced, he plyed the pulpitt often, and renewed
his chalenges many tymes, and perceauing
notwithstāding that Doctor Hardings
confutation was come into England,The meaninge of M. Iewels cha
                     •
                  
                  ̄lge. he
answered the same with a longe volume of
Rhetoricall words, & stuffed the margents
therof with the shew of infinite authors, as
though the whole world had byn for him
and none for the other side; and with this
he deceaued the people then, and doth to
this day, such I meane as haue not commodity
or learninge, or other meanes to examine
those places, and to find out the manifold
lyes and falsifications therin conteyned.
And this was the gaine by all likely
hood that Maister Iewell pretēded to his cause
by that worke, knowing full well, that this
sort of men is farre the greater, which
would be gayned and setled in his doctrine
before the learneder sort (who are but few
in comparison of the other) could haue
tyme, books, and commodity to discouer &
refute him, & when they should do yt, they
should hardly be beleeued.
            And in this conceate he was not deceaued,
yf we respect that present tyme, and
many yeares after, as also yt is probable the

               L. Plessis Mornay had the like designment, in
stuffing vp his bookes with the like authorityes
of Fathers, but yf we consider the
continuance of tyme (wherof truth is said to
be the daughter) yt hath succeeded vnto
him, as yow haue heard, and will do more
and more dayly, as to such shifts is wont to
happen, that is to say (accordinge to Kinge
Dauids sayinge before recorded) 
                  
                     •
                  ppr
                     •
                  brium
sempiternum dedit eis,
               Men cō
                  uerted by M. Iewels booke to be Catholiks. God layeth euerlastinge
shame vpon them. For how many learned
men lightly of our nation haue taken vpon
seriously, to go ouer that booke of Maister Iewells,
& to examine yt by the authors themselues
with any indifferency of mynd; haue
for the most part byn therby conuerted to
Catholike Religion, though neuer so great
Protestants before: of which sort I haue
heard relation of many, but of some I can
testify my selfe, for that I haue heard it from
their owne mouthes, who of earnest Protestants
were made most zealous Catholikes
by that meanes principally; of which
number I thinke yt not inconuenient to
name h
                  ••
               re some 2. or 3. omittinge others
which for iust respects may not to be named.
            The first of them is Syr Thomas Copley,
               The L. Coplcy and his conuersion from protestancy. made
Lord afterward in his banishment by the K.
of France, who often tymes hath related vnto
me, with much comfort of his soule, how
that being a zealous Protestant and very familiar to the late Earle of Licester in the beginninge

of this Q. dayes, when Maister Iewells
booke was newly come forth, he being
also learned himselfe in the Latyn tongue,
tooke paines to examine certayne leaues
therof, and findinge many falshoods therin,
which were in excusable (as they seemed to
him) he conferred the same with the said
Earle, who willed him that the next tyme
Maister Iewell dyned at his table, he should
take occasion after dynner to propose the
same, which he did soone after; and receauing
certaine triflinge answers from Maister
Iewell, he waxed more hoate, and vrged the
matter more earnestly: which Iewell perceauinge,M. Iewels answere to the L. Copley.
told him in effect; That Papists were
Papists, and so they were to be dealt withall, and
other answere he could not gett; which
thinge made the good Gentleman to make
a new resolution with himselfe, and to take
that happy course which he did to leaue his
countrey, and many great commodityes,
which he enioyed therin, to enioy the liberty
of consciēce, for saluation of his soule:
and so he both liued and died in voluntary
banishment for confession of that truth,
which his Sauiour by occasion of Maister Iewells
falshood, had reueyled vnto him.
            The second example, which I remember
of my owne knowledge,M. Doctors Steuens. is Maister Doctor Steuens,
a learned man yet aliue, who being Secretary
or Chaplyn to Maister Iewell (for I remember
not well whether) and a forward

man in Protestant Religion at that tyme,
espied certayne false allegations in his Maisters
booke, whilst yt was yet vnder the
print in London, wherof aduertisinge him by
letters (for that he supposed yt might be by
ouersight) the other commaunded notwithstandinge
the print to goe forward, and passed
it ouer as it was, which this man seeing,
that had a conscience, and sought the truth
indeed, resolued to take another way of findinge
yt out: and hauinge found yt in the
Catholike Church where only it was to be
found, he resolued also to follow yt, and so
he did, and went voluntarily into banishment
for the same, where yet he liueth vnto
this day in France, with good reputation
both of learninge and godlynes.
            The third example that I call to mynd, is
the worthy man before named Maister VVilliam
Reynolds,
               M. VVilliam Reynolds. who being first an earnest professor,
and Preacher of Protestant Religion
in England, and much engaged amonge the
Puritans in Northampton-shire (as he was
wont to tell) he fell in the end to read ouer
Maisters Iewells booke, and did translate some
part thereof into Latyn: but before he had
passed halfe ouer, he found such stuffe, as
made him greatly mislike of the whole Religion,
and so he leauing his hopes, & commodityes
in England went ouer the sea into
these parts, and the last yeare of Iubiley, to
witt, 1575. he came to Rome, and brought

that booke with him,M. Iewels booke pretented to the tribunall of Inquisition in Rome. and presented both
himselfe and yt, to the Tribunall of Inquisition
of his owne free motion and accord,
where I ghesse the booke remayneth still,
yf yt be not burned: and himselfe after absolution
receaued from his former errors
(which he with great humility and zeale
required, & my selfe also at that tyme spake
with him in that place) he returned into
France, and Flanders, and there liued many
yeares with singular edification for his rare
vertue & learninge; and how hartily indeed
he was conuerted, may well appeare by his
zealous wrytinge both in Latyn & English
in defence of Catholike Religion, & in confutation
of Protestant errors, which himselfe
before had held for verityes. And thus
much of the falshood of Maister Iewells wrytyngs,
wherof, he that will see more, lett
him read Maister Hardings returne of vntruthes,
but especially yt would import him that
hath learninge, leasure and commodity, to
examine the quotations themselues by a
good library: but in this kind of false dealinge,
I can giue Maister Iewell a compagnion
as good as himselfe, yf not exceedinge him,
which is Iohn Fox, who aboue all that euer
wrote perhaps, may be recorded for notorious
in this behalfe.
            I haue had occasion theseThis may appeare by the Treatise of 3. conuersions of England. sett 
                     •
                  orth in three Tomes. monethes past
to peruse a great part of his last edition of
Acts and Monuments, printed the fifth tyme in

the yeare 1596. and do find it so stuffed with
all kind of falshood, and deceytfull manner
of telling tales, as I could neuer (truly) haue
beleeued yt, yf I had not found yt by my
owne experience. And I do persuade my
selfe fully (notwithstandinge all his hypocriticall
words and protestations, which are
more, and oftener repeated by him, then in
all the wryters togeather, that I haue read
in my life) that there is scarse one whole
story in that huge volume, told by himselfe,
except when he relateth other mens words
out of records, and therby is bound to the
formality therof,Iohn Fox his f
                     •
                  lsifyinge. but that it is falsified, and
peruerted one way or other, eyther in the
beginning, middle, or end, by adding, cutting
of, concealing, false translating, wrong
cyting, or cunning iugling and falsification,
which I do not speake for any tooth against
the man, that is dead, and whome I neuer
knew, but in respect of truth only, and of so
many deceaued soules, as are in danger to
perish by his deludinge them. Nor when I
speake of Maister Fox his falshoods, do I make
accompt of any errors or ouersights (though
neuer so grosse) that are found in him, as to
reckon some for Martyrs that were aliue at
the making of his booke: (for this he excuseth
in his later edition, in that he was deceaued
by false informations) nor do I vrge
that others are made Calendar-martyrs by
him, whome he cannot gainsay, but that

they were malefactors, and some of them
eytherSee the story of Collyns and Co
                     •
                  
                  bridge 10 & 11. Octobris part. 1. madde or denyed Christ himselfe,
and yet placeth he them in his Calendar, for
Saints: These escaped (I say) are not heere
to be vrged by me now, but rather in another
place. The points that I for the present
accuse him of, are willfull corruptions, and
falsifications that cannot be excused: as
among other things (and for examples sake)
when he recyteth any point in controuersie
of the Catholiks doctrine, he putteth yt
downe commonly in plaine cōtrary words
& sense, to that which he must needs know
that they holde and teach, for so much as
their publike books are extant in euery
mans hands to testifie the same.
            Of this kind,30. 
                     •
                  falsifications of Fox in tvvo leaues. a certaine learned student
of diuinity, brought to me of late 30. places
taken out of two only leaues of Fox his
booke, to witt, from the 12. to the 14. which
I looking vpon found them all most euident
by conference of the Catholike authors alleaged
by the said student: and moreouer,
besides these thirty, I did discouer so many
other plaine falshoods, and manifest willfull
lyes, in those only two leaues, as might
wellNovv they are found to be quadruple to vvitt aboue 
                     •
                  20. Se part. 3. cap. 22. of the Treatise of 3. cōuersiōs of England. double the former number; and I do
offer to proue them one by one, yf any
frend of Iohn Fox will ioyne issue with me
vpon this point. And then yf by Arithmetique
a man will multiply these lyes & falsifications
of two leaues only, with a thousand

and more, which Fox hath in this last
volume, and will adde afterward to euery
two leaues so many falshoods; the number
will rise to so huge an accoumpt, as were a
shame to sett downe; and would much surpasse
Iohn Sley
                     •
                  ans Story in this kind (though
he be the Protestants Protochronicler) out
of which an eleuen thousand lyes were only
gathered by the Catholike wryters of
Germany.Sleida
                     •
                   a great lyar. And this is so much as for the
present seemeth needfull to be said about
this matter.
            The end of the relation; there followeth the defence.
         
         
            A DEFENCE
OF THE PRECEDENT
RELATION
against the shiftes, calumniations, and tergiuersations,
as well of the L. Plessis himselfe, and some
of his Hugonotes in France; as of their Proctor
O. E. in England.
            
               The Preface, concerninge the authority of
the Actes sett forth in France.
               
                  
                     THE former relation being sett downe
wholy and entirely as yt was printed in
the yeare 1600. (though somwhere more
explaned, and towards the end made
s
                     •
                  orter) I am first to yeld a reason in this place, why
the passages or points accused of falshood that vvere

handled in the conference ensue not heere, as they did
in the former edition: wherof the cause is, for that
those passages indeed, were neuer seene or viewed by
the relator himselfe, but added only by a frend (as in
the preface therof is signified) according to his wrytten
copy receaued from Paris; which copy, though it
agree in truth and substance, with the publike Acts
themselues, of that conferēce which afterward haue
byn authentically 
                     〈◊〉
                   sorth, yet for that the points
are not so cleerly laid open, as some men perhaps
would require, I haue thought good to relate the same
againe in this my defence, out of the said Acts themselues.
               Concerning which Acts, yow are to consider, that
about some two or three monethes after the said conference
at Fountayne-bleau,
                  The occasion of publishinge the Acts. that is to say in the
moneth of August wheras this conference was made
vpon the fourth of May in the same yeare 1600. the
Catholiks remayninge quiett and content with the
victory of truth, that had fallen out in their fauour,
Monsieur Plessis and his Hugonote Ministers, hauinge
departed and broken vp the said conference, in
the manner and sort which a little after yow shall
heare, and findinge themselues extreemely gauled,
with so dishonourable an euent; resolued for some remedy,
to sett forth a certayne discourse in French
without name of the Author, the Title heerof was.
A true discourse of the conference held at
Fountayne-bleau,
                  Discours veritab
                        •
                     e. &c. Acts fol. 10
                        •
                     . 
                  &c. In which discourse they
endeauoured to handle three thinges, First touchinge
the history of matters passed therin, carpinge bitterly
heere and theere both at the King, and Chancelour
                  
and other Assistants & Iudges, as disfauourable
and partiall in many points against them and their
cause, which is refuted by the defender (to witt and B.
of Eureux himselfe) by the publike Acts and records
of the conference and be the depositions of 200. persons
as presently yow shall heare him affirme.
               Secondly they diuised,See Athanas. in his Apologyes
                        •
                      and S. Aug
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         Breuiculo.
                   vpon better deliberation,
new defences for the points wherin they had byn condemned
in the conference, as both the Arrians did
after the Councell of Nice, wherin they were condemned,
and the Donatists after their conference
with the Catholiks at Carthage, and as euery man
condemned at our English barres would do, yf they
might haue replyes allowed them, after their condemnations.
The third point of euasion vsed by them
is, recrimination, that is to say, to shew that others
also do falsifie besides them, and haue vsed fraud in
their quotations, which though yt were true (as in
the particulars obiected, is shewed by the defender
that they are all false) yet were it no honourable defence
as each man will confesse. And this is the summe
of that discourse, and the confutation therof.
               Now then for so much as Plessis, and his frends had
published this false discourse; yt was thought good by
the K. & his Councell vpon request of the Catholiks,
that the authenticall Acts of the said conference, and
all particularityes passed therin, and taken fourth by
seuerall publike notaryes appointed for that purpose
before hand, and one of them of the new religion,
should be examined anew, vpon the depositions as
well of the said notaryes, as also of 200. more, and
so published to the world, which was done, and the

whole presented to the K. by the B. of Eureux vpon
the 29. of August in the same yeare 1600. which
epistle, for that it is short & very substantiall, I haue
thought good to relate heere for a foundation of all
that is to 
                     •
                  ollow, & for creditt of the Acts themselues.
Thus then he wryteth to the King himselfe that was
present, and an eye-witnesse of all.
            
            
               To the Kinge.
               
                  
                     
                        Sire.
                     
                     
                        I would neuer haue beleeued,The letters of the B of Eureux to the K. of Frāce 29. Aug. an. 1600. that so publike
& renowned an action, as that of the
conference at Fountayne-bleau, represented in
one of the most illustrious Theaters of the
world, and adorned with the presence of
your Maiestie, of so many Princes & officers
of the crowne, Counsellours of Estate, and
other Lords & nobles of great marke; could
haue bin called in question, or that any man
could haue byn found, that will dare to take
vpō him to peruert, or disguise the knowne
verity therof, for which cause I haue abstayned
hitherto to wryte any thinge of that
matter, least by publishinge my priuate testimony
therof, I should seeme to enfeeble
the depositions of 200. persons of more authenticall
creditt then myne owne: but yet
seeing now that Monsieur du Plessis contrary
to the saith and witnesse of so many eyes &
eares, as were there present, and contrary to

the testimony both of the mouth and pen
of your Maiestie, hath cast forth into the
field a certayne new discourse, wherin by
his eloquence of Pe
                                 •
                              icles, he will needs go
about to persuade those that were present
at the Conference, cōtrary to that which they
saw, and those that were absent contrary to
that which so credibly they haue heard: I
haue thought cōuenient by your Maiesties
permission, to lend him the paines of a few
dayes labour for settinge forth the true description
of the fact it selfe, as yt passed, and
therby to dissolue all his cunninge illusions,
and inchauntments.
                        Wherfore, Soueraigne Lord, I do offer
heer
                              •
                            vnto your Maiestie the simple verity
of the history as she lyeth in the Acts in her
naturall white habyt, without colours or
paintings, most humbly beseechinge your
highnesse, that yow will vouchsafe to see
the same, or cause yt to be seene and examined
by such, of whose wisdome & grauity
your Maiestie standeth most assured; and yf
it shalbe found to be such, as heere I do qualifie
yt, that then permission may be giuen
to publish the same for a faithfull image and
representation to posterity, of that which
there fell out. And yf Monsieur du Plessis do
hold himselfe content with that which passed
in this conference, he hath in his hands
other 52. articles to be examined as the remnant
of those 60. which were agreed vpon

for the first Conference, from which he departed
without bidding any man fare well,
and hath had tyme inough since that to study
better vpon them: I for my part am ready
to giue him the same exercise vpon the
said articles, as I did vpon the other 9. handled
at Fountayne bleau, and after these ended
to come to the other that do remaine of the
500. falsifications, which I haue bound my
selfe to proue against him; and so much the
more willingly would I passe to the examination
of those other articles; by how much
more graue the authors are, and the matters
more important, & his deprauations more
enormous then those we haue handled as
chosen out by himselfe, and in the meane
space I shall lifte vp my hands to heauen, &
pray almighty God to continue his grace
towards your Maiesty from better to better,
and to establish his Kingdome togeather
with yours, &c. At Condie this 29. of August.
1600.
                     
                  
               
               This was the letter and request of the B.
of Eureux for examination and publishinge
of the Acts; whervnto the K. agreeing, cō
                  mytted
the reuew therof vnto certayne of
his Counselle, which had byn present at
the said conference, and findinge the same
to be sincere, and true in all respects, as his
Maiestie testifieth, gaue order for the publication
therof by his letters patents, signed
at Lyons in France the 22. of December 1600.
               
                  
Wherfore out of these acts, as most true and
authenticall, I shall frame this my defence,
though very breifely, against the extrauagant
ouerlashings of O. E. in his answere,
who saith & denyeth at his pleasure without
authority, wyttnesse, reason, or probability,
as after shall appeare by that which
ensueth.
            
         
         
            WHAT IS CONTEYNED
MORE IN PRINT ABOVT THE
fact it selfe of the Conference had at Fountayne-bleau,
then is comprehended in my former
Relation,
            CHAP. I.
            FOR that my briefe narration before recited,
was founded only vpon certayne
letters sent from Paris to Rome presently after
the conference had, as by pervsing therof
yow haue seene, and my purpose also was
to be very briefe; I could not sett downe so
many particularityes, as these acts do now
represent: yet do I find that whatsoeuer I
related before, is now confirmed againe by
these acts, and diuers things added, wherof
some principall I shall heere touch in few
words, cytinge the leafe of the said Acts,
wherin they may be read more largely. The
title of the said Acts is this: Actes de la conference

tenue, &c. Acts of the conference held betweene
the L. Bishop of Eureux, and the L. Plessis in presence
of the King at Fountayne-bleau, the fourth of
May 1600. published by the permission and authority
of his Maiestie, &c. the same yeare 1600. And
thus much of the title, now to the contents.
            The first occasion of this combatt,The first occasion of the cōferēce Act. fol. 1. sett
downe in these Acts is, that vpon the 20.
day of March anno 1600. a great noble man
of Normandy named, Lord Sainct-Mary du Mont,
a Protestant at that tyme, but soone after
conuerted, meetinge with Monsiear Plessis at
the lodginge of the Lady Princesse of Orange
in Paris, told him how he was cryed out of
euery where about the falsifications found
in his booke lately printed against the Masse, &
that himselfe had seene some shewed vnto
him by the B. of Eureux which he could not
solue. Heervpon Monsieur Plessis thinkinge
himselfe touched greatly in honour, did
iudge yt the best way to make a publike
Chalenge to the said B. of Eureux, which he
wrote and gaue abroad the very same day,
and the L. Sainct-Mary sent one of them presently
to the B. wherevnto he made answere,
acceptinge of his Chalenge, vpon the
25. of March, which letters before ISupra cap. 3. haue
alleaged; and soone after the said Bishopp
thinking yt conuenient to print and publish
the same, did so, and sent a copy therof to
the King, togeather with a letter of his
owne hand of the 28. of March, wherin

amongst other words he saith thus: I do send
vnto your Maiestie a Chalenge of Monsieur Plessis
made about the examen of his allegations in his booke
against the Masse,The B. of Eureux letter to the king. Act. fol. 5. 
               togeather with my answere to
the same. I should be vnworthy to serue so great and
noble a King, and of so high courage at your Maiestie
is, yf I should refuse such a Chalenge, especially in a
quarrell that may be ended without bloud, and tend
much to the glory of almighty God, and to the saluation
os him that shalbe ouercome, and therfore I do
most humbly beseech your Maiestie to permitt this
triall, &c.
            
            Heervpon Monsieur Plessis vnderstandinge
that the B. had wrytten to the King, he
wrote also another to his Maiestie to the
same effect, & returned likewayes anSupra cap. 4. answere
to the Bishop, shewinge himselfe willinge
to goe forward in the said triall, but
with diuers exceptions and diuersions, as in
the said letter appeareth, which we haue
related before. The King hauinge receaued
these letters from both partyes, and conferred
the same with his Counsell, resolued to
permitt the triall demaunded, as also to be
present theratt himselfe, and so gaue order
to the L. Chancelour of France vpon the second
of Aprill, to warne the partyes to prepare
themselues, and to be ready for the beginninge
of the next moneth with all prouision
necessary for that Triall.
            In the meane space the Popes Nuntius that
lay in Paris hearinge of an appointment for

triall of matters in Religion, began to make
some difficulty to permitt any such publike
act, appertayning to the vniuersall cause of
Christendome, without licence and approbation
of the Sea Apostolike, and proofe of
the persons that must dispute, alleaginge
that it was a thinge inconuenient to lay the
creditt of so great and generall a cause of
Religion vpon the learning of any particular
man whatsoeuer,No generall dispute of Religion to be permitted without approbation of the supreme Pastors
                     •
                   
                  Actes fol. 8. 9. 10. without necessity. But
when he was answered by the B. and after
by the K. himselfe, and others, that their
meaninge was not to dispute of controuersies,
but only to examine places cited by
Monsieur Plessis whether they were truly and
faithfully calleaged or no? and that this
should be sett downe and obserued as the
first law of this conference, the Nuntius was
satisfied, and so the day was appointed, his
Maiestie commandinge expressely, that the
conference should be made with all sweetnesse
and courtesie, &c.
            So in the meane space diuers things were
set in order necessary for that conference, as
namely for choosinge the iudges on both
sides, and principall assistance without all
partiality, to witt, learned, wise and graue
men, to the end that all might passe with
indifferency, loue, and charity, as much as
might bee; & namely for the Catholiks, was
chosen the president of Tou, a great learned
man, vpright & constant, and a neere kinsman

and frend to Monsieur Plessis.
               The iudges & deputyes chosen for 
                     •
                  oth sides. The second
was Monsieur Pitheu, aduocate in the Court
of Parlament of Paris a man both graue and
generally well learned, and a 
                  •
               amiliar frend
also to Monsieur Plessis. The third was Monsieur
le Feure Maister of the Prince of Condie. And
on the other side were named the President
Calignon, Chauncelour of Nauarre, and the
Lord de Fresne Canaye president of the Chamber
of Parlament appointed for them of the
new Religion in Languidoc, and Monsieur Cazaubon
Reader of his Maiestie in Paris, all
earnest, learned and iuditious Protestants.
            The K. departed from Paris the 21. of
Aprill to Fountayne bleau to hold there the
conferēnce, leauing order with the L. Chancelour,
that the next weeke followinge, he
with the rest of the iudges and deputyes
should follow, and bringe the B. of Eureux
with them; & so they did, arriuing at Fountayne-bleau
the 27. of Aprill, and the next day
arriued also Monsieur Plessis,
               A new Memoriall of Plessis conteyninge 4. points for new delayes. but brought no
books with him, sayinge that he had not
byn warned to do so, and so the next day after
that againe, he presented a new petition
to the Kinge in wrytinge by the Chancelour
askinge 4. thinges, which his Maiestie caused
presently to be conferred with the B. &
to take his answere thervnto. The first was 
that wheras the B. had giuen out
                  •
                that he
had obserued aboue 4000. falsifications in
his booke Against the Masse, and therby infamed

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
the same, that yt might be examined
page by page,
               Act. pag. 13. 14. 15. 16. 
               and leafe by leafe, as before he had
demaunded, but the B. refused this for the
same reasons which he had alleaged before
in hisSupra cap. 3. letter to Monsieur Plessis, principally
for that yt was but a refuge to draw out
tyme, he well knowinge that yt would neuer
be ended.
            
                The second demaund was, that all such
places of his booke, as the B. did not accuse
of falsity, might be esteemed as allowed and
approued after this conference. But this also
the B. said was no reason, for that perhapps
other men would find other faults in
other places, which he had not examined,
and that after these first 500. now obiected,
were examined, he offered to be bound to
go ouer his whole booke, page by page, and lyne
by lyne as Plessis desired.
            
                The third petition was, that if this might
not be graunted, that at least the Bishopp
would giue him in wrytinge, the first 500.
places, that he had noted togeather with his
proofes, against the same, and that he might
haue tyme to examine them before hands,
to cutt of long disputes before his Maiestie.
But to this the Bishopp aunswered in like
manner, that if he did so, the other would
aske so much tyme to examine them, as he
would delude this conference now appointed.
Wherfore he offered, that yf the present
triall might go forward, he would send

him 50. places the day before to prouide
himselfe for the first day, and so 50. the next
day, for the second conference, and so forth
for 10. dayes togeather, vntill all the 500.
were examined.
            The fourth demaund was, that the same 
order might be held in examininge his
booke, which he had held in wrytinge the
same, to witt beginninge from the first part
therof, &c. But this also the Bishopp refused,
sayinge that it was only a shift, for that
Plessis comonly had hādled only light points
in the first part of his booke, wheron it was
no reason to stand and leese tyme, but rather
as an accuser he might begin where he
would, and that Plessis was bound to aunswere
him: yet for the last vpshott & to end
all, he offered the King, to giue the whole
500. places presently into his Maiesties
hands in wrytynge, & so to take them from
him euery day by 50. at once, to be examined
in ten dayes, as is afore said, and after
this he said, he would bynd himselfe to remaine
a whole moneth with him in Paris or
els where he should thinke best, to examine
the rest of the 4000.
            After this vpon the second day of May all
the iudges and comissaryes being now arriued
(except the President Calignon, that remained
sicke in Paris) Monsieur Plessis gaue vp
another Memoriall to the King, requyring
yet once againe, that the Bishop would giue

him in wrytinge the 500. places gathered
against him, or at least wayes deliuer them
vp into the hands of the Iudges,Another delay sought by petition of Monsieur Plessis to the king. with commission
that yf this conference were broken
of, they should deliuer them into the
hands of the said Plessis, and that duringe the
conference, they should deliuer him only
50. a day. Whervpon the King calling the
Bishop into his great gallery in the presence
of the Chancelour, and of Monsieur Rosny president
of the finances, as also of the president of
Tou, Cazaubon, and others, asked him why
he would not yeld to this demaund; whervnto
he answered as before, saying that this
was but a new delay, therby to gett into his
hands the whole 500. places, and then to
seeke to answere them rather by wrytinge,
then by present conferēce, which he might
breake of by diuers occasions,Actes fol. 21. yf once he
were sure to haue therby the places into this
hands, and therfore he desired his Maiestie
to admitt no further delayes now, but that
the appointed triall might go forward,
which being once ended, he promised most
faithfully, that he would stay to examine
the whole booke, as longe as his Maiestie
should appoint, or Plessis desire.
            Whervpon the Lords present as well
Protestants as Catholiks said, that the Bishopp
had good reason in his answers to
Plessis his demaunds, and thervpon the Chancelour
was cōmanded by the King to goe &

pronounce this arrest vnto the said L. Plessis,
and that yf he would not go forward,
                  Monsieur Plessis threatened by the king. as he
had promised, his Maiestie would take another
course, & proceed to the examination
of his booke in his absence,Actes fol. 17. 18. which message
the Chancelour hauing done, Plessis answered,
that he could not accept of yt; wherat the
Chancelour told him, that he should looke
well to his creditt, for that if he should be
found to be a falsifier in matters of diuinity,
& his booke condemned in his absence, yt
would be a great shame vnto him, whervnto
the other replayed, that he had rather yt
should be condēned vniustly in his absence,
then in his presence, which answere being
carried to the K. by the Chancelour, his Maiestie
commaunded that the examine should
begin that very afternoone,Actes fol. 22. at three of the
clocke; but after vpon other busines that fell
out, it was deferred vntill the next day at 7.
of the clocke in the morning, which determinatiō
of the K. being knowne, there was
great dealing with his Maiestie by diuers of
the pretended Religion, that the matter
should not go forward, and new articles &
demaunds were proposed in the behalfe of
Monsieur Plessis; and namely two noble men
Protestants named Castelnau & Chambaret, as
also the president Fresne Canay cheefe deputy
of their side, tooke in hād to deale betwene
the King, Plessis & the Bishop, & after many
goings & commings, messages, answers &

replyes,A new agreemēt about the conference. it was agreed, that the B. should
giue him presently 60. places in wryting of
the 500. promised, to prepare himselfe for
the next day, which the Bishop did, & out of
those 60. Plessis chose 19. which seemed to
him most defencible, with which he wēt to
the King, protesting as followeth: Syr, of the
60.
               Acts fol. 26. 
               passages sent me by the Bishop of Eureux, I haue
had tyme only to examine and verifie 19. and of these
I will leese my honour,
               An hipocriticall protestation. 
               and life, yf he fynd one false.
I shall proue my selfe this day before your Maiestie, to
be another manner of man, then he esteemeth me.
These were his words. Which being heard,
the King sent presently for the Bishop, and
gaue him the list of the 19. places, which
Plessis had chosen to defend, which list when
the Bishopp had read, he tould the King &
the deputyes, that stood present with him
that he found deceatfull dealinge in euery
point, for that these 60. places being gathered
in hast and tumultuously,A nevv shift of Plessis in choosing out 19. places. as his Maiestie
knew himselfe, in lesse then halfe an houres
space by his commandemēt, out of certaine
loose papers, where aboue 800. corruptions
were noted of Monsieur Plessis, and put togeather
as they lay in order, he had chosen to
defend them, not as they stood in the Catalogue,
but by particular election, to witt
the 27. 39. 44. 50. 53. 56. &c. And whereas
there were most of the ancient fathers named
in this list as corrupted by him, & only
two schoolmen among the rest for example

sake, to witt Scotus and Durandus, he had
gui
                  •
               fully placed them in the first ranke of
his 19. placed to begin withall, as captaynes
of the rest therby to disauthorize the whole
conference, and to weary the hearers, as
though the cheefe moment of the triall had
byn about Scotus and Durandus.
               The K. great moderation. The K. answered
that it should be good to giue contentment
to Plessis, and those of his party,
wherein it might be; for which cause he said
further, as before, that he desired this conference
might passe with all quietnesse possible,
and that the Bishop should abstayne as
much as he could from vsing the word false
or falsification, and other such like, as might
be offensiue, for that his intent was to pacifie,
and gaine men by this triall, and not to
exasperate. And the same he said also vnto
the Lords deputyes there present, requiring
them, that yf they should see any man
wax into bitternesse & choler, they should
restraine him, & seeke to end all with good
words and substantiall matter.
            After dynner about one of the clocke, the
said conference was begone in presence of
his Maiestie, and of a great number of the
cheefe nobles of France, which were long to
name; for before the K.The K. & nobles how they sat in the cōferēce. satte the L. Chancelour
and the deputyes of both partyes before
named; and at his right hand satt the Archbishopp
of Lyons and sundry other Bishopps,
and on his left hand the 4. secretaryes of

State, & behind the King sate the Princes,
namely the Dukes of Vaudemont, Nemeurs,
Mercury, Dumayne, Niuers, Elbeuse, Aignilon,
Ianuile, and others, and after them againe the
officers of the crowne, Counselors of State.
and others of the nobility, and about 200.
other hearers within the chamber, & aboue
500. in a gallery and garden without, expecting
the resolutiō from passage to passage,
wherof there were many Protestants and
diuers Ministers of the new Keligion.
            All being sett, the L. Chancelour made
first a briefe speech, confirmed afterward by
the King himselfe, that the meaning of this
meeting was to try out the truth of certaine
allegations, that were called in controuersy
in the L. Plessis booke, and not to dispute of
any article of Religion at all; to which effect
also the Bishop had a breefe speech, alleaging
the example of Eugenius Archbishop
of Carthage,
               Vict. de Vtic. lib. 2. de Persetut. Vand. who being required by Hunnericus
King of the Vandalls in Africa, to dispute
with the Arrians, he refused the same without
consent of other Bishopps, and especially,
of the B. of Rome as head of all. Monsieur
Plessis also, made a very short preface, saying
that as he had wrytten his books with intent
to do God seruice for the reformation
of his Church, and would thinke himselfe
happy,
                  L. Plessis speach & protestation. yf he could help any thing therin: so
was he so farre of from all intention of willfull
falsifyinge, that yf he knew his right

hand to haue done yt, he should be the first
to burne the same. He made mention
againe, and shewed greefe,Actes fol. 31. that 4. thousand
places should be noted, as falsified by him in
his booke, and finally protested, that howsoeuer
it succeded with him, his cause was
particular, and touched not the reformed
Churches in France, which were before him,
and would be after him, &c.
            The B. repeated againe the matter of
4000. places corrupted, and offered to stand
vnto yt, and to verifie them as well, as those
500. new agreed vpon, and repeated againe
breifely the whole story of this action, and
how guilfully Plessis had proceeded in cullinge
out 19. places only of 60. offered him,
and of these had put in the first ranke Scotus
and Durand two schoolemen, about the controuersie
of the Sacrament,
               The Bishopps reall dealinge. leauing out other
places of S. Cyprian, S. Cyrill, S. Chrisostome, &
other ancient Fathers, obiected to haue bin
corrupted by him in the very same controuersie
of the reall presence amongst the
number of these three score: which fraud,
to the end the iudges and deputyes might
see and behould, he laid downe vpon the
table that stood before them the whole Catalogue
of the said 60. places sent the day
before to Plessis: which being done, the King
comaunded the foure secretaryes of the
crowne, to wryte only the conclusions and
iudgments that should be giuen, and not the

whole speaches, for yt would be ouerlonge.
and so the conference began, the B. sayinge
at the opening of the first booke Domine labi
                     •
                  
mea aperies. & os meum annunciabit laudem tuam.
Monsieur Plessis also prayed briefly with his
hatt before his face, &c.
         
         
            OF NINE PLACES EXAMINED
IN THIS FIRST DAYES
conference, and how they were all iudged by sentence
of the deputyes to haue byn corrupted by
Monsieur Plessis.
            CHAP. II.
            IN this first dayes conference, which endured
6. houres, there could be examined
only 9. places of the 19. which Plessis had
chosen to defend, of which nine also the first
two by his art and fraude, (as in the former
Chapter hath byn seene) were of 2. schoolemen,
or scholasticall wryters, Scotus, and Durandus,
which being only named for exāple
sake by the B. of Eureux in his catalogue of
60. places, (but yet after many more important
then they of the anciēt Fathers) which
Plessis thought good to thrust backe,Hovv Scotus & Durandus came to be the first in 
                     ••
                  iall. all the
said ancient Fathers and namely S. Cyprian,
S. Cyrill of Ierusalem, S. Iohn Christostome and
others cited in the same controuersie, and
many more in other questions, & to aduāce

forward to the first & second places of triall
the said Scotus and Durandus, thinking therby
partly to weary his Maiesty & the audience,
and to make the conference lothsome and
contemptible, by so base a beginning; partly
also presuming, that he might more easily
trifle out the tyme in wranglinge about
these, as he did a whole houre about the
first place only of Scotus, and would haue
done the whole day, yf he might haue byn
permitted, but the Bishop discouering this
fraud vnto the auditorye, shewed withall,
that his deceyt and false dealing was all one
in corrupting meane authors as the best, and
greatest, & therfore that it was not so much
to be cōsidered by the iudges what the wryter
was that was falsified, but how much, &
with how great fraud he is falsifyed. And
with this they passed to the particulars.
            
               The first place examined out of Scotus
about the reall presence.
               This preamble being made, the B. began
to read out of Plessis booke pag. 869. accordinge
to his forsaid edition in 4. printed at
Rochell by Hierome Hautin, these words out of
Scotus, about the Sacrament of the Altar.Act. fol. 34.
                  Iohn Duns (saith he) called Scot, almost 100.
yeares after the Councell of Lateran, was not afraid
to call in question, if the body of Christ be really conteyned
vnder the species, or accidents (of bread)
and he disputeth that it is not, and his arguments are,

for that the quantity doth not permitt yt, nor yet the
locality and circumscription annexed to the nature
of a true body, such a one as Christ had, &c. Thus
he. And then for proofe he quoteth in the
margent. Scotus vpon the 4. booke of Sentences
dist. 10. quaest. 1.
               Out of which place the B. did inferre
two willfull and malitious deceyts of Plessis,
                  Two impostures.
the first that he would make his Reader beleeue,
that Scotus, & the rest of the Schoolemen
when they propose any matter to be
disputed to and fro, do doubt of the truth
therof, which is a most absurd imposture,
for so he might say also, that they doubt
whether God be God, or whether God
can create any thing, for that they putt this
question.Scot. 2. sent. dist. 1. q. 2. 
                  Vtrum sit possibile Deum aliquid creare?
whether it be possible for God to create
any thing of nothinge? and presently yt ensueth
by way of obiection: Videtur quod non:
yt seemeth that yt cannot be: But after all
arguments ended, they resolue that yt is so,
to witt, that there is a God, and can create
things of nothinge, and do solue all the arguments
alleaged by themselues to the
contrary. And so doth Scotus in this matter
settinge downe his full determination in
these words: Dic
                        •
                      quod corpus Christi esse ibi verè,
realiter,
                  Scot. in 4. sent. dist. 10. q. 1. 
                  est simpliciter de substantia fidei: I do
say that it is simply a substantiall article of
our faith, to beleeue that Christs body, is
truly & really there, vnder these accidents.

And he proueth the same by two places of
scripture, to witt Math. 26. where Christ
saith: This is my body, and Iohn. 6. where he
saith: My flesh is truly foode. This then is the
first imposture which Plessis is proued to
haue vsed in alleadginge Scotus against his
owne meaninge, discourse, and resolution.
               The second is, for that he saith, that Scotus
argumēts against the reall presence, were
the quantity, locality, and circumscription annexed
to a true body; wheras these are not argumēts
of Scotus, but of heretiks refuted by Scotus, as
appeareth by himselfe in the same places,
where he addeth also these words: If heretiks
would expound the forsaid words of Christ:
                  Scot. ibid. This is
my body, to be vnderstood figuratiuely, yt is quite
against the intention of our Sauiour. These 2. corruptions
then, being so manifestly laid forth
out of this first place of Scotus, and shewed
that they could not be of ignorance, but of
willfull malice to deceaue the reader,The first shift of Plessis to defend his impostures. 
                  Plessis
was sore pressed, but yet had diuised a certayne
way of some kind of escape, yf yt may
be called an escape, and not rather a greater

                     •
                  ntanglement, which was to say, that he affirmed
not simply that Scotus doubted of the
reall presence, but rather of the manner of
Christs body being there, to witt, by Transubstantiation,
and for that respect he named
the Councell of lateran in his speach, which
Councell first of all had determined the said
article of Transubstantiation: But the Bishopp

shewed this to be a very sleight euasion,Concil. Lateran. 
                        •
                     an. 1. for
that the Councell of Lateran determined as
well the article of the reall presence, as of
Transubstantiation, as appeareth in the said
Councell, and that Scotus was as resolute
in the one as in the other. And finally
that Plessis words before recyted are plaine
inough without a comentary, that Scotus
durst to call into question whether the body of Christ
were really in the Sacrament or no, vnder the 
                        •
                     ormes
of bread & wyne, yea & to dispute that yt was not,
which words do speake plainly, as yow see,
of the reality. Soe as these shifts, are but a
new abusing of the Reader.
               And as for the places he would seeme to
alleage out of Scotus, as somwhat soundinge
against Transubstantiation, yt was told him
first, that yt was from the purpose, for so
much as his citation of Scotus was against the
reall presence; and secondly that these other
places made no more for him, then the former,
but wholy against him, and so yt was
proued by readinge and examininge publikely
the said places, wherin there was an
houre spent. And the Bishopp perceauinge
that Plessis desired to draw out the tyme, vrged
the deputyes to giue sentence vpon the
falsisication of the places alleaged, which
they differred to do, vntill the next place of
Durand was examined, for that they vnderstood
the case was in a manner all one, or
much like in both schoolemen: And so yt

was in deed,The sente
                        •
                     
                     ̄ce against Plessis. for that in both of them yow
shall heare the sentence giuen afterward,
that Plessis had taken the obiection for the resolution,
which was a great a disgrace,
                     Act. fol. 52. yf you marke
yt, as could be to such a man, that presumed
to vnderstand what he read.
            
            
               The second Place examined out of Durandus
about Transubstantiation.
               The next place of the 19. chosen by Monsieur
Plessis to be examined, was out of Durandus,
Plessis his words as they ly in his booke
pag. 870. are rhese: Durandus called by our Sorbonists
the mostre solute Doctor,
                  Act. fol. 46. 
                  hath these words in
his 4. booke vpon the sentences dist. 11. To the contrary
(saith he) supposinge the substances of bread
and wyne (after the consecration) do remayne;
there ensucth therof but one difficulty, and this neyther
very great nor indissoluble, to witt, that two bodyes
remayne togeather (vnder the same accidents)
but yf yow put the contrary (to witt that
there is Transubstantiation) there ensue more
difficultyes, that is to say, how those species or accidents
(without their substance) can nourish or
be corrupted, and how any thinge can be generate
therof, seing all generation is of matter or substance,
& therfore it seemeth that we ought to sticke rather
to the first way, (to witt against Transubstantiation,
&c. So he.
               Out of this place the B. of Eureux did argue
Plessis of the same falsity and deceytfull
dealinge as before in Scotus,
                  A dishonorable imposture. or rather more

plaine and euident, and consequently more
wicked and dishonorable to him, for that all
these words heere alleaged out of Durandus
are not his owne, but the words of others
that do obiect the same, which he dissolueth
afterward, when he hath put downe
his owne sentence in these words: Primum
est dicendum,
                  Purand. sent. li. 4. dist. 11. q. 1. 
                  quod substantia panis & vini conuertuntur
in substantiam corporis Christi. 
                  First we
must say and hold (notwithstandinge the
former obiections & arguments to the contrary)
that the substance of bread and wyne,
are turned into the substance of the body of
Christ. This is his resolution, quite contrary,
to that which Plessis would haue him
seeme to hold. And then hauing set downe
this resolution accordinge to the common
faith of the Catholike Church, he passeth to
answere the former obiection, sayinge to
the former argument to the contrary (about
difficultyes): vve must answere, that in those
thinges that appertayne vnto faith, we must not
allvvayes choose that vvhich seemeth (to humayne
sense) to haue lesse difficultyes;
                  Durand. ibid. 
                  but we
must hould that which is consonant to the sayings
of holy Fathers, and to the tradition of the Church.
So Durand.
               Which words being recyted in the hearing
of all, yow must imagine in what a pittifull
plight poore Plessis was, to see one man
looke vpon another, and ether smile or byte
their lippes at such manifest grosse trumpery;

but yet necessity made him take hart, &
to aduenture a new euasion, saying, that albeit
this were but an obiection in Durand,
yet it seemed to him such an obiection, as
might hould the place of a resolution, yf the
authority & decision of the Church had not
withheld him. And for proofe of this, he
would needs cite diuers other places out of
Durand, where he saith; that yf God would
he could haue made his body to be in the
Sacrament, togeather with the substance of
bread without Transubstantiation, and that yt
should be temerity to hold the contrary: but
the Bishop refuted this presently as impertinent
matter, and nothinge to the purpose
to help his cause: For albeit Durand did
hould, that God out of his omnipotency
might haue appointed yt so yf he would,
that both substances, (to witt both of his
body & bread) should haue byn togeather;
yet did he it not so de fact
                        •
                     , as Durand proueth
out of his owne words, when he said
of bread, this is my body, &c.
                  Math. 19. It was noted also
that in the end of the first text alleaged
by Plessis out of Durand, the words in vulgar
were: Therfore the first way is to be followed,
wheras the true words of Durand in Latyn
were,
                     Plessis taken in two falfityes at once. 
                  ergo (vt videtur) primum est eligendum:
therfore (as yt seemeth) this first way is rather
to be chosen: so as Plessis of purpose left
out the words (vt videtur) that yt might not
seeme (as yt was) an obiection, but rather a

resolution, which was another tricke of
vnfaithfull dealinge.
               Well then after all textes read at large,
and examined by the iudges, when Plessis
would haue cauilled yet further & drawne
out the tyme, as he did in the former place
of Scotus; the B. desired the K. that the law of
this triall might be obserued, and sentence
giuen vpon the matter yt selfe already proposed,
without further excursions, whervpon
the King willed the deputyes to giue
sentence, which they did by the Chancelour,
after he had asked euery mans voyce in particular,
and the sentence was in these words
in French.The sentence of the first two places. 
                  Que le Sieur de Plessis auoit pris la obiection
pour la resolution. That the L. Plessis had
taken the obiection (in Scotus and Durand)
for the resolution. And this was the end of
this second triall, with shame inough, yow
may imagine, to him that professed more
learning, then to be deceaued in such a matter,
yf he had not listed to haue byn both
deceaued and to deceaue.
            
            
               The third place examined out of S. Chrysostome,
about Prayer to Sainctes.
               After the former two places of Scotus and
Durand dispached,Acts of the conf. fol. 52. the third chosen by Monsieur
Plessis, to be defended, was out of S. Chrysostome,
in his homily, vpon the first of Saint
Paules epistles to the Thessalonians, where handling
those words of Ieremy the Prophet:Ierem. 15. 
                  If

Moyses and Samuell stood before me, my affection
should not bee vnto this people, &c. Plessis saith,
that wheras the Papists do alleage this sayinge
of the Prophett to proue prayer vnto
Saints, S. Chrysostome draweth a quite contrary
conclusion from thence, his words are
these pag. 537. of his booke against the Masse:
S. Chrysostome doth draw from these words of the
Prophett a quite contrary conclusion,
                  Chrysost. 
                        •
                      hom prima in 1. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Thessal. 
                  to witt that we
must not rest our selues vpon the prayes of Saints, but
must worke our saluation (as S. Peter saith) in feare
and trembling. &c.
               
               Out of which allegation of S. Chrysostome
the Bishopp did shew, and plainly declare,
that Plessis had depraued S. Chrysostomes meaninge,
for that he did not inferre any such
conclusion at all against prayer to Saints,
but manifestly the contrary in these words
in the very same place, sayinge for his conclusion
after a long discourse: These things then
being so (as we haue shewed) we must neither neglect
the prayer of Saints for vs,
                  Chrysost. ibid. 
                  nor yet putt all our hope
therin, for that the one would depriue vs of great
succours, the other would make vs idle and neglect.
VVherfore we must pray to them, to make intercession,
and hould vp their hands for vs, and we of our
part must liue vertuously.
               
               These are the words of S. Chrysostome truly
alleaged, which do euidently shew, that
Plessis did notoriously corrupt both S. Chrysostome
his words and meaning in his forsaid
allegation:Two impostures of Plessis.
                   his words, in that he affirmeth

                  S. Chrysostome to say: that we must not rest our
selues vpon the prayers of Saints: which he doth
not say, but that, we must not put all our hope
therin. Secondly he leaueth out those words
of S. Chrysostome, where he exhorteth vs to
pray vnto Saints, and to liue vertuously. He corrupteth
also S. Chrysostomes meaning, for that
he enforceth vpon him the quite contrary
conclusion, to that which he maketh, to
witt, that we must not pray to Saints at all, wheras
S. Chrysostome saith, we ought to pray to Saints, &
not to depriue our selues of so great a succour.
               
               Heere Plessis was in a great Bracke againe,
& could not tell which way to wynd himselfe
out, yet two leapes he gaue, but neyther
did serue his turne.Tvvo vayne leaps of Plessis to gett out of the bracke. The first was, by
sayinge, that his intention was not to sett
downe Saint Chrysostomes words formally as
they lay in the text, for that his discourse
was longe, and indured for diuers pages, but
only to put downe the some therof. But
this was beaten backe by the B. asking him
first, why then he sett downe those words
in a different letter, as proper words of S.
Chrysostome? Secondly, why he left out Saint
Chrysostomes true words before recyted, and
put in other of his owne, of a cōtrary sense?
Thirdly why he changed, & falsifyed Saint
Chrysostomes whole meaning, drifte, and conclusion,
as hath byn shewed; and finally he
told him, that albeit S. Chrysostomes discourse
were large in expounding the forsaid verse

of Ieremy the Prophett; yet was his conclusion
about praying to Saints very short, and
vttered in no more words then before was
sett downe; so as this helped him nothing.
               His second skip therfore was to say, that
S. Chrysostome in this place spoke of prayinge
to liue Saints only, and not to dead Saints,
but the Bishop replied, that albeit this were
true (as it appeareth euidently to be false by
the examples of Dauid and Iob, whome Saint
Chrysostome there nameth) yet that this releeued
him and his falshood nothing at all:
For yf he spoke of liue Saints only, then
could not Plessis draw an argument from
that his speach against the Catholike vse of
praying to Saints desceased;
                     Plessis cōcluded by the B. and sentēce giuē against him. and yf he spake
of dead Saints, or both of dead and liuinge,
then doth he confirme the Catholike vse, & not impugne the same, as Plessis would haue
made his reader beleeue. And howsoeuer yt
bee, the Bishopp vrged, that he was heere
conuinced of diuers falshoods, and so required
sentence, whervpon the iudges commaunded
two seuerall Greeke textes of S.
Iohn Chrysostome to be brought of diuers impressions,
the one at Heidelberge, the other at
Verona, & conferringe them togeather, found
the Fathers words to be iust as before they
haue byn sett downe by vs, and falsified by
Plessis in his booke, and therfore after euery
mans opinion required, & conferred among
themselues, the Chancelour pronounced in

all the deputyes names in these words: Que
le Si
                        •
                     ur du Plessis auoit obmis en ce passage ce que y
deuoit estre mis. that is to say: That the Lord
Plessis had left out in this passage, that
which ought to haue byn put in: which in
effect, is to call him a falsifier in good and
honourable tearmes. And so much of this
place.
            
            
               The fourth place examined out of S. Chrysostome,
about prayer in like manner to Saints.
               
                  The fourth place was another of S. Chrysostome
about the same argument of praying
to Saints cyted falsely by Plessis in the 574.
page of his booke against the Masse, where he
maketh S. Chrysostome to speake thus against
praying to Saints: ChrysostomeChrysost. hom. 5. in Math. (saith he) seemeth
to haue attempted the ouerthrow of this abuse
assaultinge the fundament therof by all occasions, for
so much as he saw, that the people did thinke more
how to help themsel
                     •
                  es by suffrages of others, then
how to amend their liues; wherfore he did endeauour
to batter this opinion; saying we are much more assused
by our owne suffrages then by the suffrages of
others; and God doth not so soone graunt our saluation
at the prayers of others,Acts fol. 58. as to our owne prayers, for so
he tooke pitty of the woman of Cananaea, and gaue
pardon to the adulteresse, and paradise to the theefe
without being moued with intercession of any aduocate
or mediator, &c.
               Out of which words, besides that which
was before obiected vpon the precedent

place, the B. accused Monsieur Plessis, that he
had dealt fraudulently also in cytinge these
words, for that he had cutt of the very next
words ensuing, which made against him, &
declared plainly S. Chrysostomes whole meaning,
to witt: And this we say (saith S. Chrysostome)Chrysost. ibid.
                  not to the end we should not make our
prayers or supplications vnto Saints, but that we
should not therby become slothfull in doing also for our
selues. To which charge Monsieur Plessis answered,
that Chrysostome in this place did not
speake of dead Saints, but of liuinge Saints,
for proofe wherof, he alleadged certayne
coniecturall reasons,Two or three scapes of Plessis stopped by the B. which the B. hauinge
refuted, as both false and impertinent to the
matter, he vrged him that this refuge, yf yt
were true that S. Chrysostome spoke only of
lyuing Saints, yt was against himselfe, and
proued two absurdityes in steed of one, the
first, that he deduced a conclusion out of S.
Chrysostome against prayinge to dead Saints,
wheras the Father spake of liuinge Saints
only: the second, that he cutt of from the
text, the principall words that should haue
declared the Fathers meaninge. To this replyed
Plessis, that he brought not this place
of Chrysostome against praying to Saints, but
against them that would help themselues by
the suffrages of others.
               
               Vpon this answere the K. himselfe began
to speake, saying, that the word others, was
a generall word, that might be extented

aswell to the dead, as to the liue, and that
Plessis should remember, that he had said a
little before in cyting S. Chrysostome, that Chrysostome
attempted the ouerthrow of this abuse.
                  The K. tooke the argument. And
then he demaunded of him what abuse he
meant, if he meant not the abuse of praying
to Saints desceased, as impugned by S. Chrysostome:
which instance of his Maiestie was
confirmed by the B. cyting diuers places of
Plessis booke, where by name he auoucheth
S. Epiphanius and S. Chrysostome in the Greeke
Church to be aduersaryes of prayinge to
Saints,Acts fol. 
                        •
                     o. which yet now he would not stand
vnto. But Plessis replyed; that he did not alleage
S. Chrysostome in this place,Another poore shift of Plessis.
                   as directly
impugninge prayer to Saints deceased, but
indirectly, in that he saith, that we must not put
our confidence in the meritts of other men. Wherto
the Bishop answered, that S. Chrysostome said
not absolutely, that we must not rely at all vpon
other mens prayers, but that we must not so rely, as
we be negligent of our owne parts; which speach
doth neyther directly nor indirectly impugne
prayer to Saints, especially being ioyned
with his plaine declaration before mentioned,
cutt of by Plessis.
               
               Wherfore after diuers such vayne, & impertinent
replyes of Monsieur Plessis, the B. required
sentence to be giuen; whervpon the
texts alleaged being openly read, both in
Greeke and Latyn of diuers editions printed
both in Paris and Basill, and one Greeke

copy of hand wrytinge out of the Kings library,
the words were found as before hath byn cyted,
and sentence was giuen by the
consent of all deputyes in the same words
that the other was before, to witt,Acts fol. 64. 
                  that the L.
Plessis had left out in this passage, that which he ought
to haue putt yn. And with this ended their
examen of the fourth place, & the blushing
remayned to Plessis as yow may imagine,
seeing all his Protestants to hange downe
their heads at this successe.
            
            
               The fifth place examined out of S. Hierome about
the same argument, of prayer to Saints.
               
                  After the two forsaid places of S. Chrysostome
discussed, as yow haue heard, there
came in order a place of S. Hierome vpon Ezechiell,
cyted by the said Plessis in the 583. page
of his booke against prayer to Saints,Hier. in Ezech. lib. 4. cap. 14. 
                  and put as
yt were for an antidotum to other sayings of
S. Hierome in fauour of prayings to Saints, in
his books against Vigilantius. The place is cyted
in Plessis booke in these words: But Saint
Hierome (saith he) in his commentaryes, when he
was out of choler and greife, did wryte thus: If we
haue confidence in any one, lett yt be in God only, for
yt is wrytten, that the man is cursed that confideth in
men; albeit they be Saints, & albeit they be Prophets,
yet must we not confide in them, nor yet in the Princes
of the Church, who though they be iust, yet shall they
deliuer but their owne soules, and not those of their
children.
               
                  Out of this place the B. obiected, that
Plessis had alleaged these words with fraud
& corruption, leauing out the clause which
made all cleere, and vtterly marred Plessis
markett, to witt, Si fuerint negligentes, yf their
children be negligent, then cannot Saints
saue them: filios autem & filias (saith S. Hierome)
quos in Ecclesia genuerim, si 
                        •
                     uer
                        •
                     t negligentes,
saluare non poterunt. 
                  That is, Saints cannot
saue their sonnes and daughters, whome
they haue be gotten, by their preachinge in
Gods Church, yf the said children be negligent
on their parts. And the same very exception
or restriction had S. Hierome repeated
in other words before in the same
Chapter,Hier. ibid. saying: Nec principes nos poterunt liberare,
nisi filiorum suerit assensu
                        •
                     , & illorum obsecrationes
suis conatibus iuuerint. 
                  The very cheefest
and principall Saints of the Church cannot
deliuer vs, except we their children do giue
our consent thervnto, & except we do ayde,
by our owne good endeauours, their prayers
made for vs. Which two clauses she winge
euidently, that S. Hieromes former speach
was but conditionall, & not absolute, when
he said, that we must not put our trust in others,
(euen as that of S. Chrysostome was before) yt
followeth that the leauinge out of these
clauses that conteyne the principall point of
all the speach, was willfull fraud, and falsification,
endeauouringe to make Saint Hierome
to speake against himselfe, about

prayinge to Saints, which he neuer meant.
               Heere now Plessis being strayned, as before,
ran to his ordinary shift, of sayinge,
that S. Hierome spake not of dead Saints, but
of liuinge only, which though it were euidently
false, as the Bishop shewed by other
plaine words of S. Hierome in the same place,
and by Plessis himselfe,VVilfull false dealinge against S. Hierome.
                   that cyted this place
as an anti
                        •
                     otum to other places of his, against
Vigilantius, where Plessis himselfe confessed,
that he talketh of prayer to Saints deceased:
besides all this (I say) wherby this refuge
was euidētly knowne to be but a shift,
the Bishop pressed him most with this; that
of what sort of Saints soeuer S. Hierome
speaketh heere, quicke, or dead, he speaketh
not simply or absolutely, that they cannot saue
vs by their prayers, but with this expresse condition,
twise repeated by him, and left out
by Plessis: If we be negligent of our owne parts; or
as S. Chrysostome said before; yf we rely wholy vpon them, and do nothing of our selues.
               
               Wherfore he prayed the iudges to giue
sentence concerninge this place, as of the
former; whervpon Plessis began to cauill
againe,Acts fol. 69. and to say, as he did in the former
passage of S. Chrysostome, that he alleaged not
this place of Saint Hierome directly against
Saints deceased, but indirectly. But the B.
proued that neyther directly, nor indirectly
this place of S. Hierome made any thinge
against prayers to Saints, but rather for the

same. For he that saith, that prayinge to
Saints auayleth not him, that is negligent
of his owne part, signifieth in effect, that yf
he be diligent, he may be holpen therby,
which is S. Hieromes doctrine against Vigilantius,
as Plessey confesseth, though he saith that
he was then in choler but now out of choler,
when he spoke the contrary as he
would haue him to seeme.
               After this, Plessis leapt to another place of
S. Hierome in his cōmentaryes vpon S. Paules
epistles to the Corinthians,
                  Another shift of Monsieur Plessis.
                   where he saith:
That Saints shall not be able to help at the day of
iudgment, &c. Which the Bishop expounded,
and graunted, for that then there shalbe no
more place for prayer or intercession, but
euery one to receaue his reward: yet he added
further, that this place of S. Hierome, was
brought into examination out of the order
of those 19. that Plessis had chosen, and that
yf he would be content, to continue the examination
of this one page of Saint Hierome,
                  An offer to prooue 4. new falsifications against Plessis in one page.
whence this place is drawne, the B. offered
to bynd himselfe to shew 4. notorious falsityes
committed by him, in this one page:
but Plessis refused this combat, & said that he
would not interrupt the order sett downe
already for examination of his 19. places
aforesaid; but yet both the King and rest of
the auditory, did well marke and note this
offer made by the Bishopp and diuers tymes
repeated by him, and that the other durst

not accept therof. Wherfore the iudges
being called vpon againe, to giue sentence,
conferred togeather, and with one consent
gaue this verdict.Acts fol. 97. 
                  Que le passage auoit deu estre
mis entier. That this place or passage on S. Hierome
ought to haue byn sett downe by Monsieur
Plessis wholy, and entyre, as yt lay in the
author, and not mangled or dismembred, as
it was found to be. And yow may imagine
how Plessis blushed at this sentence.
            
            
               The sixt place examined, out of S. Cyrill,
about honouringe the holy Crosse.
               The sixt place was out of S. Cyrill cited by
Monsieur Plessis pag. 223. of his booke in these
words: S. Cyrill
                  Cyril. l. 6. contra Iulian. Apostat. 
                  answered the Emperour Iulian
when he reproached Christians for honour done vnto
the crosse, that Christians did not giue adoration nor
reuerence to the signe of the Crosse. So saith Plessis:
But the Bishopp charged him, that the last
words of this sentence, to witt, that Christians
did not giue adoration nor reuerence to the signe of
the Crosse, were not in S. Cyrill, and willed
him to shew them. Plessis answered, that in
deed they were not S. Cyrills owne words,
and therfore he did not put them in a different
letter of quotation, but yet that the
sense of them was to be found in S. Cyrill.
The B. replyed, that neyther the words nor
sense were there, and yet that Plessis pag. 89.The firstly proued against Plessis.
                  
of his booke against the Masse had sett downe
the same thinge as of S. Cyrills owne words

in a different letter of quotation thus: Cyrill
likewise reproached by Iulian the Emperour doth
answere flattly, that the Christiās did neither adore,
nor honour the signe of the Crosse. So as heer
                     •
                   yow
see not only these words alleaged as S. Cyrills
in a different letter, but also often vrged by
Plessis, that for so much as he could not bring
forth the words, at least he should shew the
sense therof in S. Cyrill.
               
               
                  Plessis answered, that the sense might be
gathered out of Cyrill,
                  A friuolous obiection of Plessis answered, and returned vpon himselfe. in that Iulian the Apostata,
against whome he wrote, obiectinge
vnto him, that the Christians adored the
Crosse of Christ, Cyrill did not answere that
it was true, which of likelihood he would
haue done, yf in those dayes Christians in
deed had worshipped the Crosse. But to
this the Bishop replyed, that the consequēce
was not good, for so much as Christian
wryters of that tyme, were wont to goe very
reseruedly, in vttering the points & misteryes
of our faith vnto pagās, though heere
in effect Cyrill did confesse yt, as presently
shalbe shewed, for that he yeldeth the reason
why they did yt. But on the other side
yt is a farre better argument to say: Iulian
the Apostata obiected that Christians adored
the Crosse of Christ, and painted the
images therof vpon their foreheads, & vpon
their dores, and S. Cyrill denyeth yt not, but
endeauoureth to giue a reason, why they
did so; Ergo it is more probable, that Christians

did worshipp the Crosse of Christ indeed
in those dayes.
               And heere the King tooke vp the argument
againe sayinge,The K. reply against Plessis.
                   that yt was very probable,
that Iulian would neuer haue obiected
this to the Christians, yf they had not
done so indeed, for otherwise he should
haue byn laughed at by all. Which speach
of his Maiestie the B. cōfirmed, by shewing
how learned an Emperour Iulian the Apostata
was, and how he had byn brought vp
from his youth in Christian Religion, and
could not be ignorant in so publike a matter
as this; and moreouer (said the Bishop)
yf yt were true, that S. Cyrill did reprehend
the Emperour Iulian, for charginge falsely
Christians to worshipp the Crosse, yt is not
likely, that other Christian Emperors followinge
soone after, as Iustinian and others,
would in their lawes haue called the same,
Adorandam & honorandam verè crucem,
                  Iustin. Imper. in Authentde Monachis. Si quis aedi
                        •
                     icari. the
Crosse that is truly to be honoured & adored
Which mention of Emperors being
heard by the King, he required presently
that the books should be brought, and the
places read openly, which was done out of
the constitutions of Iustinian printed at Geneua,
and the words were read there as the
B. had alleaged them; and the same shewed
out of diuers other authors more ancient
then Iustinian, as Rusticus Diaconus,
                  Acts fol. 72. 
                  Sedulius presbyter,
Athanasius, and S. Chrysostome.
               
               
                  Which being done, Plessis came out with
another obiection of Minutius Foelix, who
answeringe to one Cecilius, a pagan, said,
Cruces nec colimus, nec optamus. We do neither
worshipp nor wish for Crosses; but the Bishop
shewed this to be but a rest, and quite
against himselfe.A deceytfull reply of Plessis turned vpon himselfe. For that the pagan hauing
obiected to Christians, that they honoured
Crucem, wherby he vnderstood a gibbett or
gallowes, said, Christiani adorant & merentur
Crucem, Christians do adore, and do deserue
the gibbett, in which sense Minutius answered
him: Nos Cruces nec colimus, nec optamus,
we do neyther worship nor wish Crosses in
your sense, that is to say, gibbetts. And all
did maruayle at Plessis, that he would bring
in this deceatfull obiection: out of which
notwithstandinge the Bishop inferred, that
except the Pagan Cecilius had knowen in
those dayes, that Christians worshipped
Crosses, he would neuer haue obiected the
same so confidently against them, eyther in
iest, or in earnest.
               And this being done the B. demaunded
iudgment vpon the place, but there stept vp
one Monsieur Mercier,
                  A reply of Monsieur Mercier the Protestants secretary. one of the secretaryes of
the conference for the Protestants side, sayinge
that by the text of S. Cyrill there lyinge
on the table, before them, yt was manifest,
that he obiected vnto Iulian extremam imperitiam,
extreme ignorance or lacke of skill in
Christian affayres, for obiectinge to them

that they honoured the Crosse, and made
the signe therof vpon their foreheads and
dores, which by likelyhood he would neuer
haue done, yf Christians had vsed to do
so indeed. Whervnto the Bishop answered,
that S. Cyrill did not obiect ignorance about
the fact, and custome of honouringe the
Crosse, and makinge the signe therof, as is
aforesaid, for that this thing was so notoriously
knowne, as yt had byn rather lacke of
witt or shame, then skill in Iulian to obiect
yt, yf no such vse had byn: but S. Cyrill accused
him of ignorance, and folly for his illation
made thervpon, which was, that Christians
were miserable & contemptible therby,
to witt, for yelding so much honour to
the signe of a crosse or gibbett, so odious to
them as nothinge more. And this to be his
meaninge is plaine by S. Cyrills whole discourse,
which was there read both in
Greeke and Latyn in these words: Furthermore
(saith he) Iulian calleth vs miserable,
                  Cyril. l. 6. contra Iulian. 
                  who
are so carefull alwayes to signe our houses and foreheads
with the signe of the pretious Crosse, but we
shall easily demonstrate vnto him, that such kind of
speaches do proceed from vvicked cogitations, and do
sauour of extreme ignorance, &c. Which text
being pondered,The sentence against Plessis. & the iudges hauing conferred
among themselues, this sentence was
giuen vpon the place of S. Cyrill before alleaged.Acts fol. 76.
                  Que le passage allegué par le Sieur du Plessis
ne se trouoit point dans S. Cyrille. That the

passage alleaged heere by the L. Plessis out of
S. Cyrill is not found at all in Cyrill. Of which
sentence yow see the consequence that ensueth,
to wit, that Plessis had made or diuised
yt of himselfe.
            
            
               The seauenth Place examined out of the Code
or Imperiall lawes, about paintinge or
caruings the signe of the Crosse.
               After the place of S. Cyrill examined and
found falsified about worshipping the crosse
(as you haue heard) there was brought into
triall, another place concerning the same argument,
about a law of the two Emperors
Theodosius, & Valens cyted by Plessis in the 223.
page of his booke, against paintinge or caruing
the image of the crosse in these words:
VVhat wil these men say, (to wit the Catholiks)
of the Emperors Theodosius & Valēs, that prohibited
expressely by edict, this custome of painting or caruing
images of our sauiour. For so much (say they) as we
haue care of nothing more then of the seruice of God,
we forbidd all sorts of persons to make the signe of our
Sauiour Iesus Christ, either in colours, stone, or other
matter, either to engraue paint or cutt the same, but
rather whersoeuer any such thing shalbe foūd, that yt
be taken away vnder paine of greuous punishmēt. So
cyteth Plessis the words of the law. But the
B. of Eureux shewed that this cytation is full
of willfull fraud, and corruption, for that
amōg other things it leaueth out the words
humi & in solo, which signifie on the ground:

which words conteyne the very life and
sense of all the whole text, & law alleaged,
& do declare the true meaning of the lawmakers
therin, for that the true text of the
law in the code lyeth thus:
               
                  Cùm sit nobis cura diligens, &c.
                  Cod. Lib
                        ••
                     tit. 8. nemini licere. &c. Wheras our
care is diligent in all things to defend the
Religion of almighty God: we commaund
that it shall not be lawfull, for any man to
carue or paint the signe of our Sauiour
Christ, either on the ground, or in any stone
or marble lyinge vpon the ground, &c.
                  
Which ordination the Bishopp did shew to
haue byn made by the Emperors,An egregious corruption. for more
honour of sacred images of our sauiour, to
the end that they should not be defiled with
mens feete, as appeareth by the same prohibition
made and confirmed not long after
by the Councell of Constantinople,
                  Concil. Constantinop. in Trullo. cap. 73. named In
Trullo, where it is said: vve commaund that all the
figures of the Crosse, that are made vpon pauiments be
taken away or defaced, to the end that the triumphant
signe of our victory, be not vnworthily defiled by
mens feete.
               
               And at this sore charge Monsieur Plessis seemed
much ashtonished, and had no other refuge,
but to say that he alleaged the text as
he found yt alleaged by Petrus Crinitus: but
the Bishopp replyed, that it had byn conuenient
for a man of Plessis quality and profession
in learning, before he had wrytten and
printed this thing, and especially before he

had so insolently asked the question, what
Catholikes would say vnto it, to haue seene
the place it selfe, knowinge that Petrus Crinitus
was but a rash grammarian of later
tymes, reprehended of this very falsification
by sundry learned men of our dayes, and namely
by Alanus Copus, Doctor Sanders, Cardinall
Bellarmine and others. Which Plessis could not
but know, and haue seene; and moreouer
the very title of the law yt selfe is extant in
the Code in these words: Nemini licere signum
saluatoris Christi humi, vel in scilice, vel in marmore,
aut insculpere aut pingere;
                  
                     Plessis either ignorant or strangely malitious. Which is: that it
is not lawfull for any man to engraue, or
paint the signe of our Sauiour Christ on the
ground eyther in flint or marble; which
title of the law seemeth impossible, but that
Plessis must haue seene and read, for so much
as he cyteth diuers other lawes out of the
same Code, or els he is a very superficiall fellow:
and yf he saw yt, and yet alleaged it as
he doth, his falshood is intollerable.
               But he persisting in denyall, that he was
bound to looke the law it selfe in the Code,
but that it was sufficient to follow Crinitus
his allegation therof, the iudges for compassion
(as it seemeth) after consultation
among themselues gaue this sentence: Que
il auoit veritablement allegué Crinitus, mais que
Crinitus 
                        •
                     'estoit abusé. That Monsieur Plessis had
truly alleaged Crinitus, but that Crinitus was
abused. Which had byn some excuse yf

                  Plessis had byn a simple yonge scholler; but
being the man he is, and taketh himselfe to
be, yt is hard to say where the abuse was
greater, eyther in him, or Crinitus; for so
much as in his text he alleaged not Crinitus,
but the Emperors themselues, and insulted
therby ouer Catholiks, as yow haue heard,
though in his margent he quoted Crinitus,
which was little to the purpose, knowinge
that he lyed, as must be presumed that he
did, and cannot well be auoyded.
            
            
               The eight Place examined out of S. Bernard
about honouringe our Lady.
               The L. Plessis being desirous to make a florish
against Catholiks, for geuing to much honour
(as he saith) to our Lady, he alleageth a sentence
out of S. Bernard in the 604. page of
his booke, in these words:Acts fol. 83. 
                  S. Bernard (saith
he) wryteth of the virgin her selfe in his 174. epistle,
that she hath no need of false honours, for so much as
she is full of true; and this is not to honour her, but to
take away her honour; the feast of her conception was
not well inuented. So he.
               In which words the B. accused Plessis to
haue vsed as great falshood as in the former
passages, for that he had guilfully patched
togeather two different sentences of that
epistle, wrytten in seuerall places, to make
one to his purpose, after the fashion of Centons
of Homer, Virgill and other poets, and had
so recyted them, as they might seeme but

one, and moreouer had cutt of the sentence
that wēt betwene them, & was immediatly
annexed to the former, & conteyned the
decision of the whole question, to witt, inventrix
of grace,
                  
                     S. Ansel. accused of impiety by Plessis.
                   
                  mediatrix of saluation, &c. For
better vnderstāding wherof must be noted,
that Mensieur Plessis a little before had accused
S. Anselme of impiety, for calling the blessed
Virgin Inuentricem gratiae, mediatricem salutis,
restauratricem saeculorum: sayinge that these
praises, and honours were false and immoderate.
For proofe wherof he alleaged Saint
Bernard, as though he had byn of a contrary
opinion to Anselmus, and to the Catholiks of
these dayes, in that he disallowed false honours
giuen to our Lady, for which he cyted
the passage before mentioned,Great falshood in alleaginge S. Bernard.
                   made of 2.
seuerall sentences, tied togeather, & cutting
out from the middle therof these words of
S. Bernard: Magnifica gratiae inuentricem, mediatricem
salutis, restauratricem saeculorum, &c. 
                  Do
thou magnifie this inuentrix of grace, this
mediatrix of Saluation, and restorer of the
world, &c.
                   Which are the very same words
that Anselmus did vse before him, and for reprouing
wherof S. Bernard was alleaged: so
as two or 3. falshoods were vrged out of this
place against him: First that of two sentēces
are guilfully made one; Secondly that the
principall clause was left out of purpose; and
thirdly that S. Bernard was alleaged to ouerthrow
that, which expressely he cōfirmeth.
               
                  To the first Plessis answered, that in leauinge
out that sentence, he did no more,
then the Apostles did, who alleaged some
tymes seuerall sentences of the old testamēt,
togeather as one text.A s
                        •
                     ift of Plessis shaken of by the B. But the Bishop replied
that the Apostles might do yt, for that
they had the selfe same spiritt, which the
wryters of the old testament had, and therfore
could not go from their true meaning:
but that we shall neuer find the Apostles to
alleage two places of scripture contrary to
the wryters mynd, and to leaue out in the
middest, that which maketh most to the
purpose for declaring their meaning, as Plessis
hath done heere in S. Bernard.
               
               To the second & third points, about clippinge
of the sentence in the middle, and alleaginge
S. Bernard against his owne meaninge;
Plessis endeauoured to make certayne
answers, & to shew that the sentence which
he had left out, made nothinge to the purpose
which he had in hand; which the Bishopp
graunted, yf his purpose was to deceaue
his Reader (as no doubt but yt was)
but otherwise, yf he had meant truth, yt
must needs be much to the purpose to putt
yt in; for that it ouerthroweth directly (as
yow see) all that which Plessis would haue
proued, by S. Bernards authority against S.
Anselme. And finally the Bishop after diuers
other cauills answered, returned to the first
matter againe, and to affirme as at the beginning,

that Monsieur Plessis had not dealt
truly and sincerely in this allegation of Saint
Bernard, but that he should haue alleaged the
sentences seuerally, as they lay in the booke,
and not haue left out the principall clause,
that went betwene them, yf he had dealt
truly. Wherfore he desyringe iudgment
vpon this passage,The sentence giuen against Plessis. the Acts do sett it downe
in these words: Monsieur le Chancelier, auec
l'aduis des deputés pronon
                        •
                     a qu'il eust esté bon que il
eust fait.
                  Acts fol. 96. The L. Chancelour with the aduise
of the deputyes, did pronounce, that yt
had byn good that Monsieur Plessis had done
so; (as the Bishop of Eureux required) which
is as much to say that in not doinge so,
he behaued himselfe but badly, which
was a checke of no small moment in such
a matter.
            
            
               The ninth Place examined out of Theodorete
about Images.
               The last place that was tryed in this first
daies conference, was out of Theodorete vpon
the 113. Psalme cyted by Monsieur Plessis in the
118. page of his booke against the vse of
Images in these words: God maketh what he
pleaseth, but Images are such as pleaseth men to
make them; they haue the places or habitations of
senses, but haue no sense indeed, and in this much lesse
them flyes and fleas and such other vermine, and yt is
iust that all that adore them do leese both reason and
sense, and be like vnto them. Heere the Bishopp

obiected two manifest and willfull falsifications:Acts fol. 90. 91. 92.
First for that he had against the expresse
meaninge of Theodorete translated the
Greeke word Idoll for Image, which Theodorete
did cleerly distinguish: and secondly for
that he cut of a plaine clause in the middest,
wherby the author of purpose did expound
himselfe, to witt these wordes; adored
by pagans, and adored for Gods, so as this
declared euidently, that he had no true
meaninge.
               To this Plessis answered, that as for the
words Idoll and Image, they were all one,The difference betwixt Idoll and Image.
                  
which he said he could shew both out of
scriptures and Fathers. The other replyed,
that albeit accordinge to their Etymologye
in Grammer, the Greeke word Eicoon and
Eidoolon do sometyme signifie the same, and
that some ould heathen writers do vse them
so: yet the Ecclesiasticall vse therof both in
scriptures & ancient Fathers, doth alwayes
distinguish most exactly these 2. words: as
for example, it can neuer be found, either in
scriptures or ancient Fathers, that the word
Idoll is taken in good part, as Image is, nor
that they did euer call the Cherubins,
                  Exod 25. 3 Re
                        •
                     . 6. 1. Cor. 11. 
                        •
                     . Cor. 3. & 4. Coloss. 1
                        •
                     
                   and
other Images in the Temple of Hierusalem,
Idolls; nor do the scriptures call man the Idoll
of God, but the Image of God; nor did euer
any Christian wryter dare to speake otherwise,
nor to call our Sauiour the Idoll of his
Father, but only the Image of his Father, and

other like examples, wherby is euident, that
both the scriptures, and holy Fathers did
obserue a strict distinction betwixt these
words: And heervpon was there spent some
tyme in certayne vayne replies vsed by Plessis,
but no one example could he giue out of
the scriptures to the contrary, nor yet out
of any Father to this purpose.
               And on the other side the Bishop pressed
him with the words of Theodorete
                  Theodor. quaest. 38. in Exod. himselfe
in his questions vpon Exodus, where he setteth
downe expressely the difference betweene
Idoll and Image: and besides this, that
in his Ecclesiasticall Greeke history of the
liues of Fathers, called the Religious history, he
recounteth in the life of Saint Symeon Stilites,
that the Christian Romans in his tyme did
set vp Images for deuotion to the said Stilites,
and therby procured to themselues both safegard and
protection, as the authors words are, wherof
the Bishopp inferred, that for so much as
Theodorete did prayse the Romains for this
Act, yt cannot be imagined that he held
Images to be the same that Idolls, which before
he so much detested in the place heere
alleaged by Monsieur Plessis, for that so he
should prayse the Romans for idolatry.
               Heere the deputyes called for Theodorete
in Greeke,
                     
                        •
                     Another shift t
                        •
                     
                     
                     
                        •
                     en away from P
                        •
                     essis. & examined the place of Stilites,
& found it true as the Bishop had alleaged:
& Plessis had no other refuge left but to say,
that these Images of Stilites were not putt vp

in Churches. But the Bishopp replyed that
to be of no importance, whether they were
or noe. For yf they were Idolls they were vnlawfull
also in priuate houses, and consequently
Theodorete would not haue praised
them. But yet to shew that in that tyme
also of Theodorete & before, Christian Images
were accustomed to be sett vp religiously in
Churches, the Bishop alleaged many places
out of S.
                  Orat. de S. Barl
                        •
                     am. 
                  Basill, S.
                  Orac. in B. Theod. 
                  Gregory Nissen,
                  In Biblioth. cap. 52. 
                  Photius,
                  In hym. de S. Cassiano. 
                  Prudentius,
                  Ad S
                        •
                     
                     uerum sulpit. 
                  Paulinus and others, which
textes were there brought forth, read, and
allowed. And all this ended he required
Monsieur Plessis to confesse this first abuse against
Theodoretes owne meaninge, and to
answere to the second, why he had left out
those words, that declared his meaning, to
witt, Idolls adored by the pagans, and adored for
Gods? He aunswered that he had left them
out for breuityes sake, and had sett downe
only the substantiall clauses of Theodoretes
text. But the Bishop replyed, that this breuity
was not commendable, and that the
clause left out was the most substantiall of
all the rest, for declaringe the truth, and
Theodoretes meaninge in the matter in hand.
Plessis answered,Many turnings and windings of Plessis. that it appertayned not to
his purpose to alleage those words. The Bishop
said that yt did, yf his purpose were to
deale plainly, & to haue the truth knowne.
Then fell Plessis to his ould refuge and said,
that he had not alleaged the forsaid text of

                  Theodorete directly against Images, but indirectly,
and by a certayne analogie or consequence,
which the Bishop refuted. And finally
after all, he demaunded iudgment
vpon the place, and vpon both the two corruptions
obiected, which after diligent reuew
of the place in Theodorete, and aduise taken
of all the deputyes, the Lord Chancelour
pronounced in all their names in these
words.Acts fol. 105. 
                  Que ce Passage ne se deuoit entendre que des
Idoles des payens, & non des Images de Chrestiens:
comme il paroissoit par ces mots; Ador
                     •
                  es par les
payens, & adorées pour dieux, que auoient esté
obmis. Which is to say, that this passage of
Theodoret must be vnderstood of Painim Idols,
and not of Christian Images, as is plaine by the
words: 
                     adored by Paynims, and adored for Gods,
                  
which were left out. By which sentence
(giuen also by his owne men) he remayned
condemned as yow see of both the falsityes
obiected at the beginninge by the Bishop.
               And heere now it being vpon the point
of seauen of the clocke at night, the K. dismissed
the company for that tyme, and remitted
the continuation of the same conference,
to begin againe the next day at seauen
of the clocke in the morning,The conference reiourned till the next day. & to endure
vntill an eleuen, and then againe after
dynner from one to six, and so forward vntill
all the places might be examined, and
the same was agreed vnto by all the rest.
And presently the Bishopp of 
                     
                        •
                     ureux caused

all the bookes to be carryed to the house of
Monsieur du Plessis, to prepare himselfe in the
other passages, that were to be examined
the day followinge.
            
         
         
            WHAT HAPPENED AFTER
THE END OF THIS FIRST DAYES
Conference; of Monsieur Plessis his demeanor,
and departure: Of the booke he sent forth for his
excuse; and what successe hath ensued of mens
conuersion thervpon.
            CHAP. III.
            As soone as the K. Maiestie was departed
from the place of conference, euery
man began to talke & reason of that which
had passed, but especially those that had expected
without in other Chambers, and
Galeryes round about, and in the K. garden
beneath, and could get no place within the
Chamber, where the conference was holden;
these, I say, as well Catholiks, as Protestants,
pressed greatly to know what had
byn done, & what had byn the issue of that
tryall. And so earnest sute was made vnto
the Secretaryes, for copyes of the sentences,
as that very night they were geuen abroad
in wryting, conteyning as before yow haue
heard, to witt that vpon the first 2. places of
Scotus and Durandus, the sentence was; that

Monsieur Plessis had taken the obiection for the resolution.
Vpon the second places of S. Chrysostome;
that he had left out that which he should haue
put in.
               A breefe recapitulation of the sentences. Vpon the fifth place of S. Hierome;
that he ought to haue alleaged the passage entyre, as
yt was in the author. Vpon the sixt place of
S. Cyrill: That the passage alleaged out of S. Cyrill
was not to be found in him. Vpon the 7. place
out of the Emperors Theodofius and Valens;
That Plessis had alleaged truly Crinitus, but that
Crinitus was abused. Vpon the 8. place out of
S. Bernard: That it had byn well, Plessis had cyted
the place distinctly as yt lay in the author, without
cuttinge of any thinge in the middest. And finally
vpon the 9. place out of Theodorete against
Images: That the passage alleaged, was not to be
vnderstood of Images, but of Idolls, and that this appeared
by the words which Plessis had omitted in his
allegation.
            
            Which iudgments being read and considered,
yt was wonderfull to behould the
great diuersity of affections, which they
styrred vp, to witt of comfort, and alacrity
in the Catholiks, and of confusion & greife
in the Hugonotts there present, who being
in number aboue 200. considered, that these
sentences had passed by the consents aswell
of their owne iudges, as of the other, & that
there was no way left of tergiuersation.
And further that Monsieur Plessis being one of
the cheefest men simply of their Religion
in France, and most accoumpted of for his

learninge, this his disgrace was the disgrace
of all their Religion, and his error inexcusable,
in respect of his former bragges, and
Protestations, and of the willfull falshood
now found in him.Diuers cheefe Protestants began to thinke of their cō
                  uersion. Wherfore diuers of
them, and those also of the principall, began
soone after, by assistance of Gods holy
grace, to open their harts to another cogitation
for their conuersion, as a little after
yow shall heare.
            The Kings Maiestie also was exceedingly
moued in mynd, to see what had passed, as
may appeare by his affectious speaches, and
letter wrytten to Monsieur Espernon that very
night after his departure from the conference,
which letters we haue recytedSupra cap. 5. before,
and the causes of his motion we shall
touch a little afterward, when we haue sett
downe what ensued immediatly vpon this
first dayes conference, which was a great
reason also to mooue his Maiesty the more,
as presently yow shall see. Wherfore we
shall relate the same in the very words of
the printed Acts, which are these that
follow.
            The next morrow,VVhat passed after the first conference ended. which was friday
the fifth of May at 6. of the Clocke in the
morning, came a gentleman to the Bishop
of Eureux, telling him that Monsieur Plessis had
byn very euill that night, & that he prayed
the Bishop to be content to haue the conference
differred for that morninge;Acts fol. 105. but the

Bishop asked him for how longe this delay
should be, the gentleman answered vntill
that Mōsieur Plessis should be in state of health
to prosecute the same. Soone after this, there
came to the Kings chamber Monsieur de la Riuiere
cheefe phisitian to his Maiestie, tellinge
him that the conference was like to be broken
vp, by reason of the L. Plessis indisposition,
whome he said, that he had left very
sicke, with violent vomitts, and tremblings
of all the parts of his body; which he King
hearinge, comaunded him presently to go,
and tell the same to the L. Chancelour, to
the end that he and the deputyes should not
take their iorney in vaine that day to the
pallace; which being told vnto them, and
they imagininge, that perhaps Monsieur Plessis
his sicknesse might endure longe, sent that
very night late to his Maiestie, to know his
iudgment & pleasure, whether they should
remayne still in Fountayne-bleau, or returne to
Paris. The King that he might giue them
more certayne answere, willed the Chancelour
at ten of the clocke at night, to go and
see Plessis, & to know from his owne mouth,
what he would do concerning the prosecution
of this conference. The Chancelour hauing
with him at that tyme, the L. President
Fresnes Canay, cheefe deputy for the Protestant
party in the said conference, desyred
him to go to him which he did, and brought
answere, that Plessis was not in state to go

forward now, but he would aduise vpon it
in Paris: which answere being related to the
Chancelour, by the President, and from the
Chancelour, to the King; his Maiestie gaue
licence to the iudges, & deputyes to depart
to Paris, which they did the next morninge,
being the sixt of May, except only the President
Fresnes, who remained at Fontayn-bleau
with the King.
            But the next day at noone, about six
houres after the departure of the said deputyes,
the President Fresnes, hauing byn to visitt
Monsieur Plessis againe, came, and aduertised
the Chancelour, that he was much better
in health, & that for his part the conference
might beginne againe, which the Chancelour
hearinge,A new offer of Plessis for continuing the conference, but dured not. sent presently for the B. of Eureux,
& in presence of the said president told him
the newes, who was gladd therof, and offered
himselfe presently, & said moreouer,
that as yet his bookes were not sent away.
Which the Chancelour hearing, called for the
Secretary Monsieur Mercier chosen for the part
of Plessis, and willed him presently to go and
signifie vnto him, that he had vnderstood,
that he was better in health, & contēt to returne
to the conference, which if it were so,
the B. was also ready & his bookes not yet
sent away, & though some of the deputyes
were departed, yet the president Fresues their
chiefe deputy remained, & others might be
nominated at, or vpon the very place it selfe.
            
               But Monsieur Plessis answered, that he was
not maister of his owne sicknes, which grew
more and more vpon him, and that he was
goinge to Paris from whence he would not
depart without seing the L. Chancelour,
               
                  Plessis fleeth the cōferēce, and slippeth avvay from Paris, without takinge his leaue of any. to
informe him of his affayres; & so conforme
vnto this he departed the 8. of May being
Monday; and the Chancelour hauinge receaued
his answere, aduertised the K. therof,
and so they went all to Paris, and his Maiestie
arryued there vpon the 12. of May.
And about some 4. or 5. dayes after, Monsieur
Plessis departed to his gouerment of Saumur
without takinge his leaue of his Maiestie or
seing the L. Chancelour (as he had promised)
and without sending any word at all to the
B. of Eureux, about the conference or further
triall.
            Thus farre goeth the narration of the
printed Acts, published by authority of the
King & deputyes that were present, wherby
we see the end of this action, and how
the L. Plessis behaued himselfe therin: But
about 2. monethes after, came forth the
aforesaid little discourse with out name of
author,
                  Plessis his new discourse bearinge the title of, true discourse of
the conference at Fontayn-bleau, full of elusions,
disguisments, and inuectiues (saith the B.
of Eureux) sett forth by Plessis himselfe, though dissemblinge
his name, to the end he might enioye the
fable vnder this maske and ly with out blushing, obtruding
to his Reader what he thought best: For so

are the words of the said Bishopp in the refutation
of this michinge discourse, which
conteyned, as before hath byn shewed three
principall points; the one in peruerting the
story of the Acts themselues: the second in
diuising new shifts and euasions, which occurred
not vnto him while he was in the
triall: the third, in recriminations, or obiectinge
other mens falsityes in like manner.
Which kind of proceedinge did more yet
discreditt Plessis with the wiser sort of men,
then his former ouerthrow in the field, for
that this did shew indeed that to be true
which Tertullian saith;Tert. de praescript. aduer. haereses. 
               that heretiks may more
easily be ouercome, then persuaded; and that Plessis
had an obstinate mynd to go forward, notwithstandinge
whatsoeuer was, should, or
might be proued against him, but yet diuers
other of the more learned and grauer sort of
his owne side, began, as hath byn said, to
enter into another cogitation, & to thinke
whether yt were not best by this occasion,
to seeke out the truth of matters indeed, and
that without pertinacity or passion, for so
much as yt was a matter concerninge the
eternall saluation or damnation of their
soules.
            And this happy course amonge others,
tooke, (as in part before yow haue vnderstood)
the aforsaid noble man of Normandy,
Monsieur Sainct-Mary du Mont, who being a
great Protestant before, was first moued towards

Catholike Religion, partly by the
Sermons of Monsieur Buchage brother to Duke
Ioyeus made afterward a Capuchin friar, as
hath bynSupra cap. 1. declared (which Sermons were
principally against the falsifications of Plessis
in his booke against the Masse) partly also by
the sight of some of the said falsifications
themselues,
                  The conuersiō
                   of Monsieur du Mont, and of Monsieur Fresnes. shewed vnto him in priuate by
the said B. of Eureux before the conference,
but he was fully conuerted by the trialll it
selfe, and became afterward a zealous Catholike.
But more notorious and admirable
was the conuersion of the L. Fresnes Canay
cheife president for the Protestant party,
in the parlament Chamber called Demy party
in Languedocke & chosen by Monsieur Plessis
himselfe for chiefe deputy on his party for
this conferēce: who taking the same course
in enforminge himselfe, found matters so
euident, as he became a Catholike vpon the
sight of this triall, and that with such feruour,
as he would not be absolued secretly
of his heresie before held, (as for respect vnto
his dignity and place was offered) but
would needs abiure publikely in the hands
of the B. of Paris, and so he did, being a very
learned man in his profession, & at this day
is Embassadour for his Christian Maiestie
with the State of Venice, where his wife in
like manner the last yeare, by his owne
especiall meanes (she being a Lady of
much nobility) was conuerted also, & both

of them remayned most zealous Catholiks.
            Which two examples of Monsieur Sainct-Mary
and Mousieur President Fresnes (both of
them being learned and earnest Protestants
all their life before) did greatly mooue the
King himselfe, for his comfort and confirmation
in Catholike Religion, but no one
thing so much, as his being present at the
forsaid Conference, and so he is said to haue
often confessed afterward, for that he saw
there, that which he could neuer haue imagined,
to witt that men of learning & iudgment,
would willfully for maintayninge of
faction, wryte and publish that, which they
must needs know in their consciences to be
false. He cōsidered that these 9. places there
examined,Motyues of much consideration to the Kings Maiestie in this Action. were picked out by Plessis himselfe
of 60. sent him by the Bishop, and that
these 60. were but a parcell of 500. which
the said B. had bound himselfe to exhibite
in 10. dayes, to be discussed: and that by all
probability the forsaid 9. were of the least
falsified, and easiest to be defended of all
the rest, at least wise of the first 60. for that
otherwise Monsieur Plessis would not haue
chosen them. Wherfore hauinge seene by
experience, that no one of those 9. was able
to be defended from plaine and willfull falshood,
he imagined what would fall out in
the rest, if the conference had gone forward,
and if all should passe as in these 9. throughout
the 500. there ready to be exhibited, yea

in 3500. more which the Bishop said he had
gathered out, and offered to bynd himselfe
to conuince them, of no lesse falsity and imposture,
then those nyne, and all this out of
one boooke. These things (I say) laid togeather,
his Maiestie had good cause to
thinke, what may be thought of that mans
conscience, that wryteth and printeth such
a booke in matters of Religion.
            Moreouer his Maiestie could not but remember
what tales the said Plessis, and other
such fellowes had told him against Catholiks
& Catholike Religion for many yeares,
whilst he was yet a Protestant, to witt, that
they had no truth on their side, no antiquity,
noe true ancient authority, but all was
for them, and their new pretended Religio
                  •
               .How the K. was abused by Hugonot
                     •
                  s whilst he vvas of their Religion.
He could not forgett also, what sollemne
protestations they were accustomed
to make, of their owne sincerity both in
wrytinge, and preachinge, and especially
Plessis in this last contētion about his booke,
before yt came to the tryall, offering to leese
his life and honour, yea to burne his owne
hand, yf any one place were proued to be
wittingly corrupted, or falsified, which yet
was so euidently conuinced by the triall,
not in one only, but in euery one of the nine
places, as no man of reason could deny yt,
and the deputyes of his owne party gaue
sentence against him.
            Wherfore this hauing so fallen out, and

the Bishop of Eureux protestinge of his side,
that the places of greatest corruption remayned
yet behind, aboue twenty fold
more in number, then those that had byn
examined, seing also the shamfull flight of
Monsieur Plessis from the continuation of the
combatt,His Maiesties comfort in being a Catholike. and the shamelesse discourse cast
abroad by him without a name, wherin
many matters of fact well knowne to his
Maiesty were denied, affirmed, or disguised,
according to passion, most contrary to the
knowne reall truth therof: All these considerations
(I say) & many other concurring
togeather, and representing themselues to
his Maiesties wisdome, made him to feele
infinite comfort in the happy resolution he
had taken of being a Catholike, and to contemne
from that day forward all contentious
wrytings of factious sectaryes, that
care not what they say or wryte, so they
may therby hould vp their sect and faction.
            Neyther did this euent of Plessy Mornayes
conferēce, worke those effects only for the
openinge his Maiesties eyes and vnderstanding
in Religion, but of many more besides
throughout France, wherof though I be not
so particularly informed, as many others
bee; yet diuers persons of marke could
I name besides the former two, that receaued
like light & grace from almighty God,
by the same meanes, and of great Hugonots
became good Catholiks; as the L. Baron Saligniac
               
Liefetennant for the K. of the countrey
of Lymoge togeather with his wife,Hugonots conuerted in France by disclosing hereticall fraudes & falsifications.
daughter of the Chauncelour intituled Del
Hospital, and sister to the Archbishopp of Ais.
The L. Baron du Bonneuald a great noble
man in Lymosin, togeather with another Baron
of Gascoigne, whose name occurreth not
at this present, though I haue seene the narration
of his conuersion wrytten out of
France. Monsieur du Sansay Entendent ouer the
Kings Finances in France. Diuers cheefe learned
men also, and among them some Ministers,
as namely Monsieur Caiette late Minister
and Preacher to the Kings sister, marryed to
the Prince of Loraine, togeather with diuers
of her cheefe officers, amongst which, was
Monsieur du lac de Barn, Monsieur Rebeul, & Monsieur
Sponde th' elder, two great learned men,
and another Sponde brother to the former,
no lesse learned, who at this day hath the
care of the Popes library in Rome, togeather
with a nephew of Iohn Caluyn conuerted, &
entertayned like wise by his Holynesse. And in
this very yeares, wherin we wryte this, to
witt 1603. we haue diuers letters and relations
out of France, by which we heare of
sundry conuersions of many, wherof before
there was little hope, as for example of one
Aluarez a learned Spaniard, that had preached
many yeares heresie in Languedocke, of
one Tirius a Scottishman, Maister of a Colledge
in the Citty of Nimis; of a cheefe Minister

in Gascoigny Preacher in times past vnto
his Maiestie of France, when he was
King of Nauarre. And of a learned schoolemaister,
vvhoe amonge other schollers
brought vp the children of the cheife Preacher,
and Minister of all those parts named
Chamier.
               Letters relating diuerse conuersions of Hugonots in France.
            
            I haue seene letters also, relating the
particular conuersions of diuers chee
                  •
               e Protestants
in the Citty of Metz in Lorayne, and
in the cittyes of Nimis and Mompelier in Languedock,
which later two cittyes are in the
hands of Hugonotts, and were wont to haue
few or no Catholiks in them, and now are
so many, as his Christian Maiestie hath byn
entreated of late, to name them seuerall Catholike
Bishops. And the same letters do report,
that there is no one moneth lightly
passed, but that in Auinion for example (from
whence one of these letters were wrytten)
some 20. 25. 30. or 40. persons, comminge
from other parts abroad of their owne accord,
where heresies do raigne, do abiure
the same in the hands of the Catholike Inquisitor,
with great zeale and feruour, and
detestation of heresie. And that in the Citty
of Aubenas, where one P. Iacobus Salesius a Iesuite
was martyred by the Hugonots a few
yeares gone, aboue 200. haue byn of late
cōuerted, & so in other townes there about,
where heresies were wont to raigne, & on
the other side scarse any one Catholike is

heard of, to be peruerted (God be thanked)
in many yeares togeather.
            All which in great part is ascribed both
to the euent of this conference with Plessis
Mornay, & to the diligence of other Catholike
wryters and preachers, who euery
where in their bookes and sermons do discouer
the falshood of heresie, and hereticall
authors, which no doubt is a principall
point to be vrged against them, though
themselues would seeme to make yt a matter
of small consideration: But the truth is,
that no one thinge doth gaule them more,
nor mooue discreet, and ingenuous men to
forsake them, then to see that they deale not
sincerely, but deceytfully and with false
consciences, be they subiect neuer so little
concerning Religion.A vvish that his Maiestie of England vvould permitt the like triall. Wherfore if it might
please almighty God to mooue the high
wisdome of our learned King, to make the
like triall in England, I would not doubt of
the like successe both in his Maiestie and
other well-mynded protestants, especially
yf yt might be made with like indifferency
of iudges, deputyes, and Secretaryes for both
partes. And so much of this matter.
         
         
            
            WHAT MONSIEVR PLESSIS
DID ANSVVERE, AND CAVSED
to be cast abroad after his returne home, from the
Conference at Fontayne-bleau.
            CHAP. IV.
            WE haue shewed before how that Monsieur
Plessis, after his secrett departure
from Paris, and returne to Saumur, calling his
Ministers, & frends about him, diui
                  •
               ed how
he might repaire the losse of credit receaued
at Fountayne-bleau by the conference; and yt
seemed good in their eyes, full of passion, &
greife, to sett forth a certayne wrytinge intituled:
A true discourse of the conference at Fountayne-bleau,
putting no certayne name thervnto,
but only these 4. letters F. D. L. M. and
this discourse was printed, and diuulged
with such diligence, for sauing the honour
of their cause, as with in 3. monethes after,
there were 3. seuerall editions extant therof,
as appeareth by the B. of Eureux his citation
of the third edition.
            The contents of this discourse consisted
in three things,Three points of Plessis reply. as before we haue shewed:
first in misreportinge and peruertinge, the
very history yt selfe, of the conference: The
second in diuisinge new shifts, for couering
the falsifications before condemned, & sentenced:

the third in recharging the B. with
other pretended falsityes, taken out of Gratian,
that gathered the canon law, and some
other; and some other obiected out of the
Bishopp his owne works. All which three
assaults are beaten backe by the B. vpon
him, with a particular confutation therof
printed togeather with the publike Acts:
wherin he sheweth that the first of these
points is great audacity, to goe about to deny,
or disguise that, which the records of 4.
seuerall Secretaryes, and the memory of
aboue 200. wittnesses, can, and do testifie to
the contrary. The second is importunity, to
endeauour to call in question and doubte
againe matters, so authentically examined,
and decyded, & this with lesse reason, then
at the beginning. The rhird is impertinency:
for that albeit Plessis could proue that
others had byn faulty also in their allegations,
(as he doth not but only by calumniation)
yet was not this any good excuse for
him, nor any iust defence of his honour.
And for that the said Bishop doth handle
largly and learnedly all those three points in
his forsaid confutation: I might remit wholy
the Reader thervnto: and so I shalbe forced
to do for the later two points, for that
this briefe defence of myne admitteth not so
large a disputation: only I will note heere
some few examples of the first point: wherby
yow may easily iudge of Monsieur Plessis
               
manner of proceedinge both in that and all
the rest,Necessitas cogit. ad turpia. and how necessity (as the prouerbe
saith) enforceth a man oftentymes to shamefull
attempts.
            
            First then (saith the Bishop) besides a perpetuall
deprauation to be seene in this discourse
of Monsieur Plessis of whatsoeuer passed
in the conference, and besides his silent passing
ouer and dissemblinge so many aduantagious
conditions, as were made vnto him,The first point examined. Acts and Refut. fol. 108.
besides many intolerable slaunders and calumniations
laid by him vpon the K. himselfe,
as also vpon the Chancelour & deputyes
as partiall against him: he obiecteth diuers
things in particular so manifestly false, & to
be conuinced by the records themselues, as
yt easily declareth, that he had sett vp his
rest to continue the defence of his cause, by
the same meanes of shameles lying, wherby
he had begonne yt.
            As for example in the 34. page of his discourse
& third edition,1. Deprauation. he wryteth that the
Bishop had obiected vnto him, in the examination of the third place which was out
of S. Chrysostome, vpon the first epistle to the
Thessalonians, that he had left out of the text,
these words: (yf we our selues be negligent) and
heervpon he insulteth, for that these words
are not in S. Chrysostome. But this is great
folly: for the Bishopp obiected the leauinge
out of those words in the sentence of S. Hierome,
               Sup. cap. 2. place 5
                     •
                  .
and not of S. Chrysostome, as before hath

byn seene in the examination of those places:
and the words obiected to be left out
of S. Chrysostome, were others no lesse malitiously
cutt of then these. As before yow
haue seene in the examination of the said
third place.
            Then passinge to the page 38. of his discourse,
Plessis saith (talking of the same place
of S. Chrysostome),2. Deprauation. that the andience hearing
Chrysostome to speake of preaching to Saints,
imagined that he had spokē of dead Saints:
and vpon this ignorance (saith he, for so he qualifieth
the iudgmēt of all that were present)
they gaue an applause, &c. Which is altogeather
false, for that the applause giuen, was
not vpon this first place of S. Chrisostome vpon
the epistle to the Thessalonians, but another
out of his homilyes vpon the second epistle
to the Corinthians, brought in vpon the examen
of the fourth place of the nyne before
examined. And the cause of this
                  •
                said applause
of laughter of the auditory was this:
That Plessis pretending to bring two places
out of Saint Chrysostome against prayinge to
Saints, which were the third and fourth before
examined, and then yt being proued
by the Bishopp that both those places were
falsified by him, and that they made expressely
for prayer to Saints, yf he had put them
downe wholy, and truly, he had no other
refuge, yf yow remember, but to say, that
he had putt downe the true sense of S. Chrysostome,
               
though not his words: & then being
beaten from that with other places of Saint
Chrysostome, declaring his owne meaning for
prayer to Saints, Plessis was forced to confesse
against himselfe (that had alleaged him
for impugning prayer to Saints) that indeed
Chrysostome allowed prayer to Saints, but yt
was to liue Saints only, and not to dead:
against which shift the Bishopp recyted this
place followinge out of his 26. homily vpon
the second epistle to the Corinthians, talking
of the pious deuotions of the Emperors of
his tyme, in prayinge to S. Peter, and S. Paul,
& highly praysing the same in these words:
He that is apparelled in purple doth make supplication
to Saints,
               Chrysost. hom. 26. in cap. 2. Cor. & hom. 66. ad Pop Antiochen. 
               that they wilbe his intercessors to God, and
he that weareth a diademe, doth pray to a tent-maker,
and to a fisher-man now dead, to be his protectors:
and will yow dare then to say that their maister
is dead, whose seruants now after their deathes,
are the Protectors of Emperors liuinge vpon earth?
Which place being recyted out of S. Chrysostome,
               A Cufusion of Plessis.
that confirmeth so euidently both
prayer to Saints, and to dead Saints, some
laughter there was, and strangewondering
at the impudency of Plessis, in running so often
to his refuge of dead and liue Saints: and
he could not but blush to see himselfe so
euidently taken. And this is the applause,
which he complayneth of, though wrongfully
and fraudulently alleaged, as yow
haue heard.
            
               Furthermore the same Plessis passinge on
to handle the decision, and sentence geuen
vpon the foresaid fourth place, telleth his
reader for certayne, that the iudges did not
determine that there was any omission vsed
therin in cytinge Saint Chrysostomes words.
Which is such an impudency,3. Deprauation. as not only
the records of all the foure Secretaryes do
vniformally conuince,Discours. pag. 36. who haue the sentence
of the deputyes thus registred; that
Monsieur Plessis had left out that which he should
haue putt in: but the very layinge open of the
text of Saint Chrysostome doth conuince the
same, to him that hath eyes and skill to read.
            It followeth vpon the examination of
the same fourth place before mencyoned,4. Deprauation.
that he chargeth the deputyes of ignorance,
in geuinge sentence (as he saith) that the
words of S. Chrysostome, there cyted out of his
homily vpon S. Mathewes ghospell, ought to be
vnderstood of Saints deceased, wheras they gaue
no such sentence at all, as the records of all
foure secretaryes do testifie,Discours. pag. 46. but only the very
same sentence, which was giuen before
vpon the third place, to witt; that Plessis had
left out, that which he should haue put in: and the
Bishop grauntinge in that place, that those
words of S. Chrysostome,
               Acts fol. 59. being indifferent to
be vnderstood either of dead, or liue Saints:
did vrge, that yf Plessis would vnderstand
them only of liue Saints, they made most
against himselfe, who had brought that

place of S. Chrysostome to impugne prayer to
dead Saints. So as this doth only shew a
mynd in Plessis to ly, cauill, and calumniate
without releeuing himselfe therby, but rather
encreasing his dishonour and shame.
            About the fifth place examined out of S.
Hierome vpon Ezechiell,
               5. Deprauation. he accuseth greatly
the B. for that he would not (as he saith)
harken to him, when he alleaged another
place of S. Hierome vpon the epistle to the
Galathians, where he hath these words:Discourse pag. 48. 
               At
that day vvhen vve shalbe before the tribunall of
Christ, neyther Noe, Iob, nor Daniell, can pray any
more for any man, &c. Which charge is euidently
false, as beforeSuprae cap. 2. loc. 4. yow haue heard declared
in the examination of this place, and
may see in the Acts themselues. For that
albeit the Bishopp told him, that this place
was brought in against order, besides the
number of those 19. which Plessis had chosen
to be first examined: yet he was content to
stand vpon the examination therof, yf Plessis
would, & of other places cited in his booke,
and to bynd himselfe to proue, that in that
only one page he had committed 4. notorious
falsificatiōs; but Plessis refused to ioyne
with him in that point;Acts fol. 69. and so the Bishopp
expounded the place alleaged of S. Hierome,
that yt was meant of the day of iudgment,
when no more praying to Saints shalbe, nor
of Saints for vs, which doth not impugne
our present prayinge to them, but rather

confirme the same. For that S. Hierome affirming
heere, that there shalbe no more prayinge
to Saints, or of Saints for vs at the day
of iudgment, doth euidently signifie that
before that tyme, both may be vsed.
            About the examen of the sixth place,6. Deprauation. out
of S. Cyrill, concerning the honouring of the
Crosse, Plessis deceaueth notably his Reader,
in tellinge him, that falsity being obiected
vnto him by the Bishop,Discourse pag. 49. the King spoke in
his behalfe, pronouncing with a loud voyce
that both partyes had reason: which all men
there present know to be false; for that the
King did rather the quite contrary, sayinge,
that wheras Plessis had brought that place of
Cyrills words to Iulian, to proue that Christians
in his tyme did not adore the Crosse,
yt seemed to him that they proued neyther
the one nor the other, (which was a condemnation
of Plessis, that had alleaged the
same against honouring the Crosse) & then
his Maiestie added further, that by the obiection
of Iulian, exprobratinge vnto them
that they did honour the Crosse: yt seemed
to him euident, that he would neuer haue
made such an obiection, yf yt had byn altogeather
false. Which speach of his Maiestie
being publike and registred in the eares of
all men, a man may see the modesty of Plessis,
that dareth so openly, and in print, to peruert
the same.
            Vpon the very same place he falsifieth also7. Deprauation.
               
in like manner, the sentence giuen by the
deputyes,Discourse pag. 50. sayinge that the Chancelour pronounced
simplely, that the words alleaged out of Cyrill,
were not found in him, leauing yt easy to the hearers
(saith he) to inferre, that the sense notwithstandinge
was to be found in him. Which is a great
vntruth, for that the sentence registred by
all 4. secretaryes comprehendeth the whole
passage in these words:Acts fol. 72. 
               The passage cyted by
Monsieur Plessis out of Cyrill, is not found in Cyrill;
which sentence conteyneth as yow see
both sense and words. And it is a poore shift
of Plessis, to go about to help himselfe by so
childish an inference, as for that they gaue
sentence, that the words alleaged by him
were not in Cyrill, yt might be inferred, that
the sense was.
            After this the Bishopp sheweth diuers
other grosse vntruthes in this kind, as namely,
that in reportinge the sentence of the
Chancelour,
               8. and 9. Deprauation. and deputyes vpon the last place
examined out of Theodorete, about Idolls, he
falsely peruerteth the same, leauing out the
principall important words of the said sentence,
to witt, adored by Paynims, and adored for
Gods, contrary to the faith of the records
themselues, vniformally taken by all 4. secretaryes;
& then againe to excuse himselfe
from a foule disgrace, happened in the examination
of the first place about the reall
presence out of Scotus,
               Discourse pag. 60. & 65. whose text Plessis could
not read, he telleth in his discourse this notable

lye, that the B. of Eureux had vsed a
certayne fraudulent sleight to disgrace him,
which was to bring two editions of Scotus,
the one fayre to be read, which he sent him
ouernight with the 60. places to prepare
himselfe, the other he retayned with him
of an euill print, which he obtruded to him
in the conference. But this shamelesse fiction
the Bishop refuteth first by the testimony
of them, that brought backe againe
the bookes from Plessis house to the conference,
and then by the wittnesse of 4. seuerall
Frenche gentlemen,A foolish calumniation refuted. to witt, Monsieur du Bertant,
du Beaulien, du Berulle, and du Salettes, that
came with him from Paris, & knew that he
brought but one only edition of Scotus with
him, which was in folio of the print of Badius
Ascensius in the yeare 1519. and lent vnto him
by the college of Sorbone in Paris for this
conference, which booke being giuen to Plessis
to verifie his place alleaged out of him, he
could not so much as read, nor turne the
booke, for that there were some abreuiations
therin after the manner of schoole-doctors,
and therby all the lookers on, and
hearers well perceaued that he was vtterly
ignorāt in reading schoole-doctors, though
euery where for ostentation of learning, he
was accostomed to cyte them in his bookes.
And this shame Plessis had no other way to
couer, at that present, before all the auditors,
but to say that he was not practised

but in his owne bookes only, though afterward
vpon more deliberation, he thought
good to deuise this other shift of changinge
the booke by the Bishopp, which yet being
so malitiously cōuinced of calumniation by
the wittnesses before mentioned, did exceedingly
tend to Plessis discredit. And this shall
suffice for the first point of Plessis reply,
wherin yow see, that for defence of his 9.
places before conuicted of falsification, he
vttereth 9. other great vntruthes, for doublinge
the number.
            As for the other two points of new shifts
and recrimination,The other 2. points of Plessis discourse I will remitt the Reader
to the Bishop his owne refutation, for them
that vnderstand the french tongue; and for
the rest yt will not be hard to ghesse by example
of this which we haue alleaged, what
manner of stuffe yt is, which Plessis could alleage
for his further defence in so manifest
conuinced falsifications; and yow shall heare
presently what O. E. in England can say for
him. And yf yow find him by this little, a
man with out faith or spiritt of truth in his
assertions, then shall yt be wisdome to beware
not only of this his booke against the
Masse, wherout so many falsifications haue
byn gathered, but of others also wrytten in
the same spiritt, and namely of one, that for
many yeares hath gone in English, intituled
of the Church, which being smothely wrytten,
and stuffed out with great shew and

ostentation of Scriptures, Fathers, Historyes,
and other such furniture, hath dazeled
the eyes of many, as did also this other against
the Masse, vntill yt was sifted and examined
by learned men. But for the other in English,
I can assure the Reader, that yt is a most
deceytfull booke, and may be well brother
to this against the Masse.
               A note of Plessis Mornay his booke of the Church. And yt is now very
neere twenty yeares gone, that the late Earle
of Lecester gaue one of them to a kinsman of
his, named Guilford, to read for his satisfactiō
in Religion, who conferring the same with
another learned gentleman a frend of mine,
desired that yt might be examined, which
my said frend began to do with such comodity
of bookes, as he could procure at that
tyme, and found so full stuffed with all kind
of deceatfull impostures, and falsifications,
as he remayned astonished therat, and conferred
the same with a learned Baron of the
Realme now dead, and he with another yet
liuinge, and neere to his Maiesties person,
who did all wonder at so notorious treachery,
though th'examē passed not through
the greater part of the booke, for that it was
interrupted by some trouble fallinge to the
examiner; but he hath affirmed many times
since, and doth at this day, that yt is incredible
to beleeue, what corrupt dealinge
there is therin, and exhorteth all those that
haue meanes, to try the truth of this his assertion,
which I cannot do at this present,

for that I haue not the booke by me; yet
I thought it conuenient to giue a note therof,
for stayinge of them, that haue, or may
be deceaued therby, and for styrringe vp of
others to make this examen. And so for this
tyme we leaue Plessis to himselfe, and to his
shifts in France, and shall passe ouer to consider
what O. E. his aduocate can say for him
in England.
         
         
            WHAT O. E. (OTHERWISE
MATHEVV SVTCLIFFE) HATH
wrytten for defence of Plessis Mornay, concerning
the 9. places handled in the former Conference:
and how he committeth farre greater
faultes then Plessis himselfe.
            CHAP. V.
            HAVING pervsed what Monsieur Plessis
hath byn able to say for himselfe, both
in the conference and after, vpon better deliberation:
we must now examine briefly
what our ould frend O. E. (for vnder that
vizard he masketh hitherto) hath diuised
for his defence: For that my forsaid breife
relation, fallinge into his hands, he thought
yt to appertayne to his manhood, as a martiall
minister, to proclayme himselfe champion
in Plessis quarrell, therby to fullfill the
prouerbe; that none so bold as blynd bayard: and

though he be not able to defend his owne
head (as after yow shall see) from the same
or like blowes which Plessis hath receaued:
yet will he needs be doing, & intrude himselfe
for a shylde to the other; and this with
such violence, or rather virrulency of speche
raginge and rauinge at all those, that will
seeme to touch Plessis fidelity, in the places
alleaged, as he may seeme to need rather
byndinge then answeringe: yet somewhat
shall we say to him, as the straitnesse of this
place and tyme will permitt; and therby
shew sufficiently what manner of aduersary
he is, and that hauing lost or laid aside (as
it seemeth) all manner of respect to shamfastnes
and modestie, he may easily lend out
his tongue & pen for small hire to any man.
And truly I can not but maruayle, that a
man of his profession & place, can persuade
himselfe that so excessiue a raylinge and opprobrious
stile, against all whome he aunswereth, should gayne him credit with any
modest or sober sort of men: he will find
some in the end that will returne him legem
talionis & then he may count his gaine. I for
my part am resolued not to be drawen by
him to that veine, but to vrge him only
with substantiall points of the controuersy
in hand, as the reader shall see by that
which ensueth.
            Wherfore to come to the matter, wheras
Monsieur Plessis diuided his refuge into three

points, as before yow haue heard. The first
concerninge the history of the conference
it selfe;Three partes of Plessis defence. the second in seeking out new euasions,
the third in recriminations: O. E. setteth
before vs the same Coleworts sodden
againe, but guised after another fashion;
puttinge recriminations in the first place of all,
but much more vaynely then Plessis did in
the third. And in the second he taketh vpon
him to defend the truth and fidelity of Plessis
in all the places before examined. And for
that in this point consisteth in deed the only
substance of the controuersie: I shall only
examine the same in this place, leauing the
other to a more full and larger aunswere,
when we shall haue vewed a secōd edition,
which O. E. is said to haue made of his new
chalenge, in fiue seuerall controuersies to
N. D. now to the places as they lye in order,
with this only aduertisment premised, that
it shall be good for the Reader first to looke
ouer the examen of each place, handled before
in the second Chapter of this defence,
where all the 9. places are examined seuerally,
and I do meane to remit me often for
more breuityes sake, thervnto.
            
               The first Place out of Scotus.
               Yow haue heardSuprae cap. 2. before how Monsieur Plessis,
was argued by the Bishop of two seuerall
impostures in alleaginge one place of
Scotus about the reall presence, sayinge: that

Scotus was not afrayd to call in question,
                  Acts fol. 34. 
                  yf the body
of Christ be really conteyned vnder the species or accidents
(of bread) and he disputeth that yt is not,
                  Scot. in 4. sent. dist. 10. q. 1. 
                  &


his arguments are, for that the quantity doth not permitt
yt, &c. Hence, I say, two deceatfull falsifications
are obiected: the first, in that he
maketh his reader beleeue, that Scotus his obiection
is his resolution: the other, that the
arguments of heretiks, brought in by Scotus
against the reall presence, and refuted by him;
are Scotus his owne arguments. Of which
impostures, sentence was giuen of the deputyes
against Plessis, as before yow haue
seene, neither could the impertinent replies
and euasions attempted by him, deliuer him
from the shame therof.
               Now lett vs heare what O. E. his spokesman,
hath diuised for a new supply of holes
to run out at.
                     O. E. in his Refutation. pag. 12. 
                  First (saith he) though Scotus had
not so spoken (as Maister Plessis hath set downe)
yet could not Maister Plessis be charged with falsification,
seing he doth not quote his words, but setteth
downe his owne collection: The most that could be
said, was, that he had mistaken the meaning of Scotus.
                  The 2. first shifts or startinge holes.
These are two shifts, poore ones as yow
see. For first, the Bishop did not charge Plessis
for misciting Scotus words, but for peruertinge
of his meaning, in settinge downe his
obiection for his resolution. Secondly, yf
Plessis be a man of any learninge or common
sense at all, this his mistakinge of Scotus meaning,
(which heere O. E. would haue to by so

called) cannot be censured for lesse then
willfull imposture. For yf he had not so
much iudgmēt, as to discerne an obiection
from a resolution, then was he a simple fellow
to wryte books: and yf he did discerne
yt, and yet sought to deceaue his Reader in
so weighty a matter, as is the controuersie of
the reall presence, he was and is a willfull imposter.
               These then are the 2. first points of our
English Aduocates defence; lett vs heare
how he goeth forward.Refut. ib. 
                  And yet (saith he) yf
Peron had charged him only with mistakinge, himselfe
bad byn mistaken, and greatly had he wronged
his aduersary. For that yt cannot be denyed, but that
Scotus did indeed call into question, whether Christs
body be really, (by
                  These tvvo vvords are put in by O. E. 
                  Transubstantiation) conteyned
vnder the formes of bread and wyne, and disputeth
that yt is not; which is all that the L. Plessis doth say
of Scotus, for which he is chalenged by his wrangling
aduersary, &c. Is it all Syr Mathew? As truly as
yow are trew of your word.Sup. cap. 2. He that shall
read the examen of the place rehearsed before,
shall find that his aduersary chalengeth
him not for saying that Scotus made this obiection
for the reall presence, or disputed against
yt after the fashion of schoolemen;
but for that persidiously he alleaged the
place, as though Scotus had byn of that negatyue
opinion, and that the arguments
obiected had byn his owne, and not of heretiks,
& solued by him. This is the charge

of the Bishop against him. And what will
yow say to Maister Sutcliffe auouchinge the
contrary? But lett vs see what manner of
proofe he will bring for his assertion, for
that he durst not lett so grosse an absurdity
passe without some shadow of reason,
which yet yow shall see to be farre worse,
then if he had passed it ouer in silence. Heare
then his euasion.
               
                  Neyther is it materiall (saith he) that this is the
vse of schooles,
                  Refut. ib. pag. 12. 
                  first to obiect against the truth, and
afterward to resolue what is true, and to answere
the obiections, for that doth not disprooue Monsieur
Plessis his assertion, seeing Scotus, doth not only in his
obiections, but also in his resolution of that question,
say as much as M. Plessis collected out of him, &c.
Yf this can be proued I will call O. E. a cunning
aduocate indeed. But if it cannot, then
is he to to forgetfull of his credit to auouch
this againe so boldly, after he hath seene yt
conuicted before out of Scotus owne words,Sup. cap. 2. pl. 1.
in the resolution of that very question sayinge.
I do affirme, that yt is simply a substantiall
point of our faith,
                  Scot. in 4. Sent. dist. 10. q. 1. 
                  to beleeue that Christs body is truly
and really vnder those accidents of bread, &c.
Which resolution he hauing proued out of
diuers places of scripture, as namely Math.
26. and Iohn 6. he dissolueth the arguments
made before to the contrary. Which being
so, what shall we say of Maister Sutkliffe that
after all this seene and read, auoucheth the
very same againe, that M. Plessis did before?
               
                  But how doth he go about (thinke yow)
to proue, that Scotus in his resolution touchinge
the reall presence did hold the same,
that in his obiection against yt? Yow shall
heare his owne words immediatly following
in the same matter.In Refat. ibid. 
                  Nay (saith he) Scotus
seemeth rather to dislike Transubstantiation then
otherwise. Behold heere the trew dealinge of
M. Sutkliffe who giueth vs quid pro quo as Apothecaryes
are wonte. He should haue proued
that Scotus determined in his resolution against
the reall presence, and now he saith that Scotus
seemeth rather to dislike Transubstantiation then
otherwise. So as for the reall presence,
                  Sutcliffe giueth quid pro quo.
                   heere
is thrust in Transubstantiation, and for determination
and resolution is shuffled in a seeminge to
dislike rather then otherwise. Was there euer
any such good Apothecary that gaue quid
pro quo? And if heere to help himselfe out he
will say, that the reall presence and Transubstantiation
is all one controuersie, he impugneth
himselfe in the very next place of Durand, as
you shall see when we come to it, where he
affirmeth Durand to hold (and yt is true) and
Scotus holdeth the same also, that the reall presence
of Christs body in the Sacramēt, might
haue byn by other meanes, then by Transubstantiation,
yf God would haue had yt so:
and consequently are distinct things.
               And heereof also I do conuince O. E. of another
false tricke of thrustinge in the words
(by Transubstantiation) a little before in recytinge

the question of Scotus, which is not in
S
                        •
                     otus himselfe, nor in his words more truly
alleaged in this behalfe by Plessis as before
yow may see, for that Scotus question is,
whether Christs body be really conteyned vnder the
formes of bread and wyne?
                  Deceatfull dealinge. And this fellow proposeth
yt thus. VVhether Christs body be really by
Transubstantiation conteyned, &c. And this to
the end he might deceaue his Reader, as
heere he doth by leapinge from the one to
the other, when he is pressed or gauled,
wheras Scotus doth handle these two controuersies
of the reall presence, and Transubstantiation
as different and distinct things, not
only in sundry questions, but in sundry distinctions
also, to witt the first in the tenth,
the second in the eleuenth distinction vpon
the Maister of the Sentences: So as heere I must
represent vnto you the boldnes or ignorance
of O. E. to exceed much that of Maister
Plessis his Client.
               And thus much of the controuersie about
the reall presence. But now least yow might
thinke he had somewhat more to say, to
proue Scotus to be against Transubstantiation
then against the reall presence,
                  VVhither Scotus helde Transubstantiatō
                      & how? for that he so
leapeth from the one to the other, lett vs
heare his arguments, though yow must
note by the way his nice assertion in saying:
that Scotus seemeth rather to dislike Transubstantiation
then otherwise, and his arguments are two
obiections of Scotus against Transubstantiation
                  
as the other were before against the reall
presence.
               
                  The first obiection
                  First obiection. 
                  of Scotus against himselfe
is, for that bread, togeather with his accidents
or species, do more represent vnto vs the nature
of spirituall food without Transubstantiation,
then the bare accidents by and after Transubstantiation;
ergo the nature of the Encharist in this respect
of nourishmēt, might haue byn conserued, though God
had not appointed Transubstantiation, but his body to
haue byn togeather vvith the substance of bread.
Which argument yow see maketh against
the alleager O. E. flatly, for that yt proueth
the Reall presence, and Transubstantiation to be
distinct things, and that the one might haue
byn without the other, and therfore it was
folishly brought by O. E. seing it is not only
an obiection and no resolution, but also an
obiection that impugneth his assertion.
               
               The second obiection2. obiection. of Scotus against
Transubstantiation, is
                        •
                      that in misteryes of our faith,
that interpreta
                        •
                     ion seemeth most to be admitted,
which requireth least miracles for maintayninge
therof; but fewest miracles seeme to be required
without Transubstantiation, then with Transubstantiation,
ergo we should rather admitt the reality of
Christs body, togeather with bread without Transubstantiation,
then the same body with only accidents of
bread by Transubstantiation. These be two obiections
among others made by Scotus against
Transubstantiation, aboue fifty leaues after his
former obiectiōs against the reall presence.

Which obiections after his resolution sett
downe for Transubstantiation he answereth
& solueth, beginning thus: Ad argumenta, &c.
Now must we answere the argumēts made
to the contrary, &c. But yet about the first
obiection he repeateth againe: Dico quod bené
fuisset Deo possibile instituisse,
                  Scot. 4. in sent dist. 11. q. 3. 
                  quod corpus verè esset
praesens, substantia panis manente, &c. 
                  I say that
if God would, he had byn well able to haue
appointed his body to haue byn present in
the Sacrament togeather with the substance
of bread, without Transubstantiation, &c.
But hauinge appointed otherwise (as appeareth
by the declaration of the Church)
we are not to respect more or fewer miracles,
&c.
                  
               
               And hence now yow see, that O. E. endeauoringe
to deliuer Plessis from the shame
of cytinge Scotus his obiection for his resolution,
in the cōtrouersie of the reall presence,
himselfe bringeth forth tow more obiections
for resolutions, without seeing the
shame therof about the article of Transubstantiation,
                  Refutat. pag 12.
yea & further blusheth not to inferre
thervpon this conclusion; That Scotus
plainly misliked that interpretation, that without
diuers miracles cannot be maintayned, &c.
                  Two Rotorious lyes. 
                  And that
albeit he was content to subscribe to the Popes determination,
& durst not do otherwise; yet that he himselse
thought otherwise, &c. O Iesus! what shall
a man say of these manner of people? Let
vs heare Scotus his owne words, in the same

place where he talketh of the Churches determination
& exposition of scriptures, for
this point of Transubstantiation. Dico (saith
he) quod eo spiritu expositae sunt scripturae quo conditae;
                  Scot. in 4. sent. dist. 11. q. 3. 
                  & ita supponendum est quod Ecclesia Catholica
eo spiritu exposuit, quo tradita est nobis fides, spiritu
scilicet veritatis, &c. 
                  I do day that the scriptures
are expounded by the same spiritt, by
which they were wrytten, and so we must
suppose that the Catholike Church hath
expounded them vnto vs (to wit the scriptures
that concerne this mistery of Transubstantiation)
with that spiritt wherwith our faith was
deliuered vnto vs, that is to say, by the spiritt
of truth, &c.
                  
               
               Lo heere, Scotus foundeth the truth of
Transubstantiation not vpon the Popes determination,
or vpon the authority of the
Church only, as falsely O. E. chargeth him;
but vpon the truth of scriptures expounded
by the Church, with the same spiritt of
truth wherby they were wrytten, and consequently
is farre of from plainly mislikinge this
interpretation, as O. E. affirmeth, but for that
amonge other arguments, Scotus named the
determination of the Church, the calumniator,
that could not abide the word, charged him
presently, to be moued only with that reason.
What would he haue babled against him yf
he had left written as S. Augustine hath done,August. cont. epist. fundamēti cap. 5.
                  that he would not beleeue the ghospell, yf the authority
of Church did not mooue him thervnto? And do

you note further that Scotus in the same place
affirmeth, that albeit this verity about Transubstantiation,
was declared first in the Councell of Lateran,
yet was the substance therof beleeued also from
the beginning,
                  Hovv Transubstantiatiō
                      vvas beleued from the beginninge. 
                  vnder other words of cōuersion Transmutation,
Exchange of substances, and the like.
Which he sheweth out of the ancient Fathers,
yea and that yt was included implicite
in all th' old creeds of th' Apostles, & others
Ponitur (saith he talkinge of the Councell of
Lateran) veritas aliquorum credendorum magis explicitè,
                  Scot. ibid. dist. 11. q. 3.
                  quàm habebatur in Symbolo Apostolorum, vel
Athanasij, vel Niceni. 
                  In this decree of the Coū
                     cell
of Lateran the truth of certayne articles
belonging to faith, is more cleerly & particularly set downe, then yt was before in the
Creed of the Apostles, or of S. Athanasius, or
of the Nicene Councell.
                   So as by this it appeareth,
that Scotus did not beleeue the truth of
T
                        •
                     ransubstantiation as a thinge determyned
only by the Councell of Lateran, but as conteyned
in the scriptures, and beleeued in
substance from the very beginning, and declared
or expounded only by the Councell of
Lateran, directed by the spiritt of God. And
this is sufficient to conuince O. E. of plaine
calumniation; and though he say in the end
of his defence, that Dominicus Soto and Iosephus
Angles, are at some difference about Scotus
his meaning: yet are his words & whole
discourse cleare inough, without any commentary
of others, as yow haue seene. And

quently this shall suffice for the examen of
this first place.
            
            
               The second Place out of Durand.
               For that we haue byn longer in the first
place, to shew therby some portrayture of
O. E. his manner of answeringe and defendinge
his Clyent; so shall we be bree
                     •
                  er in
the remnant. The charge vpon the second
place was (yf you remember) that Plessis had
abused Durand, as he had before done Scotus,
but most of all his Reader by them both, in
alleaginge an obiection for a resolution;
which is euident, for that Durand beginning
to comment vpon the 11. distinction of the
fourth booke of the Maister of Sentēces, which
distinction is about. Transubstantiation (as the
former is about the reall presence) he frameth
his first question thus: Primo quaeritur, &c.
                  Durands obiectiō 
                     li. 4. sent. dist. 11. q. 3.
                  First yt is demaunded, whether the body of Christ be
in the Sacrament by conuersion of the substance of
bread into yt, &c. Et arguitur quod no
                        •
                     , &c. And
yt is obiected that yt is not, but rather the substance
of bread remaineth, for that sewer difficultyes do follow
that way, then by putting Transubstantiatiō, &c.
And after this he setteth downe his resolution
to the contrary,The Summe of the 
                        •
                      controuersie. Sup. cap. 2
                        •
                     
                   and answereth this obiection
as before yow haue heard: whervpon
after diuers shifts attempted by Plessis
for some euasion, he found none to the purpose,
and so had sentence against him.
               And what now doth his aduocate thinke

yow bring to releeue him? truly nothing at
all. For first he doth not so much as mention
this place of Durand, wherof the controuersie
was; but another where Durand
saith (as Scotus also did before) that God by his
omnipotency might haue ordayned, that his body
should haue byn in the Sacrament without Transubstantiation,
yf he had would. Which no man denyeth.
But heare his words: The second place
(saith O. E.)
                     O. E. his reply Refut. pag. 13. 
                  was taken out of Durand, who saith
that yt is rashnesse to affirme that the body of Christ,
may not by the power of God be in the Sacrament, by
other manner, then by the conuersion of bread into his
body, neither can it be denyed that Durand hath these
words, and why then is Maister Plessis charged with
falsification? Fersooth because they say he tooke the
opposition for the resolution. Thus he. Wherto
I answere, that he is grossely deceaued, for
that Plessis is not charged for settinge downe
the obiection in steed of the resolution out
of this place of Durand, but in the former
place by me alleaged, which he hath heere
omitted. For of this place there was neuer
any question or difficulty of the Conference,
though yt was alleaged to another purpose,
as before is mentioned. Yow will aske me
perhaps, & why then doth O. E.
                  
                     O. E. his errour in parte excused, & in parte aggrauated. alleage this
wronge place of Durand, leauinge out the
other, wherof the controuersie is? Surely
I must in part excuse him, for that he erred
also heerin, who set forth the particular passages
without the Relators knowledge, after

the relation ended and printed, as before
hath byn signified, and is testified in the preface
to the said passages: yet was his error
much more pardonable then this of O. E. for
that he had only a wryttē copy of a particular
frend from Paris, & had not seene the publike
Acts printed, nor Plessis reply, as this
other had done, writing more then a whole
yeare after they were published; & therfore
for him to come now, and dissemble the
true place in controuersie, and deceaue his
Reader with a new fraud, sayinge that we
accused Plessis with falsification, for takinge the
obiection for the resolution in this place, (wheras
as all men do know yt was in another) sheweth
as well his condition deuoted to continuall
shiftinge, as also his weaknesse to defend
his clyent in the former charge, he
being glad to slipp out & runne away vnder
the shadow of an other mans error.
               And yet to leaue behind him some sente
of what he is, he would needs vtter two
other notorious vntruthsTwo notorious vntruths about Durand.
                   at his parting: the
one, where he saith: that yt may plainly be gathered
by Durands words, that the determination only
of the Councell of Lateran, & the Romish Church
moued him to hould Transubstantiation. Wherof
there is no such word in Durand but rather
the plaine contrary, for so much as he proueth
Primum patet authoritate Sanctorū, & ex determinatione Ecclesiae
                        •
                      dist. 11. q. 1. n. 9. 
                  Transubstantiation not only by the
Councell of Lateran, but also by diuers cleere
sentences of ancient Fathers, namely S. Ambrose,

S. Augustine, Prosper and Eusebius which
were long before the Councell of Lateran.
The other vntruth is, where he saith, that not
only they, but Bellarmine also doth note the same in
Durand, taxinge him for hard beleefe of Transubstantiation.
Wheras Bellarmine in the place cited
doth expressely say,Bellar. I. 3. de Eucharist. c. 
                        •
                     1. 
                  Durand to hold conuerti
panem in corpus Christi per consecrationem:
that the bread is conuerted by the words of
consecration into the body of Christ, but
yet that he hath a certayne particular opinion
about the manner therof, which is nothinge
to our controuersie: So as O. E. not
hauinge releeued his client any thinge at all
in this point, hath loaded himselfe with 2.
or 3. faults more then he had on his backe
before, And so he passeth from this place to
the other that followeth.
            
            
               The third Place out of S. Chrysostome.
               The charge giuen vpon Plessis in this place,
is as before yow haue seene, for that he
going about to alleage S. Chrysostome against
prayer to Saints,Acts fol. 52. said that his conclusion
vpon the words of Hieremy was quite contrary
to that of Catholiks at this day, to
witt, that we ought not to rest our selues vpon the
prayer of Saints,
                  Sup. cap. 2. 
                  but worke our saluation with feare
and tremblinge; wheras the true words and
meaning of S. Chrysostome are quite contrary,
who saith in the very place: Let vs not contemne
the prayers of Saints for vs, nor yet place all

our hope therin: the first not to depriue our selues,
                  Chrysost. 
                        •
                     om. in 
                        •
                     . epist. ad Thessal.
                  of so great a succour, the second not to make our
selues negligent, &c. As before yow haue
Supra
                        •
                      cap. 2. heard
                     •
                   which words being discussed, and
all Plessis shifts and turnings examined, sentence
was giuen of falshood against him.
Now lett vs see how O. E. will releiue his
cause: The third place (saith he) was drawne out
of Chrysostome, but neyther can his aduersary proue
this place to be falsified by him, not impertinently alleaged:
not the first,
                  O. E. Refut. pag. 13. 
                  for that he doth not alleage
Chrysostomes words, but maketh a collection vpon
them: not the second, for that as Maister Plessis affirmeth,
yt may euidently be gathered out of his words;
that we must not rely vpon the prayers of Saints, but
worke our saluation with feare and tremblinge.
               
               Behould heere a quicke dispach of matters,
and no maruayle yt is, though O. E.
do lend his labour to many in answeringe
for them, seing yt costeth him so little, and
he doth yt with so great facility: but I must
returne vpon him in both these points, and
do say to the first, that Plessis in his collection
hath falsified both the words and sense of
S. Chrysostome,
                  2. falsifica
                        •
                     iōs, of Plessis.
                   as before in the second Chapter
hath byn shewed. The words, in leauing
out those that expressely made against him,
the sense, in drawing a quite contrary conclusiō
to that, which S. Chrysostome did make.
For that he exhorteth men to pray to Saints
to be intercessors for them, and withall to
liue well themselues: but Plessis by including

the one would exclude the other. And as for
impertinency, there is little accoumpt to be
made, where there is imposture, and open
cōtrariety to the authors meaning, as heere,
and therfore impertinently doth O. E. goe
about to excuse impertinency, where we
obiect greater crimes: but marke his reason,
why yt is not impertinent,Tvvo falshood of O. E.
                   
                  for that (saith he)
it may be euidently gathered out of Chrisostomes
words, that we must not rely vpon prayers to Saints.
               
               But why doth the craftie minister, leaue
out the word (wholy) which maketh or marreth
the whole sense, for to rely, and to rely
wholy are two different things. Why also
doth he leaue out the other words added by
Saint Chrysostome for explication of his owne
meaninge,Chrysost. ibid. to witt, So as we be not negligent of
our owne part? Yow shall heare his graue answere.
Neither is it materiall (saith he) that these
words:
                  O. E. Refut. ibid. yf we be negligent, are omitted, for they
are not to purpose, seing Chrysostome would not haue
vs rely vpon the intercession of Saints, albeit we be
diligent to do our endeauour our selues. This now
is to to shamelesse, for yt is the quite contradictory
to that which S. Chrysostome in expresse
words exhorteth, to witt: to the end we
do not depriue our selues of so great a succour, lett vs
pray vnto Saints to be intercessors for vs, and of our
owne parts, lett vs liue vertuously, &c. And who
then is more shamelesse heere, eyther the
clyent or the aduocate? but let vs heare out
the rest of this defence. It is also obiected (saith

he) That Chrysostome aloweth intercession of Saints,
                  Refut. ibid.
                  but be yt he did so, yet doth not this conuince that he is
falsely alleaged by Maister Plessis, seing that which
he gathered, may be true, albeit this were graunted,
&c.
               
               Heere I would haue the Reader to stand
attent, and marke the conueyance of these
deceytfull maisters in deludinge men. Plessis
gathered out of S. Chrysostome that he impugned
prayer to Saints deceased: and now
faith O. E. that albeit Chrysostome did allow prayer
to Saints, yet that which Plessi
                        •
                      gathered may be true:
But I would aske how Plessis could truly gather
out of S. Chrysostome that he impugned
prayer to Saints,Impudētinglinge of Plessis & of his Attornay O. E.
                   yf he allowed intercession
to Saints, except yow will say that S. Chrysostome
both allowed and impugned one and
the selfe same thing. It followeth in O. E. for
the conclusion of his defence. How much then
(saith he) is it more vnlikely,
                  Another contradiction betwene O. E. and Plessis.
                   
                  that Maister Plessis
shalbe conuicted, seing Chrysostome in that place hath
nothinge which doth not appertayne rather to the
prayers of holy men liuing, then of holy men departed.
These are the last words of his defence immediatly
followinge vpon the former, and
all that he saith in this cause. And yow will
easily consider how they hange togeather;
I only will say this. That yf this place of S.
Chrysostome alleaged by Plessis against prayer
to Saints departed, doth rather appertayne
to lyuinge Saints then to dead, as O. E.
heere affirmeth (and hath bynSupra cap. 2. loc. 3. before refuted)

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
then eyther Plessis was ignorant or
maliious to alleage yt against prayers to
Saints departed as he did: so as yow see, that
O. E. doth rather impugne his client then
defend him; & so not worthy any see at all.
            
            
               The fourth Place out of S. Chrysostome.
               The falsifications obiected vnto Plessis
vpon this other place of S. Chrysostome, out
of his commentary vpon S. Mathew, was,
that the said Plessis hauinge told his reader in
his booke against the Masse,
                  Acts fol. 57. that S. Chrysostome
was carefull euery where to ouerthrow the
foundatiōs of the abuse of prayer to Saints,
said:Chrysost. hom. 5. in Math. 
                  that vve haue more assurance by our owne
prayers, then by the prayers of others, &c. leauing
out his vvords immediatly followinge,
which declared his meaning, to witt; we do
not say this to the end we should not make our prayers
to Saints, but to the end wshould not be slouthfull,
our we selues. Which being proued after diuers
euasions in vayne attempted by Plessis, to be
a plaine willfull corruption and falsification
of the authors meaninge; sentence was geuen
against him, as before yow haue heard.
Lett vs heare what the poore Aduocate hath
to bringe of new.
               And first yow must note,
                     O. E. seeketh to be obscure oftentymes of purpose. that whensoeuer
he is puzeld, & findeth himselfe entangled,
so as he seeth not which way to turne
or gett out; his custome is, to make himselfe
obscure of purpose, that so by casting some

mistes before his Readers eyes, he may escape
away; & heerof you shall haue frequent
examples yf yow stand attent. Now then
O. E. hauing recyted part of the former text
of S. Chrysostome, as Plessis had sett yt downe;
he entreth thus into his defence: This (saith
he) the aduersary himselfe cannot deny to be truly
alleaged (by Maister Plessis) how then came yt to passe,
that he dealinge thus iustly and truly,
                  O. E. Refut pag. 14 
                  he should notwithstanding
be charged with falsification? Forsooth
saith his aduersary for that he left out the words followinge;
to witt and this we say not, that we would
deny prayer to Saints, &c. And for that he applyed
Chrysostomes words against prayers, to Saints departed.
               
               Lo heere, yow haue first a Iustification of
Plessis, that he had dealt iustly and truly videlicet
in alleaginge S. Chrysostome, and then
two obiections of his aduersary brought in
with a forsooth, as though they had byn
trifles. The first was, that he had cut of certaine
words of the sentence that made most
to the matter: the other, that he had alleaged
S. Chrysostomes words quite against the
authors drift & meaning, &c. Let vs see how
his aduocate will answere the two charges:
yow shall heare him in his owne words:Refut. 
                        •
                     ib. 
                  As
yf (saith he) yt were so haynous a matter, not to set
downe words altogeather impertinent. This is to
the first obiection, & he hath no one word
more. Wherfore it is to be considered, whether
the aforsaid words left out were altogeather

impertinent or no, which we shall
briefly examination.
               The question was whether S. Chrysostome
in his commentaryes vpon S. Mathew did go
about to ouerthrow the foundation of
prayinge to Saints,The state of the question and O. E. his impertinency. as Plessis said that he did,
& for proofe therof he alleaged the forsaid
words: that we haue more assurance by our owne
prayers & good life, then by the prayers of others, &c.
And presently after the said Father adioyneth
for his explication the other words
left out by Plessis: vve do not say this, that vve
should not pray to Saints, but to the end that our
selues be not slouthfull for our selues. And now I
would aske: were these words altogeather
impertinent to haue byn put in or no? Or is
not O. E. an impertinent fellow, not to blush
to make such an aunswere? Seing these
words yf they had bene expressed, doe vtterly
ouerthrow Plessis whole drifte & argument.
And thus is the first obiection aunswered
or rather shamelesly shifted of by
him, lett vs see the second, whither he will
aunswere it more substantially.
               The second obiection was,The second charge more foolishly aunswered then the former. that Plessis had
wrongefully alleaged the forsaid words of
S. Chrysostome, (vve must haue more assurance in
our owne prayers, then in other mens) against
prayer to Saints desceased, wheras S. Chrysostome
expressely protesteth in the very same
place, as now yow haue heard, that he meaneth
not so, and so consequently Plessis did

abuse him egregiously to force him against
his owne meaninge, words, & protestation.
How aunswereth O. E. vnto this thinke
yow? yow shall heare:O. E. Refut. pag. 1
                        •
                     
                   
                  As yf (saith he) yt did
not follow, that we are not to rely vpon Saints prayers,
and therfore we are not so continually to pray to
Saints, and so to trust in their intercession as the
Church of Rome doth, that maketh prayer to Saints
a great peece of their Church seruice. Marke heere
two points (gentle Reader) first that albeit
S. Chrysostome do say and protest, that by his
words; we must confide more in our owne diligence,
then in others, he meaneth not against prayer
to Saints: yet O. E. saith that yt followeth
of his words, that we must not rely vpon Saints
prayers, whome shall we beleeue, either Chrysostome
of his owne meaninge and intent, or
O. E. that will force him to say that which
he denyeth? Secondly do yow marke that
O. E. seemeth heere to admit some certaine
measure of prayer to Saints, so yt be moderate:
for he saith that, we must not so continually
pray to Saints, nor so trust in their intercessions, as the
Church of Rome doth, &c.
               
               But heere (perhaps) some man will aske
me, is it possible that O. E. hath so little
iudgement as not to see this absurdity, to
force S. Chrysostomes meaninge against his
owne protestation? Wherto I aunswere
that at length he saw yt, and went about to
remedy the same, thus:O. E. Refut. ibid. 
                  But were yt (saith he)
that the argument were not good (to witt of Plessis
                  
collection out of S. Chrysostome) and his consorts
do commit falsifications, as often as they bring weake
or euill shapen arguments. Wherto I aunswere,
that yf they should be so mishapen as yours
(Syr Mathew) are, that do bely the author to
his face, and will beare him downe that he
meaneth the plaine contrary to that which
he protesteth in expresse words, I would
not only say that they were weake and mishapen,
but false and malitious also; and
the authors worthy to leese their creditt
for euer.
               Finally O. E. hauing no more to say about
this place,A false and ridiculous conclusion. concludeth his whole defence in
these words: Yt was also (saith he) further answered
(videlicet in the conferēce by Plessis) that
Chrysostome had nothinge in this place, that might
force vs to beleeue that he taught or beleeued prayers
to Saints departed, which may serue fully to answere
all the aduersaryes vaine cautillations. Wherto I reply,
that I know not what may be sufficient
to force O. E. and his faithlesse bretheren, to
beleeue that S. Chrisostome approued prayers
to Saints: but yf his owne words often repeated
may be sufficient, yow haue heard
them before sufficiently out of him selfe, &
consequently the iudicious Reader will easily
discerne, where substantiall proofes and
where vaine cauillations do lye & so much
of this place.
            
            
               
               The fifth Place out of S. Hierome.
               The fraud and vnfaithfull dealinge obiected
vnto Plessis vpon this place,Acts fol. 65. was like to
that of the former; to witt, that he had cyted
certayne words out of S. Hierome vpon
the Prophett Ezechiell as makinge against
prayer to Saints, leauinge out those words
that immediatly followed, and declared his
whole meaning. The words alleaged were:
that we must confide in God,
                  Hier. l. 4. in Ezech. cap. 14. 
                  and not in other mens
prayers: for albeit they be Saints and Prophetts, yet
shall they deliuer but their owne soules, and not those
of their children, yf their children be negligent.
Which last words (if their children be negligent)
Plessis craftily cutt of, and being pressed therwith
and not able to cleere himselfe, had finally,
after many shifts reiected, iudgement
geuen against him of falshood, as before you
haue heard. Let vs see now,Sup. cap. 2. how O. E. will
recouer his creditt againe, and remember
what I noted before of his willing obscurity,
when he hath no list to be vnderstood, as
I presume the ordinary Reader will hardly
vnderstand him in this passage,VVillfull obscurity of O. E. yf this explication
of mine were not premised, which
seemeth to be the thinge he most desireth in
this place: For yow shall see him pittifully
plunged in the puddle of contradiction, before
he gett out, thus then he beginneth
his defence.
               
                  The fifth obiection was (saith he) for that in

Plessis citing these words out of Hieroms comment aryes
vpon Ezechiel lib. 4. cap. 14.
                  O. E. Refut pag. 14 
                  bonum est confidere
in Domino, &c. He left out those words. Sincgligentes
fuerint. But no falsifications can be without
fraude: now what fraud could be immagined in
omitting words that make nothing for his aduersary,
nor against himselfe? Thus he,An obscure narration of the state of the question. makinge his
exordium with an interrogation as yow see.
But before I aunswere yt, I would first aske
him, why he putteth downe the state of this
controuersie so darkely? for yf I had not
explaned the matter somewhat before, who
would heere haue vnderstood wherin the
difficulty lieth? for what sense do make
those words in Latyn, and not englished,
bonum est confidere in Domino, &c. and si negligentes
fuerint? but all this is of art and fraud to
dazell the Readers eyes, that he vnderstand
not the falsity wherin Plessis was taken. For
yf his proctor O. E. had sett downe the true
words of the controuesie, as I did before, his
question had byn aunswered of it selfe: for
who but a simple fellow will put in doubt,
but that the words before rehearsed (yf their
children be negligent) be of cheife importance
to be putt in, or left out, seing they do solue
all the difficulty? For yf the children of Saints be
negligent (saith Saint Hierome) then vvill not
the only prayers of their parents saue them:
                  Hier. ibid. but yf
they be diligent, and do cooperate also of
their owne parts, then will they auayle them, as
S. Chrysostome in like manner declared in the

former passage. Consider then how true, &
substantial this first defence of O. E. is, which
maketh his entrance with so blynd & false
relation of the controuersy it selfe, and how
well he deserueth to be an aduocate for
others, that so marreth his cliēts cause euen
at the beginning. But let vs heare his second
defence of the same charge, or rather his second
euasion yf it be better then the first.
               
                  Besides (saith he) the ordinary glosse doth rehearse
these words no otherwise then the L. Plessis quoteth
them, whome I thinke the Mathureux Bishopp of Eureux
will not charge with falsification.
                  Discourse veritable pag. 148. This supply
is taken out of Plessis owne discourse
sent from Saumur after his flight from Paris,
and it sheweth that O. E. had read the same,
and therby is inexcusable when he dissembleth
yt, as before in voluntary mistakinge
the second place out of Durand, and vpon
diuers other occasions, but to the point. Yf
the glosse vpon Ezechiel did cyte the words
of S. Hierome dismembred as Plessis doth, yt
were in no wise a iust excuse for him. First,
for that the glosse vseth to cyte short peeces
of sentences, as yt serueth to purpose for explicatiō
of words in the text, but Plessis tooke
vpon him to sett downe a whole place out
of S. Hierome, for impugning prayer to Saints
desceased, and so cyted them verbatim and at
large, vntill he came to the words that made
against him:Gloss. in cap. 14. in Ezech. to witt, that Saints prayers will not
help their children, yf they be negligent, which

condition yet the glosse omitteth not but
expresseth yt in other equiualent words
thus: yf they follow not the faith and works of their
parents. Wherfore this shift helpeth neyther
Plessis nor his proctor any thing at all. And as
for the Malheureux B. of Eureux,
                  The B. of Eureux Vnlucky only to hugonots.
                   he may perchance,
be called malheureux, that is to say
vnluckie to the Hugonots of France, for that hauinge
byn once so cheefe a man of their party,
hath since his conuersion so learnedly &
luckily battered their sect, as no man more
in France, nor perhaps in Europe, and they
do well feele the blowes, but otherwise the
reproach is foolish to call him vnlucky.
               And this is all which O. E. can diuise to
bring forth for defence or excuse of the falsification
obiected in leauinge out S. Hieroms
restriction (yf children be negligent): but now
let vs heare another obiection made by the
Bishop & answered by O. E. It was also heere
obiected (saith he) that Hieromes words in Ezechiel
make nothing against prayers to Saints:
                  O. E. Refut. ibid. 
                  but it must be
remembred
                        •
                      that the controuersy heere was not whether
                        •
                     
M. Plessis had vvell concluded out of that place
but vvhether he had rightly alleaged yt, &c. Well
Syr; and we haue shewed now, that he alleaged
it not rightly, hauinge left out the
principall clause, that he should haue put in:
and if yow graunt also, (as yow seeme thervnto
enclyned), that he hath not rightly
concluded; then is he dooble false, to witt,
both in alleagation & conclusion: but somwhat

I hope yow will diuise to excuse his
collection and conclusion, though the authors
words themselues be against it. Lett
vs see then what yt is.
                     O. E. taken in most cleere absurdity. 
                  Besides that (saith he)
vve answere, that it is no vveake argument to conclude
thus: (as Plessis doth out of S. Hierome) vve
must not trust in the prayers of men, and therfore are
not to rely vpon the prayers of men departed this life.
But I say to the contrary, that it is a weake
and wicked argument to conclude thus, as
the words lye in S. Hierome, vve must not rely
vpon the prayers of men though neuer so holy, yf vve
be negligent of our owne parts, ergo vve must not
trust in the prayers of Saints departed, though vve be
neuer so diligent, to liue vertuously our selues; this
I say were an absurde manner of argument
and conclusion,
                     Eureux in Refut. of Plessis false discourse fol. 141. 132. 243. & de inceps.
                   and yet this is the argument
and conclusion of Plessis and of O. E. for impugning
prayers to Saints deceased, against
which false conclusion the Bishop in his refutation
of Plessis reply, doth alleadge aboue
a dozen most plaine and effectuall places,
out of S. Hierome, S. Chrysostome, and other
Fathers, which plainly and perspiciously
do approue the doctrine and practise of
prayer to Saints deceased in their dayes, and
O. E. durst not take vpon him to aunswere
any one of them, but pullinge downe his
hatt ouer his eyes, passed by them as he had
not seene them. But let vs heare his last conclusion.Hier. l. 2. in epist. ad Gala.
Finally (saith he) Hierome wryting
vpon the epistle to the Galathians doth flatly

demne prayers made to Saints departed
and for dead men, sayinge, Dum in hoc saeculo
sumus, &c. VVhilst vve are in this vvorld, vve may
help one another by prayers or counsells, but vvhen we
come before the trihunall of Christ neither Iob, nor
Daniell, nor N
                        ••
                      can pray for any man, but euery one
shall beare his owne burden. And do you see what
plaine places these fellowes bring forth and
how flatly they conclude? This place yf
yow remember, was alleaged by Plessis in the
conference & answered by the Bishop, that
being meant euidently of the day of iudgement,
made nothinge against prayer before
that day, nor could he reply any thinge at
that tyme, nor did he afterward in his discourse,
as appeareth by the Bishops refutation
fol. 146.Disecous du Pless. pag. 4
                        •
                     . Refut. fol. 144. & 146. 147. and 147. but only stood vpon
his vaine distinction and refuge of lyuinge
and dead Saints, which shift to auoyde most
euident authorityes of the Fathers, the Bishopp
refuteth dy diuers places alleaged out
of S. Hierome himselfe, & one namely against
Vigilantius, where he obiecteth to that heretike
the very same words, vsed heere by his
scholler O. E.
                  
                     Hier. ep. 2. cont. Vigilant Anotable place of S. Hier. against the heretiks of this time. 
                  Dicis in libello tuo, quod dum viuimus,
&c. Thou saist (saith he) in thy booke, that
vvhilst vve are in this life vve may pray one for another,
but that after death no mans prayer shalbe
heard for other, &c. but yf the Apostles and Martyrs
being vpon earth in flesh, could pray and be heard for
others, when they had need, yet to pray also for themselues,
how much more now after their victoryes,

crownes, and triumphes, &c. S. Paul saith of himselfe,
that 276. soules, were geuen him at his prayers
in the shipp, vvhen he vvas aliue, and dost thou think
                        •
                     
he vvill be mute now after he is gone to Christ, and
vvill not dare to open his mouth for them that haue
beleeued his ghospell throughout the vvorld? and shall
Vigilantius a liue dogge, be better then Paul a dead
Lyon? So S. Hierome: meaning that Vigilantius
presumed, that himselfe being a liue
Saint could be heard for others, but S. Paul
being a dead Saint, could not, and O. E. presuminge
the same also of himselfe (as yow
may well imagine that he doth) may in like
manner apply the same aunswere of S. Hierome
to himselfe, being in this point no lesse
a barkinge dogge against prayer to Saints,
then was Vigilantius. And so much of this
place.
            
            
               The sixt Place out of S. Cyrill.
               The falshood obiected to Plessis vpon this
place,Acts fol. 70 & Refut. fol. 148. was, that wheras he had alleaged the
authority of S. Cyrill against worshippinge
the Crosse, sayinge: S. Cyrill answered the Emperour
Iulian, vvho reproached the honour done to
the Crosse by Christians: that Christians did not geue
adoration nor reuerence to the signe of the Crosse, &c.
It was obiected, I say, that the last words of
this sentence, which are of most moment,
to witt;Lib. 6. cont. Iulian. 
                  that Christians did not giue adoration or
Reuerence to the signe of the Crosse; are not in S.
Cyrill, albeit Plessis vsinge often to repeate

those words as the words of S. Cyrill, had
putt them downe also (in one place) in a
different letter: which charge Plessis being
not able to auoyde, after diuers shifts, turnings,
and wyndings, was condemned as
before yow haue seene, neyther was he able
to reply any thing of moment afterward in
his discourse from Saumur,
                  
                     Refut. of discourse fol. 147. as appeareth by
the Bishops refutatiō, all which O. E. hauing
perused, and thought well vpon, lett vs see
what he bringeth for releefe of his clyent,
and I shall sett downe all his words togeather,
as they ly in his answere, for that they
conteyne not many lynes, he knowinge not
well which way to turne himselfe, but yet
must needs say somewhat, for that he could
not well hold his peace.
               
                  
                     The sixth place (saith he) vvhich the L. of Plessis
was charged to haue corrupted,O. E. Refut. pag. 15 was drawne
out of Cyril contra Iulian, 1. 6. & why was he
charged thinke you? forsooth by cause he alleaged
him to proue that adoratiō was not to be
yealded to the signe of the Crosse,
                     A very poore defence of Plessis by O. E.
                      but heerin there
could not be any falsification vsed: and that
first, for that he did not alleage the authors
words; and secondly for that he doth well
conclude according to Cyrills meaning; for
where Iulian obiected to Christians that they
worshipped the crosse; Cyril answereth, that
these words proceeded of badd thoughts & extreeme
ignorāce; so likewise saith Minutius Foelix in his
Apologie Cruces nec adoramus, nec optamus, that

is we neyther worshipp nor desire Crosses.
               
               This is his whole discourse, full wise and
learned as yow see, which the poore man
hauinge seene refuted particularly in the
Acts themselues of the conference, and after
more largely in the refutation of Plessis michinge
discourse without a name, he bringeth
it in heere againe, as though it had neuer
byn heard of or refuted before, without
adding one word of help or new supply for
poore Plessis, but only some new vntrew lyes
of his owne, as his fashion is: as first of all,
where he saith, that forsooth Plessis vvas charged
with falsification,
                  Three new vntruthes brought for a supply by O. E. to help out his cliēt. because he alleaged Cyrill to
proue; that adoration vvas not to be yelded to the
signe of the Crosse. I say forsooth yt is an euident
vntruth; for he was so charged for that he
alleaged that out of S. Cyrill which was not
in Cyrill. And againe it is another vntruth,
to affirme; that Cyrill obiected extreeme ignorance
to Iulian, for that he reproached Christians for honouring
the Crosse. Seing it was for another distinct
cause, as
                     Supra cap. 2. lo
                           •
                        . 6. A fraudulent equiuocation of the word Crosse taken of the author for a gibbet or gallowes. before hath byn shewed: to
wit, for a false inference or collection made
therof. And it is a third vntruth, that Minutius
Foelix did say in our sense, vve neyther vvorshipp
nor desire Crosses, that is to say, as they
signify, the Crosse of Christ, & not gibbets
as his pagan aduersary obiected vnto him;
& O. E. deserueth some such Crosse, for impugninge
the other of Christ, and for deluding
his Reader in this place with so grosse

an equiuocation, yf his other Acts and Gests
by sea and land do not meritt also the same.
               And I do call these later two, proper vntruthes
of O. E. though they were obiected
before by Plessis in the Conference, for that he
hauinge seene them euidently answered, &
refuted before, bringeth them in againe, and
dissembleth the refutation, as yow haue
seene in the second Chapter of this defence,
where all these nine places are examined
particularly, as they were handled in the
conference it selfe.
            
            
               The seauenth Place out of the law of the
Emperours Theodosius and Valens.
               The legerdemayne obiected vnto Plessis
vpon this place, was, as before yow haue
seene, that pretending to alleage a certayne
law or imperiall institution against paintinge
and caruinge of imoges, he left out the
words humi & in solo,
                  Lib. 1. Cod. tit. 9. Nemini licere vel in sol
                        •
                      vel in marmoribus humi positis sculpere, &c. that is to say vpon the
ground, which did make or marre all the
markett. For that the Emperors for reuerence
of images, forbiddinge them to be
painted vnder mens feete, Plessis alleaged
them against images absolutely: and not
being able to defend this falsification, but
by layinge the fault vpon one Petrus Crinitus
a new author of our tymes, whome he had
quoted in the margent, but not named in
the text, he was cōdemned at length of this
forgery. Lett vs see how his aduocate will

defend him, I shall sett downe his whole
defence togeather as in the former place.
               
                  The seauenth place (saith he) vvas out of Petrus
Crinitus where the Lord of Plessis is charged
to leaue out the word (humi) alleaginge the
lawe of Theodosius and Valens against the making
of the signe of the Crosse,O. E. Refut. pag. 15. but his accuser
should haue remembred, that he did alleage
not the words, as now they are found
in bookes falsifyed by Idolaters and Crosse
worshippers, but out of Petrus Crinitus which
cyteth the law out of authenticall records.
Our wise relator heere,An other defence of O. E.
                   to make the matter
seeme more heynous, saith, he falsifyeth the
law of Theosius, Valens, and Iustinian, as if they
had byn ioint authors of that law: when as
Iustinian was not yet in the world, when
that law was made. Neyther is it much materiall
if Tribonian, in the Emperours name,
had putt in the word (humi,) for wee are rather
to rely vpon the Originals then vpon
Tribonians honesty, that put words in & out,
and altered lawes at pleasure.An obscure defence by O. E.
                   Neyther was
the law of Theodosius and Valens to be reputed
new, albeit the word (humi) had bin left out,
seing both Epiphanius, and the Councell of Eliberis
in Spaine, and diuers other Fathers had
condemned paintinge of images.
               Thus pleadeth O. E. for his client, but in
such sort, as I thinke verily heerafter few
will entertayne him for their aduocate, and
though he thrust himselfe in, as he hath

done in this cause, he wilbe reiected and
thrust out againe, and barred of all practise,
as a puny pettifogger, that doth more hurt
then help his clients cause, we shall make a
few notes vpon this his answere, wherby,
and by readinge the examen made before
vpon this place,Sup. cap. 2. in the conference yt selfe,
yow will easily see the vanity therof. First
then yt is false, that Plessis alleaged Petrus Crinitus,
though he quoted his name in the margent,
there being great difference betweene
allegation and quotation.Acts. fol. 77. As all men know
that are learned the text of Plessis went thus:
vvhat vvill they say (to witt the Papists) to the
Emperors
                  This is false for it was Theodosius the second &. Valentinian the third. 
                  Theodosius and Valens, vvho by an expresse
edict, did forbidd the paintinge of images.
Thus he did triumphe, with the Emperors
themselues in the text, though in the margent
he quoted Crinitus for his refuge, when
he should be pressed. Secondly, where he
saith; that Crinitus cyteth the law out of authenticall
records, and not as they are found now falsified
by Idolators, yt is a notorious vanity, and this
audacious Iconoclast should haue cyted
some proofe out of some one author or
other for yt, and not so boldly of him selfe,
without all reason or authority auouch so
vntrew a paradox. Plessis himselfe in the cō
                  ference,
could only say that Crinitus alleaged
them Ex libris Augustalibus, out of the Emperors
bookes, which bookes the Bishop shewed
euidently, to be no other, but the Codes
                  
now extant,Pet. Crinit lib. 9. de honest
                        •
                      disciplin
                        •
                      cap. 9. conteyninge the Emperors
lawes and constitutions, and this by the
words of Crinitus himselfe, referringe his
reader thervnto: Si quis (saith he) authorem
desiderat, &c. Yf any require the author of this 
                        •
                      alleage,
lett him reade the decrees and Edicts of the
Emperors, gathered by most learned men Trebonianus,
Basilides, Theophilus, and Dioscorus, especially
vnder Iustinian, &c. Thus Crinitus of the Emperors
constitutions. Out of which he cyteth
this law by memory as yt seemeth, erringe
as well in the Chronologie, as also in
the names of Theodosius and Valens, who did
not liue togeather, nor made lawes togeather,
wheras he should haue said in deed
Theodosius and Valentinian, as also leauing out
the words humi & in solo. And yt is a desperate
defence of O. E. to call in doubt the
truth of all the Emperiall lawes for this
thousand yeares & more, gathered by Trebonianus and other learned men, before named,
& read in all schooles & vniuersityes without
note or corruption, vntill now that this
new academike minister O. E. will needs
call them all in question and suspition, so as
nothing heerafter shalbe of certayne credit.
               And yf this had byn so as O. E. affirmeth,
that the Emperiall lawes had bin corrupted,
and that Trebonian that liued aboue a thousand
yeares past vnder Iustinian the Emperour,
had pu
                        •
                      in, and put out, and altered lawes at
his pleasure, was there no man to haue noted

yt in so many ages before Sutcliffe? Cuias a
learned lawyer noted only, that Trebonian by
consent of the Emperour Iustinian changed
the word crux,
                  A vayne calumniation of O. E. against Treboniā.
                   that before Constantine, signified
a gibbett or gallowes in the old pagan
Emperors lawes, into the word furca. But
what is this, that O. E. should say so boldly,
that he altered lawes at his pleasure? but this is
the spiritt of heretiks to bring all things in
doubt, & to take away fidem publicam all creditt
from all things but their owne sayings,
and then he that can talke most, shalbe most
credible; & this is one ground of their new
ghospell.
               Thirdly wheras O. E. endeauoureth to
tripp the Relator for ascribinge this law to
three Emperours iointly, Theodosius Valens, &
Iustinian, which Iustinian liued after the former
two; he sheweth more will then skill
to be reuenged, for as Iustinian could not
make a common law with the former two
Theodosius and Valens,
                  Lib. 1. cod. tit. 8. Nemini licere, &c. for that they liued not
togeather; so neither could the former two
make any common law betweene semlues,
for that they raigned not iointly, Valens
being slayne a dozen yeares before Theodosius
the first came to be Emperour, wherfore yt
is to be vnderstood of Theodosius the second,
and Valentinian the third, and so yt appeareth
by the Code yt selfe, which Code for that yt
was gathered by Iustinians order, and authority,
beareth the name in like manner of Iustinians

Code,
                  Another Cauill returned vpō 
                     O. E.
                   and by that reason this law also
may be called in this respect Iustinianus
Law, and consequently O. E. was much
ouerseene in running so hastily vpon the relator,
who yet was not he that did sett forth
these particular passages in print, as before
hath byn said.
               Fourthly I would haue yow to note, the
arrogancy of hereticall writers in contēning
learned men when they stand in their way,About olde originalls pretēded by O. E.
                  
as heer Trebonian. Vir doctissimus (saith Crinitus)
a most learned man that gathered the lawes togeather
with others, vnder Iustinian. But what saith
O. E. of him? yow shall heare. Neyther ys yt
much materiall (saith he) yf Trebonian in the
Emperors name had putt in the word humi, for vve
are rather to rely vpon the originalls, them vpon Trebonians
honesty, &c. Heere to say nothinge of
the difference of honesty, honour, learninge
& dignity, betweene Trebonian and Sutcliffe,
for that comparisons are odious, I would
aske what originalls are those that O. E.
saith we must rely vpon? Crinitus out of
whome he would seeme to gather them
saith (as yow haue heard) that they are the
Emperiall constitutions conteyned in the
Code,
                  Crinit. l. 9. de hom. disciplin
                        •
                      cap. 9. and gathered vnder the Emperour Iustinian,
which constitutions haue continued
now in diuers editions ouer all Christendome,
for more then a thousand yeares
without any difference in this behalfe, yea
the edition of Geneua it selfe produced in the

conference hath the text of this law as the
rest, with the words humi & in solo. The ancient
commentaryes, and Glosses also made
aboue 300. 
                     •
                  eares past vpon this law, as that
of Azo, Salicet, & others, haue the same words
and do note no difference euer to haue byn
in this point. Whence then or where are
Mathew Sutcl
                        •
                     ffes originalls,
                  O E. foy
                     
                        ••
                      about his ne
                        •
                      originals. 
                  corrupted as he saith)
by Idolators & Crosse worshippers? Crinitus is but
a late writer, and saith he hath none but out
of the Code, and these are all against the Minister;
what will he do? or what shall we
say to such people? are not our poore deceaued
contreymen in a good state, to depend
vpon these mens words and assertions in
matters of Religion.
               But let vs see the end of his defence vpon
this place.O E Refut. pag. 15. 
                  Neyther vvas (saith he) this law of
Theodosius and Valens, to be reputed new, albeit the
word hum
                     •
                   
                  had byn left out, seing both Epiphanius,
and the Councell of Eliberis in Spaine & diuers other
Fathers had condemned Images before. But why
had not O. E. cyted the places out of Epiphanius,
& those other Fathers which condemned
paintinge of Images, that we might
haue read them.Acts fol. 8
                        •
                     . 2 83. & Refut. fol. 
                        •
                     69. 170. The B. of Eureux did cyte
both in the conference it selfe, and in his refutation
of Plessis discourse, many auncient
Fathers expresse words, both before, and
after this law was made of Theodosius, and Valen
                        •
                     inian,
(named heere againe ignorantly
by O. E. as the law of Theodosius and Valens)

to witt, the authorityes of Eusebius, Chrysostome,
Hierome, Cyrill, Prudentius, Paulinus, S. Gregory
Nissen, S. Gregory Nazianzen, and others,
all allowinge the pious vse of images in
their dayes; yea and an other expresse law
of the same Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian,
                  Cod Theod. lib. 16. tit. 10. is also of him alleaged, cōmaunding the
signe of the Crosse to be put in Churches;
& how chaunceth it that the Minister heere
also pulleth downe his hat ouer his eyes,
and will not see, nor aunswere any one of
these authorityes? yow may easily gheasse
the reason.
               And as for the Councell of Eliberis in
Spaine, yt being a prouinciall Councell of
19. Bishops only, about the yeare 305. they
prohibited nothing, but that Images should
not be painted in those dayes vpon walles,
both in respect of the indecency & corruption
that came therby vnto them,The Canon of the Coū
                     cell of El
                        ••
                     eris a
                        ••••
                     
                     red. by the
moisture of the said walles, somewhat contemptible
to the pagans and heretikes, yet
liuing among them; as also to the end, that
being painted in tables rather then vpon
the said walles, Christians might carry them
away, as they did other Ecclesiasticall ornaments
when persecution fell out, and not
leaue them to the spoyle and dirision of the
persecutors. And this reason is gathered out
of the words of the constitution it selfe, confirmed
by the practise, both of that t
                     •
                  me &
after. And so much of this place, O. E. hauing

borrowed this obiection of the Councell
of Eliberis, out of Plessis reply in his discourse
vpon the place, though in the Conference
he came out with yt,Discourse pag. 55. and had his full
answere vpon the 9. place out of Theodorete,
which O. E. heere dissembleth and replyeth
no one word, (as hath bene said) to this or
to any of the authorityes alleaged there by
the Bishop, for the auncient vse and honour
of Images.
            
            
               The eyght Place out of S. Bernard.
               First yt is to be noted that this 8. passage,
being by error of the aforsaid french wrytten
copy sent from Paris, placed in the 9.
roome by him that sett forth the said passages,
is restored heere by vs againe vnto his
proper place, accordinge to the Acts of the
conference, and Plessis reply, which O. E. also
followeth without mencioninge the error,
which is an argument that he had read all,
and so much greater is his shame, that he
commeth so bare & weake to play the Aduocate,
after much better matter vttered before
by Plessis himselfe, who was accused
vpon this place (as before yow haue seene)
for tyinge togeather fraudulently two different
places of S. Bernard, as making against
the honouring of our blessed Lady, and persidiously
leauinge out in the myddest that
clause of the Father,Acts fol. 
                        •
                     3. which being in the text
annexed to the former of the two sentēces,

made all cleere (yf yt had byn left in) and
ouerthrew the whole drift of Plessis cauill,
the clause was: Magnifie the inuentrix of grace,
                  Ber
                        •
                     . ep. 174.
                  the mediatrix of Saluation, and the restorer of the
world. Vpon which deceytfull dealing, after
many corners sought in vaine to runne out
and escape, Plessis had sentence against him.
But lett vs see what releefe the new attorney
bringeth.
               
                  As yf yt were necessary (saith he) vvhere diuers
places are alleaged out of one author,
                  O. E. Refut. pag. 16. 
                  to wryte out all
that cometh betwixt one & the other. Lo a quicke
dispatch of the matter. But I would aske
O. E. a case of conscience as professinge also
diuinity, which is this: yf when that which
goeth betweene, conteyne the very substance
& soule of the matter or controuersy
(as heere yt doth) whether in such a case yt
be lawfull to leaue yt out, or noe? or whether
this be properly falshood and falsification?
For yf yt be not, then we may peruert
the Pater noster or any prayer, or peece of
scripture, and make yt seeme blasphemous.
And let the reader marke that O. E. hath no
euasion heere, but most absured. Yet lett vs
heare him further for Plessis excuse. He alleageth
Bernard (saith he) not as an authenticall witnesse,O. E. Refut. ibid.
but as a man fauouringe his aduerse party being
nourished in monasticall errors and superstitions.
Well Syr, and for that S. Bernard did not fauour
him in Religion (as no Saint euer did)
is it therfore lawfull to falsifie and corrupt

his words and sense? We know well that
both yow and hee do alleage the words of
S. Bernard, and other Catholike wryters, as
the diuell doth scriptures, which bynd not
him, but others against whome he alleageth
them;How heretiks do alleage Cath. authors. and so Plessis alleaged Scotus and Durandus
before, but as the prouerbe is: A man should
not bely the diuell. And no lesse falshood, and
corruption of mynd is discouered, in falsifyinge
authors whome they creditt not, as
others whome they credit. Wherfore let vs
heare his conclusion vpon this place. He
saith that S. Bernard and we do not agree about
honors to be giuen to our lady, as in
the feast of her conception, in callinge her
Mediatricem salutis, and that both he and Epiphanius
wrytinge against the heretiks called
Collyridians, do much mislike the honours
which we giue to the blessed Virgin. All
which are toyes, & answered before in the
examen of this place, for so much as concerneth
S. Bernards agreement and ours; but for
the foolish women called Collyridians condemned
by Epiphanius, and by the whole
Church for offeringe sacrifice to our Lady,
this cauiller hath byn answeredSee the confutation of O. E. his chalenge by VV. R. Chal. 3. 
                           •
                        . 9. n. 61. 62. and 3 conuers. of England part. 2. cap. 2. 
                        •
                     . 21. 22. so often
(to witt that yt appertayneth nothinge to
our controuersie) and this in diuers bookes
now out against him, as only lacke of iudgment
& matter (as it seemeth) haue induced
him to obiect yt heere againe, he hauinge
byn foyled therin, and made to see, that Epiphanius
                  
expressely in that place honoureth
highely our El. Lady. and denyeth only diuine
honour vnto her. And not that which the Catholike
Church doth giue vnto her.
            
            
               The 9. and last Place out of Theodorete.
               The charge of falsifying laid to Plessis vpon
this passage of Theodorete,
                  Acts fol. 90. was, that he cyting
a place of this author in his commentary
vpon the Psalmes,Theodor. com. in Psal. 113. against pagan Idolls, Plessis
did fraudulently so alleage the same, as yf he
had spoken yt of Christian Images, for
which purpose he vsed two sleights, the first
in translating the Greeke word Idoll by the
Latyn word Image; the second by cutting of
these words: Idolls adored by pagans, and adored
for Gods. For excuse of which two fa
                     •
                  sifications,
when Plessis had vsed diuers shifts as
well by some shew of proofe, that Idolls and
Images may somtymes be taken for the same,
and then that the clause omitted was not of
such importance, & after both these refuges
largely confuted by the Bishopp,The state of the question. as in part
yow may see before vpon the examen of
this place, sentence was giuen against him
by consent of all the deputyes, which O. E.
would now gladly haue reuersed. Let vs see
his good reasons and arguments he bringeth
for the same.
               To the first obiection of Translating falsely
Images for Idolls,O. E. pag. 17. of his Refut. 
                  O. E. first answereth
thus: As yf euery one (saith he) that doth translate

amisse, were to be charged with falsification, or as yf
all badd translations of the old Latyn interpreter of
the Bible, were so many falsifications. And is not
this a substantiall answere? we do not say
(Syr Mathew) that all erroneous translations
be falsifications, yf they be of meere error,
without malice, but yf yt be with plaine intention
to deceaue the reader, and to make
him apprehend one thing for another in fauour
of their heresies, then can yt not be denyed,
but that yt is falsification and wicked
deceyte, as heere now to translate the word
Idoll in Theodorete by the word Image, & leauinge
out those other words, adored by the pagans
for Gods, wherby his meaninge was declared,
that he meant not of Christian Images,
but of pagan Idolls. Was not this deceyt in
Plessis, and was not this cosenage in willfull
corruption? resolue yow the case out of
your diuinity.
               And where our English Sectaryes at this
day in their translatiōs of scripture, in their
Bibles do translate one and the selfe same
word out of Hebrew,Heretical corruptiō in Translatinge. Greeke, and Latyn,
diuersly, accordinge as yt serueth to their
purposes, is it not truly falsification? as for
example, the selfe same Greeke word Idoll
and Idolator they translate in some places so,
and in other, Image, and Imageworshippers: the
Greeke word signifyinge tradition, whersoeuer
traditions are reprehended, they translate
yt tradition; but whersoeuer they are

commended, yt is turned into ordinances, instructions,
&c. Whersoeuer Priests are reprehended
or spoken euill of, there the word
Priest is neuer omitted, but where they are
spokē well of, there must come in the words
Elders, Ministers and the like. Though the
Greeke & Hebrew words be the selfe same
as in the other place. And almost infinite
other such examples you may read, learnedly
laid togeather in the discouery of Maister
Gregory Martyn,
                  
                     M. Martins discouery printed as 1582. cap. 1. 
                  of hereticall corruptions in translation
of the scriptures. And thus much to O. E. his
first answere, let vs see his second.
               
                  Besides this (saith he) Maister Plessis offered to
prooue, and most true it is, that euery Image hauing
idolatrous or heathen worshipp done vnto yt, is Idolum.
And who denyeth this (Syr Mathew)?
can yow or yours proue that the reuerence
we do to the sacred Images of Christ, & his
Saints is idolatrous or heathenist? Then may
yow condemne all those auncient Fathers,
with the vniuersall Church of their tyme
for heathenist Idolators, which are alleaged
by the Bishop in his reply to Plessis discourse,
and shewed out of their owne words & testimonyes,Refut. of discours. fol. 184. 155. &c.
that they vsed Images with this
Christian hononr
                     •
                   and worshipp, which we
talke of, in the most florishing time of Gods
Church, wherof themselues were the cheefest
flowers, as namely (to recyte some as
they ly in his booke.) Prudentius, Cassianus,
Paulinus, Gregorius Nissenus, Basil, Theodorete,

Hierome, Gregorius Turonensis, Gregory the great,
Euagrius, Chrysostome Bede, Damascen; and others,
to whose authorityes and sentences O. E.
answereth heere not one word, but letteth
them slipp, as though he had neuer heard of
them; and this is his common tricke when
he hath nothing to reply: yet notwithstanding
shall yow heare him bragg, and vaunt
anon when the skyrmish is ended, as yf he
had fully answered all, and playd his prise
with great manhood.
               And thus much about the first falsification
in translatinge Image for Idoll, wherin O. E.
hath valiantly holpen his client as yow see.
Lett vs now examine what succour he geueth
him for the second charge, to witt, for
leauinge out the words: adored by pagans for
Gods, which should haue explicated Theodoretts
plaine meaning, that he vnderstood not
of Christian Images, when he spake against
such kind of Idolls. To the second (obiection)
is answered (saith he) that the vvords 
                  
                     •
                   gentibus
culta being sett downe in the allegation,
                  O. E. Refut ibid. 
                  do rather
hurt,
                  A notorious shifting answere. 
                  then help the Papists, that vvorshipp Images
vvith kissinge, croachinge, censinge prayinge, as the
gentills did their Idolls: those reasons therfore that
are forcible against the Idolls of the Gentills, are also
most forcible against the Popish vvorshipp of Images.
So saith he. And this is all the substance of
his aunswere to this obiection, wherin to
omit his intemperat raylinge I would haue
euery man of reason to consider the folly &

falshood of his answere; falshood in tellinge
vs only that these words à gentibus culta, were
left out, wheras Theodoret saith à gentibus culta,
& pro dijs culta, worshipped by pagans, and
worshipped for Gods, wherin standeth the
whole point of the controuersie. His folly
is apparant, in telling vs, that if these words
had byn truly sett downe, and not left out
by Plessis, yt had byn worse for vs, geuinge
vs therby to vnderstand, that Plessis of compassion
not to hurt vs more left them out;
but yet at leastwise this good we should
haue had therby, yf he had left them in, as
he found them; that the place of Theodorett
cyted by him against Images, would plainly
haue appeared impertinent to the purpose,
for that yt treated only of pagan Idolls, and
this had b
                     •
                  n help inough for the Papists against
Plessis and O. E. who from this place of
Theodorete corrupted by them, would impugne
Christian Images, now let the Christian
reader iudge what help Plessis and O. E.
had need to haue to deliuer them from the
note of so false dealinge.
               And this shalbe sufficient for this briefe
examen of the 9. places aforesaid, out of
which O. E. being once gotten; harken I
pray yow how he craketh,O E. Refut. pag. 
                        •
                     7. boasteth and
vaunteth: If then (saith he) the aduersary could
not gett any ground of Maister Plessis in these places,
vvhich vvere
                  See this to be fal
                        •
                     e cap. 1. 
                  chosen as principall, and placed first
as places of most aduantage, we may well suppose yf

the triall had proceeded, that he would haue receaued
farre more disgrace,
                  Ibid. p. 19. &c. And againe yf a gentleman
no professed diuine, vpon such vnequall tearmes,
was able to make
                  A brokē head. 
                  head against his aduersaryes;
much better I hope should we be able to resist, yf professed
diuines might procure an indifferent triall, &c.
And yet further:Ibidem. 
                  most ridiculous it is to thinke,
that this Thrasonicall Chalenger was able to make
good that cause, which neyther with lyinge, forginge,
facinge, nor any witt or pollicy,
                  Great bragges. 
                  the greatest
clarks of that faction are able to maintayne. And in
his preface to the refutation of my relation:
It will plainly appeare by examination of the particulars,
that the L. of Plessis vvas most vniustly charged
vvith falsification, &c. And vve vvill plainly
proue that the Popish sect hath gained nothing by this
conference, but shame, and confusion, &c. And finally
(saith he) yf Persons meane to reply, let him pull of
his vizard, and come barefaced into the field, and he
shall not vvant those that vvill encounter him, &c.
Thus he, as a cocke of the game that croweth
when his head bleedeth; and yow must
further note, that whilst he cryeth heere to
other men, to put of vizards, and to come bare faced
into the field, himselfe lay yet hidden vnder
the vizard of O. E. so as that which he
reprehendeth in others, he practiseth in
himselfe, which is the worst, and weakest
kynd of persuasion, that may be. Christ
Iesus inspire his harte with his holy grace,
& myne also to consider, not so much what
maketh for the maintenance of any part or

faction, as for simple truth, wherby both of
vs must be saued, which saluation I desire
to him, as to my selfe, and this is all the hatred
I beare him, notwithstandinge all his
scolding, & with this would I end, but that
an others booke of his is come to my hands,
wherof I must say a word or two briefly in
the next Chapter for conclusion of all.
            
         
         
            THE CONCLVSION OF
THIS TREATISE, VVITH THE
notice of another booke sett forth by Mathew
Sutcliffe, and the contentes and partes therof
examined.
            CHAP. VI.
            AS I was drawinge towards the end of
this Treatise, I had the sight of a second
edition of O. E. his chalenge, printed againe
vnder the name of Mathew Sutcliffe, wherby
we see, that now at length himselfe confesseth,
to haue gone hidden hitherto vnder
the veyle of those two letters, which he so
much obiected to others for a fault in his
wrytings. I had heard of this new edition
before, but had not had the vew vntil now,
and I do thinke, that yf the author had
stayed a little longer, and seene the answere
that is now out against yt, he would haue
lost much of his appetite to publish yt

againe;The cause of the second edition of S
                        •
                     tcliffes fond chalenge. but the cause of this hasty resolution
was for that one E. O. opposinge himselfe to
O. E. sett forth a certaine detection, of diuers
notorious vntruthes, corruptions, and falsifications,
found in the former edition of
this vayne chalenge, which so greatly troubled
O. E. being otherwise cholerike & impatient,
both by nature and custome, as yt
draue him not only to runne out of his
name O. E. but neere also out of his witts &
right senses, in diuulginge that which must
needs turne to his vtter discreditt, yf I be
not deceaued: I meane his former ridiculous
chalenge, very learnedly & substantially refuted
as I haue said by VV. R. & therewithall
this his new answere to E. O. who if he reply
againe (as I presume he will, if the inequality
of tyme & place, or contempt of the author,
do not let him) he is like to take exceedinge
aduantage against him, as in part may
be seene by that little, which afterward
I do examine out of the first two or three
places obiected by him.
            And wheras to make vp a more complet
ostentation of defence, O. E. turned now into
Mathew Sntcliffe, hath thought good to adioyne
another supplement also of recriminations
against diuers sorts of men: this of
all other things is like most to disgrace him,
when yt commeth to examinatiō, for heere
wilbe fulfilled the poets sayinge: Vana & sine

                     •
                  iribus ira; much malice and little power; all

which will in part appeare by some short
notes,4. partes of Sutcliffes new edition. which in this place I meane to make
vpon euery part of this worke, which are
foure: to witt, the Epistles and prefaces, the
chalenge renewed; the defence against O. E.
and the recriminations against diuers.
            To begin then with the first part,1. parte. this
whole worke is dedicated, to Sr. Robert Cecill,
now L. Cecill, but with what reason, euery
man will easily consider, that knoweth the
author, and whome and what courses he
hath followed, and is acquainted with his
speaches of him, whilst his best maister was
in authority. For my part I refuse not the
noble mans iudgement in this controuersie
betweene vs, of false and true dealinge, for
that I assure my selfe, that howsoeuer otherwise
in affection he may stand auersed from
our Religion: yet cannot his vnderstanding
(being such as yt is) swarue in so euident a
matter of fact, as heere we are to handle.
Wherfore lett vs make (yf he please) the L.
Cecill iudge, and vmpire in this our contention
de crimine fal
                     •
                  i, desiringe his honour to
take so much paines, as first to looke backe
vpon that, which hath hitherto byn treated
about Monsieur Plessis, and then to stand attent
to that, which in this Chapter we are to
handle of Mathew Sutcliffe, and so to giue sentence,
accordinge to his wisdome, and verity
of the cause.
            One principall point in his epistle dedicatory,

as also in his preface to the Reader
is, extraordinary vauntinge, as though no
man could match him, or durst appeare in
his sight, wherof you haue seene what cause
hitherto he hath had, & shall do more heraafter.
                  Sutcliffes foolish vaūting.
               I haue wrytten diuers treatisses (saith he)
not only against Robert Parsons, but also against Robert
Bellarmine, and their consorts the Papists; yet do
I not find any that dare incounter me hand to hand,
nor haue I receaued any answere to any purpose, nor
haue I yet encountred any, that hath opposed himselfe
to any discourse or argument of myne, &c. This to
Syr Robert; but much more earnestly after in
his preface to the Reader: Yf Persons haue not
leasure to answere me, let Garnet or Blacke well
that are neerer supply for him; yt is a shame to beginne
a quarrell and to giue yt ouer first; for one bout
they haue no reason to refuse me.
            
            Heere now I suppose my L. Cecill must
needs smile, to see the mā so earnest to haue
one boute, especially when he shall haue vnderstood,
that some fiue or six books are out
against him vpon the suddayne, & each one
of them geuinge him so many boutes, as at
length by reelinge, the poore fellow is on
the ground: albeit I must confesse, that Catholike
writers are come now in such a loathinge
and contempt of this mans works
& writings, both for the vanity of the matter
therin conteyned, and perpetuall scurrility
of words infecting the same, as few are
willing to leese tyme in answering him, he

bringinge nothinge commonly but absurd
shifts, foolish euasions, old worn-out allegations
of others, and such excessiue turpitude
of tongue, as is loath some to any man
to aunswere him, wherof yow are like to
haue some little last in this place, as occasion
is offered.
            
               There followeth in the same epistle dedicatory
another complaint, apprtayninge to
the same veyne of vauntinge,
               
                  Sutcliffe accounteth falsifications for trifles ad bymatters. 
               to witt, that
Catholiks do now fly the mayne point of
ioyninge with him, and his fellowes vpon
the triall of controuersies, and do runne to
trifles & by-matters; let vs heare his words:
My base and vnworthy aduersaryes pleasure is (saith
he) to contend with me about certayne small quyrks,
and questions, about certayne pretended vntruthes,
and falsifications, &c. And againe. Your honour
shall perceaue the great weaknesse of our aduersaryes,
and the pouerty of the principall actors in the same,
vvho abandoninge the mayne points in controuersie,
begin now to picke quarrells at words, allegations,
points, quotations, and other by-matters, and ceasing
to ioyne with vs and like diuines to argue and dispute,
fall to plaine calumniation and rayling. Thus he.
            
            And heere againe I doubt not but the
Lord Vmpyre, will laugh to heare Sutcliffe
accoumpt the falsification of Fathers, Doctors,
and auncient wryters, and this both
in words & sense, alleaging them expressely
against their owne meaninge, to be but
quirkes, quarrells and questions about words, points,

quotations, and other such by-matters, as yf two
contending about some great inheritance,
and the one obiectinge that his aduersary
had falsifyed the euidences, whereby the
whole controuersy must be tryed; the other
should answere, that these are but quirks and
by-matters. And this is the accoumpt, which
Maister Sutcliffe and his people do make of
false or true dealinge, or changinge, choppinge,
alteringe, or peruertinge the authors,
whome they alleage, as yt maketh best
for their purpose: But we on the contrary
side must heere professe, as men bound to
strict truth,Of what importance Catholiks doe hold false dealinge to be. that we esteeme highly of these
matters, not only in cheefe points of controuersies,
the beleefe wherof concerneth
our soules, but euen in lesse matters also, for
that they discouer a badd mynd, & wicked
conscience, whersoeuer they are found wittingly,
and willingly comitted; and yet are
not we so rigorous in this point, but that
we do easily allow vnto Maister Sutcliffe, that
which in this epistle to Syr Robert he demandeth
for himselfe sayinge: Do what a man can,
yet may 
                     •
                  ther marginall notes be misplaced, or words
stand-disorderly, or things be mistaken.
            
            This I say we easily graunt; neither was
there euer (I thinke) any controuersie hitherto
betweene vs, about misplacinge of
marginall notes, or disorderly standinge of
words (so they altered not the true sense of
the authors) which yet yt hath pleased Maister

Sutcliffe disorderly to bring in, to the end
he might seeme, that the accusations laid against
him, are for such trifles: but neither
these trifles, nor the mistakinge of matters
themselues (so yt be without fraud) are vrged
by vs against them, but only where wilfull
deceyt is euident, and where the deceauer
cannot morally be thought to haue byn
ignorant of his deceyt. These (I say) are the
faults which we obiect vnto Maister Sutcliffe
and his fellowes, and not misplacing of marginall
notes, or mistandinge of words, points, or quotaetions;
nay we may ad a further degree of false
dealinge, that hath no excuse in the world,
which is,Diuerse degreas of falshode & falsifications. that where the falshood is euidēt,
and cannot be denyed, nor by any probable
meanes defended, yet not to confesse the
same, nor to excuse yt by ignorance, forgetfullnes,
trust vpon other men, or by any like
error, but to continue, and bolster out the
same by other sleights and new frauds: this
I say is the highest degree of all falshood and
impudency, & vsed as now yow haue seene
both by Maister Plessis in his reply after his
first confutation; and much more by Maister
Sutcliffe his aduocate in his broken defence,
and the like we shall see practised againe by
him afterward in this Chapter, vpon like
occasions of defendinge himselfe, and his
owne wrytings.
            Concerninge which wrytings, he demaūdeth
in his said epistle to Syr Robert Cecill,
               
as also in his preface to the reader a certaine
priuiledge from the ciuill law, which is, that
when diuers cases are proposed by one party
in law to be admitted, or excepted against
by the other, and that the other excepteth
only against some, and letteth passe the rest;
then yt is to be vnderstood (saith the law)
that those which are not excepted against,
are admitted. Which benefitt Maister Sutcliffe
would haue allowed to his chalenge; that
is, wheras E. O. hath excepted only against
some 26. places of Fathers and Doctors corrupted
and falsifyed by him; all the rest besides
these 26. might be held as free from
corruption.Decius in I. 1. ff. de Reg. iur. 
               Yf lawyers say true (saith he) that
exceptions confirme the rule in cases not excepted,
then hath my aduersary confirmed the mayne discourse
against Persons, and his adherents, hauinge
not said any thing vnto yt, but only excepted against a
few places, wherof he taketh 13. to be vntruly alleaged,
and 13. to be falsifyed. And againe in his
preface to the reader: yf he be not able to except
against more places then 26. or ther about, yt is cleere
that I haue said true in the rest, and that I haue argued
and alleaged authorityes to good purpose.
               
                  Sutcliffe would authorize the rest of his booke by a priuiledge of the ciuill law. So he.
And will not heere our iudge laugh againe
thinke yow, to see this poore man endeauour
so diligently to authorize his booke,
by the accusations of his aduersary, and by a
priuiledge drawne from the Ciuill law? The
rule alleaged of exceptions doth hold only
where some few cases are proposed to be

excepted against, by the aduerse party, but
it holdeth not in a mayne booke, where the
points are many, and almost infinite that are
handled and proposed, and out of which is
lawfull for any accuser to take his accusations
where he will, without authorizinge
or ratifyinge the rest, and in our common
law of England no man can be ignorant,
but that yf one should be accused (for example)
for stealinge of 5. sheepe, and should
acquitte himselfe therof: yet this would not
barre any other accuser, that would afterward
call him into tryall for hauing stolen
fiftye more.
            Wherfore Maister Sutcliffe can not shroud
himselfe by this, but that other men also
may examine his chalengeChalleng. 3. cap. 9. besides E. O. as
we haue seene that VV. R. hath done, and
gathered out an infinite huge heape of vntruthes,
and if I ghesse not amisse, not much
lesse then a hundred in one Chapter. Wherfore
seing Sutcliffe is so earnest to prouoke &
intreate aduersaryes to wryte against him,
yt is reason he prepare himselfe to answere
all commers, & not to slipp away vnder the
shaddow of a Ciuilian rule or priuiledge,
for so much as he is an Englishman, & consequently
must be tryed by the common
law of the land.
            And this may suffice for this first part of
his new worke, standinge in epistles & prefaces,
except yow would haue a breefe example

represented yow heere at this very
beginning, of the manner of answering and
shiftinge, which he meaneth to vse afterwards
in his whole discourse, and therby
know the man & his talent euen at his first
entrance. Heare then how he answereth a
speach of his aduersary touching the continuance
of Catholike Religion.In his preface to the Reader. 
               My aduersary
(saith he) calleth Popish Religion Catholike, & affirmeth
it was plāted heere by Gregory the great, &c.
and that it was alwayes visible since Christ, &c.
but he should do well to shew how true Religion can
be visible, for our Sauiour Christ saith: that true
vvorshippers vvorshipp God in spiritt, and truth, but
spirituall vvorshipp and true internall deuotion, is not
so easily seene; vnlesse therfore our aduersary suppose
Popish Religion to consist in the Popes myter, and in
cooles of monks, and such like externall matters, he
shall hardly proue Religion to be visible.
            
            And is not this matter subtilly shifted of
thinke yow? or may not this man play his
prize in this kind of fensinge, in what place
soeuer? True Religion (saith he) is not visible.
What then? yet men that professe true Religion
are visible,The confutation of a ridiculous answere of Maister Sutcliffe.
                and by them may the continuance
of true Religion be visibly deduced;
and this was that which his aduersary
meāt when he said, that the visible Church
or Congregation of Englishmen, comming
downe visibly from the tyme of S. Gregory
vnto oures, and professing alwayes one and
the selfe same faith & Religion, did make a

visible Church, and therby a visible deduction
of Catholike Religion, for the space
of a thousand yeares to geather, and that
this was not only to be seene or proued by
the Popes myter, or cooles of monkes, (as
this merry madd minister iesteth) but by all
English Kings crownes, and coronations,
by all parlament robes, and other honourable
testimonyes of our nobility both spirituall
and temporall, and by whatsoeuer
other most authenticall proofe this scoffer
can diuise. And who then will not laugh
to see him, for ouerthrow of all this demonstration,
to start out behind a bush, and say:
Lett him shew vs yf he can, that true Religion is visible.
Wherby yow may somewhat see into
the man, and his witt & talent; Let vs passe
to the second part of his booke.
            The second part of this new edition conteyneth
(as before hath byn shewed) a renewinge
of his former chalenge,The secōd part of his edition. wherof yt
shall not be needfull for me to speake any
more in this place, hauinge declared before
the causes and speciall motiue
                  •
                of this needlesse
renouation, only I will say, that whosoeuer
will take the paynes to reade the
briefe & learnedIntituled a briefe & cleere cō
                  futation of avaine & vaunting chaleng of O. E. minister, &c. By VV. R. 1603. answere of VV. R. against
the same, and the multitude of errors, ignorances,
lyes, and frauds therin conuinced, he
will blush in Sutcliffes behalfe, yf he be his
frend, or laugh and insult ouer him yf he be
his enemy: and whensoeuer he shall make

his reply for the first edition already answered,
I do not thinke but that VV. R. (yf the
thinge it selfe be not to contemptible) will
vouchsafe to returne his full reioynder, both
to that and this, or at least wise to the most
principall points of them both. Wherfore
we shall leaue this, & passe to the third part,
wherin we shalbe forced to stay and entertaine
our selues somwhat longer, for examination
of certayne places obiected against
Maister Sutcliffe by E. O. and therby see his talent
in answe
                  •
               inge for himselfe, whether yt
be better then for his client before, and albeit
I shall not be able to stand vpon the siftinge
of many places heere; yet will the vew
of some two or three of the first, giue a good
coniecture of all the rest.
            Wherfore the third part of this new edition
comprehendeth (as before hath byn
signified) the shew of a certayne answere,The third part of this edition. or
defence of Maister Sutcliffe his truth and honest
dealing in 26. places, or therabout, obiected
to him by E. O. as fraudulently handled.
And albeit before he come to the combat,
he do send forth those excessiue vaunts,
and bragges, which in part you haue heard:
yet in the conflict yt selfe, yow are like to
see the poore man not a little daunted, and
encumbred. The difference also of speach
betweene him & his aduersary will appeare
notoriously markeable,
                  Sutcliffes immodestie. for so much as himselfe
recytinge his aduersaryes words and

arguments (for besides his owne relation
we haue nothinge therof) doth scarse euer
note hard speach or phrase, vsed by him against
himselfe, wheras, the others answere
is a perpetuall inuectiue of intemperate
scoldinge, asse, dolt, dizard in grayne, franticke,
lunatike, estaticall, owleglas, and like tearmes,
                  Sutcliffes scolding.
ate the ordinary and cheefe flowers of his
phrases, and yet notwithstandinge yf yow
stand attent to the matter, and marke what
passeth in the combatt, yow will quickely
lay the truth of these reprochefull phrases
vpon Sutcliffe himselfe, and say that he deserueth
them, for contemning so lightly, so
graue, modest and learned an aduersary, as
his seemeth to be.
            And surely yf he be the man in deed,
whome Sutcliffe aduentureth to name in
some partes of his annswere, that is to say
Maister Ph. VV. I haue knowne him for such,
many yeares, and he may hold Sutcliffe to
Schoole, as many yeares more in discretion,
vertue, and true skill of diuinity, yf a man
may iudge of him accordinge to his wrytings:
but this shall appeare better by the
examination of the places, which I 
                  •
               aue
promised to discusse. And yet heere yow
must be aduertised, that we shall not be able
to make this examē so exactly in all points
as otherwayes we would desire, for that we
haue not the treatise yt selfe of E. O. his accusations,
for which cause we are forced to

alleage things only as Sutcliffe is content to
cyte them, whome in euery thinge lightly
we find both faulty, false, and faithlesse, and
therfore yf he be conuinced heere by his
owne relation, yow must be sure that yt is
with more then euident reason.
            The first place then obiected by E. O. against
O. E. (now discouered to be Mathuw
Sutcliffe) ys taken out of this chalenge of the
first edition cap. 1. pag. 20. num. 10.
               The first places of Sutcliffes 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                where he
auoucheth boldly; that the vse of exorcisuis,
blowinge, salt, spittle, ballowed water, annoyntments,
lights, and other such ceremonyes (as his
words are) vvere not practized by the auncient
Church, &c. Against which false assertion
E. O.
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                obiecteth first Iohn Caluyn his maister,
who confesseth these ceremonyes to be very
ancient. And secondly he alleageth diuers
Fathers, that make mentiō of the same,
each one in their tymes, Origen, Nazianzen,
Ambrose, and others. Lett vs see now how
this minister will deliuer himselfe of this
first charge, and do you marke his shifts, for
neuer mouse in a trapp, nor dogge in a cannase
did seeke more holes to runne out at,
th
                  ••
                this slippery fellow.
            First about Caluyn he seemeth to be most
troubled, esteeminge more of his authority
perhaps, then of all the rest alleaged, and
therfore he saith. How leglasse doth affirme (for
so he teasmeth his aduersary, without comparison
more learned then himselfe) that

Caluyn doth confesse yt (to witt the antiquity of
these ceremonyes) but vvhat yf yt be true?
               Answere to Except pag. 1. 
               and
vvhat yf Maister Caluyn do not confesse that vvhich
I say to be vntruth? Marke good reader, do you
not see heere a sound beginninge of answeringe
by contrary interrogations, to witt,
what yf yt be true? and what yf yt be not true? but
yow will aske me what in the end is his resolution
about Iohn Caluyn. Yow shall heare
yt many lines after, for in this place he saith
no more. But neyther doth Caluyn, (saith he) nor
any of these Fathers mention eyther the vse of the
Apostles, or practise of the auncient Church; nor doth
any Fathers speake of all these ceremonyes togeather,
nor can the practise of the Roman Church, in the
signes and formes of these ceremonyes be iustified by
Fathers.
            
            Lo heere 3. or 4. holes opened to runne
out at;The holes opened by Sutcliffe to runne out at. first, that albeit Caluyn confesse these
ceremonyes to be very auncient, and that
the foresaid ould Fathers and Doctors do
mention them in their writings: yet do they
not mention the vse of the Apostles, or practise
of the auncient Church before their
dayes. Is not this a pretty shift? as though
themselues were not sufficient witnesses of
the ancient Church? The second is, that albeit
the Fathers, though dispersedly as occasion
was offered, mencioned these ceremonyes
as vsed in the Church in their dayes,
yet did they not sett them downe altogeather
in one place. And is not this a more silly

shift? as though the Fathers testimonyes of
them in seuerall were nothing, except they
did set them downe altogeather; by which
reason, the Euangelists themselues may be
reiected, for that they putt not downe all
things togeather but many dispersedly, as
occasion is offered to treat of them. The
third is, that albeit these ceremonyes were
in vse in the primitiue Church, yet not in
the same particular signes and formes of
words, as they are vsed now in the Roman
Church; for so he hath a little after, that yf
we wilbe obstinate, we must proue that the
Fathers prayed in consecratinge lights, or
vsed the same words in hallowinge water
& salt, which is now set downe in the Roman
Missall; & by these & other like shifts,
which for breuityes sake I omitt, he putteth
of all, that can be laid against him.
            And it is as good a manner of answering,
as a merry good fellow is said to haue vsed
at Oxford,
               The interpretation of statutes by a good fellow studēt in Oxford.
                in a visitation to auoid the punishment
for the breach of certayne Statutes of
his colledge, in the beginninge of the late
Queenes raigne; to witt, that when the statute
was vrged against him, which did forbidd
schollers vpon paine of expulsion to
come in or go out ouer the walles; he answered:
that is true when the gates be open: and
then being vrged by another statute forbiddinge
vnder the same paines to beare any
weapons; he answered: that bearinge is vnderstood

in mens hands, but not as hanginge at their girdills.
And by these meanes was he able to
answere fully all obiections made against
him for breach of statutes. And so is Sutcliffe
for falsifyinge of Fathers by the like manner
of answeringe. And this shall suffise for the
first place. In the end wherof notwithstanding
he returneth againe to Caluyn as being
more troubled with his authority, then all
the other Fathers brought against him.
            
               Maister Caluyn (saith he) doth not affirme any
thinge contrary to my words,
               Ansvvere to except. pag. 5. 
               for albeit he saith, that
he knew how ancient some of these ceremonyes are,
vvhich I deny to haue bene vsed in the first Churches;
yet doth he not expresse how auncient they are, nor
speake any thinge of their seuerall formes, &c. Lo
shiftinge & shufflinge vpon Caluyn also. He
did graunt, they were auncient, but did not tell
how ancient; and Sutcliffe said before, that
they were not practised in the ancient Church, and
now he saith; that he denyed them to be vsed in the
first Churches; and though thirdly yow should
proue that they were vsed as Caluyn saith in
the ancient Church; yet will he say that Caluyn
doth not affirme them to haue bene in
the first Churches of all; nor doth he specify
the perticular formes of words, now vsed
by the Roman Church. And so will he
scape out that way; but now I would aske
the discreett reader in good sadnes what
scriptures, what Fathers, what most euident
truth, may not be shifted of, and deluded

by these kind of illusions. Let the reader
but looke ouer the sixt Chapter of ceremonyes,Magdeburg. cent. 2. 3. 4. cap. 6.
in the 2. 3. 4. and fifth centuryes of the
Magdeburgians, and he shall see the antiquity
of all these points against Sutcliffe in this
place.
            The second place obiected by E. O. to O.
E. is in the same page, where he saith: It is no
Catholike doctrine of the Councell of Trent,
               Examination of the secōd place. 
               to denounce
them accursed, that shall not hold baptisme to
be necessary to Saluation. The words of the
Councell are these in the fourth Canon
concerning baptisme: Si quis dixerit baptismum
liberum esse,
               Sess. 7. Can. 5. 
               hoc est, non necessarium ad salutem, anathema
sit. 
               Yf any man do affirme that baptisme
is free, that is to say, not necessary to
saluation, lett him be accursed. And it is to
be vnderstood re vel voto, as generally all Catholike
diuines do expound, to witt that a
man be eyther really or actually baptized, or
at least wise haue a desire therof, which desire
is to be vnderstood in them that haue
yeares of vnderstandinge, and are letted
otherwise by some extrinsecal meanes from
actuall receauinge the same. And what
Christian man would reprehend this doctrine,
or call it vncatholike, as Sutcliffe doth?
E. O. assaulteth him with three sorts of weapons,
as himselfe confesseth. First the authority
of ancient Fathers, that affirme baptisme
to be necessary to saluation; secondly
the words of their owne cōmunion booke,

where talking of the Sacrament of Baptisme,
they say, that none is saued that is not regenerate
by water. Thirdly out of his owne words, diuers
tymes repeated in other places vpon
other occasions, where he saith, that children
by baptisme are receaued into the arke of Christ his
Church. And againe; that want of baptisme sendeth
infants to hell fire. Wherof his aduersary
inferreth: ergo yt is necessary to saluation; for
that neither out of the arke, nor in hell fire,
can they be saued, which is the same doctrine
that the Councell of Trent doth
teach, and addeth a curse to them that deny
yt. And these are the charges giuen; now
lett vs see how Sutcliffe seeketh to runne out
of the lists.
            First he standeth much vpon the words
lett them be accursed, and willeth vs to shew
out of the Fathers that they do vse the word
accursed:
               Answere to except. pag. 5. 
               Neither doth any Father (saith he) affirme,
that such are accursed that hold not baptisme
to be necessary. Is not this an egregious foolery?
as though the controuersie were of the
word accursed, & not of the doctrine yt selfe,
seing that Sutcliffes owne words in his accusation
are:The first notable shift. 
               VVhich doctrine (of the Councell)
doth not (saith he) appeare to be Catholike, and
yet now would he hide himselfe vnder the
word accursed, as though the controuersie
were not about the doctrine, but about the
word, and yet of we will stand also vpon
the curse, Sutcliffe cannot so escape, but must

vndergoe the said curse in like manner, for
he shall find the same both condemned and
accursed expressely in the Councells of Carthage
and Miliuitanum, at which S. Augustine
was present: and vpon both the said Councells
earnest request, the same was accursed
also by Pope Innocentius the first, as testifyeth
S. Augustine epist. 90. 92. & 93. And this is the
first shift.
            Secondly, of all the Fathers that spake of
this matter against him, and S. Augustine by
name in almost infinite places, he maketh
his aduersary to alleage only one text out of
the said Father (and we must beleeue him
for that we haue not his aduersaryes treatise)
S. Augustines place is lib. 3. de anima cap. 9.
               Aug. l. 3. de orig. animae ad Vinc. Vict. cap. 9.
but cyteth not his words, yet aunswereth
them thus: To S. Augustine I answere, that he
speaketh of such as dy in originall sinne, and seeme to
contemne baptisme.
               Asnamelesse shifting of, of S. Austen. and the rest of the Fathers. This is the most blockish
refuge, that possibly can be imagined: for
first all men before baptisme dy in originall
sinne, and secondly S. Austen speaketh of infants
that haue not capacity to contemne
baptisme, his words are these: Noli credere,
noli dicere, noli docere, &c. do not thou beleeue, do
thou not say, do thou not teach, yf thou wilt be a Catholike,
that infants preuented by death, before they
be baptized, can come to receaue pardon of originall
sinne. Behould then the forehead of Sutcliffe
that would wype of both this, and infinite
places of S. Augustine more expressely auouchinge

the same doctrine by such a sensles
sleight. Damnari animas
                     •
                  
                (saith he wryting to
S. Hierome)
                     •
                  
               
               Aug. epist. 28. ad Hieron. 
               si sine baptismo de corpore exierint, &
sancta scriptura, & sancta testis est Ecclesia. that
the soules are damned, that passe out of this
world without baptisme, both holy scripture
and holy Church is wittnesse: now
would I demaund of Sutcliffe whether euer
he read these places or not? yf he did not,
then must he confesse himselfe to be ignorant
or willfull, in that he would aunswere
S. Augustine without lookinge vpon him: yf
he did and aunswered as he doth, then is he
both malitious and shameles.
            But now thirdly to the authority of their
communion-booke brought against him by E. O.
sayinge; that none is saued,
               The 3. shift. 
               that is not regenerate
by baptisme, he answereth thus: It is impious to
tye Gods grace to Sacraments, &c. VVe exclude not
extraordinary courses. Wherin first (as yow see)
he reiecteth plainly the authority of the
said Communion-booke, that tyeth saluation to
regeneration by baptisme, & secondly yow
must remember, that the question, whether
this doctrine of Sutcliffe of extraordinary
courses, and sauinge men without baptisme
be Catholike, & conforme to the vniuersall
doctrine of ancient Fathers or noe, wherof
he speaketh not one word, nor alleageth
any one testimony to prooue his opinion
Catholike, that is to say generall and vniuersall,
but only saith: vve exclude not extroordinary

courses, and telleth vs not who these: (vve) are,
for that it cannot be the Church of England
which set forth the said communiō booke,
and consequently hauing neyther the auncient
Church, nor our Church at this day,
nor the Church of England to stand with
him, I would gladly know how he will
make his opinion Catholike, that is vniuersall.
And thus much of the third shift.
            The fourth is in his answere to his owne
words, alleaged against him by E. O. whervnto
he aunswereth thus:The fifth shift and cosenage 
               I do confesse that infants
dyinge in originall sinne are damned to hell fire,
but I hope no man will say, that all that dy before
baptisme, albeit they much desired yt, and beleeued
in Christ Iesus, died in originall sinne. O slippery
euasion? our questiō heere is Sir Mathew of infants
that cannot desire baptisme. For as for
others that be of age, and do desire yt, they
may be saued by baptisme in desire, as before
is graunted. Againe your immediate
words before in this very sentence, doe
speake of infants: for you say; I do confesse that
infants are damned to hell fire; and what a fellow
are yow then, which say in the second part
of the same sentence, albeit they much desire yt
and beleeue in Christ Iesus. Thirdly yow said a
little before, that vvant of baptisme did soud infants
to hell, and now yow say, that infants dying
in originall sinne are damned to hell fire, which
though in our sense is all one, that hold infants
dying without baptisme, do dy in originall

sinne, yet in your sense, that hold that
infants may dy before baptisme, & yet freed
from originall sinne, is altogeather differēt,
& consequētly a meere consenage, so to alter
your words for deceauing your reader.
            But now we come to the last shifting answere
of all, which is such, and so vnintelligible,
as no man reading & considering the
same can otherwise thinke, but that the author
was either distempered, or bereaued of
his senses, when he framed it. I shall relate it
in his owne words, & lett the reader iudge
of it.The fi
                     •
                  th absurde euasion vpon this place. 
               He concludeth finally (saith he to wit E. O.)
that seing the vvant of baptisme doth send infants to
hell (these are Sutcliffes owne words before
recyted) ergo baptisme is necessary to Saluation; but
his consequent is weake and of no valew,Ansvvere to except. section. 4. pag. 13. for many dy
for want of knowledge, and for want of small matters
and not only of baptisme; and yet God is not necessarily
tied to saue none, but such as are baptized:
sicke men dody for want of phisicke, and yet is not
phisicke absolutely necessary. In this place therfore
the detector wandreth out of his way, & yet effecteth
nothinge. Thus he; and heerwith endeth his
whole defence vpon this second charge giuen
him by E. O. and suerely yf he wrote yt
not more then halfe a sliepe, or when he was
greatly distracted in other matters, I know
not what to thinke or say of yt. Many (saith
he) dye for want of knowledge & for want of small
matters, & not only of baptisme. Eyther he meaneth
heere of eternall or temporall death?

yf of eternall, how can yt be caused by the
want of small matters? yf of temporall, how
is it caused by want of knowledge? or how
agrees it with the death caused by want of
baptisme, which is eternall? how agreeth
yt also with sendinge to hell, which is to endure
euerlastingly? againe yf a man dy precisely
or only for want of phisicke, then was
phisicke absolutely necessary to saue that
mans life, otherwayes he did not dy absolutely
for want of phisicke; & so wheras he
accuseth the detector for wandringe out of the
way, and effectinge nothinge, this man reeleth vp
and downe in the way, and effecteth his
owne disgrace and shame with all readers
and lookers on.
            And now by the examination of these 2.
places yow may see the fashion of this mans
answering, and how easy a matter it is, and
may be for any man to take vpon him the
answering of all aduersaryes whatsoeuer in
this manner; and by these two examples
yow may ghesse at all the rest. And albeit I
would gladly end heere, hauing byn longer
then I purposed; yet can I not without examining
one place more, which is the fourth
in order, concerning prayers & sacrifice accustomed
to be offered in ould time,Examination of the 4. place about masse & prayers for the dead. for such
as were departed this life; in which place
Maister Sutcliffe, being taken trip by E. O. and
much pressed with the authorityes of diuerse
ancient Fathers about that matter, he

beateth himselfe vp and downe pittifully;
to gett out of the lists, but cannot, and as a
hare in the nett mesheth himselfe more and
more by struglinge: Yow shall haue the
commedy (for so it is in deed) as himselfe
setteth it downe in his owne words, which
we must beleeue, for that (as often hath
bene aduertised) we haue not the treatise it
selfe of E. O. and albeit the falshood of this
minister discouereth yt selfe by so many
wayes in euery thinge, as I am forced to
stand in iealosy of all that he relateth of
others, yf yt be not for his owne profitt; yet
must we take his word, as I haue said, and
therfore lett vs he are him tell the story.
            
               VVhere I affirme (saith he) that the Papists say
masses and prayers for soules departed,
               Answere to Except. pag. 11. 
               and for the
dead haue appointed speciall offices, and that my aduersary
shall neuer be able to proue, that such masses,
prayers, and offices haue ben frequented by true Catholiks,
there howleglasse stormeth and sheweth
great impatience. This is the beginning of his
narration, which I cannot otherwise but
suspect of calumniation, in that he talketh
of impatience in his aduersary, for that he
sheweth no particulars at all of any such
matter; and he that shall see the euent of this
combatt will iudge (I trow) the cause of
impatience to fall rather vpon Sutcliffe then
his aduersary, yf shame and confusion may
cause impatience: lett vs passe then to the
matter and points themselues as Sutcliffe relateth

them. First E. O. alleageth (saith he) the
testimony of S. Chrysostome,
               
                  S. Chrysostomes sentence of prayinge for the dead in the masle. Chrysost. hom. 69. ad Pop. 
               that saith, that not
without cause it was ordeyned by the Apostles, that in
the dreadfull misteryes commemoration should be
made of the dead, knowinge therby that much gayne
and profitt doth come vnto them: secondly he alleageth
EpiphaniusAntloch. S Epiphanius. haeres. 75. and Augustine do
haeresibus haer. 53. that seeme to say, that Aërius
vvas condemned for denying that sacrifices and oblations
were to be offered for the dead, or that prayers
vvere to be made for them. Thirdly he alleageth Caluyns
confession, that saith yt was a receaued custome
thirteene hundred yeares agoe,10. Calni
                        •
                     . to pray for the dead,
and reproueth S. AugustineS. Augustine. and Monica for yt; finally
he calleth out my brother WillettVVillett. 
               for a wittnes against
me, in that he saith, that diuers ancient wryters
enclyned to maintayne and commend prayers for
the dead. Hitherto Sutcliffe, relatinge the
words of his aduersary E. O. now lett vs see
how handsomely he will aunswere the
same, and do yow note his art, for yt is excellent,
and to the purpose.
            
               First (saith he) in all these proofes is no mention
of speciall offices for the dead.
               Sutcliffes first shift. Do yow see which
way the hare will go away? as though the
question or controuersie betweene vs and
Protestants, were about speciall offices for the
dead, and not whether we ought or may
pray for the dead or noe? But yet do yow
heare more of these his escapes, for he setteth
them forth by articles.2. shift. 
               Secondly (saith he)
there can no masses be shewed like vnto the masses of

Requiem aternam. Do yow see the folly of the
man? Tell me, (I pray yow) what importeth
yt, with what words the masse beginnes or
endes (which the Church vpon particular
deuotion may institute, change, or alter diuersly)
so that the substance remayneth,
which is, that soules departed were prayed
for in S. Chrysostomes dayes in tremendis mysterijs,
in the dreadfull misteryes, as his words are?
and that deduced from the Apostles tyme, as
by this very place of his heere alleaged is
euident: so as the particular forme of the
masse, little importeth, but only for Sutcliffe
to runne out vnder the shaddow therof, for
that neyther Catholike Priests now at this
day, are bound to say masses beginning with
Requiem aeternam. when they pray for soules
departed, so they do remember the substantiall
point, which is to pray for them in the
masse,Masses for the dead in the primitiue Church. or ad altare (as S. Augustines phrase is)
dum offertur pro eis sacrificium,
               August de cura pro mortuis cap 1. at th' Altar whilst
sacrifice is offered for them, or as S. Cyprian
before them both said, dum sacrificium pro dormitione
corunt celebratur, whilst sacrifice is celebrated
or solemnized for their departure.9. Conf. 110 Cyp. epist. 66 ad Clerum.
            
            And these two examples shalbe sufficient
to shew in generall his manner of euasions,
what they are and how wittily inuented.
For albeit he go forward in diuisinge diuers
other, as that there were no Speciales missae votinae
at these tymes, and that the commemoration made
for the dead then, was but a bare recytall of their

names, & other the like, without so much as
offering to prooue any one point therof, or
to alleage any one author before himselfe;
yet do I not meane to stand vpon these
toyes to refute them in particular, the iudicious
reader will easily discerne of himselfe
what substance they haue, wherfore lett vs
passe to see how he answereth the foresaid
authorityes of Fathers alleaged against him.
            
               To the place of Chrysostome (saith he) I do answere,
               Sutcliffes shiftinge answere to Saint Chrysostome.
               that he meant only that the dead should be remembred
in celebration of the misteryes, & was vncertayne what good yt did vnto them. But this last
part of the comentarye is plaine contrary
to the text yt selfe, which saith yf yow remember,
that much gaine and profit doth come vnto
them therby, though the words themselues as
they ly in S. Chrysostome are yet more significāt,
for that talking of the Apostles, whome
he affirmeth to be the authors of this custome
of praying for the dead in time of the
deadfull misteryes, he saith: Sciunt enim indè
illis multum contingere lucrum, vtilit atem magnam.
The Apostles did know, that the soules
departed were to receaue much gaine, and
great vtility by that remembrance made
for them. The former part also of the aunswere,
is cleerly false, to witt, that S. Chrysostome
meant only, that the dead should be remembred
without praying for them, which the whole
text, & his drift in the same place doth euidently
conuince, and the very next words

immediatly followinge vpon his former by
me alleaged are these: Cum enim, &c. For when
all the whole people meetinge togeather and holdinge
vp their hands (in the Church) as also the
               Sacerdotalis plenitudo constiterit. 
               fullnes
of Priesthood being there with them, and that the
dreadfull sacrifice is proposed, how can yt be but that
vve shall mooue God, vvhen vve pray for them; to
witt the dead, of whome he speaketh. Consider
then good Reader) the shamelesse dealinge
of this cauiller in peruertinge S. Chrysostome
so manifestly: and yf thou wilt see
more places, where that Father explaneth
himselfe at large in this matter, read the 41.
homily vpon the first to the Corinthians,
and his 21. vpon the Acts of the Apostles,
and then yow will confesse, that these are
egregious companions, in so deluding their
readers by shamefull shiftinge. And this of
S. Chrysostome: now lett vs see what he saith
to S. Epiphanius and S. Augustine about Aërius
condemned of heresie well neere 1300.
yeares past for denying sacrifice and prayers
to be offered for the dead.
            
               Vnto the places (saith he) of Epiphanius and Augustine (I answere) that Aërius was condemned
for disalowinge the order of the Church in this commemoration
for the dead,
               Hovv Sutcliffe shisieth of Epiphanius & S. Augustine about Aërius & prayer for the dead. 
               and geuing thanks for their
blessed end, and this is that prayer which Caluyn and
we confesse to haue byn in the Church a long tyme.
Heere yow see that he taketh vpon him to
aunswere to three seuerall partyes, to witt
S. Epiphanius, S. Augustine and Iohn Caluyn, and

that with the same truth that he answered
before S. Chrysostome: to witt, with plaine
cosenage and shiftinge. For vnto the two
Fathers he saith (yf he say any thinge) that
they affirmed Aërius to haue bin condemned
as an heretike, not for denyinge sacrifice or
prayer for the dead, but for disallowing the
order of the Church in their commemoration
& geuing thanks for their blessed end,
which comme moration he expoundeth a
little before, to haue byn a recytall only of dead
mens names, without any prayer for remission of
sinnes, which yf yt were so, and that Sutcliffe
will graunt as he seemeth to do, that Aërius
was iustly condemned and held for an heretike,
for disallowinge this commemoration
or recytall of dead mens names, why do
the Protestants also disallow the same, or
at leastwise do not vse yt in England in
their communion, and so by omittinge the
same doe participate with him in the same
heresie.
            But all this is shamefull shifting, turning
and wyndinge of a leud and lost conscience
to deceaue the reader, for the words of Saint
Epiphanius and S. Augustine are most plaine &
euident that Aërius was condemned of heresie,
for denyinge prayers and sacrifices to be
offered for the dead:Aug. haer. 53. 
               orare vel offerre pro mortius
non oportere (saith S. Augustine) he held that
prayers and oblations ought not to be made
for the dead, and do yow note that this was

not yeaster day but in the tyme of Constantine
the great, when Aërius was condemned
as an heretike by the whole Church of that
tyme, for denyinge these points which our
Protestants deny also, & blaspheme at this
day. Magnum mundo malum (saith Epipbanius of
Aërius) suriosus mente,
               Epiphan. haer. 75. 
               elatus opinione, &c. Aërius
was a great plague of the world, furious in
mynd, and proud in his opinion, &c. What
would he haue said of Sutcliffe at this tyme,
who sheweth himselfe no lesse proud then
he, and auoucheth the same heresyes, and
many more besides?
            But to returne to Sutcliffes answere to the
forsaid two Fathers concerning Aërius. First
yow may see & consider, that in his former
relation of the matter, he vseth a sleight of
his budget, when he saith: that Epiphanius and
Augustine seeme to say that Aërius was condemned,
&c. for they do not only seeme to say so,
               The beginning and cause of Aërius his heresie. but
do absolutely affirme yt, and S. Epiphanius
maketh a longe discourse therof, shewinge
the beginninge and occasion of Aërius fall
into this heresie, to witt, that he being a
Priest, could not be made a Bishopp (which
S. Augustine also toucheth) and that vpon this
enuy, spite & mallice, he beganne to obiect
against the cleargy, that they ought not to
offer sacrifice or prayer for the dead, but only
for the lyuinge, and consequently for the
same was condemned, and held alwayes after
for an heretike by the Church of that,

and all other ensuinge ages. Secondly yt is
another sleight to say, that Aërius was condemned
for disallowing the order of the Church in
this commemoration of the dead, as though Aërius
his fault had not byn against any point of
Catholike and vniuersall doctrine of the
Church, but disobedience only against some
Ecclesiasticall order; and therfore yf yow
marke yt, he neuer nameth him heretike, as
indeed disobedience to orders is not properly
heresy, if it be not against some article
of doctrine.Three seuerall shifts of Sutcliffe to deceaue his Reader. And all these are shifts and conueyances
of Sutcliffe to dazell the readers
eyes, wheras the forsaid Fathers say plainly,
that he was condemned for hereticall doctrine.
And S Chrysostome, as you haue heard,
before alleaged, affirmeth the contrary doctrine
of prayinge for the departed in tyme
of the dreadfull misteryes, to haue come
downe from the Apostles themselues, and
the same in effect saith Epiphanius,Ibid. pag. 13. traditione a
patribus accepta, by tradition receaued from
their forefathers.
            The third shift is, that Sutcliffe in this his
shufflinge aunswere foisteth in these words,
commemoration of the dead, and geuinge thanks for
their blessed end: as thongh Saint Epiphanius or S.
Augustine had said or meant so: which is
quite contrary, for they expressely affirme,
that this commemoration was to pray for
them, that is to say for those that are synners,
and haue need of our prayers, which

               Epiphanius expresseth in these words:Ibidem. 
               pro iust is
& precatoribus memoriam facimus, peccatoribus
quidem misericordiam Dei implorantes: we make
commemoration of iust men, and for synners,
desiringe Gods mercy for those that
be in synne, &c. Which is the very same
that S. Chrysostome distinguisheth in the place
before alleaged of his 69. homily to the
people of Antioch: that some are greater sinners,
some lesse, some perfect and holy. But S. Augustine
(accordinge to his manner) more cleerly &
perspicuously in these words: Non omnibus
prosunt,Aug Enchirid. cap. 110. &c. 
               our prayers and sacrifices offered
for the dead, do not profitt all sorts of
men; And why do they not profitt all but
only for the difference of life, which euery
man hath lead in this body? Wherfore
when sacrifices eyther of the Altar, or of
any other almes are offered vp for Christians
departed, yf they be very good men,
for whome they are offered, they are thanke
geuings,Three sorts of men desceased. & for them that are not very euill,
they are propitiations or appeasings with
God; but yf they be very wicked, then
though they be no helpes to the dead: yet
are they some kind of comfort for the liuinge,
and vnto those deceased, whome
they do profitt, they are profitable in this,
that eyther they procure them full remission,
or at least wise, that their punishment
or condemnation, be therby made more tolerable.
            
            
               
So S. Augustine, who explaneth as yow see
most perspicuously the Catholike doctrine,
and cutteth of all shifts from cauillinge heretiks,
about the different sorts & qualityes
of men desceased, & with what distinction
the Catholike Church doth make commemoration
for them in the publike sacrifice,
either by praying, or praising God for them.
And thus much of his shuffling and shifting
away the Fathers authorityes, lett vs now
come to consider, how he will put of his
Maister Caluyn,
               Hovv Sutcliffe shifteth of Caluin and VVill
                        •
                     tt.
                and his Brother VVillet alleaged
also yf yow remember against him. But as
for VVillett he maketh him not worthy of a
seuerall answere, but presumeth him to be
of his opinion in all points, and the like he
would also force Caluyn vnto, for that hauinge
said, that the commemoration of the
dead (for deniall wherof Aërius was condemned)
was but a thankesgeuing for their
blessed end, he saith immediately: And this is
the prayer which Caluyn and we confesse to haue ben
in the Church a longe tyme, but maketh nothinge for
Howleglasse his purpose. Which I thinke also,
nor yet for Sutcliffes purpose, yf he haue any
purpose but only to play the foole, and to
mocke and delude his Reader. For first we
haue shewed, that Aërius was not condemned
for denying thankesgiuing, but sacrifice
& prayer for the dead. And secondly Caluyn
is not alleaged by E. O. as confessinge only
the vse of thankesgeuing, or bare recytall of

their names to haue byn in vse aboue thirteene
hundred yeares past, but of prayinge
for the dead, and for reprouing S. Austen, and
S. Monica for that custome, and how chaunceth
then that Sutcliffe aunswereth not vnto
this obiection, which himselfe had sett
downe before with his owne pen, but slideth
away in silence, as though he had neuer
spoken yt, nay he dissembleth and omitteth
the quotation of Caluyns place, to the
end we should not find yt out, but I haue
thought good to note the place in the margent,
whose words are;Calu. 3. Iustitat. cap. 5. §. 10. 
               ante mille & trecentos
annos vsu receptum fuit, vt precationes fierent pro
defunctis: yt was receaued by common custome
aboue a thousand, and three hundred
yeares agoe, that prayers should be made for
the desceased: and a little after he saith, that
they were all deceyued in that doctrine.
            Now then do yow looke in Sutcliffes face,
and see what countenance he will set vpon
this notorious cogginge: this is that prayer
(saith he) vvhich Caluyn, and vve confesse to haue
byn in the Church a long tyme, but maketh nothinge
for howleglasse. What prayer Syr? commemoration
only of names with thankesgeuinge?
This first is no prayer at all. Neyther do eyther
the Fathers aforecited, or Caluin call this
a prayer, or treat of this, as by there words
yow haue seene. How then can it be said
that Caluyn, Sutcliffe, and his brother VVillett,
doe agree in this confession of this prayer

to haue bene in the Church for so longe
time? But if he speake of true prayer in deed
for the dead, as both Caluyn and the Fathers
do, then how maketh this nothinge for his
aduersaries purpose, whome fondly he tearmeth
by the name of Hovvleglasse; himselfe
being the true owle indeed, and worthy
to be bayted by all the byrds of the
ayre, for his ridiculous behauiour in this
his answere; for yt maketh expressely and
directly for E. O. his purpose and principall
cōclusion, to witt that prayers for the dead,
were frequented by true Catholiks aboue
thirteene hundred yeares gone, except Sutcliffe
will say, that the cheefe Fathers of that
age were no true Catholiks, or that Aërius
was no true heretike.
            And this shall suffice for this tyme and
place, though I might presse the poore fellow
with many other absurdityes, and ridiculous
refuges in his defence of this charge,
as that he leapeth disorderly to a place of S.
Chrysostome,
               Hom. 30. in epist. ad Phillippens. where he saith, that iust men whether
lyuinge or dead are vvith Christ. Which is
true in spiritt, and then to another place,
where he saith;Hom. 69. ad Pop. Antio
                  
                     •
                  hen. 
               that iust men dying, see God face
to face; which is true in the first sort of those
three before mentioned by Saint Augustine,
which is yf they be very iust. And yet out
of these two places would this simple disputer
inferre, that Saint Chrysostome beleeued
not purgatory, which is expressely agaidst

               S. Chrysostomes owne words and discourse, in
this very place by Sutcliffe alleaged, but lett
vs passe to his conclusion & so make an end.
            
               Lastly (saith he) in auncient tyme,
               A notorious vntrut he about praying a for Patriarkes and not to them. 
               they made
commemoration of the patriarks, of the blessed Virgin,
of the Apostles, Martyrs, and others, now they
pray to them, not for them as in tymes past. And
why doth not this simple shamelesse fellow
alleage some one author, some one testimony,
wittnesse, or authority for so bold an assertion?
Now they pray to them, and not for them
(saith he) as in tymes past: But what auncient
Father, Doctor or historiographer can he
cite, that euer said so, or mētioned any such
practise eyther of himselfe or others, that
prayed for the blessed Virgin, Apostles,
Martyrs, or the like in those ancient dayes?
But we haue manifest proofes to the contrary,
that they were prayed vnto in the
masse of old tymes, not prayed for. S. Cyrill
B. of Hierusalem that liued aboue twelue
hundred yeares agone, hath these words
talking of the masse:Cyrill. Cath. Myst. 5. 
               Cùm hoc sacrificium offerimus,
&c. VVhen vve offer vp this sacrifice, vve do
make mention by name of those which died before vs,
and first of Patriarks, Prophetts, Apostles, and Martyrs,
that God vuill receaue our petitions by their
prayers and deprecations for vs: Behould heere,
S. Cyrill did make a commemoration of the
Patriarks, Prophetts, Apostles and Martyrs,
as praying vnto them, and not for them, in
his masse and sacrifice.
            
               
The like saith S. Basill both in his liturgy
and elswhere affirminge the very same, for
that speakinge of the forsaid cōmemoration
of Patriarks, Prophetts, Apostles, &c. in his
masse he prayeth thus:
                  
                     •
                  asel. liturg. & in Anaph. Syriaca. 
               Per cos audeamus ad te
accedere & tremendo hoc sacro munere defungi. Let
vs presume by them and their intercession
to come vnto thee (o Lord) and to exercise
this dreadfull and holy office. And finally
S. Augustine, not only affirmeth this doctrine,
but yeldeth a reason also therof, to witt of
the different commemoration, that is made
in the masse of desceased Saints, and disceased
sinners in these words:Aug. tr
                     •
                  ct. 84. in Ioan & serm. 17. de verbis Apostol. 
               Ideo quippe ad ipsam
mensam, &c. Therfore do we not at the Altar make
like commemoration of Martyrs, as we do of others
that are desceased in peace; so as vve pray not for
them, but rather that they do pray for vs. So S. Augustine.
And the same he repeateth againe in
diuers other places; so as this is cleerly conuinced
against Sutcliffe by testimony of antiquity
which he presumeth to name, but
cyteth no wittnesse at all.
            Now then to conclude this whole matter,A consideration about Sutcliffes maner of vvryting.
lett the Reader by this little make some
ghesse, what he may iudge of the whole.
And yf in the examination of these two or
three places only, so many falshoods, frauds,
sleights, shifts, contradictions, and impudencyes
haue ben discouered, what would
be found, yf the whole number of six and
twenty obiected by E. O. should be discussed?

yea the whole chalenge diligently
skanned? consider also I pray thee good
reader, whether in defence of these 9. places
Sutcliffe haue not vsed the highest degree of
falshood before described of witting & willing
deceyte, seing that before he did sett
downe this article in his first chaleng about
masses and prayers for the dead, yt is probable,
that he had read some auncient Fathers
that made mention therof, and yet
would he auouch that no true Catholike
had vsed the same, but being reprehended
for yt, and told of his lyinge by his aduersary,
& diuers Fathers cited for proofe therof,
and his owne Maister Caluyn, and his brother
VVillett for acknowledginge the same, yet
commeth he now to affirme and print yt
againe in his second edition of his chalenge,
and dissembleth, peruerteth and shifteth of
the authorityes both of the said Fathers, &
Caluyn himselfe, as though they had neuer
ben obiected against him. And what will
yow say to this manner of dealinge? will
you aduenture your soule with such a man?
or will yow giue creditt any more to his
fond crakinge or vauntinge aboue mentioned?
            But we are ouerlong in this third part,The 4. part or principal member of this edition. &
cannot well get out of it, through the multitude
of aduantages that Sutcliffe geueth vs
in pursuinge him in this his chase of defendinge
himselfe; yet must we sound retreat,

and say only a word or two of the fourth
part of this his new booke, conteyninge, as
yow haue heard, a heap or fardell of recriminations
gathered togeather against auncient
Popes, Councells, synods, historiographers,
and other Catholike wryters, and
lastly against Cardinall Bellarmyne, Cardinall
Baronius and F. Parsons; by which ostentation
of names and authors, he would make men
beleeue, that all the world were full of corruptions
and falsifications in wrytinge, and
consequently that those of his, and of his
fellowes are little to be respected; but when
the occasion shall come to aunswere this second
edition at large, the differences wil be
shewed, and how vainly this little enuious
mouse, hath gone about to gnibble at Catholike
authors edges of their garments, &
particularly at the wrytings of the most famous,
learned, and honourable men of our
tyme, Cardinall Bellarmine, and Cardinall Baronius,
who haue so beaten downe heresy with
their most excellent works, as by allusion
we may say of them in respect of Sutcliffe,
ipsi conterunt caput tuum, tu vero insidiaris eorum
calcaneis, they haue broken thy head, and
thou doest byte at their heeles. Of the
third which is F. Persons and the obiections
heere brought against his wrytings, we had
thought to haue spoken somewhat more
particularly, but lacke of tyme and roome
maketh vs also to albreuiate this, yet

somewhat for example sake shalbe said.
            
               Sutcliffe nameth two books of his,
                  Sutcliffes obiectiōs to two of F. Persons bookes. the first
entituled. A briefe discourse conteyninge reasons,
why Catholiks refuse to go to Church. The next is
called: A Christian directory, and commonly
knowne by the name (saith he) of Parsons Resolution.
Against the former booke he bringeth
two reasons, as wise as his head can
deuise: the one, that he promised to make
three parts of that booke, and performed
but one,Ansvvere to except. pag. 182. 
               abusinge (saith he) both his frends and
aduersaryes with his false promises: The other
reason is (saith he) for that to persuade men
not to go to Protestāts Church must needs
stand vpon this supposition, that the Popes Religion
is true, and therfore he should first haue
proued this principle before he had gone
about to giue reasons, to stand stedfast therin.
But now (saith he) yf Parsons can say nothinge
why the Religion in England is not Catholike and
Apostolicall, then all his reasons fall to the ground.
These two reasons do well declare what a
man of worth Sutcliffe is. And not to shew
on my parte distrust in the Readers iudgement,
I will not go about to refute such vanityes.
For if this last reason haue any force,
yt proueth also that no Protestant Preacher
or wryter, may exhort any of his Religion
to constancy, perseuerance, patience, humility,
or any other vertue, except he proue
first all that Religion to be true. But lett
vs passe to the other booke, perhaps his

obiections wilbe stronger against that.
            
               His directory also (saith he) is a most idle,
               Ansvverē to except. ibid.
                
               and
vayne discourse (so idle and vaynè do seeme all
treatises of piety to this prophane minister)
yt should consist of three parts, but as the fashion is, of
three promised, he keepeth backe two, performeth
the third very simply.
               Eight fond obiectiōs against the booke of resolutiō. This is his censure of that
booke. And presently (as he is fertile in inuention,
though foolish in his election) he
commeth with eyght choise accusations against
yt. The first is, for that he proueth
 there is a God, and that Christian Religion
is true aboue all other Religions, and that
he treateth against dispayre of Gods mercyes,
tentations, and too much feare of persecution:
VVhich rather doth hinder a man (saith
Sutcliffe) from leading a Christian life, then help him
 to resolue. The second. That the greatest part
(saith he) is taken out of Loartes, Stella, Granatensis,
               and other such authors. TheThis was only set downe for yovv and yours to dravv them frō atheisme third.
for that yt argueth Catholikes to be badd
Christians, that they must be taught there
is a God, hell, heauen, and the like. The
fourth: That Sutcliffe doth not find, that yt
hath made hitherto any one Christian, or
directed him to the way of lyfe, but many
yong men to the gallowes. The fifth that yt 
hath not brought Father Persons him selfe yet 
to a good resolution, nor to enter into Religion.
 The sixt. For that his discourse to
proue that there is a God, and but one true
Religion, and that there is a heauen, & hell

among Christians already well persuaded,
is impertinent. The seauenth. For that yt 
is diuided into speculation and practice: as
yf (saith he) a man could practise that is not entred
into the exercise of Religion; or as yf resolution were
not farre differēt from practise. The eight & last,
for that yt is fraught with idle discourses, &
the principall point so weakely proued, that
yt will rather make Christians to doubt of
Religion, then atheists to beleeue.
            These are Sutcliffes reasons,The conclusion. which shew
the mans depth; and conforme to these, are
his obiections picked out of the forsaid two
books about allegation, wherof I would
gladly haue sett downe some halfe adozen
at least for example, so to haue seene the
weight and substance therof, but that I am
forced to make an end, referring my selue
to a fuller examē when his reply shall come
forth. Now then only I am to aduertise the
Reader, that he weigh with himselue what
manner of man Sutcliffe is, in these his wrytings,
he vaunteth and chalengeth as yow
see, as yf he were agyant, and when he cometh
to the gryping he is iust nothing: he
offereth to answere for all, as Iewell, Fox, Peter
Martyr, Ridley, Fulke,
               
                  Sutcliffe a Knight of the post in being suerry for many. 
               Plessis Mornay, & whome
els yow will besides, but when yt cometh
to the triall, he is able neither to make good
for them, nor for himselfe, and is iust like a
knight of the post, that will offer to be surety
for ten thousand pounds, when all his

owne substance is not worth ten shillings.
            His writings are loose, ragged, negligent,
barr
                  •
               n, obscure, and vnsauery, without substance
either of learning, prudēce, sharpnes,
or good stile:A censure of Sutcliffes writings. yf yow looke them ouer, yow
shall find them for the most part fraught, &
furnished only with bare assertions of his
owne, cast out without proofe or authority,
wittnesse, or testimony, in margent or
text; except in his vaine and vaunting chalenge,
where hauing to speake of matters
testified by Catholike wryters both ancient
and new, he maketh ostentation of many
quotations, and allegations of authors,
(though little to the purpose) and might
haue done of many more out of euery one
of his fellowes note-bookes; but when he
goeth from that fountaine, & must add any
thing of his owne inuention, there shall he
find him, very cutted, obscure, dry, and barren,
as may appeare by his aunswers before
examined, both of Plessis Mornay & himselfe:
and yow may see the same confirmed more
largely, by only lookinge ouer the pages of
his feeble defence of Syr Francis Hastings, now
battered againe to the ground by the recharge
of the VVarn-word.
            
            The principall talents then of this man
seeme to be extreeme vaunting and rayling,
wherof I haue laid yow downe some examples
before, and might do many more
especially in the later, to witt of rayling, for

I thinke scarse euer any ciuill man tooke
pen in hand to wryte, with that a cerbity &
scurrility of stile, which this man vseth against
all with whome he dealeth, and seemeth
to putt his cheefest glory therin. And
not to goe out of the present example in
hand of his answere to E. O. who being a
modest man hath dealt with him very temperatly,
for so much as we can gather by
Sucliffes owne reply: yet harken I pray yow
what manner of speech and threat he vseth
towards him, and to all Catholikes for his
cause, and this for some kind of rusticity (as
yt seemeth) committed against Sutcliffes person:
I will sett (saith he) a fellow to answere him,
(to witt Maister Sutcliffe
               
                  Sutcliffes raylinge in Praefat. to the Reader. himselfe vnder some
maske or vizard) that shall so curry him, and his
consorts the Papists, and that shall in such sort ripp vp
their villanyes, that the whole fraternity of asses shall
curse him for brayinge so vnciuilly. Consider I
pray yow, whether this be not a fitt speach
for a minister of malediction? yf E. O. should
returne vpon him againe and say: I could
ripp vp also for my part, yf I were delighted
with this kind of reuenge, for I know
what hath passed both in England, Ireland,
and other Ilands, I know of the matter of
Castle Cary; of the arraignment and sentence
geuen in Dublyn; the knights that did accuse
or beare wittnesse; the words touching the
bowling greene of Exceter, what they were,
whome they concerned, the manner of the

mans returne from Ireland, & dep
                  •
               rtement
in England, and other such particularityes:
Yf E. O. (I say) should make such a reply, &
offer to stand to yt in deed, and to take out
records as he may; what would O. E. gaine
by this vnciuill prouocation, of the whole fraternity
of asses? but these so vntemperate and
vnaduised speaches, are but impotencyes of
an vnbrideled mynd, and therfore rather
to be pittyed or contemned, then reuenged
or further answered, except further necessity
be laid vpon vs therof.
            Wherfore to end all at this tyme,
                  Sutcliffes barbarous conclusion against Catholikes blood. Ansvvere cap. 13.
                we do
pardon also his vncharitable conclusion, exhortinge
the prince that then was, and the
State to shed more bloud of Priests, Iesuits,
and Catholiks; impiety proceedinge of the
same passion, and distemperature of iudgement
and affection which the other did,
we passe ouer with like contempt: we disdayn
in like manner his false and wicked, yf
not madd accusation, that the last noble
Queene of Scotland of most pious memory,
was ruyned by Priests and Iesuits; wheras
no man knowinge the affayres of England
can be ignorant, but that whilst Priests and
Iesuits, and all other English Catholiks forrowed
hartily, & prayed most earnestly for
her Maiestyes preseruation, this fellow and
his companions barked dayly at her most
bitterly and spitefully, and neuer ceased or
could be satisfied vntill they had seene her

most noble blood shed for stoppinge their
mowthes, yea and for drawinge her into
more certaine daunger therof, their custome
was to vrge Priests and other Catholiks at
their very deathes, and places of execution,
when they prayed for the Queene, to explane
what Queene they meant, either that
of Scotland, or the other of England, so iealous
they were of Catholike Priests affections
towards that renowned Princesse,
now with God in glory, whose death and
other iniuryes, yf his diuine iustice shall
thinke conuenient not to leaue vnpunished:
we beseech him, that yt may fall rather
vpon such as were the styrrers thervnto,
then vpon others deceaued by them, and
vpon those also rather in this life temporally,
then in the next euerlastingly; and so to
his high tribunall we commit the whole.
            FINIS.
         
      
   