
      
         
            
            
            A REVIEVV OF TEN PVBLIKE DISPVTATIONS Or Conferences held vvithin the compasse of foure yeares, vnder K. Edward & Qu. Mary, concerning some principall points in Religion, especially of the Sacrament & sacrifice of the Altar.
            VVHERBY, May appeare vpon how vveake groundes both Catholike Religion vvas changed in England; as also the fore-recounted Foxian Martyrs did build their new opinions, and offer themselues to the fire for the same, vvhich vvas chiefly vpon the creditt of the said Disputations.
            
            BY N. D.
            
               
                  Aug. lib. 2. against Petilian the Donatist.
               
               VVe are constrayned to heare, discusse, and refute these trifles of yours: least the simpler and weaker sort should fall into your snares.
            
            Imprinted vvith licence Anno M. DC. IIII.
         
         
            
            The contentes of this Reuievv.
            THe Preface shewing what vtility disputation may bring, for discussion of matters in controuersy; and how farre: togeather with the causes, why the reuiew of these ten disputations is now published.
            
               1. Often publike disputations, recounted by Iohn Fox to haue byn held in England, about controuersies in Religion, especially concerninge the blessed Sacrament of the Altar, vvithin the space of foure yeares, at two seuerall changes of Religion vnder K. Edward and Q. Mary; besides many other more particular, held in Bishops consistoryes and other places about the same matters. CHAP. I.
            
            
               2. The state of the cheife question handled in the forsaid disputations, concerninge the Reall presence, Transubstantiation, and the Sacrifice of the Masse; with the cheese grounds that be on eyther side. CHAP. II.
            
            
               3. Certayne obseruations to be noted, for better answeringe of hereticall cauillations against the forsaid articles. CHAP. III.
            
            
               4. The examination of such arguments, as in the former disputations were alleaged by the Zivinglians and Caluinists, against the Reall presence of Christs body in the Sacrament. CHAP. IV.
            
            
               5. VVhat Catholike arguments were alleaged in these disputations for the reall presence: & how they were answered or shifted of by the Protestants. CHAP. V.
            
            
               6. Of two other articles about Transubstantiation, and the Sacrament of the Altar, what passed in this disputation. CHPP. VI.
            
         
         
            
            THE PREFACE, Shewinge what vtility disputation may bringe, for discussion of matters in controuersie, & how farre: togeather vvith the causes, vvhy the reuievv of these ten disputations is now published.
            
            
               THAT disputation is a good meanes and profitable instrument, to examine and try out truth, euen in matters of faith, yf yt be rightly vsed, & vvith due circumstances, no man can deny; for that experience in Gods Church doth teach yt, to vvitt, that great vtility hath often-tymes byn receaued by such disputations: and vve read amonge other examples, that in the tyme of Antoninus the Emperour sonne of Seuerus, that died in Yorke, a little more then a hundred yeares after Christ, the

               Montanists heresy, vvho vvere called also Cataphrigians, grovving strong, and dravvinge to it diuers pricipall men, and namely Tertullian, vvith the admiratiō of the vvhole vvorld; one Caius a Cath man most excellently learned, and of rare and vertuous 
                  Anno Domini 215. life, tooke vpon him to dispute publikely in Rome in the presence of the vvhole Church, vvith licēce of Zepherinus the Pope, against a chiefe principall man of that sect called Proclus, and so confounded him therin, as frō that day forvvard the sect began greatly to decline; of vvhich disputatiō do make mentiō both Eusebius & S. Hierome, & yt did 
                  Euseb. l. 6. hist. c. 14. Hier. de vir. Illust. in Caio.
                much profitt that Catholike cause.
            2. And about 2. hundred yeares after this againe, vve read of another profitable disputation held in our countrey, by S. Germanus & his fellovves, French Bishopps, vvith the

Brittish Pelagians vpon the yeare of 
                  Bed. l. 1. hist. c. 14. & Const. presbyt. in vita S. Lupi episc.
                Christ 429. vvherby they vvere so confuted, as also vvith the miracles vvrought by S. German, by certaine reliques brought from Rome, as their heresie neuer prospered there aftervvard, but vvas soone extinguished. VVe read in like manner of diuers publike cōflicts & disputatiōs, held by S. Austen vvith diuers learned heretiks of sundry sects, as namely vvith Fortunatus a Manichean priest, in the citty of Hippo in Africa, vpon the yeare 392. al the clergy & people being present, & publike notaryes appointed to set dovvne both their argumēts: & the issue of this disputatiōs vvas, that vvhē the Manichean heretike could not ansvvere, he said (saith Possidonius) secum suis maioribus collaturum, that he vvould conferre those difficultyes vvith his betters, & then if they could not satisfy him

               se animae suae consulturum, that he See the acts of this disputatiō 
                  in Possid. l. de vita Aug. c. 3. vvould haue care of his ovvne soule. But this care vvas (saith the same Possidonius) that he ranne avvay from the citty, and neuer appeared there againe. VVhich point S. Augustine himselfe obiecteth, in a certayne epistle, to another Manichee 
               
                  Aug. epist. 244. Priest, that came to succeed in Fortunatus his place in that citty, prouokinge him also to like disputation, but the heretike refused the combatt.
            3. And after this againe, the said Father being novv made Bishopp, vpon the yeare of Christ 405. he disputed publikely for tvvo dayes togeather, vvith another principall Manichean heretike named Foelix, in presence of the vvhole people, notaryes being appointed on both sides to take their arguments. In 
                  S. Austens disputation with Foelix Manichaeus
                vvhich disputation, S. Austen did so

euidently conuince his aduersarie, as he in the end yelded (a strange example in an heretike) and renounced his heresie, and became a Catholike, vvhereby the Mauichean heresie vvas so shaken and discredited throughout all Africa, as no man euer openly aftervvard durst defend the same in disputation, but it vanished avvay by little and little, as a smoke vvhen the fire is putt out. This vvhole disputation is to be seene at large in S. Austen, laid forth in tvvo books of his de actis cum Faelice Manichaeo. And this for the Manicheans.
            
            4. But vvith the Donatists and Arrians, he had many other like conflicts: as for example, vpon the yeare of Christ 411. there vvas a sollemne disputation held at Carthage 
               
                  S. Ausren his disputation with the Donatists. in Africa, for diuers daies togeather, betvvene the Catholike and Donatist

Bishopps, the Cath. Bishopps being in number 286. vvherof the principall disputer vvas S. Austen 
               Breuic. collat. primi diei. himselfe; & of the Donatist Bishops 279. vvhich shevveth the multitude of heretiks in those parts to haue byn great, notvvithstandinge they had bin much diminished by Cath. Bishops labours and vvrytings: for that 17. yeares before, there mett togeather against the Catholiks 400. Donatist Bishopps, exceptinge six: this disputation vvas before the Conte Marcellinus gouernour of that countrey, and publike notaryes vvere present to take the argumēts on both sides, and all being ended the Iudge pronounced this sentence: Omnium documentorum manifestatione, à Catholicis Donatistas confutatos. 
               Aug. in Breuic. That the Donatists vvere conuinced by the Catholiks, by the manifest truth of all kind of arguments.

               S. Augustine himselfe setteth forth a breefe relation of all that meeting & disputation, intituling yt Breuiculum. And in a certayne epistle of his testifieth moreouer of the euent, that albeit those miserable Epist. ad Gaudent. Bishops vvere not conuerted therby, but rather made more obstinate & obdurate: yet that many of their people vvere, & especially of the furious Circumcellians, that vvere ready to murder men vpon zeale of their heresie.
            5. I lett passe another disputation vvhich the said Father had, some 10. or 11. yeares after that, by the order of Pope Zozimus of Rome, in the Citty of Caesarea in Mauritania, vvith one Emeritus a Donatist B. of that Citty; all the vvhole people of the Citty, togeather vvith diuers Bishopps, being present; but little good could be done vvith him, his

obstinacy vvas so great and peruerse. 
                  Acta apud Aug. ep. 157. & l. 2. Retract. c. 51. & Possidon. in vita Aug. c. 14. The acts of that disputation are extant in S. Austen, & often mention therof is made by himselfe, & by Possidonius in his life. And this for the Donatists.
            6. But vvith the Arrians I find the same Father to haue had sundry disputations also, as namely once vpon the yeare of Christ 422. the Gouernour Bonifacius, hauinge many 
                  Possid. ib. cap. 17. Gothes in his campe vvho vvere of the Arrian sect: they had also an Arrian Bishopp that gouerned them, named Maximinus, vvho in their opinion vvas very learned, and therfore they made instance, that he might dispute vvith S. Augustine, vvhich the good Father accepted, for he refused none, and so they had their meetinge and disputation, 
                  S. Augustines disputatiōs vvith the Atrians. and the acts thereof are extant in his vvorks, togeather vvith

a certaine booke of his ovvne added thervnto, for explication of diuers points, vvherof these heretiks vvere vvont to vaunt aftervvard, as though they had gott the victory; vvhich happened to the same Father in another combatt, held the very same yeare, vvith one Conte Pascentius of the same Arrian sect, vvho vvas cheefe fifchall or treasourer of the Emperor, and most arrogantlie chalenged to dispute vvith S. Austen, but yet in priuate & vvithout notaryes, in respect of the Emperiall lavves, that did forbidd publike disputations in fauour of sects and heresies. VVhich disputation S. Augustine accepted; and the same vvas held priuatly, in the presence of many noble and learned men, but the heretikes 
                  Aug. epist. 73. 74. 75. 76. 77. vvould not yeld, but rather published soone after (as their fashion is)

that they had the victory, vvhich S. Austen vvas forced to refute by many seuerall epistles, and by settinge forth the disputation it selfe, as yt is to be seene in his vvorks.
            7. And this may suffice for a tast of some disputations, held at diuers tymes and in diuers countreyes, vvith heretiks of sundry sects in the ancient Church: And I might recite Photius in Bibliotheca. many more, as that of Maximus a learned Catholike monke in Africa, 
               Anastasius hoc anno. vvho vpon the yeare of Christ 645. held a very famous disputation against one Pyrrhus, Archbishop of Constantinople, a great pillar of those heretiks called Monothelits, that held one only vvill, and not tvvo to be in Christ our Sauiour, vvhich disputation being made in the presence of many Bishopps, and of the gouernour of that Country, named Gregorius Patricius, the hereticall

Archbishopp vvas so confounded, as he left his heresie, vvent to Rome, and gaue vp a booke of his pennance to Pope Theodorus, and vvas receaued by him into the Catholike communion againe: and that vvas the euent of that disputation.
            8. And not full 20. yeares after this againe, to vvitt vpon the yeare 664. vvas that great disputation also in England, betvvene the English and scottish Bishops, about the obseruation of Easter, in the presence of tvvo Kings Oswyn and Egfrid his sonne, Kinges of Northumberland 
               
                  Beda l. 3. h
                        •
                     st. cap. 25. and of the Mercians: the cheefe disputers, on the Scottish Bishopps parte, vvere Colman and Cedda, and of the English, Agilbertus Bishopp of the VVestsaxons and VVilfrid: and the issue of this disputation vvas, that Kings Osvvyn
               
vvas conuerted to the vnion of the Roman Church, and caused the vse thereof to be practized in his countrey.
            9. And so vve see by these examples, and many more that might be alleaged, that disputations in points of Religion are sometymes necessary, & do much good, vvhen they are taken in hand vvith equall and due conditions, and conuenient lavves for indifferency in tryinge out the truth, for that othervvayes they may be pernicious, & haue byn refused by anciēt Fathers, as vve read of one reiected by Saint Ambrose in Milayne, vpon the yeare Publike disputation refused by S. Ambros. vpon iust causes. of Christ 286. vvhen Auxentius the Arrian-Bishopp, being puffed vp vvith pride & arrogancy, by the fauour of the Empresse Iustina, infected vvith the same heresy, had not only prouoked S. Ambrose to publike

disputation, but had further procured that Valentinian the yong Emperour, being yet a child, & not baptized but only Cathecumenus, did make a publike edict, to commaund the said disputations to be held vpō such a day, in his publike court or consistorie, before himselfe & the said Empresse, certaine learned Pagans and Ievves being appointed for iudges in that matter. But S. Ambrose, by the counsell of diuers Bishopps gathered togeather vvith him, refused to come to those disputatiōs, vvryting a booke to the Emperour Valentinian for his 
                  Ambros. epist. 31. vvhere is extant also the booke sent by Ambrose to Valentinian.
                excuse, shevvinge the iniustice and vnequality of the order, and of those tymes, and persuadinge him to recall the said lavv. And yf he vvould haue that controuersie in religion, betvveene them and the Arrians, treated againe, he should

follovv therin the excellent example of his predecessor Constantine the great, vvho suffered Priests and Bishopps only to handle that matter in the Councell of Nice, and so vvas this disputation broken of: & presently there happened a thing of great admiratiō (saith Paulinus in the life of S. Ambrose) vvhich vvas, Paul. in vita Ambrosij. that a certaine principall learned Arrian, acerrimus disputator; & inconuertibilis ad fidem Catholicam, being a most eager disputer, and esteemed not possible to be conuerted to the Catholike faith; being deceaued, at it seemeth, of his hope and expectation to dispute in this conflict, vvent to the Church, to heare at least vvhat Ambrose could say out of the pulpit in his sermons: vvhere seing an Angell to speake as it vvere in his eare, he vvas by that miracle not only conuerted to be a

Catholike, but became also a most vehement defendor of that faith against the heretiks.
            10. To returne then to our purpose of disputation, yt is of great moment, hovv, and in vvhat tyme and place, and vvith vvhat lavves and conditions they are made, vvherof yovv vvill see the proofe and experience also in these ten, that heere vve are to present; vvherof six being The comparison betwene Cath & hereticall disputations. held vnder the gouernemēt of Protestants, and 4. vnder Catholike magistrates, yovv shall see complaints on both sides of inequality vsed: but he that shall read and consider them in differently, and vvithout passion, euen as they are sett dovvne by Fox himselfe (for vve could gett no other records therof for the present) he shall easily see no small differences to appeare. For that the disputatiōs both at Oxford
               
and Cambridge in K. Henryes dayes, vvere only certaine ostentations of light skyrmishes a farre of, so vainly and fondly performed, as they haue no substance in them at all. And so he vvill see that shall read these examinations. The other vnder Queene Mary, though the first of them in the conuocation-house, vvherin Protestants only vvere opponents, vvas not much vnlike the former for substāce, or rather lacke of substance: yet the other three held in Oxford against Cranmer, Ridley and Latymer by Catholike disputers, are of a farre different kynd, as hauinge both iudges, notaryes, and arbitrators to the likinge of both parts appointed. And albeit in the manner of vrginge arguments, there vvant not complaints of the Protestant party, as after yovv shall heare: for that diuers

somtymes are said to haue spoken togeather, & one man to haue putt himselfe into the prosecution of another mans argument, somevvhat disorderly as to them yt seemed: yet touchinge the thinges themselues, to vvitt the arguments & proofes there laid forth & prosecuted, there vvere so many cleere, substantiall & vveighty, as the reader vvill cōfesse there vvas no tyme lost in those 3. dayes disputation of the Cath party. And so to the examination therof I remitt me.
            11. One thing of no small importance there is to be cōsidered in this preface about the nature of disputation; to vvitt, that as it is a fit meanes Disputatiō fitter in some to moue doubts & examine the truth, then to resolue the same. to styrre vp mans vnderstandinge to attēd the truth, by layinge forth the difficultyes on both sides; so is yt not alvvayes sufficient to resolue his iudgement, for that yt

moueth more doubts then he can aunsvvere or dissolue. And this happeneth not only in vnlearned people, vvhich by no meanes can descerne vvhich party hath the better, vvhen both parts are learned & alleage arguments for themselues, in matters aboue their capacity, but euen the most learned also, yf they haue no other meanes of resolution then arguing to and fro by disputation, are brought many-times to be more doubtfull therby then before, & this euen in matters both naturall and morall of this life. The reason vvherof is, that mans vnderstandinge being limited, and the light of knovvledge imparted vnto him from God, being but a little particle or sparkle of his infinite diuine knovvledge: yt cometh to passe, that the more this sparkle is exercised, & inkendled in searching

out Gods vvorks and secrets in this life, the more yt seeth her ovvne vveaknes, and beginneth to doubt more, & to be more ambiguous in herselfe, vvhether that vvhich shee apprehendeth be truly apprehended or no, or vvhether by further search shee shall not find it othervvise, and see herselfe deceaued in this apprehensiō, as she hath found in many other apprehensions that vvent before, vvhen she had lesse knovvledge.
            12. And vpon this ground no doubt came those philosophers, called the Academicks, to found their sect & profession, that they vvould belceue or affirme nothing, but dispute of all things to and fro vvithout assent. And heere hence came also the sayinge of that other philosopher: Hoc Unum scio, me nihil scire. I knovv only this, that I knovv nothinge.

And S. Austen himselfe before his conuersion, being yet a Manichee, & vvearyed out vvith this search by vvay of arguments to and fro, vvhich should be the true Religiō (for this vvas one of their principall groūds, as himselfe testified, to beleeue nothinge, but that vvhich vvas euidēt by reason) fell at length to forsake the Manichees, & to ioyne himselfe to the Academiks: but after long search finding no certainty also therin, and hearing their sect Aug. l. de moribus Ecclesiae contra Manicheos. euery day impugned by S. Ambrose Bishopp of Millayne (vvhere then Augustine remayned) he returned in the end by the motion of almightie God, to consider vvhat more grounds the Catholike Religion had, to stay a mans iudgement 
                  Aug. confess. lib. 5. cap. 13. & lib. 6. c. 1. 2. 11. or cōscience, then the vncertainty of disputations, and findinge the same, resolued himselfe to renoūce

all sects and to be a Catholike, as in his ovvne confessions at large he declareth.
            13. By this then vve do see, that albeit disputation rightly vsed, be a good meanes to discouer truth by mouinge doubts to and fro, yet is yt not alvvayes sufficient to resolue and quiett a mans iudgement, euen in naturall thinges: and yf not in these, hovv much lesse in supernaturall and diuine, vvherin humaine disputation hath farre lesse force? For that humaine sciences, deducinge their disputation from principles that are euidently knovvne vnto vs by light of nature, may farre better resolue a man by force of those disputations, and enforce VVhat force disputatiō hath in resoluing matters of faith. him to yeld his assent, then in matters of diuinity, vvhere the first grounds and principles, are not knovvne to vs by light of nature,

as in humaine sciences, but are receaued only by light of faith, & reueyled from God: vvherfore these disputations may serue to examine and discusse matters, for stirring vp our vnderstanding, but the resolution & determination, must come frō a more certaine meanes vvhich is infallible, and this vve see practised in the very first cōtrouersy, that euer vvas handled in the priuitiue Church, as is recorded by S. Luke in the Acts of the Apostles, vvhere the question being, vvhether Christiās conuerted of gentills, should be bound to the obseruation of the mosayicall lavv or no? there vvas (saith the text) first magna conquisitio, 
               
                  Act. 15. a great search or disputation about The manner of proceeding vnder the Apostles. the matter; and then secondly the Apostles declared their sentences in order; and finally the determination vvas in all their names, representing

the vvhole Church, visum est spiritui sancto & nobis, yt seemed good to the holy-ghost and vs, and so vvas the matter determined, and the like forme hath byn obserued euer since that tyme in the Cath. Church, determining all cōtrouersies that haue fallen out, to vvit, that first there should be great search & discussion of the matter, by lavvfull and free disputation, to vvhich end the most learned men of all nations are sent cōmonly to generall Councells, to performe this point. And secondly all argumēts on both sides being heard & examined, the Bishops presēt do giue their voices, and accordinge to the greater part, vvith concourse & generall approbation of the generall head, do they determine visum est spiritui sancto & nobis. So as heere disputatiō serueth not to determine but to examine.
            
               
14. And for that the sectaryes of our dayes haue not this sound meane to determyne matters, but do depend The wāt which sectaryes haue to determyne matters by Cicero in Paradox.
                only vpon probability, and persuasibility of speach, or vvryting one against the other, by which (as Tully saith) nothinge is so incredible, that may not be made probable: therfore are their questions and controuersies endlesse and indeterminable; and though they haue had aboue a hundred meetings, conferences, disputations, Councells and synods from their first disputation held at Lypsia, vpon the yeare 1519. vnto their synodde in Vilna, vpon the yeare 1590. vvhereof yovv may see more largely in Stanislaus Rescius his obseruations: yet could they neuer agree, nor vvill hereafter, lackinge the forsaid meanes of resolution and determination vpon their disputations.
            
               
15. And yf this do fall out euen in the learnedst of our sectaryes, that they cannot by disputations alone resolue soundly eyther themselues, or others in matters of cōtrouersy, for that still there remaine doubts and difficultyes, vvhether matters vvere vvell prosecuted or no; and nevv arguments do offer themselues dayly to and fro: vvhat shall vve thinke of the vnlearned and ignorant people, that cannot vnderstand that is argued, and much lesse iudge therof? and yet vpon the creditt of such disputations do aduenture their foules, as yovv haue seene by many lamentable examples before in both mē & vveomen, that vpon the fame & creditt of these English disputations heere sett dovvne by Fox, partlie vnder K. Edward, & partlie vnder Queene Mary, and vpon the probabilitie of

some fond and broken arguments The willfullnes of Foxtan vnlearned sectaryes in disputation. vsed therin for the Protestants side, as somevvhat apparant & plausible to their senses & capacity, haue not only stood therein most arrognatly against their Bishopps, and learned Pastors by open disputatiōs in their Courts and Consistoryes, but haue runne also to the fire for the same, vvherof Allerton, Tankerfield, Crashfield, Fortune, and others Mensi
                     •
                  us Ian Mars. Sept & Noucmb. before mentioned being but Cooks, Carpenters, and Coblars by occupation: yea vveomen also as Anne Alebright, Alice Potkins, Ioan Lashford, Alice Dryuer, and others may be ridiculous but lamentable examples.
            16. Neither is this a nevv or strange thinge, that hereticall vveomen should grovv to such insolency, as to stand in disputation vvith the learnedst Bishops of the Catholike side, for that vve read it recorded in

Ecclesiasticall historyes aboue 12. The story of a Mani hean woman that disputed with a Bishopp. hundred yeares gone, to vvitt vpon the yeare of Christ 403. that a certayne vvillfull vvoman of the citty of Antioch named Iulia, infected vvith the abhominable heresie of the Manichees and feruent therein, came vnto the citty of Gaza, vvherof S. Porphyrius a holy learned man vvas Bishop, & beginning there to peruert diuers Christians, & being for the same reprehended by the Bishopp, she contemned him, yea chalenged him to open disputatiō, vvhich the good man admittinge, she behaued herselfe so insolently therein as vvas intolerable: So as vvhen he had suffered her a great vvhile to alleage her blasphemous arguments, & could by no meanes reduce her or make her harken to the truth, he fell from disputation to vse another meane, turning himselfe

to God, sayinge: O Eternall 
               Mareus in vita S. Porphirij.
                
               God vvhich hast created all thinges, and art only eternall, hauinge no beginninge or endinge, vvho art glorified in the blessed Trinitie, strike this vvomans tongue, and stopp her mouth that she speake no more blasphemyes against thee. 
               VVhich vvords being vttered, Iulia began to stammer, and to change countenance, fallinge into an extasis, and so leesing her voyce, remained dumme vntill she died, vvhich vvas soone after, vvherat tvvo men and tvvo vveomen that came vvith her fell dovvne at the Bishopps feete as kinge pardon, and vvere conuerted, as vvere diuers gentills also by the same miracle.
            
            17. And this vvas the conclusion of that disputation; and though it pleased not almightie God to vse the like miracles externallie in Qu. Maryes dayes, for the repressinge of

those insolēt vveomen that disputed so malepartlie, and vttered so manie blasphemous speaches against the soueraigne misterie of Christs reall presence in the Sacrament; yet can there be no great doubt, but that invvardlie he vsed the same, or no lesse iustice vnto them, especiallie seing he suffered them to go to the fire all vvithout repentance, and so to perish both bodilie and ghostlie, temporallie add eternallie. And for that in recytinge The cause of the Edition of these disputations. their storyes before sett dovvne, intendinge all breuitie possible, I could not conuenientlie lay forth their seuerall arguments in disputation, as neyther of those that vvere their maisters and inducers to this maddnes; I haue thought good heere to examine all togeather in this Re-vievv, vvhereby yovv shall see vvhat

grounds they had of so great an enterprise, and of so obstinate a prosecution therof. And this shall suffice by vvay of Preface: Novv vvill vve passe to the recytall of the said disputations.
         
      
      
         
            
            OF TEN PVBLIKE DISPVTATIONS, Recounted by Iohn Fox, to haue byn held in England, About Controuersies in Religion, especially concerning the blessed Sacrament of the Altar, within the space of 4. yeares, at two seuerall changes of Religion, vnder K Edward, and Queene Mary; Besides many other more particular, held in Bishops Consistoryes, and other places, about the same matters. CHAP. I.
            Novv then to come more neere to the matter yt selfe, we are breefly to recount the forsaid ten disputations, or publike meetinges and conferences, that after the change of the outward face of Catholike Religion in England, were held in our countrey within the space only of 4. or 5. yeares, and the effects that ensued thereof, which in great part were not vnlike to the successe of all those disputations, meetings, conferences, colloquies and other attempts of triall before mentioned, to haue ben with little profitt of

agreement, made in Germany, Polony, France and other places amongst the Protestants of this age, since the beginning of their new ghospell, the causes and reasons wherof, haue in part ben touched by vs in our precedent preface, and shall better appeare afterward by the examination of these ten publike disputatiōs, from which, as from generall storehouses, or head schooles, were borrowed the armour & arguments, for these other lesser bickerings of particular Foxian Martyrs, which they had with their Bishops, Prelates & Pastors at their examinations & arraignemēts, vpon the confidence & pride wherof, they were induced to offer themselues most obstinately & pittifully vnto the fire, as in th'examē of Iohn Fox his Calendar, you haue seene aboundantly declared.
            
               
                  First Disputation. §. 1.
               2. Wherfore to recount the particulars as breifely as we may, the first publike disputation First disputation of Peter Martyr at Oxford. 1549. of these ten, wherof we now are to treat, was held at Oxford against the reall presence of the blessed body & bloud of our Sauiour in the Sacrament of the Altar, by Peter Martyr an Italian Apostata friar, vpon the yeare of Christ (as Fox setteth it downe) 1549. which was the third of K. Edward the sixt his raigne, about the moneth of Iune (for he expresseth not the very day) and the cheife moderator or iudge in this disputation, was D. Cox Chancelourat that

tyme of the vniuersity; but after vnder Q. Elizabeth was B. of Ely, and his assistents were Henry B. of Lincolne, D. Haynes deane of Exceter; 
                  Fox pag. 1249. 
                  M. Richard Marison Esquier, and Christophor Ne
                     
                        ••
                     son Doctor of Cyuill law; all comissionars (saith Fox) of the Kings Maiestie, sent downe for this effect to authorize the disputations.
               3. For better vnderstandinge wherof yow must note, that albeit K. Edward had raigned now more then full two yeares, and that the protector Seymer and some others of his humour, would haue had change of doctrine established euen at the beginninge, about the point of the blessed Sacrament; yet could they not obtayne it in Parlamēt, partly, for that the farre greater part of the realme was yet against it, but especially for that it was not yet resolued by the Archbishopp Cranmer himselfe, of whome if you remember, Iohn Fox doth complaine in one place vnder K. Henry; that good Cranmer had not yet a full feelinge of that doctrine. 
                  Fox pag. 1115. & 1205. Whervpon we see, that in the first parlament of K. Edwards tyme, begon vpon the 4. of Nouember & ended vpon the 14. of December 1547. there was an act made with this title. An act against such persons as shall vnreuerently speake against 
                  See Statue. booke an. 1. Edvv. 6. cap. 1. 
                  the Sacrament of the body and bloud of Christ, &c. Wherin magnificent words are spoken of this Sacrament and all those greatly reprehended, that in their sermons, preachings, readings, ta
                        •
                     ks, rymes, songes, playes, or gestures, did name and call yt, 
                     
                        •
                     y such vile and vnseemely words (saith the Statute) is Christian eares did abhorre to heare yt rehearsed;
                  
and this was the the first spiritt of that Caluinian humor in England, misliked by Cranmer and the rest at that tyme, but soone after allowed well by Iohn Fox in such of his Martyrs, Fox pag. 1548. as call yt wormes-meate, idoll, and the like.
               4. And finally this party so much preuayled with them that gouerned, as not longe after, that is to say, in the second parlament be gone the 4. of Nouember 1548. and ended the 14. of March 1549. they gott their new communion 
                     Zuinallanisue admitted. 1546. booke to be admitted, wherin their new doctrine also against the reall presence was conteyned, and then Peter Martyr, who, as in his story we haue 
                     Sup. Decemb. 26. shewed, was sent to Oxford before with indifferēcy, to teach what should be ordeyned him from higher powers in that parlament, hauing expected all the lent long, whilst the parlament endured, what would See Doctor Saunders l. 2. de sehi, m. A
                        •
                     gl. be decreed about this point; and finding himselfe in straytes, for that he was come to the place of S. Paul to the Corinthians, where he must needs declare himselfe, receauinge now 1. Cor. 11. aduertisment of the new decree, did not only accomodate himselfe to teach and preach the same doctrine presently: (which yet the other The dissemblinge of Peter Martyr & Bucer.
                   friar, his companion Martyn Bucer would not doe in Cambridge) but also was content vpon request & order from the Councell, to defend the same in publike disputations, for better authorizinge yt through the whole body of the realme. This then was the occasion of this first publike disputation, to giue some countenance and creditt to the new receaued opinion

and paradox of Zuinglius, Occolampadius, and Carolstadius, three schollers of Luther himselfe, against the reall presence, which as often Luth. lib. cont Sacrament. & alibi sap
                        •
                     . yow haue heard before, Luther did condemne for damnable heresie, and them for heretiks that mayntayned yt.
               5. The questions chosen by Peter Martyr were three: First about Transubstantiation, whether after the words of consecration, the bread and wyne be turned into the body and bloud of Christ. The second about the reall presence; whether the body and bloud of Christ be carnally and corporally (for so are his words) in the bread and wyne, or otherwise vnder 
                  Three questions to be disputed at Oxford 1549. 
                  the kinds of bread and wyne. The third was: whether the body and bloud of Christ be vnited to bread Sacramentally? But of this last question Fox relateth nothing, that yt was eyther handled or touched in this disputation. About the former two, this manifest fraud was vsed, that wheras the first about Transubstantiation, dependeth of the second of the reall presence, it should haue byn handled in the second place, and not in the first, as heere yt is; for cleerer conceauing whereof, the Reader must note, that the mayne controuersie betweene the Sacramentaryes & vs, is about the reall presence, to witt whether the true body of Christ be really and substantially in the Sacrament after the words of consecration, which we do hould affirmatiuely, and so doth Luther also, & then supposing that it is so, there followeth a second question de modo essendi, of the manner of Christs being there, to witt, whether yt be there togeather

with bread, or without bread, or whether the bread be anihilated by the ptesence of Christs body, or whether yt be turned into the very substance of Christs body, as we haue shewed out of Scotus and Durand before, in the discussion of Plessis Mornay his Triall; and euery See the defence of the relaciō of 
                        〈◊〉
                      his disputation vvith B. Pe
                           •
                        on of Eureux tom 2 part. 3 or our three conuernons, one of these opinions, about the manner of Christs being there, do presuppose the reall presence, denyed by the Sacramen taryes: So as to dispute first about this particular manner of Christ his being there by Transubstantiation, before yt be discussed whether he be really there or noe, ys to sett the cart before the horse, and the foote before the head.
               6. And yet for that they do persuade themselues, that they haue some more shifts or shewes of probability against Transubstantiation, then against the reall presence, or can delude better our arguments in the simple peoples eyes, they alwayes runne to this, & leaue the other: And it is, as if the question being, first whether gold were in a purse, & then whether yt were there alone or els togeather with ledd, tynne, or some such baser mettall; some wrangeler would first dispute the second question before the first; or as if two demaūds being propounded, first whether in such a vessell (where watter was knowne to be before) there be wine put in, and secondly whether this wine haue turned that water into it selfe or noe? or that water & wine do remaine togeather, and that one would pretermit the first questiō, to witt, whether wine be really & truly there or no? and cauil

only about the second, vvhether the vvater be turned 
                  Tvvo similitudes to expresse the vayne vvtāgling of Sacramētaryes about Transubstantiatiō. 
                  into wine, or remaine togeather with the wine? In which cases yow see first, that this manner of dealinge were preposterous and impertinent wrangling, but especially, yf the wrangler did deny expressely that there was any gold at all in the purse, or wine in the vessell, for then yt were too too much folly for him to dispute the secondary questions whether the said gold were there alone, or with other mettalles; or whether the wine had cōuerted the water into it selfe or no; for yf neither gold nor wine be really there presēt, then is there no place for the secōd dispute at all. And so fareth it in our cōtrouersy of the reall presence of Christs body. For if the said body be not really & substātially in the Sacramēt at all, as the Zuinglians & Caluinists do hould; then is it impertinēt for them to dispute the second question, whether it be there without bread or with bread, or whether bread be turned into it or no by Trāsubstātiation, for so much as they suppose it not to be there at all; only Luther & Lutherans may haue cōtrouersy with Catholiks, about the māner how it is there, seing they beleeue it to be there in deed; but Zuingliās & Caluinists cānot, but only about the first question, whether it be there or noe; which question notwithstanding, for so much as they fly and runne alwayes to the second, as we haue shewed; notorious it is that they runne frō the purpose, & shew thēselues not only wrāglers but also deceauers, seeking to dazell the eyes of the simple in this behalfe,

as in this first disputation at Oxford, Peter Martyr begon with Transubstantiation, and was much longer therein, then in the controuersie of the reall presence.
               7. And in the second disputation of B. Ridley in Cambridge, two only questions being proposed; the first was by preposterous order of Transubstantiation, and the second of the Sacrifice, but the reall presence was wholy omytted, and the like in the rourth disputation vnder Maister 
                  Fraudulēt dealing of Protestāts, in disputation. 
                  Pearne for the Protestants, as after yow shall see. And when lastly Maister Ridley came to resolue vpon all three disputations, held vnder him in Cambridge, and the questions handled therin, he quite passeth ouer the controuersie of reall presence. And so yow shall obserue the like tricke in most of the other disputations, and yet (as I say) yf there be no reall presence, the question of Transubstantiation hath no place at all, no nor the sacrifice neyther, as Ridley confesseth in his said resolution, and this for the first shift of Peter Martyr & his fellowes in this disputation.
               8. The second shifte is, that he putteth downe fraudulently the second question about Fox pag. 1249. the reall presence, whether the body of Christ be there carnally or corporally, for albeit we do hold that both Caro & Corpus, which is 2. fraud. the flesh and body of Christ our Sauiour, be there truly and really, yet not after a fleshely and corporall manner, as these words seeme to import, but rather Sacramentally, that is to say though truly, and really, yet after a Sacramentall

and spirituall manner, euen as our soule is in our body, and an Angell in a corporall place. And albeit some authors and Fathers do vse sometymes the word Corporaliter, speakinge of the reall presence, yet do Fox and Martyr malitiously euery where call yt a carnall and corporall presence, therby to deceaue the simple reader, See aftervvard c. 3. as though yt were there with locall dimensions, after the manner of other bodyes, and not after a spirituall manner of being.
               9. The third fraude in settinge downe this first disputation is, that wheras Fox doth tell Fox pag. ibid.
                   vs in this place, that the principall disputers against Peter Martyr were Doctor Tressam, Doctor Chadsey, and Maister Morgan, yet doth he not tell vs one word what they said against him, nor 3. fraud. doth he relate any one of their arguments or answers, but only the arguments of Peter Martyr against them with triumph, as who would say, he had gotten the victory without resistance: but yow shall see in the ensuing Chapters, what manner of arguments Peter Martyrs were, and how easy to be answered, as no doubt but they were by them, yf Fox had thought good to haue related both parts (as he ought to haue done) or haue left both parts out. But this is his ordinary custome of dealing. Wherfore that you may vnderstād partly how the matter went in deed, by the relation of one that was present, to witt D. Saunders, I will set downe breefely his words of the action in generall, as yt passed. Thus then he wryteth about this first Oxford disputation.
               
                  
10. Petrus Martyr (saith he) &c. 
                  Peter Martyr, of 
                        Sand l
                              •
                           b. 2. de schism. Angl.
                      whome many of the Sectaryes promised to themselues great matters, for that he was publike reader in Oxford, being challenged in those dayes by many of that vniuersity, to defend his doctrine by disputation, and namely by D. Rich. Smyth who had byn his predecessor in the same chaire, neuer durst to yeld ther vnto, vntill he had obtayned that D. Cox a sectary of his owne side, and a man of very loose life should be sent from the court, to be moderator and iudge in the same disputation: And that D. Smith was called from the vniuersity, &c. But when the said disputation had endured for three dayes, and that Cox had seene his 
                        D. Saunders relation of this disputation at Oxford.
                      
                     Peter Martyr much more pressed then he looked for, and almost hissed out of the schooles by all the schollers and hearers, he was forced to say that he was sent for away in all hast to London, & consequently could no longer attend to these disputes. Wherfore hauing giuen great praises publikely to Peter Martyr, and admonished the schollers to keep peace, he brake vp those disputations, & so departed with infamy in the sight of all men: yet Peter Martyr afterward set forth these disputations fraudulently, as heretiks are accustomed, and would needs seeme to haue had the victory, but by the iudgment of that vniuersity he was twise vanquished, first in that he durst not encounter D. Smith, & secondly for that he could not answere the arguments of the other Cath. Doctors. Thus he. Wherby we may perceaue, the

reason wherfore Fox would not set downe at length the particulars of this first disputation at Oxford, as he did of some of the others after.
            
            
               
                  Second Disputation. §. 2.
               11. The second disputation was held at Cambridge about the same tyme (saith Fox) to witt The secōd disputation held by D. Ridley in Cambridge.
                   vpon the 20. of Iune anno 1549. the defendant for the Protestant side was D. Madew; the opponents D. Glyn, M. Langdale, M. Sedgewike, and M. Yonge, the moderator was D. Ridley B. of Rochester at that time, but soone after of London by depriuation of D. Bonner. The commissionars sent from the King to assist as iudges, besides the said Nicolas Ridley, were Thomas B. of Ely, Syr Iohn Cheke schoolmaister to the King, a forward Protestant in those daies, though vnder Q. Mary he left them, D. May a Ciuilian, and D. VVenday the Kings phisition. The questiōs disputed were two, as before hath byn said. The first, whether there were any Transubstātiation & the second, whether there be any externall & propitiatory sacrifice in the masse. The question of the reall presence, wherof both these do depend, was not handled at all, for the causes yow must thinke before mentioned, and he that shall read ouer this whole disputatiō, shall find it a very cold & trifling thing, much of the time being spent in ceremoniall words of courtesy, much in impertinēt Triflinge disputations of our first Protestants. excursions frō the purpose, out of all scholasticall forme of disputing or strayning the defendant, & when any thing drew neere

to vrge or presse, eyther the moderator would diuert the same by intrudinge himselfe, or the proctors by their authority would interrupt yt. Heere (faith Fox) the proctors commaunded the opponent to diuerte, &c. And againe, heere the proctors commaunded Langdale to giue place to another. 
                  Fox pag. 1254. And further; heere he was cōmaunded to reply in the second matter. And yet further, heere M. Sedgewike was commaunded to ceasse to Maister Yonge. Which Yonge, hauinge scarce made three instances in proofe of the Sacrifice against Ridley, ended all the disputations with these words: VVell I am contented, and do most humbly beseech your good Lorshipp, to pardon me of my great rudenesse & imbecillity vvhich I haue heere shewed, &c. Which indeed sheweth great imbecillity, yf he said so in deed, and that Fox hath not made him to speake as best pleaseth himselfe.
               12. I could alleage diuers other simplicityes out of this disputation, yf I would stand vpon them, yea on the part of Fox and Ridley themselues; for in one place Fox maketh this note vpon a certayne answere of Ridley: Heere is to be noted (saith he) that Peter Martyr in his answere at Oxford, did graunt a change in the substances of bread 
                  Fox pag. 1255. 
                  and vvyne, vvhich in Cambridge by the Bishopp Doctor 
                  Fox noteth the disagreement of his ovvne men. 
                  Ridley vvas denyed. Behould heere the goodly agreement, that was betweene the first founders of Sacramentaryes doctrine in England, and how worthy to be noted by themselues. Friar Martyr in Oxford graunted a change in the substances themselues of bread and wyne, by the words of consecration; but Bishop Ridley in

                  Cambridge denieth the same, so great difference is there betweene Oxford and Cambridge, the Friar and the Bishopp: and is not he well holpen vp that hangeth his soule on these mens opinions? this then is one simplicity of Fox, but lett vs heare another of Ridley related by Fox his ownepen, in his answere to Maister Sedgewicke, who began thus.
               13. Right VVorshippfull Maister Doctor I do aske of yow first of all, whether the Greeke article (this) Ridleyes fond aunsvveringe. 
                  being of the neuter gender, be referred to the vvord (bread) or to the word (body)? to the first yt cannot be, for that it is of the masculine gender, ergo to the second. This was the obiection or demaund, lett vs heare the Bishopps solution. Forsooth (saith Fox pag. 1256. he) that article is referred to neyther of both, but may signisie vnto vs any other kind of things. Thus the Bishopp. So as by this exposition, Christ might as well fignifie a staffe, or a stoole, or any garment or thing that lay on the table, or whatsoeuer els any man will diuise, as well as bread, or his body, when he said of bread, this is my body. And is not this a Bishopp like aunswere? But of the arguments and aunswers of this second disputation, we shall haue occasion to speake afterwards, when the controuersies themselues shalbe discussed in particular, and so we shall passe forward to recoumpte the other disputations that ensue.
            
            
               
               
                  Third Disputation. §. 3.
               14. The third disputation was held at Cambridge vpon the 23. of Iune in the same yeare 1549. as Fox recounteth, wherin two propositions were held affirmatiuely for the Catholiks, by the aforesaid D. Glyn defendant, to witt The 3. disputation at Cambridge anno Domini 1549. for the reall presence & sacrifice of the masse. The opponents for the Protestants were M. Perne, M. Gryndall B. afterwards of London, and Canterbury, M. Ghest and M. Pilkinton, which last vnder Q. Elizabeth gott the Bishopricke of Durham. The moderator and iudges were the same as in the former disputation, to witt Ridley and his fellowes, and the manner and forme not much vnlike, though somewhat more disorderly, each one puttinge in his verdict to and fro at his pleasure. But yet whosoeuer shall pervse the same vvith equality, will easily perceaue an eminent difference for learninge, discretion and clere aunsweringe betweene the said Doctor Glyn and his opponents, which principally is to be attributed to the difference of his cause from theirs; they neuer prosecuting commonly one medium for aboue one or two instances, but leaping presently to another: so graue and substantiall a disputation was this for poore people that heard yt, or heard of yt, and followed the resolution therin sett downe, to hange their soules vpon the certaynty therof.
               
                  
15. Maister Perne beginneth with a complaint, 
                     D. Perne confesseth the corporall presence of Christ in the Sacrament. against D. Glyn, that he had left Transubstantiation & taken vpon him to defend the reall presence in the Sacrament, vvheras we deny nothinge lesse (saith he) then his corporall presence or absence of his substance in the bread. Wherby yt is euidently seene, that Maister Perne was not of Ridleyes opinion, but held the reall presence, though with Luther perhaps he did not beleeue Transubstantiation: and this is euident by his arguments which after he vsed, nothinge in deed against the reall presence, but only to proue that Christ his body was togeather with bread. The like manner of impertinent dealinge vsed Ridley himselfe in diuers of his arguments; as for example: this is that bread (saith he) vvhich came 
                  Fox pag. 1257. 
                  downe from heauen, ergo, yt is not Christs body, for that his body came not from heauen: which proueth also that yt was not bread, for that Ridley will not say (I thinke) that the materiall bread which Christ had in his hand, camed owne from heauen. The like argument vseth Pilkin
                     
                        •
                     on thus: vvhersoeuer (saith he) Christ is, there be his 
                  Fond arguments of Sacramentaryes. 
                  ministers also, for so he promised: but Christ as you hould is in the Sacrament, ergo his ministers are there also. Which were a foule incōuenience as you see, if all our English ministers should be in the Sacrament for the poore people to byte at. And yet this argument seemeth so graue vnto Iohn Fox, as he maketh this marginall note theron. VVhere Christ is, there are his ministers. And the poore fellow hath not so much witt, as to see that those words of Christ were meant

of his glory in the life to come, and not of the Sacrament which is ministred vpon earth.
               16. But to the end yow may the better perceaue, how disorderly this and the former disputation at Cambridge, was made by the new Protestants to ouerbeare the Catholike cause, I shall sett downe some lynes of a narration of D. Langdale, Archdeacon of Chichester, a Cambridge man who was present at the said disputation, and confuted afterward in print the said Ridleyes determination vpon these disputations. Thus then he wryteth: Vix dum finita 
                  Albanus Langlandus in confut. Determ. Nicol. Ridley. 
                  Collegiorum visitatione, &c. 
                  The Colledges of Cambridge were no sooner visited by the Kinges Commissionars, but there appeared vpon all the gates two conclusions set vp, the first against Transubstantiation, the other against the sacrifice of the masse, and presently the bedells of the vniuersity went about to giue warning, that yf any man had any thinge to say against these conclusions, he should come forth the third day after, (which was Corpus-Christi day,) to dispute, or otherwise all to be bound to perpetuall silence for euer after. The concourse of noble men, & all other degrees was great, and scaffolds made for the place of disputation, that the multitude might the better heare: but all that were indifferent, did see matters to be handled with great inequality; for that whosoeuer spake for the Catholike side presently his speach was eyther interrupted, or for breuity shifted of to another tyme, and Ridley that was the Captayne of all steppinge

in at euery turne to assist his defendant, did eyther with threates or fayre words, or by scoffes and bytter taunts seeke to diuert the Catholike disputers.
               
               
                  17. And when the first dayes disputation was in this manner ended, yt was denounced to the auditory, before the dismission of the schooles, that yf any man would come forth The partiall dealinge of Protestāts in their disputations. and defend within a day or two, the Catholike parte of those questions, he might, but afterwards it should not be lawfull for any man to speake therof: which vnexpected denuntiation being heard, one man looked vpon another, and all for a tyme were silent, vntill at length a most learned and graue man, pious and skillfull, as well in knowledge of the tongues, as also in diuinity, wherof he had bvn there publike reader before (to witt Doctor Glyn) stept forth and offered himselfe to the combatt, and performed yt the third day after, takinge the place of defendant without help of any moderator, but all rather against him, beginning his declaration, (which Cambridge men call his position) with the words of the Prophett: Credidi propter quod locutus sum. 
                     
                        Psalm. 115. And the Protestants were so vrged in these disputations about the reall presence, that notwithstandinge they auoyded and dissembled that question so much as they could, yet were they driuen to such shifts, to putt of the cleere places & authorityes of ancient Fathers about the same, as was ridiculous to heare; for that sometymes they said Christs body was present

in the Sacrament by signification, then by representation, then by meditation, then by appellation, sometymes by propriety, other tymes by nature, then by power, then againe by grace, then by memory or remembrance, then by vertue & energy, and by many other diuises of deluding or shifting of the matter. All which being done, and another third day of disputation passed ouer in like manner, Ridley tooke vpon him to giue the determination of all, as though he had gotten the victory. Thus farre out of Doctor Langelands booke; wherby may be gathered how the matter passed in these disputations.
               
            
            
               
                  Fourth Disputation. §. 4.
               18. The fourth disputation was held also in Cambridge soone after the former, wherin, according The 4. disputation at Cambridge. 1549. to Fox his relation, the forsaid Maister Perne was defendant for the Protestants, and the opponents for the Catholike part, were Maister Parker, Maister Pollard, Maister Vauesour, and Maister Yonge: the moderator and iudges Fox pag. 1257. was Maister Ridley of Rochester togeather with his fellowes aforementioned: the two questions were about Transubstantiation, and the Sacrifice; the other of the reall presence was pretermitted (accordinge to the former declared sleight) though yt were the principall and the ground, wheron these other two do depend, & concerneth the very substance of the Zuinglian
                  
and Caluinian sect, now newly set vp and authorized by these disputations, and consequently should first and principally haue byn discussed, yf eyther good method or shew of true dealinge had byn obserued. But D. Perne the defendant beleeued the reall presence, as in the former disputation yow haue heard him protest, though in this disputation he sought to expound himselfe in these words: I graunt that Christ is in the Sacrament truly, wholy and verily after a certayne property and manner. I deny not his presence, but his reall, and corporall presence. But this is a difference without a diuersity (by M. Pernes 
                  
                     D. Pearne speaketh doubtfully & doubly about the Sacramēt. licence) for yf Christs body be there truly, wholy and verily, he must also be there really, as to euery mans common sense and reason is euident; and so Maister Perne by this distinction sheweth, that he beleeued nothing at all really, truly, or verily at that tyme, yf his heart were accordinge to his words.
               19. And albeit, as I haue said, Maister Perne propoundeth The fond manner of this disputation. the questions of Transubstantiation & sacrifice of the masse, yet when they came to ioyne issue, their speach was most of all about the reall presence, and I call yt a speach rather then disputation, for that yt had neyther order, method, nor substance in yt, but was a most ridiculous colloquy of one to another, without vrginge or answeringe any one argument substantially, but as little beagles lyinge togeather, one starteth vp and giueth a barke or two, and lyeth downe againe; so these disputers, aunswerers, and moderator

handled the matter; as for example, M. Parker being to argue first, began to alleage three vayne reasons (as Fox calleth them in the margent) for the reall presence, to witt, that yt was prophesyed, promised, and performed as he proued by diuers places of scripture, which being done Iohn Fox, without tellinge vs any aunswere at all giuen by Maister Perne, hath these words. Heere they were sorced to breake of through the want of tyme, yet Maister Parker replyed this with a prayer against Maister Perne; vve giue th
                        •
                      thankes most holy Father, that thou hast hidden these 
                  Fox pag. 1260. 
                  things from the wise and prudent, and hast reueyled them to babes, for pride is the roote of all heresies whatsoeuer, &c.
               
               20. Now heere I vvould aske Iohn Fox what he meaneth by this note; that they were forced to breake of for lacke of tyme? and yet that Contradiction in Fox his vvords. 
                  Parker replyed, and began his reply with a prayer? For yf they brake of, how did he reply, especially his reply being somewhat long? And yf he replyed in so large a manner as Fox setteth it downe, how did they breake of? & how ridiculous a thing is it, that a sollemne disputation being begon in presence of the whole vniuersity, and of so great an audience, and Maister Parker being the first opponent, the matter should be broken of without hearing any one answere of the defendant? But these are Fox his fooleryes, and these were the first and most firme foundations of our new Caluinian sect in England. Many other particulars might be sett downe, especially of Ridley
                        •
                     
                  
                  
moderatinge, who at euery turne made himselfe defendant & answered farre worse then Perne himselfe, but we shall haue better occasion to touch the same afterward, when we shall examine more particularly what passed about euery controuersie, in each of these disputations; only Vauesour of all the opponents seemeth to haue spoken best to the purpose M. Vauesour commended. (as Fox relateth him) for that he alleaged an authority of S. Augustine in Psalm. 98. which Ridley, not able to answere, ridiculously shifteth of as yow shall see afterwards, when yt commeth in ranke to be examined, and in his preface he cited two sayings of Zuinglius and Oecolampadius, 
                  
                     Zuinglius and Oecolampadius doubtfull of their doctrine at the beginninge. of their owne doubtfullnesse at the beginninge, in the doctrine with they first broached against the reall presence. Zuinglius his words are: Albeit this thinge that I meane to treat of, doth like me very well; yet notwithstandinge I dare define nothinge, but only shew my poore iudgement abroad to others, &c. Oecolampadius his words are wrytinge to his brother. Peace be with thee. As farre as I can coniecture out of the ancient Fathers, these words of Christ (this is my body) is a figuratiue locution, &c. Thus they at the beginninge very doubtfully, as yow see, but afterward, as those that tell lyes so often, as at length they beginne to beleeue them to be true themselues, so did these men; and yet others were so foolish as to follow them in their doubtfull fancyes, a pittifull case in the cause of our soule. Well, Iohn Fox concludeth this whole Fox pag. 1261. disputation with these words: Heere endeth
                  
(saith he) the third and last disputation holden at Cambridge 1549.
            
            
               Fifth Disputation. §. 5.
               21. The fifth disputation was the publike determination made by B. Ridley, as iudge and The 5. disputation or determination at Cambridge by M. Ridley.
                   moderator vpon the questions, before handled in the three disputations of Cambridge, vvhich determinatiō I do reckon among the number of the other disputations publike, and colloquyes, both for that yt was made vpon a seuerall day most sollemnely, and with no lesse concourse of people then the former, as also for that yt setteth downe all the heads of his principall arguments, as the first disputation doth those of Peter Martyr, though without the answers or replyes of his aduersaryes. And indeed this being a collection of all the substantiall points, of whatsoeuer had byn alleaged by the Protestants in all three disputations, as also whatsoeuer himselfe could adde thervnto; and being done with so great study & deliberation, as to be deliuered in the greatest concourse and expectation of people (for the nouelty therof) that euer perhaps were seene togeather in Cambridge before; yt being the first publike determination against the truth of Christs sacred body in the Sacramēt, that euer that vniuersity, from her first foundation had heard of: For all these reasons and respects (I say) this determination may perhaps

be numbred amongst one of the most sollemne conferences, or disputations held by the Sacramentarye Protestants in our countrey.
               22. Ridley then began the assembly with these words: There hath byn an ancient custome amonge you, that after disputatiōs had in your common schooles, 
                  Fox pag. 1261. 
                  there should be some determination made of the matter disputed and debated, especially touching Christian Religion; because therfore it is seene good to these worshipfull assistants, ioyned with me in commission from the Kings Maiestie, that I should performe the same at this tyme, I will by your fauourable patience declare, both 
                  
                     Ridley his entrance to his determination. 
                  vvhat I do thinke and beleeue my selfe, and what all other ought to thinke of the same, vvhich I vvould that afterward ye did with diligence weigh and ponder, euery man at home seuerally by himselfe, &c. This is his preface, wherin yow may note first, what a different assurance it is for a man, to repose the saluation of his soule vpon this new beleefe and thinkinge of Maister Ridley, which was not yet as yt seemeth full three or foure yeares old with him (for vntill K. Henryes death he was euer held of another opinion) or vpon the generall determination, learninge, iudgement, piety, & consent of the worthiest in the Christian world, assembled togeather in councells, wheroften, (as in our preface we haue touched, and shall againe afterward) had determined for the reall presence in the space of the Diuers cō
                     sideratiōs about the vncertainty of Protestants beliefe. last 500. yeares, before this contrary determination of Ridley, to witt after the question was once moued by Berengarius, vntill yt was moued

againe by Zuinglius and Oecolampadius; lett euery discreet man, I say, consider what a differēce this is, for a man to aduenture his soule and euerlastinge inheritance theron. For yf a man had demaunded of Ridley himselfe 4. or 5. yeares before this day, what a man was bound to thinke and beleeue in this point for sauinge his soule, he would haue said the quite contrary to that he determineth now.
               23. Secondly yow may consider another difference in this priuate determination, of Ridley & his associates from that of Catholike Councells, for that Councells after enquiry and disputations made for the truth, do determyne by generall consent of the Bishopps assembled, with assured assistance of the holy ghost; wheras Maister Ridley remytteth all to the priuate iudgement of euery one at home, seuerally by himselfe; which is as much to say, notwithstanding all the disputation, and his determination, yet must euery man and woman follow their owne fancy at home, and be iudge of all that hath byn disputed, or determyned: & this is the certainty that Protestants haue for common people to rely vpon.
               24. Thirdly yt is to be noted, that notwithstanding Fox calleth this decision, the determination of Doctor Nicolas Ridley B. of Rochester, vpon the conclusions aboue prefixed, yet handleth he only two questions in this his determination videlicet; Transubstantiation, and the Sacrifice of the Altar, but the first much more amply and aboundantly, pretermitting the very cheefe & principall

question in deed, wherof all the rest dependeth, which is of the reall presence, which maketh the very essence of Caluinian and Zuinglain sect, wherby they do differ from both Lutherans and vs: of which absurd imposture we haue spoken sufficiently before, and seing so much had byn said in the former disputations about that point, though greatly against the Protestants inclination, me thinketh he ought not to haue left out wholy that question in this his determination. But as I haue often said, their principall shift in those dayes was to stepp from the mayne point, whether Christ were really in the Sacrament or no; & to leape vnto a quiddity of the manner of his being there, to witt by Transubstantiation. Fiue pretended heades of Ridleyes determination. About which notwithstandinge, B. Ridley beginneth his resolution with great oftentation of words sayinge; that he had fiue principall grounds or head springs for the same: First (to vse his words) the authority, Maiestie, and verity of the scriptures: secondly the most certayne testimonyes of ancient Catholike Fathers: thirdly the definition of a Sacrament: fourthly the abhominable heresie of Eutiches, that may ensue of Transubstantiation: fifthly, the most sure beleefe of the article of our faith; he ascended into heauen, &c.
               
               25. These be Maister Ridleyes fiue bulwarks or castles of defence builded in the ayre, which he handleth so fondly and childishely, as after yow shall see in the particular examinations of his arguments. Only heere I will say in generall, that the reader shall find his authority,

maiestie, and verity of scriptures against Transubstantiation, to be a meere vaunt and vanity, for he hath no one cleere or substantiall place at all. And as for his certayne testimonyes of the ancient Fathers, they will proue so vncertaine for his purpose, as yow shall see them most certaynely against him. His third castle of the definition of a Sacrament, vvill proue a cottage of no strength at all, for that the true nature of a Sacrament standeth well vvith Transubstantiation. His fourth head springe about the heresie of Eutiches, will proue a puddle, and himselfe puzzeled therin, for that the heresie of Eutiches confoundinge two distinct natures in Christ, hath no more coherence vvith Transubstantiation, then Rochester with Rome. And finally his last ground about the article of Christs ascendinge into heauen, hath no ground to rest on, but is a meere imagination in the ayre, to witt, that for so much as Christ ascended into heauen, ergo there is no Transubstantiation.
               26. Wherefore to leaue this first question of Transubstantiation, and passe to the second of Ridleyes resolution about the sacrifice of the masse. sacrifice, vow must vnderstand, that when Maister Ridley had spent most of the time about Transubstantiation, he had little left concerning the sacrifice of the masse, but concluded his said determination in very few words thus: Now for the better conclusion (saith he) concerning the sacrifice, because yt dependeth vpon the first, I will in few 
                  Fox pag. 1262. 
                  vvords declare what I thinke. Two things do persuade me, that this conclusion (against the sacrifice of the

masse) is true, that is certayne places of scripture, and certayne testimonyes of the Fathers. Lo heere the graue and weighty motiues that Ridley had, to aduenture vpon so great a change in beleefe as this was, after so many yeares, being a Priest and Catholike Bishopp, and offeringe sacrifice after the manner of the Catholike Church, from the first day of our contreyes conuersion, vnto th'end of K. Henryes raigne. His motiues were, as yow heare, certayne places of the scripture, which were only taken out of the Epistle to the Hebrues, talkinge of Christs bloudy sacrifice on the crosse, which was but 
                     Hebr. 9. & 10. one, & certayne places of the Fathers, to witt, two or three misvnderstood out of S. Augustine, 
                  The miserable proceeding of Ridley.
                   and one out of Fulgentius, all which notwithstandinge proue nothinge for his purpose, as after yow shall see declared in their place, and turne. And the selfe same Fathers haue so many other cleere places to the contrary, as we will desire no better iudges for proofe of our Catholike cause, then yf Ridley would remitt himselfe to these two Fathers iudgements, by him cyted against vs; for that both of them do professe themselues to be Priests, and to offer externall sacrifice, vpon the Altar as our Priests do now.
               27. Consider then how wise and constant a man Ridley was, to leaue his ancient faith so generally receaued throughout all Christendome in his dayes, and so many yeares practised by himselfe, vpon two such motiues, as are certayne places of scripture misvnderstood by himselfe,

and certayne testimonyes of Fathers, that seemed to him to haue some difficulty. Which Ieuity vvas so displeasaunt vnto almighty God, as by the effects we see, that wheras at the beginning he seemed to doubt vpon these two motiues, leauinge other men to iudge therof, he became by little and little to be so obstinately blinded at length therin, as albeit some foure or fiue yeares after, he were openly conuicted in disputations at Oxford, as by his answers yow shall afterwards see, yet was he content to burne for the same, which was the highest degree of calamity that could fall vpon him, in body and soule. And thus much of him and his determination for the present.
            
            
               
                  Sixt Disputation. §. 6.
               28. In all the former disputations both at Oxford and Cambridge, yow shall find nothinge The sixt disputatiō at Cambridge by Bucer 1549. of friar Martyn Bucer, no not so much as that he is once named in all these conflicts, about the blessed Sacrament. And yet yow must remember, that he was principall reader of diuinity in Cambridge at this tyme, as Peter Martyr was in Oxford: and therfore as the first place was giuen to the said Peter in Oxford; so yt is likely, that the same would haue byn to Martyn in Cambridge, yf they had found him so pliable to their hands in his opinions about the Sacrament, as the other was; but in no case would he be induced as yet, to accommadate himselfe

therin, and therfore had he not any part Martyn Bucer in great distresse. allowed him in this comedy, eyther of defendant, opponent, disputer, counselour, moderator, assistant, or other office or imployment: nay yt is thought that he incurred so great disgrace about this matter, as he could willingly haue departed the realme againe, (as Bernardinus Ochinus vpon such like discontentment did from London) had not the necessity of his woman, and other impediments of pouerty letted him, not knowinge well whither to goe, as being expulsed from Argentina at his comming to England, as 
                     Mense Decemb. cap. 16. before we haue shewed in the story of his life.
               29. Wherfore resoluinge himselfe at length to passe ouer this mortification, and to giue our English Protestants some satisfaction, though not in the points which they desired, he thought it good after Ridleyes departure, to defend certayne other paradoxes, which Fox recordeth in these words: Ouer and besides these 
                  Fox pag. 1262 & 1263. 
                  disputations aboue mentioned, other disputations vvere holden in Cambridge shortly after by Martyn Bucer, vpon these conclusions followinge: First, that the canonicall bookes of scripture alone, do sufficiently teach the regenerate all things necessary belonginge to saluation. Secondly, there is no Church on earth that erreth not, as well in faith, as in manners. Thirdly we are so iustified freely of God, that before our iustification, 
                  The questions of Bucers disputatio. 
                  yt is sinne and prouoketh Gods wrath against vs, whatsoeuer good worke we seeme to do. Then being iustifyed, we do good works.
               
               30. These were Bucers conclusions, which

well I may call paradoxes, for that euen in the common sense & iudgement of euery meane capacity, the falsity and absurdity therof is apparant. For as touchinge the first, though we graunt, that the diuine books of scripture, yf they were fewer then they are (respectinge Gods holy prouidence) are sufficient to teach both regenerate and not regenerate (that beleeue the verity therof) the true way of saluation, and that the said diuine prouidence hath, doth, and will so prouide, that albeit some parts of these we now haue should be lost (as diuers others before haue byn) yet should the remnant still be sufficient to that purpose, with such other supplyes of Gods assistance as he would send; yet to say, as this man doth, that the canonicall bookes of scripture 
                  Hovv scriptures are sufficient to saluation. 
                  alone, do sufficiently teach all things belonginge to saluation; yf by alone he will exclude all other helpes of tradition, antiquity, testimony of the Church, interpretation of the Fathers, direction of generall Councells, and other like aydes, yt is a most absurd paradox; for neyther can we know which bookes are to be held canonicall, nor what they teach truly & sincerely, nor what may be deduced out of them; yf we remoue the former helpes; And the case is, as yf one of the Kings of our countrey goinge abroad, as some did to Hierusalem, or other forrayne warres, and intending to be longe absent, should leaue with his Councellors for their better gouernement certayne lawes wrytten with his owne hand, & other

directions by word of mouth how to proceed, A case representinge the heretiks of our dayes about cryinge for scriptures alone. interprett, and vse them, commaunding all men to obay them, and that some troublesome people after many yeares continuance in their gouernement, should appeale from them, to the Kings wrytten lawes only, prayinge the sufficiency therof (for better colou
                  
                     •
                  inge their pretence) and suinge that yt were 
                     •
                   blott vnto the said lawes, and to the Kings wisdome that made them, to acknowledge any insufficiency at all in them for perfect direction of the common welth, which lawes 
                     •
                  et, themselues would expound, as pleased them best for their owne purposes.
               
                  
                     •
                  1. In this case, who seeth not whervnto this practise tendeth, and for what causes so great prayses are giuen to the sufficiency of these lawes, vsed to make the praisers iudges of all, and to exempt them from all controlment of others? And the very same is seene in the other case of the scriptures, which being written by the spiritt and fingar of God himselfe, and deliuered vnto vs by the Church, whose commission also and authority in the same scriptures is sett downe, byndinge vs vnder 
                     Matt. 18. 1 Tim 3. Marc. vlt. Matt. 16. dlamnation to heare her from age to age as the pillar and firmament of truth, there stepp vp togeather diuers sorts of sectarves in all ages, & of this of ours, Lutherans, Zuinglians, Caluinists, Anabaptists, Trinitarians, and the like chalenged by the said Church of disobedience, and do all appeale ioyntly and seuerally from her, to only scriptures, praysinge highly the sufficiency,

and excellency therof, and refusinge all other meanes, eyther of tradition or ancient exposition, for vnderstandinge of the sense and true meaninge. And when we alleadge the Catholike Doctors and Pastors of euery age, as spirituall Gouernours and Conselors vnder God in the Church, for explaninge his diuine will and meaninge in this behalfe; they refuse all, and only will be interpreters and expositors themselues, and this not only against the Catho. Church, which they ought to obay, but one sect also against another for their particular opinions, and diuersityes, which by this meanes are made irreconciliable, and indeterminable, as experience teacheth vs. For when, I pray yow, will Luther & Zuinglius or their followers, come to any accord eyther with vs, or amongst themselues by only canonicall scriptures, expounded after each partyes particular spiritt, iudgement and affection? The like I may aske of Anabaptists & Arrians, English Protestants and Puritans, or of any other Sectaryes that yow can name vnto me, which neuer agreed by this way, nor euer will. And this is the first paradox of Martyn Bucer, that only scriptures are sufficient to teach euery man.
               32. The second is yet worse (yf worse may be) to witt; that there is no Church on earth, which 
                  The secōd paradox of Martyn Bucer.
                   
                  erreth not as well in faith as manners. Which yf yt be so, then erreth also in faith the true Church of Christ, and is a lyinge Church, and may lead vs into error and heresie. And of this yt

followeth againe, that we can haue no certainty of any thinge in this life, and that almighty God doth damne vs very vniustly for heresie, wherinto we may be brought by his true Church, and spouse, which on the other side, he hath commaunded vs to heare, and obay 
                  
                     Matt
                           •
                        . 18. 
                  vnder payne of damnation; yt followeth also that S. Paul did falsely call the Church, the pillar and 
                  1. Tim. 5. 
                  firmament of truth; for as much as yt may both deceaue and be deceaued. Christs promise also was false, when he assured his Church, that 
                  Marc. vlt. 
                  he would be with her by his spiritt of truth vnto the worlds end; and that, the gates of hell should not prevaile 
                  
                     Matth. 16. 
                  against her. All these absurdityes, impossibilityes and impietyes, do follow of this second paradox, besides infinite others, which any meane capacity may deduce of himselfe.
               33. The third paradox also is no lesse monstrous to common sense and reason, then the two former, to witt, that vvhatsoeuer good worke 
                  The third paradox of Martyn Bucer.
                   
                  any man doth, or may seeme to doe before iustification, a sinne, and prouoketh Gods wrath. But I would aske this new opiniatour or paradox-defender, how he would answere to that of Exodus, where yt is said of the Egyptian mid-wyues 
                     •
                   infidells no doubt) quia timuerunt obstetrices Deum, aedificauit illis domos. God gaue them aboundant 
                     Exod. 1. children, for that vpon feare of offendinge almighty God, they disobayed their King Pharao in sauinge the Hebrues children. doth God vse to reward sinne? or to prayse that which prouoketh his wrath? Againe, the Prophett Ezechiell sheweth vs how God did

temporally reward Nabuchodonozor and his army 
                     Ezech. 20. with the spoyle of Egypt, for that they had serued him faithfully in chastizinge of Tyrus. And S. Hierome vpon that place hath 
                     Hier. in Comment. in cap. 20. Ezech.
                   these words: By that Nabuchodonosor receaued this reward for his good worke, we learne that gentills also yf they do any good thinge, shall not leese their reward at Gods hands; and how can God be said to reward that which offendeth him? The Prophet Daniell also to the same Nabuchodonosor an infidell, gaue this counsell, peccata tua eleemosymis 
                  
                     Dan. 4. 
                  redime: redeeme thy synnes with almes, which he would neuer haue done, yf yt had byn a synne, & prouoked Gods wrath to giue almes, or to performe any such other morall vertue before iustification, especially being styrred & holpen thervnto by Gods especiall help, which may be before iustification, as Martyn Bucer in this paradox supposeth. And lastly not to stand any longer in this which is of it selfe so euident; I would aske friar Martyn, whether Cornelius the centurion being yet a gentile, did sinne and prouoke Gods wrath in prayinge, and giuinge almes before his conuersion? Yf he say yea (as needs he must accordinge to his doctrine) the text of scripture is against him, for the Angell said vnto him: Thy prayers and almes deeds, haue ascended vp, and haue byn called into remembrance in the sight of God▪
                   
                  
                     Act. 10. Vpon which words S. Augustine in diuers of his 
                     Aug. l. de pradestinat. sanct cap 7. & lib. 1. de Baptis c. 3. & l. 4. c. 23. works, doth call the said almes-deeds of Cornelius, before he beleeued in Christ, Iustice, and the gifts of God, which he would neuer haue

done, yf they had byn synnes, and prouoked Gods wrath, as this new-fangled friar hath taken vpon him to defend.
               34. And this shalbe sufficient for this sixt disputation of Martyn Bucer, which is fiue tymes as much, as Fox setteth downe of the same, for that he relateth only the time and place of the said dispute, togeather with the conclusions afore mentioned, & that Sedgewicke, Yonge, and 
                     
                        •
                     erne were opponents to Bucer therin; but all the rest he remitteth to a larger discourse at another tyme, supplyinge the breuity of this Bucerian disputation, with another dispute betweene custome and verity, which he calleth: A fruitfull dialogue, gathered out (saith Fox) Fox pag. 1263. 
                  
                     
                        •
                     f the Tractations of Peter Martyr, and other authors, 
                        ••
                      a certayne reuerend person of this realme, teachinge all men not to measure Religion by custome, but to try custome by truth, &c.
               
               
                  
                     •
                  5. And this was another diuise of those 
                     •
                  ayes of Innouations and noueltyes, to dazell 
                     ••
                  mple mens eyes, as though Custome and Veri
                     
                        ••
                     , 
                  An altercation betvveene custome & verity. the handmayd and maistresse, were so fallen out, that one impugned the other, & could not agree or stand togeather any longer, and consequently custome and antiquity, must needs 
                     •
                  ue place to nouelty; the fraud and folly of which diuise may in very few words be dis
                  
                     •
                  ouered, and their true frendshipp and agreement easily be declared; yea their in separable 
                     ••
                  herence to be such, as in our case of the con
                  
                     ••
                  ouersie about the reall presence (for in this 
                     ••
                  int they are made to braule and full out)

                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
they cannot possibly be separated. For yf verity in this matter haue not antiquity and custome with yt, yt is nouelty, and by consequence not verity at all. And on the otherside, custome in points of Christian faith and beleefe, yf yt be generall, and of long tyme (for otherwise yt cannot properly be called custome, in the subiect we handle) may not possibly be found in our Christian Church without verity, for that otherwise the whole Church should vniuersally admitt a falsity, & continue yt by custome, which to imagine were folly and madnesse, yea most insolen
                     •
                   madnes, yf vve beleeue S. Augustine, whose words are: Disputare contra id, quod tota per orbe
                        •
                     
                   
                  
                     Au
                           •
                        . epist. 118. ad Ia
                        
                           •
                        uer.
                   
                  frequentat Ecclesia, insolentissimae insaniae est. 
                  It is a most insolent madnes to dispute against that which the whole Church throughout the world doth practice. And he addeth in the same place, though it be not cōteined in the scriptures.
               
               36. Wherfore for Iohn Fox, and his reuerenc maister Nicolas Ridley, Peter Martyr and others to come out now with a dialogue or brauling altercation, betweene custome and verity about the matter of the Sacrament, and to seeke to sett them by the eares, or make a diuorse betweene them, for that custome had continue
                     •
                   from the beginning of our conuersion to that day without verity, was a very simple and rediculous diuise, & worthy Iohn Fox his wi
                     ••
                   
                  Custome and verity cannot be at odds in the Christian Church. and grauity, for by this he confesseth in effect that custome and antiquity was against him wherof we in this matter do rightly also inferre,

verity I say in this matter concerninge Christian faith and beleefe, receaued in the Church by custome and tradition of former ages, which our sauiour Christ did promise to assist with his spiritt of truth, whatsoeuer Fox or his fellowes may obiect, or we admitt, against Idolatry or other reprehensible customes of former tymes amongst the Iewes, gentills, nations, contreyes, and commonwelthes different from the Christian Church; all which had no such assurance of truth, for beginninge and continuinge their customes, as our Christian Church hath. And so much of this feigned fight, betweene custome and verity in Christian Religion; whatsoeuer arguments of moment are alleaged in the combatt betweene them about the reall presence, shalbe afterward handled in their due places. So as of this disputation and Martyn Bucers we shall make but one, to witt, the sixt.
            
            
               
                  Seauenth Disputation. §. 7.
               37. Hitherto are the publike disputations, recorded by Fox to haue byn held by Protestants, for establishinge and authorizinge their new religion vnder K. Edward, and all within the compasse of one yeare, to witt, 1549. there ensue now foure other, appointed some foure yeares after in the first of Q. Maryes raigne 1553. vvhich albeit they were vnder a Catholike gouernement, yet were they for giuinge satisfaction

only to Protestants of those dayes, The 7. disputation in the cō
                     nocation house armo 1553. when Catholike Religion was to be restored to th' end that the other might see their owne leuity in changinge the same. And the first of these disputations (being the seauenth in order) was held in the conuocation house, at Fox pag. 1284. 
                  S. Paules Church in London, begon (as Fox saith) vpon the 18. of October in the foresaid yeare, and during for six dayes togeather. The questions vvere the accustomed about the reall presence and Transubstantiation. The manner of disputinge was not in forme or after any fashion of schoole, but rather of proposinge doubts, and answeringe the same for satisfaction of them that were not resolued, and so much lesse then in the former was any thinge pursued to any point of triall. Doctor VVeston deane of VVestminster was chosen prolocutor, M. Doctor VVeston prolocutor. who protested in his preface (as Fox saith) that this conference vvas not held to call any points of Catholike Religion into doubt, but to solue such 
                  Fox ibid.
                   
                  scruples or doubts, as any man might pretend to haue.
               
               38. This conuocation consisted for the greatest part, of all those clergy-men that had borne rule in K. Edwards dayes, exceptinge Cranmer, Ridley, Latymer and Rogers, and I know not yf any other that were commytted before. And the first point that was handled therin, was about a certayne Caluinian Catechisme, sett forth a little before vnder the name of that conuocation, whervnto the prolocutor required subscriptions, to testifie that yt was not sett forth by their consents, meaninge,

as yt seemed, therby to conuince Ridley or Crammer, or both of false dealinge therin. The second point was of subscribing to the reall presence, whervnto all the whole house agreed (saith Fox) sauinge fiue or six, to witt, Maister Philips Deane of Rochester, Maister Haddon Deane of Exceter, Maister Philpott Archdeacon Six only of all the cō
                     uocation house refused to subscribe. of VVinchester, Maister Cheyney Archdeacon of Hereford, & Maister Elmour Archdeacon of Stow, and one other whome he nameth not, and by these were propounded all the doubts, that were there discussed: and as for the first two dayes, there was nothinge done at all, but a certaine communication. The third day came the Lord great-master, with the Earle of Deuonshire and diuers other noble men, and Cheiney afterward Bishopp of Glocester, who M. Cheiney. confessed the reall presence, but not Transubstantiation, proposed some doubts about the second point, which we shall afterwards examine in their place. The prolocutor appointed Doctor Moreman to aunswere him and the rest extempore, wherby we may ghesse how D. Moreman. substantiall a disputation yt was, for that the defendant came nothinge at all prepared. Pho
                     
                        •
                     ipps also proposed some what about the reall presence; Elmour and Haddon spake little vpon that day, though the next day Elmour, then M. Elmour Chaplaine to the Duke of Suffolke, and after Bishopp of London, read certayne authorityes but of a note-booke, which he had gathered against the reall presence.
               
                  
                     •
                  9. But of all other, the most busy was Philpott, 
                  M. Philpot.
                  
both that day, and the other followinge, vauntinge and chalenginge the whole company to dispute. Then quoth Philpott (saith Fox) I vvill speake playne English, the Sacrament of the Altar, which yee reckon to be all one with the masse; is no Sacrament at all, neyther is Christ any wise present in yt, and this his sayinge he offered to proue before the vvhole house, yf they listed to call him thervnto, and before the Queens grace, and her counsell, and before the face of six of the best learned men of the house of the 
                  Fox pag. 1285. 
                  contrary opinion, and refused none. And yf I shall not be able (quoth he) to maintayne by Gods word that I haue said, and confound those six which shall take vpon them to withstand me, in this point, let me be burned with as many sag gotts as be in London, before the court-gates, &c. This was Philpotts vaunt, and yet yf yee consider the poore arguments he brought forth in this conference, which afterwards shalbe discussed, togeather with his fond answers that he gaue in his 15. or 16. seuerall examinations, before the Bishopps of VVinchester, London, Chichester, Bangor and others (for so much payne was taken to saue him) yow will say that his B. Gardiner had reason, when he held him for more then halfe madd, Iohn Philpotis vaūt in the cō
                     uocation house. as in his story we haue related. Consider also, that his denying Christ to be present any wise in the Sacrament, is much different from that yow heard Maister Perne affirme before, by approbation of Maister Ridley the moderator, that Christs body was truly, wholy, and verily in the Sacrament after a certayne propriety; but these men must not be taken at their words.
               
                  
40. And finally, the conclusion of all this conference with Philpott was, that the prolocutor in the end, seing him out of all reason to trouble the house, layed two comaundements vpon him; the first that he should not come thither any more, vnlesse he came in gowne and typpett, as the others came: the second, that he should not speake but in order, and with licence as the rest did; whose aunswere Fox relateth in these words: then quoth Philpott 
                  Fox ibid.
                   
                  I had rather be absent altogeather, so insufferable was all order, or temperate manner of proceedinge to this disorderly man; and so Q. Mary sent a wryte the next day to dissolue the conuocation: And such as had disputed (saith Fox) on the contrary part, were driuen, some to sly, some to deny, and some to dye, though to most mens iudgements, that heard the disputation, they had the vpper hand, &c. These are hereticall bragges, as yow will better see afterwards when we come to examining of arguments. And as for dyinge, none of the forsaid disputers died, to our knowledge, but only Philpott in his madd moode; Cheyney, Elmour, and Haddon gott Bishopricks, & other dignityes vnder Q. Elizabeth. And so much of this disputation in the conuocation house.
            
            
               
                  Eight, ninth, and tenth Disputation. §. 8.
               41. These last three disputations I do ioyne togeather, for that they were held successiuely

in Oxford vpon three seuerall dayes in the moneth of Aprill, anno 1554. with Cranmer, Ridley, and Latymer vpon the forsaid three questions Three disputatiōs in Oxford against Cranmer, Ridley and Latymer.
                   of the reall presence, Transubstantiation, and the sacrifice of the masse. The names (saith Fox) of the vniuersity Doctors and graduates, appointed to dispute against them vpon the said questions, were these of Oxford, Doctor VVeston prolocutor, Doctor Tressam, Doctor Cole, Doctor Oglethorpe, 
                  Fox pag. 
                     
                        •
                     299. 
                  Doctor Pye, Maister Harpesfield, Maister Fecknam. Of Cambridge, Doctor Yonge Vice Chauncelour, Doctor Glynn, Doctor Seton, Doctor VVatson, Doctor Sedgewicke, and Doctor Atkinson, to witt six of each vniuersity, all meeting at Oxford togeather to this effect. Thus farre Fox; who describeth also the manner and forme of this disputation, much more reasonable, orderly & indifferent, then all the former disputations vnder the Protestants, yf we beleeue Fox himselfe, who saith; that in the middle of the Doctors, there were appointed foure to be exceptores argumentorum, wryters of the arguments (to vse his Fox ibid. words) and a table sett in the middest, and foure notaryes sittinge with them; So as by his relation there were eight indifferent men chosen to register whatsoeuer passed: yet yf he relate truly, the manner of arguinge, was not so orderly and schoolelike as might haue byn, wherby yt came to passe, that scarce any argument The indifferēt dealinge of Cath. in their disputation was prosecuted to the end; and the answeringe was such, as comonly was wholy from the purpose, as by diuers examples, yow shall see afterwards declared; as also we shall

examine what arguments Cranmer could alleage against the reall presence, vpon the fourth day of disputation, to witt the next day after Latymer had ended. For that Doctor Harpesfield answeringe for his degree, defended the question of the reall presence, and Maister Cranmer was courteously inuited to the said disputation, and suffered to say what he would or could against that verity, & was fully answered; notwithstandinge Fox will needs beare vs in hand to the contrary, as his fashion is.
               42. And wheras the said Doctor Harpesfield in his preface, did much commend the diligent readinge of scripture with prayer, and conferring one place with another, but yet said that this was no secure way or meane, for euery particular man to resolue himselfe of the sense therof, but must rather beleeue the body of the Catholike Church therin, then his owne 
                     •
                  udgement. Fox saith that Maister Cranmer in The foolish reprehentiō vsed by Cranmer & Fox.
                   his reply reprehended that direction, sayinge: vvheras yow referre the true sense & iudgement of the scriptures to the Catholike Church, as iudge therof, yow are much deceaued, &c. And Fox himselfe addeth this marginall note: Yf Maister Harpesfield (when he saith we must not follow our owne heads and senses, 
                        •
                     ut giue ouer our iudgement to the holy Catholike Church) had willed vs to submitt our selues to the holy Ghost he had said much better. So Iohn. But I Fox pag. 1326. would aske him, who shalbe iudge what the holy Ghost teacheth vs? For that is the question. For yf a particular man readinge the scripture with prayer, and conferringe place

with place only, may be presumed to attayne therby the true meaninge of the holy Ghost (which notwithstanding cannot be certayne, for that an heretike may vse the same meanes) how much more may the vniuersall body of the Church, vsing the selfe-same meanes also, as many of her learned members no doubt do; how much more, I say, may shee be thought and presumed to attayne to the true sense of the holy Ghost, seing that she hath a speciall promise of his infallible assistance to that effect, which particular men haue not, though heretiks are wont proudly to presume thereof? And so yow shall see yt appeare also in these disputations, when we come to discusse the particulars.
               43. And heere it is to be noted, that presently vpon the end of this Oxford disputation, vnder Q. Mary, it was reported, that others should be held at Cambridge betweene the Doctors of that vniuersity, and the residue of the Protestant preachers that were in prison; wherof they being aduertised by the warninge of Doctor Ridley, as yt seemeth by Fox, and castinge Fox pag. 1336. their heads togeather vpon the matter, determined to refuse all disputation, except it were before the Queene and priuy Councell, or before The Protestāt Ministers excuse them solues frō disputation. the houses of parlament, to which effect they sett sorth a publike wrytinge and protestation, with certayne reasons of excuses mouinge them thervnto, subscribed by Hooper, Farrar, Taylor, Philpott, Bradford, Rogers, Saunders, and some others. And their cheefe excuse was,

for that matters had byn determined by parlament before they were disputed of, not consideringe that in K. Edwards dayes, the same course with farre lesse reason was held and determined by Parlament, before the Protestants disputations in Cambridge.
            
            
               
                  Of diuers other Disputations held besides these ten. §. 9.
               44. These ten disputations I thought good to sett downe, for that they were held vpon the first chaunges of Religion in England, within the space of 4. or 5. yeares, as before hath byn said: diuers others I do passe ouer, The disputation of K. Henry vvi
                        •
                     h Lambert.
                   though some of them were as sollemne as these; as that of K. Henry the 8. against Lambert, vvherin Doctor Cranmer disputed for the reall presence, and the Lord Cromwell gaue sentence against him, as we haue shewed 
                     Sup 
                           ••
                        p. 14 di
                           •
                        
                      4. Octob.
                   before in Lamberts story. That also which was held on pretended in the beginninge of the raigne of Q Elizabeth at Westminster, betweene nyne persons of the Catholike parte, and as many of the Protestant preachers newly come from beyond the seas. Those of the Catholike side were siue Bishopps, to witt Doctor Iohn VVhite Bishopp of VVinchester, Doctor Baynes of Lichsield, Doctor Scott of Chester, Doctor Oglethorpe or Carliele, Doctor VVatson of Lincolne, with foure other Doctors adioyned vnto them, Doctor Cole
                  
Deane of London, Doctor Langedale Archdeacon of Lewis, Doctor Harpesfield Archdeacon of A pretended disputation in the beginninge of Q. Elizabethes raigne anno 1559. 
                  Canterbury, and Doctor Chadsey Archdeacon of Middlesex. And for the Protestant parte, were Doctor Scory an Apostata friar, & Doctor Cox before mentioned, that fledd the realme vnder Q. Mary, with whome ioyned M. VVhitehead, M. Grindall, M. Horne, M. Sandes, M. Ghest, M. Elmour, and M. Iewell, all freshly come from beyond the seas, who all, except some one or two, were soone after for their good demeritts, made Bishopps, and accommodated by thrustinge out the other, in reward of this disputation, wherin notwithstanding there was not one argument made, nor solution giuen, but only an ostentation sought to effectuate that with some colour, which otherwise was determined before, and lacked but a pretence, for that the Queene and those that were nearest about her, hauinge determined to make a change of Religion, thought they should do yt best, and most iustifiable, yf they promised some name of disputation, wherin the Catholiks had byn satisfied or vanquished; to which end, there were so many shifts, partialityes, and diuises vsed, and so many iniuryes offered to the Bishops of the Catholike party, as they thought good vpon the second dayes meetinge, to passe on no further, except more reason or indifferency vvere vsed towards them.
               45. For first, in this disputation summoned & denounced throughout the whole realme,

by order of the Queene and Councell, Syr Nicolas Bacon lately made Lord Keeper, tooke vpon him to be president, and cheefe moderator, The great inequality & iniuryes offered in this pretē
                     ded disputation. whome all men knew to be one of the greatest aduersaryes to Catholike Religion, that was in England, violent in condition, and vtterly ignorant in matters of diuinity. Secondly the questions appointed to be disputed on, were not chosen nor assigned by the said Bishopps, but by the same Syr Nicolas and his adherents in the name of the Councell, at the instance or pleasure of the Protestant new pretenders, wherof when the Bishopps complayned, the Lord Keeper answered: the questions are neyther of their (to witt the Protestants) propoundinge, 
                  Fox page 1924. 
                  nor of your diuise, but offered indifferently to 
                        •
                     ow both.
               
               46. The questions were three, first vvhether yt were against Godsword, and the custome of the primitiue 
                  Three questions to small purpose. 
                  Church, to vse a tongue vnknowne to the people in common prayer, and administration of Sacraments. The second, vvhether euery Church had authority to appoint, take away, and change ceremonyes and Ecclesiasticall rites, so the same be to edification. Thirdly whether yt can be proued by the word of God, that there is offered vp in the masse a sacrifice propitiatory for the quicke, and the dead: VVhich questions vvere to be handled (saith Fox) in the presence of the Queenes 
                  Fox pag. 1919. 
                  Councell, Nobility, and other of the parlament house, for the better satisfaction and enablinge of their iudgements, to treat and conclude of such lawes as might depend heerevpon. By which words you may easily conceaue what the drift of this pretended disputation

was, and how guilefully these questions were chosen, and sett downe, yf yow marke their words and sense, especially the former two, which only or principally were to be handled, and how impertinent these questions were to the great moment of the whole matter and sequele, that was to ensue therof, which was no lesse then the vniuersall change of the whole body of Catholike Religion, throughout the realme.
               47. This then was the first hereticall fraud in appointinge this disputation, and the questions to be disputed, but they were many Diuers frauds. more and greater in the prosecution therof; for first the Catholike cleargy lackinge their 1. cheife head, which was the Archbishopp of Canterbury lately dead, the other Archbishopp of Yorke, to witt, Doctor Heath was entertayned with feyre words for a time, to effectuate with his brethren, what the Protestant party of the Conncell should thinke expedient▪ whervpon he being Chancelour yet in name, though the effect of his office was giuen to Syr Nicolas Bacon, vnder the little of Lord Keeper, he was brought into the place of disputation, and sate in his roome amongst other Councellours, togeather with the Duke of Norfolke, & other of the nobility as one of them, and rather against the Bishops, then for them, (though no doubt the good man meant yt not so) then was yt appointed to the said Catholike 2. Bishopps by the Archbishopp, in name of the Councell, only two dayes before their

meetinge at the conference (for so complayneth Fox pag. 1923. col. 1. num. 1. the Bishop of Lincolne in the second dayes meetinge) that both they, to witt the Bishops, should begin to say what they could for themselues, & the Protestant preachers should answere them. And secondly that the conference should be in English and not in Latyn; and thirdly, that yt should not be by way of arguinge or disputinge, but only of speach or 3. readinge yt out of some booke or paper: All which three points seeminge indignityes to Three indignityes o
                        ••
                     ered vnto the Bishops. the Bishopps, they complayned greeuously therof at their first publike meetinge, which was in VVestminster Church vpon the last of March 1559. being friday; and Bishop VVhite of VVinchester being the first to speake for his side, said that they were ready to dispute & argue, but had not their wrytinge ready to be read there, but would do it at their next meeting: yet for giuinge some satisfaction, Doctor Cole extempore alleaged some breife reasons concerninge D. Col
                        •
                     . the former questions or propositions, reseruinge the rest vnto their fuller booke or wrytinge.
               48. But heerevpon presently the Protestant preachers came out with their booke, or inuectiue against Latyn seruice, fraught with a vayne shew of many allegations, Scriptures, Fathers, Councells, and Constitutions of Emperors, sounding as it might seeme somewhat to their party, though nothing at all in truth, yf yow examine them, as they ly in Fox himselfe, An ostentation of the Protestant side. but with this ostentation they sought to

get the applause of the people, & heerby well declared that they had more then two dayes warninge to prepare themselues; and albeit when this was done, the Bishops offered to refute all the same cleerely at the next metinge, yet could they not be heard or permitted, as presently we shall shew, but that this must needs stand for the whole resolution in the first questiō. And Fox like one of his kind, seeketh to preuent the matter in these words: The same being reade (to witt the wryting of the Protestant party) vvith some likelyhood as it seemed 
                  Fox pag. 1922. 
                  that the same was much allow able to the audience, certayne of the Bishopps began to say, contrary to their former aunswere, that they had now much more to say in this matter, vvherin although they might vvell haue byn reprehended; yet for auoydinge of any more mistakinge, and that they should vtter all they had to say, yt was ordered that vpon munday followinge, the Bishopps should bringe their mynd and reasons in vvryting to the second assertion, and to the last also ys they could, and first read the same, and that done the other part should bring likewise theirs, &c.
               
               49. Lo heere the indifferency that was vsed; the Bishopps are accused of cauillation, that they offered to aunswere in wrytinge to the Protestants libell, which is not only denyed them, but yt is ordayned also, that after other Open inequality. two dayes, they should bringe in whatsoeuer they haue to say to the second and third questions, and readinge yt first, giue their aduersaryes leaue to triumphe in the second place, as they had done vpon the first question the day

before. But vpon munday, when all the assembly was sett, the Bishopps stood firmely vpon this, that they would first read publikely their owne vyrytinge, vvhich there they brought with them vpon the first question of Latyn seruice, in answere to that of the Protestants at the last meeting, but in no case would yt be graunted them. Fox relateth the Altercation thus.
               50. VVinchester. I am determyned for my part, that there shalbe now read that, vvhich vve haue to say 
                  Altercatiō of the Bishops vvith Syr Nicolas Bacon.
                   
                  for the first question.
               
               L. Keeper. VVill yow not then proceed in the order appointed yow?
               
               Winchester. VVe should suffer preiudice, yf yow permitt vs not to treat of the first question first, and so vve vvould come to the second, and I iudge all my brethren are so mynded.
               
               Bishopps. VVe are all so determyned.
               
               
                  L. Keeper. Yow ought to looke vvhat order is appointed yow to keepe, &c.
               Winchester. Syth our aduersaryes part haue so confirmed their assertion, we suffer preiudice yf yow permitt vs not the like.
               
               Lincolne. VVe are not vsed indifferently, sithen 
                        •
                     ow allow vs not, to open in present vvrytinge that, vve 
                        •
                     aue to say for declaration of the first question, &c. for that vvhich Maister Cole spake in this late assembly, 
                  The resolute speach of D. VVatson B. of Lincolne.
                   
                  
                     
                        •
                     as not prepared to strengthen our cause, but he made 
                        •
                     is oration of himselfe extempore, &c. VVe are all euill ordered as touchinge the tyme, our aduersaryes 
                        •
                     art hauinge warninge longe before, and we were war
                     
                        •
                     ed only two dayes before the last assembly in this place,

and vvith this busines and other trouble, we haue byn dryuen to be occupied the whole last night, for we may in no case betray the cause of God nor will not do, but susteyne it to the vttermost of our power, but heervnto vve vvant presently indifferent vsinge, &c.
               L. Keeper. I am vvillinge and ready to heare yow, after the order taken for yow to reason therin, and further or contrary to that, I cannot deale vvith yow.
               
               Lichfield. Let vs suffer no disorder heerin, but be heard vvith indifferency.
               
               51. Thus went on that contention, wherof I omitt much for breuityes sake; but by this little, so partially declared by Fox, as may be immagined, and appeareth also by diuers circumstances, yow may ghesse how the matter passed, and which part had more reason. At the length, the Archbishop of Yorke, knowing belike that this standinge of the Bishopps would not preuaile against designements, already made by the Queene and Councell in disgrace of the Catholike cause, willed the Bishopps ro giue ouer in this matter, and to passe to the second question. But then began a new strife, which party should first begin to speake in this question also, the Bishops affirminge both in respect they had begonne the other day, and that the Protestant party was plaintife or accusant, they should begin, and the Bishopps would answere, but this in no case would be graunted, but that the Bishops must begin againe, and the other haue the last word as before: which indignity the Bishop of Lichfield being not well able to beare, requested

humbly the Lords there present, that they might dispute, and try first which party was Catholike and of the Catholike Church, for that therby would appeare who had right to the first or second place of speach, and being somewhat earnest therin, spake to M. Horne in these words as Fox relateth.
               52. Lichfield. Maister Horne, Maister Horne, there 
                  Another altercatiō vvith the L. Keeper. 
                  are many Churches in Germany, I pray yow vvhich of these Churches are ye of?
               
               Horne. I am of Christs Catholike Church.
               
               L. Keeper. Yow ought not thus to runne into wandringe talke of your owne inuentinge, &c.
               Lichfield. Nay vve must first go thus to vvorke vvith them yf vve vvill search a truth: these men come in and pretend to be doubtfull, therfore they should first bringe vvhat they haue to impugne, &c.
               Winchester. Lett them begin, so vvill vve go onward.
               
               Chester. They speakinge last vvould depart cum applausu populi, &c. surely vve thinke yt meete that they should for their parts giue vs place.
               
               Lichfield. Yea that they should and ought to do, vvhere any indifferency is vsed.
               
               Elmour. VVe giue yow place, do vve not? I pray yow begin.
               
               L. Keeper. Yf yow make this assembly gathered in vayne, and vvill not go to the matter, lett vs rise vp and depart.
               
               Winchester. Contented, lett vs be gone: for vve vvill not in this point giue ouer. And so finally after some other like altercation, Bacon dissolued the assembly with this threat.
               
                  
L. Keeper. My Lords, for that yow vvill not, that vve shall heare yow, you may chaunce shortly to heare of vs. So he. And this hearinge was; that soone after (saith Stow) the Bishopps of Lincolne and Winchester vvere sent to the Towar, and the rest 
                  
                     Stovv anno Domini 1559. 
                  bound to make dayly, and personall appearance before the Councell, and not to depart the Citty of London and VVestminster, vntill further order vvere taken vvith them for their disobedience and contempt.
               
               53. And this was the issue of the first disputation The issue of this disputation vvith the Bishops. vnder Q. Elizabeth, vvherof presently there was a booke printed and published, accordinge to the fashion of the new Doctors, giuinge the victory to the Protestants, and ouerthrow to the Cath. Bishopps, who yet, as yow see, were neuer permitted to propose any one argument, or reason in due place and tyme.
               54. And with this shall we end our narration of publike disputations, omitting many more priuate and particular, as the conference of Ridley, and Secretary Burne, Doctor Fecknam, and others in the towar, in the beginninge of Q. Maryes 
                  Fox pag. 1297. raigne: The colloquy of the foresaid Fecknam, with the Lady Iane in the same place; the particular conferences and examinations of Hooper, Farrar, Taylour, Rogers, Philpott, Smyth, Bradford, Tyms, Saunders, Blandford, and others of the learneder sort of Protestants, but many more of craftesmen, artificers, weomen, and such like of the ignorant sort, in the Bishopps consistoryes and other places: Out of which also we shall reduce the summe of the principall

arguments or answers, yf yt be different from the rest, when we come afterward to their due places.
               55. And now all this being seene and considered, the reader will easily discerne, what ground of certainty may be drawne from all these disputations, altercations, and conferences, to found theron the security of his soule in beleeuing, as the Protestants doe: yea and yeldinge themselues to the fire for yt, as many did in Q. Maryes dayes, vpon the fame The inference vpō these disputatiōs. and creditt of the forsaid disputations, which yet many of them vnderstood not, nor euer heard or read, but most of all were not able to resolue themselues by them, yf they had heard, read, or vnderstood them, but only in generall they rested themselues vpon this point, that the Protestants were learned men, and had gotten the victory in disputations against the Catholiks, for that so yt was told them. And this they thought sufficient for their assurance.
               56. But now on the contrary side, yf a man would oppose to these ten publike disputations before recyted, ten learned Councells of the Catholike Church, that disputed, examined, and condemned this heresie of theirs against the reall presence, vvithin the space of these last 600. yeares, since Berengarius first began Ten councells examined & confirmed the doctrine of the reall presence.
                   yt, as namely those foure named by Lanckfranke, to witt, that of Rome vnder Leo the 9. and another of Versells vnder the same Pope; the third at Towars in France vnder Pope Victor
                  
successor to Leo, the fourth at Rome againe vnder Pope Nicolas the second; In all which Berengarius himselfe was present, and in the last, not only abiured, but burnt his owne booke. And Laufrane. contra Berengarium. after this, six other Councells to the same effect, the first at Rome vnder Gregory the 7. where Berengarius againe abiured, as 
                     VVald. tom. 2. de Sacram. cap. 43. 
                  VValdensis testifieth: The second of Lateran in Rome also vnder Innocentius the third: the generall Councell of Vienna; the fourth at Rome againe vnder Pope Iohn the 22. the fifth at Constance, and the sixt at Trent. All these Councells (I say) yf a man consider with indifferency of what variety of learned men they consisted, of what singular piety and sanctity of life, of how many nations, of what dignity in Gods Church, how great diligence they vsed to discusse this matter, what prayer, what conferringe of scriptures, and other meanes they vsed, and with how great consent of both Greeke and Latyn Church conforme to all antiquity, they determined and resolued against the opinion of Protestants in our dayes; he will easily discouer, how much more reason, and probability of security there is, of aduenturinge his soule of the one side then of the other, which yet he will better do, by contemplation of the vanity of new Protestants arguments and obiections, against so ancient founded and continued a truth. Which obiections we shall examine in the Chapters followinge. And so much for this.
            
         
         
            
            THE STATE OF THE CHIEFE QVESTIONS handled in the forsaid disputations, Concerninge the reall presence, Transubstantiation, and the Sacrifice of the Masse, vvith the chiefe groundes that be on eyther side. CHAP. II.
            THE questions that were most treated, and vrged on both sides, at the two changes of Religion vnder K. Edward and Q. Mary, were principally three, all concerninge the Sacrament of the Altar, as before hath byn shewed: The first about the reall presence of Christ in the said Sacrament: the second concerninge the manner of his being there by Transubstantiation: and the third about the same as it is a Sacrifice. Which three points of Catholike doctrine being left by K. Henry the 8. standinge in vigour, as he had found them deliuered, and preserued by all his ancestours Kings of England, from the beginninge of our conuersion vnto Christian Religion, they were all changed within two yeares after the said Kings death, by authority of his sonne, being then somewhat lesse then a dozen yeares ould, and by

force of a certayne act of parlament, confirmed by his name intituled: An act for the vniformity 
               See the booke of statutes an. 2 & 3. Edou. 6. 
               of seruice and administration of Sacraments, &c. Which act though in shew yt conteyned nothinge els, but the admission and approbation of a certayne new booke of Common-prayer and administration of Sacraments (for so are the words of the Statute) gathered togeather by Cranmer, Ridley, and some others of the same humor, yet for that in this new communion booke, togeather with many other articles of auncient beleefe, these three also of the reall presence, Transubstantiation, and Sacrifice were altogeather altered, and a new manner of faith therin taught, yt was giuen forth that all was established and setled by Parlament: and for that Hovv disorderly Catholike Religion vvas ouerthrovvne in K. Edvvards dayes. this collection of new articles of beleefe, passed, as you haue heard, in a bundell or fardell shuffled vp togeather in hast, vnder the name of a reformed booke of Common-prayer, without any great examination or dispute about the particulars, but in generall only takinge voyces in the parlament house, as well of laymen as other learned and vnlearned, whether the booke should passe, or noe; wherin the L. Seymour Protector and his crew, hauing the Kings authority in their hands, and gettinge Cranmer and Ridley on their sides for loue of weomen, and other preferment, easily preuayled, as by the statute yt selfe may appeare: yt was thought expedient, as before hath byn noted, that presently after the statute published, two meanes should be vsed for authorizinge

and better creditinge the same. The one by persuasion of diuers meetings, conferences, and disputations of the learneder sort, which before yow haue heard related; and the other by imprisonment & depriuing such Bishops, and other cheefe Ecclesiasticall persons, as should shew themselues most forward or able to resist this course, which they began with VVinchester, Durham, and London: And thus passed they on for those 4. or 5. yeares that remained of K. Edwards raigne after this change, wherein notwithstandinge, almighty God shewed wonderfully his hand of iudgement and punishment soone after, vpon the principall authors of this innouation both spirituall & temporall; as of the later, both the Seamours, Northumberland, Suffolke, and diuers of their followers; of the former Cranmer, Ridley, Hooper, Latymer, & the like, as to the world is euident.
            2. For vpon this followed the raigne of Q. Mary for other 4. or 5. yeares, who seeing so The entrance of Q. Mary.
                pittifull a breach made in the realme by this vnlucky alteration, she as a zealous Catholike Princesse, endeauored to restore the old faith and Religion againe, to the former vnity of the vniuersall Church, and close vp the wound that had byn made, vsinge to this effect the selfe same meanes of instruction and correction, by arguments and punishments, but in different manner, and with farre vnlike iustice of proceeding. For that the arguments were the very same, which euer had byn vsed by ancient Fathers, against old heretiks in the

like controuersies: and the punishments were no other then such, as auncient Ecclesiasticall Cannons did prescribe, and were vsed only towards them, that eyther had byn cheefe authors of the innouations, or stood so obstinately in defence therof, as by no meanes they could be recalled.
            3. Now then yt is to be considered, which of these two sorts of people had more ground or reason, either those, that withstood the first change in K. Edwards dayes, which was from the old accustomd Religion to a new: or those that resisted the second change or exchange vnder Q. Mary, which was nothinge els indeed but a returne from the new to the ould againe. And heerby will appeare the state of the controuersie vvhich now vve are to handle. For as for the first sort, to witt Catholiks, the historicall state of their controuersie The state of the cō
                  trouersie in three questions. is manifest, concerninge these three questions about the Sacrament; for that no man can deny, but that the doctrine of the first, and third, which is the reall presence, and Sacrifice, had byn receaued and held for true throughout England, (wherein concurred also the vvhole Christian vvorld abroad) from the tyme before by me prefixed of our first conuersion, and more, euen from the Apostles dayes: neyther could any tyme be appointed, or memory brought forth, when, how, or by whome, the said doctrines had their beginnings in England, or els where, which accordinge to S. Augustines rule, and diuers particular

demonstrations layd downe by vs before, in Aug. l. 2. de baptis. e. 7. l. 4 e. 6. & 24. & l. 5 c. 23. the first part of the Treatise of three Conuersions, doth euidently couuince, that they came from Christ, and his Apostles themselues; vvhich ought to be sufficient, though no other proofes of Scriptures, Fathers, Doctors, and Councells could be shewed in particular for the same, as may be almost infinite, and some yow shall heare a little after in this Chapter.
            4. And as for the second question of Transubstantiation, though yt be but a certayne appendix of the first, about the manner how Christ is really in the Sacrament, as Sup. cap. praeced. before hath byn shewed, & was not so particularly declared, and defined by the Church in this very tearme of Transubstantiation, vntill some 400. 
                  anno 1215. yeares gone in the generall Councell of Lateran, (as neyther the doctrine of homusion or consubstantiality 
               The names of cōsubstantiality, of Mother of God, and Transubstanriatiō, determined after one manner. was, vntill 300. yeares after Christ in the Councell of Nice, neyther the dignity of theotoces, wherby the blessed Virgin is called the Mother of God, vntill the Councell of Ephesus aboue 400. yeares after Christ:) yet was the same doctrine euer true before from the beginninge, and vttered by the Fathers in other equiualent words & speaches, of changes, and Transmutations of natures, conuersions of substances, and the like; and when there had not byn such other euident proofes extant for the truth therof; yet the consent and agreement of so great and vniuersall a Councell of Christendome, as the said Lateran was, wherin

both the Greeke and Latyn Church agreed; and after great and longe searche by readinge, disputinge, prayinge, conferringe of Scriptures and Fathers, and other such meanes, concluded this doctrine to be truth: Yf there had byn (I say) nothinge els for English Catholiks to rest vpon in this point, but the generall consent, and agreement of so learned, holy, and venerable an assembly; yt might iustly seeme sufficient in the sight of an indifferent or reasonable man to weygh, and ouerweygh, against the particular iudgements of all the innouators of any age to the contrary; and so no maruayle, though they stood so earnest against that innouation, this being the state of the controuersie on their part.
            5. But now for the Protestants, the state of their question was farre different. For first, wheras Martyn Luther about the 9. or 10. yeare The state of the question for the Protestants. of K. Henryes raigne, had begon some noueltyes about the second and third question of Transubstantiation and Sacrifice, holding still the first of the reall presence for firme, and that three of his first schollers Oecolampadius, Carolstadius, and Zuinglius full sore against his will, takinge occasion of his innouations, had added others of their owne, about the said first question, denyinge the reall presnce, though in different sorts: and that after them againe Iohn Caluyn a French-man, had diuised a third manner of beleefe therin, not a little different from them all about the said doctrine, both affirminge & denyinge the reall presence in different manner

and sound of words: yt seemed good to our English Protestants at that tyme, or the more part therof, to choose the last and newest opinion of all, and to establish yt by parlament, banishinge ther vpon the ould faith, that euer vntill that day had byn held and beleeued in our countrey, as well by themselues as others.
            6. And thus came in the first new Religion 
                  •
               nto England, by some shew of publike authority, which being sett forth with so great applause, Motiues that drevv in nevv Religion. and ostentation both of publike disputations, colloquyes, conferences, lectures, preachings, exposition of scriptures, and consent of Parlament, as yow haue heard, did partly by this outward shew and ostentation of authority, partly by the pleasinge face of 
                  •
               ouelty yt selfe, and sweet freedome that yt brought from all former Ecclesiasticall discipline, so infect, and enchaunt the harts, iudgements, & affections of diuers of the common people, and some also of the learned, (but the 
                  •
               ighter, and more licentious sort) as afterward vvhen Q. Mary came to take accoumpt, and vvould recall them againe to the station vvhich they had forsaken; they chose rather of 
                  •
               ride and obstinacy, to suffer any thinge, yea 
                  •
               o dye, and go to the fire, then to renounce these new fancyes once fastened vpon them: 
                  •
               nto which pertinacity the fame of the forsaid Protestants disputations, did not a little animate them; for that yt was giuen out generally (and so doth Fox stand stiffely in the same) that the Sacramentaryes had the vpper hand

in all, as well against the Lutherans in the first question of reall presence, as against the Catholiks in that and all the rest: vvhich bragg how vayne yt was, will appeare after when we come to examine their arguments in particular.
            7. But yet before we come to that, two other points seeme expedient to be performed, for better direction of the readers vnderstandinge in these high misteryes of our faith: the first to see what sure grounds the Catholiks had, and haue at this day to stand firme, and immoueable in their old beleefe about these articles, notwithstandinge any plausible or deceytfull arguments of sense and reason, that may be brought against them; & secondly certayne obseruations, wherby the force or rather fraud of hereticall obiections may be discouered, which so beguyled many simple people in Q. Maryes dayes, and made them runne headlonge to their perdition; the first of these points I shall handle in this Chapter: the second in the next that followeth.
            
               
                  Catholike groundes of these three articles, and first of the reall presence. §. 1.
               8. The first ground that Catholike men haue of these, and all other misteryes of Christian

faith that are aboue the reach of common sense and reason, is the authority of the Catholike Church, by which they were taught the same: as points of faith reuealed from God. And this is such a ground, as we see by experience, that the most part of people of what Religion soeuer, being yonge or vnlearned, can yeld no other reason in effect, why they beleeue this or that article of theire faith, but for that they receaued the same from their Church and teachers therof, being not able themselues to searche out any other grounde therof: yea the most learned of all from their infancy, tooke all vpon this assurance only of their Church, which Church yf they held to be of infallible authority, so as she can neither be deceaued nor deceaue (as we do of the Catholike) then should they rest firme & sure in their opinion vpon this ground; but yf they hould that all Churches may erre, and bringe into error both in doctrine, and manners, as yow haue heard Martyn Bucer hold before in his Cambridge conclusions, and most sectaryes 
                     Sup. cap. 1. of our tyme do follow him in that assertion, then can they haue no ground or certainty this way, but each man and woman must seeke other grounds and proofes, and stand vpon their owne iudgements for triall of the same, which how well the most part of people can do, being eyther yonge, simple, vnlearned, or otherwayes so busyed in other matters, as they cannot attend thervnto, euery man of meane discretion will consider, and

consequently they must needs be said both to liue and dye, vvithout any ground of their faith at all, but proper opinion, and so perish euerlastingely.
               9. The famous Doctor S. Augustine handleth this matter in a speciall booke to his frend Honoratus deceaued by the Manichies, as himselfe also sometymes had byn, and he intituleth his booke De vtilitate credendi: of the profitt that 
                     Aug. tom. 6. commeth to a man by beleeuing the Church, and points of faith therin taught, without demaundinge reason or proofe therof, which the Manichies derided, and said that they required nothinge to be beleeued of their followers, but that which first should be proued to them by good proofe and reason, and not depend only of mens creditt: but the holy Father scorneth this hereticall bragg and oftentation of theirs, and commendeth highly the contrary custome of simple beleeuinge vpon the creditt of the Catholike Church, for that otherwise infinite people should haue no faith at all, and exhorteth his frend Honoratus to take the same course; first to beleeue, and after to seeke the reason. His discourse is this: Fac nos nunc primum quaerere, cuinam Religioni, animas nostras, 
                  
                     Aug. lib. de vtil. cred. tom. 6. cap. 7. 
                  &c. 
                  Suppose that we now first of all did seeke, vnto what Religion we should commit our soules to be purged and rectified; without all doubt we must begin with the Catholike Church, for that she is the most eminent now in the world, there being more Christians in her, at this day, then in any other Church of

Iewes, and Gentills put togeather: And albeit amongst these Christians, there may be sects and heresies, and all of them would seeme to be Catholiks, and do call others besides themselues heretiks: yet all graunt, that yf we consider the whole body of the world, there is one Church amongst the rest more eminent then all other, & more plentifull in number, & (as they which know her do affirme) more sincere also in truth; but as concerninge truth, we shall dispute more afterward; now yt is sufficient for them that desire to learne, that there is a Catholike Church, which is one in yt selfe, whervnto diuers heretiks do feigne, and diuise diuers names, wheras they, (and their sects) are called by peculiar names, which themselues cannot deny, wherby all men that are indifferent, & not letted by passion, may vnderstand vnto what Church, the name Catholike, which all parts desire & pretend, is to be giuen.
               
               10. Thus S. Augustine: teachinge his frend how he might both know and beleeue the Catholike Church, and all that shee taught simply, and without asking reason or proofe. And as for knowing and discerning her from all other Churches, that may pretend to be Catholike, we heare his marks, that she is more eminent, vniuersall, greater in number, and in possession of the name Catholike. The second that she may be beleeued securely, and cannot deceaue nor be deceaued in matters of faith, he proueth elswhere, concluding finally

in this place: Si iam satis tibi iactatus videris, &c. 
                  
                     Aug. ibid. cap. 8. 
                  Yf thou dost seeme to thy selfe now to haue byn sufficiently tossed vp and downe amonge sectaryes, and wouldst putt an end to these labours and tormoyles, follow the way of Cath. discipline, which hath flowen downe vnto vs from Christ by his Apostles, and is to flow from vs to our posterity.
               
               11. This then is the iudgement and direction of S. Augustine, that a man should for his first Hovv a man may knovv the Catholike Church. ground, in matters of faith, looke vnto the beleefe of the greatest & most eminent Church of Christendome, that hath endured longest, embraceth most people, & hath come downe from our fore-fathers with the name of Catholike, not only among her owne professors, but euen among her enemyes Iewes, infidells, and heretiks, and so is termed & held by them 
                     Aug. de vera rel. c. 7. & serm. 131. de temp. & lib. 3. cont. Gaudent. Denat. c. 1. in their common speach, as the said Father in diuers others places declareth at large. Which rule of direction, yf we will follow about these three articles of faith now proposed, the reall presence, Transubstantiation, and Sacrifice of the masse, yt is easily seene what ground we haue for their beleefe, in this kind of proofe, so highly esteemed by S. Augustine, which is the authority of the vniuersall Cath. Church. For that when Luther and his followers began to oppose themselues in our dayes, no man can deny, but that our beleefe in these articles was generally receaued ouer all Christendome, as well Asia and Africa, where so euer Christians be, as Europe, and so vpward tyme

out of mynd; neither can any beginning be assigned to these doctrines in the Cath. Church, but only a certayne definition and determination of some Councells, about the name of Transubstantiation, as after shalbe declared.
               12. Now then, hauinge found out this first Groundes about the reall presence. ground which S. Augustine and other Fathers do make so great accoumpt of, which is the authority and beleefe of that Church, that generally is called Catholike: Yf we passe further, and see what grounds this Church had or hath to admytt the same, (which yet is not needfull, or possible to all sortes of men, for that only can be done by the learneder sort) we shall find that she hath such grounds, as may conuince any man that is not obstinate, and indurate to the contrary. And first to begin with the article of the reall presence, what ground, proofe, or Theologicall demonstration can there bee, which the Cath. Church hath not for her beleefe in that high mistery? which as it was to be one of the cheefest, most sacred, and admirable of Christian Religion, so was yt meet that yt should be confirmed, by all the principall wayes that any article of faith could or can be confirmed, that is to say both by scriptures of the ould and new Testament, and the true exposition therof by auncient Fathers, that liued before this controuersie began with Sacramentarye
                     •
                  ; by authority and tradition of the Apostles and their successors; by testimony of auncient Fathers from age to age; by consent and agreement,

practise and vse of the vniuersall Church; by the concourse and approbation of almighty God, with euident and infinite miracles, by confession of the aduersaryes, and other such generall heads of arguments, which Catholike diuines do produce for this truth, for iustifyinge the Churches faith therin.
               13. And out of the scriptures their demonstration Demonstrations out of the scripture. is not single or of one sort only, but in diuers manners, as to the height and dignity of so diuine and venerable a mystery was conuenient. For that out of the ould Testament, they shew how yt was prefigured and prophesied, and in the new both promised againe, exhibited, and confirmed, and this not by exposition of their owne heads only, as sectaryes do, but by intendement, and interpretation, of the grauest and most ancient Fathers, that haue liued in the Church of God from age to age, who vnderstood so the said figures and foreshewinges of the old Testament. As for example, the bread and wine misteriously offered to almighty God by Melchisedeck King and Priest, who bare the type of our Sauiour Gen. 14. Psalm. 109. Heb. 7. The shew-bread amonge the Iewes, that only could be eaten by them that were sanctified Exod. 40. &c. Reg. 21. The bread sent miraculously Three figures of Christs flesh in bread. by an Angell to Elias, whereby he was so strengthened, as he trauayled 40. dayes without eating by vertue only of that bread. These three sorts of bread to haue byn expresse figures of this Sacrament, and of the trew flesh

of Christ therein conteined, do testifie by one consent all the ancient Fathers, as S. Cyprian lib. 2. epist. 3. Clem. Alexand. lib. 4. Strom. Ambros. lib. 4. de Sacram. cap. 3. Hier in cap. 1. ad Titum. Chrysost. hom. 35. in Gen. August. lib. 2. cont. litteras Petii. cap. 37. Cyrill. Catechesi 4. Mystag. Arnobius, Eusebius, Gregorius, and many others.
               14. Three other figures there are not expressed in the forme of bread, but in other things more excellēt then bread, as the paschall lambe Exod. 12. Leuit. 23. The bloud of the Testament Three other signes of Christs flesh. described Exod. 24. Heb. 9. And fulfilled by Christ Luc. 22. when he said: This cupp is the new Testament in my bloud, and againe: This is my bloud of the new Testament Matth. 26. The manna also sent by God from heauen was an expresse figure of this Sacrament, as appeareth by the words of our Sauiour. Ioan. 6. and of the Apostle 1. Cor. 10. Out of all which figures, is inferred, that for so much as there must be great difference betweene the figure, and the thing prefigured, no lesse yf we beleeue S. Paul, 
                  
                     Colloss. 2. Heb. 10. then betweene a shaddow, & the body whose shaddow yt is; yt cannot be imagined by any probability, that this Sacrament exhibited by Christ, in performance of those figures, should be only creatures of bread and wine, as Sacramentaryes do imagine, for then should the figures An inference vpō the former figures. be eyther equall, or more excellent then the thing prefigured yt selfe, for who will not confesse but that bread for bread, Elias his bread made by the Angell, that gaue him strength to walke 40. dayes vpon the vertue

therof was equall to our English-ministers Communion-bread, and that the manna was much better.
               15. And yf they will say for an euasion, as they do, that their bread is not common bread, but such bread as being eaten and receaued by faith, worketh the effect of Christs body in them, and bringeth them his grace; we answeare that so did these figures and Sacraments also of the ould Testament, being receaued by faith in Christ to come, as the ancient Father and Preachers receaued them: And for so much as Protestants do further hould, that there is no difference betweene the vertue & efficacy of those old Sacramēts, and ours, (which we deny) yt must needs follow, that both we & they agreeinge, that the Fathers of the old Testament beleeued in the same Christ to come that we do now, being come, their figures and shaddowes must be as good as our truth in the Sacrament, that was prefigured, if it remaine bread still after Christs institution, and consecration. But Catholike Fathers did vnderstand the matter farre otherwise, and to alleage one for all, for that he spake in the sense of all in those dayes, Saint Hierome talking of one of those forsaid figures, to witt, of the shew-bread, and comparinge yt with the thinge figured, and by Christ exhibited, saith thus: Tantum interest, &c. 
                  There is so Hier. in 
                           〈…〉
                        . much difference betweene the shew-bread, and the body of Christ figured therby, as there is difference betweene the shaddow and the

body, whose shaddow yt is, and betweene an Image and the truth, which the Image representeth, & betweene certaine shapes of things to come, and the things themselues prefigured by those shapes. And thus much of figures, & presignifications of the old Testament.
               
               16. In the new Testament, as hath byn said, are conteyned both the promise of our Sauiour, Proofes out of the nevv Testament. to fullfill these figures with the truth of his flesh, which he would giue to be eaten in the Sacrament, as also the exhibition and performance therof afterward, the very night before his passion, with a miraculous confirmation of the same by S. Paul, vpon conference had therin with Christ himselfe after his blessed assension. The promise is conteyned in the sixt Chapter of S. Iohns ghospell, where our Sauiour foretelleth expressely, that he would 
                     Io. 6. giue his flesh to vs to be eaten: for that except vve did eat the same, vve could not be saued: that his flesh vvas truly meat, and his bloud truly drinke; and that his flesh that he would giue vs to eat, vvas the same that vvas to be giuen for the life of the world: All which speaches of our Sauiour expounded vnto vs in this sense, for the reall presence of his flesh in the Sacrament by the vniuersall agreeinge consent of auncient Fathers, must needs make great impression in the hart of a faithfull Christian man, especially the performance of this promise ensuing soone after, vvhen Christ being to depart out of this world, and to make his last will and Testament, exhibited that which heere he promised,

takinge bread, brake and distributed the same, sayinge: this is my body that shalbe deliuered 
                  
                     Matth. 26. Marc. 14. Lu
                           •
                        . 22. 
                  for yow, which words are recorded by three seuerall Euangelists, and that with such significant, and venerable circumstances on our Sauiours behalfe, of feruent prayer, washinge his Apostles feet, protestation of his excessiue loue, and other deuout, and most heauenly speaches in that nearnesse to his passion, as well declared the exceeding greatnesse of the mistery which he was to institute: whervnto if we add that excellent cleare cōfirmation of S. Paul, who for resoluing doubts as it seemed had conference with Christ himselfe after his ascension (for before he could not, he being no Christian when Christ ascended) the matter will be more euident. His words are these to the Corinth. Ego enim accepi à Domino, quod & tradidi vobis, &c. For I haue receaued from our Lord 1. Cor. 11. himselfe, that which I haue deliuered vnto yow about the Sacrament; and do yow note S. Paules confirmation of the reall presence.
                   the word (for) importinge a reason why he ought specially to be beleeued in this affayre, for so much as he had receaued the resolution of the doubt frō Christ himselfe. And then he setteth downe the very same words againe of the Institution of this Sacrament, that were vsed by Christ before his passion, without alteration, or new exposition, which is morally most certayne that he would haue added for clearinge all doubts, yf there had byn any other sense to haue byn gathered of them, then the plaine words themselues do beare.

Nay himselfe doth add a new consirmation, when he saith, that he which doth eate and drinke vnworthily this Sacrament, reus erit 
                        •
                     orporis & sanguinis Domini, shalbe guilty of the body and bloud of our Lord. And againe: Iu
                     
                        •
                     cium sibi manducat & bibit, non dijudicans corpus Domini, he doth eat & drinke his owne iudgement, not discerninge the body of our Lord: Which inferreth the reall presence of Christes body, which those, whome the Apostle reprehendeth, by the fact of their vnworthy receauing doe so behaue themselues, as yf they did not discerne it to be present. All which laid togeather, & the vniforme consent of expositors throughout the whole Christian world, concurringe in the selfe-same sense and meaninge of all these scriptures, about the reall presence of Christs true body in the Sacrament, yow may imagine what a motiue yt is, and ought to be to a Catholike man, who desireth to beleeue, and not to striue and contend. And thus much for scriptures.
               17. There followeth the consideration of Fathers, Doctors and Councells, wherein as The secōd ground about authorityes of Fathers. the Sacramentaryes of our tyme, that pleased first to deny the reall presence, had not one authority, nor can produce any one at this day, that expressely saith, that Christs reall body is not in the Sacrament, or that yt is only a figure, signe, or token therof (though diuers impertinent peeces of some Fathers speaches they will now and then pretend to alleage) so on the cōtrary side, the Catholiks do behould

for their comfort, the whole ranks of ancient Fathers through euery age, standinge with them in this vndoubted truth: Yea not only affirming the same reall presence in most cleere, and perspicuous words (wherof yow may see See Claud. de Xanctes repet. & Bellarm. l. de Euchar. tom 2. and others. whole books in Catholike wryters replenished with Fathers authorityes, laid togeather out of euery age from Christ downe wards) but that which is much more, yeldinge reasons, & endeauoring to proue the same by manifest arguments, & theologicall demonstrations, vsing therin such manner of speach and words, as cannot possibly agree vnto the Protestants communion of bare bread and wyne, with their symbolicall signification or representation only. As for example, where the Fathers do shew how Christs true flesh commeth to be in this Sacramēt, videlicet: by the true conuersion of bread into his body, and by, that this body 
                  The first reason of the Fathers. 
                  is made of bread, and by, that the substances of breat and vvyne be changed, and other like speaches, as may be seene in S. Ambrose 4. de Sacram. cap. 5. & lib. 6. cap. 1. lib. de myst. init. cap. 9. Cypr. Serm. de Coena. Chrysost. hom. 83. in Matth. & de proditione Iudae. Cyrill. Catec. 4. Mystag. Nissenus orat. Catech. 37. and others.
               18. Secondly, yt is an ordinary speach of the The secōd reason of Fathers. Fathers, to cry out & admyre the miracle that happeneth, by the conuersion in this Sacrament, ascribinge the same to the supreme omnipotencv of almighty God, as yow may see in S. Chrysostome l. 3. de sacerdotio: O miraculum, &c. S. Ambrose lib. 4. de Sacram. cap. 4. Iustinus Martyr

Apolog. 2. sayinge: that by the same omnipotency of God, vvherby the vvord vvas made flesh, the flesh of the vvord vvas made to be in the Eucharist, which agreeth not to a Caluinian communion.
               19. Thirdly, some of them do extoll and magnifie The third reason. the exceeding loue & charity of Christ towards vs, aboue all other humane loue, in that he feedeth vs with his owne flesh, which no shephards did euer their sheepe, or mothers their children, which is the frequent speach of S. Chrysostome hom. 83. in Matth. & 45. in Ioan. & hom. 24. in ep. 1. ad Cor. 2. & homil. 60. & 61. ad Pop. Antioch. And to the same effect S. Augustine ep. 120. cap. 27. & in Psal. 33. which speaches can no wayes agree to the Protestants supper.
               20. Fourthly, diuers of the said Fathers do The 4. reason. expressely teach, that we do receaue Christ in the Sacrament not only by faith, but truly, really, and corporally; semetipsum nobis commiscet (saith S. Chrysostome) non side tantum, sed & reipsa: 
                  
                     Chrysost. hom. 60. ad Popul. Ant
                           •
                        och.
                   Christ doth ioyne himselfe with vs (in the Sacrament) not only by faith, but really. And 
                     •
                  n another De Sancto Phylogonio. place, he putteth this antithesis or opposition betwixt vs, and the Magi, that saw and beleeued in Christ lyinge in the manger, that they could not carry him with them, as we do now by receauinge him in the Sacrament, and yet no doubt they beleeued in him, and carryed him in faith as we do now; to which effect S. Cyrill Alexand. saith: Corporaliter 
                  4. in Ioan. cap. 13. & 14. & l. 11. cap. 27. 
                  nobis filius vnitur vt homo, spiritualiter, vt Deus: Christ as a man is vnited vnto vs corporally, (by the Sacrament) and spiritually, as he is God.

Whervnto yow may add S. Hilary lib. 8. de Trinitate, and Theodorus in the Councell of Ephesutom. 6. Appendic. 5. cap. 2. and others.
               21. Fiftly the Fathers do many tymes, and The fifth reason. in diuers places, and vpon sundry occasions go about to proue the truth of other mysteryes, and articles of our faith, by this miracle of the being of Christs flesh and body in the Sacrament, as S. Irenaeus for example, doth 
                     Lib. 4. cent. haer
                           •
                        s 
                           •
                        . 34. proue Christs Father to be the God of the old sestament, for that in his creatures he hath left vs his body & bloud, and in the same Ibidem. place he vseth the same argument, for establishinge the article of the resurrection of out bodyes, to witt, that he that vouch safeth to nowrish vs with his owne body and bloud, will not lett our bodyes remayne for euer in death & corruption. S. Chrysostome in like manner, 
                     Hom. 3. in Matth.
                   by the truth of his reall presence in the Sacrament, doth confute them that denyed Christ to haue taken true flesh of the Virgin Mary, which hardly would be proued by the Sacramentary supper of bread and wyne, as euery man by himselfe will consider.
               22. Sixtly to pretermitt all other points handled to this effect, by the said Fathers, as that The sixth reason. diuers of them do exclude expressely the name of figure, or similitude from this Sacrament, as S. Ambrose lib. 4. de Sacram. cap. 1. Damasc. lib. 4. cap. 4. & 14. Theophilact. in Matth. 26. Others yeld reasons why Christ in the Sacrament, would be really vnder the formes or accidents of bread and wyne, to witt, that our

faith might be proued and exercised therby, & the horror of eating flesh & bloud, in their owne forme & shape, taken away, and so the same S. Ambrose Ibid. l. 4. de Sacram. c. 4. Cyrill. in cap. 22. Luc. apud D. Thom. in catena. Others do persuade vs not to beleeue our senses that see only bread and wyne, wherof we shall speake more in the obseruations following: so S. Augustine, serm. de verbis Apost. & l. 3. de Trinit. cap. 10. Others do proue this reall presence by the sacrifice, affirminge the selfe same Christ to be offered now in our dayly sacrifice vpon the Altars of Christians, after an vnbloudy manner, which was offered once bloudely vpon the Altar of the Crosse, as more largely shalbe Diuers euident reasons togeather. shewed: so S. Chrysostome hom. 17. ad Haebr. & 2. 
                     ••
                   2. ad Tim. Greg. lib. 4. dial. c. 58. Nissenus orat. 1. 
                     
                        ••
                      pascha, &c. All these considerations I say, and many others that may be taken out of the Fathers wrytinges, I do for breuityes sake lett passe in this place, though most euidently they do declare the said Fathers plaine meaninge, and beleefe in this article, and cannot any way be applyed to the new Communion of Protestants, but by manifest impropriety and de
                  
                     •
                  ortion.
               23. And therfore I will end only with one consideration more, very ordinary with the The seanenth reason. said Fathers, which is, the diuine reuerence, honour, and adoration, that in all ages the said Fathers haue giuen vnto the blessed Sacramēt, whose authorityes were ouerlong heere to recyte in particular. The sayinge of S. Austen
                  
is knowne Nemo manducat nisi prius adorauerit, no 
                     Aug. 
                           ••
                        ne. 1. 
                        •
                     . ps. 
                     
                        ••
                     . man eateth the Sacrament but first adoreth the same, and S. Chrysostome, Adora & manduca▪ 
                  
                     Chrysost. hom. 3. in epist. ad Ephes. Theodor. in 2. dialog.
                   adore yt and receaue yt; And Theodoret to the same effect, Et creduntur & adorantur, quòd easint quae creduntur. They are beleeued and adored (the flesh and bloud of Christ) for that they are in deed the things they are beleeued to be. And to speake nothinge of many other Fathers sayings to this effect, S. Chrysostome his large discourses about this matter may serue for all, 
                     Chrysost. hom 60. ad Popul. Antioch. & hom. 3. in ep. ad Ephes. & lib. 6. de Sacerdotio.
                   who wryteth, that at the tyme of consecration and sacrifice, the very Angells come downe, and vvith tremblinge do adore Christ their Lord therin present▪
                   vvhich he vvould neuer haue vvrytten, y
                     •
                   bread, and wyne were only there present.
               24. By all these wayes & meanes then, may easily be seene what the auncient Fathers in The third ground of Coūcells. their ages did thinke, speake, and beleeue, of this high & admirable mistery of Christs real presence in the Sacrament. And albeit ther▪ were no Councells about this matter, for the space of a thousand yeares after Christ, the cause therof was, that in all that space no on▪ man euer openly contradicted the same, atleast after the tyme of S. Ignatius vntill Berenga
                        •
                     
                     rius, (for yf any man had done yt, we may se
                     •
                   by the foresaid Fathers speaches, who must haue byn the chiefe in these Councells, what their determination would haue byn against them) and when the said Berengarius had once broached this Sacramentary heresy, the whole 
                     Theodoretus in 3. Dial.
                   Christian world rose vp presently against the

same, as against a blasphemous nouelty, and ten seuerall Councells condemned the same, as in the former Chapter hath byn declared.
               25. Wherfore the Catholikes hauinge with them all these warrants of truth by scriptures, The 4. ground of the Churthes consent. fathers, councells, tradition of antiquity, vniforme consent of all Christian nations, both Greeke, Latyn, Asian, African, & other countreyes embracing the name & faith of Christ, and that no beginninge or entrance can be shewed of this doctrine in the said Church, nor any contradiction against yt when yt first entred: as on the cōtrary side the first of spring of the other, togeather with the place, author, tyme, manner, occasion, resistance, condemnation, and other like circumstances are and may be authentically shewed, prooued and conuinced, yea that the very face of Christendome from tyme out of mynd, by their 
                     •
                  hurches, altars, offerings, adoration, and manner of diuine seruice admittted euery where, without contradiction, doubt, or question, do testifie the same: the truth moreouer therof being confirmed by so infinite con
                  
                     •
                  ourse of manifest miracles, recorded by such authors, as no man with piety can doubt of their creditt; the Catholiks I say hauinge all his mayne cloud of wittnesses (to vse the Apostles Miracles. Hebr. 12. 
                  
                     •
                  ords) for the testimony of this truth, and being practized and accustomed in the beleefe 
                     ••
                  erof for so many ages togeather without 
                     ••
                  terruption, and seing moreouer that Luther 
                  
                     ••
                  mselfe, and all the learned of his side that

were open professed enemyes in other things to the Catholike beleefe, yet in this protested the truth to be so euident, as they durst not impugne it, nay held the first impugners therof for damnable heretiks, addinge also heerevnto that Zuinglius the first chiefe author, confesseth himselfe to haue byn moued thervnto by a certayne extrauagant spiritt, which he saith he knew not whether yt was blacke or white. 
                  Zuing. l. de vt Sacramentaria. All these things, I say, laid togeather, and the liues and manners considered of them, that haue held the one & the other faith; that is to say the infinite Saints of the one side, whome the Protestants themselues do not deny to haue byn Saints; and the qualityes and conditions of the others, that first began, or since haue defended the new Sacramentary opinions: lett the discreet reader iudge, whether the Catholiks of England had reason to stand VVeighty considerations. fast in their old beleefe, against the innouations of our new Sacramentary Protestants in K. Edwards dayes. And the like shall yow see in the other articles that ensue of Transubstantiation and Sacrifice, dependinge of this first of the reall presence, as before yow haue heard. But much more will yow be confirmed in all this, when yow shall haue read ouer the disputations followinge, and seene the triflinge arguments of the Sacramentaryes in these so weighty & important articles of our beleefe and the ridiculous euasions where with they seeke to auovd, or delude the graue tistimonyes of scriptures, and Fathers before mentioned.

For therby wilbe seene, that they seeke not truth in deed with a good and sincere conscience, & feare of Gods iudgements; but only to escape and entertayne talke for continuaunce of their faction, which ought to be marked by the reader, yf he loue his soule. And thus much for the grounds of the reall-presence.
            
            
               
                  Groundes of Transubstantiation. §. 2.
               26. Touchinge the second question about Transubstantiation, though yt be lesse principall then the former of the reall-presence, for that yt conteyneth but the particular manner how Christ is really in the Sacrament, & consequently not so necessary to be disputed of with Sacramentaryes, that deny Christ to be there really at all, as before hath byn noted: 
                     •
                  et shall we briefely discouer the principall 
                     •
                  rounds wheron Catholiks do stand, in this 
                     •
                  eceaued doctrine of the Church against Lutherans especially, who grauntinge the said 
                     
                        ••
                     all presence, do hold that bread is there togeather with our Sauiours body: which Catholiks for many reasons do hould to be absurd. 
                     •
                  nd albeit the word Transubstantiation & particular declaration therof, was not so expresse
                  
                     •
                   sett downe in the Church vntill some 400. 
                     •
                  cares gone in the generall Councell of Lateran

vnder Pope Innocentius the third, as the word Trinity, Homousion, or Consubstantiality and cleere exposition therof, was not vntill the Councell of Nice 300. yeares after Christ; yet was the truth of this doctrine held euer before in effect and substance, though in different words: to witt mutation, transinutation, conuersion of bread into the body of Christ, transelementation, and the like, which is proued by the perpetuall consent of doctrine, vttered by the ancient Fathers in this point from the beginninge, which are recorded by Catholike wiyters of our dayes from age to age: and one only alleageth thirty and two, that wrote heereof before the Councell of Lateran, and are ouerlong to be recited in this place; only they may Fathers authorityes reduced to tvvo heads. be reduced for more perspicuitie to two heads: the one of such as deny the substance of bread to remayne after the words of consecration; the other of such as do expressely auouch a conuersion of bread into Christs body.
               27. Of the first sort, that deny bread to remaine, is S. Cyrill Bishop of Hierusalem, whose First head. words are: hoc sciens, ac pro certissimo habens, panem hunc, qui videtur à nobis, non esse panem, etiamsi gusts 
                  
                     Catech. 4. mystag.
                   
                  panem esse sentiat, &c. 
                  Thou knowing and being certayne of this; that the bread which we see is not bread, not withstanding it tast as bread and the wyne which we see not to be wyne but the bloud of Christ, though to the taste still see me to be wyne. And S. Gregory Nissen 
                  Lib. de Sancto Baptismo non 
                        •
                     ōge 
                        〈◊◊〉
                     . 
                  Panis iste panis est in initio communis, &c. 
                  This

bread at the beginninge is comon bread, but when yt is consecrated, yt is called, and is indeed the body of Christ. Againe Eusebius: Antequant consecrentur, &c. 
                  Before consecration 
                        Hom. 1. de Pasc.
                      there is the substance of bread and wyne, but after the words of Christ, yt is his body and bloud: All which do exclude, as yow see, bread after consecration. And to the same effect S. Ambrose: Panis hic, panis est, ante verba Sacramentorum, 
                  
                     De Sacram. cap. 4. 
                  sed vbi accesserit consecratio, de pane sit 
                        •
                     aro Christi. 
                  This bread before the words of the Sacraments, is bread, but after the consecration, of bread is made the flesh of Christ. And S. Chrysostome treating of this mistery, asketh this question, and aunswereth the same. Num 
                  Hem de Euchar 
                        •
                     n Ence
                        •
                     . 
                  
                     
                        •
                     ides panem? num vinum? absit, ne sic cogites! 
                  Dost thou see bread? dost thou see wyne heere? God forbidd, thinke no such matter. And to this same effect many others might be cyted, but yt would grow to ouergreat prolixity.
               28. The second sort of testimonyes that do affirme conuersion and change of bread into 2. head. the body of Christ, are many more, yf we would stand vpon their allegation, and in place of all might stand S. Ambrose, whose faith was the generall faith of Christendome in his 
                     •
                  ayes; & he doth not only oftentymes repeat, that by the words of Christ vttered by the Priest vpon the bread, the nature & substance therof is changed into the body and bloud of Christ, but proueth the same by examples of all the miraculous mutations & conuersions, recorded in the old and new Testament. Prebemus
                  
(saith he) non hoc esse quod natura formanit, 
                  
                     Ambros. l. de ijs qui 
                           ••
                        trantur cap. 9. 
                  sed quod benedictio consecrauit, maiorémque vim esse benedictionis quam naturae, quia benedictione etiam ipsa natura mutatur. 
                  Lett vs proue then (by all these other miracles) that this which is in the Sacrament, is not that which nature did frame (vsed bread and wyne) but that which the blessinge hath consecrated, and that the force of blessinge is greater then the force of nature; for that nature herselfe is changed by blessinge; And againe: Si tantum valuit sermo Eliae, vt ignem de coelo depoueret; non valebit sermo Christi, 
                        •
                     t 
                  Ambros. ibid. 
                  species mutet elementorum? 
                  Yf the speach of Elyas was of such force, as yt could bring downe fire from heauen, shall not the words of Christ (in the Sacrament) be able to change the natures of the elemēts? videlicet (as I said before) of bread and wyne. And yet further: Yow haue read, that in the creation of the world, God said, and thinges were made, he commaunded, and they were created; that speach then of Christ, vvhich of nothinge created that which was not before; shall yt not be able to exchaunge those thinges that are, into other thinges, vvhich they vvere not before? sor yt is no lesse to giue new natures to things, then to chaunge natures, but rather more, &c.
               29. Thus reasoneth that graue and holy Doctor, to whome we might adioyne many more both before and after him, as namely S. Cyprian in his sermon of the supper of our Cyprian. de Cena Domini. Lord: Panis iste quem, &c. 
                  This bread which Christ gaue vnto his disciples being change not in shape, but in nature, is by the omnipotency

of the word made flesh. 
                  S. Cyrill Bishop of Hierusalem proueth the same by example of the miraculous turning of water into wine, at the marriage of Cane in Galeley: aquam mutauit 
                  
                     Cyrill. Catech. mystag. 4. 
                  in vinum (saith he &c.) 
                  Christ turned water into wyne, by his only will, and is he not worthy to be beleeued quod vinum in sanguinem transmutauit, that he did chaunge wyne into his bloud? For yf at bodily marriages he did worke so wonderfull a miracle, why shall not we confesse that he gaue his body and bloud (in the Sacrament) to the children of the spouse? wherfore with all certainty, let vs receaue the body and bloud of Christ, for vnder the forme of bread is giuen vnto vs his body, and vnder the forme of wyne his bloud. Thus hee of this miraculous chaunge, wherof Saint Chrysostome treatinge also vpon S. Mathew wryteth 
                     Hom. 83. in Matth.
                   thus: Nos ministrorum locum tenemus, qui verò sanctificat & immutat, ipse est. 
                  We that are Priests, should but the place of his ministers: (in this great chaunge) for he who doth sanctifie all, and maketh the chaunge, is Christ himselfe. To like effect wryteth Eusebius Emissenus; quando 
                  Serm. de corp. Domini. 
                  benedicendae, &c. 
                  When the creatures of bread and wyne are layd vpon the Altar to be blessed, before they are consecrated by the inuocation of the holy Ghost, there is present the substance of bread and wyne; but after the words of Christ, there is Christs body and bloud. And what maruayle yf he that could create all by his word, posset creata conuertere, could conuert, and chaunge those thinges

that he had created, into other natures?
               
               30. I might alleage many other Fathers to this effect, but my purpose in this place doth not permitt yt: this shalbe sufficient for a tast, that the doctrine of conuersion or chaunge of bread and wyne, into the body and bloud of Christ, which is the doctrine of Transubstantiation, was not new at the tyme of the Councell of Lateran, but was vnderstood and held euer before, by the cheefe Fathers of the Catholike Church, yea and determined also by two Councells at Rome: and the first therof generall, wherin was present our Lansrancus 
                  Lanfrant. l. de corp. Domini Guit. l. 3. de corp. Domini & Ansel ep de corp. Domini. vpon the yeare of Christ 1060. vnder Pope Nicolas the second; and the other 19. yeares after vnder Pope Gregory the seauenth, & both of them aboue an hundred yeares before the Councell of Lateran, wherin notwithstanding is declared expressely this doctrine, of the chaunge of bread & wyne into the body and bloud of our Sauiour, albeit not vnder the name of Transubstantiation; and yt is proued expressely out of the words of Christs institution, This is my body, which can haue no other probable exposition, but that the bread is chaunged into his body. And so yt is expounded by all the forsaid Fathers, and others that, before this controuersie fell out, interpreted the same words of our Sauiour.
               31. These grounds then had the English Catholiks in K. Edwards dayes to stand in the defence The consent of the vniuer sall Church. of this doctrine, that is to say, the cleere words of scripture so vnderstood by all antiquity,

togeather with the assertions and asseuerations of all the Fathers, the determination of Councells presently vpon the controuersie first moued, and namely of that great famous Lateran Councell, wherin concurred 
                     Canon. 1. & 2. both the Greeke and Latyn Church, there being present, the Greeke patriarks of Constantinople and Hierusalem, 70. metropolitan Archbishops, and aboue a thousand and two hundred other Fathers of diuers states, & degrees, (compare this with a meeting of some twenty or thirty ministers impugninge the same.) All which hauinge disputed the matter, and considered as well by scripture, and by ancient The greatnesse of the Lateran Councell. tradition of the Fathers and vniuersall Cath. Church, what had byn held before, did with full agreement determine & declare this matter, accursinge whosoeuer should from that tyme foreward, deny that doctrine of Transubstantiation. Which decree of that Councell being receaued generally, vvithout contradiction throughout the Christian world, hath byn confirmed by seauen other Councells since that tyme, as before we haue shewed. And let the discreet reader vveigh vvith himselfe, vvhich party hath more security for yt selfe, eyther the Catholike that followed all this authority & consent of antiquity, or our new Protestants, that vpon fresh imaginations of their owne heads, diuised a new doctrine contrary to all this antiquity. And thus much of this article, for a tast of that which may be alleaged for yt.
            
            
               
               
                  Groundes for the sacrifice of the masse. §. 2.
               32. The third question proposed to be handled in the foresaid disputations, was about the sacrifice of the masse, to witt, whether the selfesame body of our Lord, whose reall presence is proued in the first question, be not only a Sacrament in the Christian Church, as yt is receaued vnder a signe of bread and wyne by the Priest and communicants, but a sacrifice also, as yt is offered to God the Father by the Priest vpon the Altar; and whether this externall and visible sacrifice be appointed by Christ, to be iterated and dayly frequented in the Church vnto the worlds end, and this both for an externall worshipp peculiar to The state of the question. Christians, whereby they are distinguished from all other people, as also for propitiation of sinnes, by applyinge the meritt and vertue of the other bloudy sacrifice of our Sauiour on the Crosse once offered for all, and euer auayleable (as S. Paul at large declareth in his epistle to the Hebrewes) for sanctifyinge the redeemed: this then being the question, and this being a doctrine so generally receaued throughout the Christian world, both in the Greeke, Latin, AEthiopian, Armenian, and other Christian Churches, as there was no doubt or question therof, when Luther and his ofspring

began; yt fell out in England, that vnder the child King Edward his raigne, name & authority, that the L. Seymour protect our and his followers, with some few Priests that were weary of massinge, and desirous of marriage, but cheefly Cranmer and Ridley, Hooper, Latymer, and others, bad heads of the cleargy in those dayes, tooke vpon them to pull downe this publike vse of sacrifice, and afterward to examine, and call in question the doctrine therof. At which chaunge and suddayne innouation, neuer seene in England before, from the first day that Christian Religion entred vnder the Apostles, as all the realiues and contreyes round about remayned astonished: so diuers notwithstanding of the lighter sort, enclyned to noueltyes, applauded to them, & followed their diuise; others more prudent and respectiue to their owne saluation, consideringe that there went more in this matter then the pleasure and fancyes of a few particular men, stood constant in that, which before they had receaued, and that which generally they saw, and knew to be in vse throughout all Christendome without cōtradiction, which could not be by S. Austens rule, but that yt must needs 
                     Aug. l. 2. de baptis. c. 7. lib. 4. cop. 6. & 24. & l. 5. c. 23. come downe from the Apostles themselues, for so much as all opposite doctrine to that, which was first planted by them & receaued from them, could neuer be so generally admitted without contradiction.
               33. Wherfore entringe into due consideration of this matter, whilst all the ruffe ran the

other way for 5. or 6. yeares space, vnder that King Child, and those other little tyrants that bare sway, and one destroyed the other by Gods iust iudgement vnder him. These good men (the Catholikes I meane) fell to search what grounds they had, or might find out for this so receaued a doctrine & practise, as this of the masse and sacrifice was. And first they The search of Catholiks vnder K. Edvv. for the groūds of the masse. found, that wheras the first insult of heretiks was against the very name of the masse, as a new diuised thinge without reason or signification; they found (I say) that it was a very ancient and vsuall word, for the externall sacrifice About the name of masse. of Christians vpon the Altar, in the Latyn Church, for twelue hundred yeares past and downeward; in place wherof the Grecians haue vsed the word Liturgie, Synaxis, and the like, and this vse is not only to be shewed by the testimonyes of particular Fathers, as Saint 
                  
                     l. 5. ep. 33. 
                  Ambrose, S. 
                  
                     Serm. 91. & 251. de sēp & serm. 237. in domin. 19. post. Pentecost.
                   
                  Augustine, S. 
                  
                     Ep. 81 ad D
                           •
                        oscor & 28. ad episc. Germ
                   
                  Leo, S. 
                  1. ep 12. & l. 4. c. 10. 
                  Gregory, 
                  
                     Lib. 2 hist. Uandal.
                   
                  Victor Vticensis, 
                  
                     Lib. 3. de cant. ps. ord.
                   
                  Cassianus, and other; but by whole Councells also, as by that of 
                     Can. 1. 
                  Rome, vnder Pope Siluester the first of 275. Bishops, held almost 1300. yeares gone; the second & fourth of 
                     In 2. Conc. can. 3. & 4. Ca. 84. 
                  Carthage held the next age after, and the Councell of 
                     Can. 47. 
                  Agatha in France the same age; the Councell of 
                     Can. 4. 
                  Ilerdum and 
                     Can. 1. 
                  Valentia in Spaine, and of 
                     Can 28. 
                  Orleance in France, all aboue 1000. yeares gone, which was sufficient matter against the vanyty of heretiks, that condemned the name & the words: for example of S. Ambrose sayinge Missam facere coepi, orare in oblatione Deum. I began to say masse, and to Ambros. ibid.
                  
pray to God in the oblation of the sacrifice, and those of S. Austen: In lectione quae nobis ad missas legenda est, audituri sumus. 
                  We shall heare or Aug. ibid. this matter more in the lesson which is to be read vnto vs at masse. These speaches I say, & this practise of so ould learned & holy Priests, as these and their fellowes were, did preuayle more with the grauer sort of English people, then the lightnesse & inconstancy of Cranmer Ridley, and such other licentious Priests, as for liberty fell to Apostasie.
               34. And this for the name of the masse. But for the nature and substance therof, which conteyneth the externall true and proper sacrifice of the Christian Church, they found such store of euident proofes, and most graue authorityes, as might stay, confirme and satisfie any mans mynd, that were not willfully bent to the contrary. And wheras I do vse the words of externall, true and proper sacrifise, yow must remember therby the fraud of these new heretiks, who, as before about the reall presence, did go about to delude all the sayings of holy Fathers, and other testimonyes of Antiquity, that spake of Christs reall being in the Sacrament, by running to the words spiritually, sacramentaly, by faith, and the like: so heere fyndinge the whole torrent and streame of Christian antiquity to stand for this Christian sacrifice, & to mention, reuerence, & auouch the same; these fellowes for auoydinge their authorityes do runne from the proper externall sacrifice, wherof we treate, vnto the internall,

and inuisible sacrifice of the mynd, wherof K. Dauid saith, that a contrite spiritt is a sacrifice to God. And when this cannot serue, they run also to improper and metaphoricall externe sacrifices, such as are, mortification of the body Rom. 12. sacrifice of thankesgeuinge. Psalm. 49. Sacrifice of almes deedes. Hebr. 13. and other such good works, which by a certayne analogy or proportion with the nature of proper sacrifices, are called also sacrifice in scriptures & by the Fathers, but improperly. To these then do our Protestants runne, when they are pressed with the authorityes of auncient Fathers, that name the vse of Christian sacrifice in the Church, and will needs make vs beleeue, that the Fathers ment not properly of any true visible or externall sacrifice, but eyther of inward or inuisible sacrifice of the hart, mynd, and good desire; or els of outward metaphoricall sacrifice of pious and vertuous workes.
               35. But all these are fraudulent shifts to ouerthrow one truth by another. For as we do not deny, but that there is an inward and inuisible sacrifice of our mynd, in dedicatinge of our selues to God, and to the subiection of his Maiestie, without which the externall sacrifice is little worth to him that offereth the same: And as we graunt that all good works be sacrifices in a certayne sort, by some similitude they haue with true & proper sacrifices, for that they are offered vp to God in his honour; yet do we say, that this is from our purpose

in this place, who talke of a true proper externall sacrifice offered vp to God, after a The description of a true externall and visible sacrifice. peculiar sacred rite, or ceremonyes, by peculiar men deputed to this office in acknowledgement of Gods diuine power, maiestie, and dominion ouer vs, & protestation of our due subiection vnto him, such as were the externall sacrifices in the law of nature, offered vp by patriarks and heads of familyes, and by Priests of Aarons order vnder the law of Moyses, and by Christ and his Priests accordinge to the order of Melchisedech in the new law; and for so much as both the internall, & metaphoricall sacrifices before mentioned of good affection, desires, and holy works, are not peculiar to any law, but were lawfull and needfull vnder all lawes, and in all tymes, and require no particular kind of men or ministers to offer them, but may be offered vp by any man or woman whatsoeuer: therfore do we exclude all these from the name of the sacrifice, which heere is meant by our description, and comprehendeth as yow see an externall visible oblation, made by him or them, who are peculiarly deputed by God to this office, which are Priests: So as when soeuer our aduersaryes do slipp from this proper signification of a sacrifice to the other, eyther internall or metaphoricall, which may be offeted by all sorts of people, and therevpon do say that all men are Priests, they runne, as vow see, quite from the purpose, as they do also for examples sake, when to auoyd the necessity of externall

fastinge, they runne to the internall fastinge An exāple of an hereticall fraude about fastinge. of the mynd, sayinge that true fastinge, is to fast from sinne, which as we deny not in that sense of spirituall fastinge; so is it notwithstandinge a plaine shift, and runninge from the purpose, and cannot stand with many places of the scripture, which must needs be vnderstood of the externall fast; as when Christ is said by the Euangelists to haue fasted 40. dayes togeather; and S. Paul affirmeth that he and his fellow Apostles fasted frequently; It cannot be vnderstood (I say) of fastinge only those tymes from sinne; for that Christ fasted alwayes from sinne without exception; and so do all good men both fast and facrisice also, by offeringe vp good desires and pious actions to almighty God, dayly and hourely without distinction of men or tymes.
               36. But this is not the proper, visible, & externall sacrifice which heere we meane, which was instituted by God, as peculiar to Christian people vnder the law of the ghospell, for an externall worshipp vnto him (besides the internall) and testification of their inward subiection, loue, and piety towards him; which sacrifice comming in place of all others that went before, both in the law of nature and of Moyses that prefigured and foresignified the same; and being but one and singular The excellency of the Christian and externall sacrifice. insteed of them all, and their great variety, is to be esteemed so much more excellent then they all, as the law of the ghospell is more excellent then those lawes, and truth aboue

shaddowes, & the sacred body of Christ God and man himselfe, to be preferred before the bodyes of beasts, byrds and other such creatures, vvhich vvere but signes and figures of this.
               37. And in this sense do both scriptures, fathers, councells, and all holy Christian antiquity speake and treat of this most diuine, venerable and dreadfull sacrifice, wherof, as of the highest and most principall mystery and treasure, left by our Sauiour in his Church, there are so many testimonyes, as before hath byn signifyed, that yt shall not be possible for me in this place, and with the breuity which is necessary, to alleage the least part therof; yet some few generall heads shall I touch, which the learned reader may see more dilated, by diuers Catholike wryters of our dayes, and he that hath not commodity or tyme to do that, may geue a ghesse by that which heere I shall sett downe.
               38. First then, for that this holy sacrifice of the Christian Church was so principally intended by almighty God for the new law, as hath byn said, many things were sett downe by the holy Ghost in the old Testament, both prefiguringe and prophecyinge the same, as first the sacrifice of the King and Priest Melchisedech in bread and wyne, Gen. 14. which all the auncient Fathers, by generall consent, do apply to the sacrifice vsed now in the Christian Church, and yt were ouerlong to alleage their particular authorityes, lett. S. Augustine
                  
speake for all: Primum apparuit (saith he) sacrificium 
                  
                     Aug. l. 16. de ciuit. cap. 22. (Melchisedech) quod à Christianis nunc offertur Deo toto orbe terrarum. 
                  The first sacrifice appeared in Melchisedech, which now is offered to God by Christians throughout all the world. And in another place: Vident nunc tale sacrificium offerri Deo toto orbe terrarum: 
                  Christians 
                        Lib. 1. cont. aduers. leg. & Prophet. cap. 20. do see the like sacrifice (to that of Melchisedech) to be offered to God, ouer all the World. And all the other sacrifices, signes and oblations mentioned before, as prefiguringe the reall presence of Christs sacred body, and true flesh in the Sacrament, are applied by the selfe same Fathers, whome before we haue named, to the prefiguration also of this diuine sacrifice, conteyninge the selfe same thinge, which the Sacrament doth, but in a different sort, in respect of diuers ends, the one as yt is receaued by the communicants; the other as yt is offered vnto God the Father.
               39. After these prefigurations there follow the predictions of Prophetts as that of Esay 19. and 66. where is forteold the reiection of the Aaronicall priesthood and sacrifice, and a new promised vnder the Christians. The prophesy of Daniell also, where it is foretould, that in the last age of the law of grace, by the comminge of Antichrist, iuge sacrificium, that is the dayly 
                     Dan. 8. & 11. sacrifice shall cease. Of this (I say) is inferred by the ancient Fathers, that vntill Antichrists comminge there shalbe a perpetuall and dayly sacrifice amonge Christians; which is most of all confirmed by the prophesie of Malachias in 
                     Malach. 1.
                  
these words: Ad vos ò sacerdotes, &c. 
                  To yow ò priests, that despise my name, and do offer vpon my Altar polluted bread, and do sacrifice the beasts that are blind, lame and weake, I haue no more likinge of yow, saith the lord of hosts, and I will not receaue at your hands any gifts, for that from the east to the west my name is great amonge the gentills, and they do sacrifice vnto me in euery place, and do offer vnto my name a pure oblation, for that my name is great amonge the gentills, saith the lord of hostes. Out of which place the Fathers do shew first, that heere the priesthood and sacrifice of Aaron was to be reiected, & a new priesthood and sacrifice, accordinge to the order of Melchisedech, erected amongst the gentills, wherby ordinarily are vnderstood the Christian people conuerted chiefly (from gentility) who were to succeed in their place, and that with such certainty, as the present tense The opposition of the prophesie of Malachie. is put for the future, accordinge to the manner of prophesies; and the Antithesis or opposition betweene the two sacrifices, the one reiected, the other promised, doth make the matter more plaine; for that as the Iewes sacrifice could not be offered but in one place, to witt, in the Temple of Hierusalem: so shall the Christian sacrifice be offered vp in omni loco, that is euery where without respect of places from the east to the west. The Iewish sacrifices were many and of diuers sorts, but the Christian sacrifice that should succeed in place therof was to be but one. The Iewish sacrifices

were polluted, not so much in respect of great quantity of beasts bloud powred out therin, and for that they offered defectuous beasts, as for the wickednesse of them that offered the same; but the Christian sacrifice was to be cleane & vnspotted, not only in respect of the vnbloudy manner, wherin yt was to be offered vnder the formes of bread and wyne, but especially for the excellency of the thinge yt selfe offered, being the most pretious body of Christ himselfe, and for that the demeritt of the offerer cannot take away the worth of the offeringe.
               40. These circumstances then considered, and that the heretikes heere cannot runne to their shift of inward, and inuisible sacrifices, (for that these could not be vnderstood by the Prophett as new sacrifices, that should succeede to the ould, for that these were alwayes in vse with good men, duringe the tyme of the old sacrifice also, and were lawfull, yea commaunded Circumstances that proue the sacrifice of the masse to haue byn fore prophesied. in all tymes, to witt, to haue inward piety and deuotion, giue almes, and the like) these things I say considered, togeather with the expositions of holy Fathers, as well vpon these as vpon other places of the old Testament, there can be no probable doubt, but that this externall sacrifice of the Christian was prophesyed by the holy Ghost longe before the comminge of Christ.
               41. Secondly, the same is proued out of diuers places of the new Testament: And first out of S. Iohns ghospell, where as our Sauiour

promised in mysterious words the institution of this blessed sacrifice, as before hath byn seene; so also did he signifie that this sacrifice should succeed in steed of all sacrifices that went before. For wheras the Samaritan woman 
                     Ioan. 4. & 6. Ioseph. lib. 10. de Antiquitat. Iudaic. c. 8. at the well, speakinge of the schisme betweene the Iewes & Samaritans about adoring in the Temple of Ierusalem, and in the hill Garizim of Samaria (which word of adoringe must needs in that place signifie sacrifycinge, as yt doth also in other places of scripture, as Gen. 22. Act. 8. and els where, for that the controuersie betweene the Iewes and Samaritans was about the vse of sacrificing, as the highest externall act of adoration) our Sauiour aunswereth to her question, that the houre was now come, when neyther in that hill of Samaria, nor in Ierusalem they should adore; that is to say, vse any more sacrifice, but that a new adoration in spiritt and truth should succeed the former; which adoration being vnderstood The explication of the place of S. Iohn ca. 4. about Sacrifice. of sacrifice, as the circumstance both of the place and matter do enforce, yt followeth that Christ did heere promise a new sacrifice, that should be spirituall and true: spirituall, both in comparison of the bloudy sacrifice that went before, & for that the consecration of Christs holy body in this sacrifice, is made by speciall worke and operation of the holy Ghost; true also and in truth it may iustly be said to bee, for that yt is the fullfillinge of all precedent sacrifices, and the truth of all former figures.
               
                  
42. There ensue the places of Saint Mathew, 
                  
                     Matth. 26. Marc. 14. Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11. 
                  S. Marke, S. Luke, and S. Paul about the institution and first celebration, of this vnbloudy sacrifice of Christ in his last supper, where yf we admitt that, which all the circumstances of the places themselues do plainly insinuate or rather inforce; the continuall exposition and tradition of the auncient Church doth teach vs, to witt, that Christ our Sauiour hauinge consecrated his sacred body, did offer the same vnto his Father as a most gratefull sacrifice in his last supper; then must yt follow, that the words hoc facite in meant commemorationem, do this in remembrance of me, implyed a precept not only of receauinge and communicatinge the body of Christ, but to offer vp the selfe same also to God in sacrifice, after the example of Christ himselfe; which is that we call the sacrifice of the masse, & to proue that th' Apostles vnderstood these words (I meane, Proofe of the sacrifie by Christs Institution. 
                  do this in remembrance of me) so; and in this sense, not only the most ancient Fathers, as hath byn said, do testifie the same, but the ancient liturgies or ritualls also of the Apostles and their schollers, as namely of S. Iames, S. Clement, and S. Dionysius Areopagita, do make the matter manifest, concerning the Apostles practise in this behalfe, to witt, that they did offer vp this Christian externall sacrifice in all places of the world, where they liued, and that from them the Church 
                     •
                  ooke the same precept and vse, accordinge to the testimony of old Irenaeus Bishopp & Martyr, that liued aboue 1300. yeares

gone, whose words are: Eum qui ex creatura pa
                     
                        •
                     u 
                  
                     Iren. lib. 4. adu. haeres. cap. 32. 
                  est, accepit, & gratias egit, dicens; Hoc est corpus meum; & calicem similiter qui est ex e
                        •
                      creatura quae est secundum nos suum sanguinem confessus est, & noui testamenti nouam docuit oblationem, quam Ecclesia ab Apostolis accipiens, in vniuerso mundo offert Deo. 
                  Christ tooke that bread which was a creature and gaue thanks sayinge: This is my body; and that cupp or wyne in like manner, which accordinge to vs, is of a creature, he confesseth to be his bloud, and heerby taught a new oblation of the new Testament, which the Church receauinge from the Apostles, doth offer the same to God, throughout the whole world.
               
               43. Heere now are touched all the points that might be doubted of by sectaryes, to wit, that this bread and wine being first creatures, are confessed by Christ, after consecration, to be his body and bloud: secondly that this was A most cleere place of S. Irenaeus for the dayly sacrifice. not only an institution of the Sacrament, and communion, but of a new oblation & sacrifice for the tyme of the new Testament: thirdly that yt was not only to be offered once and in one place, as Christs bloudy sacrifice was vpon the Crosse, but throughout the whole world by the whole Church. And fourthly that this manner of oblation was taught the Apostles by Christ himselfe, and by them deliuered to the said Church. What can be spoken more cleerly or distinctly by so ancient a wittnesse? neyther can heretiks heere haue any refuge to internall or inuisible sacrifices of

the mynd, or to vnproper externall sacrifices of thankesgeuinge, almesdeeds, and the like, for that they are many, and were before also lawfull vnder the law of Moyses, as often hath byn noted, & heere is said to be taught a new particular and singular oblation of the new Testament, in steed of all the sacrifices of the ould Testament, vvhich Irenaeus confirmeth presently in the next words after, by the prophecye of Malachye before mentioned sayinge: Malachias sic praesignificauit, &c. 
                  Malachy the Prophet did so foretell vs, (that this new sacrifice Iren. ibid. and oblation of the new Testament, should thus be instituted by Christ, and frequented by the Church) when he said to the Iewish Priests, I haue no will or likinge in yow, &c.
                   
                  Manifestissimè significans, quoniam prior quidem populus cessauit offerre Deo; omni autem loco sacrificium offertur Deo, & hoc purum in gentibus; most manifestly signifyinge, that the former Iewish people (being reiected) haue ceased to offer sacrifice vnto God; but that amonge the gentills (to witt, Christians conuerted of them) a pure sacrifice is offered in euery place of the world, that is to say, without respect of any certayne place, as the Iewish sacrifices were.
               44. With S. Irenaeus Bishop and Martyr, concurreth in the same age, and somewhat before him, S. Iustinus philosopher and Martyr, who speakinge of the selfe same thinge, and of the Iewes reprobation, and of the sacrifice of the new Testament ordayned by Christ in place therof, writeth thus in his dialogue, intituled,

                  Triphon against the said Iewes: A nemine Deus 
                  Iustin. dial. Triph. 
                  hostias accipit, nisi à sacerdotibus suis, &c. 
                  God doth accept hosts and sacrifice of none, but of his Priests; wherfore he preuenting all those that do ofter such sacrifice vnto him in Christs name, as Iesus Christ hath deliuered to be made in the Eucharist of bread and wyne, & are made by Christians in euery place, doth testify that they are gratefull vnto him: but your sacrifices (o Iewes) he doth reiect. Thus he. And these two testimonyes, of two so famous Martyrs and Doctors, are sufficient for wittnesses of the first and next age after the Apostles, to declare what the said Apostles both taught and practised in this point of publike sacrifice, and what the Church of that time vnderstood Christ himselfe to haue done in that behalfe, though I might adioyne other foure testimonyes more auncient yet then these; which are S. 
                  
                     l. 5. Const. Apost. c. 18. & l 8. c. 5. & 36. 
                  Clemont, scholler to S. Peter S. 
                  
                     l. de Eccl. Hier. cap. 3. 
                  Dionysius Areopagita, scholler to S. Paul; S. 
                  
                     epist. ad Burdegal. cap 3. 
                  Martiall Bishop of Burdeaux, and S. 
                  
                     ep. 1. Deeret. ad Orthodox.
                   
                  Alexander Bishop and Martyr of Rome; All which do no lesse cleerly then these two, declare vnto vs the doctrine and practice of their tymes vnder the Apostles.
               45. But for auoydinge prolixity I must passo them ouer, aduertisinge only by the way, that where in the Acts of the Apostles yt is wrytten by S. Luke, cōcerning the mission of S. Paul, 
                  
                     Act. 13. and Barnaby to preach, Ministrantibus illis Domino, & ieiunantibus, dixit Spiritus Sanctus, segregate mihi 
                  That the Apostles did sacrifice. 
                  Saulum & Barnabam, &c. 
                  They ministring vnto

God, and fastinge (to witt, Barnabas, Symon, Lucius, Manahen and Saul, that were Prophetts and Doctors saith S. Luke) the holy Ghost said to them, take out for me Saul, and Barnabas, to the worke that I haue chosen them for. Now as concerning the mynistery which these men were performing, when the holy Ghost spake vnto them, the Greeke word vsed by S. Luke, 
                  Litourgounion. importeth rather sacrificing, and so doth Erasmus translate yt, who was no euill Grecian, nor of small creditt with our aduersaryes: and of that word proceed the names before mencyoned of Liturgy, conteyninge the order of this sacrifice in the Christian Church.
               46. But howsoeuer this bee, yow haue heard the iudgement of the first age, after the Apostles, by two wittnesses of singular credit, S. Iustinus, and S. Irenaeus: for the second may speake S. Cyprian to the same effect: Iesus Christus Dominus & Deus noster, ipse est summus sacerdos 
                  
                     Cypr. lib 2. epist. 8. 
                  Dei Patris, & sacrificium Deo Patri ipse primus obtulit, & hoc sieri in sui commemoratione praecepit. 
                  Iesus Christ our Lord and our God, he is the high Priest of God the Father, and he offered vp first of all to God his Father a sacrifice, and commaunded this to be done in his commemoration. Lo he commaundeth vs to sacrifice as he did sacrifice. And for the third age after the Apostles S Ambrose may only speake: Ponti fex noster ille est, (saith he) qui obtulit hostiam nos 
                  
                     Ambros. com. ent. in cap. 10. ad Hebr.
                   
                  mundamem ipsam offerimus nunc, quae tunc oblata quidem, consumi non potest. 
                  He is our high Priest that offered the host which made vs cleane,

the selfe same do we offer now, which then was offerred, and cannot be consumed. Behould that we offer the selfe same host that Christ offered, and cannot be consumed. And for the fourth age S. Austen may stand for all, who answering Faustus the Manichee, that obiected, that he and other Catholiks did offer sacrifice vnto Martyrs; the holy Father denyeth yt sayinge: Sacrificare martyribus dixi, &c. 
                  I said that we did not sacrifice vnto Martyrs, but 
                        Aug. l. 20. contr. Faust. Manich. cap. 21. I said not, but that we sacrifised to God in the memoryes of Martyrs, which we most frequently vse to do, after that only rite, which God in the manifestation of the new Testament hath comaunded vs to sacrifice vnto him.
               
               47. By all which testimonyes is euident, that the Church of God, in the first foure ages after the Apostles, did both offer an externall sacrifice, which was the same that Christ had offered before, and this after a peculiar rite insinuated by Christ to the Apostles, and deliuered by them to their posterity (which peculiar rite is more expressed in the liturgies before mentioned) and that all this is done by the authority and example of Christ himselfe in his last supper, and by tradition of the Apostles, which is inough to settle any pious mans conscience. Now then thirdly, wheras I should by order passe to the consideration of ancient Fathers sayings & testimonyes about this matter, they are so many and copious, as I should be prolix and weary to the reader in

producing so many as may be alleaged, no one article or mystery of our faith, being so often handled or inculcated by them, as this of the Church sacrifice. For better comprehendinge wherof, I shall, as for the mystery of the reall 
                  Diuers heads of Fathers authorityes. 
                  presence before, heere note only vnto thee certayne generall heads, whervnto the said Fathers 1. testimonyes may be reduced; as first, that euery where in their wrytings, speakinge of this oblation made in the masse, they vse the words sacrificium, hostia, victima, offerre, immolare, sacrificare, all which are words that peculiarly and properly do signify sacrifice; which is certayne that the said Fathers would neuer so comonly haue vsed, no more then the Protestants do vse them now of their supper, if they had meant no otherwise then the Protestants do for other Sacraments; as Baptisme for example they do not call eyther sacrifice, host, or victime, nor that the act of Baptizinge, is offerringe, immolation or sacrifice, as they do the act of celebratinge masse, wherof you may read all the Fathers generally, as S. Hyppolitus Martyr, Orat. de Antichrist. S. Ambrose in psalm. 38. Nissen. orat. de resurrect. Chrysost. hom. 24. in 1. Cor. & hom. 17. in epist ad Hebraeos. Cyrill. lib. de adorat. Aug. l. 2. quaest. Euang. q. 8. & l. 4. de Trinit. cap. 14.
               48. The second head is of those authorityes, 2. that do compare this Christian sacrifice with the sacrifices of the Iewes, affirminge the one to be of the flesh of beasts & spotted, the other of the pure, and immaculate flesh of Christ, which they would neuer haue done in like

manner, yf they had not meant properly of true externall sacrifices, offered by Christians in the new law, wherof yow may see at large Tertullian lib. contr. Iudaeos cap. 1. Iustin. in Triph. Chrysost. in psalm. 95. Cyprian. lib. de vnitat. Ecclesiae Ambros. in cap. 1. Lucae. Nazianz. orat. 2. de paschat. Aug. lib. 17. de Ciuitat. Dei cap. 20. S. Leo. serm. de passion. and many others.
               49. The third head is of those authorityes, 3. that compare this dayly sacrifice of the Christian Church, offered in euery place throughout the world, with the only sacrifice of Christ, offered once for all vpon the Crosse, wherin for differēce sake they vse the words, cruentum & incruentum sacrificium, that is bloudy and vnbloudy sacrifice, for distinguishinge the māner of the oblatiō, the one vpon the Crosse, the other vpon many Altars in the Church at once, till the worlds end, otherwise holding the thing it selfe offered to be the very same in th' one & other sacrifice. See S. Chrysost. hom. 24. in 1. Cor. & hom. 2. ad 2. Tim. Cyprian. lib. 2. ep. 3. Ambros. in psalm. 38. Nissen. orat. 1. de resurrect. Aug. lib. 3. cont. Donatist. cap. 19. & lib. 20. contr. Faust. cap. 21. Isichius in Leuit. cap. 8. and others.
               50. The fourth head is of those, that affirme 4. this our dayly sacrifice to be propitiatory both for the liue and dead, as well those that are absent as present, and that for both these sorts of people yt ought, and was accustomed to be offered in their dayes, which doth euidently proue yt a true sacrifice, for that a Sacrament only doth profitt only those that do communicate

and receaue the same, and no Protestant will say that their communion is offered vp for those that are absent, quicke or dead, as the ancient Fathers do euery where say, that our host & Eucharist was offered vp in their dayes, and consequently they held yt not only for a Sacrament, but also for a sacrifice; whereof yow may see S. Chrysostome hom. 79. ad Pop. Antiochen; where he saith yt was offered for Bishopps and Gouernours of the Church; & hom. 72. in Matth. for sicke men, & lib. 6. de Sacerdotio for the dead. For which effect see S. Augustine lib. 22. de ciuit. cap. 8. & in Enchirid. cap. 110. & lib. 9. Confess▪ cap. 12. where he professeth to haue offered sacrifice of the masse for his mother S. Monica.
               
               51. The fifth head is of those places wherin 5. the Fathers do vse the words Altar, Priests and Priesthood, as proper, peculiar, and appropriated to true sacrifices; For as the Protestants of our tymes do not vse these words, for that they hould not their supper to be a sacrifice, but rather do fly them, though neuer so much vsed by the said Fathers, and in place therof do vse the words, table, minister, mynistry, and other such like of their new Religion; so neyther would the Fathers haue vsed the same words, yf they had had the same meaning that Protestants haue; For that well knew the said Fathers how to expresse their meaninge in proper words, and therfore when they say that Altars amonge Christians, are, sedes 
                  
                     Optat. l. 6. cont. Par
                           ••
                        .
                   
                  corporis Christi the seats of the body of Christ, and that

in their dayes Christians did Tertull. l. de Pen
                        •
                     te
                        •
                     t. 
                  adgeniculare aris Dei, knele downe at the Altars of God, & quod 
                  
                     Ambros. l. 5. ep. 33. 
                  obsculabantur altaria, that they kissed the Altars, and that the office of Christian Priests is to sacrifice vpon the said Altars, yt is euident what they meant, to him that will vnderstand them, wherof more may be read in S. Cyprian lib. 1. ep. 9. Euseb. lib. 1. demonstr. Euang. cap. 6. Athan. in vita Anton. Nazianz. orat. in Gorgon. Nissen. lib. de baptisimo. Chrysost. hom. 53. ad Pop. Antioch. & hom. 20. in 2. Cor. Hieron. lib. cont. Vigilant. & dial. cont. Lucifer. Aug. lib. 8. cap. vlt. and others.
               52. The sixt consideration out of the Fathers, 6. may be their lyturgyes or forme of diuine seruice or masse, for offeringe of this sacrifice in those dayes, of which sort of liturgyes there are extant vnto this day diuers, as that of S. Iames the Apostle, S. Clement scholler and successor of S. Peter, of S. Basill, S. Chrysostome, S. Ambrose, which albeit in all particular forme of prayer, do not agree with our forme and canon of masse at this day, yet in the substance of the sacrifice they do, as also in many other particular circumstances, vsinge the words of oblation, sacrifice, victime, signes, singings, blessings, eleuations, and other such rites which Protestants cannot abide. And for the cannon, and forme of our masse, which is vsed at this day in the Latyn Church, most parts therof are to be seene in S. Ambrose his books de Sacramentis, and the whole order as now yt is hath endured without alteration from S. Gregory the first downeward, wherof yow may see Alcuinus,

Amalarius, VValfridus, and other ancient authors in their books de diuinis officijs.
               
               53. By all which generall heads, yow may Luther reiecteth all Fathers about the masse. easily see the multitude of testimonyes, that may be alleaged out of the Fathers, yf we should prosecute euery one of these in particular; & how great reason Martyn Luther had to except against them all, or rather to defy them all, when first he begā to write against this sacrifice, Hic non moramur (saith he) si clamitant Papistae, Ecclesia, Ecclesia, Patres, Patres; heere we care Lib. de Messa & l. deaurogand. miss. & lib. contr. Angliae hegem. not, though Papists cry, Church, Church, Fathers, Fathers; And againe: Heere I do professe against them that vvill cry out, that I do teach against the rite of the Church and ordinances of Fathers, that I vvill heare none of these obiections. And in another place against our K. Henry of England, much more immodestly and wickedly, when the King alleaged the authorityes of ancient Fathers for the masse, this shamelesse fellow answered: Thomisticos asinos, &c. I say that these. Thomisticall asses haue nothinge to bringe forth, but only a multitude of men, and vse of antiquity. And a little after he saith expressely; that he careth not though a thousand Augustines, and a thousand Cyprians be brought against him. So as this first Father and chiefe Captayne of our Protestants, did easily graunt, as yow see, that the whole consent of ancient Fathers was against him.
            
            
               
               
                  Ponderations Upon the Premises. §. 4.
               54. All which being considered, there remayneth only to weigh, what a discreet man Import
                        ••
                      considerations. may thinke or do in this important case: For first heere is all the antiquity of the Christian 1. Church on the one side, that testifyeth vnto vs not only what was beleeued and exercised in their dayes, but vpon what grounds also, both of scriptures of the old and new Testament, and by Christs owne institution, fact and ordination, and by the practise and tradition of the Apostles themselues. Then is there 2. the continuance of all ages since, throughout all countreyes and nations of Christendome, as hath byn said. There is the agreement of all 3. generall Councells: The consent of all Ecclesiasticall 4. historyes, wherin as there is continuall mention of both publike and priuate exercise of this externall Sacrifice: So is there 5. no memory at all, of any tyme synce the Apostles wherin yt began, or that euer any contradiction, doubt, or question was about the same, for 1200. yeares togeather after Christs assension, which must needs haue happened, yf the vse therof had not byn prescribed and left by Christ and his Apostles themselues. For what men or people would haue attempted to begin, or bring in so great a matter

as this? or who would haue receaued yt without opposition, yf yt had not byn established euen from the beginninge? I adde also another cōsideration of no little importance, 6. which is, that yf Christ had left his Church & people without a particular externall sacrifice, wherby they should be distinguished from all other people; the Christian Church vnder the law of grace, should be inferiour to the Church of the patriarks vnder the law of nature, and vnto the Prophetts vnder the law of Moyses: for that both of those Churches and people had an externall dayly sacrifice, wherby to honour God, besides the internall sacrifice of their mynd: neyther can yt be said, that Christs owne sacrifice on the Crosse, once offered for all, is this dayly sacrifice apprehended by vs in faith, for that they also beleeued in him, and their sacrifices were acceptable only by faith in him to come. And therfore as Christs one sacrifice then to come, was no impediment, why their dayly sacrifices, which tooke their valour from this one of Christ, should not be dayly offered amonge them: so the same sacrifice of Christ vpon the Crosse, being now past, should not take away our dayly sacrifices offered in remembrance therof, and for the applying of the infinite valour of that one sacrifice vnto vs, from which this other dayly sacrifice taketh his sufficiency.
               55. Furthermore the very outward forme of all Christian Churches, there buildinge 7. with Crosses, Altar, Iles, and the like, the

foundinge of monasteryes, Chappells, oratoryes, the ceremonyes in foundinge them, their statutes for sayinge of masses for the dead, which were in Britany both before our nation was conuerted, and much more after; the whole Canon of our Latyn masse-booke which is graunted by our aduersaryes, and euidently proued to haue byn, as yt is now, for aboue a thousand yeares togeather, and brought in by S. Augustine our first Apostle: All these things I say, do shew whether this were a matter to be called in question by a few libertyne Priests, and auaritious noble men, & to be banished the realme vpon a soddayne, vnder the name of a child Kinge, that knew not what yt meant, as yt was in K. Edwards dayes in our miserable countrey.
               56. Moreouer yf yow ponder with your selfe, what manner of Priests they were for 8. life, learninge, and vertue that acknowledged themselues to haue offered sacrifices vpon Altars in their dayes, as S. Irenaeus, S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostome, S. Augustine, S. Gregory. and others of the first ages, yea and for these 
                     •
                  ater ages, since Berengarius mooued first the question about the reall presence, as S. Anselme, 
                        •
                     . Bernard, S. Thomas of Aquin, S. Dominicke, and The comparison of Priests that offered or impugned the sacrifice of the masse. almost infinite other Saints, and holy men, of whome all historyes do report wonderfull extraordinary tokens, of almighty God his speciall fauours towards them; and do compare them with the first marryed Priests and Apostata friars, that were the first impugners

of this sacrifice in England or round about vs, we shall find a great difference. And then yf we consider, by what good spiritt or motiue 9. 
                  Luther began the first contradiction in Germany, which was by the diuells owne persuasion and personall appearance vnto him, and disputinge against yt (for yt seemed that he esteemed so much both of the man and the matter, that he would not send an Embassadour vnto him, as he did soone after to Zuinglius, for impugninge the reall presence, but go himselfe in proper person) and that all this is confessed by themselues, and testifyed by their owne wrytings: All this, I say, being laid togeather, may strengthen him that hath any faith at all, to stand constant in the beleefe of the Catholike Church concerninge these articles: For yf there be any certainty or ground in Christian Religion at all, yt must needs be in these, wherein authority, learninge, antiquity, consent, continuance, vniuersality, miracles, and all other sorts of theologicall arguments, both diuine & humane, do concurre and nothinge at all with the impugners, but only selfe-will, passion, and malitious obstinacy, as yow will better see afterward, when yow come to examine their obiections.
               57. Furthermore yt is to be pondered, what miserable men they were that first in 10. our dayes, against the whole army of God Church did presume to impugne this blessed sacrifice, vpon such simple and fond reasons a
                     •
                   before yow haue heard, to witt Luther in Germany,

vpon the motiue laid downe vnto him by the diuell, in his disputation with him, recorded by himselfe in his wrytings, and Nicolas Ridley in England, vpon certayne places of the scripture, and certayne testimonyes of Fathers (to vse his owne words) which made nothinge at all for his purpose, as after most cleerly shall be shewed in due place, and we may easily ghesse by that, which hath byn alleaged before out of scriptures and Fathers: for that scriptures cannot be contrary to scriptures; nor are Fathers presumed to impugne Fathers, in so great a point of faith as this is.
               58. Wherfore miserable & twise miserable were these men, that first vpon so small grounds aduentured to make so fatall a breach in Gods Church; and thrise miserable were other, who vpon these mens creditts, ranne to aduenture both body and soule euerlastingly, in pursuite of this breach and contradiction begunne, as were the most of Fox his phantasticall Martyrs of the ruder and vnlearned sort, who in all their examinations & answers, were most blasphemous in defiance and detestation of this blessed-Sacrament, as yow haue seene in their historyes; and therby did well shew that they were gouerned by his spiritt, that aboue all honours doth enuy this that is done to almighty God, as the highest, and most pleasing to his diuine Maiestie of all others. And so much for this point.
            
         
         
            
            CERTAYNE OBSERVATIONS To be noted, for better aunsweringe of hereticall Cauillations, against these articles of the blessed Sacrament. CHAP. III.
            HAVING exhibited a tast in the former Chapter, of the many great and substantiall grounds, which Catholike men haue to stand vpon, in these high and diuine misteryes of Christs sacred body in the Sacrament and sacrifice, and shewed in like manner that the faithlesse and infidious Sacramentary, that wrangeleth against the same, hath no one plaine place indeed, eyther of scriptures or Fathers for his purpose, but only certayne obiections, founded for the most part vpon sense and humayne reason against faith, and aunswered ordinarily by our schoolemen themselues that first obiected the same, and out of whose books the heretiks stole them; I haue thought yt best for more perspicuityes sake, & for helpinge their vnderstanding, that are not exercised in matters aboue sense, to set downe a few obseruations in this very beginninge

wherby great light will grow to the reader, for discouering whatsoeuer shall after be treated about this matter. But yet before I enter Tvvo things diligently to be noted. into the obseruations themselues, I would haue the reader consider two things; first the inequality betweene our aduersaryes and vs in this case, for that their arguments against these mysteryes, being founded almost all in the appearance of comon sense (as hath byn said) the vnlearned reader is capable of the obiection, but not of the solution, which must be taken from matters aboue sense, as presently yow shall see.
            2. The second point is, that yf any of the old heretiks, or heathen philosophers should rise againe at this day, and bringe forth their arguments of sense & humaine reason against such articles of our faith, as in ould tyme they did impugne, for both improbable and impossible in nature; as namely the creation of the world out of nothinge; three distinct persons of the blessed Trinity in one, & the selfe same substance; two distinct natures in one person conioyned by the incarnation of Christ; the resurrection of our putrifyed bodyes, the selfe same substance, qualityes, quantityes, & other accidents, & such like points: Against which, I say, yf ould philosophers, & heretiks should come forth againe in our dayes, and propose such arguments as in their dayes they did, which seeme inuincible and vnanswerable to common sense and humaine reason; do yow not thinke that they should haue infinite

people both men and weomen to follow them, especially yf they were countenanced out with the authority of a potent Prince and Kingdome, and suffered to speake their will, as our men were, that first impugned the reall presence, and sacrifice in England; and yet as the auncient Fathers in their tymes, did not abandone these articles of faith for those difficultyes, or appearance of impossibilityes; no nor the common Cacholike people themselues, that could not reach to the vnderstandinge therof; so must not we do now, though we could not aunswere in reason the aduersaryes arguments, which yet by the ensuinge obseruations, yow will easily be able to do, And this for an entrance; now to the obseruations themselues.
            
               
                  First Obseruation. That vve are not in this mystery to follow our sense, or Imagination. §. 1.
               3. The first obseruation is taken out of the ancient Fathers wrytings, who treatinge of this mystery of Christs being in the Sacrament, do expressely warne vs to beware, that we iudge not of the matter according to sense or humayne imagination: So saith S. Cyrill B. of Hierusalem, whose words are: Quamuis sensui 
                  
                     Cy
                           •
                        ill. Catech. 4. mystag. prope enitium.
                   
                  hoc tibi suggerat, &c. 
                  Albeit externall sense do suggest vnto thee, that this Sacrament is bread and wyne; yet lett faith confirme thee to the

contrary; neyther do thou iudge by the tast, knowinge most certainely, that this bread, which seemeth so vnto vs, is not bread in deed, notwithstandinge the tast doth iudge it to be bread; but is the body of Christ; and that the wyne, which so appeareth to our sight, & by the sense of our tast, is iudged to be wyne, yet is it not wyne, but the bloud of Christ. Thus hee, neere thirteene hundred yeares gone. And the like aduertisment giueth in the same matter S. Ambrose, somewhat after him, who hauing determined most cleerly the truth of the reall presence, sayinge: Panis iste, panis 
                  
                     Ambr 1. 4. do Sacram. cap. 1. 
                  est ante verba Sacramentorum, vbi accesserit consecratio, de pane sit corpus Christi: 
                  This bread is bread, before the words of the Sacrament be vttered (by the Priest) but when the consecration is added thervnto, the bread is made the body of Christ: He frameth an obiection of the senses in these words: Fortèdicas, aliud video, &c. 
                  Perhaps 
                        Ambr. l. de myster imitiand. c. 7. thou wilt say, I see another thinge (to witt bread, and not the body of Christ) and how then dost thou say that I receaue his body? To which question S. Ambrose aunswereth at large alleaginge many other myracles, wherein our senses are deceaued.
               4. The like obseruation hath S. Chrysostoine in sundry places, talkinge of this mystery: Credamus (saith he) vbique Deo, nec repugnemus ei, etsi 
                  
                     Chrysost. hom 8 
                        •
                     . in Matth.
                   
                  sensui & cogitationi nostrae absurdum esse videatur, &c. 
                  Let vs alwayes giue creditt to God, nor let vs resist him, albeit the thing seeme absurd to our sense and cogitation, for our sense may easily

be deceaued; and therfore for so much as he hath said; This is my body, lett vs not doubt therof at all, but beleeue him. 
                  Saint Epiphanius standeth also vpon the same aduertisment, reprehendinge them greuously, yea condemninge them that dispute and frame their arguments, from the testimony of their senses against the reall presence, whose words he bringeth in thus: Et videmus (say they) quod non aequale 
                  Epiph. in Ancoras. circa medium. 
                  est, &c. 
                  We do see with our eyes, that this which we do receaue in this Sacramēt (to witt, the host) is neyther equall nor like the image of Christ in flesh, nor to his inuisible deity, nor to the formes or lineaments of his body, for yt is of a round forme, &c.
                   So they; but S. Epiphanius his conclusion is against them thus: qui 
                  Epiph. ibia. 
                  non credit esseipsum verum, excidit à gratia & salute; 
                  he that doth not beleeue Christ himselfe to be truly there (vnder the round forme of bread that is giuen) is fallen both from Gods grace, and his owne saluation.
               
               5. And finally not to enlarge my selfe further in this behalfe, Eusebius Emissenus, or who els was the author of that excellent sermon de corpore Dominï, concurreth also in this note against the iudgement of our senses sayinge; Verè vnica & persecta hostia side aestimanda, non specie, non exteriori consenda visu, 
                  This only and perfect Eusibius Emiss serm 5. de Pasehat. host is truly to be esteemed by faith, and not to be iudged by the externall shape or veiw of our eyes. Thus hee; wherof S. Chrysostome giueth an example when he wryteth of this mystery: O quot modò dicnns, vellem formam, & speciem

cius, vellem vestimenta ipsa, vellem calce amenta videre. 
                  
                     Chrysost. hom. 51. & 83. in Matth.
                   
                  O how many are there (videlicet of the simpler sort, and not so grounded in faith) that say, I would I could see Christ, his forme & shape in the Sacrament, I would see his apparell, I would see his very shooes. Thus said some in those dayes, vpon simplicity perhappes; but so say many more in our dayes, vpon heresie and infidelity. And truly yf we consider most of the arguments of all Fox his artificers, or weomen Martyrs, they were such as these heere mentioned, & deryded by S. Chrysostome, and vpon these arguments went they to the stake: Let your God in the Sacrament (said Alice Driuer and her fellowes) shedd some bloud, and vve vvill beleeue. The like cryed out many other simple & rude people; vve see bread, we see wyne, vve see a round cake, we will neuer beleeue yt to be God, except we see him worke some miracle. What would S. Chrysostome (thinke yow) and other Fathers before mentioned haue said' to these people, yf they had heard them sound out such blasphemous cryes of infidelity, and vnbeleefe in their dayes? And so much for this first obseruation, which is vsually to be found in all auncient Fathers wrytinges.
            
            
               
               
                  The second Obseruation. That not only sense and common Imagination, but neyther philosophicall reason is necessary to be followed in these mysteryes. §. 2.
               6. The second obseruation is much like to the first, but passeth some degrees further, and is taken out of the auncient Fathers aduertisments in like manner, to witt, that not only sense, and sensuall imagination is not to be followed in these diuine mysteryes, of our Sauiours body; but neyther naturall, or philosophicall reason it selfe, is allwayes to be followed, notwithstandinge yt reacheth farre higher then sense can attayne to: which is proued first by the generall definition of faith, vsed by S. Paul in his epistle to the Hebrues, where yt is said to be argumentum rcrum non apparentium, an argument or assent of things, that do not appeare by reason, which yet is more explicated by Saint Gregory, when he saith: sides non habet meritum, vbi humana ratio praebet experimentum; 
                  
                     Greger. hom. 26. in euang.
                   faith hath no meritt, where humane reason doth yeld a proofe: Saint Augustine also saith: This is the praise of faith, yf that which is beleeued 
                  
                     Aug. tract. 79. in Ioan.
                   
                  be not seene, for what great matter is it, yf that be beleeued, vvhich is euident? And this is vniuersally in all points of our faith, the beleefe wherof must not depend of the euidency of reason, for then yt should be science (as philosophers tearme yt) and not faith, which faith dependeth

on the authority, trust and creditt we giue to the reuealer, which is God himselfe.
               7. But especially is this to be done in this high mystery of the blessed Sacrament of the Altar, which is not only a mystery, but a miracle also, and such a miracle, as requireth no lesse power then the omnipotency of God to performe the same: Necessarium est (said S. Chrysostome to his people of Antioch) mysteriorum 
                  Chrysost. in serm. ad Pop. Antioch. 
                  discere miraculum, &c. 
                  It is necessary for vs to learne this myracle of mysteryes, what it is, why it was giuen vs, what vtility cometh therwith vnto vs & the like: And againe the same Father in his bookes of Priesthood, descending to treat more in particular one point of this mystery, which is, how Christs body is at one tyme in many places, he cryeth out; O miraculum! o Dei benignitatem! O myracle! o goodnesse of God! and why? qui cum patre 
                  
                     Chrysost. l. 3. de Sacerd.
                   
                  sursum sedet, in illo ipso temporis articulo omnium manibus petractatur, 
                  he that sitteth aboue with his Father, in that very instant of tyme is handled by all Priests hands: And S. Cyprian to the same effect: Panis quem Dominus discipulis porrigebat, non 
                  Cypr. serm. de cana Dominj. 
                  effigie sed natur a mutatus, omnipotentia verbi sactuiest caro: 
                  The bread which our Lord gaue to his disciples (at the last supper) being changed not in outward shew (for yt appeareth bread still) but in nature, by the omnipotency of Gods word is made flesh.
               
               8. Thus thought and spake the ancient Fathers of this high mystery, and myracle in the Sacrament. And conforme to this, they called

vs alwayes from reason to faith, from contention to humble beleefe, when they treated therof, for so wryteth among other auncient Fathers S. Hilary speakinge of this matter: non est humano aut saeculi sensu in Dei rebus loquendum. 
                  
                     Hilar. lib. 8. de Trinit.
                   
                  We must not talke of works of God accordinge to humayne and wordly reason, &c. touchinge the naturall verity of Christ in vs (by this Sacrament) that which we affirme except we haue learned yt of himselfe, we do affirme the same folishly, and impiously, but he hath said: my flesh is truly meate, &c.
                   Vnto whome S. Ambrose agreeinge, saith of the same 
                     Ioan. 6. mystery: Quid hic quaeris natura ordinem, &c. 
                  Why 
                        Ambr. l. 4. de Sacram. cap. 4. seekest thou heere the order of nature (touchinge the body of Christ in the Sacrament) forsomuch as our Lord Iesus was borne of the Virgin beside the course of nature. Heere yow see he compareth this mystery, and myracle of Christs being in the Sacrament, with the myracle of his incarnation & myraculous byrth, of the blessed Virgin. The very same iudgement held S. Ephrem equall in antiquity 
                     Ephrem. lib. de natura De
                           •
                         minimè scrutan da cap. 5. to S. Ambrose. Quid scrutaris inscrutabilia. &c. 
                  What dost thou search after thinges vnsearcheable? Yf thou examine these thinges curiously, thou wilt seeme not to be faithfull but curious: be faithfull and simple, and so participate the immaculate body of thy Lord, beleeuinge most certaynely, that thou dost eat the very whole lambe yt selfe, &c.
                   So he.
               9. Saint Augustine also in many places doth beat earnestly, against this standing vpon reason

in matters of faith, but especially in his epistle to Volutianus, sayinge: Quae sibi quisque fatilia, 
                  August. op. ad Volutian. 
                  &c. 
                  The thinges which each man esteemeth easy for him to conceaue, though he cannot make them, he is content to beleeue them, but all that is aboue his capacity he holdeth for false and feigned. And againe: Si ratio quaeritur non erit mirabile, 
                  yf yow seeke reason for euery thinge, yt will not be maruelous, 
                  Demus, Deum aliquid posse quod nos fateamur inuestigare non posse: 
                  Lett vs graunt that God can do Aug. ibid. somewhat, wherof we cannot seeke out the reason; 
                  in talibus rebus tota ratio facti est potentia facientis; 
                  in such matters all the reason, that can be alleaged for the fact, or for that which is done, is the power of the doer. And in another place the same Father hauinge spoken of the blessed Sacrament and how Christ our Sauiour is therein sub aliena specie, vnder another forme of bread and wyne, as the Angells also appeare vnto vs vnder assumpted bodyes, he concludeth thus: Mihi autem omnino vtile est, &c. 
                  It is very profitable for me to remember my Ibidem. owne feeble forces, & to warne my brethren that they also be myndfull of theirs, to the end that our humayne infirmity do not passe further (in search of these mysteryes) then is safe for vs to do. So blessed S. Augustine.
               
               10. And finally S. Cyrill Bishop of Alexandria handlinge those words of the faithlesse Capharnaites, Ioan. 6. How can he giue his flesh to be eaten. &c. reprehendeth greatly such curious inquisition sayinge: Numquam in tam sublimibus

rebus illud (quomodo) aut cogitemus aut proferamus. In 
                     Cyrill. Alex. l. 4. in Ioan. cap. 12. so high matters (as these of the Sacrament) let vs neuer thinke or alleage this word (quomodo) that is, how yt can be? And in this manner did the ancient Fathers proceed about this mystery, by way of faith and humble submission of their iudgements and vnderstandings, and not by feeding their imagination with probability of humayne reason against faith, as the sectaryes of our tyme do, yea and placinge so much confidence therin, as they were content to dy for the same (as after yow will see by experience, when we come to handle their arguments in particular, wherof the greater part (yea almost all) relyed eyther vpon common sense, or some little shew of humayne reason. And thus much for the second obseruation.
            
            
               
                  Third Obseruation. That reason is not contrary to faith, but inferior vnto it. §. 3.
               11. The third obseruation may be, that though yt is iustly accoumpted a fault of folly, pride, heresie, or infidelity by the foresaid Fathers, to stand too much vpon sense & reason in these mysteryes, which do surpasse them both; yet are they not contrary to reason, for that one truth cannot be contrary to another, and God is the author of both lightes, the one as a lower, the other as a more high and

eminent light, so as, though this lower cannot reach to discouer that, which the higher doth disclose & comprehend; yet is not this extinguished or violated by the other, but rather perfected and strengthened. Reason reacheth only to thinges that are probable in nature, faith ascendeth to all that is possible, and not only possible to man, but euen to God himselfe, which so farre exceedeth both the power and vnderstanding of man, as S. Paul speaking but of one point only of our faith, which is the ioyes of heauen, saith that the hart of man could not comprize the same.
               12. And yet yf we would enter into the search of what is possible to Gods power and omnipotency, the scripture in few words setteth yt downe: Non est impossibile apud Deum 
                  
                     Luc. 
                     
                        •
                     . 
                  omne verbum: there is nothinge impossible to God, which is as much to say, that all thinges are possible. And againe our Sauiour speaking to his Father said: Omnia tibi possibilia sunt: All 
                     Marc. 14. things are to thee possible. And yf we would require examples, the creation of the heauens, and of all things both in & vnder them, will minister thousands, whervnto humayne reason cannot reach. And S. Iohn Baptist gaue an example to the Iewes, that God of stones 
                     Luc. 3. is able to raise vp children to Abraham; but this also is nothing in respect of Gods infinite and incomprehensible omnipotency, which is aboue the reach of our vnderstandinge.
               13. No limitation then at all is to be layd to Gods almighty power, but that he may do

whatsoeuer he please, except only one, accordinge to diuines, which is, that the thinge do not imply contradiction in yt selfe, as that yt should be and not be at once, which is impossible, 
                     D. Tho. 1. part. q. 14. art. 3. or that yt should import any imperfection or impotency in God, as to synne, or dye, which are effects rather of want of power, then of omnipotency. And in this do the more learned Protestants also agree in word with vs, sayinge, that yf yt were cleere that God would haue yt so, or had said yt, that of bread should be made his flesh, and that one substance should be turned into the other, they would graunt that he could do yt by his omnipotency. Thus they say in, words, to auoid the odious note of infidelity, or limiting Gods power; but when they come to the point indeed, they found all their greatest arguments vpon the impossibility thereof, as though God could not do yt. And so shall yow see afterwards, when we come to discusse their strongest arguments. And their great Grand-father Iohn VVikliffe, or rather VVicked-beleefe, as VValsingham calleth him, did absolutely deny that God was able to do yt, 
                     VValdens. tom. 2. cap. 72. & 73. as Thomas VValden testifieth out of his owne wrytings. And Iohn Caluyn his scholler in this point calleth vs madd-men, for that we beleeue that God was able to make bread his flesh in the Sacrament, and yet not to haue the externall forme, nature and propriety of flesh: Insane (saith he) quid à Dei potentia postulas, 
                  
                     Calu. lib. 4. Institut. cap. 17. §. 24. 
                  vt carnem faciat simul esse, & non esse carnem? 
                  Thou

madd-man how dost thou demaund of the power of God, that he should make flesh to be flesh, and not flesh at one tyme? But how doth Caluyn proue (thinke yow) that our beleefe of the Sacrament implyeth this contradiction of flesh and no flesh? Forsooth (to vse his words) for that we graunt, that God can make, that the selfe-same flesh of Christ can occupy diuers 
                  Calu. ibid. 
                  places at once, and that yt be conteyned in no certayne place, and that yt lacketh both the outward shape of flesh and proper manner of being, &c. And for beleeuinge of this he counteth vs madd-men, as yow haue heard, and so must he account also of necessity all those holy Fathers before mentioned, who beleeued the same mystery, as we do, notwithstandinge the outward appearances of impossibility, for comprehendinge wherof they fledd from sense and reason to faith and beleefe.
               14. And yet further then this the reader must vnderstand, that for so much as the said reason and faith, are not contradictory the one to the other, but more eminent the one aboue the other, as before hath byn shewed, Catholiks do take vpon them to proue, that no one of these difficultyes obiected by faithlesse Protestants, is impossible, or implieth contradiction in reason it selfe, as by the ensuing considerations shall more particularly be declared; notinge only to the reader by the way, that yf the particular intrinsecall natures and essences of euery thing were cleerly knowen vnto vs, 
                     •
                  s they are for example vnto Angells, and

other Saints, that be in glory, we should easily see what doth imply contradiction to the said natures, and what doth not, but for that God, for our humility and greater meritt, would haue vs not alwayes to see this; therfore are we forced to ghesse at the same by way of discourse and reason, and by one example to another, as yow shall see in the ensuinge obseruations.
            
            
               
                  Fourth Obseruation. How a body may be vvithout an ordinary naturall place. §. 4.
               15. One of the greatest difficultyes therfore obiected by the aduersary, is, that a true and naturall organicall body, such as Christs is confessed to be in the Sacrament, cannot be without the ordinary dimensions of a peculiar place, which we deny in such sense, as heere we shall declare. For better vnderstandinge Three vvayes or manners of being in place. wherof is to be noted, that three wayes a thinge may be in a place, first naturally and ordinarily by extension and commensuration vnto the said place, soe as euery part 1. and part cell of the thinge placed, do aunswere to each 1. part of the place yt selfe, which manner of being in place, philosophers do call circumscriptiuely, for that all places of the body so placed are so limited and circumscribed by the part of the place, as neyther that body can be i
                     •
                   any other place, nor that place admitt another

body, without penetratinge the one of the other, which by ordinary course of nature is held for impossible.
               16. Another manner of being in place is more spirituall, and hard to conceaue, to witt, 2. when a thing is so in a place, as the parts therof are not extended to the parts of the place, as in the former example, but yet that the whole thing is so defined and limited within the compasse of that whole place assigned thervnto, as naturally yt cannot be in any other, whilest yt is there, as for example, the soule of a man in the body thervnto assigned, is so conteyned therin, as yt is not elswhere, and yet is it not so extended by commensuration, as in the former example, that one part of the soule aunswereth one part of the body, and another, another part, but the whole soule which is indiuisible, and hath no parts at all, is wholy in the whole body, and wholy in euery part and parcell therof, which is a miraculous strange being, yf yt be well considered, & notwithstanding naturall as all philosophers do graunt, for that the whole soule of man is as wholy (for example) in the singar and foote, as in the breast and head, and yet is but one soule in all, and nether many soules nor one soule diuided into parts. And after the same manner, is an Angell also in a place definitiuely, and not circumscriptiuely, that is to say wholy in the whole place, which he occupieth, & wholy in euery part therof, without multiplication or diuision in himselfe, or extension

vnto the parts of the place wherin yt is. But for that the example of the soule, is more familiar and euident to our sense and reason, it doth better expresse the matter. And yt is to be noted, that yt doth somewhat imitate the being of God himselfe wholy, and without diuision in all parts of the world, and in all creatures therof without limitation, change, or multiplication, but only yt differeth in this, that the soule, or an Angell, being both creatures, cannot be euery where, as the creatour naturally is, and he cannot be otherwise; but yet by his diuine power, the said creatures may be in diuers places at once, as after shalbe shewed.
               17. These two wayes then of being in a place, as I haue said, are naturall; the first circumscriptiuely, the second definitiuely. But besides these two, there is a third supernaturall, and possible to Gods diuine omnipotency, and not repugnant to reason yt selfe, as after shalbe shewed; which is, that one and the selfe-same thing, may by Gods diuine power, be placed in two different places at once, that is to say, that the selfe-same soule, as yt is naturally, wholy, and entyrely in the head, for example, and in the foote; so yt repugneth not to the same nature or essence of the soule, to be putt in two different bodyes at once. The like of an Angell in diuers places, and the same also may be held of a naturall body, ys God will haue yt so, as in the next obseruation shalbe proued. And this way or manner

of being in place, for that the Cath. Church doth hould yt to be in the body of our Sauiour in the Sacrament, is called by diuines a sacramentall being in place, nor for that the true body is not really there, as some hearinge the word Sacramentally, vsed sometymes by the Fathers and Doctors, do fondly apprehend, but for that it is there after this speciall manner, as we haue declared, that is to say, so as yt is also in other places at the same tyme.
               18. Now then, these three wayes or manners of being in place declared, yt remayneth, that we shew how yt is possible to Gods power, and not repugnant to naturall reason, that a true body, which of his owne nature is in Hovv a body may be definitiuely in place. place, only after the first manner of circumscription and commensuration, or extension, may, by Gods power, be in place also after the second and third way, that is difinitiuely and Sacramentally, without the first way of commensuration and extension to a place. And first heere we shall shew the said possibility in the second way, and then of the third in the ensuinge obseruation.
               19. The only cheefe ground, or reason obiected by the heretiks, why it may seeme to repugne or imply contradiction, that a true organicall body togeather with his quantity, such as Christs is in the Sacrament, should be definitiuely without extension in place, is, for that yt appeareth contrary to the nature of quantity to be without such extension; but this ground Cath. Philosophers and diuines

do easily ouerthrow, shewinge that three things do agree to quantity or magnitude, wherof the first is to be extended in yt selfe, and to haue distinct partes one from the other among themselues, though not euer visible, or perceptible by our sense; and this first point is so essentiall to quantity and magnitude, as yt cannot be imagined separable, so as it remaine quantity. And therfore this is graunted to be in the body of our Sauiour in the Sacrament, though our sense doth not comprehend yt. The second property of quantity or magnitude, proceedinge from this first, is; not only to haue partes distinct in themselues, but to haue them extended also in place, accordinge to the commensuration therof, as in the first way of being in place we haue declared.
               20. And for that this second condition, or propriety, is later then the former, & ensueth therof, yt is not so intrinsecall to the nature & essence of quantity, but that by Gods diuine power yt may be separated, without destroyinge the said nature, which our diuines do shew by examples of other thinges, where God hath separated such secondary proprietyes, without dissoluinge the natures, as heatinge, for example, from fyre in the fornace of Babylon, which heatinge notwithstandinge is as naturall to fyre, as yt is to quantity to occupy place. Christ also in S. Mathewes ghospell, hauinge said to his disciples, that yt was easier 
                        Cap. 19. for a Camell to passe through the eye of a needle, then for a rich-man to enter into the

Kingedome of heauen, and the Apostles wondringe therat, and sayinge: vvho then can be saued? our Sauiour answered, that, that vvhich vvas impossible to men, vvas possible to God, which yet could not be possible, but by separatinge from the camell all his naturall extension, and commensuration of place. Wherfore all the auncient Fathers vpon this place attributing this to myracle, do affirme, that by Gods diuine power yt may be done, to witt, that a camell remayninge in the nature of a camell, may passe through a needles eye: quid prohibet (saith S. Gregory Nazianzen) quo minus hoc siat, si voluntas it a tulerit? What letteth but that this (of 
                     Nazianzorat. 36. quae est quarta de Theolog.
                   the camell) may be done, yf Gods will be to haue yt so? Some Protestant will stepp forth, and say that yt cannot be done, for that the Camell should not in that case haue quantity and be organicall (for so they say of our Sauiours body in the Sacrament), but Nazianzen was of another opinion: And so may yow read Origen, S. Hierome, S. Augustine, S. Hilary, 
                  
                     Matth. 19. Luc. 18. Marc. 10. 
                  S. Chrysostome, and other Fathers in their commentaryes, and expositions vpon this place of S. Mathewes ghospell.
               21. The third naturall condition or propriety of quantity (proceedinge of this second) is, that for so much as by the forsaid second propriety, The third condition or propriety of quantity. the thinge placed doth fill vp the place which yt occupyeth, euery part therof answeringe to euery part of the said place only, and one place conteyne one body; so as naturally yt is no lesse impossible for two bodyes to be

in one place, then for one body to be in many. Yet notwithstanding supernaturally, and by Gods omnipotent power, both the one & the other may be without implication, or contradiction of the essence, or nature of a true body. The reason wherof is this: for that this third propriety in quantity or magnitude, flowinge of the second, as hath byn said, may much more easily be separated from the essence of the said quantity and body, then the second, and consequently the former being separable, this is much more, wherof our diuines do giue diuers most euident instances, out of scripture yt selfe. As for example out of S. Iohns Ghospell, where twise yt is said, that 
                     Ioan. 20. he came in to his disciples, when the gates were shutt. And in S. Mathew, and S. Marke, 
                  
                     Math. 28. Mare. 16. where yt is shewed, how Christ after his resurrection came forth of the sepulcher, the stone also being shutt; and in his natiuity he came forth of his mothers wombe, without violation of her virginity, and in his assension 
                     Ephes. 4. he passed through all the heauens with his naturall body. In all which myraculouse examples 
                     Se S. Aug. ep. 3. ad Volus. & l 22. de Ciuit. Dei cap. 8. & Chrysost. Euth
                           •
                        m Cyrill. &c In cowmentavijs.
                   (for so do the ancient Fathers hould and affirme them to be) there must needs be penetration of bodyes, or two bodyes in one place, which is no lesse repugnant to the ordinary nature of quantity (as hath byn said) then for a body to be without certaine dimension of any place.
               22. Besides this our diuines do alleage the examples of the damned spirits, miraculously

tyed to certayne locall places in hell; and that which is more maruelous, that the damned soules being spiritts, should suffer, and be tormented by corporall fire, wherof S. Augustine treateth at large lib. 21. de Ciuit. Dei cap. 1. 2. & deinceps, which is no lesse against the ordinary nature and propriety of spiritts, to suffer corporally, then yt is against the nature of a body, to be after a certayne spirituall manner without his locall dimension; by all which we may perceaue, that although yt be aboue naturall reason, that organicall bodyes should want these externall locall positions; yet is yt not contrary, or contradictory thervnto, but subiect to Gods omnipotent power, when, and where yt pleaseth him to make yt so, and consequently yt may be so also in the blessed Sacrament, without destroyinge the nature of a true body, as fondly Protestants do pretend.
               23. And heerby now falleth to the ground, a whole mayne multitude of vayne arguments, brought by Fox his Martyrs, as after yow shall see, against the reall presence, all of them founded vpon this ground, that a true organicall body cannot, by Gods power, be either without locall dimensions, or in moe places then one at once. The first of which two assertions hath now ben improued, and the second shalbe in the next ensuinge obseruation.
            
            
               
               
                  The fifth Obseruation. How a body may be in diuers places at once. §. 5.
               24. As the weake faith and learninge of the Sacramentaryes of our tyme, cannot reach to conccaue, that a body can be without an externall place; so much lesse, can they comprehend, that yt may be by Gods omnipotency placed in diuers places at once, for that yt seemeth to their sense, and humayne reason to be impossible; but the ancient holy Fathers, more wise and learned then our said Sectaryes, tooke another course in this point, which was to asscribe yt to miracle, and to Gods infinite power, which they could not by reason arriue vnto: I might cyte diuers Fathers, but one or two shall serue for all; Omiracle! (saith S. Chrysostome) o goodnes of God! that 
                  
                     Shrysost. lib. 3. de Sacerdotie.
                   
                  the same Christ who sitteth in heauen vvith his Father, is conuersant at the selfe-same tyme, in the hands of all that receaue him on earth! And the same Father, wrytinge of the same sacred body of our Sauiour, as yt is a sacrifice, saith: Vnum est hoc sacrificium, &c. This sacrifice is but one, for that otherwise, because yt is offered in many places, there should be many 
                  
                     Chrysost. hom. 17. in ep. ad hebr.
                   
                  Christs, vvhich is not so, but one, and the selfe same Christ is in euery place, (when yt is offered) here yt is whole Christ, and there it is whole Christ, and yet but one body: for as euery where one body, and not many bodyes are offered, so is there also but one sacrifice, &c.
                  
In which places you see S. Chrysostome to hould & to affirme, that Christs true body, without diuision or multiplication, is offered vp in many places at once, yea innumerable places, yf we beleeue S. Gregory Nissen whose words are: As Christs diuinity doth replenish the world, and yet is 
                  Nissen. orat. de Paschate. 
                  but one; so is his body consecrated in innumerable places, and yet is but one body. So he. And do yow obserue, that the Father saith not, that Christs body is euery where, as his diuinity is, as the Lutherane Vbiquitaryes of Germany, do absurdly affirme; but that yt is in innumerable places by consecration.
               25. Well then these Fathers denyed not the reall presence, as our Sacramentaryes do, for that they conceaued not the reason, how one body might be in diuers places at once, but mounted by faith aboue reason, asscribing the same to miracle and Gods omnipotency, as yow haue heard: and so do Catholiks at this day. Heare the pious speach of a great learned man aboue 400. yeares gone. Yow vvill say to me 
                  
                     Hugo de Sa Victor. l. 2. do Sacram. p. 8. cap. 11. (quoth he), how can one and the selfe same body, be at one tyme in diuers places, &c. Do not maruayle, he that made the place, made the body, and the place for the body, and the body in the place; and vvhen he ordayned that one body should be in one place, yt was as pleased him, and yf he would, he could haue made yt othervvise, &c. Thou hast seene only that vvhich he hath made, and not that vvhich he can make, and heerevpon dost maruayle when thou seest any other thinge, then that which thou art accustomed to see; but do thou thinke vpon the matter, and yt will cease to be maruaylous,

or at leastwayes, yt will not seeme to be incredible. Thus he.
               26. But our diuines do go yet further, shewinge that this is not impossible, euen in nature yt selfe, for God to performe, as yow may perceaue by that we haue declared in the former obseruation: For yf yt were repugnant and contradictory to the nature of a true body, to be in diuers places at once, this must be eyther in respect of the vnity therof, for that Tvvo difficultyes solued. yt should therby be diuided from yt selfe, or multiplyed in yt selfe, and so not be one but many bodyes; or els secondly yt should be impossible to be in diuers places, in respect of the quantity, which a true body hath, wherby yt should be limyted to some certayne space or place; but neyther of these two difficultyes do impossibilitate the matter, as now we shall declare.
               27. Not the first about vnity, for that God The first difficulty about vnity. being a substance indiuisible, is euery where wholy, and in euery one of his creatures, and yet remayneth one still, nor can be diuided or multiplyed: which is so wonderfull a consideration, as S. Augustine saith therof: Miratur hoc 
                  
                     Aug. ep. 3. ad Volus.
                   
                  mens humana, & quia non capit, fortasse non credit. Mans mynd doth wonder at this, and for that yt conceaueth yt not, perhaps yt doth not beleeue yt. Some likenesse also of this admirable being is in an Angell, which though it cannot be euery where at once, as God is, yet hath yt a wonderfull being in place; notwithstanding, as before hath byn touched, being placed

within any compasse or circuite, as for example in a house or Church, yt is wholy in all that space, and wholy in euery part therof, & yet remayneth one and simple without diuision in himselfe: which example is more euident also in our soule; as before we haue declared, for that the selfe-same soule in a body, when yt is an infant, and when yt is at his full grouth, is wholy in the whole body, & wholy in euery part therof, and yet is yt not multiplyed therby, nor diuided. Whereby is made manifest, that yt repugneth not to the essence or vnity of any one substance, to be in diuers places at once, and this naturally, but much more supernaturallye, by the omnipotent power of God.
               28. There remayneth then the second difficulty The secōd difficulty about quantity. about quantity, or a body indued with quantity, how yt is not letted therby to be in two places at once, wherof we haue treated in the former obseruation, shewinge how actuall locality by circumscription, being but a secondary propriety, following and flowing from the nature of quantity, may, by Gods power, be separated from the same, so as the said quantity may remayne with her true essence, of hauinge distinct parts in yt selfe, and yet no extensiue location, or commensuration of place, in which case yt repugneth no more for the selfe-same quantity to be in many places at once, then yt doth vnto a spirituall substance without quantity, such as is an Angell, or the soule of man, and consequently

the substance of Christs body, togeather with the quantity in this manner, may by Gods power be put in many places at once, as we see by course of nature it selfe, that the substance of mans soule without quantity, is put in many particular places of a mans body, without diuision or multiplication, remayninge still but one only soule, as hath byn declared. And this shall suffice for explication of this possibility, how yt doth not imply contradiction, and therefore is not impossible to God.
               29. Neyther do our diuines shew only, that Diuers articles beleeued by Protestāts are more hard then this. this is not impossible in our Sauiours body, but further also, that we do beleeue diuers other mysteryes of our faith as hard or harder then this, yea much more impossible to sense and reason, yf we consider well the difficultyes therof, as the creation of the world of nothinge, the mystery of the blessed Trinity, the beleefe of Christs incarnation, our resurrection, and the like, for yt is much harder by humayne reason and naturall philosophy, to conceaue how the world could be created of nothinge, and how one and the selfe-same nature can be wholy in three reall distinct persons, without diuision or multiplication in yt selfe, and how one person can be in two diuers distinct natures, as yt is in our Sauiour, and how one, and the selfe-same thing being perished and corrupted, may be raised againe with the selfe-same accidents that perished before. These points I say, and diuers others

which both we and Protestants do confesse to be true, are more harde, and impossible in naturall reason, then yt is to be beleeue that one body is in diuers places at once.
               30. Furthermore there be certayne familiar Naturall examples inducing vs to this manner of being of Christes body in diuers places. examples in nature yt selfe, that do resemble somewhat the matter, and may induce a man that is not obstinate, and hath any meane capacity to conceaue somewhat of the possibility therof, as when a great lookinge-glasse that represented but one face vnto yow when yt was whole, being broken into many parts euery part will represent wholy the selfe-same face. The voyce also of him, that speaketh to a great multitude, though yt be but one in yt selfe, yet cometh yt wholy to euery mans eares, which S. Augustine alleaged for a wonderfull thinge towards the prouinge of Gods being wholy euery-where: Omne quod sonat (saith he) & omnibus totum est, & singulis totum 
                  
                     Aug. ep. 
                     
                        ••
                      
                     ad Volus.
                   
                  est. All that soundeth is heard wholy of all, and wholy of euery particular man. And though these examples be not like in euery respect, yet may they serue for a certayne induction to make vs comprehend the other, wherof we now speake.
               31. Last of all, Catholike diuines do not only shew the possibility of this point, that our Sauiours Examples of the being of Christs body in diuers places it once. body may be in diuers places at once, as also that sundry other mysteryes of our faith are beleeued, of more difficulty then this, yf we regard common sense and reason, but do shew also out of the scriptures themselues, that

Christ after his assension hath byn in more then one place at once, as is manifest by that famous apparition of his to S. Paul, recorded 
                     Act. 9. & 22. in the acts of the Apostles, when he appeared vnto him in the way neere to Damasco, inuironed with a great light, and talked with him in such sort, as both the light and words were seene and heard by his companions, and many other apparitions to S. Peter himselfe, testified 
                     Egesipp. l. 3. de excidio Hierosol. Ambr. orat. cont. Auxentium Athan. in vita Anton. Greg. lib. 4. dial. c 16. Paul. ep. ad Macarium. Ioan. Dia
                           •
                        . l. 2. de vita Greg. c. 22. by Egesippus, and S. Ambrose; to S. Anthony also testified by S. Gregory, & besides diuers others recorded by S. Paulinus, Ioannes Diaconus, and other authenticall wryters, from whome, except we will derogate all creditt and authority, we may not doubt, but that Christ remayninge still in heauen (for so hould both we and Protestants togeather, that he departed not from thence) appeared also in diuers places of the earth to his Saints, and consequently 
                     Mare. 16. his body could be in diuers places at once, wherby is broken and dissolued another squadron of arguments, framed by the Sacramentaryes Hovv Christ is in heauen and in the Sacramēt after a different manner. of our dayes to the simple people, as though Christs reall body could not be in the Sacrament, for that yt is in heauen; wheras we affirme, that both may be and stand togeather, though in different manner, for that in heauen he is circumscriptiuely, and in the Sacrament sacramentally, which tearmes we haue before declared.
            
            
               
               
                  The sixth Obseruation. How Christes body in the Sacrament, may be now vnder a greater forme, now vnder a losse, and the least, that may be discerned. §. 6.
               32. By this also which is said may be conceaued, how the sacred body of our Sauiour, in the Sacramēt vnder the accidents of bread, is sometymes in a greater visible quantity, and sometymes in a lesse, accordinge to the externall formes and accidents vnder which yt is, yea and in the least part & parcell of the consecrated host, that is perceptible to our sense, for that the said body being remoued by Gods omnipotent power from all locall extension, it may be vnder a greater or smaller externall quantity, without alteration of the body yt selfe, as we see in the soule of man, which is the selfe-same in the least part of the body wherin it is, as in the greatest, or in the whole body, yea when the said body is changed, or groweth from a lesser to a greater quantity, as in an infant, who after commeth to be a great man, the selfe-same soule replenisheth the one and the other without grouth or diminution in yt selfe, and so the body of Christ in a great host or a little, or in any least part therof, when yt is broken, is wholy, and the selfe-same body, with the selfe-same internall organicall quantity, which yt had vnder a great host. And this point that the quantity of a

substance may be increased or diminished externally, in respect of place, without alteratiō 
                  Note this example. of the inward quantity, or substāce, is euident by many examples, which we see dayly of rarefaction and condensation. As for example when a gallon of water is put in a great vessell ouer the fire, yt cometh by boylinge to fill the whole vessell, that is capable of many gallons, and yet as the inward substance is not increased, so neyther the quantity in yt selfe; and contrary wise, when the said water is againe cooled, it returneth to occupy as small a place, as yt did at the beginninge, and yet retayneth allwayes the selfe same both quantity and substance.
               33. By which example, & many other that may be alleaged, some kind of notice may be gathered vnto our common sense and reason, how the substance of Christs body in the Sacrament, togeather with his internall quantity, may by his omnipotent power, be sometymes vnder a great externall quantity, or extension in place, & sometymes vnder a lesser; yea the least, that by our senses may be perceaued: and yet is Christs body wholy and entirely there, accordinge (in some proportion) to the lookinge-glasse before mentioned, which being broken into diuers small peeces, each one representeth the whole visage seuerally, which before was exhibited by the whole: And so, when any consecrated host is broken into many parts, that which was cōteyned before in the whole host, is now cōteyned wholy

vnder euery particular parcell therof, as yt was also before. And to this effect, are those words of S. Epiphanius before alleaged, against them that said: Videmus quod est aequale, &c. 
                  We see that the host receaued in the Sacrament, is Vli supra. not equall or like to the figure of Christs body, but is round, &c.
                   Wherfore all the arguments of Fox his Martyrs, that were founded on this improportion of the host to Christs naturall, and externall quantity, haue no ground at all, but a little fraudulent shew and appearance of sensible improbability, and yet were many of their cheefest arguments builded on this only foundation, as yow haue seene readinge ouer their historyes before recyted, and shall do more afterward, when we come to examine their arguments seuerally; and in the meanee space this shall suffice for an aduertisment about this obseruation.
            
            
               
                  The seauenth Obseruation. How accidents may be without a subiect, and of their operations in that case. §. 7.
               34. The seauenth obseruation may be, about the accidents or formes of bread and wyne, that do remayne by Gods omnipotent power without a subiect, after the words of consecration, as they did before in the substance of bread, whervpon the more simple sort of Sacramentaryes following sense, will needs argue, that the substance also of bread & wyne,

do remayne after the said consecration; and those that be more learned, do go about to proue the same by philosophicall reason, for that the nature of an accident is to be in another, as the nature of a substance is to be in yt selfe, wherof ensueth, that for so much as no 
                     Aristot. 5. Metiph. 
                           •
                        ext. 35. accident can be in God, as in a subiect, (neyther are they in Christs body, as we also doe confesse) they must needs be heere in their proper subiect and substances of bread and wyne: but all this is founded vpon a false ground, for albeit naturally an accident cannot be but in a subiect, yet supernaturally, and by the power of God susteyninge yt, and supplyinge the place of a naturall subiect, yt may be, as we do confesse on the contrary side by Christian faith, that the humayne nature of Christ in the mystery of the incarnation, hath not her proper subsistence in yt selfe (which yet is as naturall to a substance to subsist in yt selfe, as yt is to an accident to be susteyned by another) but is susteyned by the diuine person of Christ.
               35. And the reason of this, concerninge accidents, is, that albeit the intrinsecall nature of an accident is to be vnperfect, and to depend of another, and therby to haue an aptitude to be in another, yet the act therof may be separated by Gods power, from the said nature, as a thinge posterior, and followinge from the said nature, as we haue she wed before in the naturall propriety of quantity, to haue commensuration of place; and this to be, true that

this actuall inherence of accidents, may be seuered from the essentiall aptitude thervnto, without destroing the nature of the said accident, many philosophers both Christian and heathen do affirme, whose sentences you See Auer
                           •
                        . in cpitom. Metaphys. tract. 2. Aui
                           •
                        ēbron. l. font. vitae tract. 2. VValdensis tom. 2. cap. 76. may see gathered by diuers learned men, as well of ancient as of our tymes. Sundry Fathers also are of opinion, that this case happened de facto in the creation of the world, when the light being made vpon the first day, as the booke of Genesis recounteth, which being but a quality and accident, remayned without a subiect vnto the fourth day, when the sonne and moone weare created. And of this opinion expressely was S. Basill, in his explication 
                     Basil. he. 2. & 6. de oper. sex die
                           •
                        um Damascen. l. 2. cap. 7. of the works of God in those six dayes. And the same holdeth S. Iohn Damascene, Procopius in his commentary vpon the first Chapter of Genesis, and Saint Iustine in the explication of our faith.
               36. This then being so, that these accidents of bread & wyne may remaine, by the power of God, in the Sacrament, without their proper subiects, yt followeth to consider, what actions they can haue: And first yt is to be noted, Of the actiuity of accidents being seperated from their substance. that whatsoeuer actions, or operations are proper to them, as accidents, when they were in their proper subiects of bread and wyne, before consecration, the same they may haue afterwards, when they conteyne the body and bloud of Christ, without inherence therein, for that God supplyeth all by his power, which their said subiects or substances

did performe, when they were present. So as the effects, for example, that the accidents of wine & bread did worke in our senses before, by mouinge our sight by their colours to see, our tast by their sauour, and other like effects: the same do they performe also afterwards: So as, for example sake, by drinkinge much consecrated wyne, though there be no substance of wyne therin, but only the proper accidents of wyne, as heat, smell, and other qualityes and proprietyes of wyne; may a man be incensed, or distempered, as much as yf the substance of wyne were there in deed, for these are the proper actions and operations of the said accidents themselues; but where the concurrāce of substance is necessary to any action, as in nutrition, generation, or corruption of one substance into another, there doth God supply the matter, that is necessary to that action, when the body of Christ doth cease to be there, which is, when those accidents of bread and wyne are corrupted and not otherwise: As for example, in the resurrection of our bodyes, where euery body is to receaue his owne proper flesh againe, which yt had in this life, yf some one body hauinge eaten another body, or parcell therof in this world, and conuerted the same into his proper substance; in this case (I say) almighty God must needs supply otherwise, by his omnipotent power, that part and matter of substance, that wanteth in one of these two bodyes, for that els one of them should be vnperfect, and want

part of his substance in the resurrection. And after the like manner we say, that when a consecrated hoast is eaten, and afterward is turned into the naturall norishment of the eater, which norishment requireth a materiall substance, God doth supply that substance in that instant, when the formes of bread and wyne perishinge, the body of Christ ceaseth to be there.
               37. And this appertayneth to the prouidence of almighty God, for supplying the defects of particular naturall causes, when any thinge fayleth, that is necessary for their naturall operations. The very same also is to be obserued in generation, and corruption, as for example, when the accidents of the consecrated host perishinge, and some other substance should happen to be engendred thereof, as wormes, or the like, there the body of Christ ceaseth to be, when the said accidents do perish, and for the new generation insuinge thereof, God supplyeth fitt matter, as in the example before alleaged of the resurrection of our bodyes, wherof the one had eaten part of the other. By which obseruation yt wilbe easy afterward to dissolue many cauillations, proceedinge eyther of ignorance, heresie, or both, and obiected by Sacramentaryes against this mystery.
            
            
               
               
                  The eight Obseruation. About the wordes Sacrament, signe, figure, type, commemoration, memory, &c. §. 8.
               38. For so much as the Sacramentaryes of our tyme, did forsee that they should be forced to oppose themselues, for defending their hereticall noueltye, sagainst the whole streame of scriptures, expositors, fathers, councells, reasons, practise, antiquity, and vniforme consent of the vnhole Christian vvorld, they thought best to diuise certayne tearmes and distinctions, which should serue them for euasions or gappes to runne out at, when-soeuer they should be pressed by our arguments: and these their shifts do consist principally, in the fraudulent vse of these tearmes of Sacrament, signe, figure, type, commemoration, memory, sacramentally, spiritually and the like. Wherfore we thinke yt needfull to explane and declare in this place, the natures, vses and abuses of these words.
               39. First then a Sacrament, according to the common definition asscribed to S. Augustine, is a visible signe of an inuisible grace, as in baptisme, The vvord Sacramēt explicated. the externall washinge by water, is the signe of the internall washing of the soule by grace: So heere also in this Sacrament of the Eucharist, the externall & visible signe are the consecrated formes of bread and wyne, as they conteyne the body of Christ; the internall or

inuisible grace signified, is the inward nourishinge and seedinge of our soule: And this is the first and cheefe manner how this Sacrament is a signe, that is to say a signe of grace, and not of Christs body absent, as Protestants are wont most fondly and fraudulently to inferre.
               40. Secondly these externall formes and accidents of bread and wyne, are also a signe of Christs body conteyned vnder them. And in this sense is the Eucharist called sometymes by the Fathers, the signe of Christs body, but of Christs body present, as hath byn said, and not absent. Thirdly this Sacrament is a signe of Christ his death and passion, and of the vnion of his mysticall body the Church with him: For that as bread and wyne represented by these formes, are made of many grains and many grapes; so is Christs mysticall body, consistinge of many members vnited to him; so as by all these wayes may this Sacrament be called a signe, to witt, a signe of the inward grace, and norishment of the soule obtayned therby, a signe of Christs true body present, a signe of Christ his death, and mysticall body, and yet do none of all these figures exclude the true reall being of his body in the Sacrament, but do rather suppose the same.
               41. And the like may be said to the other words, or tearmes of figure, type, commemoration, 
                  The other vvords of tipe figure &c. explicated. or memory, all which, when they occurre, are to be vnderstood in some of these senses, without preiudice of the reality, or truth of our Sauiours being in this Sacrament, as for example,

this Sacrament is a forme, type, commemoration & memory of Christs death on the Crosse, and yet this excludeth not his reall-presence from hence. As for example, if a Prince hauing gayned in proper person a great & singular victory, should institute a sollemne triumph, to be made euery yeare in memory therof, & some times should go in that triumph himselfe also, yt might be truly said, that this triumph is a figure, Note this example. type, commemoration, and memory of the other victory, & of the Prince, yet is the Prince truly also in yt himselfe, and so may be said in like manner of this matter of the Sacrament, wherin Christ in differēt manner, is a figure or type of himselfe. And the like may be said of the dayly sacrifice also, which sacrifice is a commemoration or memory of the other bloudy sacrifice, once offered on the crosse, and yet conteyneth the same reall body of our Sauiour, which the other did, after another manner. And by this will the reader easily discouer diuers poore shifts & fallacyes of our moderne heretiks, especially of Ridley before named, who as yow haue heard him professe, was moued to leaue his ancient faith of the masse, & his practice therin, for that in some certaine places (for sooth) of the Fathers, he found that this sacrifice (of the masse) is called a commemoration of Christs passion; a stronge argument, no doubt, to moue him to so great a resolution. And so much of this.
               42. Now then are to be examined the other words, sacramentally, really, and spiritually: and as

for the first, the common sense, and meaninge Tvvo significatiōs of the vvord sacramentally and both against the Sacramentaryes. of schoole diuines is, that diuised this word, to signifie therby a peculiar manner of Christs supernaturall being in the Sacrament, different from his naturall and circumscriptiue being in heauen, and from the naturall being of an Angell definitiuely in a place, wherof we haue spoken before. So as, when they say that Christ is sacramentally vnder the formes 1. of bread and wyne, they do not deny his true and reall being there in flesh, the very selfe-same that is in heauen; but he is there in another manner. And this is the chiefe proper signification of the word sacramentally amongest schoole-men, for which the word was inuented.
               43. But in the common vse, and sense of our speach, sacramentally signifieth, that Christs 2. body is there vnder a Sacrament or signe, which are the formes of bread and wyne, and not in his owne proper shape, euen as an Angell, when he appeareth in a body, he may be said to appeare bodyly, for that the body is the figure or forme, vnder which he appeareth; and conforme to this sense, we are said to receyue Christ sacramentally, when we receaue him truly and really, but yet not in his proper forme, but vnder another forme, that is to say of bread and wyne, wherby the fraudulent dealing of our moderne Sacramentaryes may appeare, who deceauing the people with this word sacramentally, do oppose yt to really and truly, as though when any author saith, that

we receaue Christ sacramentally in the Eucharist, yt were to be vnderstood, that we did not receaue Christs body in deed and really, but only a signe therof, and by this they endeauour to delude all the places, though neuer so euident, of holy Fathers affirminge, that Christs true flesh and body, the very same that was borne of the virgin Mary and crucified for vs, is receaued in the Sacrament, these good fellowes aunswere that yt is true, sacramentally, which we also graunt, yf sacramentally, do not exclude really, accordinge to the true signification of the word: But yf by sacramentally, they meane as they do, that only a signe is receaued of Christs body in the Sacrament, then is their deceyt manifest as yow see; for that sacramentally, hath no such signification at all amonge diuines, but only is diuised amonge them for a shift.
               44. The like fraud they vse about the word VVhat the vvord spiritually signifieth in this mystery. 
                  spiritually, which in the sense of holy Fathers, being opposite to carnally and corporally, in their ordinary materiall signification, is by sectaryes also wrested, as though yt were contrary to the word really, so as whensoeuer they are forced to graunt Christs body to be spiritually in the Sacrament (by which phrase the said ancient Fathers do meane only, that he is not there after a carnall, or common manner, as he liued vpon earth) they will haue yt vnderstood, that he is there only by faith, and not in deed really and substantially. They abuse also the signification of the foresaid wordes

carnally & corporally, which hauing a double sense, the one that Christs body is naturally and really in the Sacrament, the other that he is there after the externall being of other bodyes, they deceytfully do take them now in one sense, and now in another, and alwayes oppose them to the word spiritually, which in the former sense are not incompatible, but may stand togeather, though not in the later. And for auoydinge of this equiuocation, diuines do wish those two words, carnally and corporally, though true in the foresaid sense, yet to be more sparingly vsed, then the other words really and substantially, that are equiualent in sense, and lesse subiect to equiuocation and mistaking.
               45. Wherfore to conclude this obseruation, all these words are to be noted, and their true vse and signification remembred by him, that will not be deluded by hereticall sleights and impostures in this high mystery, but especially are to be obserued these three, wherby our Sacramentaryes do most of all deceyue the vulgar people, in their assertions and answers to our arguments, to witt, sacramentally, spiritually and by faith, as though they did exclude the reall presence of Christs body in the Sacrament; which is most false, for that in the true sense we admitt them all. For example, we graunt that Christ is sacramentally in this Sacrament, both as sacramentally signifieth a distinct manner of Christs being there, from that in heauen, and as yt signifieth his being

there vnder a Sacrament or signe, but yet really, we graunt also that he is there spiritually, that is to say, after a spirituall, and not corporall circumscriptiue manner, yet truly and really. We graunt further, that he is in the Sacrament by faith, for that we do not see him, but apprehend him present by faith, but yet truly and really, and not in faith and beleefe only. And by this yow may perceaue our Sacramentaryes manner of disputinge, Our heretiks cauill like to that of the Arrians. iust like the Arrians of old tyme, and of our dayes, who seeke to enacuate all places alleaged for the vnity and equality of Christ with his Father, by one only distinction of will and nature: So as when Christ said for example Ioan. 6. my Father and I are one, yt is true said they, they are one in will & loue, but not in nature; & thus they deluded all that could be brought for naturall vnity, except only the authority, and contrary beleefe of the vniuersall Church, wherby at last they were ouerborne.
               46. And the very same course held the Sacramentaryes of our dayes; for whatsoeuer plaine and perspicuous places you bring them out of antiquity, affirminge the true naturall substantiall body of our Sauiour, to be in the Sacrament, they will shift of all presently, by one of these three words; yt is true, sacramentally, yt is true spiritually, and yt is true by faith only, as though these could not stand with really or truly; and heere of shall yow haue store of examples afterward in the aunswerings of

                  Doctor Perne, Cranmer, Ridley and Latymer for the Sacramentary party to our arguments, taken out of the ancient Fathers. For when the said Fathers do auouch, that Christ our Sauiours true naturall body is in the Sacrament, they answere, yt is true sacramentally, and thinke they haue defended themselues manfully therby, and when in other places the same Fathers do professe, that the very same flesh that was borne of the virgin Mary and cruicified for vs, is there, they aunswere, yt is true spiritually and by faith, but not really. And thus they do euacuate and delude all that can be alleaged: But yf they cannot shew (as they cannot) any one Father that tooke or vsed the words sacramentally, spiritually, or by faith, in this sense, as opposite to really and truly in this mystery, then is it euident, this to be but a shift of their owne inuention, to escape therby. And so much of this obseruation.
            
            
               
                  The nynth Obseruation. How Christ is receaued of euill men in the Sacrament, and of good men both in, and out of the same. §. 9.
               47. It followeth vpon the former declaration of the words, sacrament, signe, and the rest, that we explane in this place, a certayne distinction insinuated by the ancient Fathers, and touched in the Councell of Trent, of three 
                     Concil. Tr
                           •
                         dent. sess. 13. Can
                           ••
                        .
                   sorts of receauinge and eatinge Christ by this

Sacrament: First sacramentally alone, the second 
                     D. Them. 3. part q. 80. art. 1. spiritually only, the third both sacramentally and spiritually togeather. An example of the first is, when euill men do receaue the Sacrament vnworthily, for that these men, thought they receaue the very Sacrament, to witt the true body of Christ vnder the formes of bread and wyne, yet do they not receaue the true spirituall effect therof, which is grace and nourishment of their soule, and of these doth S. Paul speake expressely to the Corinthians, when he saith: He that eateth and drinketh vnworthily (videlicet the Sacrament) doth eat and drinke iudgement to himselfe, not discerninge the body 
                  1. Cor. 11. 
                  of our Lord. And in this sense do the auncient Fathers vpon this place, expound the Apostle, as yow may see in the commentaryes of Saint Chrysostome, S. Ambrose, S. Anselme, and other expositors 
                     Aug. l. 5. de 
                           •
                        apt. cap. 8. both Greeke and Latyn; and S. Austen in many places of his works doth expressely shew the same, alleaginge this text of the Apostle for proofe therof, Corpus Domini (saith 
                     Aug. epist. 162. & in psalm. 10. he) & sanguis Domini nihilominus erat illus, quibus dicebat Apostolus, &c. It was notwithstanding the body & bloud of our Lord, which they tooke, to whome the Apostle said; he that eateth and drinketh vnworthily, eateth and drinketh his owne damnation. And to the same effect he saith in diuers other places, that Iudas receaued the very selfe-same body of Christ, that the other Apostles did; and the same affirmeth S. Chrysostome in his homily intituled, of the Treason of Iudas; & generally it is the vniforme

opinion of all the auncient Fathers, whensoeuer any occasion is giuen to speake or treat therof.
               48. The second manner of receauing Christ by this Sacrament, is tearmed spiritually only; for that without sacramentall receauinge of Christs body and bloud, a man may in some case receaue the spirituall fruite or effect therof, as yf he had receaued the same really, and this eyther with relation to the Sacrament, videlicet, when a man hath a desire to receaue yt actually, but cannot; or without reference thervnto, when by faith and grace good men do communicate with Christ, and participate the fruite of his passion. In which sense of spirituall communion, or eating Christ, S. Austen 
                  
                     Aug. tract. 25. in Ioan.
                   wryteth vpon S. Iohns ghospell, Crede & manducasti; beleeue, and thou hast eaten. And to the same effect do our Fathers often speake, when they treat of this spirituall & metaphoricall eating only without relation to the Sacramet: which manner of speaches the Sacramentaryes of our dayes do seeke to abuse, as though there were no other eatinge of Christ in the Sacrament, but by faith alone, which is furthest of from the said Fathers meaninge, though sometymes they had occasion to speake in that manner.
               49. The third member of our former diuision is, to eat Christ both sacramentally and spiritually, as all good Christians do, when with due preparation & disposition, they receaue both the outward Sacrament and inward

grace and fruite therof: by obseruation of which threefold manner of receauing, many obiections and hereticall cauillations will easily afterward be discerned. And so much for this.
            
            
               
                  The tenth Obseruation. Touchinge indignityes and inconueniences obiected by Sacramentaryes against vs, in holdinge the Reall presence. §. 10.
               50. As by the former obiections of naturall impossibilityes, yow haue heard this soueraigne mystery impugned, both by the learneder sort of old and new heretiks; so do the more simple & ignorant insist & insult most, vpon certayne inconueniences, indignityes, and absurdityes, as to them do appeare. As for example, that Christ in the Sacrament, should be eaten with mens teeth, go into the belly, not only of men & weomen, but also of beasts yf they should deuoure yt, that yt may putrifie, be burned, cast and fall into base and vnworthy places, be troden vnder mens feet, with the like, which is a kind of argument plausible at the first sight vnto vulgar apprehensions, and such as seemed to moue principally the most part of Iohn Fox his artificers, and spinster-martyrs, as may appeare by their rude clamours, and grosse obiections, exprobrations, irrisions, iests and scoffes at their aunsweringe before their ordinaryes.
               
                  
51. And heerin also they shewed their spiritt of derydinge and blaspheminge that, which they vnderstood not, to concurre with that of the pagans and Iewes against the whole body of Christian Religion, and of auncient heretiks against the principall articles therof. Of the pagans S. Augustine wryteth thus: In ipsum Christum non crederemus, si fides Christiana cachinnum 
                  
                     Aug. ep. 49. q. 
                     
                        •
                     . 
                  metueret paganorum: We should not beleeue in Christ himselfe, yf Christian faith did feare the scoffinge of pagans. S. Paul also wryteth both of Gentills and Iewes, that the Crosse of Christ (that is to say, that God should be apprehended, beaten, wounded and crucified) was to these a scandall, and folly to 1. Cor. 8. the others, though vnto the elect, yt was the very wisdome, power & vertue of God himselfe. We read also in the ghospell, that the Saduces amongst the Iewes, scoffed at the resurrection of bodyes, by asking Christ a question 
                     Matth. 22. of a woman that had seauen husbands, whose wife she should be in the resurrection, purposinge therby to haue inferred an absurdity against the said article, to witt, that eyther seauen men should haue striued for one woman, or one woman haue byn wife of seauen men. And the Marcionists infamous heretiks, that tooke the same heresie from the Sadduces, as also the Originists concurringe therin against the said beleefe of our resurrection, went about to disgrace the same, as both Tertullian, 
                  Tertul l. de resur. caro. 
                        ••
                     ter. in ep. ad Pamachi
                        •
                     m. and S. Hierome do testifie, by certaine absurd indignityes, which they imagined would ensue

therof, as for example that difference of sexes procreation, mydwyues, nurses, priuyes, and the like, must needs be in heauen, but the auncient Fathers answered them with the words of our Sauiour to the said Sadduces, Erratis, nescientes scripturam, & virtutem Dei. Yow do erre, 
                     Matth. 11. not knowinge the scriptures, nor the power of God.
               52. And the same aunswere was giuen by Catholiks to the first Sacramentaryes, that euer publikely appeared, to witt the Berengarians aboue 500. yeares past, who obiected the very same absurdityes, that our hereriks do at this day, as testifieth Guitmundus and Algerus, 
                  
                     Guitmundus lib 2. & Algerus leb. 2 cont. Berengarium.
                   that liued in that age and wrote against them; they were aunswered (I say) that their error proceeded of not vnderstandinge the true meaning of scriptures, nor the power of God, which in the Sacrament conserueth his body without all leasion, hurt, indignity, or inconuenience, whatsoeuer happeneth vnto the formes, vnder which his body is, and that it is nothing so base and vnworthy a matter, euen in our sense & comon reason, that Christ our Sauiour being impassible in the Sacrament, should vnder another forme be said to fall on the ground, to be burned, to be eaten, &c. then in his owne proper forme, when he was passible, and sensible to ly in his mothers wombe, or to cry and weepe in the cradle, or to suffer hunger, thirst, and other humayne necessityes, and to be whipped, wounded and put to death, all which indignityes, supposing

that he was the selfe-same God that created the world, might seeme more absurd, and improbable in common sense and reason, then this of the Sacrament, and so they did seeme to old heretiks, who obiected and derided the same, as the forsaid Marcionists, that God should be in a womans belly, and in a maunger; and Nestorius the heretike, that God should be two monethes old for example, and two cubitts bigg, and other such iests and scoffes, as yow may read of them in Tertullian, Theodoret, Euagrius 
                  
                     Tert lib. do carn. Christs & Theod. l. 4. haeret. faehul. & Euagr. l. 1. hist. c. 2. and other wryters.
               53. Wherfore to conclude this obseruation, two points are to be noted in this whole matter: First that many things that seeme to happen to Christ in these cases, do not touch him indeed, but only the externall formes of bread and wyne, as when they are burned for example, do putrifie, or the like, Christs body is not burned, or putrified, but ceaseth to be vnder them, when the said formes or accidents are corrupted, for that the substance of Christs body, supplyinge the substance of bread, is no longer there then the substance of bread would haue byn there, yf yt had not ben conuerted into Christs body, but yf bread had remayned, yt would haue ceased by any kind of corruption, as burninge, putrifyinge, or the like, and so doth Christs body, though in a different sort, so that the substance of bread might, by the said corruption, be chaunged into some other substance, which Christs body cannot be, but only ceasseth to be there, God

supplyinge some other matter for production of that, which is brought forth of new, as in the former obseruation hath byn declared.
               54. The other point, that those other conditions which by reason of the formes are asscribed vnto Christ his body in the Sacrament, as to moue from place to place, when the formes are moued, to be seene, touched, eaten with our teeth and the like, which are frequent phrases among the Fathers, haue no Notethese tvvo examples. inconuenience amonge them at all, no more for example, then when our soule is said to be moued with the motion of the body, which soule notwithstandinge of his owne nature is not moueable: so as an Angell being a spiritt, may be handled, seene, or stroken in the body which he taketh to appeare in, as is euident by the whole story of Tobias and other places of scripture, which Angell of himselfe notwithstandinge, is not capable of such thinges; and finally Gods eternall diuinity and maiesty is present in all places & things, the most basest and horrible that can be diuised, and yet suffereth no inconuenience therby: For though he be for example in the dunghill, yet he cannot be said to haue any euill smell therby, neyther to be burned in the fire, though the formes of bread and wyne be burned therin, nor to putrifie, though he be actually present in those things that rott and putrifie. And by this may yow see the vayne calumniations of fond heretiks, against the power of almighty God, out of their senses and foolish imaginations.
            
            
               
               
                  The eleuenth Obseruation. About the nature of a sacrifice, as it is ordayned to different effectes, and how that of the Crosse standeth vvith that of the masse. §. 11.
               55. The eleuenth and last obseruation shalbe peculiarly about the last of the three questions proposed, which is sacrifice of the masse, notinge therin two ends, offices, or effects to be considered: First that yt is ordayned ad cultum externum, to an externall worshipp of God peculiar to himselfe, in the highest degree of honour, called by the Gretians Latria: secondly ad propitiationem pro peccatis, for pacifyinge of Gods wrath for sinnes, and albeit both these effects may be in one and the selfe-same sacrifice (and so we hould them to be in the sacrifice of the masse, for that yt was ordayned by Christ, as well for a perpetuall outward honour & worshipp to be exhibited vnto God in the Christian Church vnto the worlds end, as also for remission of sinnes by application of the meritt of Christs bloudy sacrifice on the Crosse) yet may they be separated of their owne natures, so as a sacrifice may be ordayned only ad cultum, that is to say, for an externall worshipp only, without power to remitt sinnes: And so in a manner were the sacrifices of the ould law, which little or nothing auayled for sinnes. And againe, sacrifice may be ordeined only or principally to satisfy for sinnes,

without relation therof ad cultum, to perseuere in any state of men, to be often offered by them, and such was Christs on the Crosse, which is not reiterated againe in the same bloudy and passible manner, as then yt was, but in another farre different sort in the masse, which is capable of both these effects, as hath byn said.
               56, Now then in the first sense, as a sacrifice is ordayned ad cultum, to an externall worship The first effect of sacrifice. of God, yt conteyneth an outward protestation of our knowledge of Gods supreme Maiestie, power, and absolute dominion ouer vs, and in our subiection thervnto, which is the highest honour that can be giuen by a creature vnto the creator, and is so particular to God alone, as hath byn said, as yt cannot be imparted to any creature, without the horrible sinne of Idolatry, and is so conioyned with the nature of Religion yt selfe, as no true Religion hath euer byn without this degree of externall honour, exhibited vnto God by his people; and so we see that all good men in the law of nature, by Gods instinct, did sacrifice vnto him, as Adam, Abell, Noe, Melchisedecke, and others, as afterwards also in the law of Moyses, the same was expressely ordayned by Gods owne commandement; & the Gentills did the same, though not to one true God, but to many idolls, by suggestion of the diuell, that therin emulated Gods honour exhibited vnto him by sacrifice. And this for the first effect or office of sacrifice.
               
                  
57. The second is propitiation, or pacifyinge The secōd effect of sacrifice vvith 3. degrees therof. of Gods wrath for sinnes, as hath byn said. Wherin for more perspicuityes sake, three degrees may be obserued. First of such sacrifices as were so weake & imperfect in themselues, touching this point of propitiation and satisfyinge for sinnes, as they profited little or nothinge, except only as they were morall good works; and accordinge to the piety of the offerer, they might help somewhat; but they had neyther sufficient force in themselues to remitt sinnes, neyther to apply the vertue and satisfaction of any other sacrifice, already exhibited, to the remission therof, but were only figures, and shaddowes of things to come: and such were the sacrifices of the old law of Moyses.
               58. The second degree is quite opposite to this for excellency of perfection, power and meritt, being in yt selfe of so infinite valour, as yt is sufficient not only fully to satisfie for the sinnes of all the world; but also to giue vigour to all other sacrifices, both internall, and externall; And this was the sacrifice of Christ our Sauiour on the Crosse; & betweene these two sacrifices, to witt the weaknesse and imperfection, multitude and variety of the one vnder the old law, and the singularity, excellency, force and infinite power of the other, is the large antithesis & opposition, vsed by S. Paul in his 9. and 10. Chapters of his Epistle to the Hebrewes, shewing, that as the Iewes sacrifices were many in number, and of diuers sorts and

infirme of themselues, & therfore offered vp in great multitudes and often; so the sacrifice of Christ for the excellency therof, and infinite force and valour, was single, & but one, and once offered for all, and not iterable for acquiringe the price of mans redemption, and perfect sufficiency for the sanctifyinge of all, though yet he affirmeth not, that yt may not be iterated in another manner, & to another effect, to witt for applyinge the sufficiency & meritt of this one sacrifice offered for all, to the vtility of particular people: For albeit Christ hath satisfied for all quoad sufficientiam (to vse the termes of schoole) yet not quoad efficaciam, which is as much to say, as albeit Christ hath redeemed all and paid the price for all, yet all are not saued therby, nor do receaue the efficacy or benefitt therof, for that they apply not to their owne vtility that which is gayned for all.
               59. Now then for applyinge this treasure vnto people in particular, our aduersaryes do confesse, that some things are necessary of our parts, as faith & baptisme, but we do ad more meanes, as ordayned by Christ himselfe, and amonge other the sacrifice of the masse, not for acquiringe any new price or sufficiency of our saluation, but for applyinge the effect or efficacy of that, which already is gotten by Christ our Sauiour, through his passion on the Crosse, & heerof resulteth a third degree of propitiatory sacrifice, that is neyther so infirme as the sacrifices of the ould law were,

that remytted not sinnes, nor yet in a manner of so potent effect, as to acquire the price of our saluation, for that yt is not offered vp to that end, but only to apply the vertue of the other sacrifice already gotten, and so may be iterated, not for any defect in it selfe, but for that sinnes dayly growinge haue need of dayly application of the said sacrifice, as hath byn said.
               60. And in this sense do all the ancient Fathers, in the places before alleaged, call this sacrifice of the masse iuge sacrificium, a dayly sacrifice, and iterable, notwithstandinge that the other on the Crosse could be offered but once, as S. Paul proueth. And now these obseruations being premised, we shall passe to examine and aunswere the arguments of our aduersaryes, in all the former disputations brought forth.
            
         
         
            
            THE EXAMINATION OF SVCH ARGVMENTES As in the former disputations were alleaged by the Zuinglians & Caluinists, against the reall-presence of Christes body in the Sacrament. CHAP. IV.
            Novv then to ioyne more neerly with our Sacramentaryes, and to come to the Tvvo thinges to be considered. vew of particular arguments, brought forth against the article of the reall-presence, yt is to be held in memory, that which before we haue noted: first, that these new Doctors hauinge no one direct place eyther of scriptures, or Fathers for their purpose, that expressely denyeth the said reall-presence (as we haue for the affirmatiue) they are forced to runne to certayne inferences, as for that Christ is in heauen, he cannot be in the Sacrament, & such other like of no validity, as presently yow shall see. And secondly it is to be remembred, that these arguments (the most wherof are founded on sense and humayne reason against faith) are ordinarily to be found both alleaged, vrged and aunswered

in all our schoolmens books at large, before our Sacramentaryes were borne, and consequently these men bring no new things, as worthy of a new labour. But yet for better satisfaction of them, that haue not read the said schoolmen, nor are of sufficient learning to see the solution of themselues, we shall breefely runne ouer in this place, whatsoeuer was obiected by the said Sacramentaryes, of any moment in all the former disputations, or other conferences, colloquyes, or examinations, reducinge all for more perspicuityes sake vnto certaine heads or groundes in manner followinge.
            
               
                  The first head or ground of Sacramentary obiections; for that yt seemeth impossible to them, that Christes body can be in many places at once. §. 1.
               2. This is the first principall ground of all the Sacramentaryes vnbeleefe, and out of which they draw the greatest squadron of all their arguments and obiections, as presently yow shall see, for that yt is a point very plausible to comon-sense and humayne reason, that a naturall body naturally cannot be but in one place at once: but he that shall read our obseruations in the precedēt Chapter, where we haue shewed, that not only supernaturally and by Gods omnipotent power yt may be

done, but that it comprehendeth not so much as any contradiction in nature it selfe; and further shall consider, that alboit Christs true and naturall body be in the Sacrament at many places at once, yet not after a naturall manner, but supernaturall and miraculous, as euery where the ancient Fathers do admonish vs (and we haue alleaged many of their admonitions before) he I say that shall consider this, will easily contemne and laughe at the vanity of so many Sacramentary arguments, founded vpon this weake ground and principle only, that a naturall body cannot be in more places then one at once, which is true naturally, that is to say by the ordinary course of nature, but by the power of God, that is aboue nature, yt may be, and this without an essentiall contradiction, as I haue said, in nature yt selfe.
               3. Well then, now will I sett downe the whole squadron of arguments, which out of this false principle, or rather true principle misvnderstood, Iohn Fox layeth foorth with great ostentation out of Peter Martyr his Oxford disputations, which arguments are 8. in number, and did seeme so insoluble vnto Fox his diuinity, and philosophy, as he putteth no answere at all giuen by the Catholike defendants to the same. I shall deliuer them also in dialecticall forme, as they ly in Fox this once, togeather with his foolery of cytinge the moods and figures of sophistry in the margent to euery argument, a thinge knowen to euery child that beginneth logique, & consequently

is ridiculous to men of learninge, though strange to the ignorant people, that may imagine great secrets to ly hidden in those words of Disamis, Darij, Baroco, Festino, Bocardo, and thinke that Iohn Fox doth go about to coniure vs his readers, by settinge them downe: but now to the arguments themselues.
               
                  1. Argument.
                  
                  4. Di- The true naturall body of Christ is placed in heauen. It is graunted. 
                     Matth. 24. & 26. Ioan. 12. & 16. Act. 3. Colloss. 3.
                  
                     sa- The true naturall body of man can be but in one place at once, where he is. It is true naturally. 
                     August. ad Dardanum, propter veri corporis modum, saith he, that is for the manner of a true body.
                  
                     mis. Ergo the true naturall body of Christ can be in noe place at once, but in heauen where he is. But ye may be supernaturally.
                  
               
               
                  2. Argument.
                  
                  
                     Da- Euery true naturall body requireth one certayne place. That is by course of nature.
                  
                  
                     ri- Christs body is a true naturall body. True.
                  
                  
                     j. Ergo. Christs body requireth one certayne place. True naturally.
                  
               
               
                  3. Argument.
                  
                  
                     It is true according Augustine giueth not to the soule of

Christ to be in more places at once then 
                        
                           ••
                         the ordinary nature of a soule. one. Aug. ad Dardan.
                  
                  
                     The one and the other may be by Gods omnipotēcy. Ergo. Much lesse yt is to be giuen to the body of Christ, to be in more places at once then one.
               
               
                  4. Argument.
                  
                  
                     True according to their ordinary course of nature. The nature of Angells is not to be in diuers places, but they are limited to occupy one certayne place at once. Basil. d
                           •
                         spiritu sancto. cap. 22.
                  
                     Christ in the Sacramēt filleth no place. Ergo. The body of Christ being the true naturall body of man, cannot fill diuers places at once.
               
               
                  5. Argument.
                  
                  
                     Ba- Whatsoeuer is in many & diuers places at once, is God. This is falle for Fox his soule vvas in his foote and head, and yet not God.
                  
                  
                     ro- The body of Christ is not God, but a creature.
                  
                     co. Ergo. The body of Christ cannot be in more places togeather. Naturally.
                  
               
               
                  6. Argument.
                  
                  
                     Fe- We must not so defend the diuinity of Christ, as we destroy his humanity.
                  
                     sti- Yf we assigne more places to the body of Christ, we destroy his humanity. This is false.
                  
                  
                     no. Ergo. We must not assigne to the body of Christ plurality of places.
               
               
                  
                  7. Argument.
                  
                  
                     Fe- Whatsoeuer thinge is circumscribed, that is to say, conteyned in the limitts of any peculiar place, cannot be dispersed into more places at once. This graunted.
                  
                  
                     sti- The body of Christ is a thinge circumscribed. It is true de facto in heauē, but not in the Sacramēt.
                  
                  
                     no. Ergo the body of Christ is not dispersed into more places at one tyme. True as it is circuscribed.
                  
               
               
                  8. Argument.
                  
                  
                     Da- Euery quantity, that is euery body hauing magnitude, length, and other dimensions, is circumscribed in one peculiar place. True naturally but not supernaturally. 
                     Cyrill. de triuit. lib. 2.
                  
                     ri- The body of Christ hath his dimensions, and is a quantity. True, though a body is 
                           〈…〉
                         quā
                        tity, but a substance that hath quantity.
                  
                  
                     j. Ergo the body of Christ is circumscribed. Non soquitur.
                  
               
               
                  Aunswere.
                  5. These are the doughty arguments, which Fox affirmeth their great Patriarke Peter Martyr to haue alleaged against the reall-presence, out of this first philosophicall ground, that one body cannot be in many places at once; Whervnto I might aunswere in the words of S. Augustine, to such kind of men, as measure Gods power by their owne imagination: Ecce qualibus argumentis, 
                     
                        Aug. l. 21 de Ciuit. D
                              ••
                            cap. 
                        
                           •
                        1 
                     omnipotentiae Dei, humana contradicit infirmitas,

quam possidet vanitas: behould with what kind of arguments, the infirmity of man, possessed by vanity, doth contradict Gods omnipotency. Yf yow read the fourth and fifth obseruations sett downe in the former Chapter, yow will easily see both the infirmity, and vanity of all these arguments, & how this great variety vpon one ground, are but m
                        •
                     ncedmeats guised in diuers sorts and fashions, by the art of Fox and Peter Martyrs cookery, and yet are they held for great demonstrations, and stronge fortresses of the Sacramentary faith, or rather infidelity, and vrged euery where by their followers.
                  6. Iohn Rogers vsed the same argument in his defence before the Bishops, as yow may see in Fox pag. 1251. Christ is corporally (saith he) in heauen only, ergò not in the Sacrament, where he vseth an equiuocation also in the word corporally, for that we do not say, that Christ is corporally in the Sacrament, yf by corporally he meane not only really and substantially, but also after a corporall manner, accordinge to externall dimensions. Thomas Tompkins the weauer of Shordich, vseth the same argument against his Ordinary in like manner, to witt, that Christ body cannot be in the Sacrament, for that yt is in heauen. Fox pag. 1395. Maister Guest in his Cambridge disputations against Doctor Glyn, leaned principally to this argument, and B. Ridley, his moderator, or president of these disputations, vrged a place of S. Augustine ad Dardanum to the same effect. Tolle spatia corporibus, & nusquam erunt
                     
Take away the spaces from bodyes (saith S. Austen) and they shalbe no where. But D. Glyn defendant answered him well, that S. Augustine spake expressely of the naturall being of bodyes, accordinge to their ordinary externall dimensions, and not how they might be by Gods supernaturall power and omnipotency.
                  7. But aboue all others, Philpott did keep reuell 
                        Phil
                              •
                            of his styire in the conuocation house about this argument. in the conuocation house about this argument, against Maister Morgan, & Maister Harpesfield, alleaginge diuers places of scripture for the same, but little to the purpose God wooteth, as that of S. Paul: Christ is like vnto vs in all points, except sinne. And therfore said he, as one Fox pag. 1288. of our bodyes cannot be at Paules, and at VVestminster togeather; so cannot Christ be in heauen, and in the Sacrament. But yt was told him, that these words of S. Paul, were true in S. Paules sense, but yet that Christs body was vnlike also vnto vs besides sinne, in diuers other points, as for example, in that he was begotten without the seed of man, and that his body was inuisible, when he would haue it soe, and that he rose out of the sepulcher the same being shutt, and diuers other like points, which our ordinary naturall bodyes haue not, though God of his omnipotency might giue the same to our bodyes also. Then he alleaged the savinge of S. Peter in the Acts: VVhome heauen must receaue vntill the consumation of the world. Wherof he would inferre a necessity of Christs remayning in heauen, vntill the day

of iudgement. Then Morgan laughed at this (saith Fox) Harpesfield stood vp, and asked him how he vnderstood that place, Oportet Episcopum 
                     1. Tim.
                      
                     esse vnius vxoris virum, A Bishop must be the husband of one wife. And whether this be of such necessity, as he may not be without a wife, one at least? With which demaund Philpott was so entangled, as he could not well go forward, as there yow may see, and refused to aunswere Maister Morgan, as the prolocutor would haue had him.
                  8. Well then, this is the first and principall ground and bulwarke of all Sacramentary vnbeleefe in this article, that Christs body cannot be by Gods omnipotent power in two places at once, to witt both in heauen, and in the Sacrament, which we haue shewed before in our fourth, fifth and sixt obseruations, to be a fond and temerarious position, whervnto we referre the reader to see the grounds more at large, and heere only we shall say a word or two to the former eight arguments, as they lye in order. Yet first it shalbe good for the reader to remember that, which we haue noted before in the story of Melancthon, who Melancth. Epistola ad Mart
                           ••
                        um 
                           〈◊〉
                        . saith, I had rather offer my selfe to death, then to affirme, as the Zuinglians do, that Christes body cannot be but in one place at once. But yet Peter Martyr, Philpott, Cranmer, and their fellowes would dye, and some of them also did dye, for the contrary, so as Saints of one Calendar, do heere dye for contrary opinions one to the other. But let vs answere the arguments.
                  
                     
8. To the first we say, concerning the minor To the first argument. proposition, that a true naturall body, naturally, and by ordinary course of nature, cannot be at one tyme, but in one place, and that meaneth S. Augustine ad Dardanum, but supernaturally, and by Gods ommpotent power, that exceedeth nature, yt repugneth not to be in diuers places at once, yf God will haue yt so: as in our fifth obseruation is proued. To To the second. the second argument we say, that euery true naturall body requireth one certaine place by ordinary course of nature, and not otherwise. To the third, that soules and spiritts by their To the third. naturall course haue but one totall place, wherin they may be said to be, as one soule in one body, and one Angell in the place, that it pleaseth to occupye, or to haue operation therin: albeit yf we respect partiall places of the same body, as head, foote, fingar and the like, the selfe-same soule is wholy in diuers places at once, which is no lesse wonderfull and incredible to our sense, then for a bodily substance, to be in two distinct places at once. And the like is in the Angell, who may occupy, for example, a whole house or towne for his totall place, and yet be in euery particular and partiall place therof wholy and entyrely, which is graunted both by all philosophers and diuynes, though vulgar sense cannot apprehend yt.
                  9. To the fourth may be answered the very To the fourth. same, as to the former, that the being of Angells in place definitiuely, is like in all respects

to that of the soule. Read our fourth obseruation in the precedent Chapter. To the fifth To the fifth. argument the aunswere is easy, for we deny that whatsoeuer is in diuers places at once, is God, for that by his omnipotent power a creature may be: yt is Gods priuiledge that he is euery where wholy and entyrely, ex vi naturae diuinae, by force of his diuine nature, that is to say, he is so euery-where, as he cannot be but euery where, which is not true eyther in a spiritt, or in Christs body, or in any other creature whatsoeuer; for that all creatures, as they haue limited natures, so are they limited also in place, and restrayned from vbiquity, or being euery where, which is proper and peculiar to almighty God alone: & so to speake of the body of Christ in particular, yt is not euery-where; and we detest both the Eutichian vbiquitaryes, that held Christs body to be euery-where, as confounded with his diuinity; and no lesse the Lutheran vbiquitaryes of our dayes, that hold Christs body to be euery where, by reason of the coniunction with Christs diuinity; the Catholike faith affirming only, that Christs body, though naturally it be but in one place, yet by Gods omnipotency it may be in more.
                  10. To the sixt argument we deny the Minor, 
                     To the sixt. to witt, that we destroy Christs humanity by grauntinge, that yt may be in diuers places at once; for that yt repugneth not to a humayne creature, to be in more places then one by Gods omnipotency: this we haue shewed

more largely in our fifth obseruation. To the To the seauenth. seauenth we deny also the Minor; that Christs body in the Sacrament is to be circumscribed, or circumscriptiuely there, as yt is in heauen. The differences betweene three manners of being, to witt, circumscriptiuely, definitiuely, and sacramentally, yow may see more at large declared in our fourth and fifth obseruations. To the eight and last, we say that the maior is To the eyght. to be vnderstood naturally, and not supernaturally by diuine power: to the Minor, we aunswere, that Christs body hath not externall dimensions in the Sacrament, though yt haue in heauen: and in the Sacrament yt hath only internall and inuisible quantity, without extension to place; wherof yow may read more in the fourth and fifth obseruations. And this shalbe sufficient for this first ground of philosophicall arguments. Now will we passe to the second.
               
            
            
               
                  The second head or ground of Sacramentary argumentes, drawen from contrary qualityes or quantityes, &c. §. 2.
               11. This second ground is not much different from the former, for both of them are founded on sense, and humayne reason, and heere I will not conioyne all the arguments

togeather, as before I did, but set them downe seuerally, as Fox recordeth them out of Peter Martyrs disputation.
               
                  1. Argument.
                  
                  
                     Ba- Yf Christ had giuen his body substantially and carnally in the supper, then was that body eyther passible or impassible.
                  
                     ro- But neyther can yow say that body to be passible or impassible, which he gaue at supper: not passible for that S. Austen denyeth yt Psalm. 98. not impassible, for that Christ saith: This is my body, vvhich shalbe giuen for yow.
                  
                  
                     co. Ergo he did not giue his body substantially at supper.
               
               
                  Annswere.
                  12. And this same argument vsed others after Peter Martyr, as Pilkilton against Doctor Glym, & alleageth the same place of S. Austen, as yow may see in Fox pag. 1259. But the matter is easily answered, for that the minor or second proposition is cleerly false, for that Christs body giuen in the supper, though yt were the same in substance, that was giuen on the Crosse, the next day after, yet was yt deliuered at the supper in another manner, to witt in manner impassible, & vnder the formes of bread and wyne, so as according to the being,

which yt hath in the Sacrament, no naturall cause could exercise any action vpon yt, though being the selfe same which was to dye vpon the Crosse, yt is also passible, euen as now in heauen it is visible, & in the Sacrament inuisible, though one & the selfe same body, & now in both places glorious and immortall, & this meaneth expressely S. Austen in the place alleaged, whose words cited by Fox are: Yow are not to eate this body that yow see, nor to drinke the bloud that they are to shedd who shall crucifie me. Which words being spoken to them, that were scandalized at his speach about the eatinge of his body, do shew that we are in deed to eate his true flesh in the Sacrament, but not after that carnall manner, which they imagined: carnaliter cogitauerunt (saith S. Austen in the 
                        S. Augustines sentence of drinkinge Christs bloud. same place) & putauerunt, quod praecisurus esset Dominus particulas quasdam de corpore suo, & daturus 
                           ••
                        is. 
                     They imagined carnally, and thought that Christ vvould haue cutt of certayne peeces of his body, and giuen vnto them; which grosse imagination our Sauiour refuteth by tellinge them, that they should eat his true body, but in another forme of bread and wyne.
                  
                  13. And yet that yt is the selfe-same body & the selfe-same bloud, the same Doctor and Father affirmeth expressely, both in this and many other places. Verè magnus Dominus, &c. he 
                        Aug. in exposit. Isalm. 33. 
                     is in deed a great God, that hath giuen to eat his owne body, in which he suffered so many, and great thinges for vs. And againe talkinge

of his tormentors: Ipsum sanguinem quem per insaniam 
                     
                        In Psalm. 
                        
                           •
                        5. 
                     fuderunt per gratiam biberunt. The selfe-same bloud which by fury they sheed, by grace they dronke. And yet further of the same: Quous
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         biberent sanguinem quem fuderunt; 
                     
                        Tract. 31. in Ioan.
                      mercy left them not, vntill they beleeuinge him, came to drinke the bloud, which they had shedd. And finally in another place: Vt eius iam sanguinem nossent bibere credentes quem fuderant 
                     
                        De vtil
                              •
                           t paenit. c. 1. 
                     saeuientes; that comminge to beleeue in him, they might learne to drinke that bloud, which in their cruelty they sheed. And last of all, in another place explaninge his owne faith, and the beleefe of all Christians in this behalfe, he saith against heretiks of his tyme; Mediatore
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                      
                     
                        Lib. 2. contra aduers. leg. & proph. c. 9. 
                     Dei, &c. We do with faithfull hart and mouth, receaue the mediator of God and man Christ Iesus, giuing vnto vs his flesh to be eaten, and bloud to be dronken, though yt may seeme more horrible to eate mans flesh, then to stea the same, and to drinke mans bloud, then to snedd the same. Consider heere the speach of Saint Augustine, whether it may agree to the eatinge of a signe of Christs body or bloud; what horror is there in that? And thus much to this first argument.
               
               
                  2. Argument.
                  
                  
                     Fe- Bodyes organicall without quantity, be no bodyes. VVithou
                           •
                         all quantity.
                  
                  
                     ri- The Popes doctrine maketh the body of Christ in the Sacrament to be without quantity. Not vvithout all quantity.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Ergo: the Popes doctrine maketh the body of Christ in the Sacrament to be no body.
               
               
                  Aunswere.
                  14. We graunt that bodyes organicall, without all quantity are no bodyes; but Catholike doctrine doth not teach, that Christs body in the Sacrament, is without all quantity, but only without externall quantity, aunswering to locall extension, and commensuration of place, which repugneth not to the nature of quantity, as before is declared at large, in the fourth obseruation of the precedent Chapter; wherby yow may see both the vanity of this argument, as also the notorious folly & ignorance of Fox, who by occasion of this argument of an organicall body vrged, by Cranmer in Oxford, against Maister Harpesfield when he proceeded Bachler of diuinity, bringeth in a whole commedy of vayne diuises, how all the learned Catholike men of that vniuersity, were astonished at the very propoundinge of this graue doubt, to witt; VVhether Christ hath 
                     Fox pa
                              •
                           . 1327. 
                     his quantity, quality, forme, figure, and such like propertyes in the Sacrament. All the Doctors (saith Fox) fell in a buzzinge, vncertayne what to aunswere, some thought one way, some another, and thus Maister Doctors could not agree. And in the margent he hath this note: The Rabbyns could not agree amongst themselues: and then he prosecuteth the matter for a whole columne or page togeather, makinge

                     Doctor Tressam, to say one thinge, Doctor Smith 
                     A Comicall diuise of Iohn Fox. another, Harpesfield another, VVeston another, M. VVard philosophy-reader another, whose philosophicall discourse about the nature of quantity, Fox not vnderstandinge, neyther the other that were present, as he affirmeth, concludeth thus: Maister VVard amplified so largely 
                     Fox ibid.
                      
                     his words, & so high he clymed into the heauens with Duns ladder, and not with the scriptures, that yt is to be maruayled, how he could come downe againe without falling. So Iohn according to his skill; but Maister VVard and the rest, that vnderstood philosophy, knew well inough what he said, and yow may easily conceaue his meaninge, as also the truth of the thinge yt selfe, by readinge my former obseruation; for I thinke yt not conuenient to repeate the same againe heere.
               
               
                  3. Argument.
                  
                  
                     Da- All thinges which may be diuided haue quantity.
                  
                     ri- The body in the Popes Sacrament is diuided into three parts. False & foolish.
                  
                  
                     j. Ergo: the body in the Popes Sacrament hath quantity, which is against their owne doctrine.
               
               
                  Aunswere.
                  15. We deny that it is against our doctrine, that Christs body in the Sacrament hath inward quantity, but only externall and locall.

We deny also, that Christs body is diuided into three parts in the Sacrament, or into any part at all, for it is indiuisible; only the formes of bread are diuided. And this is the ignorance of the framer of this argument, that vnderstandeth not what he saith; for it is ridiculous to affirme, that when the consecrated host is diuided into three partes, that Christs body is diuided also, which is no more true, then when a mans fingar is cutt of wherin the soule was wholy before, that she is also diuided therwith.
               
               
                  4. Argument.
                  
                  
                     Ee- No naturall body can receaue in yt selfe at one tyme contrary or diuers qualityes. Vigil. cont. Eutich. lib. 4.
                  
                     ri- To be in one place locall, and in another place not locall, in one place with quantity, and in another place without quantity, in one place circumscript, in another place incircumscript, is for a naturall body to receaue contrary qualityes. False, nor are these properly qualityes.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Ergo: they cannot be said to be in Christs body.
               
               
                  Aunswere.
                  16. To the first proposition of this argument, I say, that the sentence of Vigilius, alleaged by Fox in this place, is nothinge to his

purpose: For that Vigilius dealinge against the heretike Eutiches, that would haue Christs humanity confounded with his diuinity, saith, as Fox alleageth him: These two things are diuers, and sarre vnlike, that is to say, to be conteyned in a place, and to be euery where, for the word is euery where, but the slesh is not euery-where. Which sentence of Vigilius maketh against Iohn Fox his frends, and some of his Saints also the vbiquitaryes, that hold Christs body to be euery where, as his diuinity is, of which heresie yow haue heard before Su
                           •
                        ra m
                           ••
                        se decembri. 
                     Melancthon to be accused by Coliander one of his owne sect, but Catholiks do not hold this vbiquity of Christs body, but that yt may be circumscribed in a certayne place, and so yt is de facto in heauen, though otherwise by Gods omnipotency, the same body may be and is in diuers places; which this sentence of Vigilius nothing impugneth, and consequently is nothing to the purpose.
                  17. To the second or minor proposition, I say that Fox is a simple fellow, when he calleth contrary qualityes to haue quantity locall and not locall, circumscript and vncircumscript, wheras these do appertayne to the predicaments of quantity and vbi, rather then to quality, and are not so contrary or opposite to themselues; but that in diuers respects they may be in one, and the selfe-same thinge, as Christ is locally in heauen, and not locally in the Sacrament; with visible and externall quantity in heauen, but with internall and inuisible in the Sacrament.
               
            
            
               
               
                  The third head or ground of Sacramentary arguments, concerninge the receauinge and receauers of the Sacrament. §. 3.
               18. Another company or squadron of arguments against the reall-presence, though lesse then the former, is framed by our Sacramentaryes against the reall-presence, concerning the receauers, or manner of receauinge the same. Yow shall heare them as Fox layeth them downe.
               
                  1. Argument.
                  
                  
                     Fe- The wicked receaue not the body of Christ. It is denyed.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        i- The wicked do receaue the body of Christ, yf Transubstantiation be graunted. And the like follovveth of the reall presence vvithout Transubstantiatiō.
                  
                  
                     son. Ergo. Transubstantiation is not to be graunted in the Sacrament.
               
               
                  Aunswere.
                  19. Do yow see a wise argument? and why leapeth Fox (thinke yow) from the reall presence to Transubstantiation, but that he is weary of the former controuersie, for that

Transubstantiation hath a proper place very largely afterward, so as heere yt is wholy impertinent. And further, yf yow consider the matter rightly, yow will see that the same followeth as well of the reall-presence, as of Transubstantiation; for yf Christ be truly and really in the Sacrament, eyther with bread, or without bread, then whosoeuer receaueth the said Sacramēt, must needs receaue also Christs body. Wherfore this skipp of Fox from reall presence to Transubstantiation was needles, and helpeth him nothinge; besides that, the whole argument is foolish; for that his Maior or first proposition; that wicked men receaue not the body of Christ, is wholy denyed by vs, and not proued by him, but presumed; and how fondly yt is done, shall appeare presently in our aunswere to his other arguments of this kind, and the whole matter is discussed more at large in our ninth precedent obseruation.
               
               
                  2. Argument.
                  
                  
                     Ca- To eat Christ is for a man to haue Christ dwelling and abiding in him. Cyprian. de Cana Domini & Aug. lib. de ciuit. Dei 21. cap. 15. True, fruitfully.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        es- The wicked haue not Christ dwellinge in them. Fruītefully they h
                           •
                        ue not.
                  
                  
                     tres. Ergo the wicked eat not the body of Christ.
               
               
                  
                  Aunswere.
                  20. The whole aunswere of this argument is sett downe more at large in our foresaid ninth obseruation, where yt is shewed, that there are three manners of receauinge Christ sacramentally only, spiritually only, and both sacramentally and spiritually, and that euill men do receaue him ater the first manner only, that is to say, they receaue Christs true body in the Sacrament, but not the spirituall fruite therof, which S. Paul expresseth most cleerly, when he saith; that an euill-man, receauinge the Sacrament, Iudicium sibi manducat, non dijudicans 
                     1. Cor. 12. 
                     corpus Domini, Doth eat his owne iudgement and condemnation, not discerninge, or respectinge the body of Christ which he eateth. And this is the assertion of all holy Fathers after him, to witt, that vvicked-men do eate the body of Christ but not the fruite, and namely the two heere cited by Fox to the contrary, S. Cyprian and S. Augustine do expressely hold the same: For that S. Cyprian vpon these words of th' Apostle, making an inuectiue against them that receaue Christs body vnworthily, saith: Antequam expiantur delicta, ante exhomologesin factam 
                     Cypr. sor
                           ••
                        . de lapsis. 
                     criminis, ante purgatam conscientiam sacrificio, & manu sacerdotis, &c. 
                     Before their sinnes be clensed, before they haue made confession of their faults, and before their conscience be purged by the sacrifice and hand of the Priest (this was the preparation to receaue worthily

in S. Cyprians tyme) they do presume to receaue the body of Christ. Wherof the holy Father inferred: Spretis his omnibus atque contempt is, vis infortur corporieius & sanguini. These due preparations being contemned, violence is offered by them to the body and bloud of Christ, which he would neuer haue said, yf those wicked-men had not receaued the body and bloud of Christ at all, as Protestants do hould.
                  21. S. Augustine is frequent also and earnest in 
                        Aug 
                              •
                            cont. Fulgent. Donatist. cap 6. lib. 2. cont. Pet
                              •
                           
                           lian. cap 11. & in psalm. 10. & serm. 11 de verbis Domini & 1. de adulter. con
                              ••
                           g c. 17. & trast. 50. in Ioan.
                      this matter: Corpus Domini (saith he) & sanguis Domini, nihilominùs er at illis quibus, &c. It was no lesse the body and bloud of Christ vnto those (wicked-men) to whome the Apostle said: he that eateth vnworthily, eateth & drinketh his iudgement, then yt was to the good. And the same Father in diuers places affirmeth, that aswell Iudas receaued the true body of Christ, as the rest of the Apostles, though yt were to his owne damnation: Nam & Iudas proditor bonum corpus (saith he) & Symon magus bonum baptisma 
                           •
                         Christo accepit, sed quia bono benè non sunt vsi, mali malè vtendo deleti sunt. 
                     For that Iudas the Traytor also receaued the good body of Christ, and Symon Magus the good baptisme of Christ, but for that they vsed not well that which was good, they being euill-men perished accordingely.
                  
                  22. The other places cyted in the margent, I pretermitt for breuity sake to sett downe at large, this being knowne to be the generall Catholike sentence of all auncient holy Fathers, concerninge Iudas and other euill-men,

that they receaue Christ, but to their owne damnation; and the sentence of S. Paul before cyted is so cleere, and euident, as no reasonable doubt can be made therof. And when Fox doth heere alleage certayne places of S. Cyprian and S. Augustine, affirminge that the eatinge of Christ is dwellinge in him and he in vs, and that those that dwell not in him, do not eat him, yt is to be vnderstood of spirituall and fruitfull eatinge of Christs body, which agreeth only to good men and not to euill, which euill do only receaue sacramentally the body and bloud of Christ, as before we haue said, and more at large is doclared in our ninth obseruation; yea the very words alleaged heere of S. Augustine by simple Iohn Fox, that 
                        Aug. l 2
                           •
                        
                        ▪ 
                        de Cu
                              •
                           t. des cap. 31. discerneth not what maketh for him, & what against him, do plainly teach vs this distinction. For that S. Augustine vpon those words of Christ in S. Iohns ghospell; he that eateth my 
                     
                        Ican. 6. 
                     flesh, and drinketh my bloud, dwelleth in me, and I in him, inferreth presently these words: Christ sieweth what yt is, not 
                     Non Sacrament▪ tenus. 
                     sacramentally, but indeed to eat his body and drinke his bloud, vvhich is when a man so dwelleth in Christ, that Christ dwelleth in him.
                  
                  23. So he. Which words are euidently meant by S. Augustine of the fruitfull eating of Christs body to our Saluation, which may be said in effect the only true eatinge therof, as he may be said truly to eat and feed of his meate, that profiteth and nourisheth therby: but he that taketh no good but rather hurt by that he eateth, may be said truly and in effect not to

feed in comparison of the other that profiteth by eatinge, though he deuoure the meate sett before him; and so yt is in the blessed Sacrament, where the euill doe eat Sacramento tenus, as S. Augustine saith, that is sacramentally only, and without fruite; not that they receaue not Christs body, but that they receaue yt without fruite to their damnation; which distinction is founded in the scriptures, not only out of the place of S. Paul before alleaged to the Corinthians, but out of Christs owne words in sundry places of the ghospell, as that of S. Mathew: Venit filius hominis dare animam suam redemptionem pro multis. The sonne of man came 
                        Matth. 20. to giue his life for the redemption of many, wheras indeed he gaue yt for all, but for that not all, but many should receaue fruite therby, yt is said to haue byn giuen fruitfully only for many and not all. And againe in the same Euangelist: This is my bloud of the new Testament 
                     Math. ibid. 
                     that shalbe shedd for many. that is to say fruitfully, and to their saluation, but sufficiently for all, and so in like manner all men good and badd, do eate Christ in the Sacrament, but euill-men sacramentally only, without the spirituall effect therof, but good men both spiritually and sacramentally togeather.
                  24. And to this end appertayne also those words of S. Augustine, alleaged by Bradford, Ridley and others, that wicked-men edunt panem Domini & non panem Domini, they eat the Lords Box pag. 1466. bread, but not the bread that is the Lords; that is to say, they eat not the bread, that bringeth

vnto them the true effect and fruite of the Lords body, which is grace, spirit, and life euerlasting, though they eat the body it selfe, which is called the bread of our Lord only in this sense, that it hath no fruite nor vitall operation, but rather the contrary.
               
               
                  3. Argument.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        a- Yf the wicked and infidells do receaue the body of Christ, they receaue him by sense, reason, or faith.
                  
                     
                        
                           ••
                        - But they receaue him neyther with sense, reason, or faith, for that the body of Christ is not sensible, nor the mystery is accordinge to reason, nor do infidells beleeue.
                  
                     
                        
                           ••
                        . Ergo. Wicked-men receaue in no wise the body of Christ.
               
               
                  Aunswere.
                  25. This argument is as wise as the maker; for first we do not alwayes ioyne wicked-men and infidels togeather, as he seemeth to suppose, for that an infidell (their case in receauinge being different) when he receaueth the Sacrament, not knowinge or beleeuinge yt to be the body of Christ, he receaueth yt only materially, no otherwise then doth a beast or senselesse-man, without incurringe new sinne therby: wicked-men receaue yt to their damnation, for that knowinge and beleeuinge

yt to be the body of Christ (or at leastwise ought to do) they do not discerne or receaue yt with the worthynesse of preparation, which they should do: and as for sense & reason, though Christs body be not sensible, yet are the formes of bread, vnder which yt is present and receaued, sensible, for that they haue their sensible tast, coulour, smell, and other like accidents, and though the mystery yt selfe stand not vpon humayne reason, yet are there many reasons both humayne and diuyne, which may induce Christians to beleeue the truth therof, euen accordinge to the rule of reason yt selfe, which reasons we call arguments of credibility: So as in this Sacrament, though yt stand not vpon sense or reason, yet in receauinge therof is there fraude both in sense and reason, which is sufficient to shew the vanity of him that vrgeth it: now shall we passe to the last argument of Peter Marty
                           •
                        
                      though drawen from another ground.
               
               
                  4. Argument.
                  
                  
                     Bo- The holy Ghost could not come yf the See this argument vrged by Causton, Higbed, and other Foxian Mar
                        
                           •
                        yrs pag. 1400. &c.
                      body of Christ were really present, for that he saith: Ioan. 16. vnlesse I go from yow the holy ghost shall not come.
                  
                  
                     car- But that the holy-ghost is come, yt is most certayne.
                  
                     do▪
                      Ergo: yt cannot be that Christ himselfe should be heere really present.
               
               
                  
                  Aunswere.
                  26. First neyther Fox, nor his Martyr can deny but that the holy-ghost was also in the world, whilst Christ was bodyly present, for that yt descended visibly vpon him in the forme of a doue, and after he gaue the same to his disciples sayinge: accipite spiritum sanctum; receaue 
                        Ioan. 20. ye the holy-ghost; wherby is manifest, that there is no repugnance, why Christs bodyly presence may not stand togeather, with the presence of the holy-ghost. Wherfore the meaninge of those other words Ioan. 16. that except Christ departed, the holy-ghost should not come, 
                     
                        Ioan. 16. 7. must needs be, that so long as Christ remayned vpon earth visibly, as a Doctor, teacher, & externall guide of his disciples & Church; so longe the holy-ghost should not come in such aboundance of grace, to direct the Church, eyther visibly, as he did at pentecost or inuisibly, as after he did. But this impugneth nothing the presence of Christ in the Sacramēt, where he is inuisibly, & to feed our soules, not as a Doctor to teach & preach, as in his bodily conuersation vpon earth he was; for this he asscribeth to the holy-ghost after his ascension: Ill
                           •
                         spiritus veritatis docebit vos omnem veritatem, that spirit of truth shall teach you all truth.
                  27. And these be all the arguments of Peter Martyr registred by Fox, who concludeth in these words: And thus briefely we haue runne ouer all the arguments, and authorityes of Peter Martyr in

that disputation at Oxford vvith Doctor Tresham, Fox pag. 11
                           •
                        1. Chedsey and Morgan, before the Kings visitours aboue named, anno 1549. So he. And for so much as he setteth downe no solution vnto these arguments; we may imagine that he held them for insoluble: and then yf you consider how weake and vayne they haue byn, and how easy to aunswere; yow will therby see how sure grounds, this poore Apostatafriar Martyr had to become a sacramentary, & to leaue his former Religion, which had endured in Christs Church for so many ages before; yea and to oppose himselfe against Doctor Luther in this point of the reall-presence, who was their Prophet, and had first of all opened vnto him & others the gapp to his Apostasie. And finally what good assurance a man may haue, to aduenture his soule with these companions in such a quarrell, as Cranmer, Ridley, Latymer, Rogers, Hooper, and others did, who hauing byn Cath. Priests for many yeares, did first of all others imbrace in England these new opinions of Peter Martyr, which yet were so yonge and greene, as himselfe was scarsely settled in them, when he first entred in to that Iland, as in his Me
                           •
                        s
                           •
                         Decem
                           •
                        r. story more particularly we haue declared. Wherfore to leaue him, we shall now examine some other arguments, alleaged by others after him, especially by those that were actors in the former ten disputations at Oxford, Cambridge and London, which are not much fewer in number, then these alleaged already of Peter Martyr.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  The fourth sort of arguments alleaged by others after Peter Martyr. §. 4.
               28. And of these the first shalbe that of Causon and Higbed, in their confession to B. Bonner 
                        •
                     nno Domini 1555. The flesh profiteth nothinge (saith First obiection. Christ) Ioan. 6. Ergo Christ hath not giuen his flesh to be eaten in the Sacrament; and diuers others do Fox pag. 1400. obiect the same, as a great argument; yea Zuinglius himselfe calleth this argument: A brasen vvall, 
                  Zuingl. l. da ver
                        •
                      & fals. Religcap. de Euchar. 
                  and a most stronge adamant, that cannot be 
                        •
                     oken. But the auncient Fathers, tha
                     •
                   knew more then Zuinglius, did easily breake this adamant, and brasen wall, giuinge diuers solutions The au
                        •
                     
                     svvere. therof: as first, that yf we take these words of our Sauiour to be spoken properly of his flesh; then must the sense be, that his only flesh, without his soule & diuinity, prositeth not to our saluation: and so do expound the place both S. Augustine and S. Cyrill, for that Aug. & Cyril. in Ioan. otherwise no man can deny, but that Christs flesh with his soule and diuinity, doth profitt greatly euen in the Sacrament yt selfe; for that Christ in the selfe-same Chapter of Saint Iohn saith: he that eateth my flesh hath life euerlastinge. 
                  
                     Ioan. 6. Secondly, other Fathers more to the literall sense do interpret those words: (the flesh profiteth nothinge) not that Christs flesh doth not profitt, but that the carnall vnderstandinge of that speach of Christ, about his flesh, to be eaten

in the Sacrament (such as the Capharnai
                        •
                     e had, whome he refuteth) profiteth not to ou
                     •
                   saluation, but requireth a more spirituall and high vnderstandinge, to witt, that yt is to be eaten in another manner vnder the formes o
                     •
                   bread and wyne. And this is the exposition both of 
                     Lib. 3. in 
                           •
                        p. ad Rom. cap 
                     
                        •
                     . 
                  Origen, 
                  Serm. de Caena Dom. 
                  S. Cyprian, 
                  On
                        ••
                     es 
                  S. Chrysostome 
                  
                     
                        ••
                     hunc 
                  
                     
                        •
                     heophilact, 
                  
                     locum 6. loan.
                   
                  Eu
                        •
                     himius, and others, and is th
                     •
                   more playne and manifest sense of that place.
               29. Maister Guest (one of the Protestant opponents) in the first Cambridge disputation M. Guests argument against the reall presence. against Doctor Glyn, vrgeth againe and again
                     •
                   this argument: That vvhich Christ tooke, he blessed that vvhich he blessed, he brake: that vvhich he brake 
                  Fox pag. 1258. col. 2. num. 80. 
                  he gaue: but he tooke bread: ergò he gaue bread: T
                     •
                   which argumēt Doctor Glyn answered by a lik
                     •
                   Collection out of the scripture: That which Go
                        •
                     
                   
                  
                     G
                           •
                        n. 2. 
                  tooke out of Adams side, vvas a ribbe; but what he tooke that he brought and deliuered to Adam for his vvise ergò he deliuered him a ribbe for his wife. Which aunswere, though yt made the auditory t
                     •
                   laugh: yet Maister Perne comminge to answer
                     •
                   
                  D. Perne. for the Protestant party; vpon the third day o
                     •
                   disputation, would needs vrge the same argument againe in his preface; which Maister Vauisour, that disputed against him, repeating publikely, gaue the like answere about the ribb
                     •
                   out of Genesis: vvherwith Fox being angry maketh this note in the margent: An vnsauer
                        •
                      comparison: perhapps for that he holdeth th
                     •
                   
                  Fox pa
                           •
                        . 1261. col. 1. num. 8. ribbe for rotten, which so longe agoe was taken out of Adams side: for that otherwise I d
                     •
                   not see what euill sauour Fox can find therin

but the effect of the aunswere stands in this: that as God tooke a ribbe, and made therof our mother Eua: so Christ tooke bread, and therof made his body, though in a different manner, the matter or substance remayninge in the one change, but not in the other.
               30. The same Guest in the same disputation maketh this other argument against the reall-presence. Guests second argument. 
                  The body of Christ is not generate, or begotten in the Sacrament; ergò, yt is not in the Sacrament. 
                  Fox pag. 1259. Whervnto Doctor Glyn answered: Yow impugne a thinge yow know not: what call yow generation? Guest. Generation is the production of accidents. Glyn. A new definition of a new philosopher. Thus they two, and no one word more about this argument: nor did Guest reply, either in iest or earnest, but leapt presently to his former argumēt againe: That which he tooke he blessed; that which he blessed he brake; that vvhich he brake, he gaue, &c. Wherfore to aunswere Guests obiection we say: first that generation is not the production of accidents, as fondly he affirmeth, which production of accidents appertaineth rather to alteration, augmentation and locall motion, as Aristotle teacheth, 
                     Lib. primo Generat. & lib. 3. Phys.
                   wheras generation is the production of a substance and not of accidents: Secondly we say that Christs body in the Sacrament is there, not by generation nor creation, but by another miraculous operation of God, called Transubstantion, which is a conuersion of the bread & wine into the true body & bloud of Christ. And thus much in earnest to M. Guest.
               
               
                  
31. After Guest there commeth Maister Pilkinton, as wise as the other in matter of disputation, though afterward by the creditt of his manhood therin, he gott the Bishoppricke o
                     •
                   
                  Durham. He began thus against Doctor Glyn. This one thinge I desire of yow most worshippfull Maister Doctor, that yow will aunswere me with breuity as I shall propound and thus I reason:

                     
                        The body of Christ that vvas broken on the Crosse, is a full satisfaction for the sinnes of the vvhole vvorld.
                     
                     
                        But the Sacrament is not the satisfaction of the vvhole vvorld.
                     
                     
                        Ergo, the Sacrament is not the body of Christ.
                     
                  
               
               To this argument Doctor Glyn answered, that he vsed an equiuocation in the word Sacrament: for that yf the word Sacrament in this place, be taken for that which it conteyneth to witt the body of Christ; then is the minor proposition false; for that the body of Christ as yt was giuen on the Crosse, is the satisfaction for the world: But yf he take the Sacrament for the outward signes only of bread & wyne, them he graunteth both the conclusion and the whole sillogisme to be true, that the Sacrament is not the body of Christ. Whervnto Pilkinton maketh one only reply, and that most fondly, out of the same equiuocation, sayinge: that the Sacrament hath not satisfied for the world, and that men may be saued without the Sacrament, as many were before yt was instituted: Whervnto Doctor Glyn very

learnedly aunswered: that yf he tooke the Sacrament, as before he had distinguished, for Christ conteyned in the Sacrament, then had the Sacrament, that is to say Christ therin conteyned, both satisfied for the whole world, and none were euer saued without him, for that all were saued by faith in him to come.
               32. The same Pilkinton leaping from his former argument, without takinge his leaue, falleth vpon another medium in these words:

                     
                        The body of Christ is resiant in he auen. 
                        
                           Pilkinton
                                 •
                              
                            second argument.
                     
                     
                        And the body of Christ is in the Sacrament.
                     
                     
                        Ergo: the Sacrament is in heauen.
                     
                  
               
               This argument yow see is as good and no better, then yf we should say:

                     
                        The soule of a man is in the fingar.
                     
                     
                        And the soule of a man is in the foote.
                     
                     
                        Ergo, the foote is in the fingar.
                     
                  
               
               But yet Doctor Glyn declared there further, after he had iested at the argument, that Christ was in one sort in heauen, and after another sort in the Sacrament; in heauen locally, visibly & circumscriptiuely, but in the Sacrament inuisibly and sacramentally: which differences being not found in the soule, being in the foote and fingar, maketh our argument more heard to answere, then that of Pilkinton.
               
               33. There followeth a third argument of Pilkinton thus:

                     
                        In the body of Christ there be no accidents of bread.
                     
                     
                        But in the Sacrament there be accidents of bread. 
                        
                           Pilkintons third argument.
                     
                     
                        Ergo: the Sacrament is not the body of Christ.
                     
                  
               
               Heere yow see is the same fond equiuocation

and doubtfull sense of the word Sacramen
                     •
                   before expounded, and poore Pilkinton can not gett out of yt: For yf he take the word Sacrament, for the only body of Christ conteyned therin, then is the minor proposition false; for that the Sacrament in this sense hath no accidents of bread in yt. But yf he take the Sacrament for externall signes, then we graunt both his minor and conclusion to be true, and nothinge against vs, to witt, that the Sacrament in this sense is not the body of Christ, though comonly in our sense the Saerament comprehendeth both the one and the other.
               34. But further Maister Pilkinton had a fourth argument, & with that he was briefly dispatched: he proposed the same in these words.

                     
                        VVhersoeuer Christ is, there be his ministers also, for so he promiseth. 
                        
                           Pilkintons fourth argument.
                     
                     
                        But Christ, as yow hould is in the Sacrament;
                     
                     
                        Ergo: his ministers are there also:
                     
                  
               
               This argument is worthy of Maister Pilkinton and his ministers, for yt proueth by like consequence, that they should haue byn in Pilatt
                     •
                   pallace with him, and on the Crosse. And y
                     •
                   may be argued also, that for so much as they are n
                        •
                      with him now in heauen, ergo: he is not there. Wherfore the meaninge of that place in S. Iohn ghospell: VVhere I am there shall my minister be; (h
                     •
                   
                  
                     Ioan. 12. saith not vvheresoeuer as Maister Pilkinton puttet
                     •
                   yt downe) is to be vnderstood of the participation of Christs glory in the next life, a
                     •
                   himselfe expoundeth in the 17. of S. Iohn, wher
                     •
                   he saith to his Father, that he will haue the
                     •
                   
                  
                     Ioan. 17.
                  
                  to be with him, to see his glory. And in the meane space we see how these fellowes, that glory so much of scripture, do abuse the true sense of scripture, in euery thinge they handle. And thus much do I find obiected against the reall-presence in the Cambridge disputations.
               35. There ensueth another disputation houlden in the Conuocation-house, in the beginninge of Q. Maryes raigne, which in our former order or Catalogue of disputations is the seauenth; M. Philips his argument. wherin Maeister Phillips Deane of Rochester, did argue against the reall presence in this sort. Fox pag. 1283.
                  
                     
                        Christ saith, yow shall haue poore people with yow.
                     
                     
                        But me yow shall not haue. 
                        
                           Matth. 11. Iean. 12.
                     
                     
                        Ergo. Christ is not present in the Sacrament.
                     
                  
               
               Whervnto Doctor VVeston prolocutor in that conference answered, that Christ is not present in that manner of bodyly presence, as then he was, so that good people may vse works of deuotion and piety towards himselfe, as then S. Mary Magdalen did, in whose defence he spoke those words: But Phillips not contenting himselfe with this answere, alleaged a longe discourse out of S. Augustine in his commentary vpon S. Iohns ghospell where the holy father saith; that Christ is present vvith vs in Maiestie, prouidence, grace, and loue now, but not in 
                  
                     Aug. tract. 50. in loan,
                   
                  corpotall presence. Whervnto answered D. VVatson afterward B. of Lincolne, expoundinge that place by another of the same Father vpon the same Euangelist, where he saith: that Christ is not now present after that mortall condition, which then 
                  
                     Tract. 70 in lea
                           •
                        o
                   
                  hirras, &c. Which nothinge letteth his being

after another manner in the Sacrament. Nay S. Augustine in the very same Treatise, not ten lynes before the words alleaged by M. Philipps, hath these words: Habes Christum praesentem, peraltaris 
                  Aug. ibid. 
                  cibum & potum. Thou hast Christ present in this life, by the foode and drinke of the Altar: which is another distinct way of presence from those two, named by him in the former place, of grace and corporall conuersation. And y
                     •
                   may seeme that this Philipps was not only satisfied by this answere, for that he replied not; but further also was conuerted vpon this conference, or disputation in the conuocation-house, or very soone after: For that Fox 
                     Pag. 1283. in margine.
                   affirmeth that he cōtinued Deane of Rochester, all Q. Maryes dayes, which no doubt he should not haue done, yf he had not subscribed, as all the rest did, to this article of the reall-presence.
               
               36. Next after Philips Deane of Rochester, stepped vp Philpott Archdeacon of VVinchester with great vehemency, and tooke vpon him Fox pag. 12. 4. 
                        •
                     l 2. num. 10. to pioue, that Christ in his last snpper did not eat his owne body by this argument: that sor so much as remission of sinnes was promised vnto the receauinge 
                  Phil
                        •
                     otts first argument. 
                  of Christs body, and that Christ did not receaue remission of sinnes, ergò, Christ did not receaue his owne body. Whervnto Maister More-man who, extempore was appointed to answere him, and Doctor VVeston the prolocutor, gaue this answere; that as well he might proue that Christ was not baptized, for that he receaued no remission of sinnes therin: but as he receaued that Sacramé
                     •
                   for our instruction and imitation only; so did

he this other. Wherabout though Philpot made agreat styrre, as not content with the aunswere; yet could he reply nothing of any moment, and so ended that dayes disputation. The next day he returned againe, and would haue made a longe declamation against the reall presence, but being restrayned he fell into such a rage and passion, as twise the prolocutor said, he was fitter for Bedlam, then for disputation.
               37. After Philpott, stood vp Maister Cheney Archdeacon of Hereford, another of the six which did contradict the masse and reall presence in the Conuocation-house, who was after made B. of Glocester, being that tyme perhapps inclyned to Zuinglianisme, though afterward he turned, and became a Lutheran and so lyued and died in the late Queenes dayes. There is extant to this man an eloquent epistle in Latyn of F. Edmund Campian, who vnhappily had byn made Deacon by him, but now being made a Catholike, exhorted the Bishopp to leaue that whole ministry: This mans argument against the reall presence, being taken out of the common obiections of Catholike wryters and schoole-men, was this, that for so much as it is cleare by experience, that by eatinge consecrated hosts for example, a man may be nourished, and that neyther Christs body nor the accidents and formes alone, can be said to norish ergo besides these two there must be some other substance, that nourisheth, which seemeth can be no other but bread:

And the like argument may be made of consecrated wyne that also nourisheth. And further in like manner he argued, concerninge consecrated bread burned to ashes, demaundinge wherof, that is to say, of what substance these ashes were made, for so much as we hould no substance of bread to be therin: and Fox would make vs beleeue, that all the Catholiks there present could not aunswere that doubt, and amongest others he saith of Doctor Harpesfield: Then vvas Maister Harpesfield called in to 
                  Fox pag. 1287. & 1288. 
                  see vvhat he could say in the matter, vvho tould a fayre tale of the omnipotency of almighty God. But Fox vnderstood not what Doctor Harpesfield said in that behalfe, as may easily appeare by his fond relatinge therof: We haue sett downe the aunswere to these and like obiections, before in the 7. and 10. Obseruations, and yt consisteth The aunsvvere to M. Cheneyes argument about mitrition & generatiō. in this; that in these naturall actions, and substantiall changes of nutrition and generation, wherin not only accidents are altered, but new substances also are produced, & consequently according to nature that operation doth require not only accidents, but also substantiall matter wherof to be produced; God by his omnipotency doth supply that matter, which is necessary to the new production of that substance, eyther by nutrition or generation.
               38. And albeit the vnbeleefe of heretiks doth not reach to comprehend and acknowledge, that God should do a myracle or action aboue nature euery tyme that this happeneth out,

yet can they not deny yt in other things: As for example, that euery tyme, when any children are begotten throughout the world, God immediatly createth new soules for them, which needs must be thousands euery day, yet none of our sectaryes will deny or scoffe at this, or hold yt for absurd, the like may be said of all the supernaturall effectes & benefites which God bestoeth dayly & hourly vpon vs in the Sacraments or otherwise.
               39. There remayne only some few places out of the Fathers to be explaned, which were obiected in this article, partly by Maister Grindall against Doctor Glyn, and partly also by Peter Martyr in the end of his Oxford-disputation, Certayne places of Fathers explaned. but related by Fox in the question of Transubstantiation, & not of the reall-presence, though properly they appertayne to this, as now yow will see. The first place is out of Tertullian against Marcion the heretike, where he hath these words (saith Fox): This is my body, 
                  Fox pag. 1250. col. 2. 
                  that is to say, this is the signe of my body. Whervnto I answere, that Fox dealeth heere like a Fox in cytinge these words so cuttedly, for that Tertullian in this very place (as in many others) doth most effectually, not only say, but proue also, that bread is turned into Christs true body after the words of consecration; and so do 
                     Tert. lib. 4▪ 
                     cont. Marcion. c. 40. Magd. c
                           •
                        nt. 2. cap. 4. the Magdeburgians affirme expressely of him: his words are these: Christ takinge bread, and distributinge the same vnto his disciples, made yt his body; sayinge this is my body, that is the figure of my body, and immediatly followeth: Figura autem non

fuisset, nisi veritatis esset corpus: but yt had not byn the figure of Christs body. yf his body had not byn a true body or truly their present. In which words Tertullian affirmeth two things, yf yow marke him; First that Christ made bread his true body; & then that bread had byn a figure of his body in the old Testament, which could not be, yf his body were not a true body, but a phantasticall body as Marcion did wickedly teach: for that a phantasticall body hath no figure. And this much for the true literall sense of Tertullian in this place; who goinge about to shew that Christ did fullfill all the figures of the old Testament (& consequently was sonne of the God of the old Testament, which Marcionists did deny) fullfilled also the figure wherin bread presignified his true body to come, by makinge bread his body: sayinge, this bread that was the figure of my body, in the old Testament, is now my true body in the new, and so doth the truth succeed the figure. And this to be the true literall sense and scope of Tertullian in this place (as before I haue said) euery man may see plainly, that will read the place.
               40. The other places are taken out of diuers other Fathers, who some tymes do call the Sacrament, a figure or signe, representation, or similitude of Christs body, death, passion, & bloud, as S. Augustine in Psalm. 2. Christ gaue a figure of his body, and lib. cont. Adamant. cap. 12. he did not doubt to say this is my body, when he gaue a figure of his body. And S. Hierome: Christ represented

vnto vs his body. And S. Ambrose lib. 4. de Sacram. cap. 4. As thou hast receaued the similitude of his death, so drinkest thou the similitude of his pretious bloud: These places I say, and some other the like, that may be obiected, are to be vnderstood in the like sense, as those places of Saint Paul are, wherin Christ is called by him a figure, Figura substantiae Patris: A figure of the substance of his Father. Heb. 1. And againe; Imago Dei. An Image of God. Colloss. 1. And further yet; Habitu inuentus vt homo. Appearinge in the likenes of a man. Ould hetetikes haue framed some particular heresies out of the Fathers by their misvnderstandinge their meaning. 
                  Philipp. 2. All which places, as they do not take from Christ, that he was the true substance of his Father or true God, or true man in deed (though out of euery one of these places some particular heresies haue byn framed by auncient heretiks, against his diuinity or humanity) so do not the forsaid phrases, sometymes vsed by the auncient Fathers, callinge the Sacrament a figure, signe, representation or similitude of Christs body, exclude the truth or reality therof, for that there is as well, signum & figura rei praesentis quam absentis, A signe or figure of things present, as well as of things absent, as for an example, a firkyn of wyne hanged vp for a signe at a Tauerne dore, that there is wyne to be sould, is both a sygne of wyne, and yet conteyneth and exhibiteth the thinge yt selfe: And so yt is in the Sacrament, which by his nature being a signe, figure, or representation, doth both represent and exhibitt, signifieth and conteyneth the body of our Sauiour.
               
                  
41. And as it should be an hereticall cauill to argue out of the said places of S. Paul, as the old heretiks did, that Christ is called a figure of the substance of his Father, and the Image of God, or the similitude of man: ergo, he is not of the reall substance with his Father, nor really God, nor truly man: so is it as hereticall to argue as our Sacramentaryes do; that Tertullian, Augustine, & some other Fathers do sometymes call the Sacrament a similitude, figure, signe or remembrance of Christs body, his death and passion, as in deed yt is; (for that otherwise yt should not be a Sacrament) ergo: yt is not his true body, that is conteyned therin, especially seing the same Fathers, do in the selfe-same places, whence these obiections are deduced, expressely & cleerly expound themselues, affirming Christs true reall body to be in the Sacrament vnder the formes of bread and wyne: as for example Saint Ambrose heere obiected in the 
                     Ambr. l. 4. de Sacra
                           ••
                        . cap. 4. fourth booke de Sacramentis cap. 4. doth expressely and at large proue the reall-presence, as exactly as any Catholike can wryte at this day: sayinge: that before the words of consecration, yt is bread, but after yt is the body of Christ. And againe. Before the vvords of Christ be vttered, the chalice is full 
                  
                     S. Ambrose expoundeth himselfe against the Protestāts. 
                  of vvyne and water, but when the words of Christ haue vvrought their effect, then is made that bloud which redeemed the people. And yet further. Christ Iesus doth testifie vnto vs, that vve receaue his body & bloud, and shall we doubt of his testimony? Which words being so plaine and euident for the truth of Catholike beleefe, lett the reader consider,

how vaine and fond a thing yt is for the Protestants to obiect out of the selfe-same place, that vve receaue the similitude of his death, and drinke the similitude of his pretious bloud, for that we deny not, but the body of Christ in the Sacrament is a representation and similitude of his death on the Crosse, and that the bloud which we drinke in the Sacrament, vnder the forme of wine, is a representation and similitude of the sheddinge of Christs bloud in his passion. But this letteth not, but that it is the selfe-same body & bloud, though yt be receaued in a different manner, as it letteth not, but that Christ is true God, though he be said, to be the Image of God, as before yow haue heard.
               42. There remayneth then only to be aunswered, that speach of S. Augustine obiected in these disputations. Quid paras dentes & ventrem? crede & manducasti: Why dost thou prepare thy 
                     Aug. tract. 25. in Ioan.
                   teeth and thy belly? beleeue and thou hast eaten. Whervnto I answere, that this speach of S. Augustine and some other like, that are found in him, and some other Fathers, of the spirituall eatinge of Christ by faith, do not exclude the reall presence, as we haue shewed before in our nynth obseruation. It is spoken against them, that come with a base and grosse imagination to receaue this diuine foode, as if yt were a corporall refection, and not spirituall; wheras indeed faith & charity are those vertues, that giue the life vnto this eatinge: faith in beleeuinge Christs words to be true, as S. Ambrose in the place before cyted saith,

                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
and therby assuringe our selues, Christs true body to be there: and charity in preparing our selues worthily, by examinations of our conscience, that we do not receaue our owne damnation, as S. Paul doth threat. And this is the true spirituall eatinge of Christs body by faith, but yet truly and really, as the said Fathers do expound vnto vs, whose sentences more at large yow shall see examined in the Chapter followinge.
               43. These then being all in effect, or at least wayes the most principall arguments, that I The conclusion of this chapter. find obiected by our English Sacramentaryes in the forsaid ten disputations, against the article of Christs true & reall being in the Sacrament, you may consider with admiration and pitty, how feeble grounds those vnfortunate men had, that vvere first dealers in that affaire, wheron to change their faith and religion, from that of the Christian world, from tyme out of mynd before them: and to enter into a new sect and labyrinth of opinions contradicted amonge themselues, and accursed by him that was their first guide to lead them into new pathes, to witt, Luther himselfe, and yet to stand so obstinately & with such immoueable pertinacy therin; as to offer their bodyes to temporall fire, and their soules to the euident perill of eternall damnation for the same; but this is the ordinary enchauntement of heresie founded on pride, selfe iudgement, and selfe-will, as both by holy scriptures and auncient Fathers we are admonished.
               
                  
44. One thinge also is greatly heere to be noted by the carefull reader, vpon consideration of these arguments to and fro, how vncertayne a thing yt is for particular men, whether learned or vnlearned (but especially the The miserable case of sectaryes, vvith out any sure ground to Icane vnto. ignorant) to ground themselues & their faith vpon their owne or other mens disputations, which with euery little shew of reason to and fro, may alter theire iudgement or apprehension, and in how miserable a case Christian men were, yf their faith (wherof dependeth their saluation or damnation) should hange vpon such vncertayne meanes as these are, & that God had left no other more sure or certaine way then this for men to be resolued of the truth, as we see he hath, by his visible Church, that cannot erre; yet thought we good to examine this way of disputatiōs also, and the arguments therof vsed by Protestants against the truth. But now followeth a larger & more important examen, of the Catholike arguments alleaged by our men against them, in this article of the reall-presence. And what kind of aunswers they framed to the same, wherby thou wilt be greatly confirmed (good reader) yf I be not much deceaued, in the opinion of their weaknesse, and vntruth of their cause.
            
         
         
            
            VVHAT CATHOLIKE ARGVMENTS VVere alleaged in these disputations for the reall-presence; and how they were aunswered or shifted of by the Protestants. CHAP. V.
            AS I haue briefly touched in the former Chapter, the reasons and arguments alleaged for the Sacramentary opinions, against the reall-presence; so now I do not deeme yt amisse, to runne ouer in like manner, some of the Catholike arguments that were alleaged against them, though neyther tyme nor place will permitt to recyte them all, which the discreett reader may easily imagine by the grounds and heads therof, sett downe in the second Chapter of this Treatise, though many & waighty they were or might be. Wherfore to speake breifely somewhat therof, and for more breuity and perspicuity, to draw the matter to some kind of order and methode: yow must note, that of these ten disputations, only foure were in tyme of Catholike gouernement, as before I signified, that is to say; the six-dayes conference in the Conuocation-house,
               
in the beginninge of Q. Maryes raigne, & Disputation in the conuocatiō house. the three-dayes seuerall disputation at Oxford with Cranmer, Ridley, and Latymer, some monethes after. And as for the first in the Conuocation-house, the Protestants only did dispute, for three continuall dayes togeather, to witt, Phillips, Haddon, Cheyney, Elmour, and Philpott, and seuerall Catholike men were appointed to aunswere them. And when in the end the Protestants were required to aunswere according to promise, in their turnes, the Catholike opponents for other three dayes, they refused Fox pag. 1287. col. 2. num. 30. yt all, sauing Philpott, vpon certayne conditions to be heard yet further, but Doctor VVeston the prolocutor reiected him, as a man fitter to be sent to bedlam (saith Fox) then to be admitted to disputation, &c. For that he both was vnlearned, and Philpott. a very madd man in deed. Wherfore out of this disputation, little or nothinge is offered about this article of reall-presence, for that the Catholike party disputed not at all.
            2. And as for the other three dayes disputation in Oxford, the last, which was with Latymer, was very little, for that he fledd disputation, as there yow shall see; and the few arguments that were made against him, were rather in proofe of the sacrifice of the masse: so as most arguments were alleaged in the former two-dayes conflict against Cranmer and Ridley, which presently we shall examine, though vnder K. Edward also, one day of the Cambridge disputations was allowed to Catholike opponents, to propose their argumēts,

               Doctor Madew being defendant for the Protestants, and Doctor Glyn, Maister Langdall, & Maister Sedg-wicke opponents for the Catholiks: to as out of these foure disputations, we shall note breifely some Catholike arguments, that were alleaged, aduertisinge the reader first to consider with some attention the points ensuinge.
            3. First that we haue nothinge of these disputations, First point to be obserued. their arguments or aunswers, but only such as pleaseth Iohn Fox to deliuer and impart with vs, which most euidently do appeare to be mangled and vnperfect in many places, without head or foote, coherence or consequence, which must proceed eyther of purpose to make matters obscure, and therby to bring the reader into doubt and confusion, or of lacke of good information; and that the former is more credible then the second, may be gliessed by the variety of impertinent notes in the margent, scoffes, and iests in the text yt selfe, often tymes putt in to deface the Catholike party, and to giue creditt to his sectaryes: And consequently what faith may be giuen to his narrations (but only where they make against himselfe) is easy to be seene, especially in that himselfe cōfesseth, that Ridley wrote in prison his owne disputations after they were past, & the same we may presume of the rest, and then no man can doubt, but that they would putt downe their owne parts to their vttermost aduantage, or at least-wise with the smallest losse, that they could diuise.
            
               
4. Secondly yt is to be considered of the The secōd point to be obserued. precedent reader, that must aduenture his soule euerlastingely by takinge one part or other in this controuersie heere in hand, how much yt may import him to stand attent to the places and authorityes, alleaged out of scriptures & Fathers for the truth, & to consider them well, reading them ouer againe, and againe & weighing the true meaning & sense of the wryter, and not how sleightly or cunningly they are, or may be shifted of by any witty wrangler, for so much as this may be done with any wrytinge or euidence neuer so manifest, yf the defendant will list to cauill, & the reader be so inconsiderate or carelesse of his owne perill, as to be delighted or abused therwith.
            5. Thirdly in the allegation of Fathers testimonyes, The third point considerable. which heere are to ensue, yt is to be weighed, not only what they say, but also how they say, what phrases and speaches they vse, and to what end, and whether yf they had byn of the Protestants Religion, they would haue vsed those phrases or no, more then Protestant wryters do themselues at this day, especially so ordinarily and commonly as the said Fathers do, they being men both learned, wise, and religious, that well knew how to vtter their owne mynds & meaning, what is proper & improper speach, & withall not being ignorāt, how great inconueniences must ensue of improper speaches in matters of faith, where men are bound to speake precisely

and warily: and on the other side is 
                  •
               o be considered also, yf they were of contrary opinions to the Protestants, and of that faith which we affirme them to be in this point of the reall presence, what more effectuall speaches could they haue vsed to expresse yt, then they do, callinge yt the true body, the reall body, the naturall body of our Sauiour, the same body that he tooke of the blessed Virgin, and gaue vpon the Crosse, the body vvherby he is vnited vnto vs in humanity; and denyinge it expressely to be bread after the vvords of consecration, though yt seeme to be bread to our eyes & tast, and that we must not trust our senses therin, but yeld to Gods omnipotency, and beleeue, that as he hath vvrought infinite other miracles, so hath he done this; that we must adore yt, vvith the highest adoration; and other like phrases, which neyther Protestants can abide, or euer do vse in their wrytinges; nor could the Fathers, yf they had byn expressely of our Religion (as we say they were) diuise words more significant, proper, or effectuall to expresse the truth of our Catholike faith, then yf of purpose they had studyed for yt, as no doubt they did; So as yf the auncient Fathers did vnderstand what they spake, and that they spake as they meant; then are the Protestants in a pittifull plight, whose saluation or damnation dependeth in this, whether we must vnderstand them, S. Paul, and Christ himselfe literally, as they spake, or by a figure only; so as yf they vsed no figure, then is the Sacramentary opinion to be held for heresie.
            
               
6. Fourthly is to be considered also in this The 4. point of note. matter, as els-where we haue noted, that when any one of these auncient Fathers, in what age soeuer, is found to vse these effectuall words, for vttering his meaning about this high mystery of Christs being present in the Sacrament, he is to be vnderstood to expresse not only his owne iudgement, and beleefe therin, but the iudgement also and beleefe of the whole Church of Christendome in that age, for so much as any Doctor, neither then nor after, did note him for error, or 
                  •
               emerity in speakinge & wrytinge as he did, which no doubt would haue happened, as in all other occasions of errors or heresies yt did, yf his speach had bin vnsound, vnproper, or dangerous; so as when we find but one Father vncontroulled in these assertions, we are iustly to presume, that we heare the whole age and Christian Church of his tyme speake togeather, and much more when we see diuers Fathers agree in the selfe-same manner of speach, and vtteringe their meaninge. And whosoeuer is carefull of his soule in these dangerous tymes of controuersies, ought to be mindfull of this obseruation, and so shall we passe to the disputations themselues.
            
               
               
                  Out of the first Cambridge-disputation in K. Edvvardes dayes, wherin the defendantes were D. Madevv, and B. Ridley highe Comissioner. 20. Iunij. 1549. §. 1.
               7. Albeit in this disputation matters were but sleightly handled, and no argument vrged to any important issue, by reason of the often interruptions of the Cambridge-proctors and sleights vsed by Ridley himselfe; yet do I find that Doctor Glyn, being a very learned man indeed, did touch diuers matters of moment▪ though he prosecuted not the same, yf Fox his relation be true, and much lesse receaued he any substantiall solution therof. As for example, in the beginninge he made a very effectuall discourse how this diuine Sacrament conteyninge Christs reall body, was not only prefigured by diuers figures in the old Testament, as namely the Paschall-lambe, the manr
                        •
                     
                   and shew-bread (which signifyed the great importa
                     •
                  ce and moment therof when yt should 
                     D. Gly
                           ••
                        e his first discourse. be performed) but also was so peculiarly and diligently promised by our Sauiour, in the six of S. Iohn, comparinge yt with the said figures and shewing how much yt was to exceed the same, and namely the manna that came from heauen, and finally expoundinge yt to be hi
                     •
                  
                  
owne flesh which he would giue vs to eate in fullfillinge those figures: Panis quem ego dabo ca
                     
                        •
                     o mea est, the bread that I will giue you shalbe 
                     Ioan. 6. my flesh, and that truly and indeed: caro enim 
                        •
                     uea verè est cibus; for my flesh is truly meate, &c. 
                  Ibidem.
               
               8. This promise then, and this prefiguration was not (quoth he) performed by Christ, but in his last supper when he tooke bread and de
                  
                     •
                  iuered it sayinge: this is my body: which performance, yf yt must aunswere eyther to Christs promise in the ghospell, or to the figures in the old Testament, must needs be more then bread, for that otherwise yt should not be better then the manna, that was bread from heauen, which Christ in S. Iohns ghospell expressely promised, should be changed into his flesh. And yf Christ in his last supper, had but giuen a figure of his true body; then had he fullfilled the figures of th' old Testament with a figure in the new, and so all had byn figures contrary to that of S. Iohn: Lex per Moysen data est, veritas autem per Iesum Christum facta est. The 
                     Ioan. 1. law was giuen by Moyses (in figures) but the truth thereof was performed by Iesus Christ, &c.
               
               9. Thus began Doctor Glyn, but I find no solution The Ievves equall to vs by the sacramentary doctrine. giuen thervnto, but that Doctor Madew being asked whether the Sacraments of the old law, and new were all one? he said: yea indeed & effect: Doctor Glyn inferred, that then they were not inferiour to vs; for that they had bread that signified Christs body as well as ours, and they by eating that bread with faith

in Christ to come, did eat Christs body, and participate his grace therby, no lesse then we, which is a great absurdity, and contrary to the whole drift of S. Paul speaking of that matter, and extollinge the dignity of this Sacrament, yea cōtrary to the expresse discourse of Christ himselfe, sayinge: not Moyses gaue yow bread from 
                  
                     Ioan. 6. 
                  heauen (meaning the Manna) but my Father giueth yow true bread from heauen. And to this discourse also yow shall find nothinge aunswered in effect.
               10. From this Doctor Glyn passeth to shew out of S. Augustine, S. Ambrose, and S. Basill, that Fox pag. 1253. the body of Christ must be adored before yt be receaued; whervnto was aunswered: that only a certayne reuerent manner of receauinge vva
                        •
                      therby meant, but no adoration; but the other replyed, Adoratiō of the Sacrament. that the Fathers spake of proper adoration; yea S. Austen went so farre therin in his books De ciuitate Dei, that he affirmeth the heathens to haue esteemed the Christians, to haue adored Ceres and Bacchus, Gods of bread and wyne, by the adoration which they vsed to this Sacrament of bread and wyne, which they would neuer haue suspected of the Protestants, by their behauiour towards their supper of bread and wyne. Whervnto another aunswere was framed, that Saint Augustin
                        •
                     
                   meant only of adoringe Christs body in hea
                  
                     ••
                  n and not in the Sacrament; and this aunswere was confirmed by Ridley very sollemnely, sayinge for his preface: For because I am on
                        •
                      that doth loue the truth, I vvill heere declare vvha
                        •
                     
                     
I thinke in this point, &c. I do graunt a certayne honour and adoration to be done vnto Christs body, but then the Fathers speake not of yt in the Sacrament, but of yt in heauen, &c. Neyther is there any other aunswere giuen. And yet who seeth not, that this is but a playne shift? For when S. Augustine for example saith: Nemo illam carnem manducat, 
                  
                     Aug in Psalm. 98. 
                  nisi prius adorauerit: No man eateth that flesh (in the Sacrament) but first adoreth yt. And Saint Chrysostome: Adora & communica, dum proseratur 
                  
                     Chrysost. hom. 60. ad Pop Antioch.
                   
                  sacrisicium, adore and communicate, vvhilst the sacrifice is brought forth; yt is euident by common sense, that the adoration is appointed to that body, which there presently is eaten, and not to Christs body absent in heauen; for by this kind of their adoration, we adore also our ordinary dinners, to witt by adoringe God in heauen, and sayinge grace &c. And he that shall read the place of the Fathers themselues, will wonder at this impudency, for Saint Austen doth expound those words of the Psalme Adorate scabellum pedum eius, and applieth 
                     Psalm. 9
                        •
                     . yt to his flesh in the Sacrament, and S. Chrysostome speaketh expressely of Christs flesh, as yt is in the Sacrament, and offered as a sacrifice.
               11. And yet doth Fox make Doctor Glyn to haue replyed neuer a word, nor so much as produced the textes themselues of the Fathers named by him, but giuinge yt ouer passed to another argument, sayinge: Yf yt please your good Lordshipp, S. Ambrose and S. Augustine do say, that before the consecration yt is but bread, and after the consecration

yt is called the body of Christ; Wherto was 
                     S. Ambrose and S. Austen handsomely shifted of. aunswered: Indeed yt is the very body of Christ Sacramentally after the consecration, vvher as before yt is nothinge but common bread, and yet after that yt is the Lords bread, and thus must S. Ambrose and S. Augustine be vnderstood. So said the aunswerers, and Doctor Glyn vvas by the procters commaunded to cease, and passe to the second question; but he obtayned by intreaty to go foreward an instance 
                     D. Glyns reply. or two more, shewing out of the words of S. Ambrose, that Ridleyes aunswere could not be true; for that S. Ambrose said; that after the 
                  Fox pag. 1254. 
                  consecration, there is not the thinge that nature did forme, but that which the blessing doth consecrate. And that yf the benediction of Elias the Prophett, could turne the nature of water, how much more the benediction of Christ, God & man can do the same, ergò there is a greater change in the natures then of common bread, to become the Lords bread.
               12. To this reply there was no other aunswere giuen, but that S. Ambrose his booke d
                        •
                      Sacramentis was not his, & Ridley affirmed that all the Fathers did say so: which was a shamelesse lye in so great an auditory, nor could he bringe forth so much as one Father that said so, nor alleaged he any one argument to proue yt to be so; and yf he had, yet S. Ambrose repeating
                     •
                   againe the very same sentence in his booke de initiandis is sufficient for the authority of the place, but Glyn is made to passe away the matter with sylence, sayinge: VVell lett this passe, &c. And then goinge to other authorityes

of Fathers, ys 
                     ••
                  yped of with like shif
                     ••
                  ; as when he cyteth S. Cyprians words: Panis non 
                  A strange shiftinge of the authorityes of Fathers. 
                  effigie, sed natura mutatus, omnipotentia Dei sit caro: t
                     •
                  e bread by consecration being changed not in shape, but in nature, is by the omnipotency of God made flesh; they aunswere that by nature is vnderstood a naturall property or quality, and by flesh, a fleshly thinge or quality, and not the substance, so as the sense must be, that bread is changed not in outward shape, but into a naturall property of a fleshly thing, &c. And when Doctor Glyn replyed to ouerthrow this inuention out of S. Ambrose, who affirmeth this chāge of bread to be made into the flesh, that was taken of the Virgin Mary, ergò yt was not only into a fleshly thinge, quality, or property, but into the true flesh of Christ; Ridly gaue an aunswere, that I vnderstand not, nor himselfe I thinke, but only that he must say somwhat in so great an audience, and expectation; or Fox vnderstood yt not that setteth it downe: for these are his words:
               13. VVhen Doctor Glyn vrged the sayinge of S. Ambrose, that bread is changed into the body taken from the virgin Mary, that is to say (saith he) that by the word 
                  Fox pa
                           •
                        . 1
                        •
                     54 col. 
                     
                        •
                     . num. 3. 
                  of God, the thinge hath a being that yt had n
                        •
                     t before, and we do consecrate the body, that we may receaue the grace and power of the body of Christ in heauen by this Sacramentall body. So he. And doth any man vnderstand him? or is his aunswere any thinge to the purpose for satisfyinge the Fathers? S. Cyprian saith: that the bread by the omnipotency of God is changed in nature, and made

flesh and S. Ambrose saith: yt is the flesh taken from the Virgin; and Ridley saith heere; that yt hath a being, vvhich yt had not before, and that, they do consecrate a sacramentall body of Christ, therby to receaue the grace and power of Christs body in heauen; but howsoeuer they do consecrate that body: (which is a strange word for Sacramentaryes to vse) yet do they graunt that this Sacramentall body is but bread; and how then can yt be flesh, and flesh of the Virgin; were not the Fathers ridiculous, yf they vsed these equiuocations, yea false and improper speaches?
               14. Well Doctor Glyn goeth foreward, and alleageth S. Chrysostome vpon S. Mathewes ghospell, where to persuade vs the truth of Christs body in the Sacrament, he saith: that we must 
                  Fox pag. 1254. 
                  beleeue Christs words in these mysteryes, and not our senses, for that our senses may be deceaued; but Christ sayinge this is my body cannot deceaue vs; and that he made vs one body with himselfe, not through faith only, but in very deed: and further, that the miracle which he wrought in his last supper, he vvorketh dayly by his ministers, &c. Whervnto Ridley aunswered nothinge 
                     S. Chrysostome shifted of. but these words: Maister Doctor, yow must vnderstand, that in that place S. Chrysostome shewed, that Christ deliuered vnto vs no sensible thinge in that supper. So he. Which notwithstanding is euidently false, for he deliuered sensible bread & wyne, according to the Protestants faith, and accordinge to outs, the formes of bread and wyne, which are also sensible: and yf there were no sensible thinge, then could there be no Sacrament, which must conteyne a sensible

signe. And to refu
                     •
                  e this shift of Ridley, Doctor Glyn obiected Theophilact, expoundinge S. Chrysostome, and vsinge the same words that he did, to witt, that the bread is transelemented, and transformed. He alleageth another place or two of S. Augustine togeather with S. Irenaeus: 
                  
                     Matth. 11. To all which Rochester aunswereth resolutely: VVell say what yow list; yt is but a figuratiue speach, as S. Iohn Baptist was said to be Elias for a property, &c. 
                  Hovv S. Iohn Baptist vvas Elyas.
                   But who doth not see the absurdity of this euasion; for so much as the meaning of Christ, about Elias his spiritt in S. Iohn Baptist, is euident, nor euer went any auncient Fathers about to affirme or proue by arguments, that S. Iohn Baptist was truly Elias in person (himselfe 
                     Ioan. 1. expressely denyinge yt) or that yt was meant literally, as they do of the words of Christ in the Sacrament: And this could not Ridley but see, but that he was blinded in pride and passion, for that otherwise he would neuer haue gone about to aunswere the Fathers by euident wranglinge, so contrary to their owne sense and meaninge.
               15. After Doctor Glyn was putt to silence in this order, succeded Maister Langdale, Maister 
                  Langdale disputeth 
                  Sedgewicke and Maister Yonge, but very breefely concerninge this article of the reall-presence, not being permitted to speake more, and the most part of the tyme trifled out also, with courtesyes of speach, the one to the other; My good Lord; good Maister Doctor; pleaseth yt your good Lordshipp; liketh yt your good Fathershipp; honourable Father, and the like ceremonyes, for they durst

do no other, Ridley being then high commissionar; yet Maister Langdale vrged a place of S. Chrysostome, where he bringeth Christ, savinge these words: I vrould be your brother, I tooke vpon 
                  Fox pag. 1256. col. 1. num. 43. 
                  me common flesh and bloud for your sakes; and euen by the same things that I am ioyned to yow, the very same I haue exhibited to yow againe; meaninge in the Sacrament. Wherof Maister Langdale inferred, that seing Christ tooke vpon him true naturall flesh, and not a figure of flesh only, or remembrance therof, therfore he gaue vs his true naturall flesh like man in the Sacrament, and not a figure. Wherto Ridley aunswereth in these words and no more: VVe are not ioyned 
                  Fox ibid.
                   
                  by naturall flesh; but do receaue his flesk spiritually from aboue. Which aunswere is not only contrary to the expresse words and meaning of S. Chrysostome in this place, but of Christ himselfe also brought in heere by S. Chrysostome to vtter his meaninge, as yow haue heard. I tooke vpon me common flesh for your sakes, and by the same things that I am ioyned to yow, the very same I haue exhibited vnto yow againe. Where yow see that he saith, he gaue the very same in the Sacrament, which he had taken vpon him for our sakes, and that by the same he was ioyned to vs againe; and now Maister Ridley saith; that vve are not ioyned to him by naturall flesh. These be contraryes, which of two shall we beleeue? Christ, and S. Chrysostome expoundinge him, or Ridley against them both?
               16. Maister Sedg-wicke disputed next, but hath 
                     M. Sedgewicke his disputat
                        ••
                     n. not halfe a columne or page allowed to the

settinge downe of his whole disputation; yet he vrginge diuers reasons in that little tyme out of the scriptures, why the Sacrament of the Altar cannot be in the new law by a figure, but must needs be the fullfillinge of old figures, and consequently the true and reall body of Christ; he brought Maister Ridley within the compasse of a dozen lines, to giue two aunswers one plaine contrary to another, as his words do import: for this is the first: I do graunt yt to be Christs true body and flesh, by a property 
                  
                     M. Ridley his ovvne contradiction. 
                  of the nature assumpted to the God head, and we do really eate and drinke his flesh and bloud, after a certaine reall property. His second aunswere is in these words: It is nothinge but a figure or token of 
                  Fox ibid.
                   
                  the true body of Christ, as it is said of S. Iohn Baptist, he is Elias, not that he vvas so indeed or in person, but in property and vertue he represented Elias. So he. And now lett any man with iudgement examine these two aunswers: For in the first he graun
                     •
                  eth at least wayes a true reall property of Christs flesh, assumpted to his Godhead, to be in their bread, wherby we do really eate his flesh, and drinke his bloud. And in the second he saith, yt is nothinge but a figure, and consequently excludeth all reall property; for that a figure hath no reallity or reall property, but only representeth and is a token of the body, as himselfe saith; which is euident also by his owne example, for that S. Iohn Baptist had no reall property of Elias in him, but only a similitude of his spiritt and vertue. And so these people, whilst they would seeme to say somewhat,

do speake contradictoryes amonge themselues.
               17. There followed Maister Yonge, who as breefly as the other, touched some few places of the Fathers (though they be not quoted) 
                     M. Yonges disputation. where they say that our bodyes are nourished in the Sacrament by Christs flesh, and that truly we drinke his bloud therin, and that for auoyding the horror of drinking mans bloud, Christ had condescended to our infirmityes, and giuen yt to vs vnder the formes of wyne; and other like speaches, which in any reasonable mans sense, must needs import more then a figure of his body and bloud, or a spirituall being there only by grace, for so much as by grace he is also in Baptisme and other Sacraments: & finally he vrged againe the place of S. Cyprian: That the bread being changed not in shape but in nature, vvas by the omnipotency of the vvord, made flesh. Wherto Ridley aunswered againe in these words: Cyprian there doth take this vvord nature for a property of nature, and not for the naturall substance. To which euasion Maister Yonge replyeth; this is a strange acception, that I haue not read in any authors before this tyme. And so with this he was glad to giue ouer (saith Fox) and askinge pardon for that he had done, said: I am contented, and do most humbly beseech your good Lordshipp to pardon me of my great, rudenesse, &c. Belike this rudenesse was for that he had said, that vt was a strange acception of S. Cyprians words, to take change in nature, for change into a property of nature, and flesh for a fleshely thinge

or quality, as before yovv haue heard, and that this should aunswere S. Cyprians intention: for lett vs heare the application: Bread (in the Sacrament) The confutation of 
                        •
                      after Ridi
                           •
                        yes euasion about Saint Cyprian.
                   
                  being changed not in shape but in nature (saith S. Cyprian) by the omnipotency of the word is made flesh; that is to say, as Ridley will haue yt bread, being changed not in shape, but in a property of nature, is made a fleshely thinge, or fleshely quality: What is this? or what sense can it haue? what property of fleshely nature doth your communion bread receaue? or what reall property of bread doth it leese by this change mencyoned by S. Cyprian? We say, (to witt S. Cyprian) that our bread retayning the outward shape, doth leese his naturall substance, and becommeth Christs flesh, what naturall property of bread doth yours leese? And againe. What fleshely thinge or quality doth yt receaue by the omnipotency of the word in consecration? And is not this ridiculous, or doth Ridley vnderstand this his riddle? But lett vs passe to the next disputation vnder Q. Mary, where we shall see matters handled otherwise, and arguments followed to better effect and issue.
            
            
               
               
                  Out of the first Oxford-disputation in the beginninge of Q Maryes raigne, wherin D. Cranmer, late Archbishopp of Canterbury, was defendant for the Protestant party, vpon the 16. of Aprill anno 1554. §. 2.
               18. When as the Doctors were sett in the diuinity schoole, and foure appointed, to be exceptores argumentorum (saith Fox) sett at a Table in the middest therof, togeather with foure other notaryes sittinge with them, and certayne other appointed for iudges (another manner of indifferency, then was vsed in King Edwards dayes vnder B. Ridley, in that disputation at Cambridge) Doctor Cranmer was brought in, and placed before them all to answere, and defend his Sacramentary opinion, giuen vp the day before in wrytinge, concerninge the article of the reall presence. Fox according to his custome noteth diuers graue circumstances, as amonge others, that the beedle had prouided drinke, and offered the aunswerer, but he refused vvith 
                  Fox pag. 1300. 
                  thanks. He telleth in like manner, that Doctor VVeston the prolocutor offered him diuers courtesyes for his body, yf he should need, which I omitt for that they are homely: against which Doctor VVeston notwithstanding he afterwards stormeth, and maketh a great

inuectiue for his rudenes, and in particular for that he had (as Fox saith) his Theseus by him, that is to say a cuppe of wyne at his elbow, whervnto Fox ascribeth the gayninge of the victory, sayinge; yt vvas no maruayle though he gott 
                  Fox pag. 1326. 
                  the victory in this disputation, he disputinge as he did, non sine suo Theseo, that is not without his 
                        •
                     plingcupp. So Fox. And yet further, that he holding the said cuppe at one tyme in his hand, and hearinge an argument made by another that liked him, said: vrge hoc, nam ho
                        •
                      facit pro nobis: vrge this, vrge this, for this maketh for vs. Thus pleased it Iohn Fox to be pleasant with Doctor VVeston; but when yow shall see, as presently yow shall, how he vrged Iohn Fox his three Martyrs, and rammes of his flocke (for so els-where he calleth them) in these disputations, not with the cuppe, but with substantiall, graue, and learned arguments, yow will not maruaile that he is so angry with him: for in very deed he brought them alwayes to the greatest exigents of any other, and more then all the rest togeather: Now then lett vs passe to the disputation.
               19. Doctor Chadsay was the first that disputed against Cranmer, beginninge with the institution of Christs Sacrament, recorded by S. Mathew, 
                  
                     Matth. 2
                        •
                     . Marc 14. Luc. 22. 
                  Marke, and Luke, shewinge out of them by diuers plaine clauses and circumstances, that Christ in his last supper, gaue vnto his disciples, not bread, but his true naturall body, which was giuen the next day on the Crosse, to all which Cranmer aunswered thus:

                  Yf yow vnderstand by the body naturall, Organicum, that is hauing such proportion of members, as he had liuinge 
                  Fox pag. 1 302. col. 1. num. 70. 
                  heere, then I aunsivere negatiuely. By which aunswere we may perceaue, that this great Doctor, who had wrytten a great booke against the reall-presence, by which Latymer amongst others was made a Sacramentary, and stood therein vnto death vpon the creditt of this booke (as after yow shall heare him often 
                     
                        •
                     . Chadsoys first argument. professe) vnderstandeth not the very state of the question betweene vs, for that we hould not Christs body in the Sacrament to be Organicall, in that manner as Cranmer heere imagineth, with externall dimensions & proportions of members as he liued vpon earth, 
                     Sup. cap. 3. though truly organicall, in another manner, without extension to place, as in our fourth and fifth obseruations before sett downe we haue declared; so as he erringe in the very grounds and first principles of the controuersie, yow may imagine how he will proceed in the rest.
               20. It was obiected vnto him next after this, that as a wise-man lyinge on his death-bedd, The secōd argumēt. and hauing care that his heyres after his departure do liue in quiett, and not contend about his Testament, doth not vse tropes and figures, but cleare and plaine speach in the said Testament; so must we presume of Christ, & for the confirmation of this, Doctor VVeston alleaged Fox pag. 1302. a place out of S. Augustine, De vnitate Ecclesiae vrginge this very same similitude; that yf the last words of any graue or honest man

lyinge on his death-bedd, are to be beleeued, 
                     Aug 1. 
                           ••
                         vnitat. Ecil. cap. 10. much more the last words of our Sauiour Christ in his supper, to which argument I find no effectuall aunswere giuen at all, but only that Cranmer saith: 
                     that he vvhich speaketh by tropes and figures, doth not lie;
                   but he aunswereth not to the other inconuenience, that his heyres may fall out about his Testament, the one vnderstandinge them literally, the other figuratiuely, as we & they do the words of Christ about this Sacrament.
               21. Next to this is brought in a large testimony of S. Chrysostome, out of his homily vnto 3. Argument. the people of Antioch, which beginneth: Necessarium est, dilectissimi, mysteriorum discere miracu
                     
                        •
                     um, 
                  Chrysost. hom. 61. ad Pop. Anti
                        •
                     ch. 
                  quid tandem sit, & quare sit datum, & quae rei 
                        •
                     tilitas, &c. 
                  It is necessary, most dearely beloued, to know this myracle of mysteryes, what yt is, and why yt was giuen, and what profitt cometh to vs therby, &c.
                   And then S. Chrysostome declareth at large, how Christ most myraculously aboue all humaine power, giueth his body to be handled and eaten by vs 
                        •
                     n the Sacrament; so as we fasten our teeth in his flesh, and that he did more then euer any parents did, who many tymes giue their children to others to be fed, but Christ feedeth vs with his owne flesh, and with that very flesh by which he is our brother, and vnited vnto vs in flesh. Out of which discourse D. VVeston 
                  
                     •
                  rged, that for so much as Christ is made our brother and kins-man, by his true, naturall & organicall flesh; erge he gaue the same his true

naturall and organicall flesh to vs to be eaten in the Sacrament. Wherto Cranmer aunswered: I graunt the consequence, and the consequent: 
                  Fox pag. 1303 col 2. num. 1. Which is contrary to that he said a little before, (yf yow marke yt) that his organicall body was not there.
               22. But Doctor VVeston went further, that seing he graunted this, then did yt follow also, that his true organicall flesh was receaued in our mouth, which S. Chrysostome calleth our teeth. But this Cranmer denyed, and said, he vvas eaten only by faith: Whervpon VVeston came on him againe sayinge, that for so much as he gaue vs the selfe-same flesh to eate in the Sacrament (and this with our teeth, as S. Chrysostome saith) wherby he became our brother & kins-man, yt must needs import a reall eatinge: Wherto Cramner aunswered: I graunt he tooke and gaue (in the Sacrament) the same true naturall and organicall flesh, vvherin he suffered, but feedeth vs spiritually, and his flesh is receaued spiritually. This was his aunswere, and this he repeateth often, and from this he could not be drawne: And heere now yow see, the practise of that shift, wherof we haue spoken before in our eyght and nynth obseruation, whereby these willfull people, vnder the tearmes of spiritually and sacramentally, do delude them selues, & their readers, as though they said somewhat to auoid Catholike arguments, taken out of auncient Fathers plaine and perspicuous authorityes, wheras indeed they say nothinge in substance at all, but do turne and wynd and

hide themselues vnder the sound of different words without sense. For yf yt be true as Cranmer heere graunted, that Christ gaue his true naturall and organicall flesh to be eaten 
                     •
                  n the Sacrament, and that with our teeth or corporall mouth, as S. Chrysostome saith, how can yt be denyed, but that we eat his flesh really, and not spiritually only, yf spiritually be opposite to really, as in Cranmers sense yt is, which vnderstandeth, spiritually and figuratiuely to be all one: but in our sense spiritually standeth with really, for that we hould Christs body to be receaued really and substantially in the Sacrament, but yet after a spirituall manner, different from that which the Capharnaits did imagine of a grosse carnall eatinge of Christs flesh, as other flesh is accustomed to be eaten, wherfore to imagine that Christs true naturall or organicall flesh is eaten truly in the Sacrament, and yet only absent, by faith, spiritually and in a figure, is to speake contradicto
                  
                     •
                  yes with one breath.
               23. Diuers other texts and testimonyes of 
                     〈◊〉
                  . Chrysostome were alleaged by Doctor VVeston 
                  4. Argument or reply. 
                  
                     •
                  o confute this ideacall fiction of Doctor Cranner, as that for example homilia 83. in cap. 26. 
                     
                        •
                     atth. Where he saith amonge other thinges: 
                     
                        •
                     eniat tibi in mentem, &c. 
                  Lett yt come into thy remembrance with what honour thou art honoured, (in the Sacrament) what table hou dost inioy, for that we are nourished herin with the selfe-same thinge, which the 
                        •
                     ngells do behould and tremble at, &c.
                   
                  VVho

shall speake the powers of thy Lord? VVho shall declare forth all his praises? VVhat pastor hath euer nourished his sheepe vvith his owne flesh, &c. Christ feedeth vs vvith his owne body, and conioyneth & vniteth vs to him therby. And againe vpon the 50. Psalme: Pro 
                  
                     In Psal. 50. 
                  
                     
                        •
                     bo carne propria nos pascit, pro potu sanguinem suum nobis propinat. In steed of meat, he feedeth vs with his owne flesh, and in steed of drinke he giueth vnto vs to drinke his owne bloud. And againe, homil. 83. in Matth. Non side tantum, sed 
                  Chrysost. hom. 38. in Matth. 
                  reipsa nos corpus suum effecit, &c. Not only by faith, but in deed he hath made vs his body. And finally for that yt was denyed expressely, Saint Chrysostome to meane that we receaued Fox pag. 1303. Christs body, with our corporall mouth, Doctor VVeston vrged these words of Saint Chrysostome: 
                  Chrysost. hom. 29. in 2. Cor. 13. 
                  Non vulgarem honorem consecutum est os nostrum excipiens corpus dominicum. Our month hath gotten no small honour in that yt receaueth the body of our Lord.
               24. But all this will not serue, for still Cranmer aunswered by his former sleight thus: VVith our mouth, vve receaue the body of Christ, and teare it vvith our teeth, that is to say the Sacrament of the body of Christ. Do yow see the euasion? And what may not be shifted of in this order, doth any minister in England vse to speake thus o
                     •
                   his communion-bread, as S. Chrysostome in the place alleaged of the Sacrament, after the words of consecration? or do any of the auncient Fathers wryte so reuerently of the water Fox pag. 1233. col. 1. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 74. of baptisme, which they would haue done, and ought to haue done, yf Christs body be no

otherwise present in this Sacrament, then the holy-Ghost is in that water, as Cranmer oftentymes affirmeth, and namely some few lynes after the foresaid places alleaged? But Doctor 
                  5. Argument. 
                  VVeston seing him to decline all the forsaid authorityes by this ordinary shift, of the words spiritually and sacramentally, vrged him by another way out of the same Chrysostome, concerninge the honour due to Christs body vpon earth, quod summo honore dignum est id tibi in terra 
                  
                     Chrysost. hom. 34. 
                  ostendo, &c. I do shew thee vpon earth, that which is worthy of highest honour, not Angells, not Archangells, nor the highest heauens, but I shew vnto thee the Lord of all these things himselfe. Consider how thou dost not only behould heere on earth, that which is the greatest and highest of all things, but dost touch the same also, & not only touchest him, but dost eat the same, and hauinge receaued him, returnest home.
               25. Thus S. Chrysostome. Out of which place Doctor VVeston vrged him eagerly, excludinge all figures, and eatinge of Christs body absent by faith; for that S. Chrysostome saith not only Ostendo tibi, I do shew vnto thee, that which is D. VVeston doth vrg
                        •
                      eagerly. vrgo hec, vrgo h
                           •
                        c.
                   worthy of highest honour aboue Angells, and Archangells, but ostendo tibi in terra, I shew yt to thee heere vpon earth, which signifieth the presence of a substance, wherto this highest honour is to be done, and that this thinge is seene, touched, & eaten, in the Church, which cannot be a figure, nor the sacramentall bread, for that highest honour is not due to them;

nor can vt be Christ absent only in heauen, for S. Chrysostome saith, I snew it thee heere on earth, &c. To all which pressinges. when Doctor Cranmer had no other thing in effect to aunswere, but these phrases often repeated; that it is to be vnderstood sacramentally, and, I aunswere that it is true sacramentally, &c. The hearers fell to cry out, and hisse at him, clappinge their hands saith Fox) and callinge him, indoctum, imperitum, impudentem, vnlearned, vnskillfull & impudent. And Fox to help out Cranmer in this matter, besides all other excuses, maketh this learned glosse in the margent vpon S. Chrysostomes words: Ostendo tibi in terra, &c. I do shew vnto thee vpon earth, what is worthiest of highest honour, to witt, Christs body. The body of Christ (saith Fox) is shewed forth vnto vs heere on earth diuers vvayes, as 
                  Fox pag. 1233. 
                  in readinge scriptures, hearinge sermons, and Sacraments, and yet neyther scriptures, nor sermons, nor Sacraments are to be worshipped, &c. So he, which is as iust as Germans lippes. And I would aske
                     •
                   this poore glossist, what maketh this note to the purpose of S. Chrysostome? for neyther doth he speake of the different wayes, wherby Christs body may be shewed forth vpon earth, but saith that himselfe did shew yt in the Sacrament vpon the Altar, to all that would see it. Nor doth he say that the meanes or wayes, wherby Christs body is shewed, are worthy greatest honour or worshipp, but that the thinge that is shewed forth, is worthy of highest honour. And how then standeth Fox his glosse with this sense, or whervnto serueth

it, but only to shew these wreched-mens obstinacy, that one way or other will breake through, when they are hedged in by the Fathers authorityes most plaine and manifest.
               26. After this assault giuen by Doctor VVeston, the first opponent Doctor Chadsey returned to 6. Argument. deale with Cranmer againe, & by issue of talke, D. Chadsey. came to vrge these words of Tertullian; Caro corpore & sanguine Christi vescitur, vt animade deo 
                  
                     Tertull. l. de res
                           •••
                        ct carne
                           •
                        . c. 8. 
                  saginetur. Our flesh is fedd with the body and bloud of Christ, to the end that our soule may be fatted with God; which is as much to say, that our mouth doth eate the body of Christ, and our mynd therby receaueth the spirituall fruite therof. Out of which words D. VVeston 
                  
                     •
                  vrged, that seing our flesh eateth the body of Christ (which cannot eat, but by the mouth) Christs body is really eaten and receaued by our mouth, which so often by Cranmer hath byn denyed, but now his words are: Vnto Tertullian I aunswere, that he calleth that the flesh, vvhich is the Sacrament. Of which aunswere I cannot vnderstand what meaninge yt hath, except Fox do er
                     •
                  e in settinge yt downe; for yf the flesh be the Sacrament, then must the Sacrament 
                     Cranmers shifting of Tertulli
                           ••
                        .
                   feed on the body and bloud of Christ, accordinge to Tertullian which is absurd. But 
                     •
                   suspect that Cranmers meaninge was, that the body of Christ was called the Sacrament, for so he expoundeth himselfe afterward, when he saith: The flesh liueth by the bread, but the soule is inwardly fedd br Christ: so as when Tertullian saith; our flesh is fedd by Christs body and bloud,
                  
he would haue him to meane, that our flesh eateth the Sacramentall bread and wyne, that signifieth or figureth Christs body and bloud, & our soule feedeth on the true body of Christ by faith: but both Doctor Chadsey & Doctor VVeston refuted this shift presently by the words immediatly ensuinge in Tertullian: Non possunt 
                  Tert. ibid. 
                  ergo separari in mercede, quas opera coniungit: Our body and soule cannot be separated in the reward, whome the same worke doth conioyne togeather; and he meaneth euidently by the same worke or operation, the same eatinge of Christs body. Wherfore yf the one, that is the soule, doth eat Christs true body, as Cranmer confesseth, then the other, which is our flesh, eateth also the same body as Tertullian saith; and for that Doctor VVeston liked well this argument out of Tertullian, and said to Doctor Chadsey, sticke to those words of Tertullian, as Fox Fox pag. 2305. affirmeth, yt is like that the foresaid tale of vrge, vrge, feigned of him was meant at this tyme. But yf yt were, the reader may easily see that he had more to vrge against his aduersary, than a port at his elbow; and so shall yow see by that which is to ensue; wherfore lett vs passe yet somewhat further in this combatt.
               27. Doctor Cranmer hauinge breathed a little 7. Argument out of S. Hilary.
                   vpon the former sharp on-sett of Chadsey and VVeston, one Doctor Tressam began very grauely and moderately to vrge a new argument and discourse, which seemed very important, and after yt was vrged, did more straine and presse

the defendant, then any thinge before disputed. The argument was founded vpon a place D. Tressa
                        •
                     . of S. Hilary, in his eight booke de trinitate against the Arrians, which both for the great at authority and antiquity of the Father, and cleernes of his words and reason, seemed to all there present to conuince; nor could Doctor Cranmer any way handsomely ridd himselfe of this place, but by his ordinary shiftinge interpretation, as ptesently shalbe seene. Doctor Tressam his discourse was this, that wheras the like controuersie for diuers points, had byn betweene the old Catholiks and Arrians in Saint Billaryes tyme, as now is betweene vs and Doctor Cranmer, and his fellowes, the Catholiks houldinge in that controuersie, the vnion of Christ with his Father to be in nature and substance, and the Arrians in will only and affection: Whatsoeuer authorityes the said Catholiks alleaged out of scriptures or auncient Fathers, for the naturall vnion betweene Christ and his Father; I and my Father are one. Such other places: the Arrians shifted of by sayinge: that is true in vvill, but not in nature, yt is true in loue and affection, but not in substance; euen as our Sacramentaryes do now, when we alleage neuer so cleere authorityes, for the true reall nature and substantiall presence of Christ in the Sacrament, and therby of his reall vnion also with vs by eatinge the same; they delude all with sayinge only; yt is true by grace and not by nature; yt is true by faith, but no
                        •
                      in substance; yt is true figuratiuely and sacramentally,

but not really; yt is true in a signe, by a trope; after a certaine manner of speach; yt is true spiritually, and by a naturall property, but not indeed substantially: and such aunswers; but all these shifts (saith Doctor Tressam) did S. Hilary cutt of so longe agoe, for that he proueth the true naturall coniunction of Christ with his Father, by our true naturall coniunction with him, by eatinge his flesh in the Sacrament; so as except we deny the true essentiall, reall and substantiall vnity of Christ with his Father, we cannot accordinge to S. Hilary deny the true, reall and substantiall vnity of vs with Christ, by receauing his true naturall flesh in the Sacrament.
               28. The place of S. Hilary is in his 8. booke of the blessed Trinity against the Arrians, as hath byn said, where he expoundeth these words of Christ in S. Iohns ghospell: As the liuing Father 
                  
                     Io
                           •
                        n. 6. 
                  sent me, so do I also liue by the Father, and be that eateth my flesh, shall also liue throw me: vpon which words of our Sauiour S. Hilary saith: This truly 
                  Fox pag. 1306. 
                  is the cause of our life, that vve haue Christ dwellinge by his flesh in vs, that are fleshye, vvhich also by him shall liue in such sort, a
                        •
                      he liueth by his Father. Of which was inferred, that Christ dwelled in vs in flesh by the Sacrament, and not only in spiritt. For better declaration wherof D. Tressam, before the allegation of these words, alleageth a larger discourse of the same S. Hilary, against the said Arrians vpon this point in these words: I demaund of them now (saith Hillary) who will needs haue the vnity of will only betweene the Father, and the 
                  
                     Hilar. l. 8. do Trunt.
                   
                  sonne, vvhether Christ be now in vs truly by nature, or

only by the agreement of vvilles? yf the vvord be incarnate in very deed, and vve receaue at the Lords table the vvord made flesh, how then is he to be thought not to dwell in vs naturally, &c. Out of which words of S. Hilary Doctor Tressam vrged, that Christs flesh was not only imparted vnto vs in faith and spiritt, but also really and naturally, according to S. Hilary, and that as his coniunction was naturall with his Father, and not in will and loue only: so is his coniunction with vs in flesh truly naturall, substantiall, and reall, and not only in spiritt and faith. For more confirmation wherof, Doctor Tressam alleaged also the Bucer. l. cont. Abrincensem words of Martyn Bucer, their late Protestant-reader in Cambridge, who wryteth that according to the holy Fathers meaning Christ dwelleth in vs (by the body giuen in the Sacrament) not only by faith and loue, as absent, but naturally, corporally, and carnally, &c. To which authority of Bucer Doctor Cranmer gaue no other answere but this iest. I know that Maister Bucer (saith he) was a learned man, but your faith is in good case which leaneth vpon Bucer, &c.
               
               29. But he could not so easily shake of the autority of Hilary, but was hardly pressed therwith, as yow may see readinge ouer the place yt selfe of this disputation, as also by that his aduocate Iohn Eox is constrayned to make sundry large notes, and glosses in the margent to help him out: For Doctor Tressam vrged, that we are not only vnited to Christ by faith and spiritt, but carnally also: Whervnto Cranmer seekinge an euasion answereth: I say that Christ Fox pag. 1306.
                     
was communicated vnto vs not only by faith, but in very deed also, vvhen he vvas borne of the Virgin. Behould the shift, we talke of Christ imparted to vs in the Sacrament, and so doth Hillary; he answereth, that Christ was imparted to vs in the incarnation; and yet yf yow consider, our flesh was then rather imparted to him, then his to vs. And againe, Turks and Infidells haue as much coniunction with him by the incarnation as we, for that they are men, & the flesh that he tooke, was common to all; So as heere yow see nothing but euasions sought for; and Doctor Tressam perceauing that he could gett no more of him to the purpose, fell to pray for him; but Doctor VVeston followed the argument much further, as there yow may see, for yt is ouerlonge to be alleaged heere. The principall point is, that S. Hilary auoweth: That our coniunction with Christ is not only by will, affection, and faith: but naturall also and reall, by eatinge his flesh in the Sacrament, as himselfe is naturally vnited to his Father and not only by will. And when Doctor Cranmer sought many holes to runne out at, VVeston presseth him againe with other words of S. Hilary explicatinge himselfe, which are these.
               30. These things (saith he) are recited of vs to this end, because heretiks feigninge a vnity of vvill only, betweene 
                  Hilar. ibid. 
                  the Father, and the sonne, did vse the example of our vnity vvith God, as though we being vnited to the sonne, and by the sonne to the Father only by obedience, and vvill of Religion, had no propriety of the naturall coniunction by the Sacrament of the body and bloud.
                  
Lo heere yt is accoumpted a point of Arrianisme by S. Hilary, to hould that we are vnited to Christ only by obedience and will of Relilion, and not by propriety of naturall communion with him, by eatinge his flesh in the Sacrament of his body and bloud. Whervpon Doctor VVeston vrged often and earnestly, that not only by faith, but by the nature of his flesh in the Sacrament, we are conioyned not spiritually only, and by grace, but naturally and corporally; Whervnto Cranmers aunswere was in these words: I graunt that Cyrill and Hilary do say that Christ is vnited to vs, not only by vvill, but also by nature, he is made one with vs carnally and corporally, because he tooke our nature of the Virgin Mary, &c. Do yow see his runninge from the Sacrament to the natiuity; but heare out the end. VVest. 
                  Hilary, where he saith Christ communicated to vs his nature, meaneth not by his natiuity, but by the Sacrament. Cran. Nay he communicated to vs his flesh by his natiuity. VVest. We communicated to him our flesh, Fox ibid.
                      when he was borne. Cran. Nay he communicated to vs his flesh when he was borne, & that I will shew yow out of Cyrill. VVest. ergò, Christ being borne gaue vs his flesh. Cran. In his natiuity he made vs partakers of his flesh. 
                  VVest. Wryte syrs. Cranm. Yea wryte. And so ended this Encounter, brought (as yow see) to two absurdityes on Cranmers side; the one, that where S. Hilary speaketh of the Sacrament of the body and bloud of Christ, he flyeth still to the incarnation: the other, that

he saith; Christ to haue imparted his flesh to vs in the incarnation, wherin he tooke ours. Wherfore Doctor Chadsey seing the matter in this state, interrupted them by accusing Cranmer to haue corrupted this place of S. Hilary, in his booke against the reall presence translatinge these words: Nos verè sub mysterio carnen
                        •
                     
                     corporis sui sumimus, we receaue vnder the true mystery the flesh of his body; wheras he should haue said: VVe do receaue truly vnder a mystory (or Sacrament) the flesh of his body; vvhich 
                     •
                  raud Cranmer could by no other wayes auoid, but by sayinge, that his booke had Vero and not verè, which Iohn Fox saith was a small fault; and yet yow see yt altereth all the sense, as yf a man shauld say Pistor for Pastor.
               
               31. The next conflict to this was betweene Doctor Yonge, and Doctor Cranmer, wherin Yonge accusinge him first for denyinge of principles, and consequently, that they could hardly go forward with any fruitfull disputation, except they agreed vpon certayne grounds, he made sundry demaunds vnto him, as first, whether there were any other naturally true body of Christ, but his organicall or instrumentall body? Item whether sense and reason, ought not 
                     D. Yonge disputeth. to giue place in this mystery to faith? Further, whether Christ be true in his words, & whether he mynded to do that, which he spake at his last supper? And finally, whether his words were effectuall, and wrought any thinge or noe? To all which Doctor Cranmer aunswered affirmatiuely, graunting that the said words of

Christ did worke the institution of the Sacrament, whervnto Doctor Yonge replyed, that a figuratiue speach wrought nothinge, ergò yt was not a figuratiue speach when he said: Ho
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     st corpus meum. And albeit D. Cranmer sought b
                     •
                   two or three struglinges to slipp from this inference, sayinge that yt was sophistry, yet both Doctor Yonge and Doctor VVeston, who came in still at his turne, said; sticke to this argument. It is a figuratiue speach, ergo yt vvorketh nothinge, that quickely they brought Doctor Cranmer in plaine words to graunt, that a figuratiue speach worketh nothinge: Wherof they inferred the contrary againe on the other side: A figuratiue 
                  Fox pag. 1307. col. 2. num. 30. 
                  speach (say they) vvorketh nothing by your confession, but the speach of Christ in the supper, as yow now graunted, vvrought somewhat, to witt the institution of the Sacrament, ergo the speach of Christ in the supper vvas not figuratiue, which is the ouerthrow of the foundation of all sacramentall buildinge.
               32. And heere yow must note by the way, that Fox doth not crowne the head of this syllogisme with any Baroco, or Bocardo in the Fox angry vvith a syllogisme. margent, as he is commonly wont to do with the rest, for that yt pleased him not. Wherfore 
                     •
                  o leaue him, we shall passe to Doctor Cranmer himselfe, whose aunswere yow shall heare in his owne words: I aunswere (saith he) that these are meere sophismes, for speach doth not vvorke, but Christ by speach doth worke the Sacrament, I looke for scriptures at your hands for they are the foundation of 
                        •
                     isputations. So he. And yow may see by this

his speach, that he was entangled, and would gladly be ridde of that he had graunted, for that both the maior and minor propositions were of his owne grauntinge, and the sillogisme good both in moode and forme, though the conclusion troubled both him and Fox, and the refuge whervnto both of them do runne in this necessity, the one in the text, the other in the margent, is very fond, sayinge
                     •
                   
                  that not the speach of Ghrist, but Christ did vvorke, as though any man would say, that a speach worketh, but by the vertue of the speaker: and consequently yf Christ do worke by a figuratiue speach, then doth a figuratiue speach worke by his power and vertue, and so wa
                     •
                   yt fondy graunted by Cranmer before, that the figuratiue speach of Christ, in institutinge the Sacrament (for of that was the question) did not worke; and yt is a simple euasion now, to runne from Christs speach to Christ himselfe as though there could be a diuersity; euery man may see these are but euasions.
               33. But now further Doctor Yonge refuted largely this assertion, that Christs speach worketh not out of diuers and sundry plaine testimonyes o
                     •
                   the Fathers, which there openly he caused to be read and namely S. Ambrose, as well in hi
                     •
                   booke de initiandis, as de Sacramentis, where he handleth this matter of purpose, to proue that the speach of Christ in the Sacrament, to wit
                     •
                   
                  hoc est corpus meum, did worke & conuert brea
                     •
                   and wyne into flesh and bloud, and prouet
                     •
                   the same by many other exāples of scriptures

                  Sermo Christi (saith he) 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      nihilo facere, 
                  Amb. de e
                        •
                      qui initiantur. 
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd non erat, non pot
                        •
                     st ea, qu
                        •
                      sunt in id mutare, quae 
                        •
                     n erant? 
                  The speach of Christ which was able to make of nothing that, which was not before, shall yt not be able to change those things that were before, into things that are not? And to the same effect in his booke de Sacramentis: Ergo sermo Christi hoc conficit Sacramentum; 
                     
                        Ambr. l. 4. de Sacram. cap. 4. 
                     Qui sermo? nempè is, &c. Therfore the speach of Christ doth make this Sacrament; but what speach? to witt, that wherby all things were created: the Lord commaunded and heauen was made, the Lord cōmaunded & earth was made, the Lord cōmaunded & the seas were made, &c.
                   
                  Vides ergò quàm operatorius sit sermo Christi: si ergò tanta vis est in sermone Domini, vt inci
                     
                        ••
                     rent esse quae non erant; quanto magis operatorius erit, 
                        ••
                      sint quae erant, & in aliud commutentur? Yow see 
                     S. Ambrose most cleere against Cranmer and F
                           •
                        x.
                   therfore how working the speach of Christ is; & yf then there be so much force in the speach of our Lord, as that those things which were not, tooke their beginning therby; how much more potent is the same speach in workinge, that those things which were before, be changed into another? And presently he addeth: the heauen was not, the sea was not, the earth was not, but heare him speake: 
                  he said the word, and they were done, he commaunded and they were 
                        ••
                     eated; Wherfore to answere yow I say, that it was not the body of Christ before consecration, but after cōsecration, I say vnto thee, that now yt is the body of Christ. So S. Ambrose.
               
               34. And heere now (good reader) I doubt

not, but yow see the fond euasion of Cranmer and Fox his aduocate, cleerly refuted by S. Ambrose; where they say, that the speach or words of Christ worke not; but Christ by the words; as though there were a great diuersity in that point. But now lett vs see, how they will scamble ouer this authority of S. Ambrose, that saith expressely, both that the speach of Christ did worke potently, and worke the conuersion of bread and wyne into flesh and bloud: first Fox hath this note in the margent against S. Ambrose, as though he had miscompared the words of creation, with the words of the institution of the Sacrament. The Lord Iesus (saith Fox) vsed not heere commaundement in the Sacrament, as in 
                  
                     S. Ambrose corrected by Fox. 
                  creation, for we read not Fiat hoc corpus meum, as vve read Fiat lux, &c. Do yow see the mans subtile obseruation, or rather simple & sottish cauillation against so graue a Father? The words: Hoc est corpus meum, this is my body, imployeth somewhat more then Fiat corpus meum: lett yt be my body; for that yt signifieth the thinge done already, which the other willeth to be done. And so for this we will leaue Iohn Fox to striue with S. Ambrose, about the vsinge or abusinge of scriptures alleaged by him. And so much of Fox.
               35. But how doth Cranmer himselfe auoyd this plaine authority of S. Ambrose, thinke yow? Yow shall heare yt in his owne words, for they are very few to so large an authority. All these thinges (saith he) are common, I say that God doth chiefly vvorke in the Sacraments. Do yow see

his breuity and obscurity? but his meaning is, that wheras before he had denyed, for a shift, that Christs words did worke, but only Christ by his words (a difference without a diuersity) now seing S. Ambrose so plaine to the contrary, in settinge forth the workinge of Christs words, he seeketh another shift in this aunswere, which is, that albeit Christs words do worke in the Sacraments, yet Christ chiefly; as though any controuersy were in this, or any man had denyed yt. But what saith he to the mayne point, wherin S. Ambrose affirmeth not only Hovv Cranmer shifteth of Saint Ambrose.
                   Christs vvords to be Operatoria, vvorkingewords, but that their worke is to make bread, the true and naturall body of Christ after they be vttered by the Priest? nothing truly in substance doth he aunswere herevnto, but after his shifts he saith only, that yt vvas called the body of Christ, as the holy-ghost vvas called the doue, and S. Iohn Baptist was called Elias (which are but bare signes & representations, as euery one seeth) hay he goeth againe presently from this, which heere he had graunted, that God worketh in the Sacraments: For when Doctor Yonge vrged him thus: Yf God worke in the Sacraments, he worketh in this Sacrament (of the Fucharist) Cranmer aunswereth: God worketh in his faithfull, not in the 
                  Fox pag. 1308 col. 1. num. 7
                        •
                     . 
                  Sacraments. And thus he goeth forward grauntinge and denyinge, turninge and wyndinge, and yet poore miserable man he would not turne to the truth, nor had grace to acknowledge the same laid before him, but toyled himselfe in contradictions, endeauouring

to shift of most euident authorityes of ancient Fathers, by impertinent interpretations. As when Doctor Yonge vrged him with those cleere words of S. Ambrose: Before the words of Christ be 
                  
                     Ambr. l. 4. de Sacram. cap. 5. 
                  spoken, the chalice is full of wyne and water, but when the vvords of Christ haue vvrought their effect, then is there made the bloud that redeemed the people. Cranmer aunswered: that the words of Christ wrought no otherwise in this Sacramēt, then in baptisme. Ambrose said (quoth he) that the bloud is made, that is, the Sacrament of the bloud is made, fit sanguis the bloud is made, that is to say ostenditur sanguis; the bloud is shewed forth there.
               36. These and such like vvere Cranmers sleights to ridd himselfe that day, and yet did not Doctor Chadsey and VVeston leaue him for these starts, but followed him close with other cleere places of S. Ambrose, the one expounding the other. As for example, Fortè dicas, &c. Perhaps 
                  
                     Ambr. l. 6. de Sacram. cap. 1. 
                  yow may say, how are these things true? I vvhich see the similitude, do not see the truth of the bloud: First of all I tould thee of the word of Christ, vvhich so vvorketh, that yt can change and turne the kinds ordayned of nature, &c. And againe in another place. Ergo didicisti, &c. Therfore thou hast learned that of bread is made the body of Christ, and that vvyne and vvater is putt into the cupp, but by consecration of the heauenly vvord it is made bloud. Sed fortè dices speciem sanguinis non videri, sed habet similitudinem: But perhaps yow will say, that the shape or forme of bloud is not seene; but yet it hath the similitude. So S. Ambrose, and for that he saith, as

yow see, that albeit the bloud after consecration, hath not the shew or forme of true bloud; yet hath yt similitude, (for that the forme of wyne commeth neerest to the likenesse of bloud) heerof Cranmer layinge hands, could not be drawne from affirminge that S. Ambrose meaninge is, that it is not true naturall bloud after the consecration, but beareth a similitude only, representation, or 
                     •
                  ipe therof, which is quite contrary to S. Ambrose his whole drift and discourse, yf yow consider yt out of passion.
               37. After these bickerings about S. Ambrose, were vrged against him, by the two Doctors, Chadsey and VVeston, diuers other Fathers, as Iustinus Martyr aboue 14. hundred yeares gone, The testimony of S. Iustine examined. whoe in his Apology for Christians writeth: that as by the word of God, Iesus Christ our Sauiour being made flesh, had both flesh, and bloud for our saluation: so are 
                        •
                     e taught, that the meate consecrated by the vvord of prayer instituted by him (vvherby our bloud 
                  
                     Iustin. Apol. 2. 
                  and flesh are nourished by communion) is the flesh and bloud of the same Iesus, that was made flesh. Out of which place they vrged; that as Christ is truly and really incarnate, so is he truly and really in the Sacrament, accordinge to S. Iustinus, and that our flesh and bloud is nourished by that communion, and consequently in Saint Iustinus tyme, yt was not held that Christs body was receaued only by faith.
               38. The words of Saint Irenaeus were vrged in like manner, he being another Martyr of the same age with S. Iustine, who wryteth thus:

                  Eum calicem, qui est ex creatura, suum corpus confirmauit, 
                  
                     Iren. lib. 5. cap. 2. cont. haeres.
                   
                  ex quo nostra auget corpora, &c. This is the cupp, which being a creature, he confirmed to be his body, by which he encreaseth our bodyes, when both the cupp mixed & the bread broken, hath ioyned to yt the word of God, yt is made the Eucharist of the body & bloud of Christ, of which the substance of our flesh is encreased and consisteth. By which words the said Doctors proued, that the flesh and bloud of Christ was otherwise held by S. Irenaeus to be in the Sacrament, and receaued by vs, than only by faith, seing our bodyes also are nourished therwith; yea the very substance of our flesh is encreased and consisteth therby, as his words are. To all which Cranmer had no other aunswere, but his old shift, that the Sacrament of the body and bloud, vvas called the flesh and bloud of Christ though really yt be not. And from this he could not be drawne: And so finally the tyme drawinge late, they vrged him there Diuers corruptiōs obiected to Cranmer.
                   publikely with certayne falsityes, vsed in his booke against the reall presence, and besides those that had byn obiected before, as for example. Doctor Chadsey obiected a manifest corruption in translatinge the foresaid place of S. Iustine, which Cranmer excused no otherwise, but that he translated not Iustine word Fox pag. 
                     
                        •
                     309. for word, but only gaue the meaninge; but the other, as also Doctor Harpesfield, shewed that he peruerted the whole meaninge, and so yt is euident to him that readeth Iustine.
               
               39. Doctor VVeston obiected a place corrupted

in Emissenus by putting in the word spiritualibus, Cranmer aunswered, that yt was so in the decrees, Doctor VVeston replyed, that he had left out diuers lynes of purpose, vvhich made against him in Emissenus for the reall presence, Cranmer aunswereth: this booke hath not that. VVeston obiected another place falsified, where for Honora corpus Dei tui, honour the body of thy God, to witt of Christ, Cranmer had translated yt thus: honour him vvhich is thy God. Wherto he answered, that he did it not without a weighty cause, that men should not thinke that God had a body. Doctor VVeston obiected also, that alleaginge a sentence out of Scotus, he had left out a clause, that made much to the purpose in the matter handled, to witt secundum apparentiam, as may appeare. Cranmer answered iestingly: that is a great offence I promise yow. Another place in like manner was obiected, as peruerted by him in Scotus words, as also one or two in S. Thomas, Aquinas, wherto I find no aunswere; but disputation is broken vp with this cry of the auditory, in fauour of the Catholike party, vicit veritas, the truth hath had the victory; and with this we shall also end this first disputation against Cranmer, hauinge byn forced to be longer then we purposed at the beginninge, & therfore we shalbe so much the shorter, yf it may be, in that which ensueth with Ridley and Latymer.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Out of the Disputation with D. Ridley in the same dininity-schoole at Oxford, the next day after Cranmer, to witt, the 17. of Aprill 1554. §. 3.
               40. The next day followinge (saith Fox) was brought forth Doctor Ridley to defend in the same questions of the r
                        •
                     all presence, Transubstantiation, and Sacrifice; against whome Doctor Smith was the first and principall opponent, for which cause Fox, before he beginneth 
                     D. Smith opponent. to relate the combatt, maketh a particular inuectiue against him, for that he had byn vnconstant in Religion, the simple fellow not consideringe that yf yt had byn true; yet that the same might be obiected with much more reason, against these his cheefe champions, Cranmer, Ridley and Latymer, that had byn Catholike Priests for many yeares togeather; But Fox his great anger against Doctor Smith was, 
                     •
                  on that he pressed hardly B. Ridley in his disputation, and so did Doctor VVeston also, as after yow shall see, for that vpon all occasions he came in with Vrge hoc, vrge hoc; but for the rest Ridley vvas most courteously vsed by them both and offered to haue his opinions taken in wrytinge, and that he should haue space till saturday after to consider of them, and that vvhat bookes soeuer he vvould demaund,

should be deliuered to him, and that he might Tvvo notaryes chosen. choose any two of the whole company to be his seuerall notaryes, and he tooke Maister Iohn Iewell afterward made B. of Salisbury by Q. Elizabeth, 
                  Fox pag. 1311. and Maister Gilbert Monson, that had byn notaryes vnto B. Cranmer the day before.
               41, But the greatest difference, and difficulty fell out, for that Ridley hauing brought thither with him his opinion, and large explication thereof already wrytten, would needs read the same openly to the whole auditory, which was penned in such bitter, spitefull & blasphemous termes, with such abhominable scoffes, and raylinge contemptuous speach, against the sacred mysteryes, and the vse therof, as the commissionars were often-tymes forced to interrupt him, and commaund him to sylence, or to begin disputation, neyther wherof would he do, but with an obstinate face go foreward in readinge his declarations, whervpon, Doctor VVeston callinge vnto him said, as Fox relateth: Yow vtter blasphemyes vvith 
                  Fox pag. 1312. 
                  an impudent face. Wherfore finally they made him breake of, promisinge that they would read & ponder all themselues, not being conuenient to infect mens eares with publike readinge therof, but that he might defend the fame, as occasion should be offered in his answers and disputations.
               42. The first argument brought against him by Doctor Smith was, for ouerthrowinge that principall foundation of the Sacramentary heresie
                     •
                   
                  Christs body is inheauen, ergò yt is not in the

Sacrament. Wherof yow haue heard often before, for that both Peter Martyr alleaged yt, as a The first argument about Christs being in many places. cheefe fortresse of their faith, though Philipp Melancthon, that is a Calendar-saint togeather with Peter Martyr, as before yow haue heard, did say, that he had rather offer himselfe vp to death, then to affirme vvith the Sacramentaryes, that Christs body cannot be but in one place at once. And this was See of Melancthon supra mens
                           •
                         Decomb.
                   a principall ground also of Iohn Lambert, burned for Sacramentary opinions vnder K. Henry the eyght, against whome Doctor Cranmer, then Archbishopp of Canterbury, was the first and cheefest disputer after the King, and specially tooke vpon him to confute this reason of Lambert as vayne and false, and contrary to scripture, as before yow haue heard in the story of Lambert. And the same reasons, and arguments, which Cranmer vsed against Lambert out of the scriptures, doth Doctor Smith vse now against Ridley, to witt that Christ appeared corporally and really on earth, after his assension, to S. Paul and others, ergò, his being in heauen is no l
                        •
                     t to his reall presence in the Sacrament. The antecedent he 
                     Act. 9. & 26. proued out of the Acts of the Apostles, and S. Paules Epistles, where yt is shewed, that Christ appeared vnto him after his assension; but Ridley did not aunswere this argument, as Lambert, and other Sacramentaryes before him had done, denyinge that Christ appeared corporally and really vpon earth, but rather that his voyce was heard from heauen, but he said, that Christ left heauen for a tyme, and came downe. I do not (saith he) so straitly tye

Christ vp to heauen, that he may not come into earth at 
                  Fox pag. 1314. col. 2. num. 28. 
                  his pleasure, howbeit I do affirme, that yt is not possible for him to be in earth and heauen at one tyme. So hee, whervnto Doctor Smith replyed: ergò yt is lawfull for Christ to be heere present on earth vvhen he will. Ridley. Yea when he will yt is lawfull. Smith. 
                  Ergò his ascendinge to heauen, doth not restrayne his reall presence in the Sacrament. Ridley. I do not gainsay, but that yt is lawfull for him to appeare on earth, when he will, but proue yow that he will.
               
               43. Lo heere another starting hole: but yet first yow see the great Sacramentary bullwarke, so much stood vpon by others, that 
                  
                     Matth. 14. Act. 3. Coloss. 3. 
                  Christ is in heauen at the right hand of God, and that the heauens must receaue him, vntill the day of iudgement, and consequently cannot be vpon earth or in the Sacrament; is quite forsaken by Ridley, grauntinge that this argument proueth nothinge: he is ascended to heauen, ergò, he is not on earth; for he may leaue heauen and come downe, accordinge to Ridley. Yea Ridleyes owne principall ground is forsaken by him, for that among his fiue principall grounds and headsprings (for so he calleth them) sett downe by him in his Cambridge disputation, Fox pag▪
                      1261. 
                  vvhy he did inclyne to this sentence and iudgement, (for then he was but inclininge) the last was (yf yow remember) the most sure beleefe of the article of our faith, he ascended into heauen, which now yow see may stand without this doctrine. Secondly, wheras he denyeth that Christ will depart from heauen at any tyme, sayinge: proue yow yf he vvill, yet very

soone after being pressed by Doctor Smith out of the scriptures, that Christ after his assension vvas seene visibly, really, and corporally vpon earth, he answered in these words: I graunt the antecedent; (that is Christ did appeare on earth). Smith. Do you graunt the antecedent? Ridley. Yea I graunt the antecedent, because I know that there be certayne ancient Fathers of that opinion. Heere yow see that Ridley, by grauntinge this antecedent, to witt, that Christ after his assension, did appeare really and corporally vpon earth, eyther doth contradict himselfe, when he denyed before, that Christ would euer come out of heauen (notwithstandinge he could) or els he must graunt, that Christ appeared vpon earth against his will, or without his owne will, which were a greater absurdity, then any of the other.
               44. And furthermore he contradicteth himselfe againe, in that he said a little before, that Christ may leaue heauen, and come downe into earth vvhen he vvill: For being asked by Doctor Smith this question: Doth Christ so sitt at the right hand of his Father, that he doth neuer foresake the same? Ridley answereth in these words: Yf yow vnderstand his sitting to be after a corporall manner of sitting, so is he alwayes permanent in heauen: Which yf yt be true, then is that false which before he said, Fox pag. 1315. col. 1. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 40. 
                  that Christs body is not so tyed to heauen, but that he may come downe into the earth vvhen he vvill. And much more false is yt, that Christ did really and corporally appeare vpon earth to Saint Paul, and others as a little before he graunted: so as by these yow may see the briars

wherinto Ridley was driuen about this argument.
               45. The third point to be noted in these inconstant speaches of Ridley, is, that yt is not possible for Christs body to be in heauen and earth at one tyme; and yet when we vrge them with impiety for laying impossibilityes to Gods omnipotency, they will presently runne to that answere, as Ridley also afterward doth: that they dispute not what God can do, but what he vvill do. Wherfore to returne to our disputation; when Doctor VVeston heard him talke of this impossibility, & that Christ yf he would appeare in earth, must leaue heauen, he tooke vpon him to conuince this falsity, out of two authorityes, the one of S. Chrysostome, the other of S. Bernard. S, Chrysostome his place, is vpon the Epistle to the Hebrues, talkinge of the dayly externall sacrifice of Christians, offered throughout the world in many churches at once, saith thus; vna est haec oblatio, non multae, &c. 
                  
                     Chrysost. hom. 17. in 
                           •
                        p. ad Hebr.
                   
                  this oblation we offer is one and not many; and how is it one and not many, which being once offered vp in sancto sanctorum (to witt, vpon the Crosse) notwithstandinge is offered by vs dayly? This sacrifice (which dayly we offer) is a paterne of that (once offered on the Crosse) and alwayes we offer the selfe-same, not offeringe now one lambe, and to morrow another, but alwayes the selfe-same; wherfore heere is but one sacrifice, for that otherwayes by this meanes, yf there be many sacrifices in many places, there should be many

Christs, which is not so, but one Christ in all places; 
                  qui & hic plenius, & illic plenus, vnum corpus, which Christ is fully heere, and fully there, being but one body, &c.
               
               46. Out of which place Doctor VVeston did vrge B. Ridley very straitly, who first, would seeme to make light of the place, sayinge: these things make nothinge against me: but VVeston vrged: how say yow then, one Christ is in all places, heere fully, and there fully. Ridley. One Christ is in all places, but not one body is in all places, &c. And this euasion pleaseth so much Iohn Fox, as he wryteth in the margent, one Christ, but not one body in all places, as though Christ could be separated from his body, or as though S. Chrysostome did not expressely talke of one body: Heere Christ fully, and there Christ fully one body; and the very next words of Chrysostome immediatly followinge are these; euen as then Christ offered in many places, is one body, and not many bodyes, so is the sacrifice also but one. But lett vs heare Doctor VVeston vrge the same: Weston. One body saith Chrysostome. Ridley. But not after the maner of bodily substance he is in all places; not by circumscription of places: for hic & illic, heere and there in Chrysostome do assigne no place as Augustine saith: Sursum est Dominus, & vbique est veritas Domini. The Lord is aboue, but the truth of the Lord is in all places. Weston. Yow cannot so escape, Saint Chrysostome saith, not the verity of Christ is one, but one Christ is in all places both heere and there. Ridley. One sacrifice is in all places, because of the vnity of him, vvhome the sacrifice doth signifie,

not that the sacrifices be all one and the same.
               
               47. Marke now heere gentle reader, what An obseruation of Ridleyes shifts vpō one place only of S. Chrysostome.
                   yt is to dispute with these people, that seeke after nothinge but shifts & holes to runne out at, or stipp away? Consider how many they be vpon this only place. For first when Ridley was pressed with S. Chrysostomes authority, as yow haue heard, prouinge euidently, that Christ could be at one tyme in diuers places, his first shift was, that yt maketh nothinge against him; and then, that albeit Christ be in many places, yet his body cannot be in many places, as though Christ were in any place without his body: And then againe yt being shewed, that S. Chrysostome speaketh expressely of Christs body, the next shift was, that his body is not there after the ordinary manner of bodily presence, to witt, by circumscription of place, which is quite from the purpose, for that we hould this also, as before you haue heard in the fifth & sixt obseruations, to witt, that Christ is not circumscriptiuely in the Sacrament. And further yt is another absurd shift, or rather ignorance in Ridley (and may be the fift or sixt about this matter) to affirme as heere he doth, that Christs body is not by circumscription euery-where, or in all places: for we hould also, not only, that which he saith, by circumscriptiō, but that no wayes, either circumscriptiuely, or definitiuely, or sacramentally is Christs body euery-where, but only in many distinct places, by Gods omnipotent will. The other of vb
                     •
                  quity being a

property of Gods diuinity only to be in euery place at one tyme, as before we haue shewed. And lastly to follow Ridley and his riddles no further about this matter, the words of S, Augustine are foolishely alleaged by him; that the Lord is aboue, but the truth of the Lord is in all places: For as Doctor VVeston well noteth and telleth him, vve talke not heere, how the Lords truth is eueryvvhere, but whether Christs body be in diuers places or noe: for Christs truth is euerywhere, where his faith grace or power is, but not his body. And albeit his truth admitt not the circumstances or proprietyes of places sursum and deorsum, yet his body doth: which Ridley considered not, when he brought this example, but only desyred to say some-what, though neuer so much from the purpose.
               48. And the like shiftes he sheweth in his last answere about this place of S. Chrysostome, when Doctor VVeston vrginge, that one Christ and one body is in all places whersoeuer his sacrifices are offered, he aunswereth not to the words of Saint Chrysostome at all, but saith only at randome, that one sacrifice is in all places (S. Chrysostome saith one body) because of the vnity of him vvhome the sacrifice doth signifie, which is as much to say in his sense, as the sacrifice being but a signe or signification of Christ that is one, is multiplyed in diuers places. And what great miracle is this I pray yow, to multiply many figures in diuers places of one thinge, who may not do so? and yet Saint Chrysostome s
                     ••
                  teth yt downe for a wonderfull strange and admirable matter,

                  that one Christ the selfe-same lambe, one body, fully heere and fully there, should be offered at one tyme in many places, which miracle in Doctor Ridleyes sense is both easy and no miracle at all, and so much about this place of Saint Chrysostome.
               
               49. The second authority out of S. Bernard is in these words: Vnde hoc nobis pijssime Iesu, &c. 
                  Bern. s
                        •
                     r
                        ••
                     , de Cana D
                        •••
                     . 
                  How cometh this vnto vs, ô most pious Iesu, that we seely wormes creepinge on the face of the earth, that are but dust and ashes, should deserue to haue thee present in our hands, & before our eyes, who sitteth both whole and full at the right hand of the Father, and who in the moment of one houre, from the risinge of the sunne, vnto the goinge downe thereof, art present one and the selfe-same in many and diuers places, &c.
                   To this place D. Ridley gaue diuers answers: First (saith he) these words of Bernard make nothing for yow at all. This is very confidently spoken as yow see, no lesse then to the place of S. Chrysostome before; and I beleeue he will not stand longe vnto yt: For yf Saint Bernard doth meane as he saith, he must needs make much for vs in the words now recyted, wherin I referre me to the iudgement of the reader. Wherfore Maister Ridley not trustinge much to this answere, passeth to his second sayinge: I know that Bernard vvas in such a 
                  Fox pag. 1315. 
                  tyme, that in this matter he may vvorthily be suspected. So he. And yet least he might seeme to leese some creditt in reiectinge S. Bernard, he hath a third answere thus: notwithstanding (saith he)

                  I will so expound him rather then reiect him, that 
                        〈◊〉
                      shall make nothinge for yow at all. Lo heere his last cast; and this he learned of his Maister Caluyn, not so much to reiect in words the Fathers, as Luther did, but rather by false and crafty interpretation, sleightly to auoyd them, which indeed is not humility but double impiety; and more impious to the Fathers themselues, then to be vtterly denyed, for by this meanes they are made coadiutors of heretiks: lett vs heare then S. Bernard expounded by Ridley to his purpose: S. Bernard (quoth he) saith, that we haue Christ in a mystery, in a Sacrament, vnder a veyle or couer; in the meane tyme heere now he saith, that the verity of Christ is euery-vvhere. So he. And is not Ridley ridiculous heere? let the reader compare S. Bernards words before alleaged, with this exposition of Ridley, and he will say that the commentary hitteth as right the text, as the blynd-fold-man doth hitt the hennes head on the ground, when his face is another way from her. And thus much of Doctor Ridleye
                        •
                     
                   three aunswers to this place of Saint Bernard.
               
               50. After this Doctor Smith vrged him againe vvith another place of S. Chrysostome, where he Another place of S. Chrysostome vrged about Elias.
                   makinge a comparison, betweene Elias the Prophett and Christ, saith, that Elias left his cloake to Elizeus with his double spiritt, when he went vp to heauen; but Christ did much more miraculously, for that he left vs his flesh in the Sacrament, and yet tooke the same vp 
                     Chrysost. hom. 2. ad Pop. An
                        
                           ••
                        ch.
                   with him: Helias quidem melotcm discipulo reliquit;

filius autem Dei ascendens, suam nobis carnem dimisit; Helias quidem exutus, Christus autem & nobis reliquit, & ipsam habens ascendit. 
                  
                     Elias indeed at his departure, left his cloke or hearcloth vnto his disciple Elizeus; but the sonne of God ascendinge vp to heauen left his owne flesh vnto vs: Elias left his cloake, but Christ both left vnto his his flesh & yet carryed the same with him. Which plaine place when Ridley went about to delude, as he had done other former places, by sayinge that Chrysostomes meaninge was, that he left his flesh vpon earth not really and substantially, but to be receaued after a spirituall communication, by grace, addinge this example: as we also (quoth he) by hearing the ghospell, and by faith: So as by this aunswere we haue Christs flesh no otherwise present by meanes of the Sacrament, then we haue him present by hearinge the ghospell, or by beleeuinge in him, which is to euacuate wholy the speach & comparison of S. Chrysostome. Wherfore to ouerthrow this shift, Doctor Smith alleaged another plaine place of the same Chrysostome in confirmation of this where he saith: O miraculum! ô Dei benignitatem! qui sur sum sedet, 
                  
                     Chrysost. l. 3. de. Sac
                           •
                        rdoti
                           •
                        .
                   
                  tempore sacrificis hominum mantbus continetur, &c. 
                  O miracle! o goodnesse of God! that he which sitteth aboue, is conteyned in mens hands in the tyme of the sacrifice. But all this would not serue, for he auo
                     •
                  ded this as he had done the other, sayinge: he that sitteth there (to witt in heauen) is heere present in mystery and by grace, and is holden of the godly, &c. And finally

though there were diuers boutes in this matter, yet could nothinge be gotten more.
               51. But to this sense, Doctor Smith, Doctor Seton, Doctor Harpesfield and Doctor VVeston, vrged him much about the place, asking him where was the miracle, yf Christ left his flesh heere only in mystery and by faith; how could the comparison stand betweene Helias and Christ? for Christ must do more then Elias; Elias left his mantle and could not carry yt vp with him, Christ not only left his flesh, but carryed vp the same, ergò he left the same that he carryed vp, &c. But he carryed vp his true and naturall flesh, ergò he left the same; to all which he aunswered againe: He tooke vp his flesh vvith him to heauen, and left heere the communion of his flesh on earth. With which shiftinge aunswere Doctor VVeston being moued, began after his fashion to vrge the matter earnestly sayinge: yow vnderstand in the first place his flesh for very true flesh, and in the second place for grace and communion of his flesh, I will make yt euident how blockish and grosse your aunswere is: As Elias left his cloke (saith S. Chrysostome) so the sonne of God left his flesh; but Elias left his true substantiall 
                  
                     Chrysost. hom. 2. ad Pop. Antioch.
                   
                  cloke, ergò Christ left his true substantiall flesh: and heerin he spake in English. Ridly. I am glad yow speake in English, and surely I vvould vvish all the vvorld might vnderstand your reasons and my answers: Reliquit nobis carnem, Christ left vnto vs his flesh. This yow vnderstand of flesh, and I vnderstand of grace: he carryed his flesh to heauen, and left behind him the communion of his flesh vnto vs. Weston. Yee iudges

vvhat thinke yow of this, aunswere Iudges. Iudges. It is a ridiculous, and very fond aunswere. Ridley. vvell I vvill take your vvords patiently for Christs sake.
               
               52. And this was the end of the controuersy about this place of S. Chrysostome, to witt, that we must take grace for flesh, and when Christ is said to haue left his flesh heere with vs, we must vnderstand his grace: Yet Doctor VVeston alleaged also another place out of the same Father, where he saith: Spargimur, &c. VVe are sprinkeled vvith the very selfe-same bloud, 
                  Fox pag. 1317. col. 1, num. 80. 
                  that Christ carryed vp vvith him, &c. Whervnto Ridley answered after his fashion: yt is the same bloud, but spiritually receaued. Then vrged he Sain
                        •
                      Bernards words againe; the selfe-same Christ is present vvholy in diuers places, euen from the vvest to the east, from the north to the south, &c. Wherto Ridley aunswered; that God accordinge to his Maiestie and prouidence, as S. Augustine saith, is euery-where with the faithfull, and so must Bernard be expounded. Do yow see this exposition? Read Saint Bernards words before sett downe, and yow shall see, that he speaketh of Christ, as sittinge in heauen, and yet present vvholy in the Priests hands, &c. And not of his Maiestie & prouidence, wherby he is euery-where, as before hath byn declared: So as this is not to expound, but to confound the Fathers, and I thinke verily that Ridley was much troubled, when he gaue such impertinent aunswers and expositions.
               53. And with this would I passe ouer this whole strife about Saint Chrysostomes places of Elias, but that I must let yow know, that there

had byn some yeares before, a great styrre and altercation in the conuocation-house about the same, for that Philpott hearinge that place alleaged against him, as his fashion was, vaunted wounderfully, that this being the Papists cheefe and principall foundation, he would so beat them from yt, and (as Fox addeth) giue such a plucke at yt, as yt should neuer sorue their turne more: and when yt came to the triall, he said that he had two wayes to beate them from it: The first was, that Christ goinge vp to heauen carryed his owne flesh with him, and e
                     •
                  t the same behind him, in that he left vs behind him, 
                  Tvvo pluckes of Philpott praysed by Fox.
                   
                  that are flesh of his flesh and bones of his bones. This is the first blow and plucke, wherby yow see, that Christs progatiue is plucked also; for Helias as well as he left his flesh behind him in this sense, for he was of our flesh: and Philpott also left his flesh behind him in vs, though his owne were burned in Smith-field. And finally S. Chrysostome speaketh expressely of the Sacrament of the Altar, sayinge: that therein Christ left his flesh, but he did not leaue all mankynd in that Sacrament; wherefore this first plucke is to small purpose. But lett vs see his second.
               54. The second is, that Christ (saith he) lest his flesh in the mysteryes, that is sacramentally; and that this mysticall flesh, Christ leaueth as well in the Sacrament of baptisme, as in the sacramentall bread & wine. So he. Wherin (yf yow marke) he giueth not only the ordinary old plucke of other Sacramentaryes, to the verity of Christs flesh, makinge

that mysticall, which S. Chrysostome speaketh expressely of the naturall flesh left by him, and therby plucketh out of ioint all Saint Chrysostomes whole meaninge and discourse, The absurdityes of Philpott.
                   but giueth a new plucke also to the whole Sacrament of the Eucharist, affirminge Christs flesh to be as much in baptisme, as in the other, & consequently that both Saint Chrysostome, and other Fathers, do in vayne trouble themselues, with so much extollinge the excellency of the Eucharist for hauinge Christs flesh in yt, for that the water of baptisme hath the same, & so yow see the whole Sacrament plucked vp by these pluckes of Philpott, and yet (saith Fox) that he did s
                        •
                     rewdly shake our reall presence, 
                  Fox pag. 1294. 
                  by giuinge such a plucke to one of our cheefe foundations. Yow see how one of these men do flatter the other.
               55. Next to this entred one Maister VVard to dispute that had byn Philpotts reader, and seing 
                     M. VVard disputeth. 
                  D. Ridley to haue doubted so much in grauntinge and denyinge Christs body to haue appeared vpon earth, as in the former disputations of Doctor Smith, yow haue partly heard, though much be omitted for breuityes sake, he began to vrge him againe in that point, alleaginge against him the authority of a Catechisme Fox pag. 1317. sett forth by himselfe, in the name of the whole conuocation-house in K. Edwards dayes, where the selfe-same point is graunted, which heere he denyed; but Ridley for two or three abouts, would not yeld that the Catechisme was his, though the iudges said that

                  Cranmer had confessed the matter the day before, and Maister VVard auouched to his face, that he being Bishop of London, & in his ruffe, compelled him to subscribe thervnto; yet at length he confessed, that both he and Cranmer had approued the same vnder their hands, & that the place alleaged against him, might easily be expounded without any incōuenience; and so they slydd away from that matter, and a place of Theophilact came in question, where he wryteth, that Christ in the institution of the Sacrament of the Altar non dixit, hoc est figura corporis mei, sed hoc est corpus meum: he said not, 
                     Theoph. comment. in 36. Matth.
                   that this is the figure of my body, but this is my body: which authority Ridley wiped of by sayinge his meaninge to be, that yt was not only a figure of his body. Wherevnto Doctor VVeston replyd, that this only was one lye put in by him, for that Theophilact had no such word, nor could yt stand with his sense, for that he did not make the opposition betweene figure, and only, but betweene the body and figure, sayinge; yt vvas his body, and not a figure of his body. And for proofe of this, another place of Theophilact was alleaged vpon Saint Iohn, where his words are: 
                     Theoph. in 
                           •
                        ap. 6. Ioan.
                   
                  quoniam infirmi sumus, &c. for that vve are infirme, and abhorre to eate raw-flesh especially the flesh of man, therefore yt appeared bread, but is flesh: what can be more plaine, and perspicuous then this? and yet do I not find any annswere to haue byn giuen by Doctor Ridley to this place, but that he passed to another matter, to expound the word Transelemented vsed by Theophilact. And I

passe ouer diuers other places, as that of Tertullian, acceptum panem corpus suum illud fecit: he 
                     Tert. lib. 4. cont. Marcion.
                   takinge bread made yt his body; and that of Iustinus Martyr, sayinge: That Christs flesh in the Sacrament, is the same that vvas taken of the blessed Virgin. 
                  
                     Iust. Mart. in Ap
                           •
                        l. 2. And that of S. Augustine vpon the Psalme; 
                     Aug. in Psalm. 96. 
                  that he gaue vs to eat the selfe same flesh, wherin he vvalked vpon earth. All which places being obiected before to Cranmer, and read both then & now out of the authors themselues, by Doctor VVeston that had the books by him, were no otherwise aunswered heere, then by the same shifts which Cranmer had auoyded them before, yt appearinge euidently that they had agreed vpon certayne distinctions, and common euasions, wherby to delude all the Fathers authorityes that might be brought against them, though they were neuer so cleere or pregnant for the purpose.
               56. It followeth, that by order of disputation the turne came to Doctor Glyn to dispute against Doctor Ridley, who made (saith Fox) a very contumelious preface against him, vvhich Ridley 
                  
                     D. Glyns argument about vvorshippinge the Sacramēt. 
                  tooke the more to heart, for that he had allwayes taken him to be his frend. And albeit Fox doth not sett downe the same preface, yet by Doctor Glyns entrance to his argument, a man may see, that the cheefe point was in reprehendinge him, for deludinge and shiftinge of both scriptures and fathers so shamfully, as he had heard him do, for he saith: I see that yow euade or shift away 
                  Fox pag. 1319. 
                  all scriptures & fathers. And Ridley answered: this is a greeuous contumely, that yow call me a shifter, &c.
                  
And finally Doctor Glyn endeauored to draw him to yeld to the Catholike Church, which being the piller of truth, could not be thought to haue fallen to such Idolatry, as for many ages to haue worshipped erroneously bread and wyne, for the flesh and bloud of Christ in the Eucharist, and for proofe therof he alleaged Saint Augustine against Faustin the Manichec, where he saith, that this vse of adoring Christs body in the Sacrament, was so auncient and publike, as some pagans did thinke that Christians 
                     Aug. cont. Faust. Manich l. 20. cap. 13. did adore Ceres and Bacchu
                        •
                     
                   the Gods of bread and wyne. He alleaged also Erasmus authority, who affirmeth that this worshipping, and adoration of the Sacrament of the Altar, Erasm. in ep. ad frat. Infer. G
                        •
                     r
                        ••
                     . was in vse before the tyme of S. Augustins and S. Cyprian; which is not so in the Sacrament of Baptisme, though Ridley affirme there is as much the flesh of Christ, as in the other, and consequently, there is some speciall cause in the Eucharist aboue other Sacraments. To which two authorityes I find nothinge aunswered particularly; (as neyther to Erasmus) but to the thing it selfe Ridley aunswered: VVe do handle the signes reuerently, &c. And againe: There is a deceyt in this word Adoramus, we adore, for vve vvorshipp the symbolls, vvhen reuerently vve handle them: vve vvorshipp vvhersoeuer vve perccaue benefitts. Whervnto Doctor Glyn aunswered: So I might fall downe before the bench heere, and worshipp Christ therin, &c. For a bench also is a beneficiall creature to them that sitt on yt. But for all this no further satisfaction could be had,

but that all the adoe which the Fathers do make, about the highest honour in earth to be giuen to the Sacrament of the Altar, comes to no more by these mens interpretations; but that the signes of bread and vvyne must be reuerently handled, & Christ absent must be vvorshipped therein, as in other thinges, vvherin vve perceaue or receaue his benefitts: vvhich indeed are all his creatures made & ordayned for our profitt, for by them all, we perceaue & receaue Christs benefitts: So as all these great admirations of the Fathers, about the honour, worshipp & adoration due to this Sacrament, come to no more in effect, but that vve must reuerence Christ therin, as in other his beneficiall creatures, and vvorshipp the symboll of bread and wyne, as much as you do the water in baptisme: vvhich yet neuer any of the Fathers said was to be adored by vs (as they do of the Eucharist) though Baptisme be a most necessary and profitable Sacrament.
               57. Then disputed one Doctor Curtopp, alleaginge 
                     D. Curtopp argued. a place out of S. Chrysostome, affirminge: that which is in the cupp, or chalice, to be the same bloud (after the words of consecration) that flowed 
                  
                     Chrysost. hom. 24. in 1. Cor. 10. 
                  from the side of Christ, wherof he inferred, that true and naturall bloud did flow from the side of Christ, ergò true and naturall bloud was in the chalice. To this Ridley answered in effect Fox pag. 1319. after his ould fashion, that yt was true bloud, that is to say, the Sacrament of his bloud. Curtopp. The Sacrament of the bloud is not the bloud. Ridley. The Sacrament of the bloud, is the bloud, and that is attributed to the Sacrament, vvhich is spoken of the thing

of the Sacrament. At which aunswere D. VVeston being moued, as yt seemed, argued in English (saith Fox) thus: That vvhich is in the chalice is the same that flowed out of Christs▪ side, but there came out very true bloud, ergò there is very true bloud in the chalice. Ridley. The bloud of Christ is in the chalice in deed, but not in the reall presence, but by grace and in a Sacrament. Weston. That is very vvell; then vve haue bloud in the chalice. Ridley. Yt is true, but by grace, and in a Sacrament; and heere the people hissed at him, (saith Fox) wherat Ridley said: O my maisters I take this for no iudgement, I will stand to Gods iudgement. This was his last refuge and further then this, nothinge could be had at his hands.
               58. There rose vp after this Doctor VVatson, 
                  D. VVatson disputeth. who after a long altercation with Ridley, whether after consecration the Sacrament might be called true bread: Ridley alleaged this place of S. Paul. The bread which we breake, is yt not a communication 
                  1. Cor. 11. 
                  of the body of Christ? As though yt had made for him. But VVatson brought S. Chrysostomes expositiō: Quare non dixit participationē &c. VVherfore did not S. Paul say heere, that yt is the participation (of Christs body) but the communication? 
                  
                     Chrysost. in 1. Cor. 11. 
                  because he would signify some greater matter, & that he vvould declare a great conuenience betwene the same, for that vve do not communicate by participation only & receauing, but by co-vniting or vnion; for euen as the body is co-vnited to Christ; so also are we by the same bread conioyned and vnited to him. Out of which place of S. Chrysostome, yt appeareth euidently, that his bele
                     •
                  fe was; that as his body and flesh

was really vnited to his person, so are we vnto him in flesh, by eatinge the same in the Sacrament, which is another manner of vnion then by faith and generall only. But to this lett vs heare Ridleyes aunswere in his owne words: Ridleye. Let Chrysostome haue his manner of speakinge, and his sentence, yf yt be true, I reiect yt 
                   Fox pag. 1320. 
                  not, but lett yt not be preiudiciall to me, to name yt bread. So he. And thus was S. Chrysostome shifted of, neyther admitted, nor fully reiected; but if he spake truly, then was he to be credited, which was a courteous kind of reiection; for Ridley would haue the reader beleeue, that he spake not truly. And so much for him.
               59. And so when nothinge more could be gotten by Doctor VVatson from Maister Ridley in this argument, Doctor Smith stepped in to him againe, and vrged a place of S. Augustine vpon the thirty and third Psalme: Ferebatur in manibus suis, &c. He was carryed in his owne hands, applyed by S. Austen to Christ: his words are: Hoc quo modo fieri possit in homine, quis intelligat? 
                  1. Reg. 21. Who can vnderstand how this can be done by a man? for that no man is borne by his owne hands, but by other mens hands, neyther can vve find how this 
                  
                     Aug. in Psalm. 33▪ 
                     contion. 1. 
                  was fullfilled literally in K. Dauid, but by Christ we find it fullfilled, for that Christ was borne in his owne hands, when he said this is my body, for he did become that body in his owne hands, &c. And againe in another sermon vpon the same place, he repeateth againe the very same thinge sayinge: How vvas Christ borne in his owne hands? for that vvhen he did 
                  
                     Aug. ibid. cont. 2. 
                        ••
                     
                   
                  commend vnto vs his body and bloud, he tooke into his

hands that vvhich the faithfull knew, and so he bare himselfe after a certayne manner, vvhen he said this is my body. Out of which places appeareth euidently, that S. Augustine beleeued, that Christ after the words of consecration vttered, did beare his owne body in his hands, and that this in his iudgement was so miraculous a thinge, as neyther King Dauid, nor any other mortall man could do yt, but only Christ, which yet is not so in a figure (for euery man may beare a figure of his owne body in his hands) and furthermore yt is cleere by these authorityes, and by those words (nôrunt fideles) that this was the beleefe by all faithfull people of S. Austens tyme. Which argument being much vrged against Maister Ridley, both by Doctor Smith and others, he sought to declyne the force therof dyuers-wayes, as saying first; that S. Augustine vvent from others in this exposition, (but yet named none) and then, that this place of scripture vvas read otherwise of other men, accordinge to the hebrew text, & other like euasions, which yet proue not (as yow see) but that Saint Austen was of this opinion and beleefe himselfe, (which is the question in this place) and after all this he passed to his ordinary refuge, that Christ bare himselfe sacramentally only, and not othervvise; layinge hands, for some shew of reason, vpon the word quodammodò vsed in the second place by S. Austen, that is, after a certayne manner. And when it was replied to him, that S. Austen vsed that word, to shew the different manner of his being in the Sacrament, and out of the

Sacrament, but that otherwayes all parts and circumstances of S. Austens speach do shew, that he beleeued Christ to haue holden really, and truly his owne body and flesh in his hands, they could gett no other aunswere from him but this: He did beare himselfe, but in a Sacrament. 
                  Fox pag. 1321. Wherat men maruaylinge, Doctor Smith said: Yow are holden fast, nor are ye able to escape out of this labyrinth. And then began Doctor Tressam to pray for him with a sollemne prayer, which being ended he said: Yf there were an Arrian heere that had this subtile witt, that yow haue, he might soone shift of the scriptures, and Fathers as yow doe. Wherat Doctor VVeston, seeming vnwilling that tyme should be spent in prayinge and not in disputinge, said: eyther dispute, or hould your peace I pray yow. And with this they passed to another disputation, vvhether euill men do receaue the true body of Christ or not: But S. Austens authority of bearinge himselfe in his hands, gatt no other solution, but that Christ bare himselfe in his hands, that is the figure or representation of himselfe, which neither Dauid, nor other mortall man could do: At which absurdity most of the audience did laugh.
               60. But concerninge the other questions, vvhether eu
                        •
                     ll men do receaue Christ, Doctor Tressam 
                  
                     D. Tressam disputeth. brought two or three places out of S. Austen concerninge Iudas, that he eat the true body of Christ, as the other Apostles did, and then againe of wicked men in generall: Quia aliquis 
                  
                     Aug. lib 
                           •
                        . cont D
                           •
                        nat. cap. 
                     
                        •
                     . 
                  non ad salutem manducat, non ideò non est corpus: because some do not eate to saluation, yt followeth

not therfore, that yt is not his body: but to all this Maister Ridley aunswered by his former shift, that yt is the body to them, that is, the Sacrament of the body. Do yow see the fond euasion? there was no doubt or question whether euill-men did eat the Sacrament, or externall forme, (for euery man doth eat that, when they receaue) but the question was and is of the true body: and therfore when Saint Austen speaketh of this body, yt is madnes to vnderstand yt of any other thinge, then the reall body. But lett vs heare what was replyed: Doctor VVeston said: I bringe Theophilact against yow: Iudas (saith he) gustauit carnem Domini: Iudas did eate or tast the flesh of Christ. Ridley. Fox ibid. num. 49. 
                  That is the Sacrament of the Lords flesh. Doctor VVatson replyed out of the Councell of Nice: Exaltata mente fideliter credamus, iacere in illa sacramensa 
                  Concil Nico
                        •
                      primum tit. de diuina m
                        •
                     nsa, &c. vlt
                        •
                     m. editionis. 
                  agnum Dei tollentem peccata mundi, a sacerdotibus sacrificatum. 
                  Let vs faithfully beleeue with an exalted mynd, that there lyeth in the holy table the lambe of God, that taketh away the sinnes of the world, which is sacrificed by the Priests. Ridley. That Councell vvas collected out of auncient Fathers, and is to me of great authority, &c. Fox ibid.
                   
                  the vvords make for me: the lambe of God is in heauen accordinge to the verity of the body, and heere he is with vs in a mystery accordinge to his power, not corporally. Watson. But the lambe of God lyeth on the table. Ridley. Yt is a figuratiue speach, for in our mynd vve vnderstand him vvhich is in heauen. Watson. But he lyeth there, the Greeke vvord is KEÎTA. Ridley. He lyeth there, that is, he is there present, not corporally,

but he lyeth there in his operation, &c. And by this Fox pag. 1321. yow may see, to what purpose yt was to dispute with this man; for that God by his power and operation is euery where, and in euery creature. And yf Christ be no otherwise heere, but by his power and operation, as in baptisme, what an impertinency is this of the Councell of Nice, to vse so many and significant words, that vve must faithfully beleeue vvith a high mynd and courage, against sense and reason, that the lambe of God lyeth on the table sacrificed by Priests, and the like; Is there any Protestant that speaketh thus▪ or can the like words be verified in the Protestants communion, of signes, figures, representations and symbolls?
               61. Lastly to skipp ouer diuers other things, Doctor VVeston pressed him with two other places of S. Chrysostome, so cleere, as nothinge can be spoken more cleerer. The first is in these words: vve vvorshipp the selfe
                        •
                      same body in the E
                        •
                     charist vvhich the vvise men did vvorshipp in the manger. And then againe: vve haue not heere the Lord in the manger, but on the Altar; heere a vvoman 
                  
                     Chrysost. hom. 24. in 1. ad Cor.
                   
                  holdeth him not in her hands, but a Priest. These are the words. Let vs heare his answere. Ridley. I graunt the Priest holdeth the same thinge, but after another manner. She did hold the naturall body, the Priest holdeth the mystery of the body. So hee. And Fox wryteth in the margent. The s
                        •
                     me thinge, 
                  Fox pag. 1322. 
                  but the manner diuerse. But who seeth not, that our contention is about the thing, and not the manner; for we teach also that the manner of Christs being in the Sacrament, is different

from the manner of his being in heauen, but the thinge really is all one. And so yf Ridley do graunt the same thinge to be holden by the Priest hands, which the blessed virgin held in 
                     Ridloy in vvords vvil seeme to agree. her hands, as heere yow see him graunt in words, then the controuersie betweene vs and him is ended. But presently he leapeth from his graunt againe, sayinge she did hold the naturall body, and the Priest holdeth the mystery of the body, which are different things, and not only different manners of holdinge. Wherefore Doctor VVeston repeatinge againe this argument out of S. Chrysostome to the multitude in English (saith Iohn Fox) and consideringe the manner of Ridleyes aunsweringe, and that nothinge more could be had of him, he dissolued the disputation in these words: Videtis praefracti hominis animunt, gloriosum, vafrum, inconstantem, &c. Yow see the stubborne, vauntinge, deceytfull, and inconstant mynd of this man. And with this Encomion departed Doctor Ridley to his prison againe, and the other Doctors each man to their owne lodginges.
            
            
               
                  Out of the Disputations with M. Hugh Latimer, togeather with the conclusion of the whole triall in this article. §. 4.
               64. Vpon the third day being wednesday

the 18. of Aprill, was brought forth Maister Hugh Latymer to aunswere as the former had done, but the disputation was much more shorter then the other, and in English, for Maister Latymer (saith Fox) alleaged that he vvas out of vse vvith Latyn, and vnfitt for that place. He gaue Fox pag. 1323. vp his confession about the three articles in wrytinge, after the imitation of Cranmer and Ridley, full of scoffes and bitter taunts, as his veyne was, and rested most vpon the masse, and the foure marrow-bones therof (for so blasphemously he called them) which were (forsooth) 
                     Latymers 4. morrovv. bones of the masse. 
                  consecration, transubstantiation, oblation, and adoration, of all which yow haue heard the ancient Fathers speaches before, how different they are from these of Latymer, as was also their spiritt.
               63. The first entrance to talke betwene Maister Latymer, and the Doctors was, for that he sayinge in his wrytinge, that nothinge was to be receaued concerning the Sacramēt, which was not expressely sett downe in the institution of Christ, Doctor VVeston inferred, that then weomen must not receaue the communion, for that no expresse mention is made in scripture of their receauinge; and when Latymer aunswered, that S. Paul said: Probet autem seipsum homo, which signifieth said he both men and weomen, yt was replyed, that in Greeke yt was anthropos that was proper to man, &c. Then Doctor VVeston asked him, how longe he had byn of this opinion? he said about some seauen yeares (he being more then seauenty

of age) and that my L. of Canterburyes booke had specially confirmed his iudgement therin. And yf (quoth he) I could remember all therin conteyned, I vvould not feare to aunswere any man in this matter. So he. And many tymes after he ran still to this booke of Cranmer. My Lord of Canterburyes booke (saith he to an argument of Doctor Cartwright) handleth this very vvell, and by him could 
                  Fox pag. 1325. 
                  I aunswere yow, yf I had him. And againe in another place to another argument. The solution of this (saith he) is in my Lord of Canterbury his booke. And yet further to another. I remember I haue 
                  
                     Latymer foundeth himselfe on Cranmers booke. 
                  read this in my Lord of Canterburyes booke. Wherto Doctor Tressam aunswered, that there are in that booke six hundred lyes, but Latymer replyed nothinge, &c.
               
               64. Then said Doctor VVeston: Yow vvere once a Lutheran. Latimer. No I vvas a Papist, for I could neuer perceaue how Luther could desend his opinion, vvithout transubstantiation. The Tygurines once did vvryte a booke against Luther, and I oft desired God that he might liue so longe as to make them aunswere. So he, wherby is seene, that he fauoured Luther more then the Tygurines at that tyme, for that he would haue had them aunswered. But Doctor VVeston said further: Luther in his booke de priuata missa, testifieth that the diuell reasoned vvith 
                  
                     L
                           ••
                        h. l. de inissa Priua
                        
                           •
                        a fol. 14. Contigit
                   
                  him, and persuaded him that the masse vvas not good, vvherby yt appeareth that Luther said masse, and the diuell dissuaded him from yt. Latimer. I do not take in hand heere to desend Luthers sayings or doings: ys he vvere heere, he vvould desend himselfe vvell inough I trow. So Latymer, leauinge Luther to himselfe,

but Fox will needs defend him with this marginall note sayinge: In that booke, the diuell 
                  Fox pag. 1324. 
                  doth not dissuade him so much from sayinge masse, as to bring him to desperation for sayinge masse, such temptations many tymes happen to good men.
               
               65. And will yow consider the grauity and verity of this note; first he saith that the diuell did not so much dissuade him from sayinge masse, as to bringe him to desperation: then somewhat he did dissuade him, though Iohn Fox excuseth the diuell and accuseth Luther. not so much as to the other; which I beleeue, for that the one was his damnation, and his leauinge of masse was but the way to yt. Secondly yf the diuell did endeauour to bringe Luther to desperation for sayinge of masse, he must needs persuade him first, that the masse was naught, as yf he would draw a man to desperation for vsing almes deeds, he must first persuade him, that almes-deeds are naught and wicked, and as wise a man as he should shew himselfe, that at the diuells persuasion will beleeue that almes-deeds were naught, and leaue the same; so were Luther & Latymer as wise to beleeue this suggestion of the diuell against the masse. And where Fox saith, that such temptations of the diuell do happen 
                  The diuells impugningo of the masse as euill, proueth yt to be God. 
                  many tymes to good-men. I graunt yt, but not that euer any good man did yeld therevnto, or iudge a thinge euill, for that the diuell did say yt was naught, but rather to the contrary, his impugnation of yt is alwayes a signe, that the thing is good and pleasinge to almighty God, whose aduersary the diuell is; yea the greater

his impugnation is, the better must we presume the thing to be, and consequently when he would make the masse to seeme so heynous a thinge to Luther, as that he should be damned for sayinge the same, yt is a good proofe that the masse is an excellent thing, & displeaseth the diuell, and that Luther and his followers leauing to say masse, do please much the diuell in followinge his suggestion therin, as good and obedient children, to so holy a ghostly Father, and so to him we leaue them.
               66. There followeth, that albeit Latymer was loath to dispute, yet some few arguments were cast forth against him, but all in English, for so he would haue yt. And first Maister Doctor Tressam alleaged an authority of Saint Hilary, affirminge a naturall vnity to be in vs with Christ by eatinge his flesh. Which place, for that yt was alleaged before against his fellowes, I will not stand much vpon yt, but only note this mans euasion: Latymer. I can not speake Latyn so longe, &c. But as for the words (saith he) of Hilary, I thinke they make not so much for yow: but he that should answere the Doctors, had not neede to be in my case, but should haue them in a readyness, and know their purpose: Melancthon saith, that yf the Doctors had forseene, that they should haue byn so taken in this controuersie, they vvould haue vvrytten more plainly. This was his answere, and more then this yow shall not find, and in this, there is a notable imposture of an old deceauer, for that Melancthon being of opposite opinion to him in this article, and wrytinge a whole worke of the Doctors sentences

for proofe of the reall-presence, against the Sacramentaryes, as in his Mens
                        •
                      Decembri. life we haue shewed, what he speaketh of this mystakinge the Fathers and Doctors, he speaketh expressely of the Sacramentaryes, and not of those that defend the reall-presence, which he also, being a Lutheran, defended, and affirmeth plainly that all the Fathers are of the same opinion, though yf they had foreseene, that such heretiks, as are the Sacramentaryes, would haue risen vp, and haue wrested their words and meaning (as yow haue heard both Cranmer, Ridley, and Latymer to haue done) they would haue spoken more plainly in the controuersie, though hardly they could haue spoken more cleerly against them. And by this first entrance, yow may marke the plaine dealinge of old Father Latymer.
               
               67. Doctor Seaton Vice-chauncelour of Cambridge, seing these sleights of the old fellow, beginneth thus with him: I know your learninge vvoll inough, and how subtile yow be: I will vse a few 
                  Fox pag. 1325. 
                  vvords vvith yow out of S. Cyprian, vvho saith, that the old Testament doth forbidd the drinkinge of bloud, and 
                  
                     D. Seatons argument Cypr. de Can. Dom.
                   
                  the new Testament doth commaund the drinkinge of bloud. Out of which words he framed this argument. That yt vvas true and reall bloud, vvhich the old Testament forbadd to drinke, ergò yt is true and reall bloud vvhich the new Testament commaundeth to drinke; for that otherwise the antithesis or opposition of the two Testamēts in this point can not hold, yf the one forbidd the true drinking of true and reall bloud, and the other commaundeth

the figuratiue drinking of spirituall bloud by faith, for that these things are opposite, and that the Iewes also in the old 
                     •
                  estament did drinke Christs bloud by faith, &c. To which argument Latymer aunswered nothinge in effect, but this; vve do tast true bloud, 
                  Fox pag. 1325. 
                  but spiritually, and this is inough. And then proueth he the same by those words of S. Augustine before aunswered by vs; crede & manducusti; beleeue, 
                     Aug. tract. 25. in Ioan.
                   & thou hast eaten, as though the words credere and edere, were all one in the scriptures. Whervpon Doctor VVeston recyted a story that passed betwene Maister Hooper and B. Gardener; for when Hooper would needs hould, that to cate was to beleue, and that an Altar signified Christ in the scriptures, B. Gardener inferred, ergò, when S. Paul saith to the Hebrewes, that vve haue an Altar, vvherof the Ieuwes must not eat: the 
                  
                     Heb. 13. 
                  sense is, vve haue Christ; in whome the Iewes must not beleeue. And after this he retourne
                     •
                   to presse Latymer strongly againe vpon this place of S. Cyprian; sayinge: that is comusaunded in the new 
                  
                     S. Cyprians Place vrged by D. VVeston.
                   
                  Testament, vvhich is forbidden in the ould, but true bloud vvas forbidden in the old, ergò true bloud also is commaunded to be drunken in the new. Whervnto Latymer aunsweringe twise, vttered two contraryes: for first his words are: It is true as touchinge 
                  Fox pag. 1325. col. 1. num. 27. 
                  the matter; but not as touchinge the manner of the thinge, where he graunteth (as yow see) that true bloud is meant in both Testament, but the manner of drinkinge is different, which also we graunt & teach: but heare his second aunswere vpon the other instance.
               
                  
68. Weston. The old Testament doth forbidd the tastinge of bloud, but the new doth commaund yt. Latymer. Fox ibid. num. 70. 
                  It is true, not as touchinge the thinge, but as touchinge the manner therof. Before he said: yt is true touchinge the matter, but not touchinge the manner; now he saith; yt is true touching the manner and not touchinge the thinge: so as yf the thinge and matter be all one, as yt is, he speaketh contraryes. Whervpon Doctor VVeston opened the whole argument to the people in English, and the absurdity of his answere, but Latymer replyed againe and againe; that true bloud vvas commaunded spiritually to be dronken in the new Testament. Whervnto one Doctor Pye replyed, 
                     D. Pye disputeth. and obiected, that yt was not forbidden to be dronken spiritually in the old law: for that (saith he) they drinke spiritually Christs bloud in the old law, ergò, the drinkinge therof in the new must be more then only spirituall. To this Latymer aunswered, the substance of bloud is dronken, but not in one manner. So as heere yow see, he graunteth also the substance of bloud to be dronken, though in a different manner from that of the old Testament. But being pressed by the said Doctor Pye, that we require not the same manner of drinkinge bloud in the new law, which was forbidden in the old; but only that yt is as really and truly bloud, as the other was; his finall aunswere and resolution is this, It is the same thinge, but not the same manner, I haue no more to say. Heere then is his last detertermination, and consider I pray yow the substance therof; yf yt be the same thinge, then

must yt needs be really and truly bloud; for this is the thinge or matter wherof the question is, for that otherwayes we know that the bloud forbidden in the old Testament, is meant the bloud of beasts, and the bloud commaunded in the new, is meant of the bloud of Christ; So as in this, Latymer cannot graunt them to be one thinge, but only in the reallity and truth of bloud, that is, as the one is true and reall bloud of beasts: so is the other true and reall bloud of Christ; which yf he graunt (as heere in words he doth) then cannot the different manner of drinkinge the same alter the substance of the thinge yt selfe; or yf yt do, then is yt false, that yt is the same thinge; and so euery way is ould Latymer taken, but lett vs passe foreward.
               69. Doctor VVeston to confirme the reallity of Christs bloud, receaued in the Sacrament, alleaged another place of S. Chrysostome, where Chrysost. serm. de Prodit. Iudae. talkinge of Iudas he saith, Christus ei sangninem quem vendidit offerebat. Christ gaue him (in the Sacrament, to witt, to Iudas) the bloud which he had sould. Can any thinge be playner spoken. Latymer answered: he gaue to Iudas his bloud, in a Sacrament, and by this thinketh he hath said some what to the purpose, wheras indeed he saith nothinge. For we say also, that he gaue him his bloud in a Sacrament, as we say, that we giue wyne in a cuppe, but this excludeth not the reality of the bloud, no more then the giuinge in a cupp, or vnder a veyle, taketh away the true reality of the wyne; yet is this

the common hole for Sacramentaryes to runne out at, when they are pressed; for both they and we do agree, that Christs bloud is giuen in the Sacrament vnder a signe sacramentally, and the like phrases; but the difference betweene vs is, that we by this do not exclude the truth & reality of the thing therin conteyned, as they do, & therby delude both themselues and others, speakinge in such sort, as they cannot be vnderstood, but only that a man may easily vnderstand, that they seeke therby euasions, and wayes to slipp out at.
               70. I passe ouer diuers other authorityes of Fathers alleaged by the Doctors, as those words of S. Cyrill: Per communionem corporis Christi, 
                  
                     Cyrill. l. 10▪ 
                     in cap. 13. Ioan.
                   
                  habitat in nobis Christus corporaliter. By the communion of Christs body, he dwelleth in vs corporally, ergò, not spiritually only and by faith. Latymer aunswered; first that (corporally) hath another vnderstandinge, then yow do grossely take 
                  Fox pag. 1325. 
                  yt. And then being pressed againe, he said: The solution of this is in my Lord of Canterburyes booke. So he. But Fox not contented, (as it seemeth) with this aunswere, putteth downe a larger, though without an author, wherby we may conceaue yt to be his owne. Corporally (saith he) is to be taken heere in the same sense, that S. Paul saith, the fullnes of diuinity to duuell corporally in Christ, that is, not lighty, nor accidentally, but perfectly & substantially, &c. Which answere yf Fox will stand vnto we are agreed; for we require no more but that Christ by the communion of his body in the Sacrament, doth dwell perfectly

and substantially in vs, for that importeth also really, as the fullnesse of diuinity is really in Christ incarnate, and not by vnion only of will, as the Arrians said, and as our Sacramentaryes do talke of Christs vnion only by faith in vs. And lett the reader note by the way Iohn Fox his witt, & deepe diuinity, who knowinge not what he saith, graunteth by this example more then we require; for he graunteth the same substantiall vnity to be betweene Christ and our soule, which is betweene Christs diuinity, and his humanity; which is false; ours being accidentall and separable; the other substantiall & inseparable, for that yt is hypostaticall. But these thinges Iohn had not learned, and so we pardon him, and do returne to Latymer againe, who being vrged hardly by Doctor Smith about Saint Cyrills words; that Christ by communion of his body in the Sacrament dwelleth corporally in vs, ergò, not only spiritually by faith; he aunswered: I say both that he dwelleth in vs spiritually, and corporally, spiritually by faith, and corporally by takinge our flesh vpon him; for I remember that I haue read this in my Lord of Canterburyes booke. Heere now yow see another shift different from that of Fox, authorised by my L. of Canterburyes booke, but shaken of by S. Cyrills booke, which saith expressely as yow haue heard, that Christ dwelleth in vs corporally by the communion of his body in the Sacrament, and talketh not of the incarnation.
               71. Wherfore Doctor VVeston seing that more could not be had of Latymer in this point, he

passed to another matter, which was to deale with him about the Sacrifice of che masse. In scoffinge against which, Latymers grace, or disgrace rather and sinne, did principally consist; and so alleaginge many auncient Fathers authorityes against him for this purpose, and reading the places at length, hauing the books there present, Latymer was quickly dryuen to a non-plus, as may appeare by Fox his owne narration, though he setteth yt downe like a Fox indeed, suppressinge all the particulars of the said places, but only the names of the authors, and the first words of the texts, and not them also in all. And then toucheth he the aunswers of Latymer, and the Catholike Doctors replyes so brokenly and confusedly, as may easily shew that he would declyne the tempest of that combatt from Latymers shoulders, and not haue the matter vnderstood, insinuatinge only some 8. or 9. authorityes alleaged for proofe of the propitiatory sacrifice, wheras more then 8. or 9. score might haue byn cyted to that effect. And finally though Latymer muttered out two or three particular aunswers heere and there, sayinge; that S. Chrysostome had Emphaticall locutions, and the like; yet his last rest was sett vpon this; that the Doctors might be deceaued in some points, though not in all things: Wherof Fox well allowinge, maketh this scoffinge comment in the margent, Doctores legendi sunt cum venia; the Doctors are to be read with pardon, which can haue no other sense, but that eyther we must pardon them

when they speake not truth, or we must aske pardon of them, not to beleeue them when we mislike them; for other sense I cannot make of this comentary.
               27. Doctor Cole replyed; is it not a shame for an 
                  The last colloquiū
                     ▪ vvith Latymer.
                   
                  old man to lye? yow say yow are of the old Fathers faith. Latymer. I am of their faith vvhen they say well, I referre my selfe to my Lord of Caterburyes booke wholy 
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     ibid.
                   
                  herin Doctor Smith. Then yow are not of S. Chrysostomes faith, nor S. Augustines faith. Latymer. I haue said, vvhen they say vvell, and bring scriptures for them, I am of their faith, and further Augustine requireth not to be beleeued, &c. Weston. Forty yeares gone, vvhether could yow haue gone to haue found your doctrine? Latym. The more cause we haue to thanke God now, that hath sent the light into the vvorld. Weston. The light? ney light and lewd preachers, &c. remember vvhat they haue bin, that haue bin the beginners of your doctrine, none but a few flyinge Apostataes, runninge out of Germany, &c. remember vvhat they haue bin, that haue sett forth the same in this realme, a sort of flyinge braines, and light heads, which vvere neuer constant in any one thinge, vvhich vvas well seene in the often alteringe of their communion-booke, and turninge their table one day vvest, and another day east, they gott them a tankerd, and one saith I drinke and am thankefull, the more ioy of thee, saith another, &c. Yow neuer agreed vvith the 
                        •
                     igurynes of Germanie, or vvith your selues, your stubburnesse is of vaine glory, and vve all see by your owne confession, how little cause yow haue to be stubburne, your learninge is in feoffers hold, the Queenes grace is mercifull, if yow vvill returne. Latymer. Yow shall haue no hope in

me to returne. And thus ended that disputation.
               74. And heere Iohn Fox is very angry with Doctor VVeston for this speach, and for reuenge therof, maketh this note in the margent: Blasphemous lyes of Doctor VVeston sittinge in the chaire of pestilence, and then presently he maketh the narration of him, which before we haue related about Vrge hoc, vrge hoc, and in the margent he hath this other Notandum, vrge hoc quod VVeston, vvith his beere-pott in his hand: which notwithstandinge is more modest, then yf yt had byn a wyne-pott. And I maruayle much why the wisdome of Fox should obiect this beerpott so often & eagerly against Doctor VVeston, seeing his owne great chaire, which is yet kept for a relique of his holines in London by the sisters, hath two places made on both sides therof, the one for the Candlesticke, the other for the ale-pott and nutmegges, which Father Fox is said to haue loued well, and so do his wrytings also shew, & yet no Catholike man I thinke hath euer obiected the same vnto him before this, as he doth the beer-pott to Doctor VVeston. But these are trifles. Lett vs passe to more serious considerations.
            
            
               
                  The Conclusion, with some Considerations theron. §. 5.
               75. By the re-view then of these three dayes disputations, a coniecture may be made, how

matters did passe then, and how they stand at this day betwixt vs and Protestants in these articles of controuersie: Yow haue heard before the great vaunts that Doctor Ridley made in his disputations at Cambridge vnder K. Edward, how euidently forsooth and apparently the truth stood with him and his fellowes, & this vpon siue principall grounds and head-springs Fox pag. 1261. as he calleth them; vvhich are the Maiestie and verity of scriptures; the most certaine testimony of the ancient Fathers; the definition of a Sacrament; the ab
                        •
                     ominable heresie of Eutiches, and the most sure beleese of the article of our faith; He ascended vp to heauen. B. Cranmer also after that againe in the beginninge The vaūts of Ridley & Cranmer hovv vvell performed. of Q. Maryes raigne, settinge forth a certayne vauntinge schedell, which Fox called a Purgation of Thomas Archbishopp Cranmer, hath this chalenge therin: I vvith Peter Martyr (saith he) and other foure or fiue vvhich I shall choose, vvill by 
                  Fox pag. 1261. 
                  Gods grace take vpon vs to desend all the doctrine and Religion, sett 
                        •
                     orth by our soueraigne Lord K. Edward the sixth to be more pure, and accordinge to Gods word, then any other that hath bin vsed in England these thousand yeares, so that Gods vvord may be iudge, and that the reasons and proofes of both parts may be sett out in vvrytinge, to the entent as well, that all the world may examine and iudge theron, as that no man shall start backe from his vvryting
                        •
                     .
               
               76. Thus he. And now yow haue seene more or lesse by the former disputation, how he, & his fellow Ridley were able to performe their bragges, and though yow haue seene them brought to the exigents, which before

hath appeared: yet yf yow will beleeue them or Iohn Fox their Chronicler, settinge forth their Acts and Monuments, they were so farre of from being conquered, as the aduerse part was rather putt to the foyle, for that they could say nothinge in effect against them. And for example, Fox wryteth of Doctor VVeston (who most of all other vrged them with many good arguments as yow haue heard) that 
                  Fox pag. 1326. 
                  not only he had his Theseus there by him to help him out (to witt his beere-pott) but moreouer that he said neuer a true word, nor made neuer a true conclusion almost 
                  
                     Ibid. pag. 1330. 
                  in that disputation. Which how true or false yt is, the reader himselfe may be iudge, that Impudency of Fox. hath pervsed ouer the same in this our review: And the very like in effect wryteth B Cranmer 
                  Fox pag. 1331. in a certayne letter of his to the Councell, vpon the 23. of Aprill 1554. immediatly after the disputation ended, complayninge greatly of the disorder & iniquity therin vsed, which yet by that we haue examined before out of their owne words, I meane set downe in Fox, his penne being bent wholy to their fauour, there could not be great iniquity or inequality, the combatt consistinge in discussinge authorityes of auncient Fathers; but yt is the nature of this people as alwayes to be contentious, so euer to be clamourous, and neuer satisfied except they haue their will, but especially to wryte and speake both contemptuously and partially: yow shall heare how Malster Ridley relateth the euent of this disputation; for that hauinge sett downe his owne

disputations and aunswers in the prison, and this with the greatest aduantage, yow must imagine that he could diuise, after much gall vttered in the preface therof against this disputation, concludeth the same with these passionate words, as they are in Fox.
               77. Thus vvas ended the most glorious disputation of the most holy Fathers, Sacrificers, Doctors and Maisters, 
                  
                     D Ridleyes passionate speach of the disputation. 
                  vvho fought most manfully for their God and Gods, for their faith and felicity, for their countrey and kitchen, for their beuty and belly, vvith triumphant applauses and famous of the vvhole vniuersity. So hee. And by Fox pag. 1330. this yow may know the man, and how much his words are to be credited; yow hauing considered what hath byn laid downe before, by Fox his owne report, touching the substance of the disputation and authorityes of Fathers, alleaged and examined and shifted of, though in the forme of scholasticall disputation and vrging arguments, yt may be there were some disorders; yet that maketh not so much to the purpose, how arguments were vrged against them, as how they were aunswered by them; and yet could not the disorder be so great, as it was vnder Ridley himselfe in the Cambridge-disputation, as is most euident to the reader by Fox his owne relation, who as before I haue noted, is alwayes to be presumed to relate the worst for vs, and the best for himselfe in all these actions.
               78. Wherfore yt is not a little to be considered, what was the difference in substance or substantiall proofes, brought forth in the Cambridge
                  
Protestant-disputations vnder K. Edward, and these Oxford Catholike-disputations vnder Q. Mary; and whether Doctor Ridley that was moderator of those, or Doctor VVeston prolocutor in these, did best vrge or solue arguments against their aduersaryes; for that this consideration and comparison only, will giue a great light to discerne also the difference of the causes therin defended. One thinge also more is greatly in my opinion to be weighed in this matter, which is, that the said auncient Fathers hauinge to persuade so high and hard a mystery as this is, that Christs true and naturall flesh and bloud, are really vnder the formes of bread and wyne, by vertue of the Priests consecration, they were forced to vse all the manner of most significant speaches, which they could diuise to expresse the same, and to beate yt into the peoples heads and mynds, though contrary to their senses and common reason, and therby to fly from the opposite heresie and infidelity of our Sacramentaryes; lurkinge naturally in the harts of flesh and bloud, and of sensuall people; but synce that tyme by Sathans incytation, broached and brought forth publikely into the world. For meetinge wherwith the holy prouidence of almighty God was, that the forsaid Fathers should by all sorts of most significant speaches & phrases, as hath byn said, so cleerly lay open their meanings in this matter, as no reasonable man can doubt therof, and not only this, but also that they should vse certaine

exaggerations the better to explane themselues, such as they are wont to do in other controuersies also, when they would vehemently oppose themselues against any error or heresie, as by the examples of Saint Augustine against the Pelagians in behalfe of Grace, and against the Manichees in the defence of Free-will. And of S. Hierome against Iouinian for the priuiledge of Virginity aboue marriage. and other like questions, wherin the said Fathers, to make themselues the better vnderstood, do vse sometymes such exaggeratiue speaches, as they may seeme to inclyne somewhat to the other extreme, which indeed they do not, but do shew therby their feruour in defence of the truth, and hatred of the heresie which they impugne.
               79. And the like may be obserued in this article The Fathers effectuall speaches to persuade the reall-presence. of the reall-presence, of Christs sacred body in the Sacrament of the Altar, which being a mystery of most high importance, and hardest to be beleeued, as aboue humayne sense and reason, and therfore called by them: the myracle of mysteryes: yt was necessary for them, I say to vse as many effectuall wayes, 
                     Chrysost hom. 61. ad Pop. Antioch. & 
                           •
                        lij.
                   as they possible could for persuadinge the said truth vnto the people, and for preuenting the distrustfull cogitations and suggestions both of humayne infirmity, and diabolicall infidelity against the receaued faith and truth of this article; and so they did, not only vsinge most cleere, plaine, effectuall and significant manner of expounding themselues, and their meaninge,

but many such exaggerations also, as must needs make vs see the desire they had, to be rightly and fully vnderstood therein. For better consideration of which point (being of singular moment as hath byn said) the reader shall haue a little patience, whilst I detayne my selfe somewhat longer, then I meant to haue done, in layinge forth the same before him.
               80. And first of all, concerninge the effectuall speaches for vtteringe the truth of their beleefe in this article, yow haue heard much in the former disputation, and heere we shall repeat some points againe, which in effect are, that wheras the said Fathers founded themselues ordinaryly vpon those speaches of our Sauiour: This is my body vvhich shalbe giuen for yow: my flesh is truly meate, and my bloud is truly drinke. 
                  
                     Matth. 26. Luc. 14. Ioan. 6. 
                  The bread vvhich I shall giue yow is my flesh for the life of the vvorld, and other like sentences of our Sauiour; the Fathers do not only vrge all the circumstances heere specified or signified, to proue yt to be the true naturall and substantiall body of Christ (as that yt was to be giuen for vs the next day, after Christs words were spoken, that yt was to be giuen for the life of the whole world, & that yt was truly meate, and truly Christs flesh) but do adde also diuers other circumstances of much efficacy to confirme the same, affirminge the same more in particular; that it is the very same body which was borne of the blessed Virgin, the very same body that suffered on the Crosse, corpus

affixum, verberatum, crucifixum, cruentatum, lanceae 
                  
                     Chrysost. hom. 24. in 1. Cor.
                   
                  vulneratum (saith S. Chrysostome) 
                  the selfe-same body, that was nayled, beaten, crucisied, blouded, wounded with a speare, is receaued by vs in the Sacrament. Whervnto S. Austen addeth this particularity, that yt is the selfe-same body that walked heere amonge vs vpon earth. As he vvalked heere in flesh (saith he) amonge vs; so 
                  
                     Aug. in Psalm. 98. 
                  the very selfe same flesh doth he giue to be eaten, and therfore no man eateth, that flesh; but first adoreth at; and Hisichius addeth; that he gaue the selfe-same 
                  
                     H
                           •
                        sich. in cap. 22. Leui
                           •
                        .
                   
                  body, vvherof the Angell Gabriell said to the Virgin Mary, that it should be conceaued of the holy Ghost. And yet further; yt is the same body (saith S. Chrysostome) that the Magi, or learned men did adore in the manger. But thou dost see him 
                  
                     Chrysost. hom. 2. in 2. ad Cor.
                   (saith he) not in the manger, but in the Altar, not in the armes of a vvoman, but in the hands of a Priest. The very same flesh (saith S. Austen againe) that sate at the table in the last supper, and vvashed his disciples 
                  
                     Aug. in Psalm. 33. contion. 1. & 2. 
                  seet; The very same (I say) did Christ giue with his owne hands to his disciples, vvhen he said; take eate, this is my body, &c. And so did he beare himselfe in his owne hands, vvhich vvas prophesied of Dauid, but fulfilled only by Christ in that Supper.
               
               81. These are the particularityes vsed by the Fathers for declaring what body they meane; and can there be any more effectuall speaches then these? but yet harken further. Thou must know and hold for most certaine (saith S. Cyrill) that 
                  
                     Cyrill. Hi
                           •
                        
                        vos Cathec. 4. mystagog.
                   
                  this vvhich seemeth to be bread, is not bread but Christs body, though the tast doth iudge it bread. And againe the same Father: Vnder the forme or shew of bread,

is giuen to thee the body of Christ, & vnder the forme or snape of wine, is giuen to thee the bloud of Christ, &c. And S. Chrysostome to the same effect: VVe must 
                  Chrysost. hom. 60. ad Top. Antioch. 
                  not beleeue our senses eaysie to be beguiled, &c. VVe must simply, and vvithout all ambyguity beleeue the vvords of Christ sayinge: This is my body, &c. O how many say now adayes, I vvould see him, I vvould behould his visage, his vestments, &c. But he doth more then this, for he giueth himselfe not only to be seene, but to be touched also, handled and eaten by thee. Nor only do the Fathers affirme so asseuerantly, that yt is the true naturall body of Christ, though yt appeare bread in forme and shape, and that we must not beleeue our senses heerin; but do deny expressely that yt is bread after the words of consecration, wherof yow heard longe discourses before out of S. Ambrose in his books de sacramentis, and de initiandis. Before the words of 
                  Ambr. l. 4. de Sacram. cap. 4. & l. de initiand. 
                  consecration, it is bread (saith he) but after consecration, de pane sit caro Christi, of bread yt is made the flesh of Christ; And note the word (fit) yt is made. And againe. Before the words of Christ be vttered (in the consecration) the chalice is full of vvine and vvater; but vvhen the vvords of Christ haue vvrought their effect, ibi sanguis efficitur qui redemit plebem, there is made the bloud that redeemed the people. And marke in like manner the word efficitur, is made, and consider whether any thinge can be spoken more plainly.
               83. But yet the Fathers cease not heere, but do passe much further to inculcate the truth All doubts about this matter condemned. of this matter, reprehending sharply all doubt, suspition or ambiguity, which the weaknesse

of our flesh or infection of heresie may suggest in this matter. S. Cyrill reasoneth thus: VVheras 
                  
                     Cyrill Hier. catech. mystagog. 4. 
                  Christ hath said of the bread, this is my body, vvho vvill dare to doubt therof? and vvheras he hath said of the wine, this is my bloud, vvho vvill doubt or say yt is not his bloud? he once turned vvater into vvine in Cana of Galiley by his only will which wine is like vnto bloud, and shall vve not thinke him vvorthy to be beleeued, vvhen he saith, that he hath changed vvine into his bloud? So he. And S. Ambrose to the same effect. Our Lord Iesus Christ doth iestifie vnto vs, that we do 
                  
                     Ambr. l. 4. de Sacordot. cap 4. 
                  receaue his body and bloud, and may we doubt of his creditt or testimony? And the other Saint Cyrill of Alexandria saith to the same effect; that in this mystery we should not so much as aske quomodo 
                  
                     Cyril. Alex. l. 4. 
                        
                           •
                        nc. 13. Ioan.
                   how yt can be done? Iudaicum enim verbum est (saith he) & aeterm supplicij causa: For ye is a Iewish word, and cause of euerlastinge torment. And before them both Saint Hilary left wrytten this exhortation: These things
                  ▪ saith he) that are wrytten, lett vs read, and those things that 
                  
                     Hilar. l. 8. de trinit. cont. Arrian.
                   
                  vve reade lett vs vnderstand, and so vve shall perfectly performe the duty of true saith; for that these points vvhich vve affirme of the naturall verity of Christs being in vs. exceptive learne them of Christ himselfe, we affirme them wickedly and foolishly, &c. VVherfore, vvheras he saith my s
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     h is truly meat, and my bloud is truly drinke, there is no place left to vs of doubting concerning the truth of Christs body & bloud, for that both by the affirmation of Christ himselfe, and by our owne beleefe, there is (in the Sacrament) the flesh truly and the bloud truly of our Sauiour.
               
               83. So great S. Hilary: and Eusebiu
                        •
                      Emissenus
                  
bringeth in Christ our Sauiour speakinge in these words: For so much as my flesh is truly meat, 
                  
                     Euseb. Emissenus. hom 5 de s
                           ••
                        ch.
                   
                  and my bloud is truly drinke, leit all doubt fullnes of in fideli
                        •
                     y depart; for so much as he vvho is the author of the gift, is vvittnesse also of the truth therof. And S. Leo to the same effect: Nothinge at all is to be 
                  
                     Leo serm. 6. de 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      7. 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   
                  doubted of the truth of Christ
                        •
                      body, and bloud in the Sacrament, &c. And those do in vaine aunswere amen (when they receaue yt) if they dispute against that vvhich is affirmed. And finally S. Ep
                        •
                     p
                        •
                     anius concludeth Ep
                        •
                     ph. in An
                        ••
                     r. thus: He that beleeueth it not to be the very body of Christ in the Sacrament, is fallen from grace and saluation.
               
               84. And by this we may see the earnestnesse of the Fathers in vrginge the beleefe of Christs true flesh, and bloud in the Sacrament; But they cease not heere, but do preuent and exclude all shifts of Sacramentaryes, which by Gods holy spiritt they forsaw, euen in those auncient dayes, affirminge that not by faith only, or in 
                     •
                  igure, or image, or spiritually alone Christs flesh is to be eaten by vs; but really, substantially, and corporally: Not only by faith (saith S. Chrys
                        •
                     stome) but in very deed he maketh vs 
                  
                     Chrysost. in 
                           •
                        om. 87. in cap. 21. Matth.
                   
                  his body, reducing vs as yt were into one masse or substance vvith himselfe. And Saint Cyrill: Not only by saith and charity are we spiritually conioyned to Christ 
                  
                     Cyril. Alex. l. 10. in cap. 17 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   (by his flesh in the Sacrament) but corporally also by communication of the same flesh. And S. Chrysostome againe: Not only by loue, but in very deed are we 
                  Chrysost. 
                        •
                     b. 
                  conuerted into his flesh by eatinge the same. And Saint Cyrill againe: VVe receauinge in the Sacrament 
                     Cyril. Alex. ib. l. 11. in Ioan. c, 27. 
                  corporally and substantially the sonne of God vnited naturally

to his Father, we are clarified & glorified therby, and made partakers of his supreme nature. Thus they. Whervnto for more explication addeth Theophilact: VVhen Christ said: This is my body; he shewed that it vvas his very body in deed, and not any 
                  Theophil. Alex. in cap. 10. Mare. 
                  figure correspondent thervnto, for he said not; this is the figure of my body; but, this is my body; by vvhich vvords the bread is transformed by an vnspeakable operation, though to vs it seeme still bread. And againe in another place. Behould that the bread vvhich is eaten by vs in the mysteryes, is not only a figuration of Christs 
                  Idem in ca. 
                        •
                     . Ioan. 
                  flesh, but the very flesh indeed, for Christ said not, that the bread vvhich I shall giue yow, is the figure of my flesh, but my very flesh indeed, for that the bread is transformed by 
                  arcanis verb
                        •
                     . 
                  secrett vvords into the flesh. And another Father more auncient then he, aboue twelue hundred yeares past, handlinge those words of Christ This is my body, saith: It is not the figure of Christs body and bloud; vt quidam stupida mente nugati sunt; as some blockish mynds haue Magnesl. 3. ad Th
                        •
                     ostinem. trifled; but it is truly the very body and bloud of our Sauiour indeed. And finally the whole generall Councell of Nice the second, aboue 800. yeares past, hath these words: do yow read, as longe as yow vvill, yow shall neuer find Christ or his Apostles, or 
                  Conc. Ni
                     
                        •
                     en. 2. act. 6 
                  the Fathers to haue called the vnhloudy sacrifice of Christ offered by the Priest, an image (or representation) but the very body and bloud of Christ it selfe. And could the auncient Fathers speake more effectually, properly or cleerly then this?
               85. And yet he that will examine and weigh their sayings, a man exactly shall find them to speake, in a certaine manner more effectually:

for that they did study, (as we haue said) how Emphaticall & effectuall speaches of the fathers. Hilar. lib. 8. de Trints. Cy
                           ••
                        l. l. 11. In Ioan. 
                     
                        •
                     . 26 to vtter their meaninge with emphasie. S. Hilary vseth this kind of argument: yf the word of God were truly made flesh, then do we truly receaue his flesh in the Lords supper, and therby he is to be steemed to dwell in vs naturally: S. Cyrill proueth, not only a spirituall, but a naturall and bodily vnion to be betweene vs and Christ, by eatinge his flesh in the Sacrament. Theodorete doth proue that Christ tooke flesh of the blessed Virgin, and ascended vp Theod. dial. 2. 
                        •
                     nconfus. with the same, and holdeth the same there, by that he giueth to vs his true flesh in the Sacrament; for that otherwayes he could not giue vs his true flesh to eate, yf his owne flesh were not true, seeing that he gaue the same that he carryed vp, and retayneth in heauen. S. Irenaeus, S. Iustine, & S. Chrysostome do proue not Iren. lib. 4. cont. hares. cap. 3. Iustin apol. 2. ad An. tonin Piu
                        •
                      Imp. Chrysost. hom 60. & 61. ad top. Antioch. only this, but the resurrection also of our bodyes by the truth of Christs flesh in the Sacracrament, for that our flesh ioyninge with his flesh which is immortall, ours shalbe immortall also. And the same Saint Irenaeus also doth proue further, that the great God of the ould Testament, creator of heauen and earth, was Christs Father; for proofe wherof he alleageth this reason; that Christ in the Sacrament did fullfill the figures of the old Testament, & that in particular, wherin bread was a figure of his flesh, which he fulfilled (saith Irenaeus) makinge yt his flesh indeed.
               86. I passe ouer many other formes of speaches no lesse effectuall; which doe easily declare the Fathers mynds and meaninges in

this point, as that of Optatus Mileuitanus, who 
                     Optat. l. 6. contra Donatist.
                   accused the Donatists of sacriledge & horrible wickednesse, for hauinge broken downe Catholike Altars, wheron the body, and bloud of Christ had byn borne: VVhat is so sacrilegious (saith he) as to breake downe, scrape and remoue the Altars of God, on vvhich your selues haue sometymes offered, and the members of Christ haue byn borne, &c. VVhat is an Altar, but the seate of the body and bloud of Christ? and this monstrous villany of yours is doubled, 
                  Chalice-breakers. 
                  for that yow haue broken also the chalices, vvhich did beare the bloud of Christ himselfe. So he. And is there any Protestant, that will speake thus at this day? or doth not this reprehension agree fully to Protestants, that haue broken downe more Altars, and chalices, then euer the Donatists did? Saint Leo the first saith: that the truth 
                  
                     Lee serm. 7. de pas. chate.
                   
                  of Christs true body and bloud in the Sacrament, was so notorious in his dayes; vt nec ab insantium linguis taceretur. That very infants did professe the same. And in the same sermon he saith: that the body of Christ is so receaued by vs in the Sacrament; vt in carnem ipsius, qui caro nostra factus est, transeamus, that we should passe into his flesh, who by his incarnation is made our flesh. Saint Chrysostome in many places of his works, doth vse such deuout, re
                     •
                  orent and significant speaches of that, which is conteyned in the Sacrament vnder the formes of bread, & wyne after consecration, as no doubt can be of his meaninge, whereof yow haue heard diuers points before in the disputations, as that it deserued the highest honour in earth; that he

did shew it lyinge vpon the Altar, that the Angells descended at the tyme of consecration, and did adore Christ 
                  
                     Chrysost. hom. 61. ad Pop. Antioch. & hom. 6. d
                           •
                         virbis I sa
                           •
                        a & hom. 3. de inc
                           •
                        mprahens. Dei natura.
                   
                  there present vvith tremblinge and seare, and durst not looke vpon him for the Maiestie of his presence. And other such speaches, which is conforme to that before cyted in the disputation out of the Councell of Nice: Credamus iaecere in illa mensa sacra, agnum Det à Sacerdotibus sacri
                        •
                     icatum. Let vs beleeue to lye on that holy table, the lambe of God sacrificed by Priests. And is there any Protestant that will speake thus?
               87. But aboue all the rest are those speaches, which before I said to tend to a certeyne exaggeration, as that, our flesh is turned into his flesh 
                  Exaggeratiue speaches of the Fathers to vtter their minds the more cleerly. 
                  by receauinge the blessed Sacrament: that our flesh is nourished by his; and that of two fleshes there is made but one flesh; Whervnto do appertayne not only those former phrases, which already yow haue heard of the naturall and corporall vnity; which the Fathers do so often inculcate to be betweene Christ and vs, by eatinge his flesh in the Sacrament, & that we are brought therby into one masse, or substance of flesh with him; but many other like significant manners for vtteringe their mynds, as that of S. Chrysostome: he nourisheth vs vvith his owne body, 
                  
                     Chrysost. hom. 61. ad Pop. Antioch. & hom. 45. in loan.
                   
                  and doth ioyne and conglutinate our flesh to his. And againe: That by his body (giuen vs in the Sacrament) Se nobis commiscuit, & in vnum nobiscum redegit. 
                  He hath mixt himselfe to vs, and brought himselfe and vs into one body and flesh. And yet further: he doth permitt himselfe not only to be handled by vs, but also to

be eaten, and our teeth to be fastened vpon his flesh, and vs to be filled with the same flesh; which is the greatest point of loue (saith Saint Chrysostome) that possible can be imagined. So 
                     Cyrill. Alex lib. 4. in loan. cap. 17. he. And conforme to this S. Cyrill of Alexandriae vttereth himselfe after another sort, for he vseth the example of leuen, which Saint Paul doth touch in his epistle to the Corinthians, when he saith; that a little leuen doth leuen a whole 
                  1. Cor. 5. 
                  bach; euen so (saith S. Cyrill) the flesh of Christ ioyned to our flesh, doth leuen or pearse through it, and conuert it into it selfe. And in another place he vseth 
                     Idem. l. 10. in loan. cap. 13. this similitude; that as vvhen yow take a peece of vvax melted at the fire, and do droppe the same vpon another peece of vvax, these two vvaxes are made one; so by the communication of Christs body and bloud vnto vs, he is in vs and we in him.
               88. Another auncient Father also vpon the point of 1200. yeares gone had this similitude: As wine (saith he) is mixed vvith him that drinketh 
                  
                     Marcus Anac
                           •
                        oreta in 1. ad Cor.
                   
                  the same, in such sort, as the wine is in him, and he in the wine: so is the bloud of Christ mixed also vvith him that drinketh the same in the Sacrament. And S. Irenaeus, Tertullian, & S. Iustinus Martyr, all of them elder then this man, do vse commonly this phrase of nourishinge, and feedinge our flesh by the flesh of Christ. How do they affirme (saith S. Irenaeus against certayne heretiks that denied 
                     Iren. lib. 4. cont hares. cap. 34. the resurrection) that our flesh shall come to corruption, and not receaue life againe, vvhich is nourished by the body and bloud of Christ? And againe. Ex quibus augetur & consistit carnis nostrae substantia. Of 
                     Ibid. lib. 5. cap. 2. which body and bloud of Christ, the substance

of our flesh is encreased and consisteth. And Tertullian, caro, corpore & sanguine Christi 
                  Tert. lib. de resurrect. carnis. 
                  vescitur, &c. Our flesh doth feed on the body and bloud of Christ. And marke that he saith the flesh, and not only the soule. And Iustine in his second Apology to the Emperour Antoninus talkinge of the Sacrament, saith, it is, cibus quo sanguis carnes
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      nostrae aluntur. The meat wherwith our bloud and flesh is fedd; and to this manner of speach appertayne those sayings of S. Chrysostome: Altare meum cruentum sanguine, 
                  
                     Chrysost. hom. 24. in 1. Cor. 10. my Altar that is made redd with bloud. Where he speaketh in the person of Christ. And againe to him that had receaued the Sacrament, dignus es habitus qui eius carnes lingua tangeres: Thou are made worthy to touch with thy tongue the flesh of Christ: And yet further 
                     Hom. 27. in c. 11. ad Cor.
                   in another place: Thou seest Christ sacrificed in the Altar, the Priest attendinge to his sacrifice, and powring out prayers; the multitude of people receauinge the Sacrament, praetioso illo sanguine intingi & rubefieri. 
                  
                     Ibid. l. 3. d
                           •
                         Sacerdot.
                   To be died and made read with that pretious bloud. All which speaches and many more, that for breuity I pretermitt, though they tend to a certayne exaggeration (as hath byn said) yet do they plainly declare the sense, iudgement and beleefe of the Fathers in this article, and so albeit literally, and in rigour, they be not in all respects verified: yet need we no better arguments to certifie vs of the Fathers meaninges then these, to witt, how farre they were of, from the Protestants opinions in this mystery.
               
                  
89. And truly yf we would now put downe heere on the contrary side the Prorestants assertions, and their cold manner of speaches in this behalfe, and compare them with this vehemency of the Fathers; we should presently see a wonderfull difference. I will touch some few only conteyned in this booke. First they say (and yt is a common refuge of Cranmer and 1. the rest in this disputation as you haue heard) that their communion-bread is Christs true body, as S. Iohn Baptist was true Elias.
               
               
                  Item. That yt is Christs body, as the doue was the holy-ghost. 2.
               
               
                  Item. That the body of Christ is eaten in the Sacrament of the Altar, no otherwise 3. then yt is in baptisme.
               
                  Item. That infants when they be baptized do eate the body of Christ also. 4.
               
               
                  Item. That Christs body is in the Sacracrament, as when two or three are gathered 5. togeather in his name.
               
                  Item. That the body of Christ is eaten in the Sacrament, as yt is eaten, when wee read 6. scriptures, or heare sermons.
               
                  Item. That the breakinge of Christs body is nothinge but the breaking of the scriptures 7. to the people. And these are the common phrases of all lightly. For I lett passe many particular assertions of some, much more cold and contemptible then these, wherby yow may easily se
                     •
                   the difference of estimation, reuerence, respect, and beleefe betweene them and the auncient Fathers.
               
                  
90. And on the other side, he that will consider the great care and warynesse, which the The great vvarynesse of the Fathers in speakinge of articles of faith. said Fathers did vse in speakinge properly and exactly, as well in other mysteryes & articles of our faith, as in this, shall easily see, that they could not fall into such excesse of speach, with open reprehension & contradiction of others, yf their meaninge had not byn euident, and the doctrine Catholike and generally receaued, which they endeauoured to inculcate by these speaches; for so much as we are taught by all antiquity, that there was such exact rigour vsed in this behalfe in those dayes, that a word or sillable could not be spoken amisse, without present note or checke. And S. Hierome saith: that sometymes for one only vvord heretiks 
                  
                     Hier. lib. 3. Apol. cont. Ruffin,
                   
                  haue byn cast out of the Church. And Saint Basill being intreated and vrged by a Gouernour of Constantius the Arrian Emperour, to accomodate himselfe in manner of speach only about two words: homiousion, and homousion (which are not, said the gouernour, found in scripture) he answered him noe: & that for one Sillable he vvould offer his life, yf it vvere need. And the like exactnesse 
                     Theodore
                           •
                        
                        ▪ lib. 2. hist. c. 18. & 19. did the anciēt Fathers, of the Coūcell of Ephesus, shew afterwards in standinge so resolutely 
                     Concil. Ephes. act. 1. & 2. for the word Deipara, mother of God against Nestorius, & refusing the vse of the other word Christipara, mother of Christ, though the one & the other of the words refused, to witt, homiousion & Christipara in their senses are true; but for that some hereticall meaninge might lurke therin, they were refused.
               
                  
91. And to conclude, yf antiquity was so carefull and vigilant, to exclude dangerous & incommodious speaches in other articles, how much more would yt haue byn in this also of the reall presence, yf the said Fathers speaches before rehearsed had not byn true, as in the Protestants sense they cannot be, but must needs tend to most dangerous error of misbeleefe and idolatry? And consequently there is no doubt, but that they would haue byn reproued by other Fathers, yf the Protestants opinions had byn then receaued for truth. And this shall suffice for this Chapter.
            
         
         
            OF THE TVVO OTHER ARTICLES ABOVT Transubstantiation, and the Sacrament, what passed in this Disputation. CHAP. VI.
            HAVINGE handled more largely, then was purposed at the beginninge, so much as apperteyneth to the first article of the reall-presence, as the ground and foundation of the other two; I meane to be very breefe concerninge the rest, as well for that in the Oxforddisputations there was scarse any thinge handled

therof; but only some demonstrations out of the Fathers alleaged to Latymer (which he as yow haue heard could not aunswere) about the third and last point; as also for that whatsoeuer was treated therof in the disputations at Cambridge, and in the Conuocation house, especially about Transubstantiation, hath byn aunswered for the most part in our former treatise about the reall presence. And albeit it was some art of the Sacramentaryes, in the beginninge of these controuersies vnder K. Edward, to runne from the discussion of the principall point, as more cleerly against them, vnto the question of Transubstantiation, for that might seeme to yeld them some more shew of matter or obiections to cauill at, as before we haue declared: yet when the matter commeth to examination, they haue as little for them in this as in the other, or rather lesse, for that the other, to witt, the reall-presence, or being of Christ really and substantially present in the Sacrament, hauinge byn so euidently proued against them, as before yow haue seene; this other of Transubstantiation, being but modus essen
                  
                     •
                  i, the manner how Christ is there, little importeth them; nay themselues do graunt, that yf Christ be there really present, yt cannot be Reall presence cannot be graunted vvithout Transubstantiation according to Latymer.
                denyed but that he is there also by Transubstantiation of bread into his body: for so Father Latymer, yf yow remember, affirmed before in his disputations, when he was said once to haue byn a Lutheran (which Lutherans do hould both Christs body and bread to be togeather

in the Sacrament) he aunswered, I say, that he could neuer perceaue, how Luther could defend his opinion without Transubstantiation, & Fox pag. 1324. that the Tygurynes, being also Sacramentaryes, did write a booke against him in this behalfe, prouinge belike that in grauntinge the reall presence, as he did; he must needs graunt Transubstantiation also, wherin they had great reason: for that in truth the imagination of Luther, and Lutherans, that Christs body and bread doe stand togeather, vnder the same formes and accidents, and be receaued togeather being so different substances, is a most grosse and fond imagination; so as the Lutherans graunting the one, & denying the other, are condemned of absurdity euen by the Zuinglians themselues, as yow see, and as we say also iustly.
            2. And on the other side we say in like manner, as before hath byn noted, that the Zuinglians and Caluinists, and other Sacramentaryes denyinge wholy the said reall presence, do in vayne wrangle about Transubstantiation. For as he that should deny (for example sake) that any substance of gould were in a purse, or any substance of wyne in a barrell, should in vaine dispute whether the gold were there alone, or togeather with some baser metall, as siluer, tynne, or copper, or whether the wyne were there alone, or in company of water; so in this controuersie yt is an idle disputation for Sacramentaryes to discusse, whether the substance of Christs reall flesh be alone in the Sacrament,

or togeather with the substance of bread, for so much as they deny yt to be there at all.
            3. Yet notwithstanding, for that their cheefe altercation is about this point, as by their disputations may appeare, I shall breefely examine their grounds, vvhich, accordinge to 
                  Ridleyes fiue grounds against Transubstantiation at Cambridge. anno 1549. 
               B. Ridleyes ostentation vttered in Cambridge out of the diuinity chayre, vnder King Edward the sixt, as before yow haue heard, are fiue in number sett forth in these vauntinge words: The principall grounds or rather head-springs of this 
               Fox pag. 1261. 
               matter are specially fiue. First, the authority, maiestie, 
               1. 
               & verity of holy scriptures: the second: the most certayne 
               2. 
               testimonyes of the auncient Catholike Fathers: the third, The definition of a Sacrament: the 3. fourth, The abhominable heresie of Eutiches, that 
               4. 
               may ensue of Transubstantiation. The fifth: the most 
               5. 
               sure beleefe of the article of our faith: He ascended into heauen. And then a little after he concludeth thus: These be the reasons vvhich persuade me to en
                  
                     •
                  lyne 
               Fox ibid.
                
               to this sentence and iudgement.
            
            4. Heere yow see the principall grounds, or rather head springs, that persuaded Ridley to inclyne, or rather declyne, for yet he seemed not fully setled in this article of beleefe. And albeit these grounds may seeme to conteyne somewhat, in shew and sound of words: yet when the substance thereof commeth to be examined, they are found to be idle, and puffed vp with words indeed. For first what authority, maiesty and verity of scriptures doth this man bring forth; trow you, for confirmation

of this his vaunt? truly nothing in effect, The first ground examined. or of any shew or probability, but only that yt is called bread and wyne in the scripture, after the words of consecration: For which purpose he hauinge alleaged the words of Christ: I will not drinke heerafter of this fruite of the vyne, vntill I do drinke yt new vvith yow in the kingdome of 
               
                  Matth. 26. Marc. 14. 
               my Father: he inferreth that the fruite of the vyne is wyne, which we graunt vnto him, & do hould is called wyne by him after the consecration, as his flesh after the words of consecration is called bread by S. 
               1. Cor. 11. 
               Paul, S. Luke, and other Apostles, affirming yt notwithstanding to be his owne true body and flesh, but retayninge the name of bread, for that yt was made of bread, and was bread before, as the serpent was called the rodd of Aaron, for that yt was 
                  Exod. 7. made of that rodd, and not because yt was not a true serpent afterwards, though yt were still called a rodd, and to signifie this, that bread conuerted into Christs flesh is not really bread afterward, but the true flesh of Christ, though yt retayne the former name of bread, yt is not simply called bread but with some addition; as bread of life: bread of heauen, this bread, 
               
                  Ioan. 6. and the like. And finally Christ himselfe doth expound what bread yt is in S. Iohns ghospell when he saith: The bread that I shall giue yow, is my flesh for the life of the vvorld.
            
            5. Heere then yow see, that Ridleyes text of scripture; I vvill not drinke hereafter of the fruite of the vyne, vntill I drinke yt new vvith yow in the Kingdome of my Father; doth not proue that yt

was materiall wine which he dronke, for that he should then drinke materiall wyne also in heauen: And yet assoone as Ridley had brought Fox pag. 1261. forth this place, as though he had done a great feate, and fully performed his promise, for proofe of the authority, maiesty, and verity of scripture, he beginneth presently to excuse himselfe, for that he hath no more store, sayinge. There be not many places of scripture, that do confirme this thinge; neyther is yt greatly materiall, for yt is inough yf there be any one plaine testimony for the same. Lo whervnto this vaunt of the authority, maiesty, and verity of holy scriptures is come, to witt, to one place, vnderstood and interpreted after his owne meaninge alone, against the vnderstandinge of all antiquity. And though he go about afterwards to scrape Impertinēt places alleaged against Transubstantiation.
                togeather diuers other parings of scripture, nothinge at all to the purpose, as, Yow shall not breake any bone of his: Do yow this in my remembrance: labour for the meate that perisheth not: this is the worke 
               
                  Exod 12. 1. Cor 11. Ioan. 6. 
               of God, that they beleeue in him whome he hath sent: he that eateth my flesh and drinketh my bloud, dwelleth in me and I in him; and some other like places: yet as yow see by his owne confession, they are not plaine places, and consequently his vauntinge of authority, maiesty and verity of scriptures, commeth to iust nothinge indeed, but only to words and wynde. Lett vs see what he bringeth for his other foure grounds and headsprings.
            6. The second is, the most certayne testimonyes of 
               
                  Ridleyes secōd groūd of fathers. 
               the auncient Catholike Fathers. This we shall examine

afterwards when we haue considered of the other three, yet may yow marke by the way, that he vseth heere also the superlatiue degree, of most certayne testimonyes, which certainty of testimonyes yow shall find afterward, to be like his maiesty of scriptures, already alleaged. Wherfore let vs see his third ground. The third ground (saith he) is the nature of 
                  Ridleyes 3. ground. The nature of a Sacramēt. the Sacrament, which consisteth in three things: vnity, nutrition and conuersion. And then he explaneth himselfe thus: that as in bread one loafe is made of many graynes, so signifieth this Sacrament, that we are all one mysticall body in Christ. And againe. As bread nourisheth our body; so doth the body of Christ nourish our soule. And thirdly. As bread is turned into our substance, so are vve turned into Christs substance. All vvhich three effects cannot be signified (saith he) by this Sacrament, yf there be Transubstantiation, and no nature of bread left, and therfore there can be no Transubstantiation.
            
            7. This is Maister Ridleyes deepe diuinity about the nature of this Sacrament: but yf yow reade that which we haue noted before in our eyght obseruation, concerninge the true definition 
                  Sap. cap. 3. §. 8. and nature of a Sacrament in deed; yow will see that this was great simplicity in him (though accordinge to his hereticall groūd, that the Sacramēts doe not giue grace) to leaue out the principall effect signified in the Sacrament, which is grace, for that a Sacrament is defined: A visible signe of inuisible grace receaued therby. This Sacrament also is a signe of Christs body there present vnder the

formes of bread and wyne: yet deny we not but that these other three effects also of vnity, nutrition and conuersion may be signified therby, as in like manner the death and passion of our Sauiour, wherof this Sacrament is a memoriall and commemoration: neyther doth the Transubstantiation of the bread into the body of Christ, lett or take away these significations, for so much as to make this Sacrament, there is taken bread and wyne, which naturally doth signifie these effects of vnion, nutrition, and conuersion, which Ridley heere mentioneth, though yt be not necessary, that the substance of the said bread and wyne should still remayne, but only there formes and accidents, which do signifie and are signes to our senses, as much as yf the substances themselues of bread and wyne were present. As for example the brasen serpent, did as Fox pag. 1261. much represent, and was a signe of Christ in respect of the analogie betwene Christ and a true serpent, as yf he had had the substance of à true serpent, whereof he had but only the forme and shape; and so are the outward 
                  Exod. 7. formes of bread and wyne, after the words of consecration, sufficient to represent vnto vs the Analogy that is betweene feedinge the body, and feedinge the soule, vnity of graines, and vnity of Christs mysticall body which is his Church.
            8. And thus much of Ridleyes third ground which impugneth Transubstantiation; which ground (as yow see) is so weake and feeble,

as he that shall build theron, is like to come to a miserable ruyne of his owne saluation. But much more ridiculous is his fourth ground, vttered in these words: The fourth 
               
                  Ridleyes 4. ground about Eutiches his heresie. 
               ground (saith he) is the abhominable heresie of Eutiches, that may ensue of Transubstantiation. Thus he saith in his position, but lett vs heare him afterward in his probation, which is not much larger then his proposition, for thus he wryteth: They vvhich say that Christ is carnally present in the Eucharist, do take from him the verity of mans nature. Eutiches graunted the diuyne nature in Christ, but his humayne nature he denyed. And is not this a goodly proofe of so great a charge? Nay is not this a goodly ground and head-springe of proofes? Consider I pray yow how these matters do hange togeather. Eutiches heresy was, as yow may see in the letters of Saint Leo the first, and in the Councell of Calcedon; 
               
                  Leo ep. 12. ad Theedos. Conci
                        •
                     . Cal
                     
                        ••
                     d. sess. 5. that Christs flesh being ioyned to his diuinity was turned into the same, and so not two distinct natures remayned, but one only made of them both. And how doth this heresie I pray yow, follow of our doctrine of Transuostantiation! Eutiches said that the diuine and humayne natures in Christ were confounded togeather, and of two made but one: we say that they remayne distinct, and do condemne Eutiches for his opinion, and by our Church he was first accursed and anathematized for the same: Eutiches said, Christs humayne nature was turned into his diuine; we say only that bread and wyne is turned into

Christs flesh and bloud: what likenesse hath this with Eutiches heresie? But (saith Ridley) vve do take from Christ the verity of mans nature. This is a fiction and foolish calumniation, as before yow haue heard, and consequently deserueth no further refutation.
            9. The fifth ground, is (saith he) the most sure beleefe of the article of our faith: He ascended into 
               
                  Ridleyes 5. ground cōcerning Christs assension. 
               heauen. This ground yf yow remember hath byn ouerthrowne before, and abandoned by Ridley himselfe in his Oxford-disputation, where he graunted; that he did not so straitly tye Christ vp in heauen (to vse his owne words) but that he may come downe on earth at his pleasure. And againe Fox pag. 1314. & 1515. in another place of the said disputation: VVhat letteth but that Christ yf yt please him, and vvhen yt pleaseth him, may be in heauen and in earth? &c. And yet further to Doctor Smith that asked him this question: Doth he so sitt at the right hand of his Father, that he doth neuer foresake the same? Ridley aunswered: Nay I do not bynd Christ in heauen so straitly. By which aunsweres yow see, that this whole principall ground and head-springe of Ridleyes arguments against Transubstantiation, is quite ouerthrowne. For yf Christ in flesh after his ascension may be also on earth when he will, as Ridley heere graunteth, then is it not against the article of our Creed (He ascended into heauen,) to beleeue, that not withstandinge his ascension, he may be also on earth in the Sacrament. And albeit Ridley do cyte heere certayne places of S. Augustine, that do seeme to say: that Christ after

his ascension is no more conuersant amonge vs vpon earth; yet that is not to be vnderstood of his being in the Sacrament, which is a spirituall manner of being, but of his corporall manner of conuersation, as he liued visibly among his disciples before his ascension. And this is sufficient for discussion of this fifth ground, wherof the cheefe particulars haue byn handled in diuers places before.
            10. Now then will we returne to his second The discussion of the Fathers authorityes alleaged by Ridley. Dionys. Areop. in Eccles. Hictarch.
                ground againe, of the most certayne testimonyes of the auncient Catholike Fathers. And first he alleagath Saint Dionysius Areopagita, for that in some places of his works he callerh yt bread And the like of Saint Ignatius to the Philadelphians, which we deny not, for S. Paul also calleth yt so, as before we haue shewed: but yet such bread, as in the same place he declareth to be the true body of Christ, sayinge: that he vvhich receaueth yt vnworthily, shalbe guilty of the body and 
               1. Cor. 11. 
               bloud of Christ, addinge for his reason non dijudicans corpus Domini, for not discerninge the body of our Lord there present. And so S. Ignatius 
               Ignat. in epist. ad Philadelph. in the very selfe-same place saith: that yt is the flesh and bloud of Christ, as yow may read in that Epistle.
            11. After these he citeth Irenaeus whose words are: Eucharistia ex duabus rebus constans, terrena & calesti, which Ridley translateth thus: Sacramentall bread consistinge of two natures earthly and heauenly: But by Maister Ridleyes leaue Eucharistia in this place is fraudulently translated by him Sacramentall bread, except he

meane as we do, and as Irenaeus did, that yt was the body of Christ, but called bread for that yt was made of bread: For that Irenaeus in the very same place, wryting against heretiks asketh this question: Quomodo constabit eis, eum 
               
                  Iren. lib. 4. cont. haeres. cap. 34. 
               panem in quo gratiae actae sint, corpus esse Domini sui? How shall yt be made euident to these heretiks, that this bread, in which thanks haue byn giuen, is the body of their Lord? Wherto he aunswered, and proueth the same by diuers arguments: so as no place of any Father could haue byn alleaged more against himselfe, then this is by Ridley. And as for that he saith, that the Eucharist consisteth of two natures, earth-ly and heauenly, he meaneth euidently, by the heauenly nature, the true body of Christ, and by the earthly nature, the externall symbolls, formes, and accidents. And so much of him.
            12. And the selfe-same thinge do meane both Theoderete and Gelasius, heere also by him 
                  Theod. dia
                        •
                     . 2. Gelas. 
                        •
                     . de duabus natur
                        •
                     .
                alleaged, as vsinge the like phrases; that the natures of bread and wyne do remayne, which they vnderstand of the externall symbolls, formes and accidents. For as for the reall presence, they do both of them affirme yt in the same places by Ridley alleaged. And so this shall suffice for this place, there being nothing els worthy aunsweringe. And now yf yow consider, what variety of plaine and perspicuous authorityes haue byn alleaged by vs before, both out of the disputations and otherwise, for confirmation of the Catholil

beleefe of the reall presence and Transubstantiation, yow will easily see what broken wares these bee, which Protestants bringe forth to the contrary, and how fondly this second ground of Ridleyes proofes is intituled by him; the most certaine testimonyes of the auncient Catholike 
               Fox pag. 1261. 
               Fathers: vvho after my iudgement (saith he) do sufficiently declare this matter. And I will not greatly stand against him, for that the mans iudgement being peruerted by heresie, faction and ambition of those tymes, any thinge would seeme sufficient to him to draw him to that byas, whervnto himselfe inclyned. And thus much of this article.
            
               
                  About the third Article of the Sacrifice of the Masse. §. 2.
               13. For that there was little or nothinge disputed of this third article, eyther in Cambridge, Oxford, or London, except only a little against Latymer, as presently we shall see, I haue thought best to betake me only to Ridleyes determination in this matter: he beginneth the same thus: Now in the later conclusion, concerninge the sacrifice, because yt dependeth vpon the first (to witt of the reall-presence) I will in few vvords declare 
                  Fox pag. 1262. 
                  vvhat I thinke; for yf we once agree in that, the vvhole controuersie in the other vvill soone be at an end. Marke heere good reader that Ridley confesseth this controuersie of the sacrifice to depend

of the reall-presence, which reall-presence being so substantially proued before, as yow haue heard, little doubt can be made of this; yet will Ridley tell vs what he thinketh (a goodly ground for vs to hange our soules on) which is, that there is no sacrifice at all, but that of Christ vpon the Crosse, and he will tell vs also his grounds for so thinkinge: Two things (saith he) there be, vvhich do persuade me, to 
                  Fox ibid.
                   
                  vvitt, certayne places of scripture, and certayne testimonyes of the Fathers. So he. And as for scriptures, he alleageth no one, but out of the Epistle to the Hebrues; that Christ entred once for 
                  
                     Heb. 9. 
                  all into the holy-place, and obtayned for vs eternall redemption. And againe. That Christ vvas once offered 
                  
                     Heb. 10. 
                  to take away the sinnes of many. And yet further: that with one offeringe he made perfect for euer those that are sanctified. And hauinge cyted these places, he maketh this conclusion. These scriptures do persuade me to beleeue, that there is no other oblation of Christ (albeit I am not ignorant there are many sacrifices) but that vvhich vvas once made vpon the Crosse.
               
               14. Heere now yow may see the force of a passionate iudgement, and how little doth suffice to persuade a man to any heresie, that is inclined thervnto of himselfe. I would aske of Ridley heere, how chaunceth yt that S. Chrysostome, S. Basill, S. Ambrose, S. Cyrill, S. Hierome, S. Augustine and other Fathers cyted before so aboundantly, and perspicuously affirming the dayly sacrifice of the masse, and distin guishing betweene Cruentum & incruentum sacrificium, he

bloudy sacrifice of Christ on the Crosse once offered vp for all; And the selfe-same sacrifice dayly reiterated, and offered againe in many places throughout the world, after an vnbloudy manner: how these Fathers, I say, had not byn persuaded, as Ridley was, by these places The difference betvveene Ridley and the anciēt Fathers in their persuasions. of scripture to deny the Sacrifice of the Masses had they not read (thinke yow) the Epistle to the Hebrewes; or did they not vnderstand yt as well as Ridley? and how then was Ridley persuaded, and not they? there reason is, that, which he touched before, when he said: after my iudgement, &c. For that he followed his owne iudgement, blynded by his owne affection in this point against the masse, and they followed not their owne iudgement, but the vniuersall iudgement and beleefe of the Catholike Church in their dayes, and so must Ridley giue vs leaue to follow them, rather then him.
               15. As for his second motiue of certayne testimonyes of the Fathers, yt is so weake and broken a thinge, as he dareth not come forth with yt, but only quoteth certayne places of Saint Augustine, wherby he saith that the Christians 
                     Aug. ep. 23. & l 43. 9. 61. & l. 20. co
                           •
                        r Faust. Manich. c
                           •
                        . 2 & 20. keepe a memoriall of the sacrifice past; and that Fulgentius in his booke de fide calleth the same a commemoration. And these be all the Fathers, and their authorityes which he alleageth for his second motiue: wherby yow may see, that he was moued by a little against the masse: For we deny not but that the sacrifice of the masse is a commemoration also of

the death, passion, and Sacrifice of Christ vpon the Crosse, and he that in steed of these impertinent citations out of S. Austen nothing at all to the purpose, would lay downe on the contrary side, all the cleere, euident, and effectuall places, sentences, discourses and asseuerations, which this holy Father hath in profe and confirmation of the visible externall sacrifice of the masse, wherin Christs sacred body, the same that was offered on the Crosse, is offered againe dayly both for quicke and dead by Christian Catholike Priests on the Altar, might make a whole Treatise therof, and I remitt the reader to Hieronymus Torrensis his collection, called Confessio Augustiniana, 
                  
                     Torrens. in Confess August l. b. 3. cap. 7. where throughout a 11. or 12. paragraphes, he doth set downe large authorityes, most plaine and euident out of the said Fathers works. And yt is inough for vs at this tyme, that Latymer being pressed in his disputations with diuers of these authorityes answeted: I am not a shamed to acknowledge my ignorance, and these testimonyes 
                  Fox pag. 1325. 
                  are more then I can beare away, and after againe, being further pressed with the most euident authorityes of S. Augustine, and S. Chrysostome in particular, affirminge that the sacrifice of the masse is propitiatory both for quicke and dead, he aunswered: The Doctors might be deceaued in some points, though not in all things: I beleeue them when they say vvell. And yet further: I am of their saith vvhen they say vvell. I referre my selfe to my L. of Canterburyes booke vvholy 
                  Fox pag. 1326. 
                  heerin, And yet againe. I haue said vvhen they say

vvell and bringe the scriptures for them, I am of their faith. And further. Augustine requireth not to be beleeued. So he. And by this yow may see, what accompt they make both of S. Augustine and other Fathers, notwithstandinge for a shew, sometymes they will cyte some places out of them little to the purpose, but being witting in their owne consciences, that really and substantially they make against them, they shift them of finally in this order as yow haue heard, and will beleeue and teach only as pleaseth themselues, which is the peculiar pride and willfullnes of heresie, from which God deliuer vs. And with this I end this whole Treatise.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   