
      
         
            
            
            THE
Returne of the renowned Caualiero
Pasquill of England, from the other side the Seas,
and his meeting with Marforius at London vpon
the Royall Exchange. VVhere they encounter with a little houshold talke of Martin
and Martinisme, discouering the scabbe that is bredde in
England: and conferring together about the speedie
dispersing of the golden Legende of the
liues of the Saints.
            
            
               ❧ If my breath be so hote that I burne
my mouth, suppose I was Printed by
Pepper Allie. Anno. Dom. 1589.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            PASQVILS RETVRNE
TO ENGLAND.
Pasquill and Marforius.
            
               
                  PAS QVILL.
               Thou art the man
MARFORIVS, I looked for, though
I little thought to meete thee so suddainly
vpon the Exchange.
            
            
               MARFORIVS.
               Euer since you tooke shipping at Grauesende,
I haue had the disease of a Marchants
wife, so loue sicke in your absence,
that myne eye was neuer pulde from the Wethercocke, and
longing like a Woman for your returne, I neuer sawe gale of
wind blow merrilie out of the East, nor heard any Ship shoote
off her Ordnaunce in the Thems, but I ranne presently to the
water side to discouer your comming in; I wonder how I missed
you?
            
            
               PASQVILL.
               Neuer maruaile at that, I haue
learned to maske it; while some of Martins good freendes
stood watching for me at Lambith bridge, I came to an Anker
in Sandwich Hauen. But of fellowship tell me, howe hath my
Countercuffe beene intreated?
            
            
               MARFO.
               It requireth a
Summers day and a Winters night to tell you all. It was verie
welcome to the Court, thankfullie receiued in both Vniuersities,
the Citties of the Land doe giue you good speeches, as for
the Countrey, after the plainest manner, with hart and good
will they are ready to greete you with a Cake and a cup of Ale
in euery Parrish. This onely is the thing that greeueth them,
they know not what Pasquill is. They desire in all places of the

Realme to be acquainted with you, because they would bring
you intelligence thicke and threefolde, to further your volume
of the liues of the Saints.
            
            
               PASQ.
               I thinke I shall prooue a
state man, my packets come in so fast alreadie, that I beginne to
swell in Bookes as bigge as Surius. If any desire to knowe what
I am, tell them that I was once a Barbour in Rome (as some report)
and euerie chayre in my shop, was a tongue ful of newes.
Whatsoeuer was done in England, Fraunce, Germanie, Spaine,
Italie, and other Countries, was brought to me. The high and
secrete matters of Lordes, Ladies, Kings, Emperours, Princes,
Popes, & Monarchs of the world, did ring euerie day as shrill
as a Bason about my doores. In memory whereof, as Mercurie
turnd Battus to a stone for bewraying his theft, it is thought
that one Pope or other, mistrusting the slipprines of my toūg,
blest me into a stone to stoppe my mouth. Others affirme, that
the Cittie of Rome, to requite mee with honour when I dyed,
erected me a little monument of stone, with a bodie, heade, and
hands thicke and short, answerable to my stature, and set it vp
in the open streete, where I assure you I haue stoode manie
yeeres in the rayne, my face is so tand with the Sunne, and my
hyde so hardened with the wether, that I neither blush when I
byte any man, nor feele it when any man byteth me.
            
            
               MARFO.
               I wonder how you were able to continue
there?
            
            
               PASQ.
               To heare euery mans talke that passed by,
was better then meate and drinke to me. In steede of apparrell,
in Summer I wore nothing but paper lyueries, which manie
great men bestowed vpon me to their great cost, in Winter, I
care for no colde, because I am a stone.
            
            
               MAR.
               I beseeche
you Sir tell me, how came you into England?
            
            
               PAS.
               Beeing
once somwhat busie with Signor Iacomo, about a pretie wench
kept at Frescata for the Pope his Fathers tooth. Gregorie the
thirteenth, terque quaterque, shooke his white head at me with
such a terrible looke, that I was a feard hee would haue smytte
my head into Tyber with a Thunderbolt. Neuerthelesse, the
olde man beeing of a mylde disposition, and very mercifull, I
receiued a pardon for that fault. At the last, hearing the Schollers

of the English Seminarie merrie, as they returned from
thier Vineyarde, and full of fine tauntings when they talked of
the Sectes and opinions spronge vp in England, I stole out of
Rome by night, to make tryall my selfe of the trueth of theyr
reports. When I came to England, for the good will I carried
to my olde occupation, I entred at London into Sprignols shop,
where the first newes I heard among two or three Gentlemen,
as they were a trimming, was, of a Martinist a Broker, the
next doore by, which with a face of Religion, hauing gotten
other mens goods into his hands, was but newe run away, and
left his wife to the charitie of the Parrish. With this ridings, I
grew verie inquisitiue to know what Martin was? A knaue
quoth one; a theefe quoth another; he teacheth the Courte a
Religion to robbe the Church. And some of the Cittie that
fauour him, apt Schollers to take such an easie lesson, begin to
practise theyr cunning vpon their neighbors. Hauing gotten
this thred by the end, I neuer left winding til I came to the paper
that made the bottom. I frequented the Churches of the
Pruritane Preachers, that leape into the Pulpit with a Pitchfork,
to teach men, before they haue either learning, iudgment,
or wit inough to teach boyes.
            
            
               MAR.
               I pray you Sir, why doe you call them Pruritanes?
            
            
               PAS.
               
                  A pruritu. They haue an itch in their eares▪
that would be clawed with new points of doctrine neuer dreamed
of and an itch in their fingers, that woulde be noynted
with the golden Aenulatum of the Church. I knowe they are
commonly called Puritans,Three marks of a Puritan. 1. and not amisse, that title is one of
the marks they beare about them. They haue a marke in the
head,PRO. 30. 12. 2. 3. they are selfe conceited, They take themselues to be pure,
when they are filthie in Gods sight; They haue a marke in the
eye, theyr lookes are haughtie; They haue a marke in the
mouth, a yerie blacke tooth, they are A generation that cursse
their father.
               
            
            
               MAR.
               How now Caualiero▪ are you com to
Scripture?
            
            
               PAS.
               Doost thou thinke, Marforius, that Pasquill hauing stoode so manie yeeres in the streets of Rome,
heard so many famous Clarks; especially father Sware the Spaniarde,

and the sifted Greeke witte of Father Augustine, and
hauing spent so much time in priuate reading the best Bookes
that night stirre vppe my deuotion, I would skippe ouer the
Booke of all Bookes, the holie Bible? No, no, I haue that volume
in my hands, when many a Martinist hugges a drabbe in
his armes, as you shal perceiue by the liues of the Saints. I tarrie
but for one packet of information frō Essex side, and that
worke shall come out of the Presse like a bryde frō her chamber,
spangled & trapt, with a full caparizon of the ornaments
of this present age.
            
            
               MAR.
               The Owles Almanack is expected
at your hands as well as that.
            
            
               PAS.
               That is a peece
of seruice not to be neglected in his time. I haue there sette
down all the vpstart Religions in this Land. The Anabaptists,
the Family of Loue; the seuen capital haeresies for which som
haue beene executed of late yeeres in Suffolke; the diuersities
of Puritans and Martinists, with a number more which you
shall heare of when that Booke is Printed. A lamentable spectacle
it will be, to see so many faces in one hoode. But GOD
knoweth, (before whom I stand) I desire not to cast it out as a
block in the waies of men, for any to stumble at, or to stand at
defiance with all Religion; but as a Sea-marke to discouer the
quicksands of newe Religions.
               I haue heard that Bernardin Ochin, a man of great learning,
whom I knewe in Rome to be the first founder of the order of
the Capuchines, being once tucht with the finger of Gods spirite,
began to detest the superstitions of the Church of Rome,
and fled to Geneua. The same man had a desire also to visite
England, and during the time of his remaining heere, he found
so many blind Sects and Religions within the land, that he turned
backe like a dogge to his owne vomit, and in some sorte
he fell into the biace of the Church of Rome againe. Vnhappie
man, that beeing once lightned, looked backe to that Scicilian
Aetna, that spues vp sinoake and sulpher into the world,
to put out the eyes of men; Vnhappie England, that by the diuersities
of opinions in Religion, sette so many handes to his
shoulders to thrust him downe, that was so ready with a turne,

to ouerturne. Howe these newe pampred factions at this day,
haue shaken the harts of many of her Maiesties louing people,
and made them Chamaelion like, capable of any faith saue
the right, I leaue it to them that looke into it.
            
            
               MAR.
               Take
heede what you say, it is a common report that the faction of
Martinisme hath mightie freendes.
            
            
               PAS.
               Thats a bragge Marforius, yet if there be anie
such, I shall find them in the end, and against the next Parliament,
I will picke out a time to pepper them. Though they
were as high as the maste, as sure as the tackling, as profitable
as the fraught, and as necessarie as the sayles, when the shippe
is in danger, ouerboorde withall. What meaning soeuer some
men haue in it, I am assured, that it can neither stand with policie
nor with Religion, to nourish anie faction in ciuill matters,
much lesse in matters belonging to the Church. Quid
prodest si vos contineat vna domus,
                  DIVISION. 
                  et separet diuersa voluntas?
What auaileth it, (saith one) for men to be shrowded vnder
one rooffe, if they be not of one hart? One secret faction in a
Realme dooth more hurte, then any generall plague or open
warre. The pestilence and the sword are two heauie scourges
in Gods hand, that deuoure many thousands of men in a little
time, yet they reach no further then the bodie, but a faction deuours
more, and sweepes away both bodie and soule together.
Though the Iewes at the siege of Ierusalem, were pressed by
their enemies without the walles,One of these factions was the faction of the zealous reformers. and punished with such a
mortalitie within, that the carkases of the dead did dunge the
ground, yet they neuer went to the wall, till they grewe to be
factious, & fell to taking one another by the throate. Giue me
leaue a little Marforius, to shift my sayles, and come towardes
Italie. They that were wise prophecied long before of the state
of Rome, that it should neuer decay but by diuision Which
came to passe. For when the factions of Sylla and Marius, Caefar
and Pompey, Anthonie and Lepidus brake foorth, the florishing
Cittie beganne to cast her lease. The great Empire of
great Alexander, like a flame of fire in a heape of flaxe, when
it was at the highest, did shed it selfe suddainlie in the ayre, and

came to nothing by the dissentiōs of those that succeeded him.
The proude neck of the Graecians, for all their wisedom, was
after the like manner brought vnder the Persians and Macedonians.
If we rolle our eyes at one side into the bosome of our
neighbour Fraunce, wee shall perceiue, that although it were
many times inuaded in the skyrts of the Countrey, by the Romans,
yet it remained inuincible, till Caesar toke holde of the
discords within the Realme. My head is full of water, and my
cheekes be wette, when I thinke vpon Constantinople, whose
particular iarres, layde her gates open to the Turke, vnder
whose captiuitie she groneth to this day.
               A faction in a Kingdome may wel be compared to a spark
of fire,Note it catcheth hold at the first in some obscure corner, in a
Shoppe, in a Stable, or in a ricke of Strawe, where it lyeth couert
a little time, but by little and little it gathers strength, till
it reare it selfe vp to great houses, Pallaces, & Princes Courts,
and at last it rageth and ouerruns whole Citties & Countries,
without quenching, before they be vtterly ouerthrowne. In the
time of Iustinian the Emperor, about the credite and aduancement
of two colours, Blewe and Greene, there grew in Constantinople
two mightie factions, which made such a head the
one against the other, that in one day it cost many thousandes
of men their liues, and the Emperor himselfe was brought in
great hazard, both of his Empire and his owne person. Vpon
as light an occasion in the Dukedome of Florence, for the
two colours of Blacke and White, verie pestilent quarrels began
there, and the factions of the Bianchi and the Neri, breaking
forth like a lightning out of the Clowdes, scourde & wasted
the Country where they went. These were but litle sparks
in the rushes,Note gentle Martin. that euery man treadeth on, and very trifles at
the first, yet you see how foule a Cockatrice may be hatcht of
so small an egge. If I shoulde rip vp the stomacks of some in
England, when wee consider the brawles, the Garboyles, the
tragicall exclamations for Church apparrell, may wee not say
that England is falne into that fantasticall faction of Florence
for Black & White? Wher had this brable his first beginning,

but in some obscure corner, in the tippe of the tongue of some
blind Parlor-preacher in the land, in shoppes, in stalles, in the
Tynkers budget, the Taylors sheares, and the Sheepheardes
Tarboxe? I doubt not Marforius, but it will wither where it
sprang, and ende at where it began, in shame, and ignoraunce.
Thou knowest that the surest proppe of all Princes, is to promote
true Religion, and to keepe it inuiolable when it is established,
for this is the well tempered Morter that buildeth vp
all estates. He that honors me, (saith God) I will honor him. But
this chopping & changing of the Religion of the land (which
was acquited of accusations in the time of the famous K. Edwarde
the fixt, and now aduaunced by the happy raigne of the
Queenes most excellent Maiesty, & approued by the wisedom
both spiritual & temporal, of the whole Realme, & confirmed
by a generall consent in the high Court of Parliament) is nothing els,
but to picke out the Morter by little and little, that
at the next pushe, Martin and his companions, might ouerthrow
the state, and make the Emperiall crowne of her Maiestie
kisse the ground.
               Where there is a diuision fostred, there can be no continuaunce
of the present state,MATH. 12. GOD himselfe hath taught it vs.
Martins cheefe practise, in the Prouinces of Englande where I
haue wandred, is, to perswade the simple, that her Maiestie
layeth such a logge vppon their consciences, as they ought not
beare, whereuppon they presume to make a shrewde scruple
of their obedience, and begin to bounde like a Colt that would
cast his ryder. Hath God powred so many blessings, vpon the
Church of Englande, by the very often, and very miraculous
preseruations of her sacred Maiesties royall person, and therby
giuen testimonies out of Heauen to the Religion of the
Lande, and dares Martin attempt to make a doubt bothe of it,
and her? Credit me Marforius, this bursting the sinew of peoples
obedience to their naturall Prince, cannot be doone, but
for a mischiuous intent, what visor soeuer they sette vppon it.
I would faine knowe what should be the reason, that so manie
hundreds of thousands in this Realme, haue hetherto humbled

themselues at the feete of one person? can it be because shee is
mightier then all they, she beeing but one, & they many millions;
she a woman and they men? Is it any terror, thinke you,
of the big bodied Holberders that guarde her Maiestie? No
Marforius, if there were not some wonderful matter that withhelde
them also, euen they might be giuen ouer to a reprobate
sence, to bende euery man the point of his Holberd at her. If
we search it till the worlds ende, we shall find no other cause of
this sweet harmonie of peoples harts, that remaine faithful and
flexible to the shaking of her princelie finger, but onely this,
the Religion of the Lande. When Martin shall be suffered to
displace GOD, that now dwelles in the bosome of her Maiesties
louing people, and buz slaunders of Religion into theyr
eares, whereby they may conceiue, that her highnesse by the
maintenaunce of the Gospell, hath shutte vp their saluation in
close prison, and that it mooues God in his wrath to drawe the
Sworde against her and the Realme, (as Martin himselfe auoucheth)
what other consequent may we looke for, but that
euery Pruritane transported with the heate and the ignorance
of his zeale, wyll be as readie as a Papist, to lift vp his hande against
her, which mischiefe I beseech God to returne into their
bowels. How odious and how dangerous innouations of Religion
are, Secretarie Machiauell, a politick not much affected to
any Religion, discloseth by the example of Fryer Sauanaroll.
He was a man like Martin, sprong vp in such a time as Martin,
when Spayne, Fraunce, Rome, Arragon, and the Emperour,
entred a league to make warre altogether vppon the Venetians.
Sauanarola boasted of Reuelations, and secret conferences,
held betweene the holy Ghost and him; Martin brags hee
is a speciall man, raysed vp on a suddaine by the spirit of God
for the good of England, as if GOD had beene a stranger to
vs all this while. Sauanarola made a bragging proffer, which
he neuer performed, that he would passe through the fire, for
the confirmation of his doctrine; Martin hath vaunted he wil
seale his opinions with his hart blood, but you may see by the
starting holes hee seeketh, that hee neuer meant to keepe hys

promise. Sauanarola brought himselfe & his followers to confusion
at last; and so will Martin. I muse howe any state man
can abide to heare of innouasions in Religion where the truth
is preached? There is but one God, which cannot be deuided,
if he could, hee were not GOD. All his graces tende to a gathering
together of Gods people in a vnitie of Faith,1. COR. 2. 12. not to a
scattering into diuers Faythes, wherein the principall grace of
a Martinist consisteth. Looke vnto the Heathen, the accusers
of Socrates, made choise of this accusation aboue all others, as a
matter very worthy of death in him: that he was a fellow that
sought to sette a newe stampe of his own vpon theyr Religion.
One of the first Lawes that Romulus layd, as a ribbe of yron into
his gouernment, was, Deos peregrinos ne colunfo.
               
               Take a patterne if you wyll, from priuate Families. What
a pittifull thing is it to see, two Religions in one house? where
the Father and the Sonne, the Husband & the Wife, the Maister
and Seruaunt, are of diuers faythes, the ioynts of that
house begin to gape, and the fall of that house is to be feared.
The diuersitie of opinions in so high a degree as is Religion,
cannot choose but diminish the loue and respect, that the one
of them should carrie vnto the other. The Sonne will be carelesse
of his dutie to his Father, whom hee takes to be a reprobate;
the Father will make but slender reckoning of the Son,
that beleeues not as hee beleeues. The Wife will giue little
reuerence to that Husbande, whom she imagineth to be damned;
The Husband wil be rough and rigorous to such a Wife
as obeyes not him; The Seruaunt wyll neuer giue due honour
to his Maister, when hee iudgeth him to be the bondslaue of
the deuill; The Maister will as hardlie protect that Seruaunt,
whose hart he perceiues not to bee with him.
               As then the gouernment of Common-weales, was first
drawne from the gouernment of priuate houses, so that
which is the ruine of priuate houses, growes in time to be the
ruine of Common-weales. I haue taken a little paine to visite
diuers of the Courtes, Benches, Sessions, that are helde in this
Lande in her Maiesties name, by vertue of her authoritie, but

I neuer saw so bolde, so-open, so-barbarous contempt of magistracie,
in any other part of the whole worlde, as I haue seene
heere. Such canuaces made, such stales set, such traynes layde,
such platformes drawne by the factious, to bring theyr Superiours
into contempt, and yet they prooue so ridiculous in euerie
steppe they tread, that I am ready to stand on my nose whē
I trace them out.
               I was once in Antwerpe, when great sute was made to the
Masters of the English house, (by a Gentleman then emploied
in the Queenes affaires) for the entertaining a Preacher amōg
them, both to teach & to minister the Sacraments there vnto
thē. The request was soone graunted, & Trauars, a fellow that
delighteth in obliquitie, was the man that was brought thither,
when he came, he had neither taken the Orders of the Ministerie,
nor any lycence to preach, according to the gouernment
of the Church of Englande, but ran into a corner among the
French to receiue it there. At last, one of the Ministers of
those Churches, came with him to the companie, and made a
sollemne protestation before thē all, that he founde Mast Trauars
a fitte man for the deuiding of the word, and deliuerie of
the Sacraments. Hac oratione finita. Sweete Maister Trauars,
quem oneris causa nomino, for I beare him on my backe till my
tale be ended, at the first iumpe read a Statute made in Scotland
(for Church gouernment) to the naturall Subiects of the
Queene of Englande, and tolde them he woulde followe that.
I would gladly be resolued in this place, whether Trauars dyd
not begin very pretilie to play the Pope, in taking vppon him
to discharge her Maiesties Subiects of the allegiance they owe
to theyr naturall Prince, and in stealing away from the crowne
of England, as many english harts as would harken to him, to
translate them at his pleasure to a forraine power? As he layde
his foundation in dissention when hee began to be a builder in
Gods house, so hath his worke vnto this day prospered, the
whole frame I perceiue is fallen vppon him. They that were
discreete, ventured couragiously to sette a leauer at him, & neuer
gaue ouer till he was remooued.
               
                  The Chronicles of Englande, and the daylie enclosures of
Commons in the Land, teach vs sufficiently, howe inclinable
the simpler sort of the people are to rowtes, ryots, commotions,
insurrections, and plaine rebellions when they grow brainsicke,
or any new toy taketh them in the head: they neede no
Trauars nor Martin to encrease their giddines. It should seeme
that the graund Prior of Fraunce, (a man now dead) had gotten
some taste of theyr disposition, when in a Sonet that hee made
for his own pleasure, to paint out the natures of all Nations, he
toucht the pryde, the wantonnes, the mutabilitie, and the mutinies
of the Spaniard, the Italian, the French, and the Scotchman,
and to the shame of this Nation, hee giues the Englishe a
dash ouer the face with a blacke coale, and sayth: Traistre Angloi
the English man is a Traytor. This is the grounde, the
Popes and the King of Spayne, these many yeeres haue chosen
to themselues to worke vpon, and vsed the English in nothing
more, then in matters of high treason. Therefore I would
wysh the whole Realme to iudge vprightly, who deserues best
to be bolstred and vpheld in these dangerous times, either they
that haue religiously & constantly preached obedience to her
Maiesties louing people, or they that with a maske of Religion
discharge them of theyr obedience?
            
            
               MAR.
               Speake softly Caualiero, I perceiue two or three
lay theyr heades at one side, like a shyp vnder sayle, and begin
to cast about you, I doubt they haue ouer-heard you. This Exchange
is vauted and hollow, and hath such an Eccho, as multiplies
euery worde that is spoken by Arithmaticke, it makes a
thousand of one, & ympes so many feathers into euery tale, that
it flyes with all speede into euery corner of the Realme.
            
            
               PAS.
               All the better for me, when I lacke matter to talke
of, I may resorte hether to take vppe a little newes at interest.
            
            
               MAR.
               I maruaile Caualiero, that you presse not the
Martinists with much Scripture, they are great quoters of cō
                  mon
places if you marke them.
            
            
               PAS.
               Therin they are like
to a stale Curtizan, that finding herselfe to be worne out of credite,
borroweth the gesture of a sober Matron, which makes

her to euery one that knowes her, the more abhominable; for
the common sorte whistle at her for her pride, and the grauer
sort spyt at her for her impudencie. Howe whorishlie Scriptures
are alleaged by them, I will discouer (by Gods helpe) in
another new worke which I haue in hand, and intituled it, The
May-game of Martinisme. Verie defflie set out, with Pompes,
Pagents, Motions, Maskes, Scutchions, Emblems, Impreases,
strange trickes, and deuises, betweene the Ape and the Owle,
the like was neuer yet seene in Paris-garden. Penry the welchman
is the foregallant of the Morrice, with the treble belles,
shot through the wit with a Woodcocks bill, I woulde not for
the fayrest horne-beast in all his Countrey, that the Church of
England were a cup of Metheglin, and came in his way when
he is ouēr-heated, euery Bishopricke woulde prooue but a
draught, when the Mazer is at his nose. Martin himselfe is
the Mayd-marian, trimlie drest vppe in a cast Gowne, and a
Kercher of Dame Lawsons, his face handsomlie muffled with a
Diaper-napkin to couer his beard, and a great Nosegay in his
hande, of the principalest flowers I could gather out of all hys
works. Wiggenton daunces round about him in a Cotten-coate,
to court him with a Leatherne pudding, and a woodden Ladle.
Paget marshalleth the way, with a couple of great clubbes, one
in his foote, another in his head, & he cryes to the people with
a loude voice, Beware of the Man whom God hath markt. I can
not yet find any so fitte to come lagging behind, with a budget
on his necke to gather the deuotion of the lookers on, as the
stocke-keeper of the Bridewel-house of Canterburie; he must
carrie the purse, to defray their charges, and then hee may be
sure to serue himselfe.
            
            
               MAR.
               Peace, Caualiero, your tongue will be slitte if
you take not heede, I haue heard some say, you should wringe
for this geare if the Queene were dead.
            
            
               PAS.
               Tushe, thou
art but a crauin Marforius, if thou-feare that; hadst thou but
one droppe of that water in thine eye, which the Seruaunt of
Elisha the Prophet had, when he discouered so many Chariors
of fire about his Maister, thou shouldest see the Prayers of the

Church of Englande, flie vppe into heauen for her Maiestie,
and returne againe with Oliue-branches in their mouthes (like
the Dooue that was sent out of the Arke) to bring tydinges of
peace and long life vnto her highnesse. These wonderful preseruations
of her royall person, which the eyes of this Land euery
day behold, are euident tokens, that GOD hath a worke
for her to doe; there is a nayle to be knockt into Siseraes head,
before she be called from the earth. But whē extremitie of age
shall ende her dales, I am of the minde of many thousandes in
this Land.
            
            
               MAR.
               What is that?
            
            
               PAS.
               He shal doe
me a pleasure that cuts my throate.
            
            
               MAR.
               I perceiue your
abode in England, hath made you participate with the nature
of an Englishman, where you sette downe your reste, you are
verie resolute, and it appeareth by your conceit, you were able
to range a fayre battaile of Scriptures to charge your enemies,
if you were driuen to lead your forces out.
            
            
               PAS.
               It greeues me Marforius, to behold, that by reason
of this newe faction, crept into the harts of the most vnlearned
of all the Ministerie, the Preachers of England begin to strike
and agree like the Clocks of England, that neuer meete iumpe
on a point together. Whereby either the hearers of these contentions,
should say, as the Auditors of the Philosophers did
in times past, that the truth is buried in a pitte where it cannot
be founde; or els be perswaded at the last, that GOD hath
mockt them, and left the way of saluation vnto men, as vncertaine,
as the way of Hanniball in the Alpes. It is very strange,
that the Gospell hauing beene planted in this Lande by those
reuerend By shops that are gone to GOD, men that watered
their labours with their owne blood, Christ seeing this pernicious
impugning of all that, which by his Saints and holy Martirs
he hath left vnto vs, hee should be now compelled to come
ouer our shinnes with the same rebuke that hee gaue to Phillip
and the rest of his Disciples,IOHN. 14. 9. 
                  Haue I beene so long with you,
and haue you not knowne me? Hath Christ been so long so freelie,
so learnedlie, so zealously preached in this Land; and must
wee nowe on a suddaine, (as if God had shewed vs a iuggling

cast) grope for him againe in a Puritans budget, stuft full of
rayling & reuiling Pamphlets? I am sure the Apostle teacheth
me,IAME. 
                        •
                     . 17. that the wisedom which is of God, is Pure and Peaceable:
if it be pure, it cannot cōmunicate with that taste of the deuils
tongue, which is a slaunderer by his occupation. If it be peaceable,
it is without faction, & neuer runs into the dāgerous gainsaying
of Core, whose sinne could not choose but be very great,
because the punishment thereof was very great. But I feele by
the pulse of a Puritane when I touch him, that his disease is the
very Apoplexie of the Donatistes, Quod volumus sanctum est.
What soeuer they like, is Apostolicall, be it neuer so bad: and
and what they mislike is Diabolicall, be it neuer so good.
               I shall neuer forget that man of God, Maister Iohn Foxe,
who though he neither sought Benifice nor Bishoprick in the
Land, yet whē some of the faction came vnto him with a Scottish
Minister, and brought him certaine Articles of Religion,
(coyned in a Mint among themselues) desiring him to set his
hand vnto them, the teares rolling downe plentifully vpon his
face, he reiected them all with a sharpe reproofe. An other time,
when Paget fawned vppon him, full of play, like a wanton
whelpe, whose worme was not taken out of his tongue, the
good Father, enccuntered him in London in an open streete
with this geeting, God send thee a right minde to thy crooked gate.
A good Prayer beleeue mee for this dogged generation, that is
euer barking against the Moone, and as men that are troubled
with sore eyes, they think any light or Religion better & wholsomer
then that they haue, because they want learning to discerne
and iudge of that they haue. Yet they think I warrant you,
to carrie all away with censoricall lookes, with gogling the eye,
with lifting vppe the hand, with vehement speeches, when the
Wine which they broach vnto the people, is the very poyson of
Dragons, and the gall of Aspes, prest from a bitter Grape that
neuer came out of Gods Vintage.
               
                  Aquitanicus Prosper found this to be the cause of all contention
in the Schooles of Philosophers and Rhethoritians Seipsis
ducibus vtebantur. Euery one that had a whirlegig in his braine,

wold haue his own conceit to goe currant for as good paiment,
as any infallible grounde of Arte; And I perceiue the priuie
traine that giues fire vnto all this Gunshot, that hath beene so
latelie discharged at God, and good men in the Church of England,
is an ouerweening that Martin hath of himselfe, when he
would haue that to be the meaning of the holy Ghost, that his
mastership imagins. It pleaseth his worship, in his Proem to his
cokish conclusions, to make himselfe merry with the Bishop of
Winchester for saying, I am not of opinion, that, Vna semper debet
esse aconomia Ecclesiae, yet presently he fetcheth his seas himselfe,
and leapes very boldlie ouer head and eares, when hee auoucheth,
that Christ, his Apostles and holie Martirs, are of opinion,
that the gouernment of the Church, should alwaies and in all
places be one &c. without setting downe any one testimonie of
Christ, or Apostle, or holy Martir in that behalfe. Good Byshop,
his opinion must be refused, and Martins opinion must
be receiued; euery Goose of mast Martin must goe for a Swan,
and whatsoeuer he speakes, must be Canoniall.
            
            
               MAR.
               But for all that, though Martin forgot himselfe
suddainlie in that streine, beeing somwhat eager of his Game,
when hee tost the learned Fathers opinion like a ball with the
Rackit, and made full account to bandie the whole Bishoprick
away, yet in other places he quoates Scripture.
            
            
               PAS.
               Hee
coateth Scriptures indeed, for he is light of foote, & ouer-runs
them Marforius in euery place. Qui in Euangelio quod vultis creditis,
vobis potius quam Euangelio creditis. They that beleeue
what soeuer they lust in holy Scriptures, are a generation that
giue more credit to themselues than to the Scriptures; therefore
it were good (saith a godly father) for such people, to tell
the worlde plainlie, that they make no reckoning at all of anie
Scriptures. And I assure thee, if that man may be taken for a
fugitiue and a Rebell, that runnes to the enemie and forsakes
his Prince, those simple creatures may worthilie be denounced
to be runnagates from God, and from her Maiestie, that forsake
this sweete gouernment, vnder which they haue manie yeeres
enioyed the true preaching of the Gospell, to be speake them a

new fashion of Religion at Martins shoppe. Yet is there nothing
so familiar in their mouthes, as Templum Domini, and
Verbum Domini, The Temple of the Lorde, and the worde of
the Lord: they take the word by the nose with a paire of Pinchers,
& leade it whether soeuer it pleaseth them. But there wil
be a day of account, when GOD, (by whose finger the worde
was written) shall reuenge the forcible entries they haue made
into his possessions, & punish euery forrow they haue plowed
vpon his backe. They are the very Spawnes of the fish Saepia,
where the streame is cleere, and the Scriptures euidentlie dyscouer
them, they vomit vp yncke to trouble the waters, and labour
to bring Religion to this passe, that as Appio the Gramarian
reports of himselfe, he called forth Homer out of his graue,
onely to aske him what Countriman he was, and who was his
Father? So now we must either burne all the Bookes and famous
Libraries in the worlde, and take Martins assertions for
vndoubted Maximes, or els fetch vp the Apostles by coniuration,
to demaund of them whether we be right or no?
               As I came through Fraunce Marforius, I was desirous to
ryde from the one ende to the other of Clara Vallis, where I
found the last will and Testament of S. Bernard, standing in
this forme vpon his Tombe.S. Bernards wil standing at thys day vppon hys Tombe. 
                  Tria vobis fratres, obseruanda relinquo,
quae vt potui obseruaui. Primo. Nemini scandalum feci, si
quando incidit sedaui vt potui. Secundo. Minus semper sensui meo
quam alterius credidi. Tertio. Laesus de laedente nunquam vindictana
petii. Ecce charitatem, humilitatem, patientiam, vobis relinquo.
Bretheren (saith he) there be three thinges that I bequeath vnto
you to be obserued, which as well as I could I haue obserued my self.
First, I neuer gaue scandale vnto any person, if I did, I pacified the
matter to my power. Secondlie, I stood vpon mine owne conceite lesse
then I did vpon other mens. Thirdly, when I was wronged, I neuer
sought reuenge. Beholde, Charitie, Humilitie, and Patience I bequeath
vnto you. This good Father shall ryse vppe in iudgment
to condemne Martin. Had he beene fearefull of giuing anie
Scandale vnto the worlde, his vncharitable Pamphlets had neuer seene
the Sunne, Had hee giuen lesse credite to his owne

censures and opinions, than to the censures and opinions of
better men, so many good Scriptures had neuer been wrested,
so many flowers in Gods Garden had neuer been defaced. Had
he been ready to suffer wrong without wringing of reuenge
out of Gods hand, he would neuer haue thundred & lightned
at so many rare men, whose learning and vertue is a pricke in
his eye, and a strong watch that intercepts euery passage vnto
his Hierarchie. Let him swell while he burst, with the worde
in his mouth, so long as hee breaketh the rule of Charitie, and
cares not whom he strike, so the edge of his tuske may haue a
lighting place, wee may easily see what is within him. Infaelix
lolium & steriles dominantae auenae. Scripture is often in the typ
of his tongue, but Cockle is the graine wee reape with him. It
is the propertie of Martin & his followers, to measure Gods
mouth, by theyr owne mouth, as you shal see in the May-game
that I haue promised you: for there you shall haue a number
of strange Notes vpon the Text, some of them gathered from
William Dike at S. Albanes, in his clarklie Paraphrases vppon
S. Luke and S. Iohn, some haue beene brought me from other
places, & some I gathered my selfe, in an assemblie of the brotherhood
at Ashford in Kent. I went thether with a Student of
Cambridge to a sollemne exercise, and comming in the habite
of Schollers, we pressed somewhat boldly into their companie
to dine with them, assuring our selues to finde some new seruice
at theyr Table. When the Dinner was doone, one of them
read a Chapter, euery man keeping his place still; The roome
was full of Artificers, men and women, that sate rounde about
vppon stooles and benches to harken to it. The Chapter was,
the 1. Cor. 3. which being read. The reader began first to vtter
his conceit vpon the Text, in short Notes, then it came to his
next neighbours course, and so in order Glosses went a beging,
and Expositions ranne a pace through the Table, till they
came to me, whom they desired to open my mouth among the
rest, I vtterly refused to vndertake the taske, notwithstanding,
I was so wonderfully vrged, that I coulde not any way shift thē
off, and somewhat I spake among them. When I came to the

ende of my cariere, my companion was requested to pricke it
for company with his freendes. I needed no Minstrill to make
me merrie, my hart tickled of it selfe, when it came to his turn,
because I knew him to be a Gentleman well studied in Philosophie,
but he had not yet medled with Diuinitie. He chose the
thirteenth verse of the Chapter to discourse vpon. Where the
Apostle saith, Euery mans worke shall be tryed by fire. But to
see how brauely hee trotted ouer all the Meterors bredde in the
highest Region of the ayre, to see how louingly hee made the
sence of the Apostle, and Ouids fiction of Phaetons firing of
the world to kiss before they parted, and then howe souldierlike
hee made an ende of his manage with a double rest, was
sport enough for vs to beguile the way, as we trauailed backe
againe from thence to Canterburie.
               I haue brought many a propper note out of that meeting,
for euery mans spirit at the Table, had two bowts with the Apostle
before hee left him, and one whilst another spake, had a
breathing time giuen him to whisper with the holy Ghost, to
know what shold be put into his head to vtter, against it came
about to his course againe.
            
            
               MAR.
               Trust mee Caualiero, I take this to be the odde
peece of worke of all that hetherto you haue spent your time
in, I trauaile like a woman with child, till this be out. But haue
you not heard Cooper at Paules chayne, and the rest of the men
that are commended to your eares by Martin Senior?
               
            
            
               PAS.
               I haue followed them also, and I finde them fitte to preach vppon
Bellowes, and Bagpipes, and blowne Bladders, they are so
full of ventositie, that I cannot come at their matter for winde
and words.
            
            
               MAR.
               What say you to Dike of S. Albanes,
how like you him?
            
            
               PAS.
               
                  He is an Asse, he is an Asse, quoth
a learned Gentleman of Lyncolnes-Inne, that went thether to
heare him at the last Assises, and found him so bald, so bare, and
yet so bold to flie into heauen with a fewe sicke feathers, that
Mouit Cornicula risum. Thys generation hath a little smacke of
one of the plagues of Aegipt, they skippe very lustily into priuate
houses, and fill our eares full of croking like the Frogges

of Aegipt.
            
            
               MAR.
               What shoulde be the cause of these
new Sect-maisters?
            
            
               PAS.
               This mischiefe hath many fountaines,
which I will reduce for thy sake into a little compasse.
One cause I finde to be meere ignoraunce.CANT. 6. 9. GODS Church
is compared to an Armie, well ordered and sette in good aray.
In an Armie you haue manie Commaunders, Corporals, Sergiants,
Leiutenants, Captains, and Coronels, yet not all of equall
authoritie, but all vnder the direction of one Generall,
for the better leading in and out of the whole forces: and in
Gods Church, as it hath grown great, companies cōming daily
in vnto it out of euery tongue, and Tribe, and Countrey, and
Nation, so all Ecclesiasticall and Christian Histories, and Antiquities
teache vs, that there hath beene a diuersitie of learned
and skilfull leaders, some higher, some lower then others in
theyr places, and all vnder the controlment of one Generall,
Christ himselfe, for the greater terror of Haereticks & enemies
of the Church, and for the grace, the beautie, and order of euerie
Cornette and Ensigne in the same, which is a thing glorious
in Gods eye, because he is the GOD of order. But the Martinists
(sillie wretches) ignorant and vnlearned men, vnfitte for
any eminent charge in the Church themselues, seeke to drawe
euery place in this Campe royall to an equalitie with thēselues.
A preposterous humor noted in the Ecclesiasticall Histories,
diuers that were sette beside the Cushion when Bishoprickes
were a dealing, sought to make Bishops equall with euery Minister.
In this daungerous attempt, I finde the three plagues
that GOD threatneth for peoples sinnes, to be powred out at
this day vpon the Church of England. First. The Sworde is vppon
the right eye, and the right hand: what soeuer is right in the
Church of England, is wounded by the Martinists, a crooked
generation, that loues to swym side-long with the Crabbe. Secondly.
Like people, like Priest begins now to be verified: the
Preachers of the faction, (like Puppets in a motion) begin to
snappe and to turne, and to speake, what, and when, and howsoeuer
the people will, at whose tables they are fed like Geese
in the Capitol, to gaggle at euery man that is against them.

Thirdly. Beautie and Bandes: the two staues that God vses like
a Sheepheard to guide his people, are knapt in sunder. Beautie
is burst; for our order is turned into cōfusion: Bandes are burst
also, for our vnitie is fallen into dissention. The maine poste
whereuppon the Bucklers, the Armour, the imaginarie Trophes
of the faction, is hanged vppe for the simple to gaze and
wonder at, is onely this, The Church of England hath committed
fornication with the Church of Rome, and tript out her foote like a
strumpet, to euer deuise of mans braine that hath passed by her.
               
               Heerein I see the Churches case, is Susannaes case, this accusation
of incontinencie is framed against her, by such as haue
sought to be incontinent with her themselues. Had Susanna
prostituted her body to the Elders, her credit had neuer beene
called into Question by her accusers: had the Church of England,
giuen vppe the keyes of her Coffers, to bawdes, boggers,
and Banckroupts, the reuerend Elders of Martinisme, had neuer
put vppe any Billes of endightment against her the last
Parliament. But as the storie saith, that Daniell was raysed by
GOD to acquite her, and conuince euery scatterer of false reports,
I thinke before I end, Signor Pasquill of Englande, wyll
prooue the man, that must sette a gagge in the mouth of Martin
the great, and cut vp an Anatomie of all his knauerie. Me
thought Vetus Comaedia beganne to pricke him at London in
the right vaine, when shee brought foorth Diuinitie wyth a
scratcht face, holding of her hart as if she were sicke, because
Martin would haue forced her, but myssing of his purpose, he
left the print of his nayles vppon her cheekes, and poysoned
her with a vomit which he ministred vnto her, to make her cast
vppe her dignities and promotions.
               Thys indeede is the marke that Martin shootes at, whereby
you may see that one cause of Martinisme, is a collop that dropt
out of Mydas nose, a desire of Gold. This is the roote of all the
mischife, by this many men are fast lockt in the deuils snares,
many soules are thrust through with many sorrowes. Thys beeing
the ground master Martin hath made his choise of, when he
castes his accounts, and surueighes howe little witte and howe

little might hee hath to goe thorough with his building, like a
furious beast wrapt in the cordes where hee cannot stirre, after
many a vayne plunge which he giues to breake away, when he
sees his labour lost, transported with a rage, he roares and he
somes, and sets himselfe downe in the Scorners Chayre.
               Though Babies and fooles stagger, and stande amazed to
beholde their newe pranckes, yet almost the meanest in Gods
Schoole knowes, it is no strange thing, that the Church sholde
be vexed with such enemies. In the time of holy Dauid the
King, the Church was assaulted by a kinde of people, whose
mouthes were as Quiuors, and theyr tongues as Shafts, that did
shoote very secretly at the best men. Vnto this kinde of people,
holy men of God haue giuen sundry tytles, and thereby, as it
were, clapt many Brandes vppon theyr backes, to make them
knowne to be rotten Sheepe of the deuils foulde. They are
termed to be Bulles of Bashan, Foxes, Serpents, Vipers, Woolues,
Spyders, Theeues, Firie-ouens, False-ioyes, & a great many names
more of like honor, they haue wonne in the fielde, and borne away
the prize in euery age.
               A yeere would scarce suffer me to discouer them all at large.
Yet that I may touch at euery Coast which I haue descried,
they are called Bulles, because they dosse out theyr hornes against
the truth; Foxes, because theyr conspiracies, and incontinencies,
theyr vnchaste and disordered life, shewes them to be
tied together by the tayles like Sampsons Foxes, but their heads
be loose, they shake off theyr obedience to their natural Prince.
Serpents, because they glide vpon theyr bellies, No sin among
some of them, from the nauell downward. Vipers, to giue light
and estimation vnto themselues, they teare open the bowels
of theyr owne Damme, and liue by the death of her that bred
them. Woolues, In outwarde appearaunce, they are like to the
dogge, and make a shewe to the world they would keepe the
Sheepe, but all theyr desire is to kill the Sheepe. Spyders, because
they sucke out theyr mallice from very good hearbes, and
spynne with great studie an vnprofitable webbe, good for nothing
but to catch Flyes. Theeues, they breake in by night into

Gods house, and would spoyle though it were with the bloode
of the Saints. Firic-ouens, they haue a scorching breathe, and
when they are drawn, they deliuer a batch for the deuils tooth.
And to wind vp their vertues in a word or two, they are False-ioyes,
their substance is brittle, and their Bookes be Glasse, giue
thē but a filop, they run to a powder. What grounde they haue
gotten by their practises among the witlesse, I neede not tell
you, seeing Martin Senior is so forward to tell you himselfe, that
he hath a hundred thousand in the Lande, readie to lift vppe a
new Presbitery with priuate hands. Though I know that he lyeth
loudlie, yet it were not amisse Magna componere paruis, and
to looke to his fingers, that he be not as readie when hee spyes
his time, to lift vp a newe Prince.
               After GOD had once brought his Church out of Egipt,
by the hand of Moses, there wanted neither Iebusite, nor enemy
a long time to flye in her face, and to hinder her passage to the
Land of promise; And since God led his Church in this Land
out of the bondage of Rome, by the conduct of her excellent
Maiestie, there neuer yet wanted Papist, Atheist, Brownist,
Barowist, Martinist, Anabaptist, nor Familie of Loue to bid
them battaile, that their course to Gods Kingdome might be
stopt. But in all their attempts it fareth with them, as it dooth
with the Wrastler within the Lystes, he winnes now and than,
not because he is strong or impossible to be ouer-come, but because
the match that he deales withall is weake; Martin hath
made some head, in some parts of her Maiesties Dominions,
not because his worshippe is inuincible, but because hee hath
closde with the clowted shoe, and got a little credite by mens
infirmites.
            
            
               MAR.
               By your leaue, Caualiero, they say Martin hath great
vpholders.
            
            
               PAS.
               It may be so to, some few that are as readie
as himselfe, to rob the church: though hee stand in they bosoms
like the Grasse vpon the house to scape the Clergies Sickles,
Pasquill will haue a hooke to pull him down. In the mean
season,PSAL. 37. his state is as the Grasse vppon the house, they that are
wise and religious doe passe by him, but they neuer blesse him,

as men doe the croppe vppon the grounde. Curses I haue read
and heard of many that haue followed their humors, that haue
affected any pillage of the Church. When Symon the mutinous
(vppon a particular grudge hee bare to Onias the high
Priest)2. MAC. 3. had enformed Seleucus the King of Asia, of the Churches
Treasure, the King sent Heliodorus his Treasurer, to seaze
it to the Crowne:Martins Visor. 
                  Heliodorus came like a Foxe, to visit and reforme
the disorders of C
                     •
                  elosyria and Phaenice. When the high
Priest perceiued, that reformation was his errande, but golde
he sought, the graue countenance of Onias was striken down,
and the people beholding their Father heauie, ranne some to
the Temple, some to the Cittie-gates, some stood in their windowes
looking out, some gadded vppe and downe the streetes,
like Bacchus Froes, franticke for the time, and all ioyntly lifted
vp their hands, their eyes, and their voice to heauen, for the defence
of the Church Treasure. Heliodorus was no sooner entred
the Treasurie to take the spoyle, but there appeared to
him a terrible man in Complet Armour of Gold, mounted on
a barbed Horse, which ranne fiercelie at the Kings Treasurer,
and trampled him vnder foote. Therewithall appeared also,
two men of excellent strength and beautie, whipping and beating
him with so many stripes, that hee was carried out of the
place speechlesse, and without any hope of life at all.
               But because Martin will say the Bookes of the Machabees
are Apocrypha, and Sprignols man told me (as he trimd me the
other day) that there is a new Barbar in London, about to shaue
the Bible, wherin he finds somwhat that he would haue cleane
discarded, I will deale with such Scriptures, as preuent them of
all euasions. How dangerous it is to gelde the Church goods,
the end of Ananias and Saphira shal witnes for me,ACTS. 5. for though
their death was the punishment of their sinne in lying, yet I
trust Martin will graunt me, that they were drawn to that sin
by the corde of Sacriledge. And if a greedie desire of withholding
that from the Church which thēselues had giuen, was
of force to open such a windowe to the deuill, that they were
presently giuen ouer as a pray to the iawes of hell, to lye and

dissemble with the holie Ghost, howe many foule sinnes, and
howe many greeuous plagues are to be feared in this Lande,
which alreadie hang at the ende of the lyne of Martinisme, and
would speedilie be puld vpon our heads, if we should but beginne
to take that from the Church, which we neuer gaue? It
may be, Mast Martin will flappe mee in the mouth with his
politique reason, that it is good for the Realme, to maintaine
their warres by the Church reuenewes, because forraine inuasions
are dailie looked for. But to meete with his wisedome at
the halfe sword, I remember that Aegipt in the time of Ioseph
the Patriarche,GENE. 47. 22. 26. felt so extreame a famine, that the fift parte of
the Lande was sold to releeue the Lande, yet the Patriarche in
all this care he had, both of the Countrey and the King, to succour
the one, & enrich the Coffers of the other, neuer attempted
any sale of the lande of the Priestes, nor once diminished
the same. If the holie Patriarche in so great extreamitie, neuer
venturde to alienate the possessions of Idolatrous Priestes,
though it were to the releefe of a whole Kingdome, with what
face dares anie politique in the world, curtoll the maintenance
of the Church of God, and vntile the houses that by religious
Princes haue beene consecrated to Gods seruice?
               Let vs see the good that ensueth of their deuices, & let England
be warned by the praesidents of other Nations. Celce the
Constable of Gertrund King of Burgonie, hauing vnder the
authoritie of the king his Maister, enriched himselfe with the
goods of the Church, was one day in the Church at his deuotion,
and as he hearde the Prophet read, that proclaimes a woe
vnto them that ioyne house to house, and land to land, he gaue
a shrike suddainlie in the congregation, and cried out, this is
spoken to me, this curse is vpon me, and vppon my posterite
and afterward died miserablie. In Fraunce, Lewes the sixt, surnamed
the great, was once a protector of the priuiledges of
the Church, for perceiuing that the Conte de Clerimont, the
Lord de Roussi, the Lord de Meugn, the Lorde de Beuuieu, and
others, had rifled the Bishopricks and Churches within the
Realme, he caried Armes in the defence of the Church against

them, and compelled them to restore their robberies to the
Church againe. The same King L
                        •
                     wes the great, vrged wyth
extreame necessitie in his age, beganne at the last, to pull the
Church himselfe. But S. Bernard, (one of the Lampes of the
Church of GOD in those dayes) sollicited the King with diuers
Letters, exhorting him fatherlie to giue ouer that course:
at the last, perceiuing that neither entreatie, nor reproofe was
able to withdraw him, he began to darte out the thunderbolts
of the Church, and to threaten him, that hee shoulde shortlie
feele the iudgment of God vpon him, which suddailie came to
passe, for by the suddaine death of the young Prince his eldest
Sonne, the staffe of his age was broken.
            
            
               MAR.
               You haue made Signor Caualiero, a sad discourse,
yet I feare all this will not saue the Bishopricke of Elie, from
shiuering it selfe into many peeces.
            
            
               PAS.
               What remedie
Marforius? Though I be but a stone, I am not so sencelesse to
presume like a Martinist, to teach her excellent Maiestie how
to weare a Crowne. Her highnesse beeing so richlie furnished,
with so rare and high graces from aboue, and knowing which
way to hold the Scepter of the defenders of the faith, better by
her owne experience, than by the wisedome that is euery day
powred into her bosome by the counsels of others, for Pasquil
to come in nowe with any aduice for her, were to cast (God
wot) one little droppe of water into the Sea. Therefore whatsoeuer
I haue alreadie spoken in this behalfe, or shall vtter
hereafter, when Martin or his Maister prouokes me to single
Combat, I cowch it heere with all dutie and humilitie at her
Maiesties sacred feete.
               I know the humor of a Martinist to be such, as Dauid described
long agoe,PSAL. 12. 4. 
                  Our tongues are our owne, who is Lord ouer vs?
An ambitious desire to sitte in the doores of euerie mouth to
be seene and talked of, hath made thē surfet, and shaken them
with many colde fittes of the Feuer of Eutydimus. Hee was a
wrangling Logician, that had rather say any thing, then seeme
to be conquered in disputation, which made him as a man mad
and impudent, to maintaine by argument, that his dog was his

father, and the father of all the world, he grew so peruerse and so
slippery in his conclusions, that he proued as quick as an Eele
in euery quirke, the harder he was griped, the sooner hee slipt
out of euery hand. But Pasquill is made of another temper, hee
acknowledgeth the least Magistrate in the Land to be Lord of
his tongue, & the Lawes of this Country, to be the curbe that
God & her Maiestie haue made for vnrulie mouthes, least her
people should gore one another like brute beastes. Pasquill offereth
his back to S. Bernards discipline, far from the contentions
of Martin and Eutydimus, he giueth lesse credit and authoritie
to his own wit, than to the least of all those that he findes
to be men of more learning and iudgment then himselfe.
               
                  Martin cryes out (as if he had already poysoned the springs
head, where the whole Realme shold fetch water) Let the Court
alone, he saith he knowes what a wonderfull working the hope
of gaine and of gold hath in that place, yet Pasquill is resolued,
that her excellent Maiestie, (as hetherto she hath doone) will
continue still her princelie fauour to the Priuiledges of the
Church of England, and giue the blessing to it that Moses gaue
to the Priest-hood of the Tribe of Leui, and pray for thē First,
That the Vrim and Thummim may be among them,
                  DEVT. 33. 8. wisedom and
knowledge for the peoples good, and that when they offer vnto
the Lord, The work of their hands may be accepted. Next, that
God in his mercie would Blesse their substaunce, and smyte theyr
enemies quite through the loynes, that they may neuer rise againe.
               
            
            
               MAR.
               Inough Caualiero, the Clock strikes eleuen, and
the Marchants come in to the Exchange apace, I think it were
best to talke no longer here. And seeing Martins matters begin
to be whust, it were good in my iudgment to suppresse your
volume of The liues of the Saints.
            
            
               PAS.
               Nay Morforius,
I must haue three courses of the Launce with Th. Cartwright,
before I leaue. Hath Martin made him his God, and thinketh
he to escape my fingers? I will be with him to bring, from the
very first rocking of his cradle, to the last penny that hee payd
for purchasing. What? shall I neuer take the faction without
hypocrisie? wold a man think this companion were persecuted

by the Church of England, that in the heate of his persecution
is so braue a purchaser? Goe toe bother Thomas, tell your
neighbors about you, Rogers of Bifielde, Fen of Couentry and
the rest, that I keepe a Register of all the Puritane purchasers
in the Realme, & I meane to be Clarke of their Audit for these
seauen yeres, my Paten is already sealed.
            
            
               MAR.
               Seeing you
will forwards with the works you haue taken in hand, giue me
some direction for the priuie dispersing them when they come
out.
            
            
               PAS.
               I would haue thee principally, to drop some of
thē down at Penrie the Welch-mans haunt.
            
            
               MAR.
               Where is
that?
            
            
               PAS.
               Tut, I perceiue you know nothing. At the signe
of the siluer forke and the tosted cheese, where the Painter to
bewray both his abuse of the Scriptures, & his malice against
the Church, hath drawne him his word with a Text-pen, Zelus
domus tuae comedit me. A speeche holy Dauid did vse, when
the zeale of the Church did eate vp the Court, and a speeche
now describing the spirit of Penrie, that would faine turne the
Church of the Lande to a tosted cheese, that the zeale of the
Court might eate vppe her.
            
            
               MAR.
               You said in the ende of
your Countercuffe, that you would sende vs a Comentarie vpon
Martin Iunior, I forgot till now to aske you what is become of
that?
            
            
               PAS.
               I fell that night into a traunce, wherein mee
thought I saw a very golden wit performe that matter, with so
keene a tooth, and such a pleasant grace, that I gaue ouer to
him, and farthered The liues of the Saints, as much as my leysure
would giue me leaue. And credit me, when I came to the
life of the myncing Dame of Rochester with the golden locks,
whose conceipt was so quick, that shee caught a childe whilst
her husbande was from her, as her clappe was so suddaine, that
no body knowes how it came, or how it went, for since she was
deliuered, (passe & repasse) the childe was neuer heard of: so
my pen was as swyfte as the post-horse of the Towne, I ran a
great deale of ground in a litle time about her causes. But who
commeth yonder Marforius, can you tell me?
            
            
               MAR.
               By her gate and her Garland I knowe her well, it is
Vetus Comaedia. She hath been so long in the Country, that she

is somewhat altred, this is she that called in a counsell of Phisitians
about Martin, and found by the sharpnes of his humour,
when they had opened the vaine that feedes his head, that hee
would spit out his lunges within one yere. And I promise you
she prophecied very truly of him, you may see by the Bookes
that he set foth last, that his strength is spent.
            
            
               PAS.
               I haue
a tale to tell her in her eare, of the slye practise that was vsed
in restraining of her. In the meane season Marforius, I take my
leaue of thee, charging thee vpon all our old acquaintance, and
vppon my blessing, to set vp this bill at London stone. Let it be
doone sollemnly with Drom and Trumpet, and looke you aduance
my collours on the top of the steeple right ouer against
it, that euery one of my Souldiers may keepe his quarter.
            
            
               
                  PASQVILS PROTESTATION
VPPON LONDON STONE.
                  I Caualiero Pasquill, the writer of this simple hand, a young man, of
the age of some few hundred yeeres, lately knighted in Englande,
with a beetle and a bucking tub, to beat a little reason about Martins
head, doe make this my Protestation vnto the world, that if any
man, woman, or childe, haue any thing to say against Martin the
great, or any of his abettors, of what state or calling soeuer they be,
noble or ignoble, from the very Court-gates to the Coblers stall, if it
please them these dark Winter-nights, to sticke vppe their papers vppon
London-stone, I will there giue my attendance to receiue them,
from the day of the date heereof, to the full terme and reuolution of
seuen yeeres next ensuing.  
                  
                     Dated 20. Octobris. Anno Millimo▪
Quillimo, Trillimo,
                      
                     Per me venturous Pasquill the Caualiero.
                  
               
            
            
               MAR.
               
                  Brauamente Signor. This deuice (I perswade me)
will haue his working, assure your selfe I wil put it in execution.
Is there any thing els you would haue me doe?
            
            
               PAS.
               Yes, if I thought you were at leysure, you haue been very busie
I perceiue about Martins death, and though he liue yet, it may
be you prophecie of his end. Yester-night late, olde Martins
Protestation in Octauo was brought vnto mee, I see by the

volume, hee languisheth euery day more and more, the pride of
his flesh is so much falne, that you may tell euery bone in hys body
now. I pray thee Marforius, after the Soldatescha bravura of displaying
my Banners vpon London-stone, send this Pistle to Martin
by the next Poste.
            
            
               
                  Caualiero Pasquill of England, to Martin the great,
wisheth more wit and learning, and a
better minde.
                  MAy it please your Masterdom to vnderstand, that by the last Butterflie you
sent abroad, you tel me a tale of a dry Sommer, and protest that you seek
not to stannch the hote thyrst of any couetous Courtier, with the Bishoprickes
of the Land, but to share thē amongst the Ministerie. Fie, fie, doe not you know
that a lyer must haue no shetle memory? If you looke eyther to your former
works, where you vrge the spoyle of the Church for the maintenaunce of wars,
or to your son Martin Senior, a man that hath slept in his fathers bosome and
knowes your minde, in exhorting his yonger brother, to resigne the care of
Church reuenewes to the Court, you shal find your selfe takē with an ouerture.
Pasquill is not so blind, but he sees Martin to be a man, that goes two manner
of waies: and peraduenture he followed your last packe of Bookes to the verie
Gates where they were carried in. A chip of ill chance, you haue lost your iugling
stick, your conueighance is such, that you shatter, and carrie not halfe so
cleane as your freends would haue you. You say this quarrell will neuer be determined
but by blood. All the better say I, Pasquill will be the first that wyll
lay down his life vpon the cause. God hath hardned my face against the faces of
men. I haue already made vp my reckoning of euery danger that may ensue. It
is neither losse of liuing nor life, nor so blind a bob as BLIND ASSE, that
will scare a Caualiero from this honorable fight he hath vndertaken. The wise
& learned (to whose iudgmēts I appeale) shall censure vs both. To meet with
your affixes at euery great post & place of cōcourse, by Gods helpe, I will hang
such a payre of pendents at both your eares, before it be long, that whosoeuer
beholds you, shal say, Don Diego di Martin, hath an idle braine. You brag you
haue giuen M. D. Bancroft such a sliue ouer the shoulders, as the credite of hys
Chaplenship shall not recouer. Thongh the learning and honestie of the man
doe very much credit him, with all that are eyther learned or honest of themselues,
yet seeing you come to his Chaplinship, I cannot forbeare you, but tell
you plaine, that halfe a looke of his honourable Maister, shall giue hime more
credit in England in one day, then Martin or all his crew shal be able to robbe
him of while the world stands, though they swell at him with enuie like a nest
of foule Toades, till their bodies splyt, and poure out theyr bowels vppon the
earth. I haue many other things to lay to your charge, which I purpose to wink
at, vntill your Dialogue be ended, but then Syr, because you tell me you are yet
vnmaried, I wyll take downe your breeches for altogether.
                  
                     Caualiero Pasquill.
                  
               
            
         
      
   