
      
         
            
            
            THE Widowes treaſure, plentifully furniſhed with ſundry precious and approoued ſecretes in Phiſicke, and Chirurgery for the health and pleaſure of mankinde. ⸪
            Hereunto are àdioyned, ſundry pretie practiſes and concluſions of Cookerie: with many profitable and holeſome medicines for ſundrie diſeaſes in Cattell.
            At London, Printed by Edward Alde, for Edward White, 1588.
         
         
            
            
            
               ❧To the Curteous Reader,
            
               THis Pamphlet beeing written (not manye yeeres paſt as it ſhould ſeeme) at the earneſte requeſte and ſuite of a Gentle woman in the Cuntrye for her priuate vſe, which by theſe ſinguler practiſes hath obtained ſuche fame, that her name ſhalbe remembred for euer to the poſteritie. The originall Copie (by great chaunce) was lent me by an eſpeciall freende of mine, in the peruſing whereof I founde it ſo furniſhed with ſuch rare experiments and pritie conceites as t
                  •
               e like are not to my knowledge extant in the Engliſhe tung. I thought it my duty for the health and pleaſure of many my freendes, to ſet them forth to the veiwe of the world, to be practiſed eſpecially of thoſe that take delight in ſuch matter, or hath any occaſion through their defectes to vſe them

for their healthes ſake. This I dare preſume to reporte of the woorke, that there are heerein included very manye ſecrets, that I knowe by the Widowes owne practiſe, to be moſt ſinguler and approued, and though perhapes they are not orderly ſet downe as manye of better ſkill might haue doone, I deſire you to conſider that this was of the collectione of ſuche a one as neuer once thoughte to haue made thē common: but onely to his good freend M▪R. This caueat ſhee alſo giueth by the waye, to reade them aduiſedly and practiſe with diſcretion, and as you finde commende: and ſo wi
                  •
               h all humilitie concluding, I dedicate vnto you this her Treaſure and cheefe Iewell: deſiring you to be a defence aſwell for her as for mee, from all ſuche as ſhall in your hearing ſcorne her, or mee for diſcloſinge ſuch profitable experimentes. ⸪
            Fareyou well.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶The Widowes Treaſure.
            
               To make Sirrop of Roſes or Violettes.
               
                  TAKE of Violettes or Roſes a pounde, ſtéep them in thrée pints of warm water put it in an earthen pot with a narow mouth the space of vig. houres▪ or more, after ſtrain it and warm the water againe: & put in it a gaine ſo many Roſes or Violets, & likewiſe let them lye in ſtéepe eighte houres, & thus doo at the leaſt fiue times, the oftner the better, in eſpeciall the roſes, and after take to euery pinte: halfe a pounde of Suger, and ſtéepe them together til the Suger be molten, then ſéethe them togeather with a ſofte ſwéete fier to the heith of a Sirrup: If you haue more Roſes or Violettes, or Fewer, let ſo muche be the proportion of the water according to the proportion before.
            
            
               To make Diatreon Piperion the beſt.
               TAKE white Pepper, blacke Pepper and long Pepper, of eache ſixe dragmes

and eightéene graines, Time, Ginger, Anneſéedes of eache a dragme: beate the longe Pepper, Anneſéedes, Ginger, and Time into▪ fine powder, bruſe the other two Peppers as groce as maye be: then take Suger clarified with Hiſſop water, eightéene ʒ. ſéethe the Suger, and take ſo muche of the water aboue ſaide as will couer it. To knowe when it is enough, drop a drop on a ſaucer, and if it will come from the ſaucer without cleauing: it is enough. Then after cooling, put in your pouder and ſtirre them altogether, and after put all into a Pot. &c.
            
            
               Virtutes huius confectionis ſequuntur.
               THis decoction is good to eate,
               alwaies before and after meate.
               For it will make digeſtion good,
               and turne your meate to puer blood.
               Beſides all this it dooth excell,
               all windines to expell.
               And all groce humors cold and rawe,
               that are in belly, ſtomack or mawe.
               It will diſſolue without paine,
               and keep ill vapors from the braine.
               
                  Beſides all this it will reſtore,
               your memory though loſt before.
               Vſe it therfore when you pleaſe,
               fortherin reſteth mighty eaſe.
            
            
               To make Roſa ſolis.
               TAKE firſt a quarte of the beſte Aqua vitae that you can gette, and put it into a Glaſſe or Pot of earth, then put into it fiue handfulles of Roſa Solis cleane picked, and the Rootes and dead leaues cleane clipped off, a quarterne of Suger beaten to powder, nine Dates opened and the white ſkin within pilled or pluckt off, then ſhred the Dates in ſmall péeces, and one ʒ. Ginger, di.ʒ. Nutmegges, ʒi. Anniſeedes, ʒiiii. Liquorice, beating all theſe laſt rehearſed into fine powder: Then put them altogeather in the ſayde glaſſe or pot, letting them ſtand very cloſe ſtopped the ſpace of thrée or fower dayes, then take them al & ſtraine the foreſaide thinges into ſome cleane veſſell as hard as you maye, ſo that you maye haue aſmuche of the ſtrengthe as is poſſible to haue of it: then take and put the liquor into the glaſſe or veſſell that you mean to

preſerue it in, and ſtop it very cloſe that no ſtrength paſſe out of it in any maner.
            
            
               Doctor Hatchers powder againſt the Stone.
               TAKE the Rootes of Ireos, Liquorice, calamus aromaticus, the haire of the Harts ſkinne burnt, of eche ʒ.ſ. the Rootes of Enula campana, Fillependula, Ginger, longe Pepper, Anniſéedes, Fenell ſeede, Saxifrage ſéede, Ana. 
                  ʒii. Sinamon, Maces, Ciperus, Spicknarde, Saffron, Betonye, Ana 
                  ʒi. Suger ʒ ſ. ſene of Alexandria ʒiii. Rhabarke, ʒi. Of all theſe premiſes make a powder fine and ſmall, and take thereof the weight of viii d. in the morning faſting with white Wine, twice or thrice a wéeke leuke warme. It clenſeth the Bladder, Backe, Reines and Kidneies from the Stone, it remedieth belly ache, and prouoketh a laxe.
            
            
               Maiſter Stranges plaiſter againſt the ſtone.
               TAKE Plantaine, Featherfewe, Garden Tanſie, and Houflike, of eache alike

quantitye, and ſtampe all theſe togeather and ſtraine them, then take the iuice and put to it Beane flower as muche as ſhall make it thicke, and then take thrée or foure ſpoonefulles of Honye, and clarifie them in the fire: which doone put the iuice and the flowre into the Honye, and boyle them on the fire togeather vntill they be ſtiffe like a plaiſter. When you will vſe this medicine, you muſte take a double cloath that ſhall be a quarter of a yarde broade, and as long as will goe rounde about you, and as hot as you can ſow it round about you, and this muſt you weare two daies and a night or els two nightes and a daye before you take it off.
            
            
               To prouoke ſleepe.
               TAke a ſpoonefull of Womans milke, a ſpoonefull of Roſewater, and a Spoonefull of the iuice of Lettice boyle them in a diſhe, then take ſome fine Flaxe, and make your plaiſter as broade as you will haue it lye on your forehead, and then moyſte it with the ſame Liquor, ad grate a little Nutmegge to ſtrawe ouer it, and lay it to

your temples and it will prouoke ſléepe.
            
            
               A ſoueraigne medicine for the Collicke.
               MAKE a toſte of Houſholde breade of cleane Wheate, and euer as you toſte it caſt Malmeſie on it, then take dryed Lauender Flowers, and caſte it on the Toſte then laye it on a thinne cloth, and as hotte as you can ſuffer it lay it to your Nauel as cloſe as you can.
            
            
               To make Aqua compoſita.
               TAKE a handfull of Roſemary, a good roote of Enula-campana, a handfull of Hiſſop. di handfull of Tyme, di. handfull of ſage, ſixe croppes of mints as many of Peniriall, as manye of Marierum, di. handfull of Horehound, two vnces of Liquorice, two vnces of Anniſéedes bruſed, then take thrée Gallons of good Ale, and put therein all theſe thinges aforeſayd, and couer the pot cloſe til it boyle, and then ſet on your Limbecke, and kéepe vnder it but a ſofte eaſie fire. And if a man

haue the Stone, theſe Hearbes be good to put into the ſaide water, viz. di. handfull of Sarifrage, one handfull of Parcelye, di. handfull of Philependula, and di. handfull of Fennell.
            
            
               For Cough and Flew me in the ſtomacke.
               TAKE a quarte of ſtale Ale, and a handfull of Gooſemeate whiche is named Hayrefe, and a quantitye of pared Liquorice, and a quatity of ſmall Raiſons, and boyle altogeather vnto a pinte, and drinke thereof firſt and laſt.
            
            
               For the Sciatica.
               TAKE Sauery and mixe the iuice therof with Wheate Flower, and make a plaiſter thereof, and laye it where you féele the paine.
            
            
               A ſoueraigne Oyntment for weakneſſe in the backe.
               TAKE a handfull of Dasse rootes, and as much of Planten, Burſa paſto
                        •…
                     s, centumnodi,
                  
and the croppes of Acrons, Ana i, handfull of Bole Armoniacke and the powder of Hartes horne, then take a Bucke Conye that is fat, and boyle all theſe together in white Wine and water, as muche water as Wine till the ſaide Cony be conſumed the fleſhe from the bones, and after take the Conye and the other géere foorth of the broath, and ſtraine the broth into a cleane veſſell, and let it ſtand till it turne into a Iellye, and when you be in bed cauſe the backe therewith to be annointed by a chaſingdiſhe of Coales thrée nightes togeather: and laye theron a Linnen cloth warm and ſoftelye laye it on, and in no wiſe chaſe your back.
            
            
               For Flewme or ſtopping in the Stomack.
               TAKE two handefulles of Honiſuckle leaues, and an ounce of Anniſéedes: and thrée Stickes of Liquorice, boyle all theſe togeather in a quart of water til they be boiled from a quart to a pint, then drink therof in the morning faſting.
            
            
               
               For Strangury or Stone in the Reynes of the backe.
               TAKE Water of Camomill Stilled, and drincke thereof when you feele paine, one ounce faſting vntill the paine be alaid: and eate a little Suger after: becauſe the water is bitter.
            
            
               To make Oyle of Camomill.
               TAKE Oyle a pinte and a half, and thrée ounces of Camomill flowers dryed one daye after they be gathered in the ſhadowe then put the vile and the flowres in a glaſſe and ſtop the mouth cloſe, and ſet it into the Sunne by the ſpace of forty dayes.
            
            
               To make oyle of Roſes.
               TAKE Oyle waſhed eighteene ounces, the buddes of Roſes the white endes of them: cut away thrée ounces, lay the Roſes abroad in the ſhadow foure and twenty howres, then put them in a Glaſſe to the Oyle, and ſtop the glaſſe cloſe: and ſet it in the Sunne at leaſt forty dayes.
            
            
               
               The maner how to waſhe the Oyle.
               TAKE and put it into a Baſon of faire Water, and beate it well with your hande that the droſſe may fall downe, then take of that parte which remaineth aboue on the Water with a Spoone, and put the ſame Oyle into an other baſon of faire water and waſh it as you did before: and ſo purifie it thrée or foure times.
            
            
               To make the Oyntment of Roſes.
               TAKE Oyle of Roſes foure ounces, white Waxe one ounce, melte them together ouer ſéething Water, then chaſe them together with Roſewater and a little white Vineger.
            
            
               To make a Tyſande.
               TAKE Borage, Langdebéefe, Sorrell Endife, Cinquefoyle, two or thrée handfulles of Barlye well picked, and bothe the endes taken off, then take halfe a handfull of red Fennell Rootes, and a quantitye of

Liquorice, ſuger Candie, Figges, Dates, great Raiſons, boyle all togeather from a gallon to thrée pintes.
            
            
               For the ſtrangurye.
               TAKE a pounde of Guiacum, otherwiſe called Lignum vitae, and let it be beaten to pouder as the Apothicary informeth you then put the ſubſtaunce therof in a pot with thrée quartes of pure water, and cloſe the mouth of the pot ſurely, that in no wiſe the ayre thereof goe out, then make but a ſoft fire vnder the Pot that it dooth not ſéethe or boyle, and to remaine ſo hotte (but not boyling the ſpace of foure and twenty howres, and at the end of foure and twenty howres open the head of the pot, and take the whole ſubſtance and liquor, and put it in a ſtillitorye, and put thereto a Pottle of white Wine, and when you haue ſtilled the ſame drinke thereof in the Morning faſting, or any time els when you féele paine, and if you will haue but halfe a pounde of Guiacum, then according to the proportion of that quantity, vſe the ingredience as is aboue written: and becauſe many can not

come by white Wine if you haue a pounde of Guiacum, after the rate put to the pounde a gallon of cleare water to be ordered the ſpace of foure and twentye howers as is aforeſayde: then ſtraine it through a Cloath: and drincke of it at your pleaſure, but the vertue therof wil not laſt paſt thrée or foure dayes.
            
            
               A Cliſter for the Strangury.
               TAKE Camomill Flowres and Mellons of eache one handfull, ſéethe them in a quarte of water to a pinte: then ſtraine the liquor and put thereto thrée ounces of oyle of Camomill: & the waighte of two grotes or leſſe of ſal
                     •••
                  d ſo prepare the Cliſter.
            
            
               For the ſwelling of the Yearde or Coddes.
               TAKE Egrimonye of the Water thereof ſtilled: and put thereto a quantity of Allome and ſet them ouer the fier till they almoſte boyle: then with a ragge of Linnen cloath annoynt the Yeard vnder the ſkinne with the water well and warme: and it wil

abate the payne of the Yearde and of the Cods alſo if they be waſhed with the ſame. Alſo to incarnate the ſkinne of the Yearde within, take the water of Fumitary, & lay Liquorice pared therin one night, and put of the ſame water into the Yearde with a ſpunge, or els with a tent of linnen cloth.
            
            
               ¶Doctor Bartlets Medicine for Aches with ſwelling.
               TAKE flowers of Camomill and Roſe leaues, ſéethe them in white Wine, making a plaiſter thereof, laye it to the place where any paine, ache or ſwelling is.
            
            
               To make one to piſſe.
               TAke the powder of the berries of Iuie, and drinke it with white Wine, or els with ſtale Ale hot.
               THe woorthy Doctor and excellent practicioner Raſis writeth, that whoſoeuer oftentimes ſnuffeth vp into his noſtrelles the iuice of great Margerum ſhal neuer be diſeaſed in the head.
            
            
               
               A ſinguler remedy for all diſeaſes in the head of what cauſe ſoeuer.
               TAke a handfull of Camomill, a handfull of Betonye, a handfull of Veruaine leaues cleane picked, ſtampe them and ſéeth them in Ale woorte, and when it hath ſodde, put therevnto a little Commin ſéede finely beaten, with a little powder of Harts horne, thrée ſpoonefulles of Vineger, the yolkes of two Egges and a little Saffron, ſtirre them about, and lay a plaiſter hot ouer all his forehead. It is an approued medicine for the Megrim.
               Cheſtwoormes that are found betwéene the Barke of Trées, which will be rounde like a Peaſe ſodden in Oyle it maketh a ſinguler ointement for the Megrim: and the ſame Oyle dropped into the eares ſwageth the paine.
            
            
               An approued remedye for the Toothache
               The Rootes of Henbane ſodden in Vineger and Roſewater, put the decoction in your mouth.
            
            
               
               A woorthy purgation to auoide Choller.
               TAKE halfe an vnce of Caſsia newly drawne, a dragme of good Rubarbe, infuſed a night with water of Endife, with a little Spicknarde, and an vnce of Sirrop of Violets: mixe all the ſayde thinges with thrée ounces of Ptiſan or Whay, and drinke it warme.
            
            
               Againſt vnkindely heate of the Liuer.
               TAke a good handfull of Liuer woorte that groweth vpon the ſtones, and an other of Fumitorye, with as muche of Hartes tunge, and ſéethe them in Whay clarified, and drincke them euerye daye twice. Alſo ſéethe Barberies in Whay and drinke it.
               THe Liuer of a Hare dryed and made in powder, is approued for all diſeaſes of the Liuer.
            
            
               Mythridates medicine againſt corrupt ayres.
               
                  TWentye leaues of Rewe, two fatte Figges, two Walnuts, and a little ſalte, whoſoeuer eateth of this compoſition, ſhall be ſure from all kinde of venim that day.
            
            
               To increace Milke in Womens Breſtes.
               PArſney Rootes and Fenell Rootes ſodden in broath of Chickens, and afterwardes eaten with a little freſh Butter, maketh your milke increace.
               RIce ſodden in Cowe milke with crummes of white breade. Fenell ſéede in powder and a little Suger is excéeding good.
               CHriſtall made in fine powder, and mixe it with as muche Fenell ſéede and Suger, and vſe to drinke it warme with a little Wine.
            
            
               An excellent ſope for Scabbes and Itche.
               TAke white Sope halfe a di. and ſteepe it in ſufficient Roſe water, til it be wel

ſoked, then take two dragmes of Mercury Subblimed, diſolue it in a little Roſe water, labour the Sope and the Roſe Water well togeather, and afterwarde put in it a little Muſke or Ciuet, and keep it. This is ſinguler to cure a great Scabbe or Itche without perrill.
            
            
               An approued medicine to driue away Lyce.
               TAke the Dregges of Oyle, or freſhe Swines Greace a ſufficient quantitye wherin you ſhall chaſe an vnce of Quicke Siluer till it be all ſuricke into the greace, then take powder of Staues-acre fearced and mingle all togeather, make a Girdle of a woollen liſt meet for the middle of the pacient, and all to annoint it ouer with the ſaid medicine, then let him weare it continually next his ſkinne, for it is a ſingular remedy to chaſe them away. The onely odour of Quick ſiluer killeth Lyce.
            
            
               For to ſtop the Flixe.
               TAke Sene croppes and ſtampe it, and drinke it with ſtale ale, and it will amend

by Gods helpe.
            
            
               For the blooddye Flixe.
               TAke an Apple and roſte it, and put therin as muche Waxe as a Beane, and let the Patient eate it, and by Gods helpe it will amend.
            
            
               For any bruſe.
               TAke an Ore Gall and Onyons, and fry them with Shéepes Tallow, and it will helpe preſently.
            
            
               An ointment for the backe.
               TAke foure ounces of Vnguentum, Frigidum Galeni, an ounce of the iuyce of Houſlike, two dragmes of Mirt
                     •
                  e, and as much of Lead burned, one dragme of Camphier, halfe a dragme of red Roſe leaues, as much red Currall, and according to Art make all theſe an Oyntmente in a Morter of Lead.
            
            
               For an Ague.
               TAKE a handfull of Hartes horne that groweth in the féelde, and a handfull of

baye Salte, and lay it to your wriſtes.
            
            
               For the Tooth ache.
               TAKE Bytonye, Sage, and Allome, ſeethe them in Vineger, and let it lye in your Tooth.
            
            
               To keepe Veniſon freſh a long time.
               PReſſe out the blood cleane, and put it into an earthen pot, and fill it with clarified Honey two fingers aboue the fleſhe, and binde a Leather cloſe about the mouth that no ayre enter.
            
            
               To keepe it from rotting after it is new flaine.
               COuer it cloſe from the Sunne or Ayre with Fearne, and laye it in a colde place, then waſhe it cleane and let it lye in Water halfe a daye, and then laye it on the Floore to drye, then ſet the Water and Salte together, and let it coole till it be leuke warme, and then waſhe the

Veniſon therin, and let it lye in that pickle three dayes and thrée nightes, then take it out and powder it with drye Salt, and barrell it and ſtop it faſt.
            
            
               To keep Peares.
               PVt them in a veſſe;ll that they touche not each other, and make a bed of peares and an other of fine white Salt, and couer them cloſe.
            
            
               To kill Lyce.
               MAke a fier and put quicke ſiluer therein, and hang the clothes ouer it in the ſmoke and no vermin will come in them.
            
            
               Againſt drunkennes,
               DRinke the iuyce of Yarowe faſting, or els the Marrow of Porke faſting.
            
            
               To make Linnen cloth or Yearne white.
               TAke a Herring Barrell, and fill it full of Ale dregges, and ſtoppe it faſt, but

firſt you muſt haue a good diſhefull of parthed Beanes, and put them in a Linnen bagge, and béeing hotte, put them to the Dregges till they coole, and ſhut it faſt the ſpace of one quarter of an hower, then take a paunde of Allome ground to powder, and caſt it therein, and let it lye ſo foure dayes well cloſed, then waſh it.
            
            
               To remedy the feet that are ſore with Trauailing.
               TAke Plantaine and ſtampe it well, and annoint your féete with the iuice thereof, and the gréef will ſwage.
            
            
               A notable experiment againſt the Phitiske of the Lunges.
               TAKE of the Pimpernell brought into very fine powder two ounces, of newe Pimpernell water, and of Suger as much as ſhall ſuffiſe, making thereof an Clectuarie, of which take dayly two dragmes.
               PArſly with crummes of Breode applyed in the ſtéede of a plaiſter, dooth heale the

Shingles, but the decoction of the ſame drunke dooth breake the Stone, Florenti.
               
               MIntes put into Milke, it neither ſuffereth the ſame to curde, nor to become thicke, in ſo muche that layed into curded milk, this would bring the ſame thinne againe, ſo that by the ſame vertue and propertie he ſaith to reſiſt and abate the generation as wel in man as woman. Florentinus.
               
            
            
               A good drinke for the peſtilence.
               TAke a Lillye roote and waſhe it cleane and boyle it in white Wine till the one halfe be waſted, and then giue it the ſicke to drinke, and he ſhall breake out ful of bladders as if he were burnte of ſcalded, which of them ſelues will drye and waxe whole. Paſtor.
               
               CHeſtnuts eaten with Honnye faſting, doo helpe a man of the Cough.
            
            
               To make a perfect black Inke to write or limme withall.
               
                  TAke one pound of Galles, one pound of Gumme Arabick, of Vitrioll an ounce, bruſe your Galles and Vitriall, and put them into a veſſell fit for your purpoſe, fil it with white Wine, that all your ſtuffe may be couered aboue a hand bredth: then ſet it in the Sunne and ſtirre it dayly.
            
            
               A very good Greene.
               TAke the iuice of Rewe, Verdegres, and Saffron, bray them, and when you will vſe it, mingle it with Gumme water.
            
            
               An other Greene.
               TAke greene Baize, ſtéepe it alone in vineger, then ſtraine it through a Linnen cloth, and grinde it with a little Hony and Gumme water.
            
            
               An Emeralde Greene.
               TAke Verdegres, Litarge, Quicke Siluer brayed to powder, and ground with the piſſe of a yong childe.
            
            
               
               For to make a colour like Golde.
               TAke an vnce of Orpiment, one vnce of fine Chriſtall, bray them ſeuerally, and mingle with them the white of an Egge.
               TAke Saffron dryed, beaten into powder, and put to it as muche gliſtering Orpiment that is ſcalye & not earthy, then with the gall of an Hare or a Pyke, braye them togeather, put them in ſome violl vnder a dong-hill fiue dayes, then take it out and kéep it, for it is the colour of Gold.
            
            
               ¶ A notable receite to make Ipocras.
               TAke of Ginger two dragmes, of Sinamon i.ʒ, of Cloues, Nutmegges & Galanga, of eache a quarter of an vnce, ſtampe them, and put them in a Bagge or Strainer. Then take a pinte of the beſt red or white Wine that you can get: or a pinte of good Malmeſie, and mixe them all together, then take a pounde of Suger fined, and hauing ſtamped it, put it into the other Wine, and ſo poure it vpon the ſtrainer

wherein you did put the ſaide Wine with Spices, then hauing taken it out, you muſt powre it on againe, ſo often vntill it becomme as cleare as it was before, ſtirring it ſometime in the ſtrayner or bagge, with this ſpeciall note, that that is but to make a Flaggon ful: therfore as you wil haue it in quantitye, take the more ſtore of the ſaide thinges: you maye binde a little Muſke in a fine Linnen cloath at the ende of a Strayner, ſo that all the ſubſtāce may runne ouer it: ſo that it ſhall haue the odour of Muſke.
            
            
               A proper deuice to make lightes of an excellent ſauour.
               TAke two ounces of white Encence, of Camphire an vnce, beate it in powder, and make thereof little round pellets adding there vnto ſome white Waxe, then put them in a platter full of ſwéet Water, and fire the pellettes with a Candle, and you ſhall haue an excellent light and ſweet ſauour.
            
            
               To deſtroy Lyce.
               
                  TAke Frankenſence beaten to powder, and a quantitye of Bores Greace, and boyle them togeather in an earthen panne and héerewith annoynte the places where the Lice are.
            
            
               To make red Incke.
               TAke two vnces of Braſill, and a pinte of Water, and put the Braſill into it, and let it remaine there ſixe or ſeuen howres, then ſéeth it vntill the thirde part be deminiſhed, and it is a perfect red.
            
            
               Whether the Wine be mingled with Water or no.
               TAke ripe Mulberies and put them into your Wine, if they ſwim the Wine is pure, but if they ſinke there is water mingled. Alſo a Peare clean pared cauſeth the ſame effect.
            
            
               To heale lippes that are chapt with winde or colde.
               NEw Waxe, Maſticke, and Frankenſence, with oyle of Roſes, al this made

in an ointment, and there with annoint the chappes, and they wil heale preſently.
            
            
               For kybed heeles.
               TAke Gumme Dragant and galbanum, of each a like, and make thereof a powder, then take Oxe Tallowe, and a little Oyle of Violets, and melt them on the fire and therin put the ſaide powders, and make héereof an oyntement, and héerwith dreſſe your heeles.
            
            
               For ſcabbes in Children.
               OYle of Roſes, the waight of ſixe pence in common ſalt, and a little freſh Butter ſtirred altogeather vntill it become an ointment, healeth them.
            
            
               To deſtroy Crablice.
               AShes laide in Oyle, or take of Aloes, Olibanum, and Ceruſe, of eache foure ounces, beating them all into powder, and mingled with Oyle of Roſes, or freſh barrownes greace.
            
            
               
               An order to make Wormewood water of the beſt ſort as followeth.
               TAke ſixe gallons of olde and ſtrong Ale, and take a voyder full of Woormewood cleane picked and waſhed, the Water wel wrong out of it, or ſhaken, halfe an vnce of large Mace, halfe an vnce of Cinamon, two vnces of Nutmegges, a quarter of a pound of Anniſéedes, and as much Liquorice, and bruſe all thoſe Spices togeather, but not too ſmall, and cut the Woormewood betwixt your handes, and then ſet all theſe together in the pot, and ſtil them as you ſtil Aqua vitae togeather, and ſo you ſhall haue two quartes of the beſt, beſides the ſmaller or weaker.
            
            
               To make a good Poſſet Curde.
               FIrſte take the Milke and ſéethe it on the fire, and before it ſéeth put in your Egges according to the quantitye of your Milke, but ſée that your Egges be tempered with ſome of your Milke that ſtandeth on the fier, and you muſt ſtirre it ſtill vntill it ſéethe, and beginneth to riſe,

then take it from the fire, and haue your drinke ready in a faire Baſon on a chaſingdiſhe of coales, and put your Milk into the baſon as it ſtandeth, and couer it, and let it ſtande a while, then take it vp, and caſt on ginger and ſinamon.
            
            
               A medicine for the mother.
               TAke nep royall, and ſtampe it, then take two ſpoonefulls of the ſame iuice, and a ſpoonefull of ſallet oyle, and let it ſéeth away two partes, theſt vnto that remaineth but the quantitye of the Oyle onelye, and annoynte the place where the Mother riſeth.
            
            
               To make ſirrope of Roſes or flowers.
               FIrſte haue a glaſſe with faire Water, and make it warme in a Potte of ſéething Water, and when your water in the glaſſe is warme, then put to it roſe leaues and let it ſtand till it be colde, then wring out your Roſes, & make the foreſaid water warme againe as before, and then put

in other Roſes, and ſo doo nine dayes: and then put in Ginger, and ſéethe it vntil it be ſirrop.
            
            
               To take away the Cough or Stitche.
               TAke a pinte or a quarte of Malmeſie one handefull of Annyſéede, one handefull of vnſet Hiſſoppe: one Licorice ſticke bruſed, halfe a diſhe of ſwéete Butter, ſéeth all theſe thinges togeather till they be thicke: and after ſpreade it vpon a toſte of wheate bread and lay them within a linnen Cloath as warme as you maye ſuffer it to your Stomacke. But if you will take this for a Stitche leaue out the Butter.
               The Head annointed with the iuice of Léekes, preſerueth the haire from falling.
            
            
               To make Iellye.
               FOR a Pottle of Iellye, take of Sinamon a quarter of a pounde, of Ginger two ounces and di. of Graines two Peniwoorthe, of longe Pepper two Peniwoorthe,

Cloues halfe an ounce, of Suger two poundes, di. of Turneſoles two ounces and di. and ten Nutmegges, looke that the Spice be good and well made cleane, then take ſixe Calues féete, or an olde Cocke and thrée quartes of Claret Wine, and a pinte of Water, and let them boyle ſo long togeather vntill you may ſée the ſodliquor clammiſhe betwéen your fingers, then take it from the Fier and ſtrayne it through a ſtrayner, and ſo let it ſtande till it be colde, that the filth maye diſcende to the bottom and when you will finniſhe your Ielly, take the beſte of the ſaide liquor and put into an other Pot with the proportion of Spices, and boyle them togeather by the ſpace of halfe an houre, and in the mean time make cleane your Turneſole and duſte it well, then take a Ladle full of the ſaid liquor and put your Turneſole in it, and when it is a little well ſoked, then wring out ſo oft as it ſhall be néedfull, vntill your Ielly be faire coloured. Then take the whites of eight Egges, and beate them together a good while and ſkimme of the froth, and a litle before you ſhall thinke it time to drawe your Iellye, put the ſayde whites into the

Iellye with thrée ſpoonefulles of Vineger, and foorthwith drawe your Iellye through a wollen bag, and put in a branche of roſemary in the end of it, and ſo diſh it.
            
            
               How to dreſſe Orrenges.
               TAKE Oringes and ſhaue them with a Knife, and quarter them like an Apple and take out all the meate out of them, and laye them in Water, and ſhifte them twice a daye: then when you thinke they be inough, take them out, then ſet on faire Water on the fire: then put your Oringes in and parboyle them: then take them out and ſet their mouthes downewardes in a Flaſket that the Water maye runne out, then ſet on faire water ouer the fier to parboyle them againe: and if they be not well parboyled, boyle them againe till you may pinche them through: then take them out and put them in a faire cloth, and lay them in a Flaſket that it may drain out of them: then take a gallon of running Water and put them into it, & at euery foure Orenges you muſt put in a pound of Sugar, & when you haue doone ſo: ſet it on the fire, but before

you ſet it on the fier, take an Egge and breake it & take out the white of it and lay it in water, take your hand and beat it in yt water: then ſet it on the fier and let it burn cleare vnder it: and looke that no ſmoak ariſe: and when it dooth, ſéethe ſkimme of the top of it very cleane, then take it off the fier and with a ſtrainer ſtraine it into another pot, then put in your Oringes, then make the fier good and temperate, ſo that it ſéethe not too faſt, then you muſt take a ſpoone and ſkimme of the ſome: ſo that you touche not the Oringes, and as the ſirrop dooth ſéethe, ſo with a ſpoone turne them, and alwaies laye the ſirrop vpon the Oringes, when they haue ſod half an howre take them out and let your ſirrop ſéethe a good ſpace, then take ſome of the ſirrop and coole it, and if you ſée it any thing ſtiffe, then put the oringes into it againe.
            
            
               To preſerue Damſons.
               TAke a glaſſe that hath a wide mouth, and ſtrewe ſome Sugar in the bottome, then laye a rowe of Damſons and a rowe of Sugar, thus doo till

your glaſſe be almoſte full, then put to it Roſewater and a fewe Cloues and a little Sinamonne, then ſtoppe your glaſſe with paſte: then haue a pot with hot water readye on the fire, and put ſome haye in the bottome of the Potte for sauing the Glaſſe from breaking, and let not your pot boyle too faſt, then take vp the Glaſſe and licke whether your Suger be conſumed, and in the meane ſpace make ready your Sirrup, then when it is colde, put in your Damſons. The Sirrup muſt be made of ſuger, and Wine, Roſewater, and whole Sinamon, or half faire water: prouided that the glaſſe muſte boyle till the Suger be conſumed.
            
            
               To make drye Peares.
               TAke faire water and Roſewater according to the quantitie of your peares, then take Honye as much as you thinke good and put in your Peares, then let them ſéethe very ſoftlye that they breake not, then take them out and put them in a Collander and let them drain, then when you drawe your bread put them

into the Ouen in ſome earthen panne, and if they be not drye at the firſt, put them in againe vntil they be dry, then barrel them.
            
            
               For the ſhaking of the hand.
               WAſhe your handes in the Water that is in a Lauor, and put therein ſome Sage, let your handes drye of them ſelues without wiping.
            
            
               To ſtay the bloody Flixe.
               TAKE and cut out a péece of a péece of Béefe of a newe killed Oxe about the Briſket, & eate it raw, and this helpeth it.
            
            
               To reſtore the blood againe.
               TAke halfe a pinte of Muſkadell, and a peniwoorth of ſallet Oyle, and put them together and drinke it in the morninge, and walke an houre after.
            
            
               For running of the Raines.
               TAke pellitorye of the wall a good handfull, wilde Time and Parſlie, boyle

them in a quart of ſtrong Ale, vntil it come to a pinte, and drinke therof morning and euening nine or ten dayes halfe a pinte at a time, and warme it.
            
            
               For the Ague.
               TAKE a handfull of Smalledge, and a handfull of baye Salte, and a handfull of white Frankenſence, and ſixe Plantaine leaues, beate all theſe finely in a Morter then deuide them into foure partes, and lay two parts to your breſts, and the other two partes to the bought of your armes. An howre before your fit come, you muſt haue a pinte of Ale ſodde to the halfe, and when it riſeth ſkimme it, then put in a white breade cruſt, and let it ſéethe with the Ale, and when your Ague beginneth to come drink it and eate the cruſt of bread.
            
            
               A drinke for the ague.
               TAKE Baye leaues and Sage leaues and ſéethe them in white Wine, after ſtraine the wine from the leaues, then take baye-berries & bruſe them,

ſomewhat grocelye and put them in the Wine, and a little before your fit commeth drink it.
            
            
               A medicine for the Woormes in a childes belly or any other.
               TAKE a pound of May Butter, and clarifie it in the Sunne, then take two poundes of Woormwood ſtamped, and then waigh it after it be ſtamped, the Woormewood muſt be gathered gréene, then mingle them togeather with your hands after they be put togeather, and ſet them in the Sunne nine dayes in a potte or Glaſſe, and let it boyle an howre and a half, then ſtrain it, ſo put it vp in a Gally pot or in a dubble glaſſe and alwaies at the full of the moone annoint the belly of the partye againſt the fire, at no time els, and the medicine made in Maye.
            
            
               A medicine for to get the Beetelwigges out of a mans eare.
               TAke Hearbgrace, ſtampe it and ſtraine it with Aqua Compoſita, and put the iuice into the eare that is pained, after lye

downe on that ſide, and binde a cloth faſt about the head and it will come out.
            
            
               For a Legge that is ſwolne with a fall.
               TAke Hemlockes, and heate them hotte betweene Tyles and laye them to it: and it will aſwage the paine.
            
            
               For a wenne when it beginneth.
               TAke an old ladle and hold it againſt the fire vntill it dooth frye, and annoynt the Wenne with that that fryeth out of the Ladle thrée or foure times in a daye, and it will help it.
            
            
               For the Collicke.
               TAke a quarte of white Wine and make a Poſſet, then take the Poſſet drink and put therein a handfull of Mother of Tyme and a handfull of yung Parſlye, and ſéeth it in the Poſſet drinke, and take halfe a penywoorth of long Peper, and put in the poſſet and giue it to the patient to drink.
            
            
               
               For the canker in the mouth or throte, or to waſh your teeth that be hollow and ſtinketh.
               TAke a quantitye of Red Sage, and xij. croppes of Roſemarye, and Honyſuccles, and wilde Dayſies, and Sinckfoyle boyle them all in a pinte of faire water till it be ſodden the halfe pinte, and then take a little Roch Allome and burne it to powder and then take halfe a ſpoonefull of Honey, then put them into a faire cloth and ſtraine it, and when it is colde put it into little glaſſes.
            
            
               For the Gowt.
               TAke Camomill, Balme, Hollyhockes, Lettice, Mallowes, Grounſell, Chickwéede, of eache a handfull, boyle them in faire Water till it be tender, then take a quantitye of great Otemeale and beate it ſmall, then put it into thoſe Hearbes that you haue boyled, with two ſpoonefulles of Capons greace, and then boyle them all together vntill it be ſo thicke as it maye be ſpread vpon a Cloth, and as you ſéethe it,

ſtirre it that it burne not too, then beeing ſodde: ſpreade it on a cloth, that it maye be layed to the gréeued place as hotte as may be, and it ſhall helpe in twice dreſſing.
               IF you haue any payne in the ſoale of your foote, take halfe a doſſen of the leaues of ground Iuye, and pricke them and wrappe them to the ſoale of your foote, and ſo continue vntill you finde eaſe.
            
            
               To preſerue Quinces.
               FIrſt pare your Quinces, and core them then take to euery pounde of Quinces a pinte of Roſe water and a pounde of Suger, then take the Roſe water and Sugar, boyle them togeather with ſome of the cores of the Quinces, then clarifie the Liquor with the whites of Egges, and ſet it ouer the fire againe, and when it ſéetheth put in the Quinces, and caſt in a ſticke or two of Sinamon, and if they caſt not colour quicklye, couer them and let it ſéethe vntill you maye put a ruſhe through them then let it ſtande vntill it be colde, and ſo ſet it vp.
            
            
               
               Marmalade of Quinces.
               TAKE your Quinces and coare them, and pare them: then put to them ſo much Water as ſhall ſuffice to boyle them ſo tender that they may be ſtrayned, when they be ſodden, put out as muche of the Liquor as you leaue when that you haue ſufficient to ſtraine it, and let it ſtande vntill the next daye morning, then meaſure with a pounde diſhe how many poundes of ſubſtaunce you haue: then take to euery eight pounde of Quinces ſixe pounde of Sugar: then put it to the Liquor that you kept before that your Quinces were firſt ſodden in and then ſet it on the fire and let it ſéethe a while: and clarifie it with white of Eggs: then ſtrayne the ſayde liquor, and put it to the ſubſtaunce of the Quinces aforeſayde: and ſo ſet it on the fire, and let it boyle vntil it haue a faire colour, that it maye cut at the ſides of a diſh: then put it into boxes. If you will put in any Muſke, take Roſe water in a Saucer, and put in your Muſk and when you haue taken your Marmelade from the fier: immediatlye put in the ſame Roſewater and Muſke, and ſtirre it togeather

and boxe it.
            
            
               A Borage Tart or Spinage.
               PArboyle your Spinage, then ſtampe it and ſtraine it with halfe a doſſen yolkes of Egges, ſeaſon it as your Cream Tart.
            
            
               A medicine for the Plague
               VVHen you ſuſpecte your ſelfe to be infected, goe to bed, and cauſe a pinte of Malmeſie to be put in a Potte, and halfe a Penywoorthe of Graines beaten ſmall to put in the ſame Potte, boyle them together, and drinke therof as hotte as you can and ſweat.
            
            
               A Whaye for Itche or breaking out.
               CLarifie Whaye with the Leaues of Succorye, Endiue, Borage, of eache an ounce of Fumitorye flowres, of Hoppes an ounce, one Fennell and Succorye Roote bruſed, of great Raiſons an ounce, let theſe be clarified with a quantitye of Whaye,

drinke thereof euerye Morning a draught Warme fiue or ſixe Morninges, then take a handefull of Sene ſodden in a Pot cloſelye ſtopped from a Pinte to a quarter of a Pinte with a few Anniſeedes bruſed, then ſtraine it and drincke it in the morning faſting, and by and by a little Aleburye, and ſome thinne broth.
            
            
               Againſt the fellon and Vncomes.
               TAKE an ounce of Sage, of Rewe the waighte of the Sage in Senegreene, waſhe theſe together and ſhake out the water, drye them cleane with a cloth, and chop them very ſmall, then take ſower Leauen the bigneſſe of a Tennis ball, blacke Sope a ſpoonefull, two ſpoonefulles of Tarre, ſtampe it in a woodden diſhe with a peſtell of Wood, laye the ſame morning and Euening vnto it an inche thicke.
               SIrrope of Fumitorye, openeth and taketh awaye all obſtructions of the Lyuer and ſtomacke, and fortifieth all the members, it cureth all the ſores about the in warde partes, which come of Salte

and burnte water, as Scabbes, Leper, and French paxe.
            
            
               Sirrop of Roſa ſolis good for ſowning or any other diſeaſes in the ſtomack.
               TAke a quarte of the beſt Aqua Compoſita, Aqua vitae a quarte, a quantitye of the Roſes of Solis cleane picked: and ſome what dryed in the Sunne, put all theſe in a glaſſe, ſet it in the Sun foure or fiue dayes: then take di▪
                  ʒ. of caſe Ginger, di. ʒ. of Nutmegges, di. ʒ. of Cloues, white Pepper, of Graines, Anniſéedes: Colianderſéede, Ana a quarter of an ounce of Sene, a Sticke of Licorice, foure cornes of longe Pepper, di. ʒ. of Sinamonne, then put all theſe Spices beeing well choſen, finely fried ſomewhat bruſed into the pot, then take a quarter of a pounde of Redde Currans, di. a quarter of a pounde of dates, a quarter of a pounde of Raiſons at the Sunne, eighte Figges of Algarye, viii. graines of Muſke, as muche of Ambergrice, white and redde Corrall, Ana. of Pearles ʒ, all theſe infuſed togeather in the ſaide Liquor: and ſet in

the Sunne forty dayes, and cloſely couered that no ayre may come vnto it.
            
            
               Aqua Roſa Solis.
               TAKE a pinte of Aqua vitae, a Gallon of the flowres of Roſa Solis well picked, a péece of Angell Golde, of Roſemary flowers or the hearbe it ſelfe, and a quantitye of fine Suger, ſtyll them in a Stillatorye and kéepe the Water cloſe, and occupye it by a ſpoonefull at once.
            
            
               To make fine Cakes.
               TAke a quantitye of fine wheate flower, and put it in an Earthen Pot ſtoppe it cloſe and ſet it in an Ouen, and bake it as longe as you woulde a Paſtye of Veniſon, and when it is baked it will be ful of clods, then ſerce your flower through a fine Serſer, then take Clouted Creame or ſwéete Butter, but Creame is beſt: then take Suger, Cloues, Mace, Saffron and yolkes of Egges, ſo muche as will ſeeme to ſeaſon your Flower, then put theſe thinges into the Creame, temper all together, then put

thereto your flower, ſo make your Cakes the paſte will be very ſhort, therfore make them very little, lay paper vnder them.
            
            
               To make an excellent Pomander.
               TAke of Storax Calamita 
                  ʒ.ſs. of Beniemin two ounces, of Labdanum ʒ.ſs. of Cloues, white Saunders, of eache thrée dragmes, Margerum two dragmes: mingle with theſe powders Muſk and Ambergrice of eache a ſcruple: make your ball with the infuſion of Roſewater and Ciuet in a morter ſomwhat warme.
            
            
               A precious oyntment for all manner of Aches.
               TAke a pound waight of Sage, as muche of Rew, halfe a pound of Woormewood, and as muche of Croppes of Bayes, and beate them verry ſmall in a Morter: then take two pound and a halfe of ſhéepes Tallow, and temper it with the Hearbes that be beaten: and beate them againe together newe and then put them in a panne, and ſet them vpon hotte Embers, and put therto a

pottle of Oyle of Olife, and let it ſtand vpon the hot Embers two howres and a halfe at the leaſt, then ſtraine it through a courſe cloth, and put it in an earthen Pot, and ſo occupye it. This would be made in May or in Iune.
            
            
               For the canker in the mouth.
               TAke white Vineger a quantitye, with as much Honye: and then ſet them on the fire to boyle with a little Allom: and waſhe your mouth therwith as oft as ſhall neede.
               TAke the iuice of Plantaine, and Vineger, and Water of Roſes, and waſhe your mouth.
               TAke the iuice of Woodbin, and the iuice of Solſeque, that is Marigoldes: and Hony, and powder of Canell, and pouder of Copporis, and the powder of wilde Sage, burnt and medled all togeather, and laye it theron where the Canker is, and it ſhall dry it. But to ſlay the Canker take a Red Onyon and lay it theron.
               
                  CArduus eaten or drunke in powder prouoketh ſweate.
               A Mouce roſted and giuen to Children to eate, remedieth piſſing a bed.
            
            
               A precious drinke for the Peſtilence, approued.
               TAKE Fetherfew, Matfelon, Mogwort, Solſequi, Scabions, and Mallowes, waſhe them and ſtampe them: and temper them with Ale: and giue the ſicke to drinke ſixe ſpoonefulles at once, if he haue it betimes it wil deſtroy the corruption, and ſaue the ſicke patient.
            
            
               A ſinguler medicine to reſiſte the peſtilence.
               TAke pouder of Saffron tenne graines, Wallnutes twentye graines, Figges ʒ.ij. and ſixe Sage Leaues ſtamped togeather with ʒ i. of Pimpernell water, and iij. Graines of Mithridatum, kéepe this in a cloſe Glaſſe, and eate thereof in the Morning twelue Graines, and this will defend the receiuer from the Peſtilence.
               
                  THe greate Garden Docke druncke in Wine, purgeth Flegme, Cholour, and water downwardes.
            
            
               The vertue of Motherwoorte.
               IT groweth by the high wayes and Stony Walles, buſhing with many ſtalkes leaued like a Nettle, but more ragged: and towards the bottome like Crow foote. It is of wonderfull force againſt any ſickenes of the hart: whereof the chéefe name is deriued, it helpeth Crampes and Palſies, it killeth Woormes in the body, it clenſeth the breſte from Flegme, it dooth open colde obſtructions, it prouoketh Vrine. Moueth Womens flowres the iuice drunke, or the hearbe in decoction, and a ſpoonefull of the powder of this hearbe giuen in Wine, helpeth the hard labours of Women.
            
            
               An excellent medicine againſte Impoſtumes Plurifie, Coughes, and all diſeaſes in the Breſt.
               TAKE a handfull of Scabions the herb
                     •
                   dryed, of Liquorice cut ſmall an ounce,

twelue Figges, Fenell ſéede an ounce, Anniſéede as muche, Erius halfe an ounce lay theſe in water or white Wine a night, the next daye boyle them til it be conſumed to yt third part, then ſwéeten it with ſuger.
            
            
               A medicine for the Collick.
               TAKE Otes and bren them in a pan, as yée doo parched Peaſon, and as hot as yée may ſuffer it, lay them to the Nauel in a Linnen cloth.
            
            
               For the ſame.
               TAke a faire flatte ſtone, and make it red in the fire, and then take it out, and let it coole till the redneſſe be paſſed, and then take a halfpeniwoorth of Saffron, and lay it vpon the ſtone, and turne it thither and hether, vntill it be turned almoſte to powder and take a ſpoonefull of Malmeſie, and put the Saffron there vnto and ſo drinke, it wil ſoone paſſe away.
            
            
               A preſent remedy againſt the plague.
               
                  TAke a great redde Onyon, and make a hole in the middeſt, and put a ſpoonful of Triacle, roſte him in the fire: take a ſpoonefull of Vineger, a ſpoonefull of Aqua compoſita: bruſe them all togeather, ſtrayne them through a cloth and giue it to drinke.
            
            
               For the cough.
               TAke thrée Figges and roſte them, and put them in a Cup of Béere, and a little Liquorice and Anniſéedes beaten, then let it ſtande by the fire till it be warme, then take out the Figges and eate them, then drinke vp the drinke and goe to bed warme and in iiij. nightes it breaketh the Cough.
            
            
               To delay heate.
               TAke of Vineger one parte, fine Suger two partes, running water foure parts boyle them all togeather to the one halfe or more: and when you ſhall occupie it, take a ſpoonfull and a halfe of the ſaid ſirrop, and eight or nine ſponefulles of Barlye water drinke it.
            
            
               To breake Flegme.
               
                  TAke a quarte of Muſkadel, a pint of Hiſoppe water, thrée good Raſes of caſed Ginger, and as muche of Liquorice cleane pared, then take two peniwoorth of Suger candie bruſed, put all theſe in a glaſſe, ſhake them together: couer your glaſſe foure and twentye howres, drinke thereof Morning and Euening.
            
            
               A preparatiue before you purge the Stomacke.
               TAKE Sene three ounces, of Polipodye thrée ounces, of Anniſéedes thrée ounces, ſéethe all theſe in a quart of water to a pinte: and ſtrain them through a faire cloth put in Suger to make them pleſant.
            
            
               To purge the ſtomacke.
               TAke a handfull of Mercurye, as muche of yong Mallowes, an ounce of Sene, thrée ſpoonfulles of Anniſéedes, put them in a pinte of white Wine, and as much Ale all night, the next daye ſéeth them together till halfe be conſumed, then drincke a good draughte thereof in the Morning, ſléepe vpon

it.
            
            
               An excellent purger from all partes of the body.
               TAKE an ounce or two of perfecte Turpentine of the chéefeſt, bruſe it and diſolue it in a Morter with a Peſtell, with halfe the yolke of an Egge, put thereto thrée ounces of ſmalledge water, beat them together till it be like milke, and ſup it vp but firſte waſh your Turpentine in Fenell water.
            
            
               To make the haire of the bearde to growe.
               TAKE Cane Rootes, Brionye Rootes, Beetes, Radiſhe, Flower de Luce, Onions, of eche a like the quantity of fowre ounces, ſixe fat Figges bruſed and ſtamped very ſmall, Maidenhayre, Sothernwood, Dill of eache a handfull, ſéethe all theſe in good Wine: then wring out the liquor and ſtraine it through a Strainer, then put to it freſhe Butter neuer Salted, pure honey two vnces, Oyle of Almondes ſwéete and ſower, Oyle of Sefania an ounce, Oximell

ſquillicke halfe an ounce, the powder of Meale, Nigella, Fenegréeke well ſifted and throughlye boulted in a Boulter, one handfull of Graſſe, Labdanum an vnce: ſet theſe vpon the fire and ſtirre them wel till it be thicke. This Linament being applied to the Chinne and Chéekes, will become heare: The body firſt purged from all filth inwardly proued by experience.
               OYle of Mirrhe healeth all kibes, Burninges, Pimples, Cliftes, about the Fundament.
               OYle of Tartar mingled with Camphire, the face béeing therewith anointed, it maketh it faire and ſmoothe.
            
            
               For a cut or ſore bruſe.
               TAke Rootes of Louage, Alehofe, Parſelye, Ana 
                  ʒ.ſs. beate them in a Morter very fine, then take Barrowes greace and boyle them together, then ſtraine forth the Iuice: then take as muche vnwrought Waxe as a Wallnut, halfe aſmuch Roſin and let them boyle together: and after you haue thus doone let it paſſe through a ſtrainer

into a little panne of water, then let it ſtande vntill it be colde, then labour it in your handes vntill it be ſomewhat ſhorte, and then wrappe it in a péece of Leather, and ſo vſe it.
            
            
               For a weake Backe.
               TAKE ſixe Croppes of redde Neppe, two ſpoonefulles of Archangell flowers, and ſhread them fine, and take two new layed Egges and ſtirre it together, make thrée or foure Fritters with a morſell of ſwéet Butter, frye them in a little earthen pan and let them be eaten without bread or ſalt but with fine Suger.
            
            
               The plaiſter for the back.
               TAke white Archangell flowers and leaues, Chumphrye leaues and rootes i.ʒ. Plaintaine and Burſa paſtoris, Ana. i.ʒ. beaten very fine, and put to them a ſpoonefull of Honye, and fry them in a frying panne, and deuide it into foure partes, and make of euery parte a plaiſter, and ſo lay it to the Patients back euery night a plaiſter.
            
            
               
               Maiſter Roſes medicine againſte the ſtone, and to cauſe one to make water.
               TAke a new laid egge and in the great ende thereof make a hole and take out the yolke and white of it: and lay the hole of the ſame Egge downewardes vpon a hot Brickſtone vntill it be purged, ſo that you may make pouder thereof, then take it and drinke it with white wine firſt in the morning and laſt in the euening and it helpes.
            
            
               For the heate in the Raines, and to auoide the bliſtring of the mouth.
               TAKE Liuerwoorte, Sorrell, Succory, Balme, Ana i ʒ. and ſéethe theſe in a Quarte of Whaye well clarified halfe an houre, and drinke thereof euery morning a good draught of halfe a pinte at once.
            
            
               For one that is deafe.
               TAke ſwéete Sallet Oyle halfe a pound, adde to it Woormewood, Sorrell, Anniſeedes, Perwincle, Ana di.ʒ. and drye all

this to powder. Take powder of olde Roſes, an vnce of Colloquintida béeing boyled in Oyle a good while, then ſtraine it through a cloth a good while, and put héerof thrée droppes into the eares of the partie that is gréeued béeing warme, and vſe this euery day twice: this hath béen proued
            
            
               Againſt the Pyles
               TAke a great ſiluer Cele, flea him, draw him, and let him touche no water nor ſalte, cut him in gobbittes and roſt him: the firſt dropping béeing caſt out: take the next dropping, and with a fine Linnen cloth being dipped in it, the dropping of the Cele being heate, and ſo with the cloath ſoke it vpon the places gréeued: this wil helpe be they neuer ſo ſore.
            
            
               For the paſſion of the harte.
               TAke redde Roſe leaues, the powder of Saffron, the Oyle of Mace, and melte them togeather, quilte the ſame in a litle thinne Silke, and draw it ouer with a little thinne Ciuet, and apply it to the region

of the hart.
            
            
               For the Itche.
               TAKE twelue of the yelloweſt Docke roots, ſcrape them as you wil ſcrape parſ nippes, cut them ſmall and ſtamp them vevery fine, ſet them ouer a Chaſing diſh of coales, and put therein halfe a diſh of ſwéet Butter, and let them boyle togeather till your Rootes be readye to ſtrain, and when they be throughly boyled ſtraine them, and when you haue ſo doone, put therto a ſpoonfull of Brimſtone beaten to powder, then ſtirre them both together, and ſet them in a colde place and it wil be a ſalue, and ſo let the patient annoint his body before the fire and let it ſoake into the ſkinne, vſe it morning and euening.
            
            
               For a Fellon.
               TAke Leuen very ſowre, and crumme it into a little Pipkin, then take a quarter of a penny diſhe of Butter and foure ſpoonfulles of Roſe Vineger leaues and all, and ſo boyle all together, and laye it to the place as hot as may be: this is proued.
            
            
               
               To deſtroy an Impoſtume.
               TAke the Rootes of Hollihocke and waſh it very pure, ſéethe it till it be tender; then put that water that you ſod it in into a clean veſſell then take Linſéede, Fenegréeke of eche the like quantitie: and looke that you haue as muche of them both as of the roote, then ſéeth it in the ſame water vntill it dooth rope as birdlime then ſtampe the Rootes, and put therto barly Meale: then mingle all together and fry them with Bores Greace and laye it to the fore plaiſter wiſe.
            
            
               For the Rewme and Cough of the Lunges.
               TAke yong Elicampane rootes a pounde, of Setrarch, of Maiden haire Ana i.ʒ.al béeing newe gathered: ſcrape the Elecampane rootes and cut it into ſmall ſlices: ſéeth them altogeather into fiue pintes of running water till they come to a pinte and a halfe: then ſtraine them and put therto fine Suger thrée quarters of a pounde, then boyle it till it come vnto thrée quarters of

a pinte, then take two yolkes of new laied Egges and beate them: and let them boile together while you may ſay yt Pſalm Miſerere, and take héereof at night a ſpoonefull, and an other in the morning, lying on their backes an hower after they haue receiued it: & in foure dayes keeping them warme, it will ridd the greateſt Cough that is.
            
            
               For a Canker or diſeaſe of the Gummes or Throate.
               TAKE a handfull of Plaintaine, a handfull of Honey-ſuccles, an ounce of Daſie leaues, halfe a handfull of Sage, a quart of running Water, theſe thinges béeing boyled therein vntill it come to a pinte then ſtraine them and put therein fiue ſpoonfulles of ſharpe Vineger, fiue ſpoonefulls of ſtone Honye, as muche Rochallom as a Wallnutte: this is prooued to heale a Canker.
            
            
               A Gargell for a furred mouth.
               TAKE Barly water, ſtrawberye leaues, and Sinkioyle, Ana di.ʒ.a ſticke of Liquorice

di. pinte of white Vineger, let it runne through a two fold linnen cloth; it is good for a ſurred mouth or throate.
            
            
               To heale the Canker vpon the Yarde.
               TAke an vnce of Roche Allom, and half an vnce of Verdegres, with Smithes water: and put all in ſome veſſell of glaſſe and ſéethe it two houres; ſtraine it and vſe it as you thinke good.
               PIllute Aeliphauge, helpeth the ſtinkinge of the mouth, béeing taken euerye daye nipped betwixt your teeth.
            
            
               For a Stitche or winde Collicke.
               TAKE Capillus veneris, Parſlye rootes, Fennell rootes, of eache a quarter of an vnce, bruſe theſe hearbes and drinke that iuice with white Wine.
            
            
               Haire to grow.
               A Cornes burnte and mixt with Beares greace.
            
            
               Againſt Spottes and Pimples in the Face.
               
                  
                  NIgella brayed and mixed with Flowre and Honey, and make thereof an ointment, and annoynt here-with the ſpots at night, and in the morning waſh them with Parſlie water.
            
            
               For a hot burning in the ſtomacke growen of Choller, which cauſeth the Feuer.
               TAKE Borrage, Mallowes, Fumitorye Violet leaues, Béetes, greate Raiſins the Stones taken out: Prunes, Polipody with a little Dill: ſeethe theſe in pottage and eate héerof.
            
            
               For a ſauſtem face.
               TAKE the iuice of houſlike, and the iuice of Tanſye, and ſeethe them in a pinte of white Wine to halfe a pinte, and when it is colde, laye it to the face with a Flaxen cloth dipped in the ſame, and ſo let it lye al night, and when it is drye, then you may wet it ſo often as you liſt.
            
            
               For an Ache.
               
                  TAke Oyle de Baye, and Aqua vitae, a ſpoonefull and mixe them together, and anoynt it.
            
            
               For heate in the face.
               TAke a pounde of Almondes, a pinte of warme Water, ſtraine them, then put thereto halfe an ounce of white Campher, a pinte of white Wine, beat them together, and ſtraine it with a pinte of Margerame water, and put it in a glaſſe, and waſh therwith.
            
            
               For the ſame.
               TAke Vineger halfe a pinte, Deares ſuet as muche as you can holde in your hand Brimſtone ſo muche as will goe into an Egge béeing finely bruſed, ſéethe them altogeather till they be almoſte drye, béeing made in a ball, take a litle thereof, and put it into a Saucer and melte it with a fewe Coales, then take a fine cloth and dip therin, and rub ſoftlye the place where the corruption is, vntill it be taken away.
               If this helpe not within a moneth, then drinke euerye morning a Cuppe of Béere,
put into it fine Engliſh Madder finely picked, bruſed, and ſearſed and drink it.
            
            
               For the ſame.
               TAke Capons Greace melt it and ſtrain it through a cloth, and let it ſtande to coole a a quarter of an howre, then put in Brimſtone finelye bruſed, and mingle it with the Capons greace, and annoint the face therewith when you goe to bed where the pimples be or rednes, and in the Morning waſh it with Roſewater luke warme Remember you pick not your Noſe, if you will haue it ſtronger: put in Ginger finely beaten, a peniwoorth of eche will ſerue, but of Capons greace y.d.
            
            
               To vomit vp Cholor.
               TAke ſixe Docke Rootes cleane waſhed and the pithe taken out, a fewe toppes of Redde Mintes and a little Woormwood béeing ſtéeped in a quarte of Ale, or white Wine all night, and drinke thereof half a pinte at one drafte: It is good to clenſe the bodye in all partes, as before is ſaid, perhappes with a froole or two, this is approued

béeing taken betwéene Marche and Iune.
            
            
               For a Fellon.
               TAke twelue Snailes in the garden, and beate them ſhelles and all vntil that it come to a ſalue and applye it, and when it waxeth drye, take freſhe ſtil, and it wil kill heale, and drawe.
            
            
               To ſtop the whites in women.
               POmegranet Flowres, the kirnelles of Pine apples bruſed together, with two or thrée braunches of S. Iohns woorte, being boyled in a quarte of red Wine from a quarte to a pint and a half: and drink morning and euening.
            
            
               For the ſtuffing of the Lightes and Lunges.
               TAKE Arthemeſia, Epithimum, redde Sage, Roſemarye toppes, redde Fenell of eache a handfull, a Galingale roote halfe ʒ. of gréene Ginger, halfe ʒ. of Manus Chriſti, a ſticke of Liquorice, ſéethe it from a quarte to a pinte.
            
            
               
               For the heate in the back approued, D. Huicke.
               TAKE the water of Plantaine diſtilled or the iuice therof put to the leaues, the leaues of red Roſes diſtilled, and the Water of red roſes, and the water of red Roſe Vineger, then put all theſe togeather in an earthen pot, & put it into the water as Linnen cloath: and the ſame ſtéepe there, then after a while take it out, and with a fewe leaues of red Roſe cake, lay it to the backe and when it waxeth 
                     •
                  ot vſe another cloath dipped therin.
            
            
               To drye vp the Rewme.
               TAke Nutmegs, Cloues and Mace, beaten to powder with the powder of Roſemary: boyle theſe togeather in ſwéete Sallet Oyle vntill it be ſomwhat thick: ſpread it vpon a cloth and laye it to the crowne of the head: this is approued to help it.
            
            
               To keepe the eyes cleere, coole, and from rednes and to kill the Itche.
               
                  TAke of P
                     •
                  a
                     •••
                  ne two handfull, Houſléek one handfull, ſtampe them and ſtraine them and let it ſettle, then powre out the cleare iuice from the droſie, put thereto halfe as muche red Roſewater, and a quarter of a Spoonefull of white Suger Candy in powder, then take Lapis Caluminaris a péece as bigge as your thumb, and ſlake it 12 times in the ſame water, and héereof put 4 droppes morning and euening lying vpon your backe. Approued.
            
            
               Againſt the Collick and Stone in maner of a plaiſter.
               TAKE Parſlye and Smalage, Ana. two ſpooneful of Capons Greace, put this in an earthen veſſell, putting the one ſpoonful in the bottome, and the other in the top vpon the hearbes, ſet theſe on the Embers to boyle from Morne to night, then ſtampe them and ſtraine them: and ſpread the ointment vpon a linnen cloth, and lay it hot to the Nauell and bottome of the belly.
            
            
               A Cliſter to be giuen to a Childe or woman in childe bed.
               
                  TAke a pinte of newe Milke, thrée vnces of redde Suger candied, boyle your Milke well, then take it of: and let it ſtand till it be no warmer then you can abide it on your chéeke, and with a Cliſter pipe put it vp.
            
            
               A Cliſter.
               TAKE a Hen pullet, drawe it very clean and breake all the bones thereof, then ſéethe it with a quarte of licour, vntill that it come to a pinte, then take a handfull of Spinage, one handefull of Marche Mallowes or other Mallowes, and a handful of Violet leaues, ſeethe theſe hearbes in the licour of the pullet very well, with as muche ſalte as wil ſeaſon an Egge, then put therto a Saucer full of pure Sallet Oyle, and warme it.
            
            
               To breake the Stone.
               TAke a Cocke of a yéere olde, and open him, and you ſhall finde in his Mawe ſmall white ſtones, take them and beate them in a braſon Morter very fine, and put it in good white Wine, and drink it: and it wil breake the ſtone.
            
            
               
               Againſt toothache.
               TAke a little burnt roche Allome, and in the burning put a little fine Linte into it, and put it into your téeth that is hollow this will eaſe the paine.
            
            
               A medicine to ſtrengthen the backe.
               TAke a quarte of good Ale, thrée or foure whole Maces and as many Dates, the ſtones taken out, and pith alſo: then take the toppes of Roſemarye a good handfull and boyle all togeather from a quarte to a pint, then take the oyle of two or thrée new layde Egges, and take off the rinde about the yolke: then put the yolke into the Ale, and boyle them togeather, and ſtirre them wel, and ſo drink it morning and euening.
            
            
               For the heate in the backe.
               TAke Vng. frigidum Galeni 
                  ʒ.iij. you muſt take the oyntment and ſpread it vpon a fine Linnen cloath, béeing firſte dipped in red Roſe water, then warme it againſt the

fire and ſo lay it vpon the Kidneis, & when it waxeth hot take it off, and lay to an other
            
            
               For the Collick and Stone.
               TAKE the Cuttinges of a Vine and drye them throughlye, when you will make your Medicine: burne them, then take the Aſhes that dooth come thereof: and put it into a pinte of Reniſhe wine or white Wine and let it ſtande in it all night, and in the morning drink therof: thus vſing the quantity of the vine to the quantity of the wine Probatum eſt.
               
            
            
               To ſtaunche blood.
               TAke the beſte Vineger that you can get, Plantine Water, of eache two poundes: and therein wette diuers linnen clothes, and laye them to the ſoles of the féete, the palme of the hand, and againſte the Liuer: and the blood ſhal forthwith ſtanche.
            
            
               To take away ſpottes from the handes or ſunburninges.
               
                  TAKE the in
                     ••
                  e of a Lemon with a little Baye Salte, waſhe your handes with it and let it drye, then waſh them with cundit water, and you ſhall finde all ſpots gon: it is good againſt ſcurffe or ſuch like.
            
            
               Againſt ſtuffing of the Lunges.
               TAKE and make a Poſſet of Sacke and Ale, with Anniſéedes and Licorice beaten to powder, and let it ſéethe with the drinke, put in it a good péece of Suger, and Dredge, if you haue any, and drinke thereof euery morning, it helpeth.
            
            
               A water to waſh the yard, for one that had the running lately of the Reines.
               TAKE Daiſies, Plantine leaues, and woodbinde, of eache three handfulles, of the beſt Engliſh honye, and a péece of Roche Allom as bigge as a Walnut, boyle al theſe in a quart of faire water with a prittye quantitye of redde RoſeWater in an Earthen Potte cloſe couered, ſo long as you will ſéethe an Egge vntill it be hard, then ſtraine it: and with this

water with your ſering, ſquirte it into the yard, the water béeing luke warme: ſo that the pipe thereof be put an inche or more, and ſpout it ſtrongly that the water may come behinde the ſore place, and ſo vſe it euerye day thrée times for a monethes ſpace.
            
            
               For Sinewes that be ſhrunke, in maner of an ointment.
               TAke twelue yong ſwallowes out of the neſt: take alſo vnſet Tyme, the leaues and ſtringes of Strawberies, and Lauender Cotten of eache a handfull, and ſtampe them togeather, and the Swallowes, with their feathers Guttes and all: then ſtamp them in a morter, and ſo boyle it in Maye Butter, and then let it be put into an earthen Pot, ſtopped cloſe the ſpace of nine dayes, then ſéeth it againe with ſome more May butter, and ſtraine it: and when néed is chaſe it againſt the fire.
            
            
               For ſore eyes that ſmart or Itche.
               TAKE Lapis Caluminaris, and make it hotte in the Fire, quench it in a pint of

white wine thrée or foure times: then take the ſrane and ſtampe it to fine powder, and ſtraine the wine with the powder, and put it in a glaſſe, and when you haue néede vſe it. Remember to ſhake the glaſſe till it be thicke, and with a feather drop two or thrée droppes in your eies the party lying on his back.
            
            
               Againſt the Sciatica.
               TAKE foure or fiue great Onyons and roſt them very ſoft, then pil and ſtamp them in a Morter, and put thereto halfe a pinte of Aqua vitae, thrée ſpoonfuls of Neats féete Oyle, and boyle them together till it waxe verye thicke, then ſtrain them, and therewith annoynte the gréefe, chaſing it in before the fire a quarter of an howre: euening & morning, then lay a wilde Cats ſkin thereto: the hairye ſide next your fleſhe, and within xv. dayes you ſhall haue eaſe.
            
            
               ¶An oyntment for Aches, bruſes, Lamenes, Stitches, Gowtes hardnes of the Splene, Ague, Cankers, and for paine in the eares.
               
                  TAKE of Sage and Rewe of eache a pounde, of Woormewood of Baye leaues, of eache halfe a pounde, of Sheepes Sewet cleane picked from the Skinne thrée pounde, of ſwéete Oyle Olife a pottle, chop the hearbes very ſmall and then ſtampe them as ſmall as maye be, thē ſhred the ſewet very fine and put them all togeather: and then ſtampe them altogether vntill the ſewet be not ſeene: then take it foorth and put it into a faire Panne and put the Oyle into the Panne and couer it cloſe, and ſo let it ſtande for the ſpace of ten dayes: then take it forthe and breake it into a braſſe panne, and ſet it on a ſoft fier, and alwaies ſtirre it vntill the hearbes be crackinge, then take it off and ſtraine it through a wide Canuas Cloth into a faire Earthen pot and ſo kéep it. For thoſe vehement aches when you ſhall lay of this ointment vpon it, you muſt take the Wooll that groweth betwéene the Shéepes Legges or the longeſt of the wooll and carde it in brode flakes and baſte it vpon a linnen cloth and keep that alwaies to it.
            
            
               To cauſe one to piſſe.
               
                  TAke horſedunge of the Stable, newe Maye Butter and Aqua vitae, of eche like portions, fry them together and make thereof a plaiſter and apply it to the patient from the Nauell to the Fundament as hot as you maye ſuffer it, and feare not though it cauſe to make bloud iſſue, for ſuch is the woorkinge of the medicine; it cauſeth the ſtone to auoide: approoued.
            
            
               A ſoueraine medicine for an ache in the ſhoulder.
               TAke Figges and Raiſons of the Sunne of eache a like quantitye, and halfe aſmuche Muſterde ſéede, and beat them very ſmall; grinde them with the beſte Vineger in a paire of Muſtard Quernes, that doone ſpread it vpon a Lambes ſkin and laye it to the ache.
            
            
               To ſtaunche blood at the noſe.
               TAKE an Egge and breake it and put out the meat: and then receiue ſo muche blood as will fill the ſhell of the partye bléeding: that doon ſet the ſame in the fire vntill

it be hard, then burne the 
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  ie to aſhes and it will ſtanche the bleeding.
            
            
               Idem.
               TAke an Inkell and binde the perſon ſo bléeding about the temples of the head, and knit the knot thereof in the neck, and it ſtauncheth.
            
            
               For an Ague.
               TAKE thrée pintes of Ale, an ounce of redde Sage, the like quantitye of Baye leaues, thrée ounces of fine Suger, with a ſpoonfull of Pepper, ſéeth all theſe together in the Ale vntill it be ſodden to a pint: then ſtraine it through a fairecloth, and drinke this before the fit commeth.
            
            
               To binde to the handes being parcell of the ſame Medicine.
               TAke as muche gréene glaſſe as will fill a ſpoone béeing beaten to powder, take thrée ſpoonefulles of ſtone Honye, with a handfull of Red Sage: mingle theſe with a head of Garlick, putting thereto as many Cobwebbes as will temper the ſame,

being an Egge ſhell full, then take them all together and vſe this a quarter of an houre before the 
                     •…
                  itte: this muſt be vſed round about the wreſtes.
            
            
               For one that conſumeth, to be eaten in the morning.
               TAKE a new laid Egge let it be rere roſted, and put thereto a Cake of Manus Chriſti, and let it diſſolue in it: and eat the ſame euening and morning.
            
            
               For a cold ſtomacke.
               TAKE a new laide Egge béeing rere roſted, and put thereto a prettie quantitye of groce Pepper: let him eate it nexte his hart to diſſolue cold humors.
            
            
               For the ſwelling of the hart, and breaking of Flegme.
               TAKE a quarter of a pinte of Damaſke Roſewater, thrée ſpoonefulles of white Wine, with a fewe ſoppes of white Bread a prettye quantitye of Butter and Suger, this béeing boyled vpon a Chafingdiſhe of

coales, let the partye eate thereof thrée or foure ſpoonfulles after meat.
               TAke a ſmall quantity of Malmeſie, butter and Vineger, of Roſes, boyle them in a Chafindiſh, and put thereto a roſe cake to heate in it vntill it be through ſoked, and laye it to the ſtomacke, and let the party be rolled.
            
            
               Againſt an Ague, the Plague, and good to comfort nature.
               TAke a pinte of Malmeſie, and a handful of Maye Wéede bruſed, and the iuice thereof put into Malmeſie, and let the party drinke therof.
            
            
               For the winde Collicke.
               TAKE of Sacke and Aqua vitae, of eache a quarter of an ounce, put therto a péece of Suger and let the party drink therof.
            
            
               To ſkoure the inward partes, and for the riſing of the Lunges.
               TAke a pinte of Sacke and burne it, for to delaye the heate thereof, put therin a

peniwoorthe of Treacle, a little Ginger, a Nutmeg grated, Sinamon a good quantity with Suger, and after it is boyled put thereto a peniwoorthe of Sallet Oyle, and drink therof morning and euening: it will clenſe the body.
            
            
               For an Ague.
               TAKE a prittie quantitye of Daffadondillies the blades, and bruſe them and ſéethe them in a pinte of Ale or wine, with a ſpoonefull of Graines bruſed: let the partie drink therof before his fit come.
            
            
               For one that is deafe.
               TAke a red Onyon and cut out the Core béeing in the middeſt thereof, putting therein the Oyle of roſted Almondes, the Onyon béeing ſomething warme: the next morninge when it is colde, let the party gréeued cauſe one to drop thrée droppes thereof in the eare of the party in the morning or euening, ſtopping his eare with blacke wooll that groweth vnder the ſhéeps eare: and let him lye on the ſame ſide.
            
            
               
               Idem.
               TAke grounde Iuie the iuice thereof and white Copper is béeing burnte, and lay the ſame in the iuice of the Iuie till it be diſſolued, and ſo vſe thrée drops morning and euening.
            
            
               For the bloody Flixe.
               TAKE Iurden Almondes and blaunche them, and let them boyle in Engliſhe Honye till they be blacke, and ſo eate them with a little of the beſt Engliſh honye.
               AMber Beades beaten to powder and put into a Chafingdiſhe of Coles, the partye gréeued muſt ſitte ouer them, as he would eaſe him ſelfe.
            
            
               An excellent medicine for the greene Sicknes.
               TAKE a gallon of Morning Milke after it be ſetled Creame and all, take alſo breaſte of the yungeſt Veale, and the fatteſt you can gette, and waſhe it faire, and drye it with a Cloath,

ſo that no water remaine in it, bruſe the ſame Bones and all, and put it into the Milke, take twelue Dates or more, and cut them in the mids, and take alſo a quarter of an ounce of whole Mace, and halfe a pounde of Currans, two handfulles of mintes, a handfull of wilde Time, and put all theſe into the Milke with the Veale, and let the liquor ſéeth vntil halfe be conſumed in ſéething, and when it is well ſodden, it will be as a Ielly: when it is colde the pacient maye either drinke it béeing warme, as a broth, and maye be eaten as Iellye being colde. If the pacientes ſtomacke will beare it make a toſte of wheaten bread, and ſoake it in Malmeſie, and ſtrew vpon it the powder of Mintes, the party muſt vſe this fiue or ſix wéekes, or as long as you think good, béeing towardes Springe time, with ſome exerciſe.
            
            
               To prouoke Vrine ſpeedily.
               TAKE Wood Betonye bothe Rootes and Leaues, waſhe them, and put them to drye in a Sinne in an Ouen where brown bread hath béen newly

drawne, vſe halfe a ſpoonefull of this powder in white Wine Poſſet drink, potage or in your drinke.
            
            
               For heate in the Liuer.
               TAKE a quarte of Strawberies, wylde Tanſie, thrée pintes of newe Milke, ſtill all theſe togeather, and drinke it in the morning next your hart, and waſh your face therewith.
            
            
               To preſerue nature to eate a morninges.
               THE yolke of an Egge with Manus Chriſti.
               
            
            
               To make a Cliſter.
               TAke a fatte Shéepes head, or a Capon, a handfull of Béetes, a handfull of Mallowes, a handfull of Violets, and if the patient be hot, take thrée ſpoonefull of Oyle of Roſes, if cold: take the like quantity of oile of Violets, boyle all theſe togeather vntill it come to a pinte, then ſtrain it, and let the patient drinke.
            
            
               
               For one that is weake, and to comfort the ſtomack.
               TAKE a pinte of ſacke, and burn it with a top or two of Vnſet Hiſope and Roſemary, take thrée Dates beaten in a morter to pay, and let it burne with the wine, alſo with a newe layde Egge beaten, a ſpoonful of Damaſke Roſewater, and a ſpoonfull of Sallet Oyle, drink this morning firſte, and night laſt.
            
            
               Idem.
               MAlmeſie burnt with a halfepeniwoorth of Saffron, béeing dryed to powder, with Sallet Oyle and Triacle, of eache a halfepeniwoorth, vſe it morning & euening.
            
            
               Idem.
               NEttle ſéedes dryed and beaten to powder, and drunk with Malmſie euerye morning.
            
            
               To reſtore nature, and helpeth a weake back.
               
                  TAke a quarte of Sacke, a toppe of Roſe marye, Winter Succorye, Peniriall, of eache a like, Ginger and Nutmegges, as will burne the Wine. Then take a newe layde Egge or two yolkes and all, and beat it with three ſpoonefulls of red Roſewater, and put therto a péece of Suger, then take the burnte Sacke, and burne it with the Egge a good while, and put in it a Mace, and it will be in maner of a Cawdle, vſe to drincke of this warme thrée times a daye, morning, after dinner, and when you go to bed: put therin ſome Sallet Oyle.
            
            
               To ſtay running of the raines.
               TAke a pinte of Milke, and a good quantitye of Otemeale, béeing well bruſed, and ſéethe it with the Milke, and put therein a good péece of Suger, and eate the Milke therof béeing ſtrained.
            
            
               A precious ointment or Oyle.
               
                  For Swelling or aking in Feete, Legges or in Knees, taken with colde, excellent to heale a Wound, farre better then any Balme, for olde bruſes and ſhrinking of Sinewes, merueilous

good: an Oyle for all maner of ſores paſsing all other. Thus it is noted in an olde Regeſter book.
               
               TAKE a Gallon or a Pottell of Sallet Oyle of the beſte: then take Sage, Lauender, Southernewood, Woormewoode, and a quantitye of Camomell, after the quantitye of the Oyle, and cut the hearbes ſmall, then put them in that oyle in a farre baſon of Latin or other mettall, and ſtirre it well together: and put in ſo many hearbs that it maye be thicke ſtanding, and ſo let them ſtande and rotte a moneth full: then make a faire fier of Coles, and putting to a quantity of the ſame Oyle, let it on the fier in the ſame Baſon, and let it boyle thrée howers or more. Then take it from the Fier and let it frye, and when it is Milke warme or ſomewhat hotter, then take a bagge of greate Canuas, and with a ſtaffe ſtraine out all the matter as cleane as you maye and then put it in a Glaſſe or other faire thinge and keepe it well cloſed, and it will continue in his vertue twenty yéeres after.
            
            
               Probatum eſt. For ſtued Mutton.
               
                  PVT your Mutton into a Pot with faire water, and let it ſéethe and ſcum it faire then put in Salte, make not too much broth then take Hiſſop, Time and Parſelye, and chop them ſmall and put them into the pot with a little Pepper: and ſerue it out with ſoppes, and if it be in Winter put in ſome Carret rootes.
            
            
               To dreſſe a Hare or Cunny in broth with a pudding in their bellyes.
               YOur Hare or Cunnye béeing fleaed and the Eares left on, let it be waſhed in two Waters, hauing before prepapared in a redineſſe Grated Bread, Currans, ſwéet Mutton ſewet or Beefe ſewet finely minſed with pleaſant and wholſome hearbes, as Winter Sauerye and Peniriall, with ſwéete Margerome, theſe alſo verye finely chopped, and ſeaſoned with pepper and Salte: Cloues and Mace, the yolkes of thrée Egges, with ſwéete Creame, and Suger with two or thrée Dates, all theſe mingled together, put into the bellie of the Hare or Cunnye, and ſo ſowe it vp Then take Mutton broth of the beſte and fatteſt, put it in ſuche a Kettle where your

Hare maye lye compaſſe, or Cunnye long wayes, after it hath boyled a litle put it in, and put thereto Grapes or Gooſeberries, ſwéete Butter, Salt, Veriuice, Currans, grated Bread and Suger, and when it is boyled ſerue it forth with ſoppes.
            
            
               Mutton.
               PVT your Mutton in a Pot with faire Water and let it be well ſcummed, then take ſome Toſtes of Breade and toſte them browne, and then caſt them into colde water, but take them vp againe quicklye: and let them lye and drye a while, then ſtraine them with Wine and Vineger, and ſo put it into the pot and let it boyle: But in ſome Pepper, whole Cloues, and Sinamon, and let all this be well ſtewed, but forget not Salte▪Serue it out vpon ſoppes: and boyle ſome Onions in it cut into péeces. And likewiſe this will ſerue for Veniſon, Mallardes and Teles.
            
            
               To boyle chickins with Endiue and Succorye or Lettice, or any other colde hearbes.
               
                  PRepare a Loyne or a racke of good Mutton with a marow bone or two, and béeing chopped, put it in a Pipkin with faire Water ouer the fier, and let them ſéethe a pretty while togeather, then take half of it out of the Pipkin, and ſtrayne it with a ſtrayner, then put in your Chickins, afterwardes hauing prepared your colde hearbs cleane waſhed put them in: Alſo hauing ſtéeped your white breade ready to ſtrayne thorough a Strayner, let your Brothe be therewith thickned: So take Pepper, ſalte Vergis and Suger, and ſeaſon your broth: then vpon Soppes ſerue it foorth with the marrowe vpon it.
            
            
               For ſmall Lampernes.
               LET your Lampernes be cutte in ſmall peeces: then take a frying Panne with Butter and Onnions minced, and ſo frye them togeather. And when they be well fryed put them in a Potte, then take two toſtes of browne bread and toſte them well then ſtraine them with a quantitye of Vineger, Wine and Water: and put therto a little Pepper, and Cloues and Maces, and

boyle all this togeather with your Lampernes vpon the coles: and ſo ſerue thē out with ſoppes.
            
            
               To potche Egges in broth.
               TAke Vergies and faire water, and a diſh of newe Yeſt: and put therein Cloues, Mace, Currans, Suger, ſweete Butter, a handfull of Spinage: and let them boyle a good while: then hauing potched your egges in faire Water that is ſéething: then laye your Egges in broth and ſerue them foorth with hearbs laied ouer them.
            
            
               To bake Breme, Trout, Mullets, Pike or any fiſhe.
               LEt them be well ſeaſoned with Cloues and Mace, Salt and pepper, and ſo bake them with ſmall Currans Vergis and butter, great raiſons and prunes.
            
            
               For ſoppes on the fiſh dayes.
               TAKE ſome Onions and frye them with Butter a while: then take Water Pepper and Salte, and put altogeather into a

pot with the Butter and Onions, and let them ſimper vpon the fier. And ſo ſerue them out vpon ſoppes, and caſt a fewe ſmal Raiſins vpon the ſoppes, and put the broth vpon them.
            
            
               For Spinage.
               TAKE Spinage and waſhe it well, then laye it vpon a boorde and giue it fiue or ſixe choppes with a knife, then put it into a frying panne with a little faire water and ſéethe it well, then take Butter, Vergis and Salte, and put it to the Spinage, and ſo boyle it together in a pot or betwéen two Platters: and ſo ſerue them out with Soppes.
            
            
               Sodde Egges.
               SEethe your Egges almoſte harde, then peele them and cut them in quarters, then take a little Butter in a frying panne and melte it a litle brown, then put to it in to the Panne a little Vineger, Muſtard Pepper and Salte, and then put it into a platter vpon your Eggs.
            
            
               
               For Oxe tunges boyled.
               WHen your Oxe Tunges be boyled take them and peele them, then cut them ouerthwart in ſmall péeces, then frye them with Butter, and put them in a Potte with Toſtes ſtrayned with Wine vineger and Water, and let them boile: put thereto Salte, Onions quartered, Pepper Sinamon, and whole Cloues, and ſo ſerue them with Soppes.
            
            
               Spinage.
               TAKE Spinage and parboyle it well, then wringe the liquor cleane from it then choppe it very ſmall, and put it into a Platter and breake ſome Egges into it: then take a handfull of grated bread and put into it and ſuger with a little ſalte, and beate all this together but let it not be too thicke nor too thinne, but better thicke then thinne: then take a frying panne with ſome Butter, and when the Butter is a little more then melted, take a ſpoone and laye your ſpinage in the Frying panne euery ſpoonefull by him ſelfe, and ſo fry it as you woulde frye Fritters, and put it in a

diſh and caſt ſuger on it.
            
            
               for Egges.
               TAKE ſome Egges and beate them well with a little faire water and ſalte: then take a frying Panne and melt your butter and then put in your Egges: then take a knife and lift vp the Egges, that the rawe may goe all to the bottome of the Panne, then turne it vp with your Knife on euery ſide that it may be ſquare, then laye a diſhe vpon the panne, and turn the panne vpſide downe vpon the diſhe and ſo ſerue in your Egges with Vergis or Vineger, as you will.
            
            
               A drench to plume vp a horſſe, and to expell colde, to cleare him of the Glaunders and to open the pipes.
               TAKE grounde Willis, alias Groundſell, Enulacampane of eache a handefull, ſtampe them and ſtraine them in Ale, ſéethe them all together: then take of Fenicreke, of Turmericke, Aniſeedes, of Cumminſéedes, of Garlike, of long Pepper, of Licorice: of Graines, and if he haue

the Bottes or woormes giue him Sauine. Giue him this drinke luke warme a quart at a time, then ride him till he be hot, then bring him into the Stable, and litter him well, and corie him till he be thorow colde, then let him after ſtand vpon the bitte, and turne him to graſſe.
               TO a Horſſe that hath eaten a Feather, giue a branche or two of Sauin dry.
            
            
               A drench for a cough.
               A Quarte of Vineger Fenicreke a peniwoorth, Turmerick i. d, Enula-cāpana i. d. long Pepper i. d. Barberies i. d. Liquorice y.d foure Egges, Anniſéedes, laye the Egges in Vrine all night, and after in theſe drugges beaten and ſo giue it the beaſt.
            
            
               To make a good powder to giue a Horſſe in his prouender, or to giue him to drink for the cough, and other diſeaſes.
               TAKE of Liquorice i. d. cut it in péeces, and beate it into powder, then take Anniſeedes i d. of graines i. d. of 
                     •••…
                  mericke i. d. of Fenicreke i. d. one Nutmeg, 
                     •••
                  e a

pinte of oyle Oliue a quart of Milke.
            
            
               To cauſe a horſe to haue a good hoofe.
               TAKE Cow dunge or Ore dunge, and let it be mingled with ſtronge Vineger, and in the euening apply it being made very hot vpon his feete, and wrappe vpon the hoofe a péece of Leather, or ſome old ragges to keepe in the heate, and within two dreſſinges it ſhall be remedied.
            
            
               For a horſſe that is ſtung with an Adder or Snake, a preſent remedy.
               TAKE thrée handfules of Sanicle (it is a wéed commonly known) and ſtampe it, and put it in new Milk, and with a Horne drinche him. Or take Honye and Salte, and two Onions: then ſtampe them and applye it to the ſore place, and drinche him with this compoſition as followeth: Wine a quart, and put into it white Pepper, Herbegrace, and Time with a little Triacle.
               
                  AND if hée be prickte with a Nayle this is a ſure remedye, ſearche well to finde out the Nayle, his hoofe béeing cleane pared, ſpecialiye the corrupted place or hole where the naile had fettered, then take Roſin and Waxe to fill the ſame place, and with an hot Iron let ſtone Pitche be melted vpon it, and lay therupon ſome Cotton then being wel ſhooed againe you may trauaile: him at your pleaſure.
               IF your Horſſe by hap drinke a Horſeléech he is in great daunger: for by their ſuccking they will kill him, but preſentlye take ſwéet Oyle and powre into his mouth the quantitye of a quarter of a pinte, and it will deſtroy them quickly.
               IF your Horſe ſwallow down Hens dung in his Haye it will ſo fret his guts, that he wil voide at his Fundaurent, very foule excrementes, which beeing perceiued make him a drench with Parſly ſéede, Smallage ſéede, Honye and Wine, and walke him at leaſt after it two houres.
               
                  IF your horſſe haue the Bottes, giue him euery Morning two handfulls of Agrimo nye without any other meate in his racke, till ſixe howres after, and within foure or fiue dayes it ſhall deſtroy them.
               IF your Horſſe be Louſie about the eares, necke or tayle or any other parte of his bodye: take the beſte Sope you may haue a pound, and halfe a pound of quicke Siluer, mortified with Aqua vitae, and with this ointment you ſhall deſtroy them.
               IF he cannot piſſe, giue him a quarte of Chalk water ſomewhat warm, if broken-winded, take Longwoort dryed, or Dwarſe Gentian and mingle it with his water that he drinketh till he amend.
               IF he be ſcabbye let him be let blood, and afterwarde with this ointement let him be annoynted where the scabbes are. Take Soot of the Chimneye, ſoft Sope, the iuice of Hemlockes and Vineger, Quickeſiluer, liquid Pitche and honye, and mingle them till they come to be an Ointment. Kill the Mercurie with faſting Spittle.
               
                  IF his back be galled: take the powder of two olde Shooes béeing burnte, with a prittye quantitye of Butter molten, and powre it vpon your horſe backe very hot, after that, put the powder thereon. This is approued.
            
            
               An excelient medicine for a ſore horſebacke, if he be neuer ſo ſore bruſed, if there be a Fiſtula it healeth it or any dead Fleſh.
               TAKE a quantitye of Allome and burne it, and alſo take a handful or more of Barlye and burne it, and take the powder thereof and mixe it with the roche Allome béeing bothe mingled togeather: powre it vpon the ſore morning and euening, but if the ſore be corrupt and full of deade fleſhe, then vſe more of the roche Allome, then of the power of Barlye, and when it beginneth to heale, vſe them both togeather, but more of the Barlye then of the roche Allome: this is a moſte excellent remedye, if you haue no Allome preſently, let him take a good quantitye of Butter and Vergis and put it vpon the fire, and make it very

hot, and ſo powre it vpon the ſore morning and Euening, laying a little Haye and a cloath, binde it cloſe all night. If the horſe be pinched and ſwolne then kéep it warme and dip a pad of Haye in water, and layē it vpon it and keep the ſaddle or ſomewhat els vpon it all night, and it will delaye the ſwelling Proued.
            
            
               A preſent remdeye for the Cow-flixe.
               TAKE a pottle or gallon of fayre water, and put therein ſo manye Hedge floes as will ſuffiſe to be ſtéeped in the ſaide water and ſet it ouer the fier to ſéeth, and therwith mingle the powder of Chalke Egges: whiche you may haue at the Kéele, becauſe it is the beſt and fineſt in medicine: & giue it your Cattell.
            
            
               For faint cattel as well Cow, Oxe, Bull or ſteere.
               ONelye Vergis is the remedye giuen them to drinke, and preſently turned to good Paſture.
               
                  OR els thus: take for euerye one a pinte of Vergis, and put thereto a litle handfull of Baye Salt, and therewith rub their tunges, and afterwardes let them drincke the reſt, as we haue aboue declared.
               AND alſo, ſometimes by euell féedinge or bruſing, their teethe are ſo looſe that they feede not, which you ſhal remedy thus. Take the tayle of the beaſte thus diſeaſed, and with your hande féele for ſoft places, which beeing founde, ſlit it a long and binde it vp againe with ſoote and Garlicke mingled togeather, and it helpeth preſentlye.
               BVT the moſt perfecteſte medicine that maye be giuen, is to haue this ſpeciall care that they want no water.
            
            
               An excellent drenche for cattell to be giuen them, either at the ſpring time or fall of the Leafe.
               TAKE hard ſoote that commonlye is vpon the poſt of a houſe or roofe where the ſmoake hath his iſſue, which being beaten

into powder with Baye ſalte, ſéeth the ſame in running water and giue it them to drinke, Rancke Iuie with the ſoote and ſalt, and when the iuie is ſofte, wringe out the iuice and ſtrain it through a Strayner, and let your Cattell drinke thereof blood warme. Often prooued.
               IF they be hidebounde, take the leaues of Flowredeluce, ſtraine them and let them drink the iuice therof. It is approued.
               IF they be ſwolne of the Taint, giue them to drinke preſently mans Vrine mingled with Salte and Treacle. Approued.
               IF your Cattell viz. Horſes, Milchekine, or Oxen happen to be bruſed or wounded by any miſfortune, preſently giue them to drinke the iuice of Sanicle, and alſo applye the hearbe to the outwarde parte where the gréefe maye happen▪ Comphrye is of the ſame vertue: eſpecially for a fall, ſquat or bruſe,
               SNailes ſtamped with ſowre Leauen and Comphrye, and applied to any part of the

Beaſte that is pricked with thorne, it will draw it foorth ſoone.
            
            
               For Cattes that are ſick or hurt.
               THe blood of a Graye mixed with Salte, and inſtilled into the hornes of Beaſtes is approued for to preſerue them from the Murren.
               IF you ſuſpect them to be infected, applye to their noſtrelles the hearbe Peniroyall ſomewhat bruſed.
               OR cut the beaſte in ſome parte and put into the wound powder of black Helebor, whiche is of this ſinguler vertue to drawe vnto it any poyſoned humour, and it yeeldeth preſent remedy.
            
            
               A ſouerain drink for all maner of Cattell that you ſuſpect to be Lung ſicke.
               TAKE me the Hearbe that is called Cowſlippe or Lungwoort, it groweth vnder euery hedge, and ſtamp it: and put therto Fenegréeke and madder

with good Ale, and with a Horne or prittye Tunnell drenche either your horſſe Oxe, Cowe or Swine, and it ſhall yeelde preſent remedye if there be any diſeaſe in the Lunges.
               DVarfe Gentian of ſome called Mock Gillofer, ſmall chopte and giuen to Swine and all other Cattell: it preſerueth them wonderfully from the Murren, and all ſuch contagious diſeaſes as happen to Cattell in corrupt times.
               THE bitter Vetche is moſte profitable to be giuen to oxen or other Kine, that you are deſirous to haue ſoone fatted.
               THe water whiche ſtandeth in the hollowes of Béeches, dooth perfectly cure the naughty ſcurfe and wilde Tetters or ſcabbes of men, horſes, Kine and ſhéepe, if they be waſhed therewithall.
               THE leaues of blacke Elder are very good Fodder and féeding for Kine, and cauſeth them to yéeld ſtore of Milke.
               
                  PRicktimber or Spindletrée is hurtfull for all Cattell, eſpeciallye Gotes, for it killeth them if they purge not preſentlye vpwardes and downwards.
               HOgges and Swine are verye quicke of hearing, and are giuen muche to ſléepe, and will eate their owne Pigges and féede vpon vile Carrion: which cauſeth them many diſeaſes, as Botche, Bile, and ſore throate: But the beſt remedye that I know is to let them blood vnder the tunge, and giue them Madder with Pances, called hearbe Trinitie, ſod in Whaye: and it ſhall heale them preſently.
            
            
               Moſt precious and approued drinches for all cattell, but ſpecially Kine and Oxen.
               TAKE two handfulles of Lungewoorte of bothe kindes, of Rewe, of the inner rinde of Elder, theſe being ſmall chopte, let it be put in a gallon of good Ale, which béeing ſet ouer the Fier in a Skillet, let it ſéeth till a quarte be conſumed, then ſtirring it, put

thereto of long pepper, of graines, of Licorice, of Aniſſéedes, of Cominſéedes, of turmericke of eache an vnce: of Madder a quarter of a pounde, and while theſe ſéeth, take me a greate Boule diſhe, and put therein a handfull of Baye Salte, halfe a handful of Garlicke, thrée or foure newe laied Egges ſhelles & al: two balles of Orlament, grind all theſe things with a Peſtel in the boule, then take the liquor aforeſayde from the fier till it be halfe colde, and put the warme liquor into the boule, with the garlick ſalt, Egges, and Orlament, brewe them together well, and let beaſtes drink of this blood warme.
               OFten times by many occaſions, Oxen will piſſe blood, which maye be holpen thus: Take two ounces of Broomeſeeds two ounces of Pepper, thrée vnces of redde Phaſioli made all in powder, and mingle it with a pottle of white wine, and when you giue it them, ſtirre it well together, and drenche them twice or thrice a day.
            
            
               An other excellent drench.
               
                  TAke Baye beries a handfull, of Cominſéedes two ounces, a handfull of Madder, a boule of Orlamente, of Fenegréeke, Turmericke and Triacle of each an vnce, of Anniſéedes and Graines, of eache two vnces, theſe béeing well pouned, put them into a gallon of good Ale, and ſet them ouer the fier till they be blood warme, and ſuffer not your beaſtes to drinke till noone in the Sommer, and in the Winter not till night.
            
            
               The vertue of Angelica or Healeall.
               IF any perſon be ſodenlye infected with ye Peſtilence, feuer or immoderat ſweat: let him take this Roote in powder the waighte of a groat, and put there a dram of Treacle, and then compound them with four ſpoonefulles of the water of the ſayde Roote, and then after he hath drunke: let him lye and ſweate faſting for the ſpace of foure howres. It is approued.
               THE Rootte ſtéeped in Vineger and ſmelt vnto: and the ſame Vineger ſometimes

drunke faſting, is an excellente preſeruatiue.
               THE Roote and water thereof is excellent againſte all inwarde diſeaſes, it ſcoureth the gatheringes of a Pluriſie when it beginneth: it helpeth corrupted Lunges, good againſte the Collicke, Strangurie and prouoketh tearmes: menſtruall in women, helpeth inflamations and ſwellinges. The iuice of the Roote aſſwageth the paine of the téeth béeing put into it, and woorketh excellentlye againſt the paine in the eyes, the iuice of the Roote dropped into the eye quickneth the ſight, and purgeth it from all filth, and the water or pouder of leafe or roote, hath an excellent vertue or healing of rotten Vlcers, and Cankrous Sores, for it cleanſeth them and couereth the bone with good fleſhe.
               THE Hearbe Carduus Benedictus, or bleſſed Thiſtell, is moſte excellente againſte the headache, béeing eaten or drunk it is good againſte the giddines of the head, and comforteth the memory, and reſtoreth hearing: the leafe, iuice, ſeede and water,

healeth all kinde of poyſons: for the water hath healed a woman, whoſe breaſte was eaten with a Canker in the very ribbes.
               BAlme ſodden in white wine and drunk
                     •
                   thrée or fower morninges togeather, purgeth the breaſte, healpes the ſhort winded, comforteth the hart, driueth awaye dumpiſhe heauineſſe, helpeth the falling ſickeneſſe and all other diſeaſes. If you wil diſtill Balme, chop the hearbe ſmall and ſtéepe it in white Wine a night: it is of ſoueraine vertue, for it deliuereth Women from their panges and gréefe of the Mother: alſo it cureth the paines of the harte it reſtoreth the memorye, and cauſeth ſwéet and pleaſant ſléepe.
               BEtonye hath the like vertues, it is of Soueraine vertue to breake winde, and comforteth a weake Stomacke, either the hearbe or Flowre boyled, or the water diſtilled, the drye hearb in powder woorketh all the effectes, and then alone or with Hony, women that are troubled with the Mother let them vſe it: to be ſhort, the leafe, flowre, or roote of Betonye ſodden or

drinke in Conſerue, Electuarye, Sirrop, potion, or powder, is ſinguler for all diſeaſes of the Stomacke, Liuer, Splene, Kidneyes and Bladder. It fretteth the Matrix from obſtruction, and draweth from thence all hurtfull moyſtures, for conſumption of the Lunges, Coughes, Dropſtes, continuall Feauers comming from the ſtomack, boile the leaues and flowers of Betony in Homed water, and you ſhal haue preſēt remedy.
            
            
               To drye and heale vp all ſores.
               TAke of common Sallet Oyle a pounde, of Ceruce 4. ounces, of Litarge thrée ounces, Mirrhe halfe an ounce, make theſe like a Sere cloth which is made of Waxe.
            
            
               Approued againſt the Plague.
               TAke Aqua vitae thrée ounces, Roſewater an ounce and a halfe, wherin laye in ſtéepe thrée dragmes of Sinamon, yellowe Saunders one dragme: ſtraine it through a hearen ſtrainer, and ſwéeten it with conſerue of Roſes, then take an ounce thereof euery morning, either in a ſpoone or vpon a Toſte of bread.
               FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   