
      
         
            
            
            
               An Aprill Shower Shed in abundance of TEARES,
            FOR THE DEATH AND INCOMPARABLE LOSSE, OF THE RIGHT NOBLE, TRVLY RELIGIOVS, AND Virtuous, RICHARD SACVILE, Baron of BVCKHVRST, and Earle of DORSET.
            Who Departed this Life vpon Easter day last, being the 28.th of March, at DORSET
               House.
            
            By Henry Peacham.
            
            — Sublatam oculis p
                     ••
                  rimus inuidi.
            
            LONDON
            Printed by Edw. Allde. 1624.
         
         
            
            
               
                  
                     CLaruit his armis viuus DORSETIVS Heros, Quêis ornarat auos NEVSTRIA terra suos. Nunc his ad postem fixis, latet abditus astris Hoste triumphato, nescius ipse mori.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE, RELIGIOVS, AND Nobly minded Lady, ANNE Countesse Dowager of DORSET.
            
               MADAME:
            
            
               I Am bolde; the first, to bewayle in publique, the Death of your deare Deceased Lord of Eternall and Blessed memorie; not that hee can want Mourners, whose losse concernes so deepely our Religion, King, State, your Selfe, your Children, and thousands of true Louers and Friends in particular: But because I am loath (I must confesse truely) to be preuented in manifesting my affection vnto him dead, vnto whom

liuing I was more obliged then any other of his rancke in the Land. And although I am of least abilitie in this kinde (since the most Learned Pens and skilfullest Pencils, must fall farre short of limning him to the Life, such were his excellent Parts) yet I had rather vndergoe any censure then be Ingratefull, or like an vnconscionable Debtor, refuse satisfaction when it will bee accepted for lesse then three in the hundred. It is too true, that the Zeale of the most, expires with their Friends liues or fortunes: vnfained Deuotion weares and waters their Tombes many yeares after: and so (Madame) shall I his, though I creepe thereto on my knees. For if euer Mortalitie clad true Honour, and Honestie of Heart, she veiled either in the Person of your Noble Lord and Husband; whose Pietie to GOD, Zeale to Religion, Loyaltie to his Soueraign, Loue to his Countrey, Courtesie and Affabilitie to all; set of with the rarest endowments of Body and Minde, (like so many Diamonds in Gold) drew all Hearts to his Loue, and Eyes to his Admiration. But hee is gone, and wee follow as fast as may bee: and as in Fruit the ripest; so with vs in the world, the rarest are soonest gathered for Heauen.
            
               Immodicis brevis est aetas & rara Senectus.
            
            
               I dare not presume farther of your Honours patience, already Exercised and tryed euen to the height; onely I desire of the Almightie, who is hope and helpe of the Widdow, and Father of the Fatherlesse, to send you Comfort from Heauen, and his Blessing vpon those sweet Ladyes your hopefull Children, that they may liue many yeares to propagate your Names and happie Memories to all Posteritie for euer. I humbly take leaue.
            
               
                  Aprill, 18.
               
               Who is, and euer shall bee deuoted to your Honour, HENRY PEACHAM.
            
         
         
            
            Epitaphium verè Honoratissimi, Nobiliss: pijs ac bonis, omnibus desideratissimi, D. RICHARDI SACVILE, Baronis de Buckhurst, ac Dorsetiae Comitis, Londonijs defuncti, & Withihamis communi auorum Sarcophago in agro Sussexiensi sepulti.
            
               HIc situs ille tuus Comes est DORSETIA, nomen
               Qui clarum toto fecerat orbe tuum.
               Quem si Nobilit as generis, (nam Sanguine Regum
               Cretus,) si Pietas, cum genio ingenium,
               Census, honos, aut Musa potens valuisset ab vmbris
               Infernis, pretio vel reuocâsseprece;
               Non Caput exiguâ Sanctum latitâsset in vrna,
               Nestoreos dignum vel superâsse dies.
            
            
               His Monument to the Reader.
               
                  VVHo thinkes that DORSET lyes Interred
                  Here-vnder, thinke that they haue erred
                  For 'tis not hee, 'tis but the Case
                  Wherein this precious Iewell was,
                  Who seekes for him must aske of FAME,
                  Who registers his Honour'd name;
                  Or search the Hearts of Friends, where hee
                  Is lodg'd, and liuing like to bee:
                  And if not heere, to Heauen ascend,
                  There sure hee liues world without end.
                  For though with mee his dust doth lie,
                  Beleeue it, DORSET cannot Die.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            AN ELEGIE. Vpon the Death of the Right Honourable, RICHARD SACVILE, Baron of Buckhurst, and Earle of DORSET.
            
               MY LORD! (so must I call that Honour'd mind
               And happie Soule of yours, which heere behind,
               Hath left her earthy Pawne; e're any knew
               Or could imagine DEATH would seeke his due.)
               Oh giue me leaue distractedly to rue;
               The first of many, our deare misse of you;
               Of you my Dearest LORD — 
               But Sorrow duls my Stile, and teares mine Inke
               Discolour weeping. DORSET dead? Mee thinke
               Though Fame in mourning tells it, 'tis not so
               That such a Peere, but sewest dayes agoe,
               So Healthy, Young, so vsefull to the State
               In these weake Times, that doe importunate
               The Heauens themselues, for helpe of Heart, of Hand,
               Of Wisest and the ablest of our Land
               To her Support. Ah! would it were vntrue,
               And that mine Eyes not needed to bedew
               With Siluer-dropping Aprill his blacke Herse,
               Sad Subject now of euery Learned Verse.
               
                  For by the Genius (which I hold Diuine)
               Of each true Poët, (therefore none of mine)
               I heere professe, it is no by-regard,
               Or expectation of a slight reward
               Enforces me to weepe. The common losse
               Of KING, and COVNTREY, calls to beare their crosse
               And so I will; know then whom wee haue lost,
               Euen him, whom Artes and Armes may truely boast
               To bee their owne. Wee tricke not his Discent
               And Images, which in ourThe Complete Gentleman, a worke of the Author, wherein hee setteth down his Pedigree at large. COMPLEMENT,
               Who list may view at large; nor say his Blood
               (Except the Royall) was as equall good
               As any else of NORMAN Race, sith none
               Can clayme their Grandsires Vertues for their owne.
               No, like a Diamond hee allur'd the sight
               T'admire his owne, and not a borrow'd light.
               For whatsoeuer could bee wish'd, that one
               Might make Complete and Absolute alone,
               It wanted not in him; For, first his Mind
               
               Was best compos'd, Religiously inclin'd,
               Not with the World, to winne an Aerie fame
               Of Singular, or vnderneath the same,
               To worke (as many) some malicious end
               While they the TRVTH and PIETIE pretend.
               Oh no! in him this Zeale was reall good
               And was the Ground, whereon the Modell stood
               Of that braue structure of his Noblest mind:
               For who more Zealous, Pitifull, and kind
               To heauenly TRVTH'S Professors? yee Diuines
               Of LONDON, SVSSEX, KENT, witnesse, my Lines
               Doe attribute vnto him, but his due.
               How was his Loue extended vnto you,
               By adding Stipends to your Liuings small,
               Maintaining many who had none at all?
               
                  Your Debts oft times (when least you thought) discharging
               Your bounds, and grounds from his owne meanes enlarging,
               Nor did this Bountie, stretch to you alone,
               But to Desert, in euery meanestone,
               That (as of TITVS) I may truely say;
               From him Sad-hearted none return'd away.
               And which his Bountie, yet did more endeare,
               And each reward made double to appeare,
               Was his Free-noble, Curteou entertayne,
               Deuoid of Pride, and haughte-brow'd Disdayne,
               Who did not (monstrous) wth his Honour swell,
               Hee knew that was but rin'd and outward shell
               Of Man, and best did with their humours sute
               Whose insides poore, could onely beg repute
               From Plumes and Tissue: or whose Honours cost
               The setting on, and must improoue them most.
               No, this as but the vinet of Boule
               That's emptie, whereuponthe thirstie Soule
               Commends, admires, the Grauers hand and wit,
               His thirst not quenched allthis while for it.
               'Twas hence wee knew hm affable and milde,
               Denying not accesse euer to the Childe.
               (Though Greatnesse alwayes cannot stand extent
               But Bowe-like sometimeit must lye vnbent.)
               An enemie to garish Pride and Fashion,
               The Epilepsie, of our English Nation,
               For with the plainest plaine, yee saw him goe
               In Ciuill blacke of Rash, of Serge, or so,
               The Liuerie of wise Stayednesse; Except when
               His Prince did call vpon his Seruice, then
               Stout DIOMEDE in Armes, not brighter shone,
               Or man more Glorious was to looke vpon:
               That had Death seene him at a Courtly Tilt
               Braue mounted, Plum'd, in Armes of Azure gilt
               
                  Encountring Princely CHARLES, while splinters flie,
               And prayers of people, eccho in the skie,
               Hee would I know haue lent him longer date,
               Hee yet, not lost, and wee beene fortunate.
               What Cunning Artistes pencill may I borrow,
               Thrice-hopefull CHARLES, to limne thy griefe and sorrow
               For DORSETS losse, but there's no forme can fit,
               Or bee imagin'd to decipherit.
               
                  "Light Cares may speake, the great amaz'd with wonder,
               
               
                  "Themselues then vtter, sooner burst a sunder.
               
               And hence proceeds the dulnese of each Pen
               Our hopes thus,His Death immediately ensuing the Death of the worthy Prince Lodowicke, Duke of Lenox, and Richmond.
                   stricken downe and downe agen,
               Oh whither Heauens 'twere your immediate hand
               For his owne good, (though to afflict our hand)
               Or Hels deepe Hate wrought his vntimely end,
               Occasion'd by those rootes (whch God defend)
               I cannot say, but this I must professe
               The Non-pareil, Pearle, Earle of Noblenesse
               Is (fairest BRITANE) from thy bosome torne,
               And pawn'd by Death, though by another worne;
               Thou like one lately rob'd not knowest yet,
               What thou hast lost, or how to value it.
               Beleeue (all-dreaded Empresse) from thy KENT
               To ORKNEY, vtmost of thy large extent,
               NOBILITIE not bred a finer wit
               With better judgement to dispose of it.
               What various reading heigthned his Discourse
               At all occasions, putting to the worse
               A vulgar judgement by dispute, or whan
               H'encountred Papist, or the Puritan.
               
               Who better reis'd in Scriptures and the Text,
               The Ancient Fathers, and our Writers next,
               Mine eyes I heere a-vow did neuer read
               Lines sweeter, then did from his Pen proceed;
               
                  Rare Poet sure was DORSET, therefore hee
               Was great MOECENAS of all Poesie,
               What State, what Traine, what Order, House kept hee
               At his faire KNOWLE, His House hard by Seuenoke in Kent.
                   a Paradise to mee
               That seem'd for site, a Court for grearest Prince,
               The Home of Honour, and Magnificence;
               
               Where euery day a Christmasse, seem'd, that fed
               The neighbour Poore, that else had famished.
               How did his Loue and Noblest Care extend
               To all his followers, at his latter end
               I need not tell, themselues will say for mee,
               Men neuer seru'd a better Lord then hee.
               Ah dearest Lady, flower of the Stemme
               Of CLIFFORDS race, and Honours goodly Gemme
               His truest Spouse, with (whom hee lou'd so well)
               That Pearle your MARGARITE,His onely Children liuing, Margaret the eldest, a hopefull & faire young Lady, Isabell an infant. and young ISABELL.
               How doe I sorrow for your sake, whom Crosse
               (By Father, Mother, Sonne, now Husbands losse)
               On Crosse afflicts, of worldly helpe bereau'n,
               Except the helpe (that neuer failes) of Heauen:
               Oh let not griefe that many one hath slaine,
               Wherein not any profit doth remaine,
               (For Sinne except,) deject your soule a whit,
               But Palme-like grow, the more opprest by it.
               And since I now the Common losse haue showne,
               Oh let mee drop one teare, and shew mine owne,
               Who neuer found a minde more Nobly-free,
               Respectiue, Louing, Bountifull to mee.
               Yea Constant, (for no PYLADES could bee
               More faithfull, where he did affect, then hee;
               That euen in Child-hood, whom hee chose a Friend
               His Loue embraced to his latter end,
               Such was his Honour'd minde; but hee is dead,
               And with him Hopes of thousands buried.
               
                  Sleepe then in peace (Deare Lord) and lowly Dust,
               Till thou receiu'st thy Portion with the Iust;
               For while I liue, mine eyes shall neuer see
               A Man, a Peere, a Patrone like to thee.
            
         
         
            A double Vision vpon the Death of this Noble Lord.
            
               MEe thought I saw by DVROVERNVM,
                     Cantuaburie, So called in old time. where
               Along the Siluer-streaming STOVRE doth slide
               A louely Nymph, her wiery-golden haire
               Sit rending, wayling that faire place beside,
               More beauteous Creature the worlds Compasse wide
               Ne had: her rayment white, her cheekes besprent
               With blubbred teares, and on a Crosse shee leant.
            
            
               To whom, ah whom, shall now I make my mone?
               Or who (shee said) will pitie my distresse?
               Sith now my nearest dearest Friend is gone,
               Who shall RELIGION (wel-nie Comfortlesse)
               Commiserate? (yet many doe professe
               A seeming friendship) and her labours cherish,
               Or giue me Bread, that heere I may not perish?
            
            
               I finde with many gratious entertaine
               (In Kentish soyle) yet DORVS was the man
               Whose loue I had, and hee my héart againe,
               Wonne by his Braue and Royall bountie, whan
               I deeply languish'd, that Physitian
               Of life dispaired, me hee then relieued,
               And gaue most Comfort, when I most was grieued.
            
            
               
               But hee is Dead; with that a sigh shee fetch'd,
               As mought haue torne an heart of steele in twaine,
               And said; blest Soule (with handes on high out-stretch'd)
               Where-euer thou in Heauen dost remaine,
               Enjoy thy Blisse, for hardly I againe
               Thy like shall finde, therewith I wak'd in bed,
               But Riuer, Nymph, and all were vanished.
            
            
               The second Vision.
               
                  I Saw a goodly Lawrell, streight and Greene,
                  Vpon whose top sweet singing Birds did build,
                  Whose like PERNASSVS Bay-bound head I weene,
                  Nor TEMPE, pride of THESSALIE, could yeeld,
                  Whereto repayr'd the Shepheard of the Field:
                  But Muses most heere-vnder did delight,
                  In Heate, their Hymnes and holy thinges endite.
               
               
                  But sodainly the enuious owner came,
                  And at the roote did lay with all his might,
                  That downe it fell, together with the same,
                  The Nestes and tender Young, vnfit for flight;
                  That much my heart was grieued at the sight,
                  But more, because the Muse had lost her Freind
                  Whose armes from harmes her state did full defend.
               
            
         
         
            To the Deceased Lord.
            
               AS in that Royall Chappell, where
               Seauenth HENRIE lyes in Westminster,
               
               From euery Windowes middle part;
               A line direct runnes to his Heart.So was the Plot deuised, that from the Center of euery window a direct line came to the K hart, lying in his Graue.
               
               So all our Loues by equall line
               From farre, concenter in thy Shrine.
            
         
         
            
            NOblest DORSET, dead and gone,
            My Muse with Poësie haue done:
            And in his Graue, now throwne thy Pen,
            Sit downe and neuer rise agen.
            FINIS.
         
      
   