
      
         
            
            
            A MORAL MEthode of ciuile Policie▪ CONTAYNINGE A learned and fruictful diſcourſe of the inſtitution, ſtate and gouernment of a common Weale. Abridged oute of the Cōmentaries of the Reuerende and famous clerke, Franciſcus Patricius, Byſhop of Caieta in Italye.
            
               Done out of Latine into Engliſhe, by Rycharde Robinſon, Citizen of London.
            
               Seene and allowed. &c.
            
            Anno Domini. 157
                  •
               . Imprinted at London in Fleeteſtreate neare to S. Dunſtans Churche by Thomas Marſh.
            Cum Priuilegio.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT WORshipfull and his ſinguler good maiſter Sir VVilliam Allen Knight, Aldermā of the City of London: Rychard Robinſon his humble ſeruant & faithfull Oratour, wiſheth long lyfe, proſperous health, encreaſe of worſhip, and perpetuall felicitie.
            
               
                  SALOMON that pereles prince of prudēce (right Worſhyppfull) amonge his pithye Parables perſwading to the ſearchīg forth of wiſdom & her fruits, ſayeth: The path of the Righteous ſhineth as the light, that is euer brighter & brighter, vnto the perfect daye: But the waye of the vngodlye is as the darckneſſe, they knowe not where they fall. Doubtleſſe as euery Age hath eyther had his integritie or imperfection, wherein aſwel the felicitie, as indempnitie of humane eſtate hath appeared, more or leſſe, to be prayſed for the worthyneſſe, or pitied for the wretchedneſſe: So is it a true teſtimonye of the ineſtimable loue of Godlent towardes thoſe which beinge duely directed in the path of perfection doe nothinge digreſſe there from, but perſiſt conſtant vnto the ende, rather encreaſinge then empairing their felicitie: And on the other part, where ſuche as eyther reiecte their calling, or withſtande the wiſedome of God, doe walcke in bywayes, and wander in wilful darckneſſe. Who hath not ſeene that the indignation of God hath bene euidentlye poured vppon them, ſcattringe them, & ouerthrowing theym euen in their own wickednes? the profe whereof approcheth euen vntill theſe preſent dayes, in ſuche ſorte among Chriſtians, that if Heraclitus the heathen philoſopher were now agayne liuing, and ſhould but once ſtep out at his dores, to view the ſtate and condicion of the tyme preſent (wheras in his dayes he wept but hy fittes, to ſee the infelicitie of that age) I verely ſuppoſe he would now continually

ſhede teares abundantly without ſtinting, to ſee the ruinous decay of Chriſtianitie in this later age: and I doubt alſo, if Democritus were again liuing, & did behold the doinges of bothe ſortes of people in the world, whether he wold laughe for ioye in contemplating of the proſperous eſtate of the beſt chriſtiās, or deride the froward fortune of the moſt wicked & vngodly at this day. Albeit throughout Chriſtendom now, what kingdome, coūtrie or cōmon weale appeareth altogether ſo peaceable and proſperous, which hath not bene lately, or is not preſently encōbred with obſcuritie and abſurditie of lyfe, & maners? as ſome walking in the righteous path, haue their lighte emblemiſhed by others of the houſe of Iniquitie: ſome faine would walke the true path, and with ciuil diſſention are ſeperated frō their godly purpoſes. But the greater part no doubt, refuſing light for dirkneſſe, do ſo nuzzle thēſelues in wickedneſſe, that they laboure with malignitie, to worcke a confuſed Chaos of chriſtianitie in general. In the midſt of whom, behold (right Worſhipful) greately to thadmiration of the reſt, about vs▪ but more to our priuate conſolacion, and moſt of all to the glory of thimmortal God, the vnſpeakeable loue and eternall good grace of his bleſſing, appeareth in moſt bright beames of his bliſful bountie, ouerſhadowing this our natiue countrie of England, with far more ſuperabundant felicities, then many other naciōs: namely by ſo lōg, peaceable & proſperous courſe of Chriſtes Gospell, that infallible lampe of light, directed and protected by ſo pereles & precious a prīceſſe, ſo godly & gratious a gouerneſſe, our moſt chriſtian & deareſt ſoueraigne Ladie Quene Elizabeth, aſſiſted with ſo many chriſtal ſtarres of ſtately light vnder her, garniſhing and ſauegarding the good gouernment of this her maieſties Realme & dominions of the ſame, with moſt holſome, godly, & politique lawes, and conſtitutiōs, for the cōtinual cōſeruatiō of the publique weale therof vniuerſally, free frō all priuate preiudice and publique perturbation. This then ſo ſurpaſſing felicitie dulye conſidered, what ſubiect is not throughly enforced, freely to vtter & expreſſe the receiued cōfort which he feeleth inwardly & ſeeth

ſo apparauntly? Verely when I the meanest member of thouſandes, reuolue this benefite in my mynde, and ſee how far beyond the expectation and deſertes of man, the prouidence of God dealeth with vs, thus ſtil preſeruing vs, & ſufferig others to quayle in their froward fortunes & calamities: beinge inwardly lightened with a certayn ſecret conſolation in the one reſpect, & outwardly with painful pen pitying & deploring the ſtate of the other: As duty chiefly byndeth me, I haue at this preſēt enforced my ſtudye (thoughe as a Pigmeian in ſimple power) to practiſe ſomewhat with Hercules, or as otherwiſe deſirous to trauel with Vliſſes, to win (albeit with wearines) ſomwhat if it were poſſible by any good meanes, to benefit this bulwarke of beatitude (this my natiue coūtry I mean) which with ſuch multitude of worthy practiſioners notwithſtanding, is alreadye made famous, yet ceaſſed I not with Syſiphus to roule the ſtone, but in ſuch penury of power as, Architas the Philoſopher attributinge to be the appropriate diſcommoditie to dexteritie of witte, which I denie to be remaynīg in me, I haue hazarded my pore hap in ſuch ſimple hādiworke (as I could, though not ſo wel as I would) in tranſlating out of Latine into Engliſh, nine Bookes of the Godly, reuerend and learned FRANCIS PATRICIVS Biſhoppe of Caieta in Italie: whoſe workes in the worthines thereof reuiuinge the aucthor, deade three ſcore yeares agoe and vpwardes, were in the Latine tongue by him left & intituled by the name of Commentaries of the inſtitution, ſtate, and gouernmēt of a commō Weale. Whiche albeit it conteine prophane principles of olde time, enterlaced with the actions, opinions, exā
               ples, Counſels, Sentences, and Sayinges of Heathen Emperours, Kinges, Princes, Captaynes, Oratours, Philoſophers, and ſuche lyke, for the direction of Mundane matters, in Ciuyll gouernmente, with the Learned opinion of the Aucthour diſcourſing
                  •
                vppon-euerye particularitye: Yet therein is Copie of matter worthye Memorye and Imitation for euery eſtate and member of a good chriſtian cōmon weale at this daye. And becauſe it briefly ſo toucheth good order, in mayntenaunce of a Monarchye, and the gouernment thereof:

I haue entituled it, A Morall Methode of ciuile Pollicie, prefixing the particuler contentes before euerye booke, wyth annotatiōs in the Margin
                  •
               , reducinge the ſame into one Table Alphabeticall, for the more direct aſſertion of the particularities in euery ſeuerall booke. But this 
                  •
               y my raſhe attēpte at the firſt ſo boldely begon, in continuaunce ſo bluntlye done and finiſhed, neyther beautified nor burniſhed with anye buxomnes of apt & eloquent Engliſh phraſe: fearing much mine owne imperfection therein, I laboured not onelye, to haue the ſame ſurueig hed, but alſo ſupplied, with more learned ſkille and aucthority, before I would hazard the publiſhing therof. Whiche when I had obtayned, euen then bethinkinge mee on whō I might beſt beſtow the benefite of this my ſimple trauel: beyonde the deſertes of all others, conſideringe with my ſelfe the manifeſte benefites whiche I haue receyued from tyme to tyme theſe twelue yeares at your worſhippes bountiful hands: I deemed my ſelfe a debter euen in dutie to dedicate the ſame vnto you, as a teſtimonie of my thanckefull, ſeruiſable, & well wiſhinge hart towardes you, as a pledge of the faythefull zeale that I beare to this famous Cittye of London, whereof you are an auncient Magiſtrate, and I your poore ſeruaunt a ſimple member of the ſame: and conſequentlye, as an earneſte token of my vnfayned good will and true meaninge towardes this my natiue country. Beſeeching your Worſhippe, and all other well meaning Magiſtrates to pardon my bolde rudeneſſe herein, and to accepte well in woorth my poore good will, and well meaning minde, as wiſhing vnto you especiallye that this my ſimple Myte, were in value more worth thē 
               Midas his golden Diademe, to bee throwen into the treaſurye of your worthy deſerts: and as if this my pore preſent, were more in price, then a purchaſed prize of precious Smaragdes from India (had they ſo luckely light in my lot) I could willingly at this preſent voucheſafe to thenriching of this my natiue coū
               trye: yet neuertheles (ſuch as it is) pretending ſimply & ſyncerelye, wiſhinge herein to profite, & pleaſure all men, & not

to disprofite nor diſpleaſe anye, I yelde the ſame to bee ſhielded vnder Gods good pleaſure and youre worthie patronage. Cōcluding with dutiful and hartie praier vnto the almighty, for the long and prosperous preſeruation of our moſt gracious ſoueraigne Lady the Queenes maieſtie, and her honourable Counſellours: for the floriſhinge eſtate of this oure Publique weale in euery degree, where, including the welfare and felicitye of this honourable Cittie: by duetifull remembraunce I praye especially amongeſt all others, that your Worſhippe, my good Lady & Miſtres, your louing wife, and al your Childrē, may enioye longe and happie dayes on earth, and in fine, the moſt aſſured habitacle of perdurable felicities. Amen.
            
               Your worſhippes moſt humble ſeruāt and faythfull Oratour. Rycharde Robinſon.
            
         
         
            
            Thomas Newtonus.
            
               Quantas Patritio debet Reſpublica grates,
               Cui ſuus hoc ſtudio vindice conſtat honos,
               Aureus hic monſtrat (vel me reticente) libellus,
               Ingenio, genio, diuite et arte ſcatens.
               Hinc morum ſpecies, hinc dogmata pura petuntur,
               Hinc vitae elicitur ciuica norma piae.
               Hiſtoriae quicquid Latiae, memorántue Pelaſgae
               Vtile, Patritius ſedulus expoſuit.
               Dia celebratur dignis Concordia phthongis,
               Diſſidij hic
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   lues pingitur atra trucis.
               Hic bene perſpicimus veſtigia trita Sophorum,
               Quam
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   malèa priſcis degeneramus auis.
               Qui praeſunt ſummae rerum, et moderantur habenas,
               Ex iſto exugent cōmoda magna libro.
               Primates Regni, Symmiſtae, bella gerentes,
               Artificeſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   etiam hic quo doceantur, habent.
               Deni
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Rex et Grex, populus, promiſcua plebſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
               
               Permagnum hinc poſſunt conciliare decus.
               Ifoelix Liber, i, dextra contexte Minerua,
               Digne teri à cunctis clima per omne viris.
            
            
               Thomas Newton, Ceſtreſhyrius.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ Certaine notes ſelected oute of the Preface of Franciſcus Patritius Senenſis, Byſhop of Caieta, into his Boke of the Inſtitution, State and Gouernment of a Commonweale.
            
            
               THe pleaſauntnes of the Soyle wherein the City Caieta ſtādeth, the merueilous fruictfulnes of that countrye, and the wonderful holſomnes of the ayre, foſtereth and nouriſheth men long and many yeares in health: Therfore the wordes of Scipio Affricanꝰ are the leſſe to bee merueyled at, in ſayinge, that he became yonge & waxed (as it were) a chylde againe, when he together with his frend Laelius gathered & picked vp little round ſmoth ſtones at Caieta.
            
            Nothing better ſheweth what a man is, then his ſpeache: for it openeth the ſence or meaning of his mynde, and expreſſeth the deuiſes of the ſame, which both is deuine, & is alſo cōfeſſed & knowen to be the beſt & chiefeſt parte of man. Hereunto tendeth y• wyſe ſaying of Socrates, whē as he ſayd theſe wordes vnto a youngman that helde his peace: ſpeake (ſayde hee) that I may ſee what thou art. Meaning hereby that a man is not to be conſidered and deemed by the outwarde lineamentes and feacture of his bodye and face, but by the inwarde diſpoſition and qualitie of his mynde.
            As it is gladſome & acceptable for wayfaringe men to treade in their ſteppes which haue walked well afore theym: ſo is it vnto a good gouernour to direct his courſe that way, whereby many afore haue eaſely arriued to the hauen of their deſires.
            We ſee al y• beſt writers in euery excellēt Art haue be
                  •
               e as it were ſpighted, il reported & torne in pieces by backebſters: And namelȳ 
               Homer who notwtſtāding he was ye father of al Poets & the graūd capitayn of all diſciplines, yet had he many enemies, and ſpightful carpers, eſpecially one Zoylus of Macedonia, who preſuming to prefer his owne ruſtie wyt before the golden vayne of that deuine Poete, ſaucelye inueighed by wryting againſt the Iliades & Odiſſeas, of the ſame Homer: affecting thereby the ſyrname to be tea
                  •
               med Homeromaſtix, Homers whippe.
            It is the cuſtome of all writers almoſt, to enterlace other mens doings into their own: both becauſe they may wryte thinges more

certaine, and alſo becauſe their writinges ſhould be y• more acceptable and pleaſaūt vnto the Reader. And as Flauius Albinus ſayth, this is one kinde of fruit gotten by readinge, that a man may imitate that which he lyketh and alloweth in others: and ſuch ſpeciall poyntes and ſayinges, as hee is eſpecially delighted & in loue withall, by apt and fitte deriuation maye wreſt to ſerue his owne turne and purpoſe.
            
               Afranius alſo an excellent wryter of Comedies, in the aunſwere that he made to them which layde to his charge that hee had taken many thinges out of Menander: I confeſſe (ſayth hee) I haue not onely receyued and taken out of him, but alſo out of euery other, as they ſeemed to haue any thinge that made for my purpoſe: Yea out of Latine alſo haue I excerpted & gathered whatſoeuer I thought my ſelfe coulde not do better. Quintilian geeueth vs in precept, (which Macrobius alſo aduoucheth & laboureth to perſwade), that we ſhould imitate ye little Bees, which do wāder 
                  •
               fly abroad to ſeke their hony out of many flowers, & then diſpoſe they in order, whatſoeuer they bring home and couche the ſame in their Combes and hyues, and conuert the diuers iuyce therof, with the breath of their mouthes, vnto a moſt ſurpaſſinge ſweete honie, the pleaſaūt reliſhe whereof ſurmounteth all other. Neyther may this ſeeme newe or ſtraunge, when we ſee y• al Authours both Greeke and Latine doe vſually enterlarde their owne workes, wyth other mens doinges. For from Homer not onely all Poetes, haue recourſe euen as all Riuers from the Ocean ſea, but alſo the wryters of all other matters: for wee ſee that Strabo of Crete is altogether Homerical: and Cicero alſo, who for a great part deriueth and fetcheth his matter from Plato and Demoſthenes, & tranſlated into the Latine phraſe the vertues of all the Grekes y• he lyked. And ſo did Quintiliā
                iſſue frō 
               Cicero, and all that haue ſince his days ſtudied eloquence and purity of the Latine tongue. Virgil alſo was not aſhamed to tranſlate into his workes, thouſands of Homers verſes, and liuely to imitate his affectiōs. So alſo borowed he many thinges out of Heſiodus Apollonius & Theocritus. He tooke alſo much out of Latine writers, and when hee miſlyked and diſallowed of ſome, & was aſked why he read them and noted any thing out of theym, hee aunſwered, That he gathered Precious ſtones out of the myre.
            
            Notwithſtanding I thincke it the parte of a thanckfull mynde, franckly to profeſſe their names whom wer do imitate, and of whō we haue borowed any thing: for as Plini ſayth, it is an honeſt thākfulnes to confeſſe by whom a man hath profited, and thys recompence

(as it were an hyre) is payable vnto the Aucthour by good right: leaſt otherwiſe we ſhould ſeeme to be vniuſte or deceiptfull in our dealinges. Which thing alſo Thales Mileſius hath taughte vs, for when as hee beinge very olde, had deuiſed a wonderfull reaſon concerning the Sunne, and had taught the ſame vnto Mandritus a Philoſopher of Cyrene, the ſayd Mandritus being greatly delighted with the noueltie and ſtraungenes of thinuencion (after greate thanckes firſt geuen to Thales therfore) wylled him to chooſe what rewarde, he would haue in recompence of that ſo worthye a leſſon▪ I ſhall thincke my ſelfe well and ſufficiently recompenſed (ſayth he to Mādritus) if whēſoeuer thou vttereſt this knowledge that thou haſt learned at my handes, thou do not arrogate & chalenge the inuention thereof to thy ſelfe, but declare and reporte me to be the inuentour and deuiſer thereof, rather then any other man.
         
      
      
         
            
            A MORAL METHODE of ciuill Pollicye.
         
            
               Whereof this fyrſte Booke entreateth: Of the Royall and prayſeworthie gouernmente of one ſole Prynce. Of originall conſeruation of Humane ſocietie. Of preſcribing politicke lawes and ordynaunces. Of maintayning huſbandry, trades of marchandize, and handycraftesmen.
            
               IT hath bene a very olde and publiſhed argument diſputed vpon amongeſt excellente writers in Philoſophie: whether it were better to liue wel, and ſafelye to bee gouerned by a good Prince, and to obey him rulinge in Iuſtice and equitie, or elles to liue in a free cittie and Communaltye eſtabliſhed by good lawes & traditions. For vnto ſome it ſeemeth moore meete to obeye one man rulinge iuſtly, & lawfully, then many & almoſt infinite perſons, & (as for the moſt parte it falleth out) vnſkilful in handling affaires, and matters of gouernmente. For it chaunceth I know not how, yt thoſe ſeuerall perſons, whō as it were workmē or porters we haue had in contēpt, being lincked or knit together in vnitie of mynd, the ſame afterwardes hardly can we in aſſemblies reuerence. For they confirme this Sentence by the teſtimony of Homer, who (in his ſecond Rhapſodie) ſaith.
            
               A matter cannot well handled bee,
               UUhere as commaunders are manye.
            
            MOreouer vnto this hapneth the imitacion of nature,Imitacion of Nature vnto Obedience of one Supe
                     •
                  io
                     ••
                  
                for as wee ſee and beholde one God the creator and faſhioner of all thinges, by whoſe rule and commaundement all thinges are gouerned: So ſeemeth it meete and conuenient vnto vs al, to encline vnto and regard the cō
               maundemente of one moſt excellent Prince, and to obaye

the ſame. We ſee the Sun in his nature, is as it were the onely Lorde of the day, and the Moone to be the Ladye of the nighte, whome wee beholde to rule and raigne in the ſkies amōg the planets & ſtarres, & the greater that their light is, the darcker do they make the leſſer Starres.
            But that we may deſcend vnto leſſe matters, are there not ſome brute beaſtes which lyue ſubiectes to the rule of ſome one kinge, they diſdayne not their obedience nor to do their duties and commaundemente enioyned them, and fighte as it were vnder a Generall. Who doubte the that the Bees haue their Kinge whych Gouerneth his people, and bringeth the other Bees to doe their dutye and to gather honye. For there can be nothinge more ſweeter or better to bee wyſhed vnto mortall men, then to leade a priuate lyfe vnder a good kinge or prince without iniurie or ambicion of the people. But becauſe nature hath ſo ordayned, that Princes are not immortall or immutable perſons, but ſome beinge brought vp verye delicately, geuing eare to flattering paraſites do for the moſt parte proue worſe and worſe in their gouerning: Therefore I iudge, that the lyfe of a Ciuill and well inſtituted common weale is to be thought far more ſafer, then of euerye Prince, for that is a continuall and almoſte an immortall ſtate of lyfe. But this is finiſhed in a ſmall courſe by olde age and death.
            Uerye ſeldome it hath hapned that a Prince gouerned and ruled ſtill his common weale, in that minde as he did when he began firſt to take the gouernment in hande. For of ſo greate and almoſte infinite multitude of Caeſars,
               Hee meaneth of ſuch as are careles for the cōmon vveale. whiche were all made worſe by their continuall raignes, onlye Vespaſianus of al the Princes that were there before his tyme, was chaunged better and better, as Cornelius Tacitus maketh mētion. For their beginnings were eaſie and gentle vntill ſuche time as they had gott vnto theymſelues the loue of their people, but when they had obteined their purpoſe, they made hauocke of all thynges by

their crueltie and luſt. No feare of god, no religion could reſtrayn thē, neyther ceaſed they to rage vntill they were ſubdued and ſubuerted, yea euen by their owne ſubiectes.
            
               Thales Mileſius who was called the chiefeſte of all theVVhat thinge moſt difficulte in the life of man. Sages, being aſked of a certayne familier freende of hys what thinge he had ſeene to bee moſte difficult or harde in his lyfe tyme: Sayth he, a Tyraunt, an olde man. And in good fayth, not without a cauſe did hee ſaye ſo, for there is no rule or gouernmente exerciſed more harde then vppon men, as Xenophon maketh mention.
            Undoubtedlye there is no brute beaſt ſo ſedicious or rebelling againſt his keeper or feeder, that he will not obay him, or refuſe to yelde his cōmoditie vnto him. But (alas) mā is grudging alwaies at thē which ſeeke to haue domination ouer him, deuiſeth deceiptes and inuenteth newe matters or cauſes of diſobedience. One Prince whycheThe prayſe of a Prynce. embraceth all vertues (or hath all good qualities in hym) is not at all to be founde lyuinge vppon the earth. Some one is commended for his Iuſtice, ſome other for his fortitude, or magnanimitie, ſome other for his liberality or gentlenes of nature: but when there are manye in a common weale, euerye one of theim hath ſome parte of vertue and wiſedome. Wherfore the Citizens beinge gathered together into one ſocietye doe make as it were one man,Society of Citiſens. whiche with diuerſitie of wytte and memorie doth excell, with many eyes ſeeth, with manye handes wor
                  •
               keth, and with almoſte infinite feete endeuoureth himſelfe in his affayres. Xenophon when hee wolde prayſe the ciuill ſocietie of the Perſians, affirmed that euen their children amonge theym did ſo learne iuſtice, that they both attayned vnto good letters & alſo vnto the ſtudies of good artes and ſciences.
            It ſeemeth vnto Plato a harde thing to be done, to perſwade thoſe Cittizens to Iuſtice, which were not from their tender infancie, as it were trayned vp in the same. And vndoubtedlye if the iuſte and perfect volumes of the

lawyers were extant and abroade to bee hadde, and that they were not ſo broken and mangled as they bee, they woulde geeue vs moſte cleare and ample lighte not onlye how to kepe and preſerue this ciuill ſocietie, but alſo they woulde teache vs morall wiſedome, and howe to attayne vnto the vſe of the greateſt affayres in a common weale.
            Man is a Creature farre more fellowlye and ſociable, then Bees, Antes, or Cranes, and ſuch kinde of creatures whiche are foſtered and nouriſhed by flockes and doe defend theym ſelues by troupes and companies. The firſte ſocietie is of the Male and Female for procreacion ſake: which cannot be, except they bee both together: and ſcarceSocietie humane profitable by procreation. is the one withdrawen from the other except by the ordinaunce of nature: for the pledges of the younglinges doe ſo greatlye cauſe mutuall Loue, that they are carefull to lyue together, and are affectioned towardes their fruict, as they be vnto themſelues. For it hapneth not vnto man and woman as it doth almoſte vnto all other liuinge creatures, amongeſte whom the female ſexe do take on theym the charge to feede and foſter their younge children, and for a ſmall tyme it is that they ſtande in neede of the mothersExample of ſocietie in birds. helpe. For we ſee that birds do bring vp their yonge ones ſo longe as they bee vnfeathered, and not able to flye: But ſo ſone as they perceue them able to vſe their wings, ſtraightwayes they bringe them forth of their neſtes and goe before their younge ones, which flicker rounde about theym, vntill ſuch tyme as with a ſtronger endeuour they be better able to ſhift for them ſelues, which when the old ones do ſee, they geeue thoſe their yong ones libertie, at theyr aduenture to haunt the free ſcope of the ayre, neyther haue they afterwardes anye furder care ouer theym, or at any tyme thēce foorth do acknowledge them as their own, but doe take their flight to ſeeke after the male birde, and geue their endeuour vnto a newe encreaſe or breede.
            But man when he ſeeth his chyldren borne and comen into this worlde, is affected towardes theym with ſuche

loue that hee ſtudieth or careth for nothinge more then to get lyuinge for them and ſuche large patrimonie & Inheritance,Humaine care for his poſteriti that for euer there be no lacke of any thing to thē and their poſterities. Of this did procede and riſe the plē
               tifulnes & frutefulnes of Cities inhabited, becauſe when man and wife had edified for them ſelues a dwelling houſe and repleniſhed the ſame with encreaſe of children and nephewes, they were dryuen to make other houſes, becauſe one houſe coulde not holde one lynage or ofſpringe: and ſo they began to erect villages in the countrie and to eſtabliſhe ſocietie by meanes of many houſes.
            And when they did playnly ſee what commoditie was in the ſocietie of man and woman: and howe more eaſlye and better verye manye liued together, then a fewe: yea more ſafer from the inuaſion of wilde beaſtes: they began to ioyne Lordſhippe to Lordſhippe, and laye Familye toThe firſt reaſō of Societie inſtituted. Familye, and alſo to ioyne in neighbourhoode for their owne common vtilitie. The firſt reaſō of thē which inſtituted ciuil ſocietie, or eſtabliſhed cities, was yt they might liue ſafely, & that they might be defended frō violence & aſſaultes. For tranquillitie or peaceablenes was a guide of their lyfe, to finde out innumerable cōmodities. And yt is credible that mannes ſpeache or language, wherein ſurelye he doth excell other liuing creatures, was not diſtinct & ſeuered, before humane ſocietie was firſt founded.
            Certainlye wee haue a common voyce, aſwell as other lyuinge creatures haue, whiche doth eyther ſpeciallye demonſtrate and ſhewe forth ioye or ſadnes, eyther els ſometymes deſire, and ſometimes feare, whiche is in vs. But for to know and diſcerne thinges by their proper names by plaine and perfecte ſpeache, to finiſhe or conclude aſwell our cogitations as our effectes and meaninges, that for certaine could not be but inuented by ciuill ſocietyStudies of vertues and diſciplines. of men. Mooreouer the ſtudies of vertues and diſciplines, or rudimentes of good Artes, and ſciences, was not found out nor inuented by men which liued in ſolitarines,

and of them whiche after the manner of ſauage beaſtes led their lyues in the wooddes: but by the ciuil man, whiche was conuerſant in companye of men whiche hearde many thinges, which diſcuſſed many thinges, and by whom they were inuented and firſt had in vſe. For in ſuch Citties as were well inſtructed and ordered: there were Rewardes beſtowed on them which excelled in any manner of vertue and ſuch as were alſo therby preferred to high promocion and adorned or made famous, with praiſe and commendation for their excellence. For honour as Cicero ſayth, doth foſter and mainteyne Artes and ſciences, and we allHonos alit artes. are inflamed to endeuour our ſelues for prefermente and prerogatiue by praiſe and commendatiō in our trauailes. Finally what excellent exploite ſo euer mortall men haue by their ſtudie and diligence in this life put in vre, it either had firſte iſſue and originall practize from the Citties, or elles tooke the vfe and grace thereof, in the ſame cytties.
            Man which is brought vp or trayned in cōmon ſociety, differeth verye muche from him that lyueth in a rude cottage, eyther elles in a hilly wilderneſſe, or wood: for thisDifference of Societie humane. man ſeemeth to be borne as it were vnto crueltie, amonge wilde and brute beaſtes, but the other ſeemeth to be borne amongeſt men vnto Iuſtice and humanitie. For it is true that Ariſtotle ſaith.
            He is a beaſt and not a man whiche forſaketh ciuill ſocietie: and he that refuſeth to be any parte or member of a cittie, he muſt needes be a wicked and vngodlye perſon.
            For he ſhunneth the companie of men becauſe he would not be compelled to obaye the lawes and Iudgement, and to obaye him that is a rightfull Ruler: then the whyche thinge ſurelye there can bee nothinge more pernicious or hurtfull. For of all good ciuill order the chiefe thinge is Iuſtice, whiche no doubt layeth the foundacion and groūd worke of humane ſocietie and withoute the whiche there

can bee no ciuill congregation. For as the ſaide Philoſopher ſayth, as man is the beſt liuing creature of all others whiche liueth perfectlye. ſo is he worſte and naughtieſt of all liuinge creatures, which is ſequeſtred from the lawe and iudgementes.
            The Lawes of the Perſians, (as Xenophon writeth) doe eſpecially ordayne thobedience due to Iuſtice, and in ſuchObedience vn to Iuſtice. manner euen from their Childehoode, (as we haue ſaide) the Cittizens did learne to deſire nothinge that was fylthye or vnlawful for man to do, whiche perſwaſion ſurely me thincketh is the beſt of all others. And if it might by any meanes be brought to paſſe, that all men mighte lyue inſtructed in this doctrine, wee ſhould be exonerated and diſcharged of a great parte of our labour otherwiſe. For if euerye man woulde preſcribe what were nedefull to bee done, and beinge ſo lincked and ioyned together were not affected or moued wythe couetouſnes, nor other perturbations of the mynde: they ſhoulde doe rightewell. Ambicion ſhoulde not catche holde vpon anye man, couetouſnes ſhoulde not ſnare anye man, diſſencion or mutine ſhoulde not entrappe anye man, neyther ſhoulde enuie circumuente anye manne, to withdrawe hym from the reaſon of that wherein truthe and equitie conſiſteth: neyther ſhould hee purſue and ſeeke for his priuate proffyte or inordinate pleaſure, rather then a publique weale, or that reaſon order, truthe, and equitie requireth.
            
               Anacharſis when he had heard ſay that Solon had geuen himſelfe to the ſtudie of publyſhynge Lawes at Athens, exceedinglye deryded and ſcorned his induſtrie and diligence, affirminge that thoſe lawes ſhoulde in tyme toThis is meant of lavvs made and not obſerued. come be like vnto Spiders webbes, whiche did catch and keepe faſte the ſmall flyes, but were broken and burſte in ſonder of the greate flyes: whiche ſentence alſo Solon hym ſelfe would vſe and not without a cauſe: for oftentimes in great Citties (and wherein the ſtudies of good artes and ſcienees do floriſhe) we ſe there are very manye which liue

worſe, then as if they had beene brought vp in the woods, and w
                  •
               elde countries. Dion in his bookes which are intituled, Of the ſtate of a Kingedome, did ſaye that weightie matters were farre better handled by the councel of a few perſons then withe multitude and power of moſt ſtronge and luſtye younge men: whiche in deede is ratified by the ſentence of Homer, where as hee broughte in Agamemnon as pertinent to his purpoſe, affirminge that hee could farre moore eaſlye deſtroye the Troianes common weale, if he had ten ſuch as Neſtor, or Vliſſes were, then if hee had ſo manye ſuche as Aiax, and Achilles were, fyghtinge ſtoutly and valiauntlye.
            That ſtate of a Common weale wherein fewe doe gouerne, differeth verye little at all from the ſtate of Tyrannye, for by their wealthe and their riches, the magiſtratesOligarchia. are choſen, and onelye wealth beareth ſwaye. Neyther doth this preſcribe libertie or ende of vertue, but onelye how to gette ryches, whiche Cicero affirmeth: Are the ſubſedies of warfare and the ornaments of peace. But the matter goes ill with the rich men, when no place is reſerued for vertue, and the common people bee as it were altogether brought vnder foote & ſubiection. And it coms to paſſe now & then that in ſom cities, onely hādycrafteſmen & huſbandmen do beare a ſway, which becauſe thei are moore in number, they doe decaye thoſe that bee more noble of birth and callinge, yea and haue ſuche in deriſion and contempt which are zealous in any kind of vertue and learned in good artes or ſciences. It maye bee brought to paſſe by fortune that ſuch a Cittye which is ſo gouerned, may ſtand in ſafetye and quietnes for a certayn tyme, but fortune frowning on them, it is ſone perceiued, how hard a matter it will be to lyue well amongeſt ſuche manner of men. For they that are broughte vp in fieldes, or in ſhoppes are voyde of experience in all thinges, and do beare aucthoritie with a ſeruile mynde, neyther are they furthered or furniſhed wt doctrine, noblenes of race

or with thexperience of waighty affaires. And whyle they ſtande in feare of the nobler ſort, they doe all thinges eyther raſhlye withoute aduiſemente, or cruellye withoute meaſure: for euery cōmunaltie eyther ſerues in obedience with humilitie, or ruleth with great crueltie.
            Furthermore it ſeemeth contrary to equitie ye wheras the citie cannot conſiſt of Nobles onelye, but farre greater muſte bee the reſte of the multitude, or communaltie, that onelye the Noble men ſhoulde bearerule, and all theNoble men ruling, the reſi due duly obeyinge cauſe the citty to floriſhe. reſte obaye.
            For tillage of ground & huſbandrie bringeth vnto vs, natural nouriſhement, and marchandize doth bringe vnto vs; all other thinges neceſſarie for our vſe: Whereby it comes to paſſe that neither without huſbandmē nor without marchauntes, can ciuill ſocietie bee amongeſte men.
            They therfore are not to be exempted away frō publike offices, whoſe ſeruice is ſeene to bee neceſſary in a Common weale, leaſte they thinkinge theymſelues to bee had in contempte, ſhrincke awaye and withdrawe theymſelues from the Rulers and Gouernours. For ſo often as the people of Rome did ſeperate theymſelues from the Senatours, they were neuer withoute greate peryll and daunger eftſones renued.
            Surelye the meane ſorte of men, which are neyther to much abiect or baſe, neither yet boaſte theymſelues in the wealth of their nobilitye, doe farre more modeſtlye beare rule. But if it muſt needes 
                  •
               ee that either the nobilitie, or communalty onelye, ſhoulde beare auctority, I thinke it farre more ſafely ſhould the matter be handled, by gouernment of the Nobles, then of the commons: for ſeeldome againſte comlynes or honeſtye dothe 
                  •
               ee any thing, whiche ſeeth that by his doings he ſhall hazard the prayſe of his aunceſtors with hymſelfe, but he that being of hymſelfe baſe and obſcure hathe hys aunceſtors farre more obſcure, ſeemeth to make vnto hymſelfe a very ſmal loſſe if ſometimes he do any thing amiſſe: And if ther wante no

examples of ruſticall perſons, and men vnknowen which haue fought valiantly for their coūtry.
            For wee reade, that ſome haue beene called from the plowe, other ſome from the flocke of ſhepe or other heardes, which haue obtained great victories vnto yt 
               Romaines. But I am one of that nōber which account that to be the beſt cōmon weale which is intermixt wt al kind of people.
            That is counted the beſte common weale wherein notThe beſt common vveale. euery man that liſteth or the more parte doe beare auctoritye, at ye Becke and Checke of wyll, but that Common weale wherein the Lawe onelye ſhall beare a ſwaye: for equality of iuſtice amongeſt citizens maketh a ſtable & fyrme ſociety, which euen then greatly floriſheth when as all thinges are iudged and ordered with equall ryght and Iuſtice. For it chaunceth for the moſt parte, that affections doe trouble the iudgementes of men: ſome one, feare appaulleth: ſome others, hatred: ſome hope: ſome other, awe and dread: and ſome other, ambicion or couetouſnes cōpelleth to iudge thoſe thigs which are not only cōtrary to equity: but alſo contrary to yt mind of him which iudgeth. For we ſee oftentymes, the Iudge moued wyth a certeyn affectiō, doth determin thoſe things whych wythin a ſhort ſpace after he would willingly alter and chaunge.
            Equality amongſt Cytyzens cauſeth concord, without the whych, ciuyll ſocietye is ſeene to be neyther firme norAequalitie in a Cytty cauſeth concorde. ſtable at al. For no force or ſtrēgth can ſufficiēily preuail, no ſauegard, no riches, no reuen
                  •
               es can ſuffice thoſe cities which are diſquieted or troubled wt inteſtine warres. And agayn alſo, neyther ſhal that 
                  •
               yty be ſclender in power nor of ſmal cōtinuance which is enuyroned & fortified with cō
               corde of the Citizens. Therefore there muſte bee great forecaſte had, yt the Citizens may liue with equal Iuſtyce & that ſome do not alwayes beare rule, & that other ſome do not remain alwais as inferiours, for al ſociety is vnſtable there, where all men doe not lyue in indifferencye of Iuſtice.
            
               Man (foraſmuche as he loueth and fauoureth his owne kynne, and is congregable or geeuen to companye, & ſociable or geuen to felowſhip more then other lyuing creatures: and ſeing no ſociety can be firme or ſtable without iuſtice) appeareth to be thereunto eſpecially born, whych he fauoreth and is affected moſt vnto.
            And the firſt duty of Iuſtice is Piety or godly zeale towardes God: pertaker of which vertue doubtles ther is no liuynge creature elles ſeene to be, but onely man. For mā onely doth acknowledge God, and hym as the aucthour &The firſt dutye of Iuſtice creator of the worlde, & worckmaiſter of all thinges doth renerence & worſhip, by whom ſurely he acknowledgeth himſelf to be made pertaker of reaſon, in whom he ſeinge that Iuſtice is all in all, it behoueth that he ſhow himſelf a folower of Iuſtice, if he would haue himſelfe to be counted lyke vnto himſelf.
            It bredeth great diſſētiō, wher, amōgſt thē which are foūd guilty in cryme alyke, ſom are greuouſly puniſhed, & other ſom eſcape vntouched altogether: it ſhould bee otherwiſe if thoffences were not a lyke. For far more greuouſly is that gouernour or ſhypmaiſter to be puniſhed, which ouerwhelmeth the ſame being laden with golde and ſiluer, thē hee whiche hathe loſte or periſhed a Shyppe laden withe Sande
                  •
               or Potcers claye, and yet eyther of theſe hathe neglected hys duty. For thyngs of more value ſemes iuſtlye to require more diligence. For there can bee no better perſwaſion in ciuil ſocietie, then yt which toucheth the fredom of the city, whereunto the mind of euery Cytizen is to be dyrected, whiche ſurely ſhalbe an eaſy matter to bee done if in maner all men wil hope and truſt wel that ſomtyme they maye ſupplye the function of a magiſtrate: for euery man laboureth for renowme, which when he ſhal ſe hymſelfe preuented of, and that hee is fruſtrate of hope, he is neuer at quiet in hys mynde, and eyther ſhall he bee the more negligent in a common weale, or appeare altogether euill affected towardes the ſame. Hereupon do ſedicions

growe amongeſt Cittyzens, from hence do alſo riſe factions and Enimities, which things ſurely do weaken the ſtate of a publique weale: therfore a magiſtrate ought to haue a determinate & prefixed tyme apointed for ye gouernment & exerciſe of his office. For, to beare aucthoritie continuallye in a free cittie is hatefull: it muſte alſo bee wiſely forſene yt the Cytyzens be found iuſte amonge thē ſelues, directyng all their doinges vnto vertue, and y• beinge contente withe their owne goodes that they doe not deſire other mennes.
            Let there be no place for ydle perſonsin a common weale,No place for loyterers in a comon vveale. for, ſurely by meanes of ſlowth and ſluggiſhnes, they do commit all wickednes: wherupon true is that Oracle of Marcus Cato,
            
            
               By ſlouth and doinge nothinge at all,
               Men learne to do euill: great and ſmall.
            
            They doe alwayes enuie at the paynfull trauell of the good cityzens, vnto whom when they can not be like, they labour with hartburning and hatred how to weaken and diſturbe their eſtate. Such therefore as lyue ydlye muſte bee excluded from publique offices, becauſe neyther can they rule worthely, & alſo do withdraw their duty frō obedience. In which matters all ciull ſocietie is conteyned.
            Their opinion is not to bee commended whiche ſaye that by the faulte or offence of the parents, their poſteritie ſhoulde bee for euer excluded oute of the publique weale, for in ſo doinge thei ſhall diſpayre altogether of felicitie when they ſee that all hope of pardon is debarred: and that they cannot redeme themſelelues by any vertue, or worthynes. For it oftentimes chanceth yt their mindes are moſt ready and prone, to innouation, and deſperation ſometime is turned into mighty courage: for they whiche are in any extremitie, do eaſelye take hold vppon the ſentence

of the moſt learned Poet Maro,
            
            
               Una ſalus victis, nullam sperare ſalutem.
            
            It is onely compted a ſafety vnto thoſe which bee vanquiſhed or conuinced, not to hope for any ſafetye at all.
            Of al thinges, (as Cicero writeth) wherof there is anyHuſbandry profitable- commoditie to bee gotten, nothinge can bee better or more commodious then huſbandry or tillage of grounde. Then this, nothing is more plentifull, nothinge ſweeter, neyther yet more worthye for the ſtate of a fr
                  •
               man in a cō
               mon weale: for onely huſbandrye is ſuch as vnto whome gentlemen & others ought to ſet to their hands, both for y• neceſſity of ſuſtentacion vnto our lyfe, (foraſmuch as with out the ſame we cannot lyue) and agayn becauſe it yeldes vs a moſte honeſt gayne wythout deceipt or ſyinge.
            Surely yonge men are made ſtronge wt the exerciſe of tillage of y• groūd, and be far more healthy then ſuch as are trayned vp in Cytyes, where as they vſinge ſleepe and luſtes of the bodye, are enfebled and vnhealthie.
            Yt is not therefore to bee meruayled, yf the Romaynes brought forth youngmen hardened in the fieldes, when they conquered the whoole worlde, not by Idlenes and ſlouth, but wyth ſtength and fortitude.
            But we in theſedayes do ſhonne the trade of huſbandry as a fylthy lucre, yea and haue the huſbandmen in deriſion, and do diſpyſe them as ſlaues or bondmen, and ſuche as are borne to perpetuall drudginge, and do eſteme Brokers, Pedlers, Cookes, and Coblers, more then wee doe of a good huſbandman, whoſe induſtrye we then do ſaye excedeth the induſtrye of al other worckemen, when the common people ready to ſterue for hunger earneſtlye craueth their helpe and nouriſhement, and when they beinge hungerſterued and pynched wythe Famyne becommeth vnrulye and paſte all feare: For huſbandrye only yeldes vnto vs nouriſhemente, it helpeth and furthereth buildinge, and almoſt findeth ſufficiency alſo of apparell: onlye the Huſbandman is a breeder of Cattle: whiche

thing was of ſuch eſtimation among the auncient people that Cato being demaunded, in what thing doyng a man myghte bee quickely made ryche: yf (ſayth hee) a manne feede well. And beynge agayne demaunded what thynge elles? (ſaythe hee) yf hee feede well. By the whyche aunſwere he ſheweth vs, that euen a meane dylygence of the maiſter in feedinge his Cattell excede the other profytes. For in dede there is no Arte or Scyence nor any induſtrye of men ſooner maketh a man ryche, then huſbandrye.
            
               Heſiodus and Homer, dyd more allow of the inſtrumentes, and neceſſaries pertayninge to huſbandrye and of huſbandmen, then of warryors or warlyke affayres: for the one promyſeth vnto menne lyfe and felycicye, the other death and myſerye.
            Good houſholders oughte to take accompte of theyr Sernauntes and Familyes Idlenes, rather then of theyr buſines: and the moſte learned of the aunciente fathersGood houſeholders vvhat they ought to doe. iudged that there was nothinge more odyous and hatefull then ſlouthe and drowſiues of the mynde: wherefore before they ſhoulde eate theyr meate, they called the yong men and ſeruaunes to the table, and tooke accompt of thē what duety or what buſines they had done that daye: and before theym onlye they ſet meate: whoſe dylygence they lyked & allowed, & thoſe they thruſt out of the place accuſtomed to ſuppe in, whyche by theyr ſlouthe and ſluggiſhnes had done nothing: & cōmaunded that they ſhould labour hard in ſom dutiful buſines to earn theyr own foode. Let thoſe take vpon them thys charge whych (eſpecially, in a common weale doe beare rule: to ſee that youngeGood artes or ſcyences to be cared for. men do applye their myndes vnto the ſtudie of good artes or Scyences. For in euery free Cytye there ought to bee a ſpeciall care for the mayntenaunce of good artes & ſcyences. For Plato ſayde: Bleſſed are thoſe common weales which of wyſe and learned men are gouerned.
            
            
               Or at the leaſt (ſythens we all cannot proue learned) wherein Marchaundiʒe, ſeafaring trade, and other Scientes profytable vnto ciuill ſocietye were frequented and vſed.
            Euery man ought to labour aſmuch as he may, to profyte himſelfe, his famylye, and other Cytyʒens. For amongeſte thoſe moſt ſtreite Lawes whyche DRACO made, there was eſpecially one, that, they whyche were condempned for Ydleneſſe, ſhoulde bee puniſhed withe deathe.
            
               DIOD ORVS wrytethe that there was a Lawe amongeA lavv amōg the Egiptians for due knovvledge in order of lyuinge. the Egiptiaus, whereby all men were compelled to declare their names vnto their rulers, and to ſhow by what arte, or by what manner of gayne they lyued. And yf anye man lyed or lyued by vniuſte Lucre or gayne, the ſame was adiudged to dye: and truelye not withoute a cauſe: for thoſe that bee ydle and ſlouthful youngmen, are the poyſon of the cyttye: they are apte and proue to luſte and pleaſure, they doe enuye thoſe that bee good, they cauet and deſire other mennes goodes, and finallye they proue ſedicious and troubleſ me, inſomuche as the greateſt troubles ryſe vpon them.
            
               Marcus Cato wrote verye well in his bookes of Manners, that mannes lyfe was as Iron, whyche if a manExerciſe of mannes lyfe vvhat it is do exercyſe and putte in vſe, is in wearinge made bryghte, but beinge vnexercyſed and not put in vſe, is withe Ruſte conſumed and canckered. So men with honeſt exerciſe are in like caſe tryed and worne and yf they bee not exercyſed, ſlouthe and drowſines doth brynge to theym more detrymente and dammage, then dylygence or paynes taking, doth good.
            For very well doth Cato touche the ſame in hys Oration made at Numantia to the Horſemen. ſayinge: You Souldiours, conſyder in youre myndes yf you ſhall doe anye thynge well by Laboure or Trauayle, the

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
labour and trauail doth quickly departe but the good that you doe in the ſame laboure and traueil, ſtil doth remayn for euer: but if you take any pleaſure in doinge euill, the pleaſure quickly departeth, but the euill that you doe, remainethe for euer: whiche ſentences declare that there is nothinge worſe then ydlenes, neyther anye thinge more prayſeworthy then induſtry and traueil. Merchants and handicrafteſmen are to be fauored, which wt their labourMerchaunts & vvorkmen in a citty. and induſtry get their liuinge, and do make the cyties far more abundant in thinges which may profite al men: for, merchaunts are neceſſary which do carye awaye from vs ſuch things as we haue ſuperfluous or to much ſtore of, & by exchaunge, and ſales of their commodities do bringe vs thoſe thinges whiche ſhalbee neceſſarye for vs.
            The cuſtome of the Belgians and lowe countryemen, doth ſeme▪ to me verye allowable, becauſe they wyll▪ not ſuffer Merchauntes to come and traffyque with thē
               Vayne traffiques. whiche ſhall brynge vnto theym thoſe thinges that maye cauſe them to be effeminately mynded. For it chaunceth in oure tymes that the prouocations of venery and luſtes, as entyſementes to vayne pleaſures, on euerye ſyde are brought vs from the furtheſt part of the Ocean ſea. Certaynly ſuch manner of nauigation or trafyque cannot be neceſſarye, and as I iudge muſte needes be leſſe commendable, but onely that whiche makethe exchaunge with ſuperfluous thinges for ſuch kind of commoditie, as may bee moſte for our proffyte.
            A certeyn Laconian did ſay (as it is reported) yt there is anA meaſure & meane in merchants gayne. end or meaſure to be preſcribed vnto lucre or gayne, for & in cōſideracion of the diuers chances of fortune: leaſt yt in a ſmall momente of tyme the merchaunte doe looſe and let ſlyppe that whyche in all hys lyfe tyme he hath gayned and be compelled of neceſſitye to conſume and waſte, the ſame in expences, whych thinge vndoubtedlye, cannot come to paſſe withoute reproche and diſhoneſtye, althoughe the partye be nothynge faultye.

Therefore to the ende that Merchauntes maye liue without ſutch reproche, let them preſcribe vnto them ſelues a meaſure and ende in their couetous attemptes, leaſte they bee compelled to ſuffer pouerty in their oulde age, with deriſion alſo.
            And yet notwithſtandinge, Socrates iudgeth them that buye of thoſe greate Merchauntes to thintent to ſell the ſame again, to be worthy of diſprayſe, except by weaknes of age or by reaſon of their vnhealthfulnes of bodye they cannot put in practiſe any other kinde of trade to liue vppon.
            The lawe of Solon is prayſed eſpecially wherin hée ordayned, that, that chylde was not bounden vnto his father, in any neceſſary duety of life, of whom he had receaued no Arte, Science or Trade, to get his liuinge withal.
            Handy craftes men or worckemen which prouide thoſe thinges that are profitable vnto vs, and without whomeCertayne han dicraftesmen neceſſary in a commonvveal we may leſſe commodiouſly liue, are not onely to be borne withall: but alſo are to be taken and reputed amongeſt the moſt honeſt Citizens. Smithes, Foūders, Caruers, Engrauers, Printers, Potters, Glaſiers, Shoomakers, Curriours, Taylers, Weauers, Ioyners, Maſons, Clothiers, Pargeters, roughmaſōs, Ironmōgers, & verye many other ſuch like faculties are to be admitted, partly becauſ they prouid ſuch thīgs as be neceſſary. Partly becauſ thei make their citie more noble wt diuers ornamēts.
            The Lacedemonians, to the ende they might withdraw their Cittezens from all filthy gaine, and prouoke them vnto Huſbandrye, Huntinge and warrefare. did caſte out of their Citty as well their Golde as their Siluer: coumptinge it a peſtilence or plague vnto the Cittezens. And ordained to be made a certaine coyne of Iron which was more weighty, to the ende they might be extruded & ſequeſtred frō al company of their neighbours, and liue witheout the tradinge, to or with any forrayne Countryes. They which trade in Merchaundice with modeſty

and do take no vſury (which thinge Marcus Cato declared was the next poinct to a murderer? for to one that demaū
               ded of him, what it ſeemed vnto him, to be an vſerer, heeVſury forbidden. aunſwered, what is it to kill a man▪ And they which doe not lye, neither deceaue others, with periury, orlyinge I deeme them worthy to be enryched wyth the benefittes of of a commonwealth.
            Worckemen giuen to fylthye gayne and which are the miniſters of pleaſures, and do prouide for the prouocations of gluttony, & lechery, are not only not to be admitted, into a common weale, but alſo to be thruſt out of a Citty: for wythe their typling houſes and places of ryot, they do hurt vnto many, and profyt to no man.
            And thoſe that exerciſe or vſe light arts and faculties, whereby riſeth no profite, are to bee neglected and had in contempte and rather to bee derided then eſteemed or rewarded.
            The fyrſte reſpecte or regarde of geuinge our voyces is to be had of honeſty, and vertue. And the ſeconde of lyberall ſciences which in a Citty bringe with them moſte plentifull profit. The thirde conſideration is to bee had of Nobilitye, for they whoſe aunceſtours haue floriſhed famousReaſons of regarde in a common vveale. with ſome kinde of prayſe, their children and poſterity are not to be neglected, except by their reproch or ignominye, they do darken & emblemiſh the prayſe and cō
               mendation of their aunceſtours. And the fourth conſideration, ought to be had of them, which profet the Citizens by trade of Merchaundice, worckmanſhip and induſtrye, makynge the Citye therebye more wealthye and renowmed.
            
               Uulcane who was moſt ſkilfull in the arte of Aſtronomie, & which was alſo the ſucceſſour of Mercury in the kingdome dyd inuent the mines of ſiluer, gold, and iron. The Grecians holde opinion that he fyrſt made and deuiſed the fier tonges of braſſe or copper, & other neceſſaryes touchinge huſbandry.
            
               And they ſaye that in the Arte of warre he could do verye muche: and that hee was, made lame, by reaſon of a wounde whiche he receyued in his foote: he alſo helde opinion, that the Planets and ſtarres were fyery, and that all thinges were made and created of fyre.
            It ſhal therfore behoue them (which beare rule in a cō
               mon weale, to be careful yt there want no deuiſers or chiefWorkmayſtero and deuiſers of Workes. worckmaiſters in a citty: for when the ſacred or publique buildinges, are by euill meaſure & proportion framed, yt miniſtreth occaſion to ſtraungers to thinke, that the chief princes and rulers of that common weale are cleane voyd of elegancy: but pryuate mens houſes being euil tymbred, vnhandſomely ſeuered withe windowes and lightes, and beautified vncomely, are for habitacion nothing handſom and expedient. Let the chiefe maſter of the worke therfore reſpect and loke wel to the forme and faſhion of houſes in the city, & to the cōmoditye of the buyldings & houſes, in time of peace and quietnes: but in time of warres an Architecte or chiefe deuiſer of workes ſhall ſtande in ſo good ſteede for engines, gonnes and other municions, that hee cannot but he worthy of great prefermēt, honour, & publique offices: for we reade of ſome cittyes that haue bene delyuered frō the ſiege of their enemies, only by the ſkilfull dylygence of the chiefe deuiſer or workemaiſter.
            Amongſt other ſpectacles which throughout al y• worldThebes aſpectacle are prayſed: the city of Thebes in Egipt was coūpted for the greatnes therof, for the walles and for building, moſt worthieſt of admiration: for it had. C. gates by ſituation diſtinct & ſeuered one from another, wt notable and artificial workmanſhip, wherupon it had ſo glorious a name, & was of ſuch excellency, yt al the whole prouince there was called by the name of the Citizens of Thebes: and yet the ſame was ſubuerted before the Empyre of Rome.
            The brick walles of Babylon which Semiramis builded,Babilon. contayned in compaſſe. 385. f
                  ••
                longs in height: betwene the towers fyfty cubites, and in bredth thirty foote.
            
               The Art of payntyng ſhe weth in it ſelfe greate 
                  •
               rudicion & learning & much reſembleth poetry: For Sextus Empiricus (after the opiniō of Symonides the poet) ſaid yt a picture is a ſtil or ſilēt Poeſie, & the poeſie to be a talking picture: And certaynlye it is an arte of great wyſdome andThe arte of paintinge. doth touche neare vnto deuine knowledge ſo to conceyue in mynd the dyuers formes oflyuing creatures and other things, ſo to expreſſe them with pencill, and dyuers coullours that there ſeemes nothinge wantinge vnto theym, but lyfe and breathe.
            For wee reade that an Oxe dyd lowe at the beholding of a certayn pyctured Oxe: and that not a fewe haue ben deceyued wyth the ſighte of grapes pictured. And that byrdes haue alſo bene ſtyrred vp to reioyce at the paynted proportion or ſimilitude of their kynde.
            For a pycture hath not onely a grace with it, and geeueth wonderfull delectacion: but alſo reſerueth the memory of thinges that are done and paſt, and ſhoweth perpetually before our eyes, the byſtorye of thinges that are done. And moreouer in reading of paynted ſtories wherin notable exploytes are expreſſed, wee are excited vnto the ſtudies of prayſe, and to the endeuour of accompliſhinge weighty and great matters. Wherfore it ſhal not be feared leaſt yt the hands of young men be ſtayned, or ſpotted wythe coullors, ſythens payntinge commethe neareſt vnto learninge it ſelfe.
            
               Iulius Caeſar being ſent as Oueſtor or Threaſurer into Spayne, when he came to Gades, marking well and beholdyngeThe noble mynde of Iuli us Caeſar. the Image of Alexander the great in the Temple of Hercules, ſighed, & as it were bewayled his own ſlouth & negligence, that as yet in thoſe yeares of his, he had not done any thinge worthye prayſe: whereas Alexander before hee attayned to that age, had conquered the greateſte parte of the worlde.
            He required of the Senate that he might haue free lyhertye

to eaſe hymſelfe of thoſe their affayres: and beinge pricked forward wt memoriall of ſuch like prayſe, wythin a ſmall tyme hee excelled and ſurmounted, the deedes & prowes of Alexander of Macedonie,
            
            
               Cato Cenſorius ſeemed ſcarce quiet in mynde becauſe there was no Image erected for hym: and vnto one that demaunded hym why he had not hys picture or ymage aſwell as a greate ſort of others: he aunſwered, I had rather that good men ſhould muſe and doubte, why I haue it not, then (whyche is worſe) to murmure in their mynds, why I ſhould haue it.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            THE SECOND BOKE entreatinge of carefull regarde for the ſupportation of learning, the neceſſarie vfilitie
                of liberal Artes and Scyences, and ex amples perſwading to the vſe of other exerciſes corporall profitable to a weale publique.
            
               THE kynges of Egipte,Kinges of Aegipt only bent to learninge & knovvledge. farre more eſteemed the prayſe of good diſciplines, & Sciences, then of Warfare. And therefore they all with a wō
               derfull dylygence bent theymſelues to the ſtudies of wiſdome, neyther dyd any of theym thincke hymſelfe able or ſufficiente enoughe to beare rule, vnleſſe hee ſurm
                  •
               unted and excelled the reſidue in ſome kynde of doctryne or learninge, and employed hys whole indeuour to the furtheraunce and profitinge of many others.
            Wyth thys induſtrye Ptolomeus beinge incited, furniſhedThe Lybrarye of Ptolomeus. and made that famous Library at Alexandria, to the ende he mighte therby ſow the ſeede of wiſdome vnto his Poſteritye, and profite bothe the Cyttizens, and alſo ſtraungers.
            Hee alſo inſtituted playes vnto the Muſes and vnto Apollo: and ordayned vnto Poetes and Dratours at theyr diſputations, as vnto Champions in their Combattes, greate rewardes and hyghe dignities, that they myghte the more diligently take paynes in the ſtudies and exerciſes of learning.
            Learninge (doubtleſſe) was moſt auncient among the Egiptians, whoſe prieſtes whiche were conuerſaunte about their Kinges and rulers, were accompted the firſte of all others that were notable in the Mathematicall ſciences, and vnto them alſo did reſort thick and threfolde,Egiptian lore. ſcholars out of all nacions of y• world to learne: neyther was any man thought ſufficiētly learned, which was not ſkilful in the Egiptian lore or diſcipline, to the attayning

whereof (as Diodorus Siculus maketh mention) Orpheus Muſaeus, Melampus, Daedalus, Homerus, Lycurgus, Solon, Pythagoras, Plato, Eudoxus, Democritus, Euripides, and many others went thyther, who haue made famous al diſciplines of all other nations.
            I deeme it beſt firſt & eſpecially: that al men (if it were poſſible) ſhould be learned, neyther am I of their opinion which ſaye that learning is the plague and deſtruction of wyt & memory, amongſt whom was Plato, who affirmed that the vſe of letters was a hinderaunce vnto memorye, becauſe thoſe thinges (which we haue layd vp in wryting) we (as it were) ceaſe to kepe in memory: euen as thoſe thinges which we haue layd vp in ſtrong cheſtes, vnder locke and key we thinke to be ſure ynough, & take no more care therfore: notwithſtanding amongſt al the deuiſes of mē, I doubt whether euer any thinge were deuiſed or vttered more excellent: for it ſeemeth a thing ſtraunge and miraculous howe in a fewe notes or Letters, ſo infinite ſpeches of men, & innumerable words, & ſētences ſhould be cōpriſed & cōprehended: for al kynd of doctrine & learning ſhould be mortall & ſubiect vnto decay, yea the acts & geſtes of men ſhould be ſone buried in obliuiō, if they wer not regiſtred and reſerued in monumentes of learninge: which haue bene ſo highely accompted of, that many both people, and moſte excellente perſonages doe challenge to them ſelues, the inuention thereof.
            Thoſe letters, therefore doe I deeme not onelye to beeNo Wytty Citizen vvithout learninge. throughly learned: but alſo ſcarcely can I thinke any mā in a free cytty can or may deſerue the name of a witty Citizen withoute the knowledge of learninge: for how without learning can we attaine not only vnto the high knowledge of liberall ſciences, but alſo thereby learne manye ſmall artes or faculties neither can merchandize it ſelfe or huſbādry, be in ſufficient ſauety without them: for theſe do keepe the memory of things paſt, they inſtruct poſterytye: they annexe and compare thinges done and paſt, vnto

thinges yet to come, and do keepe a perpetuall reckoninge of all our whole lyfe.
            The beſt waye here in to bee done therefore, is to trayne yong childrē herunto before they apply any other maters: if in tyme to come wee deſire to haue them proue men, or to be reputed and taken in the nomber of Cytyzens: for ſurelye the Greeke prouerbe is:
            
               A man voyde of ſkill and wantinge learned lore,
               To a tree vnprofitable, comparde is euermore.
            
            Gouernours therfore of common weales oughte to beCare for ſcholemaſters carefull & diligently to foreſee yt for euery liberall Art or good learning, ther may be aſſigned y• beſt ſcholemaiſters to be mayntayned wyth a publique ſtipend, whyche maye teache openlye: for euery priuate perſon cannot maintein lyuing for their Chyldren, and recompence their Scholemaiſters wyth conuenient ſtypende▪ and ordynary ſalary. And eſpeciallye let the Scholemaiſters teaching Grammer be excellent and notable, yea not onely in learninge but in manners alſo moſte approued: for it is moſt daungerous as it is ſpoken in the Prouerbe: To betake a ſheepe into the cuſtodye of a wolfe. And to fynde hym whom thou putteſt in truſt as ſcholemaiſter to thy cihldren, a corrupter and marrer of them, For the vices wherewithe Chyldren at that age are polluted, do eyther remayne perpetually, or elles wyth greate diffycultie are they withdrawn from them.
            The Romaynes ſo greatly eſteemed Grammer, that by decree, they ordayned the ſame to be taught wyth a cō
               monGrammer. ſalary, in the open ſtreetes or high ways, by meanes whereof it was called long time the cōmon Science: manye affirme that this Art was firſt deuiſed, and inuented at Memphis, a cyttye in Egipt.
            
               Pythagoras, the Prince of Italian Philoſophie (whom Plato doth in all pointes for moſt parte imitate) thinketh

the ſcyences Mathematicall to be moſte neceſſarye for the ciuill man: In vayne (as he iudgeth) ſhall a man ſtudye Philoſophy, which hath not taſted of the ſame▪ not as they ſaye ſuperficially, but euen throughly and effectually.
            
               Lucius Columella would haue euery day to be obſerued by the rules of Aſtronomie, bothe for profite in huſbandrye, and agayn, for the auoyding of manyfold daungers whereof we may be warned to take hede by them that be ſkylfull.
            
               Anaximander Mileſius forewarned the Lacedaemonians that they ſhoulde looke well to their Cyttye and houſes: for he foreſawe by this Science, that there was an earthquake at hand, whych thynge doubtleſſe came ſo to paſſe: and a greate parte of that Cytty and of the hyll Taygetus fell flatte to the grounde.
            So Hyppocrates did foreſhewe a plague or peſtilence whiche ſhoulde come from the Illyrians, and diſperſed his Scholars round about the Cytties of Greece, to ſuccourAſtronomie. and relieue them that ſhould be diſeaſed.
            
               Pericles generall of the Athenians, when as his hoſte was aſtonied at the Eclipſe of the Sunne, and ready to yelde the victorye to their enemies, whom they thought y• gods more fauoured, deliured thē: from their perplexity, diſcloſing the cauſe namely that it was the natural order of the Sunne, and that it came not to paſſe by any diſpleaſure of god or anye vnnaturall euent.
            In the diſcipline or doctrine of Aſtronomie, & in other ſciences Mathematical, Publius Nigidius did very greatlye excel amonge the Romaines: to whome was attributed for a Sirname, Potter, by reaſon of his excellent deuiſe and inuention of that knowledge: for when it was propoſed & argued, why two Twinnes both borne at one byrth ſhoulde haue diuerſitie of deſtenie, ſeinge they were both begotten and borne vnder one Planet, and be defending his Art, denied, y• yt could not be, by reaſon of y• ſwift mouinge of Celeſtiall Orbes, ſhewinge the ſame by this

meanes, he ſtyrred about the wheele, that bare about the Potters Claye, withe greate force, and vppon the ſame did caſte two droppes of Incke, and after a pawſe madeExample of deſ
                     •
                  eny in tvvo Tvvynnes. from turning the wheele, the droppes were found a good waye a ſonder, in the vttermoſte partes of the Wheele: how now (ſaythe he) can they thincke that Twynnes be a lyke deſtenied, and borne vnder one planet, when as the heauens are moued and whirled with ſo ſwift mouinge & turning: ſeing the wheele of a Potter being turned about with a ſmall courſe, doth manifeſt before your Eyes, the two drops of yncke at one time to be ſhaken and ſprinkled into two ſeuerall places: ſurelye this deuiſe was ſo well lyked of the Audience, that it yelded vnto the Aucthoure the palme and vyctorye of the diſputacion, and a perpetuall Syrname.
            
               Lycurgus dyd ſo allowe, and eſteeme the Scyence of Muſicke: that hee affirmed the ſame to bee geeuen vntoMuſicke. men by nature, to the more eaſie bearing and tolleration of their laboures and trauayles: and be ordayned the vſe of playinge on the ſhalmes in warfare, whereuppon they ſhould playe both at theyr marchynge forwardes, and at their retyre alſo: and ſo ſtyrre vp and encourage the myndes of the Souldiers that euen the moſte cowardly perſon beinge pricked forth with y• ſounde therof, dyd ſometymes proue the moſte valiaunte, and atchieued the vyctorye for their countrye. The people of Creta alſo, when they were about to aſſault theyr enemies, wer excyted and encouraged to fyghte, by the noyſe of the Harpe. The Argiues wyth Shaulmes as the Latines wyth Trumpettes, and the Frenchemen wythe Cornettes, were encouraged and anymated.
            
               Tymotheus the moſte excellent Muſician when he was diſpoſed to aduaunce hymſelfe any tyme before Alexander the Kynge, tuned his inſtrumentes ſo cunningly and muſicallye, that the Kynge hauinge mynde of none other thynge but that onelye, and beynge therewyth pearced

and penetrated to the harte, as it were by ſom deuyne admiration would ſtreight lay hand on his weapō and take thereby occaſion to ouercome his enemies.
            Muſicke in a free Cytty is to be allowed, yea although it brought no other thinge ells then pleaſure and delyte: for wee cannot alwayes bee buſied in affayres: and thys kynd of oblectation euen in oure buſines and dealings ys moſte honeſt: for as CICERO ſaythe very well: It is the parte of a free manne ſometymes to doe nothinge, and to wythdrawe bys wearyed mynde from long care otherwyſe. Whyche thynge eſpecially muſicke bringeth to paſſe, making vs thereby to forget our Laboures, Trauayles, and myſeries.
            
               Plato deuiſed three ſortes of Muſicke, the one he ſayde was manifeſte, conſiſtinge onelye in voyce: as wee ſee ys vſed when men ſynge: the Seconde aſwell wythe the voyce, as wythe the hande: as when wyth the ſtrykinge vppon the ſtrynges, we vſe to ſynge to the Inſtrumentes: and the thirde (ſaythe hee) is onelye fynyſhed withe the hands & fingers: as when the voyce being ſylent and ſtyl, we ſtryke and playe vppon an Inſtrument.
            
               PYTHAGORAS thincketh that Muſicke was not the inuention of men but of the fyrſt worckemaiſter of theThe inuention of muſicke after the opiniō of Pythagoras. vniuerſall worlde, whyche made the Celeſtiall Orbes, to yeld and make a certayn harmonie in their diſtinct motions, whereout procedeth the fyrſt inuention of humane muſicke: whiche muſicke doubtleſſe is profitable vnto a cyuyll perſon, and doth not onely delighte the mynde, but alſo nouriſhe the wytte, makynge men more prompte and couragious, not onelye in warlyke affayres, but alſo to atchieue euery waightye matter.
            And moreouer wee reade of PAEON and dyuers other Phyſytians, whoſe Pacientes almoſt diſpayrynge of recouerye, haue beene healed and recouered by the delyghtes and pleaſures taken in Muſycke and that

certayne mad men haue bene brought to their right wits agayne, by the ſame meane.
            If wee will haue anye regarde of the health of our bodies and tranquillitie of lyfe (whych without proſperousPhiſicke. healthe can ſcarcelye be had, we ſhall confeſſe y• Phyſycke is the moſt excellent and neceſſary Arte pertayninge vnto mortall men: For as Cornelius Celſus maketh mentiō, who hath written moſt excellent bokes of this diſcipline: Huſbandrye afoordeth nouriſhement to our bodyes when they bee healthfull, and Phiſicke promiſeth healthe vnto perſons diſeaſed: and therfore we ought to render thanckes to the lyuing god, who hath graunted vs lyfe: next of all vnto the Phiſician who dothe conſerue the ſame vnto vs, and maketh it healthfaller & of longer continuaunce. For to proue that this Arte of all other Sciences is moſte auncient, y• beſt learned Greeke Authours do teſtifye: for the inuenter bereof was Apis the ſonne of Phoroneus, and Pytho king of Egipt.
            The auncient wryters deuided Phiſick into three partes,Dyet, medicin, and manula cure. the one to conſiſte in dyet, another in remedies or medicines, and the thirde in artificall cure of the hand: and vnto this parte, did the inuentions of Alcmaeon Crotoniata ſcholar to Pythagoras the Phiſician much helpe, who ſearchinge euery member of mannes bodye, and cuttinge vpp all and euery ioynte and inwarde article, of all the vytall partes, was the firſte that deuiſed and inuented the diſſection or Anatomie of mannes body.
            If medicine for the body be neceſſary in a good commō weale, for the ſondrye kyndes of diſeaſes, whiche chaunce dayly vnto mortall men, to thend with ſtrong & ſound bodies we may lyue well: how much more neceſſarye ſhall y• phiſicke of the ſoule and mynde bee, without the whyche the bodies themſelues cānot be in good health or lyking? For man is ſubiect vnto manye diſeaſes, by reaſon of the dyuers kyndes of meates whereof 
                  •
               e feedeth, as Homer ſayth: yet notwithſtanding the diſeaſes of the mynde are

not fewer, then the diſeaſes of the bodye, and wherewyth we be far more vexed and indaungered: what diſeaſe ſeemeth anger to be, wherwith when we bee throughlye chafed, lytle or nothinge do we differ from mad and furious franticke perſons? What diſeaſe ſeemeth couetouſnes to bee? wherewith when we be throughly enflamed, we cannot be gratefull vnto our owne Countrye, not to our Parentes nor chyldren, neyther yet vnto oure ſelues: What doth feare? what doth tremblinge? what doth ſlouth and ſluggiſhenes worke, and bryng to paſſe in vs? and other perturbations of the mynde innumerable, whyche when they ſeyſe vpon vs, we are not onely in mynde-but alſo in bodye diſquieted: but the Medicine or Phyſicke for the mind is ſpecially Eloquence, which by the reaſons and arguments of Philoſophy repreſſeth or keepeth vnder, ſuch perſons as wold be to much puffed vp with vyces, lyftingEloquence. vp thoſe that are caſt downe, and makinge very daſterdes to become valiant perſons: for what other force or power can there be better, then by the force of eloquence, to brydle the raginge and furyous common people, when their courage fayleth theim for feare, & to ſtyrre them afreſhe to valiauntnes.
            Auncient wryters ſaye that Eloquence was the ladye and Miſtris of matters, nether is it only accoumpted profitable in peace and quietnes, but alſo in warres and tumultes excellethe all other ſtrengthe and force: whyche thinge to be true Pyrrhus king of the Epyrot
                  •
               s affyrmed. For when he did make warres in Italye, hee retayned as his compaygnion of his exploites Cyneas the Theſſalian an Orator and diſciple of Demoſthenes, vſinge his helpe and ſeruice, at eche pyyche moſt earneſtlye: for vnto the cyties whiche he coulde not ſubdue by force and armour, he ſent Cyneas his Orator: which Cyties for the moſte parte he perſwaded to ſurrender, euen as he deſired: inſomuch that Pyrrhus vſed often times to ſaye that m
                  •
                citties were wonne and brought vnder his power and ſubiectiō by the

Eloquence of Cyneas, then were by himſelfe vanquiſhed by force of armes.
            The Arte of Oratorye conſiſtethe in three Sortes of cauſes: Whereof the fyrſte conteyneth Perſwaſion, and Dyſſwaſion: for what thynges ſoeuer are in a common weale aduiſed or deliberated vppon, they haue neede of perſwaſion and diſſwaſion, to the intente the truth maye be boulted oute: Wherfore an Oratoure, that is to ſaye a good man, ſkilfull and flowinge in vtteraunce, ſhal perſwade ſuche thinges as ſhalbe thoughte profytable, leaſte the People ſlyde or fall awaye by a ſinyſter and falſe opinion, and allowe well of that which within a little ſpace after, they ſhall eyther be compelled to alter and chaunge or wyth repentaunt mindes, beare and ſuffer the ſame vnpaciently
                  •
               . The ſeconde is called the kynde Demonſtratiue, conſiſtinge eyther in prayſe or diſprayſe: And the thyrde kynde is that whiche in Iudgementes is exercyſed, and this fallethe oute into Accuſacion and defence.
            But many cities now a days are noſeled in an ill error, becauſe eyther Lawyers are altogether ignoraunte of pleadīg cauſes, or rather becauſe light diſpoſed brab
                  •
               ers, as the auncient wryters dyd cal them, do pleade and handle matters onelye for lucre ſake bablingly, and therevppon delayinge Suites, make the ſame to hange in ſtrife and varyaunce very longe, whiche thinge in Cities is verye daungerous: for pryuye grudges and hatred bredeth diſcorde amonge Cityzens.
            Amonge the Venetians, whoſe common wealthe is forThe noble perſonnes among the Venetians do pleade cauſes. Iuſtice, Gouernment, Wealth, and nobilitie of the Cyttizens, accoumpted not onelye throughout all Italye, but alſo throughe out all the worlde moſte famous and excellent: the moſt learned perſons of all others, in the arte of oratorie, & ſuch as by come of a noble race, do pleade, & handle theyre cauſes: by whyche meanes throughe contynuall exerciſe, they doe attayne to that perfection

that verye manye of theym proue cunninge and eloquente men in their common weale.
            Poetes are to bee mayntayned in a Cyttye, and to bee made famous aſwell wyth honour, as wyth prayſe: whiche Perſons ſurelye oughte to bee moſte cheryſhed andPoetes neceſſarye in a comō Weale. welcomed vnto all men, aſwell for the rarytye of theym, (for nothing in all ages of man can bee ſounde more rare, then a good Poet) as alſo for the abundaunce of their wit, and theyr deuine Nature, neyther ſhall Poetes be exiled from a good Cyttye, whatſoeuer Plato ſhall ſaye, ſithens they are well knowen to bee verye profytable vnto theyr Countrye: For, what learninge hathe Grammar in yt contayned, wythout the pertractation of Poetes? The Elegancye or Fyneneſſe of words, the proprietye of the Tounge, the ſweete tranſlations or Metaphors, the lybertye of Speache and Sentences, whyche doe beautyfye the Oracions, as it were with certayne Starres werr they not inuented onelye by Poetes, and aptlye placed and dyſtynguyſhed by theym, in theyr ryghte places.
            
               Socrates the Phyloſopher was wont to ſaye, it ſmallie fancied or lyked hym, to beholde the ſecretes of Nature, and to neglecte the reaſon and order of mannes lyfe: for what profiteth it vs to ſearche oute certayne hydden Secretes of Nature, to meaſure the ſtarres and ſkyes in our myndes, yf wee knowe not oure ſelues, and neglecte the reaſon or order whyche oughte to gouerne oure appetyte, and whereby wee dyffer frome bruite Beaſtes.
            What maye bee more vyle or fylthye then to ſee a man that is well learned, to bee with Luſt enflamed, furyous, or Angry, Couetous, or vnſaciable withoute Meaſure inſomuche the more he hath, the more he ſeemes to lacke, ſurelye vnto ſuche a man that hapneth, whych vnto Thales y• philoſppher, one of y• ſeuen ſages, hapned: for he on a

tyme in the night ſeaſon walking abroade dyd behold the heauens very earneſtly, by meanes whereof he fell into a dytche, or pytte that was in hys waye where hee went, whereat he cryed out: a certayne olde wife lookinge out at her wyndowe, and hearinge him cry, aſked hym what he went about to doe, that he ſo fell into the pytte, where vppon he aunſwered, that hys meaninge was to beholde the heauenly planets: but the old woman ſmyling ſayde, thou ſeeſt not thoſe thinges whych are before thyne eyes, and yet wilt thou ſeeke to knowe heauenly matters?
            The Oracle at Delphos (whych they ſaye was fixed before the dores of the Temple) ought to be prefixed before all mennes eyes, which deſire to be right wiſe: whiche is Knowe thy ſelfe: for he knoweth not himſelfe which dothe not knowe how to vſe the vertue of his mynde, whiche is broken or ſhaken with feare, which doth aduaunce himſelf beyonde meaſure in reioyſinge, who is inflamed wyth couetouſnes, tormented with luſtes: agaynſt whych euylles Philoſophie armeth vs, and doth not onely plucke vp the rootes, but alſo euerye little ſtring or fibre of perturbations. To this philoſophie will euery good Cytizen endeuour himſelfe, that deſireth to profite not onlye himſelfe and his, but hys natiue countrye alſo.
            Philoſophy teacheth vs throughlye that Iuſtice is it,Philoſophye. whiche contayneth and keepeth together humane ſociety: wythout the whych there can neyther cytty, neyther yet any houſe be rightly gouerned: For ſhee perſwadeth vs to vſe and enioy our owne right, and not to iniury any man, to lyue contente with our own goods, and to abſtayn, not onelye oure handes, but alſo our eyes from other mennes goodes.
            The knowledge of Philoſophye is not onely pleaſaunt vnto Cytizens, but alſo to Kynges, Princes, and gouernours, and doth much auayle in thenterpriſe of greate or waighty matters: for Philip of Macedonie when newes was brought hym, that his ſonne Alexander was borne,

hee dyrected hys letters vnto Ariſtotle ſayinge: that hee gaue hartye thanckes to the Godds, not only for that hee had a Sonne borne, but becauſe yt was his fortune to be borne in the tyme of Ariſtotle, of whome vndoubtedlye he hoped hee ſhoulde bee inſtructed, & that hee ſhould proue a Sonne bothe worthye for hym, and the ſucceſſion of hys Crowne: and therefore ſo ſone as thys hys Sonne could ſpeake, he gaue charge that hee ſhoulde be brought vppe at the becke or commaundement of Ariſtotle, committing him in his luſtye greene age vnto his charge to be further trayned in diſciplines, & learning: and when hys maiſter Ariſtotle by reaſon of ſickneſſe, could not well attende & followe hym in hys warres, he reſigned hys rowme vnto Calyſthenes hys ſcholar, that he might euer bee at hand & readye with the Kynge, and further him in the ſtudyes of Philoſophye.
            
               Pericles who had done ſo manye famous Exploytes amongſt the Atheniens, had for his Scholemaiſter Anaxagoras, whoſe precepts he is reported verye often to haue put in vſe, not onelye in cyuill and domeſticall, but alſo in forreyne and warlike affayres, wherein hee beinge ſtudiouſlye bent to take paynes, and hearinge that Anaxagoras beinge weary of hys longe lyfe wente about to famyſh hymſelfe to death, wyth all expedicion came to him and as a peticioner wythe prayer and teares deſired hym, that if he had no mynde or ioye to liue vnto hymſelfe: that yet at leaſt hee would liue for Pericles ſake, whoſe conference and Counſell in matters tendinge to the Common weale, hee greatly wyſhed to haue.
            
               Iulius Caeſar was a man moſte exquiſite in all kinde ofPrayſe of Iulius Caeſar his bountie to vvardes learning and learned men. learninge, and enriched all the beſt learned men in hys tyme wyth rewardes, and promotions: By whoſe example alſo, Octauius Auguſtus retayned Athenodorus as▪ hys Scholemaiſter in Philoſophie, a man as learned as anye in his time.
            The Frenchemen which are called Celtae affyrme that

they whom they called in their mother tongue Druydes,
               The firſt inuention of philoſophy amōg the Frenchmen. were the fyrſt inuentors of philoſophie: for theſe perſons, inhabiting the woodes: not onelye in contemplation, but alſo in life ſhewed themſelues preciſe philoſophers, & diſputed many things of vertue, and of the immortall God, verye godlye: and belde opinion, that death was no other thinge, then a certayne flittinge vnto a better & more laſtinge lyfe: who being induced with that perſwaſiō, fought valiantly and without feare againſt their enemies, thinckinge that man altogether a daſterde and foole, whyche feared death: ſithens euen forthwith they ſhould by death paſſe into a farre better lyfe.
            Wee haue alreadye tolde that firſte eſpeciallye the cyuyll man muſt laboure to furniſhe his mynde withe diſciplines, and ſtudies of good Artes: for the excellencye of the mynde, dothe not onely helpe the bodye, but alſo maketh it moſte readye to the atchieuinge of all and euerye greate laboure: for there can no body be ſtrong and healthye enoughe, when the mynde languyſheth: for in the warres wee do often ſee that ſome little men and ſmall of ſtature do fight wyth a good courage, and thoſe which are bigger, to be verye cowardes: and therfore it is better to helpe and fortifye the mynde with vertue, and wiſdome, if wee deſire to haue the right ſtrength of the bodye.
            The exerciſe of mennes bodye is altogether coumptedCorporal exerciſe. neceſſarye: for Slouthe dothe dull the bodye and maketh men geeuen to too much tenderneſſe, but induſtrye or laboure dothe ſtrengthen the body, and maketh men more luſtye and ſtronge.
            For the Lacedaemonians nouriſhed their children in the country, & vſed to wraſtle naked, to thend they mighte accuſtome themſelues, the better to endure trauel & labors:Hard bringing vp of youth profitable. They lodged abrode vnder the open ayre, aſwel in tyme of cold, as in tyme of heate, and hardened themſelues in the duſt, in running, ſhoting, wraſtling, caſting, and leaping. To ſet before valiaunt perſons & ſtout warriours, y• ſwete

delights of boyes and gyrles, ſeemes to me no other thing thē to weaken ſtrength & to haue all vertue in contempt & deriſion. Let children therfore bee ſo exerciſed, that they may accuſtome themſelues to take paynes & labour, but yet not in outragious ſauagenes: for as induſtrye and honeſte exerciſe doth ſtrengthen the bodie, and make it more apt vnto labour and trauayle: ſo too much exerciſe, & continuallContinual toy linge. trauell, doth breake, cut of, and ſhorten a mannes dayes, with vntymely olde age. Ariſtotle witneſſethe that with ſuch kynde of toyle, the grouth of the bodye is hyndered, and the members wrenched and diſfaſhioned. Celſus ſayth that we ſee many times men of greate toyle and labour, to become in the ende, moſt crooked and benommed in their members.
            
               Iulius Caeſar commaunded that young warriors ſhould not be trayned or taught neyther in the ſchole, nor by maiſtersThe commaundement of Iulius Caeſar for trayning of yonge ſoldiers. of defēce, but at home, in theyr dwelling houſes, by y• horſemen and Senators, ſkilfull in feates of armes, in wraſtlinge, runninge, caſting of the balle: in whych practiſes, he lyked wel to haue them exerciſed, yea, he thought it wolde doe them much good to be enured in ſwimminge, leapinge, ſkirmiſhing and making a ſhewe of a right battayle in deede: for they chat accuſtome themſelues to ſuche exerciſes, come more chearfully, and with better courage to the warres, & are both in body and mynd ſtrōger.Epaminondas, exerciſed vvraſteling.
            
            
               Epaminondas the moſt worthy captayn of the Thebanes, enured himſelfe much with wraſtling, not ſo much to get a corporal ſtrength, as for the agilitye & nimblenes of his body: alſo Plato yt greteſt of al philoſophers exerciſed wraſtling wt 
               Ariſto Argiuus, by reaſō wherof it is ſayd yt for ye notable habite of his body, hee was called Plato: for afore he was called Ariſtocles, after yt name of his graundſyre.
            The Lacedaemonians cōmaunded their womē to wraſtle among thē, & affied in mariage, the mā cōqueror wt the woman cōquereſſe together: yt the iſſue afterward coming of ſtrong and luſty parents, ſhould be likewiſe ſtronger thē others: but this cuſtome is altogether to be refuſed & refected:

Let women therfore keepe theym ſelues at home and applyeWomen by nature more tymerous and fearefull then men. their huſwifelye affayres, whome nature hath made and ordayned weake and fearfull perſons, that by meanes of feare and awe they myght be the fitter and apter to keepe home.
            Let firſt the wytte of a chylde be nouriſhte and trayned vnto wyſedome▪ if it may bee: whyche of all other thinges is the beſt and chiefeſt: let hym be exercyſed in bodye but yet ſo as he hynder not thereby the gyftes and dexteritye of hys wytte: for it is hard for a chylde to be exercyſed in bodye and mynde together at one tyme, whereof there would be diligent conſideration and reaſon had: for they neede bodylye exercyſe but a ſmall whyle, leaſt they ſhoulde bee therewythe to muche delighted: for they are made thereby more dull of capacitie,, and ſcarcely knowe howe to prouide for theim ſelues: as wee reade of Milo
               Exāple of the greate ſtrength of Mylo. 
               Crotoniates of whome it is reported that he dyd all things beyond the ſtrength and hability of man, & often winning the beſt game and victorie, was crowned: and kyllinge an oxe with one blowe of his Fyſte, ſacryfyſed hym, but at length truſtinge to muche to hys ſtrength, he came to a moſt miſerable death and doleful ende: for eſpyinge a tree where into wedges were dryuen, but not yet clouen aſonder, and laughinge at the ſlouth of them that had lefte the ſame tree, in that caſe ſo remayninge, hee went about toMiſerable end of Mylo teare it aſonder withe his handes, but when the wedges were lowſed and fallen out, and that the tree came together again to his proper nature, he was taken faſt by y• armes in that deſert & vnable to help out himſelfe, was deuoured of wylde beaſtes, and fowles of the ayre.
            
               Polydamas an other famous Champion enteringe on a tyme into a certayne Caue, and willing to ſit downe, hisExample of polydamas, frowarde fortune was ſuche, that the vpper parte of the Caue ouer theym opened wide, and fell down vpon them. Polidamas therefore goinge aboute withe his armes and ſhoulders, to beare vp the waight, all his companions,

leauinge him diſtreſſed fledde away, and hee therby fondlye enforced to make for hymſelfe hys graue there not without the greate deriſion of all the companye.
            Secundi libri.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            THE THIRDE BOOKE entreateth of the election, & choiſe of Magiſtrates, in a cōmon weale: of moral examples in furderinge their offices and duties in ſeuerall: Of diſcuſſing and redreſſing cauſes in variance: of reforming enormities and controuerſies: of needeful ordinaunces: of accuſtomed watches for defēce & ſaue garde, of the citty or countrye: of carefull prouiſion for corne and victualles, needfull aſwell in peace as in warres for the publiqueſuſtentation.
            
               AL gouernaunce of a cō
               mon weale, conſiſteth in the deſcription and choyſe of Magyſtrates, wythoute whoſe aucthoritye, wyſedome, and diligence, a cyttye cannot flouriſte nor be: For ▪amongeſt People that lyue in Freedome, there is nothing well done without magiſtrates: for euen as a ſhip wythout a Pylot can neuer bee brought into the hauen of tranquillity: and as an Hoaſt of men, without a captain, is alwayes in great daunger, & ſcarcely euer winneth the victory: in like maner eiuil ſocietie ſemeth, to be obiected and 
                  •
               ayd open vnto Fortune: neyther can be in any parte quiet or fortunate, except (by the aucthority, and councell of the Magiſtrates) it be gouerned. And yet notwithſtā
               dinge multitude of Magiſtrates troubleth and perturbethHovve a common vveale proſpereth vvithout Magiſtrates. the order of a Cyttye. For as in ſeafaring and warlike buſines, regarde muſt be had that there bee but ſewe commaunders, & many obayers: ſo alſo iudge I it meete and requiſite to be obſerued in the ſtate of a cōmonweale:
            Auncient wryters commend the Maſſilians whoſe common weale for order ſake and equitye, they prefer before

all others: for they had Senators, in number (as Strabo maketh mention) 600. of whome fyftene euery yeare by turnes bore greateſt aucthoritye: and of thoſe fyftene, alſo three were apointed to decide laws, & matters in cōtrouerſy, & theſe few only, gouerned the ciuil ſociety very wel but in time of warres & vprores, theſe Maſſilians did choſe ſuche Generalles and Princes as were ſufficient and wel able to take ſome wayghtye charge of warres in hande: for verye manye Phiſicians being brought vnto one ſicke perſon, do rather ſtryue amonge theym ſelues by waye of vayne oſtentation: then miniſter thoſe thinges which may heale, or remedye the paciente: And dyuers counſelles or opinions in greateſt daūgers do rather hazard and endamage a matter then helpe it: theſe and many others, are to be conſidered in the ordayninge of Magiſtrates.
            But this agayne and againe, I deeme worthye to beeWho be mete perſons for to be made magiſtrates in a common vveale. ſpoken, that very well it is, and moſte meete, that the adminiſtration of the Common weale ſhoulde bee commytted vnto olde men, whyche both by reaſon of their age, & experience in matters haue moſte ſkyll: for true is that ſentence of Plato, and which of Cicero is holden as it were for an oracle,
            Bleſſed maye that man be coumpted, to whome euen in his olde age, it hath chaunced, to obtayne both wyſdom and true opinions.
            
               Crantor, an ordynary ſcholar of Xenocrates, and moſte excellent Philoſopher, reckoninge the ſtate of mans lyfe, and deſcypheringe by moſt wyſe deuiſion our actions, &Fovver ſpecial regardes to be taken in mans lyfe. cogitacions: affirmed that the fyrſte part of our lyfe is to bee imployed vnto vertue: the ſecond to good health: the thirde to honeſt pleaſure: and the fowerth as he thoughte vnto ryches. For doubtles, nothing that good or pleaſant is, can happen vnto vs without vertue: next vnto thys (as the beſt cōpanion of vertue) he deemed to be good health:

For ſcarcely can it be well wyth vs in oure mynde, when it is euill with oure bodie: and ſcarcelye can the griefe of the bodye bee without the griefe of the mynde: Moreouer hee that is in good healthe, enioyeth fréeer mynde, and is not fruſtrate of the quietnes of hys wytte, and ſenſes: next vnto theſe twayne, let honeſt pleaſure come as a third cō
               paignion, which then doubtleſſe is chiefe and beſt, when the minde enioyeth it ſelfe: it meaſureth all thinges vnto the tranquillitye and pleaſures of the mynde▪ it is not delighted wyth the tickling of the ſences, or allurementes of the bodye, but in contemplation of greate and waightye matters, whyche ſurelye bee the foode of an honeſte minde, well furniſhed with liberall ſtudies: That fourth parte whyth hath ſociety with the former three, although it be the leaſt of all, yet when wee reſpect humaine neceſſitie, and when wee conſider, that man hath nede of meat, drincke, apparel, & dwelling houſe, it cannot bee accoūpted otherwiſe then neceſſary: For as Callymachus ſaith, wythout ryches vertue aduaunceth no man: and that vertue without ryches, doth little or nothing adorn any mā. Theognis the true Poet, teſtifieth, that for feare of pouerty we goe headlong euen into the Seas: for penury nowe & then vrgeth excellent perſons, and compelleth them to attempt very harde enterpriſes. Plantus the moſt pleaſāt among comical Poetes, for want and ſcarſitie of victuals, placed himſelfe for hyre to grynd in a Myll, and there ſo often as he had any vacant tyme from his worcke, hee accuſtomed himſelfe to write Comedies and to ſell theim.
            
               Caſſius Seuerus alſo an excellente Oratour, hauinge cōtinued for the ſpace of. xxv. yeares a vaniſhed man, died in great penurie, ſcarcelye hauinge ragges wherewith to couer his priuities. And Valerius the compaignion in office of Brutus dyed ſo pore, that hee was buried at the cō
               monPinchinge pouertye putteth men to their ſhiftes coſtes of the Cyttye: And the legittimate ſonne of kinge Perſeus (as Marcellinus wryteth) after his miſerable calamity and frowning fortune, was glad to practize

the Smythes occupation to get his lyuing withall: theſe cogitacions ought oftentimes to be reuolued in mynde of all theym that will rightlye conſtitute humane ſocietye.
            They that take vpon theym the office of a Magiſtrate:A Magiſtrate let them knowe that they beare a maieſtie of the common weale, and let them forget themſelues ſo longe to be pryuate perſons, as they execute or vſe the adminiſtration of a publique office: let the magiſtrates euermore haue before their eyes, the lawes of the common weale, wherunto in all pointes, let them know that obedience is to be geuē. For as the lawes do gouerne the magiſtrates: ſo the magiſtrates oughte to gouerne the people. For true is that Prouer be pronounced by Tully:
            
            
               The Magiſtrate is lawe, that doth speake and dispute:
               But the Law is a Magiſtrate ſilent and mute.
            
            For this happeneth in a good common weale, that hee whiche modeſtlye obeyeth, may ſeeme worthy, and meete ſomtyme to beare aucthority: and it is expedient, that heHe that obeyeth vvel ruleth vvell whiche obayeth the Lawes, ſhoulde hope to beare rule in tyme to come: and hee that is in offyce, and hath Iuriſdiction or gouernaunce, let him thinke that not long after, it may come to paſſe that he muſt obay others: let the firſt retaine vertues, as their guides, to direct and rule them:Vertues are the guydes of ciuill magiſtrates. without the whiche nothinge is well donne, whereof the firſte and principall is Iuſtice, whiche layeth the foundation of humane ſocietie & conteyneth in it godlines: whyche S
                     •
                  xtus Empiricus teacheth to bee the knowledge ofIuſtice. worſhipping God aright: For this vertue eſpecially reſpecteth the deuyne reuerence, myſteries and ceremonies: without the which nothinge orderlye, neyther any thing 
                  •
               olilye or godly can bee done in a common weale.
            It is the nature of Iuſtice to hurt no man, nor to iniurye any: to geeue to euery man that whyche is hys ryght: to rewarde thoſe that deſerue well, wyth fauour, prayſe,

and giftes, and thoſe that deſerue euil, with loſſes, reprochDuties of Iuſtice. ſhame, puniſhementes, and death: but moreouer a righte excellent duetye of Iuſtice is in word and deede to keepe fayth & promiſe: for nothinge can be more filthye, in thoſe whyche beare ſway in the publique weale: then to breake promyſe whiche reproche doubtleſſe is neuer blotted out wyth obliuion, as wee reade of the Carthaginians, whomTo kepe touch and performe promiſe is cō
                  mendable. 
               Ennius the Poet called faythleſſe, or leaguebreakers, becauſe they ſtarted from their leagues and promiſes: whyche (certes) was the onely and chiefeſt cauſe, why that cittye which (for the Empyre of the whole worlde) contended ſo many yeares wyth the People of Rome, (the chiefPrudence vanquiſhers of all other Nacions) was deſtroyed.
            Prudence the ſecond vertue conſiſteth in choyſe, or diſcerninge of good and badde and is the ryngleader or chief of other vertues: inſomuche that Apollophanes a worthye Philoſopher ſaid: that this onelye was the vertue vpponTemperance whome all the reſt were attendaunt. Temperaunce (notwythſtandinge) helpeth very muche, and ſo ſhinech in all our doynges: that ſhe is thought to bee the moderatrix or directreſſe thereof, this is ſhee whyche wyth ſo long continued prayſe, hath extolled that worthye ſentence of Solon, warning vs to doe: Nothinge to muche.
            
            The Chyldren of the Perſians were carefully taught, & trayned to learne temperance, whych to thend they ſhouldAn example of Temperance. the more diligently obſerue, their rulers appointed & commaunded certayne of the diſcreteſt olde men in their cytties, to bee preſente at their daylye exerciſes: to t
                  ••
                ende they fearing the lookes and graue countenaunces of their auncient ouerſéeers, might in all their doinges be gouerned and directed by modeſtye & temperance to frame thē
               Conſtancye. ſelues therafter in althinges, from time to tyme, accordingly. Conſtancie muſt alſo be therwt lyncked and annexed, namely that whyche is of wordes and dedes coūpted the moſte faythfull obſeruer or keeper: Shée cauſeth that the ſecretes of the publike weale be kept cloſe and in

ſilence, then the whiche there can be no better thinge: for whiche vertue the Perſians eſpecially are prayſed, whychePerſians truſty in keping coū
                  cell. doe vſe to kepe all their ſecretes moſt faythfully: neyther feare, neither hope, nor any other fair promiſe, can aliure them to vtter anye ſecret matter, that is to bee concealed: for they haue an olde leſſon or rule among them, whereby they are aduertiſed: that ſilence is kept wt daunger of life. Neyther are they thought able to atchieue, any great exployte, which are not able to bridle their tongues, whiche member nature hath ordayned, as the eaſieſt of al others: thereby to ſhow that ſilence is no hard vertue to be kept & obſerued:
            
               Ariſtotle ſayth yt there be thre things neceſſary in a Magiſtrate:Thre things neceſſary in a magiſtrate. firſte that he embrace Iuſtice & the other vertues, thereby to direct all thoſe things which are profitable for1. the common weale: Nexte, that hee doe loue the preſent ſtate of his cittye, and beinge therewith content enterpriſe to doe nothing eyther newe fangled or ſtraunge, but to go that waye whiche their aunceſtors haue inſtituted: and2. whiche by the treadinge Steppes' of others, was worne playne: for deſire of newe alteracions and thinges, is rather wont to wearye and weaken the common weale: then to make the ſame better by any meanes.
            Thirdly that magiſtrates ſhould haue power of yt people, ſufficient to execute thoſe thinges, which appertayne3. to their function, or office: whiche thinge doubtleſſe cauſeth that they themſelues, with greater courage bear out their office: and thoſe agayne, ſhall more diligently obaye them, vnto whom obeyſance is to be geeuen.
            All Magiſtrates which haue the decidinge of lawes, & whyche do exerciſe any kynde of reuenge or puniſhment againſt offenders, ought as ſome bolde opinion to be ſtrā
               gers: for as they themſelues ſay: priuate grudges, enimities, & hatred do ariſe amōgſt citizens, when as one citizē puniſheth another: but on the other part, felow citizens, are more tractable & prone to ſhewe fauour one towardes

other then as if the matter were in the dealinge of a ſtranger: by the reaſon whereof many people of the Italians, haue accuſtomed to ſende for ſuche Magiſtrates from other places: but to be ſhort, I am of opinion, that in a wel gouerned common weale, wherin all men bee obedient to the lawes and cuſtomes of their countrye: citizen Magiſtrates are far better, and gouerne muche more honourablye then ſtraungers: which thing doubtleſſe, not onelye by the Romains, Carthaginians, Athenians, and Lacedemonians: but by diuers others, which commit all offices vnto their Citizens, may be perceyued: but eſpeciallye it is euident by the noble common weale of the Uenetians, wherein there is no place geuen to Straungers: and yetVenetians admyt no no ſtrā
                  ger to beare rule amōg thē
                notwithſtandinge, there is neyther ſeuerity wanting, nor by ſuch maner of iudgements, any diſcordes do ariſe, neyther any ſedicions, or enimities growe.
            And one thinge concerninge that common weale of the Uenetians, wee may well ſay, which I cannot remember that euer I read or ſawe elſwhere: for the order of that citie neuer ſwarued & altered from the order & ſtate wherin by the firſt founders thereof it was conſtituted and ordayned: but hath alwaies remayned in one ſtate of gouernmentVenetians alte nothing afore time ordayned by their predeceſſors and elders. immutable: for they that builded that citty deuiſed amongeſt themſelues, and their Magiſtrates, a rewarde (as it were) for their trauayles: and this inheritance left they vnto theyr poſteritye, that no Alien or denizen, born in any other coūtry ſhuld be admitted, to beare any office or aucthoritye amongeſt them: and ſo ſithens that tyme, perpetually hath this order bene obſerued, almoſt a thouſand yeares, vntill this daye: wherefore the poſteritye of them that firſt bulded the citty, haue alwayes bene rulersSeigniorye of Venice. in the ſame city, & were called Senators, Seigniors, fathers and nobles: and all the reſt Commoners.
            The chiefe and principall care for the common weale conſiſteth in Senators, whych ought to haue aucthority, aſwell in tyme of warres, as in tyme of peace: vnto whom

alſo from the other magiſtrates men may appeale: theſe Senators alſo (according to the inſtitution of Lycurgus) are the keepers and reformers of the lawes, and as often as nede ſhall require do conſtitute newe, by certayn learned lawyers of their Seigniorye: for it is a verye harde thinge to compaſſe and comprehend all thinges in wryttē lawes: for newe affayres oftentimes happen and occurre through the diſorder of men, for redreſſe whereof new lawes are expedient, and all thinges dayly proue, worſe and worſe, whych by the lawes are to bee puniſhed.
            
               Solon the Philoſopher decreed no law againſt ParricidesManquellinge novv a commō practiſe in Solon his dayes not thought that ſuch could bee. and murtherers: being demaunded, why he had omitted the ſame: he aunſwered, that he neuer thoughte, that any ſuche miſchieuous and wicked act, could be committed or done by any man.
            All order of the Publike weale, and all Counſell, oughte in doubtfull caſes and aduerſe affayres, to come from the Senators, & counſellors, who be called fathers of theyr country, becauſe euen as parentes prouyde of dutye for their children, ſo ought the Senators for their citizens and countrymē: let theſe graue Councellors (as itA good councellor the father of his coū
                  trye were grow together into one body, which ſeeth wyth manye eyes, worketh with many handes, and ſtandeth vpon many feete, which thinge, ſurely bringeth to paſſe that ye common weale is farre better gouerned, then the ſtate of one Prince, for hee alone, forecaſteth and foreſeeth what he can: yet cannot hee meaſure, and compaſſe all thinges by counſell and reaſon: for no one mortall man hathe the knowledge of all thinges: And he is counted and reputed for the wyſeſte, who is ignoraunte in feweſt matters: for many learned, wiſe, and graue wen, laying their heades and deuiſes together, do foreſee all thinges, nothing is to theym obſcure, nothing happeneth ſodayn & vnlooked for, nothing new, nothing ſtraūge, nothīg great, or wōderful.
            There if the Senators theymſelues doe treſpaſſe, they ſeeme to offend more by their example, then by the crime

it ſelfe: for all the inferiors, do folowe their ſteppes, andExample of Superiors is a preſident for inferiors to folovv thincke themſelues ſcarcely to tranſgreſſe, when as they ſe any Senatour guylty of the ſame cryme: let them therfore be firme and conſtant, not vayne and lyinge, neyther geuen to filthy lucre: let them not onely baniſhe away all filthy vſury, but alſo all gayne, wherein may bee anye ſuſpicionVſury. of filthynes.
            
               Publius Scipio Naſica vnto whom the ſirname of a good man, was by the ſenate beſtowed: who dyd ſo many notableVndecente geſture in a Senator put to reproche. exploytes for his country, on a certayne tyme ſtandīg in ye electiō for y• office of AEdileſhippe, toke a certayn coū
               trey felowe by his hard & rough hand, & feeling the ſame ſo hard, demaunded of him in ſporte, whether hee vſed to walke vpon his feete, or vpon his hands: which thing was ſo greuouſly taken of the country felow, & other ſtanders by, that it came to the knowledge of the cōmon people, & was ye cauſe yt this excellēt Senator Scipio had a repulſe in his ſute: foraſmuch as all the country people, thought thē ſelues hereby to be had in deriſiō & made flouting ſtocks.
            Uery litle or nothing do lawes and inſtitucions profiteGod is the principall aucthor and fautour of al good lavves and procedinges. except they be groūded vpon yt ſacred ſcriptures, the aucthor wherof is almighty god himſelfe: for if thoſe aunciēt people which knew not god, but were led with certain ſuperſticions, and falſe religion did nothing apertayning to the cōmon weale, without auctority of their high biſhops: what behoueth vs chriſtiās to do, whych only embrace the true religion & which haue Chriſt yt ſon of God for the foū
               der & author of our religion: ſurely we ought to endeuor with al care & diligēce, yt nothing be done, nothing thoughtThat thing vvhich to the honour and praiſe of god is begon continueth in force and felicity. vpon, or deuiſed, except god his aſſiſtance. ayd & good wyll be thereto fauourable, & that al our purpoſes, miſteries or deuiſes, tend to his honor & glory, by whom we attain life euerlaſting: therfore gods deuine operations ought to go before the ordinaunces of man: according to this ſayinge: Imprimis venerare Deos, firſte aboue al thinges worſhyp God. The ſenators charge and duties therfore ſhalbe diligently to watch & care, that no lawes be eſtabliſhed and

enacted, but ſuch as he conſonant and agreeable to Gods good pleaſure, for if he be ayding and well pleaſed wt oure chriſtian rites, & ordinaunces▪ there can nothing go amiſſe in the common wealth, neither can ther any ſiniſter thing or miſhap chaūce herein.
            At the beginning, y• gouernance of humane affaires was in ye autority of ye biſhops: & kings beinge initiate in ſacred lore, toke charge, both of deuine & humane things, neither thought they y• any mā could poſſibly rule wel, which was ignorāt in ſacred matters & eſtraūged from god: therfore in thoſe dayes either the prieeſts thēſelues did gouerne, or els, the princes did attēpt nothīg wtout their aduiſe & auctority: for Romulus at yt firſt foundaciō & beginning of Rome, called the biſhop whiche had charge in the temples, &Byſhoppes named kinges by Romulus. holy ceremonies by the names of kings, & reigning as it were wt a mutual or aſſociat aucthority, wold haue him to be the keper of ye laws & tradiciōs of their country: & not wythout cauſe, for the Prelates being inſpired wt the holy ghoſt, do teach & inſtruct vs throughly in the preceptes of holynes and immortality.
            There are two times to bee conſidered vpon: the one of peace, ye other of warres: & as in time of warres circūſpect care for peace may not be omitted: ſo in time of peace ſuchTimes to be cō
                  ſidered in peace and Warre. things ought to be forſene which in time of warres maye ſerue & be moſt neceſſary: for ſurely it is a point of greate wiſdom, to haſtē & haue in redines, in ye time of peace, ſuch things: which fear of warres ſhuld cōpel vs ſpedely to haueTime of peace in vſe & to ocupie: both theſe cōſideratiōs therfore muſt be carefully looked to, by thē y• beare chief rule & auctority, yt with warlike municions they may defēd, & mainteine y• ſwete ioyes of peace: & that y• municiōs of warres be notTime of War. preiudiciall or hindring to ye maintenance of peace: for the Romaines, ye moſt excellent of all others, vnto the chiefeſt office appointed two Cōſulls: y• one to deale in thaffayres for the cities behoofe, & the other in warlike matters: for ſmally ſhould it preuaile thē to lyue at reſt & quietnes wtin the walles of the city, if in the fields al were in hurlyburly

& vprore, or if their enemies were not kept backe frō inuading their terretories: & on the other part to hold warres abrode, and at home to want aduiſe or councel, were very daungerous.Tyme doth alter both the ꝑſon and his ꝓꝑtye.
            
            That promocions, or offices ſhould be perpetual in the common weale, I thincke it to be perrillous: for the long continuaunce thereof, doth often alter mennes maners: & now and then geueth theym occaſion of tyrannous practizes, as wee may well ſee of Iulius Caeſar, who being continual Dictator, inuaded the Publique weale: For yt is muche more harder in proſperity to obſerue modeſtie, thē in aduerſitie▪ and therfore, that cuſtome is to be commended and allowed, wherby two Conſulles be appointed for no longer ſpace then one yeare. The Couſull ought diligently to bee carefull in muſteringe for the warres, that in euery precinct, the wealthe, nomber, and age be regarded: for thoſe ſouldiers obey vnwillinglye, & are negligēt in their dutie, whiche are forced beyonde their abilitye, & power: and very ill fareth it with that armie whiche thinkes themſelues without iuſt occaſion forced to warfare & when this Conſull hath muſtered ſouldiers, let him not ſuffer them to harbor or lodge in their wyntringe places, vnder Couert, but let theym lodge abroade in the open fielde, yea if it were in a peaceable tyme: and let him teache them, y• ſouldiers are of no more force then theyr captaynes and Generalle: for all men affirme that this ſentence of Homer is true:
            More ſafer is an hoaſt of Hartes, a Lyon being guyde: Then is an Hoaſt of Lyons which an Hart haue on their ſide.
            Speciall conſideration and care muſt bee had for the dueOuerſeers of the lavves. adminiſtring and execution of Lawes in a good Common weale, which ſurely cauſeth, that men do lyue without violence or Iniurye: for it is impoſſible for a multitude to lyue without 
                  ••
               ryfe, ſpecially in that City where all thinges be common: albeit we ſay it is much better for euery man to haue his owne: for we ſee that fieldes which are in

common amongeſt manye, lye vntylled, and growe full of▪ brambles & bryers: but priuate fieldes, farre more neate and trimlye huſbanded: but priuate patrimonies bee they whiche make men diligent & attendant, & meaſure herein is to be preſcribed vnto them, leaſt richemen inioye al, and y• porer and weaker ſort cleane thruſt out and defrauded.
            
               Varro ſayth, that variaunce at the beginninge toke hys firſt name of contencion for lymits or boūds: which thing in deede Virgil ſeemeth to affirme where he ſayth:
            
               Limes agro poſitus, litem vt diſcerneret aruis.
            
            
               There was ſet and ordayned a lymyt or bound,
               To auoyde contention in fallowed grounde.
            
            For now and then contention ariſeth for debarringe or ſtopping ye courſe of raine water or of other matters whicheOccaſions of contentions for ſmall matters amonges Citizens to be reformed. daylye happen in Fyeldes, or elles in the Cyttyes, when men doe argue and ſtande in contencion, for the walles of their houſes: for droppinges of their h
                  •
               uſe eues and of Rafters not faſtened: and oftentimes it comes to paſſe that amongeſt merchauntes, contentions may ariſe and ſpeciallye when many are found vayne, & double dealers, with whome a man muſt not deale in ſecrete meanes, but before ſome arbitrators, or conuenient witneſſes, and Iudges: Suche manner of ſtryfes whereby enimitye and hart
                  •
               urninges may growe, ought ſtraightwayes by cō
               poſition to be determined and ended, that y• citizens may be brought into concorde, which then is brought to paſſe whē euery man enioyes his own, obteyneth his due right, all variaunce or diſſention ſet aparte.
            Upon holydayes and ſuche dayes as are appointed eyther for Fayres or feaſtes, it ſhalbe good to ſtaye proſecution of cauſes and matters iudiciall, whych thinge alſo ys cuſtomablye frequented in any publique ioy or mourning.
            
               A Praetor amōgeſt the Romaines was ſo called, becauſe hee bare rule: and hee was called Urbanus amongeſt the

citizens adminiſtred the lawes: It was in the power of y• 
               Praetor to miniſter both publike & priuate aucthority, therfore it is nedeful yt the Praetors be men of vpright dealing, &A Praetor. well deſeruing of the publique weale: who oughte in no parte to be ignoraunt of the lawes and cuſtomes of the cō
               mon ſtate, but playnlye and abſolutely to bee ſo ſkilfull in lawes both publike and priuate, that nothing appeare vn to them eyther obſcure or doubtful: Let good and conſcionable lawyers pleade cauſes, and handle nothinge withLavvyers. craft and maleengine: but let them ſpeake all things trulye, and let them not leaue a lye vnpuniſhed: for there ought to be nothing in a comō weale ſo vncorrupt & ſyncere, as iudgement: which ſurely is more often corrupted with ſpeach then wt mony: wherupon very wel ſaid Cicero, yt hee vnderſtode not why he y• corupteth iudgemēt with mony, ſhould be worthy of puniſhmēt: & he that corrupts it with eloquēce, ſhould haue prayſe: to me (ſayth he) it rather appeareth yt he offendeth more in this point, which rather wt ſpeache then wt mony, corrupteth the iudge: becauſe no mā with mony can corrupt a wiſe iudge, but with ſmothe andCorruption of Iudgement. diſſēbling ſpeach any man may: for how are yt corrupters of cauſes worthy to be hated, and how greuouſly are they to be puniſhed? for they doe ſell the patronage of Iuſtice & forſake the beſt office in the world, whiche is, defendinge right: ſomtime they pynch & get mony from the defendāt, ſometyme agayn poule the plaintife, and in ye ende delude them both: and many do very il, which take on theim the patronage or office of defēding ye client, & do handle y• ſame ſo coldly, yt they differ ſmallye from forgers of cauſes: for true is the ſentence of Cicero which ſayth: perhaps men cā not be defended wtout diſpraiſe, & that negligentlye to bee defended, coulde not bee without great wickednes.
            Let lawyers therfore & patrones of cauſes pleade their clients cauſes, and that for dutie ſake, yt they may deſerueVnſaiiable Lavvyers. wel of the citizens, & let their rewarde bee, to haue a good report in al mens mouthes, & let it not be lawful for them if by any meanes it may, yt they take any bribe or gyft, for

handling the cauſe, as it was eſtabliſhed by the law called Cincia: for a filthy thing it is and not worthy any man, toBribcry is a filthye thinge. ſet out the tongue, for gayne or lucre in pleading cauſes. Surely Antipho Rhamnuſius (as antiquity reporteth) was the firſt yt euer for defence of any cauſe toke reward, whoſe example long times after, the Greciās, & Latines, folowed: ſaying that the merchandize of the tong, was of far other ſort, then any other merchandize whatſoeuer: but the Romaines from whom all good examples, aſwel of honeſtie, as of vertue, are to be taken, by the law Cincia preſcribedGood exāples, geuen by the Romaines. an order vnto the couetouſnes of orators, and pleaders of cauſes, & becauſe yonge men puffed vp with hope of gain, ſhould not be permitted negligētly to handle matters, at the requeſt of Appius Claudius, they ſuffered the lawe Cincia to be moderated.
            Unto thoſe Magiſtrates which wee aucthorize to haueConſideratiōs vpdon the trauels of the magiſtrates. thadminiſtring of iuſtice, we rather ought to impart ſom ſtāding fée or publike ſtipēd, then priuate gain: leaſt therby the iudgementes of the lawe be ſet to porte ſale, whych thing no doubt is preiudiciall vnto al people: and for the moſt part the cōmon decay of the publike weale: whether the iudgement be corrupted or whether ells any thing be done by deceipt or violence, by them whych be iudges, and haue iuriſdiction in executing Iuſtice.
            Ouerſéers of ſhamfaſtnes & modeſty, are ſo neceſſarye in a cōmon weale, that without them, litle or nothing do other magiſtrates prenaile: for there cannot be a more comodiousTribes or War d
                     •
                  sin a c
                     •
                  tye. thīg thē to haue people well manered, with ciuility: wherfore ye moſt graueſt perſons & moſt approued in vertu (ſom out of euery ſeueral tribe or ward) are her unto to be admitted: which may reforme & redreſſe the maners of the city, leſt thereby there crepe in pieueſh cuſtomes, pernicious both to the people & to yt whole city: therfore great diligēce is to be required, yt the maners of ye people be moſt ſyncere & perfect: & then again, yt no pernicious cuſtom do inuade the citizens, then the which ther can nothing in cities happen worſe: & laſtly yt the religion & ceremonial orders, which haue bene by our elders wel eſtabliſhed be alſo wel obſerued.
            
               The Romaines called the Cenſure of ſhamefaſtnes & modeſty, the Lady and Maiſtres of diſcipline,: and theym whyche bore offices, in the cōmon weale, they called Cē
               ſors,Cenſor vvas he vvhich coulde by his Wiſdōe and knovvlege execute his office viz. to conſtitute, cōmaūd & comptrolle. which tooke their name of iudging, comptrolling, cō
               ſtituting, or commaunding: of what effect it is, very wel to diſcharge and execute this office, euen hereby-may wee perceyue, in that this office or dignytye of Cenſor, dydde geeue the ſirname vnto Cato Cenſorius, who very wel executed this ſame function: The Infamy which wee call the Cenſors checke, was farre more greuouſlye taken of yt Romaines, then any other puniſhmente, and ſometimes yt rygour thereof ſtretched againſt the magiſtrates: for the Senators were caſt out of the Senate houſe, by the Cenſors checke, as wee reade of Lucius Antonius, becauſe hee put away from him a yōg Uirgine whom he had maried: none of his frendes beinge called to councell: ſo reade we alſo of Lucius Flaminius, who cauſed certayne to be put to death, for looking laſciuiouſlye at certayne women, whomInfamy of Cē
                  ſors. they loued: alſo Caius Fabricius the Cenſor, remoued out of the Senate houſe Publius Cornelius a noble perſonage, becauſe he broughte ten poundes worthe of plate to a certayneSenators diſcharged for exceſſe riot. banquet. Fat and corpulente Souldyers, perfumed with oyntment, wer noted with this checke, their horſes taken from theym, and they diſmiſſed and diſcharged out of the hoaſte.
            In iudgementes of lyfe and deathe, greate care & hede ought to be had: for cyuil hatreds and priuye conſpiracies then burſt forth vnto reuenge, whē as the magiſtrates haue power of life and deathe: and therfore the Romaines, when they had appointed their Conſulls vnto whom they committed, the ſpeciall charge, of the common weale: yet was it not lawful for theym to execute or put to death anye citizen of Rome, and trulye not withoute good cauſe: for nothinge more procurethe the diſtruction of the weale publike, then the puniſhement by death, of thoſe whiche ſpecially haue but ſmally delt with others, or whoſe crymes

or offences haue not ſo farre came to lighte as by no meanes they can or may be denayed, or elles that they beeInnocentes vvrongfully cō
                  dempned make people repyne at magiſtrates. aparantly knowne vnto all men: for that worketh a perpetuall iniurye, when ſuſpicion of innocencye remaynethe in the peoples heades, of theym whyche throughe falſe or raſhe iudgement are ſayde to be vniuſtly condempned, for innocencye caryeth with it great fauour, and the rumour or mutteringe of the people ſtryketh feare into thē which haue condempned innocentes: And moreouer the forre of conſcience bringes to paſſe, that ſuche perſons, as haue ſo ouerreached themſelues, are thought neuer to lyue in ſecuritye, but appoint vnto themſelues, preſent puniſhmēt before their eyes: Howe notable is that ſentence of Iulius Caeſar, whyche with often repeticions he would vſe?
            
               A wretched companion of olde age truelye,
               Is the memorye of auncient crueltye.
            
            And therfore, they that muſt geeue ſentence and iudgement, of the lyfe and ſpyrite of man, whych is parte of the worlde, and hathe a mynde by the ſpeciall gyfte of God, partakinge of reaſon, and filleth vp the number of the lyuinge, ought carefully to aduiſe and conſult wyth deliberation and not to do any thynge wyth raſhe iudgemente, becauſe ſuche a Deede once done, cannot bee called backe agayne.
            
               Alexander kinge of Macedonie vnto his mother Olympias, vrginge hym greatlye, to kyll a certayne guyltleſſe perſon, requeſtinge the kinges conſent thereto, in conſiderationPitty in the harte of Alexander tovvardes one that vvas like to haue bene put to death. of that nyne monethes ſpace whyche ſhee bore hym in hyr wombe: moſt gently thus anſwered. O good mother, rather requeſt or demaund any other reward at my handes: for mannes lyfe cannot bee acquited or recompē
               ſed wyth any good turne, or benefit.
            
               Sabacus, moreouer kinge of the Egiptians (a man for godlynes and religion famous) as Diodorus Siculus maketh

mencion did ſo muche abhorre ſheding of bloud, that he commaunded the conuict and condempned perſons, being bound with chaynes, to become ſlaues for the city, rather then that they ſhould be put to death: doubtleſſe truedeath redemed by thraldome. is that tragicall ſentence, and in harte and mynde, euermore to bee recited, and recorded of them, which do beare rule. viz.
            
               UUhat euer thou be that doeſt rule or raygne:
               From ſheding bloud, leaue and abſtayne.
            
            There was wonte to bee amongeſt the RomaynesEight ſpeciall kindes of puniſhmentes vſed by the Romanes. eyght kindes of puniſhmēts, that is to ſay: amerciamēts, baniſhment, impriſonmēt, whipping, recōpence of aſmuch for treſpas made, reproche, bondage, & death: yet ſeldome wt death did the Romaines accuſtome to purſue, except againſt Parrycides, murtherers, rebels, and ſuch like wicked perſōs, whoſe lyues was not to be ſpared. But nowe an ill cuſtome hathe taken place, yt theeues euen for ſmall matters are executed by death, & ſo they take awaye that whiche can neuer be reſtored vnto mortall men. The great conſideratiō for the comon treaſure in a cōmon weale ought to be had: for treaſures, & money are compted the ſinewes or ſtrengthes of the citty, without ye whyche it can ſcarcely be preſerued: for theſe thinges do beautifye a city, in proſperity, & bring ready ſuccour in aduerſity: wherfore there are to be ordained treaſurers, which may haue the aucthority of receyuing, keeping, & layinge out of the common treaſure: theſe men ought to be graue and vpright, and ought to abſtayn theyr hands from publique & priuate corruption: not vnhoneſt troubleſom perſons, but which can diligently meaſure the rate of fortune, & of ſuche perſons, as they ſhal haue to deale withal, and beſides this let thē take hede that publicanes and tollers, extorte nothinge by violence or craftye colluſion from theym ouer whom they haue rule: for that kynde of

people is odious, and nowe and then, by reaſon of theyr vnhoneſt dealing, & lewd demeanour, prouoketh rnd ſtirreth the common people to deſire of new fanglenes.
            In leuyinge of Tributes and Taxacions, treaſurersLeuving of tributei. oughte to bee gentle and ſeeldome tymes to doe it: for it greueth the cittizens, to haue their proper priuate ſtock and ſubſtance imployde on publique affayres: excepte in great diſtres, or tyme of daunger, for then all good cityzens doe of their owne good accorde fall in conſideration hereof, & willing be contributory to payment: but if they maye ſpare their priuate ſubſtaunce, they lyue better contented: & if there be no other remedy, but to do otherwiſe, then ought they to entreate all men gentlye, thereby the more eaſely to rayſe their tributes, and winne the peoples hartes withall: for farre more is the good will of citizens to be eſteemed then any maſſe of ſubſtance of treaſures. Noble was the ſayinge of Alexander the great, when onAlexanders friendes vvere his treſures. a tyme being demaunded, where he had his treaſures laid vp, aunſwered: he had layd them vp with his fryndes, & welwillers, and that they were wel & warely kept to hys vſe there: for good wyl & good loue is the lady, both of a mannes owne ſubſtaunce, and of another mannes alſo: Tyberius Caeſar alſo vnto his Lieutenauntes, receyuers, or treaſurers, whiche counſelled him to exacte trybute of his prouinces and countries, anſwered, yt it was the parte of a good ſhepeheard, to ſheare his ſhepe: & not to flea thē.
            The tyhat be aucthoriſed to coyn mony, ought to obay the commaundement of the treaſurer, leaſt they forge or embaſe the coyne: or mingle it with any other baſe mettall, for it is moſte daungerous to make counterfeicte Monye, of leſſe value then it ſhoulde bee: the conſiderationMoneta à monenda. wherof is moſt diligētly to be ouerſene of the treaſurers: ſom do ſuppoſe yt the word Moneta is called ſo properly,Pecunia à Pecore. becauſe it geueth warning, yt no deceipte in mony, ſtamp or weight be made or vſed, but yt name of Pecunia, as Varro ſayth toke his beguning of Pecus: for y• riches & ſubſtāce of men in tymes paſt conſiſted in Pecoribus: yt is to ſaye, in Cattel.

And this thinge doth Lucius Columella teſtifye to bee true, and Ouid. libro 5. Faſtorū, maketh mention where he ſaith:
            All other Inſtrumentes as yet, were not for vſe out founde,The firſt earthlye treaſures of men. The wealthy, Cattle did poſſeſſe, or els greate ſtore of grounde. And hereupon were richmen calde, hereof hath mony name: But now vnlawfully eche man, to ſeeke for wealth doth frame.
            
               Cambyſes the father of Cyrus, king of Perſia, beinge aſked by what meanes citties mighte bee kepte in beſt ſauegar, aunſwered: if they whiche keepe the ſame citties doe thincke they can neuer be wary enoughe of their enemye. The ſaying of this moſt wiſe kinge, is alwais to be reuolued of them, which beare aucthority in a common weale: for what auayleth armour? what municions? what are ye walles annd towers profiting vnto them which negligētlyeSauegarde of a cittye. keepe and looke to their watches and wardes? for wee ſee verye manye citties by negligence of their watches, and ſcoutes, (with the ſodayn comming of their enemies) put to the ſpoyle and ſacked: and moreouer as touchinge night watches, to whome citizens truſtinge, and ſleeping ſoundly, haue not knowen any thinge of the comminge ofNight Watthe their enemie, vntil the ſcaling ladders haue bene ſet vp to their walles, and they throwne downe headlong, from the tops of their turrets.
            
               Spargapyſes the ſonne of Tomyris queene of Scythia, beinge together wyth all his hoaſt of men druncke with wyne, and ſlumbring or ſlepy, were in that eſtate alltogether deſtroyed: and doubtleſſe, no Scoutes, nor watches, canScoutes, Watchers and Warders. more ſafelye or diligentlye bee exerciſed, then of theym which beare the chiefeſt aucthority, whether the ſame bee in the Tents, or within the walles, certes it is ſcarce ſafe enoughe for the Cytizens to ſleepe ſoundlye when they ſhall perceyue the chiefe ouerſeers of the watchmen to be wantinge: and a Captayne ſeemeth to commyt his hoast to the hazard of fortune, ſo long as he ſleepeth.

               Alexander of Macedonie hath left vs a good leſſō for this matter, who, becauſe he wold not be deceiued by meanes of ſleepe, vſed as he lay in his bed to ſtretch out his arme, (hauing vnder the ſame a braſen bolle or baſon ſtanding) & to hold in his hand a balle of ſiluer, to thintent that whē
               A Wiſe example of Alexander in vvatchinge. ſlepe had weried and taken away the force of his fingers: hearinge the fall of the ſiluer ball into the bolle or baſon hee ſhoulde ſtreight way by the noyſe & ſounde thereof, awake agayn out of ſlepe: ſurely this leſſon I thinck that moſt excellent king learned of the Cranes which do vſe a nightly watch among themſelues alwayes, and becauſe they would not be deceyued or betrayde by any miſhap in their ſleepe: they ſtand vpon one leg holdinge a lytle ſtone in the other, which when it falleth from them by hitting the other ſtanding leg, or making a noyſe with lighting on the grounde, they are thereby awaked oute of their ſleepe.
            Euen ſo with no leſſe care ought they to watch, whych beare aucthority in a common weale, that in ſuch maner they may ſet in order their watches and keepe the holdes of their cittye, that the common weale ſuſteyne no diſcom modity nor diſhonour therby neyther in tyme of warres, neyther yet in tyme of peace: doubtles Socrates in Plato vſed great diligence & care, in ye choyſe of ſuch as ſhouldWho are meeteſt for vvatchchers & Warders. kepe watch and ward: and ſurelye the better & more wel their citizens be, the more fitter perſons are they to kepe watche and warde: which otherwiſe we ſee falleth out in rude or barbarous cityes, wherein laborers, worckemen, porters, and pore men are put to ſcoutes, and watch: but the richer men cocker themſelues and lyue at eaſe within their owne houſes: Sometimes watches are committed in charge vnto the Souldiers only, which nowe and then being wearied wyth their dayly trauayle, eyther watche rechleſlye, or ells ſleepe ſo ſoundlye, that they are not to be awaked with any noyſe at all: as it chanced vnto thoſe Romaines which kept theyr Capitol, when it was befieged

by the Frenchemen: whiche Romaines had not they bene awaked out of their ſleepe by the gagling of a gooſe, had bene vtterlye vndone, and the common wealth of theGaglinge of a gooſe ſaued Rome from beinge taken. Latines, for euer extinguiſhed.
            Let there bee placed orderlye vppon the Walles in places fitte for that purpoſe, two warders whyche muſte haue geeuen theym a Watche woorde, leaſte they bee deceyued: and lett theym bee called vppon and puniſhed whyche ſleepe in their watche tyme: Let the Scoutes in the daye tyme watche before the Gates, on the towers, at loupe holes, or at other choſen places, leaſte that a multitude of gueſtes vnlooked for, come as it were betweene theym and home, and take awaye booties, carrye awaye Captyues and inuade the Cittye: wyth no leſſe care alſo let the night watches bee placed in the cyttye, then vpon the walles: for moſte myſchieuous deedes are rather put in practyſe by Nyghte then by Daye. Theeues, Harlottes, Cutthroates, and robbers are no leſſe to bee reſtrayned, then Publique Enemies, agaynſte whome doubtleſſeNight vvatchers charged. needefull it is that the Ouerſéers of the Watche, ſhoulde extende Punniſhmente wyth greate ſeueritye, yf they wyll rightlye prouyde for the good eſtate of theyr Cyttye: For worſte of all fareth it wyth that cytye wherin Harlots and nyght Theeues, raunginge in the ſame bee not ſufficientlye mette wythall.
            It was lawfull amonge the Romaynes by the Lawe of Twelue Tables to kyll a nyght thiefe: So hathe yt alſo bene lawfull to do, to an Adulterer taken wyth the manner, and alſo to a woman committing Fornication: Theſe notwythſtandinge I iudge are not to bee permytted, but in ſuche manner to bee handled, that for feare of punniſhmente, all men keepe theymſelues at home from doynge euyll abroade: For hee louethe to doe nothinge that is good or ryghte whyche ſhonneth daye lyghte, and hee that ſtealeth in lurckynge manner, is afrayde leaſte

ſome ſhoulde ſee hym and bewraye hym, and ſo thyncketh the nighte more ſafer for him then the day tyme.
            It was not wont onely to bee the charge of theym thatNight vvatchers preuente and vvithſtand many daungerous chaunces in a Cyttye. had the ouerſighte of the Watches amongeſte the Romaynes to exerciſe watches & wardes vppon the walles, 
                  •
               ut alſo it was enioyned that they ſhoulde bee vigilant agaynſte all nighte Traueylers: whereby the Publique quietnes of the cyttye mighte bee preſerued & mayntayned: moreouer theſe and ſuche lyke watches doe helpe in many other matters, and eſpeciallye in auoydyng caſualties of Fyer, whiche ſurely are ſeene to be moſt daū
               gerous in cytties: for both do they quenche caſuall chaū
               ces of fyer wythin the Cyttye happeninge, and alſo often tymes do catche in a tryppe ſubtyll Fyrers of houſes, whoſe offence therein is to bee accoumpted capitall and worthye of deathe: and theym alſo whiche negligentlye rake vp theyr Fyers, they ought to puniſhe by whippinge and cudgellinge.
            
               Dinocrates an excellente Architecte of Macedonie hauinge promiſed vnto Alexander the greate, to rayſe vppe the Hyll called ATHON in THRACIA, of a mō
               ſtrous height, vnto the ſimilitude and reſemblaunce of a man, whoſe lefte hande ſhoulde ſupporte the walles of a moſte large Cyttye, and the righte hande ſhoulde holde a bowlle, whyche ſhould receyue the flouddes deſcending from the Hyll, and poure theym into the Sea: Alexander (being delighted wyth the deuiſe of this figure) aſked hym whether there were any fieldes neare vnto it to nouriſhe and mainteyne the Cyttye wyth Corne and victual, yea, or no? DINOCRATES aunſwered: that yt muſt haue Succour and reliefe from beyonde the Seas: The kynge ſayd that ſuche a deuyſe was not to be allowed at all▪ for (ſayth he) as the infant lately borne into the worlde can neyther lyue nor proſper wythoute the mylke of the Nurſe: So neyther can a Cittye bee ſuſtrayned or

cheriſhed without the fruites of the fieldes.
            The example of this noble kinge ALEXANDER ought to exhort all builders of cities, to appoint the ſituacionAl princes or magiſtrates may here ymy tate the care of Alexander for his ſubiects in prouidinge corne and victuels. therof in plentiful & fruiteful places, and that they whych haue charge ouer the people do eſpecially prouide corne, and victuals for their ſuſtētacion: for ſmally ſhould the defence and ſauegarde of the citty preuayle, to ſmall purpoſe ſhould the lawes, rytes, and order of a city ſerue, if the people ſhoulde ſterue for honger: for what can bee more daungerous among that people, whom neyther armour, magiſtrates, neyther Gods Iuſtice, nor mannes Lawes, neyther anye ſhame can keepe in ſtreight order, then dearth and famine: for verye aptly hereunto ſaythe Lucanus the Poet.
            
               Neſcit plebs Ieiuna timere.
            
            Let therfore firſt and principall care be for competent prouiſion of victuall, namely bread corne, the vſe wherof is ſeene to be farre more neceſſary, then any other thinge and let there bee made three Purueyghours, or principall victuallers, to haue the ouerſighte, and ſurueighe of all victual, and make prouiſion of the ſame accordinglye: let the corne be kept for common vſe, eyther in deepe trenches, cleane fāned from the chaffe, and couered ouer, whereby for ſeuen yeares ſtore, it may bee well reſerued,Good order for corne to be kept. or in brode graners, wyth lyttle wyndowes, on the north ende thereof, wherein for three yeares ſpace it may be preſerued from the mothe, wyuell and all noyſome vermin: and let them haue a ſpeciall care that there be no corne or grayne carryed forthe of the citye, but in great ſtore and plenty thereof, leaſt it become muſtye: but let it rather be brought in by exchaunge, and rechaunge made from y• countries neare adioyninge, for it were farre better to haue ſtore enoughe at home ſufficiently not only to ſerue them and their country: but alſo if nede were to helpe our

diſtreſſed neighbours: And let theym ſet a rate or price of things, leaſt they being beſtowed at the wyl of them that ſhall ſell theym, they bee rated and eſteemed, as it ſhall ſeeme good vnto them at all tymes.
            Regarde alſo muſt be had that not with a little care &Good order for the church diligence the temples and churches of the immortall god (which with ſuche great coſtes and charges are edefied, & whiche make the cities, ſpecially therby farre more gorgeous) haue ſuche officers and ouerſeers for the gouernment thereof, leaſte otherwiſe by negligence and ſlouthe they falle to ruine or decay: wherfore AEdiles are to bee appointed, which thereupon were called by the Romaines, by that name AEdiles, becauſe (as Varro ſayth) they had the ouerſighte of ſacred and priuate houſes: It was alſo the charge of the ſame Officers, amongeſt the Romaines,Good order for ſtretee and highvvayes. to ſee that the common ſtreetes, and highwayes, ſhould bee well leuelled and made euen, and that ye ſame, ſhould be kept in decent order, and that therupon no buildinge ſhould be erected and ſet, which eyther might hynder the commodity or comlynes of the ſame: alſo they had a charge enioyned them, to ſee that the water conduites, common ſewers, and ſinckes, ſhould be clenſed and ſcoured, and that the bridges ſhould bee repayred and amended:Good order for conduites and common Sevvers. moreouer, there is nothinge in a free cyttye whyche dothe more breede enuye or hatred, then to ſee certayne fellow citizens in a ſhorte tyme enryched with the comon mony, or treaſure whereas the ſame coulde not ſuffice them all.
         
         
            
            THE FOVRTH BOKE entreatinge of mutuall Societye in Mariage: mayntenaunce of houſekeeping: ordering of a houſholde, wyth morall examples of neceſſary duties in eache degree.
            
            
               ADRIANVS Caeſar was a Prynce of excellence wytte, and exquiſite learninge: for often tymes hePrayſe of Adrianus Caeſar. both wrote, ſpake, heard others ſpeake, and talked wyth hys frendes at once, & woulde do all this at one tyme: he was alſo greatelye geeuen to Poetrye, and a fauourer of all good Sciences: in Arithmetique, Geometrye, Muſicke, and Payntynge, moſt ſkilfull: he often was wont to ſay that the Common weale is ſo to bee regarded of theym whiche beare rule in the ſame, that euerye one ſhoulde knowe how that he had to doe for the common weale and not for his owne proper and priuate eſtate.
            
               Phocion the Athenian (when as abundance of treaſures was ſent vnto hym of gyft, from Philip king of Macedonie)Phocions modeſt aunſvver in refuſinge giftes and treſſures ſen
                     •
                   hym. would not take any of it at all: and to the kinges embaſſadors exhorting him that if he himſelfe could eaſelye lacke the ſame treaſures, yet at the leaſt, to take it for his childrens vſe: for whom (ſayde they) it was verye harde beinge in ſuch penury and diſtreſſe as they were, to maintaine their fathers dignitye: he aunſwered, if my chyldren do reſemble and bee lyke to me their father in condicion, this lyttle plott of grounde whych hath brought & maynteyned me to this dignitye, ſhall alſo ſuffice to bringe vp and mainteyn them: but if they doe not reſemble me, ſure I wyll not mayntaine their ryotte with theſe Treaſures and ryches.
            In no place at theſe dayes is founde that lande whiche

of it owne frutefulneſſe nouriſheth the Cyclopes without tyllage and ſowing: neyther is that Erithrea of Luſitania whyche men ſaye Gerion ſometimes poſſeſſed, beinge of ſo rancke, and fruitefull ſoyle, that when once the corne is caſt vpon ye groūd, the new ſprouting ſeede eftſones bringethe forthe newe blades, and beareth Seauen or rather more harueſtes one after another: neyther floweth in ourLotos, ſome doe ſuppoſe to be a tree. coaſtes that floud Nylus, whiche of it ſelfe bringeth forth an Herbe called Lotos, whereof men in thoſe partes doe make bread to eate, and whereof wyth ſuch gredynes (as Homer ſayth) they doe eate, that they altogether forget y• ordering of their houſholde affayres: wherfore men muſt prouyde to haue poſſeſſion of Landes, that prouyſion of victualles may be reſerued from tyme to tyme.
            
               Marcus Curius hath by his wyſdom taught vs to haue greate ſtore of publique landes: and that priuate mennePoſſeſſion of landes in common vveale. ſhoulde haue ſo much thereof, as to the meynteyninge of their lyfe and lyuinge, ſhoulde bee neceſſarye: for when as hee oute of his tryumphes had adiudged innumerable acres of Lande to the cōmon weale, to euerye manne in ſeuerall hee onelye alotted Fowertye, neyther▪ reſerued he anye greater porcion thereof vnto hymſelfe then the reſte had: Hee was blamed of certayne perſons bycauſe he had geeuen himſelfe the leaſte parte, and had entytled the common weale to the moſte parte: hee ſayde vnto them, that no man ought to thincke that grounde to be a little or vnſufficiente whiche ſhoulde ſuffice his owne vſe and his families.
            As it behooueth ciuill Societye to haue fewe to beareAn ouerſeer to order houſholde affayres. aucthoritye, and manye to obey, ſo in houſholde affayres there ought to bee one whiche ſhoulde haue chiefe rule, & hee to bee auncient in yeares, and all the reſidue to obay. And as in a city by due obedience to lawes, the magiſtrate is ſayde to gouerne others iuſtelye, ſo in Commaundynge and obayinge, wee haue accuſtomed to gouerne

domeſticall dealinges, let them whiche beare aucthoritye or office in a common weale, know that the lawes do gouerne and are aboue them, and let them that are the chief of an houſhold follow the rule of a good huſband or houſholder: There is therfore a good order in ſome citties, yt none maye bee choſen into the Senate which hath not the charge of houſe and family.
            He that is the Gouernour of an houſholde, ought alwayes to remember that hee hath ſometymes bene a ſeruaunt, that hee do rather correct offences wyth woordes,Houſholders. then wyth ſtripes, and had rather that his family ſhould feare his ſeueritye and Iuſtice, then tremble at his crueltye: for it goeth worſte of all with that familye whyche rather wyth feare then wyth zeale, goeth aboute their buſines. And furthermore in great trauayles, and in executinge waighty offices or duties, it behoueth the houſholder to ſhewe himſelfe, the firſt man, officious, and dilygent: for the Inferiours wil be aſhamed of ſlouth & ſluggiſhenes,Such maſters ſuch familye & ſeruauntes. when they ſhall ſee the elder, to be diligent and paynefull: ſo on the other parte, he ſhal beware and take heede, that hee doe nothing filthyly, whiche his houſhold may haue in ſuſpicion: for they doe farre more offende by example, whithe beare aucthority, then in committing ye offence.
            Amongeſt the auncient in times paſt, there was ſuche multitude of Slaues, that they by violence thruſte the freemen, out of certain cities, and now & then rebelliouſly receiued & wtſtode their maiſters cōming homewards by force of arms: for we reade that ye people of the coūtrye of Scythia were a nation almoſt inuincible, for they dyd not onelye wythſtand Darius king of Perſia from enterpriſing vpon their coaſtes & borders: but alſo put him to a vyle and ſhamefull flyghte: moreouer they ouerthrew the hoaſtes of Alexander, they eſtabliſhed the Empyre of ye 
               Parthians, and people of Bactrians, they had Aſia tributarye vnto theym. 1500. yeares, from whych country, when as

theſe Scythians returned wyth conqueſt in theyr thirde expedicion (for they had bene eyghte yeares abſence from their wyues) they were at the firſt dryuen backe, and forcyblie repulſed from comminge home, by theyr owne ſeruants and bondmen. For their wyues weryed wyth long loking for their huſbandes, newe maried themſelues to their bondſlaues whiche were left at home to keepe theyr Cattle: whyche ſlaues not without ſlaughter and bloudſhed, wythſtoode and woulde not ſuffer their maiſters at their return to come home into their own coūtries & houſes: And althoughe in the ende the victorye fell to theyr mayſters, yet notwythſtandinge they bickered and ſkyrmiſhed together ſo doubtfully, that hard it was to diſcern who in the ende would get the vpper hande: but at ye laſt the bondmen beinge vtterlye vanquiſht, were hanged vpon gibbets, and the women ſtryken with remorſe of their guylty and filthy conſciences, diſpatched and murthered themſelues, partly by the halter and partly wt the ſword: Amongſt the notorious warres of the Romaynes, is not alſo the ſeruile warres recoumpted and reckoned, which tooke the name of Bondmen vanquiſhed?
            But ſometimes ſlaues haue ſhewed forth Examples of moſt tryed fayth and truſtines, as Caius Plotius Plancus witneſſeth, for he being by the Triumuiri proſcript, & appointed, to haue bene executed, for feare hyd himfelfe priuelye, in a Ferme nere Salerne, when the Souldiers that were ſent to ſearch him out, hauinge by the ſauour, of his Perfumes ſmelled him out, caught his ſeruaunts, whoRemorſe of the maiſter tovvardes his ſeruants fidelity. beinge muche and longe tyme euill entreated, and tormē
               ted, woulde not diſcleſe theyr maiſter. Plancus pytyinge and hauinge compaſſion on the fidelitye of his owne ſeruaūtes, came for the, amongeſt the myddeſt of them, & offered his throate into the handes of the ſouldiers, thereby to delyuer his ſeruauntes from preſent tormentes.
            
               Marcus Antonius alſo an excellent orator, being accuſed of inceſt, had experience in the fidelity of his ſeruaunt

who beinge brought vnto iudgement, euen he which bore the La
                  •
               terne, to that vngracious act, beinge alſo tormē
               ted, ſcourged, rackte, withe burninge plates ſchorched and halfe burned to death, would neuer declare his mayſters inceſt, wherunto he was priuye, and of councel: So haue there bene alſo others in like manner approued: but the truſtines of ſeruants to their maiſters is not alwayes to be aſſayed.
            The freeman which hath vnder him the gouernmēt of ſeruants, ought ſpeciallye to thincke that they are men, & not brute beaſtes, and that he ſhould not rage with crueltye againſt them, in ſcourging, euyll entreating, or chayning of them (for by ſcourging their hartes are made obdurate & hardned) nether do they any thing but with euilHovv the may ſter ought to entreate his ſeruauntes. wyl: but the maſter ought to deale more gently wt thē, exacting their daily taſkes, & that not without mercy: their diligence & good endeuour is to be commended, whereby they may apply themſelues wt cherefulnes in their labors and buſines: They ought alſo to haue ſuche foode and ſuſtenance geeuen theym whyche maye ſtrengthen their bodyes wythout curyoſitye and coſtlynes: Let theyr Apparell bee ſuche as may couer their bodies decentlye in Somer, and defend theym from colde and rayne in wynter: for Seruauntes pynched wyth colde, ouer awed with feare, & hongerſterued, cannot performe any manner of office or dutie ofſeruice.
            Wee muſte alſo take heede, leaſt throughe ſtrayte lookinge to our ſeruaunts they become deſperate: for now & then they are geeuen to bee cruell, agaynſte thoſe that be weaker then theymſelues: and the blowes or ſtrypes of the mayſter are ſometymes reuenged vppon their childrē and wyues.
            Wee haue yet freſhe in our memory a Seruaunte of a wicked wytte and cruell meaninge: this felow had a veryA vvicked exā
                  ple of a vvicked ſeruaunt. rygorous mayſter, that often cudgelled and bet him cruelly, wher at this his ſeruant being angry, and not knowinge

how to be reuenged vpon hys mayſter, on a tyme caught two infantes (which were his ſayd maiſters childrē) the one of a yeares age, the other of two yeares, and with them aſcendinge vp into a certayne highe Turret, called his mayſter, and wylled him to take his younge babes vp into his lap: whom ſo ſone as he had ſquatted to the groūd hee caſt himſelfe headlong after theym, becauſe he wold not come alyue into the daunger of his mayſter agayne.
            Bondmen enthralled and endaungered vnto vs by the lawe, by reaſon they are to vs indebted, are more gentlyWelvſinge of hyred ſeruauntes. to be entreated, tyll they haue payde their dutie: for we ought to remember that ſo ſone as they haue recompenſed their debt with their bodily traueyle, that they are fre borne, and not of ſeruile condicion, as are thoſe franchiſed bondmen (who although freed) yet after fredome, do owe ſome ſeruice vnto vs: wherfore we muſt accoumpt theim as Iournymen or laborers hyred, and we muſt in al thinges vſe them as freemen with curteſye, wee muſt require their worcke and allow alſo reaſonable wages, and truly pay the ſame to them: for to haue their good report it ſhal muche profite whenſoeuer wee ſhall bee dryuen to hyre other labourers.
            Of al ſocieties or felowſhips, there is none more agreable vnto nature, then y• ſociety of man & woman: for ther is engraffed by nature in euerye liuinge creature a loue & zeale to their like of kynd, and a reaſon of conſeruation by coniunction of male and female: for there can be no wylde beaſte ſo cruel, ſo ſolitary, & alone wādring, which in their time do not ſeke, a mate of their own kind & condicion for procreatiō ſake: ſeing thē there is no ſuch ſociety or felowſhip more according to nature, then that of the male and female: it be houes vs to wryte of matrimoniall cōiunctiō eſpecially when as citizens do matche theymſelues wyth Citizens in mariage by a long cōtinued good wil, & ſo reconcile & make attonement betwene grudging enemies.
            As we reade of IVLIVSC AES AR and Pompeius,
               
whoſe affinitye ſo long as it flouriſhed, dyd ſubdue and repreſſe ciuyll diſcorde, and reduced all the ciuill warres, vnto vnitye and concorde.
            For had not the rauiſhed virgins of Sabina appeaſed y• myndes of their Parentes and huſbandes by the Law ofExāple of matrimony. matrimonye, the common weale of the Romaynes, had bene vtterlye deſtroyed: very neceſſary therfore is it to in treate of maryage and naturall amitye: for man doth not onely marye and take a wyfe for procreation ſake, but alſo, to haue a companion of lyfe, wyth whom hee may liue together, and participate ether fortune, both proſperity & aduerſity: for hee that is ledde by reaſon, doth ſeeke for y• commodities of his lyfe, neyther ſeeth he that he can ſufficientlye prouide for his owne eſtate, excepte hee take a wyfe: therfore man whē he hath prouided him of a dwellinge houſe taketh a wyfe, that he may procreate childrē, to the ende to lyue more commodiouſlye, and the better beare the chaunces of eyther fortune.
            It is eſpeciallye neceſſarye for a man to ſeeke a tradeTrade of lyuinge. whereby to lyue, that hee maye be the better prouided for in hys olde age and ſickeneſſe: wherefore it is eyther requiſite for him to exerciſe huſbandrie, or ſeafaring, or ſom other kinde of honeſte trades, thereby to get conueniente ſtaye whereof to lyue.
            Therfore our carefull mother, dame nature, parent of humane kynde, hath ordayned wedlocke, to the ende that not onely the moſt pleaſaunt, but alſo the moſt profitable ſocietye of lyfe, might thereby be put in vre: therefore as Xenophon hath left in writinge in his boke of houſhold affayres, the deuine prouidence of God made women to bee more fearefull creatures then men, becauſe the ſame feare and awe, in the woman ſhould frame her the better to kepe home and to be diligente: for awe & feare help much to the diligence of keepinge, and naturall effeminacye or tenderneſſe hath deliuered vnto theim trades, & faculties wherein they may be exerciſed, and finde theimſelues occupied

euen within their owne houſes: furthermore foraſ muche as meate drincke and clothe, muſt needes be had, & cared for, not in euery place openlye, or in wylde woodes but at home vnder the roofe of the houſe, and in the innerThe man to bringe in the maintenaunce of houſkeping by trauayl abroade. partes of the ſame, it hath bene neceſſarye for men to bee occupied abrode in company and aſſemblies of men, wher they meeting together may deuiſe meanes, by laboure & induſtrye to get ſuche thinges as beinge broughte home, ſhoulde be layde vp in ſtore, in ſome conuenient place of y• houſe: the charge of diſpenſacion or beſtowing whereof, is more conuenient for the woman then for the man.
            
               Ariſtotle did verye well aſſigne the cares of all ſuche matters as are to be done abrode vnto men, and of things to be done at home vnto women: and he thincketh it veryThe vvoman to ſaue & kepe that is brought and to ouerſee it at home. vncomelye & not fitting, that women ſhould deale in matters which are to bee done abroade, as alſo for men to haue the orderinge and diſpoſinge of thinges wythin dores, for all helpes and defences of mannes lyfe are more eaſily procured and gotten, by mariage, then by ſinglehood.
            We ought to reſtore that vnto nature which wee haue borowed, as to geeue vnto others lyfe, whych our parentes haue geeuen vnto vs, by reaſon whereof we obtayne, that our chyldren ſhould reſtore that vnto vs in our extreme age and weakenes, whiche they haue receyued of vs,Nature in the childe oughte to be careful for cōfortinge the parentes in olde age. when they were not able to helpe theymſelues: let theym I ſaye nouriſh and mainteyn vs, in oure decrepicie, when we leane vpon our ſtaffe and be weake and feble: euen as we brought vp them in their tender age, when we ſuſtayned and embraced them in our armes, when they firſt learned to creepe: and by theſe meanes, the interchaunge of nature is perpetuallie fulfilled, and that which it cannot do in the ſimple generalitye is cōſerued and kept in ſpece and kynde.
            Furthermore, the diſcommodities hapninge in our old age (which ſurelye are innumerable) and the manyfolde kindes of diſeaſes which do vexe and torment barren olde

age and as it were by conſpiracies fall vppon olde men at once: by what other reaſon maye they bee ſuffered, or by what cōfort ells maye they be mitigated or aſſwaged, but by y• hope & helpe which we haue or ought to haue inourComfortable to haue chyldien. children: for far leſſe greuous do thoſe euils ſeme, which happen vnto the father ſtriken into extreme age, when he himſelfe deelining toward decay, ſeeth his ſonnes growe luſtye of body, & euery day more ſtrong: then thoſe things which vnto a man wythout children do happen, which ſee leth and perceyueth the powers both of his body & mynd to decaye, and therwithall at once al hope of helpe, & poſteritye to come to an ende: but death it ſelfe (whiche vnto all men is moſt greuous) doth bring ſomwhat the leſſeDeath. to theym that leaue children behinde them is leſſ greuous griefe vnto them: who knowing themſelues to be mortal perſons, & that they can lyue no longer then humane cō
               dicion or ſtate wyll ſuffer them, do behold their childrē by them begotten, reſembling them, to be called by their proper names, wherby they are as it were reſerued ſtil aliue in the fame and reporte of men, euen after their diſceaſſe: For they that departe this worlde, leauing bebynde themDeath of the that vvant Iſſue brought in obliuion. no chyldren, do carrye wyth theym the ruine of their race & offpringe, and deſerue euyl of the common weale, yea of mankinde alſo are they wrapped in perpetuall obliuion, neyther leaue they any ſteppe or imitacion of their lyfe afterwardes amongeſt men at any tyme.
            Therfore I think beſt for a ciuyl man to take vnto him a wyfe, not onelye for neceſſities ſake: but alſo to thendeCauſes neceſſarye vvhy the ciuill man ſhoulde mary a Wy
                     •
                  e. they maye lyue wyth more Pleaſure and profite, wyth whome a thanckefull, pleaſaunt, and atceptable ſocietye of lyfe, muſt be framed, not to fulfill the luſt of the fleſhe, but to procreate and encreaſe Iſſue, thereby to repleniſh the cyuyll common weale, whyche in deede is the proper reſpecte and dutie of mariage.
            
               AElius Commodus Uerus Emperoure of Rome, is ſayd to haue aunſwered his wife verye notablye, when as ſhee

ſeemed to bee offended at the filthineſſe of his Lyfe, and complayned of his forreyn pleaſures: Suffer me, wyfe (ſayth he) by other women to exerciſe my Luſte and ſenſualitye, for a wyfe is the name of Dygnytye, and not of pleaſure.
            
               Socrates the Philoſopher when hee had longe tyme and muche ſuffered his firſte wyfe XANTIPPA to beSocrates and his curſt Wyfe bothe angrye and churliſhe againſte him (to Alcibiades meruaylinge that he coulde beare wyth ſuche a ſhrewde, and bytter woman, and not baniſhe her oute of his houſe) made this aunſwere: that in ſufferinge ſuche a Uixen in her behauiour at home: he enured himſelfe the better to putt vp thoſe Iniuries and reproches whiche were done to him abroade by others: For Socrates had two wyues at one tyme the better thereby to perfourme throughlye the effect of pacience.
            
               METELLVS NVMIDICVS the greate andMetellus bys oracion cōcerninge mariage. eloquente Oratour: whyle hee was Cenſor diſcourſinge of the Maryage of Wyues in his Oration, ſpake theſe woordes: My Lordes if wee coulde be wythout wiues we ſhoulde all eaſelye lacke and be wythout that moleſtation? but becauſe Nature hath ſo ordayned, that neyther wyth theym can wee lyue commodiouſlye, and withoute theim we cannot lyue at all: I thincke it better rather to prouyde for a perpetuall ſauetye, then for a ſhorte or momentanye pleaſure.
            Whiche manifeſte confeſſion of the care and moleſtation of wyuing, was myſliked of many of the Cytizens of Rome, for they ſayde that METELLVS the Cenſor whoſe purpoſe ſhoulde haue beene to exhorte the common people vnto Matrymonye) could not confeſſe or vtter any thinge touchinge the griefes and diſcommodities therof leaſte in ſo doynge hee ſhoulde rather ſeeme to diſſwade the People from Matrymonye, then exhorte theym thereunto: For ſo muche as almoſte there is nothynge

throughoute the whole lyfe of man, can be founde, whych in euerye parte of it ſelfe is abſolute and perfecte, that no ſtable amitye coulde bee founde, nor more aboundaunt in all dutie, & godlines, then in matrimony.
            
               Tiberius Gracchus wyllingly & of his own accord ſaued and redeemed his wiues lyfe wyth his owne death, for he findynge at home, two ſnakes, in this ſorte deſtyned, thatExample of huſbande hys faythfull loue tovvardes hys Wyfe. vnleſſe hee killed one of theim, hee and all his houſholde ſhoulde periſhe & dye, if he let the male eſcape, it ſhoulde then be his chaunce to eſcape alyue: but if the female, thē ſhould his wyfe Cornelia eſcape alyue: hee ſo entierly loued his wife, and ſo much eſteemed matrimony, that he rather choſe to dye hymſelfe, then to ſuruiue his wife,
            The wyues of the Myniās haue lefte vs an example of admiration: for their huſbandes heinge impriſonned by the Lacedemonians, and iudged to dye for conſpiringe againſt the ſtate, looked for preſent execution, according to the cuſtome, in the night ſeaſon: but their wyues makinge a pretence or excuſe, to goe to ſpeake vnto their huſbandes,Exāple of the Wyues faythful loue tovvardes their huſbandes. & take their laſt leaue, obteyned licence of the kepers to goe vnto them, where chaunginge their apparell and diſſemblinge their ſorowes, wt their heades couered, ſuffered their huſbandes to departe, and gaue themſelues to the death, to the end that they might deliuer and ſet at libertye their huſbandes.
            Moreouer the too much cheriſhing that Auguſtus vſed towardes his daughters, made theym more wanton and laſciuious, whereupon Iulia, when a certayne ſeuere and graue frende of hers, went about to perſwade her to followe the example of her fathers frugalitye, ſhe ſcornfullyeExāple of tòo much cheriſhing & cock
                     •
                  ing of childrē
                aunſwered: my father forgets that he is Caeſar, but I remember that I am Caeſars daughter: ſhee outraged ſo farre in diſſolute lyuinge, that ſhee proſtituted her body to all men: and when as men that knew well her filthy lyfe, meruayled how ſhee brought forth chyldren ſo lyke to Agrippa her huſbande, ſeing ſhee had to doe wyth ſo manye

men: ſhee aunſwered that ſhe could lawfullye entertayne and admitte adulterers after that ſhee was greate wythA ſhameleſſe▪ aunſvvere of a ſhameles ſtrō
                  pet. chylde by her huſband: for ſeldome doth the woman kepe ſhamefaſtnes that hath once loſt her chaſtity.
            There are ſome women whiche take pleaſure to talke of their filthy demeanour, and declare the blemiſh or diſeaſe of theyr mynde and body wyth filthy ſpeche, therebySome Women delightinge in filthy talke declare the filthines of their poluted mynde. to appeare more pleaſantly conceyted vnto the worlde: as Popilia the daughter of Marcus, to a certayn man whych meruayled what ſhould be the cauſe: that all beaſtes doe neuer admitt the male to couer theim, but at due ſeaſons whē they woulde be made great with yonge, and women at all tymes deſire the ſocietye of man: ſhee aunſwered: becauſe, they are beaſtes.
            But let the huſband loke to it, that hee geeue no occaſion of filthynes or offēce, vnto his wyfe: and let her takeThe huſbands vvordes levvdlye vttered corrupt the levvd diſpoſition of the Wyfe. heede that ſhee do not ſpeake any filthye thinge, at any tyme in the preſence of her huſband, wherein ſome men doe much offend, which allure their wyues wyth vncleanlynes of wordes and filthynes of ſpeache vnto luſt and concupiſcence, and doe inſtructe theym in Fables, whereby they are made more readye to venerous dalliaunce, and inflamed with ſtraunge lou
                  •
               s: and the men nowe & then ſpeake thoſe thinges whyche are able ynough to enflame euen thoſe women that be otherwiſe very cold affected.
            Furthermore let the huſbande, farre more diligentlye abſtayn from hauing to doe with any other ſtraunge perſon, if hee deſire to haue a chaſte wyfe: for no iniury doth more diminiſhe or ſooner breake the holye ſociety of maryage, then for the one partye, I will not ſay to be onely takē in adultery, but alſo in any ſlender ſuſpicion therof.
            The Perſians therefore very well dyd greuouſlye puniſheAdultery ſharpely puniſhed by the Perſians adulterye, to then tent that the ſocietye of matrimonye might be made the more firme and ſtable.
            The continency of the huſbande for the moſte part keepeth his wyfe in chaſtitye, and maketh the man himſelfe

to be farre more commendable: Laelius the friende of Scipio, is counted the happier in this one reſpecte, that in all his lyfe tyme he had but the company of one onely womā that is to ſay, his own wyfe, whom he had and no more: for there are very fewe wyues ſo modeſte, and ſo louinge to their huſbands, that they can willingly and patiently ſuffer & beare with their huſbandes harlottes.
            I remember that I haue reade (not without meruaylinge)Women ſtomacke much to haue their huſbandes kepe an harlot. of one woman euen Tertia, wife of the former AEmilius mother to Cornelia, who was of ſuche gentlenes, and pacience, that when ſhee knewe her huſbande (being the conqueroure of Affrica) to be hotelye enamoured of her handmayd a beautiful piece, & knew wel that he vſed her too familiarly: ſhee alwayes diſſembled the matter, leaſt otherwiſe ſhee ſhould accuſe her huſband (that moſt excellent Gentleman) of Intemperancye, and that whyche is more: ſhe was ſo farre frō reuenge, yt when AEmilius was dead, ſhee ſette her handmayde at lybertye, and freely placed her in maryage (to one that ſerued her huſbande) wyth no ſmall dowrye.
            Surely a man ſhall fynde very fewe women in all the memorye of man, of this nature, that can ſufferor beare wyth their Huſbandes Strumpettes: therefore that good reaſon or argumente vſed by the lawyers, is to bee openlye fixed in the houſes of men: wherein is geeuen vs for precepte:
            
               What euer Lawe a man woulde haue
               an other to obſerue:
               From that let not hymſelfe digreſſe,
               nor once aſyde to ſwerue.
            
            For what is more reprochefull then for a man to bee condempned by that law whiche hee himſelfe hath made,Solon his lavv for puniſhinge adultery. and to reprehende that in others, wherein himſelfe lykewyſe treſpaſſeth: to mee therfore that auncient Lawe of

               Solon, ſeemes altogether vniuſte: wherein is ſayde that if the man take his wyfe in adultery, let him kyll heri but if ſhee take the Huſbande in adulterye, lett her not once touche hym, wyth her finger: for once that Lawe beinge recited amongeſt a companye of matrones one of theym (curteouſly ſmylinge vppon the reſt) ſayd: I ſee playnly that Women were excluded oute of the councell of men when thoſe lawes were ordayned: for if there had beene any woman there, they woulde neuer haue ſuffered thys Lawe to haue paſſed being ſo iniurious to our ſexe.
            Alſo that Lawe was vniuſte whiche was had in vſe amonge the Egiptians, as DIODORVS maketh mention: For it appointed the man taken in adulterye, to bee fcourged or whipped: but the woman to haue her Noſe ſlyt and diſfigured, to the entent ſhe might in that part beAn hard thing to choſe a vvife vvell. puniſhed wherewt the face is moſte comly garniſhed to the ſighte of the worlde: notwithſtandinge in matters touchinge Wyuynge: there is nothynge more harder then to make a good choiſe, for maidens are brought vp at home wtin dores, and do verye ſeldome goe abroade to be ſeene: For the whiche cauſe it is almoſte impoſſible for a man to ſearche out their Beauty, Manners, and Conuerſation, whych matter ſurelye maketh men doubtful what to do: for it is a thinge of no ſmall effecte, to marye a wyfe, and wyth her to frequente perpetuall Societye of Lyfe, whyche in all poynctes is vnknowen vnto hym at the firſte.
            The manners and conuerſacions of Maydens cannot bee better gheſſed at, and perceyued by any other reaſon, then by the ſimilitude or lykeneſſe of their parentes: forGood parents bring vp good chyldren. it is verye lyke that of good Parentes, there can no euyll children be gotten: A chaſte mother bringeth vp chaſte daughters, and ſhe that in harte neuer committed ſhame, wyll not wyncke nor beare wyth any faulte of her daughter.

All young men for the moſt part do deſire to mary a fayre wyfe: but yet it is (by the opinion of Theophraſtus) leſſe griefe for a man to haue a foule, thē to kepe a fayre wyfe: For hee thinkes that no thing is there ſafe, which al men do deſire, becauſe ſome one man doth entyſe her by beautye, ſome by wyſdome, and ſome through eloquence, and ſome by bounty and gyftes, and that whiche is aſſaulted in euery parte, is vanquiſhed on ſome parte: This much doth Saynt Ierome diſcourſe vpon, after the minde & opinion of the Philoſopher Theophraſtus.
            
            
               Ennius the Poet ſayde that wee muſt marrye wyues, y• are of a ſounde chaſtitye, and whyche are ſeene to bee of a portly fauour: Aulus Gellius expoundeth this ſentence, & ſheweth that thoſe women be of portly fauour, which areChoyſe of a Wyfe. neyther of the fayreſt, not yet of the fowleſte feature, but meane betweene both: whych mediocrity ſurelye is in al thinges beſt and chiefeſt: for this reaſon is ſufficient to y• procreation of iſſue: for pleaſaunt beautye in the womā helpeth muche, as in the men worthynes or dignitye is moſt acceptable: theſe and many other thinges are to be thought vpon, in the choyſe of a wyfe, and namely thys, that a mā chooſe one that in goods and feature is lyke to himſelfe: for inequality breedeth contempt, and perpetuall brawlinge, but equality knytteth together the myndes with moſte firme loue and affection: It is alſo good for a man to take ſuche a wyfe as hath not beene touchedEquality in choyſe. nor maryed to another man before: for there is a double labour and trouble to him that marieth a wydow, firſt to vnteache her the maners of her former huſbande, and ſecondlye to enure, and acquainte her, wyth his owne faſhions.
            
               Ariſtotle thincketh the beſt tyme for maydes to be maryed, at the age of eightene yeares, and for a man at thirtye and ſixe yeares of age: for thoſe ages are rype and perfectThe age for man and vvoman to marye for procreation of iſſue: but as touching the trayning

of theym vp in faſhions, if they were a fewe leſſe yeares yonger, I woulde thincke it more commodious, ſpeciallye in this our tyme, wherin vices (as the Satyriſt ſaith) do ſwarme: Lycurgus alſo affirmed that it was a ſhameful thing for man & woman to paſſe beyond thoſe yeares vnmaried: For he ordayned that thoſe perſons ſhould be noted wyth infami
                  •
               , and expelled the Theatres, who at y• age of xxxvii. yeares were found to haue lyued wythout a wyfe: The Romayns alſo debarred al them from bearinge any publike offyce, and eſteemed them as vnworthy to be honoured any waye by the common weale, whyche woulde not helpe and furder the ſame wyth augmentation of Iſſue.
            Let the huſband inſtruct his wyfe wyth the beſt manners, neyther wyth threateninges, reproche, nor ſtripes: for it is a ſeruile thing & not mete at any hand, for familier Societye: and in deede wyues become obdurate wythOrderly inſtruction to be geuen by the mā to the vvyfe. beatinge euen as naughtye ſeruauntes, and bondmen become worſe and worſe, and with ſtripes are dayly more & more geuen to folow their owne w
                  •
               lf
                  •
               ll wayes▪ So women are leſſe obedient to their huſbandes, and do all thinges peuiſhlye againſt the grayne, when they are vngentlye entreated of their huſbandes, and getting at any tyme occaſion for their purpoſe, run
                  •
               e head long into al filthynes without eyther awe or reuerence of matrimony, thinkinge that they make none offence at all, when they may lay for their excuſe yt they do it in reuengemēt of their ſtrypes before receiued: therfore with reaſon muſt wee deale wt them, yt they may vnderſtand all thinges to be done, for the common profyte of their whole houſeholde, for the honeſtye of theimſelues, and of wedlocke: the ſecrets alſo y• are and ought to be betweene man and wyfe, let them be included within the walles of their chamber and no further: for that man taketh an ill way both for himſelfe and his wines honeſty which blabbeth out thoſe thinges that are to be kept in ſilence: for we muſte ſo caſt in our mindes

des to liue in Wedlocke, that wee bee not as laughingeSecretes of Wedlocke betvven man and Wyfe ought not to be reuealed. ſtockes to anye abrode, for anye matters done wythin our owne houſes: therfore in matrimonye all thinges ought to be kept ſecrete: for what can bee more lewde and ſhamefull, then eyther the huſbande amongeſt his friendes, or the wyfe amongeſt her neighbours, to chatte and babvle oute ſuche matters, as ought in all poyntes to be concealed.
            
               Candaules Kynge of Lydia, had a wyfe, vppon whoſe beautye he greatly doted: neyther thoughte hee it ſufficienteThe doting ſōdnes of Cā daules, ouer 
                     •
                  is fayre vvyfe hovv hee vvas for th
                     •
                   ſame ſlayne. to blaʒe abroade her Feacture and Beautye vnto all men, and to manifeſt vnto the worlde, ſuche matrimoniall ſecretes as were to bee kept cloſe: but alſo would haue one to bee a wytneſſe of hys Pleaſures, and therefore broughte her foorth naked, and ſhewed her to his companion Gyges (as Herodotus ſaith) whom aſſone as Gyges had ſeene, hee was ſo inflamed wyth loue towardes her, that hee thoughte vppon, ne cared for anye other thing more then how to obtayne her to his owne wyll: and ſhee throughlye knowing the matter, and ſuppoſing her ſelfe to haue beene of her huſbande thus betrayed, as one that alienated his dealinges and loue to another, deuiſed with the adulterer Gyges to murther her huſband, and thereupon beſtowed both her kingdome and herſelfe vpon y• ſame Gyges: by this meanes did Candaules loſe both his lyfe, & his kingdom, when he thought his pleaſures to be leſſe, ſo longe as they were kept in ſilence and vnknowen.
            
               Cleobulus Lyndius (accoumpted one of the ſeuen ſages of Greece) geeueth vs twoo good leſſons touchinge wyuinge:Tvvo precepts to be obſerued by the huſbād tovvardes his vvyfe. the one is that wee ſhoulde deale wyth theym by flatteringe. The other that in preſence of ſtrangers, wee ſhoulde neuer chyde theym: for the one hee ſayde, was a poynte of fooliſhenes, the other of madnes.
            Furthermore let the huſband commytte in charge vnto his wyfe, al thinges domeſticall and within dores, and

let hym ſuffer her to haue the diſpenſation of the ſame:
            Let her perfourme her dilygence at home, and let the huſbande employe his induſtrye abroade: let her nouriſh and foſter their children, and let him inſtruct and teacheThe huſbands charge abrode theym: let the goodman of the houſe▪ as neede requireth knowe to ſeeke after ſuche thinges as appertayne to the vſe of the familye, and this not by vſurye, or anye filthye lucre, but eyther wyth tyllinge the grounde and fruictes of the earth, which is neuer couetous, nether diſſembleth wyth her tyllers: but euermore reſtoreth the Seedes to her committed, wythe moſte plentifull fruite and gayne: for it is meete and conueniente, that the common mother of all men, ſhoulde nouriſhe and bring vp her children as it were wyth her dugges and encreaſe, eyther wyth liberall Sciences, or Merchaundyʒe, or nauigation, in traffique, in Sellinge and buyinge, wythout lyinge or vanitye, or in other honeſt trades, tendinge to the profite, and ornament of the cyttye.
            Furthermore it behooues him to ſpare and ſaue that hee getteth: for in vayne doe they take laboure to gette Ryches, where is no regarde of ſparinge: and where the expences do ſtill runne oute, wythout anye comminge in: neyther is this prouerb of drawing vp water in a pitcher yt is ful of holes any other thing then firſt to get, and then prodigally & ryotouſly to lauiſh out: Yet would I not yt the houſholder ſhoulde bee a myſer and ſteyned wyth pinchyng couetouſnes, then the whych plague, there can beThe couetous man good to none, but hur
                     •
                   ful to all. none more pernicious: neyther yet more diſcrepante, or further of frō al humanity: for the couetous man hurtēth all men, is odious to all men, neyther doynge good to hymſelfe or to any of his frendes: Hee neuer reioyſeth at hartes eaſe, hee is alwayes ſadde, churliſhe, penſiue, and crabbed, he onelye cannot fynde in his harte to loue, and cheriſhe his wyfe, and children, nor departe with any thing vnto them, to liue merily wtall, but always is found

a ſteruer of him ſelfe, an oppreſſor of his owne nature, is alwayes hungrye, alway thirſtye, and continually vexed with an inſaciable gredye deſire, neyther can any thinge ſuffice him: Uery aptly did the riche Attalus compare a couetous man to an hungry dogge that ſnatcheth vp fragmentesA couetous mā compared to an hungrye dogge. of bread and meate at his maiſters table, whiche ſlappeth vp ſtreightwaies whole & vnchawed gubs wtout any taſte, and ſtreightways with open mouthe, lokes ſtyll for more, ſtandinge at receipt of further hope for more to come.
            Let a man thanckefullye enioye his goodes, and eſtate preſent, and wyth well doinge, let him hope ſtyll for better: for it is the parte of a faynt harted perſon, too muche to feare penurie, & for that cauſe not to dare to vſe thoſe thinges whiche are preſent: becauſe (forſooth) he feareth that he ſhall hereafter lacke.
            The charge of all dealinges within the houſe belongeth vnto the wyues: and it were very hard dealing that the goodman, who trauayleth and taketh paynes abrode to ſeeke thrift, when he cōmeth home into his owne houſe as it were into the porte or hauen of tranquillitye, after a moſte daungerous and harde voyage, ſhould alſo be buſied and trobled with ordering houſhold affayres at home, when he ſurceaſſinge all care, and deſiringe to be at quietneſſe and reſt, repayreth home, for eaſe and ſuccour: therfore let the wyfe performe her diligence, and let her take vppon her the charge of all thinges which are at home to be ordered, accordyng to the preſcribed ordinaunces of ye huſbande, vnto whome in all pointes, ſhee oughte to bee obedient, for it goeth very yll in that houſholde where ye wife beareth al rule, and the huſband obeyeth, and is made as one of the meigniall folke.
            Let the wyfe eſpecially ſet in order her houſhold ſtuffe and thoſe neceſſaries that are neate, and of value, & whicheOrdering of houſhold neceſſaries. are to be reſerued to ye vſe of a better life, whether the ſame belong to womāly furniture, or to mans apparell: let her

diſpoſe and order them wythin ſecrete roomes, in the houſe, that when ſoeuer occaſion hapneth to occupye theym, they maye bee in a readynes, and not to ſeeke: for it is aSafe layde vp ſone found. moſte certayne pouertye, when a man lacketh that thinge which hee hath, and ſtandeth in neede of the ſame, knowing not in what place it is layde vp.
            Moreouer ſuch things as dulie concerne meate & drinck, and which are prepared for dinner & ſupper, let her ſo day ly diſpend & beſow, that they be neither waſtfully gourmaundiſed, and ſwilled vp in glottonye and dronkennes, by the folkes of the houſe: neyther by reaſon of too much nyggardy and pinching, let them not bee hungerbytten and ſterued: Therfore let her keepe a meane, and ſo ſhal ſhee at one and the ſelfe ſame tyme, both rightlye prouideA moderate diet and meaſurable apparel. for their healthe, and alſo for the priuate affayres of their familye, aſwell at one tyme as at another: and let her wt great moderacyon qualeſy her ſelfe in thoſe thinges which appertayne to her own ſelfe, eſpeciallye for apparell & ornamentes for her owne bodye, which greatlye conſume her huſband
                  •
               s ſubſtaunce: For they coſt deare at the firſt and in ſmall ſpace are eyther by vſe cleane worne, or elles ſolde for a greate deale leſſe then they were bought.Wyſe Women feare euil 
                     •
                  eportes.
            
            An honeſte manered woman oughte to feare nothinge more, then euyll reporte: for ſhee that once hath an euyll name, whether it be rightlye by her deſerued, or that ſhe bee wrongfully ſlaundered, hardly can recouer her good name and fame agayne: for a woman ſuſpected of vnchaft lyuing leadeth a miſerable and wretched lyfe.
            The true ornamentes of women are Modeſtye, chaſtetye,The true ornaments of a Woman. ſhamefaſtnes and prayſe, whiche cannot bee purchaſed, wyth any gold, pearles, or precious ſtones: but ſeing it is ſo, that all theſe cannot be ſeene in any one good woman, although very honeſt: Chaſtitye yet is that only ornamente, whiche may ſupplie whatſoeuer lacketh in theChaſtitye the ſpeciall o
                     •
                  nament in a Woman▪
                others: for this enlargeth the dowrye, when it is not of it ſelfe ſufficient, it not onely adorneth and maketh come

lye that which is deformed, but alſo reduceth a woman to the ſimilitude of beautie it ſelfe, it enobleth ignobilitye, & finally fulfilleth all thinges, whiche in any parte may otherwiſe be wantinge.
            The fiftye Uirgines of Sparta haue eternized theyr names vnto all Poſteritye: for they beinge by their Parents ſent to do ſacrifice among the Meſſenians, thinkingExample of chaſtitye. to be entertayned after the maner of frendly hoſpitality: the Meſſenians with ſuch impaciencie and concupiſcence, luſted after them, that diſpiſinge the law of hoſpitalitye, they ſought meanes by ſollicityng their conſentes to carnail knowledge, & ſo to deflo wre their virginitye: whych filthy motion the virgines denyinge, & they importunatelye vrginge to diſhoneſte their bodies, yet was there not one founde of all thoſe virgines, that woulde conſent vnto their willes: but choſe rather to dye then ſo to looſe their maydēhode, whoſe bloud yt 
               Lacedaemoniās, through the great helpe of God, reuenged afterward by a notable victorye.
            The ſecond ornament of a woman is to haue prety children,A ſecond ornamente of vvomen is to haue pretye and tovvardly children. and of an excellent towardneſſe: whiche ornamente how much it is to be eſtemed of, Cornelia the wife of Paulus AEmilius hath taught vs: for when a certayne womā of Campania cōminge vnto her, & ſhewing outin a brauerye her pearles, golde, and pretious apparell, requeſted the ſame Cornelia in lyke maner to bring forth and ſhewe her ornaments, and iewels, ſhe fooded her out wyth wordes, vntil ſuche tyme as her children returned home from the ſchole, whome ſhee ſhewinge vnto the other woman, ſayde: Beholde my delicate ſtore and treaſures, allVertuous chyldren the righ
                     •
                  e Ievvelles of deareſt eſtimation vnto parē
                  tes. myne ornamentes, all my Iewelles and all my delights: which perſwaſion is the beſt that can bee vnto all matrones, that in reſpecte of their children they ſhoulde deſpyſe al other iewelles, and ornaments, and repute their chiefe attyre in the hope and towardnes of their Children.
            Beſides this let the Wyfe take heede, that ſhee vſe no

diſſymulation, nor cloaked Iuggelinge wyth her huſbād in any matter: for what thing can bee more diſhoneſt in a woman, then to ſhewe her ſelfe not to be the ſame whych ſhee was.
            
               Pompeia the wyfe of Nero the Emperour, was not onlye made a ieſtynge ſtocke to the worlde, ſo longe as ſhee lyued, becauſe ſhee prancked herſelfe too muche in curyous trymminge vp herſelfe to the beſt ſhewe of all beautye, but alſo purchaſed vnto her name perpetual ignominie. For not Poets onely, but Hiſtoriographers alſo, notCurioſitie of a ſimpering p
                     •
                  ik medayntye. a fewe do wryte, that ſhee not in couert maner, and claſelye, but apertly and manefeſtlye fancied this curioſity, & they affirme, that ſhee had alwayes in a readynes, wher. ſoeuer ſhe went, whole heardes of Aſſes, that ſhee might continually cheriſhe her delicate face, & rynſe her mouth wyth the mylke of theym daylye, thereby to appeare the fayrer and beautifuller: for there is no good hope to bee had in that woman whiche ſeeketh to bee prayſed abrode for her beautye: It was lawfull for the Spartane virgins to goe with their face bare, tyll they were maryed, thatWoman ſha
                     •
                   faſte. they mighte thereby the better gette theym huſbandes: but after they were maryed they courred doth their head and their face, as thoſe then that ſoughte after no Huſbandes, but onelye cared to retayne ſuch as they enioyed: But Gorgias Leontinus opinion is, that mennes wyues ſhoulde bee kepte at home from goinge abroade: whyche thinge ſurely liketh not mee: but for theim to goe abrodeWomē ought to be reſtrayned from much fi
                     •
                   kinge and gadding abrode. verye ſeeldome, that truelye doe I greatlye commende: For a woman that is a walker, and a traueiler from her owne houſe abrode, can ſeeldome bee chaſte: let the wyfe ſhewe her ſelfe of one mynde and concorde, wyth her huſbande in all thinges, for there can be nothinge more pleaſaunte amonge mortall menne, then when the man, and wyfe doe gouerne their Houſholde wyth concorde, and mutuall good wyll together: and on the other parte nothingDomeſtical diſcord. worſe, then mutual diſcord, & domeſtical brabling.
            
               The Athenians haue taught vs that ſilence in matters betweene man and wyfe, ought to bee vſed: for when as Philippe king of Maoedonie warred againſt the Athenians, and that their ſcoutes had intercepted letters of Olympias ſent from her vnto kinge Philippe her huſbande, they commaunded thoſe letters to bee redeliuered whole vnopened, and vntouched, becauſe they thoughte it was not lawful (no not for the enemie) to know and vnderſtād the ſecretes paſſinge from the wyfe to her huſband.
            In wedlocke alſo let all anger and ſtomackinge be far abſent, whiche makes loue manye tymes more ſlacke and ſlowe, and altogether diminiſheth the ſame, diſorderinge all domeſticall affayres, and cauſing the ſtate of wedlocke to be more vnpleaſaunt.
            The moſt auncient Romaines, did adorne that womā with a crowne of chaſtitye, whiche was onely contented wyth one huſbande, and with continuall wydowhood, toThe vvyfe no ſtomacker or reſiſter. profeſſe and ſhewe forthe the ſinceritye of her incorrupte mynde: for ſhe ſeemeth to be of an vnbrideled luſte, whiche maryeth agayne, eſpecially if ſhee haue children, whiche are the pledges of matrimonye, and expreſſe the lyuelye ymage of her late deceaſſed huſbande, both in countinaunce and name: moreouer ſhee that maryeth agayne, is ſeene to bee curſt, and wicked towards her children, becauſeWydovves'ma 
                     •
                  yinhe agayne make men iudge them to do it for luſte and lecherye. they are depriued of their father, and forſaken of all men: neglectinge theym as it were in the entraunce of their lyfe, euen at that age and time when they haue moſt neede of their parentes helpe: which reaſon (vndoubtedlye) ought to perſwade all wydowes to kepe their chaſtitye, together with their children, that they make no further tryall of fortune, of whom they being once deceyued may ſcarcely hope for better lotte or fortune afterwarde.
            
               Annia, a woman of noble race among the Romaynes, when her neighbours and friendes p
                  •
               rſwaded her in her wydowhood to mary wyth another huſband, ſeeinge ſhée was yet of aluſtye age, and excellente beautye: made

aunſwere that ſhe would not any wyſe ſo do: for ſayth ſhe if I finde a good huſband as I had before, I wyll not beeAnnia a vvorthye vvydovv her aunſvvere touching mariage the ſecond tyme. always in feare leaſt I ſhould forgo him: but if I ſhould matche my ſelfe wyth an euil huſband, what neede haue I to trye an euill man, when I haue once already had experience of a verye good man: for ſhe that is diſapointed by the deſtenye of her firſt huſbande, ſeemes to be wyſe if ſhee no more committe her ſelfe vnto the Fortune of Maryage.
            The daughter of Demotion the Athenian, althoughe ſhee was a virgine, yet hearing of the death of Leoſthenes her eſpouſed huſband, who was ſlayne at the battle of Lē
                  nos,
               Firſt loue is moſte ſtedfaſt. killed her ſelfe: affirming that althoughe ſhe neuer had any carnall or matrimonial copulation with her huſbande, yet if ſhee ſhoulde bee compelled to take another man, ſhee ſhould deceyue the ſecond, ſeeinge that in hart ſhee was maryed to the firſt: notwithſtanding thoſe women deale a greate deale better: who in the firſte flower of their yeares do hap to marye the ſeconde tyme, namely if they be then wtout children: for al lyuing creatures deſire to haue and begette Iſſue: and for procreation ſake, rather then for luſte to ioyne together, ſeemeth a thinge much more fitte & reaſonable.
            
               Hiero of Syracuſa, being on a tyme chidden by a certein familier frende of his becauſe his breath did ſlincke, & hee for helping thereof had vſed no remedies: ſayd, yt hee neuer knewe ſo muche in himſelfe before that tyme, & blamed his wyfe, in that ſhee had neuer admoniſhed hym thereof: to whome his wife modeſtly excuſinge herſelfe: ſayde, huſband be not angrye with mee, for I thought yt all mennes mouthes had ſmelled ſo, and therfore I keptA modeſt aunſvvere of a chaſt Ladye. ſilence. Armenia alſo comminge home from a royal feaſt made by kinge Cyrus, when all men for the comlyneſſe of his perſon highly prayſed Cyrus, ſhee beinge demaunded, by her huſband, what ſhee thought of the dignity and feature of yt king: huſband (quod ſhe) I neuer turned myne

eyes from you, and therefore what an other mannes feature is, I am vtterlye ignoraunte.
            In the education or bringinge vp of chyldren there are two thinges eſpeciallye to be conſidered, wherof the oneConſideratiōs in the education of chyldrē
                chiefly appertayneth to the mother, the other vnto the father himſelfe, the firſte reaſon concerneth the meanes to lyue, the ſeconde to lyue well: the firſte becauſe it is and falleth for Home, belongeth to the dutie of the mother whiche ought to bee the gouerneſſe of the houſholde matters accordinge to the preſcribed ordinaunces enioyned her by her huſbande: The matrone therefore that is with childe, ought to forecaſt and conſider that ſhee muſt bringMatrones vvith chylde. foorth a chylde, and greate dyligence muſt ſhee take that in no reſpecte ſhee hurte the chylde within her bodye, before it bee broughte into the worlde, and eſpeciallye ſhee muſte cheriſhe her owne bodye, and take her meate wyth modeſtye, feedinge vppon ſuche kynde of foode, as may nouriſhe and ſtrengthen her younge one, and not that whiche maye weaken it, and ſhee ſhall ſhunne to muche Slouthe: a moderate Walkinge for her is profitable and healthfull, and cauſeth farre more eaſie deliueraunce in childebyrthe: Shee ſhall alſo beware of all vehementeA vvicked demaunde of a Woman in an vngodly practiſe. laboures, eſpeciallye daunſinge, whiche thinge by example HYPPOCRATES confirmed: For when a certayne woman coulde not auoyde the receyued Seede of man, ſhee deſired his deuiſe to helpe her that the Seede ſhoulde not proſper, whome hee counſayled euerye daye, by iumpinge, and daunſinge, to ſtyrre the Seede, and ſo the ſeauenth day by meanes of her leapinge and daunſing ſhe brought foorth an vnperfect conception, couered ouerDaunſinge daūgerous for Women that 
                     ••
                  e vvith child wyth a lyttle thinne rymme or ſkinne, ſuche as wee ſee is in an egge betweene the ſhell and the yolke: Some women keepe ſuche Reuell rexe and coyle in daunſinge and leapinge, at banquettes and feaſtes, that for verye payne they eyther procure abortion before the tyme, or elles bringe the ſame foorthe verye weake and feeble: other to

thende to ſeeme pretye and ſlenderer vnto their louers, do gyrd themſelues ſo ſtraight, that they hurt themſelues, & their bellies alſo thereby very much: ſome cramme & fillStrait gyrding Toſpotvvome their bellies with dayntye fare and wyne, euen tyll they ſurphet agayne: and very many women vſe to cloye their ſtomackes wyth ſower fruite, and vnrype apples. I letFrute eaters. paſſe to ſpeake of their luſtes, and certayne beaſtly pranckes, not by ſpeache to be vttered, wherby they do not onelye trauaile before their tyme, but alſo do bring forth into the worlde lotheſome monſters.
            After that the lyttle infante ſhalbe borne, whiche not longe agone the mother knewe not, becauſe it was cloſed in her wombe: let her wyth her Dugges, and with that Fountayne, nouriſhe and foſter it, whiche prouident Nature hath wyth ſuche plentifulnes prepared in her breaſt: Worſt of all (in myne opinion) do ſuche women deſerue of their children, which put their babes out to nourſing,Naturall mothers are naturall nurſes. and at that tyme when they haue moſt neede of their mothers helpe, committinge theym vnto younge huſwyues and countrye nourſes, ſuche vnto whom in deede, ſome woulde not committe a younge kytlinge, if they had anye pleaſure in it: furthermore they are not whole mothers, but rather appeare to be halfe mothers, whiche ſtraight waye put out to nurſinge, theyr owne naturall chylde, & denye to geeue it ſucke, whom euen nowe in their owne wombe, wyth their owne bloud they nouriſhed: do they perſwade theimſelues that theyr neepples and duggs are by nature geeuen them for an ornamente, or beautifiynge of theyr breaſt, and not to the nouriſhmente of their chyldren▪ But wee do knowe ſome women which wyth ſlybberſauces and medecines do drye vp and ſtoppe that moſt ſacred Fountayne, the nouriſher of Mankinde, yea not wythout greate daunger of theyre owne healthes, to the end (forſooth) they may appeare the more beautifull and in the eyes of theyr Louers more pleaſaunte and acceptable.

Let no good mother ſuffer her chylde to be infected wyth the contagion of mylcke drawen from another womans breaſtes, and let her in ſo doinge performe the poynte of a whole and entiere parent, deſeruinge well of her childe:Good mother good nurſe. whom ſhee ſhall thereby make more readye to requite & recōpēce her whē it ſhal grow to further yeares of diſcretion, if it ſhall perceyue that it hath not at any tyme bene defrauded of the mothers foſteringe, and nouriſhemente, in the firſte beginninge of lyfe: for the benefite of the mothers breaſte, was among the Auncientes had in ſuch reuerence and regarde, that what ſoeuer hard or difficulte, requeſt the mothers were to craue at the handes of their childrē, their faſhion was to requeſt the ſame, for & by the mylcke whiche they gaue vnto theym in their Infancye, and babeſhippe. For what pleaſaunter delights or pleaſures can there be, then a younge ſucklinge chylde whoſe liſpinge ſpeache, & prety endeuouringes to bring out hys wordes, his ſwete laughter, and the pleaſaunt mothers ſpeach agayne vſed to her ſayd chylde, ſeemes to me farre to ſurpaſſe all other counterfeict ſcoffers or ieſters.
            Neyther nede Apes, or little dogges, to bee ſoughte for there, to ſport themſelues wythall, where little babes do creepe about the houſe.
            The members and tender partes of younge chyldren are to be faſhioned by the Nourſes handes, and the lytleOrderinge and tendering the members of children, Infantes bodye to be wrapped and bounde with a ſwathinge bande, from the ſhoulders, euen downe to the ancle, but yet ſomewhat looſer about the breaſte and bulke: for the bredth or largenes of thoſe partes, do make very muche to the dignitie and ſtrengthninge of a man, and ſomewhat ſtraighter about the ſtomacke, and about the nether partes of the bellye, the better to confirme and ſtrengthē the ſame: and that the Bellye beare not out aboue comlye proportion: Ariſtotle alſo affirmeth that cryinge is profitablie geeuen by nature vnto chyldren, for hee thinketh that it is an indeuour or ſtriuing vſed by the chylde,

to his encreaſinge, and that it helpeth much to ſtretch out the breaſt, and hart ſtringes: wherfore hee preſcribeth the Nurſe not to force the childe from cryinge. Women conceyued with child ought to haue great care of themſelues leaſt that they be deliuered before their time, or miſcary in child bearing, which thing yt we may haue foreknowledge of, Hyppocrates teacheth: for eyther he ſayth ye infant mouethFor Women to knovve the full time of goinge vvith childe, and vvhen to be deliuered. & ſtyrreth in the mothers wombe, vpon the 70. or ells 90. daye, & it expreſſeth y• it is eyther the ſeuenth or nynthe moneth, wherein ſhee ſhall be delyuered of her chylde, ſo ſhal a carefull mother be ſkilful of her tyme of deliuerāce, before it happen.
            Wee muſt take heede (as Celſus ſaythe) leaſt in tyme of proſperous healthe we do conſume and waſte awaye ſuche thinges as ſhoulde be ſauegardes and preſeruacions vnto vs in ſickneſſe: wherfore a luſtye healthefull man, who is at his owne diſpoſition, will refuſe no kinde of meate that the cōmon people vſeth, and twyſe a daye rather then once deſireth to eate meate: neyther taketh he any leſſe thē wil ſatiſfy his ſtomacke: he vſeth alſo diuers kindes of lyfe, as ſometimes to bee in the countrye, ſometimes in the cittie, but more often in the fieldes. To ſayle vpon the Seas, toHovv a luſtye, and healthfull man diſpoſeth his tyme. hauke,, and to hunte, and ſometimes to take his reſte, but yet moſt often to exerciſe himſelfe: for certaynly Idlenes enfeebleth the bodye, but laboure ſtrengtheneth it, ye one haſteneth vntimelye olde age, the other maketh a man to haue a longe and luſtye younge age.
            Wee muſte deale with children by a lyttle and lyttle to teache theym, euen as when we would fill a veſſell whych hath a narrowe mouthe: for if we poure water faſt, it fylleth and runneth ouer: but if wee drop it in by a ſlender funnell, wee ſhall fille it toppe full. To prayſe the induſtrye and diligence of children in their exerciſes, doth vntoHovv to deale vvith children in teachig thē. theim much good, and to chyde them for their ſlouth, is vnto theym profitable alſo: for, to bee preferred before their equalles, and to bee prayſed for well doinge by their mayſters,

doth much ſharpen childrens wyttes, and quickneth their courage in all their ſtudies and exerciſes.
            The mothers diſcipline and correction, for children in their firſt tender yeares of Infancie is verye profitable, & maketh theym more prone, docible and apte to learne & compaſſe greater ſtudies: Now when they ſhall come to ſeauen yeares of age, let the father take care of them, and inſtructe theym with a certayne greater diligence, whoſe charge is to trayne vp his children to lyue well and vertuouſlye,Infancy of the childrē is the mothers charge to loke vnto then whiche diſcipline, none ſurely can be more profitable, or of greater effecte geeuen from mortal men. For Alexander who for his wiſedom was ſurnamed the greate, was wonte to ſaye, that hee was no leſſe bounde vnto Ariſtotle his Scholemaiſter, then vnto king Philip his father: for albeit his father had begottt him into this worlde a lyuing creature: yet Ariſtotle was he that taughte him the waye to lyue well, whiche knowledge he in deede thought, was to be preferred before bare lyfe.
            The chiefe and ſpeciall token of witte in children ſayth Fabius Quintilianus is memorye, when as the childe learnethMemorye in children is the beſt token of Wytte. eaſlye, and remembreth ſurelye: It ſhall therfore be beſt in the firſte yeares of their youth, to exerciſe memorie for the more perfecting and throughly furdering the vigor and force of their wytt, & eyther by ambition or rewards and gyftes to allure theym, to the end they may kepe manye thinges in memorye, and not be aſhamed or abaſhed, to vtter and recite the ſame in any great aſſemblie of people. For the propounding of rewarde, & allurement, ſharpenethCheriſhing of children. the witte, ſtyrreth vp the memorye, and maketh yt myndes of Children more chearfull, and prompte to anye matter. There are ſome wryters which ſuppoſe that bluſhinge in a chylde is a very good ſigne of ſhamefaſtnes, & better then paleneſſe: for paleneſſe argueth to much fearfulnes, theother pretendeth and ſheweth a very good towardenes,Bluſhing in children a ſign of good nature as Diogenes witneſſeth: for on a tyme he ſeing a chyld to bluſh: be of good cheare my ſonne (quod he) for

ſuche a kynde of coloure, is the colour of vertue. If the father vnderſtand, or perceiue his ſonne to be docible, and of excellent wytt, no couetouſnes ought to let or ſtay him whereby he ſhould fruſtrate his ſonne of ſo great a commendacion: let him therfore ſo ſone as hee can, betake his chylde vnto good Scholemaiſters, that he mayThe fathers care to prouide a good Schole maiſter for his children. in thoſe liberall Artes, be taught and inſtructed, whervnto nature herſelfe hath moſt adapted hym: for nothing oughte more to bee wiſhed for vnto the Parentes, then to haue their children learned, of whom ſurelye, to bee vanquiſhed and ouercome, in all kynde of prayſe, they ought not onelye to ſuffer, and take in good parte, but alſo to eſteeme the prayſe and reward of victorye gotten by their Children, to appertayne vnto theymſelues.
            There is nothinge that cauſeth Children to prooue more obediente to their parentes, then when as they vnderſtande that they haue profited in ſtudies of good Artes by the furtherance, and diligence of their Parents beſtowed vpon them: Neyther ought the Chylde ſo muche to conſider of his Parentes ſubſtance, whyche trulye are but thinges tranſitorye, frayle, and in the handes of Fortune, and whiche do onelye garniſhe and ſet oute theA rich man vn▪ learned. bodye, but do not increaſe the mynde or furniſhe it wythe perpetuall goodes: wherefore verye well ſayde Diogenes that a ryche man beinge vnlearned, is as a ſheepe wyth a golden fleece.
            Parentes ought alſo to commytte the cuſtody of their children vnto their friendes to bringe vp, aſwell for that they doe leſſe cocker theym beinge abſent, and agayn becauſe they wyl bee the leſſe wanton in other mennes houſes, beinge nouriſhed at an other mans table, and cheriſhed by another mans fyer, & they greatlye feare left they ſhould be very ill thought of, & thruſt out of dores by thē, vnto whom their Parents had betaken & cōmitted theym in gouernance, vpon great truſt and diligence. For it hath bene ſeene, that euen greate Prynces, vnder Tutors, and

ouerſeers, haue manye times proued more excellent then vnder their owne Parentes. I thincke it profitable for the chylde to be taught and inſtructed in twoo kyndes of diſcipline at once, neyther is it to be feared, that the wytte of the chylde ſhoulde be ouercharged by two ſcholemaiſtersTvvo kyndes of lerning not preindicial for the chylde to practiſe at one inſtante. of ſeuerall artes or Sciences: for he is put to no more pay nes, but his diligence is deuided, and tediouſnes remoued: for when the childe is wearye of one kynde of teachinge, he goeth ſtreight to an other, euen as it were vnto an Hauen or reſtinge porte of his trauailes, and the inconſtancie of thoſe young yeares which hardly perſeuereth long in one and the ſelfe ſame thinge is not altogether vnprofitable: Nothinge more famous can bee geeuen from parentes to their children, then the ſtudies of good diſciplines and ſciences whiche are therefore called Lyberall Sciences, becauſe they make mē free from al vyle & lothſome lucre, & from all voluptuouſnes, and looſe diſhoneſtye: for they reduce and bringe vs to wyſdome: then the which there can bee nothinge more excellente vnto mortall men, by reaſonCommodities proceding of Learninge. whereof wee ſeeme to approche, and to be conioyned wyth the lyuinge God: the rewarde of whiche ſciences, if there were none other to bee had amonge mortall men, verelye vertue onelye of it ſelfe is ſufficient: whiche yet alwayes is accompanied withe Renoume, and Honoure, euen as the bodye is with the ſhadowe: If it bee ſo that Children be ſomwhat of a dull capacitie or otherwiſe leſſe fyt or apt to receyue learninge, let them be put to learne the practize of ſome other trades, and occupations, eſpeciallye ſuch asChildren of dul and meane vvytes hovve to be emploid come ueareſt in goodnes vnto learning, leaſt that they remayne vnprofitable by meanes of Idleneſſe and ſlouthe: for true is that ſentence of Marcus Cato:
            
            
               By ſlouth, and doinge nothing at all:
               Men learne to doe euyll, great and ſmall.
            
            Therfore diligent and paynful cytizens, ought to dryue

ſluggiſhe and ſlouthfull people out of their citties, euen as the diligent Bees do the Drones or Dorres, which wyllSolonsla vve, for the chylde that is not nur tered and vv
                     •
                  l inſtructed by his father. not take paynes, for the common Honnye: and wee muſte eſteeme as moſt holye, that ordinaunce whiche Solon enacted, affirming that:
            
               That chylde to his father is nothing bounde,
               In any reſpect of dutie naturall:
               If that for him hee hath not founde,
               Some kinde of trade to lyue withall.
            
            But if all other diſciplines and Arts ſhould be lacking, yet oughte they to foreſee and regarde, that their children be not brought vp without the rule of good manners: for it is farre better for men to bee wythoute children, and toBetter to be vnborne then vntaught. be for euer barreyne and berefte of all progenye or Iſſue, then when men haue children, to bringe them vp euill nurtured, or of ſewde behauiour. Epaminondas the Thebane a worthye man, and of greate wyſedome, neuer maryed anye wyfe: whiche thing his friend Pelopidas reprehendingEpaminondas. becauſe hee left not the Seede or ſucceſſion of his valiantneſſe, vnto his children, and therfore that in ſo doinge hee dyd ill prouide for the commoditye, or profite of his countrye: Epaminondas thereupon (ſmyling) aunſwered: take you heede frende Pelopidas, leaſt you doe worſe prouide for the publique vtilitie of your countrye, which may happen to leaue ſuch a ſonne begotten by you, whoſe lyfe perhaps hereafter may be wiſhed of ſome to bee better: by whiche ſayinge, this moſt wyſe Gentleman ſheweth, that Parē
               tes ought to feare nothinge more, then leaſt they haue ſuche childrē, as may degenerate frō their ſteps & qualities.
            
               Neocles the Athenian, a man noble, and excellente, had a ſonne called Themiſtocles, whome in his youth he diſherited, becauſe hee was miſlyked and thought to lyue verye lewdely, waſtinge his ſubſtance, and in euerye poynte diſobayinge

his fathers commaundemente: this ſeuere and harde dealinge did not diſcourage the ſonue, but did rather farre more encourage him to remēber himſelfe: for hee thinkinge that ſuche a manifeſt blemiſh of miſdemeanour coulde not bee extinguiſhed withoute ſome ſinguler induſtrye and prayſe, from thence foorth wholy vent hym ſelfe to thexerciſe of vertue, and by al care and ſtudy, that in him was poſſible, endeuoured to traueyle for the commoditye of his common weale: & with all dyligence that he could, protected and maynteyned the cauſes of his friends, and priuate iudgements: and within ſhort ſpace ſo amended his faultes, and reformed the vices of hys youthe, that there was no one man in his tyme preferred before him, and verye fewe were thoughte to bee founde equalle vnto him: therefore the ſeueritye of a father towardes ſuch a Sonne, was not to be found fault wythal, who in dede of a moſt naughtie & lewd perſon, reclaimed him to be a man in all kynde of prayſe moſte cōmendable.
            
               Polemon, the Athenian lyuinge vnchaſte in his youthfull yeares, was wanton and geeuen to filthy behauiour, ſometimes alſo ouerſeene with drinke, & hauing a GarlandeExample of a ryottous perſō reclaymed. (as the cuſtome was for the ſtouteſt drincker to haue (ruſhed with his companions into Xenocrates ſchoole, onely to floute and mocke, and to playe ſome pageant of knauery: at that tyme as it chaunced Xenocrates was diſcourſinge amongeſt his ſcholers touching modeſtie, temperaunce, and chaſtitye: whiche purpoſe for al this, hee chaunged not, but playnly conuerted his meaning, euen vpō 
               Polemō
                there preſent: by which oratiō made, he ſo reformed himſelfe, yt without any more ado, forſaking there his companions, and chaunginge his former old lyfe, he yeelded himſelfe ſcholar vnto Xenocrates, and within a ſhorte ſpace excelled all his ſcholefellowes: and beſides this, ſo nerelye expreſſed his ſcholemaiſter in all matters that after his deceaſſe this Polemon, beinge then lefte hys ſucceſſor, ſo learnedly behaued himſelfe after thimit a ciō
               
of y• other, that the Scholemaiſter was thought one ſtyl, and not ſcant perceyued to be chaunged. Younge men alſo are to be enured wyth bodely exerciſes, both for theirYoung men muſt be exerciſed. better health, for (as Celſus ſatih) ſlouth enfebleth the bodye, labour ſtrengtheneth it, the one cauſinge vntimelye olde age, the other long and luſtye youth, and alſo for that they might be made more proiftable members for y• cō
               mō weale in tyme of warres, wherin they are more prōpt and actiue, if they come thereunto wyth a bodye exerciſed rather then vy ſlouth effeminated: in which thinge the Lacedaemonians did verye muche excell: whoſe children, in runninge, leapinge, and caſtinge the dart, were daylye exerciſed and practiſed: from whō 
               Diogenes on a tyme returning and goinge to Athens, was aſked whither he went, and from whence he came: I come (ſaith he) from men, and am now goinge to women.
         
         
            
            THE FIFTH BOOKE EFfectuallye diſcourſinge vppon the ENDEVOVRS, TRADES, OFFICES, DVEties, and ſeuerall vocations: aſwell of the ciuill cittizen
                as of the vplandiſh countreyman: alſo the diſcouerye of vices, with the daūgers that in euery realme and countrye thereby enſueth.
            
               RApine promiſeth Idlenes and reſt: but vertue ſheweth before her, labour and ſweat. Euill manered perſons, and ſuche as in their ſpeache and geſture be groſſe and vnnurtured, be termed vnciuil: becauſe they rather ſeeme to haue bene brought vp in the coūtrey then in the Cytties. From hence is deriued the worde, &Ciuilitye. phraſe of ſpeache called Ciuilitye, or Urbanitye: becauſe it doth appertayn both to ſpeach and manners, and is ſo called by the name of the latine worde Vrbs, a cyttye: becauſe through cyuil companying or meeting together of wyſe & learned men, a certayn knowledge and learning is gotten, which dyrecteth and trayneth vp men in gallant curteſie, pleaſaunt order, and comelye grace, the contrarye wherof, is called Ruſticitie.
            If a man would in fewe woordes determine and define what a Ciuil man is, hee ſhall ſay that he is a good man, and one that is profitable to his common weale: for firſte,What a ciuill man is. and ſpeciallye hee oughte to haue before his eyes that ſentence of Plato where he ſayth:
            
               Men are of God created, not onelye
               To profite themſelues in this lyfe preſente:
               
                  But that they ſhoulde their natiue countrye
               Studye to profite wyth honeſt intent:
               Partely agayne that they be ſtyllbent,
               To profite frende, children, and kinſfolke naturall:
               To this ende to lyue well ought all men mortall.
            
            And by good righte, humane ſocietye is inſtituted andSociety humane vvherun to it tendeth▪
                appointed to lyue together, for one to profite another: Theſe thinges when wee ſhall conſider vppon, wee ſhall well perceyue that we ought to helpe and prouide for our natiue countrye.
            The little Bees, and Antes, being creatures not only the leaſt of all others, but alſo dumbe and deafe, oughte to be examples vnto vs, whiche vndoubtedlye do laboure one for another: they ſwarme together, they keepe theimExamples of Bees. ſelues together, they are preſerued altogether, wyth like defēces and ſuccours, they dryue away their enemie with common daunger, and mayntayne their ſtore, their yong ones & all their company: for who can be counted a good Citizen whiche is good for none but himſelfe onelye, gathereth riches to ſerue his own turne without imparting any thing to others, and ſcarcely for couetouſnes ſufferīg his children and wife to haue ſomuch as may conuenientlye ſerue theim meate and drinke. For we ought to eſteeme the ſtate of a common weale, as a ſhyppe whiche hath neede of the helpinge handes and diligence, of all theym which are within it: euerye maryner ought to endeuourCompariſon of the ſtate of a comon vveal vnto a Shippe. himſelfe to the vttermoſt of his power, not only to ſaue it, from being ouer whelmed & drowned: but alſo that ſhee may arryue at ſome ſafe port, or hauē. And as in it, ſom holdes the rother or helme, another directeth the Sayleyardes, another looketh to the Cables, and others about other matters as the caſe requireth, and they haue alone mutuall or common care for the preſeruation of the ſhip: So ought all citizens to worke and traueile, & ſome with councell, ſome wyth diligence, ſome wyth ryches, & ſome

wyth paynfulnes and induſtrye, to helpe the cōmon weal, that not onelye it be kept in good eſtate, but that it maye euery day encreaſe better and better: for thoſe Cittizens that bee thus minded, are coumpted beſte, and by theſe meanes, do they make the publike weale moſt wealthye, For ſurelye no ryches, no reuenues do more enlarge the ſtate of a Cittye, and make it ſafer, then when as the CytizensConcord in a r
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  me. among themſelues, be at vnitie and concorde, and ioyne together for the honour of their countrye: And on the other parte no power nor ryches are ſtronge enoughe where as the myndes of the cytizens are factious and iarringe. Whiche thing Scilurus by a merueylous example taught: for hee beinge by reaſon of ſicknes and age nowe come to decrepicie, cauſed his ſonnes beinge fowerſcore and ten in number, to be called before him, and holdinge in his handes a bundle of Speare ſtaues, whiche hee had bound vp together, in number ſo many as he had ſonnes, raught forth the ſame to euery one of his ſonnes ſeuerallye, commaundinge them to burſt them aſunder, whicheCōmoditye by concorpe. thinge they affirminge to bee vnpoſſible▪ the old father drewe theym oute one by one, and burſte theym aſunder al, and thereby toke occaſion to admoniſh them that while they agreed and were at vnitye among themſelues they ſhould not be ouercome by anye force or power, but that the longer they lyued, the ſtronger they ſhould be: contrarilye hee tolde them that they ſhoulde be weake, & of no force, if they diſagreed & were at diſcord amōg thē
               ſelues, & that euery litle enemie ſhould thē eaſely ynough ouercome them: for true is that auncient ſentence wherin is ſayed, that
            
               The common weale is a continuall liuing creature,
               Which is neuer killed, nor dyeth at any tyme,
               Except to it ſelfe it iniurye procure:
               And be the ſole cauſer of proper ruyne.
            
            The Romaynes poſſeſſed the Empyre of the whole worlde, ſo longe as they abſtayned themſelues from ciuil

bloudſhedde and inteſtine warres, but when the ambiciō of Cinna, the infamous table of Sylla, the bloudy ſlaughter of Marius, and the warres of the Sonne in lawe, agaynſteExample of ciuill diſcorde. the father in lawe, enkindled & inuaded the weale publike, thē ye Romaynes (before) the chiefe rulers of the whole worlde became laughinge ſtockes vnto their Raſcall people, and vnto their barbarous enemies: wherfore in a free cittye there can bee no better perſwaſion, then yt whiche trayneth euerye one vnto concord and vnity, wherwith euen the leaſt cities are encreaſed, and enioy the benefite of perpetuall libertie: for this is a ſure and ſafe wall of defence: theſe are the Adamant towers, whyche with no force, no warlike engine, neyther wyth any thō
               derclappes of Iupiter, can be deſtroyed & throwne down: By this meanes ſhall this our cittyzen, whom we would haue accoumpted verye good bee mynded to vnitye, if hee folowinge the opinion of Pythagoras and Plato, conſider that oure mynde doth conſiſte in three partes, whoſe principalitie, and reaſon they do ſhewe to reſte in the head as in the tower or caſtle of the bodye, that this our mind beinge immortall, ſhoulde alwayes bee nouriſhed wyth the Foode of contemplation of greateſt and wayghtieſt matters.
            Let our cittizen frame his mynde, to execute the Talente or gyfte wherewyth hee is endewed: for the offyce of the mynde is to vſe reaſon, whiche ought alwaye to beareReaſon ought to rule our affections. rule, and to haue our appetite or deſire ſo inclineable and obedient thereunto, that wee couet not any thing filthye or vndecent: and euen as an horſe vnrulye and tramplinge, is gouerned by the Brydle and Bytte, of a good ryder: ſo lett the Appetite or affection of the mynde, bee lead by reaſon, to whome let hym always obays, and neuer obſtinately reſiſte, if he deſire to be accoūpted a good & a wyſe man: for true is that ſentence of Marcus Fabius Quintilianus:
            
            
               
               As the birde to flye the horſe to runne,
               And wylde beaſtes by nature to crueltie
               Are geuen, to lyue vnder the Sonne:
               Euen ſo, man hath actiuitye
               Of mynde and wytte to lyue wythall,
               As creature wyth reaſon imbute:
               That tis beleeued, the originall
               Of his ſoule is celeſtiall inſtitute.
            
            Fortitude, Temperance, Prudence, and Iuſtice, are fower Siſters lincked together in mutuall bandes, they are neuer ſeperate, for ſurely one of them alone without ye others cannot be perfect, but ſemeth altogether maymed and vnperfect: Fortitude wythout wyſedome is counted raſhenes. Prudence wythoute Iuſtice is deemed craftines,Fovver ēardinal vertues. and an euill kinde of mallyce: Temperance without Fortitude is reconed cowardiſe, & Iuſtice wythout Tē
               perance, is thought to be crueltie. Wherupon Ennius y• Poete ſayth: Sūmum Ius, ſūma In
                     •
                  uria▪
                Extreme rygorConcord in muſicke. is extreeme wronge.
            Let therfore theſe fower vertues agree amonge themſelues in a concorde, euen as it comes to paſſe in muſicke, and inſtrumentes, that they may make a perfect concord,Good reporte and fame for vvell doing. conſonancie, and harmonye.
            It is ye common profite whiche maketh men to gayne good report for their well doinge, and well deſeruinge of all men, whiche the Auncientes in tyme paſte ſo highlye eſteemed, that they vouchſafed thoſe perſons of deuine honours of whom they had receiued cōmodities and profit.Worthy actes of Hercules. For Hercules (although a mortall man) yet was thought to be in the number of the Goddes, for no other reaſon, but becauſe he beſtowed many greate commodities vpon manye nacions: for eyther hee buſled or contended withe wilde beaſts deſtroying countries, or with his arrowes, kylled the lothlome filthye foules, or ſlewe the perillous pyrates and common robbers which kept the Seas, and

befet the wayes wyth ſuch daūgerous ſtales, y• no trauailers mighte paſſe▪ or elles did ſome other ſuche kynde of worthye exploites: doinge therein muche eaſe andprofite to mortall men, and makinge their lyfe more ſafe and happye.
            
               Dyoniſius alſo called Bacchus, was counted a God, becauſeHovv & vvhy Bacchus vvas deified and made a God. amongeſt the Thebanes, he taught the vſe howe to make wyne, and was reputed not onelye Noble and famous in warlike affayres, 
                  •
               ut a verye good ſearcher out of hidden ſecretes, for hee firſt playde the Philoſopher inTriptolemus. Europa, and then in Aſia: So was Triptolemus honored for a God, becauſe hee taught the vſe of corne amongeſt ye
               Iſis. Athenians: and Iſis a goddeſſe becauſe ſhee taught the order how to ſowe corne and flaxe: Therfore doubtles they are worthye of rewardes and dignities, which do profite, men with their inuentions.
            It was the poynte of a noble mynde, not to permitte inA vviſe man vvil neither do yll, nor ſuffer any to be done by his vvyll. anye wyſe, that a man ſhoulde deceiue himſelfe, whyche thinge by a pretye example Carneades doth admoniſhe vs in this wyſe.
            
               If thou kneweſt a ſerpent lurking priuilye
               Under a place, and wouldſte haue any man:
               Vnwares to ſitt do wne euen there preſentlye,
               VVhoſe death might redound to thy profite than.
               Thou ſhouldeſt do very yll, except wyth warninge
               Thou diddeſt dehort him thence from harminge.
            
            A Good man is always one & the ſame, he neuer ſwar
               
                  •
               eth from himſelfe, and had rather be honeſt in deede thē ſo to be accoūted, hee is not couered wt any cloake of diſſimulatiō, keping inwardly priuy hatred, & hartburning, & yet outwardly pretēding a fayre face: but hath alwayes one coūtenaūce, his eyes always after one maner, his looke always one, & his ſpeache in like maner always true.
            A cittizen muſt alwayes beware that no notable vyce

reygne in hym: hee ſhall exerciſe thoſe artes and ſciences wherewith hee may be able to lyue honeſtly, wyth out iniurye and to bringe vp his familye: For hee ought to haue regard of his domeſticall matters, to the ende he may helpe his chyldren, kinſfolkes, and frends: but eſpeciallieThe citizē carefull for himſelf and his family the common weale of his countrye, when tyme ſhall require: for as Cicero ſaythe, the priuate poſſeſſions & ryches of euery man, are the ryches and wealth of the citye. Let theym gayne, but withoute iniuryinge or hurtinge of others: for as the Poet ſayth.
            
               Goodes that are gotten by ſiniſter meane▪
               
               Are in lyke ſorte conſumed agayne.
            
            
               Architas of Tarent a noble Philoſopher of Pythagoras ſecte, whe ſent letters vnto Plato, that he ſhoulde beware and take heede of Dioniſius the Tyraunt of Syracuſa, if hee loued the ſauetye of his owne lyfe: was had in admiration amongeſt all men, becauſe hee was ſkylfull almoſt in all artes: this man was of ſuche dexterity of wytte, that he made & framed by a certayn wonderfull reaſon, & artificiall worckemanſhippe the proportion and Image of a Doue, which Doue as Fauorinus the philoſopher reporteth did flye: it was contriued wyth ſuch equall peyze or wayghte, and in the ſame was a wynde encloſed, whyche wyth a temperate ſpiryte, cauſed it to flye.
            Amongeſt the moſt noble prayſes of Affricanus, wherofPrayſe of Africanus for his bountie. both Polibius and other wryters made mention: Thys one was accoūpted great, that he daylye went downe into the iudgement hall, & from thence did not returne homewardes agayne, vntyll hee had gratified and done good, to ſome one or other: And Titus the ſonne of Uespeſian
               Prayſe of Titꝰ Veſpaſianus. (who after his father was Emperour of Rome three yeares) was of ſuche gentle, & curteous nature, that at ſupper time remembringe that hee had pleaſured and done good to none that daye, ſayde theſe woordes: Friendes

this daye haue I loſt.
            It ſhalbe the dutie of a ciuill man to vſe liberalitye, & franckenes, in gratifiyng wt requitall and thanckes vntoLiberality and thankfulnes. others, and neuer to forget a good turne receyued: which reſpecte of curteſye was ſo highly in the olde tyme regarded, y• not only perſons lyuing, but euen the very perſons already dead could not neglect it: For Simonides the Poete, ſeeinge as hee iourneyed, a certayne man (vnknowen to him) lyinge dead & raſt out vnto the byrdes, and beaſtes of the fielde, dyd ſtreight waye burye him, but when hee came to the place where he thought in his mynde to haue taken ſhippinge, hee then agayne ſawe in his dreame, the ſame partye whom hee had buryed, warninge him not to enterpriſe his voyage as hee had determined: for if hee dyd, he tolde him that night he ſhould ſuffer ſhipwracke:Gratitude. when Simonides had tolde his dreame vnto his companyons, they laughed hym to ſcorne, and hee alone remained on the ſhoare, the reſt of his other companions not creditinge his wordes: but aſſone as the Shyppe was gone a lyttle from the lande, there aroſe a tempeſt incontinente, that brake al their tackling, and al to ſquatted their ſhip, that they were drowned euerye mothers Sonne: And ſo Simonides, for the good turne that he dyd in buryinge the deade man, receyued thereby the benefite and ſauegarde of his lyfe.
            Let euerye good Cittizen take heede, that hee bee not founde a blabbe, or lyer in his talke: for to lye is the propertie rather of a ſeruile, then of a free mynde: for AriſtotlePeriurye. verye pretelye to a certaine perſon, demaundinge him, what Lyers gayned by their lyinge? aunſwered: that they cannot be beleeued an other tyme when they tel truth: but yet it is a far worſe thinge for any man to forſweare himſelfe: which fault was ſo odible among the Egiptiās, y• all periured perſōs ſuffered puniſhmēt of death as they which neyther regarded religiō towards god nor fayth towards mā: let the honeſt citizē moreouer bridle in

himſelfe a certayne braynſicke ſawcineſſe, and brablinge in ſpeach: for as it is a prayſe to ſpeake lyuely and boldly if at any tyme a man haue neede to ſpeake: ſo is it worthy of diſprayſe not to haue a ſtaye of the tongue if ſilence bee neceſſarye: for Cato in his adoleſcencie ſtudying eloquēceRaſhe ſpeache and Philoſophie, vſed a certayne wonderfull ſilence of ſpeach, and when on a tyme a certayne familier frende of his ſayde vnto him: Cato, many men do finde faulte with thy ſilence, bee aunſweered ſayinge, I wyll then ſpeake when I haue throughly learned to ſpeake ſuche thinges as are not worthy of ſilence.
            
               Pythagoras alſo the moſt wyſe prince of Italique Philoſophie, taught his ſcholars to be ſilent before he taught theym to ſpeake, thereby ſhewinge, that a mannes wordesCato vſed reſtraint of ſpeache. are firſt to bee premeditate or thought vpon, ere they be vttered. For to brydle, and reſtrayn the tongue, which nature (meaninge Scilence) hath walled aboute wyth a trenche of teethe, is a poynte of no ſmall wyſdome: thereforeSilence. the ſayde Philoſopher reſtrayned tal
                  •
               katiue younge men, enioyning vnto ech of them fiue yeares ſilence.
            
               Ariſtotle when he ſent his ſcholar and kinſeman Caliſthenes
               
                  
                     •
                  
                vnto king Alexander among many other precepts gaue him this one, that hee ſhoulde vſe to ſpeake verye ſeeldome, but yet verye pleaſauntlye before him, thatAriſtotles aduiſe to Caliſthene▪ touchinge ſilence. had both the power of lyfe and death, in the ſharpenes of his tounge: ſuch perſons alſo as haue diligently ſearched the natures of lyuing creatures, doe wryte that certayne lyuing creatures lacking reaſon, do maintayn their ſauetye with muche ſilence: As geeſe whiche by reaſon of too muche heate forſakinge the eaſte▪ and flyinge weſtward, in their flyght ouer the hyll Taurus, where many Eagles breede (which rauenous foules they greatlye dreade) doe vſe to fyll their beakes wyth little ſtones, leaſte that the force of cuſtome, or neceſſitie ſhoulde moue them to gaggle, and there bewray themſelues vnto the Eagles, to the greate hazarding of their lyues: but after they haue ſilētly

paſſed the toppe of that mountayn and hylles thereabout: they let fall the little ſtones oute of their bylles, & with a more careleſſe flight, holde on their courſe alonge the ayre with loude noyſe, and farre clearer voyces: Let therefore the Cittizen learne to keepe ſilence and to conſider with whom hee doth talke, and let him obſerue oportunity in ſpeache: for ſure according to the old prouerbe: A worde once paſt, cannot be called backe. And therefore let them rather vſe the example of the Geeſe, then of Caliſthenes: for they by a little ſilence ſaued their lyues, but this man euen with a ſmall libertie of ſpeache loſte the ſame, when as he would not geeue eare vnto the ſayinge of his good mayſter: for greater is the prayſe of a ſeaſonable ſilence, then of talke out of due tyme vſed.
            And furthermore let the good cittizen be ignoraunt in gloſing and flattring: for neyther can the gloſers or flatterers in any reſpect profite eyther kings or princes. AndFlattery muſte be eſchevved. true is that ſentence of Quintus Curtius mentioned in his moſt excellent bookes of the Actes of Alexander, where hee ſaythe.
            
               More often is a kingdome ſpoyld through clawbacks flattery:
               Then by mayne force of forreyne foe, or homiſh enemye.
            
            
               Ariſtippus the Philoſopher did earneſtlye ſue to Dyoniſius the Tyraunt for a certayn thing in the behalfe of hys frende▪ which when he ſaw he could not obteyn, ſtreight waye he humblie embraced the Tyrauntes knees, and by and by obteyned his deſire: and when this thinge was laide in his diſhe for a reproche (by ſuche perſons as were preſent) he pleaſauntly ſayd theſe wordes: I was not the aucthor of this kynde of flatterye, but Dyoniſius himſelfe,Diogenes. who hath his eares in his knees: and Diogenes being demaūded what Beaſt did byte cruelleſt, merely aūſwered,
            
               Of wylde beaſtes a backebyter,
               Of tame beaſtes a flatterer.
            
            
               For in deede flatterers do very muche hurt not onelye amongeſt princes whome they do prouoke to tyranny and crueltie, but alſo in a free cittye oftentimes (to creepe intoHurt of ſlatterers. the fauour of the common people) do geeue aduiſe vpō thinges whiche are againſt a common weale, & now and than, make the fooliſh multitude of people ſtarke mad.
            Moreouer let not a good citizen bee haſtye, or raſhe to anger: let him at no tyme ſpeake anyethinge in chydinge moode or rage: for anger procedeth of the weakenes of mannes mynde, and that by a probable argument or reaſonRaſnnes of anger. is ſhewed: becauſe angrye perſons are, to them that be in good caſe, fayntye and colde, vnto men they are women, to youngmen olde men, and to perſons in proſperitie, miſerable: yet notwithſtandinge manye things are now and than done by anger, whiche in the ende (after the parties haue pauſed, and come to theimſelues) doe makeInconueniēce of anger. theym ſorowfull and repentaunt of that whiche they haue ſayde and done: Alexander oftentimes ſhewed examples of an inuineible mynde, but becauſe hee was raſhe and haſty to anger, hee emblemiſhed and made his otherExample of furious anger in Alexander. vertues in ſome parte more obſcure: for hee kylled Clitus his frende beinge an aged man, and giltleſſe: and a little while after, when hee was come to himſelfe agayne, hee would haue thruſt the weapō which hee toke out of Clitus his wound into his own body, had it not bene for his friendes, that were then about him.
            
               Dyoniſius alſo the Tyraunte (beinge on a tyme dyſpoſed to play at y• Tenys) layd down his coate and ſword wtaDyoniſius. young man to keepe, in whom he tooke great delite: here at whā as a certain familier of his (ieſtinglye & thincking no harme) ſayd: Dyoniſius, thou putteſt thy lyfe into this mannes handes, and the young man laughing at the ſame words, the Tyraunt cōmaunded both of them out of hand to be ſlain: ye one becauſe he had ſhewed a way to kyl him, and the other becauſe he allowed and tooke pleaſure with laughter at ye ſaying: for ye which act certainly he was afterwardes

ſo ſory, that hee neuer tooke anye thing more greuouſlye in all the dayes of his lyfe: For in ſuch kyndeNot good to doe any thing vvhile anger loſteth. of anger when the mynd is kyndled and enraged, we muſt ſurceaſe from all manner of dealinges, tyll the heate of choler be aſſwaged, following herein the example of Architas, who being on a time ſome what moued with anger towardes his Seruaunt, ſaid theſe woordes: with whatHovv Architas qual ified his anger. mynde ſhould I entreate the, or how would I deale with thee now if I were not angrye?
            
               Demoſthenes that moſt excellēt Oratour ſeing ye nature & diſpoſition of Phocion, which was of contrary opiniō to al other citizens of Athens, ſayd on a tyme to him: Phociō
                y• Athenians wil kyll the, if a madnes once take them in ye heads, to whō 
               Phociō
                anſwered: nay they wil kill thee Demoſthenes if they euer chāce to be wiſe. Furthermore a ciuil mā ought ſo to diſpoſe & frame al ye ages of his time y• in eueryone of thē he may exerciſe hīſelfe in y• which ſhal then beſt become him, neyther let him do any ſuch things in his childhoode or youth, wherof he may afterwards repent whē he is growen to furder yeares: on y• other part to omit nothing which he ought to bring to paſſe at thoſe yeares: For in Childehoode is prayſed that towardneſſe of Wyt, whiche fore ſheweth hope of honeſte lyfe in tyme to come: In Adoleſcencie Diſciplines of good Artes: wherin, who ſo excel, do ſeeme preſently righte excellence men: then in the reſte of the Ages of man, the fruictes of workes are looked for: that is to ſay, ſome conformitie of ſayinges and doinges: agayne on the other part, a chyld is commended for ſimplicitie, a young man for gētlenes, and an oldman for grauity: in which poynt there is mutche amiſſe euē at thoſe firſt yeares which are more apt for learninge, which ſurely many in playinge and lewdneſſe, do loſe: for growinge to bigger ſtature for ſhame faſteneſſe they are aſhamed to learne, whereas rather they ought to bee aſhamed to be ignoraunte: Undoubtedlye that is true whiche was holden as a Prouerbe amongeſt the auncient learned men.
            
               
               So long our ſelues to learn we muſt employe.
               As in this worlde wee any lyfe enioye.
            
            Yet notwithſtandinge there are ſome whiche wyll not ſticke to mocke and floute men that are geuen to ſtudye, & learninge in that age.
            
               Themiſtocles the Athenian, a moſt excellent gentlemā, being an hundreth and ſeuen yeares olde, and perceyuing that hee muſt then needes departe oute of this worlde, is reported to haue ſayde that hee was verye ſorye that hee muſt then dye when he firſt beganne to taſte of learninge and wyſedome: what then ſhall others doe, whoſe lyfe is farre ſhorter & leſſe exerciſed in ſtudies of good diſcipline? ſeeinge that hee whiche had runne beyonde the boūdes of nature, did thincke himſelfe not to haue lyued any longe tyme, to thattayninge of perfect wyſedome.
            The longeſt ſpace of mannes lyfe whiche by his byrthe and death is defined, ſome haue runne in longe race, andManns age by the opinion of Philoſophers. ſome in a ſhorte. Plato affirmeth that Lxxxi. yeares is the laufull bounde, and ende of mannes lyfe: Solon affirmeth lxxx. yeares iumpe, many threſcore & fyftene: & ſome the threeſcore & tenth yeare: for they do deuide our age, or tyme of lyfe by the number of ſeauen, whereunto the Pythagorians attribute a certayne perfection, and doe ſhewe, that in euerye ſeuen yeares, ſome chaunge and alteracion hapneth in the bodyes of men: wherfore they affirme that euery ſeuenth yeare of our life is daungerous,Manns age deuided by ſeuen yeares. whiche the Grecians call 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , The Latines Iudicialem ſeu decretorium, Iudiciall or decreiorye: and this do they ſhewe by this meanes. Firſt becauſe in the fyrſt ſeauen yeares childrens teeth fall out or do lowſe, geuinge place to other teeth comminge vp more fitte, and readye to chawe the meate: and at that tyme the perfect pronunciation of their mother tongue is perfect and playne: In yt ſecond ſeuenth yeare the ſoft haires or moſineſſe in yong Springaldes appearethe, in the thirde the Bearde begynneth

to burgein and grow, and is the full accompliſhment of height in mannes ſtature: in the fowerth hee begynneth to ſpreade and enlarge in breadth and thickenes of ſtature: In the fyfthe the ſtrength of man is fully perfected and made rype & able for the procreation of Iſſue: In the ſixte man ſtayeth his pleaſure and voluptuouſnes: and in the ſeauenth reſteth wyſedome and eloquence, yet nowe his ſtrength doth by little and little ſecretely decay. And in the eight there is a certayne concinnitie or aptnes of the vertues of the mynde, which remayneth in ye ninth ſeptenarie or ſeuen yeares: finally in the tenth by lytle & little he groweth towardes his ende.
            
               Pythagoras ſayde that fowerſcore yeares was the prefixed tyme for the lengthe of lyfe, and deuideth it in agesMannes life deuided into fovver equal nū
                  bers compared to the fovver ſeaſons of the yeare. by twentye, allottinge vnto childehoode twenty yeares, to adoleſcencie as many: as many to youth, to manhhode other twenty, and to old age as many, comparing māns lyfe vnto the fower ſeaſons or quarters of the yeare: As to the ſpringe, chyldehoode: to ſommer youthe. To Autume manhoode, and vnto winter olde age: But Uarro a moſt excellent Philoſopher amonge the Latines, thinckethChildren. that chyldrens age continueth tyll they bee fyftene yeares olde, bycauſe ſo longe they are Impuberes: that isYongmen. to ſaye vnhearye and not apt to generation, from thence tyll thyrtie they are counted young men or luſty youthes, becauſe the bodye doth growe luſtye large and ſtrong tylManhode. y• age: vntill the age of xlv. they are called men, bycauſe at that age they are beſt able to defend and helpe their cō
               mon meale with armoure and weapons: Tyll threeſcoreOldemen. yeares they are called graue and aunciente, becauſe then eſpeciallye mannes bodye beginneth to drawe towardes olde age: and from thence, vntill thende of eche mannesExtreeme olde age. lyfe, hee affirmeth the fifthe degree to reache: vnto the whiche age who ſo doth attayn, he calleth them very old men, becauſe then the Bodye becommeth vnwieldye, by reaſon of age: but Staſeas the Neapolitane, an excellent

Philoſopher in his time and a rare Phiſltiō determineth and concludeth mannes lyfe at lxxxiiii. yeares.
            We ought not to deſire to liue long, no not although the deſtinies do ſeeme to ſmyle vpon vs, or to fauour oure peticions. by reaſon of the ſundrye chaunces of fortune, &Man may not vviſh for long 
                     •
                  yfe. doubtfull healthe of our bodye: for a certayne wiſeman, beinge demaunded how longe a man ſhoulde wiſh to liue, made this aunſwere: so long as the commodities of thys lyfe be mo then the diſcommodities thereof.
            
               Theophraſtus (as Cicero ſayth) was w
                  •
               nt to accuſe nature, for that ſheee had geeuen vnto Crowes and Hartes, longe lyfe, whoſe lyfe was altogether vnprofitable, and vnto men very ſhort and ſwyfte, who both might benefite theymſelnes and others, if they mighte haue tyme of lyfe fully to drincke of wyſoomes Well.
            
               Poſſidonius a notable Philoſopher ſayd, that one day of a learned mans tyme, was more worth then neuer ſo longe an age of the ignoraunt: let therefore our ciuill man liueModeratiō in dyet. very moderately, & let his dyet & table fare be accordinge to frugality, and temperaunce: for intemperancye & gurmaundiſe enfebleth the bodye and dulleth the mynde: for as temperancie maketh a man long young, & preſerueth the bodye in healthe and good lykinge, ſo the other dothe haſten olde age before the tyme, & maketh the body weak, taketh away coloure, and cheerefulnes of countenaunce: for it is true whiche was wont to bee in this reſpect, euen by the Phiſicians themſelues, that:
            
               Many mo perſons by glotony are ſlayne,
               Then are by warre, famine, or any other payne.
            
            For men not able fully to digeſte that whiche they receiueGourmandiſe ſurphet and belly cheare. into their ſtomacks, are geuē to be of vnluſty health, they are euermore ſick, ſeldom whole, & ſone com to their end: and furdermore ther is no goulfe or whirlpole whiche doth more ſwallow vp & waſte a mannes ſubſtaunce, then gluttonye, which the more it is filled and fed, y• more is it ſtyll an hungered, and the better it hath dyned, the

more it ſtudieth and takes care how to ſuppe: There are ſurely no ryches ſo large and copious, no houſholde treaſure ſo notable, nor wealthe ſo greate, whiche in a ſmall tyme are not ſwalowed vp into the bellye.
            
               Diogenes on a tyme readinge in a paper ſet on the doreRyotous perſons. of a certayne ryotous perſon, that was driuen to ſell hys houſe, merilye and pleaſauntly ſayde theſe wordes.
            
               I well perceiued this building ſumptuous,
               Beſet wyth wyne, and cates ſo curious,
               Would vomite out his maiſter ſhortlye
               That kept ſuch reuellrexe through follye.
            
            Glotony doth not onely waſte & conſume the ſubſtance, but bringeth very many Gentlemen into ſeruitude: do we not ſee y• ſmelfeaſtes, and ieaſters, become perpetual bōdSmelfeaſes. ſlaues for their bellies ſake? are there not manye whych as it were buye their dynner and ſupper not onelye wyth flattringe ſeruices, but alſo wyth moſte vyle and abſurde offices? for whom it were a great deale better to feede vp on the very maſt & Acornes ſhaken from the tree, & to liue wyth wylde beries & apples, then at another mannes table to be fed with peacocke & the dayntie Acipencer. Surely greately are they to bee blamed, which ſekee thē ſelues maiſters for good cheare ſake, forgetting the ſtate of Lybertie.
            
               Albidius a certayne citizen of Rome deuoured & conſumed all his goodes or ſubſtance in eatinge and drinking, &Prodigality & ryot of Albidi us. finally euen ye very houſe it ſelfe, wherein he dwelt, which was then euen all the ſubſtāce he had left) was by caſualtie of fyre conſumed & brent: this thing when Cato heard of, he ſportingly ſayd: that Albidius had ſacrificed his rē
               naunts and fragmentes: by the which ſaying Cato, quipped the glotony of the ſayde Albidius, and ſhewed yt therby he was become an open praye, and laughing ſtock vnto fortune: for yt thinge which he could not eate, hee burned.

And that whiche he could not reuell, deuour, and ſwyll, y• had hee committed into the handes of Fortune to ſporte wythall.
            Exerciſe is called the beſt ſauce for meate, and hunger is coumpted a delicate or daynty diſhe fynely ſawced, for the prouocations of glottonye and curious cates and iunkettes, ſought for both out of the ayre, the heauens, earthExerciſe and la 
                     ••
                  ur a good ſ
                     •••
                   for meat. and the Sea, doe not ſauou
                  •
               e or relice, better wyth an ydle ſlouthfull perſon, then bread doth wyth him that laboureth and is an hungered: Ptolomeus the kynge wanderinge throughe Egipt, and his ſouldiers hauinge not ouertaken hym wyth victuels, beynge verye hungrye, dyd eate courſe bread (which he gotte out of a ſhepeheardes cottage) greedely, & with greate appetite: ſwearing, that in all his lyfe time he did neuer eate any thinge more ſweete and delicate then that bread was: Alſo Darius flyinge from Alexander (beinge ſore athirſte) did with greatDarius. luſt and greedines drincke muddye and troubled water, taken out of the next ryuer, whiche was ſoylled and ſtenched wyth dead carcaſes throwen into it, ſayinge that hee neuer taſted any thinge ſweeter in all his lyfe.
            A certayne ſwyllinge dronckarde geuen to gullinge, & quaffinge, was wont to ſay in ſporte, that hee neuer thurſted bycauſe hee did with oftentimes drin
                  •
               kinge preuenteGood vvay to procure a ſtomacke. his thirſt: But the ciuil man muſt expect and looke, that nature wyl require meat, which (by walking, labouring, & exerciſinge himſelfe) is to bee prouoked: by the exāple of Socrates the Philoſopher, whō on a tyme walkinge, a certayne man aſked why he ſo did, he aunſwered:
            
               UUith walkinge, honger buy would I fayne
               Good appetite, for my ſupper to gayne.
            
            The auncient Romaynes for no other cauſe vſed to ſup in their open courtes, & vnder the open ayre: but to the entent to ſhew their continencie, and frugalitye, vnto the

people whoſe care and ſtudie, was not ſo greate to peſter their table with manye diſhes, as it was afterwardes to their poſteritie: for the Epicure who was the auoucher, and meinteyner of pleaſures, diſpiſed fine and dayntie dilicates, and filled the barkes of trees, which hee vſed for diſhes, wyth Herbes and Apples, and woulde ſaye that a man ſhoulde feede vppon homely meate, becauſe they are the more eaſely to bee had: for delicate diſhes and exquiſite brothes are prepared and dreſſed with great care, and exceſſiue coſte, and do make a greater griefe & trouble before a man can fynde theym forth, then they bringe pleaſure in eatinge. Hippocrates alſo wryteth, that ſuch perſons as are carefull for Gluttonye and Bellycheare,Epicure. Belly gods. are neuer in ſound health, neyther can be long lyued, and that their ſpirites are ſo incombred with to much bloud, and too much 
                  •
               ramminge, as if they were wallowed and ſouſed in the myre: and therfore they haue no mynde vpō any ſober or heauenly thinge, but alwayes frame theymſelues to thincke vpon their diſhes, and how they may fill their bellies: It is a thing profitable ſo to diſpoſe yt minde with ſomthing, that thereby at all tymes & ſeaſons, fruites may be had and reaped: for fewe thinges can be wantingeHuſbandrye purueyghour of many neceſ ſaries. for dayly expences vnto a ciuil man, if hee will haue diligente care, to looke to his huſbandrye, and the feedinge of his cattle: a very meane diligence wherein, Cato ſayde did encreaſe, a mannes ſubſtaunce: neyther ought any man to be aſhamed to fede flocks of beaſts or heards of cattle, for euen moſt noble perſons of all the aunciente people afore tyme, did vſe to feede and keepe Cattle.
            Let banquettinge be ſeeldome haunted of a good cittizen: for it is vncertayn whether the ſame banquets purchaſe a mā fauour or diſpleaſure: for although thoſe thatBanqueting are bidden gueſtes, bee bound to requite the ſame wt like agayn, yet there are many whiche beinge neglected and vnbidden do take diſdayne thereat, and practiſe againſte the ſame eyther reproche or Iniurye: for, to keepe Bankettes

or feaſtes is thought to belonge vnto kinges, princes, and moſt wealthieſt perſonages.
            Ryot and couetouſnes, are two plagues which (as Titus Liuius ſayth) haue oftentimes ſubuerted, and vtterlyeRyot and couetouſnes: vvo plagues. deſtroyed, whole citties and Empyres.
            Let the good Citizen keepe a meane in his apparell, & obſerue a meaſure in his degre & ability: for in deede, as it is a fowle thinge to weare yll fauoured and vndecente garmentes, ſo is it ſubiect to enuye, to weare that whiche is to gorgious and fine, and eſpecially, when as a mannes ſubſtance will not ſtretche to mainteyn the ſame, or wheras hee beinge indebted to others, braues it oute vppon other menns purſes: for in apparel this is to be conſidered yt a man weare nothing but ſuch as he may lawfully,Manner of apparel. and that it doe not differ from the cuſtomable order, and vſage of his country: let it be ſuche as may become both the perſon that weareth it, his ſtocke, & kynred, his yearees and manners: for as fine braue apparell (ſo far forth as it becōmeth) doth adde dignity & aucthority vnto mē: ſo nyce, womaniſh, & ryotous apparell, doth not cōmend & ſet out the body, but diſcouereth the vanitie of ye mynde. Adrianꝰ Caeſar herin purchaſed to himſelf prayſe becauſe hee ordayned ye the Senators, & the worſhipfull perſōs of Rome, ſhould not goe abrode, but in their gownes, except when they returned home from ſuppers.
            Al neceſſarie expences, are to be reſtrayned, as ye charges of funeralles, whiche bring no commodity to thoſe yt are dead, & are chargeable to thē that are aliue: and yet their fame and good report which liued with prayſe, & honeſtye is not darkned with modeſt funeral ceremonies: but on ye
               Vnneceſſarye expences muſt be forborne. Funeralles. other part their funeral pōpe, ſhal not make the memory of them to be famous among poſterity, whoſe life hauing bene loſe, and inglorious, hath lefte nothinge behind thē worthy of memory.
            
               Cyrus king of Perſia commaunded by his laſt wyl and teſtament, yt there ſhould beno other Sepulchre or tombe

erected for him, then the earth onely which brought forthe graſſe, & flowers, then which there can nothinge be foūde more noble, neyther any thing that may more beautifye ye graue: ſurely me thinkes the reaſon of ye auncient Egiptians is to bee deryded, whereof Dyodorus maketh mention, becauſe they diſpiſinge ye tyme of this preſent lyfe, didCoſtly funeralles of the Egiptians reproued. call their dwelling houſes, by the names of Innes as the which they coumpted their harbours and lodginges. for a ſmall tyme, but moſt vaynlye and fondlye they laſhed out luſtely, and ſpared no coſte, in erecting of ſumptuous Tō
               bes, & burialls: for they thought that the graues were ye perpetuall & euerlaſting dwelling places of them yt dyed, and were therein buried.
            The Scythians (as Plutarch mencioned) did burie wythScythians abſurd maner of burying their kinges. their dead kings, their butlers, cookes, yea and harlotts: to that end as I thincke, yt their kings ſhould want no neceſſarie ſeruice after they were dead: and certayne countries of India with their dead huſbandes, eyther burne or burie their beloued wiues, or others whōſoeuer they beſt loued in their life time: Oh a matter not only horrible inIndiās ſauage maner in burialles. ſight, but alſo to be ſpokē of, to kill a lyuing man, becauſe the dead man ſhould not lacke a frend or ſeruaunte, when as in deede he can neuer want or ſtand in nede of any ſuch, who hath no feeling at all.
            Little differeth from this madnes of the Indians, the people called Maſſagetae, and thoſe called Derbites, which do kil their kinſfolkes & friends, whē they waxe old, or by any caſualtie draw nea
                  •
               e vnto death, makīg therat great ſolempnitie & feaſting, and there eate them together with other meate: and this they ſaye they doe, becauſe they ſuppoſe it to be the worſt fortune that may happen vnto men, to be deuoured with wormes.
            
               Eſſedones philoſophers of Europe, which dwelling neare to the ryuer Danow, vſed to celebrate ye funeralls of their Parentes, and neighbours, with mery cheare, and 
                  •
               ocund reioyſing of their frendes and familiers together: ye dead

corſes being mangled & mixed with the intrayles of their ſlayne beaſts, they doe feede vpon, & eate vp in bāqueting: but the Heades, or Skulles, of their deade Bodies, they keepe to ſerue theym in ſteede of Drinckinge Cuppes,Semiramis. garniſhing theym with golde and ſiluer.
            
               Semiramis a Queene of a moſt haughty, and excellente mynde, cauſing a ſumptuous Sepulchre or Tombe, forCouetouſnes. her to be made, wherin ſhee would lye after her death, cō
               maunded theſe wordes to be engrauen thereuppon:
            
               What king ſo euer ſhal haue nede
               of mony, wealth, or treaſure,
               Let him pul ope this tombe with ſpede,
               and take thereof at pleaſure.
            
            Theſe wordes Darius the king reading, and thinkinge there had bene treaſures hid there in deede, commaunded the ſtone of the Tombe to bee taken away, whiche beinge rowlled aſyde, be ſaw other words ingraued vnto this effect and purpoſe:
            
               
                  Except thou haddeſt beene a kinge couetous
                  Couetuſnes of king Darius reproued.
               
               Of mony: inſaciable, and deſirous,
               Thou woldeſt neuer haue broke vp, and violate
               The graues of them, that are extinct by fate.
            
            This moſt excellent Ladye by a ciuil deriſion, did thus taunt the vyce of couetouſnes.
            
               Sertorius hauing won Thynge, a town in Mauriſia where (as thinhabitants ſayd) the noble Sepulchre of Antheus was being of wonderful yea incredible greatneſſe, gaue cōmaundement that it ſhould be razed and thrown to theMonument reuerently pre ſcrued. ground, and therin founde a bodye of lxx. cubites long (as Plutarch maketh mention) which he bebolding, meruayled greatly thereat, and commadūed yt the ſame Tombe ſhould be ſtreightway reedified and reſtored, & greatlye enryched the fame thereof, leaſt otherwiſe hee ſhould haue emblemiſhed his honoure, by defacinge and violating, ſo notable a monumente.
         
         
            
            THE SIX T BOOKE ENtreatinge of Nobilitie defined by the opinion of Philoſophers, the commendation of their bountifulnes, liberalitie, and franckneſſe towardes all men: how ſome are thoughte meete to ſupplye functions, by reaſon of their Aunceſtors before time aucthoriſed to beare like offices: of good prouiſiō for the ſuſtētation of the cōmons: Of ſuch as hauing houſes in the citye, and alſo in the country, cannot be ſo carefull, for the common vtilitye of both places. The diſcription of the venemous vyce Enuie: of ſeuere Iuſtice vppon male factors, iniurious to the ſtate of the common weale.
            
               HIPPODAM VS Myleſius a man deſirous of glorye, a worthy warriour, & excellentlye well learned in the ſtudies of good artes, purpoſing to write of the good eſtate of a common weale, firſt & eſpecially, thought it conuenient and neceſſarye to deuide and diſtinguiſhe the cittye and countrye in ſeueral: for it ſemed vnto him a thing very hard to compaſſe, to make a common rable and multitude of men gathered together within the walls of one citye, to lyue quietly together, excepte there were aſeperation made betweene theym: therefore hee diſtributed and deuided the people into three ſortes, one to be Artificers, another huſbandemen, and the thirde warriours: and he thoughte it good reaſon that the magiſtrates ſhould be appointed and choſen by all theſe perſons indifferentlye.
            
               Cicero vnto Saluſt who taunted him as a newe made Cittyzen, and one come of baſe Degree, boaſtinge himſelfeCicero and Sa luſt at diſſention. to bee of moſte noble diſſente aunſwered on this maner: I haue by my vertue, worthynes, and ſeruice to

my countrye ſhyned before, and geeuen lighte to all myne aunceſtors, yt if they were not knowne before, they mighte yet of me receyue a beginninge of theyr memory: thou by meanes of thy lewde lyfe whiche thou haſt leade filthelye, haſt vnto thy aunceſtors, brought great cloudes of darckneſſe, ſo that although they of thēſelues, were famous & notable citizēs, yet by meanes of the, they ſhalbe brought into obliuiō: wherfore do not thou obiect vnto me men of auncient race: for it is better, yt I do floriſhe in mine owne actes that I haue done, thē to leane vpon the reputacionCicero his aū
                  ſvvere vnto Saluſt. of aunceſtrie, & ſo to lyue that I may be an originall or beginning of nobilitye, and an example of vertue vnto al my poſterity: for Cicero might wel bring profe of ye progenye or ofſpring of his nobility, becauſe he was lyneally deſcended of the Uolſcian kinges.
            
               Plato wyſeſt of all Pliloſophers, and his folowers (frō whom Ariſtotle doth ſmally differ, maketh four kindes of nobility: ye 1. was of thē which proceded frō noble ſtockeNobility. and auncient race of honorable elders: the ſecond was of thē, whoſe parēts were mē of aucthority, princs, or chief rulers: the iii. was of thē whoſe rulers excelled others in any kind of notable prayſe or cōmendaciō, eyther at home or abrode in the warres: the iiii. kinde of nobility▪ he maketh that, which he ſheweth to be moſte excellente of all ye reſte, when as anye man excelleth others, eyther in worthynes, wyſoome, or magnanimitie of the mynde, & leaneth onely to the vertue of his owne cōmendation: And this man he iudgeth worthy to bee coumpted noble, whō not other mēns worthines ennobleth, but whom his proper vertue and valiauntnes, doth aduaunce to honour and renowme: but vnto theſe fower kindes of nobilitie, Ariſtotle alſo added the v. yt is of them which famouſly excelled in any notable diſcipline: & this did he by good right: for they ther by do not only ennoble themſelues, and their lignage, but likewiſe ennoble the Citties, and countries wherein they were borne.
            
               Iuba the ſonne of Iuba kinge of Numidia, beinge but a

childe, & taken priſoner by Iulius Caeſar, did folow his triūphe into Africa: and although he had loſt both kingdomExample of Iuba. & libertie, & alſo deſpoyled of his honour & dignitye, yet hee betoke himſelfe vnto learning, & within a ſmall time, proued ſo well, that hee was coumpted amongeſt the beſt learned writers in Greece: and whatſoeuer nobility Fortune had taken frō him, ye ſame did the diſcipline of good ſciences, more abundantly reſtore in him: wherunto alſo Hanniball gaue himſelfe, euen in the deſperate and troubleſome broyles of the Carthaginenſes, & being ſomwhat aged in yeares, did learne the greeke tounge and therein became ſo eloquent, yt he wrate the actes of certayn Emperours, and certayn excellent bookes of the orderinge of warfare & martiall affayres.
            It ſeemeth mete that they, whoſe parents, graūdſires, and aunceſtors haue afore time bene honored, and endowed wyth publique offices, ſhoulde alſo haue charge of the common weale, as it were by a certayne rightfull inheritaunce: & therupon let them employ all their diligence, & care: for as a field is very well committed into the handes of country borne perſons, which know, and can ſkil of theSucceſſion of offices. ayre and ſoyle: euen ſo they that are come of ye race of Senatours, haue learned to execute thoſe publique offices, as it were by naturall diſcipline, deuiſed to them by their aunceſtrye: for al the common people wil beare and obey more willingly & patiently, their rule or aucthority, neyther think they it amiſſe, for ye ſon to beare office, whē they call to mynd that all his anceſtours haue executed ye ſame offyce aforetime. They whiche beare rule in a common weale ought to haue a diligent care, that the people be not oppreſſed, pinched, & famiſhed wt want of corne or grayne, & y• they mai (as far as is poſſiible) enioy a perfect peace & tranquillity: for ſurely all common people (although thei be ready, & prōpt to reuengement of wrongs, for y• whiche it is ſene now & thē, y• they do enter into armes & warres: yet notwtſtāding, they expect ſom euēt & ende, & if fortune

fauour theym not, they fall to brablinge with their Rulers, by ſwearing, wreſting, and turninge all the faulte in their neckes: and more ouer we muſt not raſhly credit the opinion & rumour of the cōmon people, for as Maro ſaith:
            
               Scinditur incertum ſtudia in contraria vulgus. 
               
                  The cōmunaltie vnſtable, is disperſt in opinions variable.
               
            
            The opinions of which common people, are ſlippery, wauering & mutable, & not only for a day but notſo muche as for one hour, ſtedfaſt & firme: wherfore it may bee ſpokē of ye cōmon people which we do vſe in y• prouerbe.
            
               Of Sand an infinite quantitie take,
               And yet vnpoſſible it is a coarde to make.
            
            Religion, ceremonies, myſteries, and al deuine honor whereby we make the liuinge God mercifull, and at one with vs, requireth men holy and innocent: who beinge indowedThe ſpiritualtye ought to be mayntayned by the lyuinges of the Churche. with the zealous ſtudie of ſacred and deuine ſcriptures, do wype away the cloudes of blyndenes and error, from the eyes of men: for theſe men (to the end, they may lyue modeſtlye and keepe in good ordre, the temples & ſacred houſes, wt great coſtes & charges, edified) haue neede of wealth, ryches, and fruites of the earthe, whiche in deede do neuer or ſeeldome fayle, neyther haue they neede to make any marchaundize, by buying and ſellinge.
            Without ſauegardes, and defenders of the ſame, a cō
               mon weale cannot be. For what ſhould the Citizens doe within the walles, if they had no other defence, but withinPouertie not relieued. the walles of their Cyttye? In what wealth doth that Citty ſtand, or how are the pore relieued there, whereunto the huſbandmen of the countrye do runne for ſuccoure, when as in the fieldes adiacente, there is feare on euerye ſide? In what hope, or in what diligence, do the huſbandmen toyle or moyle, if they ſee their Sommer, or harueſt corne, and fruictes to become an open pray or ſpoyle, forHuſbandmen. the enemie: and without keepers geeue ouer all thinges in their fieldes vnto Fortune in euery place.
            The corne whiche is reaped, in the cōmon fieldes, may

bee kept and reſerued, vntill ſuch tyme as there happen a dearthe or ſcarſitie, or that the difficultie of Warre doe vrge, in hollow trenches couered in chaffe, and very wel fenced and made ſafe from all and euery kynde of vermin for ſeuen yeares ſtore, as Lucius Columella maketh mention: which thing ſurely if it were diligently looked vnto, and that in his due ſeaſon the olde frute were ſpent, and the new fruict laid vp in ſtore, it ſhould preſerue the people from all ſiege and famin of the enemie. and with moſt ſafe and ſure defence protecte theim from the annoyaunce of their enemies: for litle preuayleth armour or weapons of defence in fight, where the people do famiſhe, for want of ſuſtentation: and a famiſhed communaltie is euermore ſtudious, and bent to newfangleneſſe and tumulte.
            Hee that wyll haue a well tylled grounde, let him ſell his houſes in the cittie: for hee that taketh more pleaſureA good citizē a good huſband▪
                or felicitye to dwel in his houſe within the Cittye, then in his houſe in the countrie, hath no nede at al of any groūd: for he cannot well handle ciuile affayres, which taketh eſpeciall pleaſure in huſbandrye, and countrye dealinges: for truely it cannot bee but hee muſte needes neglect the one of theſe twayne, which coueteth to ſatiſfie his minde with both theſe benefites.
            Gardens planted with herbes & trees, be made for pleaſure and recreation: for in thē are borders of Roſes, beddes of violettes, Fiſhepondes, and ſuche other like commodities of pleaſure: for Graners, Barnes, and ſtoreHouſes,Gardens and Orchardes. wherein Corne is layde, whyche doe encreaſe bothe profite and liuinge vnto manne, doe rather ſerue for the maiſters wealth, then for his diligence: yet notwithſtanding it ſhall not bee impertinent for a Citizen, or ciuile perſon to haue pleaſure, and practiſe in huſbandry.
            And as hee growethe in more wealthe, to haue manye ſeruauntes for the orderinge of his huſbandrie, and ſuche as bee mere ſtraungers, borne out of that countrye (vnto whome hee may preſcribe thoffices of that which pertayneth

neth vnto huſbandrye.
            Straungers and foreyners beinge merchauntes, are friendly to be entertayned when they come into the citye for good and honeſt purpoſes: for the Societies, and entercourſesMerchaunt ſtraungers hovv they are to be entertayned in a cittye of traffique with ſtraūgers, helpe the trade of merchaundiſe among citizens, & do make them wealthier and furniſh the cittie with ſtore of that, which it wanteth, & caryeth away from hence thoſe things, wherof we haue ſuperfluous ſtore and abundaunce: yet is it expedient, that there ſhould be but few of them denized with the freedom of the citye: for certaynly the multitude of Inhabitaunts oute of ſundrie places is daungerous, in euerye nacion: for the common people, gathered together out of ſundrye countries, ſeldom agree well, and there can ſcarce be vnitye or concorde, among men of ſundrye nacions: and wee may well ſo thincke that ſtraungers, will but a while cō
               tinue in that zeale & good wil, or natural affection, which free borne people do, that haue receyued from their Aunceſtors as it were y• ſeede of loue towardes their coūtrey, & haue euen wt their mothers milke, a tender good wil & affection towards their citizēs. Of the true citizens that may bee ſpoken, whiche in louely ſpeache, wyues are wōtTrue Citizens to complayne ſayinge:
            
               A Louer that already hath fixt his good wyll
               Towardes one, cannot be lured by good or by yll:
               Entyſte by flattring ſpeach, nor vrgde to that end,
               To chaunge for a new, and forget his firſt frend.
            
            So greatly is the loue of our natural country engrafted in vs, euen by nature, that wee cannot want or be with out the ſame, for any contynuaunce of time or diſtaunce of places, for no reproches, neyther yet for anye iniuries.Straungers. Therefore wee muſt warely deale with ſtraungers: For Ariſtotle affirmethe that all Nacions whiche retayned many ſtraungers, and Inhabitantes of forrein countreis

to be reſident among thē, were diſquieted with diſcordes.
            We muſt eſpecially take hede that nothing be done, in the cōmon weale by violence or fraud: for what things ſo euer are done by vyolence, are weake & vnſtable, & not onlye prouoketh the multitude vnto enuie, but alſo vnto reuenge. Appius Claudius the Decemuir, by violēce chalenged Virginia to be his bondwomā, which thing her fatherAppius Claudius. not ſuffring, thruſt his daughter through the body wt hys ſword, & with embrewed handes returned to his hoaſt, exciting vp the cōmon people againſt the Senators, which thinge brought no ſmall plague vnto ye common weale.
            There be ſome that are ſorye to ſee others ſurmounte,Repyners at others vvel doinge. and excell in vertue: there was ſometimes amongeſt y• 
               Epheſians a certayn excellent mā called Hermodorus, who excellīg others both in learning & honeſty was neuertheleſſe baniſhed out of his country: and vnto certayn men yt meruayled thereat, & aſked thoſe people why they had baniſhed ſo worthy a mā, they aūſwered: there was no other cauſe, but that in vertue, and integrity of lyfe, hee dyd to farre excell y• reſt of his felow citizens: for vnto all good men doth euer chaunce cōmon backbyters, & euil willers: wherfore now and then we muſt deſſemble if we deſire to flye enuye: aſſuredly wyſedome muſt ſomtime geue place vnto raſhnes, for enuy doth not onely caſt vnder foote verye manye notable perſonages, but alſo doth ſubuert the ſtate of cities, yea & vtterly deſtroy the cities themſelues.
            The Poets fables of Enuy are notable affirming, thatEnuie deſcribed. it is a plague feeding vppon Serpentes: meaning thereby to ſhewe that enuious perſons do ſwalow poyſon, and vomite vp venime agayne: for an other mannes felicitye is poyſon vnto the enuious perſō: neyther can he take any ioy of himſelfe, except he infect others wt his poyſon: & certes, ther can be nothīg more filthy, or more vnfitting a mā then to reioyſe at an other mans euil & to bee vexed or yll apayd for other mens good fortune, both which things y• enuious man vſeth to do.
            
               
               Tymon the Atheniā dyd once make an oration at Athēs in a great aſſēblie of people, in the which he ſayd yt he had one only little Orcharde wherin was a great figtree, vponExample of envye. which many cittizens had hanged themſelues, and becauſe in that place hee purpoſed to buylde a wall, he ſayd he muſt needes cut downe the ſame figge tree: and yt therfore he was come to tel them, that if any would hang thē
               ſelues, they ſhould make haſte and come quicklye, whyle the figgetree were yet ſtandinge.
            Euerye man maintayneth his priuate Subſtaunce although it bee ſmall: Neyther doth the poore man leſſe eſteeme of his ſmall pittaunce, then the rych of his great Wealthe: and if any Contencion happen to aryſe, beetweene a poore man and a rycheman, although the ryche man (in deede) be wronged, yet becauſe hee is mightier, & wealthyer, it will be thought that he doth ye wrong & iniurye, and thereby purchaſeth the enuye of many others: but yet if any man do ſaye that the pore mannes patrimonye is taken from him, by extorcion and violence, or ſtrōg hand, euery man beginnes to feare his own caſe, deayſeth new fangled alteracions, rayleth at his betters, fauoreth the oppreſſed, bendeth himſelfe vnto Sedicions, and can neuer be quiet in his mynde, till hee ſee that he hath ſafelye, and warelye ynough prouided for his own ſafety.
            
               Periander practiſed Tyrannye in Ambracia, and cuſtomablye cōmitted buggerye with a certayne boye, whomPeriander a buggerer. on a tyme as hee was Drinckinge in preſence of manye others, hee merely aſked whether hee was at anye tyme greate with childe by him or no: the boy was throughlye enraged with anger, and could not abyde that thoſe filthy thinges, which hee had ſuffered before, ſhoulde haue bene once named and ſpoken of: and thereupon founde he meanes, to kyll and deſtroye this Tyraunte. Pauſanias alſoPauſanias. of Macedonie a youngeman in beautye and nature moſte excellent, was likewiſe violently and forcyblye abuſed in his bodye by Attalus, and by him was made dronke with

wyne, and brought in at a banquet, and offered as a common ſtrumpet vnto the luſte of the gueſtes there: Pauſanias ſtomacking this ſhamefull villanye, tolde the whole matter to kinge Philip, but the kinge with ſundry delatory woordes, ſeemed to haue thereof no care, but rather made thereat a laughinge game, preferring. Attalus vnto better place and rowme in warfare then hee: whiche iniury ſo throughly touched Pauſanias. that he conuerted his diſpleaſure towardes the kinge, and the reuenge whiche he could not take of his aduerſarye, hee extended vpon the vnrighteous Iudge: for as he ſate at the maryage of Cleopatra the daughter of Attalus betwen both the Alexanders, the ſonne and the ſonne in lawe, Pauſanias ſleweComplaintes, of pore oppreſſed ſuters muſt not be reiected him, fearing no ſuch matter & by killing the king turned into ſorow and heauines that day which ſhould haue bene a daye of ioye or gladnes, playnely hereby ſhewinge, that the complaintes of ſubiectes are not to bee diſdayned, nor contemptuouſlye be reiected.
            It goeth not wel in that common weale, where a man muſt lyue by prayer or intreatye, where Citizens muſte liue in that caſe, that they dare not ſpeake frankly or boldlye thoſe thinges whiche they thincke to be for their profite: Philip king of Macedonie, vnder a certayn pretence of libertie inuadinge a great part of Greece, beſieged Athens, excuſing himſelfe by letters, and Embaſſadors, ſēt vnto the Senate and people of Athens, that hee did not thoſe thinges, to the ende hee would take away from thē their liberties or Franchiſes, or to bringe the Citty into bondage, but becauſe he had a grudge againſt ten of their Citizens, which in the Senate houſe had alwayes barekedFayre & ſmoth Wordes. againſt him, and did not ceaſſe to rayle vpon him with reprochfull wordes: and therefore if thoſe fewe might be yelded vnto hym, hee ſayde hee woulde reyſe his ſiege and departe, and deliuer the people from warre, and famine. Namely and eſpecially be required to haue that moſt excellence oratour Demoſthenes deliuered vnto him, vppon

whom all the coūtenaunces, and fauours of the Grecians were at that time bent and caſt, & beſides him nine others of y• eloquenteſt, & notableſt perſons, both for talke & aucthoritye: hereuppon the Senate was in great perplexitye, and many of theym agreeing vpon this poynt, cryedThe Senate in d
                     ••
                  bt. out, that it were much better, to ſaue a multitude, then a fewe perſons: theſe fewe were ſhrewdely afrayde, whom the king had requeſted thus to bee yelded into his hands to death, & ſcarcely durſt they ſpeake their myndes, ſeeing that by their deathes all the reſidue, hoped for peace & lyberty, & it had come to paſſe in deede, that theſe fewe had then bene yelded, had not Demoſthenes diſplayde y• craft and dereiptful fetch of the kyng by this wittely deuiſed fable vttred vnto them.
            The wolfe on a time (ſayth he) perſwaded certain ſheepeheards (whoſe diligēce he had a deſire to deceiue) to enter frendſhip and amity with him, condicionally y• the ſhepeheards ſhould deliuer vnto him (as hoſtages or pledges) their Dogs which were his hateful enemies, & gaue al y• cauſe of all the ſtrife & debate: the ſhepeheards gaue eare vnto this tale, aſſēted to his requeſt, & for better aſſurance of their faithful meaning, deliuered their dogges, which were the moſt diligent garders of ye ſhepe: thē the Wolfe when al feare was taken away, not only at his fill, but alſo at his pleaſure deuoured and tare in pieces the ſhepe, & killed the ſhepeheardes themſelues. Euen ſo (O ye Athenians) doth Philip yt king at his preſent mean & go about: who deſireth to haue al their heads vnder his gyrdle whiche haue impugned his doings & which doe manifeſte and bring to light his ſecret treacheries, and colourable dealings: becauſe he may the more eaſlye inuade, & ſacke the city, whē it is bereft & ſpoyles of the ſauegarders therof: for doubtleſſe yt cittye muſt nedes periſh, wheras mē may not ſpeake their mindes frely in ſuch matters as concernAbſtlnence frō ciuyl bludſhed the vtility of the weale publique.
            Let ye good citizen greatly abſtain frō ciuil bloud, being euer mindful of this tragical ſentence,
            
               
               Who ſo euer he be that doth rule or raigne
               From ſheding of bloud let him abſtayne.
            
            But if neceſſity conſtrain, & that the citty cannot otherwiſe be ſet in good ſtate, except by ſheadinge of y• bloud of ſome naughty lewd perſon: let them deale as good Phiſians vſe to do, who after yt they do playnly ſee (yt the troubled & infected members of their Patientes, cānot by any maner of remedies be reſtored to perfection or recouery) although it be againſt their willes, & to the greate griefe of all the whole body: yet do they not let to cut of ye ſameNaughty mē
                  bers in a common vvealth muſt bee cut of corrupt members, leaſt they ſhould infect all the reſt of ye body: for wee muſt not fauour or ſpare any perſon, there by to bring ruine or decay to the whole Common weale: but we muſt vſe reuenge, that the ſame may be preſerued inſafetye.
            
               Amiſchiefe new hatching and but now in the pryme,
               Is ſone to confuſion ſodenly brought:
               But that which is olde, and laſted long tyme
               Is often incurable, though al meaues be wrought.
            
            To geue as ſpoyles vnto the cōmon people the goodes of ſuch as be proſcript & out of the Princes protection, is againſtComunalty of Rome refrayned from ſpoylinge one an other. all equitye, and therfore the Comunaltie of Rome deſerued great prayſe, & fauour, when Marius & Cinna, proponed the richemens houſes to be ſpoyled by the Cyttizens: for there was no man found ſo needye and ſo bare whiche at that tyme ſpared not from deſpoylinge & purloyning of that which an other man had ſore ſweat and laboured for. Neyther was there anye man amongeſte theym whiche coulde fynde in his harte, to reape any commoditye vnto himſelfe, in the tyme of that ciuill ſorow
                  •
               ,
            As ſeuerity in a citty is ſomtyme wholſome, ſo cruelty is alwayes peſtiferous: For the Seuerity of Lucius Sylla was a beginning of all euilles amongeſt the Romaynes: for that ſame moſt infamous table wherin were fourſcoreSeueritye of Iuſtice. thouſande Perſons proſcribed, and of theym fower that had borne the honourable office of Conſul, to wyt, Carbo,
               
               Marius, Norbanus, and Scipio, and amongeſt them alſo at that tyme Sertorius (a man in thoſe days greately feared) wrought much miſchiefe vnto the common weale: for other men taking hereat example, in a ſmall tyme, ſubuerted the whole Empyre.
            But yet the multitude of people, yea thoughe they doe ſome what treſpaſſe, muſt be mercifully ſpared: Iulius Caeſar after that he had vanquiſhed the hoaſt of Pompeius the greate, ſpared the Cittizens: and theym whom hee had by force of armes ſubdued, hee rewarded with benefites bountifully: and glorying in himſelfe, wrate letters vnto his friendes at Rome, therein mentioninge that he tooke greate and moſte ſweete pleaſure becauſe hee had preſerued in ſafety thoſe Citizens, whō he alwayes reputed for his aduerſaries and enemies, and had made theim to become as it were bound in tender affection, and good wyll towardes him.
            The nature of crueltie doth make the prayſe of victory far leſſe: for greater had the prayſe of Octauius beene towardes Antonius, if hee had not commaunded A
                     •
                  ilius, being thē but a Chyld moſt Innocent, & the ſonne of Antonius,
               Fauour and mercie of the conquerours and victors tovvordes theym that be ouercome. and of Fuluia, to be beheaded: and yet not with ſtā
               ding Octauius ſtreightway ſhewed the euident tokens of repentaunce, for that whiche he had done: for he ſtreight wayes reuenged the death of Attilius: for Theodorus the ſcholemaiſter of y• chylde who betrayed him vnto Octauius, priuily tooke from the childe when hee went vnto his death, a precious ſtone which he ware about his Necke, whereof Caeſar hauinge intelligence, commaunded the ſame Theodorus to bee condempned and hanged vppon a gibet, and ſo reuenged the vilanye of that trayterous ver let, ſhewing there in playne profes of his channged mind, relenting in that whiche hee had afore done.
            No man can patientlye brooke to bee flouted, contempned and to be hadde in deriſion: for wee reade of Manlius Torquatus, the Sonne of the moſte valiaunte, and noble

               Lucius Manlius, was euen from his childehoode of a dull and blunt w
                  •
               tte▪ in ſomuch that he was ſe
                  ••
                away by his father into the countrye▪ as one that ſeemed neyther fitte nor profitable eyther 
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  ••
                for priuate offices: but hee wythin a ſmall tyme after, as one wearye of his ſlouthfull lyfe, deliuered and preſerued his father beinge accuſed from a greate and waighty matter of a iudicial controuerſie: and in the Battle foughte by the Latines brought away the tryumphe and vyctory, to the great reioyſinge of the people of Rome. Neyther may Themiſtocles bee pretermitted with ſilence, whoſe lewdenes of lyfe his mother diſpayring (for thamendment or reforminge) hanged her ſelfe: but when he came to be of more diſcretion, hee proued to bee of ſuch excellency, in all his doings, that Cicero the moſt excellent oratour, called him ye prince of Greece.
            The age of twentye and fower yeares is lawfull & allowable for any man to a
                  •••
               e and attayne vnto an offyce: and let no man therfore 
                  〈…〉
                if 
                  •
               ee 
                  ••
                not a magiſtrateAt vvhat yeares an officer may be choſen before thoſe yeares: moreouer let no man diſdayne that any more auncient perſon then himſelfe is preferred in offyce before him, both becauſe the enuye is greater amōg thoſe that be of equal vocatien, and alſo becauſe, euery mā doth hope when he cōmeth to that age, that then hee ſhal attayne vnto the like preferment.
            It ſtandeth with the honour of the cytty when the Citizens are called by honorable and goodly names: for an vncomely maner of nomination or tearming of them ſeemethApt names for Citizens. ſo to take away ſomewhat of the dignitye of the perſon, as an honeſt or decent callinge of a man, ſeemethe to adde worſhippe, honour, or dignitye: In whiche thinge, the diligence of the parentes in naming their children, is to bee prayſed, and eſpeciallye ſeeinge that in that poynte they beſtow no coſte, and yet doe not a lyttle adorne their children therewith: Wherefore ſome are worthie of diſprayſe: who hauinge Parentes and Aunceſtors yll named

woulde neuer leaue or dygreſſe frō the ſame names, euen as if they were loath to defraud their poſteritye of the reproche or ignominye of their Aunceſtors.
         
         
            
            THE VII. BOOKE DEſcribinge the Natures, Vſes, Profites, & choyſes, of all ſortes of groundes▪ The ſundrye diſpoſitions and inclinations of Perſons, accordinge to the quality of the ſoyle where they be bredde. The commoditye of woodes, and the orderinge thereof. The greate neceſſitie and benefite of Waters, Fountaynes, and Springs, with the ſtraunge vertues of ſūdry VVelles in forrein Countries.
            
               MArcus Cato ſaid that in buyinge of Landes, two thinges eſpecially are to be conſidered, holeſomenes of ayre, and plentifulnes of the ſoyle: wherof if the one wereChoyſe in buyinge of Lands. lacking, he iudged that that groūd was not to be areoūpted of & to bee tilled. And not without a cauſe, for he that buyeth barren grounde, and fruiteleſſe ſoyle, buyeth to himſelfe and all his poſteritye after him, pouertie and perpetuall labour. And hee that buyeth grounde ſcituate in a peſtilent ayre, buyeth vnto himſelfe and to his ſucceſſion continual ſickneſſe, vntimely oldeage, and haſty death. For fruitfulnes of the ground, doth not a little further and helpe toward lyuing well and pleaſauntly. Whereupon the Arabians are called happye, becauſe they a
                  •
               ound and are enryched with corne, fruites of the earth, vynes, & ſweete od
                  •
               urs.
            Good choyſe muſt be had for the buylding of any City, that it be ſet and builded in a very 
                  •
               olſome pla
                  ••
               e, & that is, if it ſtand vpon ſome what highe ground
                  •
               
               ▪ For champane and p
                  •
               a
                  ••
                ground, is ſ
                  •
               eldome in euery 
                  ••
               y
                  ••
                foundChoyſe of ground in building of a City. ſafe, and 
                  •
               al
                  •
               eyes are ſubiect 
                  ••••
                fulſome fogges, & daū
               gerous miſtes, but this high place, ſhal neyther 
                  ••
               ſpecte the h
                  •
               ate regions of the ayre, nor thoſe that bee to muche tolde and fros
                  •
               ye, but thoſe that 
                  •
               ee temperate, proſper
               
                  ••
               ge towardes the Eaſte, or towardes the Sowthe.

Excepte it bee ſuche a countrye as is neare the Sea, for y• hath commonlye the Southern, and Weſterne wyndes hurtfull, eſpecially if there be 
                  •
               ennye grounde nere there unto, which haue not their courſe and iſſue into the Seas or Ryuers: for oute of the ſtandinge water, ſo ſone as the morning gleames of the ſonne appeareth vpon the ſame, there ariſeth cold wyndes or dampiſhe cloudes, infectingDiſcommodi
                     •
                  y of ſtanding, vvaters. the ſpirites of the Cattle feeding in thoſe fenny places: wt the contagion of that foggye myſtineſſe, they do alſo infect the place, and make it peſtilent, eſpeciallye in Somer and Autumne, what tyme the Southern partes of the world be far hoater thē at other ſeaſons. A
                  •••
                it al fenny & marſhye ſoyle is to bee eſchewed, & ſhonned, becauſe, it always venteth out a moſt poyſonned ayre, beinge in ſomer darkned and dymmed with vaporous fogges, and in wynter with colde exhalacions & myſtes: moreouer by reaſon of feruent heate it engendreth▪ gnattes and other ſtinging
                  •
                and odious vermin, which doe at ſuche tymes flocke together in ſwarmes, and infect the citye, and be very 
                  •
               o
                  •
               ſ
                  •
               m both vnto man and beaſt.
            Many wryters do agree in opinion, that Italye, of all other countryes is moſt temperate: and euen as the PlanetItalye a temperate nacion. 
               Iupiter, hauing his courſe, in the middeſt▪ betwene the moſt hoate and feruent planet of Mats, and the moſt cold planet Saturne, by reaſon of diuerſitie in qualities, receiueth temperatenes: ſo it, ſtretching and lying bet
                  ••
               n the Northe and South receyueth a temperate 
                  •
               irture▪ therfore innumerable prayſes doth this countrye deſerue, as Marcus Vitruuius ſayth: for it bringeth forth men of body and mē
               
                  •
               ers in proportion moſt excellent & which in fortitude of courage, wyſedome & diſcipline, are able to ſurpaſſe all other nations. Let the 
                  •
               uncient Romaynes 
                  •••
                witneſſes herein, which with their warli
                  •
               e forecaſte, and proweſſe, 
                  •
               amed and daūted the outragious fiercenes; of all the Barbarians, and which (as Cicero ſayt
                  •
               ) by theyr own induſtry either inuēted al things better thē al other

Nacions, orells whatſoeuer they receuied of other countries, the ſame they made much better and perfecter. And in ſmall tyme ſubdued they all Nacions, and obteyned the Iuriſdiction and Empyre, of the whole worlde.
            Naturall Philoſophers, affirme that ſome Bodies, broughte oute of colde countreys into hoate regions, can not endure and continue, but are ſone diſſolued: Contrarily, perſons brought out of hoate regions into colde & northernly countryes, are not onely not hurt, endamaged or diſeaſed, by the chaunge of the ayre, but are made more luſtye, healthfull, and longer lyued. Ariſtotle witneſſeth that thoſe people whiche inhabite colde Countrys, doe rather abounde in courage, ſtomacke and ſtrength of bodye, then in wyſedome or knowledge, and that their Bodies are farre taller and fayrer: the ſame country people are alſo of a whyte complexion, of a ſtreight flaxen hayre, graye
                  •
               ed, and ful of bloud, groſſe wytted, but very mightye and ſtrōge, venturous and without feare, but in tyme of ſicknes they are fearfull and fayntharted: as the Frē
               them
                  ••
               
               People bred vp in cold coū
                  tryes. which becauſe they excelled in largenes of body, deryded and ſcorned the hoaſtes of the Romayns, ſaying: Lo, what little fellowes be yonder, of ſo ſmall ſtature, of whome Ceſar maketh mention, in his moſt excellent Cō
               mentaries, where he ſayth: the ſhort and lowe ſtature of our countrymen was had in contempt amongſt yt Frenchmen in compariſon of the largeneſſe of their own bodies: and a little after as touching their wytte he addeth thus: as the Frenchmen are ready, and couragiouſly mynded to take warres in hande at the firſte: ſo is their mynde veryePeople of the Southpartes. tender, and nothinge able to reſiſte aduerſities: But cō
               trary
                  •
               wyſe men borne in the Southe partes, and beinge moreſubi
                  •
                
               
                  ••
                vnto the heate of the Sonne, are leſſe of per
               
                  ••
               age, and ſlendere
                  •
                of ſtature, of brown or ſwart colour, 
                  •
               urle hayred, blacke eyed, their legges croked, and bendinge, weake and nothing ſtrong: for theſe men, by reaſō of their ſmal ſtore of bloud, and ſubtilitie of the ayre, do excell

in wytte, and are notablie ingenious, wherefore they doe quicklye conceiue and attayne the knowledge of thinges, and are more prompt for deuiſes and cogitations: in ſickeneſſe they doe ſhewe themſelues to be of a right ſtout ſtomacke, but in battle very daſterds, & cowards.
            
               Cato diſtinguiſheth a good ground by nyne ſeueral differences, The firſt part he ſayth is, where Uyneyardes may bring forth abundaunt ſtore of good wynes: the SecondeCato his diſtictions of good grounde. hee appoynteth for an orcharde, that may caſlye bee watred: the third for Oſyers: the fourth for Oliue trees: the fyfte for medowe: the ſixte is arable grounde, apte to beare Corne: The Seauenth for Wooddes, that may bee felled and lopped at their encreaſe: The eyghte for ſhrubbes and Buſhes: The nynthe for woodes that beareth Maſte: For it muſt needes bee a good grounde whyche hathe the more parte of all theſe commodities.
            The Iuniper Trees doe with their Beries nouriſhe the winter Fowles; where wyth alſo Capons being feddeIumper. and crammed, doe nowe a dayes furniſhe out the Tables and make the ſame more elegante: and the W
                  •
               o
                  •
               thereof beinge burned, ſendeth forth a ſwete ſmelling Smoke, and odoure moſte holſome in Sommer to expell, & dryue awaye all euyll and noyſome ayres.
            No man can denye, but that the maſte of Cheſtnuttes is profitable: For it is not onely good for beaſtes to fe
                  •
               de vppon, but alſo for a mannes whole houſholde. ThysCheſtnutte. Nutte is ſo couered and harneſſed as it were with a prickinge ſhelle, that it can ſcarce bee taken oute of the ſame without hurtinge of a mannes handes: and therfore the countrye people, were wonte to burye the ſame certayne dayes in pyttes or hoales, within the earth, tyll ſuchtime as the vtter moſte pylle of the Nuttes opened of it ſelfe, and ſo oute of euerye Shell, there commeth 
                  •
               woor three Kernelles. This Tree groweth verye bygge, and is profitable almoſte in euerye reſpecte for buyldinge: and of it are made verye good Tubbes, and Wyne or Oyle

Ueſſelles, whiche the Carpenters of oure tyme doe call the Queene of all Trees, becauſe it is coumpted good almoſte for all purpoſes and vſes: wherefore not onelye for fruite and wood, but alſo for tymber, it is to be accoumpted a chiefe and ſpeciall wood.
            How neceſſarye Fyre is, not onely to the nouriſhment of mans lyfe, but almoſt vnto al vſes, euery mā may eaſelye iudge: Therfore very yll ſhould any choyſe of habitation be, if it eyther ſtande farre diſtaunt from Woodes,Wooddes and vvood ground neceſſarye. or altogether lacke the commoditye thereof. For we haue reade and ſeene in our tyme, that citties by the enemye beſieged, haue beene forced of neceſſitye to yelde, for default and wante of wood.
            Therefore that Countrye ſoyle is to bee choſen for habitation, whiche aboundeth with fire woode, whiche is ſo to bee vſed and appointed, that euerye Seauenth yeare, parte of the ſame Trees maye be cutte downe and lopte, and that there maye bee enoughe to ſuffice the vſe of all the whole people: for that which is cutte downe, had nedeFyrevvvod. to haue Seauen yeares growth, before it bee cut agayne, that the younge Setttes, and ſhrubbes therof may grow freſhe agayne, to their full Syſe and Skantlinge.
            The Woode whiche ſerueth for Tymber to Buylde Houſes, and Shippes wythall, muſte more diligentlye bee looked vnto, preſerued and kepte, and to bee clenſed euerye yeare from Thornes, Bryars, & Brambles, that they hynder not the newe Gryffes, and ſpringing plants from growynge to their full heighth, ſyſe, and 
                  •
               igneſſe.
            At the Springe of the yeare Trees do burgein, and be ſtow all their Sappe and ſtrength, vpon bowes and buddes: and therefore become they weake and exhauſted, asMayne tymber trees for buyldinges & ſhips the bodies of women that are greate wyth Chylde, are feebler, weaker, and ſlenderer of ſtrength then others, & when their time of laboure, or chyldebirth cōmeth, they become for a tyme vnweildy and weake, tyll they haue wt good Cawdels, & nouriſhments, recouered their former ſtrengthe agayne.

Euen ſo trees whyle they burgeyn and beare leaues, and afterwards while they nouriſhe their fruites yet vnrype, are of leſſe ſtrength and force: but whē in Autumne their fruites or beries are ſhaken of, and that their leaues doe fall, the rootes do take agayne vnto them all their whole ſappe, and ſtrength, and ſo are reſtored vnto their former perfect ſoliditie.
            
               Thales Mileſius preferred water as the principall and chiefeſt of al other elements: for mans nature can eaſ
                  •
               yer beare wt the want of any thing, thē of water: for admit y•
               Water. corne fayl & be not to be had, yet ye profitable encreaſe▪ cō
               ming of young ſetts, and trees, may ſupplie & adminiſter ſufficient prouiſion wherwith to ſuſtayn lyfe. We may defende lyfe with fleſhe, by hauking, by fiſhing, with herbes and rootes: but where water is wantinge, there can no foode neyther bee had nor preſerued, fitte for mannes ſuſtentacion: and therfore we accompte that country altogether vnhappye, whiche eyther lacketh water, or hath water vnholſome and corrupt.
            Moreouer it was a manner among the Egiptians, and of thē very ſtreitely for a long tyme obſerued, that beforeCeremoniall cuſtome of the Egiptians touchinge vvater. all the houſes and temples of their goddes, there ſhoulde be ſet a potte with water, to thende that they that wente into the Temples might therewith be ſprinckled, and falling down to the ground with their hands (lift vp to heauen) might geue thankes vnto the maieſtye of God, who had boūtifully bleſſed & relieued them with moſt holſom water. And furthermore wee reade of certayn countries by meanes of waters onely ennobled and made famous, as the mountayne Thiliadus amongſt the Moloſſians, which Theopompus extolleth, and ſayth, had an hundred bridges.Countries famous through vvaters. 
               Magneſia is coumpted far more famous, by reaſon of the excellency of a Well, which the Poets do there teſtifye to be dedicated vnto the Muſes, becauſe whoſoeuer dranke out of y• ſame, became therby ſwete breaſted & clearer to ſinge. Neyther is it to be mernayled at foraſmuch

there be founde innumerable vertues of waters, partelye by apparaunt, & partely by ſecrete & obſcure reaſon: Of the Sringe in Arcady, whiche the Inhabitauntes called Clitorius, which maketh ſuch as taſte of the Liquor therof, ſtraightways to abhorre al drinking of wine, foreuer.
            
               Uitruuius ſaythe that there is a Well in Paphlagonia, whiche ſemeth as though it were myxt wt wyne, inſomuch that they which drinke therof are made dronke: The lykeSpringes of vvonderfull qualities. Nature and qualitie the ryuer Liceſius in Thracia, is reported to haue, on the banckes whereof manye tymes the traueylers and wayfaring perſons are found dronken, & ſleepinge. The citty of Epheſus alſo hath Springes, not farre from it, the waters wherof ſeeme mingled with vynegar, and therfore are moſt acceptable vnto ſicke perſōs. And Strabo the Geographer, wryteth that there is a water at Hieropolis, ſo apt for dyinge of Wolle, that if y• rootes of herbs be ſtieped & mixed therein, it maketh as Orient & gorious a colour, as if it were Scarlet, or purple.
            There bee alſo whiche wryte that at Tharſis, a Cyttye in Cicilia, is a Ryuer called Cydnus, where perſonsBathes. that are bathed, and a certayne tyme waſhed, are eaſed of the goute. Moreouer Pomponius in his Coſmographye wryteth, that one of the two Iſlandes called Fortunate, is notable and famous throughe ye ſinguler vertue of two ſeueral ſprings, of whom who ſo taſteth of the one, cānot but laughe continuallye, and the onely remedy for theym that bee in that caſe, is to drincke of the other. There is alſo another Springe at Suſis, in the countrey of Perſia, whiche looſeth, and ſhaketh out the teeth of thoſe yt drinke therof: but to ſuch perſōs as do waſhe thēſelues therwith it is moſt holſome: And ſo they ſaye there is a Lake in Aſſyria, neare vnto the which groweth a ſlimye, glewiſhe, and bytuminous pytch
                  •
                earthe, of the ſame quality: wherupon if a birde light, ſhee is ſtreightwaye lymed and tyed faſt, from flyinge any furder. This kynde of Lyquor if it once be ſet on fier, can neuer be extinguiſhed, nor quēched

but onely by throwing duſt therevppon.
            A
                  •
               l whot waters haue a medicinable force and vertue aboue other waters, although they be of their proper nature cold: but becauſe they do flow or haue courſe througheHoate vvater. the hoate and ardent vaynes of the Earth, therfore they come for the warme, which notwithſtanding, cannot long remayn ſo, but be in ſhort ſpace cooled: for if by Nature they had heate in them, they wold not ſo ſone become colde.
            And ſurely vnto me it ſemeth a thing wonderfull, that there are waters ordayned by the prouidence of god, medicinable, and able to cure all diſeaſes incident vnto mortall men, which do not in their curing, vexe the diſeaſed perſons with ſly
                  •
               er ſauces, Receipts, druggs, and bitter dilutions, neyther torment them, with fyre or toole: but with a moſt ſweete bathe & waſhing, do reſtore them into their priſtinate health. Neyther haue y• Springs, whiche ryſe from ſulphereous or brimſtony ſoyle, theſe vertues only: but thoſe Springs alſo, wt paſſe & haue their courſe through allomye ſoyle, which doth cure the laſke, & reſolucion of y• ſinewes: they are very good alſ for them that haue yll digeſtiō, and yll ſtomackes: Finally they do performe that thing which Aſclepiades ſaid, was the office of a right good phiſician: y• is to ſay, to cure ſafely, ſpedely & pleaſantly: & bituminous waters alſo haue their vertues: which rather by drincking, thē by bathing, do helpe y• diſeaſed perſōs, for they do make the belly ſoluble, wtout any payne or griefe, & do cure almoſt all the inward diſeaſes of the body by purgation: & ſometime the paynfull wringinge of the intrayles and guttes, when they be ex
                  •
               lcerated, & whē that excoriacion or bloudynes floweth frō thē, are herby reſtored vnto their former health. There is alſo a Nitrous kinde of colde water, the drinking whereof doth purge, & diminiſheal vnnatural acceſſes of the body & ſpecially the humours or ſwelling of the throate, or the kinges euill: ſuch allomy, & ſaltiſh nitrous Springs yeld forth for the moſt part an euill ſmell & reliſh: for their ori

ginall, being from the very loweſt partes of the earth, do paſſe through, the boate ardent haynes of the ſame.
            Thoſe that haue written of huſbandry, do ſay that euerye kinde of pulſe, being caſt into water, and ſet vppon the fier, doth trye the ſame water very well, they be quickly & ſpeedely boyled. Certayn of the auncient Phiſicians affirmed that kind of water to be beſt, which is lighteſt, or els y• which being ſet on the fyre, will ſooneſt be boate, ſo that it be cleane and pure, & vnmoſſye. Al water that is fetchte frō the mooriſh or fenny groūds, is vnholſome, & ſo is al y• doth not runne, but ſtandeth ſtil, or els y• whiche runneth through ſhaddowye places, and darcke canes, where the Sonne geeueth no ſhyne: but worſt of all is ſnowe dryce water, as certayne auncient wrytens, haue holden opiniō. Cornelius Colſus doth thus wryte of waters: Rayn water is the lighteſt water y• is: next is Spring or Wel water,What kindes of vvaters bee beſt. then ryuer water, and laſte of all is pytte water, then deſcribeth hee ſnow or yce water, and that ſtandinge water is heauye, but the heauieſt of all others (ſayth hee) is that which is taken out of a mooriſh or fenny ground. He that throughlye conſidereth the nature of theſe thinges, wyll wyllingly prouide holeſome liquor for the vſe of himſelfe, and his fellowe Cittizens.
            The beſt ſituacion for a City is y• which is not farre diſtant frō the ſea, or frō ſom great & nauigable riuer, throughe which may be tranſported & caryed out thoſe things, wherof we haue to great ſtore, and ſuch thinges may bee brought vnto vs, wherof wee ſtand in neede. Surelye the mouthes or entries of ryuers, haue great oportu
                  •••
               ye 
                  〈…〉
                their flowings & pleaſant tydes, do not only enere
                  •••
                pleaſure, & becom moſt holſom for all cattle, ſithēs they may goe eaſly, without any courſing, & vebemēt reſiſtāce▪ 
               
                  〈…〉
                water, but alſo do make the fields & paſtures therūt
                  •
                adioyning more rancke and fruictfull. There is great diuerſitie in ryuers, & euery of thē hath not cōmodity alyke: for y• riuer Nilus is coūpted y• moſt fertile & fruitfulleſt riuer of al others, it floweth through Egipt, wt great fertilitye: for when it

               
                  •
               o hath ouer flowe
                  •
                the whole Lande all y• Somer tyme, it goeth backe agayne into his Chanell, and leaueth the fieldes fatted wit
                  •
               m
                  •
               dd
                  •
               
               ▪ and very fruitefull for any tillage, inſoma
                  •
               h that the inhabitauntes there haue ſcarcelye any neede of the labour of Oxen, or of the helpe of anye huſ
                  •
               ā
               
                  •
               men, to manure the ſame any further, then only to caſt th
                  •
               ir ſee
                  •
               e theruppon. And this do I iudge, is to be attributed vnto Nature her ſelfe, the beſt Parente of all thinges: For ſithens Egipt was deſtitute of 
                  •
               eawe, and rayne, Nature in ſupplie thereof gaue thereunto this ryuer, whiche ſhould bee able to geeue nouriſhmeutes vnto Corne and Plantes. For the deuine prouidence of God, hath appointed innumerable courſes of riuers, for the vtilitye of the Lande, and Soyle, through which their courſe lyeth: becauſe no countrye ſhoulde be altogether without the helpe and furtherance of nature. For the increaſe of ye ryuer Nilus, doth greately benefite and helpe that countrey, becauſe through the great ouerflowing therof, many hurtfull beaſtes breeding there, are thereby diſpatched & drowned, except they ſpedely flye for refuge vnto y• higher places: vnto whiche Countrye alone, theſe profites and commodities are incident, that it neyther hath any cloudes, nor cold windes, or any thicke exhalacions: the water thereof is very ſweete, inſomuche that the Inhabitantes there, can eaſely lyue without wyne, and can drincke the ſame water with great pleaſure.
            I ſuppoſe the vicinitie or nearenes of the Sea maketh much better for the preſeruation and ſafe keeping of a cittye,Nearenes of the Sea vnto a Cittie cōmodious. both for the vſe of ciuil lyfe, and alſo for the gathering together of ryches, wherewith citties are merueylouſ
                  •
               ye en
                  ••
               eaſed: but thoſe Citties are farre more harder to bee beſieged, which the Sea waſheth vpon, ſeeing that to the ſiege and expugnacion thereof, is required not onelye a greate power by Sea, but alſo a greate Armie by land. Wherof i
                  •
                the one be wanting, the Citizens maye eaſelye ou
                  ••
               come the other hoaſte, when as it ſhalbe harde for y•
               
armie by lande to ſende any ſuccoure, vnto the Nauye by Sea: on the other parte, the multitude or companye of ſea Souldiers may eaſely be profligated, and vanquiſhed by horſemen. Therfore conuenient and oportune hauens, muſt bee carefully, and wyſely choſen out, by all thē that would found and ſtabliſhe a Cittye.
            Small fieldes and little Arable groundes, eaſely bringeth dearth of Corne, which ſurely is the cauſe that thyther is ſmall recourſe of people: for people pynched with penury, and famine, be afrayde to mary, neyther deſirethPenurye. to haue anye chyldren, wherefore in ſuch a coūtry they do nothing encreaſe: yea rather the poorer ſort, hauing reſpect to their needines & famine, doe forſake their countrye, and ſeeke to plant themſelues in ſome pleaſaunt and fruitfuller ſoyle elſwhere, eſpecially if their own coūtry, be ſo ſtreite & narow, that it be not able to feede cattle: for next vnto corne, cattle whiche greately encreaſeth fleſhe, Mylke, and Cheeſe, doe beſt nouriſhe. As for fiſhing mee thinckes is not greatly to bee wiſhed for, partely becauſe that fiſhes doe geeue yll nouriſhement to the bodye, andFyſhinge. agayne do make mennes bodyes weake and ſickelye, whiche thing I maye proue by Homers teſtimony, who neuer made his warriours, and Souldiers, which encamped by the Sea ſhore, to taſte or feede vpon fiſhe at any tyme: and agayne becauſe, I doe alwayes ſee the Fyſherman to be chillinge colde, bare and needye.
         
         
            
            THE VIII. BOOKE, DIScourſinge of Buyldings, VValles, Gates, Caſtles, Fortreſſes, Garriſons, Lybraries, Churches, & other Monumentes of a Cittye.
            
               
                  AUngells whiche from the very natiuitie and birthe are appoynted vnto all men, are called the meſſengers of truth, which do ſometime forſhew & tell vnto holy & innocent men, eyther ſleeping or waking, ſuch predictions & happes of thinges to come, as by euent after wardes are founde true.
            A place that ſtandeth high, or which hath readye wyndinges & turninges, or which ſtandeth eyther vppon the Sea, or ſome great ryuer, needeth farre leſſe laboure and coſt: for where as the place is well defended by the naturall ſituatiō of it ſelfe, it nedeth the leſſe walles: but plain countries or places not highe, muſte be ſuccoured, & helped with labour, and charges otherwiſe for defence. Regarde alſo muſt be had of the height, and thicknes of the walles: for when the walles be very highe, they are eaſlyFortifications. ſhaken, & battred down with engins and Gonnes: agayn where they are too low, they are eaſely conquered, & ſkaled by the enemie with ropes, & ſkaling ladders. Forty or fyftye cubites high is of many cunning Architects, & ſkilfull fortifiers allowed: in the toppe wherof, that thicknes is ſayd to be ſufficient, whiche maye ſerue for two armed ſouldiers to go ſide by ſide, without hindring, one thother in meetinge,
            Moreouer alſo there muſt be had very diligent conſideration of the Gates of a citty, for by meanes therof it chā
               ceth ſometimes, y• by ſodeyn vprores ye townes be taken, & ſacked, or when the townſmen, & citizens returne or flye, the enemies being mingled among thē maye ſurpriſe the Gates.
            
               As Romulus at one incurſion inuaded and tooke ye City of the Fidenatians, for hee was purpoſed after that he had ſpoyled their fieldes, to harrye the countrye, dryue awaye his pray, & ſo to haue diſcamped wt his hoaſt: but whē the Fidenatiās iſſued out of theyr city, there was betwene thē a ſkirmiſhe, wherin they being weaker were diſcomfited & put to flyght. And therupon Romulus purſuing and chaſing them, ruſhed into the citty together with theim that fled, as if they had bene al of one company: & ſo wan ye city which he planted with Romaynes, & brought vnder hys owne ſubiection: Regarde therfore muſt be had, that the wayes of the Gates be not direct or ſtreight & forthright, but turning & wynding many ways to deceiue ye enemies.
            There hath bene no ſmall diſputation amongeſt theim which haue wryttē of ciuil ſociety, whether any tower orCaſtles in citties. Caſtle, be fitly to be placed in a free citty, in which thinge this is to be conſidered, whether it do more good or euill, amongſt free cittizens, to haue a ſtrong Fort cōmitted to the credite, and keeping of a fewe: And if we wyll truelye iudge of and throughly reuolue the monumentes of olde hiſtories, wee ſhall fynde, that mocōmon weales, & eſtates haue bene ſubuerted, & ouerthrowne, by negligence & trechery of them y• haue bene the rulers, & captaynes therof, thē haue bene preſerued: & yet notwtitſtāding, Rome was takē, & fired by the Frēchmen, but by y• defēce of the Capitoll was in parte ſaued, and at length wt golde boughte peace. But Ariſtotle affirmeth, yt a caſtle is vnto a good cōmon wealth, vnprofitable & daungerous: & yt it geueth oportunitie vnto Tyranny, who doubteth▪ 
               Tymotheus that notable Oratour of Corynth playnly affirmed that, y• citye which is kept by the garriſō of a caſtle, cannot lightlye be without tyranny.
            
               Pyrrhus kinge of Epyrotes on a tyme came to Athens, & was with curteous hoſpitalitie of the citizens receyued: he after viewe taken of that cittye, aboūdinge wyth excedinge greate ryches, and whiche was the mother of all laudable Artes and Diſciplines, was broughte into the

caſtle of Pallas, & there did his ſolempnities with deuoute reuerence, beholding with greate admiracion the Caſtle how ſtronge & impregnable it was both by naturall ſcituaciō, & alſo by artificial fortification: at length whē he was ready to depart, and was now come into the market place, hee rendred greate thankes vnto the Rulers of the Cittye, which accompanied him, for the confidence & fidelitie, which they repoſed in him: & finally warned theym that they ſhoulde neuer thence foorthe, geeue libertye and leaue to any king to enter into their caſtle, leaſt after ſuch entraunce and view, ſome peraduenture vſinge that good oportunitie and holde, ſhould take the vauntage, and ther upon inuade their cittie: This counſell was very well lyked of the Athenians, as they whiche well knewe, howe daungerous a thinge it was for Cittizens to ſuffer, ſtoute and valiaunt men to enter into their chiefe fortreſſe: and ſo from thence forwardes, they kepte the Gates thereof more diligently.
            Priuate houſes are to bee builte, if it may be along the highe ſtreetes, on a rowe, and of lyke proportion and makinge:Order of buylding priuate houſes for ſo they beautifie and adorne the cittie. Neither let them buylde any thinge too much outward, thereby to hinder any highe wayes: for wee muſt ſo liue, that a pryuate houſe muſt be deſcribed to ſerue the vſe and commeditye of the whole familye. Neyther let any vacant or vnprofitable place be therein, and ſo the very view & ſighte thereof, ſhall bringe the more ornament thereunto: for as Cicero ſayth: The gorgeouſneſſe of a mannes houſe augmenteth the dignitye of the perſon dwelling in ye ſame.
            And I iudge the couetouſnes of theym to be worthye of greate reprehenſion, who flowinge and aboundinge inComely buylding in a cittye greate wealth and ryches, neuer beſtow any coſte in buildinge, becauſe they wolde ſpare their mony, and fill their Cheſtes for their poſterity: wheras if our Aunceſtors had folowed any ſuch order, wee ſhould vntill this day in our Citties haue had ſheperdlye cabins, & ruſticall Cotages.
            
               A Lybrary ought to be erected in ſome holſome & quyet place, neyther ought we to ſuffer our Cittizens to beeLibraries. defrauded and diſappointed of ſuche benefite: for if places of exerciſe which make for the health of mens bodyes, be in many citties with ſuch carefulneſſe and coſte erected & appointed, how muche more ought a Lybrarye to be furniſhed and ſet forth, which is the foode of a wel nurtured mynde, and the exerciſe of a freee or well inclined nature. And if they that got the mayſteries or priſes in games, deſerued great honours (inſomuch that ſtanding in the companie, they were crowned with the garlande & crowne of Uictorye, and at their returne into their owne countrye, were like triumphant victers, caryed in chayres or Wagons, & were alſo demed worthy to be maynteyned wyth meat, drinke, & apparell, at the publique charges of ye cyties perpetually) howe much more are excellent learned men to bee had in eſtimacion, which do further and helpe the common weale aſwell in diſcipline and manners, as alſo in their wrytinges, by committinge all thinges vnto memory, which in tyme to come, maye profite their poſteritie▪
            
            Let ſuch a place bee choſen for a Lybrarye, whoſe proſpect may be Eaſtwarde, for the eyeſight requireth morning light: for if it ſhould eyther haue proſpect ſouthward or weſtwarde, the wyndes blowinge from thence, woulde with their moyſte heate, and warmeneſſe, corrupte volumes, and engender Moothes, whiche conſume, and eate Bookes. Lette the walles within the ſame bee handſomely poliſhed and trymmed, & let them be ſet oute and beautified with greene colour, for all greene thinges are good for the eyes, and make the ſighte thereof ſharpe, and quicke.
            
               Ptolomeus king of Egipt is highly commended, who finiſhedThe Lybrarye of Ptolomeus had 40000 volumes. and furniſhed a Lybrary at Alexandria, to his ineſtimable charges and induſtrye, in which librarye, there were forty thouſād volumes: al which bookes, were deſtroyed

ſtroyed by caſualtye of fyre in the battle that Caeſar had agaynſt Achiles lieutenaunt of the kinges warres: for whē as the kinges Nauy beinge by chaunce withdrawen, was commaunded to bee fyred and burned: the flame thereof catched into a part of the cittye, and ragingly burnt all y• houſes wherein the bookes were layde. In whiche fire good learning and diſciplines doubtles had a miſerable & lamentable wracke. For the wryters of all Nacions and countryes did earneſtly endeuour and ſtryue to conueygh their bokes thither, as it had bene into a Theatre & Manſion of wiſdome and learning: of which librarye, if ſo muche as the ſteps were extant, they ſhould ſurely eaſe vs of greate labours and traueyles, and with the lighte of Antiquity, would clarifye and lighten the obſcure darcknes of lettres and diſciplines.
            We muſt alſo with greate regarde foreſee, that ſacred houſes or churches be edified and buylded, in 
                  •
               itte, & oportuneChurches. places of the citty, wherin we muſt firſt and chieflye conſider this, that of churches and temples, ſome be made for the moſt commodity of the citizens, ſome for the vſe of them that forſaking the world, geue themſelues onely to contemplacion, which houſes would be in ſome out Corner or ſolitary place, where they may not be interrupted and troubled with the buſie tatlinge and ciuile tumulte, of the multitude, & therfore muſt be ſet out of ye cōpany & reſort of men, and out of the ſight of priuate houſes: and either be buylt in the territories, or els without the wals of the citye. But thoſe that are ordayned for the publique vtility of the Citizens, oughte to bee ſcituated in a fayre rowme & place, eyther in the harte of the Cittye, or in the places that be beſt inhabited and peopled, to thintente the citizens may conuenientlye thither repayre daylye wyth their wyues and children: but thoſe churches which theyCathedrall churches. call Cathedrall churches, wherof the biſhopp of the Sea hath the rule and aucthority, all Architectes thinck moſt expedient to be buylded vpon an high ground in the midſt

of the cittye, that out of it the greateſt part of the walles of the cittye may be viewed euery where round about: for within the guarde and protection therof, the whole cittye, ſeemeth to conſiſt, and thither vppon holye dayes all men flocke together as it were vnto a ſpectacle of deuine and ſpeciall matters. As for places in the churches and houſes of prayer or preachinge, where deuine miſteries are to bee celebrated, let them be ordayned, ſo farre as may bee, beſt for the miniſters and congregation: and if it may cō
               ueniently, Eaſtwarde: but if the nature of the place wyl not ſo ſuffer it, let it be ſo and in ſuch ſort, that it may ſtād in the full fight of the greater part of the churche, wherin if they take aduiſe of the ſkilful Architectes to ouerſee the workemanſhippe, they ſhall buylde all thinges commodiouſlye, and orderlye: neyther ſhall they greatlye ſtande in nede of any my wryting or preceptes thereto, ſithens the deuiſe and reaſon of buyldinge requireth rather a liuelye inſtructor, then a dead directer: moreouer yt is true, whyche as a common prouerbe is wont to bee ſpoken, that an vnſkilful maiſter or owner, cā a great deale better builde in his owne court, or vpon his owne grounde, then a moſt learned & ſkilful worckmaiſter in another. For mans diligence & long cōſideratiō of y• owner or maſter, ſurpaſſeth the deuiſe and ſkill of the Artificer.
         
         
            
            
               THE NINTHE BOOKE entreating of warres, and Martiall diſcipline,
                Of Municions, Ordenaunce, Artillerie, Victuals, Muſters, Lieutenantes, Generalles, Captaynes and Souldiers: Of peace and Warre with the circūſtances therof.
            
               
                  THere is nothinge vnto mannes nature better then to be wyllinge, neyther any thing greater, thē to be able to benefite and helpe many▪ But foraſmuch as ye ſeueral wealth of many perſons particulerly is but ſlēder and ſmall, y• although they would neuer ſo gladly, yet can they not extend liberalitye and requitall towards them that well deſerue: Onely kinges and princes may be liberall, bountiful & nobly mynded.
            
               Chilo the Lacedemonian, who was one of the ſeauen wyſe Sages of Greece was abundantly enriched, in a maner with all kindes of vertues, yet in nothing more, then in beneficence and liberality: & therfore when as he was come to extreeme olde age, oftentimes (as it were reioycingly)Liberalitie in Captaines and Generalles moſt cōmendable & expedient. he was wont to ſay, yt in all his lyfe tyme, he dyd neuer any thing ingratefully: No vertue doth more cō
               mende and adorne Capitaines, Generalles, and Gouernours of Armies, then Liberalitie, whereby they keepe their Souldiers conſtant and obedient in perfourminge their dueties, and alſo thereby allure and winne their very enemies vnto them, throughe hope of Benignitye, and franckneſſe.
            The firſt onſet and claſping together of the Armies in fighte, is alwayes coumpted daungerous, and difficulte: for true is that ſentence of Scipio: That there appeareth greater courage and hautines in him that inferreth peril

and aduentureth to geeue the onſet, then is in him that redefendeth: But after that open warre be denounced, and that euery man prepareth home warde out of his fieldes, to ſticke to his ſafety, and to ſtand circumſpectly vpon hisThe firſt onſet in battell moſt daungerous. garde: then they come together in their warlike order, & then they appoint their ſcoutes, and marſhall their ſouldiers, euery man taketh ſtomacke and courage vnto him: he beholdeth and ſeeth his enemie, neyther thincketh he it good and conuenient to bicker diſorderly, and Skirmiſhinglye, but orderlye and in good arraye: and then thoſe matters whiche feare ymagined to be daungerous, reaſon doth teache to bee farre leſſe, and not ſo muche to be doubted: then euerye man determineth withe himſelfe what is nedefull to bee done, neyther bee they taken vnprouided, nor rceiue the foyle at their enemies hands, but are euery daye more and more emboldened and encouraged, and by theſe meanes they commonly carry away the victorye, which were prouoked with iniurye afore: & thus do they many tymes reuenge themſelues vpon their enemies, and deliuer their countrye from all thraldome and Bondage.
            But the order of waging battle is farre more ſtreite, and needeth deeper councell: Neyther is it ynough for vsWaginge battell. to conſider that wee goe to fight in a righteous quarell, & for iuſtlye demaūding our own right: & yt for good cauſes warre may well be waged and proclaymed: But we muſt alſo conſider what our power is, & of what power & ſtrength, our aduerſaries and enemies are, what manner of Souldiers we haue, what partakers & confederates, what tributaries we haue, and howe they bee affected towardes vs: to what ſumme our cōmon ſtocke or treaſury amounteth to: for it is a thing odious and hatefull, to leuie tribute vppon priuate perſons, and is a thing that verye ſoone breedeth and getteth the enuie of the citizens. Wee muſt alſo conſider how ſtrong, how well fortified, & how wel victualled the ritty is, with what garriſons the

townes and Caſtles within our Iuriſdiction, be maynteyned and kepte, and what ſtore of municion and ordinaūce we haue in our armary: theſe & many ſuch like, are before hād to be perpēded & waighed, & which are thē chiefly acknowledged and beſt knowen, when the gates of the cytye being ſhutte, the enemie is kept out, and driuen backe from the walles with ſlynges, arrowes, and gonſhot.
            Aduiſe, valiauntnes, and knowledge in matiall matters, bee of greate force and do much good in warres: butAſſured peace better then cō
                  queſt hoped for. fortune, chiefly excelleth al the reſt, wherfore that ſentēce of Hannibal vnto Scipio is true, where he ſaythe: that the euentes of thinges neuer leſſe agree and fall oute, according to our purpoſes then in warre: and therfore an aſſured peace is better and ſafer, then a victorye, which we do but hope for: alſo wee muſt yelde ſomewhat vnto ye multitude and vulgar ſorte, whoſe credence always hangeth vppon fortune, and many tymes folow the myndes of men mingled and gathered together, out of ſundry countryes, whome no zealous pietye or affection towards their coū
               try, no feare of god nor religiō kepeth in awe, but are only there to allured wt hyre, & ſtipendary wages.
            All conſultation of warres to be made vpon others, although it be good for many purpoſes, yet in a free Cittye it is daungerous: for when the matter is referred to the Senate, they do not all agree in one opinion, ſome follow the truth, & ſome frame thēſelues according to thopinion of the cōmon people, & bee people pleaſers, aduaūcinge & ſetting foreward ye ſide, which the vulgar ſort beſt alloweth, & therfore the moſt part are deceiued: for there is nothinge amongſt mortall men ſo vnſtable & waueringe, as the mindes, willes, & opiniōs of the citizēs, which not only being diſalowed of (as Cicero ſayth) are angry or greued, but alſo oftentimes do repine & grudge at thinges, yt be wel done & by right & equity: therfore a wiſe man wyll aduiſedly deliberate, & conſider ech circūſtance, before he abſolutely geue his conſent, to thenterpriſing of making

warres, leaſt that he lay ſuch a burden vpon his ſhoulders vnder which he may fall downe.
            
               Labienus a man fortunate, and ryche, who of his owne proper coſtes and charges builded out of the ground, the town called Cingulum in Pice
                     ••
                  , tooke part too earneſtlye wt 
               Pompeius, wherfore he could not hope for any fauour or pardon at ye victors hands, although (in deede) moſt merciful. For whēther was an emparle & treaty of peace betwene the Souldiers of Caeſar, & the ſouldiers of Pompei, this Labienus with a loud voyce, exclaymed & cryed oute ſaying: Sirs, leaue of to make any further taulke of intreaty for peace: for except you firſt haue Caeſars head frō his ſhoulders, there can be no peace at all amongeſt you.
            Nothing can be more daungerous in a free citty, then for a man to promiſe that he will be the aucthour & ryngleader of warres, which thing ſurely euen they in mine opinion ſeeme to doe, which openly in the counſel chamber auerre yt warres are expedient to be taken in hand. Solon
               Aucthors of Warres. was accoumpted a very wyſeman, yet be (becauſe he wold not frely geue ſentēce, yt it was requiſite to make warres againg the Megarians, for the recouery of Salamine, ſodē
               lye fayned himſelfe madde, and beinge diſguiſed in apparel like a fole, prouoked the Athenians to fyght. When ye matter fell out well, and that they had wonne Salamyne, they al cōmended & wel allowed of his coūſell, & deuiſe in yt behalfe: Now Solon al this while, vnder ye ſhield of fayned madneſſe ſhrowded himſelfe, that if the matter ſhould not haue come to paſſe as he before had told them, and as hee would haue it, yet therby hee myght purchaſe pardon for his wordes and deedes.
            It is oftentimes called in queſtion, whether it be goodWarring for enlarging Empyres. to make warres, for y• encreaſe & propagation of dominiō & Lordſhippe, when any occaſion of conqueſt is offered: or elles whether, it bee better to bee quiet, and to lyue in peace: many argumentes may be brought and alleadged on both partes.

But we rather encline vnto peace.
            Glorious truelye is Martiall dealinges, and I cannot tell whether there bee any thing more noble: and no mā can denye but all greate dominions and noble EmpiresPrayſe of War fare. haue bene purchaſed and gottē by the attempt of warrs. Without all doubte the renoume and names of all moſte noble and flouriſhing citties, ſhould for the moſte part bee buryed in darcknes, were they not made famous by martiallRome and Athens. feates: Neyther hath the Citty of Athens attayned ſo great fame or renowme, which hath merited to haue ye name of the mother of all Artes & diſciplines, as Rome hath done: which was in tymes paſſed, the Imperial ſeate of the whole vniuerſall worlde, althoughe neyther of the twayne woulde ſeeme to lacke the others prayſe and commendation. For Rome it ſelfe excelled in the ſtudies of all good Artes and Sciences, and Athens lacked the glorye of warfare: for eyther of theſe Citties bare greate Reuerence vnto the ſtudies both of warre, and peace, and honored Minerua both armed and vnarmed: but we (as I ſaid before) do rather commend peace, & do eſpecially deſire toPeace better then Warre. inſtruct our citizens in the ſame, becauſe it leadeth more ſafelye and ſurelye vnto the tranquillity of mynde: And therfore lyuing content with the territories and coūtries which we already enioy, let vs not enter into any warres but onely ſuch as is neceſſarye, or if at any tyme we do enter into the ſame, let vs as ſpedely as wee can, ſeeke ſome way to brydle and qualefye our deſires: which thing euen armed Hanniball ſeemeth to ratify, when as he ſayd vnto Scipio in this maner: It had bene very good if the Gods had geeuen that mynde vnto oure predeceſſors, that you might bee contented with thempires of Italy, and wee of Afrique.
            Uayne glory and vayne deſire of ſoueraignitie, manye tymes ſo enflameth men, that they be contented wyth noVayne glorye, and ambition. territories or boundes, neyther take they any felicitye in peace.
            
               
               Curtius wryteth that them baſſadours of Scythia ſpake theſe wordes vnto king Alexander: If the Goddes hadVayne glorye and ambition noted in Alexander. geeuen vnto the a body, agreeable to the great greedines and ambition of thy myude, the whole world it ſelfe wold not ſuffice to conteyn thee, thou wouldſt with the one hād touch the Eaſt, and with ye other, the Weſt: and hauinge obtayned all this, thou woldſt yet moreouer know where and in what place, the renoume of ſuch a ſtately maieſtye ſhould be enthronized, & thus deſireſt thou ye thing, which thou canſt not comprehend: From Europa thou traueyleſt into Aſia, and out of Aſia agayne into Europa, finally if thou get the vpper hand, and ouercome all humane creatures, and men lyuing, then wilt thou make warres wt wooddes, cloudes, ryuers, wylde beaſtes, and dumbe creatures: what thinkeſt thou? doeſt thou not know yt greate trees do grow long tyme, and yet in one howre ſpace they are pluckt vp by the rootes? Hee is a foole that looketh after the fruites of them, and meaſureth not the height of the tree, wherof they grow: take heede leaſt whileſt thou ſtryueſt to come to the toppe of the Tree, thou fall to the ground with the ſame boughes, whiche thou layeſt holde vpon.
            Oh miſerable ſtate and condicion of man. Oh deceiueable expectatiō, which mortal natures haue in this world Why are we ſeduced and caryed away with ſuch greedye ambitiō, ſythens wee euidently ſee that all our goodes, & whatſoeuer worldly benefites els which we poſſeſſe & enioy, are mutable, trāſitory & frayle, and yt nothing is to be deſyred ſauinge onely vertue.
            What do the ſubuerſions of Citties gottē by conqueſt, or otherwiſe auayle? what do whole Empyres themſelues profite vs? but that onelie when wee enioy them, wee doe alwayes lyue carcking and carefull? For true is that ſentence of Iulianus Caeſar, who at the beginning of his raign being troubled with tumultuous ruflyng in France, ſaid: That hee had gotten nothinge by being Emperoure, but

onely that hee lyued thereby, euer buſie and occupied.
            If we take in hande any warres, wee muſte firſte forethincke whome we may auctoryze, & make the chiefe GeneralleGouernours, & generalles in
                     •
                   Warres. and Capitayne: for if wee will iudge arighte in this behalfe, truly there can bee nothing found more rare or difficulte, then a good Generall & Capitayne.
            Philip king of Macedony ſayd that he meruayled why the Athenians did euery yeare choſe new Generalles, and Captaynes of their warres, ſithens he in all his lyfe time had founde but one good Capitayne, namely Parmenio.
            
            
               Cicero ſuppoſeth that fower thinges oughte to bee in aFovver ſpeciall thinges requiſite in a chieftayne. chieftayn or gouernour of warres: y• is to ſay, knowledge or ſkyll in Martiall matters: Ualiaunce: Aucthoritye: & felicitie: and vnto theſe he addeth further: Uertues (ſaith hee) appertayning vnto a Generall or chiefe Capitayne, are Trauell & Labour, Fortitude, and Courage in daungers, induſtry in his dealinges, quicke diſpatche in bringinge things to paſſe, and aduiſement in forecaſting wyth prouidence, which way to worke his matters.
            All men knowe that Fortune lyeth not in oure power but is to be craued by prayer, at the handes of God: but vertue and wyſedome, ought we to haue at our ſelues.
            
               Cambyſes (as Xenophon reporteth) aduertiſed his ſonne Cyrus, that Captaynes of warres ouer and aboue alother ſouldiers, ſhoulde enure thēſelues to abyde heate & droughte, and in wynter the ſtormes and cold: & to be always at one ende in all laboures and daungerous aduentures: for aſmuche as the trauelles are not ſo greuous vnto the Captayne, as to the common ſouldier: for hee that is a Chiefetain or Generall, ought to meaſure and by due cō
               ſideration to weighe in his mynde, that fame and commē
               dation in doing of exploytes, doth very much appertayne vnto him.
            And it is expedienc for him that hath the Gouernmēt of an armed hoaſte, to enure young men to exerciſe, ſome times to goe aboute the watches: to ſee his ſouldiers victualled:

to ſee the Corne tryed: to puniſh fraude & deceipt in y• meaſure therof, 
                  •
               o puniſh faultes, to be alwayes preſent at the beginning: to heare y• complaintes of his ſouldiers: and to ſee the ſicke and diſeaſed to bee looked & preuided for. There are alſo other vertues almoſte innumerable, appertayning to a Generall, mētioned by ſuch perſons as haue wrytten of war like affayres.
            Souldiers that tranſgres or make offences, are to be puniſhed, and with feare of the lawes to be reſtrayned: as thoſe which ſkatter and wander abroade at randon from the Campe, and ſo come agayne to their tentes, and ſuchSouldiers offē
                  dinge hovv to be puniſhed. as gyue the ſlyppe and goe their wayes, raūging abroade a long while, and afterward are brought agayn: For as y• ſouldier which firſt fleeth is to bee executed & put to death for example of the reſte: ſo likewiſe is hee to bee puniſhed which ſhall do a thing in warres, that his Captayn ſhall prohibite, or which obſerueth not y• charge enioyned him, yea although hee otherwiſe worthely behaue and acqui
                  •
               e himſelfe: in which reſpecte Manlius Torquatus in all ages is commended, who commaunded his owne ſonne to bee beheaded, becauſe hee preſumed to fight againſt his commaundement, and yet he fought ſtoutly and valiauntly in defence of the common weale.
            Generalles and Captaynes, ſhall do much more good, with good example of their lyfe and conuerſation, then wt the Cenſure of maners, or with anye kynde of crueltye. For Xenophon bringethe in Cyrus diſcourſinge by waye of oration, in maner to this effect; The chiefe worke or par
                  •
                of a prince or gouernour is to ſhew himſelfe a man of honeſte conuerſation, and moreouer to looke that 
                  •
               u
                  •
               h as 
                  ••
                vnder his charge, & at his cōmaūdement▪ may proue vertuous & good men: & it is the duty of a Souldier to obay his captayne▪ willingly to take in hande al labours al aduentures, & daungers, not to fight but in araye, and according to preſcription, to loue his weapon, to haue 
                  ••
               yll in warfare▪ and to ſet more by his honour, dignitye, & good fame, then by any thing vnder the Sonne.
            
               The lawes of the Lacedemonians were verye ſeuere & ſharpe in martiall matters, wherein (as Marcellinus declareth) thoſe Souldiers were ſharpely puniſhed, whiche when the armie was rancked, & ſet in aray, durſt be ſeene to ſhroude thēſelues elſwhere, vnder anye roofe or ſhead.
            Wryters report that Scipio walkinge aboute with his friendes, vſed to eate onely cheate bread wtout any thingeHardneſſe of fare. ells: and ſo do Hiſtoriographers wryte y• 
               M
                     •
                  ſiniſſa king of Numidia vſed to dyne, who being lxxxx. yeares of age, vſed to dine ſtāding or walking before his tēte or pauiliō. Suche crymes ſpeciallye haue their originall from the chiefe Gouernours, and them that bee in aucthority: for ye ſouldiers do imitate the faſhiōs and natures of thoſe that haue chiefe rule and gouernaunce ouer them: for if ye captaynes bee good, they trayne their ſouldiers to goodnes, but if they be yll, they then make their ſouldiers apte and prone to yll: for the multitude of the common ſouldiers, are ſone infected.
            Souldiers are to be taught (by the example of Marcꝰ Cato) to be fierce and couragious againſt their enemies, & to ſhewe themſelues gentle towardes their friendes and Confederates, fearefull to doe iniuries, but readye and prompt to reuenge wrongs to them offered, and to deſire nothinge more then prayſe and glorye, whiche in deede is a verye goodlye perſwaſion: for thoſe that bee deſirous of prayſe, doe not ſhonne nor refuſe anye trauelles, neyther ſhrincke they or withdraw themſelues from anye perilles or daungers, but being inflamed with deſire of glorye, do nothing doubt to hazard thēſelues in all great aduētures & daūgers. Souldiers alſo muſt be puniſhed that haue done amiſſe: for too muche lenitye and fauoureOffences to be p
                     •
                  rdoned, and hovv to be puniſhed. doth make them more procliue and prone to offend: and if it fall out that very manye haue offended, yet muſte wee not for feare, pardon or diſpence with all, but muſt puniſh thoſe that are in the greateſt fault: for if many be puniſhed, they are to be ſent and diſtributed to receyue their executiō
               
in diuers places.
            
               Marcellus vpon a tyme openly perceyued and ſawe Lucius Bantius Nolanus, a man very bold and factious, ſolliciting and ſtirringe the towneſmen there, to reuolte and turne vnto Hanniball, & yet durſt he not put him to death, for feare of the Nolanes: wherfore he called him vnto him with fayre wordes, prayſing him openly as a worthy ſouldier, and exhorting him, to holde on and continue his good ſeruice and faythful loyalty, & to be willing ſtyl to beare out that warfare with him. And that the cittizens ſhould y• better credite y• he was in ſuch fauour wt his capitayne, Marcellus gaue him a goodly fayre Courſer, by meanes of whiche curteſie and gentleneſſe, he chaunged and altered the euyll mynde and trecherous diſpoſition of Lucius, and thence forwarde found both him and all his retinewe and crew, truſty and faythfull.
            Many holde opinion y• a Generall of an Army oughte not to combate and fight hande to hande with his enemy,Combat hovv it is allovvable in a captayne. except in tyme of great neceſſitye, and that it is ſufficiente for him to performe thoffyce of a Capitayn and leader, & not of a cōmon ſouldier. For they ſay y• citties haue bene vtterly ſacked, and whole hoaſtes ſlayn down right, or at leaſt diſcomfited & put to flighte, by the raſhneſſe of their Capitaynes and Generalles: for whyle they purſue after euery particuler enemie, they forſake and leaue the mayn hoaſte at all aduentures, and whyle they ſtudye to take heede of one mannes blow, they pull vpon their own heades, the whole mayne force of their enemies, not conſideringe howe that their owne daungers bringes with it the generall calamitye and ſpoyle of the whole hoaſt.
            
               Scipio Africanus to certayne men which ſayde that heeOne politike & ſkilful captain more vvorthe then a great ſort of commō ſouldiers. was no great fighter, wiſely aunſwered ſaying: My mother brought me foorth into this worlde a Capitayne and a Generall, not a fighter or common Souldier: thereby meaning that victorye and conqueſte, conſiſteth rather in thexperience and wyſedome of one, then in the weapons,

and ſtrength of manye: Cyrus (as Xenophon mentioneth) aſked Cambyſes how a victorye might beſte bee gotten, to whom hee thus aunſwered: hee that would winne & haue the vpper hande and victory, muſt entrappe and take hysHovv to ouercome the enemie. enemies by all manner of pollicie whatſoeuer, eyther by ſecrete ambuſhes, or deceipte and fraude, yea by rapine, theft, and pylfery they muſt be ſpoyled, robbed & impoueriſhed: for nothing is to be pretermitted, which may in anye reſpecttend to the ſubduing, & vanquiſhing of a mans enemies: a very lye in conuenient tyme by the chiefe captayne made, hath ſodenly obtayned the victorye: as that of Ualerius Leuinus, who with a loude voyce cryed outeA very. Lye ſôtime auailable that he had ſlayne Pirrhus, and therewithall to make the matter more credible, helde vp his ſword all bloudy, with the bloud of a certayne Souldier whom a little before he had killed, with which ſurmiſed lye, the Epyrotes beinge ſodenly aſtonied, ran away as faſt as they could, weping & tremblinge into their tentes.
            
               Demoſthenes the greateſt oratour among the Greciās,Demoſthenes vvyſe excuſe for his runnīg avvaye. atchieued manye warres, and was in a greate battell at Cheronea, wherein Philip of Macedonie ouercame the Athenians, out of which conflict Demoſthenes by flight and running away ſaued himſelfe: this thing being by way of reproche afterwarde layed in his diſhe, after the death of Philip, he excuſed himſelf, by reciting this notable verſe.
            
               The partie vanquiſhed weepes and wayles,
               But the partie vanquiſhing by death quayles.
            
            
               Iulius Caefar as hee in worthye exploytes ſurpaſſed allIulius Caefar valiaunt and learned. men, ſo alſo did he excell almoſt all the Romaynes in Latine eloquence. The knowledge alſo of hiſtories is commodious and profitable for them which haue the conduction and gouernaunce of armies, both becauſe in takinge counſels and aduiſes, by the euent and Fortune of other mens former happes, moſte firme examples are learne,

and agayne becauſe the vertue that is prayſed in others, doth allure and moue vs to obtayne the lyke: and fearefull Cowardiſe beinge reproued doth make men become more valiaunt: and I cannot tel whether the knowledge of warfare may by anye other diſcipline be better helped, then by peruſinge hiſtoricall Monumentes, by which we are taught and inſtructed to doe all thinges well and orderlye, whiche may eyther be ſpoken or thought by man. Nothinge newe and ſtraunge, nothinge wonderfull, nothinge vnhearde or vncouth, can happen vnto the Chieftayne, whiche hath verye good knoweledge and experience in Hyſtories.
            Warlike order and arraye, Diſcipline of Souldiers, good reſpecte and ſtudye in inuadinge, and bewaringe theSundrye good poyntes incident and mete to be knovven of a good Captayne. enemie, ſkyll in Marſhallinge the armie in righte order of arraye, knowledge when to begynne the Skirmiſh, when to leaue, how to plant Ambuſhes and ſtales, & how to take heede of the lyke, whiche place is fitte to bee choſen, whiche platte is moſte commodious to bee firſte preuented and gaygned, which agayne is to bee left vnto the enemie, howe and whiche waye to geeue the onſette and charge, and how to reſiſte and ſtande at defence, with innumerable other poynctes, which ſcarce bee comprehended in longe diſcourſe, by what other meanes canne they more eaſely bee learned, then by peruſinge ouer Monumentes and recordes of Hyſtories.
            Among all ſortes of men, there can be nothinge foundNothing more rare then a perfect Generall. more rare then a perfect Captayne and Generall, whiche if hee be not to be found in the Citty, he muſt bee ſent for from other places: for it is better to fighte well and fafelye protected vnder a ſtraunger Captayne, then in daunger and hazarde of lyfe vnder the gouernment of our natiue Citizen.
            Hee that hath the charge and aucthoritye ouer a citty, & in the tyme of warre is alſo to loke to vrbane affayres & ought to employ

employ very greate diligence, and to looke narowly vnto his charge, that the Cittye do not ſuſtayne any detrimēt or damage: and as (like a capitayn in ye campe) he ought to perfourme his office, ſo like a wiſe gouernour oughte he to exerciſe and trayne his ſouldiers within the walles of the cittye, that with ydleneſſe, niceneſſe, ſittinge in the ſhade, and other delicate and tender cockrings of the city they be not effeminated. And ſōtimes it ſhall behoue hymſelfe in perſon to viſite the wardes, and goe throughe the watches, and not to commit all thinges to the diſpoſition of them whom he maketh maiſters of the watches vnder him, who in deede ſhall kepe their watch much more diligently and carefully, if they ſtand in feare and awe of him that is chieferuler ouer them al, and ſee him to be watchfull and vigilant. For there be which ſuppoſe, that thoſe perſons are moſt ſharply to be puniſhed, which negligētlye looke to their watch and warde, leaſte by ſleepe, ſlouth and negligence of one man, the whole citty ſhould periſh,Puniſhmente for the vvatch which committeth all things to the diligence of thoſe few perſons: wherfore hiſtories do highly commende Epaminondas the Thebane, who in time of greate diſtreſſe & daū
               ger, viewing & ſurueighing in proper perſon the watches, thruſt his ſword through one of the watchmen whom hee found ſleeping, ſaying theſe wordes: A deadman I found hym, a deadman I leaue him.
            
            Neither is it to be meruayled at, that Epaminondas beinge otherwiſe a capitayne gentle and mercifull, dyd vſe and pracciſe ſuch ſeuerity vpon a man ſleeping, ſeeinge yt wee doe ſee how throughe ſuch negligence, whole cities haue bene ſackt, ſpoylde, & burnt. wherupon Virgil ſayth:
            
               Inuadunt vrbe ſomno vino
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ſepultam.
            
            
               VVith wyne and ſleepe, the Citie careleſſe made,
               The enmies do with force af armes inuade.
            
            
               By reaſon of this policie & diligence Alcibiades aboue others is prayſed: For when the Athenians were by the Lacedemoniās be ſieged, he gaue warning vnto y• watchmen that they ſhoulde well marke the light which hee in the night ſeaſon out of the tower or Caſtle, would ſhewe them, and yt at the ſight & beholding therof, they ſhould alſo holde vp an other light: and if any were founde remiſſ
                  •
                or negligent in doing accordingly, hee ſhoulde aſſuredlye ſuffer puniſhment therfore, by meanes wherof hee made the watchmen to become moſt diligent and warye.
            Alſo there ought always to be ſcoutes & eſpialles to geueScoures of a Cittye. warning in the night ſeaſō by ſome becon or flame of fire whē the enemies approched, & in the day tyme by ſmoke. Neyther ought men to be ſuffered to goe out at y• gates, into their fields, tyl yt ſcoutes haue throughlye ſearched & tried, yt they may ſafely go about their huſbādry. Neither let the ſame Scoutes continewe in their turnes, any long tyme, but dayly let freſh mē ſuccede in their rowmes, leaſt with too much traueyle and tediouſneſſe, they happen to handle their charge more negligently.
            It is alſo very commodious and profitable that chiefe rulers, and ſuch as be in aucthoritye, eyther at home or in warrs abrode, where ſom daūgerous matters do chance, ſhoulde goe forthe abrode in their own perſons to ſee the ſtate of thinges: by the example of Marcellus, who to his College or fellow in office ſayd theſe wordes: Let vs our ſelues goe with a fewe horſemen to make ſearche how the caſe ſtandeth, for the thing manifeſted vnto our eyes, ſhal more certaynly direct our aduiſe and counſel what is beſt to bee done: For Plato wylleth Princes▪ of cōmon weales to goe forth and ſee how thinges frame abrode, and wyth them to leade their children on horſebacke, thereby to enure them with leſſe feare to abyde the viewe and ſighte of their enemies.
            The auncient cuſtome that the Frenchmen vſed is verye profitable, to learne & vnderſtand of al thinges which

the enemie doeth and pretendeth: whiche cuſtome manye naciōs & princes in our tyme alſo do vſe to put in practiſe, which is y• ſome witty perſōs may be appointed to learnEſpialles abrode very neceſſarye. what fame and cōmon report goeth abrode, and to make wayfaring perſons (wil they or nil they) to ſtay, and of thē to learne and ſifte out what newes euery one of thē hath heard or knowen: let them enquire of them, oute of what coaſts or countries they came, and whither they mean to goe, & let them compell them to declare aſmuche as they know
                  •
                of their pretence to come. But yet ſuche newes, flying▪ tales and reportes, they may not alwayes credite: for many do tell lyes, and do faigninglye aunſwere according to the wyl and humour of him that aſketh the queſtion, and ſo leaue the demaunders as wiſe (for any certaintye) as they were before: but if the demaunders, and ſifters out of theſe matters be circumſpecte and wyſe, they ſhall eaſely be able to boult and trye oute the truthe, and thereby their councelles and aduiſes, which are to be daylye taken in hande, ſhal by ſuch examinacion bee much the better furthered.
            Let alſo the Lieutenant or Gouernour of a Cittie and Citizens, be very diligent and circumſpect in the ſafe kepinge and gardinge of the Gates, the Reyes whereof let him keepe himſelfe, and let him ſet in good order the watchesGates muſt diligently be loked vnto. and wardes dulye: let him alſo take heede, that hee be not deceyued and diſſembled withall, vnder the colour of his owne ſouldiers, or beguiled by the counterfeicting of an other knowen ſpeach. For Hānibal ſurprized many cyties in Italie by apparelling and arming his ſouldiers lyke Romaynes, ſending before him ſuch of his Souldiers as by longe continuance in the warres coulde ſpeake the Latine tongue. Many ſubtile ſhiftes and deceipts are deuiſed in the entraunce of the Gates of a Cittye, whiche are to be taken heede of. For ſometyme the Enemyes for the nonce and of ſet purpoſe, doe make their Beaſtes and Cariages to falle downe, or elles their Waynes that

carye greate huge Stones, to breake and falle in pieces, and thereuppon the Enemies beinge ſydaynlye at hande (whyle the Gates cannot well bee ſhutte) the townes are eaſelye taken. The Maſſilians fearing this thing, by the good Inſtytucions and Ordynaunces of their Common wealthe, did ſo keepe and warde their Citties in tyme of Peace, as if they had then beene continuallye vexed and troubled wyth warres: Wherefore vpon the holy dayes they were wonte to ſhutte the Gates of their Citties, to keepe their Watches, to ſee their Souldiers in good arraye ſtandinge vppon the Walles, to muſter and take a note of their Straungers, and other war like affayres beſide.
            Reuoltes and Runnagates, are not to bee receyued or intertayned into the Cittye: for Synon the Grecian, being gentlye interteyned, was deſtruction of the Troianes. And Zopirus the friende of Darius king of Perſia, perceyuingeFugit
                     •
                  ues and runneavvayes. the Kinge to waxe wearye with his long beſieging of Babilon, and beinge without all hope of wynninge it, cutte of his owne noſe and his owne eares, and fledde away thēce vnto the Babilonians, where he vttring many ſlaunderous and reprochefull wordes, agaynſt his kyng, promiſed them that hee woulde deliuer into their handes the victorye, and be auenged on him. They beleeuing hysCloaked treaſon vnder flattring vvoides. ſmothe words, made this Zopirus their Generall Capitayne, & deliuered vnto him theyr power, whiche when he had receyued, incontinently hee betrayed & deliuered both the Cittye and the whole hoaſte vnto Darius. So alſo Sextus Tarquinius fayning hymſelfe to haue fledde awaye from his fathers Hoaſte, becauſe hee was (as hee fayde) beaten with roddes, and comming to the Cittye of Gabij, (then beſieged) perſwaded theym to ioyne in lyke hatred with him againſt the kinge his father, and being by them appointed chiefe Capitayne, hee ſtraight wayes betrayed the Cittye, into the handes of his ſayde father.
            
               It is alſo daungerous to retayne manye ſtraungers & Aliens into the cittye: both becauſe euerye multitude of people, that is gathered and peeced together oute of ſundrye nations, is vnquiet and oftentimes, of a ſmall matter or quarell ſtirreth vp 
                  •
               umults & hurlyburlies: but alſo becauſe it is the parte of a madde man, to deuide thereDaungerous to haue manie ſtraungers in a cittye. thoſe thinges amongſt many, which he knoweth not whether they wyll ſuffyce to the mayntenaunce of a fewe.
            Unto this Sentence may bee aptly applyed that ſame precept of Cambiſes king of Perſians, which hee gaue vnto Cyrus his ſonne, where he ſayth.
            
               No man ought to ſtaye tyll pouerty oppreſſe,
               But rather to prouide in tyme of wealthyneſſe.
            
            Alexander of Macedonie beſieginge Leucadia, ſuffered all the borderers and neighbours thereaboute to flye thyther for refuge and ſuccour, that they being many, might ye ſoner conſume the victualls, which being ſpent, he eaſe lye obtayned the victory. Antigonus ſemeth to haue vſed the like deuiſe againſte the Athenians, who hauinge deſtroyed their Corne fieldes, departed thence, and wente awaye in the tyme of ſeede ſowinge, that if they had anye remaynder of Corne yet left, they might beſtowe ye ſame vpon ſowinge: & ſo makinge his returne thyther agayn ye nexte ſpring, ouer came and ſpoyled all the Corne beinge nowe ſprouted and ſhotte vp: and ſo by famine broughte them to agree to any thing, euen at his own pleaſure.Forein ſouldiers vntruſtie.
            
            The multitude alſo of ſouldiers is greately to bee feared, this haue the Carthaginians apparantly taught: for when they had made peace with the Romaines, the mercenarye ſouldiers, which were in number about 20000. which fought againſt the Romayns, conſpired together, and reuolted & fled from the Carthaginians, and beſide this, e
                  •
               ueygled and ſeduced all Africa: and there vpon beſieged Carthage, and coulde not be kept from ſcaling the

walles, had not the greate labour and induſtry of Hamilcar then chiefe Captayne of Carthage bene the greater.
            Let a Chiefetayne make diſpatche and haſte in thoſe matters that he is bent and fullye perſwaded to doe: For ſpeedye expedition is the beſt compaignion in warfare: in which thinge Alexander of Macedonie is eſpecially commended, becauſe in expedicion and ſpedineſſe, bee ſurpaſſedSpede and expedition a nottable furtheraunce to vva
                     •
                   like affayres. the celerity & haſte of all other Capitayns: and he had ſo framed his footemen, that they were as ſwyft and nimble on foote as horſes: wherfore Darius the king being by hym purſued, chaſed and perſecuted, greuouſlye complayned that he had no tyme of reſpite geeuen him to pawſe & conſider how to withſtād the alacritie of Alexander, who oftentimes couragiouſly traueyled, with great Iourneys night and day to entrappe his enemies at vnwares, and to ſet vpon them ſodenly and vnlooked for.
            Let alſo the chiefe Capitayn of the warres do his matters cloſely and ſecretly, and let him not open and diſcloſe his ſecretes vnto any man, by thexample of Metellus, whoSecrete hande linge of affayres. (as Plutarch mēcioneth, thus anſwered a certayn frēd of his, which demaunded of him what he would doe y• nexte day followinge: If this my coate which I weare (ſaythe hee) coulde vtter foorthe and openlye declare my ſecretes and determinations, I woulde ſtraighte wayes put it of, and burne it to aſhes. And Iulius Caeſar purpoſing to trāſporte and ſend his armie another waye, toke his Iourney ſecretelye, and diliuered to ſome one man his tables, ſigned withe his hande, dyrectinge theym at a certaine time and place to bee readye, and in good araye of battle to doe what hee ſhoulde commaunde theym: and nowe and then commaunded he notes to be wrytten vpon ſtones lying in y• high ways, wher his ſouldiers muſt paſſe, where by he gaue them by certayne watchwords, directly to vnderſtande what waye was nedeful and beſt to be taken.
            As it is the parte of a good phiſitian to leaue no hurtefull thing in the bodye of his Patient: ſo is it the parte of

a good Generall to remoue and take awaye whatſoeuer ſhall hynder the proſperous eſtate & preſeruation of thys his aucthoritye: for oftentimes it falleth oute that a ſmall ſparcke of fyre being neglected and not looked vnto, cauſeth a greate flame, as the prouerbe ſayth. And that ſentence of Marcus Cato is to be holden for an Dracle, wrytinge thus in his Booke of Warfare: In other mattersTvvo ſpecialle precepts in dy
                  
                     •
                  ecting vva
                     •
                  e fare. (ſayth hee) whatſoeuer is miſdone, maye bee redreſſed or afterwards at more leaſure, amended: but in warre, we muſt not admit the promiſe of any amēdement, for faultes committed: becauſe preſent puniſhment ought out of hād to folowe the offence. For the reuenger of ſlouthe and Ignoraunce is euermore at hande ready and preſt, which is neuer fauouringe or pityfull towardes the enemy that offendeth.
            There are two preceptes whiche ſeeme to conteyne in them the whole diſcipline or Arte of Warfare, the one is that there bee but fewe Gouernours and Commaunders & the ſame able well to gouern, and thē alſo ſuch as haue paſſed through al yt degrees of warfare, wherby by obeiinge aforetime theymſelues, they haue the better ſkyll to cōmaund others. They which haue theſe things, it cānot be choſen, but that they ſhall eyther obtayne the victory, or els an honeſt and honourable peace: but to them whiche fayle in theſe thinges, no power or Force can ſuffice for their defence, but they ſhalbe caryed headlonge with a blynde rage to their vtter ruine & deſtruction, euen lyke brute beaſtes.
            Clemencie and mercifulneſſe towardes their Subiectes and vnderlinges, both greatly ſet forthe the commendacion of Generalles and Captaynes, and maketh theirClemencye in Generalles moſt commendable. noble actes more famous: Cicero affirmeth that, they are to be receiued into fauour and protection which with ſubmiſſion caſt downe their weapons and betake themſelues to the mercye of the Generall, yea althoughe the Ordynance and Engine haue ſhaken or battred down the wall.

And Caeſar was wont to ſay, yt nothing pleaſed him better then to ſpare the ſimple ſorte of people, neyther is this vertue to bee omitted towardes thoſe whiche are ouercome and vanquiſhed: For ſlaughter, Luſte, Crueltye, and euerye example of outragious Pryde towardes thoſe that bee in diſtreſſe and miſerye, hath beene alwayes accoumpted deteſtable and horrible: great commendation did Marcus Marcellus wyn, who before he would gra
                  ••
                the Spoyle of the wealthy Cyttye Syracuſe, vnto hys Souldiers, wept, and by an Edict commaunded that no manne ſhoulde hurte or Iniurye any Freeman of the Citye. Liuius maketh mention that the Spoyle of that Cittye was ſo excedinge greate, that there woulde haue beene ſcarcelye the lyke in CARTHAGE, whyche was of Power and equall Strengthe alwayes to encoū
               tre wyth theim.
            In myne Opinion this note or Precepte is expediente to bee geeuen, that wee ſhoulde farre more eſteeme of aFevv vvel trayned better thē a greate number of vnſkilful peaſauntes ſmall Number of Souldiers, beinge trayned vp and exercyſed in the Feates of Warre, and ſooner ſhoulde they gayne the Uictorye, then of a greate multitude whyche are bothe vnſkilfull and Ignoraunte, who doe open and as it were make a readye waye to their own deſtruction, who are afrayde of euerye Tryfle, and rather take care for flight, then for glorye or renowme: therefore the olde precepte willeth a man that lacketh an olde beaten ſouldier, to take a Nouiſe, as yet vntrayned.
            For ALEXANDFR after the death of his father PHILIPPE, wythe Fourtye Thouſande tall armed Souldiers, that had bene by his father notablye and ſkilfullye trayned in Feates of Warres, ouercame ſundrye and innumerable Hoaſtes of his enemies, that wythſtode him, and ſubdued verye manye Regions and countries of the worlde vnder his Subiection, and compelled them to become vaſſayles vnto hym.
            What ſhall wee ſaye of the Romayues, who beinge

diſcēded frō meane beginnings yet by vertue and prowes onelye and by Martiall ſkill, did conquere all the whole world? Is it not a thing to be meruayled at, that a number of heardmen and ſheepeheardes ſhould inuade Italy, a countrye moſte mightye aboue all other Regions, and daunte and ſubdue the Germaynes, and all Fraunce: diſpiſing the largenes of their Bodies, and the number of their hoaſtes, and beſides this ſhculde alſo 
                  •
               ame & bringe in ſubiection the Spaniardes, whiche were righte fearce & cruell warrioures, and ſhoulde conquere and vanquyſhe yt 
               Africanes, which were the wylieſt & wealthieſt perſons vnder the ſonne: and moreouer ſhoulde ouerreache ye wyſedome and cunninge of the Greekes, and finallye become Lordes of the whole worlde?
            In the choyſe and muſtering of perſons apt for ye warres, wee muſt firſt and formoſt haue a reſpecte vnto yt age of the perſon, which ought to be younge and tender: For boyes and ſtripelinges, doe far more eaſelye learne thoſeYongmē moſt apteſt to bee taught and trained invvarfare thinges whiche are expedient: and doe better frame themſelues to thinges wherin is no difficulty, while their mē
               bers are not yet ſtyffe and hardened, neyther growne to their full ſtrengthe and perfection: for they 
                  •
               itte a horſe better, & they hādle yt raynes nymbler then aged perſōs with ſtowpinge bodies, whoſe lymmes be ſtiffe and hardened. And furthermore lightſomneſſe in leapinge vp & downe, ſwyfteneſſe in running, and quickneſſe in caſting, is more eaſie for the bodye, which yet is tender and gren
                  •
               , then for a body that is growne vnto ful ſtrength.
            Surely Plato prince of al Philoſophers helde opinion that younge men were to be choſen for the warres, at theAge of Souldiers. age of twentye yeares, and Seruius Tullius Kinge of the Romaynes, was of opinion to chooſe them at ſeauentene yeares olde, at which age he called them Iuuenes, becauſe they were perſon
                  •
               sable to helpe, and ayde their Country and common wealth. Some others doe wryte that the firſteyeares of Pubertie, that is when the hayres doe

beginneth firſte to grow▪ is the beſt tyme to chooſe one y• wee woulde haue to proue a worthy ſeruitour▪ But the ſouldiers which are taken vp being aboue the age of 
                  〈◊〉
                yeares, are ſeldome cōmodious. And when they handleVnfitneſſe of Souldiers. their weapons, (becauſe they doe it vnhandſomelye) they are but made laughing ſtockes vnto others, & oftentimes becauſe of their vnweildyneſſe, they are by y• old 
                  〈◊〉
                quipped, which ſaythe: that they bee as fitte for warfare as an Oxe to beare a Packeſadle: therfore it were 
                  〈◊〉
                to exempt ſuche, and remitte them to ſuche Artes as they haue bene brought vp in, then to preſſe theym to the warres, where they will ſerue to ſmall purpoſe, except it be in greate neceſſitie: for then we reade that priſoners and malefactors haue bene lou
                  •
               ed out of priſon and ſet at liberty, & bōdmē alſo in this caſe to haue ſerued for ye preſēt turn. Cornelius Celſus wryteth, that a ſquare bodyed perſonage is moſt ſeruiſable, & hee prayſeth a mediocritie of breadth and length: becauſe talneſſe whiche in youth is comelye,Stature▪ 
                  
                     ••
                  ſ
                     ••
                   commendable for a Souldier. is by nature ſone conſumed and brought to an end by Old age. But as ye ſtature which tendeth vnto mediocritye is firmer, ſtronger, and of longer continuaunce
                  •
                ſo on the other part, a ſlender bodye is coumpted weake and ſeeble▪ and a fatte bodye is thought to bee dull and vnweildye: not withſtandinge I knowe that ſome doe heſte allowe of ta
                  •
               neſſe in a Souldier▪ wherup
                  •••
                the Romaynes a 
                  〈◊〉
                their liuelye and couragious ho
                  •
               ſemen
                  •
                and in their firſte Bādes & Cohortes, ſuffered 
                  •
               one to ſerue but thoſe that were in ſtature ſixe foote, or very neare there vnto.
            Neither am I ignoraūt that Alexander and his hoaſte by reaſon of their ſmal ſtature, were at their comming intoSmall ſtature of Alexanders Souldiers. that country, derided and laughed to ſ
                  •
               o
                  •
               n
                  •
                of the Scythians, which were very tal perſons, but win a ſmal tyme after, the Scythians learned, that manlineſſe and courage, & not talnes & height was to be conſidered in the eſtemie. For it many tymes comes to paſſe that little perſons, and men of ſmall ſtature, proue & are found y• beſt warriours.

Therfore we muſt not ſtand vpon this poynt, to conſider how tall a man bee, but how ſtrong hee is▪ yet notwith ſtā
               dinge the confirmation and well knitting of the mēbers together, may geeue great tokens of ſtrength in man. Let therfore a younge man, that is to bee employed thysBeſt bodilye proportion & 
                     •
                  eacture for a Souldier. way, be wel vi
                  •
               aged, and ſtreight bodied, round necked & handing ſome what downwarde, quicke eyed and watchef
                  •
               ll▪ chearely countenaūced, broade breaſted and broade s
                  •
               ouldre
                  •
               , ſtrongly drawned in his armes, and firmly cō
               pact in the ioyntes of his fingers, long armed, ſtrong Elbowed, ſlender be
                  •
               lyed, bygge hypped, his legges rather ſlenderlye then ro
                  •
               udlye Cau
                  •
               fed, and Strongelye fo
                  ••
               ed.
            Moreouer in leuyinge and muſteringe Souldiers, we muſt conſider in what country they were borne and brought vp. For albeit in euerye place there bee borne aſwell Daſt
                  •
               rdes as valyaun
                  •
               e and ſtoute perſons, yet notwithſtandinge the aſpect of the Heauens, furthereth mucheThe countrye muſt be reſ
                     •
                  ected vvhere a ſouldier hathe hene bred and borne. vnto the Courage and Strength of the perſon: and the North coūtries are better in this reſpect, thethe Eaſterlye: But euerye temperate Countrye is reputes and taken as beſte.
            A Souldier is better to be taken out of the Countrye then out of the Ci
                  ••
               ie▪ as all the auncient wryters which haue wrytten of Warrefare doe holde Opinion: and not without good cauſe
                  •
                for the Countrye youth being hardened, and Sunne burned, ſuffering and enduring duſte, Rayne, and Snowe, feedinge vpon brown Breade, and wylde bearyes, can abyde farre more eaſely to lye abrode,City ſouldiers can ſuffer rayne, ſhowers, and ſtormes, can continewe to rume, through the ſtippery and durtye fieldes al bare footed, which no horſe can paſſe for myre & fowlneſſe, muche better then tenderly brought vp yongmen can, which haue bane cockered and nycely effeminated with town delicacies, and pleaſures of the Citty, who cannot ſleepe except they may lye vpon a ſoft feather bed, where no noyſe

muſt diſquiet or trouble them, and being no
                  •
               hable to endure eyther heate or colde, are euer p
                  •
               wling in their ſtomacke, they neuer haue good appetite to their meate except they may haue the delicate diſhes of the Citty fare, & dreſt after the City faſhion, euer ſeeking for the fineſt brothes and viandes, neyther can they bee at hartes eaſe if they want their olde domeſticall blandimentes. Furdermore nature her ſelfe preſcribeth this vnto mankind, that bee leſſe feareth wounds or death which hath leaſt knowledge of delyces and pleaſures in this lyfe.
            The Lacedemonians deſerued greate prayſe and commendation in warfare, whoſe lyfe if wee do 
                  •
               e holde, wee ſhall finde y• they euen tyll the age of 
                  〈◊〉
                ſtate▪ wereLacedemoniās hovve they lyued. occupied and buſied in the fieldes and in hunting and alwayes lyued very ſtrictlye and hardelye.
            The Auncient Romaynes eſteemed the care of warrefare and huſbandrye as one: and the ſelfe ſame perſons y• in tyme of Peace played the Huſbandemen, dyd 
                  〈◊〉
                tymeRomaynes eſteemed vvarfare and huſbandry both a lyke. of Warre ſerue for Sauldiers: Whereuppon 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Cincinnatus, was called from the Ploughe, 
                  •…
               bee Dictator, & after the victorie gotten ouer his enemies, he ſurrē
               dred his rowme and dignitie, & retourned to his Oxen▪ & ſmall plotte of Lande which hee had at home. So like wyſe Fabricius after hee had exp
                  •••
               ed Pirr
                     •••
                  
                oure of the Coaſtes of Italy, and Marcus curius▪
                S
                  ••
               named De
                     •
                  
                  tatus hauinge vanquiſhed the Sab
                     ••
                  es betooke themſelues agayne to their fieldes. Alſo Curius Marcus longe tyme after, was a Capitayne choſen out of the Country, and yet was hee ſeuen tymes Coſull▪ and wyth manye and greac victories was his fame ennobled▪ and ſo hard
                  •
               
               ned was hee in labour and paynes taking y• when he offered his legges (beinge ſwelled) to the Surgeon to bee cutte of and launced, he did it with no more feare, t
                  •
               rn he would haue geuen a Carpenterr a piece of Timber to bee ſquared: This laſte of all is to be concluded, y• the harder and paine fuller that the Trades bee which men doe commonlye practiſe and followe, the ſtronger and ſtouter

doe the ſame make the Souldiers: and the nycer and finer that they bee, the more doe they weaken courage and abate valiaūtnes. For it is not to be loked for, yt cur doggs which come peaking out of Tauernes and Typling houſes, ſhould geue the onſet vpon a Lybbard or Lyon, nay, they wyll rather ſtreightway return to y• licking of their diſhes agayne.
            The exerciſe of hunting is very good, whiche differeth much from ruſticall and warlike affayres: for Xenophon when hee determined to followe the warres of Cyrus, dydHunting a good exerciſe. firſt with greate care and diligence learne to ryde, & hunt, affirming that he was an vnprofitable Souldier, which was not in both theſe exerciſes greately enured and practiſed. For the Romains (becauſe their Yongmen ſhould not geeue themſelues too much to pleaſure, or be marred with idleneſſe and eaſe in corners and bynookes) made a goodly field for exerciſe, which they called Campus Martius, wherein the Games and exerciſes of Armes were celebrated and kept, not only for the Spectacles and ſights of Fencers, and ſwordplayers, but alſo for the vſe and exerciſe of Souldiers: and thereat were preſent certayn yt inſtructed & trained the ſame ſouldiers, which were with the cōmon charge and prouiſion recōpenſed withe double ſhares of grayne and corne: becauſe they ſhould y• better and diligentlier (being enflamed with reward) trayn and teache the ſame Souldiers.
            It would aſke a longe diſcourſe to make rehearſall of all Martiall exerciſes, & orderly to diſcribe ye rules & methodesTrayninge of Souldiers. thereof, to ſette down preceptes how young ſouldiers ſhould be trayned, howe they ſhoulde behaue themſelues in auoyding and declining weapons comminge towardes them▪ and how to deale prudentlye and manfullye in ſtryking agayne, howe they ought to playe the partes of Souldiers throughly in euery poynte: how they ſhall handle the ſhielde or Target: how to ſet and pytche theyr ſtakes, obſerue their array in marchinge, and kepe their

ſtandinges, all which thinges rather ſeeme to appertayn vnto him that wryteth of warfare, then vnto him whiche entreateth of ciuill ſocietye.
            
               Plato ſetteth downe in order, that no man ſhoulde haueWhat age is lavvful for one to be a Generall. aucthoritye in the warres, before hee were thirtie yeares of age (although there were otherwiſe in him, approued and tryed manhoode and valiaunce, and that hee were alſo euen at thoſe yeares ennobled or made famous for ſom martial exploytes) This age did the Athenians think lawfull and fitting for warlike offices, althoughe ſometimes they derogate frō this law, eſpecially in Alcibiades, who in his adoleſcencie, was ſo highly in the peoples fauour, y• whereſoeuer hee walked abroade, all the Cittizens caſte their eyes onely vppon him, and no man ſo well eſteemed amongſt them al, as he was. For before hee was of lawful age, hee was made Lieutenaunt generall of the warres againſt the Syracuſians, vnto whom notwithſtandinge were adioyned two Colleges, farre elder then himſelfe, that is to ſay Nicias and Lamachus, to thende they might more ſafelye prouide for the publike weale. Alſo Octauius Caeſar at the age of xviii yeares was elected Emperoure,Octauius Caeſar. 
               Cicero perſwading the ſame vnto the people of Rome, but afterwardes when he handled ſome matters againſt the mynde and lykinge of Cicero, he was ſory for that whiche before hee had done, and repented his former counſell and aduiſe which hee had geuen for his aduauncement & election, and thereupon wrate an Epiſtle, wherein he exclaymeth againſt himſelfe, that he had playd no wiſemannes parte, but confeſſed that the common wealth was by hym and through his meanes deceyued.
            Farre more ſafer is an armie or hoaſt committed vntoOlde beaten Souldiers are to bee preferred before youngmen. olde beaten Souldiers, then vnto youngmen, whoſe firſt aduiſemēts and counſells, are more fearce and vnſtayed, and who doe leſſe forſee and conſider the incerteintye of chaunces, becauſe Fortune neuer at anye tyme deceyued them: but Old men with quyet mindes do foreſee manye

thinges, and preuent before hand h
                  •
               lve to encounter with Fortune: and where nede is of ſtonte perſons, they do the ſame, not ſo willingly, as dryuen there unto by neceſſitie, & will rather chooſe to dyeun fight, then in flight.
            Alexander Kynge of Macedonie beinge twenty & one yeares of age loſte his father Philippe by Deathe, and becauſe hee woulde ſeeme to bee no leſſe the Heire and Succeſſor of his kingdome, then of his worthyneſſe and glorye, when as hee had taken on him the Gouernmente of the armie left him by his father, he dyd not chooſe vnto him thoſe compaignions, which he had bene brought vp, & conuerſant wtal, neither youthful yonkers: but old tried & beaten ſouldiers: many of thē ſuch as were alreadye diſcharged & diſpenced wt al frō folowing the warrs any 
                  ••
               
               ger, who aforetime ſerued his father, & had abidē many a ſharpe ſtorme vnder him: in which doing, he ſemed rather to haue choſen maiſters & capitaines of warres thē ſouldiers: and he cōmitted not the orderinge & diſpoſinge of hys Battls, but vnto thē yt were Lx. yeres of age, which ſure lye was the cauſe, that he alwayes vanquiſhed the 
                  〈◊〉
               , and obtayned the victory, & with a very ſmall hand of mē ouercame ſixe hundred thouſand of the Perſians: & if hee had not bene by death preuented, he ſurelye woulde haue ſubdued the whole worlde.
            The Tribune or Marſhall of the fielde, ought to bee a man moſt valiaunt and couragious, in prowes and Martiall Cheualrye exactlye trayned: the rulers alſo of euery particuler Crew and Band, which haue ſo many men at their commaundemente, ought in their offyce to bee perſens moſt graue, becauſe that in the abſence of the Generall, they ſupplye his rowme. He alſo that hath the charge and office of pitching the Tentes & encamping, oughtEncamping. of all others to bee moſt ſkilfull, & one by long experiēce and practiſe in warres, throughly tryed and experienced. For he ought diligently to view and ſurueigh the nature and condicion of the place, that hee maye choſe the ſafeſt &

moſt cōuenient partes  for the 
                  〈◊〉
                to campe in that there 
                  〈…〉
                his Souldiers might bee eaſely by the enemie aſſaulted and diſplaced, neyther by meanes of a Ryuer ſurrounded and drowned▪ or elles by the too much neareneſſe of wood growing thērabout, toChoyſe of ground for pitching of tents & encampinge bee conſumed and fyred whiche thinge happened vnto Craſſus in the ciuile warres, who throughe ſuche careles ouerſight, was with all his armie almoſte burned ſodenlye by the fyre, that his enemies had ſecretely enkindled. So did Camillus alſo deſtroy & ſpoyle the campe & tentes of the Volſciās by fiering the wood yt was neere vnto thē.
            Moreouer let a Generalle foreſee that there bee ſtoare enoughe of wood, of forage & of water: let them alſo haue an eaſie egreſſe abroade into the fieldes round about thē,Surueighors of vvorkes. and a ſafe returne and egreſſe backe agayne to the campe. Neither ought ye Surueigher or chiefe ouerſeer of workmen to lacke long experience, vpon whom chiefly reſteth all the charge, to ſee yt nothing be wanting to ye hoaſt yt is nedeful, eyther for aſſault & battry, or for repulſing or defence. This man ought to haue in a readineſſe Carpēters, Ioigners, Rafterers, & Maſōs, for ye contriuing & makīg of engines, & woddē towers, battring pieces, croſbowes, Slinges, & other ſorts of gunnes beſide▪ and briefly to c
                  •
               
               clude, ye auncient perſons muſt be appointed rulers ouer y• army, & the younger ſort muſt be honored with other dignities, & ſpecially ſuch as haue more glory & prayſe when the caſe falleth out well & with good ſucceſſe, thē daunger if it ſhould fall out otherwiſe, or that Fortune ſhoulde deceiue them. Reward & puniſhment are to bee demed & taken as two Gods in a common wealth, and in MartiallRevvarde for vvel doinge & puniſhmēt for euil doing. affaires eſpecially accoūpted moſt neceſſarye: for neyther ſhall it be ſufficient for a Captayne to keepe his ſouldiers at cōmaūdemēnt, and in obedience for feare of puniſhement: except alſo the hope of glory & reward do quicken & pricke forward ye courage & fortitude of ye ſouldier: & ye deſire of renoume doth of it ſelf particulerly preſcribe ſuch things as neither the leaders nor captaines thēſelues, cā
               
by any poſſible meanes directe or teache: For ſurely hope is a right greate affect and mocion of the mynde, whiche oftentimes ſtirreth vp and moueth men to do thoſe things which ſeeme to excede the ſtrength & ability of man, & which otherwiſe could not by any reaſon or meanes be perſwaded.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            The Table.
            
               A.
               Abſtinence frō ciuile bloudſhed. Folio. 63.
               Adultry puniſhed. 37.
               Age lavvful for a generall to bee choſen at. 87
               Age of Souldiers. 48.
               Alexanders frends vvere his treaſures. 28
               Alexander his vvyſe example in vvatching. 29
               Annia a vvidovv, her aunſvver as touching mariage the ſecond tyme. 43
               Appiꝰ Claudius his violence. 62
               Apt names for Citizens. 65
               Ariſtotles aduife touching ſilēce to Caliſthenes. 52
               Aſſured peace better then conqueſt hoped for. 75
               Aſtronomie. 13
               At vvhat yeares an officer maye be choſen. 65
               Aucthors of vvarre. 76
            
            
               B.
               Banquetting. 57
               Bathes. 69
               Better to bee vnborne then vntaught. 47
               Beſt bodilye proportion and feature for a ſouldier. 85
               Bluſhing in children a ſigne of good nature. 45
               Bricke vvalles in Babilon. 10
               Btibery a filthy thing. 26
               Biſhops named kinges by Romulus. 24.
            
            
               C
               Careleſſe princes. 1
               Care for Scholemaiſters. 11
               Caſtles in cities. 72
               Cato his diſtinctiōs of groūd. 67
               Cato, one of fevv vvordes. 52
               Cauſes neceſſary for mariage. 35
               Certen hādicraftſmē neceſſary. 9
               Cenſor vvhat it ſigniſieth. 28
               Ceremonial cuſtōes of Egipt. 68
               Choyſe of a vvyfe. 38
               Chaſtity in a vvoman. 41
               Cheſtnut tree. 67
               Cheriſhing of children. 45
               Children of dul vvytres. 46
               Children hovv longe they are ſo reputed. 55
               Choiſe of groūd for building. 66
                Choiſe in buying lande. eodem
               Choyſe of grounde for pitchinge of Tentes. 88
               Ciuility vvhat it is. 48
               Cicero and Saluſt at diſſentiō. 59
               Citty Souldiers. 85
               Clemency commendable. 83.
               Cloaked treaſons. 82
               Combatte. 74
               Cōfortable to haue children. 35
               Communalty of Rome. 64
               Commodities of learning. 46
               Commodity by concord. 49
               Comelye building in a city. 72
               Cōſiderations for magiſtrates. 26
               Conſiderations for children. 43
               Concord in a Realme. 44
               Concord in muſicke. 50
               Compariſon of a commō vveale vnto a Ship. 49.
               Complayntes of Suters. 63
               
                  Countries famous throughe vvaters. 68
               Continuall toyling. 18
               Coūtry muſt be reſpected vvher ſouldiers be borne. 85
               Corporall exerciſe. 17
               Corruption of Iudgement. 25
               Couetous man good to none. 40
               Couetous man, an hōgry dog. 40
               Couerouſ
                     •
                  es. 58
               Coſtly funeralles. 58
               Curioſity of a ſimpering prikmedainty 42
            
            
               D
               Daunſinge. 43
               Daungerous to haue many ſtraū
                  gers in a citty. 8
                     •
                  
               
               Darius dranke muddy vvater. 56
               Death eſc
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  d by thraldom. 27
               Death to thē that leaue childrē behinde them leſſe greuous. 35
                Death of theim that vvante iſſue brought into obliuion. ibidē
               
               Demoſthenes. 79
               Difference of humane ſociety. 3
               Dyet. 14
               Dioniſius. 53
               Diogenes. 53
               Diſcōmoditie of ſt
                     •
                  dig vvater. 66
               Domeſtical. diſcorde. 42
               Duties of Iuſtice. 21
            
            
               E
               Egiptian lore. 11
               Eight kindes of puniſhments vſed by the Romaines. 27
               Eloquence. 15
               Enuye. 62
               Epaminond
                     •
                  s. 18
               Epaminondas neuer maried anye vvife. 47
               Epicutes. 57
               Equalitie in a citty cauſeth concorde. 5
               Equality in choiſe of a vvife 38
               Eſpialles very neceſſary. 81
               Example of ſocietie in birdes. 2
                     •
                  
               
               Exerciſe of mannes lyfe. 8
               Example of deſtenie. 13
               Example of Milo. 18
                Example of Polidamus. ibidem
               Example of temperaunce. 21
               Exāple of the huſbands loue. 36
               Example of the vviues loue. 46
               Example of cockring childrē. 46
            
            
               F.
               Fauour & mercy of conquerours 64
               Faire and ſmoth vvordes. 63
               Fevv vvell trayned Souldiers, better then a great number vnſkilfull. 84
               Flattery muſt be eſchevved. 53
               Firſt reaſon of Societye inſtituted. 3
               Firſt dutie of Iuſtice. 6
               Firſt earthly treaſures of men. 28
               Firſt loue is moſt ſtedfaſt. 43
               Firſt onſet in battle daūgerous. 75
               Fovver ſpeciall regardes in mans lyfe. 20
               Four Cardinall vertues. 50
               Foure thinges belonginge to a Chief
                     •
                  ayne. 77
               For vvomen to knovve the full time of going vvith childe & vvhen to be deliuered. 45
               Fortifications. 7
                     •
                  
               
               Forrein ſouldiers vntruſty. 8
                     •
                  
               
               
                  Fruite eaters. 
                     •
                  4
               Fyrevvood. 68
               Fiſhiug. 71
               Fugitiues and runnavvayes from the armie. g
                     •
                  
               
            
            
               G
               Gaggling of a gooſe ſaued Rome from beinge taken by the enemies. 29
               Gardens and Orchardes. 6
                     •
                  
               
               Gates. 81
               God the principall aucthor of al good lavves & procedinges. 23
               Good houſholders. 
                     •
                  
               
               Good Artes and Sciences, to bee cared for. ibid.
               Good counſellours. 23
               Good exāples by Romaines. 26
               Good order for corne. 30
               Good order for the church. 31
               Good order for high vvayes. ibid
               Good order for Conduites. ibid
               Good parentes bringe vp good children. 38
               Good mother, good nurſe. 44
               Good report for vvell doing. 50
               Good citizen, good huſbande. 
                     •
                  1
               Good vvay to procure a ſtomake 56
               Gouernours in vvarres. 77
               Grammer. 12
               Gratitude 52.
               Gourmaundiſe 55
            
            
               H
               Hard bringing vp of youth. 17
               Hard thing to choſe a vvyfe. 38
               Hardneſſe of fare. 78
               Hee that obayeth vvell ruleth vvell. 21
               Honosalit arres. 3
               Hovv a common vveale proſpereth vvithout magiſtrates. 19
               Houſholders. 32
               Hovv the maiſter ſhould entreat his ſeruauntes. 33
               Hovv a healthful man diſpoſeth his ryme. 45
               Hovv to deale vvith children. 45
               Hovv Bacchꝰ vvas made a god. 51
               Hovv Architas qualified his āger 54.
               Hoat vvater, 69
               Hovv to ouercome the enemy. 9
               Humane care. 3
               Hunting. 86
               Hurt of flatterers. 53
               Huſbandry. 7
               Huſbādry, purueighour of manie neceſſaries. 57
               Huſbandmen. 60
            
            
               I
               Iuniper trees. 67
               Imitation of Nature. 1
               Inuention of Muſicke. 14
               Infancy of children. 45
               Inconuenience of anger. 53
               Indians maner in burialls. 58
               Infamy of Cenſors. 26
               Innocency. 27
               Iſis a Goddeſſe. 91
               Italy. 66
               Iulius Caeſar. 79
               Iuba. 60
               Iuſ
                     •
                  ice. 21
            
            
               K
               Kings of Egipt. 11
               Kindes of vvaters. 70
            
            
               
               L.
               Lacedemonians. 86
               Lavves made not obſerued 4
               Lavv amongſt Thegiptians. 8
               Lavv a ſilente magiſtrate. 21
               Lavvyers vnſaeiable. ibidē
               
               Leuiyng Tributes. 28
               Liberality in Captapnes. 74
               Lybraries. 73
               Lybrary of Ptolomeus. ibidem
               Lotos a tree. 32
            
            
               M.
               Magiſtrates. 21
               Manquelling. 23
               Mans age. 54
               Mans age deuided by ſeuen yeares. ibidem
               Mannes lyfe compared to the 4. ſeaſons of the yeare. 55
               Mā may not vviſh for lōg life. ibi.
               Manner of apparel. 57
               Mayne timber trees 68
               Merchauntes. 8
               Memory in children the beſt token of vvitte. 45
               Metellus his oracion concerning mariage. 36
               Moderate dyet and meaſurable apparell. 41
               Modeſt aunſvvere of a chaſt Lady 43
               Moderation in Dyet. 5
                     •
                  
               
               Moneta a monendo. 28
               Monumentes. 58
            
            
               N
               Nature in chyldren ought to be carefull for their Parentes in olde age, 35
               Naturall mothers are naturallnurſes, 44
               Naughty members in a commō
                  vveale. 64
               Neareneſſe of the Sea commodious to a Cittye, 70
               Nobles. 5
               No vvitty Citizen vvithout learninge. 12
               Not good to do any thing vvhile anger laſteth, 54
               No place for Loiterers in a common vveale. 6
               Nothinge more rare then a perfect Generall, 80
               Nightvvatches in a citty, 28
               Nightvvatchers charged. 29
               Nightvvatches preuent manye daungers. 30
            
            
               O
               Obedience vnto Iuſtice. 4
               Occaſions of contention amōg Citizens to be reformed. 25
               Octauius Caeſar. 87
               Offences in Souldiers, 78
               Olde men. 55
               Old beaten ſouldiers, 87
               Oligarchia. 4
               One politique Capitayne more vvorthe then a greate ſorte of vnſkilfull ſouldiers, 79
               Orderly inſtruction of the man to his vvyfe 39
               Ordering the members of chyldren. 44
               Order of buildinge houſes. 72
               
                  Ouerſeers of the lavvs. 24
               Ouerſeers of houſholde affaires. 32
            
            
               P
               Pauſanias of Macedonia. 62
               Paynting. 10
               Peace better then vvarre 76
               Pecunia, a pecore. 28
               Penury of corne & victualles. 71
               People bred in cold countries. 67
                People of the ſouth part. ibidem
               Periury. 52
               Perſians truſty in keeping counſell. 22
               Periander a buggerer. 62
               Phiſicke. 14
               Philoſophie. 16
               Phocion. 31
               Pinching pouertie putteth men to their ſhiftes. 20
               Piety of Alexander. 27
               Poetes neceſſarye in a common vveale. 16
               Puniſhements for the vvatch. 80
               Poſſeſſion of Landes. 32
               Pouertie not relieued. 60
               Prayſe of Titus Veſpaſianus for his gouernment. 1
               Praiſe of his bountie. 51
               Prayſe of ſome princes. 2
               Prayſe of Iulius Caeſars bountie tovvardes learning. 17
               Praiſe of Adrianus Caeſar. 31
               Praiſe of Africanus for his bountie 51
               Prayſe of vvarrefare. 76
               Pretor vvhat it ſignifieth 25
               Prodigality and ryot of Albidius. 56
               Prudence 21
            
            
               R
               Raſhe ſpeache. 52
               Raſhneſſe of anger. 53
               Reaſons of regarde in a commó vveale. 9
               Reaſon ought to rule our affections. 50
               Repiners at other mens vvel doinge. 62
               Remorſe of the Maiſter tovvardes his ſeruauntes fidelity. 33
               Revvarde for vvel doing and puniſhment for euill doing. 86
               Rich men vnlearned 46
               Riottous perſons reclaymed. 47
               Riottous perſons. 56
               Riot and couetouſnes. 57
               Rome and Athens in olde time the mothers of Artes and Sciences. 76
               Romaines eſtemed vvarfare and huſbandrye both alike. 86
            
            
               S.
               Safe layde vp ſoone founde. 41
               Sauegardes of a Cittye. 28
               Secretes betvvene man and vvife ought not to be reuealed. 39
               Scithiās maner in burying their kinges. 58
               Scoutes. 21
               Scouts, vvatchers and vvarders. 28
               Secrete handling of affaires. ibid.
               Semyramis. 58
               Seigniorie of Venice. 22
               Silence 52
               
                  Seueritie of Iuſtice. 64
               Senate in doubt. 63
               Senators diſcharged. 26
               Shameles aūſvvere of a a ſhame leſſe ſtrompet. 37
               Small ſtature of Alexanders ſoul diers, 85
               Smellfeaſtes. 56
               Societie of citizens. 2
               Societye humane profitable by procreation. ibidem
               Society humane vvherunto it tē
                  deth. 49
               Socrates. 36
               Solons lavv for the childe that is not vvell prouided for by the parents. 47
               Solons lavv for puniſhing adulterye. 37
               Some vvomen delyghting in filthy talke declare the filthines of their poluted minde. 37
               Spiritualty ought to be maynreyned by the lyuinges of the churche. 60
               Sundrye good poinctes meete to be knovvē of a good capitaine. 80
               Spede and expedition a notable furderaūce vnto vvar like affayres. 83
               Springes of vvonderfull quality in forreyn countreys 69
               Stature moſte commendable for a Souldier. 85
               Straungers. 61
               Streite girding. 44
               Studies of vertues & diſciplines. 3
               Such men, ſuch familye and ſeruauntes. 32
               Surueighours of vvoorkes. 88
            
            
               T
               Thebes 10
               To keepe touche and perfourme promiſe, is commendable. 21
               Tvvo precepts to be obſerued by the huſbande tovvardes the vvife. 39
               Tvvo kindes of learning not preiudicial for the childe to practiſe, at one inſtaunt. 46
               Tvvo ſpeciall preceptes in directing vvarfare. 83
               Trade of liuing. 34
               Trayning of Souldiers. 86
               True ornamentes of a vvomā. 41
               True citizens. 61
               Triptolemus. 49
               Tribes or vvardes in a citty. 26
               Times to be conſidered in peace and vvarre. 24
               Time doth alter both the perſon and his properties. 24
               Time or age for man and vvomā to mary. 38
            
            
               V
               Vayne traffiques. 8
               Vaine glory and ambition. 76
               Venetians admitr no ſtraungers to beare rule among them. 22
               Venetiās alter nothing af
                     •
                  rtime ordayned by their predeceſſors and elders. ibidem
               Vndecent geſture, in a Senatour put to repulſe. 23
               Vertues the guides of eiuile magiſtrates. 21
               Vertuous children. 41
               Vnfitnes of ſouldiers. 85
               
                  Vnneceſſary expences muſt be forborne in funeralles. 57
            
            
               VV
               VVater. 68
               VVaging battle. 57
               VVarring for enlarging empire. 76
               VVell vſing of hired ſeruāts. 34
               VVidovves marying again make men ſuſpecte they do it for luſt. 42
               VVhat thinge is moſt difficult in the lyfe of man. 2
               VVhat a ciuill man is. 44
               VVhat kinds of vvater is beſt. 70
               VVho be mere Perſons to be made magiſtrates in a common vveale. 20
               VVho be meteſt for vvatchers. 29
               VVorckmaiſters and deuiſers of vvorcks. 10
               VVomē ſtomach to haue their huſbands kepe an h
                     •
                  rlot. 37
               VVomen vvith childe. 43
               VVomē ought to be reſtrayned from gadding abrode. ibidē
               
               VVoman to ſaue and kepe that is brought home. 35
               VVorthy acts of Hercules. 50
               VViſe vvomē feare euil reports. 41
               VVife, no ſtomacker nor reſiſter. 42
               VViſe man vvill do no ill nor ſuffer any to be done by his vvil. 51
               VVicked demaund of a vvoman. 43
            
            
               Y
               Youngmē muſt be exerciſed. 48
               Young men hovv long they are ſo reputed. 55
               Youngmē moſt apteſt to be trayned in vvarfare. 8
                     •
                  
               
            
            Finis.
         
      
   